Gazophylacium Anglicanum: CONTAINING THE DERIVATION OF English Words.

PROPER and COMMON; Each in an Alphabet distinct: Proving the Dutch and Saxon
to be the prime Fountains. And likewise giving the Similar Words in most
European Languages, whereby any of them may be indifferently well Learned, and
Understood.

Fitted to the Capacity of the English Reader, that may be curious to know the
Original of his Mother Tongue.

LONDON, Printed by E. H. and W. H. and are to be sold by Randall Tailor, near
Stationers Hall, and by most Booksellers in London and West^^nster, MDCLXXXIX.

THE PREFACE.
IT IS not barely my Obligation to Custom, that has prevailed with me to present
the courteous Reader with a Preface to the following Essay, but rather the
necessity and usefulness thereof in a Work of this nature, that he might not be
surpised, when, after having read the Title, he should fall foul upon what is
promised therein, without any Instructions so to do.

In the first place therefore, I desire the Reader to take notice of the Method.

I. Of its Division into three Heads. The first, Of Common Names. The second,
Of such Proper Names as are of a German Original. The third, Of Proper Names
derived from the Latin, Greek, or Hebrew, with their signification.


All done by way of Alphabet; so that any Word desired, may be quickly found.

II. Observe that all along, through the Book, that Word is set next the
English, from which I have judged it most likely to be derived; and the
Synonymous Words of the other European Languages follow: Which shows, I have
left it to the Opinion of the Reader, to draw it from which he pleases.
Moreover, by a curious reading hereof, any of the European Languages may be
indifferently well learned.

III. Note, that very many of the Words being of a British or Saxon Original,
have their Explication set down.

The chief Reason why I busied my self herein, was, to save my Time from being
worse employed: And, I did imagine (as, questionless, these most indefatigable
and ingenious Persons did, viz. Kilian, Vossius, Salmasius, Martinius, Spelman,
Bochart, Junius, Menagius and Skinner, from whom I took my Pattern) I could not
spend it more commendably, or profitably, than in searching into the Original
of my Native Language; which is so strangely corrupted through Time, that when
I looked an hundred, or an hundred and fifty Years only behind me, I could
scarce imagine it ever to have been the Language of my Ancestors, or even of
the Country I was born in, it is so changed through Commerce, Correspondence,
Travelers, and such like Accidents: Much more may you imagine it to be altered
in a thousand, or two thousand Years, by Conquests, Invasions, Transmigrations
of Government, etc. which have been very frequent over, and in this Isle, above
others: So that though this my native Country might, at its first Settlement,
have a Language peculiar to it self; yet, as is said before, by Conquest,
Commerce, Traveling, Transmigrations of the Government, etc. it is brought to
what we now find it, even a Composition of most, if not all the Languages of
Europe; especially of the Belgic or Low Dutch, Saxon, Teutonick or High Dutch,
Cambro-British or Welsh, French, Spanish, Italian, and Latin; and now and then
of the Old and Modern Danish, and Ancient High Dutch; also of the Greek,
Hebrew, Arabic, Chaldee, Syriack and Turcick.

But I have forbore, as much as possible, the setting down such as are purely
of a Latin Original, lest the Book should exceed the quantity of Sheets
designed, and so possibly the Price of the Buyer; it having been the only Fault
of those that have hitherto writ upon this Subject, to be both voluminous,
high-pric'd, and in Latin; so that many Well-wishers to their Mother Tongue
could neither reach the Value nor Knowledge thereof: All which I hope I have
remedied, by doing this in English, and in a small Volume, fitted to a small
Price.

I have (that the Reader might not be at a loss in such Words as are purely
from the Latin) prefixed a few easy Rules, whereby many thousand English Words
coming therefrom may most easily be known, and made Latin again, usually, by
the Addition, Cutting off, or Changing of a Letter

The Confusion of Languages at Babel (for before it, all the then World spoke
one and the same Dialect, supposed to be Hebrew) gave Rise to all the several
Languages in the Universe; of which, the primitive Language of this Nation was
one; and, had it not been corrupted, perhaps as good and intelligible as the
best; but being so altered by the aforesaid Accidents, it has quite lost its
primitive Glory, as well as that of the French, and other Nations.

It may be justly wondered at, why we have no more Words than we have from the
Old British, now the Welsh (which, no doubt, was the Primitive Language of this
Nation:) But if we again consider how imperiously the Saxons entered and
subdued this Land, our Wonder will in a great measure abate; for they did not,
as Conquerors usually do, mix the Britains with themselves, after they had
yielded to, or were not any ways able to resist the Conqueror; but put all to
the Sword that they met withal; only some few, to shelter themselves from their
Rage, betook themselves to the Mountains of Wales and Cornwall; which being
inaccessable to the Conquerors, for want of use, were sufficient Security to
the distressed Britains, against them; which Quarter they do still live in, and
retain their own Language, for the most part, within themselves, as if they
were another Nation; only by Commerce and Intercourse, there has happened some
Commutation of Language likewise. So that our Language, in the main, is
composed of the Old English-Saxon, Dutch and Normandy-French; but of the first
principally, for that the last did only in part subdue, not destroy this
Nation, which the former did endeavor, and almost effect.

I might have added the Italian, because of its Affinity to the French; as also
because of the great and frequent Communication there was, in former Times,
between England and Italy, when this Nation was subject to the Pope of Rome:
For then all Ecclesiastical Controversies, Confirmations of Priests, Abbots and
Bishops, in their several Benefices, were to be solemnized and ratified by
Rome's spiritual Trader, the Pope: And, on the other hand, the Pope sent hither
many of his Creatures, Italians, for the better collecting of his Peter's
Pence; as also for their Preferment to Bishoprics, Vicarages, etc.

Though the Danes did, in some part subdue England, yet we are little beholding
to them for the Corruption we now labor under, except it be in the North and
West of England; which they subdued almost two hundred Years before the rest of
the Nation came in to their Obedience; and when they had it, they did not
possess it above forty Years before the Normans disturbed them in their
Enjoyments.

In a Word, All Words almost (except such as come from the French and Latin,
with their Adherents) owe their Original to the English-Saxon and Low Dutch,
Dialects of the ancient German; for Spain did very little contribute thereto,
except that some few Words have crept in by Commerce, which are only useful to
such as trade thither.

Now, lest any one, more ignorant, should not be persuaded of the vast
Alterations, and sometimes total Changes that have been made in our Language,
since this Isle was first discovered, let him read some of our Chronicles of
England, and he will be convinced of the necessity thereof; for the Saxons did
endeavor the total Destruction of the Inhabitants, and did effect it, saving
some few that fled to the Mountains of Wales and Cornwall, as is said before:
And then is it not reasonable to conjecture, that the Language, the Ancient
British (save what was preserved as before, who, by a Law of the Conqueror,
were prohibited Intercourse with the Saxons) must die with the People; and a
new one, namely the Saxon, be introduced in its stead?

I have many things to allege in defense of the Weakness and Inequality of
this Performance; as namely, its being collected at diverse times, and in haste,
because of my other more necessary Business; as also, its being printed from a
foul Copy, and the like; which first may have altered the Style, and the two
last let many things pass Muster, which, upon more mature deliberation, would
not: But I hope the discreet Reader will pass by such Failures, without carping
at them (as considering that no Man is infallible;) and as for the Ignorant and
Envious, I value not their Censures; but, with Martial, In invidum, count them
unfit for Humane Society.

Qui ducis vultus, and non legis ista libenter,
Omnibus invideas, invide; nemo tibi.
I have nothing more to beg, but the kind Reader's Charity for the Faults of
the Press, which, I hope, may consist chiefly in Literals, and so may be the
more easily mended with a Pen; and that he would not be offended at the
unpleasantness of the Style, but rather consider what the Subject will bear.

Rules whereby to know when a Word is derived from the Latin, and how it may be
made Latin again; composed to prevent the Book's growing to too great a Bulk.
1. MOst Words in English, ending in nee, or cy, are derived from the Latin,
ending in tia; as, Temperantia, Clementia; Temperance, Clemency, etc.

2. Words ending in ion in English, are made Latin by casting away n; as,
Question, Quaestio; Religion, Religio, etc.

3. Words ending in ty, are made Latin, by changing ty into tas; as, Liberty,
Libertas; Charity, Charitas, etc.

4. Words ending in ude, are derived from the Latin, by changing o into e; as,
Fortitude, Fortitudo; Gratitude, Gratitudo, etc.

5. Words ending in d, denoting the order or manner of a thing, the said Words
being Adjectives, are made Latin, by adding us; as Rigid, Putrid; Rigidus,
Putridus, etc.

6. Words having t, n, or r, in the end, between two Vowels, are made Latin, by
changing the last Vowel into us, being Adjectives; as, Mute, Obscene, Obscure;
Mutus, Obscoenus, Obscurus.

7. Most Words ending in nt, are made Latin, by changing nt into ns; as,
Latent, Latens; Vigilant, Vigilans, etc.

8. Many English Words ending in all, by adding is, are made Latin Adjectives;
as, Liberal, Liberalis; Substantial, Substantialis, etc.

Letters or Syllables, used in this Book, for a Language, understood thus;
1 A. or Arab. Signifies Arabic. 2 AS. or Anglo-Sax. Anglo-Saxonick, or
English-Saxon. 3 B. or Belg. Belgic, or Low Dutch. 4 C. Br. or Cambro-Brit.
Cambro-Britain, or Welsh. 5 C. or Chald. Chaldaick. 6 Dan. Rec. Modern Danish.
7 Fr. G. Modern French. 8 Fr. Th. Ancient High Dutch. 9 Germ. German, or
High Dutch. 10 Gr. Greek. 11 Heb. Hebrew. 12 Hib. Hibernick, or Irish. 13 Hisp.
Spanish. 14 I. or Ital. Italian. 15 L. or Lat. Latin. 16 Scoto-Hib. High-land
Scotch. 17 Sir. Syriack. 18 T. or Teut. Teutonick, or High Dutch. 19 Turc.
Turcick, or Turkish.

The SAXON Alphabet.
Sax. in Eng. A a A a B b B b C c C c D d D d E e E e F f F f G g G g H h H h I
i I i K k K k L l L l M m M m N n N n O o O o P p P p c Q q R r R r S s S s T t
T t V u V u W W w X x X x Y y Y y Z z Z z

^ Th. th, th th. and and Ae, Ae Ae, ae.

THE ETYMOLOGY OF THE English Tongue.
A
A, is a Vowel that is often superfluous in the beginning of words; as in
Arise, abide, abate, etc. Abaisance; which we falsely write Obeisance, as if it
came from the French Obeisance, when really it comes from Abbaisser, which
signifies, to depress, or make an humble inclination of the body; as we do,
when we do Abaisance. Abandon, from the French Abandonner, or the Ital.
Abandonare; if it may not better, and likelier be drawn from the Anglo-saxonick
Abannan, that is, publicly to dis-inherit: Or, which is most likely, from our
own word Bann, or the Belgic Bannen, that is, to lie under a Curse, the A
Otiosa, or superfluous, being added. Abase, from the Fr. Abbaisser, the Ital.
Abbassare, or the Span. Abaxar; to lessen, to keep under. Abash, from the Fr.
Esbahir, to affrighten; which comes from the Lat. Expaveo: l^^t be not likelier
from the Spanish Abaxar, to keep under; because Inferiors are usually abashed,
when suddenly accosted by Superiors. Abate, from the Fr. Abbattre, abatre, the
Ital. Abattere, or the Spanish Abatir; which in one sense, signify, to beat
down; in another, to substract, as in Arithmetic. The reverend Dr. Honywood
derives it from the Privative A, and the Belgic Baete; which signifies Profit,
or Interest; because by diminishing a thing, it becomes less profitable. Let
the Curious judge, which is best to follow. Abbot, Anglo-saxonick Abbud, abbod,
and abbad, Belg. Abd, abt, Teutonick Abt, Fr. Abbe, Ital. Abbate, Spanish Abad,
Lat. Abbas. It may seem to be deduced from the Heb. Ab, or Sir. Abba, Father;
which an Abbot properly is: But, to be sure, we have it, by a small corruption,
from the English-Saxon Abbod, which signifies the same. Abridge, from the Fr.
Abbreger, and that from the Lat. Abbreviare, to curtail, or make shorter. Abet,
which, I think, may not incommodiously come from the Lat. Praep. Ad to, and
bet; which, in composition, signifies, to stand by one, or bet on ones side;
and therefore should seem to be right spelled Abbet; If it may not be deduced
from a priv. and the Belg. Barten, to profit. Abide, from the AS. Abidan,
Bidan, Belg. Beyden, Ital. Badare, to subsist, stay, or tarry; which may all of
them, perhaps, come from the AS. Byan, to inhabit, or dwell. The word
metaphorically signifies, to endure or suffer any hardship. Above, from the AS.
Bufan, Belg. Boven, and the superfluous, particle a, and both again from the
AS. Ufan. About, from the AS. Abutan, which is compounded of ab, from, and
utan, without, abroad, the last, or extremity; from whence comes the Belg.
Buyten, which signifies the same. Abroad, from the superfluous Particle a, and
bload: which see. Abstain, from the Teut. Abstehen, Belg. Af-stain; which
signify; to stand off from: If it may not more commodiously be drawn from the
Lat. Abstineo; which I incline to. Abuct, from the Fr. Aboutir; which
signifies, to oppose, or confront. Accompany, v. Company, Accomplish, from the
Fr. Accomplir, Ital. Accompire; if it may not be better done from the
Decomposit Lat. Adcomplere, thoroughly to finish. Account, or Account, from the
Fr. Accompter, or the Lat. Adcomputare. Accold, from the Fr. Accorder, the
Ital. and Spanish Noun Accordo, the Lat. Accordare; which all signify, to
agree, or consent: But I think it is better deduced from the Lat. Praep. ad,
and Chorda, the string of a musical Instrument, because they ought to agree or
accord in harmony: And this is easily done, by taking away h in chorda, and
changing ad into ac, as is frequent in Composition. Hence come our According,
and Accordingly. Accost, from the Fr. Accoster, Ital. Accostare, to draw near
one: It may not inelegantly be fetched from the Lat. praep. Ad, and Costa a
rib; which, by a Synecdoche partis pro toto, may signify the whole side; as
Wrestlers do accost one another, by joining side to side. Account, from the
obsolete Fr. Acconter, the Ital. Accontare, to tell, declare, or show. See
Account, and Recount. Accouter, from the Fr. Accoutrer, to cloth, or apparel;
q. d. Lat. Adconsutare, to tack on together. Accrue, from the Fr. Noun Accrue,
an increase, or addition; if you cannot, by the help of a figure or two, deduce
it from the Lat. Accrescere, to abound, or increase. Accurse, v. Curse.
Accustom, v. Custom. Acc, from the Fr. Az; if you cannot draw it from the
barbarous Greek (...), which signifies a Die. Ach, Ache. from the AS. Ace, Ece,
grief, or pain; which may be easily derived from (...), that signifies the same
thing. I think it may most truly be drawn from the Ache bone, that part being
very much subject to a distemper called Ischias, or Hip-Gout; which we
corruptly enough call Sciatica. Acknowledge, from the praep. Ad, the AS. Cna, a
contract of Cnaan, to know, or Knowledge it self, and Legan, to put; that is,
to put into my knowledge or understanding. Acorn, from the AS. Aac, an Oak, and
Cern, grane, or fruit; from whence flow the Belg. Aker, Aecker, Eeckel; and the
Teut. Eychel, Ecker, which all signify an Acorn. Acquaint, from the Fr.
Accointer, to acquire one's friendship. Acquest, profit, or gain; from the Fr.
Acquest, the Ital. Acquisto, and all of them from the Lat. Acquisitum, ab
Acquiro. Acquit, to absolve, or free; from the Fr. Acquitter, q. d. Lat.
Adquietare, to make quiet: So our A quittance, from Ital. Acquittanza, q. d.
Adquietantia, or a quieting. Adamant, from the Greek (...), which comes from
the Privative a and (...), to tame, by reason of its insuperable hardness.
Adder, from the AS. Aetter, Belg. Adder, Teut. Matter, C. Br. Meidr, Dan Eder;
which all signify the same thing. An Addle Egg, AS. Adel, a disease, Adlian,
to be sick, q. d. a sick, or rotten Egg. Address, Fr. Addresser, Ital.
Addrizzare, q. d. Lat. Addirectare; because all our prayers and arguments are
directed to some particular thing or person. Adieu, Fr. Adieu, Ital. Adio,
Hisp. Adios, farewell: q. d. Ad Deum te commendo, I commend you to God. Adjourn,
from the Praep. Ad, and the Fr. Jour, the Ital. Giorno, a day; which, not
unlikely, comes from the Lat. Diurnum, daily. Adjoining, from the Fr.
Adjoindre, Lat. Adjungere, to join to. Adjudge, v. Judge. Adjust or Make even
Accounts; from the Fr. Adjuster, to accommodate, or fit to; q. d. Lat.
Adjustare, to make even Accounts. Admiral, from the Arabic Emir, a Lord, or
Commander, and the Greek (...), belonging to the Sea; q. d. Prince of the Sea:
It may, not unlikely, be drawn from the Teut. Ampt, me^r, al; Office, Sea,
whole; q. d. one that has the sole Command of the Sea. Minsevus takes it from
Aen, inter al; above, Sea, the whole; q. d. over the whole Sea. A^o. with much
ado; from the Verb do. or act, and the initial Particle A. Advance, Fr.
Avancer, Ital. Avanzare, to move profit, or go forward; from ab and ante; i. e.
from what one was before; q. d. from an inferior degree to an higher.
Advantage, from the Fr. Avantage, profit, or help. To adventure, q. d. Lat.
Adventurare; as Adventura, or Eventura, understand Fortuna, or Hora. Advertise,
from the Lat. Advertere, to admonish, teach thoroughly, or make sure of.
Advice, or Advise, from the Fr. Advis, or the Ital. Aviso, Counsel, or Opinion.
Affair, from the Fr. Affair, Ital. Affare, a business, or employ; q. d. Lat.
Adfacere, tied to do a thing that lies upon me to be done. Affiance, from the
Fr. Affiance, faith, or trust. Afford, from the Teut. Furdern, Fordern: It may
be also brought from the Particle A, or rather, the Praep. Ad, and the AS.
Board, a table; q. d. to allow victuals for the table. Afraid, or Afraid, from
the Fr. Effrayer, Effroyer, to scare, or terrify. I could willingly deduce it
from the Lat. Praep. Ad, and our English word Fear, or Feared. Affranchise, v.
Enfranchise. Affright, from our initial Particle A, and Fright; which see.
Affront, Fr. Affront, Ital. Affronto, Hisp. Afrenta, all signifying the same
thing; as if one should say in Lat. Adfrontare, i. e. set front against front,
or oppose one to the face. Before, v. Before. Afresh, from the initial A, and
Fresh; which see. Aft, and Abaft, Sea-terms, from the AS. Aeftan, behind, or
after; that is, the hinder part of the Ship. Somnerus uses the word Baeftan in
the same sense; a contract, as I suppose, of Abaeftan, to which, by taking of
the two last Letters, we owe the Original of our Abaft. After, from the AS.
Eft, Aefter, Aeftan, after; Belg. Achter, after; Run and Dan. After, the
ancient Teut. After. Dr. Mer. Cas. ingeniously fetches it from the Greek (...),
Caeterum. Again, from the AS. Again, again; and both ours and the AS. from the
AS. Eac, or Aec, again, and Ana, together, q. d. one after another immediately.
Against, from the AS. Again, Ongean, opposite to. Aghast, from the superfluous
Particle A, and the AS. Gast, a Spirit, Spectre, or Shadow; q. d. frighted with
the sight of some, Spectre, or Ghost. It may not unlikely be drawn from the Gr.
(...). to wonder with horror. Agate-stone, from the Gr. (...). Agnail:
Somnerus does ingeniously derive it from the AS. Ange vexed, and Naegle a Nail;
q. d. a pained Nail. It may very well be drawn from Ad to, and our English
Nail, because it grows by the nails of one's feet; q. d. a nail to a nail. Ago,
as we say, long ago, is manifestly derived from A, and go; which see. There is
an AS. word, which signifies, Bypast, viz. Agan, from which it possibly may
come. Agony, from the Gr. (...), whose root signifies, a striving, or conflict,
as people in an Agony have. Agree, from the Fr. Aggreer; but I think, more
likely from the Lat. Ad and Gratum; q. d. grateful, or acceptable to. Aggrieve,
v. Grieve. Ague, from the Fr. Aigu, sharp; because an Ague, at least, in the
Paroxism, is sharp. Ah, from the Lat. Oh; or, as all other Interjections, from
the sound that by natural instinct, one in misery puts forth. Aid, from the Fr.
Aider, Ital. Aiutare, and both of them from the Lat. Adjutare, to help. Aim,
from the Fr. Esme, a scope, or mark; though not unlikely, from the Lat.
Aestimare, i. e. diligently to take heed, as those that shoot at a Mark do Air,
from the Fr. Air, which again comes from the Lat. Aer, and the Gr. (...), the
Air. Ache, v. Ach. Aker, from the AS. Acere, Aecer, Aeccer, Belg. and Teut.
Acker, Fr. Norm. Acre, a field, ground; also a measure of ground; commonly
deduced from the Lat. Ager, and that from the Gr. (...). Right spelled, Acre.
A^arm, from the Fr. G. Alarm, or the Ital. Alarma, signifying the same thing.
Alas, from the Lat Lassus weary, or the Ital. Lastare to relinquish, and the
idle Particle A; q. d. Oh me lassum vel derelictum! O me, weary or forsaken!
Alate, from the idle Particle A, and Late; q. d. Of late: Which see. Albeit, q.
d. be it all so. Alburn- color, from the Lat Albus white, and the Ital. Burno,
by a Metathesis for Bruno, brown; q. d. a white Brown. V. Brown. Alchymy, from
the Lat. Alchymia, and that from the Arab. Al, and the Gr. (...), or (...), to
pour. Alcoran, from the Arab. Al, and Koiran, he read, or collected; q. d. a
Lecture, or Collection of Precepts. Alderman, from the AS. Ealderman, and that
from Aeldor, Ealdor, or Aldor, older, and Man man. Ale, from the AS. Eale, Run.
Dan. and Dan. rec. Oll. It may po^sibly be drawn from the Gr. (...), heat.
Alegar, a word in use in Lincolnshire, q. d. Ale-eager, i. e. Sour Ale. Alemb
ck, from the Arab. Alambic, by an easy Transmutation. Alight, v. Light. Alike,
v. Like. Alive, v. Live. All, from the AS. Ael, Eal, Ealle, All, Run. Dan.
Dan. rec. and C Br. Oll, All, Belg. Al, Teut. and Belg All, the whole, all;
all of them from the Gr. (...). Allay, to mitigate, or lenifie, either from the
Fr. G. Allier, to bind, i. e. to fasten, or restrain; or from Alleger, to
alleviate. Allegiance, or the Faith that we owe to the King; no doubt, from the
Lat. Alligare to bind; q. d. a tying, or binding; i. e. the Bond of Faith due
from Subjects to Princes. Alley, from the Fr. G. Allee a narrow Street. An
Ally, from the Fr. G. Allie, a Relation; q. d. Lat. Adligatus, bound to.
Alliance, from the Fr. G. Alliance; which signifies, a confederacy, or compact.
To Allot, from Ad and Lot; which see. Allow, from the Fr. G. Allouer, to
approve. Alloy, or Allay, from the Fr. G. Aloy, a mixture of the coursest of
any thing with the best. Allure, or entice, from the Lat. Ad, and the Eng.
Lure; which see. Almanac, from the Arab. Al, and Manach, to number originally;
though possibly, we may have it from the Fr. Almanach: Some derive it from the
Belg. Al-maen-achte, i. e. the Observation of all the Months. Alms, from the
AS. Aelmes, Aelmesse, and that from the Gr. (...), pity, or compassion; of
which, Alms are the effect. Almighty, v. Mighty. Almond, from the Fr. G.
Amande, Ital. Amandola, Hisp. Almendra; all of which come from the Lat. and Gr.
Amygdalium, (...), which signify the same. Almoner, from the Fr. G. Aumosne,
an Alms. Almost, from the Belg Al-meest, for the most part, chiefly,
especially: It may be drawn from our own words, All and Most; q. d. most part
of all. A^oft, from the Belg. Al-heft, all elevate, or sublime: But I think it
may, without offense, be taken from the Northern word Loft, now in use,
signifying, a Room above Stairs, the initial Particle A being added; which they
not unlikely retain from the Danish words, Loffter, Loffter-op, and Oploffter,
to elevate, or lift up. Alone, from the Belg. Al-een, Teut. Alloin, q. d. only
one. See All, and One. Along, from our initial A, and Long; which see. Alooff,
q. d. All-off. See All, and Off. Aloud, v. Loud. Already, from the Belg,
Alreed, Alghereed, quite ready. See All, and Ready. Also, from the AS. Aelsa,
Belg. All-soo, altogether so. See All, and So. Although; see All, and Though.
Altogether, from the Belg. Altegader, q. d. all in one collectively. V. All,
Together, and Gather. Always from the AS. Eallepaega, Teut. Allweg, q. d. by
all ways. Am, from the AS. Eom, which may be derived from the Gr. (...), I am.
Amadetto Pear. Evelyn derives it from one Amadaeus, or Amadettus, that first
grafted it, or, at least, was an extraordidinary lover of that fruit. Amatu,
from the idle Particle A and the AS. Maegen power; q. d. with all his force.
Amass, from the Fr. G. Amasser to heap together; q. d. Lat. Admassare, idem.
Amaze, q. d. to put one in a Maze or Labyrinth, from the idle Particle A, and
Maze; which see. Amber, from the Fr. G. Ambre, the Ital. and barbarous Lat.
Ambra; or if you please, from the Arab. Ambar, which signifies the same.
Amber-griese, from the Fr. G. Ambre gris, or the Ital. Ambra grigia. Amble,
from the Fr. G. Ambler, and this from the Lat. Ambulare, which by contraction
is Amblare. Ambry, or as North-Countrymen now speak it, A^^nry, an
old-fashioned kind of Cupboards; possibly, from the Fr. G. Aumoire, the same.
Ambury, a disease in Horses legs; perhaps from the AS. Embe, or Gr. (...),
about, and Beorg, or Berg, metaphorically, a bump or swelling in the body; but
properly, a little rising in the ground, artificial or natural. Ambush, from
the Fr G. Embuschir, to lay in wait privily to catch or entrap one. Amell, or
Ammel, from the Fr. G. Email, idem. Amends, from the Fr. G. Amend, which comes
from the Lat. Emendare, to mend, or make amends. Amerce, possibly from the
ancient Fr. Norm. Amercier, or from the Fr. G. and Ang. Merci, Mercy. Amiable,
from the Fr. G. Amiable, of the same signification. Amiss, from the Lat.
Amissus, lost; or more nearly, from the English Verb, To Miss, the idle initial
Particle A being added. V. Miss. Amity, from the Fr. G. Amity, and both from
the Lat. Amicitia. Ammunition, Ital. Monitione, from the Fr. G. Munition, and
the praefix Am. Among, from the AS. Gemang, between; this from Gemengan, Belg.
and Teut. Mengen, to mingle; q. d. mingledly. V. Mingle. Amorous, from the Fr.
G. Amoroux, given to love; q. d. Lat. Amorosus. Amort, All-amort, as we say of
a Man as it were in an ecstasie; from the Fr. G. Amorti, part. of the Verb
Amortir, to mortify. Amount, from the Fr. G. Monter, Ital. Montare, to amount,
(viz.) to a price, the idle Initial Particle A being added. v. Mount. Amors,
purely from the Fr. G. Amor, which is manifestly derived from the Lat. Amor.
Amper, or Ampor, a word much used in Essex, denoting Swelling or Inflammation;
from the Teut. Empor, upwards; Empor heven, to lift up; q. d. the lifting up of
the skin. Amm's-ace, v. Ace. Amulet, from the Gr. (...), a double diminutive
Termination being added. Amuse, from the Fr. G. Amuser, to think upon. V. Muse.
Ancestors, from the Fr. G. Ancestres; both from the Lat. Antecessores.
Anchorite, from the Gr. (...), (viz.) one that goes apart from the Public, an
Hermit. Anchoves, from the Fr. G. Anchois, Ital. Anchiove, Anciove, a Loach, or
small fish; perhaps from the Ital. Ancino, an hook. Ancient, from the Fr. G.
Ancien, Hisp. Anciano, old, ancient. Ancker'd, q. d. Crux Anchoretarum; from
whence the word comes. Ancle, from the AS. Ancleo, Dan. Anckle; and it may not
unfitly be drawn from the Gr. (...), crooked. And, from the AS. And, without
all doubt. And-irons, q. d. Hand-irons, or according to Dr. Th. H. Endirons,
because they are put at the end of the fire. It may not unlikely be drawn from
the A S. Brandiren, Br being taken away, partly for shortness, partly for
sound-sake. Ancut, a word still used in the North of England for Against, from
the AS. Nean, near, and the idle initial Particle A. Angel of Gold, from the
similitude of an Angel formerly stamped upon our Guinneas, alluding to that
saying of Gregorius, who seeing two young English Noblemen at the Court of
Rome, asked who they were, and of what Country: to whom 'twas answered, they
were Angli, or Englishmen: Imo potius Angeli, Yea rather (says he) Angels. For
this, consult Bid, Verstegan, and others. An Angel, or Saint of the Lord,
comes from the Lat. Angelus, or the Gr. (...), an Angel. Angelot Cheese; so
called, as we may suppose, from some Man, whose name was Angeloto, or Angelo;
he making it, and stamping his name on it. Anger, perhaps from the AS. Ange,
vexed; Teut. Angst, vexation; Dan. Angrer, it grieveth me: They may all be
deduced from the barbarous Lat. Angariare, to anger or vex. Angle, from the AS.
Angel, an hook. Mer. Cas. derives it from (...), crookedness; because when the
fish is hooked, the rod bends like to a Semicircle. Anguish, from the Fr. G.
Angoisse, both from the Lat. Angustia, anxiety: The Teut. is Angst, the Belg.
Angost, which signify the same thing. Annoy, from the Ital. Annoiare, to
molest; q. d Lat. Adnoxare, to bring damage to. Annulets, from the Diminutive
Annuli, little Rings, the diminutive Termination et being added. Anoint, from
the Fr. G. Oindre, whence Enoindre; so that, possibly, it should be Enoint, to
chafe in. Anon, or presently; q. d. Ou on, i. e. by succession presently after
the word spoke: Most likely from the Particle A, and the AS. Nean, near; q. d.
I come presently. Answer, from the AS. Andsare, and that from An for Ou, and
Sar or Saer, serious; q. d. to affirm a thing seriously, or in earnest. Ant, or
Emmet, corrupted from the AS. Aemet, Emet, a Pismire. For a further derivation
of it, consult Skinner, in his learned Etymologicon. Antelope, from the Gr.
(...) against, and (...), a neck; q. d. a Creature whose horns wreath back
toward the neck, and therefore is in Greek called (...). Anthem, from (...),
says Menagius, because of its being sung or said alternately: From (...), says
Minsevus. I rather incline to think it came from (...); i. e. hymn against
hymn, alternately, of Priest and People; from (...) against, and (...) an hymn.
St. Anthony's fire, superstitiously so called, because it was belielieved that
St. Anthony of Patavia had a miraculous Art in curing of it. Anticks, certainly
a corruption of the Lat. Antiquus: Cut with Anticks, Sculptum figuris antiquis:
To dance Anticks, Choreas ducere Antiquo more. Anticor, a disease in Horses;
for which see Markham; derived from the Gr. (...) against, and Cor, an heart;
q. d. a disease that only infests the heart, called in Lat. Morbus
Anticardiacus. Antimony, a famous Mineral amongst Chemists: In barbarous Lat.
it is Antimonium, but by the true Lat. called Stibium; by the Gr. (...): It
certainly comes from the Arab. Atimad, signifying the same. Ancters, q. d.
Brow-antiers, perhaps from the Fr. G. Andouillers; that is, the first knags or
branches in the horns of a young Stag. Anvil, from the AS. Aenfilt, Anfilt, the
same; which may derive from An for On, above, and the Verb Feallan to fall,
because the Hammer very often, as it were, falls upon the Anvil. Any, from the
AS. Anig, Enig, and those from a Root of the same Language, An, one. Apace,
from the initial A, and Pace; which see. Apart, from the Fr. G. Apart, or the
Ital. A-parte, the same. Ape, from the AS. Apa, Dan. Abe, Belg. A^p, Teut. Aff,
the Welsh Eppa; and all these possibly from the Gr. (...), a touch; because an
Ape is thought to be the quickest to perceive the touch, of any creature.
Apostume, v. Impostume. Apothecary, from the Fr. G. Apothecaire; but most
certainly, from the Gr. (...), a Repository, because they put up all their
Medicines in Boxes, Pots, Vials, etc. from the Verb (...), to hide. Appair, v.
Impair. Appil, i. e. to affright; from the Fr. G. Appalir, to grow pale, as
people in a fright. Chaucer uses it for Decay. Apparel, from the Fr. G.
Appareil, and this from the Lat. Ad to, and Parilis fit; q. d. made fit to the
body. Appartment, from the Ital. Appartamento, a particular place in an house
divided from the rest. Appay, from the Ital. Appagare, to satisfy. I had
rather deduce it from the Lat. Ad to, and Pacare, to appease. Appeach, v.
Impeach. Appease; from the Fr. G. Appaiser; q. d. Lat. Appacare, or Adpacare.
Appennage, from the Lat. Adpanagium, and that of Ad, and Panis. Spelman derives
it from the Fr. G. Appendage, an Appendix. Appertain, from the Fr. G.
Appartenir, idem; q. d. Lat. Adpertinere, to belong unto. Hence the word
Appurtenances; which see. Apple, from the AS. Apl, Aepple, Aepl, Epl, Belg.
Appel, Teut. Ipffel, Dan Eble. I would draw it from (...), soft or tender.
Apply, from the obsolete Fr. G. Applier, the same; or rather, from the Lat.
Praep. Ad to, and Ply, from Plicare to bend or incline which way one would have
it. Appoint, from the Fr. G. Appointer, idem. Appose, I suppose, for Oppose,
from the Lat. Opponere, idem. Apprentice, from the Fr. G. Apprenti, that from
the Verb Apprendre, and which is manifestly from the Lat. Apprehendere, to
apprehend; i. e. be of judgment to learn ones Trade. Approach, from the Fr. G.
Approcher, this from the Lat. Adproximare, or Adpropiare, to come near to, or
make to pertain to. Appurtenance, from the Fr. G. Appartenance; q. d. Lat.
Adpertinentia, things belonging to any person or thing. Apricocks, from the Fr.
G. Abricots, and ought rather to be spelled Apricots in English; q. d. Lat.
Mala praecocia. Apron, from the AS. Aforan, q. d. English Before one; from
whence, I suppose, proceeds the Corruption. Arbor, possibly from the Lat.
Arboretum; though the learned and ingenious T.H. thinks it to be so called,
quasi Air-vower: But because Chaucer uses the word Herber in the same sense,
the industrious Dr. Skinner thinks it rather comes from the AS. Hereberga,
Belg. Herberghe, Teut. Herberg, a Mansion; q. d. a Lodge made of Trees. Arch,
from the Gr. (...), a Prince or Governor; first used by the Romans; as a
Praefix, in the declining state of the Empire; thus, Archduke, Arch-knave,
etc. Arch or Vault, manifestly from the Lat. Arcus, a Bow; from the similitude.
Archer, from the Fr. G. Archer, Ital. Archiero, a shooter of Arrows.
Architrave, a term in Architecture, from the Fr. G. and Ital. Architrave.
Argent, a term in Heraldry for White, from the Lat. Argentum Silver, and that
from the Gr. (...); all of them from (...) white. Aright, from the initial
Particle A, and Right; which see. Arise, from the same initial A, and Rise;
which see. Arm, from the AS. Eorm, Earm, Dan. Arm, and Arm-hul, whence our
Arm-hole; Belg. Arm; Arm ter zee, an Arm or Creek of the Sea; all of them from
the Lat. Armus, and that from the Gr. (...), from (...), to fit, as the arm is
fitted to the body. Armada, from the Lat. Armata, sup. Classis; i. e. a Navy
armed or manned: A word purely Spanish. Arms, a word common to us, with the
French, from the Lat. Arma; because formerly the Ensigns of Honor were graven
upon their Shields. Armorer, or maker of Arms; from the Fr. G. Armorier.
Armory, from the Fr. G. Armoirie; q. d. Lat. Armarium, a place where Arms are
preserved. Armor, from the Fr. G. Armiere, Armure, Armeure; q. d. Lat.
Armatura, from Arma, Arms. Arquebuss, v. Harquebuss. Arrand, v. Errand.
Arrange, from the Fr. G. Arranger, to put in order; this from the Praep Ad, and
the Noun Rang, or Rank, Order. V. Rank. Arrant, as we say, Arrant Rogue: It
may, it is possible, be derived from the Lat. Errant; and so it signifies as
much as Vagabond-Rogue. Arras, Ital. Arrazzi, from the Metropolis Artois, or
Arras; where the people, named in Lat. Atrebates, are famous for making of
Arras: In Lat. Atrebata. Array, from the Fr G. Arroy, order; though Minshew
draws it from the Gr. (...), to fit. Arrears, from the Fr. G. Arrierage, idem;
q. d. Lat. Adretro, i. e. to behind. Arrearages, v. Arrears. Arrest, from the
Fr. G. Arrester; though I think it may well enough be drawn from the Lat.
Praep. Ad, and our Rest; q. d. the case being decided before a Judge or Umpire,
both parties are at quiet. Arrive, from the Fr. G. Arriver; q. d. Lat.
Adripare, to come to shore. Arrow, from the AS. Aere, Are, the same; this from
a Root in the same Language, viz. Gearian, to prepare, or make ready. Ars, from
the AS. Ears, Belg. Eers, Aers, Teut. Arsz, It has allusion to the Gr. (...),
the Fundament, or Arsegut, because principal. Arsenal, from the Ital. Arsenale;
but according to Minsevus, (...), from helping and defending of the Navy.
Arse-versy, from the Fr. G. A-Revers. Ital. A Rinverso; from the Lat. Ad
inversum, Topsy-turvy. Art, from the AS. Eart, thou art. Artechoak, from the
Fr. G. Artichault, Artichaud, Hisp. Artichoca, Teut. Artischock, Artsthock.
Salmasius draws it from a Greek Fountain; viz. (...). Artillery: Menagius draws
it from the Fr. G. Artiller, to furnish with Arms. Artisan, from the Fr. G.
Artisan; which comes from the Lat. Ars, Art. Artist, v. Artisan. As, from the
Teut. Als, l being taken out for sound-sake. Ascertain, from the Fr. G.
Acertener, and that from the Lat. Praep. Ad, and Certus, sure. Ash, from the
AS. Acse, Aese, Dan. Ask, Ask, Belg. Esch: It may be derived from (...), to
kindle; because it easily takes fire, and is very hot when kindled. Ashamed, v.
Shame. Ashes, from the AS. Ashan, the same; Belg. and Teut. Asche.
Ash Wednesday, without doubt, corrupted from the Belg. Asche-woens-dach; the
French call it Le jour des cendres, the Day of Ashes; because of sprinkling
themselves therewith, in token of Repentance. Aside, v. Side. Ask, from the AS.
Ascian, Acscian, Aescian, Ahsian, Axian, Geacsian, to interrogate, or question:
You may derive it, if you please, from the Gr. (...), to require, or
expostulate. A-skew, v. Skew. A-sleep, v. Sleep. A-slope, v. Slope. Asp, or
Aspen-tree, from the AS. Aesp, Espe; it always trembles: In Lat. Populus Arbor,
seu Populus tremula. A-squint, v. Squint. Ass, from the AS. Assa, the same.
Assail, from the Fr. G. Assailler; q. d. Adsalire, to leap upon. Assassinate,
from the Ital. Assassinare, murtherously to assault. Assault, from the Fr. G.
Assault, or Ital. Assalto, the same; q. d. Lat. Adsaltare. Assay, from the Fr.
G. Essay: But I rather incline to think it might come from the Lat. Praep. Ad,
and the old Verb Sagire; q. d. to aspire to be wise. Assemble, from the Fr. G.
Assembler, and that from the Lat. Ad, and Simul, together; q. d. Adsimulare, to
gather together in a body. Assess, or Sess, from the Ital. Assessare, if not
from Assessus, or Concessus, assent, or consent; because the Men on whom an
Assessment is made, give their assent to pay it. Ass^ege, v B^siege. Ass^zes,
or, Sizes, from the Fr. G. Assise, and that from the Lat. Assidere, from the
Judges sitting upon the Bench to hear Trials. Assoll, from the Fr. G.
Assouldre, and that from the Lat. Absolvere, to free, or let go at liberty.
Assort, v. Sort. Assure, from the Fr. G. Asseurer, Ital. Assicurare; q. d. Lat.
Adsecurare, so to demonstrate a thing, as to leave no room for doubt. Assuage,
from the Lat. Ad, and Suadeo; that is, to appease or pacify by persuasion.
Astonish, from the Fr. G. Estonner; but more likely from the Lat. Attonitus.
A-stradle, v. Stradle. Astray, v. Stray. Astride, v. Stride. Asunder, from the
AS. Asundran, Asundron, and that from the Verb Asyndrian to separate, Belg.
Sonderen, Teut. Absondern, the same. V. Sundry. At, from the AS. Aet, and both
from the Lat. Ad. Atchieve, from the Fr. G. Atchever, to perfect a thing
undertaken. Attach, from the Fr. G. Attacher, idem; both from the barbarous
Lat. Attaxare, or Attactare. Attack, v. Tack, and Attach. Attain, from the Fr.
G. Attaindre, and that from the Lat. Attenere. Attainted, from the Fr. G.
Attaindre, or from the Lat. Attingere; q. d. stained or tainted with a
suspicion of Guilt, says Minsevus. Attempt, from the Fr. G. Attenter; q. d.
Lat. Attentare, to venture upon a thing. Attend, from the Fr. G. Attendre, both
from the Lat. Attendere; from the same Root comes our Attendance. Attire, from
the Fr. G. Attour, dress for Women's heads: It may not unlikely be drawn from
the Praep. Ad, and our word Tire. Atone, rather Atone; q. d. at one, i. e.
friends again: But if you spell it with tt, it must be drawn from Ad and Tone,
by a Metaphor; a consort or Consonancy in Music, representing the agreement of
friends. I choose the first. Attorney, from the Fr. G. now out of use, Attour;
the word Tour signifiing Turns, being still in use; q. d. to serve another's
turn in his absence. Avail, from the Fr. G. Valoir, Ital. Avalere, idem; q. d.
Lat. Advalere, to prevail with one to do a thing. Avaunt, in Lat. Apage; but it
is a proper French word untouched. Avantmure, a term in War, from the Fr. G.
Avaunt, and Mur, a wall, q. d. one wall before another. Avast, a word most
common to Seamen: Possibly it may come from the Lat. Praep. Ab, from, and the
Belg. Haeste^, to make haste; q. d. make haste hence. Audit, and Auditor, from
the Lat. Audio, to hear. Avenues, from the Fr. G. Avenue, an entrance: It is a
military word. Avenge, v. Revenge. Avere, i. e. to assert the truth; from the
Fr. G. Averer, Ital. Averare, q. d. Lat. Adverare, to affirm for truth. Vossius
says, that the Verb Verare was formerly in use; whence Venus. Avery, the King's
Avery, the place where Oats are put for Horses. Minsevus draw it from the
Belg. Haver, (which word is still in use in the North of England, where they
call Oats, Haver;) or Teut. Haber: But it comes undoubtedly, from the Barb.
Lat. Averia, an Avery. Hence likewise Average. Auff, from the Belg. Alf, or
Alve, an earthly Demon, l in pronunciation being often sounded as u; as in
Psalm, quasi Psaum; Holborn, quasi Houborn, etc. See Elf. Augar, or Wimble,
from the AS. Nauegar, Belg. Eveger, Aveger, Egger, Eggher, Aggher, the same.
Awkward, from the AS. Aeerd, untowardly; the contrary to Toward. Aumelef of
Eggs, from the Fr. G. Aumelette, Omelette, a Frigacy of Eggs. Aunt, Fr. G.
Tante, Ital. Ameta; both from the Lat. Amita, an Aunt, by Father or Mother's
side. Avoid, from the Fr. G. Vuide, void, and the initial Particle A. Avouch,
from the Fr. G. Avouer, to affirm: Not unlikely from the Lat. Advocare; i. e.
to take ones part: Or if you had rather, take it from Ad, and Votum, a Vote; q.
d. Advotare, to give ones Vote for. Avow, from the Fr. G. Avouer; or rather,
from Ad, and Votum, to vote for. Aw, from the Belg. and Teut. Acht, Achte,
observance, or respect. Awake, v. Wake. Award, from the idle Particle A, and
the AS. Weard, toward, or against. Spelman derives it from the Anglo-Norm.
Agard, Fr. G. Garder; q. d. that which is to be observed or kept. Aware, from
the Teut. Gewahr, Werden, to perceive, to animadvert. V. Beware, Wrard, and
Guard. Away, from the AS. Aeg, absent, abroad. Awl, from the AS Aele, Ale, Bell.
Aelsene, Elsene, Else; Teut. Aael, Alsen, Elsen; whence, without doubt, comes
the North-Country word Elsen, or ^^lsen, signifying an Awl. Awry, v. Wry. Ax,
from the AS. Acse, Aex, Eax, Aease; Dan. Ox, Belg. Ackse, Axe, Aeckse; Teut.
Ar, Axt; all of them from the Lat. Ascia, and that immediately from the Gr.
(...), the same. Axle-tree, from the Ital. Assile, and that from the Lat.
Axile; i. e. the wood that passes through the Nave of each Wheel, to keep them
together, and support the Carriage. The Root of all, is the Lat. Axis. Ay, from
the AS. A, Aa, for ever, always; Run. Dan. Ae, Belg. Ewe, Euwe, an Age,
Eternity: All from the Lat. Aevum. Ay me, from the Fr. G. Ai, Ahi; Ital. Ahime,
Lat. Eheu, Heu; Gr. (...), all of them from a natural tone. Ayl, or Ail; as,
What ails thee? from the AS. Adel, Adl, a disease; which they that understand
Greek, may draw from the Gr. (...), to labor or strive, as Wrestlers do, or as
sick people do in some distempers. An Ayry Man, from the Fr. Air, comeliness,
or a good presence. Azure, from the Fr. G. Azur, Asur; Ital. Azurro, Span.
Azul, Arab. and Pers. Lazurd, Gr. Barb. (...); all of them from the Lat.
Lazulus, Lapis.
B.
BAbe, or Baby, from the Ital. Babbolo, Bambo, Bambino, Gr. (...), Heb. Ab.
Sir. Abba, a father. I think it rather comes from those almost inarticulate
words, children are first heard to utter, bab, dad, and mam; whence the
indulgent mother fawns upon the child, and cries babe, babbe, baby, daddy,
mammy, etc. Babble, from the Belg. Babel, Bebel, insipid discourse; or from the
Tower of Babel, where all Languages were confounded: Or, as Menagius has it,
from Bambo, Bambino; from thence Bambinare, q. d. to stammer, as does a child.
Bables, from the Fr. G. Babioles, Ital. Babbole, trifles: Or rather, from our
own word, Babe, Ital. Babbolo, an infant; q. d. children's toys. Right Baubles.
Baboon, from the Fr. G. Babouin, Ital. Babbuino, a kind of Ape; perhaps from
Babe, and the termination On, great, q. d. a great child; for they most
resemble Mankind. Back, from the AS. Bac, Baec, Baece, which denote the same.
Back-bite, to slander one absent; from our own word Back, and Bite; q. d.
ashamed to say it to the party's face. Bacon: Menagius doubts not to derive
it from our own word Bake, because it is dried with smoke. It may not absurdly
be drawn from the Ital. Pacchia, nourishing food; and this from the Lat.
Pascere, to feed or nourish. Bad, from the Belg. Quaed, Idem. Badge, from the
Belg. Bagghe, and this from the Lat. Bacca, a Jewel, or Pearl; because the Arms
of renowned men were adorned with precious stones. Badger, not unlikely from
the Teut. Back, a Jaw Bone; q. d. Backer; (i. e.) having strong jaws. Baffle,
from the Fr. G. Befler, to supplant or cheat; or Baffouer, to cover the eyes
with a Veil; but this from the initial Particle, Teut. Be, and the Fr. G. Fol,
which is pronounced Fou, a Fool; as we say, to make a Fool of, or befool one.
Bagg, from the AS. Belge, both from the Lat. Bulga, sig. the same. Baggage,
provision for an Army, from our English Bagg; for Soldiers Necessaries are
often carried in Bags or Snap-sacks: From hence comes that other Baggage, Fr.
G Bagasse, Ital. Bagascia, a Whore, a common Strumpet; in Soldiers Camps, a
Camp-whore. Bail, a Surety, one that gives Security for another Man in an
Action of Trespass; from the Fr. G. Bail, a Keeper. V. Bailiff. Bailiff, from
the Fr. G. Bailli, Bailiff, formerly a Steward in an house, Ital. Baglio, a
Foster-father; which, by a Metaphor, manifestly flows from the Lat. Bajulo, to
carry on ones shoulders. Bain, or Bagnio, from the Fr. G. Bain, Ital. Bagno,
both from the Lat. Balneum, an Hot-house. Bait, from the AS. Bagan, Teut.
Baissen; both these may seem to come from the Teut. Be, nigh, and the AS. Aete,
Teut. Esseu, meat. To Bait, (i. e.) make one creature fight with another; from
the AS. Batan, or from the Fr. G. Battre, and this from the Lat. Batuere, to
beat, or strike; or rather from the AS. Bitan, Belg. Bitten. Teut. Beissen, to
bite. V. To Beat, and Bite. The Hawk Baiteth, a term in Hunting; from the Fr.
G. Battre, Ital. Battere, to strike; for in raising his flight, the Hawk
clasheth his wings together. To Bait at an Inn, may probably come from the
Belg. Baete, a commodity, or from Baitze, Baisse, victuals. Baize, from the
Belg. Baey, Teut. Bay, hairy cloth. Minshew draws it from the English word
Base; q. d. a course sort of Cloth; ordinarily spelled Bays. Bake, from the AS.
Bacian, if not more fitly from the Dan. Bager, Idem. Balad, or Ballet, from the
Fr. G. Balade, Ital. Ballata, a Rhyme, or Sonnet; and all of them from the^ Fr.
G. Baller, Ital. Ballare, to dance. V. Ball. Balass, a kind of precious stone,
from the barbarous Lat. Balassius, idem: The famous Th. H. supposes it to be
of a barbarous Indian Original, for that many of their Cities names begin with
Bal; which indeed is likely enough. Balconey, from the Germ. Balck a rafter, or
beam. V. Balck. Scaliger derives it from the Lat. Palus, a stake, or post.
Bald, from the C. Br. Bal, bald before, this from the Gr. (...), signifying the
same. I had rather draw it from the Fr. G. Pele, coming from the Verb Peler, to
pull off the hair, and this most plainly from the Lat. Pilus. Balderdash, from
the AS. Bald, and our Dash; q. d. to mix drink, or any thing without
discretion. To Bale, a term in Sailing, to cast water out of ships with
buckets. We may draw it metaphorically from the Fr. G. Bailler, to sweep, or
make clean. Bale, a carr^age of Merchants Goods; from the Fr. G. Balle, Teut.
Balle, (i. e.) Pila, a ball, from the similitude, as to roundness. Baleful, and
Bale, sad or sorrowful; from the AS. Bael, a Funeral-pile; from the Belg.
Balghen, Belghen, to take a thing ill; or Bale, Sarcina, a burden; for grief
is really the burden of the mind. A Balk, made in plowing, from the Ital.
Valicare, to leap over, or miss: From hence our Eng. word, to balk, or
disappoint one. Balk, a piece of timber laid cross the house; from the Belg.
and Teut Basck. Scaliger, as before, takes it from the Lat. Palus. Ball, from
the C. Br. Pel, in Lat. Pila: Minsevus and Junius will have it to come from the
Gr. (...), jacio, to cast. Ball, from the Fr. G. Bal, and this from the Verb
Baller, to dance; perhaps it may flow from the Gr. (...), and this from the
Primitive (...), to move or wag the feet. Balance, from the Lat. Bis, and
Lanx; q. d. Bilanx, having two scales: From hence comes the word
Counter-ballance. Right spelled, Balance. Ballast, Gravel or Sand, wherewith
Ships are poised; from the initial Particle Be, and the Teut. Last, Onus, a
burden; or more probably from the Dan. Baglast, idem; and this from the Dan.
Bag, and Last; q. d. a Wherry, or Scullar loaded. Ballocks, from the AS.
Beallucas. Minsevus probably enough deriveth it from our English Ball, because
of the similitude. It may likewise be drawn from the AS. Baelig, a purse or
satchel, from the gathering the mouth when they shut. Balloon, from the Fr. G.
Ballon, Ital. Ballone; q. d. a great ball. Ballot, from the Fr. G. Ballottre,
Ital. Ballottare, to cast lots; or from the Noun Ball, because a ball was used
by the ancient Italians in casting lots. Balm, from the Fr. G. Baume, which
comes from the Lat. Balsamum, signifying the same. By the figures Syncope and
Apocope, Balm. Band, from the AS. Band, Bend, Fr. G. Band, Ital. Benda, Belg.
and Teut. Bandt, idem; and all of them from our word Bind; which see. A Band,
from the Fr. G. Band, Ital. Banda, a company of Soldiers; or from the
barbarous Gr. (...), a banner, or flag: Yet I had rather derive them all from
the AS. Fana, Teut. Fahn, Fahne, the same, by a Metonymy of the Adjunct.
Bandroll, from the Fr. G. Banderolle. See Band, and Roll. Bandito, an Exile;
from the Ital. Bando, a Command sent forth by public Authority. Bandog, from
Band, and Dog; q. d. a Dog chained, that he may do no harm; if you had not
rather draw it from the AS. Bana, a Manslayer. Bandoleers, cases for
Gunpowder, from the Fr. G. Band, fascia; q. d. fastened to a Belt with
strings, or thongs of Leather. Bandore, a musical instrument; from the Gr.
(...), idem. To Bandy, from the Fr. G. Bander, and this from the Lat. Pandare,
to make crooked, or to bend. Bane, from the AS. Bana, a slayer or killer of
Men. B^nes, from the Fr. G. Bans, and both from the AS. Abannar, to publish. V.
Banish. Bang, from the Belg. and Teut. Bengel, a club; and this from the Lat.
Baculus, q. d. to beat one with a stick or staff. Bangle-ear'd, (i. e.) a
flap-ear'd Dog; from the AS. Bendan, q. d. Bendle-ears, hanging flat down.
Banisters, by some called Ballisters, a term in Architecture; from the Fr. G.
Balustre, idem; which, I suppose, may come from the Noun Ball, for they are
round. Bank, from the AS. Banc, and and this from the C. Br. Ban, high. Fr.
Jun. derives it from the Gr. (...), an hill, or heap of earth. Bank, a table
upon which an Exchanger counts money; from the Fr. G. Banc, Ital. Banco,
Teut. Benck, AS. Baence, a bench. V. Bench. Banquet; or rather, Banquet, from
the Fr. G. Banquet, Ital. Banchetto, a feast; from Bank, or Bench; which see.
Bankrout, from the Fr. G. Banquerout, Ital. Bancerotto; (i. e.) he has cracked
his credit, and is marched off. Bann, from the Belg. Bannen, to curse; which
comes from the Root Ban, an Anathema, or heavy curse. A Banner, or Standard. V.
Band. Banneret, from the Noun Banner; q. d. a Standard Bearer. Bannish, from
the AS. Abannan, to punish with Exilement. To Barb, from the Lat. Barba, a
beard. Barb, an Horse so called, from Barbary, a Country where he is bred.
Barbed, a term in Heraldry, from the Fr. G. Barbe, having a beard. Barbel, a
fish so called, from the Lat. Barba; q. d. a kind of Mullet, having, as it
were, a beard. A Barber, from the Fr. G. Barber, Ital. Barbiere, a Shaver; all
of them from the Lat. Barba. A Bard, or Dunce, from the C. Br. Bardd, an old
pedling Poet. Bard, harness for Horses; from the Fr G. Barder, Ital Barde;
which come from the Lat. Paratus; q. d. put in readiness. To Bard, or Beard-
wool. V. Beard. Batdasho, from the Ital. Bardascio, and this from Bardo, for
Bardato; q. d. he that puts his body in a lascivious wanton posture. Bare,
perhaps from the Gr. (...), clear, from (...), light; but it does more than
allude to the Lat. Pareo, for Appareo, to be apparent, or visible. To Bargain:
Scaliger, writing against Festus, draws it from an old Lat. word, Bargenna,
idem. I had rather derive it from the Ital. Per, for Pro, and the Verb Gagnare,
for Guadagnare, to gain, or profit. Barge, from the word Bark; which see
hereafter. Barge-couples, a term in Architecture; not unlikely from the AS.
Bur, and the Fr. G. Couple; q. d. a beam, or one piece of wood mortised into
another, to strengthen the building. Bark, from the Dan. Barck, Belg. Berck;
and this from the Teut. Bergen, to cover. To Bark, from the AS. Beorcan, the
same. A Bark, from the Ital. Barca, Varca; q. d. Varcare, to row over a shallow
place; perhaps from the Gr. (...), a kind of boat. Barken, a word very common
in the County of Wilts, a Yard of an house; either from the word Bar, or the
Germ. Bergen, to hide; q. d. a place shut up from the field. The famous Th. H.
is of opinion, that it is depraved from the word Barley. Barm, the head, or
workings out of Beer or Ale; from the Lat. Fermen, for Fermentum; q. d. a
fermentation, which is necessary for preserving the strength of the liquor.
Barn, from the AS. Bern, idem; this from the AS. Bear, and Erne; q. d. a
Repository for any sort of Grain. Barnacle, an instrument to set on the nose of
an unruly Horse; from Bear, and ^eck; q. d. to make the Horse hold up his head.
See Bear, and Neck. Baron, from the AS. Were, Hisp. Varon, a Man; undoubtedly,
from that Germ. or Goth. Were, the same. Baron, and Femme, a term in Heraldry;
(i. e.) a Man and Woman. V. Baron. Bar, from the Fr. G. Barreau, Ital. Barra,
or the Lat. Vara; which, in Vitruvius, signifies a stake. Barrel, from the Fr.
G. and Hisp. Barril, Ital. Barile, C. Br. Baril, idem; if I may not deduce it
from our Engl. Bear, or Beer; because of its being carried upon the Brewers
shoulders; or from its containing of B^er. V. Bear. Barren, from the Belg.
Dubrerende, Fr. Th. Vnb^rig, not bringing forth. Mer. Cas. derives it from the
Gr. (...), a kind of fish that fructifieth not. Barrester, a Lawyer that pleads
at the Bar. V. Bair. Barretour, a wrangling or contentious person; from the
Fr. G. Baratter, to put a trick upon one. Bar^sc^do, from the Fr. G. Barriquer,
Ital. Baricare, to erect a Bulwark with wood. B^rriers, a military sport, or
pass time; from the Fr. G. Barrieres, Ital. Barriera; q. d. an Exercise within
certain limits. Barrow, or Wheel- barrow, from the AS. Beree, the Fr. G.
Berroette; and these from the word Bear, or from the Lat. Vehere, to carry.
Barrow-hog, A Barrow, from the AS. Beargh, Belg. and Teut. Barg; all of them
perhaps from the Lat. Porcus, a Boar-pig, or Hog. Barter, from the Fr. G.
Baratter, Ital. Barrattare; q. d. to exchange one Commodity for another. Base,
from the Fr. G. Bas, Ital. Basso, mean, ignoble; and both these from the Gr.
(...), or (...), or (...), low. Mer. Cas. is pleased to take it from the Gr.
(...), infamy, or shame. Bashaw, a Turkish Magistrate. Martinius has it from
the Turc. Basch; q. d. a Statesman. Bashful, from the word Abash, or make
ashamed; which see. To Bask, or Basker, from the Belg. Backeren, this from the
word Bake; q. d. to warm a young Child at the fire. Basket, from the C. Br.
Basgawd, and Basged, the same. Basin, from the Fr. G. Bassin, Ital. Bacino,
Hisp. Bacin, a wash-pot; which Covarruvias derives from the Gr. (...), hollow.
To Baste Meat, from the other Baste. Baste, from the Lat. Batuere, to beat;
more likely from the Fr. G. Baster; q. d. to load with blows. Salmasius
judges, that it may be taken from the Gr. (...), a club, or cudgel. Bastard,
from the Germ. Bosz, and Aerd, or Art, ill-natured; or on the contrary, from
the Germ. Best, and Aerd, for such, for the most part, are of a virtuous
disposition: Or, as Dr. Davis has it, from the C. Br. Bas, and Tardu; q. d.
basely descended. Bastard-Wine, from the Belg. Bastaerd-Wiine, or from the Lat.
Passum, and the Belg. Aerd; q. d. Wine made of withered or dried Grapes.
Bastile, from the Hisp. Bastide, this from the Verb Bastir, to build, or erect,
q. d. a Fortress, or strong Hold; such as is our Tower of London. Bastion, from
the same Root. Bastonado, a good cudgelling; from the Fr. G. Baston, Ital.
Bastone; and these from the Gr. (...); q. d. a staff supporteth the body. V.
Batoon. Bat, from the Arab. Baphas, idem; or from the AS. Baet, a Boat; because
a Bat's wings, spread out, do somewhat resemble a Boat with Oars. Bat, from the
AS. Batt, a Staff, or Cane; which comes from the Lat. Batuere. V Baste.
Brick-Bat: Th. H. imagines, that it comes from our Eng. Brick, and the Fr. G.
Bout, the end of any thing; q. d. the end of a Brick. Batchellor, an unmarried
Man; also a fresh water Soldier, and a Batchellor of Arts; from the Fr. G.
Bacheliers, Ital. Baciglieri; q. d. Bacillarii, or Bacularii; because perhaps
they were initiated under a gilded Wand, lifted up by the Crier. Or, as
Menagius has it, from Bas Chavalier, an Horseman of an inferior Rank. There
is found in Spelman, and Calvin, in his Lexicon Juridicum, Buccellarius, a
Warrier of a more honorable Order; which comes from Buccella, a portion of
provision allowed for such a Soldier's maintenance; being, as it were, not
married, because he lives abroad from his Wife. Bate, as in Makebate;
certainly of the same rise with Debate; which see. To Bate, for Abate; which
see. Bath, from the AS. Baeth, and this contracted from Baethan, to wash; if I
may not derive it from the Belg. and Teut. Bad; and this from another Teut.
word, Bahen; (i. e.) to nourish the natural heat. Battle, from the Fr. G.
Battaille, Ital. Battaglia, idem; all of them from the Lat. Batuere, to beat,
batter, or combat. Batten, a Northern word, signifying, to grow big any way;
probably corrupted from the word Fatten, or from the Teut. Batten, to do good.
See more of it in Skinner. Batter, from the Fr. G. Battre, Ital. Battere, Lat.
Batuere. v. Beat. Batter for Pancakes, from the same Root. Also Battery, a wall
to receive the blows of warlike Engines, comes from the same Root. To Battle, a
word frequently used in the University at Oxford, signifying to set down the
Scholars Commons; from the Belg. Betalen, which really comes from the AS.
Taellan, Belg. Taelen, Tellen, to pay, by adding the initial Be. Battle-door,
from the Lat. Batillum, and Fr. Th. Dera, Dre, q. d. a shovel made of wood. The
famous Th. H. derives it purely from the Fr. G. Battoir, in Lat. Pavicula, a
rammer, or instrument to pave withal. Battlements, a term in Architecture, from
Battle; which see. Battoon, from the Fr. G. Baston, Ital. Bastone; and both
from the Lat. Batuere: Or rather, according to Salmasius, from the Gr. (...), a
Porter's staff. It alludes to the Gr. (...), idem. Batune, a term in Heraldry;
from the Fr. G. Baston; a staff. Baud, from the Fr. G. Baude, impudent; q. d. A
Bold Woman. Baven, not unlikely so called from the Fr. G. Feuine, from Feu, a
fire. A learned Man derives it from the Belg. Bauwen, Teut Bawen, q. d. slender
sprigs shooting out of the roots of trees that are hewn down for timber. Bawl,
from the Lat. Balare; or which Minsevus very well conjectureth, from Bau Bau, a
barking of Dogs. Mer. Cas. draws it from the Gr. (...), to cry aloud. Bawse,
Bawsze, to cry out in a rage; from the Gr. (...), Latro, and (...), as before;
all of them, perhaps, not so properly words, as sounds. Bay, To keep at Bay, a
term in Hunting and Fowling; from the Fr. G. Abbayer, Ital. Baiare; q. d. a
Dog, by instantly barking, stays the Fowl, till shot by the Fowler: Or from
the AS. Bidan, which comes from the Praep. By; as to this day we say, He stays
by it. A Bay, from the AS. Byge, Belg. Baeye, idem. Minshew draws it from the
Gr. (...) little; because little, in respect of the Sea: Or lastly, from the
Ital. Badare, Belg. Beyden, to stay; because the Sea is calm within the Haven.
Bay, from the Gr. (...), Ash-colored; or (...), a branch of the Palm Tree;
because it resembles it something in color. A Bay Tree, from the Gr. (...),
the same; which heretofore was a token of Victory, as the Laurel is now. To
Bay, as Sheep do, from the Lat. Balare, signifying the same. Bay-window: the
learned Th. H. supposes it to be called as it were Bow-window; q. d. made in
the form of a Bow. Bays, or Bayze, to play or run at Bayze, a Sport used by
some in Lincolnshire, not unlikely from the Noun Bays, because the Victors
were presented with a Garland of Laurel, as a token of Valor. Be, is a
Preposition common to all Germ. Dialects, but especially so to the AS. Teut.
and Belg. often superfluous, yet put before Verbs, Verbals and Participles.
Beacon, a Watchtower; from the AS. Beacn, and this from the initial Part. Be,
and Cennan, Scire, because things are therein discerned a-far off. Beadle, from
the AS. Bydel, Belg. Bedelle, Teut. Beutel, Hisp. Bedel, the same; all of them
from the AS. Biddan, or rather, Beodan, to bid, as Beadles do: Hence To Bid.
Beadroll, from the AS. Beade, and Roll; q. d. a Catalogue of Prayers, said by
Beads. Beads, from the AS. Beade, a Prayer: Hence Beads-man, and the Teut.
Bitten to pray to: I suppose they may all come from the Lat. Petere, to ask. V.
Bid. Beagle, from the Fr. G. Bigles, Ital. Piccolo, and this from the Lat.
Pauculus; (i. e.) a little kind of Hound. Beak, from the Belg. Beck, Rostrum, a
snout, beak, or bill. Beaker, from the Belg. Beker, Teut. Becher, a cup; all of
them perhaps from the Gr. (...), a pitcher, or pot having handles. Beam, from
the AS. Beam, Fr. Th. Boum, Teut. Bawm, idem; but Fr. Jun. derives it from the
Gr. (...), for that the Ancients sacrificed in Groves or Woods. Beam, from the
AS. Beam, Radius, of the same derivation with the other, because of the
similitude. Bean, from the AS. Bean, Belg. Boon, Teut. Bohne, the same. Bear,
from the AS. and the Fr. Th. Beran, Bearan, Portare, to carry on ones
shoulders; or the Dan. Baerer; all of them from the Lat. Fero, and this from
the Gr. (...), to carry. To Bear, or bring forth, from the AS. Beran, Belg.
Ba^ren, Teut. Gebohren, the same. Bear, for a dead body, from the Belg. Baere,
Teut. Baet, Fr. G. Biere, Ital. Bara; all from the word Bear, but for
distinction sake spelled Byer. A Bear, from the AS. Bera, Dan. Biorn, Teut.
Bar, Belg. Baere, and this may be drawn from the Aeol. (...) for (...), Fera,
(...). Beard, from the AS. Beard, Belg. Baerd, Teut. Bart, signifying the same:
It may seem to flow from the Gr. (...), gravity, of which it is a Symptom.
Bearn, a downright Northern word; from the AS. Bearn, Run. Dan. Bar, or Barn,
a son, or a child. Some derive it from the Heb. and Sir. Bar, Filius. Beat,
from the Lat. Batuere, to strike or buffet: If I may not as well draw it from
the Gr. (...), idem. Beautify, from the obsolete Fr. G. Beautifier; q. d.
Bellificare, to make fine. Beauty, from the Fr. G. Beauty, Ital. Belta,
Bellezza; these from the Fr. G. Bell, Beau, and all from the Lat. Bellus, neat,
or handsome. Because, from the Praep. By, and Cause; or rather, from the AS. Be,
and Causa; q. d. for this or that cause. Beck, a word very much used in our
Northern Quarters, from the Belg. Bece, Teut. Back, Dan. Beck, Rivus, a little
River, or Stream. Beck, or Beak, from the Ital. Beccare, To Peck; which see.
Becken, from the AS. Becennan; q. d. to make signs. Become, from By, or the AS.
Be, and Come. Become, or to be meet, from the AS. Ceman, to please, Teut.
Bequam, neat, or fitting. Bed, from the AS. Bed, Belg. Bed, Teut. Bett, and
from these comes Bedding. It also signifies a plat, or quarter in Gardens.
Bedlem, or Bedlam, by our Ancestors called the House of Bethlehem. Minsevus
draws it from the Heb. Beth Lechem, the house of Bread. It may also come from
the Teut. Bettelen, Betteler, q. d. a Lodge, or Mansion for Beggars. V. Beggar,
and Home. Be, from the AS. Beon; and this I might derive from the old Lat. Feo,
which may not unlikely flow from the Gr. (...), Nascor, to be born. A Be, from
the AS Beo, Dan. By, Belg. Bie, Bye, Teut. Bien, C. Br. Baedd, Apicula, a
little Be. Mer. Cas. derives it from the Lat. Apis; from hence, An Eat-Bee, a
Bird so called, because it feeds upon Bees. Beech, from the AS. Bece, Dan.
Bog, which may not absurdly be drawn from the Gr. (...), Dor. (...), idem.
Beef, from the Fr. G. Beauf, both from the Lat. Bove, the Ablat. of Bos, an Ox.
Beer, from the AS. Bear, Hordeum, Barley, because made of Barley. Some derive
it, but not so well, from the Heb. Bar, Frumentum, Bread-corn. Beesen, Bisen,
or Be^zen, blind; a word very frequent in Lincolnshire; from our Eng. By, for
Besides, and the Teut. Sin, sight; q. d. deprived of the most noble sense of
all; viz. the Sight. Becsom, from the AS. Besm, Teut. and Belg. Besem; perhaps
better from the Lat. Versum, by striking out the r, and turning v into b.
Beestings, from the AS. Beast, Belg. Biest, the first milk after a calving;
whether it may not come of our Engl. Bent, is somewhat dubious. It alludes to
the Gr. (...), to curd, or thicken. Aelfricus uses the word Bysting. A Beet of
Flax, from the word Beat. Beetle, or Pavior's Rammer, from the AS. Bytl, Belg.
Beytel, idem; perhaps from the word Beat. Beetle, from the AS. Bitel, idem;
probably from the word Beat, because in the evening, through blindness, they
hit against our faces. Befall, from the AS. Befeolan, Belg. Bevallen, to
happen, to fall out. Befool, v. Fool. Before, from the AS. Beforan, Fr. Th.
Vore, Belg, Voor, Teut. Bevor; all of them perhaps from the Lat. Porro. Beg,
and Beggar, or perhaps better Bagger, because they carry their provision about
with them in bags; or from the Teut. Begeren, to ask: Perhaps it may not
unelegantly be drawn from the Lat. Vagari, to go from place to place. Beget,
from the AS. Begettan, to obtain, or procure. v. Get. Begin, from the AS.
Aginnan, Belg. and Teut. Beginnen; and this we may suppose, from the part. Be,
and Go in; q. d. to enter upon a thing. Beguile, from the part. Be, and Guile;
which see: unless you would derive it from the AS. Begalian, to bewitch, or
inchant. Behalf, from the AS. Be, and Half; which see. Behave, from the word
Have, and the praefix Be; but I rather think it may have come from the Fr. Th.
Behavan, to contain ones self, or keep within bounds; (i. e.) to be mannerly.
Behead, v. Head. Behest, v. Hest. Behind, from the AS. Hindan, Belg. and Teut.
Hinden; all from the AS. Hynan, backwards. Behold, from Be, and Hold; q. d. to
look steadfastly on an object. V. Be, and Hold. Belag, and Belagged, from the
Belg. Beleggen, or Beladen; q. d. loaded, or clogged with dirt, or any other
thing. Belay, from the part. Be, and the word Lay; q. d. to ensnare one. V.
Lay, and Way-Lay. Belch, from the AS. Balcettan; a word feigned from the sound.
Beleaguer, from the Belg. Belegeren, Beleggen, Teut. Belagern, to make a Trench
about. V. Leaguer. Believe, from the AS. Geleafan, which comes from the part.
Ge, and the word Lyfan, to assent, or yield to. Bell, from the AS. Bellan, to
roar, or make a great noise. v. Bellow. Belfrey; either as Minsevus has it,
from the Eng. and AS. Bell, and the Lat. Fero, to bear; or from the Fr. G.
Beuffroy, or Bauffroy, a Watchtower. Bellow, from the AS. Bellan, Belg Belken,
Teut. Bolcken, Fr. G. Bugler, to bellow or low as an Ox; Teut. Bellen, to howl;
all of them from the sound. Bellows, from the AS. Bilig, Teut. Balg, as
Blast-Balg; perhaps all from the Lat. Bulga, a purse, or satchel. Belly, from
the Belg. Balch, Balgh, Teut. Bauch; all from the AS. Baelig, and that from the
Lat. Bulga, or AS. Buce, a paunch: It may not unlikely be drawn from the Ital.
Bellico, the navel. Cov. derives it from the Hisp. Barriga, and this from the
Gr. (...), heavy. Belong, from the Teut. Belangen, the same. Beloved, perhaps
from the Teut. Belieben, to please. V. Love. Below, v. Low. Belt, from the AS.
and Dan. Belte, Belt; both from the Lat. Baltheus, the same. Belly, from the AS.
Belecgan, Belg. Belieghen, to accuse one falsely; or from the part. Be, and Ly;
which see in its place. Bemoan, or deplore, from the AS. Baemaenan. V. To Moan,
or Moan. Bench, from the AS. Baence, Belg. and Teut. Banck, Fr. G. Banc, Ital.
Banco, Panco, the same; some derive all these from the Lat. Abacus, a
cup-board. Bend, from the AS. Bendan, Fr. G. Bender, Dan. Bander, to bow, or
bend; all of them from the Lat. Pandare, to bow, or make crooked. Bend, a term
in Heraldry, from the Fr. G. Bend, any thing to tie round. V. Bind, or Band.
Bend, frequently used by Mariners, from the Fr. G. Bend, Ital. Benda; q. d. a
band holding the sides of the ship together. Bendlet, a diminutive from Bend;
that is, A small Bend; a term in Heraldry. Beneath, from the AS. Beneoth,
Beneothan, below, or under. Bent, or Bents, from the Teut. Bintz, a bull-rush;
this either from our word Bend, or Bind. Benumb, from the AS. Benyman, this
from Niman, (i. e.) the limbs of one stupefied, as being held fast with cold.
Bequeath, from the part. Be, and the AS. Cethan; q. d. to give one a legacy by
word of mouth. Beray, to befoul: See the word Array. Bereave, from the AS.
Bereafan, Belg. Berooven, Teut. Berauven, to spoil; all of them, if I be not
mistaken, from the Lat. Rapere, to snatch away. V. Rob, and Robe.
Bergomer-Pear, from Bergomus, a famous City of Insubria, from whence they were
first brought over: Or as Menagius very well observes, from the Turc.
Bergamout, idem; this from Beg, a Prince, and Armout, a Pear; q. d. the Prince
of Pears. Berry, Coney-Berry, from the Teut. Bergen, to hide; or from the AS.
Bure, a Parlour; q. d. a receptacle for Coneys. It may be derived from the AS.
Byrgena, a Sepulcher, for the similitude of it. Berries, from the AS. Verb
Beran, to bring forth; q. d. the product of trees or shrubs. Berth, a word
amongst Mariners, from our word Bear; q. d. a space, or distance, in which the
ship riding at anchor, is moved to and fro. Besance, or Bezant, a term in
Heraldry; so called, from an old golden Coin first used at Byzantium. Beseech;
formerly, Beseek. v. Seek. Beseem; if I mistake not, from our word See, this
from the AS. Seon, to see; because comely things are pleasant to look upon.
Beset, from the AS. Besittan, Belg. Besetten, Teut. Besetzen; all from the
part. Be, and Settan, to set. Beshit, from the Teut. Verb Bescheissen;
metaphorically signifying to defraud, or cheat, or leave in the lurch. Beshrew,
either from Shrew; which sec: or from the Teut. Beschreyen, to fascinate, or
bewitch; and this from Be, and Schreyen; as we say, to cry down. Besides, from
the AS. Be, and Side; q. d. at ones side. Besiege, from Be Circum, about, and
Siege; which see. Besmear, from Be, and Smear; which see. Besmut, v. Smut.
Besot, v. Sot. Bespeak, from the part. Be, and Specan; q. d. to speak for a
thing beforehand. Besprinkle, from the part. Be, and Sprinkle; which see.
Best, from the AS. Betest, by contraction Best; this, I suppose, from the word
Biddan, Teut. Bitten, to pray for; i. e. a thing most desirable, and therefore
most worthy to be asked of God in prayer. To Bestirr ones self, from the part.
Be, and Stire; so as to sweat in doing any thing. Bestow; Minsevus supposes it
to come from the Belg. Besteden, to spend upon some person or thing: I had
rather draw it from the AS. Be, and Stow, a place; q. d. to place one out. To
Bett, from the Teut. Wetten, Belg. Wedden, to wager. v. Abett. Betake, from the
part. Be, and Take; q. d. to fly to the Altar, or Sanctuary: Or rather, from
the AS. part. Be, and Taecan, to commit ones self to a thing, or person.
Bethink, from the AS. Bethencan, Belg. and Teut. Bedencken, to ponder, or
consider; from the part. Be, and Think; which see. Betide, from the part. Be,
and the AS. Tid, time; q. d. to happen in time. Betimes, from the AS. Be, near,
or hard by; q. d. By Time. v. Time. Betoken, from the Belg. Beteeckenen,
Teeckenen, to denote, or signify. Betray, from the Belg. Bedrieghen, Dan.
Betrager, to cozen. Somnerus derives it from the AS. Dris, an Impostour, or
Cheat; this perhaps from the Lat. Trica, a Witch; Tricare signifying, to
entangle, or bewitch. Betroth, from Be, and Troth; q. d. to make sure to a
Wife, by giving her ones Troth. V. Troth, and True. Betrust, to commit a thing
to ones trust; from the part. Be, and Trust; which see. Better, from the AS.
Better, Belg. Beter, Teut. Besser, Dan. Bedre; all the same; however, it
alludes to the Gr. (...), idem. Between; Minshew derives it, not improperly,
from the Belg. part. Be, and Tween, two: See Twain, and Two. Bever, from the
AS. Before, Aelfrick Befer, Dan. Beffver, Teut. Biber, Fr. G. Bievre; all from
the Lat. Fiber, idem; a Hat so called. Bever, from the Fr. G. Baviere, Ital.
Baviera, Hisp. Bavera, the Bever of an Helmet. Bever, Merenda, an After-noons
nunchion; from the Ital. Bevre, to drink. Beverage, from the Fr. G. Breuvage,
this from the Lat. Bibere, to drink; or rather, from the Ital. Beveraggio, and
that from the Verb Bevre, to drink; because the money laid out upon the first
wearing of new cloths, etc. is spent in drink. The Pear Beurre, (i. e.) Pyrum
Butyraceum, Butter-pear, because as soft as Butter. Bewail, from the prefix Be,
and Wail; which see. Beware, from the Belg. Bewaren, Teut. Bewahren, to guard;
and this from the Fr. Th. Beuuaran, which Fr. Jun. derives from the Gr. (...),
or (...), to take care. Bewitch, v. Witch. Bewray, from the AS. Wregan, Belg.
Wroeghen, to discover, and the prefix Be. Beyond, v. Yond, and Yonder.
Bezantler, the next knag in a Stag's horn to the Browantler; q. d. Bisantler,
another Antler. v. A^tlers. Bezeill of a ring, a word found in Higginius; from
the Fr. G. Bassin; q. d. the broadest part of a ring, wherein the stone or
signet is set. Bezoar, from the Persick Pazar, or Pazan, a Goat, because it is
found in the Belly of a certain Goat. Bezzle, q. d. Bevel, from the Ital.
Bevere, this from the Lat. Bibere; or q. d. Beastle, as we say, to be as drunk
as a Beast. Bias, from the Fr. G. Biais, Ital. Sbiaggio, an inclination; q. d.
the Bias of the Bowl makes it incline to the Jack. Bib, a napkin, or such like
cloth, put upon children's breasts, to keep their Cloths clean; from the Lat.
Bibere, to drink. To Bib, to drink a little and often, from the Lat. Bibere, as
before. Bicker, or Bickering, from the C. Br. Bicre, a Conflict; but I had
rather derive it from the word Pickeer, or Pike; which see. Bid, from the AS.
Beodan, Fr. Th. Gibinden, the same. To Bid Guests, from the Dan. Beder, Biuder,
Belg. Bidden; all from the AS. Biddan, to entreat, or earnestly invite. To Bid
for a Commodity, from the AS. Biddan, Belg. Bieden, to offer; all perhaps from
the Lat. Petere, to ask. Bigarreaur, a sort of Pear, red and white, from the
Fr. G. Bigarrer, in Lat. Bivariare; q. d. a party-colored Pear, partly white,
partly red. Big, from the Dan. Bug, AS. Buce; q. d. one whose belly struts out;
or from the Lat. Bucco; q. d. one with thick, fat cheeks. Bug may seem to come
of the Gr. (...), thick. Biggin, a child's coif, from the Fr. G. Beguin, and
this from St. Begga, that first instituted it, for a distinction of certain
religious women. Bight, a term in Sailing; I suppose, it is as much as to say,
The Bought, or bending of a cable. Bildge, a term in Sailing; from the AS.
Bilig, a belly; a ship is said to be Bildged, when it springs a Leak. Bile,
from the AS. Bile, Belg. Buyle, Teut. Beul, an ulcer, or sore; or from the Lat.
Bulla, because it stands out like a bubble in water. Bilk, from the Teut.
Bilck, an huckle-bone, used in playing at Cockall; also a Die. Bill of a bird,
from the AS. Bile, idem: It alludes to the Gr. (...), an entrance. A Bill, from
the AS. Bill, Belg. Byl, Teut. Beil, a sort of Ax. Bill, from the Gr. rec.
(...), for (...), the Lat. Libellus, by casting away the first syllable; or
lastly, from the barb. Lat. Bulla, a Bull, or Bill; which, indeed, is most
probable. Billet, from the Fr. G. Billette; perhaps from our Eng. Pile, and
this from the Lat. and Gr. Pyra, an heap of wood for burning the dead. Billet,
to quarter Soldiers upon command by a schedule, or paper; from the Fr. G.
Billet, Ital. Bolletta; all, I suppose, from the words Bill, or Bull, whereof
they are only Diminutives. Billiars, from the Fr. G. Billart, a stick or staff
that we put the ball from us with; and this from the Lat. Pila, because they
play with round things like balls. Billow, from the Teut. Bilg, Dan. Bolge;
both from Bullio; or rather, the Teut. Bellen, to make a noise like a dog, as
waves do, rolling one on the back of another. Bilter, a word found in a book
called The Art of Fowling, a bird haunting fens (as says the Author) from the
Teut. Beltz, Belg. Pels; q. d. having a kind of wool instead of feathers. Bind,
most probably from the Lat. Binare, for Combinare, by interposing d, for things
bound, are, as it were, united in one body. Binn, from the AS Binne, Belg.
Benne, a basket for bread. Voss. derives it from the Lat. Benna: I would rather
draw it from the AS. Pyndan, to enclose. Birch, from the AS. Birc, Dan. Birck,
Belg. Berck, the same. Bird; Minsevus derives it from the Belg. Broeden,
Vrueden, to sit upon: Somewhat more nearly it may be taken from the AS. Bredan,
to keep warm. V. Breed, and Brood. Birlet, from the Fr. G. Bourlet, this from
Bourre, a lock of wool, by adding the termination Let; q. d. stuffed with wool
or flocks. Birth, from the AS. Beorthat, Teut. Burt, idem. V. To Bear. Bishop,
from the AS. Bisceo, Biscop, Teut. Bischoff, Belg. Bischop; all from the Lat.
and Gr. Episcopus, idem. B sket; q. d. Lat. Biscoctus, twice baked. Bist, from
the AS. Bist, corrupted from Be. See Be. Bitch, from the AS. Bicce, Bice,
idem. Abr. Mill. affirms, that the Persian word Bitse signifies the same.
Bite, from the AS. Bitan, Belg. Beyten, Teut. Betssen, the same. Bitt, from the
AS. Bitole, Teut. Gebisz, Belg. Ghebit; so called, because chawed by the horse.
Bittackle, from the Belg. Bitte, a mouthful, the Lat. Acus, a needle, or
Tackle; which see. Bitter, from the AS. Biter, which comes from Bitan, to bite;
yet it seems to allude to the Gr. (...), idem. Bittern, from the Belg.
Butoor, Fr. G. Butor, or quasi Bos Taurus, for thrusting its beak into the
ground, it bellows like an Ox. Bitts, proper to Mariners, from our Eng. Pight,
a part. of the Verb To P^tch. Blab, or Blabber, from the Teut. Blapperen, Belg.
Labberen, idem; from the Lat. Labia, Elabiare, to speak rashly, or unadvisedly.
Blabber-lip'd, from the Lat. Labium, Labrum, a lip. Black, from the AS. Blac,
Ink, or Blaecan, to make black like Ink. Black-berrits, from the AS.
Blaece-Berian, Blaece-Bergen, signifying the same. See Black, and Berry.
Bladder, from the AS. Blaran, to blow; because it is easily filled with wind.
Blade of a Sword, from the AS. Blaed, a leaf, because broad as a Leaf. Mer.
Cas. derives it from the Gr. (...), a spit. Blade of Corn, from the AS. Blaed,
Belg. Blad, Bladr, Teut. Blatt, a leaf; all immediately from the Lat. Latus,
and this from the Gr. (...), broad. Blain, from the AS. Blaran, or the Teut.
Blaen, to blow; q. d. a blowing up in the Skin, or a swelling. Blame, from the
Fr. G. Blasmer, this from the Lat. Blasphemare, to reprove, or find fault with.
Blanch, from the Fr. G. Blanchir, to make white; V. Blank: From, hence, To
Blanch Almonds; (i. e.) take off the rind and husk. Blanch, or White-Coat, a
name of a bitch. V. Blank. Blank page in a book, where nothing is writ, from
the Fr G. Blanc, Hisp. Blanco, white. I had rather derive it from the AS.
Blitan, Teut. Blicken, Blincken, to shine. Blank, money newly coined or
stamped, from the Fr. G Blanc, signifying white. Blanket, from the Fr. G.
Blanchet; both from the Ital. Bianchetta, white cloth. Blanquet- Pear, from the
Fr. G. Le Poir Blanquet; (i. e.) somewhat white. Blare, from the Belg. Blaren,
Teut. Blarren; all perhaps from the Lat. Flare, Efflare, to blow, or breath
out. Blast, from the AS. and Dan. Blaest, a Blast; all from the Lat. Flare, to
blow; and this perhaps from the Gr. (...), to be hot, to make a noise, as does
seething water. V. To Blow. Blast of my meat, a word common in the Bishopric
of Durham; perhaps from the AS. Blaese, a torch, or flame; q. d. one that
blusheth often at table. Blasted, from our En. Blast, struk with a deadly puff
of wind. Blay, v. Bleak. Blaze, to divulge; from the AS. Blaese, properly, a
torch, or lamp; improperly, a manifestation, or declaration; or from the Teut.
Blasen, to blow abroad. V. Blast, and Blow. Blaze, a violent or scorching
flame; from the AS. Blaese, or the Teut. Blasen, to blow; because, taking the
wind, it makes a great noise. Blazon, from the AS. Blaese, metaphorically
signifying, a show, or manifestation; or the Fr. G. Blason, Ital. Blasone, an
Escutcheon, or Coat of Arms for a great Family. Bleach, from the AS. Aeblece,
to set a sunning, or whiten linen in the Sun; and this perhaps from the
negative Prefix Ae, and Blece, black; q. d. not black. Bleak, lean and weak;
also a Bleak, or chill wind. It alludes to the Gr. (...), infirm, wanting
strength. Bleak, or Blay- fish; not unlikely, from the Gr. (...); q. d. a fish
worth little. Bleak, or pale. V. Bleach. Blear-eyed, from the Belg. Blaer, a
push, or wheal; q. d. one having a rheum, or humor in the eyes: Or from the
Fr. G. Blaireau, a badger, much obnoxious to this disease in the eyes. Bleat,
from the AS. Bletan, Belg. Blaeten; all perhaps from the Lat. Balatus, a
bleating of lambs, or sheep. Bleb; some take it from the Gr. (...), a vein: I
had rather draw it from the Teut. Blaen, to swell. To Bleed, from the AS.
Bledan, the same. V. Blood. Blemish, from the Fr. G. Blesme, Bleme; and these
from the Lat. Plumbeus; q. d. to make a thing look pale like lead. V. Blane.
Blend, from the AS. Blendan, to mingle; perhaps from the word Blind; q. d. by
mixing one thing with another, their former relish is so much altered, that you
cannot perceive distinctly the taste of each ingredient. Bless, and Bliss, from
the AS. Bliss, gladness; this from the Germ. Be-lassen, for Lassen, to
dismiss; because, at parting, we use to wish one another happiness. Blew, from
the Teut. Blaw, Belg. Blauw, C. Br. Blawr, sky-colour'd; all from the Lat.
Flavus, Blue. Write Blue. Blew as a Razour; (i. e.) Blew as Azare, says D. Th.
H. Right Blue. Blight, the same that Mill-dew is; perhaps from the Teut.
Bleych. pale, from the color. Blind, from the AS. and Dan. Blind, Belg.
Blind, Teut. Blind, idem. A Blind, from Blind; such a thing as hinders the
Enemy from seeing the transactions in a Camp. Blink, either from the Dan.
Blincker, or from the Belg. and Teut. Blincken, or the Teut. Blintzen, to be
half blind: from hence comes our Eng Blinkard, one born blear-eyed. To Blink
beer; a word frequently used in Lincolnshire; from the AS. Blinnan; (i. e.) to
keep it unbroached, till it grow sharp. Bliss, an abstract of the Adject.
Blithe; which see. Blister, from the Belg. Bluyster: they seem both to allude to
the Gr. (...), to bubble up. Blithe, from the AS. Blithe, Belg. Bliide; and all
perhaps from the Lat. Laetus, brisk, or merry. Bloach; it is, not unlikely, a
contract of the AS. Blodig, i. e. a bloody tumor, or swelling. Block, from the
Belg. and Teut. Block, Bloch, Fr. G. Bloc, a log of wood. To Block up, from the
AS. Beluccan, to shut up; as says D. Th. H. V. Lock. Blood, from the AS. Blod,
Belg. Bloed, Teut. Blut, id. possibly, from the Gr. (...), to spring out; yet I
had rather draw it from Goth. ant. Blod, soft, gentle; or from the Teut. Blaen,
to swell; or, which is most likely, from the Belg. Blosen, to grow red.
Bloodings, the same with Black-Puddings. v. Blood. Bloom, a contract from
Blossom; or from the Teut. Bsum, Belg. Bloem, a flower. Fr. Jun. derives it
from the Gr. (...), to bud, or shoot forth. Blossom, from the AS. Blosm, Belg.
Bloessem, a flower; or, which is better, from the Gr. (...), to sprout forth.
Blot, from the Fr. G. Blotter; which, for ought I know, may come from the Lat.
Ablutare, a Frequentative of the Verb Abluere, to wash away. Blote, to set
a-smoaking, or drying by the fire. Minsevus derives it from the Belg. Bloedt,
blood: I would rather draw it from the Belg. Blosen, to be red. Whence we say,
Blote-colour'd; (i. e.) one that has a ruddy countenance. To Blow, from the
AS. Blaran, Teut. Blaen, the same. V. Blast. A Blow with a stick, etc. Minsevus
derives it from the Belg. Blouwe, and this from the Gr. (...), for (...), to
smite; but Mer. Cas. from (...), to cast; because, in fetching the stroke, we,
as it were, throw our arm from us. Blubber, from the Ital. Babbolo, a child;
because children are most subject to it. Blunder, from the Belg. Lunderen, or
the Teut. Boldern, to make a noise. Blunderduss, from the Belg. Donder-buss;
because it rattles like thunder; or from the Dan. Buldrer, and Buyse, for the
same reason. Blunt, from the Fr. G. Plomb; and this from the Lat. Plumbum;
because, Lead being sharpened, holds no edge. Blurr; for ought I know, from the
Hisp. Borra, a blot; but most probably, from the Lat. Abluere, to wash out.
Metaphorically. To Blurt out, from the Teut. Blatzen; and this perhaps from the
old Lat. Blatire, to prate, or talk idly. Blush, from the Belg. Bloose,
redness; or the Dan. Blusel, fear: We may metaphorically derive it from the Gr.
(...), to diffuse; because, upon fear or shame, the blood spreads its self all
over the face. Bluster, used instead of Blaster. V. Blast, and Blow. Bo, Boggle
Bo, a saying in Lincolnshire, to affright children withal. See Boggle Bo.
Board, from the Belg. Berd, a plank. V. Board. Boast, from the AS. Boan, Belg.
and Teut. Pochen, C. Br. Bost, to vaunt; and all of them from the Lat. Boar,
for Reboare; q. d. to make ones own praises ring again. Boat, from the AS.
Bate, Baet, Belg. and Teut. Boot, the same: Notwithstanding, it may come from
the Teut. Bott, i. e. an Internuncio of a fleet. Boat-swain, from the AS. Bate,
a boat, and San, a young man, or servant. V. Swain. To Bob, v. Fob off. Bob, or
Bob-tail, from the Hisp. Bobo, a fool; spoken in derision of those that tuck up
their coats behind, as short as an horses dock. Bobbin, from the Fr. G. Bobine,
a little round thing to work Bone-lace withal; both from the Lat. Bombyx, a
Silkworm. Bode, Fore-Bode, from the AS. Bodian, to foretell, Teut. Vorbott, a
prediction, or prophecy; both from the AS. Bode, Teut. Bott, a messenger.
Bodkin: Minsevus derives it from the C. Br. Bodkin, signifying the same. It may
very likely have been called Bodikin, a little body, for its smalness. Body,
from the AS. Bodige, stature. Minshew derives it from the Belg. Boode, a cover;
q. d. the mansion of the mind. Bog, from the Fr. G. Bouche, an entrance; or
rather, from the Ital. Buca, an hole. A learned man derives it from the Belg.
Boogen, to bend; because it gives way to one treading upon it. Boggle-Bo, a
saying very usual in Lincolnshire; quasi Bos. Boans, a lowing Ox; in the Belg.
Bulleman, from Bulle, a Bull, and Man; q. d. a monster, half a Bull, and half a
Man. To Boggle, to stammer through immoderate anger; from Bog, a Quag-mire; and
metaphorically, one at a stand in speech, as if he stuck in a Bog, or in the
clay. Bo-peep, a play among children; from Bo, and Peep; which see. Boil, from
the Fr. G. Builler; this from the barb. Lat. Bullire, idem. Boisterous:
Minsevus derives it from the AS. Bister, Belg. B^ise, a tempest. The learned
Th. H. by an easy Metaphor, derives it from the Fr. G. Boisteux, rough. Mer.
Cas. from the Gr. (...); i. e. to seek one by clapping the hands, and crying
aloud. Book, a common word in Lincolnshire. It may be drawn from the Lat.
Evocare, to revoke; or better from the Belg. Boocken, to thrust; for vomiting
is, as it were, a thrusting out of things swallowed. Bold, from the AS. Bald,
Belg. Boude, Fr. G. Baud, Ital. Baldo, the fame; and all of them from the Teut.
Bald, hastily; q. d. one that runs headlong into dangers. The main Boling,
a term in sailing; from the Fr. G. Boline, Bouline, a certain rope in a ship.
Boister, from the AS. Bolster, Belg. Bolster, Teut. Pulster, idem; and all of
them from the Belg. Pulwe, and Ster;) which is manifestly corrupted from the
Lat. Pulvinus, or Pulvinar, the same. Bolt, from the Belg. Buydelen, Teut.
Beutelen, Fr. G. Bluter, to sift. Bolt, a round ball to be thrown with slings;
from the AS. Bolt, Bolg. Bout, Teut. Boltz, C. Br. Bolt, the same. Dr. Davis
draws it from the Gr. (...), and (...), to cast, or throw. To Bolt out, from
the Fr. G. Voulte; q. d. to bend out as an arch: But more likely from the Fr.
G. Bouter, to thrust out; because it does, as it were, force it self out.
Boltel, a term in Architecture; from the preceding word Bolt. Bombard, from the
barb. Lat. Bombarda, a gun; both feigned from the sound. Bond, from the AS.
Bond, q. d. an obligation, or binding. Bone, from the AS. Ban, Belg. and Dan.
Been, Teut. Bein, the same. Bone-fire; q. d. Bonus ignis; i. e. portending good
luck. Bone-lace, from the Fr. G. Bon, good, and Lace; which see. D. Th. H.
derives it purely from Bone, and Lace; affirming, that in old times, bones
served for spindles. Bongrace, from the Fr. G. Bonne-Grace, an handsome mein;
because it becomes children well. Bonhommes, a third Order of a Franciscan
Fraternity; from the Fr. G. Bons Hommes; i. e. devout, good men. Boutta, a fish
so named; either quasi, Bonus natator, a good Swimmer; or from the Hisp.
Bonito, Bonico, it being indifferent good to eat. Bonnet, from the Fr. G.
Bonnet, Ital. Bonnetto, the same. You may likewise derive it from the Fr. G.
Bon a la nuit; q. d. good to wear in cold nights. Booby; I suppose, from the
Fr. G. Bouvier, an Herds-man; for such, most an end, are very ignorant. We may
further derive it from the Hisp. Bobo, or Bovo, signifying a fool. After all,
it were not absurd if we should draw it from the Teut. Bube, Belg. Boeve, a
child; q. d. one that will be a child still. Book, from the AS. Boc, Fr. Th.
Buoch, Dan. Bog, Teut. Buch, idem; all, not unlikely, from the AS. Bocce, a
Beech-tree; because the ancient Germans writ upon the barks of Beech-trees,
instead of paper. Boom, a long pole; from the AS. Beam, Belg. Boom, Teut. Baum,
a tree; it being made of a whole young tree. To Boon, a word used in
Lincolnshire, signifying, to mend the highways; from the Fr. G. Abonner, which
formerly signified, to make better. But I think it may better be brought from
the Belg. Bane, Teut. Bahn, a public path. Boon, from the AS. Been, a request,
or petition. Boon, A Boon Blade, or Companion; from the Fr. G. Bon Compagnon, a
good fellow. Boor, from the Belg. Boer, Teut. Bawer; all from the Dan. Boer;
or, which is all one, from the AS. Byan, to inhabit. Right Bower. Boot, from
the AS. Bot, a compensation, or reward. And Whelocus draws it from the AS.
Betan, to make amends. Boot, What Boot's it you? from the Belg. Baeten, Teut.
Batten, to profit, or avail. It seems to allude to the Gr. (...), to help, or
assist. Boots: Minsh. draws it from the Belg. Voot, a foot: I had rather draw
it from the Fr. G. Boteau, fascis; because, in those ruder times, straw
wreathed about their legs, was instead of boots. Booths, from the Belg. Boede,
a small cottage; Dan Bood, a shop. Booty, from the Teut. Beutel, a a purse; or,
which is far more probable, from the Belg. Baete, gain, or profit. Board, from
the AS. and C. Br. Board, Board, a table. See Board. To Board, from the Run. Dan.
Board, a side; Fr. G. Belg. Teut. Board, a brim; or from the Fr. G. Abborder, to
approach, or come near, as ships do when they grapple. V. To Border. Border,
from the Teut. Borten; or rather, from the Fr. G. Bordure, a fringe; all, I
suppose, from the Dan. Bort, Teut. Fort, on the outside, in sight. Bore, from
the AS. Borian, to make an hole through; both from the Lat. Forare, and that
from the Gr. (...), an hole through any thing. Bore; or rather, Boar, from the
AS. Bar, Teut. Eber, an hog; all, not unlikely, from the Lat. Aper, signifying
the same. Borough, from the AS. Burg, a city; or the Teut. Burg, a defense, or
fortification; these from the Gr. (...), a tower. We likewise use the word, A
Burgess, coming from the Fr. G. Bourg, a city. Borrow, from the AS. Borgian,
Belg. Borghen, Teut. Borgen, to lend, or take upon loan. Bosom, from the AS.
Borm, Belg. Bosem, Teut. Busem, idem; and all, very probably, from the Fr. G.
Poser, for Reposer, to rest. Boss, from the Fr. G. Bosse, the same; and this
from the Lat. Pusula, a blister; because it somewhat represents a blister, or
any swelling. Boss, by Gardiners, a kind of Cole-wort, full of bunches or
knobs; from the Fr. G. Bosse, id. Botargo, an Italian word, but now in use with
us; from the Fr G. Botargues, the roan of a Barbel pickled. Botch, from the Fr.
G. Bosse, Ital. Bozza; all of them from the Lat. Pusula, a blister, or blain.
Botch, from the Belg. Boetsen, to mend; or from our Eng. Patch; which see. From
hence, A Botcher. Both, from the AS. Butu, and this from Be, according, and Tu,
two. Bottle, the termination of many names of Towns and Villages; from the AS.
Bode, or our Abode; these from the AS. Bidan, to bide, or stay. Bottle, from
the Fr. G Bouteille, Ital. Bottiglia, Lat. barb. Buticula, AS. Bitte; all the
same: Or perhaps it may be a diminutive from Butt, as of Beer; which see.
Bottle of hay, from the Fr. G. Boteau; or, for ought I know, corrupted from the
Belg. Bondel, Teut. Bundtel; with us, A Bundle; which see. Bottom, from the
Belg. Bodem, Teut. Boden: King Aelfric calls it Botm; (i. e.) ground. Minsevus
draws it from the Gr. (...), idem. A Bottom of thread, from the Fr. G. Boteau,
the same. Botts, worms in horses; from the Fr. G. Bote, a knot, or heap;
because they are often drawn away in clusters: Or perhaps from the AS. Bitan,
to gnaw, or bite. To Bouge out, from the Fr. G. Bouge; this from Bulga, a bag;
q. d. sticking out like a blown bladder. Bough, from the AS. Bog, id. or from
Bow; which see. Bound, from the Belg. Bondt, idem. V. Bind, and Bond. Bound:
Whither are you Bound? I am Bound for London: Either from the AS. Abunden,
ready; and this from Bindan, to bind, by a Metaphor taken from Soldiers; who,
when they are in readiness to march, do truss up bag and baggage: Or from the
other Bound, by a Metaphor taken from Sailers; who bind themselves, not to
desert one another in any danger. Bounds, corrupted, it is like, from the Fr. G.
Bornes, id. this perhaps from the AS. Foran, before; and therefore are called
Frontiers, or foreparts of a country, or field. Bounty, from the Fr. G. Bonte,
goodness; of which it is an effect. Bourn, from the AS. Burn, Belg. Borne,
Teut. Brunn, a well, or spring; which Fr. Jun. derives from the Gr. (...), to
spring forth. Bouts, many Bouts, from the AS. Beaten, to beat, Ital. Botta, Fr.
G. Coup, a box on the ear; this from the Lat. Colaphus, idem; and all of them
from the Gr. (...), to hurt. Bow, from the AS. Bugan, Belg. Buygen, Teut.
Beugen, to bend. A Bow, from the AS. Boga, Belg. Boge, Teut. Bogen, Dan. Bue,
the same; all from our word Bow. Mer. Cas. derives it from the Gr. (...), a
bow, or arch. Bowel, from the Fr. G. Bouyau, idem; perhaps from the Lat.
Bottulus; as we say, Puddings. Bower, an anchor amongst Mariners, which a ship
carries often times to the Bow of the ship, and from thence takes its name.
Bower, from the AS. Bur, a parlour. Minsevus derives it from the Norm. Bough. I
had rather draw it from our word Bow, because it is built with crooked wood.
Fr. Jun. draws it from the Gr. (...), an house, or mansion. A Bowge of Court, a
quantity of provision allowed by the King to his servants, beyond their
ordinary pay; from the Fr. G. Bouge; this from the Lat. Bulga, a Portmanteau.
The learned Th. H. draws it from Bouche, a mouth; as they call one maintained
at the King's cost, Il a Bouche en Cour; (i. e.) he has his mouth in the
Court. Bowl, as Menagius writes, from the Lat. Bulla, or Bolus, Gr. (...), a
round clod. A Bowl to drink in, from the AS. Bolla, idem. I had rather draw it
from the Lat. Bulla, a round boss, or knob in harness for horses; because
Bowls, especially, those of any bigness, do gradually, from their basis, branch
into a round figure. To Bowlt a Coney, a term in hunting; from the Fr. G.
Bouter, and this from the Lat. frequentative Pultare, to beat hard; q. d. to
knock her out of her hole. Bowse; Vossius draws it from the Gr. (...), to fill.
If I were Grecian enough, I should think it came from (...), to blow short;
because he that drinks greedily, puts himself out of breath. A Bowser of a
College, from the Fr. G. Boursier, this from Bourse, a Purse; q. d. Purser, or
Treasurer. Bow-sprit, or Bolt-sprit, from our word, Bolt, and the Belg. Spriet,
the Sail-yard. v. Spritt-sail. The Bowt of the knee, from the Teut. Bug, the
hamm; and this again from Beugen, to bow, or bend. Bowyer, from the Dan.
Boyert, a swift Bark; perhaps so called, from its being easily veered about,
which way the Boat-swain or Pilate pleases. Box on the ear: Minshew ingeniously
derives it from the Gr. Adverb (...); or, it being very probably of a German
original, from the Teut. Pochen, to strike, or smite. Box, from the AS. Box,
Teut. Buchs; all from the Lat. Buxus, a Box-tree; by the Saxons, Boxtreo. Boy,
possibly from the Gr. (...), little; though Minsevus his derivation hereof from
the Teut. Bub, or Bube, is most probable: Yet Minsevus, upon second thoughts,
appositely enough, derives it from the Heb. Bob, a babe, or young child. The
Boy of an Anchor: Dr. Th. H. does ingeniously draw it from the Fr. G. Bois,
wood; q. d. a piece of wood fastened to the Anchor, and floating above water.
Brabble, from the Belg. Brabbelen, to scold: But it may be more safely drawn
from the Lat. rec. Parabolare, to contend in words. Brace, a term in
Architecture; from the Fr. G. Embrasser; or, which is all one, from Bras, Lat.
Brachium, a cramp-iron to hook square stones together withal. Brace, two, or a
couple; from the Fr. G. Embrasser, to embrace: Hence, To Brace, or couple two
dogs in one collar. Bracelet, from the Lat. Brachium; sometimes, though seldom,
read Brachiale, an arm, upon which a bracelet is put. A Brache, a word found in
Florius; perhaps from the Gr. v. (...), to sound or resound; a kind of Hound of
a strong cry, so called. Brackan, or Fern, from our own word Break; because,
being brittle, it is easily broken. Bracket, or Braget, a term in Architecture;
if I be not mistaken, from the Ital. Bracietto, signifying, a little crotchet,
or cramping-iron. Brackets, a word used by Mariners; from the same root.
Brackish, or salted; from the Teut. Brechen, to vomit; for salt water provokes
vomiting Bragg, from the Fr. G. Braguer, to go stately, or proudly; and this
manifestly from the Lat. Paratus, ready, or fit; for Braggadocio's consider
what they are to speak, or act beforehand, lest they should be trepanned.
Bragget, a sort of Hydromel; from the C. Br. Brag, Malt, and Goes, an
honeycomb. To Braid, or Bread hair, from the Belg. Breyden, to weave together.
Brain, from the AS. Braegen, Belg. Breyne, Breghe; both from the Gr. (...),
which signifies, the fore part of the head, where the brains lie. Brake, from
our word Breast, or the Belg. Braeck, a wooden instrument to break Flax withal.
Bramble, from the AS. Bremel, Braembel, Brembel, Bremble, vexing; because,
tearing the hands, etc. with its sharp prickles, it causes pain, or vexation.
Brambline, a kind of bird, so called, from Bramble, in which it builds its
nest. Brancher, a term in Hawking; from the Fr. G. Branchier, a young hawk, a
creature much frequenting the boughs of trees. Branch, from the Fr. G. Branche,
this from the Lat. Branca; which, before the declining state of the Empire,
signified the same. Brand, or Firebrand, from the AS. Brand, Belg. Branden, to
burn; from hence, Brand, a mark set upon cattle by the owner. But our word
Brand-new, seems, by an elegant Trope, to be taken from the Smith's craft,
being derived from Brand, and New; q. d. just new out of the fire. Brande-wine,
from the Belg. Brande-wiin, burnt wine. V. Brand, and Wine. Brandish, from the
Fr. G. Brandir, to glister as a Sword does in wielding; and so may, not
unlikely, be drawn from our word Brand. Brandling, a small worm to fish with;
from the Fr. G. Brandiller, to wag, or move this way and that way. Brangle,
from the Teut. Balgen, to fight; and this from the Lat. Bellum, war: Or from
Brangen, to be insolent, Bravo-like, such people not easily suffering an
affront. Brann, from the Fr. G. Bran, Ital. Brenna, C. Br. Brann, the same.
Mer. Cas. derives it from the Gr. (...), idem. Brant-geese, from the Belg.
Brand-Gans; q. d. Geese of a grayish color. Brased, a term in Heraldry, Three
Chevronels Brased; (i. e.) three kids passing one another cross-wise; from the
Fr. G. Emhrasser, to embrace. Brass, from the AS. Braes, Fr. G. Bronze, Ital.
Bronzo, id. Brassets, armor for the arms; from the old Fr. G. Brasset; which
is a dim. of Bras, an arm. A Brat, one come of an obscure parentage, a bastard;
from the Belg. Fradde, a boy; both, without any offense, from the AS. Bredan,
to bring up. V. Breed, and Brood. Bratt, a rag put before one; from the AS.
Bratt, course cloth; this from Brittan, to break; because it is a rotten
remnant of cloth. V. Brittle. Brave, from the Fr. G. Brave, Ital. Bravo, stout,
magnanimous. It may also seem to be derived from the Gr. (...), a Victor.
Brawl, from the Belg. Brullen, to low as an Ox; but rather from our Eng. Bawl,
by an interposition of the letter r. Brawn: the learned G. Rogers, M. D. G. M.
L. S. derives it from the Lat. Aprugna, signifying the same; yet I had rather
derive it from the AS. Bar, a Boar, and Run, a contract for Runnen, hardened.
Brawny, so called, from Brawn; q. d. one that has hard and brawny sinews, or
nerves. Bray, from the AS. Bracan, Fr. G. Brayer, signifying the same. To Bray
as an Ass, from the Fr. G. Braire; and this from the Lat. Barrire, the same. A
Bray, or false Bray, a military word; from the Fr. G. Braye, Fause Braye, a
false trench, made to hide the real one. Bread, from the AS. Breod, Belg.
Broodt, Teut. Brodt; all, I suppose, from the AS. Bredan, to nourish. V. Breed.
Fr. Jun. derives it from the Gr. (...), a morsel, and (...), to feed upon.
Break, from the AS. Brecan, Fr. Th. Brechan, Teut. Brechen, Belg. Breken, the
same. It may, not unlikely, be derived from the Gr. (...), to make a noise, or
give a crack. Breath, from the AS. Brathe, the same. It may likewise be drawn
from the Gr. (...), Aeol. (...), force, or noise; for the breath, being
stopped, breaks out by force. Breeches, from the AS. Brecce, Belg. Broecke,
the same: From hence perhaps the word Breech, if not more commodiously from the
AS. Bryce, a rupture, or parting asunder. Breed, from the AS. Bredan, Belg.
Broeden, Teut. Bruten, to nourish. Breeze, from the AS. Briosa, Teut. Dan. and
Belg. Bremse, Brems, a gad-fly, or hornet. Breast, from the AS. Breost, Dan.
Bryst, Belg. Borst, the same. Bret, from the Fr. Nor. Bertoneau, a kind of
Turbot: Or, from the Teut. Brett, or Breit, a broad plank, or side, because it
is a broad sort of fish. Brew, from the Belg. Browen, Teut. Brawen, the same.
Brewess, bread dipped in pottage, from the Fr. G. Abbreuver, to soften, make
tender. Fr. Jun. draws it from the C. Br. Briwbara, crusts, or morsels of
bread. Bribe, from the Fr. G. Briber; this from Bribe, a piece of bread;
because such as give bribes, like importunate beggars, crave of the Judge (...)
avert the stroke of justice. Brick, from the Belg. Brick, Briicke, Fr. G.
Brique, the same. Menagius draws it from the Lat. Imbrex, a rooftyle. Bride,
from the AS. Brid, Belg. Bruyd, Teut. Braut, idem; and all of them from the AS.
Bredan, Teut. Bruten, Belg. Broeden, to keep warm, or cherish. Bridegroom, most
manifestly from Bride, and Groom; because the man is, as it were, groom, or
servant to his bride on the day of marriage. Bridge, from the AS. Brigge, and
this from the AS. Ober, above, and Rige, a back: Or rather, q. d. Ober-ig; that
is, over the water. Bridle, from the AS. Bridel, Belg. Breydel, Ital. Briglia,
the same; all, not unlikely, from the Belg. Breyden, to Ride; which see. Brief,
from the Teut. and Fr. G. Brief; (i. e.) a short, concise writing. Brier, from
the AS. Braer, Hisp. Abrojo, idem. Braer, I suppose, comes from the Verb
Breacan, to break; because it teareth the skin, or cloths. Brieze, from the
Ital. Brezza, Fr. G. Brize, Hisp. Brise, a chill wind. It also alludes to the
Gr. (...), a trembling, or shivering. Brigade, from the Fr. G. Brigade, Ital.
Brigata, a society; or from the Fr. G. Brigue, Ital. Briga, a conflict, or
fight; i. e. a band of warlike men. Brigandine, from the Fr. G. Brigantin,
Ital. Brigantino, id. perhaps from the Fr. G. Brigand, a robber; because
Pirates were wont to make use of these ships, for their convenience. But you
will say, Whence comes Brigand? Faucherus draws it from the Germ. Brig, a
bridge, or Brug; because robbers sieze travelers upon bridges. Nicot. thinks
it so called from the Teut. Berg, a mountain, and Gehen, to go; q. d. one that
goes among mountains to hide himself. Bright, from the AS. Beorht, idem. Fr.
Jun. supposes it to come from the C. Br. Brith, painted; or rather,
party-colored. To Brim as a Sow, possibly from the AS. Brine, heat; because
those creatures are very hot in time of ingendring. Brimm, from the AS. Brime,
Teut. Bram, Dan. Bremme, idem. Brimstone; q. d. Brenne-stone; or, which comes
all to a thing, from the AS. Brine, fire, and Stone; q. d. a burning-stone.
Brine, from the AS. Bryne, Belg. Bryn, the same; and both of them from the AS.
Brym, the salt sea. Bring, from the AS. Bringan, Belg. Brengen, Teut. Bringen,
idem. Brink, v. Brim. Brisk, from the Teut. Frisch, cheerful; or from the Hisp.
Brio; q. d. one that is courageous and lively. V. Fresh. Brisket, q. d.
Bresket, by adding the diminutive termination ket. v. Breast. Bristle, from the
AS. Bristl, Teut. Burstel, Belg. Borstel, idem; yet not unlikely from our word
Burst, because a bristle bursteth or breaks through the skin. Brittle, from
the AS. Brytan, Fr. Th. Brettan, Brittan, Dan. Bryder, to break asunder. Fr.
Jun. derives them all from the Gr. (...), frail, or mortal. Minsevus writes it
Brickle, from the word Break; which I cannot so well approve of. Broach, from
the Fr. G. Broche, Ital. Broccia, a spit; hence we say, Broach a vessel,
metaphorically. Broad, from the AS. Brad, Belg. Breyd, Teut. Breit, the same.
Broccado; or rather, Brocado; a word purely Spanish, but frequently read in the
English Translation of Mandeslous; from the Ital. Brocca, a stud, or boss; q.
d. cloth of gold and silver. Brock, from the AS. Broc, Ital. Burcho, Buchio,
the same; or rather, from the word Break; because this creature crusheth in
pieces whatsoever it fasteneth its teeth upon; and hence comes our saying, He
bites like a Badger. Brocker, from the Fr. G. Brocart, and both of them from
the Fr. G. Broche, in our lingua, A Broach, q. d. a stag of two years old,
having horns without knags, like the end of a spit, or broach. To Broggle for
Eels, a saying among Fishermen; from the Fr. G. Brouiller, to trouble the
water; because by so doing, they are more easily taken. Broil, from the same
root; if not more properly from the Ital. Broglio, for Imbroglio; (i. e.) to
canvass. Broker, from the word Break; because Bankrupts only were, in former
ages, permitted to be of this trade. It may as well be a contraction only of
the word Procurer. Brood, from the AS. Bredan, Teut. Bruten, Belg. Broeden,
Brueden, to sit upon eggs: It alludes to the Gr. (...), to grow big with young.
To Brook, to bear a thing patiently, by inverting the sense a little, from the
AS. Brucan, to digest; or from the Dan. Brugen, Teut. Brauchen, to have the use
of a thing. Mer. Cas. draws it from the Gr. (...), to eat. Brook, from the AS.
Broca, Belg. Broeck; and this Fr. Jun. derives from the Gr. (...), a Marsh, or
Fenn. But Brook, when it signifies a river, is derived from (...), a shower.
Mer. Cas. derives it from the Aeol. (...), for (...), a river. Dr. Th. H. draws
the AS. Broca, a river, from Breacan, to break; because, upon rain, they break
over their banks. A Brook, for an Impostume, or sore; from the word Break.
Broom, from the AS. Brom, Belg. Brem, Teut. Pfriem, the same. Broth, from the
AS. Broth, Belg. Broye, Brue, Teut. Bruhe, Fr. G. Broad, Ital. Brodio, the
same. Mer. Cas. draws it from the Gr. (...), meat, or food. Brothel, by a
Metathesis, from the Fr. G. Bordel, Bordeau, Ital. Bordello, idem; or from the
Fr. G. Board, the brink, and Eau, water; because, amongst the Romans, Stews and
Bawdy-houses were erected upon the banks of rivers. Brother, from the AS.
Brother, Brothor, Fr. Th. Bruother, Belg. Broeder, Teut. Bruder, C. Br. Brawd,
the same; and all of them from the word Breed; q. d. of the same Brood. Brow,
from the AS. Broa, Belg. Brauwe, Brouwe, the eye-brow. Brow, the Brow of a
thing; from the Belg. Brauwe, the brim of any thing. Brown, from the AS. Brun,
Belg. Bruyn, Teut. Braun, Ital. Bruno, idem. Browse, from the Fr. G. Brouser,
Ital. Bruscare, to crop off leaves and twigs. V. Brush. Bruise, from the AS,
Brysed, bruised; Fr. G. Froisser, to bruise; or from Briser, which comes from
the Fr. Th. Bruzzen; both not unlikely, from the Lat. Pressare, to press, or
crush together. Bruit, from the Fr. G. Bruit, a report; this perhaps from the
Lat. Furere, to be in a rage, or fury. Brunt, to bear the Brunt of the day;
from the Teut. and Belg. Brunst; (i. e.) the Heat of the day V. Burn. Brush,
from the Fr. G. Bresse, Broisse, the same: Or, as Minsevus says, from the
Teut. Burste, a bristle; because made of bristles: From hence Brush wood, from
Brush, and Wood; q. d. young small sprigs, in comparison, like to Swines
bristles. To Brustle, from the AS. Brustlian, to rustle as Armor: Or as Dr.
Th. H. sagaciously divineth, q. d. To Bristle, as an enraged boar. Bubble, from
the Belg. Bobble, Dan. Bob^e, the same; perhaps corrupted from the Lat. Bulla,
idem. Buck, from the Teut. Baucle, Ital. Bucata, Fr. G. Buee, ley made of
ashes; all perhaps from the Lat. Focus, a fire. A Buck, from the AS. Bucca, Fr.
G. Bouc, idem, Gr. (...), a Roe, or Hind. Martinius derives it from the Teut.
Bocken, Fr. G. Buquer, to repulse. Bucket, from the Fr. G. Bacquet; and both
perhaps from the AS. Buc, a flaggon. Somnerus draws it from the Lat. and Gr.
Baucalium, a kind of water-pot. To Buckle, from the Teut. Bucken, and this from
the AS. Bugan, signifying, to stoop down, to Bow; which see. Buckle, from the
Belg. Bokel, Fr. G. Boucle, Teut. Buckel, and all, I suppose, from the AS.
Bugan, to bend. Buckler, from the Fr. G. Boucler, Ital. Boccoliero, Fr. Th.
Bukelere, a target like an half moon; which Fr. Jun. derives from the Belg.
Bocken-Leer, a Goat's skin. I suppose rather that it comes from the word
Buckle. Buckram, from the Fr. G. Bourgram, Ital. Bucherame, the same: Once it
signified a very thin sort of Linen and woollen cloth; in which sense we may
draw it from the Fr. G. Bourre, a lock of wool, and Grain. v. Grogram. Bud,
from the Fr. G. Bouter, to put forth; and this Menagius draws from the Lat.
frequentative Pultare, to beat out often. Budge, from the Fr. G. Bouger, both
from the Ital. Volgere, and this from the Lat. Volvere; q. d. to move out of
his former place. Budge-barrel, a vessel used by Mariners, containing about an
hundred pounds of gunpowder; from the Fr. G. Bouge, a bag, and Barrel. Budget,
from the Fr. G. Bougette, Ital. Bolgia; and all from the Lat. Bulga, the same.
Buff, from the similitude it has to the skin of an Ox, which the French call
Buffle, and the Italians, Buffale, much wore by officers in an army. Buffet,
from the Fr. G. Buffe, Ital. Buffetto, Hisp. Bofeton, the same. Buffet-stool; I
suppose it may come from the Fr. G. Buffet, a table; because it might serve for
a little table, it being made after the fashion of a table. To Buffle, or
Muffle, from the AS. Abyffan, to mumble; Belg. Baffen, to bark; perhaps all of
them feigned from the sound. Buffle, from the Dan. Byffel, Fr. G. Beuffle,
Ital. Buffalo; they all signify a kind of wild Ox: From hence, A Buffle-head;
q. d. Ox-head, as we may call one, that has a great head and little wit.
Buffoon, from the Fr. G. Buffon, Ital. Buffone, a talkative, prating fellow.
Salmasius draws it from the Lat. Bufo, a Toad; because such a person swells
like a Toad, when irritated. Bugg or Bugbear, v. Big. Dr. Th. H. derives it
from Pug, or Pucke, a Devil V. Pug. Bugg, for Big; as when it is said, He looks
very Bug of it. V. Big. Bugger, to lay with a male; from the Ital. Bugerare,
the same. Menagius derives it from the Lat. Bulgari, a people infamous for
unnatural lust; or from the Ital. Bugio, signifying an hole. A Bugle-horn, from
the Lat. Bucula; q. d. the horn of an heifer. Build, from the AS. Bytlian, and
this from Bilith, Teut. Bild, Belg. Beeld, a statue, or image. Bulfinch: Dr.
Th. H. supposes it to be so called, quasi Bloodfinch. (i. e.)
crimson-colour'd; it being in the Teut. primarily called Blutfinck. Bulk, from
the AS. Buce, Dan. Bug, Teut. Bauch; (i. e.) big in the body. It may likewise
be drawn from the Hisp. Bulto, which denotes the stature of the body. Bulkar, a
word frequently used in Lincolnshire; from the Dan. Bielke, signifying, a beam,
or rafter. Bull, from the Belg. Bolle, Bull, the same; or from the noise he
makes. Bull, a Denunciation, or Edict from the Pope; from the Gr. (...),
counsel; because, in former ages, they were composed by the mutual consent of a
Council, or Senate. Bullace, or Bullis, perhaps from Bowl, or Bullet, because
they are round; but I had rather side with Dr. Th. H who thinks it so called,
quasi Bull-eyes, from the similitude. Bull-beggar: Dr. Th. H. thinks it
ingeniously so called, quasi Bold Beggar, one that will not be denied. V. Bull,
and Beggar. Bullet, from the Fr. G. Boulet, a little globe; perhaps from the
Gr. (...), a round clod of earth. It alludes to the Gr. (...), to turn often.
Bullton, from the Gr. (...), a lump of earth; q. d. money having no stamp or
signature upon it. I could almost adventure to derive it from the Gr. (...), a
signature; because it is to receive the Prince his signet, or effigies, before
it be current coin. Minsevus draws it from the Hisp. Billon, or Vellon; which
he interprets, Bullion, or Copper to make money of. Bullock, from the AS.
Bulluce; a diminutive of Bull; which see. A Bully fellow; either q. d. Bulky;
or q. d. Bull-eyed. V. Balk, Burly, and Bull. Ball-rush, (i. e.) a greater and
stronger kind of rush. Bulwark, from the Belg. Bolwerck, Teut. Boll-werck, from
Boll, round, and Werck, work; q. d. a spherical fabric. Salmasius draws it
from the Gr. (...); q. d. a work made of turf, or earth. Bum, from the Belg.
Bomme, a cover for a vessel. A noted Author draws it from the Belg. Bodem; with
us, the Fuavoment. Bumbasin, from the Fr. G. Bumbasin, a web made of silk and
Cotton; both from the Lat. Bombyx; which, among the Ancients, signified Cotton,
as well as silk. Bumbast, linen doubled, and interwoven with flax: From hence
it is, that we say metaphorically, Bumbast words, or style. Bumble, or Humble-
Be, from the Teut. Humlen, the Lat. Bombilare, the Gr. (...), to hum, as does
a Be. Bumkin, from the Belg. Boomken, a little tree; a fool in Lat. being
called Stipes; q. d. a Block-head, one that has no more sense than a tree. Dr.
Th. H. thinks it so called, quasi Pumpin, or Pumpion; q. d. one that lives
upon pompions, or other course fare, as the poorer sort of co^ntry-people do.
Bunch, from the Ital. Bugno, or Fr. G. Bosse, a wen, or knot. Minshew derives
it from the Gr. (...), an hillock. V. Botch, and Boss. To Bunch, from the Lat.
Pugnus, (i. e.) to smite one with the fist. Bundle, from the Belg. Bondle,
Bundel, Teut. Buntel, idem; and all from the word Bind; which see. Bung, to nip
a Bung; which, in the Rogue's language, signifies, to pick a pocket; from the
AS. Pung, a purse, pocket, portmanteau, satchel, etc. Bung, Bung-hole, from the
Belg. Bomme, Bom-gat, Fr. G. Bondon, idem. Fr. Jun. derives it from the Gr.
(...), drink. To Bungle, from the Fr. G. Bougonner, to go about the doing a
thing awkardly; and this again from Bougeon, a great arrow, or bolt; q. d. to
shoot with an arrow too big for the white. Bunn, from the Hisp Bunnelo, Fr. G.
Bignet, idem. We may also form it of the Fr. G. Bon, good; q. d. a
well-relished cake. Bunt, the Bunt of a sail; q. d. the Bent of a sail. A
Bunting, perhaps from the Fr. G. Bondir, to hop up and down upon the ground.
Burbo^t, from the Fr. G. Barbote, and this from the Lat. Barba; because it is a
Seafish full of prickles: Or rather, from the Fr. G. Bourbe, mud; because it
troubles the water, as it swimmeth near the bottom. Burden, from the AS.
Byrthen, Teut. Burde, the same. Some there are, that derive it from the barb.
Lat. Burdo, a mule, a creature naturally proper to bear burdens. Burganet,
from the Fr G. Bourguignotte, a sort of net; q. d. a Burgundy-net. Burgeon,
from the Fr. G. Bourgeon; and this perhaps from Bourre; q. d a tender sprig.
Burger, from the Belg. Borgher, Teut. Burger, a Citizen. V. Borough. Burglary,
from the AS. Burg, and the termination Lary; which, in composition, signifies,
a robbery. It comes of the Fr. G. Larron, a robber, or robbery; q. d. the
robbing and breaking open a castle; for every man's house is his castle.
Burlesk, from the Ital. Burlesco, Burlare; q. d. Mock-poetry, composed of Jests
to make men merry withal. Burley, a Burley man; q. d. Boor-like; (i e.) like a
plowman, one that has a big, plump body. I might derive it as well from the
Teut. Gebuh^lich; this from the Verb Geburhen, to become; fat men being
generally the most comely. Burn, from the AS. Baernan, Belg. Burnen, Teut. and
Fr. Th. Brennen, the same; and probably, all from the Lat. Furnus, an oven, or
furnace. Burnet, the herb Pimpernel; so called, from the word Burn, which it is
good against: Or perhaps from Bourn, a spring; because it grows most
plentifully near rivers and springs. Burnish, from the Fr. G. and Hisp. Brunir,
Ital. Brunire, to polish. Burr, from the Fr. G. Bourre, a lock of wool; because
it has such soft and light down, that it is blown away by the wind like wool.
Burr, the root of a young stag's horn, from the same root; for then it is tender
and soft. Burrel-fly, from the Fr. G. Burreau, a tormentor; because it
miserably torments laboring beasts in the summer. Burrow of Rabbets, V.
Coneyberry. Burse, from the Belg. Borse, Fr. G. Bourse, an Exchange; or rather,
from the Teut. Bursch, a society; this from the AS. Borg, Teut. Burg, a surety;
q. d. a society upholden by mutual stipulation, between party and party.
Burser, from the Fr. G. Boursier, (i. e.) he that has the bag; Purser. Burst,
from the AS. Burstan, Belg. and Teut. Bursten; and all perhaps from the AS.
Borian, to make an hole in any thing. Bury, from the AS. Birian, idem; or from
the Fr. Th. Berge, Teut. Berg, an hill, sometimes an heap. Minshew draws it
from the Teut. Bergen, to cover. Bary, a termination added to the names of
Towns, is the same with Borough; which see. Bush, from the Teut. Busch, idem;
or from the Belg. Bosch, Fr. G. Bois, Ital. Bosco, a wood. Fr. Jun. derives it
from the Gr. (...), to crop. I had rather derive it from the Lat. Arbuscula
shrubs. Bushel, from the Fr. G. Boisseau, the same; or from the Teut. Buschel,
a bundle; which perhaps may be corrupted from the Lat. Pugillus, an handful.
Busk, from the Fr. G. Busc, Busg, the same; or more commodiously from the Ital.
Busto, the trunk of the body; because it is wore upon women's breasts, to make
their Cloths sit tight, etc. Buskin, from the Fr. G. Botine, Ital. Bottino,
idem; and these from the Fr. G. Bote, a boot, they being a sort of little
boots. Buss, from the Belg. Boesen, Bousen, Fr. G. Baiser, Ital. Basciare, to
kiss; all from the Lat. Basiare, the same. Bustard, from the Fr. G. Bistard;
and this from the Lat. Bis, twice, and Tardus, slow; because being very big and
heavy, it raises it self, and flies with great difficulty. To Bustle, v.
Brustle. Busy, from the AS. Bysgian, to busy; Belg. Be-sich, the same: Or from
the Fr. G. Besogner, Ital. Bisigare, to be Busy, or meddle with any thing.
Somnerus draws it from the AS. Bisa, a throng; q. d. a throng of Business. But;
as when we say, None but he; from the AS. Bute; (i. e.) None besides, or except
him. But, from the Fr. G. Bout, the greater end of a thing, the But-end of a
tree, etc. Butcher, from the Fr. G. Boucher, Ital. Beccaro, the same. Menagius
derives them all from the Lat. Buccea, because he cutteth flesh in pieces, or
portions. Butler, from the Fr. G. Bouteillier, Ital. Bottigliere, Lat. barb.
Buticularius, the same. V. Bottle, and Butt. Butt, from the AS. Butte, Belg.
and Teut. Butte, Fr. G. and Ital. Botte, idem. Butt, a kind of Plaice-fish;
either from the Teut. Butte, or the Belg. Bott, idem; an Hallibutt. To Butt,
from the Belg. Botten, Fr. G. Bucquer; or rather, the Fr. G. Bouter, Ital.
Buttare; all signifying, to run against, or push with the horn. Butter, from
the AS. Buttere, Belg. Boter, Teut. Butter, the same. Butter bump, a bird so
called, for its having smooth and soft feathers. V. Buzzard. Butterfly, from
the AS. Butter-flege, Teut. Butter-fliege, Belg. Botervliege, the same.
Buttery; q. d. a place where Butter is kept; from the Fr. G. Bouter, to put; q.
d. a Repository. V. Put. Buttock, from the Belg. Bout; (i. e.) the Bolt of the
bone. Dr. Th. H. derives it from Bout, and the AS. Hoh, in English Hough.
Button, from the Fr. G. Bouton, Ital. Bottone, the same. Menagius draws them
all from the Lat. barb. Pultare, to knock against a thing. Button in plants,
from the Belg. Botte, Fr. G. Bouton, a Bud; which see. Buttress, from the Lat.
Fultare; q. d. props to support the superstructure withal: Or from the Fr. G.
Brettesse, this from Brette; q. d. the pinnacles of a wall, being indented like
the teeth of a saw. A Butwink, a bird so called, perhaps because it winketh
often. Buxom, from the AS. Bocsum, this from the Verb Bugan, to bend; q. d.
flexible, or one that will soon be persuaded to a thing. Buxumness, by Chaucer
is interpreted, Lowliness, or Submission. Buy, from the AS. Bycgean, the same.
Minsevus draws it from the Belg. Bieden, to bid money for. V. To Bid. Buzzard,
from the Fr. G. Buzart, Ital. Buzzago, Teut. Bushard; and all of them probably
from the Lat. Buteo, the same. By, from the AS. By, Fr. Th. By, Belg. By,
beside, or nigh to. Hence By-name; (i. e.) nickname. By, a termination of many
names of Villages and Towns, from the AS. Bye, an habitation; and this from
Byan, to dwell; or from the Dan. Bye, a City, or Town. By-By; Mer. Cas. derives
it from the Gr. (...), to sleep; being sung by nurses, to cause their nurslings
to fall a-sleep. Byword, from the AS. Byord, a proverb; q. d. a saying always
ready. V. By, and Wlord.
C.
CAbbage, from the Fr. G. Cabus, Ital. Cabuccio, Belg. Raburs; and all from the
Lat. Caput, a head. Cabin, from the Fr G. Cabane, Hisp. Caban^ta, Ital.
Capanna; and all of them from the Lat. Cavea, an hole, or den. Salmasius
derives it from the Gr. (...), a crib, or manger Cabbine^, a diminutive of
Cabin. See Cabin. Cable, from the Belg. Cabel, Fr. G. Chable; all, not
unlikely, from the Gr. (...), or (...), signifying the same. Caboshed, a term
in Heraldry; from the Hisp. Cabeca; or rather, from the Fr. G. Caboche, an
head; and all from the Lat. Caput. Caburn, a term among Sailers; from the Fr.
G. Chevron, a kid; it being a small rope, compared with a Table. To Cackle,
from the Belg. Ra^ckelen, Gaghelen, Fr. G. Caqueter, Ital. Caccherare, the
same; all fictitious words. Cackrel, otherwise Cagarel so called a Cacando,
because it loosens the body, and moves to stool. Caddis, v. Codmorm. A Cade
lamb, perhaps from the Lat Casa; q. d. a lamb weaned, and bred up by hand in
the house, the dam dying: Or from the Fr. G. Cade, which seems to be
contracted from the Lat. Delicatus; q. d. made much of. Cage, from the Fr. G.
Cage, Ital. Gaggia, the same; all from the Lat. Cavea. Caloll, an up start
word, from the Fr. G. Cageoler, Cajoler, Ital. Gazzolare; and these from the
Lat. Graculus, a Jackdaw. The Caining of a rope, a saying proper to Mariners;
q. d. The Gaining of a rope; to wit, when they weigh up an anchor. Caitiff,
from the Fr. G. Chetif, Ital. Cattivo, Captivus; as we say, a slave to the
world. Cake, from the Dan. Kag, Belg. Kocck, Teut. Kuch, the same. Davis draws
it from the Lat. Coquo, to cook. V. Cook. Ca^amanco, possibly from the Gr.
(...), and the Lat. Mantum; q. d. cloth fit to make cloaks of. Calamary- fish,
from the Ital. Calamaro; (i. e.) a Cuttlefish, having blood as black as ink.
Calendar, from the Lat. Calendarium; that is, an enumeration of all the Calends
in the year. To Calender, from the Fr. G. Calendrer, to smooth cloth. Calf,
from the AS. Calf, Belg. Kalf, Teut. Kalv, the same. From hence, The Calf of
the leg. Caliver, from the Fr. G. Calibre, both from the Lat. Aequilibrium; q.
d. a piece of ordnance, made after an exact proportion. To Calk a ship; i. e.
mend it; from the Fr. G. Calage, tow; wherewithal it is stopped: Or more
probably from the AS. Caele, a Keel; q. d. Caelage, or Keelage: Whence we
synecdochically say, To Carine a ship; that is, to repair it. Call, from the
Dan. Kalder; or rather, the Gr. (...), the same. Cardanus draws it from the
Heb. Col, Arab. Caul, signifying, a word. Callico- cloth, from Calecut, a great
Mart-Town in India, from whence it is brought. Calm, from the Belg. Kalm, Fr.
G. Calm, Ital. and Hisp. Calma, idem. Cov. draws it from the Gr. (...),
because the wind ceasing, the air grows warm. Caltrops, from the AS.
Coltraeppe, idem. Minshew draws it from the Fr. G. Chausse trappes; so called,
because they cleave to ones cloths. Th. H. Esquire draws it from the Fr. G.
Cheval-attrappe, because it also signifies, a warlike instrument to ensnare the
legs of horses withal. V. Hose, and Trap. Calvary, Cross-Calvary, a term in
Heraldry; a cross erected in imitation of Jacob's ladder, says Morgan: Or
rather, q. d. a cross of Calvary, made for a memorial of our Savior's Cross,
that was carried up the mount, step by step. Cambrick, from the Teut.
Cammertuth; q. d. cloth brought from Cambray, a Town in Picardy. Cambring, a
term among Shipwrights; from the Lat. Cameratus, Gr. (...), q. d. arched, or
vaulted. Camerade, from the Fr. G. Chamber, Ital. Camera; q.d. a
Chamber-fellow. V. Chamber. Cammock, from the AS. Cammoc, Cammec, or Cammuc;
that which we call Rest-Harrow. Camp, from the AS. Camp, Belg. Kamp, Teut.
Kampff, a fight, or battle; from hence Champion; and all perhaps from the Lat.
Campus, a field, or plain. Can, from the Belg Konnen, Dan. Kand, the same. It
alludes to the Gr. (...). Canary- bird; so called, because it is brought, from
the Canaries. Cancel, from the Fr. G. Canceller, Lat. barb. Cancellare, to
null, or raze out a writing. Candlemass, or The Purification of the blessed
Virgin; from the Lat. Candela, a candle, and Mass; q. d. a festival celebrated
with lighted candles. Candy, Sugar Candy; either from the Island Candia,
formerly Crete, which affords great store of it; or, as Menagius has it, from
the old Verb Candire, to purify, or make white. Salmasius derives it, from the
Gr. (...); because, when broken, it appears all cornered. Cane, from the Lat.
Canna, the same. Canker, from the Lat. Cancer, any kind of spreading ulcer.
Cann, from the AS. Can, Teut. and Belg. Kanne; both perhaps from the Lat.
Cantharus, idem. Dhuezius, not unelegantly, draws it from the Teut. Kahn, a
skiff. Cannel, a kind of coal in Lancashire; from the AS. Cene, easy, and
Aelan, to kindle; q. d. easy to be kindled. Cannel- bone, q. d. a bone near
the channel; that is, the throat. Cannions, i. e. boot-hose-tops; from the Fr.
G. Canon, this from the Lat. Canna, a reed. Cannon, from the Fr. G. Cannon,
Ital. Cannone; and all, for the similitude, from the Lat. Canna, a reed; as
before. Canon, from the Fr. G. Chanoine, Lat. barb Canonicus; and all from the
Gr. (...), a rule. Canopy, from the Fr. G. Canopee, and both from the Gr.
(...), and this from (...), a gnat, or fly; q. d. a net spread over the face,
to keep off gnats or flies, whilst one sleeps: With us, it is set up over
Princes heads, for a badge of imperial power. Canow, from the Teut. Kahn; or
rather, from the Lat. Canna; q. d. a small ship, long and hollow, like a reed.
To Cant; or, To use Canting language, possibly from the Teut. Tand, a
ridiculous phantasm; or from the Lat. Cento, idle discourse; q. d. to use
insignificant or nonsensical discourse. Cant, v. Canion. Cantlet, from the Fr.
G. Canton, Ital. Cantone, a corner; Gr. (...), idem. Canton, a term in
Heraldry, from the same root; q. d. a quadrangular figure, set only in the
corner of an Escutcheon. Cantred, a word used in Wales; from the C. Br. Cant,
(i. e.) an Hundred. Canvass, from the Fr. G. Cannevas, Ital. Cannevazzo; all of
them from the Lat. Cannabis, hemp; q. d. made of hemp, hempen. To Canvass, to
search into, or thoroughly examine a matter; also to hunt eagerly after Votes in
times of Elections; from the Fr. G. Canabasser, or the Lat. Cannabis, hemp, by
a metaphor taken from beating hemp, because nothing is more laborious. Cap,
from the AS. Caeppe, Ital. Cappa; and all of them from the Lat. Caput. Capable,
from the Fr. G. Capable; both from the Lat. Capax, the same. Cap-a-pe, Armed
Cap-a-pe, from the Fr. G. Cap-a-pie; (i. e.) from head to foot. Caparison, from
the Fr. G. Caparasson, Ital. Capparisone; and all of them from the Lat. Caput,
and Paratus; q. d. armor fitted for horses heads. Cape, from the Fr. G. Cap,
Ital. Capo, Hisp. Cabo, the same. Cape, The Cape of a cloak; by a Synecdoche,
from the AS. Caepe, Fr. G. Cappe, Dan. Kappe, a cloak, or riding-coat. Caper,
To cut a Caper, metaphorically from the Lat. Caper; q. d. to skip or leap like
a goat. A Caper, from the Lat. Capio; (i. e.) a pirate, that takes and
pillageth Merchants ships. Capers, from the Lat. Capparis, or the Gr. (...),
the same. Capital, a term in Architecture, from the Ital. Capitello, Fr. G.
Chapiteau, the head of a pillar. The Capstaw, Capstand, or Capstan of a ship,
from the AS. Cop, an head, and Steng, a crane to draw up parcels withal.
Captain, from the Fr. G. Capitain, Ital. Capitano, or the barb. Lat.
Capitaneus; all from the Lat. Caput, because he is the Head of his Company.
Capuchin, one of the Order of St. Francis; from the Fr. G. Capuchon, a Monk's
hood; and both from the Lat. Caput. A Caravan, from the Fr. G. Caravane, Ital.
Caravana, and all from the Turc. Kervan, a company of Merchants traveling
through Turkey with a guard of Janissaries. Caravel, from the Ital. Caravella,
Hisp. Caravela; and both perhaps from the Gr. (...); q.d. a kind of flightship,
somewhat resembling a crab. Carbonado, from the Fr G. Carbonade, Ital.
Carbonata, Hisp. Carbonada, meat broiled upon coals; and all of them, not
unlikely, from the Lat. Carbo, a coal. Carcass, from the Fr. G. Carquasse; q.
d. Caro Cassa, i. e. flesh without life. Card, from the Belg. Kaerde, the same.
To Card wool, perhaps from Carduus, a Fuller's thistle A Mariner's Card, from
the Lat. Charta, paper Cardinal, from the Lat. Cardinalis, and this from Cardo,
as being the Heads, or Hinges of the Church. Cards, from the Fr. G. Carts,
Ital. Carte; and all of them from the Lat. Charta, idem. Care, from the AS.
Care, Lat. Cura, signifying the same. Caress, from the Fr. G. Caresser, Ital.
Carezzare; and all from the Lat. Carus, dear, or loving. Carfax, a saying at
Oxford; from the Fr. G. Quarrefour, a place where four ways meet: Or rather,
from Q^attre-Faces, having four prospects. Cargason, from the Fr. G. Cargaison,
Hisp. Cargacon, the cargo of a ship; and these from the Fr. G. Carguer, Ital.
Caricare, to load a ship. Carriage, from the Fr. G. Carriage, Ital. Cariaggio,
the same. V. To Carry. Cark, from the AS. Carc, Care; which see. Carknet, from
the old Fr. G. Carcanet, a diminutive of Carcan, a neck-lace. Carl, v. Churl.
Carlings, a term in Sailing; from the Fr. G. Char, Lat. Carrus, a carriage, or
supporter. Carnacion, from the Lat. Caro; q. d. a flesh-colors. Caroche, a
French word; from the Lat. Carruca, a kind of chariot so called. Carol, from
the Gr. (...), joy, or (...), to be glad; a certain song usually sung on ones
Birthday. Yet it may be derived from the AS. Carl, rustic; q. d. a rural
song. Carot, from the Fr. G. Carote, Ital. Carota, signifying the same.
Carowse, from the Fr. G. Carousser; both from the Teut. Gar-Ausz; i. e. fill it
all out. Carp, from the Fr. G. Carpe, Ital. Carpa, Carpano; and all of them
from the Lat. Carpo, to snatch greedily; for it is a voracious greedy fish.
Carpenter, from the Fr. G. Carpentier, Ital. Carpentiero; all from the Lat.
Carpentum, carved work. Carpet, from the Belg. Karpet, Ital. Carpetta, idem;
and this from the City Cairo, and the Ital. Tapeto; q. d. Tapestry made at
Memphis, alias Cairo, a famous City in Egypt. Carrabin, or Carabin, from the
Fr. G. Carabin, Ital. Carabino; q d. a gun to carry about one. V. Carry.
Carrack, from the Fr. G. Carraque, Ital. Caracca, Hisp. Carraca; all from the
Lat. Carrus; q. d. a ship of great burden. Carrat; from the Fr. G. Carat,
Ital. Caratto; and all from the Gr. (...), an husk, or cod; it is the weight of
four grains. Carreer, from the Fr. G. Carriere, Ital. Carriera, Hisp. Carrera;
as we say commonly, To ride in a full Carreer; from the Verb To Carry; which
see. Carrion, from the Fr. G. Charongne, Ital. Carogna, Hisp. Caronna; all from
the Lat. Caro, flesh. Carry, from the Fr. G. Charier; (i. e.) to carry in a
cart. Cart, from the AS. Cart, Fr. G. Charrette, Ital. Carretta; all of them
from the Lat. Carrus, idem; which Fr. Jun. derives from the Gr. (...), for
(...), strength; it being made strong, to support weighty carriages. A Cartel
of defiance, from the Fr. G. Cartel, Cartee, Ital. Cartello; and all, I
suppose, from the Lat. Chartula; (i. e.) a provocatory paper, whereby one man
challenges another to a duel. Cartridge, or Cartage, from the Fr. G.
Cartouche, Ital. Cartoccia; and all from the Lat. Charta; q. d. paper with
powder rammed into a gun, when it is to be shot off. Carve, from the AS.
Ceorfan, Belg. Kerven, Teut. Kerben; and all of them, not unlikely, from the
Lat. Carpere; (i. e.) to cut or divide meat in portions. A Case, from the Fr.
G. Casse; and both from the Lat. Capsa, a box, or coffer. A Casemat, a term in
war; from the Fr. G. Casemate, Ital. Casamatta, Hisp. Casamata, the same.
Minshew derives them all from the Lat. Casa, an house, and the Hisp. Matar,
flowing from the Lat. Mactare, to kill, or slay; q.d. an house out of which one
is slain unawares. Casement, from the Ital. Casamento; because they are placed
outward, on the outside of the house. Cash, from the Fr. G. Casse, Caisse,
Ital. Cassa, a coffer to hoard money in: And from hence, A Casher, a
Cash-keeper, or Purser; all of them perhaps from the Lat. Capsa, a coffer. To
Cashier, from the Fr. G. Casser; both from the Lat. Cassare; (i. e.) to disband
a Soldier, and put him out of pay. Casings, from the Teut. Roth, dung; which is
gathered by the poor people in some Countries, to make fires withal; by them
called Casings. Cask, from the Fr. G. Casque, Hisp. Casco; and all from the
Lat. Cassis, an helmet, or headpiece. Cask, from the Fr. G. Caque, or the Lat.
Cadus, a pipe of wine. Casket, from the Fr. G. Cassette, Ital. Cassetta; and
all from the Lat. Capsula, a little coffer. Caskets, a term among Mariners. V.
Case, and Casket. Cassock, from the Fr. G. Casaque, Ital. Casacca, Hisp.
Casaca; and all of them from the Lat. Casa; q. d. a long vestment wore in casa,
i. e. within doors. Cast, from the Dan. Kaster, id. Minshew draws it from the
Fr. G. Chasser, to drive away. Castauiettoes, from the Hisp. Castannetas, Ital.
Castagnette, the same; and all, not unlikely, from the Lat. Castanea,
chestnuts; q. d. little round shells, used by Dancers, like unto
chestnut-shells. Cat, from the Teut. Katz, Fr. G. Chat, Ital. Gatto, Hisp.
Gato; all from the barb. Lat. Catus, the same; and this from the Lat. barb.
Cattare, for Captare, to catch at a thing, as cats do at mice. Cat, To play at
Cat, from the Teut. Kutte, an hole dug in the ground, for the better
convenience of raising the ball, so as it may be hit with the Cat-stick.
Catipan, to turn Catipan, from a people called Catipani, in Calabria and
Apulia, who got an ill name by reason of their perfidy; very falsely by us
called Cat-in-pan. A Catch, a ship, which, for its lightness, soon overtaketh
others. Dr. Th. H. derives it from the Belg. Ketsen, to run swiftly. To Catch,
from the Fr. G. Chasser; or from the Belg. Ketsen, to pursue one closely; or
rather, from the Ital. Cattare, and this from the Lat Captare, idem. A Catch,
or Sonnet sung by turns; so called, because every one Catches it from another.
V. To Catch. Catch-poles, Sergeants to arrest and lay hold on men; from Catch,
and Poll, an head. v. Poll. Caterpillar, from the Fr. G. Chatte-peleuse; q. d.
a worm hairy as a Cat. Dr. Th. H. draws it from Chair-peleuse, i. e. hairy
flesh. Cates, perhaps contracted from the word Delicates. Minshew draws it from
the Goth. Cates, signifying the same: From hence a Cater, or Caterer, a Steward
at a feast. Catharpings, a term among Sailers, from the Belg. Katerolle; and
this from Katte, and Roll, with us, Roll; (i. e.) small ropes running in little
wheels, or pulleys. The Catlings of Wall-nut-trees, from the Belg. Kattekens,
Teut. Katzleins, Fr. G. Chattons, down, or moss, which grows about this sort of
tree, much resembling the hair of a cat. Cattle, from the Lat. Capita, because
they belong to one head, or owner, by right of possession: V. Chattels.
Catterwawl, from Cat, and Wawl. Dr. Th. H. thinks it so said, quasi Gutterwawl.
Cavalcade, v. Cavalier. Cavalier, from the Fr. G. Cavailler, Ital. Cavaliere,
Hisp. Cavallero; all from the Lat. Caballus, a pack-horse. Candle, from the Fr.
G. Chaudeau, Chaudelee; and these from the Fr. G. Chaud, Lat. Calidus, hot; q.
d. a confection made of eggs, wine, bread, sugar and spices, always to be taken
hot. Cave, from the Fr. G. Cave, or the Lat. Cavus, hollow; Caverna, the same.
Cavers, a term amongst Mariners; from the Lat. Cavea, a cave. Caviary, or
Caviare, from the Ital. Caviaro, the spawn of a Sturgeon pickled; caught in
Rha, or Volga, a river of Sarmatia, or Moscovy. Caul; (i. e.) the suet in which
the bowels are wrapped; so called, because it represents the form of a Cawl,
or net: in which sense, we may derive it from the Lat. Caveola, because a net
is, as it were, a prison for fish. But when it is taken for dress for women's
heads, it seems to come of the Ital. Cavelli, or the Lat. Capilli, hairs,
says Minshew. Cauldron, from the Fr. G. Chaudron, Ital. Chauderone; and these
from the Fr. G. Chaud, Ital. Caldo, Lat. Calidus, hot. Causey, from the Fr. G.
Chaussee, Ital. Calzata, strewed with chalk; or from the Lat. Calceus, a shoe;
because being paved with flints, it is more commodious for footmen than
horsemen. Cease, from the Fr. G. Cesser; both from the Lat. Cessare, the same.
A Cellar, from the Fr G. Celier; and both from the Lat. Cellarium, idem.
Censer, q. d. Incenser, from the Lat. Incendo, to burn; q. d. a vessel wherein
is burned Incense; which see. Centry, v. Sentinel. Certain, from the Fr. G.
Certain; this from the Lat. Certus, certain, or sure. From hence the word
Ascertain, or assure one of a thing. To Chafe, from the Fr. G. Chauffer; both
from the Lat. Calfacere, (i. e.) to heat, or warm with rubbing: Hence,
metaphorically, To Chafe with anger. A Chafer, from the Fr. G. Eshauffer, to
heat; q. d. a vessel to heat things in. A Chafer, or yellow Beetle, from the
AS. Ceafor, Belg. Rever, Teut Kafer, the same. Scaliger derives it from the Gr.
(...); q. d. having a covering on its body resembling that of a crab. Chaff,
from the AS. Ceaf, Belg. Kaf, idem. Martinius derives it from the Lat. Cavo, to
hollow; because when the seed is struck out, the husk is hollow. Fr. Jun. draws
it more ingeniously from the Gr. (...), light. Yet it may be derived from the
AS. Caf, swift; because it is easily carried away with the wind. To Chaffer,
from the Teut. K^uffer, to buy: it signifies, to exchange one commodity for
another. Chaffer, Good Chaffer, from the AS. Ceaf, good wares; or the Belg.
K^^per, Teut. Kauffer, to buy, or purchase. Chaffinch, from the AS. Caf, swift;
q. d. swift Finch. V. Finch. Chafingdish, from the word Chafe; which see.
Chain, from the Fr. G. Chain; and both contracted from the Lat. Catena, idem.
Chair, from the Fr. G. Chair; and both contracted from the Lat. Cathedra, the
same. Chilbot, rather Chabot, a term in Heraldry; from the Lat. Caput: It is a
sort of fish with a great head, called a Gull, Bull-head, or Mil^er's-thumb.
Chalice, from the Fr. G. Calice; and both from the Lat. Calix, idem. Chalk,
from the Fr. G. Chaulx, and both from the Lat. Calx, idem. Challenge, from the
Fr. G. Chalenger, Chalanger, to lay claim to a thing. Chamber, Fr. G. Chamber,
Ital. Camera, Teut. Kammer; all from the Gr. (...), a roof, or arch.
Chamberlain, Fr. G. Cambellan, Ital. Cambellano, Ciamberlano, Teut. Kammerling,
all from the barb. Lat. Cammerarius, the same. Chamblet. from the Fr. G.
Camelot, Hisp. Chamelote, Ital. Cambelotto; and these from the Lat. Camelus, a
Camel; this sort of stuff being made of Camels hair. Chamfer's, from the Fr. G.
Chamber, Cambre, crooked, or arched; or, according to Menagius, from the Lat.
Camurus, for Curvus; (i. e.) vaulted, or bent arch-wise. Chamois, from the Gr.
(...), says Scaliger; (i. e.) the skin of a young Faun: But Covarruvias
derives it from the Hisp. Gamuza; q. d. the skin of a wild goat. Chamomil, from
the Fr. G. Cammomille, Ital. Camemilla, Lat. Camaemelum; all from the Gr.
(...), a kind of apple, to which it is like in smell. To Champ, as does a boar,
from the Fr. G. Champayer, to feed; and this from the Lat. Campus, a field; or
from the Gr. (...), to devour greedily; or (...), jaws; which comes from the
Verb (...), to whet the teeth like a boar. Champain, A Point Champain, a term
in Heraldry; from the Fr. G. Champaigne, a field: One that unhumanely slays a
captive in the field, after he has cried Quarter, says Guillam. Champion, from
the Fr. G. Champion, Ital. Campione, the same; all, not unlikely, from the Lat.
Campus, a field, or the Gr. (...), to labor, or take pains. Champion- Ground,
from the Fr. G. Champaigne, Ital. Campagna, idem; both from the Lat. Campus, a
plain. Chance, from the Fr. G. Chance, and this from Cheance, a verbal of the
Verb Cheoir, to fall out, or happen. Chancel, from the Fr. Norm. Chancel, and
that from the Lat. Cancelli, (i. e.) a Vestry, anciently separated from the
rest of the Church by a partition made lattisswise. Chancellor, from the Fr.
G. Chancelier, Ital. Cancelliere; all from the barb. Lat. Cancellarius, and
this from Cancel: Hence Chancery, by contraction from the Fr. G. Chanceliere,
(i. e.) the Chancellor's Court. Chance- Medley, a term in Law; from the Fr. G.
Chance, chance, and Mesler, to mingle; (i. e.) unpremeditated death. Chandler,
from the Fr. G. Chandeliere; and both from the Lat. Candela; (i. e.) one that
makes candles. Change, from the Fr. G. Changer, Ital. Cangiare, Cambiare, and
both from the Lat. Cambire, the same. From hence, To Counter-change; also A
Changeling. Channel, v. Kennel. Chant, from the Fr. G. Chanter; both from the
Lat. Cantare; or rather, Cantillare, to sing softly. Chantecleer, a cock; from
the Fr. G. Chanter, to sing, and Clair, clear. Chanter, from the Fr. G.
Chantre, Ital. Cantiere; (i. e.) a Singing master. Chanter, a dog's name; from
the same root; q. d. a dog that fills the woods with barking. Chantry, v.
Chant, above. To Chap, corrupted from Gape; which see. Chape, from the Fr. G.
Chappe, the point of a scabbard, made of iron; or perhaps from the Ital. Cappa,
(i. e.) the cover of a scabbard. Chaplet, from the Fr. G. Chapelet, and both
from the Lat. Caput, q. d. an ornament for the head. Chap-man, from the AS.
Ceap-man, Teut. Kauffman, Belg. Koopman, idem. V. Cheap, and Chaffer. Chapel,
from the Fr. G. Chapelle, Ital. Capella, the same. From hence Chaplain, from
the Fr. G. Chapelain; both from the Fr. G. Chape, a gown; or from the Cappas
St. Martini. Spelman derives it from the Lat. Capsella, a little box, in which
relics were kept. Chaps, from the AS. Ceaflas, idem; and this from Ceafl, a
snout. Chapter, from the Lat. Caput, a head; q. d. a Convocation of the Heads
or Elders of the Church. The Chapter of a pillar, from the Fr. G. Chapiteau;
both from the Lat. Capitulum, a chapter. A Chapter, from the Fr. G. Chapitre;
and both from the Lat. Caput, the same. Char, a task set one to do; either from
the word Charge, or the AS. Carc, care. V. Charge, and Cark. Char- woman, from
the Belg. Keeren; (i. e.) a woman hired to rub, and make clean the house. Char,
a fish very plentiful in Winander Mere, a standing water in Lancashire; not
unlikely, from the AS. Carran, to turn; because it turns it self swiftly in
the water. Charcoal, from the Eng. Char, clear, and Coal; for the clear and
vehement heat which it casts; it is most fit for cunning workmanship, and
Chemical operations. Chard, The Chard of an Artechoke, from the Fr. G Chard, of
the same signification. It may likewise come from the Lat. Carduus. Gardiners
term that the Chard, that grows out of the roots of old Artechokes. Chardon, a
term among Gardiners; from the Fr. G. Chardon, Ital. Cardone; (i. e.) an
Artechoke covered with earth, till it become tender; from the Lat. Carduus, a
thistle; q. d. a great thistle. Charge, from the Fr. G. Charge, Ital. Carico, a
burden; and all from the Lat. Carrus, a cart, or wagon. V. Carry. Charger,
from the Teut. Kahr, signifying a deep platter; or from our Eng. Charge;
because in it chargeable delicacies are carried to the table. Chariot, or
Charret, from the Fr. G. Chariot; and both from the Lat. Carrus, a cart, or
wagon. Charitable, from the Fr. G. Charitable, Ital. Charitevole; and all from
the Lat. Charitas, charity. Chark, a word frequently used in Lincolnshire; from
the AS. Acyrran, Teut. Kehren. Belg. Keeren, to turn; q. d. beer kept
unbroached, till it becomes very stale, or till it turns. A Charlatan, from the
Fr. G. Charlatan, Ital. Ciarlatano, a Circler, or Juggler; and this from
Ciarlare, to incircle; q. d. one that deludes men's senses with juggling tricks,
and charming speeches. Charm, from the Fr. G. Charm, Ital. Ciarma; all from
the Lat. Carmen; q. d. a magic Verse. A Charnel-house, from the Fr. G.
Charnier, idem; and this from the Lat. Caro, flesh; because thither must all
flesh come at last: Or from the Lat. Cranium, a skull; q. d. a repository for
dead men's skulls. Charter, from the Fr. G. Chartre, public acts, or
commentaries; this from the Lat. Charta, paper. Charter House, from the Fr. G.
Chartreux, Ital. Certosa, a Monastery of Carthusian-Monks; so called, from
Carthusia, a mountain near Gratianopolis, where Bruno, who first instituted
this Order, had his seat: Or from the old Fr. G. Chartre, which formerly
signified, a prison, from Carcer, because they are shut up in the Cloister, as
it were in a Gaol, being forbidden all humane conversation. Charter- party, a
term in Law; from the Fr. G. Charte, or Carte Party, a writing, or deed,
delivered to each of them that make a contract. Chary, from the Lat. Cura,
care, q. d. careful, or wary. Chase, from the Fr. G. Chasser, Ital. Cacciare;
and all from the Lat. Captare. Chase, Chased Plate, a term in the Gold-smith's
craft, a contract of Inchase; which see. Chasten, v. Chastise. Chastise, Fr. G.
Chastier, both from the Lat. Castigare, the same. To Chat, from the Fr. G.
Caquetter, Ital. Gazzolare, to chatter, or chattle like a Iay; which see.
Chattels, a term in Law, from the Belg. Katheyl, movables. Chatter, from the
Belg. Citteren, Teut. Z^ttern, to shake, or tremble for cold. Chatter as a
Mag-pye, from the Fr. G. Caequeter, Caqueter, the same. Chaudron, a measure of
coals consisting of 2000 l. weight; from the Fr. G. Chauderon, or our Eng.
Cauldron, (i. e.) so many coals as suffice for fires under Dyars vats.
Chavender, V. A Chevin, or Chub. Cheap, v. Cheapen. To Cheapen, from the AS.
Ceapan, Belg. Ko^pen, Teut. Kauffen, to buy. Hence Chepstow, a City in Wales;
from the AS. Ceapsto, (i. e.) a place for merchandise. Cheer, v. Cheer.
Cheerful, q. d. Ital. Chi a buon Ciera (i. e.) one that is of good cheer. V.
Cheer. Cheat, from the AS. Cetta, circumventions, frauds; or the Fr. G. Achet,
an agreement, or bargain; this from the Verb Acheter, which comes from the Lat.
Captare; as we say when we are cheated in buying any thing, We are bought and
sold. Check, from the Fr. G. Eschec, Ital. Scacco, the play at Tables. Hence, A
Check with a pawn, Check with a rook; terms in gaming. V. Chess. Check-Mate,
from the Ital. Scaoco, and the Lat. Mattus, which comes from the Gr. (...), to
undergo; q. d. a check cast under the table. To Check, to repress, or keep
under; by a Metaphor from the other Check. v. Chess. Checker, to plant trees
checker-wise, or by squares. V. Check, and Chess. Checkie, a term in Heraldry;
from the Fr. G. Eschiquette, Ital. Inscacchiere, squared like Checker-work. V.
Check. Checkin, from the Ital. Zeccha, it from the Hisp. and Arab. Cequi; it is
a Venetian golden coin. Minshew derives it from the Hisp. Seca, a place where
money is coined. Cheek from the AS Chece, Belg. Kaecke, the same. Cheer, from
the Fr. G. Chere, Caire, Hisp. Xira, Cara, the countenance: Or from the Lat.
Caro, when it is taken for victuals. Cherish, from the Fr. G. Cherir, and both
from the Lat. Charus; q. d. to love one dearly. V. Caress. Chern, or Churn,
from the Belg. Keeren, Fr. G. Cerner, to turn round: Or perhaps from the Lat.
Cernere, to divide; i. e. to separate the butter from the milk. Cherry, from
the Fr. G. Cerise, Ital. Ceregia; and all of them from the Lat. Cerasum, the
same. Cheslip, or Cheselip, v. Cheslop. Cheslop, from the AS. Cese, cheese, and
Lip, or the Teut. Lauffen, to run; because it presently diffuses it self in the
milk; separating the Heterogenial, and gathering the Homogeneal part, whereof
cheese is made. Chess, from the Belg. Schaeek, Teut. Scach, Ital. Scacco, Hisp.
Escaque; all which Salmasius derives from the Lat. Calculus, the same. Chest,
from the AS. Cest, or the Lat. Cista, idem; by a metaphor it signifies, the
breast. Chester, or Cester, a termination frequently added to the names of
Towns; from the AS. Ceaster, a City, or Town; and this from the Lat. Castra.
Chestnut, from the Fr. G. Chastaigne, Ital. Castagna; and all from the Lat.
Castanea, sc. Nux, the same. Cheveril, from the Fr. G. Chevereul, Ital.
Ciavarello, a kid. v. Chamots. Cheveron, and thence Chevronel, a term in
Heraldry; from the Lat. Capreolus; q. d. a little goat. Chevin, from the Fr. G.
Chevesne, Ital. Cefalo; and all from the Gr. (...), an head, this fish having a
great head. Chew, or Chaw, from the AS. Ceoian, or the Belg. and Teut. Kauwen,
or Kawen, idem; perhaps all from the Gr. (...), to gape wide. Chick, from the
AS. Cicen, Belg. Kuycken, Teut. Kitcklein, a diminutive of Cock. Mer. Cas.
derives it from the Gr. (...); which Hesychius interprets, a cock. Chide, from
the AS. Cidan, Teut. Schelten, the same. Mer. Cas. draws it from the Gr. (...),
to be angry. Chief, from the Fr. G. Chef, Chief; both from the Lat. Caput: It
also alludes to the Gr. (...). Chieftain, or Cheftain, i. e. a captain, or
leader; from the Lat. barb. Capitaneus. V. Captain, and Chief, before.
Child^ain, q. d. a sore contracted by cold. V. Chill, and Blain. Child, from
the AS. Cild, Belg. Kindt, Teut. Kind the same. It alludes to the Gr. (...),
and (...). Chill, from the Belg. Killig^, this from the AS. Celan, to be Cold;
which see. Chimes, from the Fr. G. Gamme, and this perhaps from our Gammuth, a
term in Music. Dr. Th. H. draws it ingeniously from the Ital. Chiamare,
because the sound thereof invites people to church. Chimney, from the Fr. G.
Cheminee, Hisp. Chemenea; and all from the Lat. Caminus, Gr. (...). Chin, from
the AS. Cinne, Belg. Koon, Teut. Kinn, id. Fr. Jun. derives it from the Gr.
(...), to move; because, when people talk, it moves. Mer. Cas. from the Gr.
(...), the beard upon the chin. Yet I had rather draw it from the AS* Cinan,
and this from the Gr. (...), to gape, or open the mouth; because by drawing
down the chin toward the neck, the mouth opens. Chin-cough, or Kin-cough, from
the Belg. Kinckhoest, Kichhoest, and this from Kinchen, Kichen, to breath, and
Hoest, a cough; (i. e.) A Cough, that causes shortness of breath. Chine, from
the Fr. G. Chignon, Chinon, Ital. Schiena; and all from the Lat. Spina, the
backbone. A Chink, from the AS. Cinan, to gape as a wound or mouth. Fr. Jun.
derives it from the Gr. (...), to gape. Chink, from the Fr. G. Quinquailles,
(i. e.) money of copper, or tin, that chinketh much, though of small value; so
called from the sound such money makes. Chip, from the AS. Cyp: Hence To Chip;
both perhaps from the Fr. G Chapler, (i. e.) to cut wood in small pieces.
Chirp, a feigned sound, from the singing of birds. Chisel, a carving-tool; from
the Fr. G. Ciseau, Ital. Cisello; and both from the Lat. Scindere, to cut, or
cleave. Chisel from the Teut. Kiesel, an husk, or cod. Chitt; Minshew derives
it from the Ital. Cito, Hisp. Chico; (i. e.) a little boy. Th. H. from Kitten,
taken from the saying, He plays like a Kitten. Chitterlings; Minshew derives it
from the Belg. Schyterlingh, in Eng. q. Shitterling; because in them are
contained the excrements. Yet I had rather draw it from the Teut. Kutteln, the
inwards. Chivalry, from the Fr. G. Chevaliere, idem. In our Law it is termed
Knights Service. v. Cavalier. Chives, or Cives, a small sort of Onion; from the
Fr. G. Cive; both from the Lat. Caepa. Chocolate, from the Hisp. Chucolate, a
cordial liquor; and this from Cacao, a certain nut, which is the great
ingredient in this confection. I might draw it from the Lat. Succus, q. d.
Succulata, because it abundantly increases the nutritive moisture. Choke;
Mich. Hon. derives it from the AS. Ceoca, a cheek-bone; because the halter is
tied under the cheek-bone of criminals. Choose, from the AS. Ceosan, Fr. G.
Choiser, idem; all perhaps from the Lat. Colligere, to gather together. Chop,
from the Belg. Kappen, to mangle; or from the Fr. G. Choper, Chopper, to
stumble, or hit against a thing. Minshew takes it from the Gr. (...), to cut.
Chop, to Change, from the Belg. Koopen, to buy; for formerly men dealt by
change of one thing for another. V. Cheapen. Chopius, or as we say, Chopeens,
from the Hisp. Chapin, a sock, or upper sole; this from Chapa^; i. e. a kind of
rich shoe, wrought with gold or silver. Chopping-Boy, from the AS. Caf, stout;
(q. d.) a stout boy for his age: Or it may be derived from the Belg. Koopen, to
buy; q. d. a boy fit to be sold, and capable of servile business. Chough, from
the Fr. Picard. Chouette, Chue, Chouca, Ital. Cutta, Scotta, a crow; or from
the Belg. Kauw, a jackdaw; and this from (...), to gape often, says. Fr Jun.
but all are better derived from the sound. Chowse, from the Fr. G. Gausser,
Ital. Goffo; as we say, To make a fool of a man. A Chowse, or Fool, from the
Fr. G. Joucher, to cheat one with fair words; by a Metaphor taken from
Fishermen, who catch fishes with false nets made of rushes. Christen, from the
AS. Cristnian, to Christen, Fr. G. Chrestionner, idem. The Christian, or Boon
Christian-Pear, corrupted from the Lat. Crustumini, or Crustumiani, a kind of
Pear red on one side, formerly much esteemed. Christmas, q. d. the Mass of
Christ. Chub, from the AS. Cop, a great-headed fellow. See Iolthead, and
Iobbernoll. A Chub, or Chevin, a fish with a great head; from the old Eng. Cop,
or the Fr. G. Chef, an head. To Chuckle with laughter, from the Ital.
Scuccherare, Belg. Schachen, idem. Chuff, A Country-Chuff, not unlikely from
the AS. Cyf, Teut. Kuffe, an hogs-head, or pipe; and all from the Lat. Cupa,
idem; as we may, by a Metaphor, call an ignorant, and ill-shaped person.
Church, from the AS. Cyric, Belg. Kercke, Teut. Kirch, idem: q. d. Gr. (...),
the house of God. Churl, from the AS. Ceorl, Belg. Kuerle, Keerle, a stout or
big man. Churr-worm, from the AS. Cyrran, to turn; because this worm turns
about quickly. Cinders, from the AS. and Dan. Sinder, the dross, or scum of
metal: Or from the Fr. G. Cendre, Ital. Cineri; or from the Lat. Cineres,
ashes; but I rather incline to the former. Cinque, a cast at dice; from the Fr.
G. Cinq, Hisp. Cinco, Ital. Cinque; and all from the Lat. Quinque. Cipher, from
the Fr. G. Chiffre, Sifre, Ital. Zifra, the same; but it is really an Heb. and
Arab. word, denoting Numeration. Right spelled, Cipher. C press, from the Fr.
G. and Hisp. Cypres, the Lat Cupressus, the same. Right spelled, Cypress.
Cipress, a sort of silk; from the Lat. Cyprus, an Isle where the workers of it
first flourished. Right, Cypress. Citadel, or Fortification, from the Fr. G.
Citadelle, Ital. Cittadella; q. d. a little City, with respect to the strength
of it. Citron, a sort of fruit; from the Fr. G. Citron, Lat. barb. Citrum,
idem. Cittern, music; from the Ital. Ghitarra; both corrupted from the Lat.
Cithara, idem. City, from the Fr. G. Cite, Ital. Citta; both contractions of
the Lat. Civitas, idem. C^vet, from the Fr. G. Civette, Sivette, Ital. Sibetto,
Zibetto, Lat. barb. Zibethum, the same. To Clack, from the Belg. Rl^ck; or
possibly from the Fr. G. Clacquer, or C. Br. Cleccian, to rattle. A Clack, from
the Teut. Klatschen, or Klaffen, to prate. Claim, from the Fr. G. Claim,
Clamer, and this from the Lat. Clamare; (i. e.) openly to challenge to ones
self. Clammy, and Clam, v. Cleam. Clamps, a term in sailing, from the Belg.
Klamme, Klampe, crooked pieces of timber holding the sides of a ship fast
together. Clap, from the AS. Clappan, Belg. Klappen, Kleppen, Teut. Klapffen,
Fr. G. Clappeter, the same. Hence, A Clapper. A Clap, from the Fr. G. Clapoir;
q. d. a swelling in the groin and privities; the Venereal disease. Clap, a term
in Hawking; from the AS. Clappan, to shut close, as does an hawk's bill, or
beak. Claret, from the Fr. G Claret; and both from the Lat. Clarus, clear;
because Claret is tenuous and transparent. Clark, from the Fr. G. Clerc; and
both from the Lat. Clericus, idem. From hence, Clergy. Clash, from the Belg.
Klets, Klettse, or the Gr. (...), to make a confused noise, like the downfall
of an old house. C^asp, from the Belg. Ghespe, the same; yet I had rather draw
it from the AS. Cleofan, to close. Clatter, and Clutter, from the AS. Cleadur,
Belg. Klatteren, Kleuteren, idem; they are all feigned from the sound. Claver,
or Clover- grass, from the Belg. Klawer, Teut. Klee, idem. I think it may as
probably be drawn from the AS. Chefer, a violet; for the scent of its flowers
is not much different from that of the violet. A Claw, from the Belg. Klawen,
AS. Clapan, Teut. Klauben, to scratch, or tear. Clay, from the Belg. Kley; and
both from the Fr. G. Croye; this from the Lat. Creta, the same. To Cleaui, a
word used in Lincolnshire; from the AS. Claemian, to dawb with clammy, viscous
matter. Clean, from the AS. Claene, Belg. Kleynsen, Klensen, to make pure; by a
Metaphor taken from Destillers. It may likewise be drawn from the Gr. (...), to
trim up, or make neat. Clear, from the Fr. G. Clair; both from the Lat. Clarus,
idem. Fr. Jun. derives it from the Gr. (...), idem. Cleave, from the AS.
Cleofan, Felg. Kleven, Teut. Klaven, to stick fast. V. Clay, and Cleam. Cleave,
from the AS. Cleofan, Belg. Kloven, Kluven, to hew in pieces. A Cleft, or
Clift, from the Verb, To Cleave. Clergy, from the Fr. G. Clerge, Ital.
Chieresia; all from the Lat. Clericus, and this from the Gr. (...), a lot, or
inheritance, they being the Lord's Inheritance, dedicated to his service.
Clever, and Cleverly, from the Fr. G. Ledger, nimbly, or quickly, like a
Legerdemain; which see. A Clew of thread, from the AS. Clype, Belg. Klowe,
Teut. Klawel, Klewel, the same; and all very probably from the Gr. (...), to
roll, or wind. Cleyes, The Cleyes of a Lobster; Minshew derives it from the Gr.
(...), they somewhat resembling the mouth of a pair of tongs. V. Claw. Click,
or Clink, from the Belg. Klinken, Teut. Klingen, Fr. G. Cliquer, to rustle, as
does armor. V. Clack. Clicket, from the Fr. G. Cliquet, and this from Cliquer;
q. d. a knocker whereby we give those that are within-doors intelligence of our
coming. Clift, from the AS. Clyf, Belg. Klif; and all from the Lat. Clivus, a
steep place, or rock. Climb, from the AS. Clyman, Belg. and Teut. Klemmen; and
all perhaps from the Gr. (...); q. d. to creep up little by little, or step by
step. Clinch; Minshew draws it from the Lat. Clingere, to gripe hard with the
fist. Cling, from the ^ n. Klynger, to stick fast, o^ cleave to a thing; and
this perhaps from the Lat. Collinere, to dawb over, to wit, with clammy matter;
as bird-lime. Clip, from the AS. Clippan, Beclippan, to embrace one hard about
the middle. Clip; Minshew draws it from the Belg. Knippen, Snippen, to cut off
ones nails, cloth, etc. Cloak; Minshew draws it from the Gr. (...), to cover,
or hide. To Clock as an hen, from the AS. Cloccan, Belg. Klocken, Teut.
Klucktzen, G^ucktzen, Fr. G. Closser, Ital. Chiocciare, idem; they are all
feigned from the sound. A Clock, by inverting the sense a little, from the AS.
Clugga, Belg. and Dan Klocke, Teut. Glocke, Fr. G. Cloche, a bell. A Clock, a
certain fly so called, from the noise it makes, like the striking of a clock.
Clod, from the AS. Clud; or rather, from the Belg. Kluyte, Klot, the same.
Hence Clotted- blood, and Clouted- milk; from the Belg. Klotter-melck; q. d.
thickened, or crudded milk. Clog, from the Noun Log. V. Cumber. Cloister, from
the Fr. G Cloistre, Ital. Chiostro; both from the Lat. Claustrum, signifying
the same. Close, from the AS. Clysan, Fr. G. Clovre, to shut up; and all
manifestly from the Lat. Claudere, idem. Hence we say, A Close; (i. e.) a field
hedged about. Close by, or very near; see the other Close. Closet, a diminutive
of Close; q. d. a little Close place. Cloth, from the AS. Clath, Dan. Klede,
the same. Hence our participle Clad; perhaps it may come of the Gr. (...), to
spin. Clo^ter, from the Belg. Klotteren, Klouteren, to wax thick. v. Clod.
Cloud; Minshew derives it from the Verb Claudo, to shut up; because it shuts
up the Sun from us. Somnerus draws it from Clod, because it consists of
condensed vapors. It may also be drawn from the AS. Clut, or the Eng. Clout,
because, like a curtain, it hides the light of the Sun from us. Cloves, from
the AS. Clufe, A Clove of garlic. Clough, from the word Cleave; which see. It
is likewise derived from the AS. Clud, a rock, or cliff. Clout, from the AS.
Clut, Teut. Lod, a remnant of cloth. Clouted- milk, V. Clod. Clouted- shoon,
from the Fr. G. Clouet, a little nail; q. d. one that has his shoes mended
with nails: or from the AS. Clut, a clout, or patch. Clouterly- fellow, from
the Belg. Kloete, a stupid jolt-head: Or from Kluyte, Klouter, thick; q. d. an
unprofitable lump of flesh. Clown, contracted from the Lat. Colonus, an
husbandman; for such, most an end, are of an ungenteel carriage. Cloy, from the
Fr. G. Encloyer, to satiate; and this from the Lat. Claudere, to shut; (i. e.)
so to fill, as that there is no place left for any more. Club, not unlikely
from the Teut. Klob, Belg. Kloppel, Klove; and all of them from the Lat. Clava,
the same. Club- law, from the AS. Cleafan. Cleofan, to cleave, or split; q. d.
every man to pay an equal share. Clumps, either contracted from Clownish, or
taken from the Bell, and Teut. Clomp, Klompe, one void of common sense, a Number
skull. Clung, from the AS. Clingan, to stick fast to; (i. e.) shrunk up with
leanness, half famished. Cluster, from the AS. Cluster, a bough; by a Metonymy
of the Adjunct. Clutter, v. Clatter. Coach, from the Fr. G. Coohe, Teut.
Kutsche, Ital. Cocchi, idem. Minsevus derives it from the Hung. Kotczy,
signifying the same; because it is said to be first invented by the Hungarians.
Dr. Th. H. derives it from the Fr. G. Carosse, Ital. Caroccia, the same; and
these from the Lat. Carruca, idem. Coal, from the AS. Col, Teut. Kohl, Belg.
Kole, Dan. Kul, idem: But Vossius derives it from the Gr. (...), hot; possibly,
from the Lat. Caleo, to be hot. Coast, from the Fr. G. Cost, Ital. Costa; i.
e. the side of the sea. Coat, from the AS. Cote, Belg. Kot, idem. Coat, from
the Fr. G. Cotte, Ital. Cotta; both by contraction from the Lat. Crocota, a
saffron-colour'd garment, as says Menagius. From hence, A Coat of Arms, A Coat
of Mail. To Coath, a word frequently used in Lincolnshire; from the AS. Cothe,
a disease. Cob. or Sea-Cob, from the AS. Coppe, Teut. Kopff, the head; (i. e.)
a bird having a tuft. The Cob of an herring, from the same root. Cob-irons,
from the AS. Cop, Teut. Kopff, an head, and Irons; (i. e.) irons having great
round tops. Cobbler, from the Belg. Koppelen, and both from the Lat. Copulare,
to couple together, as Cobblers do old shoes. Cob-nut, a play amongst boys;
from the Teut. Kopff, an head; or the AS. Coppe, the top of any thing; q. d.
the nut that breaks the head of another. Cobs, round balls with which fowls
are crammed; from the Fr. G. Gob, Gobeau, a pellet; Gober, to swallow. Cobweb,
from the Belg. Kopwebbe, idem; and this from Koppe, a spider, and Web; which
see. Cocheneal, from the Fr. G. Cochenille, Hisp. Cochinillo, Ital. Cociniglia,
all from the Lat. barb. Cochinilla, idem. Cock, from the AS. Cocc, Fr. G. Coq,
the same. Minshew derives it from the Gr. (...). Hence Cocks-comb. Cock of a
Conduit; so called, because it is made in the shape of a cock's comb. The Cock
of a gun; or, To Cock a gun, from the Ital. Cocca, the point of an arrow; or
Coccare, to make the arrow fit for the bow. Cock of hay; quasi, A Cop of hay,
as they express it in Kent; which Cop manifestly comes from the AS. Coppe, the
top of any thing. Cockal, a play with hucklebones; from Cock, (i. e.) a Victor,
by a Metaphor taken from a Cock-fight; or, q. d. Cop-all, from the AS. Cop, an
head, and our All; (i. e.) he that is above all. Cock-apparel, a saying in
Lincolnshire; from the Fr. G. Quelque Appareil, (i. e.) apparel for the
distinction of Quality. Cockatrice, from the Fr. G. Coquatris, the same: Or
from Cock, and the AS. ^tter, with us Adder; q. d. a viper from a cock.
Cock-boat, by some called A Coggle, or Cobble, from the Fr. G. Coque, a
shellfish. To Cocker, from the Fr. G. Coqueliner, to flatter; and this perhaps
from Coque, (i. e.) to play with shells, or such like toys, to please children
withal: Or from the Fr. G. Coucher, to keep one much in bed. Cocket, a little
paper exhibited by the Receivers of the King's Custom, for a testimony that the
Custom of any parcel of goods is paid; not unlikely, from the Eng. Cock boat;
q. d. a discharge of a boat. Cockle, from the Fr. G. Coque, Coquille; and these
from the Gr. (...), signifying the same. Cockle, from the AS. Coccel, and this
perhaps from the Verb Ceocan, to choke; q. d. tares that choke the corn.
Cockney, or Cockneigh, from the word C^cker; q. d. a boy brought up tenderly in
the City. Dr. Th. H. derives it from the Fr. G. Accoquine, one given to
idleness; and this, I suppose, from Ad, and Coquin, a beggar; beggars being
prone thereto. Cockquean, or Cotquean, q. d. Cook queen, one that plays the
Cook among women: Or from the Teut. Kochin, a she- Cook. Cock-stride; or
rather, as it is pronounced in Lincolnshire, Cock-strinde. The learned Dr. Th.
H. tells us, that it comes from the Eng. Cock, and the AS. Strind; and this
from the AS. Strynan, to tread. Cock-swain, from Cock, for Cock-boat, and
Swain; (i. e.) the master of a boat, or barge. See Cock-boat, and Swain. Cod,
from the AS. Codde, Belg. Kodde, Teut. Kode, a little shell; and all from the
AS. Codde, a scrip, or purse; also a little sack. From hence comes the
Northern word, Cod, signifying a pillow. Fr. Jun. derives it from the Gr.
(...), any round thing. Cod-fish, from the AS. Codde, a pocket, or purse, from
the resemblance thereof. Codlins, or Coddle, Codlin, from the word Coddle; q.
d. a Summer-apple, so acid, that it is to be boiled before it is eaten.
Cod-piece, from the AS. Codde, a portmanteau, and the Eng. Piece, because it
formerly stuck out in the form of a portmanteau. Cod-worin, or Caddis, from the
AS. Cothde, a portmanteau; because of the resemblance. Cot, from the AS. Cofe,
and this from the Lat. Cavea, because it is a cave for diggers under the
ground. Cofers, a term in Architecture; from the Fr. G. Coffre, (i. e.) the
inner part of the roof; but primarily, a box, or coffer, wherein roses,
pomegranates and flowers, the ornaments of a crown, are placed. Coffee, not
long known in England; from the Egypt. Choava. Coffer, from the AS. Cofe,
Cofa; and these, not unlikely, from the Lat. Cavea, a cave, from the
similitude. The Cofferer of the King's household, whose office it is, to pay His
Majesty's Officers their sallaries; from the Noun Coffer, q. d. the Steward of
the King's Coffer. Coffin, from the Fr. G. Cofin, Ital. Cophano; and all from
the AS. Cofa, a cave; tho some derive it from the Gr. (...), which signifies,
a basket. V. Coffer. To Cog, from the Fr. G. Coqueliner; and this from Coque, a
shell; a Metaphor from children's play. The Cog of a Miln-wheel; so called,
from the sound it makes in turning round. Cogle- stone, from the Ital.
Cuogolo; both from the Lat. Calculus, and this from the Gr. (...), a little
stone. Cognizance, from the Fr. G. Connoissance, and this from the Verb
Connoistre, to know, or be assured of. Coif, from the Fr. G. Coiffe, Ital.
Cuffia, Hisp. Cofia, idem: And this Father Guadix derives from the Arab. Quehf,
an head; and from thence Quehfia, any ornament for the head. To Coil, or Qitoil
a cable, from the Fr. G. Cueillir, Ital. Cogliere; and both from the Lat.
Colligere, to gather up together. Coil, To keep a Coil, perhaps from the Teut.
Kollern, to chide; and this from Koller, a collar; because combatants take one
another by the collar. Coin, from the Fr. G. Coin, Ital. Conio, stamped money:
Or, as Spelm. and Menagius have it, from the Lat. Cuneus, a wedge. Cironius
derives it from the Gr. (...), an image; because it has the figure of the
Prince's head upon it. Some draw it from the Hisp. Cunnar, to coin. Coins, a
term in Architecture. Adr. Jun. draws it from the Fr. G. Coing, a corner; and
this from the Lat. Cuneus. It may possibly be drawn from the word Ancones found
in Vitruv. signifying the same. Cokers, from the AS. Cocer, Belg. Koker, a
case; they are a sort of Fisher-men's boots, into which their legs are put, as
it were, into cases. Cokes, from the Fr. G. Cochon, Hisp. Cochino, an hog;
whence we say, A lilly Hog: Or from the Hisp. Coco, a word wherewith to fright
children, which in understanding are but fools: Or from the Teut. Gauck, Geck,
a fool. Cold, from the AS. Cole, with us Cool, Belg. Koel, Kaud, Kaudt, Koud,
Kout, the same: Or not unlikely from the AS. Colan, Caelan; and this perhaps
from the Lat. Gelu, Gelare, to freeze. Cole, or Cole-wort, from the AS. Call,
Belg. Koole, Teut, Kohl, Fr. G. Choux, Caul, Ital. Cavoli, Coli, Hisp. Col,
idem; and all of them from the Lat. Caulis, a stalk. Cole-mouse, from the Fr.
G. Caul, and Mouse; q. d. a bird that feeds much upon Cole-worts. Collet of
a ring, from the Fr. G. Colet, Collet, the palate; this from Col, the neck;
allusively, the thickest part of the ring, wherein the signet is set. Collar,
from the Fr. G. Collier, Hisp. Collar, a neck-lace; and both from the Lat.
Collare, because it goes about the neck. Collation, from the Fr. G. Collation,
idem; and this most manifestly from the Lat. Collatio, a treatment made by one,
or two, or more persons, to entertain the company. The Hawk Collieth; in Rider,
Collineat; in Gouldman, Annuit; a term in Fowling; perhaps from the Fr. G. Col,
Lat. Collum, a neck; q. d. he moves his neck straight forward. Collogue, from
the Lat. Colloqui: Or rather, from the Teut. Kosen, to talk, and Lugen, to lie;
q. d. to deceive one by fair speeches. Collop; Minshew derives it from the Gr.
(...), to cut, or (...), food, or (...), which by Voss. is interpreted Offa, a
fat piece of flesh. Colly-flower, v. Cole-wort. Coloier, from the barb. Gr.
(...), q. d. a good old man. Dr. Th. H. derives it from (...), and (...), good
and holy. Colonel, Fr. G. Colonnel, Ital. Colonello, a captain over a thousand
men: Not as Minshew will have it, from Columna, because they are the pillars of
an army; but from Colonia, because at first they were set over Colonies. Colt,
from the AS. Colt, the same. A Colter, from the AS. Cultor, Belg. Kouter, Fr.
G. Coutre, Ital. Coltro, Coltello; and all from the Lat. Culter, idem. Comb,
Belg. and Teut. Kammen, Dan. Kemmer. It may possibly come from the Lat. Como,
or the Gr. (...), (i. e.) to trim ones locks. Comb, Dan. and Teut. Kam, Kamm;
perhaps from the Gr. (...); q. d. the ornament of a cock. Combat, from the Fr.
G. Combat, Combatre, Ital. Combattere, to fight: Or from the Lat. Con,
together, and Batuere, to smite. Combatant, a term in Heraldry; from the Fr. G.
Combatant, a part. of the Verb Combatre; (i. e.) a figure drawn like a
Gladiator standing upon his guard. Comber; Menagius draws it from the Lat.
barb. Cumbrus, Fr. G. Combre, an heap. From hence, To Incomber, to hinder the
growth of things, as trees hinder the increase of corn sown under their shades.
Come, AS. Coman, Fr. Th. Kuman, Koman, Teut. Kommen. It may be taken from the
Gr. (...); which, in Herodotus, signifies, to go. Comely; Mer. Cas. draws it
from the Gr. (...), (i. e.) neat: I had rather deduce it from our word Become;
which see. Comfit, from the Fr. G. Confit, and both from the Lat. Confectio.
Comfort, from the Fr. G. Comforter, Ital. Comfortare, to strengthen, or
instruct with Counsel. Dr. Th. H. draws it from the Fr. G. Comfort; i. e.
consolation. A Coming-wench, from the AS. Ceman, to please. Command, from the
Fr. G. Command, Ital. Commando; and these from the Lat. Con, and Mando, to
command. Commence, from the Fr. G. Commencer, Ital. Cominciare; both from the
Lat. Con, and Initium, a beginning. A Commendum, from the Fr. G. Commendo, and
this most evidently from the Lat. Commendare, to commend: It is an
Ecclesiastical Benefice vacant, that is committed to the management of a fit
person, till it be supplied. Commonalty, from the Fr. G. Communaute, or the
Lat. Communalitas, idem. To Commune, from the Lat. Communicare. Company, from
the Fr. G. Compagnie, Ital. Compagnia, society, Fr. G. Compagnon, Ital.
Compagno, a companion; and all these, either, as Caninius says, from Con, and
Pagus; (i. e.) one of the same town, or street; or as Lipsius has it, from the
Verb Combino; or Combenno, in Festus; to combine; or, which is most probable,
from Con, and Panis, (i. e.) one that participates of the same bread.
Comparison, from the Fr. G. Comparison; and both from the Lat. Comparatio, the
same. Compartiment, a term in Architecture, and Heraldry; from the Fr. G.
Compartiment, any equal Division; and this from the Verb Compartiri, to divide
into equal parts. Compass, from the Fr. G. and Hisp. Compass, Ital Compasso, the
same. Hence To Compass, from the Fr. G. Compasser, Ital. Compassare, to
environ, or stand about. Compassion, from the Fr. G. Compassion, Ital.
Compassione, the same; these from the Verbs Compassioner, Compassionare, to
commiserate, or take pity on. Complain, Complaint, from the Fr. G. Complaindre,
Plaindre; these from the Lat. Plangere, to lament. Complement, from the Fr. G.
Compliment, Ital. Complimento; or from our word, Comply; q. d. Complyments.
Complice, from the Fr. G. Complice, the Lat. Complico, to enfold; q. d. one
bound in a confederacy, or league. Complot, from the Fr. G. Complot, a
conspiracy confirmed by oaths; or by a Metaphor taken from playing at ball,
from Con, and Peloter, when a great many together, as it were Confederates, do
strive against others of an equal number. Comply, either from the Fr. G.
Complaire, Ital. Compiacere, to please greatly: Or from the Lat. Complicare, to
say as another says, without any thwarting, to apply himself to another
humor. Componed, and Counter-componed, a term in Heraldry; from the Fr. G.
Compone, Counter-compone; q. d. made of two colors contrariwise set together.
To Comport, i. e. to behave ones self; from the Fr. G. se Comporter, Ital.
Comportarsi, to behave ones self well or ill. Compose, from the Fr. G.
Composer, Lat. Componere, the same: Or rather, from Con, and Pausa; i e. to put
an end to differences. V. Repose. Comprise, from the Fr. G. Compris, part of
the Verb Comprendre; both from the Lat. Comprehendere, to comprehend.
Compromise, from the Fr. G. Compromettre, Ital. Compromettere. Conceive, from
the Fr. G. Concevoir, Ital. Concipere; and both from the Lat. Concipere, the
same. Concern, from the Fr. G. Concerner; both from the Lat. barb. Concernere,
the same. To Cond, or Cun, a term in Sailing; from the AS. Cunnan, to know;
Belg. Kond, Teut. Kund, the same. Conduct, Safe Conduct, a guard of soldiers
that defend an enemy from the violence of the common people; from the Fr. G.
Sauf Conduit, Ital. Salvo Condotta, the same. Conduit, from the Fr. G.
Conduite, idem. Confront, from the Fr. G. Confronter, Ital. Confrontare; and
these from Con, and Frons, that is, to withstand one face to face. Congy, a
decent inflexion of the body, when we salute or part from any body; from the
Fr. G. Conge, Ital. Commiato. Conn, to get a thing by heart, by inverting the
sense a little, from the AS. Connan, Cennan, to know. Conn, to strike with the
fist shut, possibly from the Gr. (...), a knuckle. Coun, I Conn you thanks,
from the AS. Connan, to know; (i. e) to retain a good turn in ones memory; or
from the Teut. Kunden, to own a favor, or gift. Conquer. from the Fr. G.
Conquerir, Ital. Conquistare, to subdue; Fr. G. Conqueste, Ital. Conquisto,
victory; all from the Lat. Conquirere, to acquire, especially by war.
Constable, from the Fr. G. Conestable, Ital. Conestabile; q. d. Comes stabuli,
Master of the Horse, Generalissimo of all His Majesty's Forces. Verstegan
derives it from the AS. Cyning, or Cunning, a King, and Stable; q. d. King of
the stable. Constrain, from the Fr. G. Contraindre, to compel, or force one. A
Contore, from the Belg. Kontoor, Fr. G. Comptoir, a table. See Account, Count,
and Compter. Contrive, from the Fr. G. Controuver, to invent; or devise; this
from Con, and the Teut. Treffen, to find out; also to hit of a thing. To
Control, from the Fr. G. Contre-rolle, to adjust Accounts. From hence, A
Controller of the King's household. V. Roll. Convey, from the Fr. G. Convoyer,
to accompany one; q. d. to carry away with, or about one. Convoy, from the Fr.
G. Convoy, safe conduct, Convoyer, to conduct: Or, as Menagius says, from the
Lat. Convehere, idem. A Cony, from the Belg. Konin, Fr. G. Connil, Connin,
Ital. Coniglio; and all from the Lat. Cuniculus, idem. Cook, from the Belg. and
Dan. Co^k, Teut. Koch, Ital. Cuoco; and all from the Lat. Coquus, the same. A
Coom, or Comb, a certain measure of corn so called; from the Fr. G. Comble; and
both from the Lat. Cumulus, an heap. Coop, from the AS. Cofa, a cave; or the
Ital. Cuba, a cage for birds; (i. e.) a place where fowls are kept, and made
fat. Coop, or rather, Coupe, or Couped, a term in Heraldry; from the Fr. G
Coupe, a Participle of the Verb Couper, to cut. Cooper, from the Belg. Kuyper,
Teut. Kuffer, the same; these from Kuype, Kuffe, a tub, or other vessel. Coot,
from the Belg. Koet, Fr. G. Cotee, a Moor-hen; Ital. Cutta, a bird, which in
Higginius, is called a Felde-fare: I suppose them all to be feigned from the
note which this fowl has. Cop, from the AS. Cop; Teut. Kopff, a top; these
from the Lat. Caput, an head; (i. e.) the tuft, or top of a thing. Cop of hay,
a word frequently spoken in Kent; from the AS Cop; or, which is all one, from
Coppe, because it rises upwards like a tuft. V. A Cock of hay. Cope; Minshew
derives it from the Teut. Kopff, an head; q. d. to hit heads, as wrestlers or
fighters sometimes do. It may be drawn from the Gr. (...), labor; (q. d.) to
be-labour one stoutly. The Cope of heaven, from the Fr. G. Chape, Ital. Cappa;
and these from the Lat. Caput, because the heavens are above the rest of the
creation. V. Cop. Possibly, from the Lat. Cavus, hollow; as we say, the
concavity of the heavens. To Cope together, from the Fr. G. Coupler, Ital.
Coppiare; and all from the Lat. Copulare, to match with. Cope, from the AS.
Caeppe, Belg. Kappe, Fr. G. Chape, Ital. Cappa, a kind of Sacerdotal habit.
Coping, a term in Architecture; from the AS. Coppe, and this from Cop; (q. d.)
the roof, or ridge of an house. Copper, from the Belg. Koper, Dan. Kobber,
Hisp. Cobre, Fr. G. Cuivre; and all from the Barb. Lat. Cuprum; q. d. Cyprian
copper; for Galen and others say, that the Isle of Cyprus was once famous for
workmanship in copper. Copperas, from the Hisp. Caparrossa, Fr. G. Coupperouse,
Couperouse: It Is nothing else but (as Chemists say) an extract of copper. A
Copsy, or Coppis, from the Fr. G. Couper, to cut; or the Gr. (...), to hew
down. Copy, from the Fr. G. Copy, Ital. Copia, idem. Cordelier, one observing
the Institution of St. Francis; from the Fr. G. Cordelier; this from the Lat.
Chorda, a rope, which they wear instead of a girdle. Cordwainer, a Shoe maker;
from the Belg. Kordewaen, Ital. Cordouano, Fr. G. and Hisp. Cordouan, a sort of
leather brought from Corduba, a City in Spain. Core, The Core in fruit, from
the Fr. G. Coeur, Ital. Core, Cuore; and both from the Lat. Cor; because like
the heart, it is in the midst of fruit, containing the seed. Cork, from the
Belg. Korck, Hisp. Corcho, Dan. Korcke, Teut. Gorch; all from the Lat. Cortex,
the bark of a tree; for it is really nothing but the bark of a tree, compared
with other trees. Cormorant, from the Fr. G. Cormorant; q. d. a Sea-crow, that
devours fishes as fast as crows do the standing corn. Corn, from the AS. Corn,
Dan. and Belg. Korn, Korne, Teut. Kern, Korn, the same. Martinius, by the
figure Metathesis, draws it from the Lat. Granum, the same; but Fr. Jun. from
the Gr. (...), to satiate, or satisfy. Corn, a disease in the toes; from the
Lat. Cornu, an horn, for the hardness of it. Cornelian, a sort of stone so
called; from the Lat. Barb. Carneolus, and this from Caro; q. d. of a
flesh-colors: Or from Cornus, because it is red, like the fruit of the
Haw-thorn. Cornel, or Cornelian, from the Fr. G. Corneille; and both from the
Lat. Cornum, the fruit of the Haw-thorn. Cornet, from the Fr. G. Cornet, Ital.
Cornetta; and all from Cornu, an horn; q. d. a musical instrument, made of
horn. Cornet, an Ensign of a Company of Horse; from Coronet, because, in times
of old, they had their heads crowned with Garlands; Or perhaps from the Fr. G.
Cornette. A Cornet-fish, from Cornu, an horn, from the resemblance. Cornub, I
Cornub'd him, from the Belg. Keeren, to beat, and Knoop, Knobbe, a knuckle; q.
d. to strike with ones knuckles. Coroner, from the Lat. Corona, a crown;
because, in the King's name, he makes inquisition into the casual and
unnatural death of a person. A Coronet, from the Ital. Coronetta, a little
crown. Corpse, or Coarse, from the Fr. G. Corpse; (i. e.) a dead body: In the one
we follow the right writing; in the other, the right pronouncing of the French
word. It may likewise be derived from the Dan. Crop, a body, by the figure
Metathesis. To Cozen; Minshew derives it from the Eng. and Fr. G Cousin, Ital.
Cugino; q. d. to impose upon one under pretense of Affinity: Yet I had rather
draw it from the Fr. G. Gosser, Gausser; as we say, To play upon one. Cost,
from the Belg. and Teut. Kost, Fr. G. Couster, Ital. Costare; and all of them
from the Lat. Constare, to cost. Costard-monger, a Fruiterer; from Costard, a
kind of apple, and Munger, a Trafficker. Costard comes, perhaps, from the word
Cost, because it was a dear sort of fruit. M. H. derives it from the Belg.
Cost, and Aerd, Teut. Art; q. d. fruit that naturally grows out of the earth.
Coster, from the AS. Coppe, or the Teut. Kopff, an head; q. d. Copster, or
Kopffster. Costive; M. H. S. Th. D. draws it from the Belg. Cost, meat, and
Stiif, stiff; q. d. one that has his excrements dried within him. Costrel, a
vessel to carry wine in. Minshew draws it from the Ital. Guastada; possibly
from Coster, signifying, a top, or head. Cottage, from the AS. Cote, Belg. Kot,
the same. V. Court. Cottarels, the meanest of clients; so called from Cote,
cottages, which they live in. Cotton, from the Fr. G. Cotton, Ital. Cottone, C.
Br. Cottwn, the same; these from the Ital. Cotogni, and this manifestly from
the Lat. Cydonium, a quince; from the similitude of the down that grows
thereon. To Cotton, from the Lat. Coadunare, to make agreeable unto, to unite.
Couch, from the Fr. G. Coucher, Ital. Coricare, Colicare, Colcare, to lie down.
Vossius and Menagius derive it from the Lat. Culcitra, idem. Couchant, a term
in Heraldry; from the Fr. G. Couchant, a Part of the Verb Coucher, to lie down
close. V. Couch. Covenant, from the Fr. G. Convenant, Convenancer, the same;
both from the Lat. Conventum, a compact, or agreement. Covent, from the Fr. G.
Convent, both from Conventus, an assembly. Cover, from the Fr. G. Couvrir,
Ital. Coperire; and both from the Lat. Cooperire, the same. From hence also
comes the Verbal Covert. Coverlet, from the Fr. G. Couverlict, Ital.
Copraletto; q. d. a cover bed. V. Cover. Covet, from the Fr. G. Convoiter, to
seek earnestly after a thing. From hence Covetous. We also find it derived from
the Ital. Covidigia; which, it is likely, has been corrupted from the Lat
Cupiditas, idem. Cough, from the Belg. Kuch, Kuchen, to puff and blow; they are
all words feigned from the sound. A Covie, from the Fr. G. Couvee, Ital.
Covata; these from Couver, Covare; and these again from the Lat. Cubare; q. d.
a brood of Partridges, Pheasants, etc. so many as are hatched at once. Counsel,
from the Fr. G. Conseil, Ital Consiglio; all from the Lat. Consilium, idem.
Count, from the Fr. G. Comte, Conte, Ital. Conte; both from the Lat. Comes:
From hence, A County; also, A Countess, from the Lat. barb. Comitissa, a
Count's wife. This word is supposed to have crept into the Latin Tongue, in the
time of Dioclesian, and to have signified, One of the King's Privy Council,
because he day by day accompanied the Emperor. To Count, or Count, from the Fr.
G. Conter, Compter, Ital. Contare; and all from the Lat. Computare, to cast
Account, or compute. Countenance, from the Fr. G. Contenance; whence comes the
word Contenancer, with us, To Countenance; (i. e.) favorably to look upon one.
Counter, from the Fr. G. Comptoir, a table to count money upon. V. To Account,
and Contore. Counterband- goods, a term in Merchandise; from the Ital.
Contrabando; (i. e) Goods prohibited by Statute; and if siezed, confiscated to
the King. V. Banes, and Banish. Counterfeit, from the Fr. G. Contrefaire, Ital
Contrafare, to imitate; q. d. Lat. Contrafacere, to make contrary; viz. the
same of different metal. Counter-point, from the Fr. G. Contrepointe, Ital.
Contrapunto; q. d. a coverlet made up in seams, crossing each other.
Counter-poise, from the Fr. G. Contrepoise, signifying the same; q. d. to
counter-balance. V. Poise. Counter-poison, from Contra, and Poison; (i. e.) an
Antidote against Poison; which see. Counter-scarf, from the Fr. G.
Contrescarpe, Ital. Contrascarpa, a term in Warfare: It may be derived from our
word Counter, and the Teut. Kerven, Belg. Scharven to cut. Country, from the
Fr. G. Contree, Ital. Contrado, q. d. Lat. Conterrata; (i. e.) one Land joining
to another. Coupe, a term in Heraldry. V. Coop. Couple, from the Fr. G. Couple,
Teut. Kuppel, Ital. Coppia; and all from the Lat. Copula, signifying the same.
Courage, from the Fr. G. Courage, Ital. Coraggid; q. d. the elevation of the
heart. Courant, written News; from the Fr. G. Courant, a Part. of the Verb
Courir, to run; (i. e.) running News. To Coute, from the Ital. Covare, Fr. G.
Couver; these from the Lat. Cubare, by a Metaphor drawn from hens sitting upon
their eggs. Course, or Ordinary, by the figures Antithesis, and Metathesis,
from the Noun Gross; which see. Or it is contracted from Currish, (i. e.) Vile,
fit for nothing but the dogs; or, rough as dog's hair. A Course, from the Fr.
G. Course, Ital. Corso; both from the Lat. Cursus, an horse-race. From hence
Courser, a Race-horse; and an Horse- Courser. Women's Courses, from the same
original. V. Flowers. Court, from the Fr. G. Cour, Court, Ital. Corte; which
come from the Lat. Cohors. Courteous, from the Fr. G. Courtois, Ital. Cortese;
q. d. one that affects the fashions at Court. Cousin, from the Fr. G. Cousin,
Ital. Cugino. Some derive it from the Lat. Consanguineus; all signifying the
same thing. Cow, from the AS. Cu, Dan. and Belg. Ko, Koe, Teut. Kuh, idem. I
scarce credit those that draw it from the Gr. (...), to bring forth; for many
other Animals multiply more than these. To a Cow's thumb, with a little
alteration of the sense, from the Fr. G. A la Coustume, (i. e.) fashionably.
Coward, from the Fr. G. Coward, Hisp. Cobarde, Covarde, Ital. Codardo; q. d.
one that has his heart in his heels: Or, perhaps from Cow, and the Germ. Aerd,
Ard, nature; (i. e) Cow-hearted: Or from the Teut. Kuh-Hirt; with us, Cow-herd.
Cov. ingeniously derives the Hisp. Covarde, from Cueva; this from the Lat.
Caverna, a cave; q. d. one that creeps into an hole in time of danger.
Cowcumber, from the Fr. G. Coucombre, Ital. Coucomere; and all from the Lat.
Cucumer, the same. Cow-herd, from the AS. Cu, and Teut. Hirt, idem; this from
the AS. Hiran, to hire for wages. V. Cow, and Herd. Cowl, from the AS. Cugle,
this from Cucullus, in Juvenal: Or from the Belg. Kovel, and this from the Lat.
Cavcola, a little cave, for the similitude of it. Cowslip, from the AS.
Cuslippe; so called, because Cows love to eat them; or, as Dr. Th. H.
supposes, because they have a smell like that of a Cow's breath. Coxcomb, I
suppose it is corrupted from the Fr. G. Cochon, an Hog; for we often call a
fool, A Silly Hog: But seeing it signifies one that has high thoughts of
himself, I may as well draw it from Cock, and Comb. Coy; Minshew very
ingeniously derives it from the Fr. G Quoy, What? which word such persons often
angrily repeat. It may also be drawn from the Noun Quoi, Coi, quiet; (i. e.)
she that sits silent, especially at the hearing of lewd talk. Coy; a cage
for fowls; from the Belg. Koye, this from the Lat. Cavea, the same: Or from the
Fr. G. Coy, quiet; because one must stand there very still, lest the birds be
frighted away. Crab, a fish; from the AS. Crabba, Dan. and Belg. Krabbe, Teut.
Krebs; and all from the Gr. (...), the same. Crab, a wild apple; from the Belg.
Schrabben, Teut. Schrappen, to bite; from the sharp biting taste it has.
Crabbat; or rather, Crabat, a a sort of band, not long worn in England; from
the Fr. G. Rabat, a falling band, contrary to a Ruff, which stands out round
the neck. It may also be taken from the Fr. G. Crabbat, comely; because it is a
comely wear: Or, more probably, from the Fr. G. Crabat, a Croatian; because a
Croatian first wore it. Crabbed, morose; from Crab; as we say, He looks as sour
as a crab. To Crack, as wooden vessels do, for dryness; from the other Crack.
Crack, from the Belg. Kraeck, Krack, Teut. Krach, Fr. G. Crac, the same; they
are all feigned from the sound. To Crac^ a nut, from the Fr. G. Croquer, the
same. A Crackling, and Cracknel, from the Fr. G. Craquelin, Belg. Kraeckelinck,
a cake that crackleth when it is broke. Cradle, from the AS. Cradele, by
Aelfricus, Cradel, C. Br. Crud, idem. It may likewise be derived from the AS.
Craet, a cart, for the similitude thereof. V. Cart. Craft, from the AS. Craeft,
Fr. Th. and Teut. Kraft, Krafft, power; and these may seem to flow from the Gr.
(...), ability of doing a thing. Crag, the neck; from the Belg. Kraeghe, the
throat: Or, not unlikely, from the Teut. Kragen, a collar, or cape of a
garment. Crag, a craggy rock; from the Belg. Kraeghe, the neck; for the tops of
mountains are often full of hillocks, like to the joints in the neck. Cram,
from the AS. Cramman, idem. V. Crum. Cramp, from the Dan. and Belg. Krampe,
Teut. Krampft, Fr. G. Crampe, Ital. Granchio, the same. Cramp-irons, v. Cramp.
Cranage, v. Crane. Crane, an animal; also an engine to unload ships with; from
the AS. Craen, by Aelfrick, Cran, Belg. Kraene, Teut. Kran, the same. Crank,
sound, healthy; from the Belg. Un, or Onkranck, i. e. not sick; the initial
syllable being lost. Crank, a term in Sailing; I suppose, from the Belg.
Kranck, weak; q. d. a ship of small strength, with small sails. A Cranny, or
little chink: Minshew draws it from the Fr. G. Cren, Cran, Lat. Crena, the nib
of a pen, the notch of an arrow. To Crash with the teeth, from the Fr. G.
Escraser, to crush in pieces; Croissir, to give a crack. Minshew derives it
from the Teut. Rauschen, the same; all feigned from the sound. Crasy, or Crazy,
from the Gr. (...); q. d. of a weak constitution: Or, if you please, from the
Fr. G. Escrase, Part. of the Verb Escraser; q. d. one wasted with sickness. A
Cratch, from the Fr. G. Creicche, Cresche, idem; and these, if I am not
mistaken, from the Lat. Craticula, Cratica, idem. Crave, from the AS. Crafian,
Dan. Kreffver, idem. Minshew takes it from the Gr. (...), a cry. Craven, from
the Verb To Crave; (i. e.) one that presently asks pardon of an adversary: Or
from the AS. Creopan, to creep; q. d. one that falls down at the feet of
every one he has at any time offended: Or, q. d. Crave-hen; that is, one
addicted more to Venereal, than Marshal affairs. Craw, from the Dan. Kroe; or
from the Belg. Kroeghe, the same. Crawl, from the Belg. Krielen, to be full of
worms. It may as well be taken from the Lat. Grallari, (i. e.) to go foot after
foot, as children do. The Cray, from the Fr. G. Mal de Craye, a disease among
hawks. This from Craye, chalk, or clay. Minshew. Cray-fish, from the Fr. G.
Escrevice, Belg. Kreeft; and all, not unlikely, from the Gr. (...), a kind of
crab. Cream, from the Fr. G. Creme, Ital. Crema; and all from the Lat. Cremor,
idem. Crease, from the Lat. Creta, chalk; q. d. a line drawn with chalk.
Credit, from the Fr. G. Credit, Ital. Credito; all from Credo, to trust. The
Apostles Creed, plainly enough from the Lat. Credo, to believe. To Creck, or
Creek, from the Belg. Kreke, Krick, Fr. G. Cricquer, Craquer, the same; all
from the sound. A Creek; Minshew draws it from the Verb To Creck; yet I had
rather take it from the Teut. Kriechen, to creep, as the water does, where the
bank is broken down. A Creek in the neck, from the word Crack; which see.
Creengles, a term in Sailing, quasi Ringles; (i. e.) small cords wound round
like a ring. Creep, from the Fr. G. Graper, AS. Creopan; and all from the Lat.
Repere, the same: Or from the Belg. Kruypen; which Voss. deriveth from the Gr.
(...), q. d. to come on privily. Cressent, or Cressant; q. d. Luna Crescens,
the Moon in the Increase; a term in Heraldry. Crest, from the Fr. G. Creste;
both conspicuously from the Lat. Crista, the same. Crevase, or Crevis, from the
Fr. G. Crevasse; both from the Lat. Crepare, to burst in the midst. Crevet, or
Cruset, v. Crewet. Creviss, Crevice, or Crevish, the same with Cray-fish; which
see. Crew, a society of good fellows. Minshew takes it from the Fr. G. Creu,
augmented, or increased. I had rather draw it from the Belg. Kroeghen; q. d. a
company of Pot-companions, or sons of Bacchus: This from Kroegh, a pipe, or
butt of wine. Crewet, from the Teut. Krug, Fr. G. Cruche, an earthen pot. Crib,
from the Belg. and Teut. Krybbe, Kribbe, Krippe, Fr. Th. Cribbe, Crippe, Ital.
Gereppia; all signifying the same. Crible, from the Ital. Crivello; both from
the Lat. Cribellum, (i. e.) a sieve to separate the good seed from the bad.
Crick, v. Creek, and Crack. Cricket, I imagine, from the Teut. Kriechen, to
creep; q. d. a little stool, almost as low as the very ground. Cricket, from
the Belg. Kricken, or the Gr. (...), to chirp; (i. e.) a minute animal, that
makes a crackling about the fire. See Creek. Cry, from the Fr. G. Crier,
Belg. Kriitten, which Fr. Jun. takes from the Gr. (...), to make a whining
noise. It does more than allude to the Gr. (...), to weep. Crimson, from the
Fr. G. Chermesin, Ital Chermesino, Cremesino, Hisp. Carmesino, the same; these
from the Fr. G. and Arab. Cherme, Chermes, or Kermes: V. Cocheneal. Salmasius
sagaciously draws our Crimson, from the ancient Fr. G. Guermes, in Lat. Vermis,
a worm. V. Vermillion. Cringe, from the Teut. Kriechen, to creep; (i. e.) to
bow ones face, in a manner, to the very ground, for fear or cold, etc. Crinkle,
from the Belg. Kronckelen, idem. V. Rumple. Cripple, from the Belg. Kreple;
this from Krepen, to creep; (q. d.) one that creeps upon hands and knees. V.
Creep. The Crock, a disease among hawks; it is a kind of Cramp; from the Fr. G.
Croc, an hook; because it draws up the joints like an hook. V. Cramp. Croft;
Spelman derives it from the Graeco-Lat. Crypta; q. d. a field enclosed. V.
Close. Croisade, from the Fr. G. Croisade; this from Croix, in Lat. Crux, a
cross; q. d. an hostile Expedition, set on foot by the Pope, for the Cause of
Religion, in which every Soldier bears a Crucifix on his breast, as an emblem
of spiritual warfare. Croises, Pilgrims for the sake of Religion; also Knights
of the sacred Order of St. John of Jerusalem; from the same Original, and so
called for the same reason as before. To Croke, from the Ital. Crocare, Fr. G.
Croaquer, Crouasser, Croasser; all from the noise which a toad makes. A Crome,
Cromb, or Crom of iron, from the Belg Krom, Teut. Krum, crooked, says Minshew.
A Crone, or Old Crone, a decrepit old woman; from the Belg. Kronie, an old ewe.
It may, not unelegantly, be taken from the word (...), time; (i. e.) well
stricken in years. Crony, a word in Colleges, and elsewhere; from the Gr.
(...); q. d. a good old friend: Or it is contracted from Congerrone, of the same
signification. Crook, from the AS. Crycce, a trumpet: Or from the Fr. G. Croc,
an hook; or the Belg. Kroken, to bend. Crooked, from the Dan. Kroget; or the
Fr. G. Crochu, the same. A Crop, from the AS. Croppas, ears of corn; or the Fr.
G. Crope, Croupe, a top: From hence, To Crop. Minshew draws it from the Lat.
Carpo, idem. It may also be drawn from the Gr. (...), a reaping-hook. The Crop,
or Craw, from the Belg. Kroppe, Teut. Kropff, the same. A Crolier-staff, from
the Fr. G. Cross; this from Crux, a cross; q. d. a Bishop's Pastoral-staff,
having the figure of the Cross on the top. Croslet, or Crosset, from the Fr. G.
Croiselet, Croisette, now out of use. It signifies, a little Crucifix in
Heraldry. Croslet, a woman's brow-piece; so called, because it is put cross the
forehead. Cross, from the Fr. G. Croix, Ital. Croce; and all from the Lat.
Crux, the same. Crotchet, in Music; from the Fr. G. Crotchet; and this from
Croc, an hook; because the character thereof does somewhat represent it.
Crouch, from the Fr. G. Crochu, crooked: V. Crook. Or, which is most likely,
from the Teut. Krauchen, idem. A Crow of iron, V. Crane. It may be no mistake
to draw it from the Gr. (...), to knock. To Crow, from the AS. Craan, Teut.
Krahen, the same; these from the Nouns, Crae, Krae, a crow. Fr. Jun. draws it
from the Gr. (...), an hoarse noise. A Crow, as before: V. To Crow. Crowd, from
the AS. Crud, the same. Or it may be drawn from the Gr. (...), to knock; men
being therein jostled one against another. A Crowd of Music, from the C. Br.
Crwth, a fiddle; Cryther, a Fiddler; both perhaps from the Gr. (...), to beat,
and its derivative (...), a stroke. Spelman draws it from the Hisp. Guerda, a
string: The derivation is as easy from the AS. Cruth, idem. The Crown, from
the Belg. Kruyne, idem; or the Fr. G. Coronne. Crucible, Lat. Barb. Crucibilum,
a Cruciando; q. d. a Chemical vessel, wherein Metals are melted, and purified.
Dr. Th. H. draws it from the Gr. (...), because gold is cast into it. Cruel,
from the Fr. G. Cruel; this from the Lat. Crudelis, idem; and this from Crudus,
raw; q. d. one that could even eat his enemy alive, raw. Cruel; or rather,
Crewel, from the Belg. Klowe, Teut. Klawel; which probably has been corrupted
from the Lat. Globulus, a bottom of thread. Crum, from the AS. Cruma, Teut.
Krume, Krummel, id. from this last, To Crumble: They all flow from the Lat.
Grumus, clots of any thing. Crump, from the Belg. and Teut. Krimpen, Krummen,
to shrink up. Crumple, v. Crump. Crupper, from the Fr. G. Croupiere, Ital.
Cropiera, Hisp. Grupera, the same. Cruse, from the Belg. Krus, Teut. Krug, Fr.
G. Cruche, a Potter's vessel. It is not much dissonant to the Gr. (...) a
water-pot. To Cruse up and down the sea, a Sea-term; from the Belg. Kruys, a
cross; as we say, To Cross up and down. Crush, from the Fr. G. Escraser; and
this, without any offense, from the Lat. Excruciare, to torment. Crutches, from
the AS. Cricce, Teut. Krucke, Ital. Croccie, Crocciole; all from the Lat. Crux,
because they are made something like a cross. Cub, as a Fox- Cub, etc. Minshew
derives it from the Lat. Cubare, to lie down; because they abide in their
holes. Cucking- stool; or rather, Ducking- stool; q. d. Choking- stool;
because Scolds being thus punished are almost stifled with water: V. Choke. Dr.
Th. H. takes it from the Fr. G. Coquine, a Beggar-woman; because sturdy
Beggar-women are washed in it. Cuckold, from the Fr. G. Cocu, idem; or more
easily from Cuckoo, and Hold; q. d. poor man, like A Cuckoo, he brings up
other men's children for his own. Cuckoo, from the Fr. G. Coucou, Ital. Cucco,
Lat. Cuculus; all from the note this bird has. Cud, To chaw the Cud, from the
AS. Cud, idem; or it is so called, q. Chewed. Cudgel, from the Belg. Kudse,
Kodse, a knotted stick. Cuerpo, To walk in Cuerpo, from the Hisp. Cuerpo; q. d.
to go in so extraordinary an habit, as will draw the eyes of people after one.
Cuff, from the Ital. Schiaffo, the same; or Zuffa, a scuffle; or from the Gr.
(...), to smite; or (...), to smite with the fist. Culdees, a sort of Monks,
formerly of Schone, in Scotland, so called, a colendo Deum, from worshipping
God. Cull, from the Fr. G. Cueillir, Ital. Cogliere; and both from the Lat.
Colligere, to choose, or gather together. Cull, or Coll about the neck, from the
Fr. G. Col, Lat. Collum a neck; q. d. to clasp about the neck. Cullender, from
the Fr. G. Coulandiere; this from the Lat. Colum, or Colo, to strain. Cullis,
from the Fr. G. Coulis, a Colando, from straining; q. d. strained broth. Cully,
from the Ital. Coglione, a Fop; also the stones of any creature, fools being
naturally well gifted. Culver, from the AS. Culfre, or the Lat. Columba, a
pidgeon. Culvering, from the Fr. G. Colouvrine, Ital. Colubrina; and these from
the Lat. Coluber; q. d. a warlike engine, made after the form of a serpent; or,
that is very destructive, like a serpent. Culvertail, a term in Architecture;
not unlikely from the Fr. G. Couple-artail, this from the Lat. Copulo, to
couple, and Articulus, a joint; (i. e.) a joining of boards together
artificially. Cumble, from the Fr. G. Comble, an heap; q. d. measure heaped up.
Cunn, from the AS. Connan, Teut. Konnen, to apprehend a matter, to understand.
Cunning, from the AS. Cunning, expert, skilful; this from the word Cunn, or
Kenn; which see. Cup, from the AS. Cup, Belg. Kop, Fr. G. Couppe, Ital.
Coppa, Gr. (...), the same. Hence comes the Lat. barb. Capula, an Acron- Cup,
and Capella, a Taster. Cupola, or Cuppola, a term in Architecture; from the
Ital. Cupo, high; q. d. an high Tower arched, having but little light. Evelin
draws it from the Lat. Cupa, a Cup. Cupping-glasses, from our Eng. Cup, and
Glass. Curass, from the Fr. G. Cuirasse, Ital. Coraccia, Corrazza: Or from the
Fr. G. Cuir, a skin; (i e.) made of leather: Or rather, from the Ital. Cuore,
the heart; (i. e.) armor for the breast. From hence, A Curassier. Curate, from
the Lat. barb. Curatus, Fr. G. Cure; (i. e.) one that takes care of his flock.
Curb, from the Fr. G. Courber, to hold back. To Curd, or Curdle, perhaps by a
Metathesis, from the word Crowd; q. d. to Crowdle, or thrust together. Curl,
from the Belg. Krollen, or the Ital. Ciurlare, idem; this from the Lat.
Gyrulus; q. d. to twirl up: Or, which seems more probable, from the AS.
Cyrran, Teut. Kehren, Belg. Keeren, to turn up. Curlew* from the Fr. G.
Corlieu, Ital. Carlotta, Arab. Corli; all signifying a bird so named. Curr,
from the Belg. Korre; this from Kirren, to grin: Or from Kurr, tamed: Or Curo,
to take care; for such dogs are commonly trained up to keep sheep. Curr-fish,
q. d. a dog-fish. V. Curr. Currants, q. d. Corinths. Current, from the Fr. G.
Courant, idem; q. d. good money, that, in Commerce, passes from one to another
without any scruple. A Current, or river running swiftly; from the same root.
Currier, from the Fr. G. Courrier, Ital. Corriere, from Currus, say some; but
it may better be taken from the Lat. Coriare, to Curry, to dress a skin. Curry,
to rub an horse down; from the Fr. G. Curer, Lat. Curare, to take care about.
It will not be amiss to take it from the Gr. (...), to brush, or make clean. To
Curry savor, from the old Fr. G. Querir, Lat. Quaerere, to seek. To Cu^se;
Minshew takes it from the Fr. G. Courrua, Ital. Corruccio, anger. Another
judiciously draws it from the AS. Cursan, this from the Lat. Cruciare; q. d. to
curse one to hell. Cursed, from the Belg. Korsel, contumacious, impious: Or from
the word Curse; q. d. one that breaks out into cursings upon the lightest
occasion. Curtain, Fr. G. Courtine, Ital. Hisp. and old Lat. Cortina, the same:
Perhaps from our Eng. Court; which see. It may likewise be taken from the Fr.
G. Coverte, Ital. Coperta, a covering. V. Cover. Curtal, or Curtail, from the
Belg. Kertelen, to cut short; or from the Fr. G. Escourter, Ital. Accortare, to
abridge; or more immediately from the Lat. Curtus, short; or from the Fr. G.
Court, short; and our word Tail; which see. Courtelass, from the Fr. G.
Coutelas, Ital. Coltellaccio, a short kind of sword, now called A Cutlass.
Curtezan, from the Fr. G. Courtisane, Ital. Cortegiana, one that is clothed
after the Court-fashions. It is also commonly taken for a Whore. Curver, from
the Ital. Corvetta, a leap, or jump. Cushinet, from the Fr. G. Coussinet, Ital.
Cucinetto, a little Cushion; which see. Cushion, from the Belg. Kussen, Teut.
Kussen, Fr. G. Coussin, Ital. Coscino, Cucino, the same; all from the Lat.
Coxa, an hip; because it is laid under them. Cuskin, either a corruption of the
Lat. Cissybium, an Ivy-cup, by adding the termination kin; or taken from the
Fr. G. Gousse, bark; that is, hollow. Custard, q. d. Gustard, a Gustando, from
tasting. It may also be derived from the Belg. Kost, meat, and Aerd, nature,
(i. e.) sustenance; by the figure Antonomasia. Custom, from the Fr. G.
Coustume, Ital. Costume, Hisp. Costumbre; all perhaps contracted from the Lat.
Consuetudo, the same. Custom, is likewise taken for a tax due to the King for
foreign Goods brought into England. Cut, from the Fr G. Couteau, this from the
Lat. Cultellus, a knife; or from the Fr. G. Couper, Gr. (...), the same.
Cutle-fish, from the Belg. Cuttel-visch, Teut. Kuttel-fisch; perhaps from the
Lat. Cutis, because it is little else but skin. Cutler, from the Fr. G.
Coustelier, Coutelier; this from Cousteau, a knife, or sword; (i. e.) a knife,
or sword-maker. Cut-water, a term in Sailing: V. Cut, and Water.
D.
To DAbb on, from the Fr. G. Dauber, Dober, to Dawb; which see. Yet I had
rather derive it from our word Do, and the AS. Uf, Teut. Auff, upon, by an
Apostrophe; as in D'on, and D'off. Hence we say, To lay it on. To D^bble, from
the Belg. Dabbelen, Dabben, to roll dirt in the hand: Or from the C. Br. Diblo,
a daggle-tail. Dace, in Lincolnshire Dares; and this from the AS. Dare, hurt;
because it is a fish thought to be unwholesome for the body. Dacker, a word
frequently used in Lincolnshire; from the Belg Daeckeren, to move swiftly; this
from Daeck, a cloud; clouds being easily dispelled with the wind. V. To
Stagger. Dad, a word whereby infants call their fathers; from the C. Br. Tad,
Fr. G. Bab, Ital. Dada, Dadda, Pappa, Tata, Tato, a father; feigned from the
sound, says Minshew. A Dag, or Rag of cloth; either from the said Rag, by the
changing of one letter; or from the AS. Dag; q. d. a rag hanging down from the
rest of the cloth. Dagger, from the Dan. Daggert, Belg. Dagge, Ital. and Hisp.
Daga, Fr. G. Dague; all of the same signification. Daggle, from the AS. Deagan,
to bedawb: Or from Dabble; which see. Daigh, from the Fr. G. Daigner, Ital.
Degnare; and both from the Lat. Dignari, to vouchsafe, or be pleased to do a
thing. Dainty, from the old Fr. G. Dain, idem; and this from Dain, Daim, a Do,
whose flesh is esteemed very much by all nations. Minshew takes it from the
Lat. Dente, the Ablat. of Dens, a tooth: Whence may come our saying, He has
got a sweet tooth. Dairy, from the Fr. G. Derriere; q. d. an house backward,
where cheese is usually made. V. Minshew. Daisy, or Daizy; Minshew draws it
from the Gr. (...), to divide; for that the flowers thereof are many, and
divided one from another. Yet I had rather draw it from the Fr. G. Dais, a
canopy; because this sort of flower does somewhat represent it. A Daker-hen,
from the Teut. Dauchen, Tauchen, to dive; q. d. a bird that dives. Dale, from
the Belg. and Dan. Dal, Dail, Teut. Thal, Tahl, any steep place: Or, not
unlikely, from the Gr. (...), to be green, or flourish. To Dally, from the
Belg. Dolen, Dollen, to play the fool. Dr. Th. H. takes it from the word
Delay. Damask, from the Fr. G. Damas, Damasquin, Ital. Damaschino, Damasco,
Damask-Linen; so called, for Damascus, the most famous and ancient city of
Assyria. Damas is put, not only for the city, but also from many things that
belong to it; as Damask Rose, etc. Dame, from the Fr. G. Dame, Ital. Dama, Lat.
Domina, the same. Dam, from the AS. Demman, Belg. and Teut. Dammen, to set
bounds to water that it may not pass. Damm, for a mother among brutes; from the
Fr. G. Dame, a dame; for she has some dominion over her young. Somnerus takes
it from the AS. Tyman, to bring forth. Damage, from the Fr. G. Dommage, Dial
Picard. Damage; all from the Lat. Damnum, loss. Damp, from the Belg. and Dan.
Damp, Teut. Dampff, a vapor, or exhalation; Dan. Damper, to evaporate. From
hence, To Damp. Damsel, from the Fr. G. Damoiselle, Ital. Damigella, Donzella,
a Gentlewoman; q. d. Lat. Dominicella, a little Dame. A Damson, from the Fr. G.
Damaisine, a plumb so called, for that perhaps it was at first brought over
from Damascus, into Europe. Right Damascen. Dance, from the Fr. G. Danser,
Ital. Danzare, Teut. Tantzen, idem; and this from Tand, a fantastical
invention. Dandeprat, a dwarf; from the Belg. Danden, to play the fool, and
Praet, trifles; q. d. one that holds a frivolous discourse. It may be taken
from our word Dandle, and the Fr. G. Pressed, ready; q. d. one so little, that he
may be carried about in ones arms like a child. To Dandle, from the Teut.
Dantzen, Tantzen; with us, To Dance a child: Or from the Fr. G. Dandiner, Belg.
Danten; all from the Teut. Tand, a phantasm, a foolish action. Dandruff, from
the AS. Tan, a scab, and Drof, dirty. Danger, from the Fr. G. Danger, the same.
Minsevus takes it from the Gr. (...), death, the greatest of all dangers.
Dangle, q. d. Hangle, v. Hang. It may be drawn from the Ital. Ciondolare; this
from Ci, and Ondolare, to wag, as the waves flow; that is, too and again.
Dangle-wallet, an exact balance. V. Dangle, and Wallet. Dank, somewhat damp;
from the Teut. Duncken; and this from the Lat. Tingo, to dip in the water.
Dapper, from the Teut. Tapffer, Dapffer, idem; q. d. a man of a small stature,
yet courageous and nimble. Dapple, a color peculiar to horses; from the Teut.
Apffel; with us, Apple; q. d. full of diverse spots, like a Pippin. Dare, from
the AS. Dearran, Belg. Derren, Teut. Durffen, idem. I might also derive it from
the Ital. Ardire, by the figure Metathesis. V. Hardy. Dark, from the AS. Deorc,
idem. Mer. Cas. derives it from the Gr. (...), invisible. Darling, from the AS.
Deorling; q. d. Dearling. V. Dear. Dart, from the Fr. G. Dard, Ital. and Hisp.
Dardo, the same. Fr. Jun. draws it from the Gr. (...), for (...), to cast.
Dash, perhaps from the Dan. Dask, idem. Minshew draws it from the Belg.
Derschen, Dorschen; both from the Heb. Dash, Dosch, he has threshed. To Dash,
perhaps from the Fr. G. Gasquer, to bespatter with dirt. Minshew takes it from
the Gr. (...); by Eustathius interpreted, Stercus, (i. e.) dung. I could also
derive it from the other Dash, or from the Fr. G. Tache, a splatch of dirt.
Dash, to terrify; from Dazzle; this from the Belg. Duyselen; to be greatly
afraid: Or, which is more probable, from the Belg. Dwaes, AS. Daes, (i. e.) to
be able to say nothing for fear. Dastard, from the AS. Daes, abashed, and the
Belg. Aerd, nature; q. d. faint-hearted, timorous by nature. Date, from the Fr.
G. Datte, Daite, Hisp. Datil, Ital. Dattero; and all from the Lat. Dactylus,
the same. Daughter, from the AS. Dohtor, Belg. Dochter, Dan. Daater, Teut.
Tachter, the same; perhaps from the Lat. Dos, a portion. Daunt, from the Fr. G
Domter, this from the Lat. Domitare, to tame, or keep under. A Daw; possibly,
from the note which it has. Dawb; not unlikely, from the Fr. G. Dauber, idem.
Dawn; Minshew derives it from the Belg. Dawevant Dagh, the dew of the day. The
derivation is not unnatural if we draw it from the AS. Daegian, to begin to be
day. Day, from the AS. Daeg, Belg. Dagh, Fr. Th. Tak, Dan. Dag, Teut. Tag, the
same. Dazzle, from the Belg. Duyselen, to stun; also to make giddy, or
lightheaded; which you may draw from Dwaes, or the AS. Daes, abashed. Deacon,
from the Dan. Degn; both from the Lat. Diaconus, or the Gr. (...), one that
ministers in holy things. Dead, Death, from the AS. Dead, Death, Belg. Dood,
Teut. Todt, Dan Dod, idem. Mer. Cass. deriveth Die, from the Gr. (...), to
interr: Minshew, from the Gr. (...), to fright; whence it is called, the King
of terrors. Dr. Th. H. takes it from the Fr. G. Devier; and this from De, and
Vie, which signifies as much as to depart this life. Deaf, from the AS. Deaf,
Belg. Doof, Teut. Dawf; this last especially from the Gr. (...), the same.
Deal, from the AS. Daelan, to divide; Belg. Deel, Teut. Theil, idem. Dean, from
the Fr. G. Doyen, or the Gr. (...), a Deacon. Dear, from the AS. Dyran, to
account dear to himself; Belg. Dier, Duyer, Fr. Th. Diue, Teut. Thewer, the
same. It may more ingeniously than truly be taken from the Gr. (...), to catch
at greedily, every one being desirous of things valuable. Debase, from the Fr.
G. Desbaisser, Ital. Dibassare, to Abase; which see; as also Base. Debate, from
the Fr. G. Debat, Ital. Dibatto; whence come the Verbs Debaire, Dibattere, to
contend, or be at variance. V. Bate, and Abate. Debauch, A Debauch, from the
old Fr. G. Desbaucher, to deflour. To Deboist; or rather, Debase, from the Fr.
G. Desbaisser, Ital. Dibassare; q. d. to Debash, for Abash: See Bashful, Abase,
and Base. Or, more naturally, from the Fr. G. Desbaucher, to traduce, or lead
amiss. V. Debauch. Debonair, from the Fr. G. Debonnair, kind, mild; q. d. De
Bon Air; that is to say, one of a good, genteel nature, carriage, and
behavior. Debt, from the Fr. G. Debte; and both from the Lat. Debitum, the
same. Decant, from the Lat. Barb. Decantare, a word lately found out by more
barbarous Chemists; which those mighty Zoilus's derive from the Lat. De, and
the Gr. (...), a corner. Decay, from the Ital. Decadere, Fr. G. Decheoir; and
both from the Lat. De, and Cadere, to fade, to come to nothing; metaphorically
taken from plants shedding of flowers. Decease, from the Fr. G. Decez, death;
Deceder, to die; and both from the Lat. Decedere, to depart. Deceive, from the
Fr. G. Decevoir; both from the Lat. Decipere, the same. Decipher, from the Fr.
G. Dechiffrer, Deschiffrer, Ital. Deciferare, to draw out, or delineate. V.
Cipher. Deck, by a little variation of the sense, from the Belg. and Teut.
Decken; both from the Lat. Tegere; and this from the Gr. (...), to cover. Decks
of a ship, from the Belg. Decken, to cover, or defend. Declension, from the Fr.
G. Declinaison; both from the Lat. Declinatio, the same. Decrease, from the Fr.
G. Decroistre; and both from the Lat. Decrescere, the same. Decree, from the
Fr. G. Decret; and both from the Lat. Decretum, the same. Decry, from the Fr.
G. Descrier, openly to defame; also to cry down any Coin. Deed, from the AS.
Daed, Belg. Daed, Teut. That, the same. v. Do. Deem, from the AS. Deman, to
judge, or examine. Deep from the AS. Deop, Belg. Diep, Teut. Tieff, the same;
which may be drawn from the Belg. Diep^e, Teut. Tieffte, a gulf. Mer. Cas.
violently wrests it from the Gr. (...), the same. Deer, from the AS. Deor,
Belg. and Fr. Th. Dier, Teut. Their; and this manifestly from the Gr. (...),
any wild beast. Deface, from the old Fr. G. Defacer, to soil, or spoil the
shape of any thing, to disfigure. Defailance, from the Fr. G. Defaillance; this
from the Verb Defaillir, to faint away as one in a fit; all from the Lat. De,
and Fallere. Defaulk, from the Fr. G. Defalquer, Ital. Defalcare, to strike, or
cut off; a term in Arithmetic; a Metaphor taken from Reapers. Default, from
the Fr. G. Defaut; this from the Verb Defaillir, to do amiss. Defile, from the
Lat. praep. De, and the AS. Full, or the Eng. Foul; which see. Deflour, from the
Fr. G. Defleurer; q. d. Deflorare; (i. e.) to rob a virgin of the flower of her
virginity. Defray, from the Fr. G. Defrayer, this from Frais; q. d. to pay
charges. Deft, a Northern word; from the AS. Daefe, pretty, or handsome. Defy,
from the Fr. G. Defier, Deffier, Ital. Disfidare, Sfidare, to challenge one
into the field. Degrade, from the Fr. G. Degrader, Desgrader, the same. Deg^ee,
from the Fr. G. Degree, the same. Delay, from the Fr. G. Delay, Ital. Dilaio, to
put off, or defer to a longer time. To Delay wine, from the Fr. G. Delayer,
Dilaier, to mix, or mingle. Delight, from the Fr. G. Delector, Ital. Dilettare;
all from the Lat. Delectare, the same. Or it may more immediately flow from the
old Fr. G. Delict, which is found in an old Translation of the Bible, and may
be englished, pleasure, or delight. Deliver, from the Fr. G. Delivrer, Ital.
Deliverare, to set at liberty. Delve, from the AS. Delfan, Belg. Delven, to
dig. Deluge, from the Fr. G. Deluge; and both from the Lat. Diluvium, the same;
this from Diluo, to wash away. Demand, from the Fr. G. Demander, Ital.
Dimandare; both from the Lat. Demandare, idem. Demeanor, Demean; Minshew
derives them from the Fr. G. Moyen, mean; q. d. to comport himself humbly;
rather from the Fr. G. Demener, Ital. Dimenare, idem. Demolish, from the Fr. G.
Demolir; and this from the Lat. Demoliri, to level with the ground. Demure,
reserved, coy, modest, serious; from the Fr. G. Des maeurs, over-mannerly; or
from the Teut. Demuth, gravity, or modesty. To Demurr, a term in Law; from the
Fr. G. Demeurer, Ital. Dimorare, to delay; i. e. to stave off an Action to some
other time. Demi, from the Fr. G. Demi; both from the Lat. Dimidium, the one
half of a thing. Demi also signifies a Degree in Magdalen-College, Oxford; A
Demy-Fellow, one that has half the salary due to a Fellow. A Denier, or Penny;
from the Fr. G. Denier, Ital. Denaro; and both from the Lat. Denarius, the
same. Den; Minshew draws it from the Belg. Den, Ital. Tana, Fr. G. Taniere,
the same. It may, if I may be allowed so much liberty, be taken from the Gr.
(...), to go under. Dennizen; Davis draws it plainly from the C. Br. Dinaswr,
Dinesidd, a Freeman; and this from Dinas, a city. Minshew derives it from the
Fr. G. Donaison; q. d. a Citizen by gift and Co-optation Or, it may be so said,
q. Danes Son, from the Danes, that adopted such into their own tribes, when
they invaded England. Dentels, a term in Architecture; from the Ital. Dentelli,
idem; and this from the Lat. Dentuli, little teeth; which they resemble. Deny,
from the Fr. G. Denier; and both originally from the Lat. Denegare, the same.
Depaint, from the Fr. G. Depeindre; both from the Lat. Depingere, idem. Depart,
from the Fr. G. Departir, Ital. Dipartire; and this from the Lat. Dispartiri;
q. d. to separate himself from others. Descant, from the Fr. G. Deschant, Ital.
Discanto, a frequent iteration of one thing; a term in Music. Descry, from the
inseparable praep. Dis, and Cry; q. d. to discover openly. Deserve, from the
Fr. G. Deservir, Ital. Deservire, the same. Desire, from the Fr. G. Desir,
Ital. Desire; or from their Verbs Desirer, Desirare; all of them from the Lat.
Desiderare, the same. Desk, from the Belg. Disch, Teut. Tisch, Ital. Desco, id.
It Is a sort of table to write upon, and keep Accounts in. Despair, from the Fr.
G. Despoir, the Verb Desperer; all from the Lat. Desperare, the same. Despise,
from the Fr. G. Despiter, Ital. Dispettare; or their Nouns Despit, Dispetto;
all from the Lat. Despicere, the same. See Despite. Despite, from the Fr. G.
Despit, indignation; or Despiteux, stomachful. See Spite. Despoil, from the Fr.
G. Dispouiller, Ital. Spogliare; all from the Lat. Spoliare, the same Destroy,
from the Fr. G. Destruir; both from the Lat. Destruere, to lay waste. Detain,
from the Fr. G. Detenir, or the Lat. Detinere, the same. Developed, v. Invelop.
Divest, from the Fr. G. Desvestir, to put off a garment. Devil, from the AS.
Deofl, C. Br. Diafl, Diafwl, Fr. G. Diable, Hisp. Diablo, Ital. Diavolo, Belg.
Duyvel, Teut. Teuffel; all from the Gr. (...), an impeacher, a back-biter, an
accuser. Devise, from the Fr. G. Deviser, idem. Devoir, from the Fr. G. Devoir,
idem. A Deuce, or Dews, from the Fr. G. Dewx, or the Gr. (...), the number Two,
at Cards, or Dice. Dew, from the AS. Deae, Belg. Dauw, Teut. Taw, the same. It
may also be drawn from the Gr. (...), to water, or wet. Dew-lap; so called,
because it laps the dew: Or from the AS. Deop laeppe; q. d. Deep-lap. Dial; q.
d. Lat. Diale, belonging to the day; (i. e.) showing the hours of the day.
Diamond, from the Fr. G. Diamant; both from the Lat. Adamas, the same. Diaper,
from the Fr. G. Diaprer, Diapre, interwoven with flowers. We may reasonably
suppose that all these flow from the Fr. G. Divaire, it being of a various
contexture. Diapered, from the Fr. G. Diapre, variously interwoven; a term in
Heraldry. Didapper, from the Belg. Duyck Dapper, a bird that dives well; q. d.
Dive-dapper. v. Dip, Dive, Dapper. To Didder, a word in Lincolnshire; from the
Belg. Sitteren, Teut. Zittern, to chatter with cold. Dight, from the AS.
Dihtan, to prepare, or make ready: Or from our word Deck; which see. Digrave;
q. d. Dike, or Ditchgrave; (i. e.) a Collector of money for the repairing of
highways, and ditches. V. Grave. Dike, v. Ditch. Dildo, contracted from the
Ital. Diletto; q. d. woman's delight. Or it may be drawn from our word Dally;
q. d. a thing to play withal. See Dally. Dim, from the AS. Dim, the same: Or
from the Teut. Demmen, Dammen, to muzzle. A Dimple in the face, or chin; q. d.
Dintle, Dentle; from our word Dint, or Dent; which see. Din, peradventure from
the AS. Din, noise; or Dynan, to sound: Or perhaps from the Lat. Tinnio, to
tingle. Dine, v. Dinner. To Ding, hit against; perhaps from the Teut. Dringen,
to pinch, or bruise: Or from the Lat. Tinnio, to ring, or tingle. Ding-dong,
from the sound of bells. Dinner, from the Fr. G. Disner, Ital. Desinare,
Discinare, to dine. Some derive it from the Lat. Dejejunare, to break ones
fast. Dint, an impression; from the AS. Dynt, a blow. Menagius derives it from
Dente, the Abl. of Dens, a tooth; (i. e.) a mark made with the teeth. Dip, from
the AS. Dippan, Dan. Dypper, Belg. Doopen, idem. A Dirge; as Dr. Th. H. informs
us, from the Psalm that begins with Dirige nos Domine. Mer. Cas. takes it from
the Gr. (...), a lamentation. Dirt, from the Belg. Drtit, Teut. Dreck, dung,
filth; or from the Verb Driiten, to shite. Disadventure, an ill chance. See
Adventure. Disard, from the AS. Dizi, Belg. Duysigh, vertiginous, amazed: Or
from the Fr. G. Disard, a pratler: Or from the Belg. Dwaes Aerd, an Idiot, one
moped. V. Dizzy. Disaster, from the Fr. G. Desastre, Ital. Disastro; q. d.
Disastrum, mis-hap occasioned by the influence of a malignant star. Disband,
from the Fr. G. Desbander, Ital. Sbandare; these from Dis, and Band; (i. e.)
to discharge, or remove from the troop. Disburse, from the Fr. G. Desbourser,
or the Ital. Disborsare, to unpurse. V. Purse. Discharge, from the Fr. G.
Descharger, or the Ital. Discaricare, to set free. V. Charge. Disclose, from
the Fr. G. Disclos, or the Lat. Disclausus, discovered, brought to light.
Discomfit, from the Fr. G. Discomfir, or the Ital. Sconfiggere, to rout an
army. Discover, from the Fr. G. Descouvrer, or the Ital. Scoprire, to uncover.
V. Cover. Discount, Ital. Scontare, Lat. Discomputare, to count, or reckon off.
V. Counts. Discourage, from the Fr. G. Descourager, Ital. Scoraggiare, the
same. V. Courage. Discourse, from the Fr. G. Discourse, Ital. Discorso; both
from the Lat. Discurrere; q. d. to run from one plea, or argument, to another.
Discredit, v. Credit. Discreet, from the Ital. Discreto, or the Lat. Barb.
Discretus, idem. Disdain, from the Fr. G. Desdaigner, Ital. Sdegnare, to count
a thing unworthy. V. Daign. Disease, from the Fr. G. Desaise, Ital. Disagio,
the same. v. Ease. D sembogue, from the Fr. G. Disemboucher, now out of use;
this from the Lat. praep. Dis, and the Fr. G. Bouche, Ital. Bocca, a mouth;
meant of that place of a river, where it emptieth it self into the sea.
Dissigure, from the Fr. G. Defigurer, Desfigurer, Ital. Disfigurare, idem; q.
d. to spoil the shape of any thing. Disfranchise, from the Fr. G. Desfranchir,
to deprive one of his liberty. V. Frank, Franchise, and Enfranchise. Disgorge,
from the Fr. G. Desgorger, to vomit up; metaphorically taken from water, as it
were, boiling up out of a gurges, or whirl-pool. Disgrace, from the Fr. G.
Disgrace, or the Ital. Disgratia, ignominy, or misfortune. Disguise, from the
Fr. G. Desguiser; or from Dis, and Guise; which see; q. d. to change habit and
countenance. Disgust, from the Fr. G. Desgouster, Ital. Disgustare; (i. e.) to
resent a thing ill. Dish, from the AS. Disc, id. or the Lat. Discus, the same.
Disheveled, from the Fr. G. Dischevele, Ital. Scapigliato; and these from their
Nouns Cheveux, and Capegli; which come from the Lat. Capilli, hairs; (i. e.)
having it dangling loose upon the shoulders. Disingage, from the Fr. G,
Desengager, to revoke an Engagement. V. Engage, and Gage. Dillodge, from the
Fr. G. Desloger, Ital. Disloggiare, Sloggiare, idem; (i. e.) to change ones
lodgings. It is likewise a term in Hunting; as we say, To Dillodge a Deer, when
we rouse him out of his Lodge. Disloyal, from the Fr. G. Desloyal, Ital.
Disleale, the same. v. Loyal. Dismal; q. d. Dies malus, an unlucky day, says
Minshew. I had rather draw it from the Belg. Duys-Mael; q: d. a stupendous
time, or chance; or, q. d. Dim^el, from the AS. Dim, dark; spoken in comparison
with hell, which is sometimes called, Utter Darkness. Dismantle, from the Fr.
G. Desmanteller, Hisp. Dismantelar, to demolish the walls of cities; by an
elegant Metaphor, taken from stripping off ones garment. Dismount, from the Fr.
G. Desmonter, Ital. Smontare, to alight, or make to a-light. V. Mount. Disobey,
from the Fr. G. Disobeyr, the same; or, q. d. Lat. Disobedire. V. To Obey.
Disorder, from the Fr. G. Disordre, the same. V. Order. Disparage, from the Fr.
G. Desparager, Ital. Dispareggiare; this from the Fr. G. Parage; q. d. to
compare with Inferiors. Dispatch, from the Fr. G. Despescher, or the Ital.
Dispacciare, the same. Dispencer, from the Fr. G. Despensier, or the Ital.
Despensiere; and both from the Lat. Dispensator, a Steward. Minshew. Dispeople,
from the Fr. G. Dispeupler, or the Lat. Depopulari, to lay waste. To Dispert,
from Dispertio, to divide; a term in Sailing, and in the Mathematics. See
Manwayring, in his Naut. Dict. Displace, v. Place. Display, from the Fr. G.
Desplier, Ital. Despiegare, to unfurl. Disport, v. Sport. Dispose, from the Fr.
G. Disposer, idem; and both from the Lat. Disponere, to set in order.
Dissemble, from the Fr. G. Dessembler; and both from the Lat. Dissimulare, the
same. Di tain, from the Fr. G. Destaindre; both from the Lat. Distingere; q. d.
to paint with various spots. Distrain, a term in Law; from the Fr. G.
Destraindre, idem. Distress, from the Fr. G. Destresse, Ital. Distretta; this
from Dis, twice, and Stringere, to bind; q. d. to labor hard under scarcity
and want. Ditch, or Dike, from the AS. Dice, Dic, Dan. Diige, Dige, the same;
and these from their Verbs Dician, Dirger, to make a trench about: Or from the
Belg. Diik, which Fr. Jun. derives from the Gr. (...), a wall. It may also be
derived from our word Dig. Dirty, from the Lat. Dictum, a saying; q. d. a
Sonnet comprising but a few words. Dive, from the AS. Dippan, Belg. Doopen, the
same: Or perhaps from the Gr. (...), to duck. Dizzy, from the AS. Dizi, or the
Belg. Duyligh, the same. V. Dazzle. Dobeler; or rather, Doubler, a great wooden
platter. V. Double. A Dock, from the AS. Docca, a plant so called. A Dock,
perhaps from the Gr. (...); this from (...), to receive; q. d. a station for
ships. To Dodge, to run from one plea to another; derived from the word Dog,
that runs this way, and that way in hunting. It is also attributed to the Belg.
Doddick, wavering; which comes from Dodde, a spit that turns often about.
Dodkin, from the Belg. Duytken, the smallest coin that is; this from the
diminutive termination Kin, and Duit, a farthing. V. Doit. Do, from the AS.
Da, Dan. Daa, Belg. Das, Fr. G. Daim, the same. To Do, from the AS. Don, Teut.
Thun, the same. Dog, perhaps from the AS. Doc, Belg. Dog, Teut. D^ck, a
Mongrel, or a Mastive. Hence To Dog one, to trace one like a dog. Minshew
derives it from (...), to bite. Dogged, from Dog; q d. perverse, of a crabbed,
surly temper. Dogger, from Dog; q. d a little light ship, which, like an Hound,
is soon turned this, or that way. Doit, from the Belg. Duyt, Fr. G. Doigt; and
this corrupted from the Lat. Digitus; q. d. a brass coin of a small value; so
small, that it may be covered with the tip of the finger. Dole, from the AS.
Dal, Dael, Belg. Deyl, Teut. Theil, a part, or pittance; these from the Verbs
Daelan, Drylen, Theylen, to distribute. V. Deal. Doller, from the Belg. Daler,
Teut. Thaler, a German silver-coin; both from the Belg. Talen, Teut. Z^hlen, to
pay. Martinius derives it from the Teut. Thal, a Valley; it being first coined
in the Valley of Joachim, in Saxony. Dolphin, formerly the title of the Prince
of Vienna; now, of the firstborn of the French King; from the Fr. G. Daulphin,
and Daulphine, a Dolphin, which those princes carried in their Coat of Arms.
Dolphin, from the Fr. G. Daulphin, the Lat. Delphinus, or the Gr. (...), the
same; this from (...), an hog; because it somewhat resembles one; or from
(...), a womb, for the bigness of its belly. Dolt, from the Teut. Doll,
imprudent; or from the Lat. Attonitus, stupefied. Don, properly a Spanish word;
contracted from the Lat. Dominus, a master. Doom, from the AS. Dom, Dome, Teut.
Vet. Duom, Run. Dan Dom, a Judgment. Whence the Verb Domner, to judge, or
condemn. V. Deem. Door, from the AS. Dure, Dora, Goth. Dor^, Dan. Dor, Teut.
Thur, Thor; all from the Gr. (...), idem: Or rather, from the AS. THor, THurh,
through. Dormant, from the Fr G. Dormant, a Participle of the Verb Dormir, to
sleep. Dormonse; q. d. Mus Dormiens, a mouse that almost always sleeps. To
Dorr, from the Teut. Thor, a fool; or from the AS. Dora, a drone; q. d. to make
one dull and stupid. A Dorser, or Dosser; that is, an horse-cloth; from the Fr.
G. Dossiere; both from the Lat. Dorsum, a back. Dosel, or Dorsel, from the Lat.
Dorsum, a back. Dote, from-the Belg. Dutten, Doten, Fr. G. Dotter, the same.
Dotterel; Cambden derives it from the Verb To Dote. V. Dote. Double, from the
Fr. G. Double, the Ital. Doppio, or the Lat. Duplum, twofold. Doublet, from
the Fr. G. Doublet, Ital. Dobletto; q. d. a vesture thicker than ordinary, to
keep the stomach warm. Doubt, from the Fr. G. Doubten; and both from the Lat.
Dubitare, the same. Dove, from the AS. Dufa, Belg. Duyf, Duyve, Teut. Dauv,
Tauv, Dan. Due, the same. Dough from the AS. Dah, Belg. Deegh, Teut. Deig,
Teyg, Dan. Deyg; these from the Verbs Dyen, Deyen. Or it may be drawn from the
AS. Deagan, to knead, to mix with water. Doughty, from the AS. Dohtig,
strenuous; or Duguth, valor; which comes from Dugan, to be strong: Or from the
Belg. Deuchd, Teut. Dugend, fortitude, courage. It also signifies, a proud
felfow; in which sense it may be so said, quasi Thoughty; q. d. one that has
high thoughts of himself. Dowager, a King's Widow; corrupted from the Fr. G.
Douairiere, and this from Douaire, a Dowry; which is allowed her by the Law.
Dowlas- cloth, perhaps from Douglas, some Scotch-man, that first wrought it; q.
d. Douglas cloth: If it may not more probably be drawn from the Fr. G.
Dourlans, a Town in Picardy, once famous for this kind of Manufacture. Down,
from the AS. Dune, Adune, downward. Down, from the Dan. Dun, Belg. Dunne; as,
Dunne Veders, (i. e.) soft feathers. V. Thin. Dow^es, from the AS. Dune, Belg.
Duyne, an heap of sand. Fr. Jun. deriveth all of them from the Gr. (...), an
heap. It may be better drawn from the Gr. (...), for (...), an hill. Dowry, or
Dower, from the Fr. G. Douaire; q. d. Lat. Dotarium, a portion. Mer. Cas.
derives it from the Gr. (...), a gift. To Dowse, from the Belg. Dousen, idem;
both from the Lat. Tunsare, to beat. Doxy, perhaps from the Belg. Docken, to
yield willingly. To Doze, from the Belg. Duyselen, to be vertiginous, to stun:
But more likely, from the word Dote; or from the Belg. Dwaes, stupid. Fr. Jun.
derives it from the Gr. (...), to talk foolishly. A Dozel, from the Fr. G.
Dousil, Doisil, a faucet. Dozen, from the Fr. G. Douzaine, Ital. Dozzina,
Dozzena, the same. Drab, one that prostituteth her body for gain; from the AS.
and Belg. Drabbe, Drabbe, course, common, or the refuse of any thing. Draff,
from the AS. and Belg. Drabbe, Drabbe, lees, or dregs: Or more immediately from
the Belg. Draf, idem. Drag, from the AS. Dragan, to draw along; the Teut.
Trecken, or the Belg. Draghen, the same; all possibly from the Lat. Trahere, to
draw. Gum- Dragant, or Dragon, corrupted from the Lat. Tragacantha, idem.
Dragon, from the Fr. G. Dragon, Ital. Dragone; both from the Lat. Draco, or the
Gr. (...), which comes from (...), to see; a Dragon being quick-sighted.
Dragoon, or Dragooners, in our modern Militia, Horsemen armed with Muskets;
from Dragon, because at first they were as destructive to the Enemy as Dragons.
In the declining state of the Empire, the Standard-bearers were called
Draconarii, from Draco; because Dragons were painted upon their Standards, says
Vegetius. Drain, from the Fr. G. Trainer, or the Ital. Trainare; a Trahendo,
from drawing; or from the Teut. Dringen, to squeese out the juice, or moisture.
Drake, Sea-Drake, from Draco, a Dragon; q. d. Water-Dragon. Drake, a warlike
engine; q. d. Lat. Draco; because it casts out fire like a Dragon. V.
Culvering, and Serpentine. A Drake, A Male- Duck; not unlikely, from the Belg.
Dreck, dirt; because it loves to feed in dirty places. Dram, from the Fr. G.
Dram, or the Ital. Dramma; which comes from the Lat. Dram, the same. Drap
de-Berry, a kind of Frize brought from France. It is a pure Gallicism. Drape-
sheep, I suppose from the AS. Drefe, a severing; the same that Cullers; which
see. Draper, from the Fr. G. Drapier, or the Ital. Drappiere, idem; these from
the Fr. G. Drap, and Drappo, cloth; which come from the Verb Draper, to
calender. Draught, from the AS. Droht, or the Belg. Draght, idem; this from the
Verb Draghen, to carry. V. Draw. The Draught, from the AS. Droge, Teut. Dreck,
the excrements, dung. Draughts, the single play at Chess; from our word Draw.
Draw, from the AS. Dragan, Belg. Draghen, Teut. Tragen, to bear. Minshew draws
it from the Lat. Traho, the same. A Dray, from the Lat. Traha, which comes from
Traho, to draw. Dread, from the AS. Draed, fear. Minshew draws it from the Lat.
Terret, the third person singular of Terreo, to affright. Dream, from the Belg.
Droom, or Teut. Traum, the same. Mer. Cas. derives it from the Gr. (...), a
vision, it may likewise, by a Metathesis, be drawn from the Lat. Dormire, to
sleep. Dregs, from the Teut. and Belg. Treck, Dreck, filth. V. Dross. Drench,
from the AS. Drencan, to drink, to water. V. Drink. Dress, from the Fr. G.
Betrescher; and both perhaps from the Teut. Tracht, which may be interpreted,
the fashion of a suit of cloths. Davis draws it from the C. Br. Trwsio, to
adorn, or deck. To Drill, from the AS. Dirlian, Dirl, to make an hole through;
this from THurh, through. Hence, A Stonecutter's Dril. Drink, from the AS.
Drink, of the Verb Drincan, to drink, Belg. Drincken, Teut. Trincken, the same.
Some derive it from the Ital. Drincare, or the Fr. G. Trinquer, to fuddle. To
Drip; V. Drop; perhaps from the Teut. Trieffen, to drop. Drive, from the AS.
Drifan, Belg. Dreyven, Teut. Treivan, Fr. Th. Dreven; as we say, To Drive on,
as fast as he can Drive. In a metaphorical sense, it may be taken from the Gr.
(...), to tear; as we say; To Drive off, or delay time. Drivel, spittle; from
the Teut. Trieffen, to drop; which see. To Drizzle, from the Teut. Riselen;
this from the Lat. diminutive Rossulus, or Roscellus; q. d. to rain as small as
dew. A Droil: Minshew deriveth it from the Belg. Drevel; this from Drevelen, to
turn any way; q. d. he that runs this way, and that way, at his master's
beck. Drole, from the Fr. G. Drole, Drolle, a merry Crony; as says Menagius:
Or perhaps from the Lat. Draucus, Drauculus, a sort of mimick. Dromedary, from
the Fr. G. Dromedaire, or the Ital. Dromedario; these from the Gr. (...), a
race; because of its swiftness. Drone, from the AS. Draen, or the Teut. Traen,
the same. Minshew derives it from the Belg. Droomigh, sleepy, sluggish. I may
also draw it from our Eng. Part. Droven, of the Verb To Drive; because they are
driven away by the Bees, from their hives. Droopish, from the Belg. Droef; this
from the Teut. Trub, of Trubben, to vex; all, by a Metathesis, from the Lat.
Turbare; q. d. troubled in mind; also sickly. Drop, from the AS. Droppan, Teut.
Trawffen, Tropffen; whence the Nouns Dropa, Tropff, Trauff; in the Belg. Droop,
Drop; which Mer. Cas. draws from the Gr. (...), (i. e.) falling downward.
Dropsy, from the Fr. G. Hydropisie, or the Ital. Hydropisia; or, more likely,
from the Lat. Hydrops, the same. Dross, from the AS. Dros, or the Belg. Droes,
the offscouring of things. Drove, from the AS Draf, herds of cattle. V. Drive.
Drought, from the AS. Drugoth, or the Belg. Drooghte; parchedness; Derivatives
of the AS. Drige, Drig, and Belg. Droogh, torrid, or Dry; which see.
Drousiness, from the Verb To be Drousie; and this from the Belg. Droosen,
always to slumber. Drown, from the Teut. Drunden, or Drunder, idem. To Drub, q.
Dub; (i. e.) to beat, as one beats a Drum; or rather, from the Teut. Druben;
as we say, To lay it on; or from the Teut. Truben, to molest one greatly. It
may also be taken from the Gr. (...), or (...), to bruise, or mangle. Drudge,
from the AS. Dreccan; because he is employed about the most servile offices: Or
from the Teut. Tragen, or Belg. Draghen, to bear burdens. I may, without any
offense, draw them all from the old Germ. Dreck, dirt. Mer. Cas. draws it from
the Gr. (...), a vintage; q. d. to labor as hard as those that tread the
wine press. Drug: Salmasius draws it from the Pers. Drova, a favor, or smell.
Drug, It is grown a mere Drug, from Dreg, Dregs; (i. e.) it bears no price,
is of no value. Druggerman, from the Fr. G. Drogueman, Trucheman; or the Ital.
Torcimanno; which comes from the Gr. (...); and all possibly from the Chal. and
Arab. Targeman, an Interpreter, or Expositor. Druid, a Priest among the ancient
Britains; from the AS. and Hib. Dry, a wise man. Martinius derives it from the
Teut. Druwed, one strong in faith. It may best of all be taken from the Gr.
(...), an Oak; under which they celebrated their superstitious rites and
ceremonies. Drumm, from the Belg. Trommel, Teut. and Dan. Tromme; which are all
words feigned from the sound. Some draw it from the Lat. Tympanum, the same, by
an Epenthesis of the letter r. Dry, from the AS. Drig, Drigge, Belg. Droogh,
Teut. Durr, the same. V. Thirst. Duce, Duce take you; perhaps from the Goth.
and AS. Dues, a spectre; (i. e.) the Devil, or Evil Spirit take you. To Duck,
from the Belg. and Teut. Ducken, idem: Or, from the AS. Gedufian, Ital.
Tuffare, to dive. A Duck, from the Belg. Ducken, Duycken, Teut. Dauchen,
Tauchen, to duck, or dive. Ducket, from the Fr. G. Ducat; q. d. a Coin having a
Duke's Coronet stamped on it: Or, as Covarruv. says, because great Dukes are
permitted to coin such money. Dudgeon, from the Teut. Dolch, or Dagen, Degen, a
dagger. v. Dagger. Dudgeon, To take in Dudgeon; either from the other Dudgeon;
q. d. to resent a thing so ill, as to draw his sword to be avenged; or rather,
from the AS. Dolg, a wound; and this a Dolendo, from grieving; q. d. to bear an
injury impatiently. Due, from the Fr. G. Deu, Part. of the Verb Devoir, to be
owing. Dugg: Minshew draws it from the Belg. Duyght, a faucet; for milk is
sucked thereout, as liquor through a faucet: Or, from the Heb. Dod, Dodin,
idem, a pap, or teat. Duke, from the Fr. G. Duc, or the Ital. Duca, idem; and
all of them from the Lat. Dux, the same: From whence also comes the Fr. G.
Duchess, the Ital. Duchessa, and the Lat. Barb. Ducissa. See Spelman. A
Dulcimer, from the Ital. Dolcemelle, Dolzaina; both from Dulcis, sweet. Dull,
from the AS. Dole, Belg. and Teut. Doll, stupid, sluggish. It may, not
unlikely, be drawn from the AS. Dolian, to suffer; for such take injuries more
patiently than others. Dumb, from the AS. Dumb, in the Dan. and Teut. Dum,
Thumb, stupid: Or from the old Germ. Dumba, a fool: Or, as we say, A Dumb
fellow. Dump, from Dumb: Minshew draws it from the Lat. Domare, to tame; for
then our courage is cooled, and we are as it were amazed. Dunce, from the Hisp.
Tonto; and this from the Lat. Attonitus, one affrighted: Or from Dumb,
allusively, as it is taken for him that is awkward to all instructions. Dung,
from the AS. Dyngan, Teut. Du^g, Dungen, the same. Dungeon, from the Fr. G.
Dongeon, a dark, strong and fenced place. Or perhaps it may be so called,
because of its nastiness, being all defiled with with the excrements of the
imprisoned. To Dun, to be importunate in words; from the AS. Din, Dynan, to
make a great noise about any thing. Dunn, from the AS. Dun; as Dun-fealu, a
dun-foal. Durgen, from the AS. Deorg, Belg. Dwergh, Dwargh, Teut. Zwarg, a
Dwarf; which see. Dusk, perhaps from the AS. Dystre, Teut. Duster, dark, or
dull. Dust, from the AS. Dust, the same: Or from the AS. Dyrre, Teut. Durre;
which signifies, dry. Duchy, from the Fr. G. Duche, Ital. Ducea, Ducato, the
same. v. Duke. Duty, v. Due. Dwarf, from the AS. Deorh, Dan. Duerre, Belg.
Dwergh, Dwargh, Teut. Zwerch, Zwarg, idem; i. e. one of a small stature. Dwell,
from the Dan. Duelger, to abide. Somnerus draws it from the AS. Delian, Belg.
Dwaelen; because our Ancestors once lodged in Tents, which they removed from
place to place. Minshew draws it from the Gr. (...), or the Goth. Dwale, to
lodge in an Inn by the way. To Dwindle, from the AS. Dinan, Belg. Duynen, Teut.
Schwinded, to decrease; also to grow dim, or go out. A Die, from the Fr. G. Die,
Ital. Dado, the same. It may not incommodiously be drawn from the Gr. (...), to
cast; or from (...), because it wipeth one of his money. To Die, v. Death. To
Die, from the AS. Deagan, this perhaps from the Lat. Tingere, to dip in colors.
Minshew draws it from the Gr. (...), to make moist, or to besprinkle.
E.
EAch, from the AS. Elc, in the Belg. Elck, Teut. Ellick, the same. Mer. Cas.
draws it from the Gr. (...), every one. Eager, from the AS. Eagor, Fr. G.
Aigre, Ital. Agro; all from the Lat. Acer, sharp, fierce, cruel. It is also
taken for the raging flux and re-flux of the river Trent, from the Run. Dan.
Eger, signifying, the Ocean. Eagle, from the Fr. G. Aigle; both contracted from
the Lat. Aquila, idem. Eak, from the AS. Aece, Eternity. V. Eke. Eam, Mine Eam,
from the AS. Eame, Belg. Oom, Teut. Ohm, an uncle; all perhaps from the Lat.
Amita, signifying an aunt. Ear, from the AS. Ear, Belg. Oor, Dan. Ore, Teut.
Ohr, the same. Ear of corn, from the AS. Ear, Teut. Ahr, Belg. Are; this from
the Lat. Arista, the same. Earable, for Arable, from the Lat. Arabilis, fit to
be plowed: Or from the AS. Earian, Teut. Erren; which come from the Lat. Arare,
to plow. Earl, from the AS. Eorl, the old Dan. Eorla; these, not unlikely, from
the AS. Are, Teut. Ehr, Belg. Eer, honor, or nobility. Early, from the AS.
Aer, Belg. Eer, Teut. Eher, signifying, before; q. d. before the rising of the
Sun. V. Ere. Earn, from the AS. Earnian, or the Fr. Th. Arnon, to get, or
deserve; this perhaps from the AS. Are, a stipend, or salary. Minsh. draws it
from the Gr. (...), to receive, or acquire. Earnest, from the AS. Eornest,
Belg. and Teut. Ernst, vehement, serious, studious, earnest, a pledge given
beforehand, to ratify a bargain; from the Lat. and Gr. Arrha, the same. The
AS. Eornest, comes from the AS. Arian, Belg. Eeren, Teut. Ehren; whence their
Nouns Are, Eer, Ehr, a salary, or stipend. Earth, from the AS. Eard, Eorth,
Belg. Erd, Aerde, Teut. Erde, the same. They may all be drawn from the Gr.
(...), the ground; whence comes the Adv. (...), below, beneath, or under.
Earwig, from the AS. Earpigga, and this from Ear, an ear, and Wicga, a kind of
moth, or small worm. Ease, from the Fr. G. Aise, or the Ital. Agio; which
Menagius draws from the Lat. Otium, pleasure, retirement; but most likely, from
the AS. Eath, easy. An Easement, a privy, or jakes; from the Fr. G. Ausemente,
or the Ital. Agiamento, the same. East, from the AS. East, Belg. Oest, Fr. G.
Oest, the same. Easter, from the AS. Easter, in the Belg. Oster, Teut. Ostern.
Somnerus draws it from the AS. Eastre, a Goddess of the Saxons, or Germans; in
whose honor sacrifices were offered about this time of the year. Easy, from
the Fr. G. Aise, the same: Or from the Noun Ease: Or, which is most likely,
from the AS Eath, id. q. d. Eathy; which Fr. Jun. derives from the Gr. (...),
custom; because use makes perfect, as we say. Eat, from the AS Etan, Belg:
Eaten, Teut. Essen, the same; and these from the AS. Ette, Teut. At, any sort
of provision; and all of them from the Lat. Edo, and this from the Gr. (...),
the same. An Eat-bee, a bird so called, because it feeds upon Bees. Eaves,
from the Fr. G. Eaux; and this from the AS. Ea, water; because they receive the
rain that runs down from the housetop. Eaves-dropper, one that privily
listeneth under the windows, what the people in the house say; from Eaves,
under which he stands; and Dropper, which see. Ebb, from the Belg. and Dan.
Ebb, or the Fr. G. Ebe, Hebbe, according to some; but most likely from the AS.
Ebba, the flux and re-flux of the Tide. V. Slide. An Eddy, from the AS. Ed,
again, and Ea, water; a whirl-pool, wherein the water turns round. Edge, from
the AS. Eege; both from the Lat. Acies, and this from the Gr. (...), the sharp
side or point of any thing. Edish, from the AS. Edisc; this from Ed, the second
time; q. d. fog, or grass that grows so fast, as to be mown twice in one
Summer. Eel, from the AS. El, Dan. and Teut. Aal, Belg. Ael, the same; and all
from the Gr. (...), or (...), mudd; because they increase most in muddy waters.
The Eves of an Holy Day; q. d. Evenings falling before a Fast Day. Effort, from
the Fr. G. Effort; (i. e.) the putting forth of ones whole strength. V. Force.
Effrontery, from the Fr. G. Effronterie, impudence; and this from the Lat.
Effrons, impudent, saucy, malapert. An Eft, or Evet, from the AS. Ebeft, and
this from Efan, smooth; so called, for the smoothness of its skin. Eft-soons,
from the AS. Efsona, by and by, immediately. Egg, from the AS. Aeg, Dan. Eg,
Teut. and Belg. Ey, the same. To Egg, from the Dan. Egger, Run. Dan. Eggia, Fr.
G. Agacer, to instigate, or prick forward; and this from the Lat. Acutus,
sharp. The same with Edge; which see. Eglantine, from the Fr. G. Aiglantier, a
wild rose. Minshew draws it from the Lat. Echinus, an hedgehog; because it is
full of prickles, like unto it. It may also be taken from the Belg. Eghel, an
hedgehog; and this from the Lat. Aculeus, a sting, or sharp prick. Egret, a
bird so named; because it is eager in hunting after its prey. E^ght, from the
AS. Eahta, Belg. and Teut. Acht, Ital. Otto, Hisp. Ootio, Fr. G. Huit; all from
the Lat. and Gr (...), the same. An Eilet-hole, V. Oilet- hole. Either, from
the AS. ^gther, idem; and this from the Preposition ^c, also, and Der,
afterward. Eke, from the AS. Eac, Teut. Auch, moreover, again, also. To Eke,
from the AS. Eacan, Gecan, to put a piece into a vesture, etc. Or from Eke,
again; q. d. to make anew in some parts. Ela, the highest note ascending in
Music; perhaps from the Lat. Eleva, elevation. E^bow, from the AS. Elboga,
Belg. Elle-booge, Dan. Albu; q. d. the bowt, or bent of the arm. V. Ell, and
Bow. Eldar, in Lincolnshire, Hellar, in Westmorland, Ellar, from the AS.
Ellarn, or the Teut. Holder, the same: Or perhaps from the Teut. Heller, clear;
from the bright color if its leaves. Elden, fuel for the fire; a word
frequently used in Axholm in Lincolnshire, and elsewhere; from the AS. Aeld,
fuel for the fire; or Aelan, to kindle. Elder, a word frequently used in
Lincolnshire; from the Belg. Elder, an Vdder; which see. Elder, from the AS.
Aeld, old; whence Aeldor, the same: Hence Ald, old age; and Ealdorman, an
Alderman; which see. It may also be derived from the Teut. Elter, Alter, Belg.
Ouder, the same. Eleven, from the Belg. Elf, Teut. Eylff, AS. Endlyfa, the
same; and this from the AS. Ene, one, and Lyfan, to leave; (i. e.) one
remaining, after the computation of ten. Elf, from the AS. Aelf, Teut. Alp;
Belg. Alf, Alve, a Fairy, or Fiend, the Night- Mare; all perhaps from the AS.
Ahleapan, to leap upon; for such people as are troubled with the Nightmare,
fancy that some witch, or hag invisible rides upon them. Minshew derives it
from the Noun Half; because they are imagined to be of a small stature. Fr.
Jun. draws it from the Gr. (...), to change; because they turn themselves into
various shapes, and steal away pretty children out of their cradles, leaving in
their stead deformed ones; which, for that reason, are called Changelings.
E^ixir: Menagius draws it from the Arab. Elixir, a breaking; this from the root
Chesre; because it breaks, as it were, and cures most diseases. Elk, from
the AS. Elch, a creature like an Ox: Or from the Belg. Elsene, an awl; because
this beast has horns as sharp as a Cobler's awl. E^, by those of Lincolnshire
E^n, from the AS. Eln, Fr. G. Aune, Aulne, Hisp. Alna; and all from the Lat.
Vlna, the same. Elm, from the AS. Elm, Belg. Olm, Fr. G. Orme, Ormeau, Dan.
Elm; and all from the Lat. Vlmus, the same. Else, from the AS. Else, or
contracted from the Lat. Alias, otherwise, but for that. Elstn, v. Awl. Embalm,
from the Fr. G. Embaumer, to preserve from corruption. V. Balm. Embarass, from
the Fr. G. Embarasser, Ital. Imbarazzare, Hisp. Embaracar, to block up, to stop
up a passage. It may also come of the Prep. Im, for In, and Bar; q. d. to keep
one within compass. v. Bar. Embark, from the Fr. G. Embarquer, or the Ital.
Imbarcare, to go a-board a ship. V. Bark. Ambassador, from the Fr. G.
Ambassadeur, Ital. Ambasciador, Hisp. Embaxadare, the same; and these from the
AS. Ambyht, a message; and this from the inseparable Prep. Amb, and Aehtian, to
esteem. Ember, from the Belg. Ameren, or the Dan. Emmer, a spark; and both from
the old Goth. and Dan. Eld, fire, and the AS. Verb Beran, to bring forth; (i.
e.) that which the fire produces. Ember-weeks: Minshew derives it from the
Teut. Embehren, to be abstemious; though I had rather derive it from Ember, for
ashes; and Week; because the Ancients fasted and humbled themselves, in sack
cloth and ashes, during that time. Embois, To Emboss a Deer, a term in Hunting;
from the Fr. G. Embosquer, or the Ital. Imboscare, to lodge in the wood; and
these from their Nouns, Bois, Bosco, a wood, or forest. It is also derived from
the Ital. Ambasciare, to pant for breath. Embossed, a term in Architecture;
from the Fr. G. Embosse; this from E^, and Bosse, a bump, or swelling; for the
similitude. Embrace, from the Fr. G. Embrasser, Hisp. Abrazar, Ital.
Imbracciare, to hug in ones arms. Embroil, from the Fr. G. Embrouiller, or the
Ital. Embrogliare; which Menagius draws from the Fr. G. Brueil, a wood, which
being cut down, blocks up the passage which lay through it. It may not
incommodiously be taken from the Teut. Brullen, to bawl, or brawl; in which
sense it is also taken. Emburse, or Imburse, from the Fr G. Embourser, or the
Ital. Imborsare, to put up in a Purse; which see. Emerald, from the Fr. G.
Esmeraude, Hisp. Esmeralda, Ital. Smeraldo; all contracted from the Lat.
Smaragdus, a precious stone so called, for its bright glistering color.
Emerods, corrupted from the Lat. and Gr. Haemorrhoides, idem. An Emmet, or
Emmot, from the AS. Aemet; and this from A, always, and Mete, meat; q. d. a
creature, that by its natural industry, is never destitute of food. Minshew
ingeniously draws it from the Priv. A, and the Teut. Musz, ease; because it is
always busy. Empair, from the Fr. G. Empirer, to make worse; this from Pire,
worse. Emperor, from the Fr. G. Empereur; from hence, An Emperess; all from
the Lat. Imperium, an Empire. Emplead, from the Fr. G. Emplaider, idem. V.
Plead, and P ea. Employ, from the Fr. G. Employer, or the Ital. Impiegare, to
set one his task. To Empoison, or Poison, from the Fr G. Empoisonner, id. v.
Poison. Emprison, from the Fr. G. Emprisonner, or the Ital. Imprigionare, to
cast one into Prison; which see. An Emps-piece, a word frequently used in
Lincolnshire; from the AS. Aemypce, egregious; this from A, always, and Mypce,
a note, or mark. Empty, from the AS. Aemti, Aemtig; these from the Verb
Aemtian, to empty; or from the inseparable privative Prep. Ae, and Mete, meat;
(i. e.) without meat, hungry. Enamel, from the Fr. G. Esmailler, Hisp.
Esmalter, Ital. Smaltare, idem. V. Amel. Enamoured, from the Fr. G. Enamoure,
or the Ital. Inamorato, to be in love. Enclose, from the Fr. G. Enclos, a Part.
of the Verb Enclorre, to include. V. Close. Encomber, from the Fr. G.
Encombrer, or the Ital. Ingombrare, to trouble, or vex. V. Comber. Encompass,
v. Compass. To Encounter, from the Fr. G. Encontrer, or the Ital. Incontrare,
q. d. to stand as an Antagonist against one. Encourage, from the Fr. G.
Encourager, to animate. V. Courage. Increase, from the Lat. Increscere, the
same. End, from the AS. End, Belg. Dan. and Teut. End, the same; AS. Endian,
Belg and Teut. Enden, to terminate, or come to an end. Endammage, from the Fr.
G. Endammager, to damnifie. v. Damage. Endeavor, from the Fr. G. Devoir,
Endevoir, idem; q. d. to perform his duty to his ability. Endite, from the Fr.
G. Endicter, Enditer, or the Ital. Indettare, Indittare, to bring an
Endictment, or Enditement against one; also to dictate, or digest into method.
Endive, from the Fr. G. Endive, or the Ital. Endivia, idem; an herb so called,
because it grows in high-way-sides. Endow, from the Fr. G. Endouairer, (i.
e.) to give one a Dowry; which see. Endue, corrupted from Endow. Endure, from
the Fr. G. Endurer, or the Ital. Durare, to suffer, or undergo affliction.
Enemy, from the Fr. G. Ennemi, or the Ital. Nemico; and both from the Lat.
Inimicus, the same. From hence, Enmity. Enfeeble, v. Feeble. Enforce, from the
Fr. G. Enforcer, to make to do a thing forcibly. V. Force. Enfranchise, to give
one his Freedom. V. Frank, Franchise. Engage, from the Fr. G. Engager, or the
Ital. Engaggiare, to pledge, or give in hostage; also to be Surety, or Bail for
another. V. Gage. Engender, from the Fr. G. Engendrer, to procreate. Engine,
from the Fr. G. Engine, or the Ital. Ingegno, ingenuity; so called, because of
the curiousness of the workmanship thereof. From hence, the Fr. G Enginier, and
our Eng. Engineer, a maker of Engines. Engraff, v. Graff. Engrave, from the Fr.
G. Engraver, the same. V. Grave. Engross, v. Ingross. Enhance, from the Fr. G.
Enhausser, now out of use; or the Ital. Inanzi, to raise the price of things.
Enjoy, from the Fr. G. Jouir, the same. V. Joy. Enjoin, from the Fr. G.
Enjoindre, to command. Enlarge, from the Fr. G. Eslargir, or the Ital.
Slargare, to amplify, or make larger. Ennoble, from the Fr. G. Ennoblir, to
make noble. Enough, from the AS. Genoh, Belg. Ghenoegh, Teut. Genugh, the same.
Enquire, from the Fr. G. Enquerir; and both from the Lat. Inquirere, to dive
narrowly into a thing. Enrage, from the Fr. G. Enrager, or the Ital. Arrabiare,
to set stark mad with vexation. Enrich, from the Fr. G. Enricher, the same. V.
Rich. Enrol, from the Fr. G. Enroller, idem. V. Roll, and Roll. To Ensaim, or
Enseam an Hawk, i. e. to make an Hawk lean; from the Prep. En, from, and the
Fr. G. Sain, fat. Ensample, v. Example. Ensign, from the Fr. G. Enseigne, or
the Ital. Insegna; and both from the Lat. Insigne, a flag, or banner. Ensue,
from the Fr. G. Ensuyvre, to follow afterward. Entail, a term in Law; from the
Fr. G. Entaillir, or the Ital. Intagliare; these from the Fr. G. En, in, and
Tailler, to cut; q. d. to leave an estate to posterity, as sure, as if it were
engraven in marble; and therefore to remain for ever. V. Fee-tail. Entangle, or
Entangle, from the Lat. Prep. In, and Tendicula, a snare, or net: Or it may be
drawn from the AS. Tangl, a twig; which being done over with bird-lime, are
laid to catch birds. Enter, from the Fr. G. Entrer, or the Ital. Entrare; and
all of them from the Lat. Intrare, the same: From hence, An Entry, and the Fr.
G. Entree, idem. Enterchange, from the Fr. G. Enterchanger, the same. V.
Change. Intercourse, from the Fr. G. Entrecours, commerce, or freedom to
discourse, one to, or with another. Enterlace, from the Fr. G. Entrelasser, or
the Ital. Interlacciare, idem, to interweave. v. Lace. Enterline, from the Fr.
G. Entreligner, the same. Entermewer, a term in Hawking; from the Fr. G.
l'Entremueur, to change the feathers into party-colours, as an hawk of the
second or third coat does. V. To Mew. The Hawk Enterp^nneth, a term in
Faulconry; from Inter, between, and Penna, a feather; (i. e) she tangleth her
wings. Enterprise, from the Fr. G. Entreprinse, Entreprendre, Ital.
Intraprendere, to attempt, or undertake. Enterr, from the Fr. G. Enterrer, to
bury. Entertain, from the Fr. G. Entretenir, or the Ital. Intratenere, to
defend, or receive; the same. Enthral. v. Thrall. Enthrone, from the Fr G.
Enthroner; and this from the Lat. Thronus, a throne; (i. e) to set upon the
throne. Entice, from the Fr. G. Attiser, idem, to make one, by fair words,
commit things unjust: Or from the AS. Tihtan, to over-perswade. Entire, from
the Fr. G. Entier, or the Ital. Intiero; and both from the Lat. Integer, whole,
full and perfect. Entomb, from the Fr. G Entomber, to put into a Tomb; which
see. Entrals, from the Fr. G. Entrailles, or the Ital. Intraglie, the inwards.
Entrap, from the Fr. G. Entraper, to catch, as it were, in a Trap; which see.
Environ, from the Fr. G. Environner, to surround; or to encompass. Enure, or
Inure, to accustom ones self to a thing; from In, and Ure; which see. E^vy,
from the Fr. G. Envy; and both from the Lat. Invidia, the same. To Equip, from
the Fr. G. Equipper, to put one in good equipage, or habit; by a Metaphor taken
from putting harness upon horses. Equitable, from the Fr. G. Equitable, just
and lawful. Ere, from the AS. Aere, Belg. Eer, Teut. Eher, ere long, before
that, in a short time. Ermin, from the Fr. G. Ermine, or the Ital. Armellino, a
field-mouse. Jul. Scalig. supposes it to be so called, from Armenia, from
whence these skins are brought. E^min, in Heraldry, is used for white,
interspersed with black spots. Errand, from the AS. Aerend, a message: Or from
the Fr. G. Err, or the Lat. Errare, to go up and down from place to place.
Errant, A Knight Errant, from the Fr. G. Chivalier Errant, one that,
Hercules-like, goes about the world to discomfit Giants, Tyrants, Monsters,
etc. Taken ordinarily for one that will swear at random, as Travelers may do,
they not being likely to be disproved. Erst, from the Fr. Th. Erist, first of
all. V. Ere. Escape, from the Fr. G. Eschapper, Ital. Scappare, Scampare, Hisp.
Escapar, to avoid any danger by cunning conveying ones self away: Or from Ex,
and Capi; (i. e.) not to be apprehended: Or from Ex, and Campus (i. e.) to flee
out of the field: Or from Ex, and the Hisp. Capo, an head; q. d. to slip ones
head out of the halter. Escarbuncle, from the Fr. G. Escarboncle, idem. Eschew,
from the old Fr. G. Eschever, Teut. Schewen, Belg. Schouwen, Ital. Schifare, to
shun, or avoid. Espaliers, or Spaliers, a term among Gardeners; from the Fr. G.
Espallier, or the Ital. Spalliere; these from the Nouns Espaule, and Spalla, a
stake. It signifies, to underprop, as they do fruitful trees, with stakes, or
pales of wood. Especial, from the Fr. G. Especial, individual, peculiar.
Espouse, from the Fr. G. Espouser, or the Ital. Sposare, to make sure, to
betroth. Espy, v. Spy. Esquire, from the Fr. G. Escuir, Escuyr, or the Ital.
Scudiero, idem: Or from the Fr. G. Escu, a shield; q. d. a Shield-bearer. V.
Shield, and Bear. Essay, v. Assay. Establish, from the Fr. G. Establir, or the
Ital. and Lat. Stabilire, to confirm, or enforce. Estate, from the Fr. G.
Estat, or the Ital. Stato, a state, or condition. Estrange, from the Fr. G.
Estranger, to alienate; this from the Noun Estrange, an alien. V. Strange.
Estray, v. Stray. Even, from the AS. Aefen, Belg. Effen, Teut. Eben, equal,
alike; Belg. Evenalo, even so. Even, or Evening, from the AS. Aefen, Belg.
Avend, Teut. Abend, Dan. Afften, the same. Aefentio, the Evening-tide. From
hence, Eve, or Eeve, a preparation, or night before a Fast. Ever, from the AS.
Aefre; this from A, and Aa, for ever, Ay; which see. Every, from the AS. Aefre
Eac, Aefre Ene, all the whole number, every one. Evil, from the AS. Efel, yfel,
Belg. Evel, Teut. Well, the same. Ewe, from the AS. Eoe, Belg. Ouwe, Oye; and
all from the Lat. Ovis, a sheep. Ewer, from the Fr. G. Aiguiere, and this from
the Lat. Aqua, water; q. d. a basin to put water in. Exchange, from the Fr. G.
Eschanger, to barter. V. Change. Exchange, The Exchange; so called, because
Merchants, there meeting together, do make, give and receive Bills of Exchange,
concerning money, or wares. Exchequer, Checker, from the Teut. Schatz,
treasure; because the King's taxes, or revenues were treasured up therein. Some
draw it from the Fr Norm. Eschequir, a place where money is coined, the Mint.
Excise, from the Belg. Acciise, tribute; so called, perhaps, because it is
assessed according to the verdict of the Assise, or a number of men deputed to
that office by the King. V. Size, and Assise. Exploit, from the Fr. G. Exploit,
Exploict, a noble achievement. Ey, An Ey of Pheasants, from the Teut. Oy,
plur. Oyer; q. d. a brood, or covy of so many Pheasants as are hatched at one
time. Eye, from the AS. Eag, Belg. Ooghe, Fr. Th. Ougon, Teut. Aug. Fr. G.
Oeil, the same; this last is contracted of the Lat. Oculus, idem; AS. Eag Aepl,
Teut. Aug Apffel, the apple of the eye; AS. Eagan-Bregh, Belg. Oogh-Brawe,
Teut. Augen-Brawen, the eye brow: Teut. Augen-Lied, Belg. Ooghen-Lid, the
eyelid. Hence, To Eye; (i. e.) look upon. To Eye-bite, an emphatical word,
from Eye, and Bite, (i. e.) to bewitch whatsoever they look upon. Eyesse, a
term in Falconry; from the Teut. Ey, an egg; q. d. a young hawk just crept out
of the shell. V. Nyas.
F.
A FAck, a term in Navigation; it is one circle of a cable, twisted round; from
the Fr. G. Faque, a bag, the mouth of which being opened, it somewhat
represents. To Fade, from the Belg. Vrdden, idem; and this from the Fr. G.
Fade, impotent; also flat, unsavory; all from the Lat. Vadere, to go; as we
say, He is going, or gone. Fadge, from the AS. Gefegan, Teut. Fugen, Belg.
Voeghen, Fr. Th. Vogan, to agree, to be adapted, made fit. Fadle, Fiddle Fadle,
trifles; from the Fr. G. Fade, or the Lat. Fatuus, a fool; and Fiddle; q. d. to
draw the stick to and again hastily, and to no tune: Or from Fiddle, and the
Teut. Faden, thread; (i. e.) a Fiddle-string; and to this day, when we show our
dis-like of any thing, we say, A Fiddle-stick. Fag- end, a saying common to
Butchers, signifying the Hind-joints; but by a Metaphor, the Hind- end of any
thing: It is derived from the AS. Fegan, Gefegan, to couple together in joints.
Faggot, from the Fr. G. Faggot, or the Ital. Fagotto, a bundle of sticks. Fail,
from the Fr. G. Faillir, Ital. Fallare, Teut. Fahl, a default; all from the
Lat. Fallo, to disappoint, or frustrate. Fain, I would Fain, from the AS.
Faegen, willingly, with all ones heart. To Faint, from the Fr. G. Faner, Fener,
to fade as flowers do with the heat of the Sun in Summer. Fair, from the AS.
Faeger, Belg. Fraey, the same; AS. Faegernesse, fairness; Faegere; as we say,
Fair and softly: Both Derivatives of Faeger, fair. A Fair, from the Teut.
Feyer, or the Fr. G. Foire; and both from the Lat. Feriae, holy days; because
Fairs are generally kept upon holy days: Or, which is most likely, from the
Lat. Forum, a Market; a Fair being a Market remarkable beyond others, for
buying and selling. A Fairy, from the AS. Ferhth, a Spirit: Or from the Fr. G.
Fee Phee, Ital. Fata, a terrestrial Elf. Minshew draws it from the Belg.
Vaerlick, Teut. Gevahrlich, terrible, dangerous. I choose rather to draw it from
the AS. Faran, to go, or gad about; because these evil Spirits are thought to
go all about, dancing in the night, in companies together. Faith, from the
Ital. Feed; and this from the Lat. Fides, the same. Fall, from the AS. Feallan,
Belg. Vallen, Teut. Fallen, the same: In the AS. there is found Fylle-seoc,
turn-sick, giddy-brain'd; as also Fylle-seocnysse, Teut. Fallenee-Sencht, the
Falling Sickness. It may be drawn from the Belg. Val, a fall; or the Teut.
Fall, a pit-fall; whence comes Aufallen, to fall on. Fallow, as Fallow- Deer,
from the AS. Falee, Fealee, Belg. Vaeluwe, Teut. Faal, or Fahl, idem; q. d. of
a palish bay color, like a brick half burned. Fallow, land once plowed; from
the AS. Fealga, Fealh, an harrow; because fitted, by twice plowing, for the
more easy use thereof. Falter, to commit mistakes in speaking, also to
stumble; from the Belg. Falteren, to make balks in speech: Thence Falteringhe,
an impediment in ones speech. V. Fall, and Fault. To Famble in ones speech,
from the Dan. Famber; as Famber min tale, I falter in my tale. Famine, from the
Fr. G. Famine, scarcity of provision and forage. To Famish, from the Lat.
Fames, hunger; (i. e.) to starve one. Fancy, contracted from the Fr. G.
Fantasy; and both from the Lat. and Gr. Phantasia, the same. Fane, v. Vane.
Faugles, New Fangles, from the AS. Fengan, Onfengan, to go about a matter, to
take a thing in hand. The eminent Dr. Th. H. supposes it to be so called, q.
New Evangels, (i. e.) new Gospels. Fangs, from the AS. Fengan, Fr. Th. Fahan,
Teut. Fahen, Fangen, to fasten upon, to catch hold of. Fann, from the AS.
Fan, Fan; and all from the Lat. Vannus, the same. Farcy, from the Ital.
Farcina, or the Fr. G. Farcin, a disease among horses, that fills the skin
with swollen, running ulcers. Fardel, from the Fr. G. Fardeau, or the Ital.
Fardello, a packet. To Fare, from the Belg. V^eren, to be well. Mer. Cas. draws
it from the Gr. (...), to be in good liking. From hence, Good Fare, plenteous
provision. A Farm, from the Fr. G. Ferme, the same. Spelman draws it from the
AS. Fearmian, Feormian, to afford a livelihood; whence Feorm, food. Some there
are that derive it from the AS. Feorh, life; because by food we are kept alive.
Far, from the AS. Feor, Feorran, Belg. Varre, Teut. Ferr, Fr. Th. Verro, the
same. A Farrier, from the old Fr. G. Ferrier, or the Ital. Ferraio; these from
the Nouns Fers, Ferri; and these from the Verbs Ferrer, Ferrare, to shoe
horses; all from the Lat. Ferrum, iron. Farrow, or Varrow, from the AS. Faerh,
Far, a Boar-pig; both from the Lat. Verris, idem. Hence, To Farrow, as a Sow
that brings forth young. Farsang, a Persian word, yet often found in English
Histories of Persian Affairs; from the Lat. Parasanga, a measure containing
thirty furlongs in length; almost the same with our League; which see. To Farse
out, a term among Mariners; from the Teut. Ferse, idem; q. d. to jag, or
untwist a rope, or cable. Farset, a word found in a book entitled Janua
Linguarum, signifying, a box, or cabinet; perhaps from the Ital. Forziere,
Forciere, a coffer, or Forcer; which see. Fart, from the AS. Fert, Belg. Vert,
Teut. Furtz, the same: Whence come the Belg. Verten, Teut. Furtzen, to fart.
All fictitious words. To Farthel a Sail, from the Fr. G. Fardeau, or Fardel, of
the Verb Fardeler, to fold up, to wrap, or roll up in a bundle. Farther, v.
Far. Farthing, from the AS. Feorthing; this from Feorth, the fourth; or Feoer,
Four; which see. Farthingal, from the Fr. G. Verdugalle, Hisp. Vertugala,
Vertugado; which Dr. Th. H. ingeniously draws from Vertugarde; that is to say,
the guard of virtue. Fashion, from the Fr. G. Facon, or the Ital. Fattione, or
Fazzo, the same. Fast, from the AS. and Dan. Fast, Faest, Belg. Vast, Teut.
Fest, Fr. Th. Vaste, firm, or sure; whence the AS. Festnian, Belg. Vesten,
Vasten, Teut. Vestigen, to make fast. To Fast, from the AS. Faestan, Belg.
Vasten, the same. To Fasten upon, from the Teut. Anfassen; both from our word
Fast; q. d. to take fast hold on. A Fat, from the AS. Fatt, Fatta, Belg. Vat,
Teut. Fasz; all from the Lat. Vas, a vessel for wine, etc. Fat, from the AS.
Faet, Belg. Vet, Teut. Fett, the same: Whence Fetten, Belg. Vetten, to make
fat. Father, from the AS. Faeder, Fr. Th. Fater, Dan. Fader, Belg. Vader, Teut.
Vatter, Fr. G. Pere, Ital. Padre, the same: Also AS. Faederleas, fatherless;
Dan. Stiffader, a step-father; all from the Lat. Pater, and this from the Gr.
(...), idem. Fathom, or Fadom, from the AS. Faethm, Belg. Vadem, a measure of
six feet, or so much in length as the arms stretched out can overreach.
Faucet, from the Fr. G. Fausset, or perhaps from the Lat. Vallicus, the Dim. of
Vallus, a pale, or stake; being forced into the head of a vessel, like a pale
into the ground. A Fauchion, from the Fr. G. Fauchon, idem; this from Fauchet,
a sickle; which comes from Faucher, to reap. Falcon, from the Fr. G. Faucon,
Faulcon, or the Ital. Falcone; and all from the Lat. Falco, idem. Hence comes
the Fr. G. Falconnier; with us, A Falconer. Fault, from the Fr. G. Fault,
Fault, or the Ital. Falto, Falta; and both from the Fr. G. Faillir, to Fail;
which see. A Fawn, or young Stag or Deer, from the Fr. G. Faon, Fan, Fam, idem.
A noted Etymologist draws it from our Participle Fallen, or Fallen; because
lately fallen out of the dam's belly. To Fawn, from the AS. Fandian, to tempt,
or entice: Or perhaps from our English Fain; which see. Fealty, from the Fr. G.
Feaulte, Feaute, idem; this from Feal, faithful; and all from the Lat. Fides,
faith; and Fidelis, faithful, trusty. Fear, from the AS. Faeran, Afaeran, to
affright; and hence Ferht, Belg. Vaer: Hence also the AS. Afeared; with us,
Affeard; all perhaps from the Fr G. Peur, or the Ital. Paura; which are both
manifestly derived from the Lat. Pavor, the same. Feasible, from the Fr. G.
Faisable, Faisible; and these from the Verb Fair, Facere, to do; q. d. easy
to be done. Fease, or Feag, to beat; by wresting the sense a little, from the
Teut. Fegen, to brush; or Ficken, to scratch where it itcheth, as we say.
Feather, from the AS. Faether, Belg. Veder, Teut. Feder, Dan. Fire, the same.
There is also in the AS. Faetherleas, unfledged, or featherless. Feature, from
the Fr. G. Faiture, idem; and this from the Verb Fair, to do. Fever, from the
Dan. and Teut. Feber, Fieber, or the Fr. G. Fievre; which are all derived from
the Lat. Febris, the same. Right spelled Fever. Fee, from the AS. Fea, Feo, or
the Ital. Fio, a reward. Feeble, from the Fr. G. Foible, Feeble, Hisp. Feeble,
Ital. Fiebole, Fievole; and all from the Lat. Flebilis, to be lamented; as we
say, Lamentable, and pitiful weak. Feed, from the AS. Fedan, Belg. Voeden,
Teut. Weyden, Dan. Feder, the same; all perhaps from the Fr. G. Paistre, or the
Lat. Pascere, idem. Feel, from the AS. Felan, Teut. Fielen, Belg. Voelen, to
touch; also to feel. Fegary, Vagary, a Vagando, from roving, or roming about.
To Feign, from the Fr. G. Feindre; and both from the Lat. Fingere, the same. A
Feist, from the AS. Fist, Teut. Feist, Belg. Veest; and these from the Fr. G.
Vesse, Vesser, a fart, to fart. A Feldfare, from the AS. Fealfor; and this from
Feal, a field, and Faran, far; q. d. a bird that flies a great way before it
alighteth. To Fell, from the Belg. Velden, Vellen, or the Teut. Fallen, Fellen,
to cast to the ground: Or from the AS. Feollan, to fall. V. Fall. Fell, from
the AS. Fell, Belg. Fell, Fr. G. Fell, Ital. Fellone, fierce, cruel. V.
Fellon. Fell, from the AS. Fell, or the Teut. Fell, a pelt, or skin. Fellon,
from the Fr. G. Fellon, or the Ital. Fellone; and all from the AS. Felen, Teut.
Fehlen, to offend. Fellon, a disease so called; from the AS. Fell, fierce,
fell; for the grievous pain it causes in the body. Fellow, a companion; from
our word Follow; which see. The Fellow of a wheel, from the Teut Felge, idem.
Felmonger, from the AS. Fell, Teut. Fell, a skin, and the AS. Mangere; q. d. a
Skin-Merchant. Felt, from the AS. Felt, the Fr. G. Feutre, or the Ital. Feltro,
the same. Female, from the Fr. G. Femelle, the same. Fen, from the AS. Fen, or
the Belg. Ven, the same. To Fence, a Defendendo, from defending. A Fence,
mound, or hedge, formed as the other Fence. Fenders, or Fender- bolts, from
Defendo, to keep off; a term in Sailing; for which, consult Manwayring, in his
Dict. Naut. Fennel; in Lincolnshire, Finkel; by Aelfricus, Fynel; in Somnerus,
Fenol; from the Teut. Fenchel, Fr. G. Fenouil, Ital. Finocchio; and all from
the Lat. Foeniculum, an herb so called. To Feoff, from the Fr. G. Fief, or the
Verb Fieffer, to enfeoff. Ferkin, from the AS. Feoer, Teut. Vier, four, and the
Dim. kin; it being the fourth part of a barrel. Fern, from the AS. Fearn, Belg.
Vaeren-kruyd, Teut. Faren-kraut; and these from the AS. Faran, Teut. Fahren,
Belg. Vaeren, to spread out broad. Ferret, from the Belg. Ferret, Feret, Fr. G.
Furet, Ital. Feretta, an animal so called. Ferry, from the Teut. Fahr, id. and
this from the AS. Faran, Teut. Fahren, Belg. Vaeren, to pass over. A Felcue,
from the Belg. Vaeskeu, or the Fr. G. Festu; and both from the Lat. Festuca, a
slender sprig, says Fr. Jun. Fess, a term in Heraldry; from the Fr. G. Fesse;
which Minshew draws from the Lat. Fascia, a swathe. Fester, from the Fr. G.
Appestare, to infect: Or, which is more probable* from the Fr. G. Festrir, to
decay, to putrefie. Festoons, a term in Architecture; from the Fr. G. Feston, a
garland of flowers; so called, because it was used on Festival-days. Fetch,
from the AS. Feccan, Faeccean, Belg. Vatten, idem; all perhaps from the Lat.
Vectare, to bring. Fetch, or Vetch, from the Fr. G. Vesse, or the Ital. Vezza,
or Veccia; and all from the Lat. Vicia, the same; which Varro draws from
Vincio, to bind; because, like a vine, it twisteth about that which is next it.
The Fetlock joint; (i. e.) the joint between the leg and foot of an horse; q.
d. Feetlock, or Feet-locks; or rather, q. Fetter-locks. Fetter, from the AS.
Fettere, Belg. Veter; and these from their Verbs Gefeterian, Vateren; properly,
to put chains upon the feet only. Fend, from the AS. Faehth, Belg. Veede,
Veide, inveterate grudge, or hatred: Or from the Teut. Fehd, Fehde, idem. Few,
from the AS. Fea, Feaa, the same. Fuel, from the Fr. G. Feu, a fire, and the
Lat. Alere, to feed; q. d. matter to feed the fire. Feu is derived from the
Ital Fuoco, Hisp. Fuego; and all from the Lat. Focus, a fire. Fibby, from
Fable; and both from the Lat. Fabula, a romance. Fickle, from the AS. Ficol,
inconstant; and this from Facen, to deceive: Or from the Lat. Facilis, easy;
q. d. one that is easily persuaded to change his mind. Fiddle, from the AS.
Fithele, Belg. Vedel, Teut. Fidel, the same: Whence the Teut. Fidelen, to play
upon the Violin; all from the Lat. Fidicula, the same. Field, from the AS. and
Teut. Feld, Belg. Veld, the same. Fiend, from the AS. Fiende, Fr. Th. Dfiant,
the Devil; these from the AS. Feond, Find, Dan. Fiend, Teut. Feind, Fr. Th.
Fiian, Fian, an adversary. Fr. Jun. derives all these from the AS. and Goth.
Figan, to hate. It may also be taken from the AS. Fandian, to tempt: Whence the
Devil is called, the Tempter. Fierce, from the Fr. G. Fire, Farouche, or the
Ital. Fiero; and all from the Lat. Ferox, cruel. A Fife, from the Fr. G. Fifre,
or the Ital. Pifara, idem: It is so called, from its whizzing sound. A Fig,
from the Teut. Feige, Ital. Figo, Fico, Fr. G. Figue; all from the Lat. Ficus,
the same. To Fig, Feage, or Firk, from the Belg. and Teut. Ficken, to whip one
hard. Fight, from the AS. Fyht, Feoht, the same; and this from the Verb Fehtan,
Belg. Vichtan, Teut. Fetchten, Fr. Th. Fehtan, Dan. Feyder, Ficter, to fight.
The Filanders, or Felanders in an hawk, from the Fr. G. Filandres, or the Ital.
Filandre, worms breeding in hawks that are too fat, say Florius and Cotgrav.
Filberd, from the Eng. Full, and Beard; the skin thereof being covered with a
down, like to the first appearance of the beard upon the chin. File, from the
AS. Feol, Belg. Viile, Teut. Feile, Dan. F^il, the same: Whence the AS. Feolan.
Belg. Villen, Teut. Feilen, Dan. F^iler, to file off. A F^le, to wit, of Pearl;
from the Ital. Filza; and both from the Lat. Filum, thread. Files of Soldiers,
from the Fr. G. Files, or the Ital. Fila; q. d. a Company of Soldiers, drawn up
ten in a file, like a line, or thread; by a Metaphor taken from weaving: From
hence, An Apothecary's File. To Fill, v. Full. The Fill horse, from our Eng.
File; q. d. the last of a team of horses drawing a cart. Fillet, from the Fr.
G. Filet; and both from the Lat. Filum, thread; fillets being made of thread. A
Fillet of Veal, Fr. G. Un Filet de veau; so called, because in that part are
strong muscles and nerves, not unlike to so many threads, to guide the feet in
their regular motion. Fillip, a feigned word. Filly, from the Teut. Fulle,
Fullen, a young mare. V. Foal. Film, from the AS. Film; both corrupted from the
Lat. Velamen, a cover: It is a thin skin over the eyes. Filtch, not unlikely
from the Teut. Filizig, a niggard; or Filtzerey, avarice. It may also be drawn
from the Fr. G. Pillar, to rob. Filth, from the AS. Filth, or the Fr. Th.
Fulitha; and these from the AS. Full, Foul; which see. Finch, from the AS. Finc,
Teut. Finck, the same. Gold Finck, Belg. Goud-Vinck, a Goldfinch; Bloed vincke,
a Bullfinch; all perhaps from the AS. Fengan, Teut. Fingen, to take; because
these birds are a prey to other ravenous birds. Find, from the AS. Findan, Fr.
Th. and Belg. Venden; Teut. Finden, the same. From hence, A Foundling, a child
left in any place to be brought up by the Parish. Fine, from the Teut. Feign,
Fr. G. Fin, Ital. Fino, pure, subtle. Martinius derives them all from the old
Lat. Vinulus comely, pleasant, gallant. Finger, from the AS. Dan. and Teut.
Finger, Finger, Belg. Vinger, the same; all perhaps from the Teut. Fangen, AS.
Fengan, Belg. Vanghen, to take hold of a thing. Finn, from the AS. Fin, Finna;
and both perhaps from the Lat. Pinna, the same. Fire, from the AS. Fir, or Fyr,
Belg. Vier, Vuyr, Teut. Fewer, the same: AS. Firscofl, a fire-shovel; Fyrstan,
a flint-stone; Belg. Vier-brand, a fire brand. From hence, A Fire-fang, Malt
that has a smatch of the fire; from Fire, and the AS. Fengan, to take hold of.
To Firk, v Fig. Firmed, Full Firmed, a term in Falconry; (i. e.) well-fledged.
Firr, from the AS. Furh, Dan. Fyr, Belg. Vueren, the same; all perhaps from the
word Fire; because this sort of wood quickly takes fire. First, from the AS.
First, Belg. Vearst, or Verst Teut. Erst, Dan. Forste, q. Forest; from the AS.
Fore, Before; which see. Fish, from the AS. Fisc, Belg. Visch, Teut. Fisch,
Dan. Fisk, the same; whence the AS. Fircian, to go a fishing; all perhaps from
the Lat. Piscis, a fish. Fist, from the AS. Fyst, Belg. Vuyst, Teut. Faust. I
may also, with Minshew, draw it from the Belg. Fassen, to fasten upon, to catch
hold of. Fit, from the Fr. G. Fait, adapted to any thing. A Fitcher, or
Fitchew, from the Fr. G. Fissan, Belg. Fisse, a ram, strong scented Ferret.
Fitters, To cut into Fitters, from the Ital. Fetta; this from Fendre, to cut
small, as into morsels. Fitts, quasi Fights; they being conflicts between the
disease and nature. Five, from the AS. Fif, Belg. Viive, Teut. Funff, the same;
whence the AS. Fifth, Fiftig, the fifth, fifty. To Fizzle, q. d. To Feille; V.
Feist, or Foist. Fl^bby, from the Ital. Fiappo, Fiacco, or the Fr. G. Flache,
Flaque, flat: Or more immediately from the Lat. Labilis, slippery; for all wet
things are slippery. A Flag, from the Belg. Vlaghe, a banner; this from the AS.
Fleogan, or the Belg. Flaggeren, to flap; from its fluttering in the wind. To
Flag, from the Belg. Flaggeren, Ital. Fiaccare, Teut. Flackeren, to flair,
flap, or waver as a sail. Flageolet, from the Fr. G. Flageolet, id. and this
from the Lat. Flabellum, a fan; it being one sort of wind-musick. Flagon, from
the AS. Flaxa, Belg. Flesche, Teut. Flasche, Fr. G. Flascon, Ital. Fiascone,
the same. V. Flask. Flair, v. To Flag. Flail, from the Belg. Vleghel, Teut.
Flegel, Fr. G. Fleau; and all from the Lat. Flagellum, any kind of lash, or
whip. A Flake of Snow, from the Ital. Fiocco, or the Lat. Floccus, a lock of
wool; (i. e.) a Lock of snow, as soft as wool. Flam, Flim-Flam, perhaps from
the AS. Flyma, and this from Flean, to flee; q. d. a false story that is
quickly dispersed over a Town or Country. Flank, from the Fr. G. Flanc, or the
Ital. Fianco, idem. To Flancker, from the Fr. G. Flanquer, or the Belg.
Flanckeren; and all from the word Flank; q. d. to fortify the walls of a City
with bulwarks or counter-mures. Flannel, perhaps from the Lat. Lanella, soft
wool. To Flap, from the Lat. Flabellum, a fan; or Labi, to slip up and down,
like the brim of an old hat. Dr. Th. H. draws it from the Ital. Fiappare, for
the like reason. Flap of the ear, from the AS. Ear-laepe, or from the Verb To
Flap; because it is softer, and more easily moved than the rest of the ear. A
Flap, Fly- Flap, from the Belg. Flabbe, a fillip with the finger; both
fictitious words. Flare in ones eyes, perhaps from the Belg. Flederen, to stare
one in the face. Flash: Minshew derives it from the Gr. (...), a flame. It may
also be taken from the Teut. Blitz, a glancing; or from the Verb To Blaze;
which see. Flashy, not unlikely, from the Lat. Flaccidus, having lost the
savor; as also weak, hanging down the head like a bull-rush. Flask, from the
AS. Flaxa, Ital. Fiascone, Hisp. Flasco, a Flagon; which see. Flasket, from the
Fr. G. Plesser, or the Teut. Flechten, to bend; so called, from the make of it.
Flat, from the Fr. G. Plat, Teut. Flach, or P^att, Ital. Piatto, even, plain.
Flatter, from the Fr. G. Flatter, or the Belg. Vlaeden, idem; and both perhaps
from the Lat. Lactare, to allure. Flaw, from the AS. Floh, a fragment: Or from
Fleah, the white of the eye; for a speck in jewels is like to a white speck in
the eye. Flawn, from the Fr. G. Flan, meat made of eggs and milk. Flax, from
the AS. Fleax, Belg. Vlas, Teut. Flachs, the same. F^ea, from the AS. Flea,
Belg. Vloo, Teut. Floh, idem; or perhaps from the Verb To Fly; because she
leapeth so quickly, that she may be thought to fly. To Flea, or Flay, from the
AS. Flean, or the Belg. Vlaen, or Vlaegen, to take off the skin of any
creature. Fleam, from the Lat. and Gr. Phlegma, the same. A Fleam, or Phleam,
from the Belg. Vlieme, or the Fr. G. Flammette; and all from the Lat. and Gr.
Phlebotomum, an instrument to let blood withal. Fl^cked, a word frequently used
in Lincolnshire, from the Teut. Fleck, a spot; q. d. speckled, or spotted.
Fledge, from the Belg. Vleggheren, Teut. Flucken, to begin to have feathers;
all from our word Fly; which see. Fleece, from the AS. Flyse, or Fleos, or the
Belg. Vlies; which comes from the Lat. Vellus, signifying the same. Fleer, to
mock; from Leer; which see. Fleet, from the AS. Flota, the Fr. G. Flotte, or
the Ital. Flotta, the same. To Fleet, or Flit, from the Teut. Fliessen, the Fr.
Th. Fliezen, or the Belg. Vlieten, to run out as vessels do, to shed. To Fleet
milk, V. Flotten- milk. Flesh, from the AS. Flesc, the Belg. Vleesch, or the
Teut. Fleisch, the same: Or, not unlikely, from our word Flay. A Fletcher, from
the Fr. G. Fleche, the Hisp. Flecha, or the Ital. Freccia, idem; q. d. a maker
of arrows; all from the word Fledge. Fleuretty, or Flurte, a term in Heraldry;
from the Fr. G. Fleurette, a little flower; this from Fleur, a Flower; which
see. To Flycker, or Flutter, from the AS. Fliccerian, or the Belg. Fliggeren,
to wag the wings; V. Fly, and Fledge. Flinch, from the Verb To Fling; or from
the AS. Fliccerian, to justle, to flutter as birds taken in a net. Fling, from
the Lat. Fligere; a word found in Lucretius, signifying, to fling, by a Trope
taken from the Play at Handball; for when the ball is hit, it is as it were
thrown up into the air. It is very probable, as one very well conjectures, that
it is contracted from Flying; q. d. To set a thing Flying. Flint, from the AS.
Flint, or the Dan. Flinte, and Flinte-steen, a flint-stone. To Flit, from the
Dan. Flytter; or from our word Fly. It is a word used in Lincolnshire,
signifying, to remove from place to place, without any constant residence.
Flitch, from the AS Flicce, the Dan. Flycke, or the Fr. G. Fliche; as Fliche de
Larde, a flitch of bacon. Flittermouse, q. d. Fluttermouse, (i. e.) a flying
mouse. V. Flutter, and Mouse. It is that which we call a Batt. To Float, from
the Fr. G. Flotter, or the Ital. Flottare; and all from the Lat. Fluctuare, to
swim to and again upon the water. Flock, from the AS. Flocc, or the Lat.
Floccus; spoken properly of such cattle as bear fleeces. Flock-bed, Belg.
Vlock-bed; this from the Fr. G. Floc, Floquet, or the Lat. Floccus, a lock of
wool. Floor, from the AS. Flor, Belg. Vloer, idem. A Floren, from the Fr. G.
Florin, or the Ital. Fiorino; a French Coin so called, because it was first
coined in Florence, having stamped upon it the figure of a flower. Florences, a
cloth brought to us from Florence, a City of Hetruria, taking its name
therefrom; as Arras, Cambrick, etc. take their names from the Towns wherein
they are made. Flote, from the Belg. Vlote, the Teut. Flotz, or the Belg.
Vlotten; and all from the Lat. Fluitare, to fluctuate above water, as a boat in
harbor, or wreck upon the main. Flotten- milk, from the Belg. Vlieten, or
Vloten, idem; q. d. to take away the cream from the milk. V. To Fleet. Flood,
from the AS. Flod, the Teut. Flut, Fluth, or the Belg. Vloed, Vlotte, a deluge;
whence Vlotten, to overflow; all from the Lat. Fluere, to Flow; which see. A
Flounder, from the Dan. Flynder, idem; both not unlikely from the Lat.
Fundulus; because it mostly abides in the bottom of rivers. Flounse, from the
belg. Plon^sen; or from the noise that any thing makes when it is cast into
the water. Flourish, from the Fr. G. Fleurir; and both from the Lat. Florere,
the same. Float, to mock, or jeer. Mer. Cas. derives it from the Gr. (...), to
contemn, or have in scorn. Flow, from the AS. Fleoan, the Belg. Vl elen, or the
Teut. Fliessen; and all from the Lat. Fluere, the same. Flower, from the Fr. G.
Fleur, or the Ital. Fiore; all from the Lat. Flos, the same. Hence Flower-
de-Luce, from the Fr. G. Fleur de Lis. Flowery, or Flory, a term in Heraldry. V.
Flower. Fluret, or Flurt, from the Belg. Fleere, a light box on the ear. A
Flurt, from the Belg. Flore, a fool, a scurrilous person: Which may po^sibly be
derived from Flauw, weak; fools being ordinarily called Weakmen, (i. e.) with
respect to understanding. It does also nearly allude to the Gr. (...), vile,
base; or (...), trifles; in which fools do usually busy themselves. To Flurt,
or make a noise with the mouth; a fictitious word. A Flush at Cards, from the
Fr. G. Flux, or the Ital. Flusso, idem; (i. e.) three, or more cards in hand,
all of a suit. To Flush, Flushing, from the Teut. Flughs, or the Belg. Vlughs,
presently, instantly; Flushing being a sudden circulation of the blood: Or
rather, from the Teut. Fliessen, to flow; because the blood, upon any fright,
or the like, instantly flies up into the face. Flush of money, from the Lat.
Fluo, to flow; q. d. one that has plenty of money. Flustred, half drunk;
possibly from the Gr. (...), to be hot, to boil up: Or, which is most likely,
from (...), to belch; whence (...), drunken, is plainly derived. Flute, from
the Belg. Fluye: Or more immediately from the Fr. G. and Teut. Fleute, the Hisp
Flauta, or the Ital. Flauto, idem. Flutings, a term in Architecture; the
furrows, or gutters of pillars; so called, because they are hollowed out with a
graving-tool, or rasp, as those pipes are which are called flutes. Flutter,
from the AS. Floteran, the Belg. Vledderen, or the Teut. Flottern, Flittern;
and all from the Lat. Volitare, a frequentative of Volo, to fly. To Fly, from
the AS. Flean, Fleogan, the Teut. Fliehen, Fliegen or the Belg. Vl^eden,
Vliegen, the same: Whence the AS. Flyht, Fr. Th. Flught, Dan. Fluct a flight:
As also the AS. Flege, Dan. Flut, Belg. Vliege, Teut. Fliege, a fly. A
Fob-pocket, from the Teut. Fuppe, a little purse. To Fob a man off, from the
Teut. Fobben, to give one the trouble of coming often to him, and to no
purpose: Or from Fobis, or Pofisz, a novice; q. d. to make a fool of one: or
from the Ital. Fiabbare, to put one off with fair words. Fodder from the AS.
Fodre, Fother, Belg. Voeder, Teut. Futter, Fr. G. Fourrage, Ital. Foraggio,
idem. V. Feed, and Food. A Fodder, or Fother, suppose of lead, from the Teut.
Fuder, a burden; this from Fuhren, to carry; all perhaps from the Lat. Vehere;
q. d. as much as can be carried in one cart. Foe, from the AS Fah, an
adversary. V. Fiend. Fog, mist. Minshew derives it from the Lat. Focus, fire;
because it is thick, and looks like smoke. I choose rather to derive it from
the AS. Fog, Belg. Foeghe, a gathering together, (i. e.) of vapors. V. F^dge.
Fog, is also taken for grass that grows after Autumn; which may come perhaps
from the Ital. Affogare, to choke; because it is, as it were, choked with the
cold of approaching winter. Foh an Interjection of Disdaining; from the Belg.
Fo^y, or the Fr. G. Fi; and all from the Lat. Vah, away. To Foil, from the Fr.
G. Affoler, to wound; or Fouler, to keep under, to oppress; which come from the
Lat. Fullo, a Fuller. A Foin, To Foin, from the Fr. G. Poindre, to prick; or
the AS. Fandian, to try; (i. e.) to try to run one into the guts. Foines, from
the Fr. G. Foine, Fouine, or the Hisp Fuina, a kind of Northern Ferret, whose
skin is much esteemed for lining of Winter-garments. A Foist, from the Belg.
and Fr. G Fuste, or the Ital. Fusta, a kind of boat: Or it may possibly be
derived from the AS. Fast, in Eng. Fast; q. d. strong built. To Foist, from the
Fr. G. Fausser, to adulterate; or Faux, false; q. d. to thrust a thing upon one
by cologuing or flattery. Fold, from the AS. Fald, idem; a sheepfold, etc. V.
To Fold. To Fold, from the AS. Feoldan, Belg. Vouden, Teut. Falten, Ital.
Infaldare, the same: From whence the AS. Fealde, Belg. Voude, Teut. Falte,
Ital. Falda, a fold, or pleat. Fool, from the AS. Fola, Dan. Fol, Belg. Volen,
Teut Fulen, idem; all from the Lat. Pullus, a colt. Folk, from the AS. Folc,
the Teut. Volck, or the Ital. Volgo; and all from the Lat. Vulgus, the common
people. Follow, from the AS. Folgian, the Belg. Volgen, or the Teut. Folgen,
idem. There is also found in the Dan. Folger after, to follow after. Foam:
Minshew draws it from the Lat. Vomo, to vomit; it in some sort representing it,
both as to color, and manner of ejection: Though I had rather draw it from the
AS. Faem, Teut. Faum, froth; and these from the Lat. Fumus, smoke; because
being risen above the water, it quickly vanishes like smoke. Fond, from the
Belg. Veynt, foolish: Or from the Lat. Vanus, vain; one that affects
vanities: Or, possibly, it is a corruption of our word Feigned; (i. e.) made
fain, or glad. You may likewise, if you please, draw it from the AS. Fundian,
to gape like a changeling. A Font, from the Fr G. and Lat. Fons, a spring; that
being the place of initiation into Christ, the Fountain of Salvation. Food,
from the AS. Foda, or the Dan. Fode, sustenance. V. Feed, Fodder, and Forage.
Fool, from the Fr. G. Fol, or the Ital. Folle, the same: From whence the Fr G.
Folly, and the Ital. Follia, folly. Menagius draws it from the Lat. Follis, a
pair of bellows; q. d. a fellow full of nothing but wind. Dr. Skinner, upon
supposition, derives it from the Teut. Faul, a sluggard. Foot, from the AS.
Fot, Dan. Fode, Belg. Voet, Teut. Fusz, the same: Whence the Belg. Voet-stap,
and Teut. Fusztapff, a foot-step. V. Step. A Fop, or Foppish; I suppose, from
the Teut. Fobis, or Pofisz, spongy, vain, empty. For, from the AS. For, the
Teut. Fur, or the Fr. G. Pour, idem. For, in Composition, denies, and
depriveth; as in Forbid, Forget, etc. and is derived perhaps from the Lat.
For As, without. Forbear, from the AS. Forbaeran, idem; or from For, and Bear;
which see. Forbid, from the AS. Forbeodan, Belg. Verbieden, Teut. Verbleten,
Dan Forbluder, the same; and all from the Negative For, and the AS. Beodan, to
bid Force from the Fr. G. Force, or the Ital. Forza; whence their Verbs Forcer,
and Forzare, to urge, or compel Ford, from the AS. Ford, or the Teut. Fuh^t,
idem; whence comes the AS. Faran, or the Teut. Fahren, to ferry over. Fore, v.
Before. Forebode, from the AS. Fore, before, and Bodian, to declare; (i. e.) to
foretell. V. Bode. Forefathers, from the AS. Forth-faederas, or the Belg.
Veur-vaeders. v. Fore, Affore, and Fathers. Fore-fend, from Fore for Before,
and the Fr. G. Defendre; as we say, God Fort-fend it; (i. e.) God forbid, or
avert it. Fore-land, from the AS. Fore, before, and Land; q. d. land next to
the seashore; or possibly, extending it self in a corner, further into the sea
than the rest, the sea coming in beyond it on each side. Foresee, from the AS.
Forseon, the Belg. Veursien, or the Teut. Fursehen, the same; whence the Teut.
Vorsicht, a fore sight of things to come. V. Before, and S^e. Fore-stall, from
our word Fore, and the Belg. Stallen, or the Fr. G. Estaller, to expose to
sale; V. Stall: Or from the Teut. Vorstellen, idem. It is a saying taken from
those that bring forth their Goods to sell before others. A Fore-staller, in
our Law, is he that buyeth corn beforehand, in the way, that it may not be
brought into the market: And this Spelman ingeniously derives from the AS.
Fore, before, and Stal, a stall; (i. e.) they buy it up before it is brought to
the market, and thereby monopolizing the whole into their hands, they
afterward sell it at what rate they please. Fore-ward, V. Before, and Ward.
Forfeit, a term in the Law; from the Fr. G. Forfaict, from the Verb Forfaire,
or the Ital. Forfare, in France and Italy, to forfeit for some fault; but among
us, to lose money or goods upon violation of the Laws of the Realm, as breaking
a compact made between man and man, etc. Forge, from the Fr. G. Forge, or the
Ital. Forgia, a Smith's forge: And hence the Fr. G. Forger, and the Ital.
Forgiare, to forge a writing, or other thing. Forget, from the privative AS.
Preposition For, the Belg. and Teut. V^r, and the AS. Geotan, the Belg.
Ghieten, or the Teut. Giessen, to get; and these from the Lat. Gutta, a drop;
q. d. to let a thing drop, or slip out of the memory: Or, which is better, from
the same For, and Gytan, to learn; (i. e.) by carelessness to unlearn what was
before learned. Forgive, from the AS. Forgifan, the Belg. Vergheven, or the
Teut. Vergeven, to remit. V. For, and Give. Forgo, from the AS. Forgan, to
forsake. Fork, from the AS. Forc, or the Fr. G. Fourche; and all from the Lat.
Furca, the same. Fork-fish, a kind of Thorn-back; so called, from its sharp
forked tail. Forlorn, from the AS. Forloren, the Belg. Verloren, or the Teut.
Verlohien, idem; (i. e.) brought to ruin and desolation: These are part. of the
Verbs Forleoran, Verliesen, and V^rlieren, to spoil, or bereave of. Forms, a
term in Hunting; it is meant of an Hare, when she squatteth down; from the Noun
Fourm; which see. Foremost, or Foremost, from the AS. Foremost, or Fyrmest, the
same. V. Before. Forage, from the Fr. G. Fourrager, or the Ital. Foraggiare,
to Fodder; which see. Foreign, or Foreign, from the Fr. G. Forain, an Alien,
one of another Nation. Forest, or Forest, from the Fr. G. Forest, the Ital.
Foresta, or the Teut. Forced, the same. Spelman draws it from the Lat. For As, or
Foris, abroad; q. d. a place far distant from, and destitute of house or
habitation. Forsake from the AS. Forsecan, q. d. never to seek any more; V.
Seek: Or from the AS. For-Secgan, Fr. Th. Vitersagan, Teut. Versagen, Belg.
Versegghen, idem. to dis-own, to renounce. Forses, not unlikely, from the Fr.
G. Force, power, or strength; q. d. a place where the water falls from a
rock, or steep place. Forsooth, from the AS. Forsooth, idem. V. For, and Sooth.
Forswear, from the AS. Ferserian, the Belg. Versweren, or the Teut.
Verschweren, to be guilty of perjury. V. For, and Swear. Forth, from the AS.
Forth, the Belg. Voord, or the Teut. Fort, idem; all perhaps from the Lat.
Foris, For As, or Porro, abroad, without. Forthwith, presently; from Forth, and
With; by a Metaphor drawn from Soldiers, that march instantly, at the word of
Command. Fort, v. Fortress. Fortify, from the Fr. G. Fortifier, idem; and this
from Fort, which comes from the Lat. Fortis, strong. Forward, from the AS.
Foreard, idem. V. Before, and Ward. F^ssel, or Focil, a term in Surgery; by
which name two bones in the arm, and other two of the leg, are called; the one
of which is called the great Fossel; the other, the little Fossel; derived from
the Fr. G. and Ital. Focile, signifying the same; (but properly, a long piece
of Steel that Butchers whet their knives on, to which these long bones are not
unlike;) and this from the Lat. Focus, fire; because steel is used to strike
fire withal. To Foster, from the AS. Fostrian, or the Dan. Fosterer, to
educate, or bring up. Hence the AS Foster-cild, a foster-child; Foster-faeder,
a foster-father; all from the Verb To Feed. Foul, from the AS. Fulan, Befulan,
the Belg. Vuylen, or the Fr. Th. Beuvollan, to be-foul: Thence the Fr. Th. Full,
and Teut. Faul, putrefied. V. Filth. To Found, from the Fr G. Fonder, or the
Lat. Fundare, idem; q. d. to build, or raise from the ground, to lay the basis.
A Founder, from the Fr. G. Foundeur; and this from the Fr. G. Fondre, or the
Ital. Fondere, to melt down, as Founders do metals. To Founder, from the Fr. G.
Fondre, or the Ital. Sfondrare, the same; all from the Lat. Fundus, the ground;
as being, the occasion of an horse's foundring. Fountain, from the Fr. G.
Fontaine, or the Ital. Fontana; and all from the Lat. Fons, the same. Four,
from the AS. Feoer, Teut. and Belg. Vier, the same; whence the Belg. Viervould,
fourfold, and the AS. Feorth, the fourth. Fourm, from the AS. Fyrmtha, a seat;
and this from the AS. Feormian, to feed; they being especially of use at great
feasts. Fowl, from the AS Fugel, the Dan. Fugl, or the Belg. Voghel, a bird;
whence the AS. Fugelan, the Belg. Voghelen, and the Teut. Vogelen, to go a
fowling; all of them perhaps from the Lat. Volo, to fly. A Fox, from the AS.
Fox, Belg. Vosch, Dan. Fucks, Teut. Fuchs, the same. Foy, from the Belg Foy, or
the Fr. G. Voy, idem; q. d. a treat given by those that are going out of Town,
or into another Country. Freight, from the Teut. Fracht, the Belg. Vracht, or
the Fr. G. Fret, a carriage, or fare; whence the Teut. Verb Frachten, Belg.
Vrachten, and the Fr. G. Freter, to load a ship: All these may be drawn perhaps
from the AS. and Teut. Oher, over, and the Teut. and Belg. Acht, Achten, to
take care of; for the Freight is the Sea-men's charge. Frail, from the Fr. G.
Frail; and both from the Lat. Fragilis, brittle. Frame, from the AS. Fremman,
idem. Minshew derives it from the Lat. Formare, to fashion, or form. To
Franchise, v. Frank, and Enfranchise. Frank, from the Fr. G. Franc, or the
Ital. Franco, free: From hence Franchise, a privilege; To Enfranchise, to make
one free of a City; and Frankling, a Libertine; also A Franch, (i. e.) a
pasture where cattle are well fatted. A Frank, a coin so called; from France,
the Nation where it is coined. To Frank fowl, Franked fowl; a word no where
found but in Higgin. from the Adj. Frank; q. d. crammed fowls. Frankincense; q.
d. frankly or freely burned upon the altar. V Frank, and Incense. Frankling, v.
Frank. Frantic, from the Fr. G. Frenatique, or the Ital. Frenetico; and all
from the Lat. and Gr. Phreneticus, frenzical. V. Frenzy. A Fray, formerly
Affray, a fight. Minshew derives it from the Fr. G. Effrayer, to terrify, or
affright. To Fray, from the Fr. G. Frager; and this from the Lat. Fricare, to
rub. It is meant of cloth, that being rubbed against any thing hard, is fret^ed
out, and tore. A Freack, from the Teut. Frech, idem; q. d. a petulant fact: or
from the AS. Fraec, an action showing the discomposedness of mind to be
voluntary, and not forced. Freck, Freckles, from the Teut. Fleck, a spot, or
stain. Free, from the AS. Freah, Freoh, Dan. Frii, Belg. Vrti. Teut. Frey, the
same; whence the AS. Freoman, a Freeman. It were needless, after all, to
derive it from the Goth. Frigon, to love; because all men love to be at
liberty. Free-booter, from F^ee, and Booty; (i. e.) a Soldier who has liberty
to take what booty he can, because he receives no other pay for his service in
the War. Freese, from the Fr. G. Frize, the Hisp. Frisa, or the Ital. Fresone,
a course cloth, full of naps; perhaps so called, because those of Freezland
first made, or wore this sort of cloth, to defend them from the intenseness of
the cold in those parts. To Freese, or rather Freeze, from the AS. Frysan, Dan.
At Frys, Belg. Vrosten, Vriesen, Teut. Frieren, the same; whence the Belg.
Vrost, Teut. Frost, frost, or ice; all perhaps from the Lat. Frigeo, to be
cold. The Freise, a term in Architecture; perhaps from the Fr. G. Fraise, a
ruff. Evelin draws it from the Ital. Freggio, with us, A Fringe; which see.
Frensy, from the Fr. G. Frenaise, or the Ital. Frenesia; and both from the Lat.
and Gr. Phrenitis, idem. Fresh, from the AS. Fresch, Belg. Frisch, Fr. G.
Frais, Fresche, Frez, Ital. Fresco, new; also brisk and lively. Fresh, from the
Belg. and Teut. Frisch, or the Ital. Fresco; and all from the AS. Frysan, and
Belg. Vriesen; these from the Lat. Frigeo, to be cold; q. d. chill, or somewhat
cold. To Fret, as cloth, etc. from the AS. Freothan, the Fr. G. Frotter, or the
Ital. Frottare; and all from the Lat. Fricare, to rub; rubbing being a cause of
fretting. To Fret, to be perplexed, or troubled; perhaps from the Fr. G.
Fretiller, to jaunt from place to place, as men do in their anger; this from
the Lat. Fritillum, by a Metaphor drawn from a Lottery, where the Gamester
shakes the dice together in a box, before he casts them out. Fretrots, a
Sect of Heretics, much like to the Adamites; from the Fr. G. Friar, a brother;
because they separated themselves from the Church, and erected themselves into
a Fraternity, in opposition thereto. Fricassey, from the Fr. G. Fricassee; and
this from the Verb Fricasser, to make a fricassey. Friday, from the AS.
Frigedaeg, Dan. Frig-dag, Teut. Freitag, Belg. Vrydagh, the same: Or from
Friga, the ancient Anglo-Saxons Goddess Venus; which comes from the Goth.
Frigan, to love; q. d. the Goddess of Love, (i. e.) Venus; whence it is called
Dies Veneris. To Fridge, or Frig about, from the AS. Frican, to skip. Friend,
from the AS. Freond, the Teut. Freund, or the Belg. Vriend, the same; which
last, Fr. Jun. derives from the Goth. Frigon, to love. It may probably be taken
from the Teut. Frewen, to rejoice; because we delight in our friend's company:
Or from the AS. Freoh, free; for friends act and speak freely, and not
flatteringly. A Friar, from the Fr. G. Friar, idem; both from the Lat. Frater,
a Brother: From hence, A Friery; (i. e.) a Fraternity, or Order in the Church
of Rome. To Frig, from the Ital. Fregare, or Fricciare; and these from the Lat.
Fricare, to rub: Or from Friga, the name which the Saxons gave to Venus.
Frigate, from the Fr. G. Fregate, or the Ital. Fregata, a kind of flight-ship;
and this not unlikely from the Ital. Fregare, to rub, or adorn. Fright, from
the AS. Frihtan, the Belg. Vurchten, or Vorchten, or the Teut. Forchten, idem.
V. Fear. The Hawk Frilleth, from the Fr. G. Friller, to tremble; this from the
Lat. Frigus cold. Frim folks, a word frequently used in Lincolnshire; from the
AS. Fremd, or the Teut. Fremvd, a stranger, one of another Country; this from
the AS. Fram, Fra, far from. V. From. Fringe, from the Fr. G. Frange, the Ital.
Fregio, Frangia, or the Teut. Frantz^, the same: Perhaps it may come from
Francis, the Ablat. of Francus, a Frenchman; because the French delight in
these things, beyond other Countries. F^ippery, from the Fr. G. Friperie, or
the Ital. Fripperia, a Broker's shop: Whence the Fr. G. Fripear; which comes
from the Lat. Frivolarius, a word read in Vossius, which signifies, a Botcher,
or mender of old things. To Frisk, from the Ital. Frizzare, to skip about; and
this from the Fr. G. Frisque, Fresh, and Brisk; both which see in their places.
Frisle, from the Fr. G. Friser, Frizer, to curl the hair: Or perhaps from the
Frisians, or Phrygians, that used to twirl up their hair. Frit, from the Ve^b
To Fret; a kind of salt used by Chemists, more sharp than ordinary. Frith, from
the Lat. Fretum, the sea; q d. a place which the tide overfloweth. Fritter,
from the Fr. G. Friteau, Frittier; as the learned Dr. Th. H. has it: Or from
the Ital. Frittella, the same; all from the Lat. Frigere, to fry. Frock, from
the Fr. G. Froc de Moine, a Monk's hood. Menagius draws them both from the Lat.
Floccus, a lock of wool. Vossius more probably takes it from the Teut. Rock, a
coat; and this from the AS. Verb Wreon, to cover; it being made on purpose to
keep other wearing apparel clean Frog, from the AS. Frocca, (by Aelfricus,
Frogga,) the Belg. Vrosck, or the Teut. Frosch, the same; all, I suppose from
the croaking hoarse noise which they make. Frolic, from the Belg. Vrolick, or
the Teut. Frolich, Froh, wanton; these from their Verbs Vrolecken, and
Frolecken, to be merrily disposed. From, from the AS. Fram; which comes from
the AS. and Dan. Fra, far. Frontier, from the Fr. G. Frontiere, or the Ital.
Frontiera, a bound, or limit; both from the Lat. Frons, a front. Fronilet, from
the Fr. G. Fronteau; and both from the Lat. Frons, a forehead; q. d. attire
for the forehead. Frost, from the AS. Frost, the Teut. and Dan. Frost, or the
Fr. Th. and Belg. Vrost, the same. V. Fre^z^. Froth, from the Dan. F^aade, the
same; this from Fraaer, to foam. The Frounce, or Frownce, a disease among
hawks; from the Fr. G. Fronser. V. Frown. Froward, from the AS. Frameard,
awkward: It is the contrary to Toward, and Towardly; which see. Frown, from the
Fr. G. Fronguer, Fronser: Or perhaps from the Lat. Frons, the forehead; (i.
e.) to wrinkle up the brows. Fruit, from the Fr. G. Fruit, Fruict; and both
from the Lat. Fructus, the same: From hence, A Fruiterer. To Frump, to mock;
from the Teut. Krumpelen, to frizzle up the nose, as people do in derision. To
Fry, from the Fr. G. Frire, the Ital. Friggere, Frittare, or the Belg. Vryten;
all from the Lat. Frigere, the same; and this from the Gr. (...), idem. A Fry,
from the Fr. G. Fray, the spawn of fishes; and this from the Dan. Fraade, idem;
also froth. To Fuck, from the Fr. G. Foutre, or the Ital. Fotere, idem; or from
the Lat. Futuo, idem; all from the Gr. (...), to plant. Th. H. Esquire derives it
from the Teut. Fuycken, Focken, to thrust, or knock. It may be derived from the
Teut. Fuchsen, the same; this from Futz, or the Belg. Fotte, a pudendum
muliebre: Or lastly, from the Dan. Foder, to beget. Faddle, from the word
Puddle; (i. e.) to drown himself, as it were, with wine, or other liquor: Or
from the Fr. G. Affoler, to make a fool of; (i. e.) to besot himself with too
much drink, which enervates the faculties of the mind. V. Fool. An ingenious
Etymologist supposes that it comes of Full, by an interposition of the letter
d; and from hence it is, that the Scots use the word Full, for one that is
drunk. Fulimart, a word found in a book entitled, The Complete Angler; for the
Etymon whereof see Martin, and Pole-cat. Full, from the AS. Full, the Fr. Th.
and Belg. Vol, or the Teut. Voll, Full, the same; whence the AS. Fyllan, to
fill; Fyllnese, fullness; Fullneh, full-nigh; Full-oft, full-often. Fuller, from
the AS. Fullere, or the Belg. Voller, the same; whence Volders Aerde, Fuller's
earth; all from the Lat. Fullo, the same. Fulsom, q. d. Foulsom, that has a
foul taste, or smell. V. Foul. Fumble, from the Dan Famler, to handle; q. d. to
handle, or go about a thing unskilfully, or aukwardly. To Fume: Minshew derives
it from the Lat. Fumare, idem. I had rather draw it from the Teut. Faum, froth;
q. d. to foam, or froth at the mouth for anger. Fumets, a term in Hunting; I
suppose from the Lat. Fimus, dung; q. d. Crotel's, or Hare's dung. A Fummer,
from the Lat. Fumus, a fume, or scent; q. d. a kind of Mart, casting a rammish,
strong scent. A learned Etymologist supposes it to have been contracted from
Fulimart, not without reason. Fundament, from the Fr. G. Fondement, idem; a
foundation; so called, because the whole body leans upon it, as upon a
foundation. Funeral, from the Fr. G. Funerailles, idem; both from the Lat.
Funus, the same. Funk, an offensive smell; by altering the sense a little, from
the Dan. Funcke, Teut. Funck, a spark of fire. A Funnel, contracted from the
Lat. Infundibulum, the same. To Furb sh, from the Fr. G. Fourbir, or the Ital
Forbire, idem; and these from the Teut. Farv, a color; q. d. to renew the
color of a thing. Furche, Cross-Furche, a term in Heraldry; from the Fr. G.
Fourchee, Fourchue; q. d. a forked cross. To Furl, from the Fr. G. Fresler, to
fold up; and this from the Lat. Pressus, pressed down; for when a sail is
folded up, it lies in less room than when it is stretched out. Furlong, from
the AS. Furlang, idem; and this from Furh, a furrow; and Lang, long. V. Furrow.
Furmety, from the Fr. G. Fourmentee, Froumentee; these from Fourment, Froument;
and all from the Lat. Frumentum; q. d. pottage made of Wheat, Rice, or other
grain. Furnish, from the Fr. G. Fournir, or the Ital. Fornire, id. From hence
the Fr. G. Fourniture; in Eng. Furniture, or household goods. Furole, a
Meteor, or fiery Exhalation, which, at Sea, most an end, appears among the
Sails, especially when there is a storm a-coming: If it be in two parts, it is
called Castor and Pollux, and is thought to portend safety; but if it be but
one, it is called Helena, and fore-bodeth shipwreck. It may be derived from
the Fr. G. Feu, fire, and Rouler, to roll; q. d. rolling, or wandering fire. V.
Roll. Furr, from the Fr. G. Fourrer, Ital. Inforrare, Hisp. Aforrar, Teut.
Futtern, Belg. Voederen, to line with skins; these from the Ital. Fodro, Teut.
Futter, Fr. G. Furreau, a furr, or skin for lining garments withal; but
properly, a scabbard. Furrow, from the AS. Furh, Teut. Furch, Dan. Fur, Belg.
Vore, the same; whence the Teut. Furchen, Belg. Voren, to make a furrow; all, I
suppose, from the Lat. Forare, to pierce, or hollow; (i. e.) a piercing, or
hollowing of the ground. To Further, from the AS. Furthrian, Belg. Voorderen,
Teut. Befurdern, to promote; all from the Teut. Vorder, the former; and this
from Fore, and Before; as we say, To put it forwards. v. Before. Further, v.
Farther. Furze, from the AS. Fyrs, a sort of prickly Broom; this from Fire,
because good to make fires with. A Fusil, a term in Heraldry; from the Fr. G.
Fuseau; and this from the Lat. Fusus, a spindle. Fustian, from the Fr. G.
Fustaigne, the Ital. Fustagno, or the Hisp. Fustan, the same. Bochartus derives
it from Fustat, a Town in Egypt, where it was first made. Fustian, from the
other Fustian, or the Gr. (...), blown up; (i. e.) a bumbaste, ambitious and
affected style in writing.
G.
GAbardine, from the Fr. G. Galleverdine, Galvardine, or the Ital. Gavardina,
the same; these from the Fr. G. Gaban, and the Ital. Gabanio, Gabanello,
Gabano, a Shepherd's coat, made of course cloth. Some draw it from the Hisp.
Gavan, a cloak: All of them perhaps from the Teut. Gabe, a gift; or our word,
To Give; which see; (i. e.) apparel annually given by masters, to their
servants, pages, etc. which we call Liveries. v. Livery. To Gabble, from the
Fr. G. Javioler, idem; this from the Fr. G. Gay, Jay, Jayon, a Jay: V. Cajol.
Or from the Belg. Gabelen, to chirp as birds; or Gaepen, to gape; or, which is
most likely, from the Fr. G. Habler, to prate; this from the Hisp. Hablar; and
both from the Lat. Fabulari, idem. Gabel, from the Fr. G. Gabelle, the Ital.
Gabella, or the Hisp. Alcavala, the same; which Covarruv. draws from the Heb
Gabal, to limit; or Gabeloth, a Tax. I had rather derive it from the AS. Gafel,
or Gafol, tribute; and these from the AS. Gifan, to give. v. Give. A Gabion,
from the Fr. G. Gabion, or the Ital Gabbione, a military term, which denotes,
a basket filled with earth. It may also be drawn from the Ital. Gabbia; which
Menagius draws from the Lat. Cavea, a cave. The Gable end of an house, from the
Teut. Giebel, Gibffel, or the Belg. Gheevel, the same; all perhaps from the AS.
Cop, or the Lat. Caput, an head. Gad, from the AS. Gadd, id. a mass of iron, or
steel. A Gad fly, q. d. Goad-fly; because she pricketh like a goad: Or from our
word Gad; because she makes the cattle gad, or go a-stray. To Gad; Minshew
derives it from the Belg. Gaen, to Go; which see. It may also be drawn from the
Teut. or rather, the old Belg. Gaden, to please, some people being never
pleased, but when gadding about. Some also, by a Metaphor, take it from the
Gad- fly; because they firk up and down, like an Ox stung therewith. V. Gad-
fly. A Gage, or Gawge, from the Fr. G. Gauge, Jauge, a rod to measure liquids
withal; these from the Fr. G. Gauchir, to turn round, says Minshew; and this
again perhaps from the AS. Wealcan, to roll; and this from the Ital. Volgere,
which manifestly comes of the Lat. Volvere, to roll. A Gage or Pledge, from
the Fr. G. Gage, or the Ital. Gaggia, idem; whence Gaggiare, to give a pledge;
all from the Lat. Vas, Vadis, a Surety. V. Engags. Gagg: Minshew draws it from
the Belg. Gaghel, the palate. Some draw it from the AS. Geagl, the cheek bone;
because it is thrust in between the jaws, and stretches them out, so as that
the party so handled, can neither speak, nor cry out. Gain, from the Fr. G.
Gaigner, the Hisp. Ganar, or the Ita. Guadagnare, to profit; whence the Fr. G.
Gain, and the Ital. Guadagno, idem. Menagius draws them all from the Teut.
Gewen, gain; or Gewinnen, to gain. It may also, not improbably, be drawn from
the Dan. and old Goth. Goffner, to profit. Gainsay, from the AS. Gean-Secgan,
to Say against; both which see. A Gale of wind, from the Teut. Gahling,
Gehling, sudden; that is, wind coming unawares: Or from the C. Br. Awel, wind;
or a blast, by casting away A, and turning w into G, and e into a. To Gall,
from the Fr. G. Galler, to claw, or itch. The Gall of any creature, from the
AS. Gealla, Dan. Galde, Teut. Gall, Belg. Gal, Galle, the same. Gallant, from
the Fr. G. Gallant, or the Ital. Galante, brave, noble; also one that has
gorgeous attire on. Some there are that would draw it from the Hisp. Galano,
Vestido a la Gala, signifying the same. Menagius draws it from the obsolete Fr.
G. Gale, joy; which may be a contract of the Lat. Dim. Gaudiolum, a little joy.
Gallery, from the Fr. G. Gallerie, or the Ital. Galleria, the same; either from
the figure of a ship, called a Gally; or q. d. Allerie; that is, a place to
walk in; from the Fr. G. Aller, to go. V. Gally. The Galliard, a kind of Dance;
from the Ital. Gagliardo, or the Fr. G. Gaillard, airy, lively; q. d. a merry
Dance. Caesar Scaliger and Vossius derive it from Gallus, or Gallicus, a
Frenchman, and the Germ. Art, Aerd, nature, or temper of mind; to wit, from
the natural airiness or agility of that Country people. Galligas kins, or wide
Hose, or Slops; q. d. Caligae Gailo-vasconicae, slops so called, because the
Vascones used such, instead of spatter dashes. Gallimawfrey, from the Fr. G.
Galimaffree, a dish of meat, made of sundry sorts of flesh, chopped small.
Minshew takes it to be so called, from the guts and garbage of beasts, cut in
small pieces, for Gally-slaves among the Romans. Some draw it from the Fr. G.
Galiffre; q. d. Lat. Gulifer, a Glutton. Gallon, a measure so called. It may
possibly come, a Gallis, from the French; q. d. a French measure. Galloon-
Lace, from the Fr. G. Galon, the same; q. d. Gallica Fimbria, a French lace: Or
from the Ital. Gala, a sort of trimming that makes a gay show, yet of no great
worth. Gallop, from the Fr. G. Galopper, Gallopper, to ride fast: Or from the
Gr. (...), or (...), to run; as Salmasius has it. Galloshooes, wooden
slippers; from the Fr. G. Galloches, Galoches, or the Hisp. and Ital. Galocha,
the same. Menagius supposes that it comes, a Gallicis Soleis, (i. e.) French
shoes. Gallows, from the AS. Galg, Gual, Gaflas, Belg. Galghe, Dan. Gallie,
or the Teut. Galg, Galgen, Gabel, idem. There is also found in Varro, Gabalus,
a cross, or gibbet, for the execution of Malefactors. Gally, from the Fr. G.
Gallee, Gallere, the Ital. Galea, or the Hisp. Galera, the same. Minshew will
have it called Navem Galeatam, a ship hahaving an helmet, a Galeat is
militibus, from Soldiers wearing helmets; to wit, Turkish and Moorish Pirates,
with whom these ships were manned at the first. Covarruv. draws it from the
Arab. Gelia, (i. e.) chargeable to maintain. Gally-pot, from the Belg. Gleye,
Potter's clay sparkling, and Pot; from whence perhaps, To Glaze a pipe. V.
Glass. Gally-worm: so Muffetus calls the worm which in Lat. and Gr. is called
Gulus, from the Gr. (...), down, for its downy roughness: But our Author
perhaps calls it so, because it somewhat resembles a Gally in length.
Gambades, or Gambadoes, a kind of shoes used by Physicians, especially those
that operate in London; from the Ital. Gamba, or the Fr. G. Jambe, the leg, or
shin; because they cover the shanks. It alludes to the Gr. (...), buskins.
Gamboles, from the Fr. G. Gambade, or the Ital. Gambaruole, wanton gestures;
these from the Fr. G. Gamba, and the Ital. Jambe, the leg; such tricks being
generally performed by the agility of the legs. Games, from the AS. Gamian,
Gemian, to sport, or go a gaming. Minshew derives it from the Gr. (...), a
wedding; because sports are most seasonable at Marriages. A Gammon of Bacon,
from the Fr. G. Jambon, the Hisp. Jamon, or the Ital. Gambone, the same; and
these from the Fr. G. Jambe, and the Ital. Gamba, a leg: Gambone, signifies, a
great leg: All from the AS. Ham, or the Belg. and Teut. Hamm, the hamm. v.
Hamm. Gammot, a Time in Music; from the Fr. G. Game, or the Ital. Gamma, the
same; both of an Arab. original, as I suppose; unless you would draw it from
the Gr. (...), q. d. (...), the turnings of the sound; or from (...), a sound.
Gammot, a kind of edged tool in Gouldman; perhaps from the Teut. Kampffen,
Belg. Kampen, to fight; that is to say, a weapon to fight withal. To Ganch,
from the Fr. G. Gancher, to cast headlong upon sharp stakes; or the Ital.
Ganciare, to make the end of a stick sharp: Whence the Hisp. Gancho, and the
Ital. Gancio, an hook; which come from the Lat. Vncus, crooked. It alludes to
the Gr. (...), a thorn-tree. Gander, from the AS. Gandra, Belg. Gans, Teut.
Gansz, Hisp. Ganso, Ital. Ganza, the same; all possibly from the Lat. Anser, a
goose. A Gane-fish, a word found in Higginus only; perhaps from the AS. Ganian,
to yawn; V. Snacot- fish. A Ganett, I suppose from the Fr. G. Canet, a young
duck, or wild duck; this is the Dim. of the Fr. G. Cane, manifestly coming from
the Lat. Anas, a duck. To Gang, from the Belg. Gangen; and this from the AS.
Began, or the Belg. Gaen, to Go; which see. Gang; as we say, He is of that Gang,
or Fellowship; from the AS. Gange, a walk, or way; and by translation, a
company of men that go and act all alike. Gangrel, A long Gangrel: in Higg. a
slam fellow; perhaps from the AS. Gangere, the Verbal of Gangan, to go; and
Ellen, strong; that is, one that, through the great length of his legs, soon
goes over much ground. Gang-week, from our old word to Gang; it being the week,
in which the bounds of every Parish are viewed. Gantlet, from the Fr. G.
Gantelet, an iron-glove: Or from the Fr. G. Gant, the Hisp. Guante, or the
Ital. Guanto, a glove; and these from the Gotho-Sw. Want, the same; and this
again from the AS. and old Goth. Windan, to wind, or wrap up; because in those
cold countries, they used formerly to muffle up their hands in skins, instead
of gloves, so to keep off the cold. Gantlope, a military punishment; from a
Town in Flanders, called in French Gant, and the Belg. Loop, a race; or Loopen,
to run; because this punishment was first invented there. Gaol, from the Belg.
Ghioole, or the Fr. G. Geole, Jaule, Gayole, the same; whence Jolier, Geolier,
a Jailer, or Jailer; all from the Lat. Caveola, a little cave. Fr. Jun. draws
it from the Gr. (...), which denotes an hollow place under ground. Some draw it
from the Hisp. Jaula, Xaula, a cage; as we sometimes call a prison. To Gape,
from the Belg. Gaepen, Teut. Gaffen, Dan. Gaver, AS. Geapan, all signifying the
same: Which last, Somnerus draws from the AS. Geopnian, to open. It is not much
dissonant from the Gr. (...), to stand gazing at a thing. Gap, v. Gape. Garb,
or Attire, from the Fr. G. Garb, or the Ital. Garbo, comeliness, decency; this
from the AS. Gearian, to trim up; or the Belg. Gaerwen, Gerwen, to adorn, or
make ready. Garb, a term in Heraldry; from the Fr. G Gerbe, or the Teut. Garb,
a sheaf. Garbage: Minshew derives it from our word Garble, that is, to cleanse;
for when the guts are taken out, the body is thereby purged, and made clean.
Garble, To Garble spices, from the Fr. G. Grabeller, or the Ital. Garbellare;
(i. e.) to make spices clean, by sifting them. Minshew draws it from the Ital.
Garbo, cleanliness; because spices, after such sifting, are made clean. It may
be drawn from the Lat. Cribellare, to sift a little; whence Cribellum, a small
sieve. Garbotl, from the Fr. G. Garbouil, or the Ital. Garbaglio, an uproar.
The learned Dr. Th. H. ingeniously draws it from the Fr. G. Grand Bouille, a
great mutiny. We may also draw it from the Teut. Gar, wholly, and Bouillir, to
boil with anger. The Garboard, a term in Sailing; q. d. the Gard-board. V.
Guard, and Board. Guard, from the Fr. G. Guard, or the Ital. Guardia, custody;
whence the Fr. G. Garder, and the Ital. Guardare, to guard, or keep in custody;
as also Gardien, and Guardiano, a Guardian. V. Ward. Gardant, a term in
Heraldry; from the Fr. G. Gardant, a Part. of the Verb Garder, to observe, or
survey. Garden, from the Belg. Gaerde, Gaerd, Fr. G. Gardin, Ital. Gardino, or
the Teut. Garte, Garten, the same; whence Gartner, a Gardener; which comes
either from the Fr. G. Guarder, to guard; or from our word, To Ward; which see.
Guardian, v. Warden. Gargle, from the Teut. Gargel, or the Fr. G. Gargouille,
the throat; all from the Lat. Gurges, Gurgulio, the weasand, a gulf; because
the throat swalloweth like a gulf in the sea. Garish, gorgeously attired; from
the AS. Gearian, to make preparation; that is, one so finically dressed that it
required a great deal of time to do it. Garland, from the Fr. G. Garlande,
Ghirlande, Guirlande, or the Ital. Ghirlanda, the same; and all a Gyrando, from
surrounding the head; or from Corolla, or Corona, a coronet. Garlic, from the
AS. Garlec, Garleac, the same. Minshew derives it from our words Garden, and
Leek. I choose rather to draw it from the AS. Gar, a dart, or lance, and Leac, a
leek; because its blades grow straight upward, like a lance. V. Leek. Garment,
q. d. Garnishment. v. Garnish. A. Garner, by a Metathesis, from the Fr. G.
Grenier, or the Ital. Granaro, Granaio, the same; all from the Lat. Granarium;
and this from Granum, grain; it being a repository for all sorts of grain. The
Garnet, a term in Sailing; q. d. Cranet, a little crane; an engine whereby
ships are loaded and unloaded. V. Crane. Garnet, or Granate- stone, from the
Hisp. Granate, the Ital. Granata, or the Lat. Barb. Granatus, a kind of
carbuncle; so called from its red color, like to that of the seed of a
pomegranate. Garnish, from the Fr. G. Garnir, or the Ital. Garnire, to adorn;
these perhaps from the AS. Gear, Gearo, readiness; or Gearian, to make ready.
It may, and that not absurdly, be drawn from Cornish, a term in Architecture;
which is an ornament to the whole fabric. V. Cornish. To Garr, for To Force, a
word common in the North of England; from the Dan. Gior, to force. A Garret,
the uppermost floor in an house; by a small variation of the sense, from the
Fr. G. Garite, a turret; which comes from the Teut. Wahren, Wehren, to defend.
V. Ward, and Beware. Garrison, from the Fr. G. Garnison, or the Ital.
Guarnigione, idem. V. Garnish. Garter, from the Fr. G. Jarretiere, Jartiere, or
the Ital. Garrettiera, the same; all from the Fr. G. Jarret, and the Ital.
Garetto, Garretto, the ham. Garth, a word frequently used in Lincolnshire, for
Yard; which see. Gartier, or Gartire, a term in Heraldry; (i. e.) half of a
garter. V. Garter. Gash, to cut, or slash; from the Fr. G. Hacher, to hack, or
cut in small chips; this from Hache, an hatchet; all from the Lat. Ascia, Gr.
(...), an ax. Gasp, by an Epenthesis of the letter s, from Gape; which see.
Ghastly, or terrible, q. d. Ghostly; or rather, Ghost-like. V. Ghost. Gastred,
or greatly affrighted; from the AS. Gast, a ghost; q. d. terrified with the
sight of some spectre: Or, q. d. Gastrid, or Ridden; that is, ridden by an Hag,
or the Nightmare. V. Ghost, and Aghast. Gate, from the AS. Gate, Gaete, the
same; this from Began, Belg. Gaen, to go. Gate, for Way, as they use it in
Lincolnshire; from the Belg. Gat, the Teut. Gasse, or the Dan. Gade, a street,
or path; all from the AS. Began, to Go; which see; and Gate, before. Gather, from
the AS. Gatherian, the same. Mer. Cas. derives it from the Gr. (...), to
gather. Gather, A sheep's Gather, from the other Gather; it being a collection,
as it were, of all the small guts into one. A Gaud, or Scoff, from the Fr. G.
Gaudir, to mock; also to quaff; this from the Lat. Gaudere, to rejoice, or take
delight in, as in the misfortune of another. Gaudy, from the Lat. Gaudeo, to be
glad; because proud folks are much pleased with their gaudy, fantastic dress:
Or from the Fr. G. Gaude, a marigold; which comes from the Belg. Good, or the
Teut. and Eng. Gold, by reason of its yellow, or golden color; which is the
most glorious of all colors. Gavel, a sheaf of corn; from the Fr. G. Gavelle,
a sheaf; and this either from Gerbel, the Dim. of the Fr. G. Gerbe, a sheaf; or
from Gabelle, Gabel, a tax; because every tenth sheaf was reserved for the
King's Tribute, both among the Hebrews, and other Nations. Gavelock, from the
AS. in Aelfricus Gafelucas, shafts. v. Iavelin. Gaunt, lean; q. d. Gewant, from
the AS. Geanian, Wanian, to wane, or decrease; that is, one that has lost his
fat, or flesh. V. Wane, and Want. A Gawk, or Cuckoo, a word found in Somnerus;
from the AS. Gaec, Geac, Gaec, a Cuckoo; which see. Gay, from the Fr. G. Gay,
or the Ital. Gaio, merry; both from the Belg. Gaden, Gayen, to please; which
comes from the Lat. Gaudere, to be glad. It is also derived from the Belg.
Gauw, cheerful, or the Teut. Gah, nimble, prompt; with us, one neat in apparel.
Some draw it from the Gr. (...), to brag of, to be haughty. To Gaze, or look
steadfastly at: Minshew draws it from the Gr. (...), to admire. It may as
plausibly be taken from the AS. Gesean, to look upon; or the Teut. Geachten, to
attend unto. A Gazet, or News-book, from the Fr. G. Gazette, the same; this
from the Ital. in the Ven. Dial. Gazzetta, Gazetta, a small coin, of the value
of our penny; because such News, or Narratives are bought commonly for a penny;
and this from the Lat. and Gr. Pers. Gaza, a treasure; q. d. Gazula, a little
treasure. Gear, He is in his Gears, or in readiness; from the AS. Gear, ready;
Gearian, to make ready; which a Grecian Etymologist draws from the expletive
AS. prefix Ge, and the Gr. (...), to make fit. It may be drawn from the same
Ge, and the AS. Are, an arrow; because, in the time of our Ancestors, famous
for so many signal victories over the neighboring nations, bows and arrows
were their only arms, or warlike furniture: Or from the same Ge, and Are,
goods, or honor. A Geir, in Higg. for a Vulture; from the Teut. Geyer,
signifying the same; which comes from the old word Geren, now Begehren, to be
greedy; and this from the Lat. Quaerere, to seek; it being a sort of ravenous
fowl. To Geld, from the AS. Gylte, having the stones cut off; or the Belg.
Ghelten, to geld; from hence our word Gelding, a gelded horse; all perhaps from
the Teut. Geil, unchaste, wanton; which is done to prevent carnal copulation:
Or from the AS. Gild, a child; q. d. to make innocent as a child, as to the
lusts of the flesh: Or rather, from the AS. Celan, to cool, to take away the
spermatick heat. A Gelly, from the Fr. G. Gelee, or the Lat. Gelatina; which
come both a Gelando, from thickening, or freezing; because, being jellied, it
represents frost. Gemelles, a term in Heraldry; from the Lat. Gemelli, twins;
Bars Gemelles, a couple of bars of equal proportion every way. A Gender, from
the Fr. G. Gendre, and this from the Ablat. Genere, the same. A Gennet, or
Ginnet-fur, from the Hisp. Ginete; which Covarruvius expounds, Vna species de
Fuyina, a kind of Foine's skin; V. Foines. Perhaps so called, from Guinney,
where they are most common, and from whence they are transported to us. Gennet,
from the Fr. G. Gennet, or the Ital. Gianetto, a Spanish Horse; and both from
the Hisp Gineta, Ginete, a light-armed horseman. Covarruvius derives them all
from the Gr. (...), a light-armed Soldier. Minshew derives our Gennet, from the
Lat. Genus, a Kind; (i. e.) an horse of a good Race, or Breed. A Gennit, or
Genniting, a small Summer-apple; perhaps from the AS. Genian, to renew; it
being an apple that is soon ripe: Or from the Fr. G. Janet, for Jean; for the
same reason that we call another sort of apple, A Iohn-apple. Gent, from the
Fr. G. Gent, gallant, richly clothed; a Contract of Gentile. Gentels, Gentles,
or Gentiles, maggots; so called, from the gentle smoothness of their bodies. V.
Gentle. Gentile, v. Gent^^. Gentle, from the Fr. G. Gentil, or the Ital.
Gentile, courteous, tame, mild: Hence Gen^leman; q. d. e bona Gente, born of a
good Country, or Family. See Menagius. Gerbe, a term in Heraldry; the same with
Garb, above; which see, and Gripe. Gerfalcon, v. Ierfalcon. Gerkin, the same
with Ierfalcon, which see. Get, from the AS. Getan, Gettan, to obtain; and both
from the Lat. Captare, to catch at a thing. Gewg^wes, childrens toys; from the
AS. Gegaf, trifles; or Heagas, pictures, graven or carved images: Or from the
Fr. G. Joyaux, Jewels; for such things are as much valued by children, as
Jewels by those of understanding. V. Jewels. A Gherkin, so we call a pickled
Cucumber; from the Teut. Gorcken, idem; simply, a Cucumber. Gheus, a French
word, yet frequently read in the Histories of the Low Countries, translated
into English; from the Fr. G. Gueux, a Beggar; for so were the Protestants
called in the beginning of the Civil Commotions in those Countries, and are yet
so called there, from a banquet kept at the house of Florentius Pallan, Count
of Culemburg; at which, the Ghests being Protestants, persons of Quality, put
on the garb of Beggars, and were merry in their cups, whilst they laid a
foundation of a Conspiracy for the liberty of their Religion. See Fam. Strad.
lib. 5. Menagius derives this Fr G. Gueux, from the Lat. Quaestus, gain. Some
draw it from the Lat. Vagus; as we say, A Vagabond. Ghittern, a musical
instrument; from the Belg. Ghitterne, or the Fr G. Guiterne, Quiterne, the
same; and all from the Lat. and Gr. Cithara, a Cittern, or Harp. A Ghizz^rd, or
Ghizz^rn, as they pronounce it in Lincolnshire; from the Fr G. Gesier, Jesier,
the craw of a fowl; or Gysier, which comes from the Lat. Jecur, the liver;
all, I suppose, from Gigerium; a word found in Festus, of the same
signification. Ghost, from the AS. Gast, the Belg. Gheest, or the Teut. Geyst,
a spirit. Some draw it from the AS. Gest, and the Germ. Gast, a guest; because
the Ghost is but the Guest of the body: Or from the AS. Gist, Gest, a
whirlwind, or blast, or puff of wind. They may all be derived from the Teut.
Gah. quickly; for what is more quick than a ghost, or blast? Mer. Cass. derives
it from Gust; which see. Giant, from the Fr. G. Geant; and both from the Lat.
Gigas, or the Gr. (...), the same; this, q. d. (...), born of the earth. To
Gibe, from the Belg. Gabberen, or the Fr. G. Gaber, to mock: Or lastly, from
the Ital. Gabbare, to deceive. Gibberish, foolish discourse; either q. d.
Iabberish, from our word To Iabber; or from the Fr. G. Gaber, or the Ital.
Gabbare, to put a trick on one; q. d. mystical talk, that none understand, but
those that speak it, Rogue's language, Pedlar's French. V. Iabber. Gibbet, from
the Fr. G. Gibbet, Gibet, or the Ital. Giubetta, idem; or q. d. Gabalet, from
the Lat. Gabalum, a Gable, or place for the execution of criminals. Giblets,
the offals, or entrails of a goose. Minshew takes them to be called so, quasi
Gobbets, or Goblets; from the Fr. G. Gob, Gobeau, a mouthful, or Gobbet; which
see. Giddy, from the AS. Gidig, vertiginous; which comes from Giddian, to play
like a fool; or Glidan, to glide, or slip; whence Glid, slippery; and by
translation, it is meant, of an unsettled mind. A Gig or I g, from the Ital.
Giga, a little fiddle; both from the Teut. Geige, or Dan. Gige, a violin. To
Gigle, from the Belg. Gichelen, Gichen, to laugh wantonly: Or from the Teut.
Gockelen, to jet; which is derived from Geck, a fool; much laughter being a
true indication of a fool. A Gigot, a French word, which signifies an hip. I
suppose it to be taken from the Lat. Jugum, a yoke; because it joineth the
bones of the body and thigh together. Gill, a small measure of things ^iquid.
Somnerus reads Gillo, and Gello, in his Gloss. perhaps from the Gr. (...), a
kind of cup; or from Gill, for Juliana, a woman's name; as Jug, for Joan; for
the Drunkard may be said metaphorically, to bug the pot, as the Gallant hugs
his Gill, or Miss. Gilliflower, so called, because it is a flower that
flourishes in the month of July; or from the Fr. G. Giroflee, the Hisp. and
Port. Girofle, or the Ital. Garofolo, Garifolo; all which come from the Gr.
(...), an Indian clove, to which this flower is like in scent. The Gills of a
fish, from the Lusitan. Guelras de Peixe, or the Hisp. Agallas de Pescado, the
same; which are derived from the Heb. Gillah, to open, or spread forth. Consult
Minshew, and Dr. Skinner. A Gimlet, from the Fr. G. Giblet, Gibelet, an
instrument to bore holes, a piercer, these perhaps from the Teut. Zapfflet,
from Zapff, a faucet. Gim, and Gimcrack, and Gin; all con^racts of Engine; which
see, and Grinn. Ginger, from the Ital. Gengero, Zenzero, or the Fr. G.
Gingembre, idem; and all from the Lat. Zinziber; which comes from the Gr.
(...), the same. Ginger, or Tingle, from the sound. Giplies, canting vagabonds,
corruptly so called, because for their tawny colors, caused by the heat of the
Sun, they are taken to be Egyptians. Gird, from the AS. Gyrdan, the Belg.
Gorden, or the Teut. Gurten, Begurten, to gird; whence the AS. Gyrdel, Gyrdl, a
girdle, and Teut. Gurt, the girt of an horse; as also Gurtler, a Girdler; all
derived from the Lat. Gyro, or the Gr. (...), to go round. Girl: Minshew draws
it from the Lat. Garrula, because they are given to prating. It may also be
drawn from the Ital. Givella, a weathercock; which comes a Gyrando, from
turning round; thereby denoting their inconstancy. Girl, a term in Hunting;
signifying an Hind of two years old; so called, a Gyrando, from running about.
Girn, for Grin, by a Metathesis. v. Grin. A Girt of an horse, V. Gird. Gittar,
or rather Ghittar, a musical instrument; from the Ital. Ghitarra, or the Fr. G.
Guiterre, the same; and all from the Lat. Cithara, an harp, the same. To Give,
from the AS. Gifan, the Belg. Gheven, or the Teut. Geven, to give; from hence
the Teut. Vbergeven, to give a thing over. Gift, from the AS. Gift, the Belg.
Ghifte, or the Teut. Gave, a gratuity, or gift. Gives, or Fetters: Some derive
it from the Belg. Ghevangs, manacles; but I had rather draw it from the Fr. G.
Ceps, or the Lat. Cippi, a pair of stocks. Glad, from the Dan. and AS. Glad,
Glaed, Glede, joyful, joy. Minshew draws it from the Belg. and Teut. Glat,
smooth. I had rather draw it from the Lat. Laetus, glad; by adding g by a
Prothesis, and turning t into d, and the diphthong ae into a. To make a Glade
in a wood, from the Gr. (...), a bough; q. d. (...), to cut down boughs. To
Glance, from the Teut. Glantzen, or the Belg. Glantsen, to shine; whence the
Teut. Glantz, and the Belg. Glants, a glance; all from the Fr. G. Eslancer, or
the Ital. Sclanciare, to glitter like a lance. The Glanders: the learned Dr.
Th. H. derives it from the Fr. G. Glandules, which signifies the same. Consult
Markham. To Glare, or strain the eyes with looking too intently upon the light;
perhaps from the Belg. Glaerende ooghen, or Glaer ooghigh, blue-eyed; which
come from the Fr. G. Esclairer, to shine; and this from the Lat. Clarare, or
Exclarare, to make to shine, or sparkle; for he that has blue eyes sees
clearer than if his eyes were gray or black, etc. Glass, from the AS. Glaes,
the Belg. Glass, Ghelas, or the Teut. and Dan. Glasz, the same; these perhaps
from the Belg. Glac, and the Teut. Glatt, smooth, slippery; or from the Lat.
Glacies, ice; unto which it is like: V. Gally-pot. Minshew and Martin. draw it
from the Teut. Gleissen, to glister; from hence comes the Dan. Time-glass; with
us, An Hour- Glass. Gleam, Warm Gleams, from the AS. Leoma, light; or Leoman,
to shine; and both these from the Lat. Lumen, light. To Glean, from the Fr. G.
Glaner, or the Ital. Sglanare, to gather ears of corn after reaping; which is
supposed to come from the Lat. Grana, grains of corn, by changing r into l. A
Gleave, or Glaive, from the Fr. G. Glaive; and both from the Lat. Gladius, a
sword. Davis derives it from the C. Br. Glaif, a reaping-hook. A Glede, from
the AS. Glida, a Kite; this from Glidan, to glide, or slip down; because she
comes down swiftly upon her prey. Gl^e, from the AS. Glie, joy; or Gleoian, to
jest, or rejoice. Minshew derives it from the Belg. Glooren, to be refreshed. I
may draw our word Glee, and the AS. Glie, from the Gr. (...), laughter. Gleek,
a Play at Cards; either from the Teut. Gluck, luck, or fortune; or from the AS.
Gelic, or Teut. Gleich, like. Glib, smooth, or slippery; perhaps (by a
Prothesis (...) G, and by an easy Metaplasmus of ae into i, and of v consonant
into b) from the Lat. Laevis, slippery, or smooth. Glide, from the AS. Glidan,
Belg. G^itden, Teut. Glitschen, or the Fr. G. Glisser, to slip, or slide;
whence the AS. Glid, slippery. A Glimmering, from the Dan. Glimmer, Glimrer, to
shine out faintly; or from the AS. Glomang, the twilight; or from our Eng.
Gleam; which see. Glimpie, either from Glimm ering, or from the Teut. Gleissen,
to glissen. To Glissen, or Glissen; v. Glister. To Glister, from the Belg.
Glisteren, to sparkle; or the Teut. Gleissen, Glitzen, Glitzern, to Glitter;
which see. Glitt, thin matter issuing out of the nervous parts, when they are
bruised, or hurt; perhaps from the Teut. Gliedwasser, by the figure Ellipsis;
this from Glied, a limb, and Wasser, water; or perhaps from the Belg. Gliiden,
to glide. Glitter, from the AS. Glitessan, to shine, the Teut. Gli^zen,
Glitzern, or the Belg. Glicken, to be bright. V. Glister. To Gloar, from the
Belg. Glorren, Gluyeren, to look askew; or from the Belg. Gloeyen, the Teut.
Gluen, or the AS. Gloan, to glow, or sparkle, by a Metaphor taken from fire. V.
To Lowre. Gloomy, somewhat dark. Minshew draws it from the Belg. Glimmen, to
shine faintly, by an Antiphrasis. I had rather draw it from the AS. Glomung,
the twilight; and this from Leoma, light. V. Gleamy. Gloss, from the AS.
Glesan, to favor; and this from the Teut. Gleissen, or the AS. Glitenan, to
shine; the word implying, to speak fair, as to an outward appearance, to
collogue. Gloss, The Gloss of colors, from the Teut. Gleissen, to shine; q. d.
the brightness of any thing which it receives by art. Glove, from the AS.
Glof, the same. Minshew draws it from the Belg. Gheloove, faithfulness; or from
Gift Love. I had rather draw it from the old Eng. Gol, the hand, and the Teut.
Ob, or the AS. Ober, over; because it is put over, or upon the hand. To Glow,
from the AS. Gloan, the Belg. Gloeyen, or the Teut. Gluen, to shine; from
hence, A Glowworm; that is, a worm that gloweth, or shines like a torch by
night. To Glow, or Glout; in Gouldman, To Stare. V. To Gloar. Glowworm, v.
Glow. Glue, from the Fr. G. Glu, the same; whence Gluer, to glue; all from the
Lat. Gluten, id. which Fr. Jun. derives from the Gr. (...), a word found in
Suidas, of the same signification. Glum, To be Glum, as they say in
Lincolnshire; it signifies as much as Sullen; perhaps from Gloomy; which see.
To Glut, or satiate himself, from the Lat. Glutio, to gulp, or swallow: V.
Glutton. Mer. Cas. derives it from the Gr. (...), or (...), to sweeten.
Glutton, from the Fr. G. Glouton, the Hisp. Gloton, or the Ital. Ghiotto,
Ghiottone, the same: Or it may be derived a Glutiendo, or Deglutiendo, from
swallowing, or glutting down; from hence the Fr. G. Gloutonnie, and the Ital.
Ghiottonia; with us, Gluttony. To Gly, as they say in Lincolnshire; it
signifies, to look asquint; perhaps from the AS. Gloan, the Belg. Gloeyen, or
the Teut. Gluen, to sparkle. V. Glow. To Gnarl, or Gnarr, to grin like an angry
dog; from the Belg. Knarren, Snarren, or the Teut. Knarten, Knirren, to snarl.
V. To Gnash, or Gnarr. To Gnash, or Gnarr, from the AS. Gnyrran, or the Belg.
Knarren, Knaschen, Knarschen, the same; all from the sound. V. Know. Gnat, from
the AS. Gnaet, or the Teut. Schnack, signifying the same. Gnat-Snapper, a bird
so called, because it snappeth, or catches Gnats, which it feeds upon. V.
Gnat. Gnaw, from the AS. Gnaegan, the Belg. Knaghen, Knauwen, or the Teut.
Nagen, the same. It alludes to the Gr. (...), to scrape; or (...) to crop.
Goad, from the AS. Gaad, the same; also a sharp point of any thing. Goal, or
the staff which a Racer intends for; either as Minshew has it, from Go, and
All; because we all go to, or aim at some Goal; that is, some end, or other; or
rather, from the Belg. Doel, the same. Dr. Th. H. derives it most ingeniously
from the Fr. G. Gaul, a pole; which is often set up for a Goal to be run to. A
Goar of a garment, a piece sewed unto another; from the C. Br. Goror, a border,
hem, or seam, both possibly from the Lat. Ora, an hem. To Goar, or prick
through; either as Mins. has it from the Lat. Forare, to make an hole through;
or q. d. To Go over, or ore: Or it is a contract of the AS. Geborian, to bore.
A Goat, from the AS. Gaete, Gaet; in Elfricus, Gat, the Belg. Gheete, Gheyte,
or the Teut. G^isz, the same; whence the AS. Gaetehierde, a Goat-herd. It may
also be drawn from the Gr. barb. (...), a she-goat; and this from (...), the
Accus. of (...), which comes from (...), a goat. A Gobbet, and Gob, a great
sop, or morsel; from the Fr. G. Gober, to swallow greedily; Gobeau, Gob, a
mouthful; this from Couper, to chop in pieces. To Gobble, or eat voraciously.
V. Gobbet, above. Goblet, from the Fr. G. Gobelet, a greater kind of Chalice;
perhaps q. d. Couppelette, a little cup; V. Cup. Dr. Th. H. draws it from the
Fr. G. Gober, to swallow. Goblins, or Fayries: Minshew draws it from the Fr. G.
Gober, to devour greedily. They may be so called possibly from Oberon, the
feigned King of Fayries. God, from the AS. God, Dan- Good, Belg. Goed, or the
Teut. Got, the same; this from Gutt, good; q. d. good in the Abstract,
Goodness it self. Hence the AS. Godsuna, a God-son, etc. God- a-mercy: Dr. Th.
H. supposes it the same as Gramercy; which see. I suppose it is rather used
for God have mercy. A Godwit, or Quail, as Rider has it; from the AS. God,
good, and Wita, a wise man; or rather, rich man; because it is a fowl that is
seldom served up, but at great men's tables: Or from the same God, good, and
Wihta, an animal. Go, from the AS. Began, the Belg. Gaen, or the Teut. Gehen, to
go; whence the Teut. Augehen, to invade, and Abgehen, to go off, as in sale.
Gog, He is A-Gog for it; that is, he earnestly, or greatly desires such or such
a thing. It may (with a little variation of the sense) be derived from the Fr.
G. Gogues, great delight; or Se Goguer, to gratify himself, to fare
splendidly. Gogle- eyed; that is, one whose eyes stand out staring, and bigger
than ordinary; from the Fr. G. Gogue, a kind of pudding made in a sheep's great
gut, being a mixture of sweet herbs, small pieces of bacon, spices, eggs,
cheese, and the blood of the sheep newly killed; which, in boiling, does swell
and distend the skin. Gold, from the AS. and Teut. Gold, the Fr. Th. Guold, the
Dan. Guld, or the Belg. Goul, the same; whence the AS. Goldfinc, a Gold-finch,
and Gildan, to gild; a also the Belg. Gulden, and Teut. Guelden, golden; whence
the Belg. Guldeling, and Teut. Gulding, a Golding-apple; all perhaps from the
Teut. Gelren, or the Belg. Ghelden, to value. Goldeny, a fish so called, from
its golden color and spots: Or q. Golden-eye, its eyes being of the color of
gold. Gold-hammer, from the Teut. Gold-ammer, Gold-hammer, a bird so named,
from its golden color; and Hammer, which comes either from the Belg. Hamme,
the hamm, or leg; or from the other Hamme, a meadow; because it most an end
feeds and bideth in meadows. Golls, the hands; q. d. Walls, or Walds; from
the AS. Wealdan, Teut. Walten, to wield, or direct; because with our hands we
direct and order our business; there being a certain affinity between W, and G;
as in Guardian, Warden; Guard, Ward, etc. Good, from the AS. God, the Belg.
Goed, or the Teut. and Fr. Th. Gut, idem. What if it be taken a Gaudendo, from
rejoicing? Goodman, a Country-term, ordinary amongst the poorer sort of people;
so called, quasi Good man: Which custom is common to the Inhabitants of Tuscany
to this day, who call their men of mean rank, Buon huomo; that is, good man, or
honest man. Somnerus thinks that it comes from the Fr. Th. Gomman, an
house-holder, or the AS. Guma, an husband. Gool, frequently used in
Lincolnshire for a ditch, or puddle; not unlikely, from the Belg. Gouw, a
water-wear: Or from the Fr. G. Gaul, Gaiole; or the Lat. Caveola, a prison, or
Gaol: because when we fall into such a ditch, we are held, as it were, in jail:
Or from the AS. Geeallian, Weallian, to bubble up as spring water. Goose, from
the AS. Gos, the Belg. Goose, Goes, or the Dan. Gaa^z, the same. A Gord of
water, in Gouldman; from the Fr. G. Gourd, or Gourt, a brook running only in
rainy weather; this from the Lat. Gurges, a gulf, or whirl-pool. Gore, from the
AS. Gore, blood; or Gor, filth; the Dan. Voor, matter, corruption; the Belg.
Goor, mud; or the C. Br. Gor, snot; which Davis draws from the Gr. (...),
corrupt matter. Gore-bellied, from the AS. Gore, gore; Gor, filth; and Belly;
(i. e.) one whose paunch being stuffed with corrupt and unwholesome blood, and
fat stands out more than ordinary. To Gorge, from the Fr. G. Gorger, Engorger,
or the Ital. Ingorgiare, the same; this from the Fr. G. Gorge, the gullet, or
windpipe: Or possibly from the Lat. Gurges, a whirl-pool; because what is put
down the throat, is hardly revoked. Gorgeous, perhaps from the Fr. G. Gorrier,
of the same sense. Minshew draws it from the Gr. (...), to glitter. They may
all be derived from the Fr. G. Glorieux, in Lat. Gloriosus, self-conceited,
foolish. A Gorget, from the Ital. Gorgietta, Gorgiera, or the Fr. G. Gorgerin,
a collar; so called because it covers the throat; which in Lat. is called
Gurges. Gormandize, from the Fr. G. Gourmandise, voracity; Gourmander, to eat
greedily; or Gourmand, a glutton: According to Cambd. from the old Brit. or Fr.
G. Gormod, too much of a thing; this from the C. Br. Gor, over, and Mod,
measure; q. d. to eat beyond measure. Gorrara, a word only found in a book
called The Complete Angler. I take it to be a bird that preyeth upon fishes;
perhaps from the Hisp. Gorra, an hat. Gosling, q. d. Goolling, a young goose;
from the AS. Gos, a goose, and the dim. termination ling. Gospel, from the AS.
Godspell, or the Fr. Th. Gotspel, the same; whence Gotspellon, to preach the
Gospel; both from the AS. God, or the Fr. Th. Got, God, good, and Spell, an
history; q. d. a divine history, or revelation. Goss, or Gors, from the AS.
Georis, Georst, heath, or ling. Gossemeer, a word found in a book entitled The
French Gardener; where it is expounded, the light down that is blown off the
Sow-thistle. The Author of an English Dictionary gives this name to the
morning dew; which, like to a cob-web, it spreads all the fields over,
especially in the time of drought; which in the Teut. is called Vnser Frawen
haar, (i. e.) the hair of the Virgin Mary; from the Fr. G. Gossampine; and this
from the Lat. Gossypium, cotton, for the similitude of it. Goss-hawk, from the
AS. Goshafoc, the same; and this from Gos, a goose, and Hafoc, an hawk; because
it pursues geese: Or as Minshew has it, q. d. Gross-hawk; that is, a great
hawk. Gossips, or Godfathers at the baptism of a child, from the AS. God, God,
and Syb, Sybbe, kindred; q. d. a kins-man in God. To Govern, from the Fr. G.
Gouverner, or the Ital. Governare; and all from the Lat. Guberno, or the Gr.
(...), the same Gound, matter issuing out of the eyes; from the AS. Gund, gore,
putrefied matter. A Gourd from the Fr. G. Gouhourde, Couhourde, Courge,
Cougourde, Cowrde; all contracted from the Lat. Cucurbita, the same. Gout, from
the Fr. G. Goutte, Ital. Gotta, le Got, Hisp. Gota, Teut. Gicht, Belg.
Ghichte, the same; q. d. Gutta, a drop; because it is an humor that falls
down, as it were, by drops, into the joints. It is rightly called by modern
Greeks, (...), that is to say, Gout^sore. Gown, from the Ital. Gonna, the Fr.
G. Gonnelle, or the C. Br. Gwn, the same: This Fr. Jun. draws from the C. Br.
Gwnio, to sow: V. Robe. It may also be taken from the Gr. barb (...), a skin.
Minshew draws it from the Gr. (...), a knee; because it covers, or reaches
below the knees: Or from the Heb. Ghan, it has covered; or from the Lat.
Gaunace, or the Gr. (...); which, in Aristophanes, signifies, a coverlet, or
thick napped cloth. Gowts, a word much used in Somersetshire, signifying
canals, or pipes under ground; from the Fr. G. Gouttes, drops; whence comes the
Verb Esgouter, to run down drop by drop; all from the Lat. Gutta, a drop. V.
Gatter. Graff, from the Fr. G. Greffe, or the Belg. Greff^e, the same; and
these from the Fr. G. Greffer, and Belg. Greff^en, to plant, or graft. Menagius
draws it from the Lat. Graphium, a pencil Grain, from the Fr. G. Grain, corn;
and both from the Lat. Granum, a grain. It is also taken for a color to dye
with. V. Chermes, and Crimson. Gramercy, from the Fr. G. Grammercy, or the
Ital. Granmerce, Grammercie; q. d. Grandem mercedem det tibi Deus, that is, God
give you a great reward. Grammar, from the Fr. G. Grammaire, the same; and from
thence Grammairien, a Grammarian; all from the Gr. (...), a letter; because it
teaches the art of writing and speaking truly and properly; or because it is
the foundation of all learning. Grample, a word read in an English Dictionary;
where it is expounded, a Sea-Crab; from the Fr. G. Grampelle, the same; this
from the Ital. Granchio, a crab; and both from the Belg. Krampe, or the Fr. G.
Crampon, a cramping-iron, or hook; because the cleys of this fish are like to
hooks: Or lastly, from the Lat. Cancer, a crab. Grampus, the greater kind of
whale; from the Fr. G. Grand Poise, or Poisson, a great fish. A Granado, from
the Hisp. Granada de fuego, or the Fr. G. Grenade, a fire-ball; so called
because it is made like a Pomegranate; which see. Grand^m, from Grand, and Dam;
which see; q. d. a grand, ancient mother, or dam. Grandeur, pomp, or state, by
a little variation of the sense; from the Fr. G. Grandeur, dignity, highness;
and both from the Lat. Grandis, great, mighty, potent. Grange, from the Fr. G.
Grange, a garner, or barn; and both from the Lat. Granum, grain. In
Lincolnshire, and elsewhere, it is put for an house, or parcel of ground being
far distant from any other houses, or towns; perhaps because such houses are
commonly furnished with garners, or granaries; from the Ital. Granaia, Grancia,
Hisp. Granja, a Country-farm, or tenement. Granfire, from Grand, and Sire;
which see; q. d. a grand, ancient father, or fire. To Grant: Minshew derives it
from the Lat. Gratuito, frankly, or freely. I had rather draw it from the Fr.
G. Garentir, to warrant. V. To Warrant. Grape, from the Fr. G. Grappe, which
now with them signifies a cluster, though heretofore taken to signify a grape,
according to the reverend Dr. Heinshaw; or from the Ital. Grappola, Graspola,
Graspolo, or the Belg. Krap, Krapp^, the same; which comes, not unlikely, from
the Teut. Griipen, to gripe, or squeeze with the fist: Though Menagius derives
them all from the Teut. Trauv, a branch, or grape; and this from the Fr. Th.
Rebon, which Fr. Jun. reads Reuon, vines. Grapple, from the Belg. Grabbelen,
the Teut. Krappeln, or the Ital. Grappare, to catch hold of, to snatch greedily
at a thing; whence the Ital. Grappa, Grappello, an hook; all from the Verb, To
Gripe; which see. Grafe, V. Grass, and Graster. To Grase; The bullet Grased,
(i. e.) ran along the ground, but entered not; perhaps from Ex and Rasare, the
Frequentative of Radere, to shave, or scrape. A Graster, from the Fr. G.
Grasier, the same; this from Gras, fat, or our Eng. Grass: which see. Grasp, to
embrace, or take hold of; from the Ital. Graspare, the same. V. Grapple, and
Gripe. Grass, from the AS. Graes, Gaers, the Belg. Grass, Gars, or the Teut.
Grasz, idem; whence the AS. Gaershop, in the Teut. and Eng. a Grass-hopper. It
may possibly come from the AS. Groan, to grow; q d. Groas, Groas, that which
grows all the fields over. To Grate, from the Fr. G. Grater, or the Ital.
Grattare, idem; and both from the Lat. Corradere, to scrape. A Grate of iron,
from the Ital. Grata, or Grada; this from the Lat. Crates, the same; and this
again from the Gr. (...), to contain. To Grave, from the AS. Grafan, the Belg.
Graven, Graveren, the Teut. Graben, or the Fr. G. Graver, the same. It seems
manifestly to come from the Gr. (...), to write; or (...), to grave. A Grave
for the dead, from the AS. Graef, Graefe, or the Belg. Graf, Grave, the same:
Or from the Belg. Graven, to dig; or Grave, as they express it in Lincolnshire:
Or from the Teut. Grub, a sepulcher; or Gruben, to delve; from hence comes our
Eng. To Grub. Grave, as Palts-grave, from the AS. Gerefa, a Governor, or
Consul, as Aelfricus has it; this from the expletive Initial Ge, and Reafian,
to exact, to despoil: Or from the Dan. Greffve, Belg. Grave, Gra, Graef, Teut.
Graffe, a Viscount; and all from the Lat. Rapere, to take by force; because
Graves perhaps were only as griping Publicans, or Taskmasters in the ancient
German Empire; or rather, Princes Accomptants, as Jul. Capitol. calls them; but
they are now come to greater honor: From hence Burgrave, Landgrave, Margrave,
that is, a Grave of a Borough, Lands, or Marches. To Grave a ship, to clean it,
and pitch it anew; perhaps, by a little varying the sense, from the Belg.
Krauwen, to scrape. See Manwayring in Dict. Naut. Gravel, from the Fr. G.
Gravelle, Gravois, the Ital. Gravella, or the Belg. Gravel; all signifying the
same: Or it may perhaps come from the Lat. Glareola, the same, by changing l
into r, and r into v: Or a Gravando, from loading; because ships are ballasted
with it. A Gray, from the Ital. Graio, the Fr. G. Grisard, or the Belg. Grevel,
a Gray, or Badger; so called from its gray color. Gray, from the AS. Graeg,
the Dan. Graa, or the Belg. Grauw, idem: Or possibly from the Run. Dan. Gram,
the Fr. G. Gris, or the Ital. Grigio, Griso, ash-colored. A Grayling, a kind
of fish, which is also called an Vmber; from the Fr. G. Vmbre, Vmbrette, or the
Lat. Vmbra, idem; perhaps it is so called from its gray, or ash color; for
which reason the Dutch call it Asche. Grease, from the Fr. G. Graisse, or the
Ital. Grasso, Grascia, idem; all from the Lat. Crassus, thick, big; because
big, corpulent bodies abound with fat. It alludes to the Gr. (...), filth.
G^^a, from the AS. Great, Fr. Th. Groz, Belg. Groot, Teut. Grosz, Fr. G. Gross,
or the Ital. Grosso, gross, big; all from the Lat. Crassus, thick. Greaves,
from the Fr. G. Greves, or the Hisp. Grevas, armor for the legs; these from
the Fr. G. Greve, Hisp. Greva, the shank; or from the Lat. Gravis, heavy. Grec,
in Gouldman; from the Fr. G. Gre, or the Ital. Grado, the will, or consent of
the mind; both from the Lat. Gratum, a thing acceptable, or well pleasing.
Greedy, from the AS. Graedig, or the Belg. Gretigh, the same; whence Greten,
Greyten, to covet greatly; all perhaps from the Teut. Begeren, or the Fr. Th.
Geran, to covet. Green, from the AS. Grene, the Teut. Grun, or the Belg. Groen,
idem: Or perhaps from our word Grow; because most vegetative plants are of a
green color. A Green-finch, a bird so called, from its green color. V. Finch.
Greese, Griece, Greices, or Stairs; q. d. Degrees, as Minshew has it: Or
rather, from the Fr. G. Gre, in the plur. Grez; and both from the Lat. Gradus,
a step, or stair; or Gressus, a pace. To Greet, from the AS. Gretan, the Belg.
Groeten, Grueten, or the Teut. Grussen, to salute one; whence the AS. Gretan
sendan, to send greeting. To Greeve, from the Fr. G. Grever, to vex; or the
Ital. Greve, grief; or Gravoso, grievous; all from the Lat. Gravare, to
burden, or load. Greyhound, from the AS. Grighund, idem; or from the Belg.
Grevel; with us, a Gray, or Badger; and Hund, an Hound; q. d. a Dog that
hunteth the Gray, or Badger. Minshew supposes that it is so called, q. Graecus
Canis, a Grecian dog; because the Greeks were the first that made use of such
dogs for hunting. A Grid-iron, q. d. Grate-iron. V. Grate, and Iron. A Griffon,
from the Fr. G. Griffon, the Ital. Griffone, or the Hisp. Grifo, the same: Or
perhaps it is so called from its great claws; for Griffe signifies, the talons,
or claws of birds of prey: V. Gripe. It may also be derived from the Gr. (...),
idem; and this from (...), crooked. A Grig, the smallest kind of Eel; from the
AS. Crecca, the brink of a river, under which they mostly lie, and increase. To
Grime, from the Belg. Begriemen, or Beghremen, to make black, to stain, to
disguise; or from Grimm, which see. Grimm, one that has a glouting, austere
look; from the AS. Grim, Gram, testy, cruel; the Teut. Grimm, anger, or Gram,
angry, enraged; or the Run. Dan. Grimi, cruel. Fr. Jun. derives them all from
the Gr. (...), the cold of winter. I should rather choose to draw it from (...),
acid, sour. Grind, from the AS. Grindan, to grind; whence Grindtothas, the
teeth called the grinders. Grin, from the AS. Grennian, Grinian, idem; or the
Belg. Greynsen, Griinen, to whet the teeth as a boar does his tushes: V. Girn.
Some also derive it from the C. Br. Gyn, the jaw; which we may draw from the
Gr. (...), or the AS. Cinan, to gape. Grinn, more usually Ginn, from the AS.
Grine, a trap, or snare. Minshew draws it from Engine; which see: Or from the
Goth. Griuher, a snare. Gripe, from the AS. Gripan, Begripan, idem (whence
Grife, griping, niggardly) Belg. G^iipen, Teut. Greiffen, or the Fr. G.
Gripper, idem: There is also in the Fr. G. Griffer, and in the Ital. Griffare,
to gripe; all possibly from the Lat. Corripere, to catch hold of. Mer. Cas.
derives our word Gr^pings, that is, the gripings of the guts, from the Gr
(...); which in Hesychius, is expounded (...), clung, or shrunk up; and Gilpe,
from (...). Abr. Myl. draws it from (...), to fish with the hands. A Gripp,
from the AS. Grep, Graep, a ditch; the Belg. Greppe, Grubbe, Gruype, or the
Teut. Grube, a ditch; these from Graven, to dig. V. Grave. Grisly, from the AS.
Grislic, rough, squalid; and this from the Verb Agrisan, to look frightfully.
Grist, Grice, or Grees, from the AS. Grist, grinding; or from Grindan, to
grind; or from Gerst, Belg. Gheerste, Teut. Gersten, barley. Gristle, from the
AS. Gristle, Grisle, the same; both perhaps from the Lat. Crustula, a crust. A
Grit, a word found in the English Dictionary, where it is expounded, a kind of
Crafish; perhaps from the Fr. G. Grater, to grate, or scrape; because with its
sharp fins, or prickles upon its back, it rubbeth or pricketh the hands of them
that touch it. Gritt, from the AS. Gretta, brann; the Ital. Grezzo, rough; or
the Fr. G. Grez, a certain rough stone. A Groat, from the Fr. G. Gros, or the
Ital. Grosso, gross, or great. It is a certain coin, in value four pence; so
called from its greatness, or quantity; because formerly perhaps it was a
brass, or iron coin. Grocers: Minshew says, that at the first, as he proves
out of our Laws, they used to sell nothing by little parcels; but all things al
Grosso, by the great, i. e. by wholesale. Or they may be so called, a Grossis,
from figs; which they mainly trade in. In our Statute-book it signifies,
Merchants that ingross a commodity. Grogran, from the Fr. G. Gros-Grain, gross
or thick grain; (i. e.) a thick web. V. Grain. The Groin, from the AS. Groan,
to grow; from the increase of nature. Groan, from the AS. Granian, or the Belg.
Groonen, idem; all very likely feigned from the sound. Groom: Verstegan and
Minshew derive it from the Belg. Grom, a boy, or youth: We may draw it from the
AS. Guma, a man; also watchful; and this from the AS. Gyman, to regard, to take
care of a thing. Groove, or Grove, a mine. V. Grave. Grope, from the AS.
Grapian, to touch lightly, to handle gently. Gross, or Big, from the Teut.
Grosz, the Fr. Th. Groz, the Fr. G. Gros, or the Ital. Grosso, great, grand;
all from the Lat. Crassus, thick. A Gross of commodities, from the Fr. G.
Gross, the number 144. (i. e.) twelve dozen. A Grot, or Cave, from the Fr. G.
Grotte, or the Ital. Grotta, idem; all from the Lat. Crypta, a cave; and this
from the Gr. (...), to hide. Grotes-work, from the Fr. G. Grotesque, or the
Ital. Grottesca, idem (a word frequent amongst Carpenters) and our word Work;
which see. A Grove, from the AS. Grove, Graef, idem: Or from our word to Grow;
q. d. a Grow, or Growing of trees. A Grove, a word used in Lincolnshire for a
grip, or ditch; from the Belg. Groeve, idem; v. Grave. Grovelling, tumbling, or
sprawling on the ground; q. d. Groundling; v. Ground: Or rather, from Grave, or
Grove; which see; q. d. standing, or going in such a posture, as if he were
about to dig the ground. Ground, from the AS. Teut. and Dan. Grund, or the
Belg. Grond, idem; from hence comes that old word in our Law, Groundage, a tax
which is laid upon ships in port or harbor. A Groundling, from the Teut.
Grundling, a fish so called; because it feeds or stays near the bottom of
the water. Grounds, dregs; from Ground, because they sink down to the bottom of
a vessel. The Groundsel of a door, from the AS. Grund, the ground, and the Fr.
G. Sueil del huis, a threshold. Grout, from the AS. Grut, the Fr. G. Griotte,
Gruotte, or the Belg. Grutte, idem; the great of Oat-meal. Grow, from the AS.
Groan, to grow; or the Belg. Groyen, Groenen, to be green, or to flourish. To
Growl, from the Teut. Groll, anger; or Grollen, to be angry: Or it is a
contract of Grumble. Mer. Cas. draws it from the Gr. (...), to murmur. To Grub,
from our word Grave; which see: Or from the Teut. Gruven, to delve. To Grubble,
from the Teut. Grubelen, to search all over, or about. Grudge, from the Fr. G.
Gruger, to murmur against; and this from the Lat. Cruciari, to be vexed. Gruel,
made of oat-meal and water; from the Fr. G. Grus, the same; and this from
Gruan, great oat-meal. V. Grove, and Grist. Grumble, from the Belg. Grommelen,
Grommen, or the Fr. G. Gromineler, to mutter, or murmur. V. Grudge, and Growl.
To Grunt, from the Teut. Gruntzen, the Fr. G. Grogner, the Ital. Grugnare,
Grugnire, or the Dan. Grynter, idem; and all from the Lat. Grunnire, idem; and
this from the sound, by an Onomatopoeia. Gubbings, the parings of Haberdine;
from the Fr. G. Gob, Gobeau, a morsel, or gobbet: Or from the Gr. (...), to
cut. A Gudgeon, from the Fr. G. Goujon, Goyon, Goisson; and these corruptly
wrested from the Lat. Gobio, or the Gr. (...), the same. Guerdon, from the Fr.
G. Guerdon, or the Ital. Guiderdone, a reward; and this from the Ital. Guida, a
guide; or Guidare, to guide, or lead; and Done, in Lat. Donum, a reward; q. d.
guidage, or reward for conduct. Abr. Myl. draws the first part of it from the
Belg. Weerderen, Wierderen, to value. Guess, from the Belg. Ghisse, idem; or
Ghissen, to conjecture; and this perhaps from the Teut. Weisen, to show.
Minshew derives them all from the Heb. Kesem, a divination. Guest, from the AS.
and Dan. Gest, or the Belg. and Teut. G^n, the same; whence the AS. Gystnus, a
guesthouse. To Guggle, as drink poured out of a bottle; from the Ital.
Gorgogliare, the same; and this from Gorgoglio; and all possibly from the Lat.
Gurges, a gulf. A Guide, from the Fr. G. Guide, or Guidon, the Hisp. Guia, or
the Ital. Guida, the same; whence the Fr. G. Guider, and the Ital. Guidare, to
guide, or lead. Guidon, an Ensign to a troop of Horse; from the Fr. G. Guidon,
a flag, or banner. See the other Guidon, and Guide. A Guidon, a term in
Heraldry; from the Fr. G. Guidon, a flag for a company of Horse; this from the
word Guide, for Soldiers follow their Ensign as a guide. To Guild, or rather
Gild, from the AS. Gyldan, idem; whence Begylded, gilded, or gilt; and Gylden,
golden. V. Gold. Guild, as in Guild Hall; from the AS. Gild, the Belg. Gilde,
Gulde, or the Teut. Gulte, a Society; these from the Belg. Gheld, or the Teut.
Gelt, money; because those of any Society contribute money for the defraying of
charges in common. A Guilder, a certain coin; from the Teut. Gulden, the same;
q. d. a gilt coin: Or from Gueldria, a Province in the Low Countries, where
perhaps it was first coined. Guile, from the old Fr. G. Guile, or Guille,
fraud, deceit; or Guiller, to gull, or put a trick on one. Guilt, from the AS.
Gilt, a crime; whence Giltig, guilty; and these from the AS. Gildan, to pay;
taken from the custom of the ancient Germans, who expiated any crimes, even
murder it self; and, which you will scarce believe, the massacre of Kings,
with fines, and great sums of money. Guilt-heid, or Sea-Bream, a fish so
called, from the golden spots it has upon its head. V. Bream. Guimad, a fish
only caught in the river Dee in Cheeshire, and a Marsh called Pemble-Meer; not
unlikely from the Fr. G. Guimauve, a kind of Mallows, which it is like for
smoothness. Guise, from the Fr. G. Guise, or the Ital. Guisa, a fashion. v.
Wise. Guitar, v. Gittar. A Gulchin, q. d. Gulekin, (i. e.) a little glutton;
for kin diminishes. It alludes to the Ital. Guccio, and Teut. Geck, a fool.
Gules, from the Fr. G. Gueules, which in Heraldry is taken for red color; this
from the Lat. Gula, the gullet; perhaps from the redness of a Cock's gullet, or
throat. Gulf, from the Fr. G. Goulfe, Golfe, or the Belg. Kolf, Kolp, idem; and
all from the Ital. Golfo, idem; which comes from the Gr. (...), a port. V.
Gulp. Gulf, from the Belg. Golpe, or the Fr. G. Gouffre, Goulfre, a whirl-pool;
this from the Lat. Gula, the gullet, or Gulo, a glutton; because, like a
glutton, it sucks in, and swalloweth every thing that is put therein. A Gull,
or Sea-Gull, a bird so called from its natural voracity; q. d. Gulosa,
gluttonous. To Gull, from the Fr. G. Guelle, guile; or Guiller, to cheat one;
V. Guile. Mer. Cas. draws it from the Gr. (...), a Soldier's snap-sack. A
Gullet, from the Lat. Gula, the windpipe; or the Fr. G. Goulet, idem. To Gulp,
from the Belg. Golpen, or the Fr. G Engoufrer, Engouler, to swallow greedily:
All from the Lat. Gula, the gullet. Gum, or rather Gound, as they pronounce it
in Lincolnshire. v. Gound. The Gumms, from the AS. Goma, idem; or the Teut.
Gaum, Gum, the palate. A Gun: Minshew derives it from the Lat. Canna, a reed;
in imitation of the Teut. Kohr, and Belg. Koer, which primarily signify a
reed, but are used to signify a Gun. Somnerus ingeniously derives it from
Mangon, by taking away the first syllable. Mangon, was a warlike machine, used
before the invention of guns. Gundola, or rather Gondola, and Gonda, the name
of a small vessel among the Venetians; from the Gr. (...), a sort of cup: Or
from the Lat. Conchulae, a little shell. V. Coggle. Gunstones, a term in
Heraldry; otherwise called Ogresses; (i. e) balls put into guns; because at the
first invention of guns, they shot with little round stones, not with bullets
made of lead, as now. Gunwale, a term in Sailing; perhaps from our word Gun,
and the AS. Wealdan, to wield, or direct; because it is the place where the
guns lie upon stock. Gurgians of meal, a word found in Gouldman only. It is
taken for the courser part of meal, whereof hous-hold bread is made; perhaps
from the Fr. G. Escouvre, to shake out; because it is that branny part, which
remains in the sieve, when the siner meal is fifted out. Gurgle, from the Belg.
Gorghel, the windpipe; or the Ital. Gorgoliare, to gurgle, as liquor does when
it is poured out of a strait-neck'd vessel. A Gurney, or Gurnard, from the Fr.
G. Gourneau, a fish so called; and this from the Lat. Cornulum, of Cornu, a
little horn. To Gush, from the AS. Geotan, or the Belg. Gosselen, to pour out,
to be poured out. Somnerus draws it from the Lat. Gutta, a drop; or from the
noise of water hastily poured out. A Gusset, from the Fr. G. Gousset, a skirt,
or border; or perhaps from the Lat. Consuere, to sow together; q. d. a piece
put into a garment. Gust, a fierce blast of wind; from the AS. Gist, or Gest, a
whirlwind; and both from the Teut. Giessen, to pour out. V. Ghost. Gut, from
the Teut. Guttelen, the inwards. Perhaps it comes from the Lat. Guttus,
Gutturnium, a laver, or washpot. Gutte de Eau, a term in Heraldry; from the Fr.
G. Gutte de l'eau, or d'eau, drops of water; Gutte Lachrymarum, or
Lachrymularum, drops of tears; Gutte d'Or, drops of gold; also Gutte de Poix, a
Guttis Piscis, from the drops, or spots of a fish: Gutte de Sang, in the Fr. G.
Goutte de Sang; (i. e.) Guttatus Sanguine, dropped, or sprinkled with blood.
Gutter, from the Fr. G. Gouttiere, the same: Or from Esgouter, to run over by
drops; and this again from the Lat. Gutta, a drop. A Guy, a term in Sailing.
Manwayring draws it from our word Guide; because it is a rope that guides the
leaning, or inclination of any weighty thing that is craned up into a ship,
lest it should be let down too hastily, and so mis-carry, or damage other
things near it. Guzes, a term in Heraldry; from the Fr. G. Guses, the compass
of the eye. A Gyronne, a term in Heraldry; from the Fr. G. Guyron, the same; or
from Giron, a lap: Or perhaps a Gyrando, from turning, or bending.
H.
HAberdasher, a Seller of small wares; either, as Minshew will have it, from
the Teut. Habi^her das? will you take this? as Chap-men commonly say: Or from
the Fr. G. Avoir d'Acheten, to have things that are to be bought. Haberdine,
from the Fr. G. Habordeau, or the Belg. Abberdaen; I suppose, a Whiting pickled
and dried; or perhaps from Aberdene, a City in Scotland, where there is great
store of such fish. V. Aberdene, in the Proper Names. Habergeon, from the Fr.
G. Haubergeon, a coat of mail: Or from the Fr. Th. Halsberge, a breast plate;
which comes from the Belg. Hals, or the Teut. Halsz, the neck; and Bergen, to
cover. Habiliments, from the Fr. G. Habillemens, apparel; and this from the
Verb Habiller, to cloth; all from the Lat. Habitus, an habit. Hab-nab, rashly,
without consideration; from the AS. Habban, to have, and Nabban, not to have;
by cutting off the two last syllables in each word: V. Have. Or, q. d. Hap n'
hap, (i. e.) whether it happen, or no. V. Happen. An Hack, a word frequently
used in Lincolnshire; from the AS. Hacca, or the Belg. Heck, a door-barr, or
place enclosed with bars; with us, an Hatch; which see. To Hack, from the Belg.
and Teut. Hacken, Hachten, to mangle; Hacke, an hatchet; or Hackelen, to
hackle: Or from the Fr. G. Hacher, to cut in small pieces. All from the Lat.
Ascia, or Gr. (...), an ax. An Hackney-horse, from the Fr. G. Hacquenee, idem;
with us, an horse let out by the day, or week, etc. for hire: Or from the Ital.
Chinea; and this from the Ital. Schiena, a back; q. d. Cavallo di Schiena, a
backed horse, a saddle-horse, or pad-nag. Had, from the Belg. Had, or the
Teut. Hette, he had. An Haddock, from the Fr. G. Hadot, idem; a fish of the
kind of whitings. An Halt, from the AS. Haeft, Belg Heft, an haft, handle, or
hilt; this from the AS. Haeftan to have, or hold; because a sword is held by
the hilt. Hagard, a term in Faulconry; from the Fr. G. Hagard, stubborn; or
rather, q. d. V^gard, a Vagando, from wandering: Or from the AS. Haeg, Hegge, an
hedge; q. d. an hawk that delights to be in hedges. V. Hedge. An Hagg, from
the AS. Haegesse; which Somner. derives from the AS. Egeslic, ghost-like,
ghastly. It may also be drawn from the Belg. and Teut Hexe, a witch; or from the
Lat. Saga, an hag; for S is often turned into H. v, Hagger. Hagger, from the
Teut. Hager, lean; or from Hagard, wild; for when hawks fly abroad wild in the
woods, they are seldom fat. Haggess, a sheep's maw, filled with suet, and other
the entrals of a sheep minced; from the Teut. Hacken, to hackle, or cut small.
Haifer; Minshew draws it from Hay, and Fare; (i. e.) a young beast that
begins to eat hay: But rather from the AS. Heafore, the same; which comes
from Heah, high, and Fore, a gate, or way of going. Hail, from the AS. Hagol,
Hagle, the Belg. Haeghel, or the Teut. and Dan. Hagel, idem. Mer. Cas. derives
it from the Gr. (...), the same. Heinous, from the Fr. G. Haineux, odious; this
from Haine, hatred; and this again from Hair, to hate, or abhor. Hair, from the
AS. Haer, Hear, or the Belg. Haer, Hayr, the same; whence Haer bosch, a bush
of hair. To Hake, from the Belg. Haecken, to hanker after a thing. Hakot, a
word yet in use in the West of England; from the Belg. Heket, or the Teut.
Hecht, the fish called a pike: Or from the AS. Hacod, id. also a mullet.
Halbert, from the Fr. G. Halebarde, Hallebarde, or the Teut. Helbarte,
Hellebard, idem; a weapon that wounds both ways; this from Hell, glittering,
and Bard, Barte, an ax: Or from the old Germ. Halle, an hall; because the
Life-guard-men of Kings were armed with halberts. Versteg draws it from the
Teut. Held, a champion, and Bard, an ax. Halcion- days, (i. e.) pleasant days,
fair weather; ab Alcyone ave, from the bird called a King's-fisher; which
whilst she is a-laying her eggs at her usual time of the year, the sea is calm
all that time, and free from storms or tempests. To Hale, a term among Sailers,
signifying to call to one, to salute him; either from the Belg. Haelen, to call
upon; or the AS. Hal, whole; whence Haele, health, or safety; q. d. to wish one
all health and happiness. V. All Hail. To Hale, for to pull any way by force;
from the Teut. Hohlen, to lead away, to drag one about by force. Half, from the
AS. Half, the Belg. Half, the Teut. Halb, or the Dan. Halff, idem; and all not
unlikely from the AS. Hal, the whole, and Of, off; (i. e.) that which is taken
off from the whole. An Hall, from the AS. Healle, or from the Lat. Aula, idem;
and this from the Gr. (...), idem iterum. Fr. Jun. derives it from the Gr.
(...), the plat, or plot of an house. Halliards, a term in Sailing; (i. e.)
those cables by means whereof they hoise upward many others about the Sails. V.
To Hale; (i. e.) to pull up by force. Hallibut, a fish of the kind of plaice;
perhaps from the Belg. Heyl, wholesome; or the AS. Halig, Belg. Heiligh, holy,
and the Belg. Bot; as Botvisch, a butt-fish. V. Butt. To Hallow, v. Holy. To
Hallow, or rather Hollow, from the Fr. G. Haller, to cry aloud, as hunters do
to animate the dogs. Halm, or Haulm, stubble; from the AS. Healm, healme, idem;
or the blade of corn; and all, I suppose, from the Lat. Calamus, a reed; or
from Culmus, a blade, or stalk. Halser, or Hawser, a term in Sailing; from our
word, To Hale. To Halt, from the AS. Healt, lame; or Healtan, to halt; and
these from the AS Healdan, to hold; for such go slowly, as if they were
detained by something, or walk with a stick in their bands: Or from Heald,
leaning to one side; for such as are lame go not upright. To make an Halt, a
term in Warfare; from the Teut. Halten, to hold; (i. e.) to stop, or leave off:
Or from the Fr. G. Alto, high; (i. e.) to set pikes up on end, as Pike-men do
when they stand or stop in their march. An Halter, from the AS. Haelftre, the
Belg. Haelter, Halchter, Halster, or the Teut. Halftter, the same; and all from
the AS. Teut. and Belg. Hals, the neck: Or from the Teut. Halten, to hold;
because with it we curb an horse, or make him to stand. Hames, a word in use in
the Northern parts of England; where it is taken for two bent pieces of wood
that are put over an horse's shoulders; from the Lat. Hami, hooks; or rather,
from Camurus, in Virgil, which signifies, crooked; and this from the Gr.
(...), bent. Hamlet, from the Fr. G. Hameau, a village; both from the AS. Haem,
or Ham, an home, or village: V. Home. Spelman draws it from the same Ham, a
village, and the Teut. Let, or Lit, for Glied, a member; q. d. a part of a
village. Hamm, from the AS. Ham, the Belg. Hamme, Ham, or the Teut. Hamm, the
same; from hence, To Hammel a dog. Fr. Jun. derives the Teut. Hamme, from the
Gr. (...), a lump cut off from the rest. Hamer, or Hammer, from the AS. Hamer,
the Belg. Haemer, or the Dan. and Teut. Hammer, the same. It alludes to the Gr.
(...), to labor, or take pains. An Hammock, from the AS. Hamaca, a kind of
Indian bed, hung by four corners; this perhaps from the Hisp. Cama, a bed;
which in Isiodor. is taken for a short, low bed. Some derive it from the Gr.
(...), on the ground. An Hamper, a larger sort of basket. Hanch, from the Belg.
Hancke, Hencke, the Fr. G. Hanche, or the Ital. and Hisp. Anca, a thigh, or
hamm: Or from the Gr. (...), or (...), an arm, or shoulder; from whence comes
the Gr. Barb. (...), a leg, or hanch. Hand, from the AS. Hand, the Belg. Hant,
Hand, or the Teut. Hand, Handt, the same. Handkerchief, or Handkercher, from
Hand, and Kerchief, or Kercher, to wipe. An Handle, from the AS. Handle, idem;
or Handlian, or the Belg. Handelen, to handle. Handsome, well shaped; from the
Belg. Hand-saem, slight-handed: whence Handigh, with us, Handy, fit for any
thing. Hang, from the AS. Hangan, or the Belg. and Teut. Hangen, idem: This Fr.
Jun. ingeniously derives from Hahan, to heave, or lift up; and this from Hoh,
Teut. Hoch, high; q. d. to lift one up on high. An Hanger, from the Belg.
Hangher, idem: Or it is so called from its hanging by one's side. Hangers, or
Pot-hooks, from our word Hang; which see. Hangings, Arras, Tapestry, etc. from
our word Hang, which see. Hank; as, He has got an Hank of a thing, for an
habit, custom, or propensity of mind; from our word Hang; q. d. to hang, or
hanker after. Hanker, to covet a thing earnestly. V. Hake, and Hang. An Hansel,
when we sell the first parcel of a Commodity; either from the Belg. Hansel, a
New-years-gift, or a New-days-gift: Or from the AS. Hand, an hand, and Syllan,
to give. Hans- Towns, from the Germ. Hansz, or the Belg. Hans, a Fellow of a
Society; (i. e.) towns of the same society and confederacy. To Hant, from the
Fr. G. Hanter, to frequent. To Hap, as they say in Lincolnshire, from the AS.
Heapian, to heap up; whence Heap, an heap; q. d. to heap up, or load with
bed-cloths. To Happen, or fall out: Minshew derives it from the Fr. G. Happer,
to snap up hastily; and this from the Belg. Happen, or the Gr. (...), to snatch
a thing up. Harang, from the Fr. G. Harangue, a Sermon, or Oration. Menagius
derives it from the Teut. Horung; with us, Hearing; because it is spoken to the
end that the Assembly may hear it. But since the Italians write it Arringo, I
had rather derive it from our Eng. Ring; because at the making of a speech, the
Auditors stand as it were in a ring; that is, on every side. To Harass, from
the Fr. G. Harasser, to vex, or hurry; also to lay all waste; this perhaps from
the AS. Hergian, or the Teut. Heeren, to spoil; and this again from the AS.
Here, or the Teut. Here, an army. V. Hurry. Harbinger, from the Teut. and Belg.
Herberger; that is, one that goes before, and procures a lodging for others. V.
Harbor. Harbor, from the Belg. Herberghe, Teut. Herberg, Fr. G. Hauberge,
Herberge, Hisp. Alvergue, or the Ital. Albergo, an Inn, or place for
entertaining travelers; all from the Ger. Her, hither, or here, and Bergen, to
hide, or cover. Hardy, from the Fr. G. Hardi, or the Ital. Ardito, courageous;
both from the Lat. Ardor, heat; or Ardere, to be inflamed with desire. An Hare,
from the AS. Hara, Dan. Hare, Belg. Haese, Teut. and Fr. G. Hase, or the Arab.
Hazaz, idem. To Hare one, to affright one, or harass him; from the Fr. G.
Harier, to vex; and this perhaps from the AS. Hergian, to pillage; which comes
from Here, an army. Hare-brain'd, out of his right senses; from our word, to
Hare, and Brain; that is, one that is hared, or scared out of his wits. An
Hare-foot, a bird so called, from the similitude of an hares foot. Hare-lipp'd;
that is, he or she whose lip is parted in two. V. Hare, and Lip. Harier, a
dog's name; from Hare, because it implies such a dog as is good at hunting the
hare. Harken, or Hearken, from the AS. Heorcnian, or the Teut. Horchen, to lend
an ear to; and both from the Verb to Hear; which see. Harlot; some derive it
from one Arlotta, that was Miss to Robert Duke of Normandy, and Mother to
William the Conqueror; or, as Cambden will have it, from one Arlotha, that was
Concubine to the Conqueror himself: Or most likely from the Ital. Arlotta, a
proud Whore: Or lastly, as the ingenious Dr. Th. H. has it, q. Whorelet, or
Horelet; (i. e) a little Whore. Harm, from the AS. Hearm, loss, or damage: Or
perhaps from the Lat. Arma, arms; because arms offensive are reckoned among
things harmful. Harness, from the Teut. Harnisch, Fr. G. Harnois, Harnas, Hisp.
Arnes, or the Ital. Arneso, furniture for horses. Harp, from the AS. Hearpe,
Belg. Haerpe, Harp, Teut. Harpse, Fr. G. Harp, or the Ital. and Hisp. Harpa,
idem; all perhaps from the Gr. (...), to ravish, for the pleasantness of the
music. Harping-trous, instruments of iron which Seamen strike whales and
great fishes withal; from the Lat. Harpago, an hook; and this from the Gr.
(...), to catch hold of. Harpsical, a kind of musical instrument; from Harp,
and the Fr. G. Chorde, or the Lat. Chorda, a string to any musical instrument.
Harquebuss, from the Fr. G. Arquebuse, the Ital. Archibugio, Arcobugio, or the
Belg. Arcke-Buyse, or Haeck-Buyse, a greater sort of hand gun, or Musket.
Kilian derives it from Haeck, an hook, and Busse, Buyse, a conduit-pipe:
Menagius, from the Ital. Arco, a bow, and Bugio, an hole; because such weapons
are now used instead of bows. A Sea- Harr, as it is said in Lincolnshire, when
a storm is a-coming from the sea-ward; from the Fr. G. Harier, to hare: V.
Harry. Or from the AS. Haern, a full tide. An Harrow, from the Fr. G. Harse,
Herce; and both from the Teut. Scharren, to scrape: Or from the Lat. Sarculum,
the same, or a weeding-hook. To Harry, from the Fr. G. Harier, to torment, or
to Hare, which see above. Harsh, severe, crabbed, or sour; from the Teut.
Herbisch, somewhat sharp; this from Herb, austere, rugged, intractable, or
rather, from the Belg. Hersch, or the AS. Has, hoarse; (i. e.) he that has a
great and awful voice. An Heart, or Stag, from the AS. Heort, the Belg. Heart,
Heart; or the Teut. Hersch, the same. Heart of oak; not as many write it, Heart
of oak; that is, the innermost part of an oak; but rather from the Teut. Heart,
hardness; because it is the most firm or hard part of an oak. V. Hard. Harvest,
from the AS. Haerfest, the Belg. Harfst, Herfst, or the Teut. Herbst, Autumn,
all which the famous Dr. Th. H. derives from Hertho, a God of the ancient
Germans, whom they adored for Vesta, and Feast; q. d. the feast of Vesta, or
the earth: Or from Herba, and Feast; because it is the season wherein herbs (
i. e. corn) are gathered into barns; at which time Country-Farmers do usually
make a feast for their Reapers, having finished their harvest. To Hase, or
Hawze, to affright one with a sudden shout; from the AS. Has, the Teut.
Heiser, Heischer, hoarse; or Heischen, to be importunate in requesting any
thing: Or from the Interjection of threatening, Haw. Hasle-nut, from the AS.
Haesl-nutu, the Belg. Hasel-noot, or the Teut. Hasel-nuz, the same; all perhaps
from our word Haste; because it is ripe before wall nuts and chest-nuts. An
Hog's Haslets, or Harslets, from the Fr. G. Hastilles, the guts; and this
perhaps from the Fr. G. Haste a spit; because they are fastened to a spit, and
so roasted. Haste manifestly comes from the Lat. Hasta, a spear; and
metaphorically, a spit. An Hasp, or Reel, from the Fr. G. Haspe, or the Teut.
Haspel, a reel to wind yarn or thread on. Hasp, by a Metathesis, from the AS.
Haeps, a lock; also a button. V. Hasp, above. Hassock, from the Teut. Hase, an
hare, and Socks; because hare-skins are sometimes wore instead of socks, to
keep the feet warm in Winter. Haste, from the Teut. Hase, an hare; q. d. to
run, or make haste, as an hare pursued. Hastings, a forward kind of pease; from
our word Hasten; because they are full, and in season before other sorts of
pulse; and therefore may, in some sense, be said to make haste. Hat, from the
AS. Haet, the Teut. Hut, or the Belg Hoed, the same; these from the Teut.
Huten, and Belg. Hoeden, to protect; because it defends the head. The Hatch
of a door, from the AS. Haeca, Belg. Heck, Hecke, idem; usually put before
doors, to keep out Beggars and Pilferers. To Hatchel Flax, from the Teut.
Hechesn, idem; whence Hechel, an heckle. Minshew draws it, from the Fr. G.
Hacher, to hackle, or cut small. The Hatches of a ship; Minsh. takes them to
be thus called, because they fall to like the Hatch of a door; which see.
Hatchet, from the Fr. G. Hatchette, a little ax; and this from Hache, or the
Hisp. Hacha, an ax; all from the Lat. Ascia, which comes from the Gr. (...),
the same; which again is derived from (...), the mouth, or sharp side of any
edged-tool. To Hate, from the AS. Hatian, Hatan, Belg. Haeten, Teut. Hassen, or
the Fr. G. Hair, Hayr, the same. Have, from the Belg. Halben, Teut. Haven, AS.
Habban, Fr. G. Avoir, or the Ital. Avere, the same; and all from the Lat.
Habere, to have. Haven, from the Belg. Haven, Teut. Hafen, Dan. Haffn, or the
Fr. G. Havre, a port; which comes either from the old Brit. Aber, the mouth of
any river, as Cambden has it; or from the Dan. and Goth. Haff, the sea. Haver
de poise, from the Fr. G. Avoir du pooids, to have weight; because it is a
weight, or pound, consisting of sixteen ounces; and therefore more weighty than
Troy-weight, where twelve ounces make a pound. Haughty, from the Fr. G.
Hautain, or Haultain, proud, high-minded; this from Haut, high; and this again
from the Lat. Altus, idem. Havoc, a wasting; from a ravenous bird, which in
the AS. is called Hafoc; with us, Hawk. Hauriant; as, a Dolphin Hauriant, a
term in Heraldry; not ab Hauxiendo, from drawing, as one would imagine at first
sight; but from the Lat. Oriens, rising up; that is, rising straight upward out
of the water. It is also meant of any fish that is in such wise drawn upon an
Escutcheon. An Haw, from the AS. Hagan, the fruit of the white-thorn; this not
unlikely from the AS. Haeg, an hedge; because it grows in hedges. Haw, a word
frequently used in Kent; from the AS. Haga, or Haeg, a little field, or
enclosed close; and this from Haegian, to hedge about. v. Hedge. An Haw in the
eye, from some likeness of the other Haw, that grows upon the hawthorn. An
Hawk, from the AS. Hafoc, Hafuc, the Belg. Havick, or the Teut. Habick, idem. V
ssius draws it from the belg. Happen, to catch hold of. The learned Dr. Th. H.
draws it from the Lat Falco, a falcon. To Hawk, or to reach in spitting, from
the Teut. Hauehen, to blow hard; or the Dan. Harcker, to hawk; and all feigned
from the sound. Hawses, a term in Sailing; the great round holes, through which
the cables are put when a ship rides at anchor; perhaps from the Fr. G.
Hausser, to hoise up; because the anchor is drawn upward by means of such
holes. Haw-thorn, the thorn that bears the fruit called haw. Minshew will
have it so called from the Belg. Haeg doren, q. hedge-thorn. V. Hedge, Thorn,
and Haw. Hay, to dance the Hay, from the Fr. G. Hay, an hedge; q. d. Dancer a
la Hay, to dance in a ring, after the form of an hedge made about an hayrick.
V. Hedge. Hay, from the AS. Hieg, Hig, the Belg. Hey, Heavy, or the Teut. Hew,
hay; whence Hewstock, and the Dan Hoestack, a stack, or rick of hay. Fr. Jun.
derives it from the Gr. (...), which in Hesychius and Suid. is put for (...),
grass. Hay, a net to catch coneys withal; from the Fr. G. Hay, the AS Haeg,
Hege, or the Belg. Haege, an hedge; which come from the Fr. G. Hayer, the AS.
Hegian, and the Belg. Haeghen, to hedge about; because coneys are hedged up,
and tangled in such a net. Hazard, from the Fr. G. Hazard, danger; and this
from the Hisp. Azar, an ace, or dogchance at dice; which is an unlucky chance.
He, from the AS. Hyse, Hise, or the Belg. Hy, he. The AS. Hise, is drawn from
the Lat. Is, or Ipse, he. Head, from the AS. Heafod, Haefde, the Belg. Hoofd,
or the Teut. Haupt, idem. Head, a termination denoting Quality, or State: See
the termination Hood. Head-borough, from Head, and the AS. Borge, a Surety: Not
as Verstegan would have it, the Head of a Borough, or Town-corporate; but the
same with that term in our Law, Frank-pledge; for which consult Cowel. To Heal,
or Cure, from the AS. Haelan, the Belg. Heelen, or the Teut. Heylen, to make
whole; whence the AS. Hael, Hal, whole: All perhaps from the Teut. Helen,
Halen, or the AS. Helan, to cover. Notwithstanding, the AS. Hael, Haela may
easily be drawn from the Lat. Salus, health, by turning S into H, or the Note
of Aspiration; as, vice versa, is frequently done, in (...), Sylva; (...), Sus,
etc. Health, v. Heal: Minshew draws it from the Gr. (...), sound, healthful. An
Heap, from the AS. Heap, Hype, Fr. Th. Huffo, Hough, Teut. Hauff, or the Belg.
Hoop, idem; this last from the Lat. Copia, plenty. To Hear, from the AS. Hyran,
the Belg. Hooren, or the Teut. Horen, idem. An Heard, or Herd of cattle, from
the Belg. Herd, or the Teut. Herd, a flock. Hearse- cloth, perhaps from the
Teut. Hulse, an husk; and this from the AS. Helan, to cover; it being, as it
were, the outer husk, or covering of a corpse. Heart, from the AS. Heort, Dan.
Hierte, Teut. Hertz, Fr. Th. Heart, or the Belg. Heart, idem; whence the AS.
Heorta, hearty, and Hyrtan, Belg. Herten, to hearten, or animate. Hearth, from
the AS. Heorth, the Belg. Haerd, Heerd, or the Teut. Herd, the same; and all
perhaps from the Gr. (...), the earth; or (...), beneath, or under. Heat, from
the AS. Heat, Haetn, the Belg. Hitte, or the Fr. Th. Hizze, Hitze, idem; whence
Hetza Sunna, the hot Sun: These from the AS. Hat, or the Belg. Heet, hot; and
these again from the AS. Hatian, the Belg. Heeten, and the Teut. Heitzen, to
heat, make hot, or warm. Heath, from the AS. Haeth, Butcher's-broom; or the
Belg. Heyde, Heyd, Ling. Minshew derives it from the Gr. (...), to burn;
because it soon takes fire. Heath-cock, a fowl so called, because it abides
most commonly among heaths. Heathen, from the AS. Haethen, or the Belg. and
Teut. Heyden; and all from the Lat. Ethnicus, a Pagan, or Gentile. Vossius
derives it from the Germ. Heyde, heath, or a barren place in the countries;
because, when the Gospel was first preached to the Gentile-world, throughout
their several cities, heathenish rites and ceremonies were for a long time
celebrated in some places far remote from any city, in deserts; or, in Pagis,
in villages; and hence it is, that such were called Pagans. To Heave, from the
AS. Heafian, to lift up; and this from Heah, high, the Belg. Heven, Heffen, the
Teut. Heben, or the Fr. Th. Heffan, to lift up on high; and all perhaps from
the Lat. Levo, to lift, or hold up. Heaven, from the AS. Hefen, Heofen, idem;
and this from Heafian, to heave, or lift up; because it is placed above, on
high; or because we lift up our eyes to behold it. Heavy, from the AS. Heafig,
Hefig, sad, weighty. Heckle, an instrument to break flax withal; from the Belg.
Hackelen, to break small, to hackle. V. Hack. Hedge, from the AS. Hegge, Haeg,
the Belg. Haege, or the Teut. Hag. Hage, idem; whence the AS. Hegian, and the
Teut. Hagen, to hedge about; as also the Belg. Quick-haege, a quick mound.
Hedgehog; so called, because in body and bristles it is like an hog, and hides
it self in hedges. Heed, from the AS. Hedan, to beware: Or from the Belg.
Hoed^, or the Teut. Hut, custody; whence the Belg. Hoeden, and Teut. Huten, to
guard. Heel of the foot, from the AS. Hele, or the Dan. Hael, idem. Heels, the
ship Heels; (i. e.) it leans to one side; from the AS. Hylding, a leaning to
one side: Or from the Belg. Helden, to lean toward. Here, from the AS Haer,
Here, or the Belg. and Teut. Her, Hier, Heic, idem; which comes from the Lat.
Heic, Hic, here: Hence the AS. Hyr-Efter, hereafter; and Belg. Herwaerts,
hereward. Hegler, a Fore-staller, or Huckster; from the Teut. Hacke, a
Woman-Hegler: Or from the Teut. Heuchelen, Heuchen, to flatter; because such
persons go to and again to great men's houses, where by fair and false words
they insinuate themselves into favor, the better to put off their endamaged
commodities. Heir, from the Fr. G. Hoir; and both from the Lat. Haeres, idem.
Hell, from the AS. and Teut. Hell, or the Belg. Hell the same. Mins. derives it
from the Gr. (...), a lake, or pit. It may also be drawn from the AS. Hole, an
hole, or hollow space under the earth. Helm, from the AS. Helm, Belg. and Teut.
Helm, Fr. G. Heaume, or the Ital. Elmo, Elmetto, an helmet; all from the AS.
Haelme, a roof. The learned Dr. Th. H. supposes that Helmet is so called, q.
Helmond; and derives it from the AS. Helan, to cover, and the Belg. and Teut.
Mond, Mund, a mouth, or face. Helm of a ship, from the other Helm; which see.
To Help, from the AS. Helpan, the Belg. Helpen, or the Teut. Helffen, idem;
whence the AS. Help, Ulph, the Belg. Hulpe, and the Teut. Hulff, help, or aid.
Minshew draws it from the Gr. (...), hope. Helter Skelter, rashly, confusedly;
perhaps from the AS. Heolster Sceado, the Chaos of darkness, the shadow of
Hell, or Death, a place of unspeakable confusion, of which the indistinct Chaos
was a type: Or rather, from the Belg. Holle, wholly, all over; Ter, to; and
Schetteren, to scatter with a rustling, or chinking, etc. Helve, from the AS.
Helfe, or the Teut. Helm, an handle, or hilt; and this from the AS. Haelme, a
roof, because it is the top of a sword, and serves to defend the hand: Or from
the AS. Heald, to hold; because we hold weapons by their helves, or hilts. An
Hem, from the AS. Hem, the same: Or from the Lat. Ambire, to hem in, or to
compass about. To Hem, from the Belg. Hemmen, or Hummen, or the Ital. Hannire,
to call to one at a distance: Or rather, from the Lat. Interjection of Calling,
Hem; all possibly from the sound. To Hem in, perhaps from the Teut. Hemmen, to
detain, or to encompass one so that he cannot fairly withdraw himself. Hemp,
from the Teut. Hanff, the Belg. Ramp the Fr. G. Chauvre, or the Ital. Cannapa,
Cannevo, idem; and all from the Lat. and Gr. Cannabis, the same. Hen, from the
AS. and Dan. Hen, Haen, or the Belg. and Teut. Hen, Hen, the same.
Hen-bane, an herb so called, because it is, or was formerly bane, or poison to
hens The learned Dr. Th. H. surmizeth, that it may be so called, q. Hen-bean;
(i. e.) the Hens bean; because its flowers are not unlike to a bean in its
blossom. Hence, from the AS. Heonan, or the Teut. Hin, idem; and this from the
Lat. Hinc, henceforth, hereafter. An Hench-man, the same with a Page; q. d.
Hines-man; from the AS. Hine, a servant, and Man, a man. Spelman draws it from
the AS. Hengift, an horse, and Man; q. d. a Groom, or he that looks after
horses Heppen, or Heply, a word frequently used in Lincolnshire, which
signifies handy, or industrious: I suppose it is the same with Helply, or
Helpful, which see. Herald, from the Fr. G. Herault, Heraut, the Ital. Araldo,
the Hisp. Heraldo, or the Teut. Herold, all the same; a Proclaimer, or Crier.
Versteg. derives it from the AS. Here, an army, and the Teut. Held, a champion;
or it may be drawn from the Belg. Heer-Alt, an Elder, or Senior in an Army: Or
from the AS. Here, an army, or the Teut. Herr, a master; that is, one that is
sworn to be faithful to an army, or master: Or from the same Here, an army, and
Ald, a servant: Or lastly, as Minshew has it, from Heierbolden to put an end
to; because they are sent to bring wars to an end, and to proclaim a future
peace. Herbal, from the Ital. Herbale, a book that gives a description of
herbs; and this from the Lat. Herba, an herb: From hence, an Herbalist; that
is, one that by study searches into the nature of herbs. Heretofore, from the
Teut. Herzuvor, the same. Heritage, from the Fr. G. Heritage, or the Ital.
Hereditaggio, Hereditanza, an inheritance; and all from the Lat. Haeres, an
heir. V. Inherit. Hermit, from the Fr. G. Hermit, Ermite, the Ital. Hermita,
or the Lat. Ermita, all the same; one that, for the sake of Religion,
renounceth humane society; all from the Gr. (...), a desert: From hence, an
Hermitage; as also the Fr. G. Hermitage, that privy place where Hermits abide.
Heron, from the Fr. G. Hairon, Heron, the Ital. Hierone, Airone, or the Hisp.
Ayrone, idem; and these from the L^^. Ardea, the same; or from the Lat. Aer,
the air; because it is a bird that flies aloft in the air: Or from the Teut.
Eyer, eggs. Herricane, a word well known by such as sail to America, signifying
a storm, or tempest; from the Hisp. Huracan, Vracan, a whirlwind, or storm. V.
Hurry. Herring, from the AS. Haering, the Belg. Herinck, the Fr G. Hareng, or
the Teut. Haring, the same; whence the AS. Herinc, a Rondelet. Heurts, a term
in Heraldry; from the Fr. G. Heurtes, blew pills. Guillim. takes them to be
drawn like Hurtle-berries, Whortle berries, or Bill-berries. Hew, or Hue, from
the AS. He, Hye, color, fashion; or Hian, to form, or hew out. To Hew, from
the AS. Heaian, the Belg. Hauwen, Houwen, or the Teut. Hawen, to cleave, to cut
asunder. Hey-day, an Interjection of Admiring; q. d. High-day, O joyful day! O
happy day! An Hey-net, used by Hunters: See Hay, of the same signification.
Hickock, or Hicket, from the Dan. Hicken, the Belg. Hick, or the Fr. G.
Houquet, Hocquet, a sobbing: In the AS. Sicettan, the Belg. Hicken, and the
Teut. Hixen, all signifying to sob; from the sound. Hick-wall, Hick-way, or
Wood-pecker, from the AS. Hicgan, to try, to search thoroughly; because it
strikes its bill against a tree, or wall, and so makes an hole therein. To
Hide, from the AS. Hydan, to conceal; the Belg. Ho den, Haeden, or the Teut.
Huten, to keep. An Hide, or Skin, from the AS. Hyde, the Belg. Haude, Huyd, or
the Teut. Haut, id. and all perhaps from the AS. Hydan, with us, to Hide; for
it hides, (i. e.) covers the body: Or from the Teut. Huten, to guard;
because it guardeth the body. Hideous, from the Fr. G. Hideux, that which
astonisheth: Or from the Gr. (...), to see; (i. e.) (...), terrible to be seen.
It is also derived of the AS. Hedan, to take heed; or Hydean, to hide; it
signifying a thing from which every one naturally takes care to hide himself.
High, from the AS. Heah, the Dan. Hey, the Belg. Ho, Hoogh, or the Teut. Hoch,
idem. Hill, from the AS. Hill, the Fr. Th. Huuele, or the Belg. Hille, the
same. It seems to be a Contract of the Teut. Hogel; or rather, as they
pronounce it, Higel, or Highel, which may come from the Eng. High, because it
is higher than other parts of the earth. Hillock, a little hill; the Diminutive
of Hill; which see. Hilt, from the AS. Helt, the Belg. Hilte, Hielte, the Ital.
Elsa, Elza, an helve; or perhaps, q. d. the Hold. V. Hold. Him, from the AS.
Him, Hime, or the Teut. Him the same; the Cyprians used (...), and the Poets
(...), for him, or her. An Hind, from the AS. Hind, the Belg. Hiinde, or the
Teut. Hind, idem; and all from the Lat. Hinnus, which comes from the Gr.
(...), a colt, the foal of a mare, or mule, metaphorically. Hind-berries, the
fruit of the Ras berry-tree; so called perhaps because they grow mostly where
hinds or deer frequent; (i. e.) in woods, or forests. To Hinder, from the AS.
Hindrian, the Belg. Hinderen, or the Teut. Hindern, the same; whence the Dan.
Forhindrer, to put one back in doing a thing. Hinge, from the Belg. Hinge, or
Henge, idem; both from our word Hang, because the door hangs upon it. To
Hint, or give one a touch of a thing; from the Fr. G. Enter, to implant. Hip,
from the AS. Hipe, the Belg. Heupe, Huppe, or the Teut. Hufft, all signifying a
thigh. Hippes, in Chaucer, Hipe, the fruit of the greater bramble; from the AS.
Heopa, the same; or Hiope, a wild rose; that is, the rose that grows upon the
great bramble. Hippocras, from the Fr. G. Hipocras, an Aromatic wine; so
called, because it is strained through a woollen cloth, called Hippocrates's
sleeve. Hire, from the AS. Hyran, or the Belg. Hueren, to hire; whence the AS.
Hyre, and Belg. Huere, signifying, ones hire, or wages. His, from the AS. His,
him, the same. To Hiss, from the AS. Hiscean, the Belg Hissen, Hisschen, the
Teut. Zischen, or the Ital. Sischiare, to hiss; or Siss, as they say in
Lincolnshire; all possibly from the sound. Historian, from the Fr. G.
Historien, idem; and both from the Lat. Historia, an history. To Hit: Minshew
ingeniously derives it from the Lat. Ictus, a blow, by adding thereto the note
of Aspiration. To Hitch, a term in Sailing; which is expounded, to catch hold
of any thing with a cable, or hook, and so to hold it fast; perhaps from the
Fr. G. Ficher, and this from the Lat. Figere, to fasten. To Hitch, as we say,
Hitch- buttock, and Hitch- neighbors; from the AS. Hicgan, to endeavor, to
strive: Or from the Fr. G. Hocher, to shake; which comes from the Lat.
Quassare, to shake much. V. Level coyl. Hitchel, v. Heckle. Hithe, as
Queen-Hithe, from the AS. Hyth, a port, or haven. Hither, from the AS. Hither,
whence Hithereard, hitherward. Hive from the AS. Hyfe, a bee-hive; this perhaps
from the Belg. Huyven, to cover the head. Hive-dross, that which bees make at
the entrance of their hive, to expel the cold withal; not from Hive, and Dross,
as one would verily think at first sight; but from Hive, and the Teut. Trost.
trust, or comfort; for it comfort the bees, by saving them from the cold.
Ho, Gee-Ho, a fictitious word used by our Coach men and Car-men, whilst they
drive their horses. Hoarse, from the Belg. Heersch, the same; and both from
their harsh sound, thereby expressing hoarsness it self. Hoary, from the AS.
Har, gray; or Harian, to grow gray. Minshew draws it from the Gr. (...); or
rather, (...), timely. Hoary, musty; from the AS. Horig, filthy; this from
Horg, Horh, or Horeen, nastiness, filth. Hob, a contract of Robin; as,
Robin-good-fellow. v. Goblius. Hobble, perhaps from the Belg. Habbelen, or
Hobben, the same; with us, to leap a little way at once: To Hopple. V. Hop.
Hobby, from the Fr. G. Haubereau, Aubereau, an hawk that preyeth upon doves,
larks, etc. An Hobbyhorse, from the Fr. G. Hobin, a pad-nag: Or from the Fr.
G. Aubere, or the Hisp. Hobero, an ash-colored horse; and these perhaps from
the Lat. Albus, white. Hobgoblins, q. d. Robgoblins, from Robin-good fellow, or
from Oberon, King of Fayries. v. Goblins. Hobotes, a musical instrument; from
the Fr. G. Haultbois, high wood; (i. e.) a wooden instrument of an high sound.
To Hockle, q. d. H^ughle; that is, to ham-string; from Hough, which see.
Hock-tide, Hock-day, and Hock-Tuesday: Spelman says, that it is a festival-day
which the English set apart, to be kept as a Memorial of the Danes being
driven out of the land; from the AS. Heah tid, the Belg. Hoogh-tyd, or the
Teut. Hochzelt, an high time; or as we say, an High Day. V. Tide. Hocus Pocus,
a Conjurer, or Jugler; perhaps from the Fr. G. Hocher, to shake, and Pocher, to
poke, or thrust forward with the finger; for all the art in Legerdemain lies
in this, viz. in shaking their little balls in boxes, or the like; and so
quickly, with dexterity of hand, snatching away what was there-under before,
and leaving oftentimes somewhat else in its room, with which they beguile the
spectators. Hoe, from the Fr. G. He, Eho, an Interjection of calling; from the
sound, as many other Interjections besides it are. H^g, a sheep of the second
year; from the AS. Hogan, to take care of; or Hoga, care; because they being
young and tender, the Shepherd is to take more care about them than the rest of
the flock. An Hog, or Swine, from the AS. Suge, Sugu, or the Belg. Soegh,
Soech, a sow; and both from the Lat. Sucula, a little sow. Hogoo, from the Fr.
G. Haut Goust, a great smell, or unpleasant relish, fuming up out of the
stomach, into the mouth, after the eating of victuals not well seasoned.
Hogshead, a measure so called. Minshew derives it from the Belg. Dekshood, and
Ogshood, the same. Some derive it from the Lat. Orca, a great vessel for wine,
and the Belg. Hoofd, an head. To Hoise, from the Fr. G. Hausser, to lift up;
and this from Haut, high; (i. e.) to heave up on high. To Hold, from the AS.
Healdan, the Belg. Houden, or the Teut. Halten, to hold, stay, and
metaphorically to set a rate on things to be sold; as we say, What held he his
commodity at? All perhaps from the Belg. Houd, an handle, or helve, by which
things are held. The Hold, a term in Sailing, the lowest room in a ship,
wherein provision is laid; from our word Hold, because it holds Sea-men's
necessaries. To Hold of the King, or a Lord: It may simply be drawn from our
word, to Hold; that is, to enjoy some Living, or Estate by the King's, or a
Lord's donation: And for this reason our Law has made use of the words Tenant,
and Tenement; both coming from the Lat. Teneo, to hold: Or from the AS. and
Belg. Hold, faithful; or the Teut. Huldigen; as we say, to pay Homage to his
Lord. An Hole, from the AS. Hole, or Hol, idem; whence Holian, Aholan, to
hollow: There is also in the Belg. and Teut. Hol, of the very same
signification. Minshew draws it from the Gr. (...), hollow. Holidom, Halidom,
or Holidame, an ancient way of swearing; either, as Somnerus has it, from the
AS. Haligdom, sanctity; or from the AS. Halig, holy, and Dom, Dome, doom, or
judgment; or lastly, it may be drawn from our Eng. Holy-Dame; that is, an oath
taken in the name of the holy Dame, or the Virgin Mary; which is most likely.
Holly, from the AS. Holegen, the same; and this from the AS. Hol, whole, and
Eege, an edge; because the leaves of one sort of these trees are whole, without
any breach in them: Or from the Fr. G. Houx; which Menagius draws from the Gr.
(...), sharp; another sort thereof being prickly about the edges. Hollow, He
carried it Hollow; that is, overcame by much; and is as much as if one should
say, He carried it Wholly; either from the AS. Allic, the whole, all; or
Wallig, wholly. Hollow, v. Hole. Holm, an AS. word, signifying an hill or isle
encompassed with little brooks or rivers: It is also a termination to many
words still in use. Holster, a case for a lesser sort of gun; either from the
Teut. Hulse, an husk, unto which it is like; or from our word, to Hold; or from
the AS. Helan, or the Teut. Helen, to cover. Holt, from the AS. Holt, a wood;
in Lincolnshire it is put to signify a forest, or a great number of any trees,
set somewhat close one to another. Holy, from the AS. Halig, the Belg. Heyligh,
or the Teut. Heylig, idem; whence the AS. Halgian, to hallow, or consecrate.
Homage, from the Fr. G. Homage, Hommage, or the Ital. Homaggio, allegiance,
fidelity; these from the Fr. G. Homme, or the Lat. Homo, a man; q. d. the duty
of a man, (i. e.) a Client, or Beneficiary; for the word Man is taken for a
Servant, and a Soldier that receives pay. Home, from the AS. Ham, Haem, ones
habitation, or mansion; whence Hameard, homeward; and the Fr. G. Hameau; with
us, an Hamlet. Fr. Jun. derives it from the Gr. (...), together; because it is
the place where we are wont to be together. Homely, not handsome: It primarily
denotes one that has course raiment on, such as is usually wore at home, where
there is seldom need of splendid or costly attire. An Hone: Mer. Cas. derives
it from the Gr. (...), a whetstone. It may, with more likelihood, be drawn from
the AS. Haen, a stone; and though this word be not read in Somnerus, yet we
read Haenan, to stone; so that there is no doubt but the Noun Haen was formerly
used by the English Saxons. Honey, from the AS. Hunig, the Belg. Honigh, or the
Teut. Honeg, the same; all not improbably from the AS. Hife, an hive, or
family; because it is made up by families, (i. e.) swarms, or hives of bees.
Honey, upon the King's Arms; the whole Motto is this, Honey soit qui mal y pense;
(i. e.) ill to him that ill thinks; from the Fr. G. Honey, out of use; for which
is now used Honte, ignominy, shame. Hood, in composition, as in Manhood,
Priesthood, etc. from the Belg. Heyd, the Teut. Heit, or the AS. Had, Hade, a
condition, or state. An Hood, from the AS. Hod, the Belg. Hoed, Hoete, or the
Teut. Hut the same; these from the Belg. Hoeden, Hueden, or the Teut. Huten, to
defend, or keep safe. Hoo^, from the AS. Hof, the Belg. Hoef, or the Teut.
Huff, the same. An Hook, from the AS. and Hisp. Hoce, or the Belg. Haeckt,
Hoeck, of the same signification; all possibly from the Lat. Vncus, crooked. To
Hoop, or Whoop, from the Fr. G. Houper, to cry out insignificantly: Or from the
Cimbr. Op, a bewailing, or lamentation; all fictitious words. An Hoop, from the
AS. Hop, or the Belg. Hoep, the same; all originally from the Fr. G. Couper, to
cut, or cleave. To Hoot, from the Fr. G. Huer, Huyer, to whoop; both feigned
from the sound. To Hop, from the AS. Hoppan, the Belg. Hippelen, Huppen, or the
Teut. Hupffen, to leap a little; whence Hupff, an hop, or leap; all primarily
from the Belg. Huppe, the hip, upon which the stress of hopping depends. An
Hop, from the Belg. Hop, Hoppe, the Fr. G. Houblon, or the Teut. Hopff, the
same. Hope, from the AS. Hopa, or the Belg. Hope, the same; whence the AS.
Hopian. Belg. Hopen, and Teut. Hoffen, to hope. Hopper- ars'd, from our word
Hop; for such, when they go along, seem, as it were, to hop on the way. Hopper,
Mill-Hopper, we may call it a funnel, through which corn is poured into the
mill; perhaps from the AS. Cop, a top, or head; or from its hopping to and
again when the Mill goes. An Hoppet, a word which in Lincolnshire is used for a
basket to carry fruit about in; perhaps from Corbet, a little basket; and this
from Corbis, a basket, by adding the termination et, which diminishes. To
Hopple an horse, to tie his feet with a rope; from the Lat. Copulare; that is,
to couple his feet together. To Hord, from the AS. Hord, a treasure; or Hordan,
to lay up riches. Horn, from the AS. Teut. and Dan. Horn, or the Belg. Hooren,
Horen, the same; all undoubtedly from the Lat. Cornu, an horn. An Hornet, from
the AS. Hyrnet, a fly so called; because it has little horns on its head.
Horse, from the AS. Horse, the Teut. Rosz or the Belg. Ros, idem; from hence our
word Horse-leech, (i. e.) a leech that does fasten it self upon horses legs,
and by sucking away corrupted blood, helps them in several distempers. V.
Leech. Hose, from the AS. Hosa, the Belg. and Dan. Hose, the Fr. G. Chausse,
the Hisp. Caleas the Ital. Ca^zi, or the Teut. Hosen, the same. It may perhaps
be drawn from the Ital. Huose, high-shooes. Hospitable, from the Fr. G.
Hospitable, idom; this again from Hospes, a guest; q. d. one given to
hospitality; he that entertaineth strangers kindly. Hospital, from the Fr. G.
and Hisp. Hospital, or the Ital. Hospedale, an house built pro Hospitio, for
the entertainment of indigent, or diseased persons. An Host, from the Fr. G.
Host, Ost, or the Ital. Host, an army; and both from the Lat. Hostis, an enemy
in war. An Host, he that keeps public lodgings for passingers, or others;
from the Fr G. and Ital. Host, which comes from the Lat. Hospes, an host; also
a guest. Hostage, from the Fr. G. Hostage, Ostage, or the Ital. Hostaggio, a
pledge in war; all from the Lat. Hostis, the enemy; because hostages are
demanded, and received from the enemy. Hostery, or Hostelry, from the Fr. G.
Hostellerie, or the Ital. Hostaria, an Inn; this again from the Fr. G. Hostel,
an house, or hall. Hostess, from the Fr. G. Hostess, or the Ital. Hostessa, an
Host's wife that keeps a public Inn. Hotch-potch, or Hodge-podge, from the
Fr. G. Hochepot, or the Belg. Hutspot, a Gallimawfrey; and these from the Fr.
G. Hocher, and the Belg. Hutsen, to shake, and Pot; q. d. Shake pot.
Hot-cockles, a play very well known; perhaps from the Fr. G. Hautes Coquilles.
Hover, from the Belg. Huyveren, to chatter with cold: Or from the other Hover,
because when we are a-cold, we stretch, or spread forth our hands toward the
fire, so to receive more warmth, leaning forwards with our bodies. To Hover, to
fly about with wings stretched out at length, as a bird over her prey; from the
AS. Heafian, to heave up; or from our word, to Cover; or from the Fr. G.
Couver, or the Ital. Covare, to coure, as an hen does upon her eggs. Hough,
from the AS. Hoh, or the Belg. Haessen, the hough, or ham. An Houlet, from the
Fr. G. Hulette, Houlotte, a little owl; all from our word Howl; which see. An
Hound, from the AS. Hunde, the Belg. Houd, or the Teut. and Dan. Hund, Hundt,
the same Minshew and Fr. Jun. think that all of them are Contracts of the Gr.
(...), a little dog. V. Hunt. An Hour, from the Fr. G. Heure, the Belg. Huere,
or the Teut. Vhr; and all originally from the Lat. and Gr. Hora, (...), an
hour. House, from the AS. and Fr. Th. Hus, the Dan. Husz, the Belg. Huys, or
the Teut. Haus, the same; from hence the Ital. Casa, unless it may rather seem
to come from the Lat. Casa, a cottage; because perhaps about the declining
state of the Empire, when good carriage, or breeding began to propagate it
self, out of palliated and flattering civility, they called their sumptuous
houses only Casas, cottages; perhaps after some such form as this, Will you
please to grace Casam meam, my cottage with your presence. An House of office:
Versteg. writes it more truly, An House of ease. House-leek, so called, because
it grows upon thatched houses. Houst, from the AS. Heostan, the Belg.
Hoesten, or the Teut. Husten, to cough; all very likely from the sound. How,
from the AS. Ha, the Belg. Hoe, or the Teut. and Fr. Th. Wie, idem. To Howl,
from the Teut. Heulen, the Belg. Huylen, the Fr. G. Houler, or the Hisp.
Ahullar, Aullar, idem; all originally from the Gr. (...), to howl; and this
from the sound. Howlsom, a ship is so called when it hulls well; from Hull,
which see. Hoy, from the Fr. G. Heu, a kind of ship so called, because it
saileth swiftly, says Adr. Jun. Or perhaps from the Belg. Hoogh, or the Teut.
Hoch, high; q. d. a ship made high, considering her burden. The Huckle-bone,
from the Belg. and Teut. Hucken, to sit down; which part Nature has ordained
for that use. Huck-shoulder'd, from the Teut. Hocker, hunch-backed, and
Shoulder; which see. Huckster, or Hegler, a Forestaller; from the Teut. Hock,
one that buyeth fruit, and such things, to sell again into the market. To
Huddle, to do any thing too hastily, to mingle many things together carelessly
and confusedly; from the Teut. Hudeln, to mix: Or rather, from the Teut.
Schutteln, to shake, by a Metaphor taken from lots, or dice, that being shook
in the Lottery box, are thereby mixed without order. Hue and Cry, from the Fr.
G. Huer, to cry out aloud, to hoot: Or rather, from the Fr. G. Oyez, hear ye.
Huff, in the play at tables; (i. e.) to take up a man which, by oversight, was
missed by the opponent; from the Teut. Heben, to take up; because we first take
up the man that is huffed, before we remove another. To Huff, from the Belg.
Hiighen, to puff, or blow: Or from the AS. Heofen, to lift up; because such as
breath thick, and strongly, may be perceived to rise and fall like a Smith's
bellows. To Hug, or Embrace, from the AS. Hogan, or the Belg. Hugghen, to be
careful and tender over: Or from the AS. Hegian, or the Belg. Haeghen, to
hedge; q. d. to encompass ones neck with the arms, as with an hedge, thereby to
defend the party, as it were, from danger. Huge, or Great, either from the AS.
Hefig, heavy; or, as Minshew supposes, from the Lat. Augere, to increase; or
from the Belg. Hoogh, high, tall; or lastly, from the AS. Oga, terror; q. d.
terrible big. Hugger-mugger, privately; perhaps from the AS. Hogan, or the
Belg. Hugghen, to observe, and the Dan. and Suec. Morker, darkness; the word
importing the doing of any thing as it were in the dark, so that none shall
know it. Huguenots, a French name given the Calvinists; either from Huc nos,
the beginning of their Apologetical Oration, made before Cardinal Lotharingus;
or the great Chancellor of France, in the time of Francis, the Second, or
Charles the Ninth; or q. d. les Guenons de Hus, (i. e.) John Huss's Apes, or
Followers; or q. d. les Guenots de Hus, John huss's Imps; or from the Teut.
Eidgenossen, men of a confederacy; and this from the Teut. Eid, with us Oath,
and Geniossen, to enjoy; this again from Nutz, profitable. Guenoe is taken from
the Lat. Genius, a good or evil Angel. Hulk, from the Dan. Holck, the Belk.
Hulcke, the Fr. G. Heux, or the Ital Vrca, a ship of burden; and these perhaps
from the AS Hulc, a cottage, for the similitude. To Hull as a ship, (i. e.) to
ride to and again upon the sea; perhaps from the Belg. Hollen, to sail, or run
swiftly. The Hus^ of a ship, (i. e.) the body of a ship, without sails, cables,
or mast; not improbably from the Teut. Hulse, an husk; it being, as it were,
only the husk, or bark of a ship. Hulluck, or Hullock, a term in Sailing;
perhaps from the Belg. Hulle, an hood, or woman's veil; because it is but a
small sail-cloth, as an hood in comparison; and this from the AS. Helan, to
cover. Humble-Bee, v. Bumble-Bee. The Humbles of a stag, from the Fr. G.
Nombles d'un Cerf, idem: Or perhaps in a somewhat different sense, from the
Lat. Vmbilicus, the navel. To Humin, from the Belg. Hommelen, or the Teut.
Hummen, idem; whence the Belg. Hommel, and Teut. Hammel, a drone; all feigned
from the sound Humor, from the Fr. G. Humeur, or the Ital. Humore; by
interpretation, the natural inclination, or temper of mind; but it rather
signifies an habit of acting according to the appetite, or some irregular
affection, than according to reason; all from the Lat. Humor, an humor in the
body; because such an habit is thought to proceed from the predominancy of some
corporeal humor: From hence the Ital. Humorista, an Humourist; he that acts
wholly according to, his own passions. To Hunch, from the Teut. Husch, a blow
with the fist; and this not unlikely from the Lat. Ictus, a blow. Hunch-backed,
from the Teut. Hocker, huck-shoulder'd, and Back: Or from the Belg. Hucken, to
hang down toward the ground. Hundred, from the AS. Hundred, the Belg. Hondert,
or the Teut. Hundert, a century. Some derive them all from the C. Br. Cantred,
idem; and this from the Lat. Centum, the same. Hunger, from the AS. Hungrian,
the Belg. Hongheren, or the Teut. Hungern, to be an hungry; whence the AS.
Hungor, the Belg. Hongher, and the Dan. and Teut. Hunger; with us also Hunger.
Hunt, from the AS. Hentan, to search out, to pursue; whence Hunta, an Hunter;
and Huntian, to hunt. Hurdle, from the AS. Hyrdl, or the Belg. and Teut Hurde,
idem. Mer. Cas. derives it from the Gr. (...); that is, any thing rolled up in
a bundle. Hurly-Burly, a tumult; either immediately from the sound, or from our
word, to Whirl, and the AS Burh, a town; that is, an uproar, or commotion in a
city, or town; a city-tumult. To Hurry, either from the Fr. G. Harier, Ahurir,
to hare, or affright one; or Harseler, to provoke; or from the AS. Hergian, to
destroy as in war. Hurt, from the AS. Hyrt, hurt, wounded; or from the Gr.
(...), to wound, by the interposition of the letter r; or from the Fr. G.
Heurter, or the Ital. Vrtare, to thrust, or squeese; and these again from the
Lat. Vrgere, to press. An Husband, from the AS. Hus, an house, and our word
Band, or the AS. Bonda, a ligament. To Hush: Minshew derives it from the Heb.
Haschah, to be silent. I should rather think it to be a corruption of the word
Hiss, which we commonly use when silence is required. Husk, from the Belg.
Hulsche, Hu^se, idem; this from Hullen, to cover the head; and both from the
AS. Helan, to cover. Huswife, q. d. the wife of the house; though we often take
it for any woman that plays the Cook well. An Hut, from the AS. and Fr. G.
Hutte, or the Teut. Hutte, a cottage; all from the Teut. Hueten, to keep sheep,
etc. Hutch, from the AS. Haecca, the Fr. G. Huche, or the Hisp. Hucha, a chest
to put corn in: All perhaps corrupted from the Lat. Arca, a chest. To Huzz,
from the sound. To Hy, to make haste; from the AS. Higan, to hasten; or Hiegen,
to strive with might and main: Or from the Belg. Hyghen, to puff: Or lastly,
from the Teut. Eilen, or the Fr. Th. Ilen, to make haste. This Fr. Jun. draws
from the Gr. (...), to roll, or tumble.
I.
I from the AS. Ic. the Teut. Ich, or the Belg. Ick; which are all derived from
the Lat and Gr. Ego, I. We also pronounce I, for Yes, Yea, which see. To
Iabber, from the Fr G. Gaber, or the Belg. Gabb ren, to talk Gibberish, to
speak much hastily and indistinctly: Or from the Ital. Gabbare, to fobb a man
off with much speaking. A Jack, from the Belg. Jack, the Fr. G. Jaque, the
Ital. Giacco di Maglia, or the Hisp Jaco de Malla, a coat of Mail. A Jack, a
fish so called; perhaps from the Lat. Jaculum, a dart; as a Pike-fish, from our
word Pike; either from the long figure of its body, fashioned somewhat like to
a dart, or spear; or because it hasteneth directly toward the bottom of the
water, as a dart flies from the hand of him that casts it. A Kitchen- Jack, or
Turnspit, from our word Jack, for John; because in most Gentlemen's houses,
before the invention of jacks, little boys were employed solely to turn the
spit, and do other drudgery of the kitchen, called always by the name of Jack.
That forked piece of wood, by the help of which we pull off our boots, is also
called Jack, because it supplies the place of Jack the boot-catcher. Iacket,
from the Fr. G. Jaquette, or the Teut. Jack, a short coat: From hence that
saying amongst the French, Tourner Jaquette, to apostatize from the Faith, to
alter his word, or promise; (i. e.) such an one as we call a Curn-coat.
Iacob's-Staff, alias Pilgrim's-Staff. a name invented by such as for Religion
sake went on Pilgrimage to St. James of Compostella, says Minshew. It is more
commonly put for an Astronomical instrument, to find out the motion and
distance of the stars; q. d. a staff whereby we climb up into heaven, as it
were upon Jacob's ladder, to contemplate, and view the stars. A Jade, or tired
horse, from the AS. Eode, he went; (i. e.) he went once, but can go no more; as
we say in Lat. vixit, for mortuus est: Or from the Lat. Cadere, to fall down:
Or from the AS. Gaad, a goad, or spur; (i. e.) an horse that will not go
without the spur. Iag: Minshew derives it from the Teut. Hacken, to cut in
notches; or Sagen, to cut with a saw; which comes from Sage, a saw; and both a
secando, from cutting. Iail, and Iailer, V. Gaol, and Jailer. Ia^es, or house
of ease: Minshew draws it from the Lat. Jacere, to lie: Perhaps from the Fr. G.
Chasse, a case. Iambs of an house, from the the Fr. G. Jambes, or the Hisp.
Jambas, the side-posts of a door; all from the Fr. G. Jambe, a leg; q. d. the
shanks, or feet of an house, for the similitude. To Iangle, from the Fr. G.
Jangler, to wrangle, or contend: Or from the Belg. Iancke^, to grin.
Ian^z^ries, the Great Turk's Life-guard-men; either from the Turkish word
Genizeri, new men, or new soldiers; or from the Lat. Janua, a gate; because,
they guard, and stand Sentinels at the Emperor's gate. To Iar, or to be at
variance: Minshew derives it from the Lat. Garrire, to prattle. I chose rather,
with Dr. Skinner, to draw it from the Fr. G. Guerroyer, to brawl. A Iar of oil,
from the Fr. G. Jare, the Ital. Giarra, Zarra, or the Hisp. Jarro, Jarra, idem.
Iargon, barbarous, illiterate discourse. Menagius derives it from the Hisp.
Jerigonca, or Gerigonca; but Minshew more ingeniously, a Garriendo, from
prating. Covarruvias supposes it to be so called, q. Grecigonca, from the
Greek Tongue; because when few of those former Ages understood Greek, it seemed
to many no better than Gibberish. It would not be amiss to draw it from the Fr.
G. Jargon, or the Ital. Jergone, idem; and these from the Ital. Chierico, a
Clergyman; for when the Laics heard the Latin Tongue, unknown to them, used
in the Liturgies, and Prayers of the Church, they called it, and all other
Tongues which they understood not, Iargon. Iavelin, from the Fr. G. Javeline,
the Ital. Giavelotto, or the Hisp. Javalina, a dart; all perhaps from the Hisp.
Javali Aper; as we say, a Boar-Spear. Minshew draws it from the Arab. Jabel, an
hunting-staff. Iaundice, from the Fr. G Jaulnisse, idem; this from Jaune,
Jaulne, yellow; whence this disease in horses is called the Yellows. To Iaunt,
used by us in a sense somewhat different from the Fr. G. Jancer, to drive an
horse about till he sweat; from whence we derive it. Or it may be drawn from
the AS. Hentan, to follow after. The Iaunts of a wheel, from the Fr. G. Jantes,
spoaks. Iaws, from the AS. Geagl, idem: Or from the Fr. G. Joue, the
cheek-bone. But the learned Dr. Th. H. tells us, that the Ancients writ it
Chawes; and if so, it manifestly flows from our word Chaw. A Iay, from the Fr.
G. Jay, Jayon, Gayon, the Dan. Kaa, the Belg. Ka, Kaw, or the Ital. Gazza, the
same; all possibly from its kawing note. Yet Fr. Jun. draws it from the Gr.
(...), to gape; or (...), to be proud. Ice, from the AS. Is, Isa, the Belg.
Eyes, or the Teut. Eisz, the same. Ich Dien, the Motto of the Princes of Wales;
from the Teut. Ich, I, and Dienen, or the AS. Denian, to serve. It was the
Motto or Symbol of John, King of Bohemia, whom Edward, the black Prince of
Wales, slew in a Battle; who for a Monument of so great and signal a Victory,
made it the Motto of his own Arms; that so he might manifest his loyal
Allegiance to King Edward the Third, his Father. Now to give a Reason why the
Motto was such, the said King John took it, thereby emphatically to express a
strange and unusual thing. It was as much as if he had said, I a King do serve;
for at that time he served under Philip Valesius, King of France. Some derive
it, and that ingeniously, from the C. Br. Irch Dien, I am your Countryman: in
memory of Edward the Second, the first of English Blood that ever was advanced
to the Principality of Wales; whom his Father, Edward the first, having subdued
all Wales, made Prince of, because he was born in the time of the Welsh Wars.
Idle, from the AS. Idel, Aydlige, or the Belg. Idel, Iidel, slothful, sluggish:
Or from the Teut. Eitel, vain, frivolous. Mer. Cas. derives it from the Gr.
(...), trifles. Jealous, from the Fr. G. Jaloux, or the Ital. Geloso, id. q. d.
Lat. Zealosus, full of zeal: From hence the Fr. G. Jalousie, the Ital Gelesia,
and our word Jealousy. To Ieer, from the AS. Cearcian, or the Lat. Garrire, to
prate: Or from the Ital Garare, to strive; or Gara, a contention: Or from the
Belg. Keeren, to brush; q. d. to touch one gently, or give one a gentle touch,
as we say: Or, which is most likely, from the Teut. Scheeren, to provoke.
Iellopped, or Iowlopped, a term in Heraldry; from the Fr. G. Joiie, a cheek,
and Loppe, Loppin, a sipppet, or gobbet. It seems to signify rather the
gills that hang down from a cock's throat, like unto a Dewlap; and so ought
rather to be written Dewl^pped. Ielly, from the Fr. G. Gelee, or the Ital.
Gelata, idem; all a Gelando, from friezing; for it is broth which, by standing
till it be cold, grows into jelly, which represents ice. Ieopardy, q. d. Fr. G.
J'ay perdu, I have lost all: Or from the Fr. G. Jeu perdu, a lost game. A
Ierfalcon, from the Fr. G. Gerfaut, the Ital. Gerfalcone, the Hisp. Girafalte,
the Belg. Gier Valck, or the Teut Gerfalck, the same; and all from the Lat.
Gyro, to turn round, and Falco, a faulcon, from its turning round in the air,
which is contrary to the flight of other birds. Minshew draws it from the Teut.
Geyer, or Belg. Ghier, a vulture, and the Teut. Falck, or Belg. Valck, a
falcon; because it is as ravenous as a vulture. Ierk, the lash of a rod; from
the Teut. Ge-rechen, for Rechen, to take revenge: Or from the Belg Jack, a
whip; whence Iacken, to lash with a whip. Minshew derives it from the Goth.
Gercken, to beat. It may be drawn from the AS. Gyrd, a rod. Ierkin, a short
upper-coat; from the AS. Cyrtelkin, a little coat; the Dim of Cyrtel, a coat;
formerly called, a Kertle. Ierkin, a male-hawk; so called, from the Teut. Geye,
a vulture, and the diminutive termination kin. Geyer is derived from the Teut.
Gebren, for Begehren, to covet; for its greediness: Or from Kehren, to turn; or
Gaher, quick, or nimble. A Iess, or Iess-hawk, v. Eyass. Iessant, a term in
Heraldry; Iessant flowers de luces; from the Fr. G. Iettant, which comes from
Jetter, to cast forth; and this from the Lat. Jactare, to cast often. Iesses,
from the Fr. G. Gects, or the Ital. Getti, or Zetti, ribbands hanging down from
garlands, or crowns. Hawks Iesses, a Jactando, from wagging to and again. A
Jest, from the Hisp. Chistes, idem. Minshew derives it from the Lat. Gestire,
or rather Gesticulari, to make many motions, to be full of action, as Actors
are when they repeat some merry thing upon the public stage. Iet, from the Fr.
G. Jet, Jaiet, or Jette; and all contracts of the Lat. and Gr. Gagates, a river
of Sicily, where the stone of this name was first found. To Iet, to carry the
body stately, or proudly; from the Fr. G. Jetter, to toss. Jewels, from the Fr.
G. Joyau, the Ital. Gioiello, the Hisp. Joyel, or the Belg. Iuweel, the same;
or q. d. Lat. Jocalia, being things pleasant to the eye: Or, possibly, from our
word Joy. Iews-trump, or Iews-harp, q. d. the trumpet, or harp of the Jews; and
it is so called, by way of contempt; for nothing is more untunable, or less
harmonious, than the hymns sung by the Jews, on their Festivals. If, in
Lincolnshire, Gif, from the AS. Gif, idem; this from Gifan, to give, or grant.
Island, from the AS. Ealand, the Belg. Eylandt, or the AS. Igland, idem; and all
from Ea, Ig, Ige, water; and Land; because it is land encompassed on each side
with water: Or from the Fr. G. Isle, or the Ital. Isola, (which are contracts
of the Lat. Insula, an Isle,) and the same Land. An Ilet, by contraction, an
Eight; from the Fr. G. Iflette, or the Ital. Isoletta, a little Island. An
Ilet, or Ollet-hole, from the Fr. G. Oeillet, the Hisp. Oiete, or the Ital.
Occhietto, an hole wherein a point is put; which are all Diminutives of the Fr.
G. Oeil, the Hisp. Oio, and the Ital. Occhio, an eye; which, in some sort, it
does resemble. Ill, a contract of Evil; which see. Imbargo, from the Hisp.
Embargo, a kind of imposition whereby ships are detained in port; this from
Embargar, to stay, or detain; and both from En in, and Barra, a bar. Imbark,
from the Fr. G. Embarquer, or the Ital. Imbarcare, to take ship. V. Bark.
Imbellish, from the Fr. G. Embellir, or the Ital. Imbellire, to adorn; these
from In, and the Fr. G. Bell; which comes from the Lat. Bellus, pretty, fair.
Imboss, from the Ital. Imbossare, to adorn with bosses. V. Boss: From hence
Imbose'd- work; which Higgin. calls Round- work. Imbroiderer, from the Fr. G.
Bordeur, the Hisp. Bordar, or the C Br. Brod^o, idem. Imbrue, from the Fr. G.
Abbreuver; to drink; or Imbuer, to stain: Or from our own words, In, and Brew.
To Imburs, to tender, or show money; from the Fr. G. Embourser, or the Ital.
Imborsare, to disburse, or pay away money. V. Purse. Imp, a terrestrial spirit;
either from the Lat. Impius, wicked; or from the other Imp, for a graff; q. d.
a little devil; because these evil spirits are said to appear to witches in the
shape of little boys. To Impase, from the Fr. G. Impaler, the Ital. Impalare,
or the Hisp. Empaler, idem; these from (...), and Palus, a stake; (i. e.) to
put Criminals to death, by driving a stake up their fu^^l^^^ts; which is one
v^^y of executing Malefactors amo^g^t the Turks. To Impeach, a term in Law,
signifying to accuse one before a Magistrate, or Justice of the Peace; from the
Fr. G. Empescher, or the Ital. Impaceiare, idem; and these from the Lat.
Impedire, to entangle. Imps, or Graffs, from the AS. Impan, or the Teut.
Impffen, to plant. Mer. Cas. draws it from the Gr. (...), ingrafted; or (...),
to implant. I may as reasonably draw it from the Fr. G. Ente, idem; this from
Enter, and both from the Lat. Insitare, the Frequentative of Inserere, to
plant. Imp^ement, according to Cowell, from the Fr. G. Employer, to employ; q.
d. Employments. Importance, from the Fr. G. Importance, or the Ital.
Importanza, a matter of moment, or great concern; these from the Fr. G.
Importer, and the Ital. Importare, to be effectual, to concern; and all from
the Lat. Importare, to import, or concern. To Impose, from the Fr. G. Imposer,
to put upon one. Impost, from the Fr. G. Impost, or the Ital. Imposta, a tax;
all ab imponendo, from imposing; because it is imposed, or forced upon us.
Imposts, a term in Architecture; ab Imponendo, from imposing; because they are
imposed, or laid upon pillars. Impostume, from the Ital. Impostema, or the Fr.
G. Apostume, idem; these from the Ital. Impostumare, and the Fr. G. Apostumer,
to grow into an impostume; and all from the Gr. (...), idem. Impoverish, from
the Fr. G. Empauvrir, or the Ital. Impoverire, to reduce to poverto and want.
V. Poor. Impregnable, from the Fr. G. Imprenable, idem; this from the Negative
In, and Prenable; (i. e.) that which cannot be taken; this from Prendre, to
take; and all from the Lat. Prendere, to catch hold of. Impressed money, from
the Prefix In, and the Fr. G. Pressed, or the Ital. Presto, in readiness; all a
Praestando, from performing; because it is money given to Soldiers, as it were,
for earnest; by receiving which, they are liable readily to perform their duty
in military affairs. To Imprint, from the Fr. G. Empreint; and both from the
Lat. Imprimere, idem. To Imprison, from the Fr. G. Emprisonner, or the Ital.
Impriggionare, idem. To Improve, from the Lat. In, and Probus, good; that is,
to make a thing better in it self: Or from the same In, and the Fr. G. Preuve,
a proof or experiment of things; (i. e.) to bring a thing to perfection by many
trials, or essays. Incarnadin, from the Fr. G. Incarnadin, or the Ital.
Incarnadino, a flesh-colors. V. Carnation. Incense, from the Fr. G. Encens, or
the Ital. Incenso, Frankincense; all from Incendo, to burn. Inch, from the AS.
Ince, Ynce; and both from the Lat. Vncia, or the Gr. (...), the same. Inchant,
from the Fr. G. Enchanter; and both from the Ital. and Lat. Barb. Incantare,
idem. To Inchase, from the Fr. G. Enchasser, or the Ital. Incastrare, to set in
gold; both from the Fr. G. Chasse, and the Ital. Castro, the collet of a ring.
Chasse is derived from the Lat. Capsa, a case; and Castro, from the Lat.
Castrum, a castle; for the collet is, as it were, the case, or castle of a
ring, wherein the stone is kept from breaking, or losing. Incircle, from the
Fr. G. Encercler, or the Ital. Incirchiare, to compass about; all from In, and
Circulus, a circle. Income, or Revenue, q. d. Comings in. Incontinent, from the
Fr. G. Incontinent, presently; that is, in the time continued, or immediately
ensuing, without the least intermission. Encounter, from the Fr. G. Encontrer,
or the Ital. Incontrare; which are both derived from In, and Contra, against;
that is, to fight against, or with another. Incressant, a term in Heraldry;
from the Fr. G. Encroissant, (i. e.) the moon in the increase; to wit, from
new, to full-moon. Indent, from the Fr. G. Endonter, to cut like to a saw's
teeth: From hence Indentures, a pair of writings so cut at the top and margin,
that the sections being mutually fitted, the one supplies the defect of the
other, and makes the page to seem whole, as if it had not been cut. Indented,
as Bordure Indented, a term in Heraldry; from the Fr. G. Endente, toothed; that
is, cut in the form of sharp teeth. Indisposed, sickly, averse to some thing;
from the Fr. G. Indispos, Indispose, (i. e.) ill disposed. To Indorse, to write
upon the backside: A Book Indorsed, or written on the back; from the Fr. G.
Endosser, or the Ital. Indossare, idem; from In, and the Lat. Dorsum, a back.
To Indow, from In insignificant, and the Fr. G. Dover, to endow. V. Dowry.
Indue, a term in Falconry, The Hawk does not Indue well; from In insignificant,
and the Teut D^wen, to concoct. Indue, from In insignificant, and the Fr. G.
Dover, to bestow: Or from Endue, endowed; and this from the Lat. Induta, or
Imbuta. An Infanta of Spain, a Spanish word; it is a name given to all Princes
of the Royal Family of Spain; q. d. Infans, an infant, (...), ( i. e. the
King's Infant, or Son. The Infantry, or Foot-forces; from the Fr. G.
Infanterie, or the Ital. Fanteria, an host of footmen; from Fante, a footman,
or servant; and this from Infans, a boy; also a servant, as we take it in a
second sense; for the armies of footmen were formerly made up of the servants
or pages to the companies of Horse. V. Lansquenet. Inform, from the Fr. G.
Informer, or the Ital. Informa^e, to give one an hint, or intelligence of
things; these from In, and Forma, a form; the word imp ying, to imprint a form,
or Idea of a matter in the understanding of another. An Ing, a word frequently
used in Lincolnshire, where it is put for a Meadow; and is derived from the
Dan. Ing, a meadow. An Ingle, one abusive against nature, a Buggerer. Minshew
draws it from the Hisp. Ingle, and this from the Lat. Inguen, the privities of
man or woman. Ingot, from the Fr. G. Lingot, a wedge of gold or silver not
coined; this perhaps from the Lat. Lingua, a tongue, which it somewhat
resembles. But since Chaucer uses it for that hollow place, into which metal
is poured when it is to be melted, it may better he drawn from the Belg.
Ingieten, to pour into; or Inghegoten, poured in. Ingratled, Bordure Ingratled,
a term in Heraldry. Guillim. draws it from the Lat. Ingredi, to enter in; from
the Lat. Gradus, a degree, says Vpton. I had rather draw it from the Fr. G.
Engrille, from Grille, which is a contract of the Lat. Craticula, an hurdle.
Ingross, from the Fr. G. Grossoyer, (i. e) to write in great, capital letters.
V. Engross. It is also a term in Merchandise, when any one man buyeth up any
commodity by the gross, or great. Inherit, from the Fr. G. Enheriter, actually
to make one heir; with us, to enjoy an inheritance. There is also in the Fr. G.
Heriter, to enter upon an heritage; and Heritier, an Heir; which see. Ink, from
the Belg. Inck, the Fr. G. Encre, or the Ital. Inchiostro, the same; and these
from the Lat. and Gr. Encaustum; because it is heated, or burnt upon the fire.
In the Teut. it is written Diute, in the Hisp. Tinta; and these from the Lat
Tincta, for Tinctura, a tincture, or coloring; a Tingendo, from staining.
Inkling, an obscure and imperfect hint of things. Minshew derives it ab
Inclinando, from inclining, or leaning downward, as we do when we lend an ear
to him that tells us any news: Or it may be drawn from the Belg. Eenckelinge,
a Descant in Music; or Eenckelen, to run divisions in Music; q. d. to give
one a touch of it: Or from In, and the Belg. Kallen, to tell; that is, to
relate things obscurely. In-laid work, from In, and the Belg. Leyden,
Ghe-leyden, to lay. V. Lay. Inmate, from In, and Mate; which see. Inn, from the
AS. Inn, the same. Verstegan derives it from the old word Ingeat; this from
In, and Began, or Gehen, to go: But Mer. Cas. from the Gr. (...), a mansion, or
place of residence. Inner, from the AS. ynner, Innor, or the Teut. Inner, idem;
and all from the AS. Eng, or Lat. In. Inquest, a term in Law; from the Fr. G.
Enqueste, or the Ital. Inchiesta; and both from the Lat. Inquisitio, an
inquisition, or search into affairs: From hence The Grand Inquest, Examiners of
crimes; also such as examine measures and weights within their respective
Wards. In-rode, or an invasion of the enemy; from In, and our word Ride;
because it is, as it were, a riding into another man's country, and lording it
over him: Or from the Teut. Einrotten, to come together by troops; from Ein,
in, and Rotte, a troop, or band of men. Inside, from In, and Side; which see.
In-sight, from the Belg. Insicht, idem; V. See. Instal, from the Fr. G.
Installer; this from In, and the AS. Stal, a stall; with us it signifies, to
initiate one solemnly in his place, or office, or dignity. Interest, from the
Fr. G. Interest, or the Ital. Interesse, usury; all from the Lat. Interesse, to
belong to, or concern; because it concerns him that lends, to gain something
thereby. To Interlard, from the Fr. G. Entrelarder, to stuff an hare, etc. with
lard. V. Lard. Interlopers, such as play the Merchant contrary to the rules and
customs of Commerce; from the Lat. Inter, between, and the Belg. Loopen, to
run; (i. e.) such as run in between, and so prevent the commerce and
correspondence of others in the way of trade. Intermeddle, from the Fr. G.
Entremesler, to meddle with another concern, to thrust his sickle into
another harvest, as the proverb is. To Interr, from the Fr. G. Enterrer, to
put in the ground; this from In, and Terra; q. d. in Terra condere, to cover in
the earth. To Intoxicate, or make mad; from the Ital. Intossicare, id. this
from the Lat. Toxicum, poison; because poison often causes madness. To
Entreat: the learned Dr. Th. H. derives it from In, and Treat; in the Fr. G.
Traiter, to treat: Or perhaps it may come from the Teut. Eintretten, to enter
into; (i. e.) to insinuate himself into a man's mind. Inveigh, from the Lat.
Invehere, idem Inveigle, to seduce, or allure; either as Minshew will have it,
from the Ital. Invogliare, to beget a will in one to a thing; or rather, from
the Fr. G. Aveugler, to make blind; and this from the Lat. Ab, for Absque,
without, and Oculus, an eye. It is also drawn from the Ital. Vagolare, to
inveigle; and this from Vago, fair; for fair things entice most. Invelop, from
the Fr. G. Enveloper, or the Ital. Inviluppare, to wrap up; all from the Lat.
Velum, a veil; q. d. to cover with a veil. Invenom, from the Fr. G. Envenimer,
idem; this from In, and the Lat. Venenum, venom; q. d. to infect with venom. To
Invest, from the Fr. G. Investir, or the Ital. and Lat. Investire, to cloth,
as with honor, etc. Inure, to accustom ones self to, from Ure; which see.
Inward; v. Ward. Iobbernowl, either from our word Nowl, the crown of the head,
and the Fr. G. Gobelin, primarily, a gobling, but in a second sense, a fool;
whence comes that vulgar saying of A great head, and little wit; or from the
Belg. Iobbe, dull, blunt, and the same Nowl. Iocund, from the Ital. Giocondo,
jovial, merry; and this from the Lat. Jucundus, pleasant. To Iog, or Ioggle:
Minshew derives it from the Teut. Iogen, to push. I choose rather to draw it
from the Teut. Schockeln, to shove, or shog, or totter as a cart upon stony
way; this from the Belg. Schocken, to shake; this again from the Ital.
Scuotere, Scossare, idem; and all from the Lat. Excussare, to shake often. To
Ioice, a term in Architecture. V. Ioises. Ioin, from the Fr. G. Joindre, both
from the Lat. Jungere, idem. A Joint, from the Fr. G. Jointe, Joinct, idem;
this from the Lat. Junctus, joined; because there the bones are joined, or
coupled together. Iointure, or Dowry, q. d. Junctura, a maintenance allotted,
or joined to the wife at marriage, in consideration of the dowry she brought
her husband. The Ioises, or Ioists of an house, from the Fr. G. Joindre, to
join; or Adjuster, to make fit; because they are fitly joined, or because they
are placed at an equal distance one from another. To Ioist, or Ieist, a word
frequently used in Lincolnshire, signifying, to feed other men's horses or
cattle in his own pastures for a certain customary price; from the Fr. G.
Gesir, to stay; or Giste, a place of abode. Jolly, from the Fr. G. Joli, or the
Ital. Giolivo, merry, cheerful; this, not unlikely, from the Lat. Jovialis; as
we say, A Jovial fellow. Menagius draws it from the Gr. (...), down; because
young men that begin to have beards, which first resemble down, are for the
most part jolly and jocund. To Iolt, from the Fr. G. Jouster, to justle. V.
Iusts. Iolt-head, perhaps q. d. Gout-head, or Gouty-head; (i. e.) Great-head;
all great, and ill-shaped things being vulgarly called Gouty. A Jot, from the
Gr. (...), id. or the Heb. Jod, the least of the letters. Jovial, from the Fr.
G. Jovial, or the Lat. Jovialis, joyful; q. d. one that was born sub Jove
laeto, under the cheerful planet Jupiter. The Hawk Ionks; V. To Iuke, or Iug. A
Iournal, from the Fr. G. Livre Journal, q. d. Liber Diurnalis, a book wherein
Travelers set down an account of each day's journey; from the Fr. G. Jour, or
the Ital. Giorno, a day. Journey, from the Fr. G. Journee, a day's work; and
this from the Lat. Diurnum, done in, or belonging to the day: From hence, a
Iourney-man, one that works for wages by the day. Iowl, or Head, from the AS.
Ceole, the jaws; this from the Lat. Gula, the gullet: From hence, a Iowl of
Ling, Salmon, etc. Iowler, an hound's name; from our word Iowl; q. d. a dog
having a great jowl, or head. Joy, from the Fr. G. Joye, or the Ital. Gioia,
idem; which are both corrupted from the Lat. Gaudia, joys. A Ioyner, so called
a Jungendo, from joining. Irksom, from the old Imp. Eng. It Irketh me; or from
the Belg. Argh, or the Teut. Arg, evil; because evil things are troublesome: Or
from the AS. Ge-Reccan, for Reccan, to punish: Or from Ge-Recc, for Recc, care:
Or lastly, from the AS. Waerc, in Chauc. Werk, and Wark, for Work, as any sore
does, when it throbs with pain. Iron, from the AS. Iren; and both from the
Hisp. Hierro, which comes from the Lat. Ferrum, idem; perhaps because our
ancestors made use of Spanish iron only, which is yet accounted the best. Is,
from the Lat. Est, or the Gr. (...), it is; or, which is more likely, from the
Fr. Th. Is, idem. Isickle, the Diminutive of Ice; which see. An Isle, or
Island, from the Fr. G. Isle, the Hisp Isla, or the Ital. Isola; all from the
Lat. Insula, idem; this q. In Salo, (i. e.) lying in the Sea: Hence the Fr. G.
Islette, an Eight, or small Island. Issuant, a term in Heraldry; from the Fr.
G. Issant, rising; this from Iss^r, to rise. Issue, from the Fr. G. Issite, or
the Ital. Vscita, success, an end; these from the Fr. G. Issir, and the Ital.
Vscire, to succeed, or come to an end; and all from the Lat. Exire, to
terminate. It, from the AS. Hit, or the Belg. Het, and all from the Lat. Id,
it, that. Itch: Mer. Cas. draws it from the Gr. (...); which Scaliger says, is
interpreted, itch, among the Tarentines. I choose rather to draw it from the Gr.
(...), corrupt matter. Judge, from the Fr. G. Juge, a Judge; or from Juger, to
judge; all from the Lat. Judex, a Judge: From hence the Fr. G. Jugement, and
our word Judgment. A Iug, possibly from the Nick-Christian-name Iug, for Joan,
for the same reason that the Kitchen- Jack is derived from Jack, for John; V.
Jack. Minshew draws it from the Lat. Jugulum, a throat; because of the
similitude it has to the neck of a man. It may also be drawn from the AS. Ceac,
and this from the Lat. Barb. Caucus, now Cyathus, a cup. To Iuggle, from the
Fr. G. Jougler, to play the Hocus Pocus, (whence Jouglear, a Jugler) the Belg.
Guychelen, or the Ital. Giocolare, idem: Or it may be derived from the Teut.
Gockelen, to play the fool, which comes from Geck, a fool; all from the Lat.
Joculari, to play the wag. Salmasius draws it from the Lat. Caucum, or
Cauculum, a cup, or little box, which Artists use for the bet-conveniency of
performing their impostures. Juice, from the Fr. G. Jus, or the Hisp. Jugo;
which are both derived from the Lat. Succus, idem. To Iuke, or Iug as birds do,
from the Fr. G. Joucher, to cherp as birds when they go to roost; this from
Jouc, a perch that hens sleep upon; this again from Joug, in Lat. Jugum, the
cross beam of a balance: Or from the Fr. G. Souche, the trunk of a tree, upon
which birds rest; which comes from the Lat. Succus, juice, or sap. Iulep, from
the Fr. G. Julep, the Ital. Giuleppe, the Hisp. Julepe, or the Lat. Barb.
Julepus, (i. e.) water seasoned and made thick with sugar. It is originally an
Arabic word. Iumble, q. d. to Iumple, or jump against: Or from the Lat.
Commolere, to grind together; or from Compilare, to heap together: Or lastly,
from the Fr. G. Combler, to heap up. To Iump, from the Belg. Gumpen, to leap,
or dance; or perhaps, q. d. Gup, (i. e.) Go up, as he that jumps seems to do by
the elevation of his body. A Iunk, a ship of burden used by the Indians:
Minshew derives it from the Lat. Juncus, a bull-rush; because, for its length,
it may seem to resemble a bull-rush. Or it may be derived a Jungendo, from
joining. Iunk^ts, from the Fr. G. Joncade, sweet meats; or from the Ital.
Gioncata, fresh cheese and cream: These from the Fr. G. Jonche, and the Ital.
Gionco; all from the Lat. Juncus, a rush, or wicker; because such sweet meats
are carried in baskets made of wicker. Iunto, a Conventicle, or private
Council; from the Hisp. Junta, Gunta, an Assembly; this a Jungendo, from
joining; (i. e.) a company of men that join and unite themselves into a
confederacy to be true to this, or that persuasion. Ivory, from the Fr. G.
Ivoire, or the Ital. Avorio; which are both derived from the Lat. Ebur, idem. A
Iurden, a great chamber pot; from the AS. Gor, filth, excrements, and Den, a
den; and figuratively, any kind of receptacle. A Jury, from the Fr. G. Juree;
which, in the French Law, is taken for a society of men cited to give their
Verdict upon a Trial had, that accordingly Sentence may be given in the Court;
and in our Law, it consists of twelve men that are Jurati, sworn to give their
opinion impartially. Iusts, from the Fr. G. Jouster, or the Ital. Giostrare, to
run at tilt; whence the Fr. G. Jouste, and Ital. Giostra, id. Or perhaps from
the Lat. Justa, ceremonies for the dead; in celebrating of which, men were
formerly armed, called Gladiatores, and stood out to challenge any that should
speak ill of the deceased. Ivy, from the AS. Ifig, or the Teut. Iben, idem.
Mer. Cas. draws it from the Gr. (...); because this tree is dedicated, or
sacred to Bacchus. Fr. Jun. from (...), strongly; because it causes trees to
decay, by twisting so hard about them.
K.
A KAarl-Cat, a word frequently used in Lincolnshire for a male-cat; from the
AS. Carl, a male, and Cat; which see. To Kaw, from the Belg. Kae, or Kaw, a
jack-daw; and both from the sound. To Kaw for breath, to draw breath with much
pain; from the Teut. Kauchen, or the Belg. Kichen, to gape, or keck. A Keal, as
they say in Lincolnshire, for Cold; from the AS. Caelan, to wax cold. It
implies as much as a cough contracted by cold. To Keck, Kickle, or Keckle,
from the Belg. Kich, shortness of breath; Kuch, a cough; or Kuchen, Kichen, or
the Teut. Keichen, to gape, or puff; all fictitious words. Keckle, or Kecling,
a term in Sailing; from the Teut. Kugel, a globe; and this from the Gr. (...),
a circle. Keel, from the AS. Caele, the Belg. Kiel, the Teut. Keil, the Fr. G.
Guille, Quille, or the Hisp. Quilla, the same. Menagius, Fr. Jun. and Mer. Cas.
derive it from the Gr. (...), hollow; or (...), to run swiftly. Keel-fat, a
vessel wherein boiled wort is put to cool, before it be put up into barrels;
from the AS. Caelan, Colan, to cool. Keen, from the AS. Cene, the Teut. Kuhn,
or the Belg. Koen, sharp: Or from the AS. Cyn, fit; (i. e.) fit to make use of.
Minshew draws it from the Gr. (...), a whetstone; this from (...), to whet.
Keep, from the old Belg. Kepen, idem; which comes from the AS. Cepan, to take
care of. Minshew draws it from the Lat. Capere, to take, (i. e.) into custody.
A Keg, or Kag, from the Fr. G. Cacque, a vessel wherein sturgeons and other
salt-fish are pickled. Minshew derives it from the Gr. (...), a a Part of the
Verb (...), to cleave. Kelter, He is not yet in his right Kelter, (i. e.) he is
not yet in readiness; from the Dan. Kilter, to gird up the loins. The learned
Dr. Th. H. interprets it thus, He is not yet in Culture. It may, by an easy
Trope, be taken from the Teut. Kelten. a wine press; q. d. he is not yet
prepared to tread the wine press, (i. e.) he has not his wine press cloths on.
Kemb, from the AS. Caemban, or the Teut. Rammen, to comb. A- Rembo, from the
Ital. Aschembo, over-thwartly, awry; this of Ghembo, crooked, or Ghembare, to
bend; and these again from the Gr. (...), to bend. To Ken, for to Know, from
the AS. Cennan, or the Belg. and Teut. Kennen, Kunnen, to know one. There is
also found in the AS. Ic Can, and the Fr. Th. Ich Bekenno, I know him. Kennel,
from the Teut. Kennel, or the Fr. G. Chenal; which are both derived from the
Lat. Canalis, a channel. Vossius draws it from the Gr. (...), a ditch. A Dogs
Kennel, from the Fr. G. Chenil, Chenin; q. d. Lat. Canile, a place where Canes,
dogs, are kept; as Ovile, a sheep-coat, etc. Kenspecked, a word frequently used
in Lincolnshire; from the AS. Cennan, to know, or ken; and Specce, a speck, or
spot; q. d. having specks, or marks, whereby a thing, or person may be known.
Kerchief, or Skull. cap: It ought rather to be written Coverchief, as it is in
Chaucer; from the Fr. G. Couvre, to cover, and Chef, the head. Kern, an Irish
Kern, an Irish Robber. If it be not a word of an Irish original, I may derive
it from the AS. Cyrran, the Belg. Keeren, or the Teut. Kehren, to turn; because
they, being very nimble, can easily and quickly turn themselves, to avoid being
taken, or to escape dangers. Kersey, from the Belg. Karsaye, the Fr. G.
Carisee, or the Hisp. Carisea, a sort of thick cloth, Linsey-woolsey: Or it may
be so called, q. Course Say; v. Say, and Stuff; Or from the Isle of Jersey,
where much of this sort of stuff was formerly made. A Kestrel, or Kastrel, from
the Fr. G. Quercelle, Cercelle, id. these from the Lat. Circulus, a circle;
because it has fine feathers in its tail, with circles of diverse colors; or
because it spreads forth its tail circularly, like a fan. A Ketch, a small
ship of burden; perhaps from the Fr. G. Caisse, a case; or Cacque, a tub;
which, if compared to a great vessel, it represents. The learned Dr. Th. H.
draws it from the Ital. Caicchio, the same. A Kettle, from the AS. Cetl, Cytel,
the Belg. Ketel, or the Teut. Kessel, the same. Mer. Cas. draws it from the Gr.
(...). Kevels, a term amongst Navigators; (i. e.) little pins of wood, upon
which the tackle and sails are hung to dry; perhaps from the Fr. G. Cheville, a
wooden pin, or nail; and this Menagius derives from the Lat. Claviculus, the
Dim. of Clavus, a nail. Key, from the AS. Caege, or Caeg, the same. Minshew
derives it from the Gr. (...), to shut; or (...), a key; by striking out l. A
Key for ships, from the Belg. Kaeye, the Teut. Kay, or the Fr. G. Quay, a dock,
or station for ships. Jos. Scal. finds Caiare, in the Gloss. of Isidorus, for
Cohibere, to keep in; a Cohibendo, from keeping in the ^^a; yet I had rather
draw it from the Lat. Cavea, an hole; (i. e.) a place for ships to lie in.
Kibe, a sore upon the heels; from the Teut. Kerben, to cut; for when the skin
is broke, it gapeth as if it were cut: Or it may be drawn from the C. Br.
Kibws, a chilblain. To Kick, from the Teut. Kauchen; and this from the Lat.
Calcare, to trample upon, or hit with the heels. Minshew draws it from the Lat.
Ico, to smite, or strike. Kick-shaws, from the Fr. G. Quelques chooses; and so
we call several sorts of sauce, which the French are curious in, above other
Nations. Kid, a bundle of birch, a birchen rod; so called, a Caedendo, from
cutting. A Kid, or young goat, from the Dan. Kid, idem; and both from the Lat.
Hoedus, a kid; which comes from the Heb. Gheddi, idem. Kidney, from the AS.
Cennan, to beget; because the kidneys are thought to be a great help to
generation: Or from the AS. Cynne, a sex, in a secondary sense, the genital
parts, (which distinguish the one sex from the other,) and Nigh; to wit, from
the nighness of the genitals, especially the vessels wherein the seed is
contained, thereto. Kilderkin, from the Belg. Kindekin, a little vessel; this
from Kinderkin, a little child; it being but a small vessel, compared with
greater, containing only the eighth part of an hogshead. To Kill, from the AS.
Cellan, to slay; the Belg. Kelen, to cut the throat; or the Dan. Quellar, to
strangle. A Kill, or Kiln, from the AS. Cylene, Cyln, the same. Minshew derives
it from the Hisp. Calera; and this, a Calendo, from making hot. The learned Dr.
Th. H. draws it from the Belg. Kuyl, a cave; this from the Gr. (...), hollow.
Kin, a diminutive termination, from the Teut. and Belg. Kind, a child. Kind,
bearing good will to any party; perhaps from the other Kind, q. d. come of a
good kind: Or rather, from the AS. Cyn, one that complieth, or agrees with
others: Or lastly, from the Belg. Kond, known; which comes from Konnen, to know
one. A Kind, or Species, from the AS. Cynne, idem; whence Cennan, to bring
forth young: Or perhaps from the Lat. Geno; for Gigno, to beget; and this from
the Gr. (...), to be born; or (...), to beget. V. Kindred. To Kindle, perhaps
from the Teut. Zunden, to set on fire: Or from the AS. Tynder, tinder; or
Tyndelan, to lay fire to. To Kindle, as we say of Coneys, when they conceive
with young; from the AS. Cennan, Acennan, to bring forth young; and this from
the Lat. Geno, for Gigno, to beget; which comes from the Gr. (...), to
conceive, or bear. King, from the AS. Cyng, Cyning, the Fr. Th. Kuning, the
Belg. Koningh, or the Teut. Konig, idem; whence the AS. Cynedome, a kingdom: Or
from the AS. Cennan, Connan, or the Teut. Konnen, to know; q. d. one that by
his prudence and understanding searches out what will tend most to the making
his Subjects happy: Or, which is more likely, from the Eng. Can, or the Belg.
and Teut. Konnen, to have power; in imitation of the Greeks, that styled Kings
(...), and (...), the Powers. King's-fisher, a bird so called; because it
feeds upon fish, and has blue feathers, representing the purple habit
wherewith Kings are usually clothed upon any remarkable solemnity, for a token
of distinction. Kindred, Kindred, Kin, from the AS. Cynrene, Cynryn, idem; this
from Cynne, a kind; or Acennan, to bring forth. Or it may be drawn drawn from
the Belg. Kind, or the Teut. Kind, a child; which are all derived from the Gr.
(...), to beget. Kirk, v. Church. To Kiss, from the AS. Cyssan, the Belg.
Kussen, or the Teut. Kuessen, idem; whence the AS. Coss, the Belg. Kus, and the
Teut. Kusz, a kiss; all from the Gr. (...), or (...), to kiss. Kitchen, from
the AS. Cycene, the Teut. Kuchen, the Fr. G. Cuisine, or the Ital. Cucina,
idem; the two last from the Fr. G. Cuire, and the Ital. Cuocere; and all from
the Lat. Coquere, to cook; q. d. Coquina. A Kite, from the AS. Cyta, the same;
this from the Ital. Cattare, or the Lat. Captare, to catch; it being a ravenous
bird, ever flying about for prey, which it snatches up hastily. Kitling, q. d.
Katling, a little cat; for the termination Ling diminishes the signification.
A Kitt, or milk-pale; from the Belg. Kitte, idem; both perhaps from the Lat.
Catinus, a wooden dish. To Kirtle, v. Tickle. To Klick up, a word frequently
used in Lincolnshire, signifying, to snatch up a thing hastily; perhaps from
the Belg. Klacken, to tremble; or from the Lat. Clepere, which comes from the
Gr. (...), to steal. A Knack, dexterity, or art in doing any thing; perhaps
from the AS. Knaincge, knowledge; which comes from Cnaan, to know: Or from the
Belg. Knap, nimble; which comes from the Lat. Gnavus, quick, apt to do any
thing. To Knack with ones fingers, from the Teut. Knacken, to snap with the
fingers. Minshew derives it from our word Knock. Knag, the knags that stick out
of an hart's horn, near the forehead: I suppose it was formerly written Knap,
from the AS. Cnaep, the knap of an hill, any thing that sticks out; or the
Teut. Knopff, a knot, or branch. The Knap of an hill, from the AS. Cnaep, the
same; also a button, or any thing that sticks out. To Knap, from the Belg.
Knappen, to snap asunder; both possibly from the sound. Knap-sack, or
Snap-sack, from the Teut. Knap-sack, or the Fr. G. Canapsa, a sack to put
soldiers provision in; both from the AS. Cnapa, the Belg. Knape, or the Teut.
Knab, a boy, and Sack; because, very likely, in time of war it was carried from
place to place by a boy. Knave, from the AS. Cnapa, the Belg. Knape, or the
Teut. Knab, a boy, or servant; with us, a rogue, or dishonest fellow. Martinus
draws it from the Lat. Gnavus, active, crafty. Knead, from the AS. Cnaedan, the
Belg. Kneden, or the Teut. Knetten, to turn meal into dough. Knee, from the AS.
Cneou, or the Belg. and Teut. Knie, idem; whence the Belg. Knielen, to kneel;
all from the Lat. Genu, a knee; which comes from the Gr. (...), from bending
down to the ground. Knell, from the AS. Cnyllan, to strike; the Teut. Knall, a
clash; or Knallen, to give a crack; all from the sound. Knife, from the AS.
Cnif, or the Dan. Kniff, the same. Mer. Cas. draws it from the Gr. (...), in
the Aeol. Dial. (...), a sword. A Knight, from the AS. Cniht, or the Belg. and
Teut. Knecht, a servant; because formerly there were none knighted but such as
were either domestic Servants to the King, or of his Lifeguard. Knit, from
the AS. Cnyttan, the Dan. Knytter, the Teut. Knopffen, or the Belg. Knoopen,
idem. Somnerus draws it from the Lat. Connodare, to tie together in knots. A
Knob, from the AS. Cnaep, the knap of an hill, the Belg. Knoop, Knobbel, the
Teut. Knopff, or the Dan. Knoppe, a knob, or knot in a tree. Knock, from the
AS. Cnucian, idem; or from the Teut. Knutschen, to break asunder; all from the
sound. Knot, from the AS. Cnotta, the Belg. Knutte, or the Teut. Knott, idem:
Or from the AS. Cnyttan, to knit. Knot, a bird so named; from King Canutus,
with whom it was held in great esteem, says Camden. Know, from the AS. Cnaan,
idem; this from the old Gr. (...), to know. Knubble, Knub, from the Teut.
Knubel, a knuckle; or from the Dan. Knipier, to beat. Knuckle, from the AS.
Cnucl, the Belg. Knokel, the Teut. Kuuchel, the Ital. Nocca, or the Dan.
Knogle, the same. Mer. Cas. draws it from the Gr. (...), idem. It may also be
drawn from our Eng. Knock; the knuckles being of special use in fighting. Knur,
from the Teut. Knorr, a knot, or knob in wood.
L.
LAbel, a term in Heraldry; from the Fr. G. Lambel, a riband; this from
Lambeau. Minshew draws it, a Lambendo; which is better done from the Teut.
Lapp, a small ^ip of a garment. Lace, from the Fr. G. Lacet, the Dim. of the
old word Lace, or Lac, idem; of Lacer, to sow together; all from the Lat.
Laqueus, a snare, or net. To Lace, or Lash, from the Lat. Laqueus, an halter;
q. d. to beat, or lash one with a rope's end. Lack, to want; possibly from the
Belg. Laecken, to decrease, or fade away; whence Laecke, Lack, a fault, or
failing. Minshew draws it from the Gr. (...), to cease. Lackey, from the Fr. G.
Laquay, Lacquay, a Page; or from the Vascon. Lecaiou, a servant, which is most
likely; those being esteemed Pages, that come out of Gascoigne, into France.
Minshew draws it from the Heb. Laach, he has sent. A Lad; Minshew draws it
from the Heb. Jalad, a boy, son, or young man. It may also be d^wn from the
Belg. Leyden, to lead; because they are led by the hand; or from the AS. Lyte,
Lyt, little. Ladder, from the AS. Hlaedre, the Belg. Ladder, Leeder, or the
Teut. Leyter, the same; these from the Teut. Leyten, and Belg. Leyden, to lead.
Ladle, from the AS. Hlaedle, the same; this from Hladan, to draw out; because
with it we, as it were, draw the pottage out of the pot. Lady, from the AS.
Hlaedig: In Versteg. Hleafdian, Leafdian, a dame, or matron; which is derived
from the AS. Hlaf, a Loaf, and the Teut. Dienen, which comes from the AS.
Denian, to minister, or serve; q. d. a server of bread; for in ancient times
Ladies of quality distributed Bread amongst their own Servants, and the Poor.
To Lag: Minshew draws it from our Eng. Logg of wood,; Fr. Jun. and Mer. Cas.
from the Gr. (...), to delay, to cease. One may also imagine it to be so said,
q. Lang; from the AS. Lang, long: As we say, He stays long, He is long
a-coming. To Lake, a word frequent in the North Parts of England; either from
the AS. Plaegan, to play, by casting away P, and turning ae into a, and g into
k; or from the Belg. and Teut. Lachen, to laugh; or, which is most likely, from
the Dan. Leeger, to play: And hence it is, that our Northern English alone use
this word, because the Danes invaded and subdued their Country, near two
hundred years before they conquered the whole Island. To Lam, or Slam, to mawl
with blows; from the Teut. Lahmen, or the Belg. Lamen, to make lame; or from
the AS. Slean, or the Belg. Slaen, to sinite. Lamb, from the AS. Belg. and
Teut. Lamb, or the Dan. Lam, idem. Lambeux, Cross-Lambeur, a term in Heraldry;
from the Fr. G. Croix a Lambeaux, a Cross with Labels Lame, from the AS. Laam,
Lam, the Belg. Laem, or the Teut. Lahm, the same. Lammas, the time when Lamb is
out of Season, and rarely fold in our Markets. Somnerus derives it from the AS.
Hlafmaesse, i. e. Loaf-mass; perhaps because the English, on that day, made an
Oblation of Loaves made of new Wheat. The Lampers, or Lampas, a disease in
Horses; from the Fr. G. Lampas, a Tumor in the Gums; so called, says Minshew,
because they cut off the swelling, and sear the fore with a lamp, or lighted
candle. I had rather draw it from the Hisp. Lamparones, kernels, botches, or
lumps in the flesh; because it is a soft swelling, like to kernels in the flesh
of a Man. Lamprel, or Lampern, from the Fr. G. Lamprillon, a little Lampry.
Lampry, from the Fr. G. Lamproye, the Hisp. Lamprea, or the Ital. Lampreda, the
same; all perhaps a Lambendo Petras, from licking the rocks; for they delight
most amongst stones; and creeping over them, they leave a slime thereon, as if
they were licked over with the tongue. Lancelet, a Chirurgeon's lance; from the
Lat. Lancella, the Dim. of Lancea, a lance. Lancepesado, from the Fr. G.
Lancepessade, or the Ital. Lancia Spezzata, a broken lance. It signifies, an
honorary sort of Soldiers, that by fighting courageously, have broken their
lances, or spears, in the Fight (their Horses also being slain under them) and
were put into the order of Footmen; but withal, they were to receive double
Pay. v. Reformado. Lancet, a Chirurgeon's Instrument to let blood withal; from
the Fr. G. Lancette, or the Ital. Lancetta, idem; these from the Lat. Lancea, a
lance. To Lanch a Ship, from the Fr. G. Lancer, or the Ital. Lanciare, to cast
a lance or dart; and these again from Lancea, a dart; for a ship a-lanching, is
darted, as it were, out of the Dock, into the River. Land, from the AS. Dan.
Belg. and Teut. Land, or the Ital. Landa, idem: Likewise, To Land; which comes
from the AS. Gelandian, or the Belg. and Teut. Landen, to come to land, or to
shore. Landgrave, one that presides over a small tract of land, or Province. V.
Land, and Grave. Landscape, from the Teut. Landschafft, a table containing a
description of lands; or from the AS. Landscipe, or the Belg. Landschap, a
region, or tract of land, i. e. the Shape, or delineation of lands; q.
Land-Shape. Lane, from the Belg. Laen, a street somewhat narrow; perhaps it may
be a Contract of Latina, q. d. The Latin-Way; for in ancient Colonies, when the
Romans and the Latins divided the lands by lot, the Romans paved and mended the
broad streets, and the Latins the narrow; or lastly, from the Gr. (...), stony.
Langrel, a warlike engine used at Sea; not unlikely, from the Fr. G. Langrole,
a kind of Lizard; (as Culverins, Drakes, and many other Engines, have their
names from Serpents;) this from Langue, the tongue, and Rouler, to roll.
Language, from the Fr. G. Langage, or the Ital. Linguaggio; and all from the
Lat. Lingua, a tongue. Langued, a term in Heraldry; from the Fr. G. Langue,
long-tongue, or one that lolleth out the tongue. To Languish, from the Fr. G.
Languir, or the Ital. Languire; and both from the Lat. Languere, the same.
Laniers, certain small ropes in a ship; perhaps from the Fr. G. Laniere, a
long, narrow, leathern thong; or from the Lat. Linum, Line, Flax; q. d.
Linaria, because made of Flax. Lank, from the Belg. Slank, slender, slim; or
from the Teut. Golenck, nimble; which comes from Lencken, to bend, to stoop
down. A Lanneret, or Lenard-Hawk; from the Fr. G. Lanier, the Dim. of Laneret,
or the Teut. Lanet, the same. Dhuez. derives it elegantly a Laniando aves, from
butchering birds. A Lansquenet, from the Fr. G. Lansquenet, a Foot-Soldier;
which comes from the Teut. Lance, and Knecht, a servant; because Footmen were
formerly as servants to Horsemen armed with Lances. A Lantern, from the Fr. G.
Lantern, or the Ital. Lanterna; and both from the Lat. Laterna, idem; which is
derived a Latendo, from lying hid: Which Etymology is most especially agreeable
to that which we call A Dark Lantern. A Lap: Minshew derives it from the Gr.
(...), to receive. Some draw it from the AS. Laeppe, or the Teut. Lapp, a
lappet of a garment. To Lap, to wrap, or cover up; from the Teut. Lapp, a lap,
or lappet of a garment. Lap of a Garment, from the AS. Laeppe, or the Teut.
Lapp, idem; or from the Fr. G. Lopin, a remnant; all perhaps from the Lat.
Labium, a lip; because of its division from the rest of the garment, or cloth.
Fr. Jun. derives the AS. Laeppe, from the Gr. (...), to leave. To Lap as a Dog,
from the Belg. Slabben, Labben, the Teut. Lappen, the Fr. G. Lapper, or the Gr.
(...), idem; all feigned from the sound. Lappet, the Dim. of Lap. A Lapwing,
from the AS. Hleapeince, the same; this from Hleapan, to clap, and Wince, a
wing; quasi Clapwing. Larboard, a term among Seamen; q. d. Lever-board, i. e.
the left side of a ship; from the Lat. Laevus, the Left, and Board; which see.
Larceny, from the Fr. G. Larcin, Larrecin; and both Contracts of the Lat.
Latrocinium, robbery. Lard, from the Fr. G. Lard, the Ital. Lardo, or the Lat.
Lardum, the fat of Bacon; these again from Lar, an house; because, for the
usefulness thereof, it is always kept in readiness in the house. A Larder, from
the Ital. Lardiero, Lardiera, a place wherein provision is laid up; this from
the Lat. Lardum, q. d. Lardarium; from hence A Larderer, the Clerk of a Larder.
Largess, from the Fr. G. Largess, a gift; both from the Lat. Largities,
liberality; which is derived a Largiendo, from giving freely. A Lark, from the
AS. Laferc, Lauerce, the Belg. Lerke, Lewercke, or the Teut. Lerch, idem. To
Lash, or Slash with Rods or Whips; from the Teut. Schlagen, to smite; or from
the Lat. Laqueus, an halter; q. d. to lash one with a ropes end; or a
Lacerando, from tearing the flesh. Minshew derives it from the sound; or it may
be drawn from the Heb. Lahats, he used me cruelly. Lask, from the Lat. Laxum,
loose; as we commonly call it, A Looseness in the guts. To Lask, a term in
Sailing; from the Fr. G. Lacer, to bind; and both from the Lat. Laqueus, an
halter, or other rope. The Last, a Contract of Latest; V. Late. Minshew derives
it from the Gr. (...), the last. A Last, or Cobler's Last, from the AS. Laeste,
the Teut. Leiste, or the Belg. Leest, a wooden measure which Shoomakers use.
Last, a kind of weight; from the AS. Hlaestan, to load, or the Teut. Last,
simply, a burden, or load; from hence our word Lastage, a tax levied upon
ships that are loaded, or have their freight. To Last, or endure; from the AS.
Laestan, to abide; both from the Adj. Last. A Latch of a door, from the Fr. G.
Loquet, a string wherewith the latch is drawn up, the Belg. Letse, or the Ital.
Laccio, a cord; which come from the Lat. Laqueus, a rope. A Latchet, from the
Fr. G. Lacet, the Ital. Laccio, or the Lat. Laqueus, a cord; for the similitude
of binding. Late, from the AS. Laete, Late, or the Belg. Latt, the same; whence
the AS. Latest, the latest, or last, and the Belg. Leutren, to delay; as also
our word Latter, q. Later; and Lately. A Lath, from the AS. Laetta, Latta, or
the Teut. Belg. and Fr. G. Latte, the same; all from the Lat. Latus, broad,
from the manner of its cutting. A Lather, or Laver, water well mixed with soap,
till it froth in the wash-tub; from the Fr. G. Laveure, idem; this a Lavando,
from washing. Latten, from the Belg. Lattoen, the Teut. Letten, the Fr. G.
Laiton, the Hisp. Laton, or the Ital. Lattone, Ottone, a kind of metal so
called; perhaps from one Otton, a Miner, the inventor of it. Lattermath, from
Latter, and the AS. Maeth, grass; this from Maan, to mow; q. d. grass mown the
second time. Lattice, Lattice- work, q. d. Nettice- work, i. e. network, by
changing N into L: Or from the Belg. Latte, a lath; it being work made of
laths, laid cross-wise in the form of a net. To Laveer, a term in Sailing; from
the Belg. Laveren, or the Dan. Lavere, to stear sometimes one way, sometimes
another, as Mariners do when the wind lies contrary. Lavender, from the Fr. G.
Lavande, the Ital. Lavanda, or the Lat. Barb. Lavendula, idem; or perhaps a
Lavando, from washing; because Laundresses use this herb to make their linen
smell sweet. A Laver, from the Fr. G. Lavoir, and this from Lavacrum, a bath,
or any thing to wash in. Laugh, Laughing, from the AS. Hlian, Hlahan, or the
Teut. and Belg. Lachen, id. whence the AS. Hleahtor, the Teut. Lach, Gelachter,
laughter, and the Run. Dan. Hleger mig, he makes me laugh. Lavish, to spend
much money idly. Minshew draws it from the Gr. (...), to destroy, to empty; or
(...), to gorge: Mer. Cas. from (...), dainty. Laundress, from the old Fr. G.
Lavandresse, now Lavandiere, or the Ital. Lavandaia, a Washer-woman; all a
Lavando, from washing cloths. Laurel, from the Fr. G. Lauriere, and both from
the Lat. Laurus, a Laurel-tree. Law, from the AS. Lah, Laga, the Fr. G. Loy, or
the Belg. Lauwe, idem; all from the Lat. Lex Legis, a law. Lawn, an ingenious
Etymologist derives it from the Fr. G. Linon, or the Teut. Leinwad, a linen
web; both from the Lat. Lineum, or the Gr. (...), linen. A Lawn, or Laund in a
Park; from the Fr. G. Land, or the Hisp. Landa, a Plain never plowed. Lax, a
certain fish without bones; from the Lat. Laxus, loose; for a fish without
bones must needs be looser and softer than other fishes. A Lay, or Song; from
the AS. Ley, or the Teut. and Belg. Lied, idem; or possibly from the Ital.
Ladetta, an hymn; all from La, a note in Music. It may also be derived from
the AS. Leoth, the same; which comes from the AS. Leod, the Fr. Th. Luit, or
the Teut. Leute, the common people; q. d. a rural sonnet. To Lay, in
Lincolnshire, To Lig; from the AS. Lecgan, the Belg. Leggen, or the Teut.
Legen, idem, or place; whence the Dan. Vdlegger, as we say, To Lay out. A Lay,
or Lea of Land, from the AS. Ley, idem, untilled land; this from Leag, Lege, a
pasture; or from our word Lay; for such lands are let lay a year, or two, or
more so, to renew the fruitfulness of the soil, when wore out with much
tilling. To Lay, as it is commonly said, To Lay an evil Spirit; from the Belg.
Leeghen, to thrust down; which comes from Leegh, low, pressed down. Lay- man,
from the Fr. G. Lai; and both from the Lat. Laicus, a Plebeian; q. (...); (i.
e.) one of the Commonalty, in opposition to the Clergy, or Ecclesiastical
Order. Laystal, or Dunghill; also an House of ease, a Jakes; from our Eng. To
Lay, and the AS. Stal, a stall; or from the same Lay, and Stale. V. To Stale.
Lazer-house, from the Fr. G. Ladriere, Lazaret, or the Ital. Lazzaretto, an
Hospital for poor, sick and lame persons; (i. e.) a place, or house, wherein
such as Lazarus was, having their bodies full of sores, or any way indisposed,
are kept upon Charity, for a Cure. Lazy, a word used in Lincolnshire, for a
Vagabond, or wicked fellow; perhaps from the Teut. Losz, Lose, naughty; which
come from the Lat. Laxus, loose; as we say of a bad Man, He is a Loose Liver.
Lazy, idle; from the Belg. Losigh, Leusigh, sluggish; this from Loos, slack; or
the Teut. Leisz, or Leiser, slow; and all from the Lat. Laxus, loose. To Lead,
from the AS. Laedan, the Belg. Leyden, Leeden, or the Teut. Leyten, idem. Lead,
from the AS Laed, Lead, the Belg. Loot, or the Teut. Lot, idem; whence Loten,
Vberloten, to solder with Lead. Minshew draws it from the Gr. (...), fusible;
because it is more easy to be melted than any other Metal. Some ingeniously
derive it from the AS. Laeden, to lead; because it is easier to be drawn out
than other course Metals, without the danger of breaking. Leaf, from the AS.
Leaf, the Belg. Loof, Loove, or the Teut. Laub, the same. Minshew derives them
all from the Gr. (...), or (...), a garment; because our first parents made use
of leaves to cover their nakedness. League, or Confederacy, from the Fr. G.
Ligue, the Hisp. Liga, or the Ital. Lega, id. all a Ligando, from binding. A
League, or three English Miles; from the Fr. G. Lieue, the Hisp. Legua, the
Ital. Lega, or the Lat. Barb. Leuca, the same; perhaps it was thus called,
because it was marked with (...), (i. e.) white stones. Spelman draws it from
the Fr. G. and old Brit. Leach, a stone. Leaguer, from the Dan Leyger, the
Belg. Legher, or the Teut. Lager, a Camp; whence Lagern, to pitch Tents; all
from our old Eng. Lig, for Lay; q. d. Ligger. To Leak, from the Belg. Leck,
Leke, a chink or flaw in a ship; whence Lecken, Leken, to run out: or from the
Teut. Loch, an hole; whence Locheren, to make an hole through, and Lechtzen, to
cleave, to stave to pieces. Leam, or Liam, a term in Hunting; from the Fr. G.
Lien, which comes from the Lat. Ligamen, a band. V. Leash. To Lean, from the
AS. Hlynian, Hlionan, id. which Fr. Jun. draws from the Gr. (...), to incline.
It is also derived from the Belg. Leynen, or the Teut. Lehnen, to lean upon;
and hence comes the Teut. Steglehne, with us, A Lean-Stock; all from the Gr.
(...), the elbow, upon which we commonly lean. Lean, from the AS. Laene,
Hlaene, idem; poor in flesh. To Leap; in Lincolnshire, To Lope; from the AS.
Hleapian, idem; whence Hleap, Hlip, a leap, or jump; or from the Belg. Loopen,
or the Teut. Lauffen, to run; from hence Leap-year, (i. e.) a year that leaps
over, as it were, (i. e.) exceeds the rest one day. Learn, originally from the
AS. Laeran, the Belg. Leeren, or the Teut. Lehren, to teach; whence the AS.
Laere, and Belg. Leere, learning; and the AS. Leornian, and Teut. Lernen, to
learn. To Leas Corn, from the Belg. and Teut. Lesen, to glean; which comes from
the Lat. Legere, to gather. Lease, or Writing, whereby lands or houses are let
out by the Landlord, to his Tenant; from the Fr. G. Laisser, to leave; (i. e.)
to leave one his lands or houses, or assign them to him upon such and such
terms of agreement. A Leash of Hounds, from the Fr. G. Laisse, three of any
thing joined; because perhaps not above three are coupled with one Leash. A
Leash, from the Fr. G. Less, the Belg. Letse, the Teut. Litse, the Ital.
Laccio, or the Hisp. Lazo, a thong of leather; all from the Lat. Laqueus, a
collar. Leasings, primarily from the AS. Leas, Lease, false; whence Leasunge, a
lie. Mer. Cas. draws these from the Gr. (...), one that tells a lie, a liar.
The Least, from the AS. Laest; this from the Compar. Laes, Less. Leisure, or
Leisure, from the Fr. G. Loisir, idem; which Menagius draws from the Lat.
Otiari, to be at ease, to rest, by adding the Article le, with an Apostrophus:
Or rather, from the Teut. Leisz, lazy, slow, (as Leisz Gehen, to go leasurably,
or leasurely;) which comes from the Lat. Laxus, loose. Leather, from the AS.
Lether, or the Belg. and Teut. Leder, the same; from hence the Teut. Ledern,
and the Belg. Lederen, leathern. Leave, from the AS. Lafe, Laf, Belaf, a
remnant; whence Belifan, to remain. Minshew derives it from the Gr. (...), to
leave. It may as well be drawn from the Gr. (...), to rest, to leave off.
Leave, To give Leave, from the AS. Lyfan, Alyfan, to grant, or permit; whence
Leaf, leave, or liberty to do a thing. Leaven, from the Fr. G. Levain, or the
Ital. Levatura, Lievito, idem; all from the Lat. Levare, to lift up; because it
lifts up the dough, as it were, and makes it Leviorem, more light. A Leaver,
from the Fr. G. Levier, idem; also a bar; and this a Levando, from lifting.
Lectern, from the Fr. G. Lectrin, Letrin, a Pulpit, or the place where
Common Prayer is read; these again from the Lat. Legere, to read. A Ledge upon
a wall, from the AS. Lecgan, the Teut. Liegen, or the Belg. Leggen, to Lay. A
Ledger Ambassador, an Ambassador for the King, or the Commonwealth; a Legando,
from sending away; or from the AS. Licgan, to lay; (i. e.) one that watches,
or lies in Foreign Countries, for the interest of the King and Kingdom. To
Lee, or Leeward, the leaning of a ship upon the Sea: I suppose, from the Fr. G.
a l'Eau; Verse or envers l'Eau, leaning toward the water. Leech, from the AS.
Laece, Lyce, or the Dan. En Laeger, a Physician; from hence the AS. Lecnian, to
heal, or cure; the Belg. Laecke, a blood-sucker, the Dan. Laeger, to heal, and
Laegdom, a cure. Leek, from the AS. Leac, the Belg. Loock, or the Teut. Lauch,
idem. Fr. Jun. derives it from the Gr. (...), a pot-herb. To Leer, or look
a-skew; from the Teut. Lauren, to observe; or from the Dan. Leer, to laugh.
Somner. derives them all from the AS. Hleare, the face, forehead, or
cheek-bone: Or it may be a Corruption of Lowr; which see. The Leer of a Deer, a
term in Hunting; (i. e.) the Lodge of a Deer; from the Teut. Lager, a lodge;
which comes from Liegen, Ligen, to lay. Lees, from the Fr. G. Lies, dregs; this
again from the AS. Liggan, Licgean, or the Teut. Liegen, to lie; because they
lie at the bottom. Leer, Courts-Leet: Spelman derives it from the AS. Lite,
little, a member: Or from the AS. Laet, a censure; q. d. an inferior Court
where Losses are valued: Or from the Belg. Laet, a Vice-Judge. Minsh. derives
it a Litibus, from suits, or quarrels, or disagreements, that are decided
therein. The Leetch of a Sail, from the Fr. G. Less, a Leash; or from the Lat.
Laxus, loose; q. d. the loose part of a fail. Leg: Minshew derives it a
Ligando, from binding, for the many Ligatures or nerves that are therein. It
may also be drawn from the AS. Leegh, low; because it is the lowest limb in the
body. Legerdemain, from the Fr. G. Legerdemain; i. e. quick of hand; this
q. Lever, from the Lat. Levis, light; because juggling tricks are performed
chiefly by the lightness or slight of hand. Leman, a Priest's Concubine, or a
married Man's Harlot. Minshew will have it to be a Contract of the Fr. G.
Mighon, a Minion. Some choose rather to draw it from the AS. Laedan, to lead; or
the Teut. Laden, to invite. The learned Th. H. draws it from the Fr. G.
L'Aimante, a Sweetheart. Lemmon, from the Fr. G. Limon, or the Ital. Limone,
Lemone; and all from the Gr. (...), a garden. Write Limon. Lend, from the AS.
Laenan, or the Teut. Leihnen, idem. Length, from the AS. Lenc, Leng, long; or
from the Belg. Lenghde, or the Teut. Lange, idem; hence Lang, long; all from
the Lat. Longus, long. Lent, from the AS. Lencten, the Belg. Lent, or the
Teut. Lentz, the Spring of the year; or from our Eng. Length, and Long; because
thou the days begin to lengthen. Lentil, from the Fr. G. Lentille; and both
from the Lat. Lentis, the same. A Lerry; the learned Th. H. draws it from the
AS. Laeran, to instruct; or from the AS. Laere, or the Belg. Leere, learning,
or a lesson. Some draw it from the Fr. G. Loure, a bag-pipe; this from Lyra, an
harp. We may also draw it from the Fr. G. Lire, a lesson, or lecture. Less,
from the AS. Laes, the same. Minshew derives it from the Gr. (...), idem. The
Lesses, from the Fr. G. Laisses, the dung of wild beasts; this from Laisser, to
leave; and both from the Lat. Laxare, to ease. Lesson, from the Fr. G. Lecon;
and both from the Lat. Lectio, the same. Lest, from the AS. Laest, the same;
this from the Comp. Laes, less. Let, a termination diminutive; from the old AS.
and Germ. Lit, Lyte, little; or from the Teut. Glied, or the Belg. Glid, Lid, a
member, part, or portion. To Let, from the AS. Laetan, the Belg. Laeten, as
Bloet Laeten, to let blood, the Fr. G. Laisser, or the Ital. Lasciare, to
suffer; and all from the Lat. Laxare, to loose, or ease. To Let, for To hinder;
from the AS. Laetan, or the Belg. Letten, idem; all from the AS. Late, Laete,
late. Letcher: Minsh. derives it from the Gr. (...), a bed; or from the Fr. G.
Luxure, lust; this from the Lat. Luxuria, idem. It may also be derived from the
Fr. G. Lasche, which comes from the Lat. Laxus, loose; as we say, A Loose-liv'd
fellow. Letter, from the Fr. G. Lettre, or the Ital. Lettera, idem; all from
the Lat. Litera, the same. Lettice, from the Fr. G. Laictile, or the Teut.
Lattich. idem; and all from the Lat. Lactuca, the same; this from Lac, milk;
from the milky juice that is in it. Levant, from the Fr. G. Levant, or the
Ital. Levante; which are derived from the Lat. and Ital. Levare, to lift up;
q.d. Sol levans; (i. e.) the Sun lifting it self up, or rising in our Horison.
Level, from the AS. Laefel, the Fr. G. Livel, or the Ital. Livello, a
Carpenter's rule, or any plain. Lever, I had Lever, from the Teut. Ich wo^te
Lieber, I had rather; or from the AS. Leofre, rather, more freely; this from
Leof, acceptable. Leveret, from the Fr. G. Levraut, Levreteau, a young Hare;
these again from the Lat. Lepus, Lepo^ris, an Hare. To Levy, from the Fr. G.
Lever, or the Ital. Levare, to exact Taxes; also to take up, or press Soldiers.
Lewd, or wicked; either from the AS. Belaea, a Traitor; or Belaean, to betray;
or from Laeede, or Laeed-man, a Layman; because the Laity are generally looked
upon as lewd and wicked, in respect of the religious Clergy. Minshew derives it
from the Belg. Luy, Ley, idle; or the Teut. Leidig, wicked, or sad; from Leid,
sadness; as we say, A sad fellow. It may also be drawn from the AS. Leode, the
common people, who are most prone to lewdness. It alludes to the Gr. (...), a
dissolute Man. Liable, from the Fr. G. Liable, obnoxious, exposed to; this from
Lier, and both from the Lat. Ligare, to bind; or from our Eng. Ly, and the
termination able; (i. e.) he that lies under censure or payment. To Lib, from
the Belg. Zubben, to geld. Minshew derives it from the Gr. (...), to oppress,
to afflict. A Libbard, from the Fr. G. Liepard, or the Belg. Libaerd, idem;
both from the Lat. Leopardus, the same. Library, from the Fr. G. Librairie, or
the Ital. Libraria, idem; these again a Libris, from books; (i. e.) a
repository for books. To Lick, from the AS. Liccian, the Belg. and Teut.
Lecken, the Fr. G. Lecher, Licher, or the Ital. Leccare, id. whence the Belg.
Leck-spit, a lick-spit; all probably from the Gr. (...), idem. Lickerish, from
the AS. Licera, or the Ital. Licchetto, gluttonous: Or from the Fr. G. Femme
Lecheresse, a lecherous woman; which comes from the Fr. G. Lecher, to lick; or
Leschard, or the Ital. Licchetto, a glutton. Licorish, from the Ital.
Liqueritia; both from the Lat. and Gr. Glycyrriza, (i. e.) (...), a sweet root.
Lid, from the AS. Hlid, a cover. Fr. Jun. derives it from the Gr. (...), to
lock up, to cover up. Liege, Liege- People, from the Fr. G. Lige, or the Ital.
Ligio, trusty, faithful; these a Ligando, from binding; from hence the Fr. G.
Ligence, Ligeancy, Allegiance, or Obligation, by which we are bound to be loyal
Subjects. In Lieu of, from the Fr. G. Lieu, room, or place. Lieutenant, from
the Fr. G. Lieutenant, q. Locum tenens, one that acts in another's room, a
Deputy, or Vicegerent. To Litt, from the Belg Lichten, the Fr. G. Lever, or the
Ital. and Lat. Levare, Elevare, idem. Light, from the Belg. Licht, or the Teut.
Leicht. id. whence Leichtlich, lightly, or easily. The Light, from the AS.
Leoht, the Fr. Th. Leohte, the Belg. Licht, or the Teut. Leicht, Leuchte, the
same; these from the AS. Liht, Lihtan, or the Teut. Leuchten, to light, or
kindle; or, which is most probable, from the Abl. Lat. Luce, the light; which
comes a Lucendo, from shining, or casting light; this again from the Gr. (...),
to see. To Light, or Alight, from the AS. Lihtan, or Alihtan, or the Belg.
A^lichten, to get off horseback; q. d. to alight, or make light; for then the
Horse is eased of his carriage. To Light on, from the Belg. Licht, by chance;
q. d. to meet with by chance; this from our word Luck, or the Belg. Gheluck,
fortune. The Lights, so called from their lightness, as being the lightest of
the entrails, with respect to quantity. To Like, for To approve of, from the
AS. Licean, Gelican, or the Fr. Th. Lichan, idem; or from the Noun Like,
resemblance. Like, from the AS. Gelic, the Teut. Gleich, or the Belg. Gheliick,
Liick, idem; whence the AS. Licnysse, a likeness, and the Belg. Liicken, to
liken, or compare. The learned Dr. Th. H. draws it from the AS. Lic, Lice, a
body. Our word Alike, seems to come of the Gr. (...), idem. To Lill, from the
Belg. Lellen, to suck; this from the Lat. Lallare, to lull asleep. Limb, from
the AS. Lim, or the Dan. Lem, the same; which Fr. Jun. derives from the Gr.
(...), a part; or (...), a member, by a Metathesis. Limbeck, from the Fr. G.
Alembic, the Ital. Lambico, Limbico, or the Lat. Barb. Alembicus, an Alembick,
or destillatory vessel; or from the Arab. Al, and the Gr. (...), a pot,
according to Hesychius. Limber; Minshew derives it from Lime, for Bird- Lime:
Other worthy Etymologists draw it from the Teut. Liud, or the Fr. Th. Linder,
soft, gentle; or from the Belg. Lencken, to bow, or bend; q. d. Lencker. Lime,
from the Belg. Leem, Liim, or the Teut. Leim, id. whence the AS. Geliman, to
glue, to dawb with lime; probably from the Lat. Limus, mud, or slime. To Lime,
or Line: Minshew writes it Ligne, and derives it from the Fr. G. Ligner,
Aligner, to line, as a Dog does with a Bitch. Limmer, or Limner, a Painter;
from the AS Liming, a blot or lim, a limb; or from the Fr. G. Enluminer, to
paint, illustrate, or polish; and from thence Enlumineur, a Limner, or Painter.
Limp, from the AS. Limphealt, lame, he that halteth. Limpin, q. d. Lompin, a
little lump; from the Belg. Lompe, a lump; being so named from its lumpish
body. Lineage, from the Fr. G Lineage, Lignage, or the Ital. Lignaggio, a race,
or pedigree; all from the Lat. Linea, idem. A Line, from the Lat. Linea, the
same. A Line, or Cord, from the Lat. Linum, flax. Ling, a termination
diminutive, from the Teut. Klein, little, when it denotes quality; or from the
Teut. Langen, for Belangen, to belong to. Ling, for Heath, from the Run. Dan.
Ling, or the Dan. Mod. Lung, idem. Ling, a Fish, from the Belg. Linghe, Linge,
the same; or perhaps, a Longitudine, from its length. To Linger, from the Teut.
Langern, to prolong, to be long in doing a thing. A Linger, or Linget, a bird
having its name from Ling, (i. e.) Heath, which it mostly feeds upon. Lining
to a Suit of Cloths, from our word To Line a Garment; this from the Lat. Linum,
flax, or linen; or from the Lat. Linere, Illinere, to dawb over; by a Metaphor
drawn from Plasterers. Link in an Iron-team; Minsh. draws it from the Lat.
Ligo, to bind; or from the Belg. Rinck, a ring. Links, Torches made of Rosin,
Pitch, etc. Minshew, with Mer. Cas. draw it from the Gr. (...), a candle. It is
also taken from the Teut. Lencken, to bend. To Link or knit together, from the
Fr. G. Lien, a chain; whence Lier, to chain up; or rather, from the Teut.
Gelenck, an iron link. Linen. from the AS. Linen, (i. e.) made of line; whence
the Belg. Lienen-Kleed, linen-cloth, and Teut. Lienwad, a linen web; all from
the Lat. Linum, flax. Write Linen. A Linnet, from the Fr. G. Linotte, a bird so
called, because it feeds upon Line-seed. Linspin, the pin which keeps the
wheel upon its axle-tree; q. d. Linkspin: Or from the Belg Leyne, Laene, a prop
or leaning-stock; for the wheel, by leaning against it, is kept on its
axle-tree. Linsy-woolsy, cloth made of line and wool, mixed together, and
interwoven. Lint to stop a bleeding wound withal, from the Lat. Linteum, linen,
whereof it is made. Lin^el, the match wherewith Soldiers or Gunners fire their
pieces; from the Teut. Lume, Lunten, tinder; and this from the Lat. Linteum,
linen. Lint^e, or Lintels of a door; from the Fr. G. Linteaux, or the Hisp.
Lintel, id. this from the Lat. Limen, a threshold. Lion, from the Fr. G. Lion,
and both from the Lat. and Gr. Leo, the same; this from the Gr. (...), to see,
from the sharpness of sight. Lioncel, a term in Heraldry; from the Fr. G.
Lionceau, or the Ital. Lioncello, a Lion's whelp. Lip, from the AS. Belg. Teut.
and Fr. G. Lip, or the Dan Laebe, the same; all possibly from the Lat.
Labium, id. To Lisp, from the AS. Wlisp, the Belg. Lispen, or the Teut.
Lispeln, idem; and all from the sound; or, which is most likely, from the Gr.
(...), (i. e.) (...), a lisping, stuttering tongue. A List, from the Fr. G.
List, or the Ital. Lista, idem, a catalogue; or from the Teut. Lesen, to
lease, or gather; (i. e.) a paper or roll, wherein names are collected. List,
from the Fr. G. Lice, id. a place where wrestlers, combatants, and such like,
show their manhood. A Li^t in garments, from the Fr. G. Lez, Lesiere, an hemm,
or border. Martinus draws it from the Gr. (...); with us, The Last. List, for
Lust; Mer. Cas. draws it from the Gr. (...), for (...), I will. V. Lust. To
Listen, from the AS. Hlystan, the Belg. Luysteren, or the Teut. Lanstern, to
hearken; all perhaps from the Lat. Lustrare, to ponder, or consider
attentively. Listless, q. d. Lust^ess, having no lust, nor desire to a thing.
Lither, or Lazy, from the AS. Lith, soft, also lazy; whence Gelithian, to
mollify, and Hlithe, calm, pleasant. A Litter, from the Fr. G. Litiere,
Lictiere, or the Ital. Lettiera, a Sedan. A Litter, or Brood, which brute
Animals, as Bitches, etc. bring forth at once; from the Fr. G. Litiere, litter,
or straw; upon which they bring forth their young; this from Lict, a bed.
Little, from the AS. Litel, (Litling, a little one) the Belg. Lettel, Luttel,
or the Teut. Lutzel, idem. To Live, from the AS. Libban, Leofan, the Teut.
Leben, or the Belg. Leven, idem; whence the AS. Liflic, lively, and Lif, the
Run. Dan. and Dan. Liff, and the Teut. Liva, life. Liver, from the AS. Lifere,
the Dan. Leffver, the Belg. Lever, or the Teut. Lever, id. possibly so called,
because it was anciently esteemed the fountain of life. Liver'd, A White
Liver'd Fellow, q. d. A White-Leather'd fellow; that is, one whose face turns
white as leather with rage unrevenged. Liverings, a kind of haggess; from our
word Liver, because they are made of an Hog or Calf's Liver; or from Livery;
which see. A Livery, from the Fr. G. Livree, the Ital. Livrea, or the Hisp.
Librea, the same. It signified heretofore victuals, as well as raiment,
distributed amongst Servants by the Gentry; now it only signifies apparel, or
marks in Apparel, to distinguish one Man's Servants from another; all from the
Fr. G. Livrer, to deliver to, or bestow upon. A Lizard, from the Fr. G.
Laisard, Lizarde, or the Ital. Lusardo, idem; and all from the Lat. Lacerta,
the same. Lo, from the AS. La, behold: Or it is a contract of the Imperative
Look. A Load, from the AS. Lade, Hlade, or the Teut. Ladung, idem; whence the
AS. Ladan, Hladian, and the Belg. and Teut. Laden, to load; all perhaps from
the Fr. Th. Lithan, or the Teut. Leiden, to endure. Lodestone: Somnerus
derives it from the AS. Laedan, to lead, and Stan, a stone. It being a sort of
stone that draws other metals to it: Or from the Teut. Laden, to invite, and
Stone, for the reason beforementioned: Or lastly from the English Load, and
Stone, because it is very weighty. Loaf, from the AS. Hlaf, the same. Luther
also uses these words in the Teut. cin Laib Brods, a loaf of bread. Loan, from
the AS. Laena, Hlaen, the Belg. Loon, or the Teut. Lohn, id. Martin. draws it
from the Gr. (...), to pay. A L^b, or Lobcock, from the Teut. Lapp, a lubber,
and Cock; the name, possibly, of some foolish fellow, from whom others are
proverbially so called. Lobby, from the Teut. Laube, the porch of an house. Lob
Lolly, either from Lob, or L^b^er, and Lully, which comes from the Lat.
Lallare, to lull; q. d. slovens pottage: Or from the Teut. Lappen, to lap like
a dog, and the same Lallare, to lull. Lobster, a shellfish, from the AS.
Loppestre, idem; perhaps from the Gr. (...), bank, from the similitude of its
shell. Lob-worm, a bait for Trouts; from the AS. Loppe, a Flea, for its
similitude; or Libban, Leofan, to live; because it is a lively, or longliv'd
worm. A Liche, or Lo^ch, from the Fr. G. Loche, idem; thought to be a lesser
kind of Groundling. A Lock, from the AS. Loc, the same; whence Belucan, the
Belg. Loken, to lock up, and the Ital. Lucco, Lochetto, a padlock. A Lock of
hair, from the AS. Locca, Loccas, idem. A Lock of wool, from the Teut. Lock,
Flock, or the Belg. Vlocke; and all from the Lat. Floccus, the same. Fr. Jun.
draws it from the Gr. (...), down; Mer. Cas. from (...), a thick wood. It may
also very probably be drawn from (...), a curled lock. Lockram cloth, from the
AS. Locca, or the Teut. Lock, a lock of wool, and Raum, thick, because it is
made of thick threads. Lodemanage, a fee which was usually paid the Commander
or Pilot of a ship; from our Eng. Lead, and Manage; which see. Lode-star, from
our word To Lead, it being a Star which leads or directs Mariners at Sea. To
Lodge a Deer, from the AS. Gelogian, to place, or stow. Loft, for an upper
floor in an house; possibly from our word To Lift, the nature of lifting being
to raise any thing higher than naturally it is. Lofty, or proud; V. Loft,
before. It is a Metaphor. A Log of wood, from the AS. Ligan, or the Belg.
Liggen, to lig or lie, because of its bulkiness. Loggerhead, from the Belg.
Luggen, to act like a fool or sluggard, and Head; or rather because of the
greatness and hardness of the head, like a log or block. Lohoc, or Loche, a
term in Physic; from the AS. Liccian, the Fr. G. Licher, the Ital. Leccare, or
the Gr. (...), to lick; all feigned from the sound. To Loll out ones tongue,
from the Belg. Lelle, or Lelleken van de tonghe, idem. Lollards, the followers
of Wickliff the Arch Heretic; the Monks derive it from Lolium, tares, because
their Heresy in the Church was like tares in the corn. But Trithemius draws it
from Walter Lolhard, a German, and a great promoter of this Sect, which is most
likely. Lolling, To Loll upon, a contract of Load, (i. e.) to lay upon with
ones whole load, or weight. Long, It is Long of you, from the AS. Gelang,
fault, blame; which comes from the old Teut. Gelangen, and now Belangen, to
belong unto. To Long after, or for a thing; from the AS. Longen, to long after,
the Teut. Gelangen, to desire, or covet, or the Belg. Verlangen, to desire very
earnestly. Looby, v. Lobcock, and Lubber. The Loof of a ship, from the AS.
Ufan, above; it being the highest, or uppermost part of it. To Look, from the
AS. Locian, Aluccan, the Belg. Lochten, Luchten, or the Teut. Lugen, to see, or
behold. Minshelb draws it from the Gr. (...) to see. A Weaver's Loom: Minshew
draws it from the Lat. Glomus, a clew or bottom of yarn A Loop, from the Belg.
Loopen, to run, for it is easily slipped off; and hence it is that we say, A
Running Knot. Loop-hole, q. d. A Leap-hole, says Minshew: Or it is drawn from
the Belg. Loopen, or the Teut. Lauffen, to run. Loop-lace, from the Belg.
Lappen, to sow together; or from our Eng. Loop, and Lace; which see. To Loose,
or Loosen, from the AS. Lesan, to set free, the Belg. Lossen, Loosen, or the
Fr. Th. and Teut. Losen, to loose; whence the Teut. Losz, and the Belg. Loos,
loose, at liberty. Minshew and Fr. Jun. draw it from the Gr. (...), to loose,
or to pay. To Loose; as, To Loose ones life, from the AS. Leosan, id. this from
our word Loss, q. d. to suffer loss: Or from the other Loose; for when a thing
is lost, it is loosed, as it were, from the hands of him that had it. Read
Lose. Loover, an hole in the top of an house, serving for a chimney; from the
Fr. G. l'Ouverte, an opening. A Lop, i. e. A Flea, a word used in Lincolnsh.
from the Dan. Loppe, a Flea; this from our word To Leap, or the Belg. Loop^n,
to run. To Lop trees, from the Belg. Loof, Loove, or the Teut. Laub, a leaf: Or
from the Gr. (...), to pill off the rind of any thing: A Metaphor. Lopper'd
Milk, from the Teut. Lab, Laub, idem; clotter'd milk; these from Laben, to
curdle, as milk kept too long in hot weather. A Lord, from the AS. Hlaford, or
Loverd, the same; this from Hlaf, a loaf, and the Teut. Ford, for Alford;
because Lords and Noblemen in old time gave loaves to a certain number of
Poor, or because they maintain many servants at their tables. Lorimers, or
Loriners, from the Fr. G. Lormiers; or from the Lat. Lora, the reins of a
bridle. Lot, from the AS. Hlot, the Teut. Lod, Lolz, the Belg. and Fr. G. Lot,
or the Ital. Lotto, idem; whence the AS. Hleotan, and Belg. Loten, to cast
lots: Or from the Lat. and Gr. Clotho, one of the three Sisters of Fate. Loath,
from the AS. Lathe, it grieves me, or Lathian, to hate, or detest; whence Lath,
loathsome, odious. Lover, from the AS. Leof, Leofa, ones Love, or Sweetheart;
whence Lufe, love, and Lufian, the Belg. Lieven, and the Teut. Lieben, to love.
Love, a very fine sort of Silk; from the Lat. Laevis, or the Gr. (...), smooth,
or soft. A Lout, or Country- Lown: Minshew draws it a Luto, from clay; q. d.
one educated in the Country. Louse, from the AS. Lus, the Dan. Lusz, or the
Belg. Luys, the same; whence Luysen, and the Teut. Lausen, to louse ones self,
to catch Lice. To Low, from the AS. Hloan, the Belg. Loeyer, or the Teut.
Luyhen, idem; all from the sound. Low, from the Belg. Loh, or Leegh, idem.
Low-bell, a bell which Fowlers use to affright birds with in the night, and so
take them; q. d. Lowing-bell, or Lowd-bell: Or from the Teut. Lohe, a flame; it
being only made use of in the night, and is accompanied with a candle, or other
light. Low, in West-morland, is used for a flame, or sudden blaze. Loud, Loud,
from the AS. Hlud, or the Belg. Luyde, the same. A Lown, from the Belg. Loen, a
bard, or stupid fellow. To Lowre, from the Belg. Loeren, to leer, or look
askew. Loyal, from the Fr. G. Loyal, or the Ital. Leale, idem: Or it is a
corruption of Legal. Loins, from the Belg. and Teut. Lend, the Fr. G. Longes,
or the Ital. Longia, Lonza, idem. Write Loins. To Loyter, from the Belg.
Loteren, or Leuteren, to delay, to linger; which may come from our Eng. Late,
Later; (i. e.) not to perform a thing till it be late, or too late. A Lozenge,
from the Fr. G. Lozenge, a medicine to preserve the lungs. A Lubber, from the
Teut. Lapp, a fool; q. d. Lapper. Minshew derives it from the Gr. (...),
disgrace. Luc^, from the Belg. Luck, or the Teut. Gluck, fortune, good or bad.
Mer. Cas. draws it from the Gr. (...), to cast lots. To Lug, from the AS.
Geluggian, to pull, or pluck. It may also be drawn from the Eng. Lock, q. d. to
pull one by the locks or hair. Lugs, for Ears, from the AS. Ligan, to lig, or
lay; because the ears of Men and Women lie unmoved, contrary to most other
Creatures. Lukewarm, from the AS. Wlaec, or the Teut. Law, somewhat warm;
which last comes from the Teut. Lueck, soft, or the Gr. (...), to loose; for
warm things loosen, and soften the skin. To Lull a child asleep, from the Belg.
Lullen, to sing; this from the Lat. Lallare, to sing asleep; and this again
from the Gr. (...), to speak. Lullaby, from our word Lull, and the AS. Abidan,
to abide. Mer. Cas. writes it Laleby; which may be drawn from the Gr. (...), to
speak, and our word by: q d. talked asleep. Lumber, furniture of little worth;
so called, q. Cumber. Lumber, or Lumbar, as, To put ones Cloths to Lumbar, (i.
e.) to pawn them; from the Belg. Lombaerd, a Broker. Lump, from the Belg. Lomp,
or the Teut. Klumpe, the same. Lump-fish, a fish so named, from its lumpish,
heavy body. Lumpish, from the Belg. Lompsch, slow, heavy. V. Lump. A Lunch, or
Luncheon of bread, from the Hisp. Lonja, from the length thereof, says
Minshew. Lune, An Hawk's Lune, from the Ital. Longoli, or the Fr. G. la Long
Lanieres, a cord, or line, wherewith the Hawk is held; these from the Lat.
Longus, long, and Laniere, from Lana, wool. A Lungis, from the Fr G. Longis, or
the Ital. Longone, a long, slam fellow. Lungs, from the AS. Lungena, the Dan.
and Teut. Lunge, or the Belg. Longhe, the same; all from the AS. Lun, empty;
for it is filled with nothing but wind. To Lurch, to steal or pilfer, from the
Lat. Lurcari, which Non. Marc. expounds, To snatch meat greedily. Caes. Scal.
draws it from the old word Lura, a sack's mouth: Voss. from the Gr. (...), or
(...), greedy, voracious. Lurdan, not from Lord, and Dane, but from the Fr. G.
Lourd, a lazy person; whence Lurdant, and Lourdin, a dunce. Lurk, to lay hid,
from Lark; q. d. to hide himself in an hole, as a Lark does in the furrows: or
from the Belg. Loeren, to lay in ambush. Lushious, a Contract of Delicious; or
from the Lat. Luxus, luxury. A Lusk, from the Fr. G. Lasche, a loose fellow,
says Minshew. Lust, from the AS. Lust, or the Belg. and Teut. Lust, id. whence
the AS. Lustan, the Fr. Th. Lustanne, and the Belg. Lusten, to lust after, to
covet. Luster, from the Belg. Luster, Liister, the Fr. G. and Hisp. Luster, or
the Ital. Lustro, idem. Lusty, from the Teut. Lustig, the Belg. Lustigh, the
Fr. G. Lest, or the Ital. Lesto, lively, strong. Lute, from the Fr. G. Lut,
Luth, the Ital. Liuto, the Dan. Lutte, or the Teut. Laute, the same. It is also
drawn from the Hisp. Laud, idem; this a Laudando, from praising, say Menagius
and Covarruvius. To Lute, from the Lat. Lutum, clay, (i. e.) to dawb with
mortar. A Ly to wash withal, from the AS. Laeg, the Belg. Lecke, Looghe, the
Ital. Liscia, or the Hisp. Lexia, the same; all from the old Lat. Lix Aqua, now
Lixivium, Ly made of ashes and water. Write Lee, or Ley. To Lie along, V. Lay.
To Lie, to tell a Lie, from the AS. Leogan, or the Belg. and Teut. Liegen,
idem.
M.
A MAce, from the Fr. G. Mass, the Ital. Mazza, or the Hisp. Maca, Maza, a
club; all from the Lat. Massa, a mass. Mackarel, from the Fr. G. Macareau,
Maquereau, or the Teut. Mackerel, Makrel, id. The learned Th. H. draws it from
the Ital. Maccarello, the same: All a Maculis, from the longish, blue spots in
the sides thereof. Mad, gone mad; from the Ital. Matto, a fool; this perhaps
from the Gr. (...), vain, foolish. Mer. Cas. draws it from the Gr. (...), to be
mad. Madam, from the Fr. G. Ma Dame; this a Contract of the Lat. Domina, a
Dame; q. d. Mea Domina, my Dame. Madder, from the Ital. Madera, q. d. Lat.
Materia, matter wherewith wool is died. Madrigal, from the Fr. G. and Hisp.
Madrigal, or the Ital. Madriale, a rural Song. The learned Th. H. draws it from
the Hisp. Madragar, to awake early, as Lovers do, to sing Love-Songs to their
Sweet-hearts at their windows. Magazin, from the Fr. G. Magazin, the Hisp.
Magazen, or the Ital. Magazin, idem. A Maggot in flesh, from the Fr. G.
Magaigne, Magagna, corruption: Or from the Belg. Maege, a Mite in bread; or
Muyck, soft, and Rot, an hole; for they breed in holes full of moist, corrupt
matter. A Maid, from the AS. Maeden, the Belg. Maeght, Maegho, or the Teut.
Magd, idem, a Virgin. Hence the AS. Maden-hade, a Maidenhead, or Virginity.
Mail, A Coat of Mail, from the Fr. G. Maille, the Ital. Maglia, or the Hisp.
Malla; as, Cota de Malla, a coat of iron; all from the Fr. G. Maille, a mash in
a net, from the similitude. Maim, from the Lat. Mancus, lame, idem. Main, from
the old Fr. G. Magne, this from the Lat. Magnus, great; as in Charle-main,
which in the Fr. G. is Charlemagne, Lat. Carolus Magnus, Charles the Great.
From hence, The Main, for the Ocean, or great Sea. Main, With all his Might and
Main, from the AS. Maegen, might, power; this again from Magan, to may, or can.
To Maintain, from the Fr. G. Maintenir, or the Ital. Mantenere, to defend, to
give sustenance to; q. d. Lat. Manu tenere, to hold, as it were, in ones hand.
A Maj^r, from the Belg. and Teut. Meyer, a Major to execute Justice between Man
and Man, within a City or Corporation. Versteg draws it from the old Eng.
Maier, this from our Eng. May; q. d. one that has full power to judge and
examine Causes. Make, from the AS. Macan, the Fr. Th. Machon, the Belg. Maken,
or the Teut. Machen, idem. Fr. Jun. draws it from the Gr. (...), to labor, to
work. A Malady, from the Fr. G. Malady, or the Ital. Malatia, id. this a Malo,
from evil; (i. e.) one that suffers evil; as we say, He is very ill, that is,
sick: Or from the Lat. Mala, evils, and our Eng. Die. The Malanders, from the
Fr. G. Malandres; this again from the Ital. Mal Andare, to go ill, or with
pain; for it makes the Horse go lamish, till he be well heated. Malapert, or
Malepert, impudent, saucy; q. d. Male Partus, ill bred, according to Minshew:
Or from the same Male, badly, and the Fr. G. Appert, ready; q d. always ready
to speak evil of others. A Male Creature, from the Fr. G. Masle, or the Ital.
Maschio; both from the Lat. Masculus, idem. Malecontent, from the Fr. G.
Malcontent, or the Ital. Malcontento q. d. Lat. Male Contentus, not well
content. Malkin, the Dim. of Mall, for Mary. It also signifies, A Mop,
wherewith Women wash their houses. A Mall, or Mallet, from the Fr. G. Mail,
Maillet, or the Ital. Maglio; all from the Lat. Malleus, idem. Hence comes the
word, To Mall; (i. e.) to beat, as with a Mallet. Mallard, from the Fr. G.
Malart, a wild Duck; this from the Belg. Mallen, to be lascivious, or
lecherous, and Aerd, nature. Mallows, from the AS. Malu, this from the Lat.
Malva, in Gr. (...); so called, (...), from making the belly soft. Malmsey, a
kind of hot wine; so called from the Lat. Marvisia, or Malvisia, a Promontory
in the Isle of Chius: Or from Monenbasia, a port in Epidaurus, from whence good
wine of this sort is brought. Malt, from the AS. Mealt, the Belg. Mout, or the
Teut. Maltz the same. Mam, some derive it from the C. Br. Mam, a mother; and
this from the Lat. Mamma, a pap. Mammocks, fragments, or pieces; perhaps from
the C. Br. Man, little, and the Dim. Ock, as in Bullock, etc. Man, from the AS.
Man, Mon, or the Belg. and Teut. Man, the same; whence the AS. Manslaga, a
Manslayer. Manacles, from the Fr. G. Manicles, fetters for the hands; both from
Manus, the hand, for that they are put upon the hands or arms. To Manage, from
the Fr. G. Mesnager, or the Ital. Maneggiare, to handle; these from the Lat.
Manus, an hand. Manchet, from the Fr. G. Michette, Miche, fine, white bread;
and this from the Lat. Mica, a crumb. Mant^ple, or Steward; from the Ital.
Mancipio, the same, says Flor. this from the Lat. Manus, and Capio. The Mane
of an Horse, from the Belg. Matne, or the Teut. Mahne, idem. A Manger, from the
Fr. G. Mangeoire, or the Ital. Mangiatoia, the same; these from Manger, and
Mangiare, to eat; which again may be derived from the Lat. Mandere, or
Manducare, to eat. To Mang^e, or tear in pieces: Minshew draws it from the Lat.
Mancus, maimed. It may also be drawn from the Belg. and Teut. Mangel, a defect.
Mangy, or scabbed; from the Fr. G. Demanger, to itch. Manner, from the Belg.
and Fr. G. Maniere, or the Ital. Maniera, the same; hence the Belg. Mannerlick,
mannerly; all from the Lat. Manus, an hand; q. d. a decent carriage, or motion
of the hands in time of discourse, which is a principal point in good manners.
A Manor, or Farm; from the Fr. G. Manoir, or the Lat. Barb. Manerium, a
Lordship; this from Manner, to remain; q. d. Mansio, a mansion to abide in. A
Mantle, from the AS. Maentel, the Fr. G. Mantel, Manteau, or the Ital.
Mantello, idem; also a manteau, a cloak. The Hawk Mantleth, (i. e.) spreads out
her wings like a Mantle. Mantle-tree of a Chimney: Minshew draws it from the
Fr. G. Mantel de la Cheminee, or the Ital. Mantello di Camino, the same. To
Manure the ground, from the Fr. G. Manouvrier, idem; this a Manu operando, from
working with the hand. Many, from the AS. Manig, the Belg. Menig, the Teut.
Manch, or the Fr. Th. Manig, many, much; whence the Dan. Mangfold, manifold. A
Map, from the Fr. G. Map, or the Ital. Mappa, a schedule containing a
description of the World, etc. Minsh. draws it from the Lat. Mappa, a napkin;
because it is large, and spread out like a napkin; as by a like Analogy we say,
A Sheet of Paper. Maple- tree, from the AS. Mapul treo, idem. To Mar: Minshew
derives it from the Gr. (...), to do amiss. It may be better drawn from the
Hisp. Marra, a fault or want; whence Marrar, to mistake: Or from the AS.
Myrran, to spend lavishly, to destroy. Marble, from the Fr. G. Marbre; both
from the Lat. Marmor, the same; and this from the Gr. (...), to shine. To
March, from the Fr. G. Marcher, or the Ital. Marchiare, to move forward after a
marshal manner. Menagius draws it from the Lat. Varicare, to straddle as
Soldiers do, with one foot foremost. A Merchant, from the Fr. G. Marchand, or
the Ital. Mercante, the same; these from the Lat. Mercari, to buy, or Merx,
wares, or merchandice. Marches or bounds of a Country; from the AS. Mearc, a
land mark. Marchpane, from the Fr. G. Massepan, or the Ital. Marzapane, a
Confection made of Pistach-nuts, Almonds, Sugar and Rose Water; q. d. Lat.
Massa panis, a mass of bread candied. Mare, from the AS. Maere, the Belg.
Merry, or the Teut. Mar, Merre, id whence the Belg. Nacht-Merie, the
Nightmare. Margent, from the Fr. G. Marge, idem; and both from the Lat. Margo,
the same. Margrave, (i. e.) The Grave or Count of the Marches: V. Marquess, and
Grave. Marriage, from the Fr. G. Marriage, or the Ital. Maritaggio, the same. V.
Marry. Marigold, q. d. Mary's Gold; possibly from some Woman with yellow hair,
that delighted in this flower. A Mariner, from the Fr. G. Marinier, or the
Ital. Marinaro, a Seaman; both from the Lat. Mare, the Sea. Marioram, from the
Ital. and Lat. Barb. Majorana, the same. Gerard takes it to have been thus
named, because it is sown in monse Maio, in May; or a magnis virtutibus, from
the great virtues thereof. Mark, a Silver Coin; so called, because it is
stamped with the King's Mark. To Mark, from the AS. Mearcan, or the Belg.
Marcken, to mark, to consider; whence the AS. Mearc, the Belg. Marck, the Fr.
G. Marque, and the Ital. Marca, a mark to know a thing by. A Market, from the
Fr. G. March, or the Ital. Mercato, the same; all from the Lat. Merces, Goods,
Merchandice. Marl, from the Belg. Margel, the Teut. Mergel, the Fr. G. Marne,
or the Lat. Marga, fat earth for manuring the fields; all perhaps from the AS.
Merg, marrow. Marmelate, or Marmelade, from the Fr. G. Marmelade, or the Ital.
Marmelada, idem. Marquess, from the Fr. G. Marquis, the Ital. Marchese, or the
Lat. Barb. Marchio, id. Marrow, from the AS. Merg, Merih, the Dan. and Belg.
Marg, the Teut. Marck, or the Ital. Marolla, the same. To Marry, from the Fr.
G. Marier, or the Lat. Maritare, id. Marsh, Marish, from the AS. Mersc, the
Belg. Maersche, Marse, or the Fr. G. Marais, Marez, idem, a fenny place; all
from the Lat. Mare, the Sea. Marshal, from the Fr. G. Marshall, the Ital.
Marescallo, or the Teut. Marschalk, Master of the Horse. Some derive it from
the Ital. Marescalco, or the Fr. G. Marshall, a Farrier; Or it comes from the
Germ. Mar, a Mare, and Schalck, a Servant. Mart, a Contract of Market. A
Marten, from the Fr. G. Martin, Mart, the Hisp. Marta, or the Ital. Martino,
id. Martingal, from the Fr. G. Martingale, or the Ital. Martingala, a small
thong or rein to rule an horse withal; all perhaps from Mare, and the Teut. In
Kallen, to call in, to stop an Horse in a full career. Martlet, a kind of
Swallow; from the Fr. G. Martelet, the Dim. of the name Martin. Minsh.
surmiseth this bird to be so called, because it comes from hot Countries, to
us, about the end of March, and goes away about St. Martin's Day. Marvel, from
the Fr. G. Esmerveiller, or the Ital. Maravigliare, idem. A Mash for an Horse;
not unlikely from the Teut. Mischen, or the Belg. Misschen, to mingle; or q.d.
Lat. Miscella, a mislin, or mixture of things. To Mash, from the Fr. G.
Mascher; and both from the Lat. Masticare, to champ with the teeth. A Mas^,
from the Fr. G. Masque, the Belg. Masche, or the Ital. Maschera, a vizard to
put over the face. Maskin, By the Maskins, (i. e.) By the Mass. Maslin, or
Millin, bread of diverse sorts of corn mixed together; from the Fr. G. Mesler,
to mingle; and this from the Lat. Misceo, idem. A Mason, from the Fr. G.
Masson, or Macon, the same. The Mass, from the AS. Maesse, the Fr. G. Mess,
the Teut. Mesz, or the Lat. Barb. Missa, idem; q. d. Lat. Missio, or Dimissio
populi, a mission, or dismission of the people. A Massacre, from the Fr. G.
Massacre, a slaughter; and this from the Lat. Mactare, to slay, or the Ital.
Mazzare, to put to death with clubs and staffs. Massy, from the Fr. G. Massif,
or the Ital. Massivo, Massiccio, solid, weighty; all from the Lat. Massa, a
mass, or lump of any thing. A Mast of a ship, from the AS. Maest, the Belg.
Dan. and Teut. Mast, or the Fr. G. Mas, Mast, idem. Mast, to feed Swine with,
from the AS. Maest, or the Belg. and Teut. Mast, Acorns to fatten hogs withal;
whence Masten, to make fat. Master, from the Fr. G. Maistre, or the Ital.
Maestro, the same; and all from the Lat. Magister, idem. A Mastive, from the
Fr. G. Mastin, or the Ital. Mastino, the same; all from the Teut. Masten, to
fatten. A Mat, from the AS. Meatte, the Dan. Maatte, the Teut. Matte, or the
Fr. G. Natte, the same. Minshew derives it from the Heb. Mittah, a bed. The
Lat. Matta is also read in Ovid. Match: Mer. Cas. draws it from the Gr. (...),
a fight: And the industrious Dr. Skinner, from the word Mate, (i. e.) a
Companion. A Match that soon takes fire, from the Fr. G. Meche, Meiche, or the
Ital. Miccia, Miccio, idem. A Mate, from the Fr. G. Macar, the AS. Maca, or the
Belg. Maet, idem. This last Fr. Jun. derives from the Gr. (...), Cum, with:
Though most likely from the AS. Metan, to meet one; for Birds of a feather
flock together. Matter, from the Fr. G. Matiere; and both from the Lat.
Materia, idem. Matter, or Corruption; from the AS. Matu, rotten; or the Lat.
Materia, (i. e.) filthy matter; or Maturus, come to maturity; for it comes not
out of a Sore, or Impostume, till it be ripe. Mattins, from the Fr. G. Matin,
or the Ital. Mattina, Mattino, and all contracts of the Lat. Matutinus, of the
morning, q. d. Morning-prayers. A Mattock, from the AS. Mattuc, the same.
Minshew draws it from the Belg. Met haeck, with an hook. Maugre, from the Fr.
G. Maugre, Maulgre, or the Ital. Malgrado, idem; q. d. Lat. Male Gratum. A
Mavis, a bird so called; from the Fr. G. Mauvis, or the Ital. Malviccio, the
same: Or it is so called perhaps a Malo visu, from its ill sight. A Maund, from
the AS. Mand, or the Fr. G. Mande, idem; (i. e.) a basket with handles; both
from the Lat. Manus, an hand. Some very aptly draw it from the Lat. Mando, to
eat, because provision is carried about in it. To Maunder, to murmur against;
from the Fr. G. Maudire, to curse; this from the Lat. Maledicere, to speak evil
of. Maundy-Thursday: Minshew supposes it to be so called, q. Dies Mandati, a
day of a command, or charge; for on this day, our Savior, instituting the
Eucharist, left that great Command to his Disciples, Do this in remembrance of
me. Maw, from the AS. Maga, the Belg. Maeghe, the Teut. Mage, or the Ital.
Magone, id. the ventricle, or stomach. To May, or Can, from the AS. Magan, the
Belg. Moghen, or the Teut. Mogen, to be able; whence the AS. Maeht, Meaht,
might, Mage, mighty, the Belg. Ick Match, and the Teut. Ich Mag, I may, or can.
May Pole, a pole so called, from the month of May, the most pleasant month in
the year, in which the Country People dance in the places wherein May-poles are
set up. A Maze, or Labyrinth, from the Belg Missen, to miss, or lose ones way:
Or from the AS. Mase, a gulf; for it is difficult to get out of the one, or the
other. Meacock, a Coward, that, like Sardanapalus, loves to be amongst Women;
q. d Mewcock; for he mews, or shuts himself up in an hole when danger
approaches. Mead, from the AS. Medo, the Belg. Meede, or the Teut. Meeth, a
liquor made of honey and water. Minsh. draws it from the Gr. (...),
drunkenness, or (...), wine, and (...), sweet. Meager, from the AS. Maegre, the
Belg. Maeger, the Fr. G. Maigre, or the Ital. Magro; all which come from the
Lat. Macer, lean. A Meal, from the AS. Maele, idem. Meal, from the AS. Mealepe,
the Belg. and Dan. Meel, or the Teut. Mehl, the same; all possibly from the
Lat. Molere, to grind. Mealy-mouthed, q. d. Mildmouth'd, or Mellow-mouth'd,
says the learned Dr. Th. H. A Mean, or Means, from the Fr. G. Moyen, the same.
To Mean, from the AS. Maenan, the Belg. Meenen, or the Teut. Meynen, idem; to
think, or suppose; all perhaps from the Gr. (...), the mind. Mean, A Mean Man;
from the AS. Gemaene, the Belg. Ghemeene, or the Teut. Gemein, an inferior
person: Or from the AS. Maene, course; as we say, A course, sorry fellow.
Means, for Riches. V. Demeans. Mear, from the AS. Mere, the Teut. and Belg.
Mere, or the Fr. G. Mer, id. all from the Lat. Mare, the Sea. Write Mere.
Mear-stones, or Meer-stones, for Mark-stones, or Bound-stones; from the AS.
Maera, or the Belg. Mere, a bound, or limit: Or from the Gr. (...), to divide.
Measels, from the Belg. Maselen, Messelen, or the Teut. Masen, blisters; this
last from the AS.Mal, the Teut. Maase, or the Belg. Mael, a spot; all from the
Lat. Macula, a spot. Measure, from the Fr. G. Mesure, or the Ital. Misura, the
same; and both from the Lat. Mensura, a measure. Meat, from the AS. Mete, id.
Dr. Th. H. draws it from the Fr. G. Mes, Mets, a mess; Minsh. from the Goth.
Mate, or the Heb. Mazan, idem. Mead, as they say in Lincolnshire, I give you
the Mead of the buying, (i. e.) full power to buy; from the AS. Maeth, or
Maegen, power; and this again from Magan, or the Teut. Mogen, to may, or can. A
Medal, from the Fr. G. Medaille, the Hisp. Medalla, or the Ital. Medaglia, a
certain ancient Coin, which is stamped for a Memorial of a King's Inauguration,
or some other great Solemnity; all from the Lat. and Gr. Metallum, metal. To
Meddle, or Mell, as the Scots pronounce it; from the Fr. G. Mester, or the
Ital. Mescolare, to mingle, (i. e.) intermeddle with another's affairs; or q.
d. To Middle, (i. e.) interpose ones self in the middle. Medly- color, from
the Fr. G. Couleur Mess, id. a mixed color. Meadow, or Meadow, from the AS.
Maede, or the Teut. Matte, a Mead; both from the AS. Mapan, the Belg. Maeden,
or the Teut. Mehen, to mow. Me, from the Lat. Me, or the Gr. (...), signifying
the same. Meek, mild; from the AS. Meca, Maca, a companion; (i. e.) one that
with meekness submits himself to the humor of every one. Meers, V.
Mear-stones, and Mark. To Meet in the way, from the AS. Metan, or the Belg.
Meeten, or Gemoeten, idem: Hence The Moot-House, or Moo- Hall, in many
Market Towns; from the AS. Gemot, a Meeting, or Council. To Meet, or Measure,
from the AS. Gemete, or the Belg. Ghemet, a measure; both from the Lat. Metiri,
to measure. Meet, or fit, from the AS. Maethe, a measure, or Maethian, to meet;
both from the Ital. Metior, to measure. Meeter, from the Lat. and Gr. Metrum, a
true dimension. Mellow, from the AS. Mearpa, soft, tender; and this a Contract
of the Lat. Maturus, ripe; for all fruit grows mellow by ripening. A Melon, or
Musk-Melon, from the Fr. G Melon, or the Ital. Melone, Mellone; these from the
Lat. Malum, an Apple. It is called Musk-Melon, or Million, because of its
smell. To Melt, from the AS. Myltan, the Belg. Smelten, or the Teut.
Schmeltzen, the same. To Me^ice, from the Fr. G. Menacer, the Hisp. Amenazar,
or the Ital. Minacciare, to threaten; all possibly from the Lat. Minari. A
Menom, or Menow, q. d. Fr. G. Le Poisson Menu, (i. e.) Lat. Piscis Minutus, a
small, or minute-fish. A Mercer, from the Fr G. Mercier, or the Ital. Merciaro,
Merciaio, the same; both from the Lat. Merx, wares. Mercy, from the Lat.
Merces, a reward: Or, as Minshew will have it, a Contract of the Lat.
Miseresce, to have compassion on. Dhuez. has the Fr. G. Je vous cry Merci, I
cry you mercy. A Merkin, from the Fr. G. Mere, a Mother, and kin, which
diminishes; q. d. little mother, (i. e.) scarce sit for procreation. A Merlin,
from the Belg Merlin, Suter^^a, the Fr. G. Esmerillon, or the Ital. Smeriglio,
a kind of Hawk so called, because he preyeth much upon Merulas, (i. e.)
Black-birds. Merlin, a fish; from the Ital. Merlana, a fish of the kind of
Whitings. Mermaid, from the Lat. Mare, the Sea, and Maid; q. d. a Sea-Maid, or
Sea-Nymph. Merry, from the AS. Myrig, idem, jovial: Or perhaps from the Teut.
Mehren, to enlarge; for mirth opens and enlarges the heart. A Mess, from the
Fr. G. Mes, the Ital. Messo, or the Lat. Barb. Missus, the same; q. d. Cibus
M^ssus, meat sent one. Some draw it from the AS. Mese, or the Hisp. Mesa,
Messa, a table; both which come from the Lat. Mensa, a table. A Message, from
the Fr. G. Message; or the Ital. Messaggio, idem, an errand. Metheglin, from
the C. Br. Meddyglyn, the same; this from the C. Br. Med, Mead, and Glyn,
clammy. V. Mead. To Mew, The Heart Meweth, or casts his horns; from the Fr. G.
Muer, idem; and both from the Lat. Mutare, to change. To Mew as a Cat, from the
Teut Mawen, the Fr. G. Meauler, or the Ital. Miagolare, the same; all possibly
from the sound. A Mew, or Sea-Mew, from the AS. Me, the Teut. Mewe, or the Fr.
G. Moette, Mouette, the same. A Micher, or Miser, from the Lat. Miser,
miserable; or from the Fr. G. Miche, a crumb; q. d. one that counts every crumb
that falls from the table. Mickle, for Much; from the AS. Micl, or the Fr. Th.
Michol, idem, much. Worm. draws them all from the Gr. (...), great. Middle,
from the AS. Middel, the Teut. Mittel, or the Belg. Mid, the same: Hence the
Belg. Mid-nacht, midnight; all from the Lat. Medialis, medial, or Medius, the
middlemost. Midge, from the AS. Micge, the Belg. Mugge, or the Dan. Myg, a
Gnat; perhaps all from the Lat. Musca, a Fly. Midriff, from the AS. Mid,
between, and Hri^, Hrife, the womb; q. d. a separation between the vital and
natural parts. Midwife, so named, either because she is in the midst of the
Wives or because her business is with the middle parts, says Minshew. Hensh.
draws it from the AS. Medif, a Wife hired for money; for the old word Meed,
signifies, a reward. Might, from the AS. Mihte, Maeht, or the Belg. and Teut.
Maeht, power; whence the AS. Mihtan, to be able, and the Belg. Machtigh,
mighty; from May. Mer. Cas. derives our word Mighty, from the Gr. (...), most
mighty. Mild, from the AS. and Belg. Mild, or the Teut. and Dan. Mild, mild,
soft; all perhaps from the Gr. (...), pleasant. A Mile, from the Teut. Meil,
the Ital. Miglia, or the Fr. G. and Lat. Mill; (i. e.) a thousand paces. Milk,
from the AS. Meolc, the Belg. and Dan. Melck, or the Teut. Milch, idem. Mill,
or Miln, from the AS. Mylen, the Belg. Molen, the Teut. Muhlen, the Fr. G.
Moulin, or the Ital. Molino, id. hence the Teut. Muller, a Miller; all from the
Lat. Mela, a mill. Millet, from the Fr. G. Millet; and both from the Lat.
Milium, the same. A Million, from the Fr. G. Million, or the Ital. Millione,
ten hundred thousand; these from the Lat. Mill, a thousand, and the Term.
Auct. on. The Milt, from the AS. Milt, the Belg. Milte, or the Ital. Milza,
idem. Voss. draws it from the Belg. Milt, mild, soft; viz. A Mollitie, from the
softness and tenderness of it. To Mince, from the Fr. G. Mincer, or the Ital.
Minuzzare, to cut small; all from the Lat. Minutus, small. The Mind, from the
AS. Gemynde, the mind; whence Myndigan, to put in mind, to admonish: Or from
the Teut. Minder, idem. Mine, It is Mine, from the AS. Min, the Belg. Miin, the
Teut. Me^, or the Fr. G. Mien, idem. Mingle, from the AS. Gemengan, or the
Belg. and Teut. Mingelen, idem; or perhaps from the Gr. (...), idem; from
hence, A Mingle-mangle, an hotch potch, or mish-mash. Minion, from the Fr. G.
Mignon, or the Ital. Mignardo, idem. Kilian draws it from the Belg. Minnen, to
love. Florius seems to draw it from the Ital. Mignone, the seam in the middle
of the testicles; which, in a secondary sense, may signify, a Sodomite.
Minneken. from the AS. Minicene, a Nun; with us, a pretty little Girl. Minster,
from the AS. Mynster; both contracted from the Lat. and Gr. Monasterium, the
same. Mint, from the AS. Minte, or the Belg. Mente; all from the Lat. Mentha,
and this from the Gr. (...), an herb so called. Mint, the place where money is
coined; from the AS. Mynet, or the Dan. Mint, money; all from the Lat. Moneta,
money. M^re, from the Belg. Moyer, id. Minshew draws it from the Gr. (...),
polluted. A Mirror, from the Fr. G. Miroir, a looking-glass; this from Miror,
to look into; and all from the Lat. Mirari, to admire. Mirth, from the AS.
Myrhthe, the same. V. Merry. Myrtle, from the Ital. Murtella; and both from the
Lat. Myrtus, idem. Misadventure, from the Ital. Misaventura. V. Adventure.
Miscreant, from the Fr. G. Mescreant, or the Ital. Miscredente, the same; these
from the Adversative Particles Mes, Mis, and the Fr. G. Creant, or Croyant; q.
d. Lat. Male Credens, mis-believing, an Infidel. Mis-deed, V. Deed, and Do.
Mish-mash, from the Teut. Misch-masch, a confused heap of things; this from
Mischen, to mingle, and Massen, to meet. It Misleth, from the Belg. Mitselen,
to rain small rain; or q. d. To Mistle, (i. e.) to rain in a Mist. To Miss,
from the Belg. Missen, to be mistaken, to be deceived: Or from the Fr. Th.
Missen, to want; as Mistum these kinds, they Missed the Child, says Luther;
all perhaps from the Lat. Amittere, to lose ones aim to shoot wide. M^s^shapen,
v. Shape. Mist, from the AS. Mist, or the Belg. Mest, Mist, idem. Minshew draws
it from the Lat. Mistus, mixed; it being a mixture of vapors. Hensh. thinks it
so called; q. Moist. A Mystery, or Trade; from the Fr. G. Mestier, or the Ital.
Mestiero, idem; and all from the Lat. Mysterium, or the Gr. (...). a mystery.
Right Mystery. Mistletoe, or M^ssendine; according to Minsh. and Somn from the
AS. Mistel-ta, idem. Mistress, from the Fr. G. Maistresse, the same. V. M^ster.
To Mis-use, from the Ital. Misusare, to abuse, to use ill. V. Use. A Mite, from
the Fr. G. Mite, or the Belg. Miite, the least coin that is; all Contracts of
the Lat. Minutus, small. A M^te in Chese, so called, for the smallness of it;
derived as above. A Miter, from the Fr. G. Mitre, or the Lat and Gr. Mitra, id.
Right M^tre. Mi tens, from the Fr. G. Mitaines, thick, woollen gloves, which
Hermits and Country People commonly wear. Mixen, from the AS. Mixen, idem, a
dunghill; this from Meox, muck, or dung Mo, for More, from the AS. Ma, more;
and this a Contract of the Lat. Magis, the rather. To Mock, from the Fr. G.
Mocquer, or the Belg. Mocken, the same: Or perhaps from the Gr. (...), to
deride. A Model, from the Fr. G. Model, or the Ital. Modello, a form, or
pattern; and these again from the Lat. Modulus, or Modellus, a little form.
Modern, from the Fr. G. Modern, or the Ital. Moderno, idem; these from the
Lat. Modernus, the same. Mohair, from the Fr. G. Mouaire; and both from the
Oriental word Mojacar, a sort of Chamlet. To Moil, to work with might and main;
from the old word Moil, for Mule; q. d. to work like a Mule: Or from the Belg.
Moddelen, Modden, to toil in the mud. Mer. Cas. draws it from the Gr. (...), or
(...), labor. Moist, from the Fr. G. Moite, idem. A Mole in the skin, from the
Belg. Mael, or the Teut. Mahl, a spot; and these from the Lat. Macula, a stain.
A Mole, or Want; from the Belg. Mol, the Teut. Maul, or the Fr. G. Mulot, the
same. Menagius supposes that it is so called, q. Murot, a great Mouse; but the
learned Hensh. derives our Mold-Warp, from the AS. Molde, mold, and Weorpan, to
cast forth. In the Teut. it is Maulwerff; and this we may draw from the Teut.
Maul, the mouth, or snout, and Werffen, to cast out; for it casts out the mold
with its snout. Molosses, a word strangely corrupted; from the Fr. G. Mallece,
and both from the Ital. Melazzo, course, or dregs of Sugar. Monday, from the
AS. Monandaeg, the Teut. Montag, or the Belg. Maendagh, idem. It may also be so
called, q. Moon-day; and therefore in Latin rendered Dies Lunae, the Day of the
Moon. v. Month, and Day. Moan, from the AS. Maenan, to bemoan, to deplore.
Minshew derives it from the Gr. (...), alone, lonesome. Month, from the AS.
and Teut. Monath, the Belg. Maend, or the Teut. Monat, the same; all from our
word Moon; which see. Monger in Terminations, as in Fish-monger, Iron-monger,
etc. from the AS. Mangere, a Merchant: Or perhaps from the Lat. Mango, a
Broker: Or lastly, from the AS. Mengan, to mingle. A Mongrel, q. Mingrel, (i.
e.) of a mixed kind. V. Mingle. Monk, from the Teut. Monch, Munch, or the Hisp.
Monge, the same; all from the Lat. and Gr. Monachus, a Monk; and this from the
Gr. (...), solitary. Monky: Minsh. draws it from the Gr. (...), to imitate;
which I shall not contradict, though I should rather suspect it to come from
the old word Mon, for Man, and the Dim. Term. Kin; q. d. Monikin, or Monkin;
(i. e.) a little Man. Money, from the Fr. G. Monnoye; and this from the Lat.
Moneta, idem. Mood, He is in an ill Mood; from the AS. Mode, the Belg. and Run.
Dan. Moed, or the Teut. Muth, the mind: As Belg. Well Ghemoed, he is in a good
Mood, or mind. Moon, from the AS. Mona, the Belg. Maene, the Dan. Maane, or the
Teut. Mond, Mon, the same; whence the Belg. Maenkind, a Moon- Calf. A Moor,
Black- Moor, from the Fr. G. More, the Ital. Moro, or the Teut. Mohr. idem; all
from the Lat. Maurus, idem; and this again from the Gr. (...), dark, obscure;
to wit, from its blackness. A Moor, incultivated ground; from the AS. Mor, or
the Belg. Moer, Moor, idem; all perhaps from our word Mear, for Marsh. To Moot
a Case: Minsh. draws it from the Fr. G. Mot, a word; q. d. To word a Case: Or
rather, from the Lat. Motare, the Frequent. of Movere, to move; q. d. to move,
or start a difficult case. Mop, and Mow, q. d. Mump, and Mew; not unlikely from
the Belg. Mompelen, to have the Mumps; this from Mond, the mouth, and Pellen,
to pull up; q. d. to make mouths at one. To Mope, or make stupid; perhaps from
the Belg. Mompelen, to mumble. More, from the AS. Mare, the Dan M^ere, the
Belg. Mere, the Fr. Th. Mere, or the Teut. Mehr, idem. Morglay, for a sword;
from the Fr. G. Mort, death, and Glaive, a sword; q. d. a deadly sword.
Morning, from the AS Marne, or Morgen, the Belg Margen, Morghen, or the Teut.
Morgen, idem; whence the Belg. Morghen-tiid, the morning-tide. A Morphew, from
the Fr. G. Morphee, or the Lat. Barb. Morphaea, the same: Or from the Fr. G.
Morte, death, and Veue, a look. A Morrice-dance, from the Ital. A la Moresca,
or the Fr. G. Moresque; q. d. a Dance after the fashion of the Moors, q.
Moorish-dance. Morrow, v. Morning. A Morsel, from the Fr. G. Morcel, Morceau,
so much as the mouth will hold at once. A Mort, a word frequently used in
Lincolnsh. for great store; from the old Fr. G. Mout, Moult, much; both from
the Lat. Multum, idem, much: Or it may come from the AS. Mor, a mountain; q. d.
a mountain, or heap of things. Mortar, from the Belg. Mortar, or the Teut.
Mortel, idem, Plastering made of Lime and Sand. A Mortise, from the Fr. G.
Mortaise, idem, the laying of joises into the beam in Architecture. Mosaic-
work, from the Fr. G. Mosaique, checker, or in-laid work. A Moschey, from the
Fr. G. Mosquee, the Ital. Moscheta, or the Hisp. Meschita; which last is a
Corruption of the Turkish Meschit, a Turkish Mosque, or Church. Moss, from the
AS. Meos, the Teut. Mosg, or the Fr. G. Mousse, the same; all possibly from the
Lat. Muscus, moss. Most, from the AS. Maest, Mest, the Belg. Meest, or the
Teut. Meist, idem; this last from the Gr. (...), for (...), the most, the
greatest. A Mote in the eye, from the AS. Mot, the same: This Minshew derives
from the Heb. Mots, chaff; Mer. Cas. from the Gr. (...), a mote in the Sun.
Mote, or Moot, from the AS Mot, a meeting, to wit, of Men about civil affairs;
this from Metan, to meet together: From hence the AS. Mot-heal; with us, the
Moot-hall. Moth, from the AS. Meth, or the Belg. and Teut. Motte, the same.
Mother, from the AS Mothor, the Fr. Th. Mudder, the Belg. Moeder, or the Teut.
Mutter, the same; all from the Lat. Matter, or the Gr. (...), idem. The Mother
of Wine, from the Belg. Moeder, lees, thickning; this again from Modder, Mother,
mud. Motly- color, V. Medly- color. A Motto, or Symbol, from the Ital. Motto,
or the Fr. G. Mot, a word; this from the Lat. Mutire, to mutter; which is again
derived from the Gr. (...), a speech. Might, from the AS. Mot, or the Belg.
Mochte, I might, or might; this from Moghen, to may, or can. Mould, or Mold in
the earth; from the AS. Molde, or the Belg. Mul, the dust of the earth; perhaps
from the Lat. Moles, any great weight. A Mould, or Mold, from the Fr. G. Moule,
the Hisp. Molde, or the Belg. Moele, a form, or pattern; whence the Hisp.
Amoldar, to mold, or cast in a mold; all from the word Model; which see.
Moulder, or Milder away, from Mold; q. d. to be turned into mold, or dust.
Moldy, or Moldy bread, from the Goth. Sue. Mogel, mouldiness, or the Fr. G.
Moisi; this from the Lat. Mucidus, musty, or Mollities, softness. Moult, from
the Belg. Muyten, or the Fr. G. Miter, to lose the feathers, as birds do; and
both from the Lat. Mutare, to change; (i. e.) to change the feathers Mound, for
an hedge: Minsh. derives it from the Lat. Munimentum, a fortification, or
fence. It may also be drawn from the Lat. Mons, an hill, or mountain. Mounstre,
from the Fr. G. Mounsieur, O my Master. V. Signieur, and Sir. A Mount, from the
Fr. G. Mont, and this from the Lat. Mons, a mountain. To Mount, from the Fr. G.
Monter, or the Ital. Montare, to mount an Horse; q. d. Lat. Montem scandere, to
climb. as it were, up a mount. Mountain, from the Fr. G. Montaigne, or the
Ital. Montagna, the same. Mountebank, from the Ital. Montinbanco, the same; so
called, because he mounteth a Bench, Stage, or Bank, for the better convenience
of being seen and heard. Mourn, from the AS. Murnan, to lament, or deplore.
Mouse, from the AS. Mur, the Belg. Muys, or the Teut. Mausz, idem; all from the
Lat. and Gr. Mus, idem. Mouth, from the AS. Muth, the Belg. Mond, or the Dan.
and Teut. Mund, idem. Minshew and Jun. derive it from the Gr. (...), a word. A
Mow of Hay, from the AS. Maan, to mow; (i. e.) so much as is mown in one day:
or rather, from the AS. More, an heap. To Mow, from the AS. Maan, the Belg.
M^yen, or the Teut. Mahen, to cut, or mow the grass; all from the Lat. Meto, to
mow; which comes from the Gr. (...), the Harvest. To Mow, or Mew; as we say, To
Mop and Mow, from the Fr. G. Fair la Move, to make a mouth, from Move, a wry
mouth; which comes from the Teut. Manl, a mouth, or Maulen, to mouth at one.
Much, from the Hisp. Mucho, the same. Muck, from the AS. Meox, or the Dan. Mog,
idem; all either from the Lat. Mucus, filth, or from the AS. Mucg, an heap;
because it is laid up on the land in heaps. A Mucketter, or Muckeuder, from the
Hisp. Mocadero, the Fr. G. Mouchoir, or the Ital. Moccaiuolo, an handkerchief
to wipe the nose. Mud, from the Belg. Modder, idem. Minsh. draws it from the
Gr. (...), to be wet. Muff, from the Belg. Moffe, Moffel, Muffel, or the Fr. G.
Mouffle, idem; these from the AS. Muth, the mouth, and Fell, a skin; which we
often hold to our mouths, to keep off cold. To Muffle, or Maffle in ones
speech, from the Belg. Maffelen, Moffelen, to stutter; all, by an Anamatopoeia.
To Muffle up ones face, from the AS Muth, the mouth, and Fealdian, to hide, or
the Lat. Velare, to cover. Mug, from the C. Br. Muryglo, to be warm; (i. e.) a
cup for warming drink, etc. Mulberry, from the Teut Maulbeer, idem; this from
Maul, the mouth, and Beer, a berry; q. d. a Mouth berry; so called, from the
sovereign virtue it has to cure Ulcers, or Gargarisms in the mouth. Mullar,
the upper stone wherewith Painters mix their Colors; from the Fr. G. Mouleur,
Moulleur, a Miller; this from the Lat. Molere, to grind. Mulled Sack, q. d.
Mollitum Vinum, mollified Sack; (i. e.) made more mild by mixing Sugar with it,
and boiling of it. Mum, Brunswick Mum, from the Teut. Mumin, or the Belg.
Momne, idem; a strong liquor brought from Brunswick in Germany: Or perhaps from
the Belg. Momnelen, or the Teut. Mummeln, to mumble, or mutter; as we say,
Drink that will make a Cat speak: Or from our word Mum, a note of silence; q.d.
drink so strong, that it soon takes away the use of the tongue. Mumble from the
Belg. Momnelen, or the Teut. Mummeln, the same. A Mummer, having a vizard on;
from the Belg. Mommer, the Teut. Mummer, or the Fr G. Mommeur, a silent Masker:
Or from our word Mum, an Interjection of silence; for they go silent, giving
signs to each other to do as they would have them. Momps, from the Belg.
Mompelen, to mumble, as he that has a sore mouth, or throat, says Minshew. He
has the Mumps, (i. e.) he is angry, and silent with it. Munk-seam, a way of
sowing sails together; q. d. The Monks-seam, or such a seam as was formerly
sowed in the apparel of Monks. Murk, or Mirk, for Dark; from the Dan. Morck,
dusky; whence Morker, darkness. A Murr-Bird, q. d. A Moorish Bird; or from the
Belg. Murren, Morren, to murmur, to make a doleful noise. Murrey, from the Fr.
G. Moree, Moreau, the Hisp. Morado, or the Ital. Morello, the same; so called,
from the Moors, or from the Lat. Mora, a Mulberry; q. d. of the color of
Mulberries. Murder, from the AS. Morthre, idem; whence Myrthrian, to slay, or
murder. Muscadine, from the Fr. G. Muscat, Muscate, or the Ital. Moscatello,
wine so called; because it is made of Grapes that smell like Musk: Or, as
Bochartus says, a Muscis, from Flies, that feed upon this Grape, rather than
any other. The Muscat-Pear, so called, from its perfuming smell, like to that
of Musk. Muscle, from the Fr. G. Muscle, or the Teut. Muschel, idem: Or from
the Lat. Musca, a Fly; for Rondel. says, that they are called, Mousches do
mar, Sea-flies. Right Mussel. To Muse, from the Fr. G. Muser, or the Belg.
Muysen, to pry into secrets with great silence; both from the Lat. Mussare, to
mumble; which is again derived from the Gr. (...), to shut the mouth. Mushrom,
from the Fr. G. Mouscheron, the same; and this from the Lat. Musca, a Fly.
Musician, from the Fr. G. Musicien, idem; a Professor of Music. Musk, from the
Ital. Muschio, or the Fr. G. Musc, idem. Musket, from the Fr. G. Mousquet, or
the Ital. Moschetto, idem; a lesser sort of Gun. Must, from the Teut. Mussen,
to be necessary, or needful. Mustaches, from the Fr. G. Moustache, the Ital.
Mostaccio, or the Hisp. Mostacha, the same; all from the Gr. (...), which comes
from (...), to shut; for they encompass, as it were, the mouth. Mustard, from
the Fr. G. Moustarde, the Ital. Mostarda, or the Belg. Mostaerde, the same: Or,
q. d. Lat. Mustum ardens, hot, or sharp Must. To Muster, from the Teut.
Mustern, to take a view of. Mutiny, from the Ital. Mutino, or the Hisp. Motin,
idem; a Sedition in an Army. Mutter, from the Belg. Muyten; both from the Lat.
Mutire, idem. Mutton, from the Fr. G. Mouton, a Ram, or Weather. A Muzzel, q.
d. Mouth-Seal; says Minshew: Or from the Ital. Musolare, to cover the face
with a Muzzel.
N.
A NAcker, or Naker-Fish, from the Ital. Naccara, the same. A Nag, from the
Belg. Negge, or the Teut. Nickel, a little Horse. Nail, from the AS. Naegl, the
Belg. Naeghel, or the Teut. Nagel, idem; (i. e.) the nail of a Man's hand. A
Nail of Iron, from the Belg. Naeghel, or the Teut. Nagel, the same; whence the
Belg. Naeghelen, and the Teut. Nageln, to drive a nail; all perhaps from the
Belg. Nae, to, and the AS. Eege, a point, or edge. Naked, from the AS. Naced,
the Belg. Naeckt, or the Teut. Nacket, idem. Name, from the AS. Nama, the Belg.
Naem, the Teut. Nahme, the Fr. G. Nom, the Ital. Nome, or the Fr. Th. Namo,
idem. A Nap in Cloth, or Knop, from the AS. Hnoppa, or the Belg. and Dan.
Noppe, idem. Nap, To take a Nap, from the AS. Hnappian, to sleep a little. Nap
of the Neck; so called, from short, soft hair growing therein, like a Nap of
wool. Napery, table-linen, from the Ital. Nappa, or the Lat. Mappa, a napkin.
Nappy- Ale, that is, soft, fat Ale, that causes one to take a nap after it, or
that warmeth one like a nappy garment; figuratively so called. Narrow, from the
AS. Nearee, Nearo, idem; and this from Near, or the Teut. Nahr, near. Nasty,
from the Teut. Nasz, moist, or damp: Or from Nesg, stale, or piss. The Nave of
a wheel, from the AS. Nauthe, the Belg. Nave, or the Teut. Nave, the same.
Navel, from the AS. Nafel, the Belg. Naevel, the Teut. Nable, or the Dan. Nawl,
the same. Naught, from the AS. Naht, Neaht, id. whence Naht-ness, naughtiness,
lewdness. Navy, from the Fr. G. Navee, or the Ital. Navata, idem; all from the
Lat. Navis, or the Gr. (...), a ship. Nay, from the AS. Na, no, not; and both
from the Lat. Ne, not. Near, from the AS. Near, or the Dan. Naer, idem. Neat,
from the AS. Neat, a laboring beast, or the Belg. Nod, an Ox, Bull, or Cow;
whence the AS. Neathyrd, a Neat-herd. Neat, for Cleanly; from the Fr. G. Net,
or the Ital. Netto, spruce; all from the Lat. Nitidus, clean. Nether, from the
Belg. Neder, or the Teut. Nieder, beneath, lower; from hence the Belg.
Nederland, and the Teut. Niederland, the Neather-Lands, or Low Countries,
adjoining to Germany. Neb, from the AS. Nebbe, the Dan. Neb, or the Belg.
Snedde a snout. Neck, from the AS. Necca, the Belg. Neck, Nack, or the Teut.
Nack, Nacken, idem. Niece, from the Fr. G. Niece, the Ital. Nezza, or the AS.
Nift, the same. Need, from the Belg. and Fr. Th. Nood, the Teut. Noth, or the
AS. Nead, Nyd, necessity. Needle, from the AS. Naedl, the Belg. Naedel, the
Teut. Nadel, or the Dan. Naal; all signifying the same. A Neger, from the Ital.
and Hisp. Negro, or the Fr. G. Negre, an Ethiopian; all from the Lat. Niger,
black. To Neigh, from the AS. Hnaegan, or the Belg. Negen, id. Neighbor, from
the AS. Neah, nigh, and Gebure, an Inhabitant: Or from the Belg. Nae, or the
Teut. Nahe, near, and Byer, a Dweller. Neither, from the AS. Nather, or
Nouther, idem: Or from the Lat. Ne, not, and Either; which see. A Nemony, from
the Lat. and Fr. G. Anemone, (i. e.) a flower of the wind; all from the Gr.
(...), the wind; because it springs in the beginning of the Spring, when the
winds blow strong. Niphew, from the Fr. G. Nepheu, the AS. Nefa, or the Belg.
Neve, idem; and all from the Lat. Nepos, a Nephew. Ness, a Termination of many
words; from the AS. Naese, a Promontory. Nist, from the AS. Belg. and Teut.
Nest, idem. Net, from the AS. Net, or the Belg. Netre, idem. Minshew and Fr.
Jun. draw it from the the Gr. (...), to knit together. Nithermost, from the AS.
Niethermert, the lowest. Nettle, from the AS. Netl, the Belg Netel, the Teut.
Ness^l, or the Dan Nedle, idem. Niver, from the AS. Naefre, idem; this from Na,
not, and Aefre, ever. N^w, from the AS. Nipe, Neoe, the Belg. Nieuw, the Fr. G.
Neuf, or the Teut. New, idem; all from the Lat. Novus, or the Gr (...), id. A
Newt, a Contract of An Eut, of Eft. Next, from the AS. Next, or the Teut.
Nechst, idem. Nibble, from the Belg Knibbelen, to gnaw, to bite a little. Nick,
He took him in the Nick of time; from the Teut. Nick, a nod; (i. e.) he took
him at his nod; this from the Lat. Nictare, to give a sign by winking. To Nick
it, to hit the nail on the head; a Metaphor taken from Archers, that set the
string of the bow in the notch of the arrow. A Nick name, from the Teut. Nicht
Nahm; not a name; (i. e) not a true name. Niggard: Minsh. draws it from Nigh
Guardet: Skinner, a Negando, from denying; for a covetous Man denies himself
and his family things necessary: Or, q. d. Nicks hard, (i. e.) goes as near as
he can. Nigh, From the AS. Neah, the Belg. Not, or the Teut. Nihe, idem. Night,
from the AS. Niht, the Belg. and Teut. Nacht, or the Fr. G. Nuict, the night;
all from the Lat. Ablat. Nocte, by night. Nightingale, from the AS. Nichtgale,
Nihtegale, the Dan. Nactegal, the Belg. Nacht-Gael, or the Teut. Nachtig^l, the
same; q. d. Lat. nocte canens Gallus, a bird that sings in the night, as Cocks
do; all from the Germ. Nacht, the night, and the Belg. Galm, an echo, or
Galmen, to re-sound. To Nill, from the AS. Nillan, to be unwilling; which is a
Contract of Na, not, and Willan, to will. Nimble, from the old word To Nimm,
(i. e.) to catch up a thing hastily and secretly. To Nimm, or Steal away, from
the AS. Niman, the Belg. Nemen, or the Teut. Nemmen, Nehmen, to take, to catch
privately. Nine, from the AS. Nigen, the Belg. Neghen, or the Teut. Nean, idem;
whence Nenute, the ninth, and Neuntig, or the Belg. Neghentig, ninety. Ninny,
from the Hisp. Ninno, a child, or the Ital. Nencio, a fool. Nip, from the Belg.
Niippen, the Teut. Kneipen, to pinch, or squeeze with the fingers, or the Belg.
Knip, idem. Nipple, from the AS. Nypele, the same. Nits, from the AS. Hnitu,
the Dan. Gnid, the Belg. Note, or the Teut. Nisz, idem; all possibly from the
Gr. (...), to prick, or pinch. No, from the AS. Na, or the Ital. No, idem. A
Noble, or Rose-Noble, q. d. a noble Coin; so called, from the purity and
excellency of the Gold it was made of, and because it was stamped with the
figure of a Rose. It was first coined by King Edward the Third, in the Year
1344. about which time, he instituted the noble Order of the Garter. Noble,
from the Lat. Nobilis. Nock, from the Belg. Nocke, or the Ital. Nocca, Nocchia,
a nock of an arrow; whence the Ital. Noccare, to notch, or nick. A Nod, from
the Lat. Nutus, idem; and this from the Gr. (...), to nod. Noddle, the head;
from the Heb. Nod, or the Lat. Nutare, to nod, says Minshew. Or it may be
drawn from the AS. Hnol, the nowl, or the crown of the head. A Noddy, from the
Fr. G. Naudin, a fool; this a Nutatione, from nodding often in time of
speaking. Noise, from the Fr. G. Noise, a tumult, scuffle, or wrangling; this
from the Lat. Noxia, noisome, harmful. None, from the AS. Nan, or Nin, none.
Nook, from the Fr. G. Niche, the Ital. Nicchio, or the Belg. Even Hoeck, id.
says Hensh. Noon, from the AS. None, the Belg. Noen, the Fr. G. None, or the
Ital. Nona, Noon, or Midday, Dinnertime. Noose, or Halter; perhaps from the
Lat. Nodus, a knot, or the Belg. Noost, hurt. Nor, from the Neg. Ne, not, and
Or, which see. North, from the AS. North, the Belg. Noord, or the Teut. and Fr.
G. Nord, idem. Nost, Nostril, from the AS. Naese, the nose, and THyrl, an hole;
whence THyrlian, to make an hole through. Not, from the Belg. Niet, or the
Teut. Nicht, idem; in no wise. Novelty, Novel, from the Fr. G. Nouvellete,
idem; this from Nouvelle, or the Ital. Novella, a Novel, a new Fable; all from
the Lat. Novus, Novellus, new, somewhat new. Naught, from the AS. Noit, Nohit,
or the Teut. Nicht, nothing: Or from the AS. Na, not, and Wiht, a creature; (i.
e.) no creature. V. Ought, and Wight. A Novice, from the Fr. G. Novice, the
Ital. Novitio, or the Lat. Barb. Novitius, an Upstart; all from the Lat. Novus,
new. A Noun, from the Fr. G. Nom, the same; both from the Lat. Nomen, idem.
Nourish, from the Fr. G. Nourrir, or the Ital. Nodrire, id. all from the Lat.
Nutrire, id. Hence the Fr. G. Nourriture; with us, Nurture, education,
nourishment. Now, from the AS Fr. Th. and Belg. Nu, or the Teut. Nuh, Nun; all
from the Lat. Nunc, or the Gr. (...), now, at this time. Nowl, from the AS.
Hnol, the crown of the head. Number, from the Fr. G. Nombre; and both Contracts
of the Lat. Numerus, a number. Nummed, from the AS. Niman, to nimm; whence
Benyman, and the Belg. Benemen, to take away; as we say of one that has the
Palsy, His limbs are taken away. Minshew draws it from the Heb. Nom, to sleep.
A Nun, from the AS. Nun, the Dan. Nonne, the Teut. Nonn, or the Fr. G. Nonne,
idem; or the old Egypt. Nonn, holy, chaste. A Nurse, from the Fr. G. Nourriee,
or the Lat. Nutrix, idem. Nut, from the AS. Hnut, the Belg. Noot, the Teut.
Nuss, the Fr. G. Noix, or the Ital. Noce; all from the Lat. Nux, idem. Nutmeg,
from the Eng. Nut, and the Fr. G. Muguette; which comes from the Lat. Moschata.
Nuzzle, v. Nestle. A Nyas-Hawk, from the Fr. G. un Niais, or the Ital. Nidiace,
Nidaso, a Nest-hawk; these from the Fr. G. Nid, or the Lat. Nidus, a nest.
O.
OAk, from the AS. Aac, Ac, Aec, the Run. Dan. Eik, the Belg. Eycke, or the
Teut. Eych, Eyche, idem. Oar to row with, from the AS. Are, the Dan Aare, or
the Belg. Oor, idem. Oar, as Lead- Oar; or rather, Ore; from the AS. Ore,
metal, or the Belg. Or, Oore, a Mine: Or from the Gr. (...), to dig. Oats, from
the AS. Aten, id. and this perhaps from Etan, to eat; for it is forage for
Horses in all places; and in some, provision for Men. Oath, from the AS. Ath,
the Belg. Eed, Eedt, or the Teut. Eyd, idem. To Obey, from the Fr. G. Obeir;
and both from the Lat. Obedire, idem. Ockamy, a certain mixed metal, of the
color of Silver, yet of little worth. A Depravation of the word Alchymy. Odd,
in numbers, from the Belg. Ood, or the Teut. Oed, Ode, idem, alone. Of, from
the AS. Of, or the Belg. Af; and both from the Lat. Ab, idem. Offals, q. d. Off
Falls; to wit, that which falls off the table, or the fragments that are left.
Offense, from the Fr. G. Offense, idem; and both from the Lat. Offendere, to
offend. An Offering from the Dan. Offering, the Fr. G. Offrande, or the Ital.
Offrenda, idem; q. d. Lat. Res Offerenda, a thing to be offered. An Offertory,
from the Fr. G. Offertoire, or the Lat. Barb. Offertorium, idem; all ab
Offerendo, from offering. An Officer, from the Fr. G. Officier, the Ital.
Officiario, or the Lat. Barb. Officiarius, the same. Often, Often, from the AS.
Often, the Dan. Offte, or the Teut. Offt, the same. Oil, from the AS. Ael, Ele,
or the Teut. Oel, the same; all from the Lat. Oleum, and this from the Gr.
(...), idem. Ointment, from the Fr. G. Oindre, to anoint; which see. Oister,
from the Belg. Oester, the Fr. G. Huistre, or the Teut. Auster, idem; all from
the Lat. Ostreum, or the Gr. (...), an Oister. Old, from the AS. Eald, the
Belg. Oud, or the Teut. Alt, the same: Or perhaps from the Gr. (...), to grow.
An Omelet of Eggs, V. Aumelet. On, from the Belg. Aen, or the Teut. An, idem.
One, from the AS. An, Aene, the Belg. Eeu, or the Teut. Ein, id. whence Aenig,
once. Only, from the AS. An, Ana, idem. Onton, from the Fr. G. Oignon, the
Ital. Ognone, or the AS. yneleac, the same; which last comes from our words
Young, and Leelt. To Open, from the AS. Openian, the Belg. Openen, the Teut.
Olfaen, or the Dan. Obuer, idem; hence the Teut. Offen, and the Belg Open,
open, manifest; as also Open Hertig, open hearted Oppose, from the Fr. G.
Opposer; and both from the Lat. Opponere, the same. To Oppress, from the Fr. G.
Oppresser; and both from the Lat. Opprimere, idem. Or, a Contract of the old
Teut. Over, idem. Or, a term in Heraldry; from the Fr. G. Or, or the Ital. Oro;
the same; all from the Lat. Aurum, Gold. Orange, from the Fr. G Orange, Orange,
the Ital. Arancia, or the Lat. Barb. Aurantium, id. all ab Aureo Color, to
wit, from its golden color. Orch^rd, q. Hort. or Wort-Yard, from the AS.
Wyrt-geard, idem, says Skinner. V. Yard, and Garden. To Ord^in, from the Fr. G.
Ordonner, idem; both from the Lat. Ordinare, idem: From hence the Fr. G
Ordonnance; with us, An Ordinance, Edict, or Decree. Ordnance, A piece of
Ordnance, a Canon, or great Gun; so called, because it is placed inter Ordines,
amongst the ranks of Soldiers; or because it breaks through Ordines hostium,
the ranks of the Enemies, cutting off many at once. Ordure, from the Fr. G.
Ordure, or the Ital. Ordura, dung; these from the Fr. G. Ord, filthy. Organ,
from the Gr. (...), an instrument; q. d. an instrument, (...), for its
excellency. Oriflamb, from the Fr. G. Oriflambe, q. d. Lat. Aureum Flammeum, a
golden flag, such as the French Kings had in the Wars against Infidels. An
Orison, from the Fr. G. Oraison; both from the Lat. Oration, a prayer. Orpiment,
from the Fr. G. Orpiment, or the Teut. Operment, idem; both which come from the
Lat. Auripigmentum, the same. An Osprey, a bird that haunts the waters; not
unlikely, from the Ital. and Lat. Ossifraga, (i. e.) Bone breaker; so called,
from the strength of its beak. An Ostler in a Stable, from the Ital. Ostiere,
or the Fr. G. Hostelier, idem. An Ostridge, from the Fr. G. Austruche, the
Hisp. Avestruz. the Ital. Struzzo, or the Teut. Strausz, the same; all from the
Lat. Struthio-camelus, id. a bird so called, because it is like, (...), a
Sparrow, in feathers; having a long, high neck, not unlike that of a Camel.
Other, from the AS. Other, Auther, idem; whence Otherhile, otherwhile. Otter,
from the AS. Oter, the Dan. Odder, or the Belg. and Teut. Otter, idem; all from
the Lat. Lutra, the same; which comes from the Gr. (...), to wash; from its
diving under water. Oven, from the AS. Ofne, the Belg. Oven, the Teut. Ofen, or
the Dan. Own, the same. Over, from the AS. Ober, Ofer, the Teut. Ober, or the
Belg. Over, idem. Overcome, from the AS. Ofercuman, or the Belg. Overkomen, the
same. V. Over, and Come. To Oversee, V. Over, and See. Overture, from the Fr.
G. Offrir, to offer, or Ouvrir, to lay open. Overwhelm, from the AS.
Ober-Apylfan, idem. V. Over, and Whelm. Ought, from the AS. Oiht, or Ouht;
idem. It Ought, an Impers. of Owe; which see. An Ounce, from the Fr. G. Once,
or the Lat. Vncia, idem; the twelfth part of a pound Troy. Our, from the AS.
Ore, Ure, or the Germ. Vor, the same. Out, from the AS. Ut, the Belg. Vut, or
the Teut. Ausz, id. whence the Belg. Vutwaerts, outward. Outlandish, from the
Teut. Auszlandisch, idem; (i. e.) a Foreigner, one coming from outlands. V.
Out, and Land. Outlaw, q. d. a person out of the Law, whom the Laws do no
longer protect. Outmost, from the AS. ytemaest, the same. Outrage, from the Fr.
G. Outrage, Oultrage, or the Ital. Oltraggio, idem. To Outstrip at running, or
in virtue; from Out and Strip, which see. Outward, from the AS. Uteard, the
Belg. Vutwaerts, or the Teut. Auszwart, idem. V. Out, and Ward. Ouzel, or
Blackbird, from the AS. Osle, idem; this perhaps from the Fr. G. Oiseau, or
the Ital. Vccello, a little bird. Owl, from the AS. Ule, the Dan. Vgle, the
Belg. Vul, or the Teut. Eul, idem; these from the Lat. Vlulo, or the Gr. (...),
to howl: All from the sound. Owse, or Ouse, the bark of the Oak-tree, which
Tanners use to thicken and color their hides withal. It may possibly come from
the AS. Ost, the scale of a fish; for the bark is, as it were, the scale of a
tree. Ox from the AS. Oxa, the Dan. Ore, the Belg. Os, or the Teut. Ochsz,
Ochs, idem. Organg of land, in Lincolnsh. Oskin; from Ox, and Gang; q. d. as
much land as may be plowed with one gang or team of Oxen in one day. Oyes, the
word used by the Crier of a Court when he proclaims Silence; from the Fr. G.
Oyez, (i. e.) Hear you me. An Ozier, from the Fr. G. Osier, or Ozier, idem; a
low Willow growing in the water; both perhaps from the Gr. (...), a Willow.
P.
A PAce, from the Fr. G. Pas, or the Ital. Passo; both from the Lat. Passus,
idem. To Pacify, from the Fr. G. Pacifier, idem; to appease, to make one to be
at Peace. A Pack from the Belg. and Teut. Pack, the Fr. G. Packet, or the
Ital. Pacchetto, the same: Hence the Belg. Pack-kleed, pack-cloth, and Packen,
to pack up wares. Pack, He Packed away, or got him away in all haste; from the
Teut. Sich Packen, to be gone, or Pack dich, be gone; by a Metaphor taken from
Warfare, when Soldiers are bid pack up bag and baggage, the camp being to be
removed with all expedition. Padded away, To Pad, to tread, or make it level;
from the Gr. (...), to tread upon, or (...), a way much frequented: Or from the
AS. Paad, a path. To Paddle, from the Fr. G. Patouiller, to move the water with
hands or feet. Paddock: Minsh. draws it from the Belg. Padde, a Toad; for that
Toads do usually hide themselves under them in the daytime. Padlock and Minsh.
supposes that it is so called, q. Pend-lock; (i. e.) an hanging lock. A
Pad-Nag, either from the Noun Path, q. d. a Nag fit to ride a journey upon; or
from Pad, (i. e.) a saddle stuffed with straw; q. d. A Saddle-Hoise. Page, or
side in a book, from the Fr. G. Page; both Contracts of the Lat. Pagina, id.
Page, A Foot Page, from the Fr. G. Page, or the Ital. Paggio, the same: Or from
the Gr. (...), a little Boy. A Pageant: Minshew draws it from our word Page,
which see before: Skinner, from the Gr. (...), to conjoin. Pail, Milk-Pail,
from the Gr. (...), the same: Or from the Hisp. Paila, which Minshew says,
signifies a Milk- Pail. Pain, from the Fr. G. Peine, the AS Pin, or the Teut.
Pein, id. all from the Lat. Poena, or the Gr. (...), punishment. Patnim, or
Pagan, from the Fr. G. Payen, a Pagan; this from the Lat. Pagus, a village; for
at the coming in of Christianity, they were, by little and little, thrust out
of the cities, and forced to worship their heathenish Deities in private
villages only. To Paint, from the Fr. G. Peint, painted; which comes of
Peindre, the same; whence also Paintre, a Painter. A Pair, from the Fr. G.
Pair, the Belg. Paer, or the Ital. Paio, idem; two of any sort of things; all
from the Lat. Par, a pare, couple, or match. Pale, from the Fr. G. Pasle, pale,
as in the face; both from the Lat. Pallidus, the same. Pales, from the AS. and
Fr. G. Pal, idem; both from the Lat. Palus, idem, a stake, or wooden pin. A
Palfrey, from the Fr. G. Palefroy, or the Ital. Palafreno, a Courser, a
Post-horse. Minshew derives it from the AS. Pale, a young Horse, and Freoh,
free: Skinner, from the Gr. (...), to shake, and the Lat. Fraenum, a bridle. A
Pall, from the Lat. Palla, a pall, consecrated, and sent by the Pope, to an
Archbishop of the Romish Church, at his Consecration; which he pays His
Holiness for. A Pallet, a little low bed. Minshew draws it from the Fr. G.
Paille, the Ital. Paglia, or the Lat. Palea, chaff; because it is stuffed with
chaff or straw. It may also probably be drawn from the Lat. Pellis, a skin; q.
d. a bed made of skins. Pallizado, a term in Warfare; from the Hisp. Palisada,
the Fr. G. Palissade, or the Ital. Palificata; all from the Lat. Palus, a
stake, or post. A Palmer, or Pilgrim for Religions sake; so called, from a
staff made of the Palm Tree, which they carried as they returned from the Holy
War. A Palmer-Worm; a Palmis, from Palm Trees, whose leaves it chiefly eats:
Or, as Muffetus has it, because it is continually in motion, as A Palmer, going
on continual Pilgrimage. Palmestry, a Palmis, from the palms of the hands,
which Chiromancers look upon, pretending to predict futurities thereby.
Palm Sunday, a Palmarum ramis, from branches of the Palm Trees, which the Jews,
on that day, carried before Christ, when they met him in the way. Palsgrave,
from the Belg. Paltsgrave, or the Teut. Pfaltsgraff, (i. e.) a Grave, Count, or
Earl of the King's Palace. Palsy, contracted from the Fr. G. Paralysie, or the
Ital. Paralesia, which come from the Lat. and Gr. Paralysis, idem, a
resolution, or loosning of the nerves: When both the motion and sense is lost,
we call it, A Dead Palsy. A Paltry Knave, from the Ital. Paltone, Paltoniere, a
most profligate Knave; or from the Fr. G. Poltron, a coward. To Pamper, from
the Ital. Pamberare, to make fat: Or, q. d. Pan, and Beer; (i. e.) bread, and
Beer. Pamphlet: Minshew draws it from the Gr. (...), all, and (...), to fill:
Skinner, from the Belg. Pamplet, which is a Contract of the Fr. G. Pampier;
which he draws from the Lat. Papyrus, paper. Pan, from the AS. Dan. and Belg.
Pan, or the Teut. Pfan, id. any sort of a pan. Pa^^^o, from the Fr. G.
Panade, or the Ital. Panada; all from the Lat. Panis, bread. Pancake, from the
Belg. Pankoeck, or the Teut. Pfankuch, idem. Pander, a Pimp, from the Belg.
Pander, one that takes a bribe to hold his tongue; this from the Belg. Pand, or
the Teut. Pfand, a pawn, or pledge. Pangs, from the Teut. Peinigen, to torment,
or from our word Pains; both from the Lat. Poena, punishment. A Panguts, or fat
belly, from the Gr. (...), all, and Guts; q. d. all guts. Pannier, from the Fr.
G. Panier, or the Ital. Paniere, the same; all from Panis, bread. To Pant, from
the Fr. G. Panteler, idem, to puff, to draw breath short. A Pantler, from the
Fr. G. Panetiere, or the Ital. Panatiere, idem, he that has the keys of the
Pantry. A Pantofle, from the Fr. G. Pantoufle, or the Ital. Pantofola, a
slipper, or sock: Or from the Gr. (...), all made of Cork: Or from (...), to
tread on, and (...), Cork; because they were formerly, for lightness, made of
Cork. Pantry, from the Fr. G. Paneterie, or the Ital. Panateria, a chest or
closet wherein bread is kept; all from the Lat. Panis, bread. Pap, from the
Belg. Pappe, the Fr. G. Pappin, or the Ital. Pappa, the same. Paper, from the
Fr. G. Papier, the same; and both from the Gr. (...), a certain reed in Egypt,
of which paper was made. A Paragon, from the Fr. G. Paragon, or the Ital.
Paragone, (i. e.) a curious pattern, or Sample: Originally, from the Gr. (...),
nigh to, and (...), a trial. Paramount, supreme, from the Hisp. Para, to, and
Montar, to mount, or get above. Paramour, so called, a Parando amorem, from
procuring love. A Parapet, from the Fr. G. Parapet, or the Ital. Parapetto, a
wall breast-high, made of clods of earth, or turves, to keep off bullets; these
from the Fr. G. Parer, or the Ital. Parare, to defend, and the Ital. Petto, the
breast. To Parboil, from the Fr. G. Pourbouiller, to half boil; or, as Minshew
has it, Parum bullire, to boil a little; or rather, q. Part-boil, to boil in
part. A Parcel, from the Fr. G. Parcelle; this a Contract of the Lat.
Particella, a small part, or pittance. To Parch, or almost burn; perhaps from
the Lat. Percoquere, to boil thoroughly: Or from the Gr. (...), black; for
things parched contract a brownish black color. Pirchment, from the Fr. G.
Parchemin, the Ital. Pergamina, or the Teut. Pergament, the same: It is thus
called, because it was invented at Pergamus, in Asia Minor, by King Eumenes,
when Paper, that was then in Egypt only, was prohibited by Ptolomy, to be
transported into Asia. Pardon, from the Fr. G. Pardon, or the Ital. Pardono,
id. whence Pardonner, and Pardonare, to pardon, to forgive. To Pare, to cut
off, from the Lat. Separare, to separate, says Minshew: Or rather, from the
Lat. Parare, for Praeparare, to make ready, or fit; whence the Fr. G. Parer les
Ougles, to pare, or cut away an Horse's hoofs, that the shoes may be fitted
accordingly. Non Pareil, a sort of Letter so called by Printers; from the Lat.
Non, and the Fr. G. Pareil, like to; q. d. none such, or none like it.
Parentage, from the Fr. G. Parentage, or the Ital. Parentaggio, kinship,
affinity; all from the Lat. Parens, a Parent. A Parish, from the Fr. G.
Paroisse, a chapel; this from the Lat. Paroecia, or the Gr. (...), an holy
neighborhood; to wit, as many as are committed to the cure of one Curate, or
Priest. Park, from the AS. Pearroc, the Belg. Pacrck, the Fr. G. Parc, or the
Ital. Parco, id. all perhaps from the Gr. (...), from its being enclosed.
Parliament, or rather, Parliament, from the Fr. G. Parliament, a County Court, or
Assizes; but with us, a Council of Lords and Commons of the whole Realm; this
from the Fr. G. Parler, to speak; or from our word Parley. Parlour, from the
Fr. G. Parloir, or the Ital. Parlagio, id. these from the Fr. G. Parler, and
the Ital. Parlare, to talk; q. d. a place for private discourse. To Parley,
from the Fr G. Parler, to speak; that is, to treat upon Articles of Peace.
Parma-citty, a Corruption of Sperma Ceti, the spawn of the Whale; for it was
formerly accounted the seed of a Whale; but now it is discovered to come out of
the Whale's head. Parmesan, from the Fr. G. Parmesan, or the Ital. Parmegiano,
idem, cheese so called, because it is brought from Parma. Parol, from the Fr.
G. Parole, a word; this from the Lat. Parabola, a parable. A Captive in War is
by the Enemy released upon Parol, (i. e.) upon his word, promising to return
within the time appointed, when he can procure no Ransom, nor get another
Captive of his King, to remain a little while in Captivity for him. A verbal
Will is also called A Will Parol. A Parrot, a Contract of the Fr. G. Parroquet,
Perroquet, idem; this from the old word Perrot, little Peter, says Menagius.
To Pa^^^ Latin, Greek, etc. from our word To Pierce; or to divide it into
parts, (i. e.) to examine every word thoroughly by its self. Parson, q. d.
Parish-Son, (i. e.) the Pastor, or Son of a Parish. v. Parish. To Part, from
the Lat. Partiri, to part, or divide. Partial, from the Ital. Partiale, he that
favors this or that Party, having a prejudice, against such as hold a
contrary Opinion. Partisan, from the Fr. G. Partisan, or the Ital. Partaggiano,
he that joins himself to a Party, or Faction. Paritzm, from the Fr. G.
Pertuisane, or the Hisp. and Ital. Partesana, an halberd, an old kind of spear:
These, says Skinner, not as Minsh. has it, from the Parthians, the inventers
of it; but from the Ital. Pertugiare, to make an hole through. Partner, q. Part
Owner; or from the Fr. G. Personnier, a partaker; or the Belg. Paertenaer, the
same. A Partridge, from the Fr. G. Perdrix, or the Ital. Pernice, idem; all
from the Lat. and Gr. Perdix, the same. A Party, from the Fr. G. Party, or the
Ital. Partito, a Faction; all from the Lat. Pars, a part. To Pass, Well to
Pass, I am come to a fine Piss; from the Teut. Wohl zu Pasz seyu, to be well,
to be in good health. It is also taken from the Gr. (...), as in (...), this
has happened to me, this is come to pass. To Pass, or go, from the Fr. G.
Passer, or the Ital. Passare, idem; all from the Lat. Passus, a pace. Passade,
an alms given to a poor Passenger; also the teaching an Horse to pace; from the
Fr. G. Passade, the same. V. Pass. Passage, from the Fr. G. Passage, or the
Ital. Passaggio, id. both from the Lat. Passus, a pace. Passant, a term in
Heraldry; from the Fr. G. Passant, passing. Passenger, from the Fr. G.
Passager, or the Ital. Passaggiere, one that passes from place to place, from
country to country. Passover, from the Heb. Pesah, to pass over; because the
destroying Angel passed over the houses that were besprinkled with the Lamb's
blood. Passport, from the Fr. G. Passeport, or the Ital. Passa-porto, idem,
safe conduct; liberty to pass through Portus or Portas, ports or gates.
Pastime, from the Fr. G. Passetemps, or the Ital. Passatempo, idem, any
recreative Exercise to pass away the time. Passvolant, a Soldier hired by the
Centurion, to fill up his number; from the Fr. G. Passer, to pass, and Voler,
to fly; (i. e.) one that passes amongst Soldiers one day, being Volaturus, to
fly off the next. Past^, from the Fr. G. Paste, or the Ital. Pasta, the same;
all from the Lat. Pascere, to reed. From hence the word Pastry, the place where
paste is made. Pasture, from the Fr. G. Pasture, or the Ital. Pastura, id. q.
d. Lat. Pastus, food, or provender. A Pasty, from the Fr. G. Paste, or the
Ital. Pasticcio, idem: Hence the Fr. G. Pastissier, and the Ital. Pasticciere;
with us, A Pasterer, or Pastry- Cook; (i. e.) one that makes pasties. Pat, fit,
that which is suitable to; from the Belg. Pas, fitness; or from the Lat. Aptus,
by a Metathesis. Mer. Cas. draws it from the Gr. (...), to fit every way. A
Pat, from the Fr. G. Bat, id. or Patte, a foot, hoof, or nail; all perhaps from
the Gr. (...), to trample upon. To Patch, from the Ital. Pezzare, to piece, or
mend. Some draw it from the Lat. Patagium, a border, or one thing sowed upon
another. Path, from the AS. Path, Paad, the Belg. Pad, Pat, or the Teut. Pfad,
idem; all from the Lat. Batuere, to beat, q. d. A Beaten Way. Pattern, from the
Fr. G. Patron, or the Belg. Patroon, id. an example; perhaps it is thus called,
because in doing a thing, we follow it, as a Client his Patron, or Advocate.
Pattin, or Patten, from the Fr. G. Patin, or the Ital. Pattin, (i. e.) wooden
soles. Minshew draws it from the Gr. (...), to tread on. To Pave, from the Fr.
G. Paver, the same; or from the old Lat. Pavire, to beat; which comes of the
Gr. (...) to strike; and from hence, A Pivement, because the stones are knocked
into the ground forcibly, with a beetle, or rammer. Pavilion, from the Fr. G.
Pavillon, or the Ital. Padiglione, a tent; so called from the Lat. Papilio, a
Butter-fly, which spreads out its wings after the the fashion of a painted
tent. A Paunch, from the Fr. G. Pance, Panse, the Hisp. Panca, the Ital.
Pancia, the Belg. Pansse, the Teut. Pantz, or the Lat. Pantex, idem: Or, a
Pandendo, from stretching out, as Voss. observes. A Paw, from the C. Br. Pawen,
the Fr. G. Patte, or the Hisp. Pata, idem; also a foot, or hoof of a brute; all
perhaps from the Gr. (...), to tread upon. Pawn, from the Belg. Pand, the Teut.
Pfand, the Fr. G. Pan, or the Ital. Pegno, id. all from the Lat. Pignus, a
pledge, or pawn. To Pay Debts, from the Fr. G. Payer, or the Ital. Pagare, id.
these from the Lat. Pacare, to content, or give satisfaction to. To Pay, for To
Beat, from the Gr. (...), to beat; or from the other Pay; q. d. to pay one the
blows he owes him. Peace, from the Fr. G. Paix; and both from the Lat. Pax,
idem. A Peach, from the Fr. G. Pesche, or the Ital. Pesca, the same; both from
the Lat. Persicum Malum, a Peach. A Peacock, from the AS. Papa, the Belg. Pauw,
the Teut. Pfaw, the Fr. G. Paon, or the Ital. Paone, idem; all from the Gr.
(...), to extend; from his spreading forth his tail. Peak, as The Peak in
Darbyshire, a sharp topp'd mountain; so called, because it is piked like a
spear or pike. A Peaking Fellow, from the Hisp. Pequenno, or the Ital. Piccino,
a little fellow: Or, from the AS. Paeca, a deceiver. A Peal of Bells: Minsh.
draws it from the Fr. G. Apeller, to call; because it calls people to Church.
Pear, from the AS. Pepe, the Dan. Paere, the Belg. Peer, the Fr. G. Poire, or
the Ital. Pero, Pera, idem. A Perch from the Fr. G. Perch, the Ital Perca, or
the Gr. (...), a fish so called. Rondel. draws it from the Gr. (...), to have
spots of various colors. Pearl, from the Fr. G. Perle, or the Ital. and Hisp.
Perla, id. Hence the Ital. Madre di Perla, Mother of Pearl; to wit, the shell
of the pearl bearing Oister. A Peasant, from the Fr. G. Paisant, or the Ital.
Paesano, a Countryman; these from Pais, and Paese, the country. Pease, from
the AS. Pisa, the Fr. G. Pois, the Ital. Piso, or the Lat. and Gr. Pisum, id. A
Peccadillo, from the Fr. G. Peccadille, or the Hisp. Peccadillo, idem: Or, q.
d. Lat. Peccatillum, a small fault, a venial sin. To Peck, from the Belg.
Picken, Pecken, or the Fr. G. Becquer, to hit with the beak. A Wood Pecker,
from the Fr. G. Pick; both from the Lat. Pica; or rather, from our word Peck,
for it makes holes in trees, by pecking with its beak. A Pedant, from the Fr.
G. Pedant, or the Ital. and Hisp. Pedante; and these from the Lat. and Gr.
Paedagogus, a petty Schoolmaster. A Pedet, from the Lat. Pedes, a Footman, or
Page, to follow at ones foot or heels. Pedigree, from the Fr. G. Degres de
Peers, the degrees of Fathers: ^, a Petendo gradus, from eriving degrees.
Pedestal, a term in Architecture, from the Fr. G. Pied-stal, or the Ital.
Piedestallo, the basis of a pillar; this from Piede, the foot, and Stallo, a
stand. Peddler: Minshew draws it from the Fr. G. Aller a Pied, to go a foot:
Skinner, from the Teut. Bettiler, a beggar. A Piece, a fowling-piece; from the
Belg. Buyse, Busse, or the Teut. Buechse, a pipe, also the same. V. Harquebuss.
A Peel, or Pill, from the Lat. Pellis, a skin; hence the Fr. G. Peler, with us,
to pill off skin, rind, or bark. A Baker's Peel, from the Fr. G. Pelle, Paelle,
or the Ital. Hisp. and Lat. Pala, idem; also a shovel. To Peep from the Fr. G.
Pepier, or the Lat. Pipire, to peep like a Chicken; all feigned from the sound.
To Peep, or look in, from the Belg. Opheffen, to heave, or lift up; q. d. to
lift up the eyes upon something. Skinner. A Peer of the Realm, from the Fr. G.
Pair, id. both from the Lat. Par, equal; for in giving their Votes in
Parliament, they are held equal. Peevish, q. d. Beetsh, (i. e.) as we say,
Waspish, one as soon provoked as a Be or Wasp. A Peg, from the Gr. (...),
(...), to fasten, or join; or the Dor. (...), to fix. Pelf, for temporal
riches, from the Fr. Nor. Peuffe, Fripery; which see: Or rather, from the AS.
Fela, Feo, much money, a fee. Pellet, q. d. Ballette, a little ball. Some draw
it from the Hisp. Pella, a little round thing; this from Pila, a ball.
Pell-mell, from the Fr. G. Pesle mesle, confusedly, without order; from Pesles,
locks of wool, and Meslez, mixed together. Pelt, from the Belg Peltz, or the
Teut. Beltz, idem; both from the Lat. Pellis, a skin. To Pelt, as, to throw
stones at: Mer. Cas. draws it from the Gr. (...), brandished, shaken; or from
(...), to smite. v. Palt. A Pen for sheep, from the AS. Pyndan, to shut in.
Pencil, from the Teut. Pensel, Pinsel, the Fr. G. Pinceau, or the Lat. Barb.
Penicillum, the same. Pendant, an ear-ring, from the Fr. G. Pendant, (i. e.)
hanging; for Pendet ab aure, it hangs down from the ear. A Pendant, from the
Fr. G. Pennon, the Ital. Pennone, or the Hisp. Pendon, a flag, or banner; these
again from the Lat. Penna, a feather; for it flies in the air like a feather:
Or a Pendendo, from hanging, because it hangs in the air. Penance, from the
old Fr. G. Penence, the same; and both from the Lat. Poenitentia, repentance,
contrition. Penny, from the AS. Penig, the Belg. Penntuck, or the Teut.
Pfenning, idem; hence Gotts Pfenning, God's Penny, earnest-money, and the Dan.
Read Penge, ready money: All perhaps from the Lat. Pecunia, money. Pensioner,
one that is maintained in a College, or Hospital, at the King's charge only;
from the Fr. G. and Eng. Pension, or the Lat. Pensio, a pension. Penlive, from
the Fr. G. Pensif, idem; this from Penser, which comes from the Lat. Pensare,
to weigh, or ponder in mind. Penthouse, from the Fr. G. Appentis, or the Ital.
Pendice, idem; both from the Lat. Pendere, to hang; q. d. an hang-by, or an
addition to an house. People, from the Fr. G. Peuple, or the Teut. Poefel,
Pobel, id. all from the Lat. Populus, the same. Pepper, from the Belg. Peper,
the Teut. Pfeffer, the Fr. G. Poivre, or the Ital. Pevero, the same; all from
the Lat. Piper, or the Gr. Barb. (...), the same. Perceive, from the Fr. G.
Appercevoir, or the Lat. Percipere, idem. Perform, from the Ital. Performare,
to complete, to bring to a form, or to perfection; or from the Fr. G.
Parfournir, to finish. Perfu^a^, from the Hisp. Perfume, the Fr. G. Parfum, or
the Ital. Profumo, the same. Perhaps, from the Lat. Per, by, and Hap, or
Happen; which see. Peril, from the Fr. G. Peril, or the Ital. Periglio; and
these from the Lat. Periculum, id. Periwi^, from the Fr. G. Perruque, the same:
Or perhaps from the Gr. (...), to compass about. Periwinkle, a kind of Sea
shellfish; perhaps from the Gr. (...), a circuit; to wit, from its spiral form;
being, as it were, in wreaths. To Perk, or Pirk up, q. d. To Perch up; by a
Metaphor taken from Hens standing upon pearches. Perry, from the Fr. G. Pere,
or Poire, a Pear; (i. e.) Wine made of the juice of Pears. Personage, from the
Fr. G. Personnage, or the Ital. Personaggio, the same; and both from the Lat.
Persona, a person. Pert, from the Fr. G. Appert, lively, sharp; this perhaps
from the Lat. Ad, to, and Peritus, skilful. Pettam, from the Lat. Pertinere, to
belong unto. V. Appertain. Peruse, to read over; from the Lat. Per, through,
over, and Use; which see. To Pester, to vex, or molest; from the Fr. G.
Empester, to trouble; this from the Ital. Impestare, or Appestare, to bring a
pest, (i. e.) some great mischief upon one. A Pestle, from the Fr. G. Pisteau,
or the Ital. Pistello, Pestello, idem; these from the Lat. Pistare, to pound,
or Pistillum, a pestil. A Petard, from the Fr. G. Petart, Petard, the Ital.
Petardo, or the Teut. Pedard, a warlike engine to batter and demolish the walls
of a city beleaguered; all from the Fr. G. Peter, to fart, allusive. Peticoat,
from the Fr. G. Petite cotte, a petty, or little coat; to wit, with respect to
a gown, or upper coat. A Petronel, a Trooper's gun; from the Fr. G. Petrinal,
or the Ital. Petrinale, id. Minshew furmiseth, that it is so called, because
Pectori appendi solebat, it was usually hung at the breast. To take Pett, from
the Gr. (...), sorrow, or (...), to grieve, to repine; or the Lat. Impetum
capere, to take a passion, or fit of anger; or from the Fr. G. Despit, as
Prendre Despit, to take a despite; by casting away the former syllable.
Pettifogger, an Informer; from the Fr. G. Petit, little, and the AS. Fogere, a
suitor; this from the AS. Gefegan, the Belg. Voeghen, or the Teut. Fuegen, to
adapt himself to another's humor, so to every favor. Petty, from the Fr. G.
Petit, little. Menag. draws it from the Lat. Putus, or the Ital. Putto, a
little one, a child. A Pew, from the Belg. Puye, Puyde, or the Lat. Podium, a
pew, or stall; this from the Gr. (...), a foot. Pewter, from the Belg. Peauter,
the Hisp. Peltre, or the Ital. Peltro, the same; from hence the Fr. G.
Espautrer, to bruise, to bildge. A Pheasant, from the Fr. G. Faisan, the Ital.
Fasciano, Fasano, or the Teut. Phasan; q. d. a Phasian fowl, (i. e.) brought at
first from Phasis, a river in Colchos. Physician, from the Fr. G. Physicien, or
the old Ital. Physiciano; or, q. d. Lat. Physicus; which comes from the Gr.
(...), nature (i. e.) one that is exercised in things natural. To P^ck, from
the Belg. Pycken, the same; this from Beak, which see: Or from the Fr. G.
Piquer, to pick. This Turneb. draws from the Lat. Spica, an ear of corn. To
P^ck out, from the Belg. Picken, to cut down corn; this from Pick, a Sickle. A
Pickax, q. d. a Picking ax. V. Ax, and Pick. To Pickeer, to skirmish; from our
word Pike; q. d. to fight with pikes. Picker, a certain Play at Cards; from the
Fr. G. Picquet, or the Ital Picchetto, the same; all from the Fr. G. Piquer, to
pick. Pickle, from the Belg. Pekel; Hence the Belg. Pekelen, with us, To
Pickle. To Piddle, or Pitle, to go about to do things of small moment; from the
Ital. Picolo, Picciolo, little; or our Eng. To Peddle; or the Fr. G. Petit,
with us, Petty. Piece, from the Fr. G. Piece, or the Ital. Pezzo, idem. A Pied
Horse, from the Fr. G. Pie, party colored: Or, which is not unlikely, q. d.
Lat. Picatus, pied: that is, of diverse colors, like to a Mag-Py. To Pierce,
from the Fr. G. Percer, or the Ital. Perciare, id. Minsh. draws it from the Gr.
(...), to go through: Skinner, from the Lat. Per, through, and Ico, to strike.
Pig, from the Belg. Big, the same; this perhaps from the AS. Piga, a little
girl; and catachrestically, a Pig. A Pigeon, from the Fr. G. Pigeon, or the
Ital. Pigione, id. A Pike, from the Fr. G. Pique, or the Ital. Picca, the same:
Hence the Fr. G. Piquer, to prick, or pierce. P^ked, from the word Pike; that
is, having a sharp point, or top; like that of a pike; or from the Fr. G.
Piquer, to prick, as all sharp things do; or from the AS. Peac, a peak, or the
sharp top of an hill. A Pilch, from the AS. Pylche, the same. Pil^hard, a fish
so called, from the AS. Pylche, a pilch, and the Belg. Aerd, nature; to wit,
from its smoothness. Pile, from the Belg. Piile, a sharp pale, or stake, driven
into the earth. Pile, Cross and Pile, the backside of a piece of money; from
the Fr. G. Pile, or the Ital. Pila, the same: Hence, Je n'ay Croix ny Pile, I
have neither cross nor pile; that is, I have no money at all. Pile, for an
heap, from the Fr. G. Pile, the Ital. Pila, or the Belg. Piile, an heap; all
perhaps from the Lat. Pyra, or the Gr. (...), a funeral pile, or heap of wood
to burn the dead with; a custom amongst Heathens. Pilfer, from the Lat. Pilare,
to steal: Or from our word Pill, and the Lat. Fero, to carry. V. Pill, and
Pillage. Pilgrim, from the Belg. Pelgrim, the Teut. Bilgram, Bilgerin, the
Ital. Pelegrino, or the Fr. G. Peregrin, the same; all from the Lat.
Peregrinus, a traveller, to wit, for the sake of Religion. A Pill, from the
Belg. Pille; both from the Lat. Pilula, id. To Pill, from the Belg. Pellen,
Polen, the Fr. G. Peler, or the Ital. Pelare, Spelare, to pill off the bark, or
skin; all from the Lat. Pellis, a skin. To Pill, or Pillage, from the Fr. G.
Pillar, idem, to plunder: Or from the Obsolete Lat. Pilare, for Expilare, id.
Pillar, from the Fr. G. Pillier, or the Ital. Piliere, the same; all from the
Fr. G. Pile, or the Ital. Pila, a pile, or heap. Pill'd, or Peeled Garlic from
our word, To Pill, or Peel; or a Pilis, from wool, or hair; for it is spoken
properly of a Sheep, whose wool peeleth off; metaphorically, of a Man whose
hair sheds by reason of some disease, especially the Venereal disease. A
Pillion, or seat for Women to ride upon; from the Belg. Peluwe, Poluwe, a
pillow, because it is soft as a pillow. Pillory, from the Gr. (...), a gate,
and (...), to see; for here the Criminal looks, as it were, out at the wicket
of a door. Spelm. draws it from the Fr. G. Pilleur, a Robber, Extortioner, or
Pillager. It may likewise be drawn from the Fr. G. Pile, or the Lat. Pila, a
sort of pillar; because the place where Criminals were punished was heretofore
encompassed with pillars. Pillow, from the AS. Pile, or the Belg. Peluwe,
Poluwe, id. all from the Lat. Pulvinus, a pillow, or bolster. A Pilot, from the
Fr. G. Pilot, the Ital. Pilota, the Hisp. Piloto, or the Belg. Piloot, the
Guider of a ship. Kilian draws it from the Belg. Peylen, Piilen, to found, or
to try the depth of water; and Zoot, lead. Pilot- fish, V. Pilot; so named,
because it follows the ship's helm, where the Pilot sits. A Pinip, from the
Fr. G. Pinge, or the Ital. Pinco, a Man's yard; these from the Lat. Penis,
idem. A Pimping thing, or thing of no moment; in imitation of the Belg. Pimpel
Meese, a Tit-mouse; also a little pimping fellow. A Pimple, or Pumple, from the
Fr. G. Pompette, a blister; this perhaps from the Gr. (...), a pimple. Pin, as
in Zinspin, from the AS. Pyndan, to hinder; for it keeps the wheels from
falling off the axle-tree. A Pin, or Pinfold, from the AS. Pyndan, to shut in.
A Pin to pin the cloths withal, from the Lat. Pinna, the fin of a fish; or from
Spina, Spinula, a thorn, a similitudine. Hence, he is on the merry Pin, from a
way of drinking in a cup in which a pin was stuck, and he that could drink to
the pin, (i. e.) neither under nor over it, was to have the wager. A Pin of a
musical instrument, from the Dan Pinde, idem; and both from the AS. Pyndan, to
shut in. The Pin, or Web in the eye, from the AS. Pyndan, to enclose; for it
incloseth and covers the whole sight. Pincers, from the Fr. G. Pinces,
Pincettes, or the Ital. Pincette, idem; and all from the Fr. G. Pincer, to
pinch, to pluck out. V. Pinch. To Piuch, from the Fr. G. Pincer, idem, to
squeese hard: Or perhaps from the Gr. (...), to bind fast. Pin-dust, from Pin,
and Dust; which see. To Pine, from the AS. Pinian, the Belg. Pilnen, or the
Teut. Peinen, to punish, or torment; q. d. Lat. Poena afficere, to put one to
punishment: Or from the Gr. (...), to be an hungry. Pink, from the Belg. Pinck,
a little eye; whence Pinckoogen, to pink with the eyes, and Pingken, to
sparkle, or shine a little. Pinks, from the Fr. G. Pinces, a sort of wild
Gillyflower: Or from the Belg. Pincke, an eye; or P^ncken, to shine, to look
bright. A Pinnace, from the Fr. G. Pinasse, or the Ital. Pinazza, idem, a kind
of light ship; both from the Lat. Pinus, a Pine Tree; which formerly was the
only timber to make ships of. Pinnacle, from the Fr. G. Pinnacle; and both from
the Lat. Pinna, the same. Pinnion, or Pinion, from the from the Fr. G. Pignon;
this from the Lat. Pinna, the pinion of a wing. Pint, from the AS. Pynt, or the
Fr. G. Pint; with us, a pound weight of things liquid. Minsh. draws it from
the Gr. (...), to drink. A Pintel, a small iron pin; q. d. a Pointel, or little
Point. Pintle, from the Teut. and Belg. Pint, id. or from the Belg. Punt, the
Fr. G. Point, or the Ital. Puncto, a point; q. d. A Man's Pointel. It is also
drawn from the Ital. Pinco, and the Fr. G. Pinge, idem; and these from the Lat.
Penis, the same; Skinner. A Pioneer from the Fr. G. Pionnier, a Digger; this
from Pion, a Foot man. Some derive it a Poeonibus, from the Poeones, a people
of Asia, that were wont to dig and undermine the earth, either to live there,
or to search for Gold, or other metals. Pip, from the Belg. Pippe, the Fr. G.
Pepie, the Ital. Pipa, or the Teut. Pippis, a disease among Hens and other
fowls; all, not unlikely, Depravations of the Lat. Pituita, phlegm; Skinner.
Pipe, from the AS. Pipe, the Dan. Piibe, the Teut. Pfeiffe, or the Belg. Piipe.
Hence the AS. Pipere, a Piper. A Pipe, for a wine-vessel, from the Hisp. Pipa,
or the Teut. Pippe, idem; or perhaps it is so called, because it is hollow and
long like a pipe. Pippin, from the Belg. Puppingh, idem: Or, not unlikely, from
the Fr. G. Pepin, the seed of fruit; perhaps because it yields more seed than
other apples. Pisinire, from the Belg. Puyde, an heap, and Miere, or the Dan.
Mire, an Ant; for they cast up heaps of dirt wheresoever they lodge. To Piss,
from the Fr. G. Pisser, the Ital. Pisciare, or the Dan. Pisser, id. Hence the
Teut. Pisz, piss, or urine: All most probably from the noise a Man makes in
pissing; q. d. Hissing. Pistachoes, from the Hisp. Pistacho, or the Ital.
Pistachio, a nut so called, from Psittaca, a city in Tygris, according to
Stephanus. A Pistol, from the Fr. G. Pistole, Pistolet, or the Ital. Pistola, a
little gun for Horsemen; and this from the Lat. Fistula, a pipe. A Pistole,
from the Fr. G. Pistole, a certain coin in Italy, Spain and France; so called,
because it was first comed in Pistoia, or Pistoria, a city of Hetruria. Pit,
from the AS. Pit, the Belg. Put, or the Fr. Th. Pyt, id. all from the Lat.
Puteus, a well. Pitch, from the Fr. G. Picts, the pitch or stature of the body.
Pitch, from the AS. Pic, Pix, ( Pick, as they say in the North) the Fr. G.
Poix, the Ital. Piece, the Belg. Peck, or the Teut. Pech, idem; all again from
the Lat. Pix, idem. To Pitch upon ones head in falling, perhaps from the Fr. G.
Peser, to weigh; (i. e.) to fall on the head with the whole weight of the body.
It alludes to the Gr. (...), to fall: Skinner. Pitch-fork, from our word, To
Pitch, or fasten, and Fork; which see. Pith, from the Belg. Pit, Pit, marrow,
or sap. A Pittance, from the Fr. G. Pitance, the Hisp. Pitanca, or the Ital.
Pietanza, a little portion of meat; these from the Lat. Pietas, piety; q. d. a
portion given one out of pity, or piety: Or from the Gr. (...), a table;
because the names of the Monkish Brethren (to whom this dole was given) were
written down in a table together, with each Man's allowance. Pity, from the Fr.
G. Pity, or the Ital. Pieta, mercy; both from the Lat. Pietas, idem. The Scots
write Piety, where we write Pity. Pizzle, perhaps from the Belg. Pese, a
nerve; in which sense the Italians call it, Il Nerbo. Minshew supposes that it
is so named from the sound of pissing; q. d. Piss. Rogers draws it from the
Lat. Pessulus, a little bolt. Place, from the Fr. G. Place; and both from the
Lat. Platea, a street; which comes from the Gr. (...), (i. e.) (...), a broad
way. A Placket, perhaps from the Belg. Plagghe, a piece cut out of a garment.
Plague, from the Belg. Plaghe, or the Teut. Plage, the Plague; whence the Belg.
Plaghen, and the Teut. Plagen, to plague, or torment; all from the Lat. Plaga,
or the Gr. (...), a blow. A Plaice, or Plaise, from the AS. Floc, or the Belg.
Plate, idem; this from the Gr. (...), broad. Plaint, from the Fr. G. Plainte, a
complaint; this from Plaindre, to complain. Plaintiff, from the Fr. G.
Plaintiff, an Impeacher; this from the Verb Plaindre, to complain. Plaster,
from the Belg. Plaester, the Teut. P^laster, the Fr. G. Emplastre, or the Ital.
Empiastro, idem; all from the Gr. (...), idem. To Plait, from the Fr. G.
Plesser, to knit, or entangle; or from the Fr. G. Plier, the Belg. Ployen, the
Lat. Plicare, or the Gr. (...), to twist, or interfold. A Plane, from the Hisp.
Plana, an instrument to make wood plain withal; both a Complanando, from making
plain. Plank, from the Belg. Plancke, the Fr. G. Planche, or the Ital. Palanca,
idem. Menagius draws it from the Lat. Planus, plain, or even. Plantain, from
the Fr. G. Plantaine; and both Contracts of the Abl. Plantagine, idem. A Plash,
from the Belg. Plasch, a ditch wherein water stands; whence the Belg.
Plaschen, to plash the water, and the Teut. Plaiz, the plashing of water,
falling downward upon the stones. To Plash tender branches of trees, to plait
them, or twist them up together; from the Fr. G. Plesser, id. this from the
Lat. Plectere, to bend, or pleat, as hair. The Plat, or Plot of an House,
either from the Fr. G. Plat, plain, q. d. a plain foundation of an house; or
the Gr. (...), to form, or frame. Plate of metal, from the Belg. Plate, or the
Hisp. Plata, id. all from the Gr. (...), broad, or (...), to form. A Platform,
a term in Architecture; from the Fr. G. Plateforme, Platteforme, or the Ital.
Piatta forma, a plain form, or draught of the work. A Platter, from the Fr. G.
Plat, the Hisp. Plato, or the Teut. Platte, idem; all from the Gr. (...),
broad, or the Lat. Patina, a platter, by an Epenthesis (...) l. Play, from the
AS. Plaegan, to play; whence Pleg, a Play, and Pleghus, a Playhouse. Minsh.
draws it from the Lat. Placere, to please: Spelman, from the AS. Pleoh, hazard;
q. d. to run hazards at play. To Plead, and Plea, from the Fr. G. Played, a Suit
at Law, Cause, or Action; whence Plaider, and the Ital. Piadire, to plead a
Cause. Pleasant, from the Fr. G. Plaisant, or the Lat. Placens, that which
pleases. Please, from the Fr. G. Plaire, or the Lat. Plaoere, idem. Pleasure,
from the Fr. G. Plaisir; both from Plaire, to please. Pledge, from the Fr. G.
Plege, Pleige, idem; also a Surety: Whence Pleger, Pleiger, to pledge, to give
Bail. To Pledge in drinking; some will have it come of the other Pledge,
because, in the time of the Danes, one of the company gave himself a Pledge,
that he that drank, should not be slain whilst he was drinking; but rather from
the Belg. Pleghen, or the Teut. Pllegen, to take care of; q. d. I will take
care to drink the next. Plenty, from the Fr. G. Plente, idem; q. d. Lat.
Plenitudo, fullness. A Pleurisy, from the Fr. G. Pleuresie, or the Ital.
Pleuresia, idem; these from the Lat. Pleuritis, the same; q. d. a pain, or
inflammation in the side, caused by stoppage of blood. Pliant, and Pliable,
from the Fr. G. Plier, to bend, to be flexible; both from the Lat. Plicare, to
fold; q. d. Lat. Plicatilis, that which will fold up. Plight, as To Plight
Faith; from the Fr. G. Plechten, to promise frankly and sincerely. To Plod, or
labor earnestly in a matter; perhaps from the Belg. Ploeghen, to plow; or from
our word Plot; which see. To Plomp, from the Belg Plompen, to plomp, as a stone
cast into water; or rather, from the sound. Plot, a Contract of Complot: Mer.
Cas. draws it from the Gr. (...), to form; q. d. to contrive, or design
something to come. A Plover, from the Fr. G. Pluvier, idem: It is a bird so
called, perhaps, quod Pluvia gaudet, because it loves the rain. A Plough, from
the Belg. Ploegh, or the Teut. Pflug, idem; whence Ploeghen, and Pflugen, to
plow; all from the AS. Pluccian, to pluck; for the Oxen pluck the plough
through the ground. To Pluck, from the AS Pluccian, the Belg. and Teut.
Plucken, or the Ital. Peluccare, idem. Pluck, A Sheep's Pluck, (...), from the
vital heat residing therein. A Plug, or Splug, from the Belg. Plugghe, idem. A
Plum, from the AS. Plum, the Teut. Pflaume, or the Dan. Blumme, idem; all from
the Lat. Prunum, the same. Plum, He fell down Plum, that is, perpendicularly,
like a Plummer. A Plummer, from the Fr. G. Plombier, or the Lat. Plumbarius;
(i. e.) he that solders or cements, cum Plumbo, with Lead. A Plummet, from the
Fr. G. Plombeau, idem; this from Plumbum, Lead. Plunder, from the Belg.
Plunderen, or the Teut. Plundern, to lay waste, to pillage. It alludes also to
our words Pull under. To Plunge, from the Fr. G. Plonger, to sink. Minsh. draws
it from the Gr. (...), to wash. A Plungeon, or Plongeon, from the word, To
Plunge; a bird that often plungeth it self in the water. Plush, from the Fr. G.
Peluche, plush, or shag; or perhaps from the Ital. Peluzzo, a little hair; all
from the Lat. Pilus, an hair. Ply, from the Belg. Pleghen, or the Teut Pflegen
to be careful, to use diligence; or from the Dan. Pleyer, to accustom; as we
say to Watermen, At what Stairs do you Ply? Henshaw draws it from the Fr. G.
Fair Pleier; as we say, Ply your work. Poch'd- Eggs, from the Fr. G. Oeufs
Pochez, idem; this from Pocher, to dig out. Pock, Pox, and Pocks, from the AS.
Poc-ald, or the Belg. Pocken, idem. Pocket, from the AS. Pochcha, or the Fr. G.
Pochette, a pocket, or purse. Poesy, and Poetry, from the Fr. G. Poesy,
Poetry, or the Ital. Poesia; all from the Lat. Poesis, or the Gr. (...), the
same. Point, from the Fr. G. Poinct, Point, or the Ital. Punto, id. all from
the Lat. Pungere, to prick. Point Blank, straight to the mark; from the Fr. G.
Sur ou verse le Point blanc, (i. e.) in aiming at a white, point, or mark.
Poise, from the Fr. G. Pois, Poids, idem; these from Poiser, to poise, or
weigh; all from the Lat. Pensare, to weigh. Poison, from the Fr. G. Poison;
whence Poisonner, or Empoisonner, to poison; all from the Lat. Potio, a potion.
To Poke with the finger, or a stick; from the Fr. G. Pocher, to dig into; this
a Contract of the Lat. Fodicare, to dig, or bore. Pole, from the AS. Pole, or
the Belg. Pols, idem. Pole-ax, q. d. a pole fortified with an ax; or, q. d. a
Polonish ax, because the Polandors use it much: Or from our word Poll, for an
head. Pole-cat, that is, a Polonish Cat; because Poland abounds with them.
Policy, craft, especially in civil affairs; from the Gr. (...), idem; hence the
Eng. Politic, crafty, or cunning. Poll, for an Head; from the Belg. Polle,
Poll, an head, or top, hence Poll-money, a tax to be levied poll by poll, (i.
e.) upon every body; and hence also, A Poll of Ling, for a jowl of Ling. Poll
is also taken from the Gr. (...), the head. Pollard, a fish so called, from the
greatness of its poll, or head. Pomado, from the Fr. G. Pommade, or the Hisp.
Pomada, an ointment made of apples. Pomander, from the Fr. G. Pomme d'Ambre; or
q. d. Lat. Pomum Ambrae, an Apple of Amber, (i. e.) smelling like Amber.
Pomegranaie, q. d. Pomum Granatum, a kind of apple having many grains, or much
seed: Or from Granata, the place where they most grow. A Pommel, from the Fr.
G. Pommelle, or the Ital. Pomella, idem; so called, a similitudine Pomi, from
the similitude of a little apple. Pompion, from the Fr. G. Pompon, or the Ital.
Popone, id. Pond, q. Bond; because there the water is bound, that it cannot
pass; Minsh. Or from the AS. Pyndan, to enclose; Skinner. A Poniard, from the
Fr. G. Poignard, idem; this a Pungendo, from pricking; or a Pugnis, from the
fists; or a Pugnando, from fighting: Skinner. Pool, from the AS Pull, the Belg.
Poel, or the Teut. Pfuhl, id. Minsh. and Fr. Jun. draw it from the Gr. (...),
clay or mud. Poop, from the Fr. G. Pouppe, or the Ital. Popa, idem; all from
the Lat. Puppis, a ship. To Poop, from the Belg. Poepen, to fart softly; both
from the sound. Poor, from the Fr. G. Poor, the Ital. Povero, or the Lat.
Pauper, idem. To Pop with the mouth, from the Lat. and Gr. Poppysmus, a
smacking with the mouth; all from the sound. Pope, from the Fr. G. Pape, or the
Ital. and Lat. Barb. Papa, the Pope, or Bishop of Rome; though, in the time of
Sidon. Apollinar. it was the title of any Bishops or Pontiffs whatsoever. A
Poplar, from the Fr. G. Peuplier, or the Lat. Populus, id. Poppinjay, from the
Belg. Teut. and Fr. G. Papejay, or the Dan. Papejoy, id q. d. Pope's delight.
Poppy, from the AS. Popig, the same. Porch, from the Fr. G. Porche; and both
Contracts of the Lat. Porticus, idem. Porcupine, from, the Fr. G. Porc Espi, or
the Ital. Porco Spino, idem; q. d. Lat. Porcus Spinatus, a thorny Hog; to wit,
a Spinis, from its prickles, and the likeness of an Hog. To Pore, or look near
letters; from the Gr. (...), pur-blind. A Porpus, or Porpis; q. d. Porcus
Piscis, an Hog-fish. Port, The Ottoman Port, or Court; from the Lat. Porta, a
gate. Portage, from the Fr. G. Portage, or the Ital. Portaggio, a Porter's fee;
this from the Lat. Portare, to carry. Portal, from the Fr. G. Portail, or the
Ital. Portella, a little port; all from the Lat. Porta, a gate. Posset: Minshew
draws it from the Lat. Potus, drink; but rather from the Fr. G. Poser, to
settle; for when the milk is curded, the thick part comes together at the top.
A Post, from the Fr. G. Post, or the Ital. Posta, a Letter-carrier. Postern,
from the Fr. G. Posterne, or the Ital. Posterla, a backdoor, or gate; all from
the Lat. Post, behind. A Postilion, from the Fr. G. Postillon, or the Ital.
Postiglione, idem. A Postill, from the Fr. G. Postille, or the Ital. Postilla,
id. Or, q. d. Lat. Post illa, after these words, that is, after the Text.
Posture, from the Fr G. Posture, q. d. Lat. Positura, a position of the body.
Posy, for A Nosegay; I suppose, a Ponendo, or Componendo, from composing, or
making up: Or from the Teut. Butzen, to cleanse or perfume the nostrils. Pot,
from the Fr. G. Pot, or the Ital. Potto, a pot, or cup; this a Potu, from
drink; or the Gr. (...), a cup. Potatoes, from the Hisp. Potados, the Fr. G.
Potades, or the Ital. Potates, idem. A Potentate, from the Fr. G. Potentat, the
Ital. Potentato, or the Lat. Barb. Potentatus, idem. Pottage, from the Fr. G.
Potage, or the Ital. Potaggio, idem. A Potter, from the Fr. G. Potier, a Maker
of earthen vessels. V. Pot. Pouch, from the AS. Pocca, or the Fr. G. Poche, a
pocket, or pouch. Powder, from the Fr. G. Poudre, Pouldre; both from the Lat.
Pulvere, idem. Poulterer, from the Fr. G. Pouletier; this from Poulette, with
us, a Pullet; all from the Lat. Pullus, a chicken. To Pounce, from the Ital.
Ponzonare, to pounce paper, Skinner. Minshew draws it from the Hisp. Poncar, to
break in pieces. To Pound, from the AS. Punyan, to bray. A Pound, from the AS.
Pund, the Belg. Pond, or the Teut. Pfund, idem; all from the Lat. Pondo, a
pound. A Pound to put Horses in, from the Teut. Pfand, a pawn, q. d. to keep an
Horse in pawn, till compensation be made for the damage he has done: Or
rather, from the AS, Pyndan, to shut in. Power, from the Fr. G. Pouvoir, the
Infinitive of Puis, I am able; to wit, taken nominally in imitation of the
Greeks; both from the Lat. Possum, I am able. Powt, Eel-Powt, from the AS.
Aelepute, idem: Or from the Belg. Puddy, a Lamprey. v. Burvot. To Practice,
from the Fr. G. Pratiquer, or the Ital. Pratticare, idem; all from the Gr.
(...), a practice; this from (...), to do. Praise, from the Belg. Prtis, or the
Teut. Preisz, id. whence Priisen, and Preisen, to praise. Prank, from the Belg.
Pronck, ostentation; whence Proncken, and the Teut. Prangen, to glory in ones
self. Prate, from the Belg. Praten, to wrangle. Minsh. draws it from the Gr.
(...), to speak: Mer. Cas. from (...), to do, or speak. Praunce as a stout
Horse. V. Prank. To Pray, from the Fr. G. Prier, or the Ital. Pregare, idem;
all from the Lat. Precani, to pray. To Preach, from the Fr. G. Presher, idem;
whence Prescheur, a Preacher, and Presche, a Sermon. Preamble, a prologue, or
preface; from the Fr. G. Preambule, or the Ital. Preambulo, idem. A Prebend,
from the Fr. G. Prebende, or the Ital. and Lat. Barb. Prebenda, id. all from
Praebeo, to allow, or afford; for it formerly signified, a certain measure, or
pittance, of meat, or other necessaries, which were allowed to Canonical
Persons. Predecessor, from the Fr. G. Predecesseur, idem; (i. e.) one that
Prius decessit e vita, has departed this life before us. To Premise, and
Premises from the Lat. Praemittere, to set before, or Praemissum, a thing set
before, or above. Prentice, from the Fr. G. Apprentis, idem; this from
Apprendre, to learn; all from the Lat. Apprehendere, to apprehend. Presto be
gone, a term in Legerdemain; from the Ital. Presto, quickly; q. d. be gone
presently. Pretty, from the AS. Praete, or the Ital. Pretto, neat, handsome: Or,
as Minshew has it, from the Belg. Practigh, or the Teut. Prachtich, proud.
Hensh. draws it from the Fr. G. Petit, little. To Prevail, from the Fr. G.
Prevaloir; both from the Lat. Praevalere, the same. Prey, from the Fr. G.
Proye, idem; both from the Lat. Praeda, the same. Price, from the Fr. G. Pris,
or the Ital. Prezzo, idem; both from the Lat. Pretium, a price. Prick, from the
AS. Pricca, or the Dan. Prick; hence the AS. Priccan, to prick, the Belg.
Prekel, a prickle, and Prekelen, to prickle: All perhaps from the Lat. Per,
through, and Ico, to strike. To Prick up ones self, to go fine; from the Belg.
Priicken, idem; both possibly from the Teut. and Belg. Pracht, pride. Pricket,
a Stag of the second year; so called, because his horns are then straight like
a prick or spit, without knags. A Priest, from the AS. Preost, the Teut.
Priester, the Fr. G. Prestre, or the Ital. Prete, the same; all from the Lat.
Presbyter, or the Gr. (...), an Elder of the Church, or a Senior. To Prime a
Gun, q. d. to put in Primum pulverem, the powder that first takes fire. A
Primmer, from the Fr. G. Primier, the first; q. d. Lat. Primus, the first Book
that Children are to learn. Primrose, that is, Prima Rosa, the first Rose, the
first flower at the coming in of the Spring. A Prince, from the Fr. G. Prince,
or the Ital. Prenze, idem; all from the Lat. Princeps, a Prince. Hence the Fr.
G. Princess, and the Ital. Principessa, a Princess. A Princock: Minsh. draws
it from the Lat. Praecox, early ripe; q. d. a young Man of forward wit. Print,
from the Belg. Printe, a print, or impression; whence Printer, to print; all
from the Lat. Premere, to press. To Prise, from the Belg. Priisen, to value, or
the Fr. G. Priser, to set a price on. A Prise, Who wun the Prise? from the Fr.
G. Prise, Prinse, a taking, or seizing; this from Prendre, to take, or seize. A
Prison, from the Fr. G. Prison, or the Ital. Prigione, id. all from the Lat.
Barb. Prisona, the same. A Privy, from the Fr. G. Prive, idem; q. d. Lat. Locus
Privatus, a private place. Prove, or Tryer, a Chirurgeon's instrument, quo
vulnus probatur, wherewith the depth of a wound is proved, or tried. A Process,
from the Fr. G. Process, or the Ital. Processo, id. q. d. Lat. Processus, the
same. Proctor in the Civil Law, a Contract of the Lat. Procurator, a Proctor,
or Attorney. Profit, from the Fr. G. Profit, or the Ital. Profitto, id. gain;
whence the Fr. G. Profiter, and the Ital. Profittare, to profit, to gain; all
from the Lat. Proficere, to profit, or prevail. A Promoter, from the Fr. G.
Promoteur, he that promoteth, causes, or brings things on. To Prompt, from the
Ital. Prontare, idem; q. d. Lat. Promptum facere, to make one ready in
repeating, or doing any thing. A Prong, from the Belg. Pranghen, to press, or
pinch; for with it we press Hay, squeezing it into less room. Prove, from the
Fr. G. Prouver, the Ital. Provare, or the Lat. Probare, idem; hence the Fr. G.
Preuve, and the Ital. Pruova, a proof, or trial. Write Prove. Prop, from the
Belg. Proppe, or the Teut. Propff, idem; hence Proppen, and Propffen, to prop.
Proper, for Tall; possibly a corruption of the Lat. Procerus, tall. Proud, from
the AS. Prut, idem; hence Pride, pride, swelling; and Prutian, to grow proud.
Provender, from the Belg. Provande, or the Fr. G. Provende, idem; these from
the Fr. G. Pourvoir, the Ital. Provedere, or the Lat. Providere, to provide.
Provost, from the AS. Prafast, the Teut. Provosz, the Fr. G. Prevost, or the
Ital. Provosto, the same; all Contracts of the Lat. Praepositus, one set
before, or over others. Provost Marshal, q. d. Praeposisitus Marescalli, Judge
of the Marshalsea; or, q. d. Praepositus Martialis, an Examiner of crimes
committed against the Martial Law. The Prow of a ship, from the Fr. G. Prove;
this from the Lat. and Gr. Prora, idem. Prowess, from the Fr. G. Prouesse, or
the Ital. Prodezza, id. Proxy, a Deputy; he that pleads, or does business in
the name of another; a Contract of the Belg. Procuratie, a Proctorship, the
office of a Proctor. To Pry into, from the Fr. G. Preuver, to try, or prove.
Publish, from the Fr. G. Publier, or the Ital. and Lat. Publicare, to make
public. To Pucker in sowing a seam, perhaps from the Gr. (...), closely; or
(...), thick. Pudder, To make a Pudder, q. d. To make a Powder, or Dust, as an
Horse that runs at full speed: Or from the Teut. Polderen, to raise a tumult,
beat, make a noise, or knock. Pudding, from the Fr. G. Boudin, idem; both from
the Lat. Barb. Botulus, a blood-pudding; by changing B into P. Puddle, from our
word Pool, by inserting d by an Epenthesis; or from the Lat. Puteolus, a little
well, by contraction. Puff, from the Belg. Poff, a cheek; whence Poffen, to
puff, to blow: All not unlikely from the sound. Puffs, or Earth Puffs, q. d.
puffings, or tumors of earth, which the Italians call Tartuffi, and make of
them a delicate dish. Pug, a soothing word; from the AS. Piga, or the Dan.
Pige, a little Girl. Hensh. draws it from Pug, or Bug, a Devil; as we say in a
coaxing way, My little Devil; and the French, Mon petit Diable, idem. Puissant,
from the Fr. G. Puissant, a Part. of the Verb, Puis, I am able; hence the
Engand Fr. G. Puissance. To Pule, from the Fr. G. Piuler, to cheap as young
Chickens; and both from the sound. Pull, from the AS. Pullan, or the Belg
Pellen, idem. Pullet, from the Fr. G. Poulet, or the Ital. Pouletta, idem; all
from the Lat. Pullus, a Chicken; by adding the Termination et, which
diminishes. A Pulley from our word, To Pull, the Fr. G. Poulie, or the Ital.
Poliga, idem. Pump, from the Fr. G. and Belg. Pomp, the Ital. Pompa, the Hisp.
Bombu, or the Dan. Pumpe, idem. Pumps, shoes having but one sole; perhaps such
as were used Pompaticis ludis, in pompous shows, which we call Balls, and
Masks; or from the sound they make, when leaped in. Punch, from the Ital.
Ponzonare, to bore, or strike in holes; hence Ponzone, a punchion, or piercer;
all from the Lat. Pungere, to prick. A Punctillo, from the Hisp. Puntillo, or
the Fr. G. Pointille; q. d. Lat. Punctillum, a little point. Punk, for a Bawd,
from the AS. Pung, a drawing purse, or satchel; in the same sense almost, that
an old Whore is called in Lat. Scortum, which primarily signifies, the hide of
a beast; q. d. an old Bawd, as dry and wrinkled, with stradling over the fire,
as an Horses hide, dried in the Sun, which, being continued there, draws up
like a purse. Puny, a younger Brother; from the Fr. G. Puis ne, (i. e.) Post
natus, born afterward. Puppet, and Puppy, from the Belg. Puppe, or the Fr. G.
Poupee, idem; also a Puppy, or Whelp, by a Catachresis; all from the Lat.
Pupulus, a little boy. To Purl as a Spring of water, perhaps from the Lat.
Bullire, to bubble; by adding r by Epenthesis. Purlom, to steal away, to deal
treacherously; from the Fr. G. Purloigner, or the Lat. Prolongare, to prolong,
to put off. Purple, from the Fr. G. Pourpre, the Ital. Porpora, the Lat.
Purpura, or the Gr. (...), the same. Purpose, from the Fr. G. Propos; both from
the Lat. Propositum, idem. Purse, from the Fr. G. Bourse, the Ital. Borsa, id.
All from the Gr. (...), a skin. Purscvant, Pursuivant; by a little alteration
of the sense, it may be drawn from the Fr. G. Poursuivant, pursuing, or
following after. To Pursue, from the Fr. G. Poursuivre, to follow after; from
Pour, for, and Suivre, to follow; this from the Ital. Sequire, idem; and this
from the Lat. Sequi, to follow. To Purvey, from the Fr. G. Pourveoir; or the
Lat. Providere, to provide, to foresee; hence the Fr. G. Pourvoyeur, a
Purveyor. To Push, from the Fr. G. Poulser, to force forward, the Ital.
Bussare, to strike, or the Lat. Pulsare, to knock. A Push, a Contraction of the
Lat. Pustula, a pimple, or blister; both from the Gr. (...), to blow up. A
Puss, a sluttish Wench; from the Ital. Puzzolente, stinking, or the Belg.
Paesele, id. says Minshew: Though Kilian draws Poesele, from the Lat. Pulsa,
which he expounds, a fat Girl. To Put: Skinner draws it from the Fr. G. Bouter,
to force in: Minsh. from Poser, to put: But most probably from the Belg.
Botten, to push with the horn; or our word Butt, as, The Ram Butts; (i. e.)
Pa^^ts, or thrusts forward; the word being promisouously used in some parts of
England. To Puzzle, q. d. To Poile, from our word, To Pose with an hard
question: Or from the Fr. G. Pucello, a Maid; or Puceller, to make a Maid of;
that is, to make to blush; Maids being prone thereto. Py, from the Fr. G. Pie,
or the Lat. Pica, a bird so called. Py, as Py-crust: Skinner supposes it to
come from the AS. Bycgan, to build, or fashion. Py-powders, or Pie-powders.
Court, a Court in which chances, or contingent Causes, are decided at
Bartholomew-Fair, without the form of Law; from the Fr. G. Pied, a foot, and
Poudre, powder, or dust; (i. e.) a Court wherein Strangers Causes are heard,
and decided out of hand, before ever the dust or clay is dried on their shoes.
Q.
To QVack like a Duck, from the Belg. Quacken; and both from the sound. A
Quack, or Quacksalver, from the Teut. Quacksalver, a Mountebank, or upstart
Physician; this from the Belg. and Teut. Quack, frivolous, a vain tatler, and
^alb, the AS. Sealf, or the Belg. and Eng. Salve. Quaff, to drink stoutly; q.
d. Go off; or from the AS. Caf, quick; q. d. to tope it off hastily. Quag, or
Quagmire, from our Eng. Q^ake, and Mire; which see. To Quail, from the Belg.
and Fr. Th. Quelen, Quelien, to vex, or afflict; or the AS. Cellan, to slay.
Quaint, from the Fr. G. Coint, neat; this from the Lat. Comptus, spruce, or
Cinctus, (i. e.) in readiness. Quake, from the AS. Cacian, idem, to tremble:
Minshew draws it from Quatio, to shake. Qualm, or Swouning, from the AS. Cealm,
death; whence Cellan, to kill; for swouning is but a shorter sort of death.
Quandary, a Dilemma, or ambiguity; from the Fr G. Qu'ndiray je? What shall I
say? I know not what to say or do. A Quarrel of glass, from the Fr. G. Quareau,
idem; q. d. Lat. Quadrula, a four-squar'd piece of glass. Quarrel, from the Fr.
G. Querelle, idem; whence Quereller, to quarrel, or fall out; these from the
Lat. Querela, a complaint, or Queror, to complain. A Quarry, from the Fr. G.
Quarriere, idem; hence Quarrier, (i. e.) one that digs in a Quarry. A Quarry,
or fat Man, from the Fr. G. un homme Quarre, (i. e.) a squary Man. A Quart, q.
d. Quarta pars, the fourth part of a gallon. To Quarter, from the Ital.
Quartare, to cut, in Quatuor parts, into four parts. Quartermaster, from the
Fr. G. Maistre de Quartiers, or the Ital. Maestro di Quartiere, the Master of
the Quarters; whose office it is, to appoint each Company of Men their
Quarters, or Lodgings. To Quash, a term in Law; from the Lat. Cassare, to make
void. Quash, to squeeze asunder; the Fr. G. Casser, to break, or the Ital.
Scassiare, to squeeze together. Quarter Cosius, as we say concerning those that
bear a private grudge against each other, They are not Cater, or Quater-Costus;
that is, they are not of any of the four chief degrees of Kinship; for there
are seven degrees of Kinship, the first four whereof are chief. Quaver, in
Music, q. Waver; or from the Ital. Quatere, to shake, says Minshew, because
the sound in playing is shook, or, as it were, made to waver. Queen, from the
AS. Cean, or the Dan. Quinde, a Woman, q. d. common Woman; or from the Belg.
Queen, a Whore, or the AS. Cean, a barren Cow. Queen, from the AS. Cen, Cena,
or the old Teut. Quena, a Woman, Wife, or Consort; q. d. a Wife, or Consort,
(...). Or from the Belg. Roniginne, or the Teut. Roenigin, a Queen: V. King.
Fr. Jun. draws it from the Gr. (...), a Woman. To Quell, or Subdue, from the
AS. Cellan, to kill, or the Fr. Th. Quellan, to vex. Quench, from the AS.
Cencan, idem. Quest, from the Fr. G. Queste, or the Ital. Chiesta, an
inquisition; q. d. Lat. Quaesitum, a thing sought. Quich-grass, or Couch-grass,
from the AS. Cice, Dogs grass; perhaps because it refreshes Dogs, when faint:
Or from the Fr. G. Herb Couchante, Grass couchant; because it coucheth and
spreads close by the earth. Quicken, from the AS. Ciccan, or the Belg.
Quicken, idem; hence the AS. Cic, and the Belg. and Eng. Quick, or alive. Hence
also the AS. Cic-fyre, quick-fire, or wildfire. Quicksands, sands so called,
because they tremble and move, as if they had life. Quicksilver, so called,
from its slippery and moveable nature, or virtue. Quiddany, a conserve made
chiefly a Cydoniis, of Quinces. A Quill, from the Teut. Ruehl, a stalk; or from
the old Germ. Rul, round. A Quill of a Barrel, from the Fr. G. Guille, a
spigot, Quilt, q. Welt; it being stitched, or sowed in, in the nature of the
welt of a shoe. Quince, from the Fr. G. Coin, idem; both Contracts of the Lat.
Cydonium, (i. e.) an apple brought from Cydon, a town in Crete. Quinzy, from
the Fr. G. Squinance, the Ital. Squinantia, or the Hisp. Esquinancia, the same;
all from the Gr. (...), to choke, or strangle. Quip, to bite one in words; from
our word Whip; q. d. to whip one with words. Minshew draws it from our word, To
Quicken. Quire, where Mass or Prayers are said or sung; from the Fr. G. Choeur,
the Lat. Chorus, or the Gr. (...), idem. Write Choire. Quire of Paper, from the
Fr. G. Quayer, idem. A Quirk, from the Lat. Circuire, for Circumvenire, to
circumvent with cavils, and captious speeches. To Quit, from the Fr. G.
Quitter, to relinquish, remit, or absolve; hence our Eng. Acquittance, a
writing whereby one is acquitted of a debt. Quite, from the Fr. G. Quitte,
quitted, or free; by a Metaphor drawn from a Debtor, that has paid his debts,
and is quite, or wholly quitted. To Quote, from the Fr. G. Quoter, or the Ital.
Cotare, to cite an Author in defense of ones Opinion. Quoth, from the AS.
Cethan, to say, or Cythan, to relate: Or, as Minshew has it, from the old
Cimbr. Quath, he said. Quoyns, Printers Qnoyns, from the Fr. G. Coing, or the
Lat. Cuneus, a wedge.
R.
RAbbet, from the Belg. Robbeken, idem. Minshew draws it very ingeniously from
the Heb. Rabah, to procreate; for they multiply exceedingly. Rabble, from the
Belg. Rabbelen, to prate: Or from the Lat. Rabula, a brawler; for the vulgar
sort are addicted to talk much. A Race, from the Belg. Rannen, to run, q. d.
Rauce; by striking out n, for better sounds sake. Race, or Lineage, from the
Fr. G. Race, or the Ital. Razza, a stock, or pedigree; both Contracts of the
Lat. Radice, a root. A Race of Ginger, from the Hisp. Rayz de Gengibre, id. A
Rack of Hay, from the Teut. and Belg. Reckon, to reach; for it reaches from
one end of the stable, to the other: Or from the Teut. Ranff, a crib; or a
Contract of our word Cratch, for a manger. Rack, as A Cart-Rack; from the Belg.
Rilck, a track, or trace. Rack, or Torment, from the Belg. Rack, idem; whence
Racken, to rack on a torturing engine: Or from the Teut. Reckon, to reach
forth, to stretch the joints of a Malefactor. Minsh. draws it from the Heb.
Rakak, to rack, or grind in pieces. Rack of Mutton, from the AS. Hracca, the
hind part of the head, or the Gr. (...), the backbone. Rack, or Kitchin-Rack
to lay the spit upon; from the similitude of the backbone, which is also
called, The Rack. A Racket, from the Fr. G. Raquette, or the Ital. Rachetta,
idem; both from the Lat. Reticulum, a little net. Radish, from the AS. Raedic,
the Fr. G. Radis, or the Teut. Rettig, idem; q. d. Lat. Radix, a root, by an
Antonomasia. Raffle, a Play at Dice; from the Fr. G. Raffler, to snap up.
Rafter, from the AS. Raefter, or the Belg. Rafter, idem. Rag, from the AS.
Hracode, ragged, or the C. Br. Rawyg, a rupture: Or, perhaps from the Gr.
(...), an old torn garment. Rage, from the Fr. G. Rage, the Ital. Rabbia, or
the Lat. Rabies, idem. Rail of wood, from the Teut. Riegel, idem. A Woman's
Rail, from the AS. Raegl, idem. Minsh. draws it from the Heb. Realah; an
ornament for Women, made of fine linen. To Rail, or revile in words; from the
Belg. Rallen, id. the Fr. G. Railler, to mock. to deride, or the Dan. Rayler,
to skream out like a clucking Hen. Raiment, q. d. Arrayment. V. Array. Rain,
from the AS. Ren, the Fr. Th. Regan, or the Dan. and Teut. Regn, id. hence the
AS. Regan, the Belg. Reghenen, and the Teut. Regnen, to rain: All perhaps from
the Gr. (...), to besprinkle, or (...), a drop. Raius of a Bridle, from the Fr.
G. Resne, or the Ital. Retine, id. a Retinendo, from staying, or holding back.
Write Reins. A Raisin, from the Fr. G. Raisin, idem; or from the Lat. Racemus,
a bunch of Grapes. A Rake, from the AS. Race, the Belg. Raecke, or the Teut.
Rachen, idem; whence Raeckelen, and Rechen, to rake. Rake-hell, from Rake, and
Hell; as we say proverbially, Rake Hell, and Skin the Devil, and you will never
meet with such a fellow: Or from the Fr. G. Racaille, the dregs of the people.
Ralliery, from the Fr. G. Railliere, jesting waggery; whence Railler, to play
the wag; q. d. Lat. Ridiculari, to ridicule, to make ridiculous. To Rally, from
the Fr. G. Rallier, to put disordered ranks into order again; q. d. Lat.
Realligare, to bind up together again. Ram, from the AS. and Belg. Ram, or the
Teut. Ramin, id. Fr. Jun. draws it from the Gr. (...), strength. To Ram, or
knock in; perhaps from the AS. Hremman, to disturb, to trouble; or the Fr. G.
Remouer, to remove: Or from the Teut. Rammeln, to make a noise by tossing any
thing; and from hence, A Rammer, to pave withal; Skinner. To Ramble, from the
Belg Rammelen, Remmelen, to go a gossipping from house to house; or from the
Lat. Reambulo, to walk to and again; or from the Gr. (...), to go round, or
(...), to go astray, to range up and down. Rammish, stinking as a Goat, or
casting a strong smell, like that of a Ram in Riding-time. Ramp, Rampant, a
term in Heraldry; from the Fr. G. Rampant, climbing up; whence Ramper, and the
Ital. Rampare, to climb up. Rampire, from the Fr. G. Rampar, a fence. Rancour,
from the Fr. G. Rancoeur, or the Ital. Rancore, inveterate hatred; from Re
again, En, in, and Coeur, the heart; because it is deeply rooted in the heart.
A Rand, from the Belg. and Teut. Rand, a seam, or list. At Random, from the
Ital. a Randello, rashly, without any deliberation: Or rather, from the Fr. G.
Rendon, an uncertainty. To Range up and down, from the Belg. Rannen, to run, or
Ranghen to wag, as a Spaniel does his tail, in seeking the prey. To Range Meal,
to sift; from the Belg. Ranghen, to shake. Rank Corn, from the AS. Ranc, proud.
It is meant of a field that brings forth more corn than it can support to
maturity, by reason of its weakness. A Rank, from the Belg. Rank, or the Fr.
G. Rang, a degree. This Menagius draws from the Teut. and Eng. Ring. Rank, from
the Lat. Rancidus, stinking. A Rank Rogue, or profligate Knave; either from the
Teut. Rank, policy, craft, or guile; or from the other Rank, for rammish, or
stinking; that is to say, One so bad, that one cannot choose smelling him out by
his words and actions. Rankle, to begin to be ulcerous; from the Lat Ranceo, to
stink; for Rankling presently turns to rottenness and corruption. To Ransack,
or Spoil; from the Negative Re in, and Saccus a sack; that is, to rob sacks, to
shake out what is therein. Ransom, from the Fr. G. Rancon; which Menagius
derives a Redemptione, by a Systole. To Raut, from the Belg. Randen, or
Randten, to act like a Madman, to play the fool. Rap, from the AS. Hreppan, to
touch; a word feigned from the sound, by an Anomatopoeia. Rap and Rend, What he
can Rap and Rend; from the AS. Reafian, or the Lat. Rapere, to snatch, and
Rend; which see in its place. A Rape, a violent ravishing a Woman; from the
Lat. Rapere, to ravish. Rape- Apples, so called, from the similitude of a Rape,
or Turnep. A Rapier, from the Fr. G. Rapiere, a long, narrow sword; both, not
unlikely, a Rapiendo vitam, from taking away life. Rasberry, or Respis: Minshew
draws it from the Gr. (...), a shrub, or (...), shrubs, and Berry; which see.
Rascal, from the AS. Rascal, an hairy beast; this from the Teut. Rahn, lean,
and Chael, a shell, or bark: Or from the Fr. G Racaille, the off scouring of
the people. To Raze, from the Fr. G. Raser, Razer, to level with the ground, or
Rayer, to blot out; all from the Lat. Radere, to scrape. Rash, from the Belg.
Rasch, swift, or the Teut. Rasen, to be mad. Mer. Cas. draws it from the Gr.
(...), abruptly: Camden, from (...), bold, adventurous. A Rasher of Bacon, q.
d. Rasura Lardi, a shaving of Bacon, or slice broiled on the coals. Rasour,
from the Fr. G. Rasoir, or the Ital. Rasciere, idem; all a Radendo, from
shaving. To Rasp, from the Teut. Raspen, the Ital. Raspare, or the Fr G.
Rasper, to file, or shave into powder; these from the Ital. Raspa, or the Fr.
G. Raspe, a file; all from the Lat. Rado, to scrape, or shave. Rat, from the
Belg. Ratte, Rotte, the Fr. G. Rat, Raton, the Hisp. Ratta, the Teut. Rat,
Ratz, or the Dan. Ratte, idem. To Rate, and Rattle, for To chide one; from the
AS. Rae'the, full of wrath, or the Lat. Iratus, angry. Mer. Cas. draws it from
the Gr. (...), to rail at. To Rate, or Prize, from the Lat. pro Rata, sc.
Portione, estimare, to value according to a portion of the same bigness sold
before. Rath- fruit, for Early fruit, that is ripe in the beginning of Summer;
from the AS. Rath, Rathe, or the Belg. Rade, Raede, soon: All Contracts of the
Lat. Rapidus, swift. V. Rath, following. Rath- wine, wine made of grapes
gathered before full maturity. See the other Rath. Rather, from the AS. Rathor,
idem, or sooner; this from Rathe, soon. Rattle, I Rattl'd him; from the Teut.
Ratteln, to trouble, or vex. To Rattle, from the AS. Wreotan, or the Belg.
Ratelen, idem. To Ravage, from the Fr. G. Ravager, to rob, to ransack; both
from the Lat. Rapere, to take away forcibly. To Rave, from the Fr. G. Ravasser,
or the Belg. Reven, id. both from the Lat. Rabies, madness. A Ravelin, from the
Fr. G. Raveln, or the Ital. Ravellino, idem. To Ravel, from the Belg. Ravelen,
to tangle: Hence To Vnravel, to dis-entangle, to free from knots, to expound
dark or mystical expressions. Raven, from the AS. Hraefn, Raefen, the Dan.
Raffn, or the Belg. Rave, id. all from the AS. Reafian, to snatch away; so
called, propter Rapacitatem, for its rapacity, says Somnerus. Ravenous, or
Greedy; from the word Raven; q. d. he that plays the Raven; for a Raven is
reckoned one of the chief of the birds of prey. To Ravish, or deflour a Maid
against her will; from the Fr. G. Ravir, to take away by force; both from the
Lat. Rapere, id. Raw, from the AS. Hrea, the Belg. Rauw, Rouw, or the Teut.
Roh. idem. Raw-boned, very lean and rough; q. Rough boned, says Hensh. A Ray
of the Sun, from the Fr G. Ray, idem; and both Contracts of the Lat. Radius,
the same Ray- fish, from the Ital. and Lat. Barb. Raia, a Thornback; so called,
a Radio Osseo, from the bony strike it has on its back. Reach, from the AS.
Raecan, to overtake; the Teut. Reckon, to reach forth; the Belg. Reichen, to
reach, to touch, or the Ital. Recare, to catch hold of. To Reach in vomiting,
from the Ital. Recere, the Belg. Brechen, or the Teut. Braecken. to vomit: Or
the same with the other Reach above. To Read, from the AS. Raedan, id the Belg.
and Teut. Reden, to speak, or the Fr. Th. Raden, to persuade. To Read; as we
say, I can Read in a Man's face, what he is; from the AS. Araedan, or the Belg.
Raeden, to guess, or divine. Ready, from the AS. Geredian, the Belg. Reeden, or
the Teut. Bereyten, to make ready: Or from the AS. Hrade, ready, or quick.
Reaks, He played Reaks: Some derive it from the Lat. Rex, a King; that is, He
played Rex; as if he had absolute power to do what he would: Others, from the
AS. Rice, a Kingdom, or Dominion. Realm, from the Fr. G. Royaume, or the Ital.
Reame, idem. Ream of Paper, from the Belg. Rfem Papfers, or the Fr. G. Rame,
idem. Reap, from the AS. Rippan, id. whence Rifter, a reaper; or from the Belg.
Ruepen, Ruppen, to crop. To Rear, from the AS. Hreran, id. whence Arehr,
raised. Reason, from the Fr. G. Raison, or the Ital. Ragione, idem; both from
the Lat. Ratio, the same: From hence the Fr. G. Raisonner, to reason, and
Raisonable, reasonable, agreeable to reason. To Rebate, from the Fr. G.
Rabbattre, or the Ital. Ribattere, to discount. V. Abate. Rebatement, a term in
Heraldry; from Rebate; for it is a note, or character of infamy upon a Coat of
Arms, and an abatement of honor. A R b^ck, from the Fr. G. Rebec, or the Ital
Ribecca, id. a sort of musical instrument. To Rebound, from the Fr. G.
Rebondir, id. to leap again, like a ball; or, with a little variation of the
sense, from the Ital. Ribombare, to re-sound, or make an echo; this from the
Prefix Re, again, and the Gr. (...), to bumble, or humble like Bees. To Rebuke,
from the Fr. G. Reboucher, to stop ones mouth; or the Ital. Ribuffare,
Rimboccare, to reprove, or upbraid; these from Re, again, and the Fr. G.
Boucher, or the Ital. Bocca, a mouth. To Receive, from the Fr. G. Recevoir, or
the Ital. Ricevere; which come from the Lat. Recipere, id. Hence our word a
Receipt for a Medicine, or other thing, because it is to be received by the
Patient. Recheat, a term in Hunting, when the Hunts-man calls back the Dogs,
that they should not pursue a counter-scent; from the Fr. G. Rachet, a
redeeming, or Racheter, to redeem. Reckon, from the AS. Reccan, the Belg.
Reckenen, or the Teut. Rechnen, idem; hence the Belg. Reckeninghe, and the Teut
Rechn^ng, a reckoning, or computation. Reclaim, or re-call from evil courses;
from the Ital. Richiamare, to re call; or from Re, again; and the Lat. Clamare,
to call. Recoil, from the Fr. G. Reculer, or the Ital. Riculare, to retreat, or
go backward, as a ball rebounding. Recorder, a musical instrument, a
Recordando, from calling to mind; because the great exploits of renowned Men,
remaining upon record, were celebrated upon it. Records, from the Fr. G.
Records, or the Ital. Ricordi, registers, or monuments; all from the Lat.
Recordari, to remember: Hence a Recorder, one of the Lord Mayor's Council, that
has the charge of registring things worthy of remark, and to be left upon
record. To Recover, from the Fr. G. Recouvrir, Recouvrer, or the Ital.
Ricoverare, id. all from the Lat. Recuperare, the same. To Recount, from the
Fr. G. Raconter, or the Ital. Racontare, to count again. V. To Count. Recourse,
from the Fr. G. Recours; or, q. d. Lat. Recursus, a running back again, a place
to run back into. Recreant, an Infidel; q. d. Lat. Recredens, unbelieving; from
the Neg. Re, and Credo, to believe. V. Miscreant. To Recruit, from the Fr. G.
Recrue, a supply of Men; this from Recroistre, to increase again. Red, from the
AS. Red, Read, the Belg. Rood, the Dan. Rod, the Teut. Roth, the Fr. G. Rouge,
or the Ital. Rosso, the same. To Re-double, from the Fr. G. Redoubler, or the
Lat. Reduplicare, the same. V. Double. To Redoubt, from the Fr. G. Redoubter,
or the Lat. Redubitare, to doubt much; for Re does here increase. To Redress,
from the Fr. G. Redresser, or the Ital. Rindrizzare, idem; q. d. Lat.
Redirigere, to direct again, to bring to a better frame. A Red-shank, a bird so
called, from the red, bloody color of its shanks and feet. V. Red, and Shank.
A Red-start, from our word Red, and the AS. and Belg. Stert, a tail; q. d
Red-ta^l. A Reed, from the AS. Hreed, Red, the Teut. Ried, or the Belg. R et,
idem. A Reek of Hay, from the AS. Hreac, idem. To Reek, for Smoke, from the AS.
Recan, or the Teut. Rauchen, idem: Hence the AS. Rec, the Belg. Reuck, and the
Teut. Rauch, smoke. A Reel, from the AS. Reol, id. this from the Belg. Rollen,
to roll. To Reel, or stagger; See the other Reel, and To Roll. To Refine, from
the Fr. G. Raffiner, or the Ital. Raffinare, to purify. V. Fine. Reformado,
from the Ital. Riformare, the Hisp. Reformar, or the Lat. Barb. Reformare, to
reform. To Refrain, from the Fr. G. se Refraindre, idem; this from the Lat.
Refringere, to break off; or from the Ital. Raffrenare, to abstain. To Refresh,
from the Fr. G. Refreschir, or the Ital. Rifescare, idem. V. Fresh. To Refuse,
from the Fr. G. Refuser, or the Ital. Rifusare, id. Hence the Refuse of things,
or off-scourings; (i. e.) things not worth acceptance. To Regard, from the Fr.
G. Regarder, or the Ital. Riguardare, to mind, to look upon. v. Guard. A
Regiment, from the Fr G. Regiment, or the Ital. Regimento, idem; these from the
Lat. Regimentum, the same; and this from Rego, to rule. A Register, from the
Fr. G. Registre, the Ital. Registero, or the Lat. Barb Registrum, a register of
things for memory's sake. Regret, from the Fr. G. Regret, or the Ital.
Regretto, inward sorrow, grief; this from the Negative Re, and Gratum,
acceptable; or the Fr. G. Regrater, to grate again; (i. e.) that which grates
and wounds the mind again and again. Rehearse, to repeat; from Re, again, and
Hear; that is to say, to exhibit, or present to the hearing the second time. To
Reign, from the Fr. G. Regner, or the Lat. Regnare, the same. Reimburse, from
the Fr. G. Reinbourser, or the Ital. Rimborsare, id. all from the Prefix Re in,
and the Fr G. Bourse, or the Ital. Borsa, a purse. Reins, from the Fr. G.
Reins, or the Lat. Renes, id. which last Voss. draws from the Gr. (...), to
flow, or run. To Reinforce, from the Fr. G. Renforcer, or the Ital.
Rinforciare, id. to give force and courage, to supply an Army with new forces.
V. Force. To Rejoice, from the Fr. G. Resjouir, to be glad; this from the
increasing Prefix Re, and Gaudere, to be glad; that is, to be very joyful, to
joy again. To Relate, from the Ital. Relatare, idem. To Release, from the Fr.
G. Relaisser, or the Ital. Rilasciare, to leave again: Or rather from the Fr.
G. Relascher, to let loose, or set at liberty. To Relent, from the Fr. G.
Ralentir, or the Ital Rallentare, to grow soft or limber, to begin to melt:
Metaphorically, to repent of a thing. To Relieve, from the Fr. G. Relever,
idem; q. d. Lat. Relevare, to lift up again: Hence the Ital. Rilievo, and the
Fr. G. and Eng. Relief, for aid, or succor. To Relish, from the Fr. G.
Relecher, to lick again; this from Re, again, and Lecher, to lick; it being
usual to lick the lips again and again after any thing that relisheth well. To
Rely, or put confidence in, from the augmentative Prefix Re, and Ly, q. d. to
lie, lean, or depend solely upon. To Remain, from the old Fr. G. Remaindre,
idem; this from the Lat. Remanere, to abide; from hence, A Remnant, and
Remainder. Remarkable, Remark, from the Fr. G. Remarquable, or the Ital.
Remarcabile, worthy of remark; these from the Fr. G. Remarquer, or the Ital
Remarcare, to remark, or take special notice of; q. d to mark again. To
Remember, from the Fr. G. Remembrer, or the Ital. Remembrare, idem; q. d. In
memoriam Revocare, to call to mind, to bear in memory: Hence also the Fr. G.
and our word Remembrance. To Remove, from the Fr. G. Remouvoir, the Ital.
Rimuovere, or the Lat. Removere, the same. Remorse of Conscience, from the Fr.
G. Remors de Conscience, the Ital Remorso di Conscienza or the Hisp Remorso de
Consciencia; these from the Fr. G. Remordre, the Ital Rimordere, and the Hisp.
and Lat. Remordere, to gnaw, or bite hard; for Re is here augmentative. Renard,
for a Fox; from the Fr. G. Renard, a Fox; this a Renibus, from his hot Reins,
from which his rammish smell arises. Hensh. draws it from Reinard, a Man's
name; which see in the Proper Names. To Render, from the Fr G Render, or the
Ital. Rendere, id. both from the Lat. Reddere, to give, or restore; by an
Epenthesis (...) n. Rendevouz, from the Fr. G Rendezvous; that is to say, the
place where every Soldier must render himself, or appear. Renew, from the
augment. Prefix Re, and New; which see. Rennet, on Runnet, to make Cheese with;
from the Belg. Rennen, Runnen, or the Teut. R^nnen, to curdle: Or from the Belg
Runnen, or the Teut. Rennen, to run; for the thin, or wheyie parts run
together, and separate themselves from the thick, or cheesy. The Rennet-apple,
from the Fr G. Pomme Renette, id. a kind of Pepin so called, from Renes, or
Rennes, a town in Gallia Celtica. Renounce, from the Fr. G. Renoncer, or the
Ital. Rinonciare, to forsake; all from the Lat. Renunciare, to forbid ones self
any vice. Renown, from the Fr. G. Renom, or the Ital. Renommee, fame, or
esteem; q. d. Lat. Renomen, an after-name, or good repute acquired by
excellency in any thing. Rent, or Rend, from the AS. Hrendan, idem. Rent, from
the Fr. G. Rent, or the Ital. Rendita, a revenue; both from the Lat. Reditus,
a rent, or return; to wit, so much money as returns to the Owner, from lands or
houses, in a year. Repair, from the Fr. G. Repairer; or q.d. Lat. Reparare, to
make ready again, (i e) mend. Repast, from the Fr. G Repas; q. d Lat. Repastus,
a plentiful feeding, or feeding again. To Repeal, or take off a Law; from the
Fr. G. Rapeler, Rappeler, to revoke; q. d. Lat. Reappellare, to call back.
Repine, or to Envy, from the augmentative Prefix Re, and Pine, or Pain; that
is, to be in great pain or uneasiness at another's prosperity. Replenish, from
Re, again, and Plenus, full; (i. e.) to fill again. To Reply, from the Fr. G.
Repliquer, or the Ital. and Lat. Replicare, idem. To Report, from the Fr. G
Rapporter, idem; q. d. Lat. Reportare, to bring back what others say. To
Repose, from the Fr. G. se Reposer, or the Ital. Riposarsi, idem. Reprisals,
from the Fr. G. Reprisailles, the Ital. Ripresaglia, or the Lat. Barb.
Represalia, Letters of Reprisal to keep the Subject harmless, if accosted by a
Subject of any confederate Prince; at Sea chiefly. To Reproach, from the Fr. G.
Reprocher, or the Ital. Riprocciare, id. to slander: These from the Explet
Prefix Re, and the Fr. G. Proche, near; q. d. to revile one face to face; as we
say, To put it home, by a Metaphor drawn from Swordplayers. To Reprove, from
the Fr. G. Reprouver, or the Ital. Riprovare, id. q. d. Lat. Reprobare, to
prove against one, or not to approve of. Request, from the Fr. G Request, or
the Ital. Richiesta, a demand. Requite, with us, To Recompense; from the Fr. G.
Requiter, id. Rereward, or Rere-Guard, by contraction Rear; from the Fr. G.
Arrieregarde, or the Ital. Retroguardia; (i. e.) the back-guard. To Rescue,
from the Fr. G. Rescourre, or the Ital. Riscuotere, idem. To Resemble, from the
Fr. G. Ressembler, id to be like another. To Resent, from the Fr. G. se
Ressentir, or the Ital. Risentire, id. These from the Augmentative Re, and
Sentio, to perceive. To Resolve, from the Fr. G. se Resouldre, or the Ital.
Risolvere, idem; all from the Lat. Resolvere, to unty. To Resound, from the Fr.
G. Resonder, the Ital. Risuonare, or the Lat. Resonare, to sound again, to
echo. Respit, from the Fr. G. Respit, id. both from the Lat. Respectus, a
looking back; it signifying a time allowed to review and consider of what is
past. The Rest, or Remainder, from the Fr. G. Rest, or the Ital. Resto, the
same. The Rest of a Lance or Musket, from the Fr. G. Arrester, to stay, or
stop. V. Arrest. Rest from labor, from the AS. Rest, the Belg. Raste, or the
Teut. Rust, the same: Whence the AS. Restan, the Belg. Rasten, and the Teut.
Rusten, to be at rest; all probably from the Lat. Restare, to remain. Restore,
from the Ital, Ristorare, the same; and both from the Lat. Restaurare, to
repair, or make good again. To Restrain, from the Fr. G. Restraindre, to keep
in; from hence also Restraint. Resty, from the Fr. G. Restif, or the Ital.
Restivo, id. stubborn; this a Restitando, from stopping often in the way. Resty
Bacon, q. d. Rusty Bacon. v. Rust. To Retail, from the Fr. G. Retailler, or the
Ital. Ritagliare, idem. To Retain, from the Fr. G. Retenir, or the Lat.
Retinere, to keep in memory. To Retch, from the Belg. and Teut. Reckon, to
extend; or the AS. Hraecan, idem: Or from our word Reach; which see. A Retinue,
or Train, from the Fr. G. Retenir, or the Lat. Retinere, to retain; also to
maintain. To Retire, from the Fr. G. Retirer, or the Ital. Ritirare, to return,
or retreat; these from Re, back, again, and the Fr. G. Tirer, or the Ital.
Tirare, to draw. A Retreat, from the Fr. G. Retraicte, or the Ital. Ritretta,
id. a drawing back of an army; all from the Lat. Retrahere, to draw back. To
Retrench, from the Fr. G. Retrencher, or the Ital. Ritrinciare, to lop off:
These from Re, again, and the Fr. G. Trencher, to cut. To Return, from the Fr.
G. Retourner, or the Ital. Ritornare, the same. To Revel all night long, from
the Fr. G. Reveiller, or the Ital. Rifvegliare, idem, to wake much; these from
Re, again, and the Lat. Vigilare, to be vigilant, or watchful; (i. e.) to be
doubly watchful. To Revenge, from the Fr. G. Revenger, the Hisp. Vengar, or the
Lat. Vindicare, to take vengeance. Revenue, from the Fr. G. Revenue, idem. V.
Rent. To Review, from the Fr. G. Reveoir, or the Ital. Rivedere, id. q. d. Lat.
Revidere, to see, or look on the second time: From hence, A Review. To Revile,
from the augmentative Re, and the Lat. Vilis, vile, or base; for it signifies,
to play upon one, as if he were good for nothing. To Revive, from the Fr. G.
Reviver, or the Ital. Ravivare, to make alive again; this from Re, again, and
the Lat. Vivus, alive, or living. To Revolt, from the Fr. G. Revolter, or the
Ital. Rivoltare, to go over to the Enemy; this from Re, again, and the Ital.
Voltare, to turn. Reward, from Re, again, and Award: Or from the AS. Weard,
toward; to do one good turn for another. V. Award. Rheubarb, from the Fr. G.
Reubarbe, or the Hisp. Ruibarbo, a root so called. A Real, from the Hisp.
Reale, (i. e.) a royal Coin. Rib, from the AS. and Belg. Ribbe, or the Teut.
Rippe, the same. A Ribald, from the Fr. G. Ribauld, or the Ital. Ribaldo, a
Whoremonger; this from Re, the Intensive Part. and the Fr. G. Baud, Bauld, or
the Ital. Baldo, bold; as we say, a bold, impudent fellow. Riband, q. d.
Re-bind, from Re, again, and Bend, or Bind; which see. Ribble Rabble, from the
Belg. Rabbelen, to speak confusedly. V. Rabble. Rice, from the Belg. Riis, the
Fr. G. Ris, or the Teut. Reisz, idem; and all from the Lat. and Gr. Oryza,
idem; a sort of grain so called. Rich, from the Belg. Riick, the Teut. Reich,
the Fr. G. Rich, or the AS. Ryc, the same; from hence the Fr. G. Richesse, the
Ital. Richezza, and our word Riches. Rid, from the AS. Hreddan, to make free
of; or the Run. Dan. Eg Ryd, I rid; (i. e.) I unload a ship, etc. A Riddle, a
sort of sieve; from the AS. Hriddel, the same. Riddle or Problem, from the
Belg Raedsel, the same; and this from the Belg. Raeden, or the AS. Araedan, to
interpret. V. Read. Or q. d. Readle. To Ride, from the AS. Ridan, the Teut.
Reitten, or the Belg. Riiden, the same. A Ridge, from the Belg. Rugghe, the
Dan. Ryg, or the AS. Hrige, the same. Rife, from the AS. Ryfe, (i. e.) that
which spreads much, as contagious diseases do. Riffraff, perhaps from the
Belg. Rifken Rafken; whereby they signify any confused disorder. To Ritte,
from the Belg. Riiffelen, to pilfer; or the Fr. G. Rifler, idem: all, not
unlikely, from the Lat. Rapere, to take away in haste. A Rift, v. River. To Rig
a Ship, from the AS. Rihtan, to mend; q. d. to right a ship. Right, from the
Belg. and Teut. Recht, the Ital. Ritto, or the AS. Riht; and all from the Lat.
Rectus, the same. Rim, from the AS. Rima, a brim. The inner Rim of the belly,
from the AS. Rind, q. d. the inner rind of the belly. Rhyme, from the AS. and
Fr. G. Rhyme, or the Ital. Rima; all from the Lat. Rythmus; this from the Gr.
(...), idem, Meter. Rime-Frost, from the AS. Hrime, or the Belg. Ri^m, the
same; all corruptions of the Lat. Pruina, hoar-frost. Rind, from the AS. Rind,
or the Teut. and Fr. Th. Rind, idem. To Ring, from the AS. Ringan, Hringan,
idem; both possibly from the sound. A Ring, from the AS. Hring, the Belg.
Ringhe, or the Teut. Ring, the same. The Devil's Gold Ring, a worm so called,
because it is of the color of gold, of a round form, and very destructive to
Vines: Higginius. To Rinse, from the Fr. G. Rinser, Reinser, id. or from the
AS. Belg. and Teut. Rein, clean; the end of rinsing being to make clean. A
Riot, from the Fr. G. Riote, of the Ital. Riotto, idem, a disturbance. To Rip
from the AS. Ryppan, to undo that which is sowed. Ripe, from the AS. Ripe, the
Teut. Reiff, or the Belg. Ri^p, idem; all not unlikely from the AS Rippan, to
reap; (i. e.) fit to be reaped. Mer. Cas. draws it from the Gr. (...), to
creep; for ripe corn leans toward the ground. To Rise, from the Belg. Rissen,
or the AS. Arisan, to arise; in another sense from the Dan. Reisen, to rise,
(i. e.) swell. Risgo, or Risk, a term among Sailers; from the Fr. G. Risque,
the Ital. Rischio, or the Hisp. Riesgo, danger. To Rive, from the AS. Ryftan,
to slit or cleave, or the Dan R ffver, to tear asunder. A Rival, from the Lat.
Rivalis, idem. A R ver, from the Fr. G. Riviere, or the Ital. Riviera, the
same; all from the Lat. Rivus, idem. To Rivet, from the Fr. G. River, to drive
a nail in surely. Rix Doller, a Dutch Coin, from the Belg. Reich, a kingdom,
and Doller; which see. The Roan, or Roes of a fish, from the Dan. Raun, or the
Teut. Rogen, the same; all perhaps from the Lat. Renes, the reins or kidneys.
Roan- color, from the Fr. G. Roiian, Roan, or the Ital. Roano, Rouano, idem.
To Roar, from the AS. Raran, idem; and both from the sound. To Reb, from the
Ital. Rubbare, or the Fr. G. Robber, idem; Or from the AS. Reafian, to spoil;
this from the Lat. Rapere, to take violently. A Robe, from the Fr G. Rob, or
from the AS. Ref, Reaf, a vestment. A Roche, from the AS. Hreoce, or the Fr. G.
Rosse, idem: Or it is so called, a Ruben color, because of its reddish color.
A Rochet, or Rocket, a sort of cloak; from the Fr. G. Rochet, idem; and both
from the AS. Rocc, or the Teut. and Belg. Rock, a coat; q. d. a little coat. A
Rock, from the Fr. G. Roe, or the Ital. Rocca, the same; and all from the Gr.
(...), a ragged clift. To Rock a child, from the Fr. G. Rocquer un Enfant,
idem; and this perhaps from the Teut. Rucken, to move to and fro. Rockets, or
Rochets, from the Ital. Rocchelli, Rocchetti, or the Teut. Ragetten, squibs to
cast into the air: Or from the Lat. Rogus, a fire, and et a Termination
diminutive. Rod, a measure of sixteen feet, and an half; from the Belg. Roede,
idem; this from the Lat. Radius, a Geometrician's staff. A Rod to correct
Offenders: Minshew draws it from the Gr. (...), idem; and this from (...), to
scourge. The Rode, from our word, To Ride, the Belg. Reed, or the the Fr. G.
Rade, idem. A Roe, from the AS. Rha, or Rah deor, the Belg. Reebeck, or the
Teut. Rehe-bock, a Roe-buck. Rogue, from the Fr. G. Rogue, bold: Or from the
AS. Roagh, to curse, to hate. A Romance, from the Fr. G. Roman, or the Ital.
Romanzo, a pamphlet having nothing real or true in it; primarily so called from
the Romans, who were famous for such kind of stories. A Rood of Land, V. Rod,
for a Geometrician's staff. Roof, from the AS. Hrof, idem; hence The Roof of
the mouth. Rook, from the AS. Hroc, or the Belg Roeck, a Crow that wastes the
corn; all perhaps from the Lat. Raucus, hoarse. From hence, A Rook at Chess,
and To Rook, to cheat in gaming; q. d. to play the Rook, or act thievishly.
Room, from the AS. Rum, the Belg. Ruym, or the Teut. Raum, idem. Roost. from
the AS. Hrost, the same; or the Belg. Roesten, to sleep as birds do; this
perhaps from the Belg. Rusten, to rest. Root, from the Dan. Roed, the same, the
Teut. Kraut, or the Fr. Th. Crut, a pot-herb. To Root, from the AS. Wrotan, to
cast up with the snout like a Sow; or from the Belg. Roeden, Roden, to pluck up
by the root. A Rope, from the AS. Rape, the Dan. Reeb, or the Belg. Roop, the
same. Fr. Jun. draws it from the Gr. (...), small twigs; others from (...), a
turning, or twisting about. Ropy Wine, or other Liquors, from our word Rope, it
being tough liquor, that hangs down in ropes from the spoon. Rosemary, from the
Fr. G. Roumarin, the Ital. Romarino, or the Lat. Barb Rosmarinus, (i. e.) dew
of the Sea. Rosin, from the Fr. G. Resine, or the Lat. Resina, id. this from
the Gr. (...), to run out; for it is a clammy juice, running out of trees, like
gum. To Roast, from the Teut. Rosten, the Fr. G. Rostir, or the Ital. Rostire,
the same. To Roi, from the AS. Rotan, or the Belg. Rotten, idem. To Rottle, or
Ruttle, from the Teut. Rotheln, or the Fr. G. Raller, to draw breath unevenly,
as dying people do. To Rove, from the Dan. Roffver, to rob; or the Fr. G.
Roder, to ransack. Where have you been Roving, v. Robbing. Rough, from the AS.
Ruh, Hruh, the Belg. Rouw, the Teut. Rauch, the Ital. Ruffo, or the Fr. G.
Roide, idem; all from the Lat. Rudis, without form. Rounceval Pease, a great,
sweet kind of Pease, so called from Ronceval, a place in the Confines of Spain,
at the foot of the Pyrenean Mountains, famous for the increase thereof. Round,
from the Fr. G. Rond, or the Teut. Rundt; all from the Lat. Rotundus, idem;
this from Rota, a wheel: Hence the Fr. G. La Ronde, or the Ital. La Ronda, the
rounds, or circuits of the watch. To Round one in the ear, or rather Rown, as
Chaucer has it; from the AS. Ruman, to whisper; whence Run, Rune, a secret.
Roundelay, from the Fr. G. Rondeau, idem: Or, from the old word Lay, a song,
and Round; because it is sung in a round, or, as we say, in parts. To Rouse, or
Rowse, v. Raise. A Rousing Lie, from the other Rouse; q. d. a lie so notorious
and loud, that it would even rouse one out of sleep. To Rout an Army, from the
Fr. G. Route, or the Ital. Rotta, a dissipation, or vanquishing of an Enemy. To
Row, from the AS. Roan, Rean, the Belg. Roeden, Roeyen, or the Teut. Ruyen, the
same. A Row, from the Teut. Reih, Reihe, a rank; this perhaps from the Lat.
Regula, a rule. A Rowel of a Spur, from the Fr. G. Rouelle, idem; both from the
Lat. Rota, a wheel; for you may turn it as a wheel. A Roll, or rather Roll,
from the Belg. Roll, the Teut. Roll, the Fr. G. Roll, Roll, or the Ital.
Rollo, a schedule, or catalogue; these from the Belg. and Teut. Rollen, the Fr.
G. Rouler, or the Ital. Rovigliare, to roll up. Royal, from the Fr. G. Royal,
the same; this from Roy, a King; from hence, A Royalist, for a loyal Subject.
To Rub, from the Teut. Reiben, the same: Or from the Gr. (...), to wipe, or
make clean. A Ruby, from the Hisp. Rubi, the Fr. G. Rubis, or the Ital. Rubino,
idem; all a Rubeo color, from its red color. Rudder, from the AS. Rother, or
the Belg. Roider, the Rudder of a Ship; Or, q. d. the Righter, from the AS.
Rihtan, to direct. Ruddy, from the AS. Rudu, Redness. See Red. Rude, from the
Fr. G. Ital. and Hisp. Rude; or the Lat. Rudis, without form; or rather, from
the AS. Rethe, ungovernable; also unpolished. Rudge Washed, Kersey made of wool
washed only on the sheeps back, from the Teut. Ruck, or Belg Rugghe, the
Ridge-bone, or the Back it self. Rue, from the F. G. Rue; this from the Lat.
Ruta, id. the Gr. (...), idem. Write Rhuc. To Rue, from the AS. Reopian, the
Belg. Rouen, or the Teut. Rewen, to repent; perhaps from the Gr. (...), to
condole. A Ruff, to wear about the neck, from the Belg. Ruyffel, a Ruffle; or
Ruyffelen, to rumple, or wrinkle. A Ruffian, from the Fr. G. Ruffien, the Hisp.
Rufian, or the It. Ruffiano, a Pimp. A Rug, from our word Rough. A Rule, from
the Lat. Regula, the same. Rumble, from the Belg. Rommelen, the Teut. Rummeln;
or the It. Rombolare, the same; and all from the sound. To Ruminage, or Rume
Goods in a Ship; from the Teut. Raumen, to make room. Hence Raum, Room. Rump,
from the Teut. Rumpff; or the Dan. Rumpe, the same. To Rumple, from the Belg.
Rompelen, id. or from Rompel, AS. Hryympelle, a Rumple. Rundlet, q. d.
Roundlet, a rotunda figura, from its round form. To Run, from the AS. Rynan,
the Belg. Runnen, or the Teut. Rennen, the same. Runnagate from Run, and Gate;
or from the Hisp. Renegado, one that apostatizeth from the Faith; this a
Renegando, from denying his Religion. Runt, a Scotch, or Welsh Ruut, from the
Teut. Rind, or the Belg. Rund, an Ox. A Rush, from the AS. Risc, the same. To
Rush, from the AS. Hreosan, the same; hence Inresan, to rush in; and Hrysca, a
Rushing in, an Irruption. Russet, from the Fr. G. Rousset; or the It. Rossetto,
a light red somewhat red. Fr. Jun. draws it from the Gr. (...), of the color
of Pomegranates. A Russeung, from the Fr. G. Roussette, (i. e.) of a Russet
color. Rust, from the Belg. Roest, Dan. and Teut. Roast, or the AS. Rust, idem;
hence the Belg. Roesten, and Teut. Rosten, to gather Rust; all perhaps from
Rest, for Arms resting, and not used, become rusty. Rustle, from the AS.
Hristlan; or the Belg. Ruysselen, to clash together; all from the sound. Ry,
from the AS. Ryge, or the Belg. Rogghe, the same.
S.
SAble; from the Fr. G. Sable, a term in Heraldry. A Sack, from the Fr. G. Sac,
the Ital. Sacco, or the AS. Sacc, Saec, the same; and all from the Lat. Saccus;
which again comes from the Gr. (...), to load; from hence comes to Sack,
Saccage and Satchel. Sack, otherwise Canary-wine, a siccando, from Drying,
says Minsh. Or from the Teut. Sack, or Belg. Seck, idem. Sackbut, from the
Hisp. Sacabuche, idem. Sad, Minsh. takes it from the Teut. Schatte, a shadow;
for men of sorrow affect shady places, or solitude, hating all society: It may
also be drawn from the Teut. Sat, full, to wit, of grief; or the Lat. Satur,
full, (i. e.) full or dark with color. Saddle, from the Dan. and Belg. Sadel,
the Teur. Sattel, or the AS. Saol, idem: These from the AS. Setl, a Seat, or
Settle: Or they may be all contracts of the Lat. Sedile, a Seat. Safe, from the
Fr. G. Sauf, or the Lat. Salvus, the same. Saffron, from the Fr. G. and Teut.
Saffran; or the Ital. Saffrano, or Zaffrano, the same; it is of an Arabic
Original. Sage, from the Fr. G. Sauge; and both contracts of the Lat. Salvia,
idem; this a salvificis facultatibus, from its salving, or healing qualities.
Sage, for discreet, from the Fr. G. Sage, or the It. Saggio, wise; and all from
the Lat. Sagire, to perceive quickly, or sagaciously. A Sail, from the Belg.
Seyl, the Teut. Segel, or the AS. Segl, idem; whence the Verbs, Belg. Seylen,
Teut. Segelen, and the AS. Seglian, to sail. Saint, from the Fr. G. Saint; or
the It. Santo, idem; both which are derived from the Lat. Sanctus, the same.
Sake, from the Belg. Sake, Saecke, the Teut. Sach; or the AS. Sac, Saca, idem.
Saker, from the Hisp. Sacre, a kind of Hawk so called; this from the Hisp.
Sacar, to pull out; it being a ravenous Fowl. Minsh. draws it from the Lat.
Sacer, consecrated, or dedicated, to wit, to Jupiter, as being of the kind of
Eagles. Saker, a sort of greater Camp-Gun, as the other Saker, which see; this
Gun being no less destructive to Men, than that Hawk is to other Birds.
Saliant, as, a Lion saliant; a term in Heraldry; from the Fr. G. Saillant, or
the Lat. Saliens, leaping. Sallet, from the Fr. G. Salade, or the It. Salata,
the same. A Sal^ow, or Sally-tree, from the Fr. G. Saux, Saul, or the It
Salice, the same; all from the Lat. Salix, idem. A Sally from the Fr. G.
Saillie, a sudden eruption of the Besieged upon the Besiegers; this from
Saillir, to break out. Salt, from the AS. Sealt, the Teut. Saltz, the Fr. G.
Sell, the It. Sale, or the Lat Sal, the same; all from the Gr, (...) the Sea.
Salt, as a Salt Bitch; from the Lat. Salax, lecherous, inflamed with Just.
Saltpeter, from the Teut. or Belg. Saltpetre, the Fr. G. Salpetre, or the
Ital. Salpietra, idem; or q. d. Lat. Salis petra, (i. e.) Salt petrefied, or
grown into an hard stony substance. Salt-sellar, from the Fr. G. Saliere, or
the It. Saliera, idem. The learned Th. H. takes Salt to be a Pleonasm,
supposing Sellar, in it self to express as much, q. Salter; i. e. a thing to
contain Salt. A Salve, from the Fr. Th. Salv^, the Belg. Salf, the Teut. Salb;
or the AS. Sealf, the same; all from the Lat. Salvus, whole; or Salvare, to
heal. Same, from the AS. Same, idem; or the Fr. Th. Samo, so: or, perhaps from
the Gr. (...), Together, by a Prosthesis of the Letter s. Sampire, from the Fr.
G. Saint-pierre, q. d. Sancti Petri herba, Saint Peter's herb, Minsh. Sample,
and Sampler, from the Fr. G. Exemple, or, Exemplaire, an Example or Pattern.
Sand from the AS. Belg. and Teut. Sand, Sand. Sangiack, from the It. Sangiacco,
a Turkish word, denoting a degree next to that of a Bashaw. Leunclavius draws
it from the Turkish Words Sanzac, a Standard, and Beg, a Master. To Sap, or
Dig, a Military term, from the Fr. G. Sapper, or the Ital. Zappare, to dig with
a spade; this from the Gr. (...), id. Sap, in Trees, from the Belg. Sap, the
Teut. Safft, or the AS. Saepe, id. Saracen, from the Lat. Saraceni, a People so
called; both from the Arab. Essarak, Robbers; they being infamous for robbery
and depredations, among their neighbors. Sarcenet, a thin Silk, so called from
the Saracens, by whom it was first sent into Europe. Sardel, or Sardin, a fish
taking its name from Sardinia, an Island in the Lybick Sea, affording great
plenty of this sort. Sark, for Shirt, from the AS. Syrc, the same: or from the
Dan. Mess Sercke, A Surplice, or Mass-Shirt. A Sarse or Serse, from the Fr. G.
Sas, a Sieve; or Sasser, to sift. Satcbel, the Dimin. of Sack, which see.
Satterday, from the AS. Seaterdaeg, or the Belg. Saierdagh; this from Scater,
the same with Saturn: Or it is so called q. Saturn day, (i. e.) the day of
Saturn. Satin, from the Fr. G. Satin; or the Ital. Sattino, the same. Voss.
draws it from the Lat. Sindon, very fine linen; and this from the Syriack
Sadin, the same. Sav^ge, from the Fr. G. Sauvage; or the It. Selvaggio, or
Selvatico, untamed; which comes from the Lat. Sylvaticus, belonging to the
wood. Sauce, from the Fr. G. Sauce, Saulse; or the Ital. and Span. Salsa, id.
all from the Lat. Sal, Salt; for that, seasons all things. A Saucer, from the
Fr. G. Saucier, or Saulsiere, the same. To Save, from the Fr. G. Sauver; or the
Lat. Salvare, id. from hence the Fr. G. Sauveur, a Savior. A Save guard, from
the Fr. G. Sauve guard; or the It. Salva Guardia, id. To Saunter up and down,
from the Fr. G. Sauter, Sauteller, to skip about. Savory, from the Fr. G.
Savouree, idem. A Savor, from the Fr. G. Saveur, id. both from the Lat. Sapor,
a relish, or smack; from hence Savory, grateful to the taste. Sausy, from the
Belg. Sassaem, or Satsaem, the same; this from the Belg. Sat, or the Teut.
Satt, satiated; for it denotes one that abuses another patience, even to a
nauseous excess. A Saw, from the AS. Syge, or Saga, the Teut. Sage, the Belg.
Saeghe; or the It. Sega, the same; and all a secando, from cutting. Saw, an old
Saw; from the AS. Saga, or the Teut. Sage, a saying, q. d. an old Say. To Say,
from the Teut. Sagen, the Belg. Segghen; or the AS. Saegan, Secgan, the same.
Say, Stuff; from the Fr. G. Sayette; or the It. Saietta, the same; these from
the Fr. G. Say, the Ital. Saio, or the Span. Say, a Cassock, called in Latin
Sagum. Scabbard, from the Gr. (...), to cover; or the old Belg. Schabbe, a
Cover. Scaffold, from the Fr. G. Eschafant; or the Belg. Schabot, idem. A
Scalado, from the Fr. G. Escalade, the Hisp. Scalada, or the Ital. Scalata, a
mounting the Walls of a Town per scalas, with Ladders. To Scald, from the Fr.
G. Eschauder or the Belg. Schanden, idem; both from the It. Scaldare (i. e.)
calidum facere, to make hot. Scald-head, q. d. scaled head, from the abundance
of Scales that fall there from. To Scale, from the Hisp. Escalar, the Fr. G.
Escaller; or the Ital. Scalare, (i. e.) per scalas ascendere, to go up by
Ladders. Scales of Fishes, from the Fr. G. Escaille, or the It. Scaglie, the
same. A Scallion, from the It. Scalogna, or the Belg. Scalonie; primarily so
called from Scalona of Palaestina, according to Skinner; or from Ascalon of
Judaea, according to Minshew. Scalp, hairy Sca^p, from the Belg. Schelpe, a
Shell; or It. Scalpo, the Skull; also a shell, by an easy similitude. A
Scalping-Iron for Chirurge^ns; so called a scalpendo, from scraping the
corrupted flesh from the bones. To Scamble, from the Gr. (...), bandy-legg'd.
To Scan a Verse, from scando to climb; for in scanning we ascend as it were by
steps, from one finger to another, so taking an account of each foot and
syllable. Scant, that which lacks somewhat; possibly from the Lat. Canthus, a
corner, (i. e.) that which wants something to fill up. A Scar, from the Fr. G.
Escare, Escarre, the same; or from the Lat. and Gr. Escara, id. a crust made on
a wound with a searing-iron, when the blood cannot otherwise be stopped.
Scarce, from the Fr. G. Escars, the It. Scarfo, or the Belg. Schaers, the same;
all probably from the Lat. Careo, to want. To Scare one, from the Belg. Schier,
on a sudden; for things that fall out suddenly, do most affright: Or from the
It. Scorare, to discourage. Scarf, from the Fr. G. Escarpe, Escharpe, id. or
from the AS. Sceorp, any vestment. Scarlet, from the Fr. G. Escarlate, the Hisp
Escarlata; the Teut. Scharlack, or the It. Scarlato, the same. Sca^^s, to slide
along the ice withal. Fr Jun. draws it from the Gr. (...), to kick. Skinner,
from the Belg. Schaetse; or the Fr. G. Eschasse, forked Stilts. To Scatter,
from the Belg. Schetteren, idem. Sc^venger, perhaps from the AS. Scaeftha,
shavings, and Fengan, to take up; or from Scafan, Teut. Schaben, or the Belg.
Schaben, to shave, and the Teut. Fegen, to make clean. To School, from the
Teut. Schulen to chide, or reprove, as a Master does his Scholar. A Scien, from
the Fr. G. Scion, a young tree. Minsh. draws it a scindendo, because it is cut
off from a tree. To Scoff, from the Belg. Schoppen; or Schobben, id. to cavil,
or mock. To Scold, from the Belg. Schelden; or the Teut. Schelten, idem, to
chide. Sconce, from the Belg. Schantse; or the Teut. Schantz, a fortified
place. A Scoop, from the Belg. Scoepe, idem, this from Schoepen, to scoop, or
draw out. To Scorch, from the Fr G. Escorcher. Scorn. from the Fr G. Escorne;
or the Ital. Scorno, idem, Contempt; this from Cornu, a Horn; hence, Cornu
Rhinocerotis habet, he is a jearing fellow. A Scoundrel, from the It.
Scondaruolo; this from Scondere, Lat. Abscondere, to hide; taken for a man whom
a bad Life and a guilty Conscience force to abscond. To Scour, from the Fr. G.
Escurer; Ital. Scurare, to take care of; or the Belg. Scheueren, to rub, or
clean. Scourge, from the Fr. G. Escourgee; or the Ital. Scoreggia, idem; these
from the Lat. Corium, a Hide, or Leather. A Scout, from the Fr. G. Escoute,
Belg. Schouwt, or the Ital. Scolta, Ascolta, a Spy; all ab auscultando, from
listening. To Scowl, from the AS. Sceol-Eag, squint eyed; or from the Teut.
Schehl, Schahl, or Schielen, to look askew. To Scrabble, from the Belg.
Krabbelen, to tear with the nails; also to scribble. To Scramble, from the AS.
Screopan; or the Belg. Schraeffen, to scrape up; or the Belg. Krabbelen, to
rend and tear with the nails. To Scrape, from the AS Screopan; the Belg.
Schraepen; or the Teut. Schrappen, Schrapffen, id. and all a scabendo, from
scratching, by interposing the Letter r. Scraps of victuals left; v. Scrape
Scratch, from the Belg. Kratsen, the Teut. Kratzen, the Fr. G. Grater, or the
Ital. Grattare, the same. Minsh. draws it from the Gr. (...), idem. Scratches,
a disease amongst Horses, like the Itch in man's body, from the Verb, to
scratch. Scrawls, Letters not even, nor uniform in writing; a contract of
Scrabbles. A Screw, from the Bell Schroeve or the Teut. Schraubt, idem; whence
the Belg. Schroeven, and Teut. Schrauben, to screw up; yet most likely from the
Fr. G. Escroue, idem. A Scrip, from the AS. Scraepe, convenient, useful.
Scritch Owl, (q. d) a shrieking Owl; see to Shriek A Scrivener, from the Ital.
Scrivano, idem; both a scribendo, from writing. A Scroul of paper, a
depravation of the word Roll; which see. To Scrub, from the AS. Screopan, to
shave; or from the Belg. Schrabben, the Teut. Schrapiten, to scrape. Scrubled,
from the Dan. Skrubbet, rough. To Scud, from the Belg Schadden, Schudderen, to
be scared; or from the It. Squittire, to run away, to escape by flight. A
Scuffle, or tumultuous rou from Shuffle; by a Metaphor taken from Card-playing.
Sculk, perhaps a depravation of the Lat. Abscondere, to hide; or from the Belg.
Schudden, to be frighted. Scull; (q. d.) the shell of the head; from the Teut.
Schedel, Schadel the same; see Shell and Scale. A Scull, of Fishes, from the
AS. Sceole, a shole, or multitude of fishes: Or perhaps from the Fr. G.
Cueiller, or the It. Cogliere, to gather together. A Scullion, from the Fr. G.
Souillon, the same; this from Souiller, to soil: Or from the Lat. Culina a
Kitchen; for he is there to give his attendance. Scum, from the Dan. skum; the
Teut. Schaum, the Ital. Schiuma, or the Fr G. Escume, the same; all possibly
from the Lat. Spuma, froth. From hence the Fr. G. Escumer, to scumm, and
Escumoir, a Scummer, or Skimmer. Scurf, from the AS. Sceorfa; or the Belg.
Schort, id. It is also drawn from the Lat Scrofa, a Sow, which is seldom free
from it. Mer. Cas. draws it from the Gr. (...), Dryness. Scurvy, from the Belg.
Schorftig, or the Teut. Schurb^ck, idem. The Scut, from the AS. Cyth, or Belg.
Kutte, idem; this from our word Cut; it being so short, as that part seems to
be cut off. Scutcheon, from the Fr. G. Escussion; or the It. Scuccione,
Escuccione, the same: these from the Lat. Scutum, a shield. Scuttle, from the
Fr. G. Escoutillon, the Hisp. Escotilon; or (which is most likely) from the AS
Scutel, the same; all from the Lat. Scutella, id. this from Scutum, a shield.
The Scuttles of a Ship, from the Fr. G. Escoutilles, idem. Sea, from the AS.
Sae, the Teut. See, or the Belg. Zee, idem. This last Vossius draws (...), from
boiling. A Seal, from the AS. Sigel, the Belg. Seghel the Teut. Siegel, the Fr.
G. Seau, or the Hisp. Sello, idem; all Contracts of the Lat. Sigillum, a mark
or Seal. A Seam, from the AS. Seam, idem; or from the Belg. Soomen, to make a
seam. To Sear, from the AS. Searan, idem; or the Fr. G. Essorer, to dry up;
this perhaps from the Lat. Exhaurire, to draw out, viz. the moisture. Some take
it from the Teut. Z^hren, to waste or consume; or the Fr. Th. Seren, to hurt.
Sear- cloth, from the AS. Serclath, idem, (q. d.) Lat. Pannus ceratus; or from
the AS. Sar, a Sore, and Cloth; it being a cloth to wrap up sores or pained
parts of the Body withal. To Search, from the Fr. G. Cercher; or the Ital.
Cercare, the same. A Season, from the Fr. G Saison; the Ital. Stagione, or the
Belg. Sayesone idem; the It. from the Lat. Statio, a station, to wit, of time.
To Season, from the Hisp. Sazonar, or the Ital. Sasonare, id. A Seat, from the
AS. Seotole, Dan. Saede, Teut. Sitz, or the Belg. Sat, idem; and all from the
Lat. seeds, sedile, id. Second, from the Fr. G. Second, and both from the Lat.
Secundus, id. this a sequendo, from following; because it immediately follows
the first. A Sedan, from the Lat. Sedile, a seat, or Sedere, to sit. Sedge,
from the AS. Saecg; or the Belg. Seck, idem. To See, from the AS. Seon, the
Belg. Sien, or the Dan. Seer, id. or from the Teut. Sie, or Siehe, see, lo, or
behold. Seed, from the AS. Saed, the Belg. Saed, or the Teut. Saat, idem; this
from the Lat. Satum, that which is sown. To Seek, from the Belg. Soeken; or the
AS. Secan, id. hence Sohte, sought. Minsh. draws it from the Gr. (...), idem;
Others from our word See. Seeling, or Cieling, from the Ital. Cielo, or the
Lat. Coelum; which, in a secondary sense, is taken for any high arch: Or from
the Lat. Coelare, to carve, or garnish, according to Minshew. It Seems, from
the Fr. G. Sembler, to seem; q. d. simile esse, to be like unto: Or from the
Belg Zaemen, to become one. From hence we take the word Seemly. To Seech, from
the Belg and Teut. Sieden, or the AS. Seothan, idem. Mer. Cas. draws it from
the Gr. (...), to be very hot. To Seize from the Fr. G. Saisir, to lay hold on.
Salmasius draws it from the Lat. Barb. Sasire, and this from the Gr. (...), to
sack, or ransack. Seldom, from the Belg. Seldom, the Teut. Selten, or the AS.
Seldon, idem. Self, from the Dan. Selff, the Belg. Solve, the Teut. Selb, or
the AS. Silf, idem. Sellander, a sore in the pastern-joint of an Horse; from
the Fr. G. Sell; or rather, from the AS, Sealt, salt, and Ampre, a swelling in
the legs, or from the Germ. G^per, upward; it being a salt humor, which,
centring in that joint, causes swelling upward. Selvage, q. Salvage, because
it saves (i. e.) strengthens a garment, to make it last longer. Semblance from
the Ital. Sembianza, or the Fr. G. Semblance, likeness. Send, from the AS.
Sendan, or the Belg. and Teut. Senden, the same. Seneschal, from the Fr. G.
Seneschal, or the Ital. Senesciallo, Siniscalco, a Prince's Steward; originally
from the Teut. Sind, Gesind, a family, and Scalt, a servant. Sennight, q. Seven
Nights; as Fortnight, q. Fourteen Nights. A Sent, a Sentiendo, from perceiving.
Write Scent, for distinction sake. Sentiment, ones opinion, or verdict; from
the Fr. G. Sentir, or the Lat. Sentio, to judge, or suppose. A Sentinel, from
the Fr. G. Sentinelle, or the Ital. Sentinella, idem; and both from the Lat.
Sentire, to perceive, or discern; for he is set to observe the approach of the
Enemy. Serge, from the Fr. G Sarge, the Hisp. Serge, or the Ital. Sargia, a
cloth so called; all perhaps from the Lat. Sericum, silk; it being but a thin,
subtle Stuff. A Sergeant, from the Fr. G. Sergeant, the Teut. and Sax.
Scherge, or the Ital. Sergente, id. all from the Lat. Serviens, one that
serves, or waits. Serraglio, an Italian word, signifying the Great Turk's
Palace where his Concubines are kept; from the Ital Serrare, to lock up: Or
rather, Seraglio, from the Lat. Serare, to lock up. A Servant, from the Fr. G.
Servant, coming from Servir; this from the Lat. Servire, to serve. Set, from
the AS. Settan, the Teut. Setzen, or the Belg. Setten, idem; from hence the
Teut. Setzling, and the AS. Setten, Setts, or young trees planted: All from the
Lat. Seeds, a seat, or place to sit on. A Setting-Dog, in the Ital. Cane
Sentacchione, idem; from the Verb Sentacchiare, to set; this from Sentare, to
sit; q.d. A Sitting dog. Settle, Settle -bed, from the AS. Setl, Setol, or the
Teut. Sessel, a seat, bench, or settle; and all from our word, To Sit. Seven,
from the AS. Seofen, the Teut. Sieb^n, or the Belg. Seven, idem; and all from
the Lat. Septem; this from the Gr. (...), the same. Sever, from the Fr. G.
Sevrer, or the Ital. Scevrare, idem; these from the Lat. Separare, to separate.
Several, q. d. Separal, from the Lat. Separare, to part one from another.
Sewer, Sewers, for a Common-shore, or Watercourse. Minshew says, that it wa
formerly written Seward from Sea, and Ward. Cowell draws it from our Verb, To
Issue; as if it might be called Issuer; Spelman, from the Fr. G. Suer, to
sweat; or Sueur, sweat. Sewet, from the Fr. G. Suif, idem; and these from the
Lat. Sebum, the same. Serton, the word is a Depravation of Sacristan, now out
of use; this from the Lat. Sacras, viz. Res, things consecrated to an holy use;
and Teneo, to keep, to have in charge. Shackles, from the Belg. Schaeckel, or
the AS. Scacul a word found in Elfric. of the same signification: Or, from the
Belg. Schaeckelen, to entangle. A Shad: Gesner says, that the Germans called
it Schad, which he takes from the Teut. Schade, hurt, or damage. Shadow, from
the Belg. Schaeduwe, the Teut. Schatte, or the AS. Scade, ^^em; hence Sceadig,
shady (...) ^^adean, to over-shadow (...) Mer. Cas. draws it from the (...), a
little shadow. A Shaft, or Arrow, from the AS. Sceaft, or the Belg. Schaft,
idem; all perhaps from our word, To Shave, or Sheaf; for that they are bound up
in bundles, in the form of a sheaf. Shag, from the AS. Sceacga, idem; whence
Sceacged, shaggy. To Shake, from the AS. Sceacan, the Belg. Schocken, or the
Fr. G. Chocquer, idem; all from the Lat. Quatio, Quasso, idem. Shall, from the
Fr. Th. Scall, or Sal: Or rather, from the AS. Sceal, the same. A Shallop, from
the Fr. G. Schaluppe, or the Ital. Scalfa, Scalfo, a ship, or boat; so called,
from the similitude of the fish called a Scallop. Minshew. Shallow, quasi Sea
Low: or from Show, and Low; (i. e.) water so low, that you may see clearly to
the bottom. Shambles, from the Belg. Schacmel, Schemel, or the AS. Scamol, a
bench, or block, upon which Butchers cut their meat. Shame, from the Teut.
Scham, or the AS. Scame, idem; hence Scamian, the Belg. Schaemen, and the Teut.
Schamen, to be ashamed. Shank, from the AS. Sceanc, or the Dan. Skenckel, idem.
A Shanker, from the Fr. G. Chancre; this from the Lat. Cancer. To Shape, from
the AS. Sceapan, the Belg. Schaepen, or the Fr. Th. Scaphon, idem; these from
the Belg. Schaep, Schape, a shape, or form. To Share, from the AS. Scyran, to
divide. Share, A Plough Share, from the AS. Scear, or the Teut. Schaar, idem:
Or from our word Shear, because it sheareth, or cutteth the ground. A Shark, or
Sherk, for a shifting Knave; from our word Search: Or more immediately from the
Fr. G. Chercher, to seek. Sharp, from the AS. Scearp, idem; whence Scyrpan,
Ascyrpan, to make sharp: Or from the Belg. Scharp, or the Teut. Scharpff,
sharp, or rough. To Shave, from the AS. Scafan, Scaefan, the Belg. Schaven, or
the Teut. Schaben, idem; all probably from the Lat. Scabere, to rub, or scrape.
A Sheaf, from the Belg. Schoof, Schoove, or the AS. Sceaf, id. To Shear, from
the Teut. Scheeren, Scharen, the AS. Scearan, Scyran, or the Belg. Schaeren,
the same. A Sheard, from the AS Sceard, the Teut. Scherb, or the Belg. Scherf,
Scherve, a splinter of wood, or a piece of a shell: Or from the Fr. G.
Escharde, idem. Sheath, from the AS. Sceathe, Scaeth, the Belg. Scheed, or the
Teut. Scheide, idem. To Shed, from the AS. Sceadan, the Teut. Scheiden, or the
Belg. Scheeden, to part, or separate. Shed, for a Hovel; a Contract of Shadow.
She, from the AS. Seo, the Belg. Sii, or the Teut. Sie, id. and all not
unlikely from the Lat. Ea, she, by a Prosthesis of the letter s. Sheep, from
the AS. Sceap, the Fr. Th. Scaaph, the Belg. Scaep, or the Teut. Schaff, idem:
Or perhaps from the Gr. (...), to cover. A Sheet, from the AS. Sceat, Scete,
Scyte, id. and hence, for similitude sake, A Sheet of Paper; which may, not
absurdly, be drawn from the Lat. Scheda, the same. A Sheldrake, a bird so
called, perhaps because its feathers are partly like unto scales, and because
it destroys fishes, as a Dragon does other earthly creatures. Shell, from the
AS. Sceala, Scala, the Bell. Schaele, Schelle, the Teut. Schal, Schele, or the
Fr. G. Escaille, id. Whence the Verbs AS. Scealian, the Belg. Schellen, and the
Teut. Shahlen, Schelen, to shell. A Shelter, from the Eng. Shell; for which
cause it is in Latin called Testudo. Shelving, for Bending downward; as also,
Shelves, or Sands in the Sea; from our word Shelf; and this from the AS. Scylf,
idem; or the Teut. Schelf, bent. Sheriff, from the AS. Scir-Geref, the Grave,
or Ancient of a Shire, or County. V. Grave, and Shire. Sherry, a wine so
called, because it was first made at Xeres, a City in Spain, now called
Granata. To Show, from the AS. Sceaian, or the Belg. Schauwen, Schouwen, id.
from hence A Show at Fairs. Schides, or Chips of wood, from the AS. Sceadan, or
the Belg. and Teut. Scheyden, to divide: Or from the Lat. Schidia, a chip of
wood. Shield, from the Fr. Th. Scild, Scilt, the Belg. and Teut. Schild, or the
AS. Scyld, id. Hence Scyldan, Sceoldan, to shield, or protect one. Shift, To
make a Shift: Minshew draws it from the Teut. Schaffen, to be a doing; but
rather from the AS. Scyftan, to remove, or put away; as we say, To Shift off,
for to cast any troubles upon another: And from hence the Teut. Schifft, a
shifting fellow. Shilling, from the AS. Scilling, the Teut. Schilling, or the
Belg. Schelling, the same; and all from the AS. Scild, a shield; it being
instamped with a shield, (i. e.) the King's Arms. Sh^^, from the AS. Scina, or
the Teut. Schien, idem. Shine, from the AS. Scinan, or the Teut. Scheinen,
idem. The Shingles, a disease which, if it incircle the body, brings death;
from the Lat. Cingulum, a girdle. Shingles, or Schindles, from the Teut.
Schindel, idem; this from the Lat. Scandula, a slate; and this a Scindendo,
from being cloven; or a Scandendo, from climbing up; they being placed upon the
house, in the form of steps. Ship, from the Belg. Schip, Schep, the Run. Dan.
Skip, or the Dan. Skib, id. and all perhaps from the Lat. Scapha, a skiff; this
from the Gr. (...), to dig out, or to make hollow. A Shire, from the AS. Scir,
Scire, idem; this from Scyran, to share, or divide. A Shirt, from the AS.
Scyric, Scyrc, the Teut. Schurtz, or the Dan. Skiorte, idem. Shire, from the
AS. Scitan, or the Belg. Schiiten, idem. Shittle cock, from the Teut.
Schuetein, to shake; or the AS. Sceotan, to shoot, and Cock; which see. To
Shider, from the Teut. Schawern, Schaudern, to tremble. V. Shudder. A Shiver,
from the Teut. Schierferen, or the Belg. Scheveren, to cut in shivers. A Shock
of Corn, from the Belg. Schocke, an heap; or perhaps from the Teut. Schosz, a
tribute; because every tenth sheaf was laid by for tithes. Shoe, from the AS.
Sceo, Sco, the Dan. Sko, the Belg. Schoe, or the Fr. Th. Scu, the same. Shole
of Fishes, from the AS. Sceole, or the Ital. Scuolo, idom: Or from the Fr. G.
Cucillir, or the Ital. Cogliere, to gather together. To Shoot, from the AS.
Sceotan, or the Belg. Schieten, idem; hence the Belg. Schentvry, shot-free; and
the AS. Scoten, shot off: All perhaps from the Ital. Scuotere, or Scotere, or
the Lat. Excutere, to shake off, with a little variation of the sense. A Shoot,
from the Belg. Scheute, or the Teut. Schoz, a sapling. A Shop from the AS.
Sceoppe, a treasury; or from the Teut. Schafft, an armoury, or Schopff, a place
to walk in; or Schaffen, to work. A Shore, from the AS. Score, idom; or the
Belg. Schoore, Schore, earth washed up by the waves: Or perhaps from the Teut.
Scheuren, to scour. The Common- Shore, a Depravation of Common- Sewer, which
see. Short, from the AS. Sceort, idem; hence Asceortian, to shorten: Or from
the Ital. Corto, or the Fr. G. Court, id. and these from the Lat. Curtus
Shotten Herring, such Herrings as have already spawned; from the Teut.
Schutten, to shoot forth. To Shove, from the AS. Sceofan, or the Belg.
Schuyven, to thrust, or jog one. Mer. Cas. draws it from the Gr. (...), to
toss, or shake. Shovel, from the AS. Scofl, the Teut. Schauffel, or the Belg.
Schoeffel, id. whence Schuyffelen, to shovel up; and all from the word, To
Snow; which see. Should, from the AS. Sceoldan, the Belg. Schuld, or the Teut.
Schoud, that which should, or ought to be. Shoulder, from the AS. Sculdor, the
Dan. Skulder, the Belg. Schouder, or the Teut. Schulter, the same. Shower, from
the AS. Scur, idem; or the Belg. Scheure, a breaking forth. To Shread, from the
AS. Scredan, to cut small: Or from our word Shear. A Shrew, or Clamorous Woman;
from the Teut. Schreyen, to cry out upon; or Beschreyen, to defame one. Shrewd,
from the Teut. Beschreyen, to bewitch; q. d. Bew^^ched: Or from the Lat.
Crudus, cruel. A Shrike, or Shriek, from the Dan. Skriger, to shrick; or the
Belg. Schrieken, to be struck with terror, or fear. Shrill, perhaps from the
Teut. Schreyen, to cry aloud. Shrimp, from the Teutonick Schrump, a Cray-fish,
or wrinkle; or it is so called, from the similitude. A Shrine, from the AS.
Scrin, the Fr. G. Escrin, the Ital. Scrigno, or the Lat. Scrinium, a place
where relics of Saints are kept. To Shrink, from the AS. Scrincan, to be drawn
in, or made less: Or from the Belg. Schrucken, idem. To Shrivel, Shrivelled,
perhaps from the Teut. Schrumpeln, to rumple: whence Schrump, Schrumpel, a
furrow, or wrinkle. A Shroud, from the AS Scrud, idem; whence Scrydan, to cover
with a garment. Shrovetide, q. d. The time of Shriving; from the old word
Shrive, signifying, to exhibit a Confession of sins before a Priest, because it
immediately preceeds Lent; and was therefore, by the Clergy of Rome, appointed
to be the time for more general Confessions. A Shrub, from the AS. Scrobbe
Scrybe, or the Belg. Strubbe, Strobbe, idem. To Shrug, from the Teut.
Schrecken, to shake: Or rather from the Belg. Schroeven, to shrivel up as a
Snail. To Shudder, from the Teut. Schaudern, or the Belg. Schudderen, to shake;
and this from the Ital. Scuotere, or the Lat. Excutere, idem. Shun, from the
AS. Ascunian, idem: Or from the Teut. Schewen, to avoid, or eschew. To Shut,
from the AS Scut. tan, or the Belg. Schutten, id. To get Shut of a thing, (i.
e.) To get Rid; from the AS. Sceadan, or the Teut. Scheyden, to separate; or
Schewen, to shun; or Schutten, to eject. A Weaver's Shuttle, from the AS.
Schutteln, to shove, or shake. Shy, from the Ital. Schifo, nice; or the Belg.
Schow, Schowig, skittish; and all from the Belg. Schouwen, or the Teut.
Schewen, to eschew. Sice, from the AS. and Eng. Six; and this from the Gr.
(...), idem. Sick, from the AS. Seoc, the Dan. Sing, the Teut. Siech, or the
Belg. Sicck, idem. Fr. Jun. draws them all from the Belg. Swack, weak, faint:
Or from the Gr. (...), one that has lost his stomach, according to Hesychius.
Sickle, from the AS. Sicol, the Belg. Sickel, or the Teut. Sichel, Sechel, id.
and all from the Lat. Barb. Secula, idem; and this a Secando, from cutting.
Side, from the AS. Side, Sid, the Teut. Seyte, or the Belg. Siide, id. whence
the Belg. Siidelinck; with us, Sideling. Side-man, so called, because he
stands, as it were, by the Church-warden's side, to assist. Siege, from the Fr.
G. Siege, or the Ital. Assedio, idem; and all from the Lat. Seeds; as we say,
To Sit down before a Town. To Si^t, from the Belg. Siften, the Teut. Sich^en,
or the AS. Siftan, idem. To Sigh, from the AS. Seofian, to deplore, Sciettan,
idem. Sight from the AS. Gesihthe, or the Belg. Sicht, Gesicht, the same.
Signal, from the Ital. Segnale, or the Fr. G. Signale, famous, worthy of
animadversion. A Signet, from the Fr G. Signet, idem; and both from the Lat.
Signare, to sign, or seal. Signiour, The Grand Signiour, from the Fr. G.
Seigneur, the Ital. Signore, or the Hisp. Sennor, Master: all from the Lat.
Senior, an Elder: Or, q. d. Lat. Insignior, a man of more worth than others.
Silk, from the Dan. Silcke, or the AS. Seolc, idem; whence Seolcen, silken.
Sill, A Door-Sill, from the Fr. G. Sueil, idem; and both probably from the Lat.
Solum, the ground. Sillery, or Cilery, a term in Architecture; from the Lat.
Coelare, to carve, or engrave. Sillibub: Minshew surmiseth, that it may be
called so, quasi Swilling Bub. Silly, from the Lat Barb. Sillus; and this a
Contract of the Lat. Simplex, or Simplus without deceit, or policy. Silver,
from the Belg. and Fr. Th. Silver, the Teut. Silber, or the AS. Seolfer, id.
and all from the AS. Sell, well, and Feran, to have good success. A Simitar, or
Scimitre, from the Fr. G. Simiterre, the Hisp. Cimitarra, or the Ital.
Scimitarra, a Persian, or Turkish sword. Covarruv. draws the Hisp. Cimitarra,
from the Arab. Scyth-Mittarra, a Scythick sword; because the Scythians first
formed it. Sin^, from the AS. Sin, Sin, the Teut. Sund, or the Belg. Sonde.
Sunde, id. Minsh. and Fr. Jun. draw it from the Gr. (...), to do harm. Since,
from the Teut. Sint, or the Belg. Sind, id. Or it is a contract of the Eng.
Sithence. To Sindge, from the AS. Saengan, the Belg. Senghen, or the Teut.
Sengen, idem, to burn a little. Sinew, from the AS. Sinu, the Dan. Seen, the
Belg. Senuwe, or the Teut. Senue, the same. Sing. Sung, from the Belg. Singhen,
the Teut. Singen, or the AS. Singan, idem: In the AS. Sungen, Gesungen, sung;
whence the AS. and Dan. Sang, the Belg. Sangh, Gesangh, and the Teut. Gesang, a
song. To Sink, from the AS. Sencan, Besencan, the Belg. Sencken, or the Teut.
Sincken, to fall, or sink down: From hence also A Sink. Sip, from the Belg.
Sippen, to sup a little: or from the AS. Sipan, idem. Sippets, from the Fr. G.
Civets, slices of bread sopp'd in things liquid: Or from the Lat. Cibus, food:
Or, q. d. Soppers. v. Sop. Sir, from the Fr. G. Sieur, Sire, or the Ital. Ser,
Sere, Master. Sire, a Father, from the Fr. G. Sire, Master; a Father being, by
the Law of Nature, Master of his Family. Sirrah, q. d. Sir ah. Sirrop, or
Syrup, from the Fr. G. Sirope, the Ital. Sirroppo, or the Lat. Barb. Syrupus,
id. Or it is so called, quasi (...), juice of Syria. Sister, from the AS.
Seosten, the Fr. Th. Suester, the Dan. Soster; the Belg. Suster, or the Teut.
Schwester, idem. Sit, from the AS. Sittan; the Teut. Sitzen, the Dan. Soder; or
the Belg. Sitten, idem; and all from the Lat. Sedere, to sit. Since, from the
AS. Sitthan, or the Belg. Sint, since that. A Sith, from the AS. Sith, id.
Sive, from the AS. Sibi, in Aelfric. Syfe, the Teut. Sib, or the Belg. Sef,
Sfce, idem; now spelt Sieve. Six, from the AS. Syx, the Belg. Sisse, or the
Teut. Sechs, idem; and all from the Lat. Sex, idem; and this from the Gr.
(...), the same. Size, for Plasterers, from the Ital. Sisa, idem. Size, for
stature; from the Fr. G. Assise, a Verbal of the Verb Asseoir, to appoint; it
being the proportion of body which Nature has allowed. Sizers, or Scissors
from the Fr. G. Ciseaux, the Hisp. Tiseras, Tixeras; or the Ital Cesoire, idem;
and all a scindendo, or caedendo, from cutting. Skain, from the AS. Saegene, a
short sword; this a secando, from cutting; or from Sica, a pocket-dagger. A
Skain, of Thread, from the Fr. G. Escaigne, idem. A Skate-fish, from the AS.
Sceadda, the Dan. Skade; or the It. and Lat. Squatina, id. this a squalore,
from roughness. A Skellet, a little pan or pot; possibly from the Fr. G.
Eskuelette, a plate; this from the Lat. Barb. Scutella, or Scutula, a Platter.
A Skiff, from the Fr G. Esquif; or the Ital. Schiffo, Schaffo; and both from
the Lat. Scapha, idem. Skill, from the Dan. Skell, the Mind; also Reason.
Minsh. draws it from the Lat. Schola, a School; or Scio, to understand. To Skim
over a thing, to do it slightly; from the old Germ. Sciumo, soon, quickly.
Skin, from the Dan. Skind; or the Belg. Schinde, idem; whence the Teut. and
Belg. Schinden, to flea off the skin. To Skip up and down, from the Ital.
Squittire, idem. A Skirmish from the Fr. G Escarmouche, the Hisp. Escaramuca,
the Belg. Schaermu^se, the Teut. Scharmutzel, or the Ital Scaramuccia, id. To
Skirmish, from the Fr. G Escarmoucher, the Hisp. Escaramusar, or the It.
Scaramucoiare, id. Fr. Jun. draws it from the Gr. (...), a Fight. A Skittish
Horse; from the Belg. Schouwt, a Scout, or Spy; it being an horse that will
boggle at the least sound, or motion, always listening like a Spy. Minsh. draws
it from (...), to leap. Skinner from (...), to skip and jump about. The
Skreaking of a Saw, a depravation of the word Creak, which see. To Skream out,
from the AS. Hreman, Hraeman, to cry out; or from the Teut. Schreyen to shriek.
A Skreen, from the Fr. G. Escran, Escrein, idem; all from the Teut. Schermen,
Beschirmen, to defend, (i. e.) to keep off the heat of the fire. The Sky, from
the Dan. Sky, a Cloud; or from the AS. Scinan, to shine; or from Sceaian to
show. Slabby, from the Belg. Slabben, to slabber with water, to drop. Slack,
from the AS. Slaec, Sleac, slow, remiss; whence Aslacian, to loosen; or from
the Belg. Slaeck, idem; whence Slaecken, to unty; and all from the Lat. Laxus,
unbound. A Slam fellow, tall and skragged, from the Belg. Slim, or Slim,
slender; or perhaps from the Teut. Schiang, a Snake, for the similitude.
Slander, from the Fr. G. Esclandre, idem; whence Esclandrir, to slander; and
both from the Lat. Scandalum, a stumbling block; or from the Teut. Schande,
disgrace; whence Schanden, to defame. Slap, from the Teut. Schlapp, a Cuff on
the ear, or buffet; and both from the sound. Slape, an old word signifying
Slippery; from our Word, to Slip. Slash, from the Teut. Schlagens or the Belg.
Slaghen, to whip, and both from the sound. A Slate, from the Dan. Slet, Sleet,
smooth; or the Belg. Slecht, Slicht, plain, even: The learned Th. H. draws it
from the Fr. G. Esclates, or Esclats, shivers of stones. A Slave, from the
Belg. Slave, Slaef, the Ital. Schiavo, the Fr. G. Esclave; or the Hisp.
Esclavo, idem. Slaver, from the Belg. Slabben, Slabberen, to slabber; or
perhaps from the Lat. Saliva, Spittle. Slaughter, from the AS Slaegan, Slean,
to stay; or the Belg. Slachten, or Teut. Schlachten, to kill; or Schlagen, to
slash. The Slay of a Weavers Loom; from the AS. Slae, idem; this not unlikely
from the AS. Slaegan, Aslean, to strike. A Sled, or Sledge, from the Belg.
Sledde, Slidde, the Teut. Schlitte; or the Dan. Slede, idem; and all from the
word to Slide. To Sleep, from the AS. Slaepan, Slapan, the Teut. Schlaffen; or
the Belg. Slaepen id. Sleeve, from the AS. Slief, Slyf, Slyfa; or the Belg.
Sloeve, idem. Sleeveless Errand, q. d. a Zifeless, or Zifeless Errand. Slender,
from the Belg. Slinder, idem; or from our word Slim. A Slice, as of bread; from
the AS. Slite, idem; whence Slitan, to cut, or slice. Slick, from the Belg.
Slicht, Sleyck, the Teut. Schlicht, Schlecht; or the Dan. Slet, smooth: Whence
the Belg. Slichten, Teut. Schlichten; and the Fr. Th. Slihten, to make slick,
or smooth. Slide, from the AS. Slidan; or the Belg. Slidden, to slip. Slight,
as the slight of hand, from the Teut. Schlaw, cunning; or from our word Zight,
(q. d.) lightness, or agility of hand; or from the Engl. word Sly; which see.
Slight, for course, from the Belg. Slicht, Slecht, or the Teut. Schlecht,
plain, unpolished, as we say of ordinary things, This is Plain Stuff. Slim from
the Teut. Schlimm; or the Belg. Slim, naughty, vile; for such a disproportioned
stature is held a bad sign in Astrology. Slime, from the AS. Slim, the Belg.
Sliim, or the Teut. Schleim, idem; and all from the Lat. Limus, idem. Sling,
from the Dan. Slynge, the Belg. Slinghe, or the Teut. Schlinge, idem; hence the
Belg. Slinghen, and Teut. Schlingen, to sling a stone. Slink, from the AS.
Slincan, to creep out of the way. Slip, from the AS. Slippan, Slupan, the Belg.
Slippen, Slibberen, or the Fr. Th. Sliafan, idem; in the Dan. Slipperud; from
whence we have our word Slippery. Slipper, from the AS. Slipper, idem; from
Slipping off and on, according to Minsh. To Slit, from the Dan. Slitder, or the
AS. Slitan, idem: Slite, Geslite, a Slit. To Sliver, or Slive, from the AS.
Slifan, to cleave. A Sloe, from the AS. Sla, Slae, the Teut. Schlchc, or the
Belg. Slay, idem. Sloe-worm, (q. d.) a Slow worm; or a worm that mostly abides
amongst Sloe-trees, according to Minsh. Or, (q. d.) Slay-worm, from its
venomous nature. To Slop, or Slap up, either from the Teut. Schlurpfen, idem;
or from our word, to Lap; which see. Slope, or Sloping, not unlikely from the
Belg. Slap, loose, slack, as a rope not fast tied. Slops, from the Ital.
Sciloppi; and both corrupted, from the Lat. Syrupi, Syrups. Slops, Country-mens
hose, Gallygaskins, from the Belg. Slobbe, a great Shoe; or from Slap, loose.
Sloth, from the Teut. Schoolsz, negligent; or from our word Slow, and ought
rather to be writ Slowth. To Slot a door, from the Teut. Schliessen or the
Belg. Sluyten, idem; to bolt the door. Slotter, or Slatter, from the Teut.
Schloosz, inconsiderate, careless; or Schlotter, remiss; or from the Belg.
Slodde, Sloore, a sluttish woman: See Slut. Sloven, from the Belg. Sloef, idem.
Slough, from the AS. Slog, or from Luh, id. a hollow place full of water. Slow,
from the AS. Slap; or the Dan Sloff, the same. Slowch, from the Dan. Sloff,
dull to understand; or from Slung, or Teut. Schlanch, a gluttonous Sot; or from
Schlausz, a Sluggard. To Slubber over, or to do slightly; from the Teut.
Schlupffen, to slip, to mistake often. Sluice, from the Belg. Sluyse, the Teut.
Schleuse, the Fr. G. Escluse; or the Ital. Sclusa, a Flood-gate, that excludes
the water. Sluggard, from the Belg. Lugghen, to do things awkardly; or from the
Dan. Slung, a greedy fellow. Slumber, from the AS. Slumeran, the Belg.
Sluymeren, or the Teut. Schlummeren, to be half asleep; and all perhaps from
the Lat. Somniare, to dream, by an interposition of the Letter l. To Slur, or
blot with Ink, perhaps from the Belg. Sloore, Soorken, a Slut; whence Slooren,
Sleuren, to slotter. Slut, from the Belg. Slodde, idem; and both not unlikely
from the Lat. Lutum, Dirt; a foul and filthy woman. Sly, from the AS. Slidan,
to slide, or slip out of; or from the Belg. Slicht, plain; for that most sly
men pretend to a great deal of plain-dealing and sincerity. A Smack, or
Sinatch, from the AS. Smaec, the Belg. Smaeck, or Teut. Schmack, a Taste; hence
the AS. Smaccan, Belg. Smaecken, and Teut. Schmacken, to have a smatch or
taste. Smack, a squeezing kiss; from the Teut. Schinatz the same. Small, from
the AS. Smael, the Dan. Small, the Belg. Smael, Small; or the Teut. Schmal, the
same. Smart, from the AS. Smeortan, or the Belg. Smerten idem; hence the Belg.
and Dan. Smerte, the smarting of a wound. Smatter, he that has a smattering in
Learning; from the word Smatth, or Smack, q. d. one that has a smatch or taste
of Learning. To Sin^ar, from the AS. Smeran, the Teut. Schmuren, or the Belg.
Bosmetren, Smeeren, id. to besmear; and this Fr. Jun. draws from the Gr. (...),
Ointment. Sm^ll, from the Belg, Smoel, Smul, warm; for every smell causes more
or less heat. Smelt, from the AS. and Dan. Smelt, a Fish so called from its
pleasant smell or relish. To Smile, from the Belg. Smnylen, or Dan. Smiler,
idem. To Smite, from the Belg. Smitten, or the Teut. Schmelssen, id. Fr. Jun.
draws it from the Gr. (...), which from Eustathius is translated percutere, to
strike or smite. A Smith from the AS. Smith, or the Belg. Sinod, Smid, id.
whence the AS. Smithian, Belg. Smeden, and Teut. Schmiden, to beat upon a
Smith's forge; and all from the Verb to Smite. Smock, from the AS. Smoc id.
Smock, from the AS. Smoca, Smic or the Belg. Sindock, id. Whence the AS.
Smocian, and the Belg. Smooken, Smucken, to smoke. Fr. Jun. draws it from the
Gr. (...), to inflame. Smooth, from the AS Smaethe, idem; whence Smaethian, to
make smooth. Smother, from the Belg. Smooren, to choke, or from the AS. Smorod,
stided. Smug, from the AS. Emicre, neat or clean: Or perhaps from the Gr.
(...), to wipe or make clean. Smut, from the AS. Besmitan, or Belg Besmetten,
to make smutty; or from the Teut. Schmutzen, to make foul; whence Schmutz,
filthiness. A Snalfle, or bit for an horse, from the Belg. Suavel, Snevel, or
the Teut. Schnabel, a snout, or nose, over which it is put. Snai^, from the
Dan. Snegel, the Teut. Schneck, or the AS. Snaegl, idem; this from Snican, to
creep softly. A Snake, from the Belg. Snake, or the AS. Snaca, idem; all from
the AS. Snican, to creep softly. To Snap, from the Belg. Snappen, Knappen, to
catch at; or from the Teut. Schnappen, to snatch up with the mouth. To Snap
with ones finger, from the Teut. mit den flugern knacken, the same. A Snare,
from the Belg. Snare, or the Teut. Schnur, idem. Schnuren, to tie fast with a
rope. To Snarl, from the Teut. Schnurren, to grin like a dog; or Snarchen, to
snort; and all from the found. Snatch, from the Belg. Snoecken, to cut off; or
from Snappen, to snap. Spelman draws it from the Teut. Schach, Felony, or
Rapine. To Sneak, from the AS. Snican, id. to get privately out of harms way.
Sneeze, or Neeze, from the AS. Niesan, or the Belg. and Teut. Niesen, idem; and
all from the sound. Snip, to go Snips, for to go halfs, from the Belg. Suippen,
or Schnitzen, to cut, or divide. A Snipe, or Snite, from the AS. Snite, a bird
so called. To Snite, from the Teut. Schu^utzen, or Belg. Snutten, Snotten, to
clean the nose of Snot. A Snithe-wind, from the AS. Snithan, the Fr. Th.
Sutthan, or the Teut. Schneiden, to cut; as we say, a sharp cutting wind. To
Snort, or Snore, from the Belg. Snorcken, or the Teut. Snorchen, idem; and all
from the sound. Snot, from the AS. Snote, the Belg. Snot, or the Teut. Schnott,
idem. Fr. Jun. draws it from the Gr. (...), Moisture. Snout, from the Belg.
Snuyte, or the Teut. Schnautze, id. Snow, from the AS. Sna, the Dan. Snee, the
Teut. Schnee, or the Belg. Sneeuw, idem; all from the Ital. Neve, or Lat. Nive.
To Snow, from the AS. Snaan, the Belg. Sneeuwen, or Teut. Schneen, idem. To
Snub one, from the Dan. Neffve, a fist; or the Teut, Knnebel, a knuckle; q. d.
to threaten, by holding up the fist doubled at one. To Snub, or sob, from the
Belg. Snoffen, Snuffen, or Snoeven, to sigh bitterly. Snudge, from the Dan.
Sniger or from the AS. Snican, to creep, or sneak up and down. Snuff, from the
Belg. Snuf, Snof, the Snuff of a Candle. See Snuffle. To Snuttle in the nose,
from the Belg. Snoeve, a respiration; whence Snoeven, to snivel; or from the
Teut. Schnauben, Schniben, to puff; all from the sound. Snuffle, from the AS.
Snofl, snot; whence Sniflung, snivling. So, from the AS. Spa, the Belg. So, or
the Teut. So, idem. A Soar Hawk, from the Fr. G. un Faulcon sar, idem; this
from the Fr. G. Essorer, or the Ital. Sorare, to Soar, to fly aloft. Sob, from
the AS. Seofian, to lament; or from the Belg. Sobben, Sobbelen, to faulter in
speaking. The Socket of a Candlestick, from the Fr. G. Souohette, the hollow
trunk of a Tree; From hence the Sockets of the teeth. Soeks, from the Lat.
Socci, id. A Sod, from the Belg. Sode, Soode, a thick Turf; q. d. solida terra,
solid or firm earth. To Sodder, from the Fr. G. Souder, the Ital. Saldare, or
the Belg. Souderen, to cement; all from the Lat. Solidare, to make firm. Soft,
from the AS. Soft, the Teut. Saufft, or the Belg. Saft, Saeft, idem. To
Solourn, from the Fr. G. Sojourner, or the Ital. Soggiornare; q. d. Lat. Barb.
Subdiurnare, to stay abroad for some time. To Soke, from the AS. Socian, to
macerate, or make tender; and this from the Lat. Succus, Juice. To Solace, from
the Fr. G. Solacer, or the Ital. Solazzare, to comfort; and these from the Lat.
Solatium, consolation. Sultan, or Sultan, from the Fr. G. Souldan, Sultan, the
Ital. Sultano, or the Hisp. Sultan, a King or Governor; also, Dominion or
Power, as Covarruv. says; who draws this last from the Heb. Silton, a
Principality. Some, a termination denoting some quality, from the AS. Some, or
the Eng. Some; q. d. having somewhat of such a quality. Some, from the AS. Some,
Sum, Sum, some body; Sumthing, something. Merc. Cas. draws it from the Gr.
(...), a Body. A Son, from the AS. Suna, the Belg. Sone. the Teut. Sohn, or the
Fr. Th. Sun, idem. A Sonnet, from the Fr. G. Sonnet, or the It Sonnetto, a
short song; all a sonitu, from the sound. Soon, from the AS. Sona, idem. Soot,
from the AS. Sot, Soote, idem; and both not unlikely from the Belg. and Teut.
Sieden, or the AS. Seodan, to sees. To Sooth one, from the AS. Gesothian, to
flatter, or humor one; this from the AS. Soth, true; q. d. to take all that
one says, for true, as Parasites craftily do. Soothsayer, for a Diviner, from
the AS. Soth, true, and Say. (i. e.) one that says what is true; q.d.
Truth-sayer. Sop, from the Belg. Soppe, the Fr. G. Soupe, the Ital. Soppa, or
the Hisp. Sopa, idem; all from the AS. Supan, to sup. Soap, from the AS. Sape,
the Dan. Sabe, the Belg. Seepe, or the Teut. Seiff; id. whence the AS. Sapan,
the Teut. Seiffen, and the Belg. Seepen, to dawb with soap; all from the Lat.
Sapo, idem; this ex Sapore, from the smell. Sorcerer, and Sorcery, from the Fr.
G. Sorcier, a Magician; Sorciere, a Witch; and all from the Lat. Sortire, to
cast lots. Sore, from the Belg. Swaer, the Teut. Schwer, or the AS. Saer, Sar,
id. grievous. A Sore, from the Belg. Sore, the Run. Dan. Sar, or the Dan Saar,
a wound, or ulcer. Sorrel, an herb; from the Fr. G. Sorel, Surelle, idem; and
all from our word Sour. Sorrow, and Sorry, from the AS. Sar, or the Dan.
Sorrig, id. hence the AS. Sarian, Besargian, to be sorrowful: or from the AS.
Sorge, the Teut. Sorg, or the Belg. Sorghe, sorrow, or care. Sort, from the Fr.
G. or Ital. Sort, a kind; and both from the Lat. Sors: And from hence the
Ital. Assortare, to sort; (i. e.) to divide into distinct parcels. Sot, from
the AS. and F. G. Sot, a Fool, or very stupid fellow. Menag. draws it from the
Ital. Stolto, striking out t and l. Skinner draws it from the Gr. (...), a
gluttonous person; as we say, a Drunken Sot. Sovereign, from the Fr. G.
Souverain, or the Ital. Sovrano, Soprano, he that is placed supra omnes, above
all. Soul, from the AS. Sal, Saul, the Dan. Siel, the Belg. Siele, or the Teut.
Seele, the same. Soldier, from the Fr. G. Soldat, the Ital. Soldato; or the
Hisp. Soldado, idem; whence the Fr. G. Souldoyer, and It. Assoldare, to make
one a Soldier in pay; and all from the Ital. Soldo, a Shilling; for that is the
Money commonly given a Soldier when his Name is entered into the list. Sound,
from the AS. and Dan. Sund; the Belg. Shesond, or the Teut. Sesuud, firm, whole
or safe. A Sound, from the Fr. G. Son, idem; and both from the Lat. Sonus, the
same. To Sound the depth of water, from the Fr. G. Sonder, idem. Sonde, a
sounding Line. Source, from the Fr. G. Source, a Fountain, whose waters sursum
surgunt, spring up aloft. Sour, from the AS. and Dan. Sur, the Belg. Suer,
Soer, the Fr. G. Seure, or the Teut. Sawer, idem; whence the AS. Surigan,
Asurigan, to grow sour or tart. The South, from the Belg. Suyd, the Teut. Fr.
G. and It. Sud, or the AS. Suth, idem. A Sow, from the AS. Sugu, the Teut. Saw,
or the Belg. Soegh, or Souwe, id. which come all from the Lat. Sus, idem; and
this from the Gr. (...), to sacrifice. To Sow, from the AS. Saan, the Belg.
Saeden, Saeyen; or the Teut. Saen, to sow seed; and all from the Lat. Sero,
idem. To Sow, or Sew, a Garment, from the Dan. Syer, or the AS. Siean, idem;
and all from the Lat. Suo, idem. Sowse, or Pickle, from the Lat. Salsum, that
which is salt or briny. Soil for ground, from the Ital. Sogliare, or the Fr. G.
Souiller, to sully. A Soil, as A fat Soil, from the Lat. Solum, land, or soil.
To Soil, from the Fr. G. Souiller, or the Ital. Sogliare, to make foul; these
from the Lat. Solum, earth; q. d. to bespatter with clay. Menagius draws it
from the word Suillare, to play the Sow. Write Soil. A Spade, from the AS.
Spadu, the Teut. Spate, or the Dan. and Belg. Spade, idem. Spalls, chips of
wood; from the Teut. Spalten, to split. A Span, from the AS. Span, the Fr. G.
Espan, the Ital. Spanna, or the Belg. and Teut. Spanne, idem; and all from the
Belg. and Teut. Spannen, to extend, or stretch forth; and this Martin. derives
from the Lat. Expandere, to spread out. A Spangle, from the Belg. Spanghe, or
the Teut. Spang, Spange, idem. Spaniel, from the Fr. G. Epagneul, or Espaignol,
idem; or q. d. Lat. Canis Hispanicus, a Spanish Dog; because the best of that
kind are bred in Spain. The Spar of a Door, from the Belg. Sparre, Sperre, or
the Teut. Sparr, a bar, or bolt; whence the AS. Sparran, and the Teut. Sperren,
Emsperren to spar, or bolt a door. Sparables, little iron nails; q. d. Sparrow
bills, for the similitude: Or from the AS. Sparran, to spar, or shut up, and
the productive Term. able. To Spare, from the AS. Sparian, the Fr. G.
Espargner, the Ital. Sparagnare, or the Belg. Spaeren, idem; and all from the
Lat. Parcere, to spare. Sparkle, and Spark, from the AS. Spaerc, or the Belg.
Spaercke, Sparcke, idem; whence Sparckelen, to sparkle. From hence the word
following, viz. To Sparkle, as Wine, or Cider, when filled out. Skinner draws
it from the Teut. Sparteln, to move upward hastily. A Sparrow, from the AS.
Speara, the Teut. Sperling, or the Dan. Spur, id. Mer. Cas. draws it from the
Lat. Passer, idem. Sp^rs for an House, from the Teut. Sperren, to stretch
forth. To Spatter, from the AS. Spaetlian, to slabber. V. Spit. A Spattle, from
the Ital. Spatola, Spatella, or the Lat. Spathula, a slice wherewith
Surgeons spread their plasters. A Spavain, from the Fr. G. Espavent,
Espervain, or the Ital. Spavano, a disease among Horses. Spawn of fishes, from
the Belg. Spene, Spenne, breast-milk; for the similitude: Or from the AS.
Spana, a pap, or nipple. To Speak, from the AS. Spaecan, Spraecan, the Belg.
Spreken, or the Teut. Sprechen, idem: Whence the AS. Spaece, and the Teut.
Spraach, a speech. Mer. Cas. draws it from the Gr. (...), to speak. A Spear,
from the AS. Spear, in Aelfricus, Spear, or the Teut. Spehr, Speer, id. or
perhaps from the Lat. Sparus, a dart. Fr. Jun. draws it from the Gr. (...), to
brandish. A Speck, from the AS. Specce, a spot; from hence the Diminutive
Speckle. Special, from the Lat. Specialis, idem. Spectacles, a Spectando, from
looking, or seeing through. Speed, as Good Speed; from the AS. Sped, a
progression; whence Spedian, to grow rich, or happy: Or from the Belg. Spoed,
haste; whence Spoeden, to make haste; all from the Lat. Expedire, to dispatch.
To Spell, from the Belg. Spellen: Or from the Fr. G. Espeler, idem; and all,
not unlikely, from the AS. Spel, an history, or speech. To Spend, from the AS.
Spendan, Aspendan, the Teut. Spenden, the Ital. Spendere, or the Fr. G.
Despendre, id. and all from the Lat. Dispendere, or Expendere, to lay out
money. Sperage, or Asparagus, from the Teut. Sparge, Spargen, the Fr. G.
Asperge, or the Lat. Asparagus, idem. To Spew, from the AS. Spian, the Teut.
Speyen, or the Belg. Spouwen, idem; and all from the Lat. Spuo, idem. Spice, He
has a Spice of it; from the Fr. G. Espece, or the Lat. Species, a species, or
kind of things; and from hence also the plural word Spices. Spider, q. d.
Spinder, or Spinner, from our word Spin. To Spill, or Spoil, from the AS.
Spillan, or the Belg Spillen, to waste. V, Spoil. To Spin, from the AS.
Spinnan, the Dan. Spinder, or the Belg. and Teut. Spinnen, idem; Mer. Cas.
draws it from the Gr. (...), to weave. I should choose rather to take it from
the Gr. (...), to draw out. To Spin out, as water out of a fountain; from the
Ital. Spingere, Spingersi, to break out violently. Spinach, from the Belg.
Spinagie, the Ital. Spinacchia, or the Lat. Barb. Spinachia, the same; q. d.
Lat. Spinata herba, a prickly, or acuminated herb. Spindle, from the AS.
Spindel, or Spindl, id. and all from our word Spin. Spink, a bird by some so
called; from the Lat. Spinus, a Sisken, a bird that sings inter Spinas, among
Sloetrees. A Spinner, from the Belg. and Teut. Spinne, a little Spider; and
both from our word Spin. A Spire of a Steeple: Minsh. draws it from the AS.
Spyrian; with us, to spy: Others, from the Ital. Spira, a sharp topp'd Tower;
and this we have from the Lat. Pyra, a a funeral-pile, for the similitude. A
Spit, from the AS. Spitu, the Belg. Spit, Spet, the Ital. Spedo, Spiedo, or
Spetto, id. Or from the Teut. Spitz, a point. To Spit, from the AS. Spaetan, or
the Teut. Sputzen, idem; and all from the Gr. (...), to spit, s being added; or
from the sound. Spite, from the Belg. Spiit, hatred; whence Spiiten, to hate,
to have a spite against one; and both Contracts of Despite; which see.
Spit-fish, from the Ital. Spetto, id. a fish so called, from the similitude of
a spit. A Spitter, an Heart of two years old, from our word Spit; for at that
age his horns, not yet knagg'd, stand straight forth, like the end of a spit.
Spittle, a Contract of Hospital; which see in its place. A Splatch of dirt,
from the AS. Specce, a spot, or speck; by an Epenthesis of the letter l. Splay,
as Splay- foot; either from Plautus the Comedian, having feet wonderfully
distorted; or from our word Display, to spread out. Splinter, from the Belg.
Splinter, or the Dan. Splind, id. whence Splinteren, to cut in splinters; and
all from our Verb, To Split. Splint, a disease in Horses; from the preceding
word Splinter, because of its hardness, and painful pricks. To Split, from the
Belg. Splitten, Splitten, Spletten, the Teut. Spalten, or the Dan. Splitter,
idem. Spokes, from the AS. Spacan, the Teut. Speyche, or the Ital. Spighe della
Rota, the spoaks of a wheel. Spole, and from thence The Spoling Wheel; from the
Belg. Spoelen, to wind on such a wheel; or Spoele, a clew of thread; and from
hence the word Spoel-worm, being a worm in Man's body, in form like a spole of
thread. Sport, from the Ital. Diporto, or the Fr. G. Deport, pass-time. Spot,
from the Teut. Spott, disgrace, ignominy; as we use the phrase, A Blot, or
Spot, in his Escutcheon. Spouse, from the Fr. G. Espouse, or the Ital. Sposa,
idem; and both from the Lat. Sponsa, a Bride; and this a Spondendo, from
betrothing. A Spout, from the Teut. Sprutze, the same; whence Sprutzen, to
sprinkle: Or from the Belg. Spuyte, idem; whence Spuyten, to spout, or spin
out. A Sprat, from the Dan. and Belg. Sprot, a fish so called. To Sprawl,
perhaps from the Fr. G. Preau, idem; or the Belg. Sprieel, a grass-plat; q. d.
to tumble, as it were, wantonly upon the grass. Spread, from the Teut.
Spreiten, the Dan. Spraeder, or the Belg. Spreeden, Spreyden, id. A Sprig, or
young branch, from the AS. Spric, idem. A Spring, from the AS. Spring, the
Teut. Sprung, or the Belg. Springh, id. whence the AS. Spryngan, and the Belg.
Springhen, id. From hence, The Springtime. To Spring a Mine; from the Teut.
^ine mine Sprengen. A Springal, or brisk Youth; from our word Spring, q. d. A
Sprigg of a Man. To Sprinkle, from the Teut. Sprengen, or the Belg.
Sprinckelen, or Sprenghen, idem. Some draw it from the Dan. Besprenger, to
dash, or bespatter. Sprout, from the AS. Spryttan, Sprutan, the Teut. Sprossen,
or the Belg. Sprotten, Spruyten, to spring forth in stalks and sprigs; whence
the AS. Sprote, the Teut. Sprosz, and the Belg. Spruyte, a branch of a tree, or
plant. Spruce, fine, gallant; from the Fr. G. Preux, dexterous, or nimble; and
this from the Lat. Probatus, one approved of, or well liked. Spur, from the AS.
Spora, the Dan. and Belg. Spore, or the Teut. Spohr, id. whence the Belg.
Sporen, and the Teut. Spohren, to spur an Horse. To Spurn, from the AS.
Spornan, idem; also to contemn. v. Spur. To Spurt, from the Belg. Sprutte a
spout; or Spruyten, to spring upward. V. Squirt. To Spy, from the Fr. G.
Espier, the Ital. Spiare, the Hisp. Espiar, or the Belg. Spien, to spy; whence
the Fr. G. Epsy, Espion, the Ital. Spia, and the Hisp. Espia, Espion, a Spy,
or Scout. A Squadron, from the Fr. G. Squadron, Escadron, or the Ital.
Squadrone, idem; and all from the Lat. Quadrata Acies, an Army drawn up in
square form. To Squall, or Squeal out, from the Fr. Th. Skellan, or the Teut.
Schallen, idem. To Squander, from the Ital. Spandere, to spend: Or from the Fr.
G. Espandre, to waste riotously; and both from the Lat. Expandere, to display.
Square, from the Fr. G. Carre, idem; this from Carrer, Quadrer, or the Ital.
and Lat. Quadrare, to make square. A Square for Carpenters, from the Fr. G.
Esquierre, or the Ital. Squadra, idem; and these from the Lat. Quadra, a square
trencher. To Squat down, from the Ital. Quatto, Chiatto, flat upon the ground;
these from the Verbs Quattare, or Chiattare, to fall flat. Squeak from the
Belg. Quacken, Queken, to quake like a Duck: Or from the Ital. Squittire, to
squeak like a Parrot; all from the sound. Squcamish, q. d. Qualmish, V. Qualm:
Or from the Dan. Vaemmis, to loath, or to be ready to vomit. To Squeese, from
the AS. Cpysan, or the Ital. Schizzare, or Scassiare, Squacciare, to press; and
this from the Lat. Quassare, to bruise; or Cassare, to make void, or empty (to
wit) of juice. Squibs, from the Teut. Schieben, to cast forth, or throw.
Squint, from the Gr. (...); for that Squint-eyes cause shame, and are a bad
sign in Physiognomy: Or from the AS. Scendan, or the Teut. Schenden, Schanden,
to scandalize. A Squire, from the Fr. G. Escuyer, or the Ital. Scudiere,
Scudiero, id. and these from the Fr. G. Escu, the Ital. Scudo, or the Lat.
Scutum, a shield. A Squirrel, from the Fr. G. Escurieu, or the Ital.
Schiriuolo, Sciurro, id. and all from the Lat. Sciurus; and this (...), from
the shadow of its tail. To Squirt, V. Spirt. To Stab, from the Teut. Staven, to
thrust in. A Stack, from the Ital. Stacca, Staccia, or the Teut. Stock Hew, a
stack of Hay: Or from the Belg. and Teut. Stecken, to stick. Staff, from the
AS. Staef, the Belg. Staf, or the Teut. Sab, idem. Fr. Jun. draws it from the
Gr. (...), to walk. Stag^ Minshew takes it from the Gr. (...), to walk; tho
more likely from the AS. Stican, or the Teut. Stecken, to push; for that his
horns are adapted thereto. Stage: Some draw it from the Fr. G. Estage, the
planking, or laying a floor: Others, from the AS. Stigan, the Teut. Steigen, or
the Belg. Steeghen, Stiighen, to go up. Stage, as A Stage-Coach, wherein we are
carried a journey, limited for each day; from the Lat. Statio, a station, or
standing place, to wit, for the Coach. Stag- Fly, having this name from the
similitude of its horns to those of a Stag. To Stagger, from the Belg.
Staggeren, idem; from hence also The Staggers, a disease among Horses. To
Stain, or Distain, from the Fr. G. Desteindre, id. q. d. Lat. Distingere, to
undye, or spoil the color. A Stainand color, a term in Heraldry; q. d. A
Staining color, disgracing Nobility. A Stair, from the AS. Staeger, or the
Belg. Stegher, idem; these from the AS. Stigan, and the Belg. Steeghen,
Stegghen, to ascend by steps. A Stake, from the Hisp. Estaca, a wooden stake;
and both from the Teut. Stecken, to stick. A Stake, or Wager, from the word To
Stick; it being publicly stuck up, for the Winner's reward. Stale Liquors,
perhaps from the word Stale, for Urine; but rather from the Belg. Stel, old. To
Stale, from the Teut. Stallen, or the Belg. Stalen, to piss; whence Stalle,
piss. A Stalk, from the Teut. Stiel, or the Belg. Steel, Stele, idem; and these
from the AS. Stigan, or the Teut. Steigen, to go up. To Stalk, from the AS.
Staelcan, to step a little and softly, to go in stilts. To Stall, i. e. to eat
till ye loath it; from the AS. Stal, or the Teut. Stall, a stable; by a
Metaphor drawn from a beast fatted in the stable, or at the stall. Stall, from
the AS. Stal, the Dan. and Teut. Stall, or the Ital. Stalla, the same; whence
the AS. Styllan, to put into its stall, or place. Stallion, from the Fr. G.
Estalon, or the Ital. Stallone, a stoned Horse; all from the AS. and Belg.
Stal, or the Ital. Stalla, a stable. To Stammer, from the AS. Stamor, he that
stammereth: Or from the Belg. Stameren, or the Teut. Stammeln, id. A Stamp,
from the Fr. G. Estampe, the Hisp. Estampa, or the Ital. Stampa, an impression;
whence the Hisp. Estamper, and the Ital. Stampare, to stamp. To Stamp with the
foot, from the Teut. Stampffen, the Dan. Stamper, or the Belg. Stampen, to
stamp upon, to trample under the feet. Stanch, from the Fr. G. Estancher, to
stop blood; both from the Ital. and Lat. Stagnare, to stand as water; (i. e.)
to make the blood stand or remain in the vessels, as water in a pond, without
issuing out. Stanchion, from the Fr. G. Estanson, a prop; this a Stando, from
standing. To Stand, from the AS. Standan, or the Belg. Staen, id. whence Stand,
a standing-place; from hence, To Stand at out, and the Teut. Beystenen, to
stand by one, to take his part; all from the Gerund Stando. Standard, from the
Fr. G. Estandart, the Hisp. Estandarte, or the Ital. Stendardo, id. all ab
Extendendo, from being extended, or displayed. Stang, from the Teut. Stange, or
the AS. Staeng, a wooden bar, or stake. Stanza, a method of Verses, containing
four, six, or eight lines a-piece; from the Ital. Stanza, or Stantia, a
Chamber, or room; these rows of Verses being proportioned one to another, like
to the floors or contignations of an house; and both a Stando, from standing.
It is metaphorically borrowed of Architects. Staple, from the Fr. G. Estape, or
the Dan. and Teut. Stapel, a Market, or place constituted for the sale of all
such Goods as are by Law to be there exposed, and no where else. Boxhorn. draws
it from the word Stapelen, to heap up in one place, this from the Lat. Stipare,
to cram, or fill up. Spelman seems to draw it from the Lat. Stabulum, or
Statio, for that there are in such a Market stalls, and standing-places. The
Staple of a door, from the AS. Staple, or Stapul, the same. Star, from the AS.
Steorra, the Belg. Sterre, or the Belg. and Teut. Stern, Stern, the same; all
from the Gr. (...), idem; this from the the Pers. Ster, idem, says learned
Vossius in voc. Stella. Starboard, the right side of a ship, where the Pilot is
exercised; from the AS. Steoran, the Belg. Stieren, Stuyeren, or the Teut.
Stewren, to stear a course, and Board. Starch, from the Teut. Starck, stiff;
whence Starcken, to stiffen, to starch. A Stare, or Starling, from the AS. and
Dan. Staer, the Teut. Staar, or the Belg. Star, idem; and all from the Lat.
Sturnus, idem; this from the Gr. (...), spread, by reason of the great numbers
they fly in. To Stare, from the AS. Starian, or the Belg. Starren, id. Or from
the Belg. Sterren, to shine like a star; the eyes exerting themselves, draw up
such plenty of the optic spirits, that they look like stars. Stark, from the
AS. Sterc, the Belg. and Dan. Sterck, the Teut. Starck, or the Fr. Th. Starc,
idem. Mer. Cas. draws it from the Gr. (...), to make firm. Somnerus ingeniously
draws it from the AS. Strace, idem; by a Metathesis (...) r. Start, from the
Teut. Starren, to stare like one terrified, to be affrighted; when any thing
affrights us unawares, we start back, thinking to decline the danger. Starve,
from the AS. Steorfan, the Belg. Sterven, or the Teut. Sterben, to die, or
perish. Stately, from the Belg. Statelick, Staerigh, or the Teut. Stattlich,
idem; these from the Belg. Stact, with us State; and all from the Lat. Status,
a condition. Stationers, Tradesmen so called, perhaps because they lived
together in one station, or street primarily. A Ship Staved to pieces, perhaps
from the Belg. Stowen, to drive; for it is meant of a ship forcibly struck
against the shore, and so split. A Stay, from the Belg. Staeyt, Staede, or the
Fr. G. Estaye, idem; whence Estayer, to sustain, or hold up. To Stay, from the
Belg. Staen, the Dan. Staar, or the Teut. Steben, to stand; all from the Lat.
Stare, idem; and this from the Gr. (...), to stand: From hence, To Stay one, or
detain him. Stead, from the AS. Steda, the Belg. Stad, Stead, or the Teut.
Staet, idem. Steady, from the AS. Staethig, or the Belg. Stedigh, idem; all
from the AS. Steda, a place, or stead. Steak, from the AS. Sticce, or the Teut.
Stuck, a chop, or piece of flesh. To Steal, from the AS. Staelan, the Dan.
Stieler, the Belg. Stelen, or the Teut. Stehlen, idem. Steam, from the AS.
Steam, idem; whence Steman, to cast a steam, and Styman, to smoke. To Stear,
from the Fr. Th. Stiureu, the Belg. Stuyren, the Teut. Stewern, or the AS.
Steoran, to rule, or guide a ship; all from the Belg. Stier, or the Teut.
Stewer, the stern, or helm. Steadfast, from the AS. Steda, a Place, and Fast; q.
d. that which is fast or unmovable from its place. Steed, from the AS. Steda,
or Stod, a stoned Nag; or perhaps from the Lat. Stadium, a course; q. d. a
Courser, or Race-horse. Steel, from the Dan. Staal the Teut. Stahl, or the
Belg. Stael, idem. To Steep, from the Belg. Stippen, to sop; or the AS. Sipan,
to soke. Steep, Steep Hill, from the AS. Steap, idem; and both perhaps from the
word Step; for steep places are generally made with steps, for the easiness of
ascent and descent. Steeple, from the AS. Steopl, in Aelfricus Stypel, idem;
and both from our word Steep. A Steer, from the AS. Styre, Steor, Styrc, or the
Belg. and Teut. Stier, idem. Stem, from the Teut. Stamm, idem; and both from
the Lat. and Gr. Stemma, idem. Step, from the AS. Staep, or the Belg. Stap, or
Step, id. whence the AS. Steppan, Staepan, to step; Fr. Jun. draws it from the
Gr (...), to tread upon, to walk. Step, in composition, as in Stepmother, etc.
from the AS. Steop, cruel, or rigorous. Sterling, not as Buchanan would have
it, from Sterling, a town in Scotland; nor because of its having been stamped
with the figure of a Star or Starling, as some fondly conjecture; but from an
Eastern People, called Esterlings, Dosterlingers, who dwelt near the Balthick
Sea, and in those days were held the best Artificers in Gold, Silver, etc.
Stern, from the AS. Stern, idem; and this from the word to Stare. To Stew,
from the Fr. G. Estuve, the Ital. Stufa, or the Dan. Stue, a hot house; and
from hence a Stews, or Bawdyhouse. Stewed- Meat, Mer. Cas. draws it from the
Gr. (...), to boil with a soft fire. Steward, from the Belg. Stead, or the AS.
Steda, a Place, or Town, and Ward, a Keeper, or Guardian; or from Sto, a Place,
and the same Ward. To Stick, from the AS. Stican, the Belg. Sticken, or the
Teut. Stecken, to prick or stab. To Stick fast, from the AS. Stican, or the
Belg. and Teut. Stecken, idem. A Stick, from the Belg. Steck, Stock, or the
Ital. Stecco, the same. Stiff, from the Dan. St^^f, the Teut. Steiff, or the
AS. Stife, obstinate, settled in resolution: Hence the AS. Stifian, to grow
stiff or stark To Stefle, from the Fr. G. Estoufler, idem; or from the Belg.
Stippen, or Stuppen, to stop, to wit, the breath; and these from the Lat.
Stipare, idem. Style, to go over hedges by, from the AS. Stigele, idem; or the
Belg. Steeghe, Stegher, a stake or step; these from the AS. Stigan, the Teut.
Steigen, and the Belg. Steeghen, to climb. Stiletto, a short Italian Dagger. I
suppose from the similitude of a Roman Style, made small and sharp toward the
point. Still, from the AS. Dan. and Belg. Stille, or the Teut. Still, idem;
whence the AS. Styllan, the Belg. Stillen, and Dan. Steller, to appease. A
Still, a Stillando, or Destillando, from destilling. Stilts, from the Teut.
Steltze, the Belg. Stelten, or the AS. Staelc, id. whence Staelcan, to go in
stilts. Sting, from the AS. Stingan, to sting, Stinge, a sting; and all from
the Lat. Stingo, to prick. Stink, from the AS. Stenc, id. hence Stencan, and
the Belg. Stincken, to cast a strong smell, to stink. To Stint one, from the
AS. Stincan, to keep in; or from the Ital. Stento, or Estento, the utmost
Extent of any thing. Stir, from the AS. Styran, Astirian, to move, to make a
rout; or from the Belg. Stooren, to stir up or provoke. Stirrup, from the AS.
Stigan, the Belg. Steeghen, or the Teut. Steigen, to ascend, and the AS. Rape,
or the Belg. Reep, Roop, a Rope. Stitch, from the AS. Stice, or Teut Stich,
idem; hence Sticken, to stitch or prick with a needle. See Stick. Stithy, for a
Smith's Forge, from the AS. Stith, hard. A Stiver, from the Belg. Stuyver, or
the Teut Stuver, a Dutch Coin so called. Stock of a Tree, from the AS. Stocce,
the Belg. and Teut. Stock, or the Fr. G. Estoc, idem; and from hence our words,
Stock- blind, and Stock-still. Stock, for Progeny; from the Belg. and Teut.
Stock, or the Ital. Stocco, a stock or race. Stock, Money to trade withal, from
the other Stock of a Tree, by an elegant Metaphor; for as the Fruit and
Branches receive nourishment from the stock of a Tree, so men are maintained
out of that gain which does accrue to them by managing well their stocks.
Stock- Fish, (i. e.) a Fish as hard as the Stock of a Tree. Stockings, from the
Belg. Stecken, Steken, to stick Minsh. draws it from the Teut. Stecken, to put
on. Stocks, from the Teut. Stock, a pair of Stocks, and both from the AS.
Stocce, or the Belg. and Dan. Stock, the stock of a tree, by a Metonymia of the
Matter, for the Thing made of that Matter. Stone, from the Belg. and Dan.
Steen, the Teut. Stein, Steyn, or the AS. Stan, id. Whence Staenan, to stone.
Stool, from the AS. Stole, the Belg. Stoel, or the Teut. Stul, Stuhl, idem.
Mer. Cas. draws it from the Gr. (...), a Pillar. To Stoop, from the Belg.
Stoepen, Stuypen, to bend or incline the body. To Stop, from the Belg. Stoppen,
the Dan. Stopper, the Fr. G Estouper, or the Ital. Stoppare, to stop with flax,
or tow; this from Stuppo, Tow. Store, for plenty, from the Belg. Stuyr, or the
Teut. Stewer, an Alms whence Stuyren, and Stewern, to bestow, or contribute to
the poors maintenance A Storm, from the AS. Storm, the Teut. Sturm, or the
Ital. Stormo, idem. Stove, from the AS. Stofa, the Teut. Stube, the Fr. G.
Estuve, the Belg. Stove, or the Ital. Stufa, a hot-house. Menag. draws it from
the Gr. (...), to raise a smoke. Stout, from the Belg. Stout, courageous; also
high-minded; or the Teut. Stoliz, proud. Skinner draws it from the AS. Stut, a
Stoat, or Stallion, which are remarkable for strength and fierceness. To Stow,
Stove, or Steave, to put in its place, from the AS. Sto, a Place; or the Belg.
Stouwen, to accumulate, to heap up. To Straddle, Striddle, from our word
Stride. To Straggle, q. Straygle, from our word Stray; which see. To Strain,
from the Fr. G. Estreindre, Estraindre, id. and these from the Lat. Extringere.
A Strain, in writing, from the AS. Strenge, Progeny; q. d. an hereditary
faculty. To Stra n or Sprain the foot, from the Fr. G. Estraindre, to squeeze;
or from Dis, and the Fr. G. Trainer, to draw, pull. Mer Cas. draws it from the
Gr. (...), sharp, or pricking. Strait, a Strait Line, from the AS. Strace, or
the Belg. and Teut. Strack, idem; all from the AS. Astreccan, or the Belg. and
Teut. Strecken, to stretch, or extend; and from hence the Adverb Straight, or
Straightway. Write Straight. Strait, narrow; from the Fr. G. Estroit, Estroict,
or the Ital. Stretto, idem; and both from the Lat. Strictus, idem; from hence
the Straits, or Narrow Seas. The Struck of a Wheel, from the Belg Streke, a
streak, or line; it being the impression the wheel leaves in the dirt. Strand,
from the AS. and Teut. Strand, or the Belg. Strande, a shore, or bank of a
river. Strange from the Ital. Strano, or the Fr. G. Estrange, idem; q. d. Lat.
Extraneus, foreign, one of another land: From hence, A Stranger. Strangles,
from the Fr. G. Les Estranguillons, or the Teut. Strengel, a disease in Horses:
Or perhaps a Strangulando, from choking; because it stops the wind pipe in
such sort, that the beast infected breaths with pain. Strap of Leather, from
the Lat. Struppi, Stroppi, leather loops, or thongs. The Strappado, from the
Fr. G. Estrapade; or the Ital. Strappata, id. A Strapping, or Lusty Lass, from
the Ital. Strappare, to tear, q. d. una Massara Strappante, a Tearing Wench.
Straw, from the AS. Streo, the Belg. Stroo. or the Teut. Stroh, idem: Or from
the Teut. Straw, Strew, Litter laid under Horses: All from the Lat. Stratum,
that which is spread or strewed. A Stray, and Estray, from the Ital. Straviare,
to go astray; or ab extrahendo, from drawing out; for that stray Cattle are to
be drawn or taken out of other men's grounds. A Streak, from the AS. Strice, the
Belg. Streke, the Teut. Strich; or the Ital. Stricca, a Line: Whence the Belg.
Stricken, the Teut. Streichen; and Ital. Striccare, to draw in Streaks or
Lines: All from the Lat. Striga, a Furrow. Stream, from the AS. Stream, the
Belg Stroom; or the Teut. Strom, the current of a river. Streamer, the Colors
of a Ship, so called, because it flaggs to and again like streams or waves of
water. Street, from the AS. Stret, Straete, the Dan. Straede, the Belg. Straet,
or the Ital. Strada, a way. Stress, from the AS. Strece, force; see Distress,
and Strain. Stretch from the AS. Astraecan; or the Teut. and Belg. Strecken, to
extend. Minsh. derives it from the Lat. Extractus, drawn, or plucked out. To
Strew, or Strew, from the AS. Streian, Stregian, the Belg. Stroyen or the Teut.
Strawen, idem; all from the Gr. (...), of the old Verb (...), the same. A
Strickle, to mete corn justly withal, from the Teut. Streichen, to stretch or
reach; also to make even; and from hence a Strike of Corn, a Lincolnshire
Measure, equal to the London Bushel. To Stride, from the AS. Straede, a Pace;
the Teut. Schreiten, or Belg. Schriiden, to straddle, Beschryden, to Bestride a
horse. Or from the Dan. Staar til Strids, to stand astride. To Strike, from the
AS. Astrican, the Teut. Streichen, or the Dan. Stricker, id. To Strike Sail,
from the Belg. Striicken het Seil; or the Teut. Die segel Streichen, to lower,
or to gather up the sails. String, from the AS. Strenge, or the Belg Strenghe,
Stringhe, id. Or most likely, from the Ital. Strenga, or Stringa, a point with
tags; all a Stringendo, from tying. Strings of an instrument, from the Dan.
Streng, idem. V. String, above. To Strip, from the Belg Stroopen, or
Af-stroopen, to strip off ones cloths. Stripe, from the Belg. Strepe, idem;
whence Strepen, to make striped or streaked: Or secondarily, from the Teut.
Streichen, to scourge. Stripling, q. d. Tripling, a Tripudiando, from tripping:
Or rather, from the word Stripe, and the diminutive Termination Ling, denoting
a Youth, not yet exempt from the chastisement of the rod. To Strive, from the
Belg. Streven, the Teut. Streben, or the Fr. G. Estriver, to contend. To Stroke
gently, or softly, from the AS. Stracan, the Dan. Stryger, or the Ital.
Striccare, or Stregolare, idem. V. Streak. Strong, from the AS. Strange, the
Teut. and Dan. Streng, or the Belg. Strengh, idem; and all from the Lat.
Strenuus, stout; this from the Gr. (...), valiant. The Stroppings of a Cow's
milk, from the Belg. Stroppen, to press hard; or from the word, To Stroke; q.
d. Strokings. Struggle, a depravation of our word Strove; or q. Strougle, from
Strong. Casau. draws it from the Gr. (...), or (...), to waste, or be spent
drop after drop, little by little. A Strumpet, from the Fr. G. Tromper, to
cheat one; or the Belg. Stront, excrements, and our word Pot; q.d. fit only --
To Strut, from the Teut. Strutzen, idem. Minshew reads it, Strout, q. Streich
out. A Stub, from the AS. Stybbe, or the Belg. Stobbe, id. and both from the
Lat. Stipes, a stick, or stock of a tree. Stubble, from the Belg. and Teut.
Stoppel, the Ital. Stoppole, or the Fr. G. Estouble, idem, and all from the
Lat. Stipula, the same. Stubborn, q. Stout born, Minshew. Stud, from the AS.
Studu, a broad nail, or boss. Stuff, a sort of cloth; from the Belg. Stoffe, or
the Fr. G. Estoffe, idem. Stuff, for Matter; from the Ital. Stoffo, Stoffa,
matter whereof any thing is made. Stum of Wine, perhaps from the Belg. Stom, or
the Teut. Stumm, dumb; it being so hard stopped, as that it cannot purge it
self: Or from the Teut. Stumpff, dull, without spirits. To Stumble, from the
Dan. Snubler, or the Teut. Stolpern, idem. Stump of a Tree, from the Dan.
Stump, the Belg. Stompe, or the Teut. Stumpff, id. whence the Belg. Stompen,
and the Teut. Stumpffen, to cut a tree off at the stump. To Stunn, from the Fr.
G. Estonner, idem; both from the Lat. Attonitum facere, to make afraid.
Sturgeon, from the Fr. G. Estourgeon, the Ital. Storione, the Belg. Steur, or
the Lat. Barb. Sturio, idem. Stutter, from the Teut. Stutzen, id. also to cast
headlong; all from the sound. A Sty for Hogs, from the AS. Stige, the Dan.
Suine-Stig, or the Ital. Stia, idem. Sty, a swelling upon the eyelid; from the
AS. Stigan, to grow up; or the Gr. (...), a peble, for its hardness. To Subdue,
from the Lat. Subdere, idem. Such, from the AS. Sylce, the Belg. Solt, Sulk, or
the Teut. Solch, idem. To Suck, from the AS. Succan, the Fr. G. Succer, or the
Ital Succhiare, id. all from the Lat. Sugere, id. this from the Gr. (...),
moist. Sudden, from the Fr. G. Soudain, or the AS. Soden, id. and all of them
Contracts of the Lat. Subitaneus, hasty. Suds to wash withal, from the AS.
Seothan, to sees; whence Asothen, sodden. To Sue at Law, from the Fr. G.
Suivre, or the Ital. Seguire, to pursue. Sugar, from the Fr. G. Sucre, the
Ital. Zuccaro, the Hisp. Acucar, the Teut. Zucker, or the Lat. Barb. Saccharum,
id. Suit, from the Fr. G. Suitte, a prosecution at Law; this from Suivre, to
follow. Sullen, q. d. Lat. Solaneus, one that loves to be all alone. Sultry,
dark, close weather; q. d. Sweltry, from the word To Swelt, or stifle with too
much heat; or, q. d. Sulphury, from Sulphur, brimstone. Summer, from the AS.
Sunna, the Sun; or, q. d. Belg. Son Here, Master of the Sun: Or from the same
Sun, and the AS. Maera, marks, or limits; q. Sunmer. To Summon, from the Fr.
G. Semondre, idem; or q. d. Lat. Submonere, to warn, or give notice; from
hence, A Summoner, and Summons, or Citation to appear before lawful Authority.
Sumpler-Horse, from the Belg. Sum, or the Ital. Soma, Salma, a burden; these
from the Gr. (...), idem. Sun from the AS. Sun, the Belg. Son, or the Teut.
Son, the same. Sundry, from the AS Sunder, or the Teut. Sonder, several;
whence Sunderlich, singularly. To Sup, from the AS. Supan, the Dan. Sober, the
Belg. Soffen, or the Teut. Supffen, idem. Supple, from the Fr. G. Souple, soft;
this from the Lat. Sub, somewhat, and Plico, to fold; q. d. that which may be
folded or bent as you will. A Suppliant, from the Fr. G. Suppliant, humble; and
both from the Lat. Supplicare, to beseech, or make supplication. To Suppose,
from the Fr. G. Supposer, idem; and both from the Lat. Supponere, id. To
Surbeat, or be Surbeaten upon the feet, by traveling far; from the Fr. G.
Soubattre, or the Ital. Sobbattere, idem; q. d. Lat. Subtus Batuere V. Beat. To
Surcharge, from the Fr. G. Surcharger, to over-charge, or load. Sure, from the
Fr. G. Seur, id. and this a Contract of the Lat. Securus, safe: And from hence
our word Surety. Surface, from the Fr. G. Surface; and both from the Lat.
Superficies, the outside of any thing. To Surfeit, from the Ital. Soprafare,
to load, or oppress: Or from the Lat. Supra, and Facere, to do too much, (i.
e.) to eat more than tends to the conservation of health. Surge, an high wave;
a Surgendo, because it rises up aloft. Surgeon, a Contract of the Fr. G.
Chirurgien; and both from the Lat. Chirurgus, id. this from the Gr. (...), the
hand, and (...), a work; q. d. a Manual Operator. Su^joinder, or rather
Surrejoinder, a term in the Law, which denotes a Trippling, (i. e.) the
Plaintiff's second Defense, made against the Defendant's Rejoinder; from the
Fr. G. Surjoindre, now out of use; this from the Lat. Suprajungere, or
Superrejungere, to join the third time; (i. e.) to adjoin a new Answer to the
two former. Surly, morose; from the AS. Surlic, sowrly. A Surmise, from the Fr
G Surmise, id. a Verbal of the Lat. Supermittere, to put above; (i. e.) to
place first in the mind. To Surmount, from the Fr. G. Surmonter, or the Ital.
Surmontare, idem; q. d. Lat. Super Montem ascendere, to get upon a mountain. V.
To Mount above. Surname, Surname, from the Fr. G. Surnom, or the Ital.
Sopranome, idem: Or, q. d. Lat Supernomen, a name added over and above the name
given in Baptism. A Surp^is, from the Fr. G. Surplis, idem. Surplus, or
Surplusage, from the Fr. G. Surplus, that which does remain; q. d. Lat. Supra
plus. To Surprise, from the Fr. G. Surprendre, or the Ital. Sopraprendere, to
take hold on unawares; and from hence the Fr. G. Surpris, and the Ital.
Soprapreso, a surprise. To Surrender, from the old Fr. G. Surrendre, idem. To
Survey, from the old Fr. G. Surveoir, idem; this from the Lat. Super, and
Videre, to overlook. V. View. To Survive, from the Fr. G. Survivre, idem; q.
d. Lat. Super vivere, to outlive. To Sustain, from the Fr. G. Sustenir, or the
Ital. Sostenere, idem; and both from the Lat. Sustinere, the same. A Suit of
Cloths, from the Lat. Suta, a Participle of Suo, to sow up: Or rather, from the
Fr. G. Suitte, a Verbal of Suivre, to follow; because one thing is agreeable
to, or follows another: As we say, I Will follow him; that is, have such cloths
as he has; and so suit, or fit him. A Sutteler, from the Belg. Soeteler, or the
Teut. Sudler, a Seller of subtle, or small wares. Swaddle, from the AS.
Sethele. or the Belg. Swadel, a swaddling cloth; whence the AS. Besethan, to
swathe. To Swagger, from the Belg. Swaddern, to be huffish, or the AS. Segan,
to keep a bustle. Swain, A Country-Swain, from the AS. San, a Herdsman, or
Sang, a Labourer; this from Sincan, to work. A Swallow, from the AS. Salee, the
Dan. Svale, or the Belg. Swaeluwe, idem. To Swallow, from the AS. Selgan, the
Teut. Schwelgen, or the Belg. Swelghen, to devour whole; from Swelgh, the jaws.
Swamp, or Swomp, from the Teut. Schwanck, slim, or lean. Swan, from the AS.
San, the Teut. Schwan, or the Belg. Swaen, idem. Swarm, from the AS. Eearm, the
Belg. Swerm, or the Dan. Busverm, a swarm of Bees; whence the AS. Searmian, the
Belg. Swermen, and the Teut. Schwarmen, to fly in swarms. Swarthy, from the AS.
Seart, or the Dan. Sort, brown: Or from the Belg. Swart, or the Teut. Schwartz,
tauny skinn'd. Swash- Buckler, a Bravado, one that can swash or clatter his
Buckler and Arms together better than fight; that makes a great cry, and a
little wool: From the Belg. Swadderen, to make a noise. A Swath of Grass or
Hay, from the Belg. Swade, id. To Sway, or Bear Rule; from the Teut. Schweben,
to move a cause as one pleases. To Sweal away as a Candle, from the AS.
Saelan, to flame out. To Swear, from the AS. Serian, the Belg. Swaeren, or tha
Teut Schweren, the same. To Sweat, from the AS. Setan, the Dan. Svaeder, or the
Belg. Sweeten, idem: whence the AS. Saette, the Dan. Sved, and the Belg. Sweet,
sweat. To Sweep, from the AS. Seopan, Sapan, idem; or the Belg. Sweepen, to
lash. Sweet, from the AS. Saet, Sete, the Teut. Suess, or the Belg. Soet, Suet,
the same. Swell, from the AS. Sellan, the Teut. Schwellen, or the Belg.
Swellen, the same. V. Swollen. Swelt, and Swelter, to be stifled with heat;
from the AS. Seltan, or the Belg. Swelten, to faint away. To Swerve, from the
Belg. Swerven, to go from. Swift, from the AS. Sift, idem; this perhaps from
the Fr. Th. Sueven, to swim; or the Teut. Schweben, to move. To Swill, from the
AS. Selgan, or the Belg. Swelghen, to swallow. Swim, from the AS. Simman, the
Teut. Schwimmen, or the Belg. Swimmen, the same: Alias, from the Belg.
Sw^melen, or the Teut. Schwimmeln, to have a swimming in the head. Swine, from
the AS. Sin, the Dan. Svin, the Belg. Sw^n, or the Teut. Schwein, idem. Swing,
from the AS. Sengan, the Belg. Swinghen, or the Teut. Schwinghen, to shake, or
brandish: Or secondarily, from the AS. Sangettan, the Belg. Swancken, or the
Teut. Schwancken, Wancken, to wag, or swing upon a rope. Swinge, from the AS.
Singan, to scourge one; whence Sing, a scourge. Swoon, from the AS. Asunan, to
faint: Or from the Dan. Svinder, to pine away; or the AS. Sindan, and the Belg.
Swinden, to be in a fit. The judicious Dr. Th. H. draws it from the AS. Sesn, a
dream, or ecstasie. A Sword, from the Teut. Schwerd, the Dan. Sverd, the Belg.
Sweerd, or the AS. Seord, Surd, the same; from hence, A Sword-fish. Mer. Cas.
draws them all from the Gr. (...), iron. A Sword of Bacon; not from the other
Sword, as one would think; but rather from the AS. Seard, the Belg. Swaerde, or
the Teut. Schwarte, an Hog's skin; this from the Belg. Swert, Swart, or the
Teutonick Schwartz, swarthy; q. d. the outward skin, or rind of Bacon.
T.
TAbby, from the Ital. Tabi, or Tabino, a sort of wrought silk; or perhaps from
the Lat. and Gr. Tapes, Tapestry; any stuff wrought with pictures, or distinct
colors. Taber, from the Ital. Tamburro, the Hisp. Atambor, or the Fr. G.
Tabour, a musical instrument so called: Hence the Diminutive Tabeuret. Tables,
from the AS. Taefl, the Teut. Taffel, the Fr. G. Tablier, or the Ital.
Tavoliere, idem; and all from the Lat. Tabula, a board, or plank. To Tack, from
the Fr. G. Attacher, to attach; also to make fast. Tackle, from the Belg.
Taeckel, Taeckelinghe, the Tacklings of a Ship; Opteeckelen, to put up the
Tacklings. Taffety, from the Fr. G. and Ital. Taffeta; or the Hisp. Tafetan,
idem. Covarruv. draws it from Tiff Taff, the Ruffling noise it makes Tail,
Minsh. draws it from (...), an end, or a tegendo, from hiding or covering; or
rather from the AS. Taegl, idem; which Fr. Jun. draws from the Gr. (...) sharp;
or (...), a word found in Hesych. put for (...) a Tail. Some have drawn it from
the Lat. Talla, or Thallus, the blade of an Onion. A Tailour, from the Fr. G.
Tailleur, idem; this from Tailler, or the Ital. Tagliare, to cut. To Taint,
from the Fr. G. Teindre, to infect; and both from the Lat. Tingere, to stain,
to give a tincture. To Take, from the Dan. Tager, idem; or the Belg. Tacken, to
take hold on; or the Fr G. Attaquer, to attach; or from the old word Tago, for
Tango, to touch. Mer. Cas. derives it from the Gr. (...), id. Talbot, a Dog
whose Tail turns up like that of a Lion, from the AS. Taegl, a Tail, and Butan,
to turn again. A Tale, from the AS. Talu, idem; whence Tellan, and Belg. Talen,
Taelen, to Tell, or relate; from hence Talk. Tale, in numbering, from the AS.
Getael, idem; and both from our word Tell, or reckon. Tall, from the C. Br.
Tal, id. which Davis draws from the Heb. Telal, he has lifted up; or the Arab.
Tala, he was long. Tallow, from the Dan. Talg, Tell, or the Belg. Talgh, or
Talch, idem. Tallous, Birds claws, from the Fr. G. Talon, or the Ital. Tallone,
idem. A Tally, or stick to notch numbers upon; from the Lat. Talea, idem. Tame,
from the AS. Tame; or the Belg. Taem, Tam, id. whence the AS. Tamian, and the
Belg. Tammen, to tame. To Tamper with, by applying various Medicines; from the
Lat. Temperare, to mix (q. d.) to attempt a Cure with change of Medicines.
Tankard; Minsh. takes it to be a corruption of the Lat. Cantharus, a Jug;
perhaps from the Fr. G. Tangue, a little Cistern; or the Teut. Tuncken, to
fill, and Aerd, Nature; or from the sound its Cover gives in falling. To Tan,
and Tanner, from the Fr. G. Tanner, Tanneur, or the Belg. Tanner, Taener, a
Tanner. Tantivy, To ride Tantivy, from the Lat. Tanta vi, with so much force as
you can; or from Tenta vi, with the strength of the Horse, and his Rider,
exerted as much as can be. Tap, To give one a Tap, from the Teut. Tappen, to
feel, or touch; or the Fr. G. Taper, to hit one lightly. To Tap a vessel of
Ale, etc. from the AS. Taeppan, the Teut. Zapffen, or the Belg. Tappen, to
broach; hence the AS. Taeppe, the Teut. Zapff, the Belg. Tappe. and the Ital.
Tappa, a tap. Tapt, Minsh. draws it from the Gr. (...), to bind, or knit.
Taper, from the AS. Taper, id. Minsh. draws it from the Gr. (...), a Burial;
for that it is used at Funerals. Tapestry, from the Fr. G. Tapisserie, or the
Ital. Tapezzaria, idem; these from the Lat. and Gr. Tapes, idem. Tar, from the
Belg. Tar, Terre, or the AS. Teore, Tare, the same. Tardy, from the Fr. G.
Tardif, slow; or the Lat. Tarde, slowly. To Tare, a term amongst Merchants;
from the Ital. Tarare, to substract out of the price, for some consideration of
loss in wares; and this perhaps from the Lat. Terere, for Deterere, to
diminish. Tares among Corn, from the Teut. Zthren, or the Belg. Teren, Teeren,
to waste; which last comes from the Lat. Terere, to spend, or consume. Target,
from the AS. Targ, Targa, the Fr. G. Targe, the Ital. Targa, Targhetta, or the
Hisp. Targeta, idem. To Tarry, from the Fr. G Targer, Tarder, or the Ital. and
Lat. Tardare, to delay. Tarse, from the Teut. Zersch, the Belg. Teers, or the
AS. Teors, idem; all from the Lat. Teres, round, according to Kilian. Tart,
from the AS. Teart, sour, or sharp; or the Teut. Zart, thin. Physicians say,
that all sour things consist of rare or tenuous parts. Task, from the Fr. G.
Tasche, idem; and both from the Lat. Taxare, to value, or impose; which comes
from the Gr. (...), to appoint. To Taste, from the Teut. Tasten. to touch
lightly; the Fr. G. Taster, or the Ital. Tastare, to try. Menag. derives it
from the Lat. Tangere, to touch; or Tactare, to touch a little. Tatters, from
the Ital. Tattere, or the AS. Taetteran, rags. To Tattle, from the Teut.
Tadeln, to find fault; which is the property of tatlers. Tavern, from the Fr.
G. Tavern, or the Ital. Taverna; and both from the Lat. Taberna, the same.
Taught, from the AS. Taehten, I taught; or the Belg. Tucht, discipline,
according to Minshew. To Taunt, from the Fr. G. Tanser, Tancer, idem; this from
the Lat. Tangere, to touch; as when any, under color of jesting, speaks home,
we say, There Is a touch for you. Tawny, from the Fr. G. Taken, Tanne, or the
Ital. Taneto, a Chestnut-colour. V. Tan. To Teach, from the AS. Taecan, idem;
this from Betaecan, Getaecan, to put in trust with, also to betake himself
unto. A Teal, from the Teut. Teelingh, idem; this from Teeln, to procreate. A
Team, or Teem of Oxen, from the AS. Time, or Getyme, the same. To Tear, from
the AS. Taeran, or the Teut. Abzerren, idem. To Tear and Roar, A Tearing voice;
from the Belg. Tieren, idem. Tears, from the AS. Tear, or the Teut. Zaehr,
Zehr, idem; all from the Gr. (...), to afflict, and (...), to trouble. To Tease
Wool, from the Belg. Teesen, or the AS. Taesan, idem: From hence, A Teasel, or
Fuller's Thistle; and Tease or nettle one. A Teat, from the AS. Titte, the Fr.
G. Tette, the Ital. Tetta, or the Hisp. Teta, the same. To Teem, from the AS.
Team, Offspring; whence Teamful, fruitful; as we say, A Teeming Woman. To Teem
out, or Empty; a Northern word; from the Dan. Tommer, to draw out, to empty:
Whence Tom, empty. To Tell, or Number, from the Belg. Taelen, Tellen, the AS.
Taellan, or the Dan. Taelter, idem. To Tell, or Speak; from the AS. Tellan, or
the Dan. Taler, idem. Mer. Cas. draws it from the Gr. (...), for (...), to
command. The Temples, from the Fr. G. Temples, or the Ital. Tempia; all from
the Lat. Tempora, the same. To Temporise, from the Fr. G. Temporiser, or the
Ital. Temporeggiare, to serve, or adapt ones self to the Times. Tems'd Bread,
from the Belg. Temsen, Teemsen, the Fr. G. Tamiser, or the Ital. Tamisare, to
sift; which come from the Belg. Teems, the Fr. G. Tamis, and the Ital. Tamigio,
Tamiscio, a sieve. Ten, from the AS. Tyn, Tien, the Belg. Thien, or the Teut.
Zehen, the same. Tenant, from the Fr. G. Tenant, or the Ital. Tenent, id. or,
q. d. Lat. Tenens, he that holds or possesses lands or houses, upon terms
agreed upon, betwixt him and his Landlord. Tench, from the AS. Tince, the Fr.
G. Tenche, Tanche, the Ital. Tenca, or the Lat. Tinca, a fish so called. To
Tender, or exibit Writings, from the Fr. G. Tender, or the Lat. Tendere, for
Pretendere, to hold, or reach forth. Tender, or, Delicate, from the Fr. G.
Tender, or the Lat. Tener, the same. Tendrel, from the Fr. G. Tendrillon, an
old Vine-stock, cut down, that young branches may spring out of it. Tenement,
from the Fr. G. Tenement, or the Ital. Tenimento idem; all a Tenendo, from
holding, or possessing. A Tent to dwell in, from the Ital. Tenda, the Hisp.
Tienda, or the Fr. G. Tente, idem; all from the Lat. Tentorium, idem. A Tent
for Sores or Wounds, a Tentando, from trying, or searching into. Tent- Wine,
from the Hisp. Vino Tento, idem; and this from the Lat. Vinum Tinctum, colored
wine. A Tenter, a Tendendo, from stretching out. A Terce of Wine, from the
Ital. Terzaruolo, or the Fr. G. Tiers, idem; q. d. Lat. Triens, the third part
of a pipe of wine A Terriar, q. d. Lat. Canis Terrarius, an Earth-dog. A
Territory, from the Fr. G. Territoire, idem; and both from the Lat.
Territorium, id. A Tester, or Testern of a Bed, from the Ital. Testiera, id.
this from the Lat. Testa, an head. Testy, from the Fr. G. Testu, or the Ital.
Testardo, stubborn, angry; these from the Fr. G. Test, or the Ital. Testa, the
head; by a Metaphor drawn from headstrong Horses. A Tether, or Rope to tie a
Beast withal to graze; from the Lat. Tentor, an holder; quia Tenet, because it
holds the beast in compass. A Tetter, from the AS. Teter, idem. To Tew, or
Toss, from the AS. Taian, to stir up and down; to roll in the mire. To Thank,
from the AS. THancgian, or the Belg. and Teut. Dancken, idem. Tharms, or
Chitterlings, from the Belg. and Teut. Darm, a gut; or the Dan. Tarmens, the
inwards. That, from the AS. THaet, the Teut. Das, the Fr. Th. Thaz, or the
Belg. Dat, idem. Thatch, from the AS. THace, thatch, or straw; whence THacian,
THaccian, to thatch an house. Thaw, from the Teut. Tawen, to thaw. V. Dew. The,
a Particle; from the Teut. Die, or the Belg. De, idem. Thee, a Pronoun; from
the AS. THe, Te, the Belg. Die, or the Fr. Th. Thich, Te, idem; all from the
Lat. and Gr. (...), thee. A Theif, from the AS. THeof, the Dan. Tiuff, or the
Belg. Dief, idem; whence the AS. THeofian, to thieve, or steal; and THeofthe,
theft. Write Thief. Them, from the Teut. Them, or the AS. Heom, idem. Then, from
the AS. THaenne, the Teut. Dann, or the Fr. Th. Thanne, the same. Thence, q.
There hence, according to Minshew. There, from the AS. THaer, THar, the Dan.
Der, or the Belg. Daer, id. hence the Belg. Daer toe, thereto; and the AS.
THaerof, thereof; and THaraeften, thereafter. Therefore, from the Belg.
Daervoo^, idem. These, from the Belg. Dese, or the Teut. D. ese, idem. Thick,
from the AS. THicce, the Belg. Dick, the Teut. Dicht, or the Dan. Tyck, idem;
from hence, Thicket, a little place set thick with trees and shrubs. Thigh,
from the AS. THeoh, or the Belg. Die, Diege, idem. Thimble, from Thumb, q.
Thumb bell, according to Minshew. Thin, from the AS. Thin, id. whence
THinnian, to make thin. Thine, from the AS. THine, the Belg. Diin, or the Teut.
D^iu, the same. Thing, from the AS. THing, the Belg. Dingh, or the Teut. Ding,
idem. To Think, from the AS. THincan, or the Belg. and Teut. Dencken, idem;
hence the Fr. Th. Sin Thunkit, and the Belg. My Dunckt, methinks. Third, from
the AS. THridda, the Belg. Dryde, or the Teut. Dritte, Tritte, idem. Thirst,
from the AS. THyrst, THurst, the Belg. Dorst, or the Teut. Durst, id. whence
the AS. THyrstan, the Belg. Dorsten, and the Teut. Dursten, to thirst.
Thirteen, from the AS. THredttyne, or the Belg. Dertien idem. V. Thite, and
Ten. Thirty, from the AS. THrittig, or the Belg. Dertich, idem. This, from the
AS. THis, These, THeos, or the Teut. Dirse, idem. Thiftle, from the AS. THistel,
or the Belg. and Teut. Distel, the same. Thither, from the AS. THider, Thither,
the same. Thong, from the AS. THeong, idem. Thorn, from the AS. THorn, the Dan.
Torn, the Belg. Doorne, or the Teut. Dorn, id: all perhaps from the AS. Taeran,
to tear. Thorough, from the Belg. D^ur, Door, the Fr. Th. Through, Thurnh, or
the AS. THurh, THruh, the same. Thon, from the Belg. and Teut. Du, or the AS.
and Fr. Th. THu; all from the Lat. Tu, idem. Thousand, from the AS. THusend,
the Teut. Tausent, or the Belg. Dusent, idem; all from the AS. Tien, Ten, and
Send, for Sent, an hundred. Thrasdom, Thrall, from the AS. THrael, a Vassal, or
Slave. Thread, from the AS. THraed, the Teut. Draat, or the Belg. Draedt, idem.
To Threap, a word frequently used in Lincolnsh. from the AS. THreapian, to
stand arguing; or THrafian, to be urgent. To Threaten, from the Belg. Dreyghen,
or the AS. THreatian, idem; also to rebuke, or chide. Three, from the AS.
THrie, THrea, the Belg. Dry, or the Teut. Trey, Drey, idem; all from the Gr.
(...), idem. To Thresh, from the AS. THrescian, the Belg. Dresschen the Teut.
Treschen; or the Ital. Treggiare, idem. Threshold, from the AS. THrescian, to
thresh, and our word Hold. To Thrive, or grow rich, ( q. d.) to drive on, or go
forward in the world. Throat, from the AS. THrot, idem; THrot-bolla, the
Throat-bowl. Throb, or sigh, from the Gr. (...), idem. Minsh. Throng, from the
AS. THrang, a Crowd; or from the AS. THringan, the Belg. Dringhen, the Teut.
Tringen, or the Dan. Trenger, to thrust. Throttle, from the Teut. Trossel,
idem; or it is rather a diminutive of Throat. To Throw, from the AS. THraan, to
cast. Throws of Women in travail, from the AS. THroian, to suffer. A Thrum,
from the AS. Trum, Getrum, a Knot, or Thrum. A Thrush, or Throstle, from the
AS. THrisc, THrostle, the Belg. Drostle, or the Teut. Trostel, the same.
Thrust, Minsh. draws it from the Lat. Trudere, idem; though more probably from
the Frequentative of it, Trusitare. Thumb, from Belg. Duym. the Teut. Daum, or
the AS. THuma, the same. A Thump, from the Ital. Thumbo, Thombo, idem. Mer.
Cas. draws it from the Gr. (...), to beat. Thunder, from the AS. THunder, or
the Belg. and Teut. Donder, Donner, idem; whence the AS. THunnan, the Belg. and
Teut. Dondern, Donneren, and the Fr. G. Tonner, to thunder; all from the Lat.
Tonare, idem. Thursday, from the AS. THunresdaeg, the Belg. Donderdagh, the
Teut. Donnerstag, or the Dan. Thorsdag, idem; this from Thor, the
Heathen-Saxons great God, Jupiter; or the God of Thunder, and Dag, a day. Thus,
from the AS. THus, id. Thwack, from the Teut. Zwacken, to strike; or from the
sound. Tick-Tack, from the Fr. G Trictac, or the Ital. Tricche Tracche, idem;
all perhaps from a Law at gaming, Touch and Take. A Ticket, from the Fr. G.
Etiquet, Etiquette, a Schedule, or Bill; or the Hisp. Tegoda, a Billet sent the
Inhabitants, for the quartering of Soldiers. To Tickle, or Kittle, as it is
used far North; from the AS. Tinclan, or the Belg. Tintelen, idem. Kittle, from
the AS. Citelan, the Belg. Kittelen, or the Teut. Kitzleu, idem; all from Cat,
Kitten, or Kitling, that love to be stroak'd and tickled. Tide, the ebbing and
flowing of the Sea; from the AS. Tid, the Teut. Zett, or the Belg. and Dan.
Tiid, idem. Tider, as, The Tider you go the better, an expression frequently
used in the North of England; from the AS. Tid, Tide, or Time; q. d. the sooner
you go the better. Tidings, or News, from the Belg. Tiidinghe, or the Teut.
Zettung, idem. Tike, Tick, or Teeck, from the Fr. G. Tic, Tique; or the Belg.
Tike, Teecke, idem; it is a vermin that annoys Cows, Sheep, etc. Tike, or Tick
of a Bed, from the Belg. Ti^cke, the same; both from the Lat. Tego, to cover.
Tile, from the AS. Tigel, the Dan. Tegl, the Fr. G. Tuile, or the Belg. Cichel,
idem; all from the Lat. Tegula, id. Till, from the AS. Til, idem. To Till, from
the AS. Tilian, Tilean, or the Belg. Tuylen idem. To Tilt a Vessel, or make it
stoop before; from the Belg. Tillen, to lift up, to wit, behind; both from the
Lat. Tollere, to lift up. Timber, from the AS. Timbre, the Dan. Tommer, or the
Belg. Timber, Timmer, idem; whence the AS. Atimbrian, to build with Timber.
Timbrel, from the Fr. G. Tymbale, and both from the Lat. Tympanum, the same;
this from (...), to beat upon. Time, an Herb, from the Fr. G. Tyn, idem; and
both from the Lat. and Gr. Thymus, id. Time, from the AS. Tima, the Dan. Time,
or the Fr. G. Temps, idem; all from the Lat. Tempus; which comes from (...), to
divide. Tin, from the Dan. and Belg. Tin, the Teut. Zinne, the Fr. G. Estain,
or the Ital. Stagno, idem; all from the Lat. Stannum, idem. Tinder, from the
Teut. Zunder, Zundel, or the AS. and Dan. Tynder, idem; which last comes from
Tynan, to kindle; from hence To Tine or Tin a Candle, for to Light a Candle.
Tingle, from the Lat. Tinnire, idem; and both from the sound. Tinker, a
tinniendo, from ringing. Tiny, from the Dan. Tynt, small, little; both from the
Lat. Tenuis, slender, or small. Tip, from the Belg. Tipken, Tip, or the Teut.
Zipffel, the point or end of a thing. Minshew draws it from our word Top. To
Tipple, from the Lat. Tipula, a Water-Spider; q. d. Tipulam agere, to play the
Water-Spider; (i. e.) to be always drinking; or, from the Verb to Tipple; see
Tip. To Tire, from the AS. Tirian, to make weary. To Tire, or Attire, from the
Fr. G. Attour, Dress for Women's heads; the Fr. Th. Zieren, or the Teut.
Ziehren, to adorn. A Tire of Ordnance, from the Belg. Tuyer, a Row, to wit, of
Guns, planted by each other. Tissick, from the Ital. Tisico, one that is
short-winded; both from the Lat. Phthisis, idem; this from (...), to decay, or
waste: Write Phthifick. Tit, a little Nag, from the Gr. (...), little,
dwarfish. Tithe, from the AS. Teotha, the tenth part; whence Teothian, to take
Tithe of; from hence Tithing, a Term in Law. To, from the AS. To, the Belg.
Toe, Te, or the Teut. Zu, idem. Toad, from the Dan. Tudtze, or the AS. Tade,
idem. A Toe, from the AS. Ta, the Belg. Teen; or the Teut. Zehe, idem. Fr. Jun.
draws it from the Gr. (...), to extend. Together, from the AS. Togaethere, or
the Belg. Te Gader, idem; V. Gather. Toies for Children; Minsh. draws it from
the Bell Toyen, or Tooghen, to adorn, or varnish. Toiles, from the Fr. G.
Toiles, a sort of Nets. Token, from the AS. Tacn, the Belg. Teecken, the Fr.
Th. Zeichn, or the Teut. Zeychen, a sign; whence the AS. Tacnian, the Teut.
Zeychnen, and the Belg. Teeckenen, Beteeckenen, to betoken, or signify. Toll,
to pay Toll, from the AS. Toll, the Belg. Tol, the Dan. Told, or the Teut.
Zoll, idem. Tomb, from the Belg. and Fr. G. Tomb, Tombeau, the Ital. Tomber,
or the Hisp Tumba, a Sepulcher; (...), idem. Tongs, from the AS. Tongue, the
Belg. Tanghe, or the Dan. Tang, idem; all from the Ital. Tengo, to hold.
Tongue, from the AS. Tunga, Tunge, the Teut. Zung, or the Belg. Tonghe, idem;
all perhaps from the Gr. (...), a sound; which comes from (...), to speak, or
give a sound. A Tool, or Instrument, from the AS. Tol, Tohl, or Tool, in Aelfr.
idem; these from the Belg. Tuylen, or the AS. Tilian, to labor. Tooth, from
the AS. Toth, idem; Teth, the Teeth. Top, from the AS. Dan and Belg. Top, the
top of any thing: Belg. and Dan. Topseyl, the top sail. A Top to be whipped on
the Ice, from the Belg. and Dan. Top or Dop, the Teut. Topff, or the Fr. G.
Toupie, idem. To Tope, from the Fr. G. Toupir, to be turned about, as in
Drinkings we say, Put it about: Or from the Belg. Toppen, to be mad; as we say,
Too much drink makes him mad. Topsy-Turvy, q. d, the tops of Turves downward,
Metaphorically taken from Gravers of Turfs. A Torch, from the Fr. G. Torche, or
the Ital. Torchia, or Torcia, idem; these from the Lat. Torris, a Firebrand;
or a torquendo, from being twisted up together. A Tortois, from the Fr. Tortue,
Tortugue, the Ital. Tartuga, or the Hisp. Tortuga, idem. Tory-Rory, and an
Irish Tory, or Thory, from the Teut. Thor mad frantic; if not of an Irish
original. To Toss, from the Belg. Tassen; or the Fr. G. Tasser, to throw on
heaps. To Tossed, from the Lat. Tostare the Frequent. of Torrere, to roast.
Totter, from the AS. Teultrian, to wag; or the Belg. Toutereu, to tremble. To
Tote, or Toot, from the Belg. Tuyte, Tote, a Horn; whence Tuyten, Toten, to
wind a Horn. To Touch, from the Fr. G. Toucher, the Ital. Toccare; or the Sp.
Tocar, idem. Tough, from the AS. Toh, the Belg. Taey; or the Teut. Z^he, idem.
Tow, from the AS. To, or the Belg. Touw, idem; both not unlikely from the AS.
Teon, to draw out. Toward, from the Teut. Zuwarts, idem. Towel, from the Ital.
Touaglio Touaglia, the Fr. G. Toualle; or the Hisp. Toalla, the same. Tower,
from the AS. Tor, the Fr. G. Tour; or the Ital. and Belg. Toure; idem; all from
the Lat. Turris, the same. Town, from the AS. Tun, id. Tunesman, a Towns-man.
To Towze, from the Gr. (...), to run at one like a dog at a sheep; or from
(...), to terrify. A Trace, or Track, from the Fr. G. Trace, Trac; or the
Ital. Traccia, idem; all from the Lat. Tractus, the same. Tract, or Treatise,
from the AS. Traht, idem; both from the Lat. Tractatus, a Treatise. Trade, from
the Ital. Tratta, Commerce; which comes, a Tradendo res necessarias, from
yielding us things necessary. Traffic, from the Fr. G. Trafique; or the Belg.
Trafike, idem; or from Trans, beyond (to wit) the Sea, and Facere, to act, or
do. To Trail, or Train, from the Belg. Trelen, to draw with ropes; or from the
Fr. G. Trainer, Traisner; or the Ital. Trainare, to draw by force. Train, or
guard, from the Fr. G. Train, or the Ital. Traina, id. A Traitor, from the Fr.
G. Traistre, the Ital Traditore, or the Lat. Traditor, idem; i. e. qui tradit,
he that delivers up his Prince or Country to the enemy. A Tramel-Net, from the
Fr. G. Tramail, Tremaille, idem. Trample, from the Teut. Trampeln, idem; or the
Ital. Trampolare, to go in Stil^s. A Trance, from the Fr. G. Transe, idem.
Trap, from the AS. Treppe, the Fr. G. Trape, or the Ital. Trappola, a Trap.
Trap- door, from the Dan. Trap, id or from the other Trap. To Trape up and
down, from the Teut. Traven, or the Belg. Drabben, idem. Trash, from the Teut,
Trusen. Drusen, the Dregs, or off-scourings of things; or the Teut. and Belg.
^reck, Dung. Travail, from the Fr. G. Travail, or the Ital. Travaglio, the
same; whence the Fr. G. Travailler, and the Ital. Travagliare, to Travail; all
from Trans, beyond, and Valere, to be able. Traverse, from the Ital. Traversa,
idem; overthwart, or cross-wise. Traves, from the Hisp. Traves de bestia, idem;
they are put upon a Horses Legs when he is taught to amble, or pace. Travested,
from the Fr. G. Travesti, or the It. Travestita, one disguised in apparel he
was not wont to wear, q. d, Trans vestitus, having on change of raiment. Tray,
for Butchers, from the Teut. Tragen, or the Belg. Draeghen, to carry; these
from the Lat. Trahere, to draw. Treachery, from the Fr. G. Tricherie, Fraud;
this from Tricher, to impose, or put upon one; both metaphorically from the
Lat. Tricae, Gins, Snares. Treacle, from the Belg. Triaeckel, or the Fr. G.
Thriacle, Theriaque, idem; all from the Lat. Theriaca, a remedy against the
poisonous bitings of wild beasts; this from (...), a Viper, the powder of
Vipers being the principal ingredient in it. Tread, from the AS. Tredan, the
Belg. Treden, or the Teut. Tretten, to go or tread. Treason, from the Fr. G.
Trahison, or the Ital. Traditione, idem; see Traitor. Treasure, from the Fr.
G. Thresor, or the Ital. Tesoro, idem; all from the Lat. Thesaurus, idem; this
(...), to lay up against to morrow. To Treat, from the Fr. G. Traicter, the
Ital. Trattare, or the Hisp. Traitar, to entertain; also to have a Treaty or
Discourse with one. A Treatise, from the Lat. Barb. Tractatus, the Fr. G.
Traicte, or the Ital. Trattato, any book in which any Argument tractatur, is
handled and expounded. Treble, from the Fr. G. Triple, or the Lat. Triplex,
threefold. The Treddles, or Treadles of a Weaver's Beam, from our word to
Tread; for that a Weaver in weaving, treads on these pieces of wood, first with
one foot, and then with the other. Tree, from the AS. Treo, Tree, or the Dan.
Tree, id. Minsh. and Mer. Cas. draw it from the Gr. (...), an Oak-tree, which
at first signified a Tree in general. Trefoil, from the Fr. G. Treffle, idem;
both from the Lat. Trifolium; this a tribus foliis, for that it is
three-leav'd. To Tremble, from the Fr. G. Trembler, or the Ital. Trembolare,
idem; all from the Lat. Tremere, idem. Trench, from the Fr. G. Trenchee, or the
Ital. Trincea, idem. The Trendel of a Mill, from the AS. Trendl, or Trendel, a
globe, center, or circle; see Trundle. Trepan, a Chirurgeon's Trepan, from the
Gr. (...), idem; this from (...), a Hole, or (...), to pierce through. To
Trespass, from the Fr. G. Trespasser, to violate a Law; this from Trans,
beyond, and Passus, a step, or Path. A Tress of hair, from the Fr. G. Tresse,
or the Ital. Treccia, a lock of hair curled. A Trestle of a Table, from the Fr.
G. Tresteau, or Tretteau, a prop or stay, consisting of three feet. The Tret, a
Term in Merchandice, which is an allowance or overplus given in goods that are
tainted; not unlikely from the Lat. Tritus, or Attritus, wasted, or impaired. A
Trevet, from the AS. THriefet, the Fr. G. Trepied, or the Lat. Tripus, a three
footed stool. A Trick, either from the Teut. Tuck, craftiness, by an
interposition of the Letter r; or from the Fr. G. Tricher, to put a trick upon
one. To Trick up, or deck, from the Gr. (...), Hair, says Minsh. From the Lat.
Intricare, to entangle, or plait the hair, Skinner. Trickle, perhaps, (q. d.)
Dupple, and this from Dup, or Drop. Minsh. draws it from the Gr. (...), to run.
Skinner from the Belg. Trecken. or its Dimin. Treckelen, to draw out in length.
Trifles, from the Belg. Treyfeleu, to trifle; or from the Lat. Tricae, idem; or
the Ital. Triccare; to play the wag. Trig, and Trig your Trig, from the Dan.
Tricker, or the Teut. Trucken, to press, (i. e.) to tread firm in the place
marked. Trill in Music, from the Ital. Trillo, idem, the Belg. Trillen,
Drillen, to shake, or quaver; or the AS. THrilian, to pierce, as we say of a
shrill sound. Trim, or neat, from the AS. Getrymed, trimmed up; this from, the
AS. Trimman, to build up, to make sure and sound, by a Metaphor drawn from
Architecture. To Trip, from the Belg. Trippen, Trippelen; or the Fr. Gr.
Treper, to dance; all, not unlikely, from the Lat. Tripudiare, to dance. Tripe,
from the Fr. G. Tripe, or the Ital. Trippa, idem. A Troup, from the Fr. G
Troop, or the Hisp: Tropa, idem; all from the Lat. Turba, a Company, by a
transposition of the Letter r. To Trot, from the Fr. G. Trotter, the Ital.
Trottare, the Hisp Trotar; or the Belg. Trotten, idem. To Trouble, from the Fr.
G. Troubler, or the Ital. Torbolare, idem; all from the Lat. Turbare, to
disturb, by a Metathesis. A Trough, from the AS. Trog, the Belg. Troch, the
Dan. Trug, the Ital. Truogo; or the Fr. Th. Thruk, idem. Trout, from the AS.
Truht, the Fr. G. Truite, the Hisp. Trucha, the Ital. Trutta; or the Lat.
Trocta, a Fish so called. I Trow, from the AS. Trupian, the Teut. Trawen, or
the Dan. Troer, to believe. A Trowel, from the Fr. G. Truelle; or the Belg.
Troweel, idem; all from the Lat. Trulla, idem. To Trowl away; from the Belg.
Drollen, or the Fr. G. Troller, to walk unseemly. Troy- weight, not from Troy,
a City in Phrygia, as 't would seem at first sight; but from the chief City of
the Troyes, a People in Gallia Celtica, which is now called Troyes en
Champaigne. Truant, from the Belg. Trouwant; or the Fr. G. Truant, idem; all
from the AS THurh, through, and Wendan, to wander. Truce, from the Fr. G.
Treues, or the It and Hisp. Tregua, id. To Truck, from the Fr. G. Troquer, the
Ital. Truccare, or the Hisp. Trocar, to exchange one commodity for another.
Truckle- bed, from the Lat. Trochlea, a pully, or wheel, says the learned Th.
H. It being a low sort of Bed having wheels, so that it may be drawn which way
one pleases. Trudge, from the Ital. Truccare, Truggiolare, to run from place to
place; or from our word Trot. True, from the AS. Tripe, the Belg. Trouw; or the
Teut. True, idem; AS. Treopthe, truth, or Fidelity. A Trull, from the Ital. and
Lat. Trulla, a sluttish woman. Mer. Cas. draws it from the Gr. (...), a Bawd,
or common Prostitute. Trump, Jews-Trump, from the Belg. Trompe, idem. Trum, in
Cards, from the Fr. G. Triomphe, the Ital. Trionfo, or the Belg. and Teut.
Trumpff, idem; all from the Lat. Triumphus, idem. Trumpery, or old Lumber, from
the Fr. G. Tromperie, fraud, or guile; q. d. vitiated goods, in buying whereof,
people are frequently cheated. A Trumpet, from the Fr. G. Trompette, Trompe,
the Ital. Trombetta; or the Hisp. Trompeta, Trompa, idem. A Truncheon, from the
Fr. G. Tronson, Transon, idem. Trundle, from the Fr. G. Trendl, a globe, or
circle; or from the Fr. Picard. Trondeler, to run like a Ball. V. Round. A
Trunk, from the Lat. Truncus, the trunk of a tree; and hence the other Trunk, a
Coffer, for similitudes sake. To Truss, from the Fr. G. Trousser, or the Belg.
Trossen, to truss up Bag and Baggage: Whence the Fr. G. Trousseau, the Belg.
Trosse, and Teut. Trosz, a Truss or Pack. Trust, V. True, and Trow. Tub, by a
little variation of the sense, from the Belg. Tobbe, or the Teut. Ruff, a cup;
or the Hisp. Cuba de vino, a Pipe of wine; this last from the Lat. Cupa, a Tun,
or Pipe. A Tuck, from the Fr. G. Estoc, or the Ital. Stocco, a sort of long
sword so called. To Tuck up the Bed-cloaths, from the Teut. Tuch, Cloth; or
Tucken, to hide or cover. Tuesday, from the AS. Tun, the Saxons God of War, and
Daeg, a day; q. Tun's-day. Tun was the same with Twisco, the God of the
Almanes, or Osterlingi, a People of Germany; and Mars of the Latins: Whence in
Lat. Dies Martis. A Tuft, from the Teut. Zopff; or the Fr. G. Touffet, Touffe,
idem. Tug, from the AS. Getogen, drawn out, being a Part. of the Verb, Teon, to
draw; or more likely from the old Belg. Toghen, to pull. Tulip, from the Fr G.
Tulippe, or Tulipan; or the Ital. Tulipa, or Tulipano, a kind of Flower, so
called, from the similitude of a Tulipan, or Turbant, a sort of Cap wore by the
Turks. To Tumble, from the Belg. Tommelen, or the Ital Tombolare, Tomolare,
idem; or from the Dan. Tumler, to slip. A Tun, from the AS. Tun, Fr. G.
Tonne, Tonneau, the Hisp. Tono; or the Belg. and Teut. Tonne; idem. Tune, q. d
Tone, from the Lat. Tonus, and this from (...), to extend. Tunnel, or Funnel,
from the Fr. G. Entonnoir, or the Lat. Infundibulum, idem. A Tunny, from the
Fr. G. Thonnin, Tonnin, the Hisp. Atun, or the It. Tonno, a fish, so called;
all from the Gr. (...) idem. A Turbant, from the Fr. G. Tourban; or the Ital.
and Sp. Turbante, a sort of Turkish Cap. It is of a Turc. or Arab. Original. A
Turbot, from the Belg. Turbot, Teut. Turbutt; or Fr. G. Turbot, idem: It may
likewise be drawn from Turbo, or the Eng. Tuen, and the Teut. Butte, or Belg.
Bot, an End; a Fish of the kind of Plaice. Turd, from the AS. Tord, or the
Belg. Torde, Tort, the same. Turf, from the AS. Turfe, Tyrf, the Belg. Torf,
Turf, the Teut. Torff; or the Ital. Tuffo, idem; all perhaps from the Gr.
(...), to raise a smoke, as it does in burning. Turkey, q. d. a Turkish, or
African Fowl. Turkey- color, from the Ital. Turchino, idem; or perhaps, because
Turks affect that color. Turmerick, q. d. Terra merita, as Lobel. and D. H.
surmise. Turmoil, to trouble or afflict, from the Fr. G. Tremouille, a
Mill-hopper, or Tremouiller, to grind; all perhaps a Tremendo, from trembling
and shaking. To Turn, from the AS. Tyrnan, the Fr. G. Tourner, or the Ital. and
Lat. Tornare, to turn or work with the wheel; from hence the Fr. G. par
Tournee, with us, by turns, as also Tourneur, a Turner. Turnament, or Tourney,
from the Fr G. Tournoy, the Hisp. Torneo; or the Ital. Torneamento, the
exercise at Tilts; all from the Fr. G. Tourner, or Ital. Tornare, to turn.
Turnep, from our words, Turn and up, from its growing spire-wise. Turpentine,
from the Fr. G. Turbentine; or the Ital. Terpentina, idem; all from the Lat.
and Gr. Terebinthina, idem. Turret, a Dimin. of Tower; which see. Turtle, from
the AS. Turtle, the Fr. G. Tourterelle; or the Ital. Tortora, Tortola, idem;
all from the Lat. Turtur, of the same signification. Tusks, from the AS. Tuxas,
the Jaw-teeth of a Boar. Tut-mouth'd, q. d. Tit-mouth'd, by an Antiphrasis; or
from the AS. Tytt, a Pap, or Teat, and Mouth; which see. Twain, from the AS.
Tegen, or the Teut. Zween, idem. Twang, a Tango, to touch, Minsh. Or from the
sound, To Twattle, from the Belg. Swetsen, or Teut. Schwatzen, idem. Twelve,
from the AS. Telf, the Belg. Twaelve, or the Teut. Zwelff, idem. Twenty, from
the AS. Tentig, the Belg. Tweentigh, the Fr. G Vingt; or the Ital. Venti, idem;
all from the Lat. Viginti, Twenty. A Twig, from the AS. Tig, Tiga, the Teut.
Zweig, or the Belg. Twtigh, idem. Twilight, because it partakes of two Lights,
to wit, of the Sun and Moon; or for that it is between two Lights, the one
setting and the other rising. Twine, from the AS. Tin; or the Belg. Tweyn,
Tween, idem; these from the AS. Tinan, or Belg. Tweynen, Twimen, to twine, or
make a double thread. V. Twain, and Two. To Twinge, from the Teut. Zwingen, to
squeeze, or the Dan. Tvinger, Fvinger, to wrest out, to extort. Twinkle, q. d.
Winkle, from the Verb, to Wink; which see. Twins, from the AS. Getpin, idem;
see Twine, and Two. To Twirl, from the Ital. Ciurlare, Zurlare, to turn about
hastily; or from our Word Whirl; which see. To Twist, from the AS. Getistan, or
the Belg. Twisten, idem. To Twit, from the AS. Editan, to upbraid; this from
the Prefix Ed, again, and Witan, to blame; or, as it were, to give to wit, that
is, to make one understand his fault. To Twitch, from the AS. Ticcan, Ticcian,
or the Teut. Zwicken, idem. Twitter, from the Teut. Zittern, to tremble. Two,
from the AS. Tu, Tua, or Ta, the Belg. Twii, Twee; or the Teut. Zwey, Zwo;
idem. To Ty, from the AS. Tian, idem.
V.
A VAil, from the Fr. G. Voile, or the Belg. Witle, Wiele, idem; all from the
Lat. Velum, idem; this from the Lat. Velo, to cover. To Vail his Bonnet, from
the Fr. G. Avaller le bonnet, to put off his Hat. Vain, from the Fr. G. Vain,
and both from the Lat. Vanus, idem. Vaivod, as the Vaivod of Transylvania, from
the Scla. and Sarm. Waiwod, a Governor of a Province. Vallens, or Valances of a
Bed, from the Ital. Valenzane, id. first used perhaps at Valentia in Spain.
Valiant, from the Fr. G. Vaillant, idem; this from the Lat. Valens, able.
Valor, from the Fr. G Valeur, idem; and Valorous, from the Ital. Valoroso. A
Valley, from the Fr: G Vallee, Valee, idem; q. d. Lat. Vallata, entrenched, to
wit, with Hills. Value, from the Fr. G. Value, or the It. Valuta, idem; all
from the Lat. Valor, the price or worth of a thing. Vancurriers from the Fr. G.
Avaunt coureur, a Precursour, or light-armed Soldier, that runs before the
Army; this from Avaunt, before, and Courir, to run. Vang, he vang'd for me at
the Vant, (i. e.) he undertook for me at the Font; it is an expression used by
West-Country-men, and is derived from the AS. Fengan, Anfengan, to undertake.
Vant, comes from the Dan. Vand, Water. The Vinguard, from the Ital.
Vanguardia, or the Fr. G. Avaunt Guard, the Front of an Army, or Fore-Guard. To
Vanish; from the Fr. G. Esvanovir, or the Ital. Svanire, idem; all from the
Lat. Vanescere, or Evanescere, the same. To Vanquish, from the Fr. G. Vaincre,
idem; and both from the Lat. Vincere, to overcome. Varlet, from the old Fr. G.
Varlet, now Vallet, or the Ital. Valletto, a Servant, or Footpage. Varnish,
from the Fr. G. Vernis, the Ital. Vernice, or the Hisp, Varniz. idem. Varvels,
for a Hawk, from the Fr. G Vervelles, certain rings put about a Hawks Legs,
having the Owner's Name engraven upon them. Vassal, from the Fr. G. Vassal, or
the Ital. Vassallo, a Client, a Fee-Farmer, or Copyholder; or from the Teut.
Gesel, one bound to accompany or attend others in times of war, Spelman. A
Vault, or Arch, from the Fr. G. Voulte, Voute, the Ital. Volta, or the Belg.
Vou e, an Arch. To Vault, from the F.G. Voltiger, the Ital. Volteggiare, or the
Hisp. Boltear, idem; all from the Lat. Volitare, to fly, or Volutare, to
tumble. To Vaunt, from the Fr. G. Vanter, or the Ital. Vantare, id. these from
the Lat. Vane, or Vanitas, Vanity. Vdder, from the AS. Uder, the Belg. Vder,
Euder; or the Teut. Euter, idem; all from the Lat. Vber, idem. Veal, from the
Fr. G. Veau, id. both Contracts of the Lat. Vitellus, a young Calf. A Vein,
from the Fr. G. Vein, or the AS. Wegn, idem; both from the Lat. Vena, idem.
Vellam, a smoothed skin, or parchment; from the Lat. Velamen, a cover; or the
Fr. G. Velin, parchment. Velvet, from the Fr. G. Velours, or the Ital. Velut^,
id. q. d. Lat. Villosum, hairy, or shaggy. Vengeance, from the Fr G. Vengeance,
idem. V. Revenge. Venison, from the Fr. G. Venaison, id. or a Venatione, from
hunting. Venom, from the Fr. G. Venim, and both from the Lat. Venenum, idem. To
Vent, from the Ital. Eventare, Sventare, idem; and all from the Lat. Ventus,
wind; (i. e.) to give wind. Vent, to sell off; from the Fr. G. Vente, the Hisp.
Venta, or the Ital. Vendita, id. all from the Lat. Vendere, to sell. Verdure,
from the Fr. G. Verdeur, or the Ital. Verdezza, greenness Verd, a term in
Heraldry; from the Fr. G. Verd, or the Ital. Verde, idem; all Contracts of the
Lat. Viridis, green. Verdict, q. d. Vere dictum, a thing truly spoken, it being
the consentaneous opinion of the Jury concerning a Delinquent; which, according
to Law, is held true and warrantable. Verdigrease, from the Fr. G. Verdegris,
or Vertdegris, id. A Verger, from the Fr. G. Verger, an Apparitor, or Beadle;
this from Verge, which is again derived from the Lat. Virga, a wand, or
Officer's staff. Ver^^ice, from the Fr. G. Verjus, idem; this from the Lat.
Viridis, green, and Juice. Vermilion, from the Ital. Vermiglio, or the Fr. G.
Vermillon, Vermeil, idem. Vermin, from the Fr. G. Vermin, or the Lat. Barb.
Vermina, idem. Virtue, from the Fr. G. Virtue, or the Ital. Virtu; all from the
Lat. Virtus, idem. Very, from the Lat. Vere, truly: Or more immediately from
the Fr. G. Vray, true. Vespers, or Evening-Prayers; from the Fr. G. Vespres;
and this from the Lat. Vesper, the evening. Vessel, from the Fr. G. Vaisselle,
Vaisseau, or the Ital. Vascello, idem; all from the Lat. Vasculum, Vascellum,
the Dim. of Vas, idem. Vestrey, q. d. Lat. Vestiarium. A Vesture, from the Fr.
G. Vesture, or the Ital. Vestura, id. all from the Lat. Vestire, to cloth.
Ugly, from the AS. Ogelic, id. Or from the Belg. Doghen, the eyes, and Laeden,
to loath; (i. e.) that which is offensive or loathsome to look upon. Vial, from
the Fr. G. Phiole, idem; and both from the Lat. Phiala, idem. Viceroy, from the
Fr. G. Viceroy, or the Ital. Vicere, idem. Victuals, from the Fr. G.
Victuailles, or the Ital. Vittouaglia, idem; q. d. Lat. Victualia, things
appertaining to the feeding the body. A View, from the Fr. G. Veiie, a view, or
sight of; both from the Lat. Videre, to see. Village, from the Fr. G. Village,
or the Ital. Villaggio, idem; all from the Lat. Villa, idem. A Villain, from
the Fr. G. Vilain, a filthy, wicked fellow; and this from the Lat. Vilis,
contemptible, of no esteem. Vinegar, from the Fr. G. Vinaigre, or the Ital.
Vinagro, id. all from the Lat. Vinum Acre, sharp or eager wine; q. d.
Wine-eager. Vineyard, from the AS. Win-Geard, the Belg. Wilingaerd, the Dan.
Vinyaard, or the Teut. Weingart, idem. Vintage, from the Fr. G. Vendenge,
Vendange, or the Lat. Vindemia, idem. Vintner, from the Fr. G. Vinatiere, idem;
and both from the Lat. Vinum, wine. Violet, from the Fr. G. Violette, or the
Hisp. Violeta; all from the Lat. Viola, idem. A Viol, from the Fr. G. Violle,
or the Ital. Viola, a musical instrument so called: From hence comes the Fr. G.
Violin, and the Ital. Violino; with us, A Violin. Virginal, a musical
instrument so named, because that Virgins are mostly taught to play upon it.
Visage, from the Fr. G. Visage, or the Ital. Visaggio, idem; all from the Lat.
Visus, sight. Visard, from the Fr. G. Visiere, the Ital. Visiera, or the Hisp.
Vizera, the holes, or eyes of an helmet; with us, any other mask; also a spirit
appearing by night. Viscount, or Vicount, from the Fr. G. Viconte, or the Ital.
Visconte, id. all from the Lat. Vicecomes, idem. A Vise, or Skrew, from the Fr.
G. Vis, a skrew; or the Belg. Vuse, idem; whence Vusen, to skrew up. Vitriol,
from the Fr. G. Vitriol, or the Ital. Vitriolo, idem; all from the Lat. Barb.
Vitriolum; this again a Vitreo color, because it is of a transparent, glassy
color. Vmber, from the Fr. G. Vmbre, Vmbrette, a fish so called; all from the
Lat. Vmbra, a shadow; because the gall of it is good against specks, or film of
tho eyes, and prevents blindness. Vmbles, from the Fr. G. Nombles d'un Cerf,
the Umbles of a Deer. Vmbrage, from the Fr. G. Ombrage, idem; both from the
Lat. Vmbraculum, a thing to keep off the Sun. Vmpire, or an Arbitrator, from
the Fr. G. Empairer, to couple together; this from En, and Pair, a pair. Un, a
Preposition Negative; from the Lat. In, which, in Composition, is often
Negative: Or from the Belg. On, the Teut. Ohn, or the Gr. (...), without.
Unawares, It came Unawares, from Un, a Prefix Neg. Insep. and Aware; which see.
Uncouth, and old word, signifying strange; from Un, or In, Negative, and the
AS. Cuth, known. Under, from the AS. Under, the Belg. Onder, or the Teut. and
Fr. Th. Under, id. from hence, An Underling. Under is frequently put in
composition with other words; as with Understand, Undertake. Vngainly, from the
Teut. Ohue Gewinn, without progress; or from Un, a Prefix Neg. and the AS.
Wine, grateful, or acceptable. Uncle, from the Fr. G. Oncle; both Contracts of
the Lat. Avunculus, idem. Unless, q. One less, one thing excepted: Or from the
AS. Onlesan, to let pass, or omit. Unweildy, from Un, signifying not, and the
AS. Wealdan, to wield, or govern. Voyage, from the Fr. G. Voyage, or the Ital.
Viaggio, idem. A Voice, from the Fr. G. Voix; both from the Lat Vox, a voice,
idem. Vold, from the Fr. G. Vuide, or the Ital Vuoto, idem. Voided,
Cross-Voided, a term in Heraldry; from the Fr. G. Croix Vuidee, idem. Vogue,
as, The Common Vogue, or speech of the vulgar; from the Ital. Voga, or the Fr.
G. Vogue, idem; these from the Fr. G. Voguer, or the Ital. Vogare, to sail
freely; all from the Lat. Vagari, to wander. Voluntier, from the Fr. G.
Voluntaire, voluntary; q. d. one that, out of his own free will, lists himself
a Soldier; both from the Lat. Voluntas, the will. Vouchsafe, from the word
Vouch, for Avouch, and Safe; q. d. to promise one secure possession of any
thing. A Vow, from the Fr. G. Vaen. idem; hence Vouer, to vow; which comes from
the Lat. Vovere, idem. Vowel, from the Fr. G. Voyelle; and both from the Lat.
Vocalis, idem. Up, from the Belg. and Dan. Op, the Teut. Auff. the Fr. Th. Vf,
or Vph, or the AS. Up, idem; Uper, upper Diverse Compounds arise from hence; as,
Uphold, Upright, Vpstart, Upward, etc. Vpbraid, from the AS. Up-gebraedan, id.
Also, To make Broad, or amplify; q. d. to make more of a thing or fault than
it is. Vpholster, he that sells all sorts of bedding; q. d. A Bolsterer, says
the learned Dr. Th. H. or rather, q. d. Vpholder. Uproar, from the Belg. Op,
with us Up, and Roe^en, to touch, or lay hands on; or the Teut. Auff, upon, and
Ruchren, to make a confusion. Vpshot, the end, or event of things; a Metaphor
drawn from Vintners, or Victuallers, who say, The shot is paid, All is paid,
and all is in. Vrchin, from the AS. Ircing, Ercen, an Hedgehog; all from the
Lat. Ericinus, or Ericius, the same. Ure, a Contract of the Lat. Vsura, an
accustoming to; and this ab Vtendo, from using. Vr, from the AS. Us, the Belg.
Ons, or the Teut. Vns, the same. Usage, from the Fr. G. Usage, custom; this
from Vser, to use, or to get a custom of. Usher, from the Fr. G. Huissier, or
the Ital. Vsciere, idem. Usurer, from the Fr. G. Vsurier, or the Ital.
Vsuriere, Vsuraso, idem; hence the Fr. G. Usure, and the Ital. Vsura, usury.
Utter, from the AS. Utter, Uttor, or Uttur, the same. V. Out. A Vulcano, or
Volcano, an Italian word, signifying a mountain that casts out smoke and
flames, as Aetna does; q. d. Lat. Mons Vulcanius, Vulcan's Mount.
W.
WAddle, either from the Teut. Wadeln, Wedeln, to wag the tail, this from
Wadel, the tail; or the Belg. Wagghelen, Waegelen, to waggle. To Wade, from the
AS. Wadan, the Belg. Waden, Waeden, or the Teut. Wadten, Watten, idem; all from
the Lat. Vadare, to wade over; or Vadum, the ford of a river. A Wafer, from the
Belg. Waesel, the Teut. W^ffell or the Fr. G. Gauffre, the same. To Watt a
Ship, or Navy, a term amongst Mariners, and by them used, when a Man, or Men of
War conduct and protect Ships of burden upon the Seas; from the Teut and Belg.
Wachten, to watch, or guard. Wag, A notable Wag from the AS. Waegan, to play
the wag; or the Ital. Vago, acute, witty. To Wag, from the Belg. Waeghen, or
the AS Wagian, idem; from hence the word Wagtail. To Wage War, or Law, from the
Teut. Wagen, to run hazards; this from Wlag, a pair of scales. A Wager, from
the Fr. G. Gageure, idem; whence Gager, to contend for a wager: Or from the AS.
Waegan, to play; as, I will play Ten Pounds on my Horse's side, against yours.
Wages from the Fr. G. Gages, idem. V. Engage, and Gage. Wagon, from the AS.
Waegen, the Belg. Waeghen, or the Teut. Wagen, idem; whence the Belg. Waeghner,
and the Teut. Wagner, a Wagoner: Or, q. d. Wag on. A Waifaring-Man, from the
Eng. Way, and the AS. Faran, the Belg. Vaeren, or the Teut. Fahren, to go.
Write Way^aring. To Wail, from the Ital. Gualare, Guaire, to lament: Or from
the Ital. Guai, the Lat. Vae, or the AS. Wa, Interjections of sorrow. To
Wainscot, from the Teut. and Belg. Wand, a wall, and Schotten, to defend (i.
e.) to strengthen a wall. Wait, Waiter, from the Belg. and Teut Wachten, to
watch; whence Wacht, a watch, and Wachter, a Watchman: Or from the Fr. G.
Guetter, or the Ital. Guatare, to observe. Waiward, or Morose; perhaps from the
Teut. Weigern, to refuse, and the Belg. Aerd, nature; it denoting one that by
nature is averse to good advice. Write Wayward. To Wake, from the Belg.
Wae^ken, the Teut. Wachen, or the AS. Wacian, idem. Wakes, Feasts used among
Christians, both for the first day of the Consecration of any Church, and for
the Anniversary of it; from the word, To Wake; for that the night is often
spent in watching, and singing Chorus's. Spelman draws it from the AS. Wac,
drunkenness; in which, such Feasts too frequently terminate. To Wallt, from the
Dan Vaneker, id. or, the sense somewhat varied, from the AS. Wealcan, to roll
from one side to another. Walker, a Northern word, signifying a Fuller of
Cloth; from the Belg. Walcker, id. this from Walcken, or the Ital Gualcare, to
full, or press cloth so as to make it smooth. Wall, from the AS. Wall, Wealle,
the Belg. Wall, or the Teut. Wall, id and all from the Lat. Vallum, a trench.
A Wallet, from the Fr G. Valise, the Ital. Valigia, or the Teut. Fellis, id.
Or, more likely from the Teut. Wallen, to travel. Wallow, from the AS. Walpian
Apylian, the Teut. Weltzen, or the Belg. Wellen, idem. Wallowish, or Walsh,
Taste, i. e. raw, and without salt; from the Belg. Walghe, Loathsomness, or
Walghen, to be nauseous; or from the AS. Wealh, or Teut. Welsch, strange, q. d.
strange tastes. Walnuts, from the AS. Walh-Hnutu, idem; q.d. Walsche Nuts, that
is, Nuts brought from a strange Country. V. Welsh. To Wamble, from the AS.
Wamb, the womb. Wan, from the AS. Wan, pale; hence Wannan, to grow pale. Wand,
from the Dan. Vaand, idem; or from our word, to Wind; because it is flexible.
To Wander, from the AS. Wandrian, the Belg. Wanderen; or the Teut. Wandeln, the
same. To Wane, from the AS. Waman, Geanian, to decrease; this from Wana, that
which wants somewhat; from hence the Belg. Wan, and our word Want. The Wang,
or Wong. Tooth, from the AS. Wang, Wong or the Teut. Wange, the Cheek bone.
Want Lou^e, from the Belg. and Teut. Wa^d, a Wall, and Loust; which see.
Wanton, q. Want one, viz. one that wants one to play with, Minsh. Perhaps
from the Belg. Waenen, to imagine many vain things; or Welidtelen, tojaunt up
and down. Wapentake, from the AS. Waepen, Weapons, and Getaecan, to deliver;
from the delivering of Arms to the Lord of the Manor as a sign of subjection,
according to Somner. War, from the AS. Waer, the Belg. Weere, the Teut. Werre,
the Fr. G. Guerre, or the It. and Hisp. Guerra, idem; all from the AS. Gar, or
Teut. Wehr, Arms; whence Wehren, to put on Arms: Or from the AS. Werian, the
Belg. W^eren, or Teut. Wahren, to defend. Warble, perhaps from the Belg.
Wervelen, Worvelen, to take rounds; with us, to play a Roundelay in Music;
this from the Belg. Wervel, a whirl pool; and this perhaps from the Lat.
Verticulum, a Whirl for a Spindle. Ward, in composition, from the AS. Weard,
the same. Ward, to keep in Ward, from the AS. Weard, Custody, or Weardan, to
watch; all not unlikely from the AS. Werian, the Belg. Waerden, the Teut.
Waeren, the Fr. G. Garder, or the Ital. Guardare, to guard or defend. Warden,
as Church- Warden, from the Fr. G. Gardien, or the Ital. Gardiano, idem. V.
Guard, and Ward A Warden-Pear, from the AS. Wearden, to preserve; for that it
keeps long before it rots. Wardmote, from Ward, and the AS. Mot, Gemot, a
meeting together; it being the Council of one Ward in a City. Wardrobe, from
the Fr. G. Garderobbe, or the Ital. Guardarobba, idem. Ware, from the AS. Ware,
the Belg. Waere, or the Teut. Waar, Wahr, idem; all, not unlikely, from the
Belg. Warren, or the Teut. Wahren, to warrant. Warfare, from the Eng. War, and
the AS. Faran, to go; or Fare, an Expedition. To Warm, from the AS. Wearmian,
the Belg. Waermen, or the Teut. Warmen; these from the AS. Wearm, the Belg.
Waerm, the Dan. Varm, and the Belg. Warm, warm. To Warn, from the AS. Waerman,
to admonish; or the Teut. Warnen, idem. The Warp of a Web, from the AS. Wearp,
the Belg. Werp, Waerpie, or the Teut. Werffte, the same: Hence the AS. Weorpan,
the Belg. Werpen, and the Teut. Werffen, to warp, to cast out. Warp,
Mould-Warp, from the Teut. Maul, the Mouth, and Werffen, to cast up; or from
Mould, and the Belg. Worpen, to cast forth. To Warrant, from the Fr. G.
Garentir; or the Ital. Guarentare, idem; all from the AS. Werian, or Belg.
Waeren, to defend; or Teut. Wahren, Gewahren, to make good; or the Belg. Waeren
to secure or warrant the Goods. A Cony- Warren, from the Fr. G. Garenne, or the
Belg. Waerande, idem; all from Waeren, to have in custody. V. Ward. Wart, from
the AS. Weart, the Teut. Warize, or the Belg. Warte, Waerte, the same. Wary,
from the AS. Waer, idem; whence Waere, a Caution; both from the AS. Werian, to
defend. V. Beware. Was, from the AS. Waes, or the Fr. Th. Vuas, the same. To
Wash, from the AS. Wascan, or the Belg. and Teut. Waschen, idem; and hence
Wasche, a Wash or Washing. Waskite, a kind of Hawk of Virginia, q.d. Vast Kite;
unless of some barbarous American original to us unknown. Wasp, from the AS.
Waeps; Waefs, the Fr. G. Guespe, or the Belg. and Teut. Wespe, idem; and all
from the Lat. Vespa, idem. Wassail, a Festival Song, which about the Epiphany
is sung in some Countries at every respective house; from the AS. Waes-hael,
All-hail; v. Hail. Wast Ground, from the AS. Weste, the Teut. Wust, or the
Belg. Woest, Wuest, idem. The Wast of the Body, from the Lat. Vastus, vast or
big; or from the AS. Waestm, the increase of the Body; this from the AS.
Weaxan, to wax or grow. Watch, from the Teut. Wacht, idem; hence Wachten, to
watch; these from the AS. Wacian, the Teut. Wachen, or Belg. Waecken, to wake.
Watchet- Color, a faint Blue, q. d. Woadchet color, the color of Woad, an
Herb wherewith Cloth is dyed blue. Water, from the AS. Waeter, Waetere, the
Teut. Wasser, or the Belg. Wieter, idem; from hence the AS. Waetran, the Teut.
Wassern, and Belg. Waeteren, to water; all from the AS. Waetan, to wet. Wath or
Ford, from the Teut. Watt, Wadt, idem; and both from the Lat. Vadum, a Ford;
vide Wade. A Wa^led Wall, a Northern word; from the AS. Waetl, a Bundle, to
wit, of small wood; or Watel, a Tile. The W^tt^^s of a Cock, from the Teut.
Wadeln, or the Belg. Waeghelen, Wagghelen, to wag. Wave, from the AS. Waeg, the
Belg. Waeghe, or the Fr. G. Vague, idem; all from the AS. Wagian, or the Belg.
Waeghen, Gewaeghen, to move or wag. To Wave an Argument, from the Fr. G.
Guesver, to leave, or omit. To Waver, from the AS. Wafian, idem. See Wag, and
Waddle. Wax, from the AS. Waexe, the Dan. V^x, or the Belg. and Teut. Wachs,
id. all from the AS Wac, soft, or flexible. To Wax, or increase, from the AS.
Weaxan, the Teut. Wachsen, or the Belg. Wassen. id. all from the Belg. Wack,
soft. Things increase while they are soft, slender and juicy. Way, from the AS.
Weg, Waeg, the Teut. Weg, or the Belg. Wegh, idem. Weak, from the AS. Wac,
Wace, the Belg. Weeck, Wack, or the Teut. Schwach, idem. These from the Belg.
Sweken, and the Teut Swachen, Swechen, to weaken. Weal, as the Common Weal, or
Wealth, from the AS. Well, well; or Welan, Wealth Riches. Wean, from the Belg.
Wennen. or the Teut. Entwehrien, id. Weapons, from the AS. Waepen, in Aelfr.
Waepna, the Belg. Wapen, the Teut. Wapffen, Waffen, the Dan. V^aven, or the Fr.
Th. Vu^phane, idem. Hence the AS. Waepnian, Beaepnian, the Dan. Vebner, and the
Teut. Waffen, to furnish with a Weapon, to arm. Wear, a Water-Wear, from the
AS. Waer, Were, or the Teut. Weiher, id. these from the AS. Werian, or the Belg.
Wieren, to guard. To Wear, from the AS. Weran, Aran, to put on, Weorman, to
wear out; or the Teut. Waeren, Wehren, to last. Weary, from the AS. Werig,
idem; whence Werigan, to be weary, and the Belg. Vaeren, the same. Weasand, or
Gullet, from the AS. Wasend, idem. Weather, Sheep, from the AS. Wether, the
Dan. Veder the Teut. Wieder, or Belg. Weder, the same. The Weather, from the
sky; from the AS. Weder, the Teut. Wetter, or the Belg. Weder, Wedder, idem.
Wederwits, weatherwise; from hence also a Weathercock. To Weave, from the AS.
Weafan, the Belg. Weven, or the Teut. Wieben, Weben, id. Hence the AS. Waebbe,
the Dan. Weff, and Belg. Web, a Web. To Web, from the AS. Weddian, Beeddian,
or the Teut. Wetten, to make a Covenant. Wedge, from the AS. Weeg, the Dan.
Vegge, or the Belg. Wegghe, idem. Wednesday, from the AS. Wodnesdag, or the
Dan. Othinszdag, Odensdag, idem; originally from the God of the Germans, Woden.
We, from the AS. We, the Belg. Wii, or the Dan. Wi, the same. Weed, from the
AS. Wedd, idem; whence Weodian, and Belg. Wieden, to weed. Week, from the AS.
Weoc, Wuca, Wic, the Teut. Woche, or Belg. Weke, id. The Week of a Candle, from
the AS. Wac, Wace, or the Belg. Wack, gentle, or flexible; also soft. Write
Wiek. Weel, for a Whirl pool, from the AS. Wael, or the Belg. Weel, Wiel, a
Swallow, or Gulf. Ween, for think; from the AS. Wenan, the Belg. Waenen, or the
Teut. Wahnen, to suppose. Weep, from the AS. Weopan, Beepan, idem. Weesel, from
the AS. Wesle, the Teut. Wiisel, Wiiesel or the Dan. Vesel, idem. Weigh from
the AS. Waegan, the Belg Weghen, Wichten, or the Teut. Wegen, to weigh, or
ponder; from hence the AS. Wiht, the Belg Wicht, Wight, and Teut. Gewicht,
weight. Wichtig, weighty. A Well, from the AS. Well, Waell, idem. This from
Weallan, Apeallan, to spring forth. Well, an Adverb, from the Belg. and AS.
Well, the Fr. Th. Vuola, or the Teut. Wol, Wohl, idem; all from the Lat. Belle,
idem. Welladay, (q, d.) Wail the day; Wellaway, from the AS. Welan, wealth,
plenty of, and Wa, Woe, or Sorrow. Welt, for a Hem, from the AS. Waeltan, to
roll. Welter, from the AS. Waeltan, the Teut. Wel^zen, the Belg. Woelteren, or
the Fr. G. Veaultrer, to wallow, or tumble. All from the Lat. Volutare, the
same. Wench, from the AS. Wenche, idem. West, from the AS. and Teut. West,
idem. Westweard, Westward. Wet, from the AS. Waet, or the Dan. Vaad, idem;
whence Vaeder, and AS. Waetan, to wet, to make moist. Whale, from the AS. Hale,
Hael, the Belg. Walvisch, or the Teut. Walfisch, idem. Wharl, or Whorl. Minsh
draws it from the Teut. Wurtel, or the Belg. Werdel, Wordel, id. This from
Wervelen, to turn round. Somner draws it from the AS. Heorsa, idem; this from
Heorsian, to turn. What, from the Belg. Wat, or the AS. Haet, the same. Wheal,
or blister, from the AS. Hele, Corruption, or Matter; this from Helan, to
putrefie; or from the Belg. and Teut. Well, the bubling of water; whence
We^len, to spring up. Wheat, from the AS. Haet, Haete, the Teut. Weitz, or the
Belg. Weyde, idem. Wheel, from the AS. Heol, or the Belg. Wiel, idem. Fr. Jun.
draws it from the Gr. (...), to roll. To Wheese, or Whease, from the AS.
Heosan, id. Heos, a rutling, or wheesing; all from the sound. When, from the
AS. Haenne, the Teut. Wann. Wenn, or the Belg. Wan. idem; all from the Lat.
Quando, the same. Where, from the AS. Haer, the Run. Dan. Vif, or the Belg.
Wiive, idem; whence Wiiven, and the AS. Wifian, to marry a wife. Wild, from the
AS. Wild, Wilda, the Belg. and Teut. Wild, Wildt, or the Dan. Vild, untamed.
Wily, Mer. Cas. draws it from the Gr. (...), crafty, or wise in counsel. V.
Guile. Will, from the Fr. G. Vueil, the AS. Willa, or the Belg. and Teut.
Will, idem; from hence the AS. Willan, the Belg. and Teut. Willen, and the Fr.
G. Vouloir, to will. Willow, from the AS. Welie, Welige, or the Belg. Willighe,
Wilghe, the same. Wimble, either from the old Belg. Wimpel, idem; or the Ger.
Sax. Weintlen, to bore a hole through. Win, from the AS. Winnan, or the Belg.
Winnen, to win, gain, or overcome; all from the Lat. Vincere, to overcome. To
Wind, from the AS. Windan, Apindan, or the Belg. and Teut. Windin, to wind up;
from hence the words Winding Sheet, and Yarn- Windle. Wind. from the AS. and
Ger. Wind, the Dan. Vind, or the Fr. G. Vent, idem; all from the Lat. Ventus,
the wind. Window, or as some pronounce it, Windore, from Wind, and Door; or the
Dan. Vindue, the same. Wine, from the AS. Win, the Belg. Wiin, the Teut. Wein.
or the Fr. Th. Vuin, idem; all from the Lat. Vinum, id. Wing, from the AS.
Hing, or the Dan. Vinge, idem. Wink, from the AS. Wincian, the Belg. Wencken,
or the Teut. Wincken, idem. Winnow, from the AS. Windian, or the Belg. and
Teut. Winnen, id. and all from the Lat. Vannus, a Fan. Winter, from the Dan.
Vinter, or the AS. Belg. and Teut. Winter, idem; whence Winteren, To Winter. To
Wipe, from the AS. Wipian, Wipan, the same. Wire, from the Fr. G. Virer, to
environ; or a Lat. Gyrando, from turning round, as into Rings. Wise, from the
AS. Wis, Wise, the Teut. Weise, the Dan. Viis, or the Belg. Wiis, idem; all
perhaps from the AS. Witan, the Teut. Weissen, or the Belg. We^en, to wite, (i.
e.) understand. Wise, in this Wise, from the AS. Wise, the Belg. Wiise, Ghiise,
the Fr. G. Guise, or the Ital. Guisa, a Guise, or manner. V. Guise. To Wish.
from the AS. Wiscian, Geschian, idem. Wisp, from the Belg. Ghisp, the same.
Wist, from the AS. Wistan, to know; or the Belg. and Teut. Bewist, conscious,
or privy unto any thing. Wit, to Wilt, from the Belg. Weten, the Teut. Wissen,
or the AS. Witan, to know. Witch, from the AS. Wicce, idem; whence Wiccian, to
bewitch; or from Wicnian; to prophecy, or foretell. Minsh. and Kilian surmise
that it is primitively drawn from the Belg. Witchelen, to whinny; for that the
ancient Germans, as Tacitus says, were wont to divine by the whinnying or
neighing of Horses. With, from the AS. With, id. In composition it is put for
Contra, against; as in these words, Withdraw, withstand, etc. To Wither, in the
AS. Gepitherod, withered; this from Wither, contrary; as we say of a thing that
fades, it goes backwards. Withy, from the AS. Withig, idem. A Witness, from the
AS. Witness, Geitnesse, or the Fr. Th. Gewitznisse, a witness, or testimony;
all from the AS. Witan, the Teut. Weissen, or Belg. Weten, to know, or
understand. Witty, and Wit, the one is taken from the AS. Wittig, or the Belg.
Wittigh, idem; and the other from the AS. Wit, the Belg. Wite, Wit, or the
Teut. Witz, understanding or ingenuity. Wizard; or a Magician, from the word
Wise; for that among the Chaldeans, Persians, and others, they were accounted
the wise men; and such Impostors now adays, are vulgarly called Wise men. Woe,
from the AS, Wa, Wae, the Belg. We. the Teut Wiche or the Dan. Vet, sorrow;
all from the Lat. Vae, woe to, fie upon thee; and this from the Gr. (...), the
same. Woad, from the AS. Wad, the Belg. Wedde, Weed, the Teut. Wetd, the Fr. G.
Guede, or the Ital. Guade, idem; all from the Lat. Guadum, Woad wherewith they
dye blue. Wolf, from the AS. Wulf, the Dan Viff, the Teut. Wolff, or the Belg.
Wolf, idem. Woman, from the AS. Wiman, Wimman, id. This from the AS. Wif,
(which comes from the Gr. (...), to join issue,) and Man, by corruption of time
called Waman, for the Saxons generally used i, instead of o. Womb, from the AS.
Wamb, id. Wonder, from the AS. Wundor, the Belg. Wonder, or the Fr. Th. Vuar,
or the Belg. Waer, idem. A Wherry, q. d. a Ferry, or Ferry-Boat; or from the
verb to Hurry, the Lat. Vehere, to carry, or the AS. Faran, to go. Whet, from
the AS. Hettan, the Teut. Weizen, or the Belg. W^tten, idem. Whether, from the
AS Haether, or the Belg. and Teut. Weder, idem. Whey, from the AS. Haeg, Haege,
for the Belg. Wey, idem; also Whig. Which, formerly Whilk, from the AS. Hilc,
the Dan. Huilck, the Teut Welsh, or the Belg. Welck, the same. Whiffle, from
the AS. Waeflan, to invent lies or excuses; whence Waeflere, a Whiffler; or
from the Belg. Weyfelen, to doubt in mind. While, from the AS. Hile, the Teut.
Weil, or the Belg. Will, idem. To Whimper, from the Teut. Wimmerin, to cry for
sorrow or joy; or the Belg. Wrimpen, to move the lips. To Whine, from the Teut.
Weynen, or the AS. Wanian, to weep; this from Wa, woe, or sorrow: Or from the
Belg. Weenen, to lament. To Whinny, from the Lat. Hinnio, to neigh as an horse;
both from the sound. A Whip, from the AS. Heop, (in Aelfricus, Spipa,) or the
Belg. Ghispe, idem; whence the AS. Heopan, and the Belg. Wippen, Ghispen, to
whip. Whiel, from the AS Hyrlfan, or the Belg. Wervelen, to turn round; from
hence arise some compounds, as, Whirl-pool, Whirlwind. etc. A Whisk, to dust
Hangings with; from the Dan. Bisker, or the Teut. Wischen, to whisk or wipe. To
Whisper, from the Belg. Wisperen, Wispelen, idem; all from the sound. Whist, an
Interjection of silence, from the Ital. Zitoo, idem; or the Dan. Hw^^ter, to
whisper. To Whistle, from the AS. Histlan, Wistlan, idem. Whence Hirtle,
Wistle, a Whistle or Pipe. Whit, every Whit, a Contract of the AS Opin^^ Opuht,
Ought, any thing. White, from the AS. Hit, Hita, the Dan. Hvid, or or the Belg.
Wit, idem; whence the AS. Hitian, and the Belg. Witten, to whiten. A White Cob,
or Whit Cob, from the word White, and the AS. Cop, the Head. Whiting, a Fish,
so called from its color. V. White. Whitsontide, from the Teut. Welssen^ag,
idem; both from White, Sun and Tide; because such as had been baptized between
Easter and Pentecost, appeared together in the Temple, all apparelled in white
raiment on White-Sunday. Whittle, a Butcher's knife, from the AS. Hitel, idem.
To Whizz, a word feigned from the sound. V. Hiss. Who, from the Belg.. Wie, or
the AS. Ha, Hua, idem. Whole, from the AS Walg, Hal, or the Belg. Heel, Al,
idem; or perhaps from the Gr. (...), whole, or (...), sound. Whore, from the
AS. Hure, the Belg. Hoere, the Teut. Huhr, or the Dan. Hoar, the same; the AS.
Huredom, whoredom; the Belg. Hoe^en, and the Teut. Huren, to go a whoring.
Verstegan draws it from the AS. Hyrian, or the Belg. Hueren, to hire; for that
she becomes a prostitute for money. Who^lbat, Hurlbat. V. Hurl, and Bat, in
their places. Whor^le-berries, and Hirrle-berries, as Somner writes it from the
AS. Heort-Berian, q. d. Heart-Berries; either because they grow in the form of
a Heart, or are of a cordial quality. Why, from the AS. Hyg, Hi, or the Fr. G.
Quoy, idem. Wicked, either from the AS. Wicce, a Witch; Wiccian, to bewitch,
Waecean, to afflict or torment; or Wigend, a Soldier, one that usually bears
the Character of Wicked; or from the AS. Wirgean, to curse; or lastly, from the
Lat. Vitiatus, one that has corrupted himself. A Wicket, from the Fr. G.
Guichet, or the Belg. Wicket, a little Gate. To go Widdle waddle, like a Duck,
from the Teut. Wickel wackel gehen, idem. V. Wag, and Waddle. Wide, from the
AS. Wide, Wid, the Belg. Wild, the Teut. Weit, or the Dan. Vild, idem; hence
the Belg. Wilden, and the Teut. Weiten, to widen, or make wide. Widow, from the
AS. Wida, the Belg. Weduwe, the Hisp. Biuda, or the Ital. Vedouas, idem; all
from the Lat. Vidua, idem; hence Widower, from the word Widow, and W^er, a man.
To Wield, from the AS. Wildan, Wealdan, or the Teut. Walten, to govern. Gewalt,
Power, Gewaltig, mighty, or powerful. Wife, from the AS. Wif, the Teut. Wish,
the Fr. Th. ^ulp, the Teut. Wonder, idem; whence the Teut. Wunderen, and the
Belg. Wonderen, to wonder. Wont, to be Wont, from the AS. Wunian, the Belg.
Gewoonen, or the Teut. Gewohnen, to accustom ones self to. To Woo, from the
AS. Wogan. Minsh, draws it from the Belg. Woude, I Would. Wood, from the Belg.
Would, the Teut. Would, the Dan. Veed, or the AS. Wude, Weald, idem. Wood, from
the AS. Wod, raving mad; or the Belg. Woed, Wood, madness; whence Woeden, the
Teut. Wuten, and the AS. Wedan, to be wood, or furious. Woof, from the AS.
Wefta, weft, as our North-Country-men rightly pronounce it; or from the Belg.
Wievel, or the Teut. Waffel, the same. V. Weave. Wool, from the AS. Wulle, the
Belg. Wolle, or the Teut. Wulle, idem. Word, from the AS. Word, the Fr. Th.
Vuort, the Belg. Word, or the Teut. Wort, id. Work, from the AS. Weorc, the
Dan. Verck, the Fr. Th. Vuerch, or the Belg. and Teut. Werck, idem; whence the
AS. Weorcan, the Teut. Wircken, and the Belg. Wercken, to work. World, from the
AS. Weorld, World, the Fr. Th. Vuorolt, or the Belg. World, Wereld, idem; this
from Weren, or the Teut. Wehren, to abide. Worm, from the AS. Wyrm, the Dan.
Orm, the Teut. Wurm, or the Belg. Worm, idem; all from the Lat. Vermis, idem.
Wormwood, from Worm, and Wood, because it is good against the worms; or from
the Teut. Wehren, to wear off, or expel, and Muth, the Heart, or the AS. Weran,
to Defend, and Mod, the Mind, or Spirit. To Worry, or disquiet greatly, from
the AS. Werigean, the Belg. Warren, Werren, or the Teut. Wurgen, to torment
grievously; also, to strangle. Worse, from the AS. Wirs, Wierse, or the Fr. G.
Wiersero, idem. Worship, from the AS. Weorth-Scype, Dignity. V. Worth. Worsted,
a sort of Yarn, from Worsted, a Town in Norfolk, famous for this sort of
Manufacture. Wort, in the terminations of the names of herbs; from the AS.
Wypt, and Herb; the Teut. Wurtzel, or the Belg. Worte, a root. Wort, from the
AS. Wyrt, or the Belg. Worte, Werte, idem; or, not unlikely, from our word
Work, for that it is continually working whilst new. Worth, and Worthy, from
the AS. Weorth, Wyrthe, the Belg. Weerd, or the Teut. Werth, Wurdig, worthy;
also the worth or value of a thing. Worth, a Termination in many proper names;
as Thistleworth etc. from the AS. Worth, a Farm; or Weorthig, a field. Wot,
from the AS. Witan, or the Belg. Weten, to know. Would, from the Belg. Would, or
the Teut. Wolte, idem. v. Will. A Wound, from the AS. Wund, the Belg. Wonde, or
the Teut. Wunde, idem; from hence the AS. Wundian, the Belg. Wonden, and the
Teut. Wunden, to wound. Wrack, from the Belg. Wrack, or Vrack, idem. Wrangle:
Minsh derives it from the Belg. Wrangh, Wranck, bitter; q. d. to be embittered
against one; but rather, from our word Wrong, which see. Wrap: Minshew draws it
from the Belg. Werp, Werpte, the warp of a web: But it may be better drawn from
the AS. Heorfian, to turn, or wind about. Wrestle, from the AS Wraestlian, or
the Belg. Worstelen, idem; or from our word Wrest. Wrath, from the AS. Wrath,
Wrath, or the Dan. Vrede, idem; all probably from the AS. Wrythan, to writh,
or shrivel up the face, as Men do in their anger. A Wreath, from the AS.
Wreothe, a garland; or Wreothian, to wreath, or tie round like a garland. Wren,
from the AS. Wrenne, idem; both Contracts of the Lat. Regina, a Queen, by a
Catachresis. To Wrest, from the AS. Wraestan, idem; whence Araestan, to wrest
out, or extort. Wretch, from the AS. Wraecca, an exiled person: Or from the AS.
Wraecan, to revenge. Wright, from the AS. Wryhta, Wyrhta, idem; this from the
AS. Weorcan, Wyrcan, to work. To Wring, from the AS. Wringan, or the Belg.
Vringhen, Wringhen, idem. A Wrinkle, from the AS. Wrincle, the Dan. Rinckle, or
the Belg. Wrinckel, idem; whence the AS. Wrinclian, and the Belg. Wrinckelen,
to wrinkle. Wrist, from the AS. Wyrest, Wyrst, idem; or from our word Wrest;
which see. Write, from the AS. Writan, the same: Or from the AS. Wrotan, or the
Belg. Wroeten, to plow the ground; by a Metaphor taken from Agriculture; whence
it is, that in Latin we use Exarare, to write. Wrong, from the AS. Wrange,
idem; this from the AS. Wringan, or the Belg. Wringhen, to wring, or exto^t
contrary to justice. Wry, Awry, from our words Writ^t, or Wreath; which see.
Mer. Cas. draws it from the Gr. (...), or (...), bent, or crooked. To W^n; as,
Where do you W^n^ i. e. Live; from the AS. Wunian, Geunian, the Belg. Woonen,
or the Teut. Wohnen, idem.
Y.
YAcht, a kind of ship; perhaps from the Teut. Iagt, this from the word Iagen,
to pursue; it being but a slight ship, more fit for Piracy, than transportation
of goods. A Yard, from the AS. Geard, or the Dan. Gaard, idem; also a grass
plat. A Yard to measure withal, from the AS. Gerd, Gyrd, the Belg. Guard,
Gaerde, or the Teut. Gerte, the same. Yare, an old word, signifying desirous,
or covetous; from the Teut. Gather, impatient. Yarn, from the AS. Gearn, the
same. To Yawn, from the AS. Ganian, Geonan, the Belg. Gewehn, Gheewen, or the
Teut. Gehnen, id. all from the AS. Cinan, or the Gr. (...), to gape. Yea, from
the AS. Gea, idem; or the AS. Belg. and Teut. Ja, yes. To Yean, or Ean, from
the AS. Eanian, to bring forth as the Ewe does; and this from the AS. Eoe, an
Ewe. Year, from the AS. Gear, the Belg. Iaer, the Teut. Iahr, the Dan. Aaar, or
the Run. Dan. Ar, idem. Fr. Jun. draws it a Grrando, from turning round; and
therefore in Latin called Annus, from Annulus, a ring. To Yearn, from the AS.
Earnian, Geearnian, to commiserate; hence Earnunge, an earning, or
commis^ation. Yeast, from the AS. Gest, Gist, or the Belg. Ghest, Ghist, idem.
Yield, or Yield, for to submit himself; from the AS. Gildan, to pay, or
perform; to wit, what the Subduer demands. To Yell, or Yawl, from the Belg.
Ghillen, or the Teut. Schallen, Schellen, idem. Yellow, from the AS. Gealee,
Geelue, the Belg. Gheluwe, the Teut. Gaelb, Geelb, the Ital. Giallo, the Hisp.
Yalde, or the Fr. G. Jaulne, Jaune, idem. To Yelp, from the Belg. Ghilpen, to
yelp like a bird. Yeoman, either from the AS. Gemaene, or the Teut. Gemetu,
common; q. d. a Common man, or one of the Commonalty; or q. Eoeman, an Ewe man,
i. e. one that follows Husbandry. Yes, from the AS. Gyse, the same. Vide Yea.
Yesterday, from the AS. Geosterlic, the Belg. Ghisteren id. or the Teut.
Gesteen, all from the Lat. Hester nus, of the day before. See Day. Yet, from
the AS. Get, Geta, idem. Yew, from the AS. I, the Fr. G. If, If, the Belg.
Iven, Iiif. idem; or the Teut. Eyden-Baum, the Yew tree. Yoke, from the AS.
Goc, Geoc, the Belg. Iock, the Teut. Ioth, or the Fr. G. Joug, id. all from the
Lat. Jugum; this a Jungendo, from yoking or joining together. Yon, Ponder, from
the AS. Geond, or the Belg. Ghender, idem. Of Yore, from the AS. Geara,
Geagora, idem; as, Geara Dagum, in the days of yore. You, and Your, from the
AS. Juh, Eo, the Fr. Th. Iuth, or the Belg. Ghy, you; from these the AS. Eoer,
and the Teut. Ewer, your. Young and Younger from the AS Jong, Geunga, the Belg.
Iong, or the Teut. Iung, Young. Hence the AS. Geonger, the Belg. Ionger, and
the Teut. Iunger, younger. Yule- Block, (i. e.) Christmas- Block, a word
frequently used in Lincolnshire, and elsewhere; from the AS. Gehul, or the Dan.
Juledag, Yuleday, or Christmass-day; this not unlikely from the Lat. Jubilum, a
voice of gladness, a Jubilee.
Z.
ZAni, a Fool. Mer. Cas. draws it from the Gr. (...), foolish; probably from
the Lat. Sanna, a a mocking, or derision; or from the word Zane, the Dim. of
the Italian name Giovanni, of John; whence we say, an idle Jack. Zeal, from the
Lat. Zelus, the Fr. G. Zele, or the Ital. Zelo, idem. Zealot, from the Lat.
Zealotes, or Zealota, idem.
FINIS.
ETYMOLOGICON ONOMASTICON: OR, An Etymological Explication OF THE Proper Names
of Men and Women: As also, Of Rivers, Countries, Cities, Towns, Villages,
Hills, Mountains, Ports, and Promontories, which were formerly used by the
English-Saxons, or are now common amongst us: Particularly the Names of such
Men, Women, and Places, as are of a German Original, and do occurr frequently
in our English History, whether they be real or fictitious; those coming from
the Latin, Greek and Hebrew being reserved to be added as an Appendix at the
latter End, where the Reader is desired to look for them.

AA, a River, which separates: Picardy from Flanders, and consequently parts
France from the Netherlands; from the Fr. Th. Aha, Streams of Water; or from
the AS. Ea, Water. See Ea. Abberbury, in old time a famous Monastery; which is
as much as to say Abbotsbury; just as Abbeville, is used by those of Picardy,
the word in it self signifying, a residence for an Abbot. Abent, a
Christen-name. Camden asserteth that it once signified a steep place; and so
perhaps might come from the word Bend. Abercom, in Scotland; it was formerly
called Abercurvig or Abercurving; if I mistake not, from the Brit. Aber, the
Mouth of a River, and the River Curving, q. d. the Mouth of the River Curving.
Aberconwey, a City in Caernarvanshire in Wales, which was Rebuilt by King
Edward the Third, out of the Ruins of an ancient British City once named
Caerbaen; it signifies the Mouth of the River Conwey; which see. Aberdene, a
Bishop's Sea, and an University, from the C. Br. Aber Don, (i. e.) the Mouth of
the River Dee. Aberfraw, in the Isle of Anglesey; from the C. Br. Aber a Mouth,
and the River Fraw; q. d. the Mouth of the River Fraw. Abergevenny, by
contraction Abergenny, and which is more common Abergany; a City in the County
of Monmouth. Situate nigh the meeting together of the Rivers Gevenny and Vsk;
from Aber a Mouth, and Gevenny, q. d. the Mouth of Gevenny. Abingdon, in the
County of Barks, a Town first called Sheovesham, afterward Abbandune by the
English-Saxons; rather from an Abbey there founded by Cissa a King of the
Vice-Saxons, and so called quasi Abbey Town, than from Abbenus an Irish Hermit.
Abus, I suppose from the C. Br. Aber, (i. e.) the Port or Haven of a River,
where belike it is situate. Acmanchester; See Bath. Acton, in the County of
Middl. and a Village elsewhere; from the AS. Aac, an Oak; and Town (i. e.) a
Town encompassed with Oaks. Adalgisus, the Son of the last King of the
Longobardi, whose Name was Desiderius, from the Teut. Adel nobility, and Geitz
covetousness, q. d. greedy of honor, ambitious. Adder, a River, so called from
its many Windings, like to a Snake rolling it self up. See Adder in the Common
Names. Adderbourn, in the County of Wilts, so called for its crooked windings;
from Adder and Bourn, which see in the Common Names; and Willybourn, from
Willow and Bourn, because of the many Willow-trees growing thereabout. Adelard,
the Christen-name of a Man, from the Teut. Edel noble, and the Belg. Aerd,
nature, q. d. one of a generous Spirit. Adelbert, a King of the Longobardi of
Italy. Junius derives it from the Teut. Edel, noble, and Bart, a Beard, q. d. a
man, that has a grave, large Beard; and he supposes that it is the same with
Albert, which see. I had rather derive, it from the Teut. Adel, Nobility, and
the AS. Beorhte, light, q. d. the very Splendour of Nobility; supposed to be the
same with Ethelbert. Adeleidis, the Wife of Lothair King of the Longobardi of
Italy; from the Teut. Adel, nobility, and Leiden, to suffer, which is as much
as to say, one that could patiently tolerate the Haughty carriage of the
Nobles. Adelhidis, the Wife of the Emperor Lewis Balbus; perhaps from the
Teut. Adel, nobility, and Heyde, a place where Broom, or Heath grows. Adelin,
a Christen-name, from the AS. Aedel, Teut. Edel, a Nobleman or Prince. Adelm, a
Bishop of Sherborn, from the AS. Ead, felicity, and Helm, an Helmet, which
secondarily signifies a Protector or a Preserver of happiness. Adelrad, or
Ethelrad, the Christen-name of a man, from the AS. Aethel, Teut. Edel, a
Nobleman, and the AS. Rade, Teut. Raht, counsel; q. d. an able Counselor.
Adelwaldus, a King of the Longobardi of Italy; from the Teut. Adel, nobility,
and the AS. Wealdan, to govern; that is to say, a noble Governor. Adewaldus, a
King of the Longobardi of Italy; from the AS. Athe, an Oath, and Wealdan, to
govern, q. d. One that will not Swear, or else one, that bound those to him,
which he subdued, by an Oath. Adhlingi, Saxon Germans, says Nithardus in his
French History: They are divided into three ranks, namely, into the Adhlingi,
that is the Nobles; into the Frilingi (i. e.) the freeborn, and into the
Lazzi, (i. e.) those which served for their freedom, called Libertines: Now the
word Adhling is manifestly derived from the AS. and Fr. Th. Aethel, Teut. Edel,
a Nobleman. Adler, Nom. Gent. from the Teut. Adler, an Eagle, or from the AS.
Aethel, noble, Teut. Edeler, more Noble. Ado, an Archbishop of Vienna, a
Writer of Annals; perhaps from the AS. Aad Ade, a funeral Pile. Adoaldus, a
King of the Longobardi of Italy, perhaps contracted and corrupted from
Adelwald, and this from the AS. Adel, felicity, and Wealdan, to govern; q. d.
one that overcomes his own Fortune; and is neither cast down with Adversity,
nor puffed up with a prosperous State. Adolph, either the same with the AS.
Eadulph, which see in its place; or, if we may credit Verstegan, it is
contracted from Adelulph, and this from the Teut. Adel, nobility, Edel, noble,
AS. Ethel, noble, and Vlph, help, (i. e.) one that stood up for, and assisted
the Nobility. Adrana, Teut. Eder, a River, that runs through the Catti, now
called Hassi; perhaps from the AS. Eddre, Teut. Ader, a Vein; or from the AS.
Eddran, the Reins; from the Similitude of the Veins, or Reins. St. Aelfegus, ^n
Archbishop of Canterbury, and Martyr; from the AS. Ael, all, and Faegen,
merry, q. d. always merry; it answers the Lat. Hilarious. See Alpheg
hereafter. Aelfgine, from the AS. Aelf, an Elf, a Witch, and Gin, the jaws, or
Ginan, to gape. Aelfred, Alfred, or Alured, a Proper Name of a man, from the
AS. Ael, all, and Frede, Peace, q. d. all Peace, which was remarkable in
Aelfred, that invincible, yet pious King of the English-Saxons, who by his
Prudence and Fortitude composed many destructive Seditions that arose in his
time. Aelgive, the Wife of Edgar King of the English-Saxons, from the AS. Ael,
all, and Gifan, to give. Aethelingey, in the County of Somerset; an Island
where the Rivers Pedrid and The One meet, in which, King Aelfred, being
discomfited by the Danes, hid himself for a while; therefore so called as it
were The Isle of Nobles; It is now by Contraction called Athelney. See Adelm
above, and Ea. St. Agelnoth, commonly called the good Archbishop of
Canterbury; perhaps from the AS. Eglan, to grieve, and noht, not at all, (i.
e.) void of Grief. Agilmundus, in Ammianus, a Petty King of the Germans; he is
described by Adr. Jun. to have had a Jaw crook'd in the manner of an Eagles
bill. It may possibly be derived from the dormant Particle A, and Gilde Mund,
(i. e.) a Golden Mouth, for his great Eloquence. See Gold, and Eagle in their
proper places. Agilulphus, a King of the Longobardi of Italy, q. d. Eilulph,
from the Teut. Eilen, to hasten, and Vlph, help; q. d. speedy succor or help;
or which is yet more probable, from the AS. Egle, grief, and the same Vlph, (i.
e.) an allayer of Sorrow and Anguish. Aidon Castle in the County of
Northumberland. Now Aidon in the C. Br. signifies the Wing of an Army; from
whence Camden supposes, that it was a Station of the Roman Army under Julius
Caesar. Ailesford, in the County of Kent; AS. Eaglesford, (i. e.) the Eagles
Ford; a Town noted for a great overthrow given Hengist and his English-Saxon
Army by Vortimer the British King. Aken, an Imperial City of Germany, formerly
the Court of Charles the Great, so named from Aquis Calidis, the Baths. Alahis
or Alachis, a Captain among the Longobardi, from the Teut. All all, and Heisz,
hot, q. d. fierce and daring. Alan, a Christen-name of a man. Jul. Scaliger
derives it from the Sclavon. Alan, a Dog, as among the Romans Caninius, from
canis, a dog. Camden from the Lat. Aelianus. Alani, formerly a warlike People
of Scythia; or the Tribe of Messagetae. Jul. Scaliger affirms that Alan in
the Scythian Tongue signifies a Dog, and were perhaps so called from the
figure of a Dog displaying its self in their Streamers. Adr. Jun. derives it
from Al, all, and an for on, q. d. always go on; either because they always
went on in Triumph over their Enemies; or because they had no settled place of
abode. Dr. Skinner explodeth this Etymon as spurious. Alaricus, that invincible
King of the Ostrogothi; from the AS. All, all, and Ric. Teut. Reich, rich, (i.
e.) abounding in riches; or it is a contract of Adelric, which comes from the
Teut. Edel, noble, and Ric, rich, q. d. nobly rich; or perhaps from the Teut.
Adel, nobility, and Ric, a Kingdom, q. d. the Flower of a Kingdom, for such are
the Nobility. Alberic, the same that Alaric above. Albert, from the Teut.
Albrecht, q. d. All bright, which see in their Places: To it answers the Lat.
Fulgentius, Lucilius. Verstegan thinks, that it is contracted from Ethelbert;
which see. Kilian draws it from the Teut. Adel nobility, and Pracht, pomp, q.
d. the Pomp of Nobility. Albis, now called Elbe, a famous River in Germany;
from the Germ. Elle, Elleboogh, an ell or elbow, because it runs in a
Current, that windeth like the Elbow, when it is bent a little. Alboinus, the
first King of the Longobardi of Italy, q.d. Germ. All-bewin, i. e. one that wun
all. It is also the same with Alwin; which see hereafter. St. Alban's, in the
County of Hertford, a Town much noted for the Murder of St. Alban, who was the
first British Martyr. By the Eng. Saxons it was called Werlamceaster, from the
River Werlam, says Camden, from whence it is called in Latin Verulamium, in
English Verulam. Alchester, q. d. Old Chester, in the County of Oxf. AS.
Aldceaster, (i. e.) the Old Town. See Old and Chester. Alcini, now called
Silesii. Adr. Jun. derives it from the Teut. Heiligen (i. e.) Holy: Which see
in its place. Alcmar, a famous Town in Holland. Adr. Jun. tells us it was once
written Almer, and derives it from All and Mere, q. d. all in a Marsh, from
fifteen Moats of Water wherewith it is encompassed. Alcwinus, an English-Saxon,
Master to Charles the Great; the same with Alwin; which see hereafter.
Aldburgh, in the County of Yorkshire, i. e. Old Borough. See Old and Borough
among the Common Names. Aldelm, at the first a Christenname, but now a Surname,
from the AS. Eald, Teut. Alt, an Old man, and Helm, (i. e.) an Helmet or
Protector of old People. Aldersgate, one of the Gates of the City of London.
According to Camden from Aldric a Saxon, who first erected it; or perhaps
because it was the Senatour's Gate, at whose Cost it was either first Founded,
or at least afterward repaired, which is most likely; q.d. Elders-Gate.
Aldgate, another of the Gates of the said City, q. d. Old gate, because of the
Antiquity thereof. Aldingham, a Village in Lanc. from the AS. Aelding, a
putting off, Eldian, to detain or hinder; so called from its craggy, rough
ways, which hinder Travelers. Aldred, a Christen-name, contracted, from
Alured, which it self is Corr. from Alfred, or Aelfred; which See. Or more
naturally from All and Dred, fear; q. d. all fear. Aldulph, Archbishop of
Litchfield in the year 790. from the AS. Eald, ancient, and Vlph, help, (i. e.)
old help. Aldworth, in the County of Berks, from the AS. Ald, old, and Worth, a
Walk, (i. e.) the old Walk. Cambden. Alegund for Adelgund, a Woman's Name, from
the AS. Ethel, Teut. Edel, noble, and Gunnen, to favor, that is to say, a
favourer of the Nobility. Alesbury, in the County of Bucks, from the AS.
Aeglesburg, (i. e.) Eaglesbury, as at this time Aquila is the chief Town of a
Province of the Samnites, now called Abruzzo. Alfreton, in the County of Derby;
some think that it was built by King Alfred; from the AS. Aelfredtun, q. d.
Alfred's Town. Alfric, Verstegan supposes that it is corrupted from Aelfred,
Alfred and Alfrid; yet I rather conjecture, that it comes from our English and
the AS. Half and Ric, Rich, that is to say, half rich. Alice, a Woman's name,
contracted from the Bar. Lat. Adeliza, and this from the Teut. Adel, nobility;
AS. Aethel, noble, and the Teut. Heissen, to be called, q. d. descended of a
great Family. Allen, Verstegan supposes, that it has been corrupted from
Alwin; which see. It may also be drawn from the Lat. Alanus. See Alan.
Allingham, and Allington, in the County of Hants; not unlikely from the AS.
Allinga, altogether, and Ham, a Village; or Ton, for Town, q. d. a very famous
Town. Alman, from the Fr. G. Aleman, Alleman, (i. e.) All man, as we say, a man
every inch of him, See German: Or as Cluverius and Agathias have it, from
Allemanni, because they were a mishmash of Men of all Nations or Countries.
Almondbury, in the County of York, once called Cambodunum; where Paulinus, the
Apostle of the North built a Cathedral, and dedicated it to St. Alban, the
first Martyr in England, and thence it began to be called Albonbury, (i. e.)
the City or Grove of St. Alban. Alncester, famous for an ancient Synod of
English-Saxons; perhaps it is so called from the River Aln, that runs by it.
Alne, in the County of Cumberland, by the ancient Romans it was called Alone.
Alne, in the County of Northumberland, by Ptolemy called Alaunus. Alpheg, a
Christen-name; not unlikely from the AS. All, all, and Fegan, Teut. Fugen, to
conjoin, q. d. a man fit for all things, one that can do any thing, Jack of all
Trades. Alphons, Hisp. Alfonso, a man's Name very common among the Spaniards,
from the Germ. Helfuns, (i. e.) help us; which see in their proper places.
Alresford, in the County of Hants, famous for a pitched Battle fought there; q.
d. the Ford of the River Alre. Alric, a King of Kent, the same with Alaric;
which see. Alswold, a King of the Northumbrians: perhaps from the AS. All,
all, and Wealdan, to rule, q. d. to govern all. Or from the AS. All, all, and
Weald, a Wood; his Territories consisting most of Woods and Forests. Alvaro, or
Alvares, a Name frequently given to Spaniards; Covarruvias supposes it to be
the same with Albert; which see. It might also be taken from the Germ. All, and
the AS. and Goth. Were, a man; q. d. all man, a valiant man. Always, in Scotland;
by Ptolemy, Alauna, from the River Alon. Alwerton, q. d. All Wear and Town; (i.
e.) a Town furnished with many Banks to keep off the Waters. Alwin, that
eminent English-Saxon, Tutor to Charles the Great; from the AS. All, Eal, all,
and Win, a Victour, (i. e.) one that wun all at Disputing. Amalaberga, a Queen
of the Turingi; it is exp. by Jun. an Heavenly Mount, from the old Teut. Hamal,
now Himniel, Heaven, and the Belg. Berga, a Mount. Amalafrida, a woman's Name;
from the old Teut. Hamal, now Himmel, heaven, and Fried, peace, q. d. heavenly
peace. Amalaricus, a King of the Spanish Vice-Gothi; from the Teut. Hammel, a
Weather; and Ric; rich, that is to say, rich in Cattle or Sheep. Amalasunta, a
most learned ^^^^n of the Italian Ostrogothi; Kilian derives it from the old
Teut. Hamel or Hamal for Himmel; Heaven, and Suenta, a Wench, q.d. an Heavenly
woman. Amali, a renowned Family of the ancient Goths; as Jun. says, from the
Teut. or Goth. Hamal, now Himmel, Heaven. Ambleside, in the County of Westminster.
the Ruins of an ancient City called by the Romans Amboglana. Ambresbury, in the
County of Wilts; so called from Ambrose King of the Britains, that was there
Slain, and our English Bury. Amerford, a Town in Holland, q. d. the Ford of the
River Ems. See Ford in its place. Amersham, in the County of Bucks, AS.
Agmundesham, this not unlikely from the AS. Aac, Ac, an Oak, Mund, a Fence or
Mound, and Ham, a Village, (i. e.) a Village fenced from the injuries of the
Winds and Cold, with a row of Oaks planted on every side thereof: Or from
Agmundus the Builder. Amery, q. d. AS. Eme rice, (i. e.) always rich. Camden.
Amie, or Amade, from the Fr. G. Aim, beloved. Amisius, Teut. Ems or Eems, a
River in Germany; by Strabo called Amisias; perhaps from the Germ. Am,
nourishing; because it makes the Fields fructify, or nourishes the
Inhabitants that live next it. Q. d. Almus amnis, a kind River. Amsterdam, the
most famous Mart-Town in Holland, q. d. the Dam or Bank of the River Amster;
see Dam. Jun. also supposes it to be so called from Giselbertus Amstelius, a
Noble man, who was Founder thereof. Amandale, in Scotland, a Valley nigh the
River Annan; See Dale. Amaraud, a Welsh Christen-name, corrupted from the Lat.
Honoratus, much esteemed. Cambden. Ancaster, in the County of Lincolnshire, by
Antoninus Crococalana, from An and the AS. Ceaster, a Castle. Andernesse, in
the County of Lancaster; from the AS. Acmundesnesse, comp. of Ac, Aac, an Oak,
Mund, a Mound, and Naese, a Promontory; q. d. a Promontory encompassed with
great plenty of Oaks to defend it from the Air. Andover, in the County of Hant.
AS. Andeafaran, (i. e.) the Ferry-place of the River Anton. Andredswald, a Wood
part in Kent, and part in Essex; from the old word Andred, fear; q. d. a
terrible dreadful Wood; and therefore called by Ethelward immunis. St. Andrews
in Scotland, in old time called Regimund, q. d. St. Regulus's Mount, which
Vngus King of the Picts, converted into an Archiepiscopal See, and gave much
Church Land to it. Angelbert, the same with Engelbert; which see. Angevin, from
the Fr. G. l'Angevin or Anjovin (i. e.) one of Anjou, a Province in France.
Anglesey, Lat. Mona, C. Br. Mon and Tir mon (i. e.) terra mon, by the
English-Saxons it was at first called Moneg, afterward when the English had
took Possession of it, it was called Engles Ea and Anglesey, (i. e.) the Isle
of the English. Angrivarii, an ancient People of Germany, now a part of
Westphalia. Adr. Jun. draws it from the Teut. Angreiffen, to take away by
force, they being a stout and warlike People. Ankerwike, a Village upon the
Coast of the River Thames, once famous for a Nunnery; from our English Anchor,
and the AS. Wic, a Haven; because the Shore is there fit to cast Anchor at.
Ansbrand, a Christen-name; from the old Goth. Anse, a Nobleman, and Brenne, a
Headpiece. Ansegisus, a Dutch Name, from the Teut. Hansz, a Society, and Gis
now Geisel, a Pledge, q. d. a Pledge of Society; or from the same Hansz,
Society, and Geitz, covetousness, q. d. a good fellow. Anselm, a Christen-name;
perhaps q. d. Germ. Vnshelm, or Vnser-helm, that is our Helmet, or our
Protector; or, as Cambden has it, from the Goth. Anses, a Nobleman, and Helm,
q. d. the Hero's helmet or defense; or from the Teut. Hanszhelm, a Defender of
his Companions. Ansuarii, formerly a People of the Netherlands. Adr. Jun. draws
it from the old Goth. Anses a Noble man, that is, such an one as excelled the
rest in Wealth and good Fortune. Anton-haven, in the County of Hants. (i. e.)
the Haven of the River Anton, from the Lat. Antonus. Antrim in Ireland; but
that it is an Irish Name, and very likely of an Irish Original, it might be
drawn from the AS. An for Un, without, and the word Trimman, to Build; (i. e.)
a Country uninhabited, a desert. Anwick, or Alnick, in the County of
Northumberland; AS. Ealnic, from the River Aln, and Wic, an Haven, remarkable
for the Captivity of William, and the Death of Milcolmb the III. Kings of
Scotland. Appleby, in the County of Westmorland, once a Military Fort, called
by the Romans Aballaba. Aragisus, a General of the Longobardi at Beneventum;
from the AS. Are, honor, and the Teut. Geitz, covetousness; q. d. covetous of
fame, for he was a very ambitious man. Arbogastes, a Frenchman, Count of the
West, Tyrant to Valentinian the Second; perhaps from the Teut. Erb,
Inheritance, and Gast, a Stranger; (i. e.) a Stranger made Heir of an
Inheritance by Adoption. Archebald, a proper Name amongst the Scots, q. d. a
bold observer; formerly Erchenbald; which see. Arcklow, or Wicklow, a Province
in Ireland, once the Seat of the Cauci; and, but that I suspect it to be of an
Irish Original, I might derive it from the AS. Ear, an ear of Corn, and Cloe, a
Globe; q.d. a round Country that affords plenty of Corn. Ardaburius, a Consul
under the Emperors Valentine the Third, and Theodosius the Less, about the
year 447, a Goth born; from the Teut. Erd, Earth, and Bawer, q. d. a Tiller of
the Earth, or an Husbandman, as George signifies amongst us. Ardaricus, a King
of the Italian Ostrogothi; from the AS. Eard, Belg. Erde Aerde, Teut. Erd,
Earth, and Ric, rich; that is to say, rich in Lands. Arfast, a Christen-name;
from the AS. Are, Teut. Ehr, honor, and the AS. and Teut. fast, Belg. Vest,
firm, (i. e.) one that holds fast his honor. Kilian thinks it to be one and
the same with Ariovistus, in Caesar. Argile, a Province of Scotland; C. Br.
Ar-Gwithil, that is next the Irish, for the Brit. called the Irish Gwithil and
Gaothel. Ariaminus, from the AS. Are, honor, and Maere, great; that is, one
greatly honored: Or from the same Are and Mehren, to increase; q. d. one that
more and more augmenteth his fame by noble Achievements. Aribertus, or
Aripertus, a King of the Longobardi of Italy, from the AS. Are, honor, and
Beorht, illustrious; or from the same Are, Teut. Er and Werth, worth; that is,
one worthy of honor. Arioaldus, a King of the Longobardi of Italy; from the
AS. Are, Belg. Eere, Teut. Ehr, honor, and the old Teut. Walden, AS. Wealdan,
to rule, (i. e.) one that reigns in much honor and Pomp. Ariovistus, a
Sweedish King, grand Enemy of Caesar the Dictatour, a most warlike Prince. Many
suppose, that it is the same with Arfast; which see before. Arminius, that
famous Captain of the Cherusci, and a most valiant Protector of the German
Liberty against the Romans. Some there are, who make it all one with Herman. It
may be derived from the AS. Are, honor, and the Teut. Meynen, to think, (i.
e.) one whose very thought is honorable. Arnold, a Christen-name; from the AS.
Are, Teut. Ehr, honor, and the word Hold, q. d. one that holds fast his
honor; or from the AS. Hold, faithful, q. d. faithful to his honor. See
Arfast. Arnulph, a Christen-name, from the AS. Are, Teut. Ehr, Belg. Eere,
honor, and Vlph, help, (i. e.) honor's help; one that stands up for the
upholding of honor. Arondell, in Cornwall, from the Fr. G. Arondelle, a
Swallow; because this Family bears Swallows in its Coat-of-Arms. Arran, in
Scotland, once called Cluyd; but that it is of a Scoto-Irish Original, I might
draw it from the C. Br. Ar, a field, and Rhann, a parcel, q. d. a Tract of
Land; or better perhaps from the inseparable Preposition Ar, which in comp.
augmenteth the sense, and the same Rhann, (i. e.) a good large parcel of
Ground. Arrow, a River in the County of Warwick, as Tigris, that in the Persian
Tongue signifies an Arrow, so called for its swiftness. Arundell, in the
County of Sussex, q. d. Arundale, a Dale or Valley by the River Arunn. Arus, a
River in the County of York; from the, C. Br. Ara, Araf, calm, running slowly,
whence the Fr. G. Araris. Arwenath, perhaps from the C. Br. Ar, a field, and
Gwinn, white, q. d. one of a pleasant Country. St. Asaph, in the County of
Flints, a Bishop's See, C. Br. Llan Elwy, (i. e.) the Temple Elwy; a small
Brook so called from St. Asaph a Britain, that in his time was an Abbot in that
place. Ascough, or Ascogh; as Camden says, from the old name Ascuith, which is
the same with Hasculph, Hastulph, and Astolphus; which see. Ashdown, in the
County of Essex, once Assandun, q. d. an Hill for Asses; famous for the great
overthrow given there to Edmond Ironside, by Canutus the Dane. Aspar, an
Arrian, the Son of Ardaburius; and a famous Captain under Leo the Great; if I
be not mistaken, a Goth by descent; perhaps from the AS. Hat, hot, furious, and
spear, a Spear, (i. e.) good at wielding a Spear. Asprandus, a King of the
Longobardi of Italy, perhaps from the Teut. Hausz, a House, and the AS. Brand,
a brand, q.d. a house-brand, Belg. Branden, Teut. Brant Brennen, to burn, q. d.
a Burner of Houses, one that lays all wast with fire. Ashen-shire, a Country
in Scotland, perhaps from the great plenty of Ash-trees growing therein.
Astolphus, the last King but one of the Longobardi of Italy; from the Belg.
Haesten, to hasten, and Vlph, help, (i. e.) one that hasteneth help, a ready
helper. Aterith, in Ireland, vulgarly called Athenry, from the Auteri, an
ancient People. Athalaricus; King of the Italian Ostrogothi; from the Teut.
Adel, nobility, and Reich, AS. ric, rich, (i. e.) rich in nobleness.
Athanagildus, a King of the Spanish Vice-Goths, from the AS. Ath, pl. Athan, an
Oath, and Agildan, to pay, q. d. one that keeps his Oath, pays his Vow.
Athanaricus, a King of the Italian Ostrogothi, from the AS. Ath an Oath, and
ric, rich, (i. e.) one that took many Oaths, or struck many Bargains, and so
grew rich. Athaulphus, the same with Adolph; which see. Athelin, an Archbishop
of Canterbury, if it were not, that I suppose it to be the same with Adelm
above, I might draw it from the AS. Ath, an Oath, and Helm, (i. e.) a keeper of
his Oath. Athelstanford, in Scotland, that is the Ford of Athelstan King of the
Eng. Saxons, who at this place ferry'd over his Army against the Scots. Atkins
contracted from Arthurkins, (i. e.) little Arthur, for the termination kin
diminishes, as says Aelfric. Attila, that Puissant King of the Hunns,
deservedly called the Scourge of God: Kilian draws it from the old Teut. At,
(i. e.) Father. Attrebatii, a People of the County now called Berks, once the
Inhabitants of Attrebatum; But there is certainly a Colony in the Netherlands,
called Attrebates, which, as Camden tells us, some derive from the C. Br.
Attrech, signifying a Land of Bread. But this word is not now in use; therefore
I had rather draw it from the initial C. Br. part. A. which in Composition is
augmentative, and Tref, a Town; (i. e.) a great Town; and who knows but the
Attrebatii took their Name from some great Town as among the Greeks the
Megalopoli, the Germ. Mecklenburgh? Aubry, once a Christen-name, but now a
Surname, contracted from Alberic; which see. Audley, formerly called de
Aldalegh; from the AS. Ald, old, and Leag, a field, (i. e.) the old field.
Audley-end, in the County of Essex, the sumptuous Palace of the Dukes of
Suffolk, Built by Thomas Audley Chancellor of England, who assumed to himself
the Monastery for his own House. Audre in Cambr. once called Athelred, from St.
Aetheldred, to whose memory was a Temple there, it is likely, erected. Audrey,
by contraction for Etheldreda, that was an Abbotess of the Royal English-Saxon
blood, the Wife of Tombert a Prince of the Girvii, and after that of Elgfrid
King of Northumberland, Canonized after her Death. From the AS. Aethel, noble,
and Dread, fear. Aventon, in the County of Gloucester, by Antoninus Avone or
Abone, from the River Avon, by adding ton; as Waterton, Riverton, etc. Avery,
once a Christen-name, but now a Surname. I suppose it to be a contract of the
old Goth. Haveric, the name of a certain King. Avice, a woman's Name, formerly
Hawis, according to some: corrupted from Helwis, and this from Hildenvig, (i.
e.) the safeguard of Women; but I had rather draw it from the Teut. Hell,
clear, and Weisz, wise, q.d. one that excelled in Wisdom. Aulcaster, in the
County of Warw. from the River Aln; for which cause it is that Matthew. Paris
writes it Allencester, AS. Allenceaster, (i. e.) a perfect City. See Allingham.
Avon, the Name of diverse Rivers in Wales; from the C. Br. Afon, signifying
simply a River. Austria, Teut. Destereich, (i. e.) the Eastern Kingdom; from
the situation thereof. Autharis, a King of the Longobardi of Italy, from the
AS. All, all, and THearran, to dare, (i. e.) one that dares undergo any
dangers, how great soever they are: Or from the same AS. All, and Jupiter; q.
d. THor, one that wholly devoted himself to Jupiter. Axholm, in the County of
Lincoln, AS. Eaxanholm, from the chiefest Town Axey, formerly Axel, and Holm,
an Isle having many Rivers in it. Axminster, in the County of Devon, from the
River Ax, and a Minster, for which it was accounted famous.
B.
BAdbury, in the County of Dorset, from the AS. Baddan-byrig, q. d. the Town of
Hostage. It was once the Court of the Vice-Saxon Kings; so called from the AS.
Bad, a Pledge, and Byrig, a City, perhaps because the Vice-Saxon Kings had the
Hostages of subdued Countries here in Custody. Bain, a River; which see in the
Common Names. Bainard's- Castle, in London, so called from William Bainard
Baron of Dunmow, the Builder thereof. Baldread, the last King of Kent.
Verstegan draws it from the AS. Bald, bold, and read, counsel; that is bold in
Counsel. Or from the same Bald, and the Teut. Reden, to speak; or from the
Teut. Bald, soon, and the same Read, counsel, q. d. one that was quick at
giving advice. Baldwin, a Christen-name, from the Germ. Bald, soon, and Winnen,
to overcome, (i. e.) one that wins or overcomes quickly. According to Lips.
it is derived from Gewal, Power, and Winnen, to overcome, q.d. powerful to
conquer: Or as Camb. would have it, from the AS. Bald, bold, and Win, a
Victour, q.d. a bold Winner or Victour. Balthi, a most famous People of the
ancient Goths. Jun. draws it from the AS. Bald, bold, they being a bold,
undaunted People. Bamba, a King of the Spanish Vice-Goths: perhaps from the
Teut. Pamp, a Glutton, or one that pampereth his Belly too much. Bamborough, in
the County of Northumberland, from the AS. Bebbanburgh; and that from a Queen
called Bebba that erected it, says Bid. It was once the Court of the Kings of
Northumberland. Bambury, in the County of Oxford, from the AS. Bana,
Manslaughter, and Byrigh, a City, (i. e.) the Town of Manslaughter, perhaps
so called for some great Slaughter there. It is also found in Somner, written
Banbeorgas; in Kilian Beenberge, Boots or Buskins, from the AS. Ban, Belg.
Been, a Bone, and the AS. Beorgan, Belg. Berghen, to hide, either because this
Colony is somewhat like a Boot; or because the making of Boots was the chief
Trade of the Country. Bangor, in the County of Ches. or rather Ban-chor or
Bon-chor, (i. e.) the Quire Ban or Bon, a Town once famous for a Minster of the
Britains. Bangor, in the County of Caern. once Banchor, q. Penchor, (i. e.) a
Capital Quire; for it is to this day a Bishop's See. Banna, in Ireland, a Town
upon a Promontory, which in Irish sig. Sacred; and by Ptolemy, the whole
Promontory is called (...). Banocksbourn, in Scotland, (i. e.) the River of
Banock, remarkable for the Slaughter of Edward the Second King of England.
Barbacan, an Arabic word, Sig. a Spy or Watch Tower. Bardney, in the County of
Lincoln, a Town memorable for the Tomb of St. Oswald the King, not unlikely
from the Belg. Beer, an Horse, and the AS. Ea, Water, (i. e.) a Pasture for
Horses by the water side. Bardulph, Bartulph, Bertulph. Verstegan says that it
was formerly writ Beriht-Vlph, (i. e.) help in Counsel, I had rather draw it
from the AS. Beorht, famous, and Ulph, help; that is a brave or famous helper.
Barkley, in the County of Gloucester, AS. Beorcenlau, a Town; perhaps from the
AS. Beorce, a Beech tree, and Lan for Leag, a Field; by reason of the great
Plenty of Beech Trees growing thereabout. Barkshire, from the AS. Berroc, a
Wood; so called because of the abundance of Box wood growing there; q.d. Bare
Oak in which the Natives in troublesome times met to consult about their
affairs. See Bare and Oak in their proper places. Barrow, a River in Ireland,
by Ptolemy called Brigus. Barry Island in the County of Glamorgan, from Baruch
a devout man that was interred there. Bartlet, the Diminutive of Bartholomew.
Barton, in Lincolnshire. Spelman says, that the AS. Berton, signifies a Barn,
and if so, it may very commodiously be drawn from the AS. Bear, Barley, and
Tun, a Town, (i. e.) a Town for Barley. Basing, a Town and Castle in the County
of Hants; from the AS. Basing, a Coat of Mail; because of the resemblance it
has thereto. Basingshall, or Bassishaw-street in London, once called
Basingis-hawe, from the AS. Basing, a Cloak, and hae, an Hall, q. d. a place
for Cloth, of which Cloaks and other Garments are made. Basset, a Surname, from
the Fr. G. Basset, a Dwarf. The Bastile, the Royal Tower in the Imperial City
Paris in France, from the Fr. G. Bastille, (i. e.) a Fort, or strong Hold, for
the excellency of it; and this from Bastir to build. Batavia, now Holland, the
most famous Province of the People called Belgii. Adr. Jun. supposes that it
is called so, q. Batons Have, that is to say, Baton's Substance, who was a
General of the Catti, now called the Hassi, and first founded a Colony there.
Batersea, in the County of Surrey, once called Patryc's Ea, (i. e.) Patrick's
Isle. Bath, in the County of Somerset, by Antoninus, called the Waters of the
Sun, by AS. Hat Bathan; and from the great Concourse of Diseased People,
Acmanceaster, (i. e.) the Sick folks Town. See Ache and Chester in their proper
places. Battle Abbey, in the County of Sussex, so called by William the
Conqueror, in token of a signal Victory over Harald the last English-Saxon
King, which was the first step to his conquering the whole Kingdom to himself.
Battle Bridge, in the County of York, where Harald the last English-Saxon King
discomfited and slew Harald Hardred the then King of Norway. Baxter, i. e.
Baker. Beauchamp, from the Fr. G. Beau Champ, that is, of a good or fair Field.
Beauchief, an Abbey in the County of Derby, from the Fr. G. Beau Chef, a good
Head; possibly so called, because a great many Learned Men lived therein.
Beaudesert, in the County of Stafford, q. d. a brave Desert. Beaufoe, from the
Fr. G. Beau, good, and Fau, a Beech tree. Beaufort, from the Fr. G. Beau and
Fort, that is, a sumptuous or commodious Fort. Beavis, Camden supposes, that
it is contracted from the Vet. G. Bellovesus, the Name of a King; as the Fr. G.
Beavois, from the Bellovaci an ancient People in France. Beauly, a Tract of
Land in Hantshire, q. d. Fr. G. Beau, lieu, a brave, pleasant place.
Beaumarish, Fr. G, Beaumarais, in the Isle of Anglesey; formerly called
Bonover, that is, a fair Fen or Marsh. Beaumont, from the F. G. Beau mont, that
is, a pretty Mount. Beaupre, from the Fr. G. Beau Pre, a fine Meadow. Beawdley,
in the County of Worcester, from the Fr. G. Beau lieu, (i. e.) a brave pleasant
place for its situation. Bid, a Christen-name, from the AS. Beade, a Prayer.
Saint Bede being so called from his earnestness in Prayer. Bedford, AS.
Bedanford, q. d. Beds, or public Inns, by a Ford. See Bed and Ford in their
places. St. Bees, in Cumberland, so called from St. Bega an Irish Virgin, that
lived a solitary Life there, Belfast, in the Province of Vlster in Ireland,
from the Fr. G. Bell fair, and our old English word Fast, AS. Festenne, a
Fortress, q. d. a fair Fortress. Belgae, a stout People, famous for Sea
Affairs. Ad. Jun. derives it from the Belg. Bulghen, to fight; for they were a
warlike People. Belinsgate, a Wharff for Ships in London, from the AS. Baelge,
a Purse or Wallet, for that those that go there, carry ready Money, if they
intend to buy any thing: Or possibly from the word Bellan, to roar, from the
noise of many waves beating against the shore. But, which is most likely, from
K. Belin or Belinus, the first Founder, according to Stow. Bellasise, from the
Fr. G. Belle Assize, a pleasant situation. Bellew, in Lincolnshire, from the
Fr. G. Bel-Eau, a pleasant Water or River. Benion, a Name common in Wales; that
is to say, Ap-Enion, the Son of Enion; which see. Bennet, a Christen-name, from
the Fr. G. Benoist, Benoit, and both from the Lat. Benedictus, blessed. St.
Bennet's in the Holm, in the County of Norfolk (i. e.) the Church of St. Bennet
in the Holm; see Holm. Bensbury, in the County of Surrey, (i. e.) Cnebensbury,
so called from one Cneben, a Captain under Aethelred, King of Kent, that was
there slain in a fight against Ceaulin King of the Vice-Saxons. Benson, a
Surname, not as Camden will have it, q. Bennet's Son, but from Benjamin, q.
Ben's Son. Bent, Camden supposes it so called from the abundance of Bents;
which see in Com: Names. Berald or Beroald, a Saxon, the first Prince of Savoy;
not unlikely from the AS. Bera, Teut. Bahr. Belg. Beer, a Bear, and the old
Teut. Walden, AS. Wealdan, to wield, to rule. See Bernard. Bergamsted, in Kent,
from the AS. Beorg, a Fort, Ham, a House, and Steda, a Stead. Beringer, or
Beringard, in Lat. Beringarius, from the Teut. Bahren, Bears and Guard, that is
a Keeper of Bears; see Bernard. Berkley or Barkley, in the Counties of Somerset
and Gloucester; see Barkley above. Bermundsey, from the AS. Bermund's Ea, that
is Bermund's Isle, formerly famous for an Abbey, erected by Bermund, either Lord
or Abbot of the place. Now Bermund may be derived either from the AS. Bera,
Teut. Bahr, a Bear, and the Teut. Mund, a Mouth; or from the AS. Beran, to
bear, and Mund, Peace, that is to say, a Peace-bringer. Bernard, the Name of a
most devout Abbot, either, as Camden says, from our English Baru, a Child, and
the Belg. Ard, Nature; or, as Verstegan, says, q.d. Beornhart, that is, one of
a stour heart. It may as probably be drawn from Bear and Ward, that is to say,
a Warder or Keeper of Bears. Bernicia, AS. Beornica-Megthe, and Beornicarice,
(i. e.) the Province of Berwick; perhaps from the AS. Beorn, a Barn that is a
Man-Child, and (...), Victory; so called for the warlike disposition of the
Natives. Bernulph, King of the Mercii, from the AS. Bearn, issue and Ulph,
help; q. d. one that helps, or provideth for his Children. Berry, the same
with Borough; which see. Bertha, a Woman's Name, from the AS. Beorht, noble,
famous. Berthold, a Christen-name, from the Teut. Bericht, learning, and Hold,
(i. e.) one that retains what he has learned; or as Kilian says, from the
Teut. Bericht and Berit, a League, and Hold, that is, one that will keep his
promise; or, which is yet more likely, from the AS. Beorht, Brave, and Hold, a
Ruler, q. d. a good Ruler or Governor. Berthulph, a Bishop of Winchester in
the year 900, from the AS. Beorht, illustrious, and Ulph, help, q. d. a famous
helper. Berten, see Barton. Bertran, a Christen-name. Camden draws it from the
AS. Beorht, famous, and rand, pure. It may as well come of the same Beorht,
brave, and ran Hran, a Whale; or the Teut. Rande, a brink of a River. Berttud,
the Wife of Clothair, King of France in the year 628. perhaps from the AS.
Beorht, fair, and the Belg. Drut Druit, faithful, loyal, q. d. fair and
faithful. Bertwald, an Archbishop of Canterbury, from the AS. Beorht, famous,
and Wealdan, to rule. Berwent-Fels, in the County of Cumberland, Mountains;
from the River Berwent running there-through, and the Teut. Felsz, a Rock, or
Cliff. Berwick, in Northumberland, formerly a famous strong Hold, which Ingulph
interprets a Manor. Leland draws it from Aberwic, i. e. a Town at the Mouth of
a River. S^mn. makes it the same with the AS. Beretun, q. d. a Corn Town.
Bets, formerly a Christen-name, but now a Surname; from the Lat. Beatus,
blessed, says Camden. Bevans, a Surname common to the Welsh, as much as to
say, Ap Evans, q.d. come of Evan or John. See Evan. Bever, in Lincolnshire,
formerly Belvoir, a French word; q. d. a Castle fair to look at; so called for
the Pleasantness of its situation. Beverley, a Town in the County of York, AS.
Beverlega, Bede's Abbey in Deir-wood. Beverwiick, a Town in Holland, from the
Teut. Beyer, a Bavarian, and Wiic, AS. Wic, an Haven; or perhaps from the word
Bever, which this Town might plenteously afford in former Ages. Biggin, from
the AS. Byan, to possess, or rather from Bycgan, to build. Bigot, from the Fr.
G. Bigot, an Hypocrite, or superstitious Person. Menag. Biland, that is, de
Belle-Lande, q. d. of good Land; See Land in its place. Binchester, in the
Bishopric of Durham, by Antoninus Vinovium, by adding the AS. termination
Ceaster, a City. Birtyc, Birthryc and Bithric; Verstegan draws it from our word
Birth, and the AS. ric, rich, that is, born to riches, an Heir to an Estate; It
might also be drawn from the AS. Beorht, Illustrious, and ric, rich, q. d.
noble and rich. Bisset, from the Fr. G. Bizet, a kind of Dove, this from Bis,
ash color. Blackney, in the County of Norfolk, from the AS. Ea, an Isle, and
our word Black, that is, the Black Isle; See Black. Black-water, in Essex, by
Ptolemy Idumanum, from Black and water; which see. Blanch, a Woman's name, from
the Fr. G. Blanch. Ital. Bianca, white. Bletsoe, in Bedfordshire, formerly
Bletnesho; from the AS. Bletsian, to bless, and seo, a Sight, to wit for the
pleasantness of its prospect. Blundell, a Surname, from the Fr. G. Blond, red
and the dim. el. Blunt, a Surname from the same root. Bodmin, a River in
Cornwall, perhaps from the C. Br. Bod, a Kite, and Min, the Bank of a River, by
reason of the great number of Kites that frequent it. Bodvari, in Flintshire,
from the C. Br. Bod, a River and Varis, a Ferry; see Ferry. Bormund, a Prince
of Apulia and Antioch; perhaps from the AS. Bode, Teut. Bott, an Ambassador,
and Mund, a Mouth; (i. e.) one that has a fluent Tongue as Ambassadors ought
to have; or from the same Bode, and the AS. Mund, Peace, that is, a Messenger
of Peace. From this name came our word Bowman, a name now given to Hounds; as
the famous Th. H. ingeniously notes. Bois, from the Fr. G. Bois, a Wood. Bold,
a Surname; Camden derives it from the Teut. Bol, a Marsh, which word I no where
find in that sense. So that I had rather draw it from the AS. Bold, a Village,
q.d. of a Village; or yet more naturally from our own word Bold, q. d.
adventurous. Bonaventure, a Christen-name; from the Fr. G. Bonne Aventure, a
lucky Chance; see Adventure. Bond, a Surname, from the word Bond or Band, q. d.
the tie of a Family; see Band and Bind. Bonevill, a Surname, from the Fr. G. De
Bonne ville, that is, of a good Town. Boscastle, in the County of Cornwall,
corrupted from Botereaux-Castle, from the Norm. name Boterau, which signifies
a Garter; that Family bearing a Garter in its Coat of Arms. Boseham in Sussex,
formerly Bosenham, from the Teut. Busz, a Bush, and the AS. Ham, an House; or
from the AS. Bosih, a Fence. Somner, says, that it was formerly called
Bosauham, and he seems to derive it from the Fr. G. Bois, a Wood, and the AS.
ham, an habitation, which, if it were so, ought to be written Boisham. Bostock,
formerly Botestock, in Cheshire; from the AS. Bote, Boot, or overplus, and
stocce, a trunk or body of a Tree. Boston, in Lincolnshire, a Market Town, so
called, q. Botolph's Town, who had a Monastery in Warw. and was had in much
reputation at this place. Bosworth, in Leicestershire, memorable for the Death
of the famous Richard the Third, from the Teut. Bosz, an Apple Tree, and the
AS. Worsth, a Court, or Weorth, worthy. St. Botolph, Camden supposes that it
is derived from the Noun Boat, and the AS. Ulph, help; because perhaps he was
the Mariners tutelar Saint, and for this reason was so much adored at Boston.
Botontines, in the County of Hunt. q.d. Buttings, heaps of Earth. See Buts
amongst the Common Names. Bottle, a Surname, from the AS. Botl, Botle, a
Village. Bottle-bridge, in Hunt. that is to say, Botolph's Bridge; or from the
AS. Botle, a Village, and Bridge; which see. Boverton, in Glamorganshire, by
Antoninus Bovium. Bovil, from the Fr. G. Boeuf, an Ox, and Ville, a Town.
Bourchier, perhaps derived from the Fr. G. Bourg, a Town, and Cher, dear; yet I
rather think, that it comes of the Fr. G. Bourcier, for Boursal a term in Law,
which signifies that which is a younger Brother's right. Bourn, in
Lincolnshire, that is a Town hard by a Bourn or River, where King Edmund was
crowned; see Bourn. Bowen, a Surname frequently given to the Welsh, (i. e.) Ap
Owen, q. d. from, or the Son of, Owen; which see. Boil, a Country in Ireland,
so called from the River Boil, or Buellio, in the County of Roscommon, a
Province of Cannaught. Brabant, a famous Province of the Netherlands, from the
old Belg. Brad, now Breed, broad, and Bandt, a Garter, or Swathe, says Adr.
Jun. so called with relation to the vast extent thereof. Bracton, at the first
a Towns name, from whence Henry of Bracton, an expert Lawyer, and Lord Chief
Justice of England in the Reign of King Henry the Third, had his Surname. It
may not unlikely be derived from Brake and Town; which see. Bradford, in the
County of Wilts, formerly Bradanford, that is, the broad Ford; see Broad and
Ford. Brakley, in the County of Northampton, a Towns name, from Brake, (i. e.)
Fern, because it was formerly much overspread with Fern; see Brake. Brancaster,
in Norfolk, formerly Brannodunum, by adding of the AS. term. Ceaster, a Town or
Castle. Brandon, formerly a famous Country. Leland derives it from the C. Br.
Brane or Bran, a Crow, and the AS. Dune, an Hill; or from the same Dune, and
the C. Br. Bren, a King; q. d. Kings-Mount. Yet I had rather draw it from
Brant, burnt, and the AS. Tun, a Town; that is to say, a burnt Town.
Brandsford, or Bransford- Bridge in the County of Leicester, (i. e.) the Ford
of Brands, for some dreadful Fire, that once happened there; see Burn amongst
the Com. Names. Bray, a Village in Barkshire, from the Bibroci, that formerly
inhabited this place. The Breach, in the County of Kent, where the River Thames
bursting through the Banks, overflowed many Acres of Ground; see Break.
Brecknockmere, in the County of Brec. C. Br. Linsavethan, that is, a standing
Slough; by Girald called Clamosus, from the thundering noise it makes, when
the Ice is thawed. Brecknockshire, C. Br. Brechiniau; from Brechanius a Prince,
that begat 24 Daughters, which were all canonized in the Choire of Saints.
Breda, a famous and most fortified City of Brabant. I suppose from the Belg.
Breed, broad, and the old Teut. Aa, AS. Ea, water; because it lies nigh Merck,
a River somewhat broader than Ordinary. Brederode, the name of an Illustrious
Family in Holland, from the Belg. Bread, Breed, broad, and Roede, a rod.
Bremicham, or Birmingham, in the County of Warwick, famous for Workmanship in
Metals; perhaps from the AS. Bryme, Breman, famous, and Ham, an Habitation.
Brentknoll, in Somersetshire, from the AS. Knol, the Top of a Mountain, and
Brent, burnt, q. d. parched with the heat of the Sun. Brent marsh, q. d. Burnt
marsh, in the County of Somerset; as the Monks of Glastenbury expound it, Frogs
Marsh, as if Brent had formerly signified a Frog. Brentstreet, in the County of
Middlesex, from the River Brent, and street; which see. Brentwood, in Essex,
(i. e.) Burnt wood, see Burn and Wood. Bretenham, in the County of Suffolk,
formerly by Antoninus called Combretonium, that is, a Village on both sides of
the River Breton. Brettou, a National term, q.d. one of Britain. Brian, a
Christen-name; in old Books it is written Briant and Brient, from the Fr. G.
Bruiant, clamorous; this from Bruire, to make a noise. Bridchurch, in
Cumberland, q. d. the Church of St. Bridget, an Irish Saint. Bridewell, an
House of Correction, formerly, an Hall in the City of London; q. d. Bride's
Well, or St. Bridget's well. Bridgewater, in the County of Somerset, a famous
Port, q. d. Walters-burgh; or Burgh-Walter, from one Walter a Soldier under
William the Conqueror, that received this Town for his Service in the Wars. De
Briewer, a name taken from the place of Birth; from the Fr. G. Brugere, Briere
a Heath; because the first of that Name, was found by King Henry the Second, as
he was Hunting in the same Heath where he was born and brought up; and
afterward came to be greatly in favor with Richard III. Son to the said King
Henry II. Brig, in Lincolnshire, formerly Glandford, q. d. a Town by a Bridge;
see Bridge in its proper place. Brigthelmsted, in Sussex, AS. Brighthealmertun,
so called from St. Brigthelm; see Bright and Helm amongst the Common Names.
Brigid, alias Bridget, the name of a certain Irish Saint; as also a certain
Queen of Sweden, her equal for Sanctity; from our English Bright. Brill, or as
Adr. Jun. writes it, Briel, a Dutch Port and Fortress; from the Belg. Bril, a
Prospective-Glass. Brill, in the County of Bucks, a contract from Burr-hill,
for the many Burrs that grow there; see Burr in the Common Names. Bristow, a
famous and rich Seaport Town, AS. Brihtsto, or Beorhtsto, a bright, pleasant
place, rightly so called for its pleasant Situation, and sumptuous Buildings.
Britain, Camden deriveth it from the C. Br. Brith, painted, and (...), a
Nation. I had rather draw it from the C. Br. Bri, Honor, and Tain, a River;
for it is an Island exceeding all others in Europe, from the great and many
Rivers wherewith it abounds; amongst which Thames, Tagus, and Pactolus, are the
chief. Britholm, Bishop of Bath and Wells, about the year 955. AS. Beorht-helm,
a bright Helmet. Brithwold, Bishop of Winchester, in the year 996. from the AS.
Brith, famous, and Wealden, to bear rule. Brittenbury, in Holland. If we may
credit Adr. Jun. it was once the Romans Magazine, in which they laid up
Ammunition for the maintenance of their Forces, bringing it over from Britain;
q. d. Britains Borough, Britainople; because a Band of Britains Quartered
there. See Borough. Broken-bridge, in the County of Wilts, formerly called
Caerderburge, the Court of the Petty Saxon Kings; perhaps from Caerdure, some
petty King that settled himself there, and Burg for Borough; which see: Or from
the C. Br. Caer, a Town, and Dwr, water, that is, a Town seated by the water
side. Bromfield, q.d. Broom-Field; which see. Bructeri, formerly a People of
Germany, where now is Westphalia. Adr. Jun. supposes 'em to be called quasi,
Brouckters, q.d. Inhabitants of Fens or watery Grounds; from the Ger. Broucken,
Marshes. Bruiton, in Somersetshire, from the River Bry, and Ton for Town.
Brunehault, by the Writers of that Age, Brunechileis; a most wicked Queen of
France, perhaps from the Teut. Bruyen, brown, and Held, a Dame, or noble
Matron. Brunswick, an Imperial City in Germany, from Bruno the Founder thereof,
and the AS. Wic, a Fortress. Buckingham, the County Town, so called from the
abundance of Beech-trees growing there; and AS. Ham, an Habitation; see Beech.
Buelth, in the County of Breckn. perhaps from the C. Br. Bwlch, broken, to wit,
for the scraggy Rocks there. Bugden, in Huntingtonshire, memorable for the
Bishop of Lincoln's Seat; from our word Bog, and the AS. Den, a Dale, that is a
watery squashy Dale; or perhaps from the same Den, and the AS. Bog, a bough, (i.
e.) a Valley shaded with the Boughs of Trees. Bullingbrook, in the County of
Lincoln, noted for the Birth of Henry the Fourth; q. d. Bull's Brook; see Bull
and Brook. Bullinger, a Surname, from the Fr. G. Boulenger, a Baker, which
Menag. draws from the Lat. Polenta, fried Barley. Bullnesse, in Cumberland,
from the C. Br. Bwlch, a Separation, and the AS. Term. Nese, a Promontory; for
England is there parted from Scotland. Burcester, in Oxfordshire, from the AS.
Bern, a Barn, and ceaster, a Town. Burchard, formerly a name of Office and
Dignity, Versteg. says, that it was formerly written Burg-Gard, a Burgess of a
Corporation: See Borough and Guard. Burdred, a King of Mercia, perhaps from the
AS. Burh, a Town, and Draed, dread, q.d. the Terror of Towns. Burford, in
Oxfordshire; AS. Beorford, from Beor, Beer, and Ford; see both Beer, and Ford.
Burg, in the County of Westmorland, whence it is commonly called Stan-more
Burg, that is, the Town under Stan-more; see Stone and Moor. The Burg, Belg. de
Burgh, an ancient Tower at Lions in Holland, erected by Hengift, an
English-Saxon, that first subdued Britain; from the AS. Burg, a Tower or strong
Hold. Burgh-Castle in Suffolk, AS. Cnobhers-burg, (i. e.) the Town of one
Cnobher, some petty King, that built it. Burgoin, Fr. G. de Burgoigne, (i. e.)
one of Burgundy. Burgundy or Burgundions, formerly a People of Germany, now of
France; from the old Germ. Burg, AS. Beorg Burg, a Fort or Castle, and that
from Beorgan, to fortify. St. Buriens, in Cornwall, from Burien, an Irish
Saint, to whom a Church was there consecrated. Burnell, from the Fr. G.
Bournal, an Honeycomb; or by the figure Metathesis from the old word Brunel,
that is somewhat Brown; see Brown. Burrow, in the County of Leicester, formerly
Burgh, (i. e.) a Bulwark; see Borough. Burrow Bank in Essex; see Borough and
Bank. Bursted, (i. e.) Burghsted, in Essex, from Borough; which see: and the
AS. Steda, a place, and this from the Lat. status or statio, a station, or
place of abode. Burton Lazers, in Leicestershire, q. d. Burton of Lazarus's,
(i. e.) an Hospital of Lepers. Burton is so called q. Bur Town, from the
abundance of Burs there growing; see Bur and Town. Burton, in Derbyshire, AS.
Baddecan, that is, hot Baths; see Bath amongst the Com. Names; I think, it
comes rather from the AS. Bocce Beocce, a Beech-tree, and Town; by reason of
the plenty of Beech-trees growing thereabout. Byron, formerly Buron, from the
Fr. G. Buron, a Cottage, this from the Belg. Buer the same, and this again from
the AS. Bur, Bure, a Parlour; all from the AS. Byan, to inhabit. Bythell, a
Surname frequent among the Welsh, q. d. Ap Ythell, born of Ythell, the Son of
Ythell; which see.
C.
CAburn, from the other Caburn, a term in Sailing; which see. Cadbury, in
Somersetshire, formerly by C. Br. called Cathbregion, memorable for a great
overthrow given the Saxons there by King Arthur. Cadwan, a King of the
Britains, from the C. Br. Cadwen, a Fight; q. d. a stout Warrior; or on the
contrary from the C. Br. Cad, a Fight, and Gewahanu, to part, q. d. one that
puts an end to Wars. Cadwallader, the Name of the last King of the Britons,
according to Lloyd, and Davis; from the C. Br. Cad, a Battle, and Gwaladr a
Captain of War. Cadwallon, or Cadwalla, the last King but one of the Britons,
from the C. Br. Cad, a fight, and Gwallow, to pour out, as being indeed a most
stout Warrior. Caeling, a River in Cornwall, not unlikely from the AS. Cele,
cool, Celan, to be cool, Caeling, a cooling; from the coldness of its water.
Caer Custenith, in Caern. (i. e.) the City of Constantius, Caerderburge; see
Broken-bridge, above. Caerdiff, in the County of Glam. C. Br. Caerdid, perhaps
q. d. the City of Didius. Caer Gai, in the County of Mer. (i. e.) the Castle of
Gaius, a Roman. Caer-Guby, in the Isle of Anglesey; from St. Kibius, Scholar of
St. Hilary, a Bishop of the Picts, that here lived a Monk's life; q. d. the
Temple of St. Kibius, or Kibiopolis. Caer Laverock, in Scotland, not unlikely
so called, because it was either Founded or Rebuilt by one Laverock. Caer Leon
upon Vsk, in the County of Mown. in the C. Br. Caer Leon ar Vske, by Antoninus
Isea, and the Second Legion, because Caesar's second Legion, otherwise called
the Welsh second Legion, were placed here; It was formerly an Archbishop's
See, but now a poor Village. Caermarden, C. Br. Caer Firdhin, by Ptolem.
Maridunum, by Anton. Muridunum; famous, as some say, for the Birth of Merlin
the Conjurer; perhaps it was so called, because it was the Town of Marius, not
of Merlin, as it is commonly taken to be; it being long before Merlin's time by
the Romans called Maridunum, and by the Welsh Caermarden. Caernarvon, it is
thus called, because it is over against the Isle of Man, from the C. Br. Caer,
a Town, Ar, at, and Von, or Mon, the Isle of Man; a Town famous for the Birth
of King Edward the Second. Caishow, in the County of Bucks. A certain Region or
Tract so called from the Cassii, an ancient People of Britain, that formerly
inhabited this place. Caishowbury, in Hartfordshire, so called from the Cassii,
and the Term. Bury, which signifies a Town. Camalet, in Summers. an high Hill
memorable for the Ruins of an old Castle of Roman Workmanship, perhaps the same
with Caer Calemion, or Camelion in Ninius, (i. e.) Chamaelion's City. Camb
Alan, and Camel in Cornwall, a River so called from the C. Br. Came, crooked,
full of windings; both from the Lat. Camurus in Virg. signifying a wriggling
Current. Cambray, in the Fr. G. Cambray, in the Belg. Kammerick, a famous
Archbishops See, for ought I know from Camera, some Court of Judicature
formerly held there; or perhaps contracted from the old word Samarobrina, that
is to say, the Bridge or Ford of the River Samara. Cambridge, a City and famous
University; in the AS. Grant-ceaster, Grant-brycge, Grante-bricge, (i. e.)
Grant Bridge; now Grant may be derived from the AS. Gron, a Fenn; but this new
word Cambridge seems more likely to come of the old Br. word Came, (whence
Anton. in Itin. mentions a City called Camboritum) then the name of this River,
and this from the C. Br. Camm, full of windings; this Davis draws from the Lat.
Camurus, crooked. Cammon, from the AS. Cammec, Cammuc, the Herb rest-harrow, or
the Fr. G. Camus, flat-nosed. Campden or Camden, in the County of Gloucester,
from the AS. Camp, a Fight, or Cempa, a Soldier, and Den, a Den or Valley;
from this Town, our illustrious Antiquarian Camden had his name. Camulodunum;
see Maldon. Caninefates, an ancient People of the Rhine. Adr. Jun. thinks that
they were called so, q. Canine fratres, which in the Language of Friezeland
signifies Cony-catchers; for certain it is, that Country affords plenty of
them. Cannington, in Somersetshire, called Cannings, and Wincanton, as also
Cangton and Caing-sham, from the Cangi, a small People of the Belgick-Brit.
that came, and dwelt here. Canotwood, in Staffordshire, commonly called
Cankwood; perhaps, q. d. the Wood of King Canute. Canterbury, in the County of
Kent, a famous City, formerly the Metropolis of the Kings of Kent, AS. Cantara
Birig, formerly in the Lat. called Durovernum, Darvernum; these from the C. Br.
Dwr, and Whern, a fierce water or River. By Nenn. it was called Caer Cent, that
is, the City of Kent. Cantire, in Scotland, or Can Tire, (i. e.) a Corner or
head of Land. Can^low, (i. e.) de Cante-lupo, Fr. G. Chante-loup, an howling
Wolf. Cantred, in Caern. a Tract wherein are comprised an hundred Villages,
from the C. Br. Cant, an hundred. Capell; Camden says, that it is the same
with Chapel: yet I had rather draw it from the Fr. G. Chapeau, It. Capello, a
Cap, or Hat. Cardigan, by the C. Br. Aber Tivi, (i. e.) the mouth of the River
Tivi; not unlikely from Caer and Decan, q.d. Dean's Town. Careg, in Cornw. from
the word Crag; which see. Caresbrook, a Castle in the Isle of Wight, remarkable
for the Captivity of King Charles the First; by contraction, for Whitgares
burg, because it was built by one Whitgar, a Saxon. Carew, in Devonshire,
perhaps from the old English word Car a Scar, or rocky Hill; but I had rather
derive it from the Fr. G. Charriie, a Carve of Land. Carlisle, in the County of
Cumberland, a Bishop's See, by the ancient Brit. and Romans it was called
Luguvallum or Lugu ballium, by the AS. Luell, as says Beda, which is
contracted from Luguvall; from which Luell and the C. Br. Caer, a Town, the
word Carlisle manifestly comes. By Nenn. it is called Caer Lualid, from the C.
Br. Lugu, a Tower, and Gwall or Gwawl, a Mound or Trench, q. d. a Fort nigh a
Trench: for there is a Roman Trench to be seen just by the City to this day.
Carmouth, in Dors. q. d. the mouth of the River Car. Caroloman, a King of
Italy, from the AS. Ceorl, a Carle, and Man. Castellum Denis, in Cornw. the
Danes Castle in their Dialect, so called, because the ravaging Danes pitched
their Tents there. Caster, in Norf. by the Brit. called Caer Guentum, perhaps
from the AS. Wentaceaster, and afterward by contraction Ceaster, a Town, out of
the Ruins whereof the City Norwich was raised. It was formerly called Venta
Icenorum. Caster in Hunt. formerly Kinneburgceaster, from Kinneburg, the
Daughter of Penda, an Heathen King of the Mercii, the Wife of Alfred King of
Northumb. who here took upon her a Monastic life, and built a Nunnery for
Women. Castle Dinas, Bren, or Bran, in the County of Denb. (i. e.) in the C.
Br. Bren's Castle, or King's Palace, for Bren signifies a King, and Dinas in
Welsh signifies a City. Castleford in Yorkshire, by Marian. Casterford, q. d.
a Castle upon the Ford. By Anton. Legeolium, and Leagetium. Catalonia, in Sp.
Catalunna, It. Catalogna, Fr. G. Cataloigne, a part of Arragon, either from the
Castellani, an ancient People formerly the Natives hereof, or from the
Catalauni, ancient Inhabitants likewise of this Region; or as some suppose,
from the Gothi and Alani, who mixedly settled themselves here. Catarrick and
Catarrick-bridge, in Yorkshire, by Ptol. and Anton. Catarractonium, in Bid
Catarracton, from the Gr. (...), or rather (...), the steep fall of a River, a
Sluice, (...). Cathnesse, a Province in Scotland, which the Catini formerly
inhabited, in some of Ptol. Copies erroneously called Carini. Catti, now called
Hassi, a People of Germany. Adr. Jun. draws it from the Belg. Catten,
signifying noble and famous Men; but seeing this word is scarcely to be found,
I had rather deduce it from the Teut. Katz, a Cat, from the sharp and wary
nature of this People, wherein they much resembled Cats. Catumerus, so called
from the Catti, whereof he was Prince, and Meyer, a Major, or Prefect, says
Tacitus. Catwick, a Village in Holland, near the mouth of the Rhine, so called
from the Catti^, a People, that settled a Colony there; and the AS. Wic, a
Port, or Fort. Catzenellebogen, a City of the Catti, now called Hassi: In the
Teut. Catzen-elboge, (i. e.) an Elbow of the Catti. Cauci or Cauchi, an ancient
People of Germany, between the Rivers Ems, and Weser, perhaps from the Belg.
Kaawken, a red Crow; which this People perhaps bore for their Arms. Cand, in
Cumberland, by the ancient Romans called Gavata. Ceaulin, or rather Ceolin, a
King of the West Saxons; from the AS. Ceola, a Cottage, and Inn, an Inn, from
the Verb Innan, to lodge at a place; or from Ceol, a Ship, and Win, a winner,
or Victour. Winnan, to win, q. d. a Conqueror by Sea. Celric, a King of the
West Saxons, from the AS. Ceol, a Ship, and ric, rich, q.d. Powerful by Sea.
Ceolulph, a King of Northumberland; from the AS. Ceol, a Ship, and Ulph, help.
Cerdic, the first King of the Vice-Saxons; from the AS. Cerre, bent or crooked,
and Dic, Dice, a Ditch. St. Chad, Bishop of Litchfield, perhaps from the AS.
Ceod, a Purse, or Scrip. Chamavi, or as some write it, Chanani, a People of the
Lower Germ. now called Frisii Sevenwoudi; or as others will have it, Campani;
not unlikely from the Belg. Kampen, to sight, and the obsolete word Au, which,
as Adr. Jun. says, signifies Land; that is to say, a People that fight for
their Country. Champernoun, in Dev. Fr. G. de Champ Arnou, (i. e.) of Arnulph's
Field. Champfleur, from the Fr. G. Champ, a Field, and Fleur, a Flower.
Champion, formerly, as Camd. says, de Champaigne, (i. e.) of Campania, a
Province of France. Champneis, from the Fr. G. Champanois, (i. e.) born in
Campania. Chardford, in Hantshire, formerly Cerdeford, AS. Cerdicsfourd, (i.
e.) the Ford of King Cerdic, over the River Avon, where he discomfited the
Britains. Charing, formerly Cerring- Cross. Somnerus ingeniously draws it from
the AS. Cyrran, Acyrran, Belg. Keeren, Teut. Kehren, to turn. Charoloman,
Brother to Charlemain, from the AS. Care, stout, or Ceorl a Carle, or Country
Clown, and Man. Adr. Jun. draws it from Charitas, Charity. Chaucer, the Homer
or Parent of all English Poetry; possibly from the Fr. G. Chausseur, formerly
Chauceur, Part. of the Verb Chausser, formerly Chaucer, to put on ones shoes,
q. d. a Shoemaker. So Skinner. Chaumound, in Cornwall, from the Fr. G. Chauve,
bald, and Mont, a Mount. Chaworth, in Nottingham, formerly de Cahors.
Cheardesly, in Buckinghamshire, AS. Cerdicslega, from the Fight between Cerdic
the Saxon, and the Britains in that place; for Slege in the AS. signifies a
Slaughter. Cheausey, formerly an Abbey, but demolished by the Danes; perhaps so
called from the AS. Ceosl, Gravel, and Ige, an Isle, (i. e.) an Isle full of
Gravel. Chegford, a Village in Devon. from the AS, Caeg, Caege, a Key, and
Ford; which see. Chelred, a King of the Mercii; from the AS. Ceol, a Ship, and
read, counsel, redan, to give counsel; q. d. one that is Skilful in Navigation.
Chelsey, in Middlesex, q. d. Shelfsey, from Shelves of Sand; it is also called
in old writing, Chelche-Hyth; not unlikely from the AS. Cealc Chalk, and Hyth,
a Port, for the term. ey, AS. Ea, signifies Water, and also Land lying next
the Water. Cheney, a Surname, formerly de Chesnoye, from the Fr. G. Chesnoye, a
place where Oaks grow, this from Chesne an Oak; which Mendg. again draws from
the Lat. Quernus; Skin. from Quercinus Oaken, made of Oak. Chensford, in Essex,
q. d. Chelmsford, so called from the River Chelmer. Cheorl or Ceorl, a King of
the Mercii, the same with Charles now. Chepstow, in Monmouthshire, (i. e.) a
Market, or place for Chapmen; See Cheap Chapman, and Stow. It is by the Brit.
called Castlewent, because it was raised out of the Ruins of old Went,
therefore called by the Brit. Caerwent; Went is either derived of the C. Br.
Gwenith, Wheat, for the great Crops of Wheat it did afford; or of Guynn, white,
for the white color of the Soil in that place. Cherebert, a King of France;
(i. e.) Cyning, or King Herebert; see Herbert. Chertsey, in Surrey; (i. e.)
Certs Ea, Cert's Isle, a Village heretofore famous for an Abbey there erected.
Cherusci, a People of Hercynium in Germany, where the Bishoprics of Munster
and Paderborn now are; perhaps from the Germ. Kehren, to sweep, and the Belg.
Oost, Teut. Ost; the East, q. d. a People that spoiled the East-Country,
committing sundry Robberies therein; Or, from the same Oost, and the Belg.
Keeren, Teut. Kehren, to turn, because they often put to flight the Inhabitants
of those Eastern Countries. Adr. Jun. draws it from the Belg. Keer-Vsz, to turn
out of doors, or beat back; because under Arminius, they drove the Romans out
of their Territories. Chesill, in Dorsetshire, a bank of Gravel; from the AS.
Ceosl, Sand or Gravel. Somner. Chester, by the Brit. called Caer-Legion,
Caer-Leon-Vaur; It was also by the AS. called Legeaceaster, because the
twentieth Legion, quartered here; and West-ceaster, West-Chester, for its
Situation. Chester upon the Street, in the Bishopric of Durham, q. d. a Castle
or Town upon the High way; by the Saxons called Conceaster. Chesthunt, in
Hartfordshire, so called from the abundance of Chestnuts there; see Fuller in
his History of Waltham Abbey. Chevercourt, some exp. it, one head of the Court,
but they are mistaken; for then it should be written Chevecourt, or Chefcourt;
so that I think it not amiss, to draw it from the Fr. G. Chevre, a she Goat,
and Cour, a Court. Chichester, in Sussex, a Bishop's See: By the Sax. called
Cissanceaster, by the Brit. Caercei, from Cissa King of the South Sax. who
built it. Chidley, in Devonshire, from the AS. Cid, a wrangling, and Ley, a
Dock, or Leag, Lege, a Field, or Pasture, (i. e.) Ground, about which
Controversies arise, the right of Possession thereof being disputable.
Childebert, a King of France, q. d. Cyning or King Hildebert, from the Teut.
Held, a Nobleman, and the AS. Beorht, illustrious. Childerick, a King of
France, q. d. Cyning, or King Hilderic, or Hulderic, from the Belg. Hulde, a
Vote, and Ric, rich (i. e.) one that has not a man against him, one that every
body stands up for. Chilham, in Kent, formerly Iulham, from Julius Caesar, that
encamped there, in his second Expedition; see Ham. in the Com. Names.
Chilperic, a King of France, q. d. Cyning, or King Hilperic; which see.
Chiltern, in Buck. the upper part whereof was by the Sax. called Cyltern, by
reason of the chill Air thereupon, or from Cylt, clay, as says Camden.
Chintilla, a King of the Vice-Gothi of Spain, about the year 636. Not unlikely,
from the Teut. Kanne Kante, a Cann or Cup, and Theilen, to divide, to give each
man his share; that is to say, a Cup Bearer. Chippenham, in the County of
Wilts, AS. Cyppanham, from the AS. Cyppan, to cheapen, and Cypman, a Chapman,
q. d. a Market or Marketplace. See Chapman and Cheapen. Chonodomarius, in Amm.
Marcell. a King of the Alemanni. Kilian and Jun. interpret it a furious Rider,
or Horseman in the time of need; perhaps from the Teut. Kuhn bold, and Belg.
Ademen, Teut. Athemen, to breathe, q. d. one that pants, like as does an
indefatigable Soldier or Warrior. Jun. seems to draw it from the Teut. Noth
Nothen, Belg. Noode, Need, and Meyer, a Major. Chund, or Hund, from the Teut.
Kuhn; valiant, magnanimous. Cicester, in Glocestershire, though it is writ
Cirencester; by the Sax. 'twas called Cyrenceaster, by the Brit. Caer, Cari, or
Ceri, from the River Churn, in Lat. Cerinus? Cimbri, a People of Chersonesus,
formerly the terror of the Romans; perhaps from the Belg. Kommer, Komber,
Teut. Rummer, damage, loss, by reason of the great damages this warlike People
did the neighboring Countries round about. It is thought by some, that the
ancient Brit. descended from these Cimbri, and as an Argument say, that they
call Wales their Cumro, and themselves Cumraeci, or Cumrages? Cimenshore, in
Sussex, so called from Cimen, a Saxon; who with his Brother Ella, the first
King of the South Saxons, arrived first at this place; Cimen may be taken from
the AS. Cuma, or Cyma, a Guest, derivatives of the Verbs Cuman, and Cyman, to
come unto. Cindeswindus, a King of the Vice-Gothi of Spain, from the Teut. Kind
des Wind, (i. e.) the Son of the Wind, so called, for the sharpness and
readiness of his wit. Cisbury, in Sussex, near an ancient Military Fort, built
by King Cissa; see Borough. Cissa, King of the South Saxons, from the AS.
Cissan, to kiss. Clan-Ricard, a Surname in Ireland, (i. e.) of the Family of
Richard. Clare, otherwise Clarence, a Village in Suffolk, a title given to
Dukes of the Blood Royal, from the Lat. Clarus, famous. Clepho or Clapho, the
second King of the Longobardi of Italy; not unlikely from the AS. Cleofan,
Belg. Clieven, to cleave, because possibly he used to cleave his Enemies in two
with his Sword. Cleveland, in Yorkshire, a Tract of Land; q. d. Cliffland; for
it is very steep, and almost unpassable with Clifts, and Rocks; see Clift:
Cleybrook, in Leicestershire, the remains of the old Town Cleycester; see Clay
and Brook. Cliff, in Sussex; see Clift. Clodobert, (i. e.) Cyning, or King
Lodobert, from the Teut. Leute, AS. Leode, People, and Beorht, famous, also
light, that is, the light of the People. Clodomir, (i. e.) Cyning, or King
Lodomir, from the AS. Leode, Teut. Leute, People, and Mehren, to make more, to
increase, (i. e.) one that extended the Limits of his Dominions. Clotair or
Clothair, a King of France; q. d. Cyning, or King Lothair; which see.
Clothilde, by Kilian Luithild, a Woman's name, sig. a Princess of the People;
from the old Teut. Luit now Leute, AS. Leode, People, and Held, a Lady, by
adding C. AS. Cyningin, Teut. Koniginne, a Queen; see Lothild. Cloves-ho, now
Cliff, AS. Cleofesho, memorable for a Council of English-Saxons held there;
from the AS. Cleofa, Cliof, Clif, a Clift, and Ho, the heel; perhaps so called,
because it is seated at the bottom of an Hill, or Rock. Clun, a River in the
County of Salop, by the Brit. Colun, and Colunwy: it would be too bold a
derivation if I should draw it from the Lat. Colonus, a farmer; because, like
the River Nile, it makes the Fields fruitful, and so advantageous to Farmers.
Cluy, by the Brit. and AS. Clud, a clift, from thence Alcluid, a Town so
called. Cob, in Camden, it signifies a Port made with hands; it might also be
drawn from the AS. Coppe, a top, or tuft, Teut. Kopff, an Head; or as the
eminent Dr. Th. H. tells us, it is an abbreviation of Jacob. Cockington, in
Devonshire, a Village, likely so called, for some great Cock-fighting kept
there; see Cock and Town. Cockly-Chapell, in Lancashire, by Anton. Coccium, by
adding the AS. Term. Ley, an Haven for Ships; see Lay. Codenor, formerly
Coutenoure Castle, in Derb. perhaps from the Fr. G. Contenir, to keep in, to
curb, q. d. the stay of the People. Coker, from the AS. Cocer, a Quiver.
Colchester, in Essex, the principal Town; by the Sax. Coleceaster, Brit.
Caer-Colin, from the River Coln. Cole, in Middl. a River, formerly Coh, which
in the Welsh sig. red; see Hertford. Cole, formerly a Christen-name, but now a
Surname, contracted from Nicol, and this from the Gr. (...). Colebrook, in
Buckinghamshire, by Anton. the Bridges, because the River Cole is here parted
into four Currents, but it joined together by four Bridges. Coleham, in Middl.
from the River Cole and Ham; which see. Collet, a Surname, being a Diminutive
of the Christen-name Nicol for Nicolas. Collins, according to Camden, corrupted
from Nicolin, the Dimin. of Nicolas; but it is now become a Surname. St.
Colman, a Scotch Bishop of Lindisf. in the year 653. from the Lat. Columbanus;
which see. Colson; q. d. Nicolson, i. e. the Son of Nicolas. St. Columbs, in
Cornw. (i. e.) the Temple of St. Columb, a Scotchman. Comb, in Dev. a
Termination for many words, as Newcomb, etc. from the AS.Comb, Comp, C. Br.
Kum, Fr. G. Comb, a Dale encompassed on each side with Hills. Compton in the
Hole, in Warw. so called from the low situation thereof; for Compton, or
Combtown, in AS. signifies a Village in a Valley. Congell, a devout Irishman,
q. d. a good Pledge; see Congersbury. Congersbury, in the County of Somerset,
from Conger, a Pious man that lived there as an Hermit. Connaught, a Province
in Ireland, by the Natives called Conaughty, formerly the Seat of the ancient
Concani and Nagnati, from whom the name of the Province seems to be derived.
Connisborough or Coninesborough, in Yorkshire, by the Brit. Caer Conan, (i. e.)
the Town of Conan, a King, that erected it. Connisby or Consby, in Linc. I
suppose so called from Conys, by adding thereto the AS. Termination by, which
signifies an Habitation, secondarily a Village; this from the AS. Byan, to
abide, or dwell. Conrade, a Christen-name, from the AS. Con, Coon, Teut. Kuhn,
Belg. Koen, valiant, able; and the AS. Raed, Rad, Read, Teut. Raht, Belg. Raed,
counsel. Conway, in the County of Caern. formerly Conovius; from whence the
Town of this Name, out of the Ruins whereof was raised a little Town called
Aber-Conway, (i. e.) the mouth of Conway. Cope, Nom. Gent. from the AS. Coppe,
a Top, q. d. the the top of an Hill. Copenhagen, or Copenhaven, in the Lat.
Barb. Haffnia, by the Dan. Koppenhaffn; from the Dan. Koppen, Merchants, and
Haffn an Haven, q. d. the Merchants Haven. Copland, in Cumberland, a Tract of
Land; from the C. Br. Kopa, sharp top'd Mountains, for which it is conspicuous:
or from the AS. Cop, Teut. Kopff an head, and Land; which see. Corbet, a
Surname; it was formerly, according to Camden, a Christen-name, being, a dim.
of the Fr. G. Corbeau, a Crow, (i. e.) a little Crow. Coriton, a Village in
Devonshire, perhaps from the great income they have by Coriander, which in the
AS. and Gr. is called Corion, and Town; which see. Or from one Corius that
founded it. Cornwall, a County, in the Sax. called Cornealh, from the Lat.
Cornu, an Horn; because in this part England is extended in the form of an
Horn; and Wealh, which name the Saxons gave to all Strangers, and especially to
the Britans; see Wales. Cornwallis, a Surname, q. d. come of Cornwall; which
see. Corobridge, in Northumberland, by Hoveden called Corobrige, by Henr. Hunt.
Cure; from its old Original, by adding the termination bridge. Cotswold, a
place in Gloc. so called from the abundance of Sheep-Cotes there; from the AS.
Cote, a Sheep-Cote, and Would, a place, that has not so much as a tree in it.
Cove, Nom. Gent. from the AS. Cofe, Cofa, a Cave. Coventry, in Warw. a famous
City and Bishop's See, either from a Convent or Monastery; or from Coven, a
small River. Covert, Nom. Gent. from the Fr. G. Couverte, a Shelter; see to
Cover. Coway Stakes, in Surr. a place so called from the Stakes, which the
Britains set up upon the adverse Shore, against Caesar, where he passed over
the Thames in the Ford; but Coway evidently comes of Cow and Way, q.d. a
passage for Cows. Cowbridge, in Glam. so called for the frequent passing of
Cows that way, q. d. the Cows Bridge; by the Brit. Pont Van. Cranburn, in Dors.
(i. e.) the River or Bourn of Cranes; see Crane and Bourn. Craven, in the
County of York, from the C. Br. Craeg, a Rock, or Stone, and Pen an Head; for
it is a stony place. Cray, a River, perhaps from the Fr. G. Craye Chalk, from
the Chalky Channel it runs through. Creccelade, a little Town in Wilts; by
Marianus Creccanford, by some Grekelade, from a School, which the Greek
Philosophers instituted there, which was afterward removed to Oxford. Somnerus
supposes this to be a mere Fable; and, as I think, not without cause; For, he
supposes, that the Town was formerly called Crecca-gelade, from the AS.
Crecca, a Brook, and Ladian, to empty, for thereabout some Brooks disembogue
themselves into the Thames. Crediton, or Kirton in Cornw. either from the AS.
Craettun, q. d. the Cart Town; or from the AS. Creed, the Apostles Creed,
because perhaps in this Town the first Bishop's See was founded among the
Saxons, and from thence the Christian and Apostolic Faith was propagated
through the whole Kingdom of the South Saxons; or, which is yet more probable,
q. Credian-tun, from the River Creden that runs close by it. It is a Town over
and above the honor of a Bishop's See, famous for the Birth of St. Boniface,
or Winifred the Apostle of Germany. Crebequer, in Kent; from the Fr. G.
Crevecoeur, It. Crepa Cuore; from the Lat. Cor, the Heart, and the Verb Crepare
to burst. Creyford, in Kent, AS. Creccanford, from the River Crey and Ford.
This Crey gave Names to the little Villages St. Mary-Crey, Paul's- Crey,
Votes-Crey, North-Crey; it is a place memorable for an overthrow given the
Britains, by Hengist a Saxon. Cripplegate, a Gate of the City of London; from
an Hospital of Cripples, which was once erected there. Crockhern, in Some. in
the AS. Cruccerne, and that from a Fountain in the same Language, Cruce, a
Cross, also a Cruse, and Herne, a Cottage. Croft, a Surname; from the AS.
Croft, a little Close. Croon, from the C. Br. Croen, a Skin; this Fr. Jun. and
Davis derive from the Gr. (...), the Skin. Crowland, formerly Croyland, in
Linc. famous for an Abbey, and Fowling; perhaps so called from the multitude of
Crows; see Crow. Fuller supposes it so called, quasi terra cruda, raw Land.
Crowch, or rather Croychback; so was Edmund, Brother to K. Edward the First,
called, not, as one would presently imagine, from his hunch-back; but from the
Fr. G. Croise, signed with a Cross; because when he was bound for the Holy
Land, he wore a Cross on his Back for a Badge of his sacred Warfare. Crutchet
Friars, Fr. G. Freres Croisez, (i. e.) Friars signed with the Bross, and had a
famous Convent in London, the the name whereof the place retains to this day.
Cumberland, q. d. the Country of the Cumbri, Britains, who remained here a long
time after all England was Conquered. Cunebert, a King of the Italian
Longobardi; either from the Teut. Kuhn, adventurous; and the AS. Beorht, brave;
or as Kilian has't, q.d. Kuniwerd, from the Belg. Kuin, stout, and Werd,
famous. Cunegild, or Conegild, a a Woman's name, from the Teut. Konig, a King,
and the old word Hild, for Hold, a Friend. Cunigund, a Woman's name, from the
AS. Cyning, Teut. Koning, Belg. Koningh, a King, and the Teut. Gunnen, to
favor, (i. e.) she that is in favor with the King. Cunimund, a King of the
Gepidae, from the Teut. Kuhn, valiant, and Mund, a Mouth, q. d. an high spoken
man; or from the same Kuhn, and the AS. Mundan, to protect, or pacify, (i. e.)
an able Protector, or Peacemaker. St. Cuthberd, Archbishop of Canterbury;
not, as some think, q.d. Cut-Beard, but from the AS. Cuth, known, and Beorht,
famous. Or according to Versteg. from the said Cuth, and the old Engl. Beright,
of a settled mind; but the former is most likely. Cuthred, a Christen-name,
from the AS. Cuth, known, and Rade, Read, Teut. Raht, Belg. Raed, Counsel.
Cuthwin, a Christen-name, from the AS. Cuth, known, and Win, a Conqueror,
Winnan, to win, (i. e.) one that behaves himself, so as to win the love of all
men. See Win. Cuts, Nom. Gent. the Dim. of Cuthbert, which see aabove.
Cynehelm, Verstegan supposes it to be contracted from the AS. Cyning, a King,
and Helm, an Helmet. It might also be derived of Cene, strenuous, and Helm, an
Helmet, secondarily a Protector.
D.
DAbscot, a National name, as Cambden says, first D'Amprecourt, and from
thence Dabridge-court, q.d. of a Town in France formerly called Amprecour.
Dacres, a National name, Fuller supposes that it is taken from Acra a City of
Syria, at the besieging and assaulting whereof, one of this Country fought most
courageously, q. d. Fr. G. D'Acres: or from Dacor a little River, after the
name of which, a Castle in Cumb. was called. Dagalaiphus, in the time of the
Emperor Valentinian the First; he was elected Consul with Gratianus the
Emperor's Son, Anno U. C. 1118. from the Teut. Dagen Daggers or Swords, and
Lieven, AS. Lufian, to love, q. d. one that delighted in his Sword, (i. e.) to
be engaged in War or Duels. Dagobert, King of the Franco-Galli, either from the
Teut. Dagen, a Sword, and the AS. Beorht, famous, (i. e.) an incomparable
Swords-man; or from the same Dagen, and Berichten, to instruct, (i. e.) a
notable Sword-Player; Jun. draws it from the same Dagen a Sword, and Bart a
Beard. Dairell, a Surname in Corn. and Buck. (i. e.) of Hairell, and Hairel in
the Fr. G. signifies an Hair-Cloth, perhaps from our word Hair, or, which is
more plausible, from the Fr. G. Airelles, Black-berries. Dallison, a Surname,
(q. d.) D' Alencon, of Alencon, a City in France. Damport, in Cheshire,
otherwise called Davenport, from the River Dan or Daven, and the Lat. Porta, a
Port. Dantzick, the greatest Mart-Town in Borussia, which, as Adr. Jun. says,
in the Henetian Dialect signifies, a Fort made to keep off the Danes; it may
perhaps be drawn from the Teut. Danne, a Fir Tree, and the AS. Wic, a Fort, (i.
e.) Danneswic, or Dannenwic, q. d. a strong hold among Fir-trees. Danubius, the
most famous River in all Europe, from the Teut. Donner, Thunder, Donnern, to
Thunder, because by its violent running, and the dashing of Stones against its
hollow Banks, it makes a noise like that of Thunder: or from the Teut. Dannen,
Fir-trees, which are planted all along its Banks. Darby, a famous County-Town,
by the Saxons Deorby, q. d. Derwenthy, from the River Derwent. In the AS. it is
termed Northorthig, from Weorthig, a Farm, and North, Northern. Dartford, in
Kent, so called, q. d. the Ford of the River Darta, formerly Darenta. Darwent,
a River. Leland draws it from the C. Br. Dwr, water, and Gwen or Gwin, clear,
neither of which are found in this sense, yet Gwynn is found to signify white.
D' aubeny, Nom. Gent. perhaps from the Fr. G. Aubain, an Alien; or rather from
a Town called by the Fr. G. Aubigny. St. David's, in Pembr. formerly Menew, so
called from St. David, who removed the Archiepiscopal See hither from Vske. In
the C. Br. Tuy Devi, (i. e.) David's house. St. Davids-Land, in Pembr. in the
C. Br. Pebideauc, and Cantred Devi, (i. e.) David's Century. Daukins, q.
Davikins, (i. e.) little David. Dauney, a Surname, Fr. G. Daunaye, from Aune,
an Elder-tree. Dauson, for Davison, (i. e.) the Son of David. Dautry, Fr. G. d'
Haute Rive, of an high Bank. Deal, in the County of Kent, formerly Dole,
memorable for the first arrival and fight made here by Caesar; from the C. Br.
Dole, a Dale, or Plain lying next the Sea. Debenham, in Suff. from the River
Deben, and Ham; which see. Dee, a River in Ches. in the Lat. Deva, C. Br.
Dyffyr Dwy, (i. e.) the Water Dwy, because it rises out of two heads, for Dwy
signifies Two; some call it the Black Water, others the Sacred Water, because
the ancient Brit. worshipped Rivers. Dee, a River in Scotland, by Ptolemy
called Dea, from the C. Br. Dee, black; perhaps from the blackness of the water
thereof. Dee, a River in Mar in Scotland, from the same root. Deemouth, in
Ches. (q.d.) the Mouth of the River Dee. Deira, in the AS. Deora rice, the
Kingdom of Deira, after which name the South part of Northumberland, lying
between the Rivers Humber and Tweed, was formerly called. Leland draws it from
the AS. Deor, a wild Beast, namely from the Forests and Warrens, for which this
Country is very remarkable. Delft, a famous City in Holland. Adr. Jun. derives
it from the Belg. Delven, to dig, or delve, from the great Trench there called
Delf-haven. Dell, a Surname, from the word to Delve; which See in the Com. Nam.
Denbigh, a County Town in Wales; in the C. Br. it is called Diffryn Cluyd, (i.
e.) the Valley Cluyd, so called from a River of that name; it may be drawn from
the AS. Den, a Dale, and Byan, to abide in, or Bigan, to inhabit. Dengy, in
Essex, so called from the Danes that besieged it. Denis, a Surname in Devons.
q. d. Dane, or Danish; or, as the eminent Dr. Th. H. has it, from the Fr. G.
Denis, Gr. Dionysius. Denis, a Christen-name, from the Gr. and Lat. Dionysius,
a Name of Bacchus, this from the Gr. (...), in the Genesis (...) Jupiter, whose
Son he was, and Nysa, a City of India, where he rode in Triumph, and taught the
use of Wine. Denmark, Adr. Jun. draws it from the Teut. Dannen, Fir-trees, to
wit from the copious store of Fir-wood therein, and the termination Mark, a
Bound or Limit. Depeford, in Kent (i. e.) the Deep Ford 5. see Deep and Ford in
the Com. Names. Deping, in Lint. according to Ingulphus, q, d. a deep or hollow
Meadow or Ing. See Deep and Ing, in their places. Derham, in Gloc. from the AS.
Deor, Deer, and Ham, a Lodge; see Deer and Ham, in their places. Dertmore, in
Devonsh. a barren place, from the River Dert, running thereby, and Moor; which
see. Dertmouth, in Devonsh. a famous Port, (i e.) the Mouth of the River Dert.
Desiderius, the last King of the Longobardi of Italy, by the French Writers he
is called Didier; They may for better sounds sake have used this in the place
of the Teut. Theodehr, which denotes the Peoples glory, or honor; from the
AS. and old Teut. THeor, the People, and the Teut. Ehr, honor. Deventer or
Daventer, a Town in the Netherlands. Adr. Jun. wrests it from the Article Dee,
and the Attuarii an ancient People. Dever Rill, in Wilts, a Rivulet, which like
the Mole in Surr. runs under ground, and about a Mile further, breaks out
again, and then runs above ground, perhaps from the Belg. Deur, AS. Durh,
through, because it passes through the Earth. D'evreux, a French Surname, q.
d. of Evereux, a Town in France. Dewsborough, in Yorkshire, from the C. Br.
Diw, God, and borough; which see in the Common Names. Diego, a Spanish Surname,
Covarr. supposes that it is a corruption of the Hisp. San-Jago, or San-Diago,
(i. e.) St. James, the Tutelar Saint of the Spaniards. D. ganwy, in Caern. from
the AS. Digel, hidden, and Wic, Wice, a Bay, or Bank, because it runs calmly
between the Banks; or from the C. Br. Digoni, to satiate, and Gwig, a Forest,
because it runs through Forests. Dilston or Dwilston, in Northumb. by Bid
Deviles-burn, memorable for the overthrow of Cedwalla a famous Britain, perhaps
q. d. Devils-bourn, because Cedwalla for his barbarous Cruelty was called a
Devil; see Bourn and Devil in their places. Dimmock, from the AS. Dim, and our
word Oak, AS. Aac, Ac, an Oak. Dinham, a Surname, from our English word Diun,
noise, and Ham, a Village. Dinsoll, Nom. Gent. not unlikely from the AS. and
Eng. THin, Thin, and Sol. Disart, a Castle in Flintsh. so called because it
stands in a Desert or Wilderness; or from the C. Br. Disathr, a way not
frequented, because it stands in a steep place, and therefore hard to be come
at. Ditmars or Dietmars, a People of Germ. or rather of Cimbr. Cheronesus. Adr.
Jun. thinks, that they are so called, q. d. Teutomarsos, the Dutch of the
Marshes; see Dutch and Marsh in the Com. Nam. Dobbins, and Dobs, a Contract and
Corrup. of Robert, by adding thereunto the Patronymick termination in, which is
as much as to say Robert's Son. The Don, or Dune, in Yorkshire, a River so
called, because it runs in a shallow channel; for Don in the C. Br.
signifies shallow. Donald, a Christen-name frequently given to the
Scoto-Irish; from the AS. Dun, an Hill, and Eald, Old. But I suppose it is of
an Irish Original. Doncaster, in Yorkshire, by Nennius Caer Daun, from the
River Dune, or Don; and Ceaster, a Town. AS. Donaceaster. Dorchester, the
County Town in Dors. by Anton. Durnovaria, (q. d.) C. Br. the waters Ford; for
Dwr signifies water, and Vara, a Ford; see Fare in the Com. Names. There Is
also another Dorchester in Oxfordshire, that heretofore was a Bishop's See,
which by Leland is ingeniously called (...), Hydropolis, a Town where there is
much water. It is of the same Original with the other. Dornford, in Hunt. where
heretofore stood a City, that in the AS. was called Dormceaster, in the C. Br.
Caer Dorm, by Anton. Duro-Brivae, (i. e.) the Ford of a Water or River.
Dorsetshire, from the C. Br. Durotriges, this from the C. Br. Dwr, Water, and
Trig, an Inhabitant; that is to say, a People upon the Sea Coast, or that
inhabit near the Sea. Dort, a great Mart Town in in Holland, a contract of
Dordrecht, or according to Adr. Jun. Durdrecht; the same Jun. calls it Dureti
Forum, from Duretus a Nobleman, who perhaps was the Builder thereof, and
Drecht, a Market Town: Or from the Teut. Dort-Dutch, or Dort-hin, there, that
way, for thereabout is the Ford of the Rhine, and a Thoroughfare. Dover, in
Kent, AS. Dofra, a very famous Port of Kent, from the C. Br. Dufyrrha, a steep
place, from the steep Rocks not far from thence. Leland calls it Dorim or
Durum, as if it came of the C. Br. Dwr, water. Douglas, a famous Surname among
the Scots; from the River Duglass, and this not unlikely from the C. Br. Dwr,
water, and Glass, q.d. Glassy water, so called from its clearness; see Duglass
beneath. Dousabel, a Woman's Christen-Name; from the Fr. G. Douce-belle, sweet
and pretty. Douze, a Woman's Christenname, from the Fr. G. Douce, sweet.
Dowgate, a Gate belonging to the City of London; q. d. Dourgate, i. e. the
Watergate, from the C. Br. Dwr. water, and the AS. and Eng. Gate. Drifield or
Driffield, in Yorkshire, memorable for the Tomb of Alfred, a famous King of the
Saxons, q. d. the dry Field; which see in the Com. Names. Drinkwater, a
Surname; not, as one would think at first, q. d. abstemious, one that drinks
nothing but water; but, as Camden observes corrupted from Derwent water, a
River so called. Droitwich, otherwise Durtwich in Worcestershire, perhaps from
its dirty situation; see Dirt, and which in the Com. Names. Dru, a Proper name
of a man; Camden draws it from the AS. Dru, crafty, subtle; and Nicot. draws
it from the Fr. G. Dru, airy, lively, but I can find neither of 'em in this
sense; therefore I had rather draw it from the AS. Dry, a Magician, one of the
Druides, that were so called from Oaks, which they worshipped; or from the Fr.
G. Dru, thick, massy. Dublin, in Ireland, in the Irish Bala Cleigh. It was
formerly the Seat of the Eblani, from whence it is, that in Latin it is called
Ebl^^. Duglass or Douglass, a River in Scotland, so called from the greenish
color of its water; see Douglass. Dugless, a small River in Lanc. see Duglass
above. Duisburg, a City in Holland; Adr. Jun, supposes that heretofore it was
called Drusburg; from Druses Caesar, and the old Teut. and AS. Burg, a Town; see
Borough in the Com. Names. Dunbarton, in Scotland, for Dun-britton, that is,
the Hill of the Britons. Dundee, in Scotland, by some called Taodunum, from the
River Tao, and the AS. and C. Br. Dun^, a Bank, or Hill, that is, an Hill by
the River Dee. Dunkirk, a famous City and Port of Flanders; from the Belg.
Duyne, a shelve of Sand, and Kirk, a Church; because it lies betwixt the Sands
of the Sea. Duninow, in Essex, formerly Dunmawg, in the Doomsday Book, Dunmaw,
from the AS. Dun, an Hill, and Mapan, to mow, it being a fruitful Hill, that
yields a great crop to the Mowers. Duns, John Duns, a Scotchman, a subtle
Doctor; those that make him an Englishman, derive it from a small Village in
Northumberland, in the Parish of Emildon, called Dunston; but those, that make
him an Irishman, draw it from Done, a Bishop's See in Ireland; But what if it
come of Duns, a Contract of Dunstan? Duns, a Contract of Dunstan. Dunsby, or
Duncansby, from the AS. Dun, an Hill, and Byan, to dwell; see Down and By in
the Com. Names: or it might be so called from its being the House of King
Duncan. Dunstable, in Bedfordshire, from Dunus, a Robber in the time of King
Henry the First, that made it dangerous to Travelers by his continual
Robberies: By Anton. It is called Magintum, Magint, whereof there are yet these
Relics; for the common People call Nine Acres of Land in the neighboring
Field, Madingbour, and Madningbour; and some Roman Coyns, which are ever and
anon found there, they call Madning Money. Dunstafag, in Scotland, (i. e.) in
the AS. and C. Br. Stephen's Hill. St. Dunstan, an Archbishop of Canterbury;
from the AS. Dun a Bank, or Hill, and Stan, a Stone. Anno 937. Dunwich, in
Sussex, from the AS. Dun, an Hill, and Wic, a Fort; q. d. a Fort upon an Hill:
It was heretofore by the Sax. called Dunmoc, perhaps from the AS. Dun, a bank,
and Mueg, an heap. Dunwolph, from the AS. Dun, an Hill, and Ulph, Help, (i. e.)
an Hill of help. Durham, a Bishop's See, according to Camden by the AS.
Dunholm, from Dun, an Hill and Holm, an Holm; because the River Vedra does
almost encompass the Hill, whereon it stands, on each side: But by Somner. it
is called in the AS. D^or-Ham, (i. e.) a Town for Deer; or from the C. Br. Dwr,
Water, and Ham, an Home, or Habitation; q. d. A watery Habitation. Durstede, the
most ancient Town of Holland, by the ancient Romans called Batavodurum; some
remains of which are yet in the Syllable Dur, by adding thereto Stead, a place
or Town; see Stead in the Com. Names. Now Batavodurum may seem to come of the
Batavi, or Dutch, and the Belg. Deure Door, a Door, it being the Entrance into
Holland. See Door in the Com. Names. Dutch, from the Belg. Duytse, Teut.
Teutsch, a German, or the same; or from the AS. Deod, Deode, a People. Kilian
draws it from the old word Deudisch, and this from the old word Deud or Dud,
God; as he also supposes that the Gothi were so called from Got, God.
E.
THE Ea, a little River in Lincolnshire, from the AS. Ea, water, from whence
the Fr. G. Eau, Fr. Th. Aha Dan. Aa, water, all from the Lat. Aqua, the same.
Eadbert, a King of Northumberland, from the AS. Ead, happiness, and Beorht,
illustrious. Eadgar, that most mighty, yet peaceable King of the English
Saxons; from the AS. Eadrg, happy, and Ar, Are, Honor; yet Verstegan draws it
from the AS. Ead, or Ath, an Oath, and Guard, to keep, q. d. one that keeps
his Oath; and he supposes that it is the same with Edward. Eadulph, a
Christen-Name, from the AS. Ead, happiness, and Ulph, help, that is to say,
Happy aid, or from Eath, easy, and the same Ulph, (i. e.) ready help. Eadwin,
a Christen-name, from the AS. Ead, happiness, and Win, an obtainer, Winnan, to
overcome, or acquire, (i. e.) one that attaineth to happiness. Ealdred, a
Christen-name; see Eldred, and Aldred. Ealphegus; see St. Aelphegus above.
Ealred, a Christen-name, from the AS. Eal, All, and Read, Rade, Counsel.
Eanswyd, Verstegan draws it from the old word Eans now once, and Wyd,
consecrated, a Part. of the Verb Teut. Weihen, Belg. Wiien, to consecrate.
Earmenheld, from the AS. Earme, Teut. Arm, Poor, and Held, a Champion; that is,
one that protects the Needy. Easterlings, so are the Borussi, Pomerani, and
other Inhabitants of the Balthick Sea, called, from their Eastern situation
with respect unto our England. Eaton, from the AS. Ea, water, and Tun, a Town,
q.d., a watery Town, for it is seated upon the Shore of the River Thames. Eay,
in Suffolk, an Isle or Holm, from the AS. Ea, water, it lying next the water
side. St. Ebba, the Daughter of Edilfrid King of Northumb. perhaps from the AS.
Ebb, the Ebbing, or flowing of the Sea; she gave the Name to a Town corruptly
called Saint Tabbs, for St. Ebbs, (i. e.) the Temple of St. Ebba. Ebchester, in
the Bishopric of Durham, from St. Ebba; which see above. Eboricus, King of the
Spanish Swedes; q. d. Ever Ric, or Rich, always rich. Edam, a Town in Holland,
rather Yedam, for Ya seems to be a corruption of the AS. Ea, water; see Dam
in the Com. Names. Edbald, a Kentish King, from the AS. prefix Ed, again, and
Bald, bold, one that after fear, takes Courage again: or from the Belg. Eed,
an Oath, and the Teut. Bald, presently, one that raps out an Oath upon the
lightest occasion; or from the AS. Ead, felicity, and Wealdan, to reign; q. d.
one that rules the People happily. Edelburgh, the Wife of Edwin King of
Northumb. Daughter to Ethelbert King of Kent, from the AS. Ethel, noble, and
Borg, a Pledge. Edenborough, the chief City of the Scots, by the Scoto-Irish
Dun Eaden, the Hill Eden, from the C. Br. Adain, a Wing, either from the Wings
of Horse Regiments, or from Wings or Pinnacles in Architecture; because there
are two Walls rising upwards, not unlike unto two Wings. Edinburgh Frith, by
Ptol. Boderio, which Camden seems to draw from the depth thereof, viz. from
the Teut. Boden, a Bottom; but I find no such word. Edenburg-Castle, in the C.
Br. Castle mined Agued, (i. e.) the Maiden's or Virgin's Castle. Ederington, in
Sussex, formerly the Haven of Adurn, that is to say, Adurn Town, perhaps from
one Adurnus the Founder thereof. Edgecomb, a Surname, from Edge, and the AS.
Comb Comp, a Valley environed with Hills; see Edge and Comb in the Com. Names.
Edinton and Edinton in Wilts, memorable for King Alfred's signal Victory over
the Danes, perhaps from the AS. Eath, eas^e, and Dun, an Hill, that is, Hills
of an easy ascent. Edith, Wife to Edward the Confessor, from the AS. Ead,
Prosperous, and ythian, to redound, (i. e.) one that overflowed in Prosperity.
Edmonton, in Middlesex, AS. Aedelinton, from the AS. Aethel, Teut. Edel,
famous, or AS. Aetheling, an Heir to the Crown; if it might not more simply be
drawn from Edmundus a King, and Martyr, of the East-English, q. d. Edmund's
Town. Edmund, a King of the East-English cruelly Martyred by the Heathenish
Danes. Camden draws it from the AS. Erd, blessedness, and Mund, Peace, that is,
blessed Peace. Edmundsbury, a pleasant Town in Suffolk, for shortness Bury;
from St. Edmund, that here suffered Martyrdom under the Danes. Edric, King of
Kent; from the AS. Ead, felicity, and Ric, rich, (i. e.) happy and rich.
Edward, a Man's name, from the AS. Ead, happiness, and Ward, a Keeper, (i. e.)
a happy Keeper. Verstegan makes it one and the same with Edgar. Edwy, a King of
the English-Saxons; from the A S. Ead, happiness, and Wy, sacred, this from the
Teut. Weihen, to consecrate. Egbert, or rather Ecbert, according to Camden the
first Monarch of England; from the AS. Ece, eternal, and Be^rht, flourishing,
q.d. always flourishing. Verstegan says, that it was heretofore writ
Eahberiht, from the AS. Eght, equity, and Berht, propense, ready, (i. e.)
greatly inclining to Equity. Egerton, the Name of a Village, and for that cause
a Surname, from the AS. Egor, Cruel, and Town; which see in the Com. Names.
Egicha, King of the Spanish Vice-Gothi, perhaps from the AS. Egesa, dread,
terror, (i. e.) the Terror of his Enemies. In the year 687. Egric, King of
the East-English, from the AS. Ece, always, and Rice, a Kingdom, (i. e.) whose
Kingdom is durable; or from the same Ece, and ric, rich, that is to say, always
rich. Egthrid, King of Northumberland, from the AS. Ece, perpetually, and
Frith, Frede, Peace, (i. e.) one that maintains a perpetual Peace. Egwin,
from the AS. Ece, sorrow, or Ege, fear, and Winnan, to overcome, that is to
say, one that manfully overcomes grief and fear; or from Ece, always, or Ecge,
an edge of a Sword, (i. e.) one that overcomes with the edge of the Sword.
Einsham, in Oxfordshire, perhaps from the AS. Eig, or Ig, an Isle, because it
is encompassed with Marshes like an Island. Eldred, the same that Aldred; which
see. Eleanor, a Woman's Christenname. Camden supposes, that it is a Corr. of
the Lat. and Gr. Helena. It may be drawn from the AS. Ael Eamer, all fruitful,
from Ael all, and Eanian, to Yean or Ean, q. d. a teaming Woman. Elenborough,
in Cumb. Heretofore a Garrison was kept thereat; derived from the River Elen and
Borough; which see in the Common Names. Elflede, the Christen-name of a noble
Princess come of the Royal English-Saxon Blood; from the AS. Eal, all, and
Flede, puffed up. Elgiva, Daughter to Richard the First Duke of Normandy, from
the AS. Help, help, and Gifan, to give. Ella, the First King of the
South Saxons, from the AS. Ellen, valor, fortitude. It answers to the Gr.
(...). Ellis, formerly a Christenname, now a Surname, according to Camden Corr.
from the Heb. Elias. Elm in Cornwall, with us Elbow, perhaps so called from its
figure, as Ancona in Italy, from (...), an Elbow. Elmelin in Caern. from
Elmtrees. Elmer, heretofore a Christen-name, but now a Surname, from the AS.
Aethelmaere, this from Aethel, noble, and Maere, famous; or from the Teut.
Adelmer, and this from Adel, Nobility, and Mehren, to increase. It answers the
Lat. Honorius, Gr. Eugenius, Lampridius. Elmham, in Norfolk, formerly a
Bishop's See; so called from Elm-trees, and Ham; which see in the Common Names.
Ely in Cambridgesh. from the AS. Ea, water, or Elige, Eeles, as Beda
conjectureth, and is most likely; or as some will have it, from the Gr. (...),
a marsh, or from the C. Br. Helig, a Willow, for as Fenny places mostly do, it
abounds with Willow-trees. Embden, the Metropolis of East-Freezland; from the
River Ems, whereupon it is situate, and the AS. Den, a Cave or Den. Adr. Jun.
tells us that it was the Seat of the ancient Chauci the less. Emeric, a
Christen-Name, q. Immeric (i. e.) ever rich, from the Teut. Immer always, and
Ric, rich. Emme, the Name of Edward the Confessor's Mother; according to some a
corrup, of the Fr. G. Amie, beloved, or sweetheart; according to others, and
that indeed more likely, from the Teut. Amme, as, Sang-Amme, a Nurse. It
answers the Gr. Eutrophime. Emson, Nom. Gent. (i. e.) the Son of Emme.
Enchuysen, a Port Town in Holland, according to Adr. Jun. so called quasi
Enckelhuysen, (i. e.) of few Houses. Engelbert, a Christen-Name, either from
the AS. Engel, an Angel, and Beorht, shining; or, according to Verstegan, from
the same Engel, and Beriht, Teut: Bericht warned, q.d. instructed by an Angel.
England, not from the AS. Enge, Belg. Enghe, narrow, nor from the AS. Angel,
Hangel, a Hook, an Angling-Rod, to wit, because they went a Fishing for a
livelihood; but from a People called Angli Englishmen, for in our Primitive
Language, Englishmen were called Engle. Enion, a Welsh Christen-name, There are
some that suppose it to be corrupted from the Lat. and Gr. Aeneas. I had rather
draw it from the C. Br. Union, uniawn, just, upright. Ent, a Surname, from the
Teut. Ente a Duck, this from the Lat. Anas, the same; or from the AS. Ent, a
Giant, this from Antaeus, whom Hercules encountered with; or lastly, as the
learned Th. H. supposes, from the Fr. G. Ente, a graff. Eoves, a certain
Shepherd; from the AS. Eoe, an Ewe, q.d. a Keeper of Ewes. In the year 708.
Erchenbald or Erchenwald, a Bishop of London, the Son of Offa, King of the
Ostro-English, by the Scots called Archebald, according to Camden, a bold
observer; I suppose it may come of the Teut. Erkennen, to understand, and Bald,
bold. Verstegan supposes that it ought rather to be written Earconweald, as if
it were drawn from the Teut. Ehr, AS. Are, Honor, the Teut. Kuhn, AS. Con,
Coon, Belg. Koen, magnanimous; and the AS. Wealdan, to rule, (i. e.) a
Strenuous maintainer, and Avenger of Honor. Erchenwin, the first King of the
East Saxons, from the AS. Are, or Ere, renown, Con, Valiant, and Winnan, to
acquire, (i. e.) one that by his Valor comes to Honor. Ercombert, a King of
Kent, from the AS. Are, Aere, Honor, Con, adventurous, and Beorht, famous, q.
d. Famous for Valourous undertakings. Eric, a Danish Christen-name, from the
AS. Are Teut. Ehr, Belg. Eere, Honor, and the AS. Ric, Teut. Reich, Rich; some
take it to be a Contract of Henric; see Henry. Erigena, (i. e.) born in
Ireland, which by the Natives is called Erin; see Ireland. Ermanaricus, a King
of the Gothi. Adr. Jun. takes it to be so called from Erm or Arm, Poor, and
Ric, Rich, q. d. Rich and Poor in a trice; or rather q. d. Hermanric, Rich in
Soldiers, for Herman signifies a Soldier, from the AS. Here, an Army, and
Man. Erminfrid, from the AS. Earme, in the Plural Earman, Teut. Arm, Plur.
Armen, a Poor man, Poor men, and the AS. Frith, Teut. Fried, Peace, q. d. the
refuge of the Poor, or their Sanctuary. Ermingstreet, from the AS. Earme, a
Beggar, for such frequent the Highways, for a better convenience of asking
Alms; or, as it were, Herman street, the Soldiers Street, from the AS. Here,
an Army, and Man, see Man and Street in the Com. Names. Ernestus, a German
Christen-Name, from the AS. Eornest, Teut. Ernst, earnest, or serious.
Ervigius, a King of the Spanish Vice-Gothi; perhaps from the Teut. Ehr, AS.
Are, Honor, and the AS. Wic, Belg. Wiic, a Fort, (i. e.) a Patron of Honor;
he lived in the year 631. Esham, in Warw. formerly Eovesham, as the Monks writ
it, from one Eoves, Egwin's Shepherd that was Bishop of Worcester. It was
before that called Eathome, or Heathfield. Eskdale, in Scotland, the
Inhabitants whereof were heretofore called Horesti or Horesci, in the C. Br. Ar
Esk, (i. e.) nigh the River Esk. Essex, in the AS. East-Seaxa, and
East-sexscire, it being heretofore the Shire or Country of the East Saxons.
Eswulph, rather Esnewulph, a King of Northumb. from the AS. Esne a Man, and
Ulph, Help, (i. e.) one that assisteth others manfully. Ethelard, sometimes
found writ Adelard, an Archbishop of Canterbury; derived from the AS. Aethel,
Teut. Edel, a Noble man, and the Belg. Aerd, Nature, forwardness. He lived in
the year 799. Ethelbald, a man's Christen-Name, from the AS. Aethel, Noble, and
Bald, Bold. Ethelbert, a man's Christen-Name; either, as Camden says, from the
AS. Aethel, a Noble man, and Beorht, illustrious; or, according to Verst. from
the same Aethel, and Berht, furnished with advice; see Adelbert. Ethelbild,
from the AS. Aethel, noble or gentile, and Bilith, Teut. Bild, a Stature, (i.
e.) one of a comely portly Stature. Etheldred, or rather, as Camden will have
it, Ethelred; from the AS. Aethel, noble, and Rade, Read, counsel; or, if it
ought rather to be written Etheldred, from the same Aethel, a Nobleman, and
Dred, dread or fear; q. d. the terror of the Nobles. Ethelfrid, from the AS.
Aethel, noble, and Frith, or Frede, Peace. Ethelgund, a Wom. Christen-Name; see
Alegund. Ethelric, a King of Northumb. from the AS. Aethel, a Nobleman, and
Ric, a Kingdom, or Rich man, q. d. one that rules over the Nobility; or, one
that governs Prince-like. Ethelstan, or Athelstan, the most invincible Prince
of the English Saxons; from the AS. Aethel, Noble, and Stan, a Stone, q. d. the
Jewel of the Land; or from Aethelsta, Aethelstan, the most noble of all, the
Superl. of Aethel. Ethelward, a Man's Christ. Na. alias Aelward, from the AS.
Aethel, a Nobleman, and Ward, a Keeper, q. d. a shelter for the Nobles.
Ethelwin, from the AS. Aethel, a Nobleman, and Winnan, to acquire, (i. e.) one
that has the Nobles on his side. Ethelwold, or Edelwald, a Bishop of Winch.
the Founder of an Abbey, at Abbingdon; from the AS. Aethel, a Nobleman, and
Wealdan, to govern, (i. e.) one that had the tutoring of the Nobles.
Ethelwolph, the Second King of the English-Saxons, from the AS. Aethel, a
Nobleman, and Ulph, aid, he being a man that stood by the Nobility. Evan, a
Welsh Christen-Name, a Contract, and corrup. of the Lat. Johannes, John, as the
Hisp. Juan. Evellmouth, in Summers. a place, which the Tide comes up to, from
the River Ivel, and Mouth. Everard, a Christen-Name, according to Gesner; from
our own word Ever, and the AS. Are, honor; the word signifying one that is
always much honored; or it may be from the AS. and Belg. Ober, over, and the
Belg. Aerd, nature, (i. e.) one that is too good natured; Camden. It may not
abruptly be drawn from the Teut. Eber, AS. Eofor, a Boar, and Ward, a Keeper;
see Bernard. Euric, a King of the Vice-Gothi, from the AS. Eafora, issue, or
Efre, ever, and Ric, Rich, (i. e.) one that had a numerous Issue, or that was
ever wealthy. Eusdale, in Scotland, from the River Eusus and Dale, which see in
the Com. Names. Eustow, in Bedfordsh. formerly Helenstow, it being then a
Covent dedicated to St. Helen, Mother to Constantine the Great. Eutharicus.
Adr. Jun. derives it from the Germ. Euther, or Other, with us Utter, and Reich
Rich, as we say, a vast rich man; or from the Belg. Euder, Teut. Euter, an
Udder, and AS. Ric, rich, q. d. rich in Cows. Ewelin or Newelin, a noted
Village in Oxfordshire, from the Elms there growing. Ex, in Devonshire, in Lat.
Isca, a River; either from the C. Br. Hesk, Reeds, or Iscaw, a Saw; and from
hence Exmore, a barren place, through which. Ex runs. Excester, in
Devonshire, a famous City, and Bishop's Sea; in the AS. Exanceaster; and
Monketon, from the Monks; in the C. Br. Caer Isk, from the River Ex running
thereby; now called Exceter. Exmouth, or Exanmouth, in Devonshire, the
Fishermens Village, at the Mouth of the River Ex.
F.
FAirfax, Nom. Gent. in Yorkshire, from the AS. Faeger, fair, and Feax, hair;
there is likewise a Fr. Th. word, viz. Fahs-Vahs, sig. a Head. The Fair
Foreland in Ireland, by Ptolemy called Robogdium, a a Promontory, so called
from the Robogdii, the ancient Inhabitants thereof. It may probably be so
called from the Pleasantness of its situation. Fane, from the C. Br. Fane,
Slender; or from the AS. Fana, a flag. Faramund, or Pharamond. Versteg. draws
it from our word Fair and the Teut. Mund, a Mouth, q.d. a fair tongue, or
Flatterer, Kilian derives it from the Belg. Waer, true, and the same Mund, a
mouth, q. d. one that speaks the truth. Farnham, in Surrey, from the AS.
Fearn, Feorn, Fern, and Ham, an Habitation; see Fern and Ham in the Com. Names.
Fastrada, the Wife of Charles the Great, from our word Fast, Belg. Vast, Teut.
Fest, constant, and the Belg. Raed, Teut. Raht, AS. Rade, Raed, counsel, (i.
e.) she that keeps counsel. Faymouth or Falmouth, an Haven in Cornwall, from
the River Fall, that there disembogueth it self into the Sea, and mouth. Fell, a
National Name. Camden expounds it, a rough rocky Hill; from the Teut. Felsz,
a Rock. Ferdinando, a Germ. Surname. Camden supposes, that it is a Corruption
of the name Bertrand, which see. I had rather draw it from the Teut. Pferdt,
Belg. Peerd, an Horse, and Dienend, one that serves; It signifying such an
one, as serves in War upon Horseback. Ferrers, Nom. Gent. from the old Fr. G.
Ferrier, It. Ferraro, Ferraio, a Farrier, a Smith that makes Horse-shooes,
which in the Fr. G. are called Fers. Fienes, this Family came of one Ingram
Fienes, the Husband of Sybilla, Heiress of Faram. of Bononia, to whom William
of Bononia, Son to King Stephen, gave the Town Mattock; perhaps so called from
some Town in France of that Name. Fifness in Scotland, from the AS. Neese, a
Promontory, and Fife, the County, q.d. the Promontory of Fife. Fingall, a
Country in Ireland, q.d. in Irish a Country for Foreigners; for the Irish call
the English Gall, (i. e.) Foreigners, and Saissones, (i. e.) Saxons. Finland,
in the Lat. Barb. Finnonia, q. d. Fineland, a fine Country; see Fine in the
Com. Names, and Scandia in its place. Fishgard, in Pembr. q. d. a a Guard of
Fishes, so called from the commodiousness of fishing therein; see Guard and Ward
in the Com. Names, in the C. Br. it is called Aber Gwain, q.d. the Mouth of the
River Gwain. Fitz-County, a National Name (i. e.) the Son of a County.
Fitz-Pain, a Norm. Surname; from the Fr. G. Fills, heretofore Filts, a Son, and
Payen, a Pagan, that is to say, a Pagan's Son. Flamborough-head, in Yorksh. in
the AS. Fleamburg, either from Flam, a flame, for Mariners give it the Figure
of a Blazing-Star; or from Flemsburg in Daneland or Chersonesus of the Cimbri,
in imitation of which our Ancestors built this, and gave it the same name, as a
Memorial thereof. Flatbury, in the County of Worcest. in the AS. Fleodanbyrig,
not unlikely from the AS. Fleding, a Flood, or Deluge, and Byrig, a City.
Fleamdike in Camb. from the AS. Flean, to flee, Fleam, flight, and Dike, a
Ditch; perhaps because of some overthrow given there. See Dike in the Com.
Names. Fleet, in the City of London, now of little use, but for the conveying
away of common Shoars, though formerly 'twas a Navigable River. See Flood in
the Common Names. Flemming, perhaps from the AS. Flyming, Flyma, an Exile, a
Banished man, because, as it is made clear out of Histories, they were often
forced to change their Habitations, and to go into neighboring Countries, by
reason of the Inundations of the Sea. Flint-Castle, and Flint; perhaps from
Flint Stones, wherewith it abounds; for it is a very rough craggy Country.
Flixton, in Suffolk, q.d. Foelixton; from one Foelix a Burgundian, who
reclaimed and confirmed the East-English, when they revolted. Flodoard, a
Christen-Name, from the AS. Flod, a River and Ward, a Warder, or Keeper. Floid,
or Flud, a Surname from the C. Br. Lhuid ruddy. It alludes to the Lat. Rufus,
Rufinus; and the Gr. Pyrrhus. Flushing, a Port and City of Trading in Zealand,
in the Belg. Flissingen; perhaps from the Belg. Fluysen, to flow violently;
because this City and all Zealand is endangered by the waves of the Sea, but
that the Inhabitants by much pains prevent such peril. Folshaw, a Village, from
the old word Foll, for Fall, and Shaw, a Forest, where are many trees. The
Foreland of Kent; see Foreland in the Common Names. The Forest of Dean, in
Gloc. either from the Danes, some ancient Authors writing it the Danes Forest,
for the English-Saxons called the Danes, Dene; or from the old Br. and Gall.
Arden, a Forest; and hence it is, that the AS. Den, signifies, a Desert, or
uncultivated place. Forness, and Foreland, in Lancashire, from the AS. Nese, or
Naese, a Promontory, and Fore; which see. Forster, a Surname, a Contract of
Forester, (i. e.) belonging to a Forest. Fortescue, a Surname, by contraction
Forscue, from the Fr. G. Fortescu, a strong Shield. St. Fosters, from Foster, a
Saint of that Name. Foster; see Forster above. Fosway, from the Lat. Fossa, a
Trench, and Way; which see in the Com. Names. Foulgiers, a Surname, from the
Fr. G. Fougiere, Feuchiere Fern. Foulk, or Fulk, a Christen-Name; some, draw it
from the Germ. Volly, generous, which is no where read of. Camden derives it
more probably from the AS. Folc, Folk, or the common People. I might also take
it from the AS. Folgian, Teut. Folgen, to follow, q. d. a Page, or Footman.
Foulness, in Essex, a Foreland wherein there is plenty of Fowls; from our word
Fowl, and the AS. Nese, or Naese, a Promontory. Foy, or Fovey in Cornw. from
the River Fawey, which there runs into the Sea; this perhaps from the C. Br.
Faw, fame, q. d. a famous River. Francis, a Christen Name, either q. d. AS.
Francisc, a Frenchman; or from the Fr. G. Franc, Frank, or free. Frandingham,
not unlikely from the AS. and Teut. Fremd, in the plural Fremden, Foreigners,
and Ham, a Village; It being probably so called from the Foreign Danes, that
took Possession of it. Frankfurt, the Name of two famous Cities in Germany, the
one upon the River Meyn, and the other upon the River Oder; from the Franks or
French, and Ford; see Franks, or French beneath, and Ford in the Com. Names.
Franklin, a Surname, from our word Frank, which see in the Com. Names, and the
dim. Termination ling or lin, the word importing a Libertine; or from the Fr.
G. Francolin, a Bird, so called. Franks, or French, heretofore a famous People
among the Germans. Adr. Jun. makes them all one with the People of Freezland,
and he thinks that they were both so called from their liberality. See Frank
and Free in the the Com. Names. According to the same Jun. they were called
Franci, q. Fryonci, that is to say, free from Taxes, for that ci which Junius
puts for Zinsz, is plainly of a Lat. Original, from the Lat. Census, a Tax or
Tribute; and therefore, I think the former Derivation is far better. Fradmar,
an ancient Germ. Surname, Adr. Jun. expounds it, Frey Meyer, (i. e.) a free
Mayor; see Free and Mayor, in the Com. Names. Frea, from the AS. Frea, a
Master; see Friga, beneath, and Friday in the Common Names. Fredegund, the
Christ. Name of a Woman, from the AS. Frede, Teut. Friede, Belg. Vrede, Peace,
and the Teut. Gunnen, to favor, q.d. a Favourer of Peace. Frediswid, the
Christen-name of a certain Saint; not unlikely from the AS. Frith, Peace, and
the Teut. Weihen, Belg. Wiihen, to dedicate. Freedstoll, in Yorkshire,
otherwise called Frithsocn, and Frithstow, from the AS. Frith, Peace, and
Stole, a Seat; it formerly being a place of immunity for Criminals, a
Sanctuary. Freezland, a Province in the Netherlands, in the Belg. Vriesen, and
West Vriesen, West-Freezland, to distinguish it from East-Freezland, which is
in Germany. Adr. Jun. makes the ancient Frisii, all one with the Franks,
deriving both from Free and Frank; which see in the Com. Names. Fremund, from
the AS. Freoh, free, and Mund, Peace; it was the Name of Offa's Son, King of
the Mercii. Frery, probably from the AS. Freah, Freoh, Teut. Frey, free, and
the AS. Ric, Teut. Reich, Rich, (i. e.) Rich in Freedom, or very free; or from
the AS. Frea, a Master or Lord, and the same Ric, rich, or Rice, a Kingdom, (i.
e.) a rich Lord, or Ruler of a Kingdom. Freshmersh, a Surname; see Fresh, and
Marsh in the Com. Names. Fridigast, a German General, from the Teut. Friede,
AS. Frede, Frith, Peace, and either from the Teut. Gast, a Guest, or the AS.
Gast, a Ghost, or Fiend. Fridigernus, a King of the Gothi. Jun. says, that it
signifies one inclining to Peace, from the Teut. Friede, Peace, and Gern,
freely, or Geren for Begeren, to desire. Geren may have its rise a Quaerendo,
from seeking after. Fridstan, from the AS. Frede, Frith, Peace, and Stan, a
Stone, it denoting a Stone of refuge. Friga, a Goddess of the Ancient Germ. the
same with Venus of the Romans, perhaps from the AS. Frig, free, and surely
nothing is more free than carnal Pleasure, nothing more indomitable; see Friday
in the Common Names, and Frea above. Friling, in the time of the ancient Germ.
Saxons it signified as much as one that is born free, from the Teut. Frey,
free; see Adhling. Frith, in our Northern, and Scottish Idiom is frequently used
for Freto in the Terminations of many Names; manifestly from the Lat. Fretum,
the raging Sea. Frithwold, Prince of Surrey, the Founder of the Monastery or
Abbey at Chertsey; derived from the AS. Frith, Peace, and Wealdan, to rule; the
word s gnifying a Peaceable King, or Ruler. Frodoard, from the AS. Frode, Frod,
weary, afflicted, and Ward, a Guardian, q.d. the Patron of the afflicted.
Frompton, in Dors. from the River From. Frumarius, a King of the Spanish
Swedes, from the Teut. Fromm, Frommer, Honest; or from the same From, and
Meyer, a Mayor. He lived in the year 461. Fulbert, a Christen-name, from the
AS. Full, full, and Beorht, splendent, (i. e.) one full of Splendor. Fulham,
in Middlesex, in the AS. Fullon Ham, (q. d.) Fowl-Town; from the AS. Fugel, a
Fowl, and Ham, a Village: It is now remarkable for the Bishop of London's
Country House. See Fowl, and Ham, in the Com. Names.
G.
GAina, a General of the Arians, often mentioned in Ecclesiastical History;
from the AS. Waegen, Teut. Wagen, a Chariot, or Wagon; or from that other
Teut. Wagen, to run a hazard. Gainsborough, in Lincolnshire, in the AS.
Genes-buruh, or perhaps Geners-buruh; from the AS. Genes, a Sanctuary, and
Buruh, a Town; the word signifying a Town of refuge. Galliard, Nom. Gent. from
the Fr. G. Gaillard, It. Gagliardo, stout, or Gallant; which see in the Common
Names. Galloway, a Bishop's See in Scotland, from the Irish, which in their
Tongue are called Gael. Gam, Nom. Gent. from the C. Br. Gam, Hunch-back'd, and
this from the Lat. Camurus, crooked. Gambrivii, an ancient People of Germany,
where Hamburgh is now; from the Germ. Gans, all, wholly, and Brauwe, the brow,
or forehead, (i. e.) all Brows, which in Physiognomy is a sign of a generous
Mind. Garagantua, from the Hisp. Garganta, a Glutton. Garcias, a Spanish
Christen-Name, perhaps from the Hisp. Jarcias, Xarcias, Cables. Garibaldus, a
King of the Longobardi of Italy, from the Teut. Gar, altogether, and the AS.
Bald, bold, venturous. Garnet, Nom. Gent, for Garner, which signifies a
Granary. See Garner in the Com. Names. Or it may more probably come from
Granatum, a Pomegranat. Garret, a Christen-name, a corruption of Gerard; which
see beneath. Gateshead, an Haven in the Bishopric of Durh. in the AS.
gate-shefed, or Heued, Goatshead, in the Lat. Gabrosentum, from the C. Br.
Gaffr, a Goat, and Hen, for Pen an Head; perhaps from some Inn, at the Sign of
the Goat; as the three Sisters in Spain, the Pear in Italy, as may be found in
Antoninus. Gausenna, an ancient City in Linc. some Relics of which Name yet
remain in the River Guash, or Wash: It is now called Bridge Casterton. Gawen, a
feigned Christen-name; if it be not a Corrup. of Walwin, Waldwin; which see.
Gebericus, a King of the Goths; Adr. Jun. draws it from the Teut. Geben, to
give, or bestow, and Ric or Reich, Rich; q.d. a charitable man. It answers the
Gr. Eleutherius, Polydorus. Gebhard, according to Jun. Liberal by Nature, from
the Teut. Geben, to give, and Aerd, Nature. Gedney, for Godney in Some. from the
AS. God, God, and Ea, Water. Geffrey, a Christen. name; as Camden expounds it,
Joyful Peace; from the Belg. Gaw, glad, and the AS. Frith, Frede, Teut. Friede,
Belg. Vrede, Peace. It answers the Gr. Irenaeus. Gelt, a River in Cumberland,
heretofore Gelta; not unlikely from the C. Br. Gel, an Horsleech, from the
great store of Leeches which breed therein. Genatrud, the Wife of Dagobert King
of the Franks, perhaps from the Teut. Genad, Gnade, Gnad, Clemency, and Reden,
or Rathen, to speak, or consult; or from the same Genad, and our word Truth, or
True, (i. e.) submissive, and loyal. Gensalaricus, a King of the Spanish
Vice-Gothi, from the Teut. Gans, all, and Ric, Rich. Gensericus. He instituted
the Government of the Vandals in Africa. It is derived as Gensalaricus above.
Gerard, a Christen-name, according to Gesner corrupted from Eberard, which see;
Or as Camden has it, from the Teut. Gar, all, and the Belg. Aerd, Nature: Or,
as Kilian says, from the Teut. Geyer, a Vulture, and Aerd, nature, (i. e.)
such an one, as has an unsatiable, ravenous appetite; this from the word
Begeren, to beg, or Beger, Avarice. German, from the Teut. Gar, all, and Man,
q.d. All man; see Alman. Jun. draws it, from Geert man, an honorable man, this
from Eere, Honor, or Eeren, to Honor. St. Germans, in Cornw. (i e.) the
Temple of St. German, Bishop of Antisiodora, that extirpated the Pelagian
Heresy. Gernon, Nom. Gent. not unlikely from the AS. Georn, Ge^rne, Studious,
Industrious. It answers the Lat. Sedulius, Gr. Philoponus. Gertrude, a Woman's
Christen-name, from the Teut. Gar, all, and our words True, Truth, q. d.
faithful, one true to her trust. See True and Truth in the Com. Names. Gerbas,
a Christ. Name, from the Teut. Gar, all, and Vast, Fast, which see in the
Common Names. It answers to the Lat. Constantius. Gibbcliff, in Warw. or rather
Guy-Cliff, from Guy of Warwick, that famed Hero that lived as an Hermit in
this place; or from Guy Beauchamp Earl of Warwick. Gibs, and Gibson, a Contract
and Corruption of Gilbert; as also Gibbons, q. d. the Son of Gilbert. Giffard,
a Surname, from the AS. Gifan, to give, and the Belg. Aerd, nature, (i. e.) one
that is naturally given to Liberality. Gilbert, a Christen-name; from the AS.
Gealethe, Belg. Gheel, Teut. Gael, yellow; or the Teut. Guelden, golden, and
the AS. Beorht, famous. Verstegan surmiseth that it is so called q. Gildberiht,
from the AS. Gild, a College, or Fraternity, and the Teut. Berichten, to
instruct; or from the old word Gild, Liberal. Giles, a Christen-name, wrested
from the Gr. Aegidius, and this from the Gr. (...), a Goats-Skin, also the
Shield of Minerva, perhaps so called because the Shields of the Ancients were
covered with Goats-Skins. It may be taken from the Lat. Julius, and this from
Iulus, the Surname of Ascanius, from the Gr. (...), Down; or it may possibly
come from the Gr. Gelasius, and this from (...), to laugh. Gilimer, the last
King of the Vandals in Africa. Adr. Jun. draws it from the Belg. Guleu, safe
Conduct, and Meyer, a Mayor; or from the AS. Geal, Gealethe, yellow, and Maere,
remarkable, (i. e.) conspicuous beyond others for his yellow Locks. Gill, a
Surname, from the Fr. G. Guille, a Quill, or Faucet; also a Keel of a Ship.
Gillingham, a Village in Dors. perhaps from the AS. Gyllan, to make a noise,
from the parting of some Brook running swiftly thereby. Gilpin, according to
Camden, a Contract, and corrup. of Gilbert. Girvii, whose Country was in the
AS. called Gira-land; after this name were formerly called the Inhabitants of
the Moorish part of the Countries of Norfolk, Cambridge and Linc. from the AS.
Gyr, a Fen, and Land. Giselbert, from the Teut. Geisel, an Hostage, and the AS.
Beorht, illustrious. Gizeric, or Giseric, a Gothic Christen-name. Adr. Jun.
surmiseth that it implies one Rich in Geese. I had rather draw it from the
Teut. Geysz, a She Goat, and Reich, Rich. Gladuse, a Christen-name; possibly a
Corruption of the Lat. Claudius. Glasnith, a Surname; perhaps from the AS.
Glaesen, Glassen, and Ytha, a wave. Glastonbury, in Summers. it was called by
the C. Br. Inis Witrin, also in the AS. Glaseney, (i. e.) the Isle of Glass;
memorable for the Tombs of two Kings, Arthur and Edgar, and of Joseph of
Arimathea, and many of the Primitive Saints in England, from Glass (which see
in the Common Names) and the AS. Byrig, a Town. Glendal, in Northumberland,
from the River Glen; it being a Dale by the same River. Glentworth, in Lanc.
from the AS. Glen, Glene, C. Br. Glynn, a Valley, and Worth, a Court, or Hall,
seated in a Valley. Glinn, in the Hib. and C. Br. signifies a Dale encompassed
with trees, but Glin, a Surname, signifies a Knee, says Davis. Gloucester, a
Bishop's Sea; in the AS. Gleanceaster, a fair City, not unlike the Gr.
Callipolis; and in this County are Fairford, and Fairley, etc. hence it is in
Lat. called Glevum or Clevum, not from Claudius Caesar, as some will have it.
Godard, a Christen-name; from the AS. God, God, Good, and the Belg. Aerd,
nature, towardness, (i. e.) one endowed with a Compliant and Divine disposition
of mind. Versteg. supposes it so called, quasi good heart. Godelif, or Godlaf.
Verstegan thinks it so called, quasi good Love. It is a Woman's Christen-name.
Godfrey, a Surname, from the AS. God, God, Good, and the AS. Frith, Frede,
Teut. Friede, Belg. Vrede, Peace; the word implying, God-like Peace.
Godmanchester, in Hunt. from Gormon, or Guthrun a Dane, that first of all the
Danish Princes embraced the Christian Faith. He here erected a Palace, which
heretofore was by Anton. called Duroliponte, by Camden Durosiponte, from the C.
Br. Dwr, water, the River Ouze, and the Lat. Pons, a Bridge. Godolphin, or
Godolcan, a Surname. In the Cornwallian Dialect, it signifies a white Eagle,
which the Family of Godolphins wears in its Coat of Arms. Godrich, from the AS.
God, God, Good, and Ric, Rich. Godscalk, from the AS. God, and Scalk, a
Servant. Godstow, from the AS. God, Good, and Sto, a place. Godwin, from the
AS. God, God, and Wi^, a Conqueror, or from Winnan, to get, and God, Good, (i.
e.) one that is a Conqueror in God, or that has obtained virtue. Goedel, an
Abbotess, or Prioress of a Covent; from the Belg. Goed, Good, and Deelen,
Deylen, to deal, or divide (i. e.) Liberal and Munificent. It answers the Gr.
Eleutheria, Polydora. Goedeland, the name of a Country in Holland. Adr. Jun.
supposes that it is taken from Goedel the Abbotess above mentioned, to whom
the Emperor Otho gave this place, and so called q. Goedels Land. It is now
corruptly called Goeyland. Goff, a Surname, from the C. Br. Goff, a Farrier.
Gogh, a Surname, from the C. Br. Gogh, ruddy; see Gouge beneath. Gorcom, the
Name of a City in Holland. Adr. Jun. derives it from the word Gorck, a Poor
man, and Home, q. d. an Habitation for the Poor; but the word Gorck is not to
be found in Kilian. Gorges, from the Lat. Gurges, which this Family bears in
its Coat of Arms. Gorney, a Surname, in Some. from Gurnay, a Town in Normandy;
this perhaps from the Fr. G. Gourneau, a Curr Fish. Gorst, a Surname, Camden
expounds it Shrubs. I had rather draw it from the AS. Georst, Gorst, Ling,
Heath. Gothi, formerly a famous People, that subdued the Romans. Adr. Jun.
draws it from the Germ. Got thienen, or Dienen, from Got, God, and Thienen, to
serve; for Odinus, that erected them into a Colony, instructed them in the
things of God. Gouda, a famous City in Holland upon the River Isel. Adr. Jun.
draws it from the Goth. or Cimbr. Gow, the Fence about, a Trench, also the
Chanel of a Conduit. Gouge and Gogh, a Surname, either from the Fr. G. Gouge,
an Hunting-Staff, or from the Germ. Gow, which Spelman translateth, Pagus, a
Village. See Gogh above. Gower, in Glam. in the C. Br. Guhir, a Country.
Graham- Dike in Scotland, the Wall or Fortress of the Emperors Antoninus Pius
and Severus, either from Graham a Scot, that first broke through it, or from a
neighboring Mountain called Grampius. Grampius, a Mountain in Scotland, now
called Grantshame, which in the Scot. Hib. Dialect, signifies an uneven, or
crook-back'd Mountain. Graves, or Grave, a Surname, so called from Grave, or
Grove; which see in the Com. Names. Gravesend, a Port in Kent, (i. e.) the end
or limit of the County. See Grave, and end, in the Com. Names. Greenvile, a
Surname, from the Eng. Green, and the Fr. G. Ville, a Town or Village: or
perhaps it was formerly written Granvile, and so derived from the Fr. G. Grande
Ville, a Grand or great Town. Greenwich, in Kent, from Green and Which, a Port
or Haven; which see in the Com. Names. Grig, a Surname, from the C. Br. Krig,
Hoarse; or, as the learned Th. H. tells us, it is a Contract of Gregory. Grim, a
Surname, from the C. Br. Grim, strong; or from our Grim, (i. e.) one that has
a grim, stern look. Grimbald, the Christen-name of that St. who with St. Noo^,
in the time of King Aelfred, the Founder of the University of Oxford, professed
Divinity there. It is thought to be the same with Grimoaldus, derived either
from the AS. Grim, Gram, Grim, or the Teut. Grimm, Anger, and the AS. Wealdan,
to rule, q. d. a Suppressor of wrath, or bridler of Passion: Or, on the
contrary, from the same Grimm, anger, Gram, angry, and Bald, soon; or from the
same Grim, Gram, angry, and the AS. Bald, bold, (i. e.) one that in his anger
fears nothing. Grimoaldus, a King of the Longobardi of Italy. See Grimbald.
Grimsby in Linc. noted for the birth of D. Whitgift, Archbishop of Canterbury,
perhaps so called from one Grimus that built it. Grishild, now Grissel, a
Christ. Name of a Woman; perhaps from the Fr. G. Gris, gray, and the Teut.
Held, Heldinne, a Noble-woman, a Lady. Groenland, Dan. Gronland, a Country
lying very far Northward; from the Belg. Groen, Dan. Gron, Green, so called q.
Green-Land; and yet it is longer white with Snow, than green with Grass.
Grovenour, Grubenor, or Grosvenour, a Surname in Cheshire, from the Fr. G. le
Grosveneur, a great Hunter. Grouthead, Robert Grouthead, that most learned
Bishop of Lincoln, (i. e.) Fr. G. le Gross test, one that had a great Head.
In the year 1245. Gruffin, a Christen-name; either, as Camden surmiseth, from
the Lat. Rufinus: Or, which is as likely, the same with Gryffith, which in the
C. Br. signifies Credulous, or strong Faith'd. Guelpho, a General in Saxony, I
suppose, either from Vlph, and then it implies, Help, or an Helper; or from
Wolf, and then it answers the Lat. Lupus, and Gr. Lycias. Guildford, in Surrey;
q. d. Golden Ford; from the AS. Gild, a College, or Fraternity, and Ford, which
see. Gundebertus, a King of the Longobardi of Italy, from the old Teut. Gunde,
now Gunst, favor, and the AS. Beorht, famous. Gunderic, a Christen-Name, from
the old Teut. Gunde, now Gunst, good will, and the AS. Ric, rich, q. d. one
that has the good will of many. Guniberga, the Wife of Arioald, King of the
Longobardi of Italy; derived from the Teut. Gunde, now Gunst, favor, and
Bergen, to hide; that is to say, one that smothereth or concealeth her love.
Gundobaldus, or Gundebaldus; from the old Teut. Gunde, now Gunst, and Wald,
abundance, this from the AS. Wealdan, to govern; or from the Teut: Gunnen, to
favor, and Bald, soon; q. d. prone to favor. Gundomar, a King of the
Burgundians, from the old Teut. Gunde, now Gunst, favor, and Mehren, to
amplify, q.d. one that daily gets more and more into men's favor. Gunhild,
an English-Saxon, the Apostle of Norway; perhaps from the AS. Con, Conn, Teut.
Kuhn, Belg. Koen, valiant, and the Teut. Held, a Nobleman. He lived in the year
1024. Guntaric, the last King of the Vandals of Africa; not unlikely from the
Teut. Gunst, formerly Gunde, favor, and Reich, formerly Ric, Rich, that is to
say, one that is kind to others, or that is beloved of others. Guntram, a King
of the Burgundians. Kilian writes it Gutram, from the Teut. Gut, good, and the
old word Ram, now Ruhm, a rumor, or fame. It might likewise be taken from the
Teut. Gunst, favor, and the same Ram for Ruhm. Gusman, a Spanish Surname, well
known to us by that Ambassador of the Spanish King sent to King James the
First. It Is as much as to say, in the Goth. and Eng. Goodman. St. Guthlac, an
English-Saxon Monk, in the honor of whom Aethelbald king of the Mercit built
the most stately Abbey of Crowland in Lincolnshire; derived from the AS. Guth,
War, and Laac, praise, q.d. one praised for his warlike Exploits; or Lac, a
Victim, (i. e.) He that is Sacrificed, or Slain in the Wars. Guthred, a King of
Kent, from the AS. Guth, war, and Read, counsel, or Redan, to give advice; that
is to say, a great Politician; or Counselor. Guthremion, a Castle in
Radnorsh. by Nennius Guarthenio, which was by King Vortimer given a German
Saint, in compensation of the ill treatment which he met with from King
Vortigern, whom he had friendly and justly reproved; It Is drawn from the C. Br
Guarsh, a reproach, and Enjaw, Just. Guy, a Christen-Name, from Guide, Hisp.
Guia, a Leader; or from the Fr. G. Guidon, a Banner, or Ensign. Gwischard, a
Christ. Name; see Wischard in its place.
H.
HAcomb, a Village in Devonshire, perhaps from Hay, and the AS. Comb, Comp, a
Dale encompassed with Hills, so called from the great crops of Hay which the
Place affords. Hadington, in Scot. in the Lat. Hadina, by adding the AS. Term.
tun, a Town. Haga, in Surrey, perhaps from the AS. Hagan, Rasberries, or rather
Haws; see Haw in the Com. Names. Hague, the most famous Village in all the
World, being the Seat of the States of Holland, from the AS. Hegge, Haeg, Belg.
Haege, an Hedge, perhaps from some great Fence made about the Prince's Palace.
Hagworthingham, in Lincolnshire, from the AS. Haeg an Hedge, Worthig, a Street,
and Ham, an Home or Habitation; see Hedge in the Com. Names. Hains, Camden
draws it from the old Christen-Name Ainulph, or Arnulph; this from the AS. Ana,
alone, and Ulph, help, i. e. one that needs not the assistance of others.
Halard, a Christen-Name, probably from the AS. Hal, whole, and the Belg. Aerd,
nature, q. d. one, that is of an healthy temperament and constitution of Body.
It answers to the Gr. Hyginus. Halberstad, a famous Bishop's See in Germany,
perhaps from the Teut. Halber, half, and Statt, a City; because in all
likelihood not above the one half of the Ground is built upon, that was laid
out for the compass thereof. Haledon, in Northumb. in the AS. Heafenfield, the
place where King Oswald by a Divine help got the Victory over Caedwalla the
Britain; drawn from the AS. Halig, holy, and Dun, an Hill, or the Termination
ton, AS. tun, a Town. Heafenfield, from the AS. Heofon, Hefen, Heaven, and
Field, (q. d.) the Heavenly Field, whereunto Aid was sent from above. Halifax,
in Yorkshire, heretofore called Horton, q. d. Halifeax, Holy hair, from the
Sacred hair of a certain Virgin, whom a Clerk, because she would not prostitute
her Body to him, beheaded. She was afterward Canonized for a Saint. It might
be called Horton, from the Lat. Hortus, a Garden; or rather q. Hors-Town,
because good Horses were bred there. Halyston, in Northumb. q. d. Holy Stone,
where St. Paul the first Apostle of the North of England, baptized many
Thousands of Men and Women; See Holy and Stone, in the Com. Names. Hamburg, a
most famous Mart-Town, and Port in Germany. Adr. Jun. draws it from the
Gambrivii, an Ancient People of Germany that came and dwelt here, q. d. the
Borough of the Gambrivii; See Borough in the Com. Names. Hampton, in Middl.
formerly by Leland called Avona, q. d. Avontown; now Avon in the old Br. is
taken in the general, for a Water or River. Hankin, a Contract. and Corrup. of
Randal, by adding thereto the Dim. Term. Kin, q. d. little Randal; see Randal.
Or as the famous Th. H. tells us, q. d. the Son of Hanna. Hanson, a Surname,
from Han the Diminutive of Randal, and Son; that is to say, the Son of Randal.
V. Hankin. Hantshire, in the AS. Hantescire; so called from the River Anton;
See Southampton. Harborough, formerly Haverburgh, in Leicest. from the Teut.
Haber, Belg. Haver, Oats, and the AS. Burg, a Town or Borough, from the great
plenty of Oats, which the place affords. Harbottle, in Northumberland, from
the AS. Here, an Army, and Botle Botl, an an House, it being formerly a Place,
where Soldiers kept their Quarters. It Is also a Christen-Name. Harden, in
Flintsh. heretofore Hawarden, Castle; a contraction of Haward, or Howard, and
the AS. Den, a Den, Valley, or Forest; See Howard beneath. Harduicus, Hardewic,
and Hardwick, a Tyrant of Italy, either from the Belg. Hard, Teut. Heart, hard,
and the Teut. and AS. Weg, Belg. Wech, a way; or from the same Hard, and the
AS. Wic, a Fort; that is to say, an hard, rough way, or a Fort hard to be won.
Harewich, in Essex, an Haven remarkable for a War between the English and
Danes; drawn from the AS. Here, an Army, and Wic, a Bay, or a fenced place.
Harfager, Harald Harfager, a Dane King of England, from the AS. Haer-faeger,
fair haired. Harhold, a Danish Christen-Name, either from the AS. Here, an
Army, and Hold, an Emperor, or Hold, faithful; or from our Eng. word to Hold,
q.d. the main Pillar of the Army; or from the same Here, and Would, which comes
from the AS. Wealdan, to rule; or the old Teut. Aid, a Servant. See Herald in
the Com. Names. Harlem, a fair City in Holland, not unlikely from the Belg.
Haer, an hair, and Leme, the Chaff or off-scowring of Flax, this City being
much noted for the Manufacture of fine Linen, and good napp'd Cloth.
Hartle-pool, in the Bishopric of Durham, by Beda Heorta, q. d. the Isle of
Hearts; from the AS. Heort, an Heart, and Pool. Harvy, a Surname, formerly, as
Camden says, a Christen-name; possibly from the AS. Here, an Army, and Wic, a
Fort. Hastings, in Suffex. Camden surmiseth, that it is so called from one
Hasting a Dane, a great Robber, that either built, or seized, or fortified this
Town. Somnerus writes it in the AS. Haesting, and Haestingaceasten, and he
draws it from the AS. Haeste, heat, because of the bubbling or boiling of the
Sea in that place. Hatfield, in Essex, it is called King's- Hatfield, from the
King's Country House; Hatfield Bradoak, from a broad Oak; perhaps in general
from the AS. Hat, hot, and field; from the hot, sandy soil of the Ground.
Hatto, a Christen-name; Kilian draws it from the old Teut. At, Father.
Haverford west, a famous and large Haven in Pembr. from the Brit. and old Gal.
Aber, a Port, a Ford hard by, and its situation to the West. See Haven in the
Common Names. Havering, in Essex, from aver, as before, and a Ring, which a
Pilgrim here gave to Edward the Confessor, as if it had been sent from St.
John the Baptist. Hawgh, or Howgh, a Surname, yet in use in the North of
England, which Camden expounds, a little Meadow, lying in a Valley. Hawis, a
Woman's Name. It is sometimes written Avice, formerly Helwisa; perhaps from the
Teut. Hell, famous, and our word Wise; or from the old Name Hildevig or wig,
which implies, Ladies Defense, as says Camden; or more probably from the
Teut. Held, or Heldinne, a Lady, and the AS. Wic, a Fort; or the AS. Hilde,
love, and the same Wic. It may be the same with Heddewig, Hedvig, which
according to Kilian signifies a Father's refuge, from the old Teut. Head At,
a Father, and the Belg. Wiick, a place of Refuge. Heddewig, a Woman's Name; see
Hawis. Heile, the ancient English-Saxons Aesculapius, or God of Physic, from
the Teut. Heyl, AS. Hael, Haelo, Health. St. Helens head, in Ireland, from St.
Helen the Mother of Constantine the Great, that had a Temple here. Helmsted,
from the AS. Helm, an Helmet, and Sted, a Place; or from the same Helm,
secondarily, a safeguard, and the same Sted, q. d. a Fort, a place of refuge.
Helvald or Helwald, an Eng. Saxon, an Apostle and Martyr of the Frisii; either
from the AS. Hael, health, and Wealdan, to rule, or from Hell, Hell, hell, and
the same Wealdan, to rule, because through the Preaching of the Gospel, and
casting out Devils by Miracles, he triumphed over the Gates of Hell. Hengist, a
famous Captain, the first English-Saxon that laid wast Britain; from the AS.
Hengest, Teut. Hengst, Dan. Hest, an Horse; perhaps so called because he had
the figure of an Horse upon his Standard; or because his Brother's Name was
Horsa. Hengston Hill in Cornw. in the AS. Hengesdoun, the Downs, or Banks of
Hengist, a Saxon-General, a Place formerly famous for Stannaries, or Mines of
Tinn. Heningham, formerly Hedningham, or Hengham, in the County of Essex,
perhaps from one Hedning the Builder of it. Henry, Camden draws it from the
Lat. Honor, honor, and I suppose it is the same with Honoric, the Name of a
King of the Vandals of Africa; Verstegan draws it from the Teut. Han, for
Haven, to have, and the AS. Rice, rich. Kilian writes it Heynrick, q. d.
Heymrick, rich at home; See Home and Rich, in the Com. Names. I might also not
obscurely draw the Name Honoric, from the Teut. Hohn, modesty and Rich. See
Hunerick. Henshaw, a Village in Chesh. that gave the Surname to the Family of
that worthy Gentleman Sir Th. Henshaw, derived from the Teut. Han for Haven, to
have, and the Eng. Shaw Belg. Schawe, a Wood, also a Shade. Herbert, formerly a
Christen-Name, now a Surname, either from the AS. Here, an Army, and Beorht,
bright, or Beorhte, light, q.d. the Glory of an Army; or as Verstegan has it,
from the same Here, an Army, and the Teut. Bericht, instructed, (q.d.) an
expert Soldier. Hereford, a Bishop's Sea, from the AS. Here, an Army, and
Ford, i. e. a Ford through which an Army passed. Hereswide, an Abbatess of
Kent, not unlikely from the AS. Here, an Army, and the Teut. Weyden, to feed.
She lived in the year 649. Hereward, from the AS. Here, an Army, and Ward, a
Keeper. It answers the Gr. Straton and Archestratus. Herman; See Harman.
Hermegild or Ermegild, a Christen-name frequent amongst the Spanish Vice-Gothi,
from the AS. Earme, Teut. Arm, a Poor man, a Beggar, and the AS. Gildan, to
exhibit, or give, q. d. an Almoner, he that gives Alms to the Poor.
Hermelinda, a Queen of the Longobardi; from the AS. Earme, Teut. Arm an
indigent Person, and Lind, mild; q. d. kind to the Poor. Hermenegild, the Son
of Levigildus, King of the Spanish Vice-Gothi, from the AS. Hereman, Teut.
Heerman, a Soldier, and the AS. Gildan, to pay, q.d. one that pays his
Soldiers well. Hermenericus, the first King of the Spanish Swedes, from the
Germ. Hereman, a Soldier, and Ric, rich, (i. e.) one that is furnished with
numerous Forces. Hermenfridus, King of the Turingi, either from the Teut.
Armen, Ermen, Poor men, and Fride Peace, q. d. the Patron of the Poor; or from
Heremen Soldiers, and Fride, Peace. Hermingard, a Woman's Christ. Name, from
the AS. Earme, Teut. Arm, in the Pl: Armen, Poor men, and Guard, a Keeper, (i.
e.) she that preserves the Poor. Hermiones, the third Division of Germany.
Adr. Jun. draws it from the Teut. Her-midwoners, the Inhabitants of the midst
of the Island. Hermundory, a People in Germany adjoining to the Catti. Adr.
Jun. supposes them to be so called, quasi Arm-undfrey, Belg. Vrii, (i. e.)
Poor and Free. Hern, a Surname, which in the AS. signifies a Cottage, or
House, says Camden. Herst, in Sussex, from the AS. Hyrst, a Wood. Hertford, a
County Town, in the AS. Herudford, (i. e.) the Red Ford. Herthus, as Tacitus
relates, the God of the ancient Germans, so called either from Earth, or
Hearth, which see in the Com. Names; It answers the Romans Vesta, by the Gr.
called (...), which signifies a Fire-hearth. Herty Point, in Devonshire. It was
formerly called Hercules's Foreland, or Promontory. Herton, Hercules Town; also
Hertlond a Village, (i. e.) the Land of Hercules, not because Hercules ever
arrived at this place, for he never came further than the Gades, and the Sea,
which after his Name was called the Herculean Sea; but because some Temple was
here erected in honor of him. Herwin, a Christ. Name, from the AS. Here, an
Army, and Win, a Conqueror, this from Winnan, to overcome, or from the same
Here, and Wine, beloved. It answers the Lat. Vincentius, and the Gr.
Nicostratus and Philostratus. Hewald or Ewald, from the AS. Ae, Law, and
Wealdan, to rule. It answers the Gr. Dicaearchus. Hexam, in Northumberland, by
Beda called Hangustaid; I rather think it ought to be written Hagulstad,
formerly called Hextoldesham, from the River Hextold. It was heretofore a
Bishop's Sea. Somnerus draws it from the AS. Haegsteald, a Batchellour, for an
Order of Monks called the Culdei or Calidei all lived a single life here with
the Bishop. Higgins, Huggins, and Hutchinson, a Contract of Hugh, q. d. little
Hugh, or Hugh's Son; for the termination in signifies a Son, as says
Aelfricus. Higham, in Sussex, that is to say, an high House, or Habitation. St.
Hilda, an Abbatess, from the AS. Hilde, affection, or desire. She lived in the
year 639. Hildebert, a Christen-Name, from the Teut. Held, a Nobleman, and the
AS. Beorht, famous. Hildebrand, a King of the Longobardi of Italy, from the
Teut. Held, a Nobleman, and the AS. Brand, a firebrand, (i. e.) he that
destroys the Enemy's Fields with fire; or, as Kilian says, an Incendiary,
one that eggeth on the Nobles; or from the old Cimbr. Helt. Teut. Held, a
Nobleman, and Bren, an Helmet. Hildegard, the Christ. Name of a Woman, from the
old Teut. Hilde, Love, (from which came the AS. Hold, a Sweetheart) and Gart
for Garten, a Garden, q. d. a Garden of love, according to Aventinus. I had
rather draw it from the Belg. Hulde, favor, and Guard, a Keeper, (i. e.) she
that keeps in favor with every body. Hilderic, a French King; more frequently
written Childeric, by adding C for Cyning, a King; derived either from the AS.
Hilde, Desire, and Ric, a Kingdom; or from the Teut. Hulde, favor, and the
same Ric, Teut. Reich, a Kingdom, or Ric rich; or from the Teut. Held, a
Nobleman, and the same Ric, or Reich, rich. Hilperic, a King of France, from
the AS. Help, help, and Ric, rich, q. d. a rich or free Helper; In the French
Annals it is written Chilperic, by adding C, for Cyning, a King, q. d. King
Hilperic. St. Hincmar, an Archbishop of Mentz in Germany, not unlikely from the
Teut. Hincken, to halt, and Meyer, a Mayor, or Prelate; It answers the Lat.
Claudius. Hith, in the County of Kent, one of the five Ports; from the AS.
Hyth, a Port, (...). Hobkins, or Hopkins a Diminutive of Hobs, as that is of
Robert, q. d. little Robert. Hobs, formerly a Christen-Name, but now a Surname,
a Corr. of Robert; which see. Hockley in the hole, in the County of Bedford,
from the AS. Hoc, dirt, and Leag, a Pasture, q. d. a dirty field. Hogarth a
Surname, from the AS. Heah, high and Geard, earth; or from the Belg. Hoogh,
high, and Aerd, nature: or, lastly, from the same hoogh, high, and our word
Heart. Hodgekins, corrupted from Hodges, and this from Roger, q.d. little
Roger. Hodges, a Surname, though heretofore it was a Christ. Name, Corr. from
Roger; which see. Hodson, a Surname, (i. e.) the Son of Hod, or Otto; which
see. Hoel Dha, (i. e.) the good Prince, or Lawgiver of the North Part of Wales:
Some there are that draw Hoel from the Gr. Helius. Holderness, in Yorkshire, by
Ptolemy called the Promontory Ocellum, from the C. Br. Ykill, a Foreland. By a
certain Monk it is called the hole Deira; See hole and Deira in their places.
Holdward; see Howard beneath. Holland, in Linc. Ingulphus, writes it Hoiland,
q.d. hollow Land, because it abounds with Ditches full of Water; see Hole in
the Com. Names. Adr. Jun. draws the other Holland beyond the Sea from the Belg.
Hoy, Hey, Houw, Hay, and Land, q. d. a Country that affords store of Hay; the
same Author in another place more probably Conjectures that the Danes that
conquered it, called it Olandia, from an Isle in the Balthick Sea, of the same
name, and this he draws from the Cimbr. Ol, Ale, and Land, q. d. Aleland.
Holm Castle in Surrey, q. d. a Castle in an Holm; see Holm in the Com. Names.
Holmsdale in Surrey, from the AS. Holm, an Holm, and Dale, a Valley, for it
abounds in fruitful Pastures. Holm Pierpont, in Not. the Residence of the
famous Marquis of Dorset; Holm signifies a place encompassed with Rivers,
Pierpont, a Stone Bridge, from the Fr. G. Pierre a Stone, and Pont a Bridge.
Holstein, from the Belg. Holt, Hout, Teut. Holtz, Wood, and Stein, a Stone, q.
d. a Country where there is plenty of Wood and Stone. Honnyton, in Devonsh. so
called quasi Honey-Town. Honoric, a King of the Vandals in Africa; the same
with Huneric and Henry; which see. Hope, a Surname, perhaps from the AS. Hofe,
an House, Cave, or Farm. Hope Castle in Flintsh. C. Br. Caer Gurley. V. Hope
before. Horden, a Surname. Camden expounds it a Steward, and derives it from
our Eng. Hoard, Treasure, q. d. the Steward of ones Substance. Horn, the
Metropolis of West-Freezland, a famous City and Port; Adr. Jun. a Citizen, and
the Glory thereof, supposes that it is so called from a great Inn in the
Marketplace, having the Horn for a Sign; or because their Coat of Arms had
upon it the figure of an Horn. Horn Church in Essex, formerly called
Horn-Minster; so called because on the East part of the Church certain pieces
of Lead jutt forth like unto Horns. Horsa, a famous Saxon Commander, Brother to
Hengist; so called from the figure of an Horse, which he and his Brother had
upon their Coats of Arms; see Hengist above, and Horse in the common Names.
Horsham, in Sussex, from Horsa the Brother of Hengist, a famous Saxon Captain.
Horsted, a Village in Kent, from Horsa the Saxon, whose Corpse were there
burned. Hoskins, the same with Hodgekins. How or Hoo, a Surname; Camden says,
that it signifies an high place, from the Teut. Hoch, high. Howard, the Surname
of a great and illustrious Family. According to Spelman, quasi Hofward, i. e.
the Warden of an Hall; or according to Verstegan, quasi Hold ward, i. e. the
Keeper of a Strong Hold, or he that is set over the Ward or Watch: Or from the
AS. Hold, a Tribune, and Ward, Ward or Custody. It might formerly imply as much
as the word Marquess; which see in the Common Names. Or it may be drawn from
the AS. Hold, Hospitality, and Ward, q. d. kind to Strangers: or it is so
called q. Hereard, the Keeper, or Pillar of an Army. It may also be taken from
the Teut. Hoch, high, and Ward, a Warder, as Camden has it; or from the old
Teut. Hold, favor, and werd worthy, as says Kilian. Howbu^n, in Scotland,
from the AS. Haeg, or Haga, a Field, and Bourn; which see in the Com. Names.
Howel, a Surname. Camden draws it from the Gr. Helius. Hoxon, in Suff. formerly
Hegilsdon, memorable for the Martyrdom of St. Edmund, a King; perhaps by a
Metathesis for Haligtun, (i. e.) an Holy Town, or the Town of an Holy Man.
Hubald, perhaps formerly Huwald, at first a Christen-Name, but now a Surname,
from the AS. Hie, a Family, and Wealdan, to govern, q. d. an Householder.
Hubert, a Christen-Name, from the AS. He, color, and Beorht, clear. Huet, the
Diminutive of the Christen-Name Hugh; which see. Hugh, a Christen-Name, from
our English word to Hew, according to Aventin. or from the Teut. Hawen,
formerly Hougen, to cleave. It may also be drawn from the Belg. Hoogh, Teut.
Hoch, high. It answers the Latin Celsus. St. Hulda, a Prophetess, from the
Teut. Huld, Hulde, savor; It answers our word Grace, a Christen-Name,
frequently given to Women. Huldericus, if it be not the same with Ilderic, or
Hilderic, which see, I may draw it from the Teut. Hulden, to honor one with
his Vote, and Ric, Rich, q. d. such an one whose Vote will go far in ones
favor. Hulet, a Surname, from the Fr. G. Houlette, a Shepherd's Crook. Hull, a
River, from whence that famous Fortification in Yorkshire, formerly called
Kingston upon Hull, takes its name; because it is situate upon the mouth of
this River, where it disembogueth it self into Abus or Humber. It may be drawn
from the Teut. Heulen, Belg. Huylen, to howl, from the noise it makes when it
meets with the Sea. Hulsok, a Surname, q. d. the Son of Vlric, or Huldric.
Humber, a famous River where the Tide comes at fixed times, as in the Thames,
by Ptolemy called Abus, in the AS. Humbre, Humbre Ea, the water Humber, not
from Humber a King slain there, as is commonly believed, but as Somnerus has
it, from Humming, because the waters thereof make a great huzzing at the
flowing and ebbing of the Tide. Leland takes it to be a Contract of Humm, and
Aber, which in the C. Br. signifies the mouth of a River. Humbert, the last
Prince of Vienna Narbonensis; Kilian exp. it Vnwert, (i. e.) not dear. I would
rather draw it from our word Home, which see in the Common Names, and the AS.
Beorht, famous, q. d. one that is magnificent at Home, or that lives
sumptuously, or keeps a good House. Humfrey, a Christen-Name, from our word
Home, and the AS. Frede, Frith; Peace, that is to say, one that makes Peace at
home. Huneric, according to Kilian, and Jun. it is derived from the Teut. Hun,
an Hen, and the AS. Ric, rich; one that has many Cocks and Hens. See Henry.
Hungerford, in Barkshire, heretofore Ingleford, perhaps so called, quasi
Engla-ford, (i. e.) the Ford of the English. Hunsden, in Herefordsh. possibly
from the AS. Hunde, a Hound, and Dune, an Hill, q. d. the Hounds Town, or Hill;
because it was a place, whither many perhaps resorted to hunt. Huntington, a
County-Town, by Marianus Huntantun, elsewhere Huntersdune, (i. e.) the Mount of
Hunters; formerly Amesbury, as it were Arnulphs bury, from Arnulph, an Holy man
that was there interred. Hurn or Hyrn, a Surname; Aelfricus exp. it a Corner.
It may be derived from the AS. Hyrn, horn, for a Corner is generally crooked
like a Horn. Hurst, or Hyrst, a Surname, also the name of a Castle. Camden
interprets it a Wood. It may be derived from the AS. Hyrsta, Horse trappings.
Hurstly, from the AS. Hurst, which as Camden says, signifies a Wood, and Leag,
with us a Lea, or Ley, a Field unplow'd. Hussy, a Surname; from the Fr. G.
Housse, a sordid Garment: also Housse, one that has such a Cloak on.
I.
James, a Christen-Name, from the Lat. Jacobus, yet more immediately corrupted
from the Hisp. Jay me, or the It. Giacomo, the same; and all from the Hebrew
Name Jacob implying a Supplanter, because Jacob cunningly deceived his Brother.
Jane, a Christen-Name of a Woman, in the Fr. G. Geanne, a corruption of Joan,
which see in its place, if it may not rather come of the Lat. Jana, answering
the Man's Name Janus. Jasper, or Gaspar, a Christen-Name, the Name of one of
the Wise men that came to worship our Savior, (if we may credit Chronology)
and if so, it must needs be of an Arab. Original, for the Wise men are thought
to have come out of Arabia. Iceni, a People of Brit. from the C. Br. Iken, a
Wedge, for this Region is extended toward the Ocean in the form of a Wedge.
This People had in Possession the Countries of Suffolk, Norfolk, Cambridge, and
Huntingdon. Long Iehindon, in Warw. formerly Vchindon, not unlikely from the
AS. Wyc, Wycing, a Sanctuary, and Dune, or Tun, an Hill, or Town. Ienks,
Ienkins, Ienkinson, corrup. and contract. from John, q. d. the Son of John.
Iennings, the Diminutive of the Christen-Name John; or as Th. H. tells us,
it is derived from the Fr. G. Jannin. Iessop, formerly a Christen-Name, but now
a Surname, corrupted from the Heb. Joseph. Jew, from the Fr. G. Juif. Belg.
Iode, Teut. Jud, all from the Lat. Judaeus, the same. Iewry, Palaestina,
Judaea, or the Holy Land; and in a Secondary sense, a Street in London, where
the Jews dwelt together formerly. There is found in an ancient Translation of
the French Bible Iuerie, of the very same sense, so that it is thought, that,
He, whom we call a Jew, was heretofore in the Fr. G. called un Jue, though at
this day both the words are out of use, and Juif is written in the room of the
word Jue. St. Iies, in Cornw. (i. e.) the Temple of Jie, an Irish Saint so
called. Ikeneld Street, one of the Roman Circuits, q. d. the Gate of the Iceni.
Ilchester, formerly Ivelchester, a Town in Summers. from the River Ivel, upon or
by which it is built: by Floren. of Worcester, Gwelcester; by Nenn. called
Pont-Ivel-Coit, that is to say, Ivel Bridge in the Wood. Ildericus, the last
King but one of the Vandals of Africa. Adr. Jun. derives it from the Belg.
Elder, or Ilder, an Udder, and Ric, Rich, that is, rich in Cattle. But if his
right Name was Hilderic, as some write it, I had rather draw it from Held, a
Nobleman, and the AS. Ric, Rich, that is, one that had many Nobles within his
Kingdom. Ildobaldus, a King of the Ostro-Gothi of Italy, not unlikely from the
AS. Eald, Aeld, an Old man, and Bold, Bold, q. d. a stout, courageous Old man.
Ilekely, in Yorkshire, by Ptolemy called Olicana, by adding thereto the AS.
Term. Ley, a Pasture. V. Lea. Immeric, a King of Kent, derived from the Teut.
Immer, ever, and the AS. Ric, Rich, q. d. ever, or always rich. Inchkeith, an
Isle in Scotland, in the C. Br. it sign. Guith, a Separation, for it is thought
to have been parted from the rest of Scotland, by the force of the Sea.
Ingaevones, the third Division of the Germans, as Tacitus writes, from the
Teut. Wohnen, ^ewohnen, to dwell, and the prefix In, for they were Inhabitants
of the inner or middle Part of Germany. Ingram, a Christen-Name, a Contract of
Engelram, this from the AS. Engel, an Angel, and perhaps, Rein, Purity, that
is, of an Angelical Purity; or from In, and Gram, angry, (i. e.) very furious,
according to Aventinus. Ingulphus, an Abbot of Crowland, and an Historian; not
unlikely from the AS. Enge, a Straight, and Ulph, help. q. d. a present help in
times of adversity. St. John's Foreland, in Ireland, by Ptolem. Isanium, from
the C. Br. Isa, signifying very Low. Iolland, or Iollan, formerly a
Christen-Name, but now a Surname, corrupted from the Lat. Julianus, Julian.
Ioscelin, a Christen-Name, as the Lat. Justulinus, as Justulus, Justinus, and
Justilianus, all from Justus. Ipswich, a famous Port and Place of Trading in
Suffolk, in the AS. Gipsich, which, according to Somnerus, was heretofore
written Gypespic, from the River Gypping, and this from the AS. Noun Geap,
crooked, to wit, from its winding Current; and Wic, a Bay, Port, or Haven.
Irchenfeld, in Herefordsh. in the Doomesday-Book, Irchenfeld. Somner. says
that it was formerly written Ircingafeld, (i. e.) the Urchins Field; see Vrchin
and Field in the Common Names. Ireland, by the Natives called Erin, by Orpheus,
Aristotle, and Claudian, Jerne; by Eustathius, (...), in the C. Br. Yverden,
from the Hib. Hiere, the West, for it is the farthest West of any Isle in
Europe, and ought rather to be called Iberia or Hesperia, from Hesperus the
Evening Star rising in the West. Waraeus draws it from the Iberi, the first
Inhabitants thereof. Bochartus from the Phoenic. Ibernae, (i. e.) the uttermost
Habitation. Irmenseal, the God of the ancient Germans; in Versteg. Ermensewl.
Jun. will have it to be written Hermonstal, from the Teut. Herr, Belg. Here, a
Lord, Mon the Moon, and Stal, a Stall, or Seat. Verstegan, who makes him the
same with the Mercury of the Romans, derives the Name better from the Teut.
Armen, Poor men, and Seal, a Pillar, (i. e.) the Pillar, or refuge for the
Poor. Spelman likewise supposes that it should rather be called Hermenseal,
from Hermes that is Mercury, and the same Seal, a Pillar, or Statue. Isabel, a
Christen-Name of a Woman, by the Spaniards and Italians; contracted from
Elisabeth, q. d. Elisa-bella, pretty Bess. Isbrand, Adr. Jun. derives it from
the Teut. Eysen, Belg. Iisen, Iron, and the old Goth. Bren, an Helmet; that is
to say, one Armed with an Helmet of Iron. I had rather draw it from the same
Germ. Eysen, Iron, and our Eng. Brand, a Torch, q. d. a searing Iron. Iselste,
a City in Holland, from the River Isel, (which Jun. makes one and the same with
Sala of the Franks) and Stein, a Stone. Islington, formerly Iseldon, a Village
near the Suburbs of London, perhaps from the AS. Gisel, an Hostage or Inn for
Entertainment, and Dune, or Tun, a Bank, or Town. Islip in Oxfordsh. memorable
for the Birth of Edward the Confessor; from the AS. Gest, a Guest, and Leof,
dear, q. d. an Hospitable Town, kind to Strangers. Istevones, a Third Division
of Germany, as Tacitus writes, from the Ger. Est, the East, and Wonen, Gewonen,
to inhabit, q. d. Est-Woners, (i. e.) Inhabitants of the Eastern Quarter. The
same with Ingaevones before. Iubilius, a King of the Hermundurae, Co-temporary
with Claud. Nero; perhaps from the Belg. Guftel, free, liberal, and this from
the Verb to give; which see in the Com. Names. Ivel, a River in Somersetshire,
which joining with another running the same way into the Sea, is then by
Ptolemy called Vzella, now Evellmouth.
K.
KAtlage, formerly Kidlington, perhaps from the AS. Cat, a Cat, and Leag, a
Pasture, or Field. Kellenton, in Westminster. by Antonin. Gallana, or Callana, by
adding the Term. ton, which signifies a Town. Kelnsey, in Yorkshire, which is
derived from the Lat. Ocellum, by adding the AS. Termination sey, which comes
from Ea, water, i. e. an Isle, or Land lying next to the Water. Kemp, a
Surname, from the AS. Cempa, a Soldier. Kenard, a Christen-Name, Cambd.
derives it from Kind, and the Belg. Aerd, Nature. It may be better drawn from
Keen, AS. Cene, Sharp, and Aerd, Nature, i. e. one acute and ingenious by
Nature: See Keen in the Com. Names. Kenchester, in the County of Heref. by
Anton. called Ariconium out of the Ruins whereof Hereford was built. Kendale,
or rather, Kandale, in Westminster. (i. e.) a Dale by the River Kan, which runs close
by it. Kenham, formerly a Christen-Name, now a Surname; derived from the Welsh
name Cynan or Conan, as says Camden. If it be not a corruption of the AS.
Kenhelm, which see beneath. St. Kenhelm, a King of the English-Saxons. Camden
supposes it to be so called q. Kindhelm, that is, the Helmet, or Protector of
his Kindred, or Relations. Verstegan draws it from the AS. Cyning, a King, and
Helm, an Helmet or Headpiece. Kennet, in Wiltshire; in the AS. Cynetan, in the
Lat. Cunelio, the name of a River. We have very likely derived the name from
the Welsh. Kenneth, a King of the Scots, unless it be of a Scoto-Hib. Original,
(which I suspect) it may be drawn from the AS. Cennan, to know, or own a thing,
and the Belg. Eed, AS. Ath, an Oath, that is, one that owneth, and violateth
not his Oath. Kenred, or rather Cenred, a King of Northumberland, from the AS.
Cene, courageous, and Read, counsel, i. e. one that is bold in Counsel. Kenric,
or rather Cenric, King of the West Saxons, from the AS. Cene, bold, warlike,
valiant, and Rice, a Kingdom, or Ricsian, to rule, or reign, q.d. a valiant
Ruler. Kent, in the AS. Cent, from whence Centise, a Kentish man. Lambard,
draws it from the C. Br. Caine, a Leaf, because it formerly abounded in Woods.
Camden draws it from the Fr. G. Canton, a corner, because England, in this
place stretches out it self in a corner toward the North-east; and hence it
is; that such a corner in Scotland is called Cantire, and that the Inhabitants
of another corner in Scot. are by Ptol. called Canta. Kenwulph, or Cenulph, a
King of the West Saxons, Founder of Wincham Abbey in in Gloc. from the AS. Cene,
bold, valiant, and Ulph, help. Kester, in Linc. formerly in the AS. 'twas
called Dangceaster, from the AS. Dang, a Thong, and ceaster, a Town, or Castle
so called, because Vortigern King of the Britans, gave Hengist the Saxon so
much ground in this place, as he could compass about with an Oxes Hide cut into
as small Thongs as could be: Thong Castle. Kesteven, in Linc. perhaps corrupted
from the ancient Name Gausenna, or from the AS. Ceosl, Gravel, or Sand. Keston,
a small Village in Kent, where Caesar, then Dictator, had a Conflict with the
Britains; in the AS. 'twas called Cesars-tun, Caesar's Town, in imitation of
the Gr. Caesaria. Kettleby, the Name of a Town in Linc. derived from the AS.
Ketel, a Kettle, and By, an Habitation; because perhaps this place was formerly
much noted for such kind of Workmanship. St. Kew, possibly the same with St.
Kibius the Britain. Kilkenny in Ireland, so called from Cella a Cell, and
Canicus a holy Hermit that lived therein. Killian, a River in Scotland,
heretofore called Kelin. Killingworth, in Warw. formerly Kenelworth, from a
Kenel or Ditch hard by it. Kimbolton, in Hunt. formerly Kinnivantum, from the
initial of the old name Kin, the AS. Bold, a Village, and Ton, a Town.
Kinburgh, the Christen Name of a Woman; Camden draws it from our Eng. Kin, and
the AS. Borh, a Surety, that is, she that engages for her Kindred. Kingils, a
King of the West Saxons, from the AS. Cyne, Kingly, and Gaelsa, Luxury.
Kingsdelf, in Hunt. a great Ditch, which King Canutus caused to be dug at
his own great charges; so called from King, and Delve; which see in the Common
Names. Kingsdelf, quasi Kings ditch. Kingston in Surrey; in the time of the
Danish Wars it was the Seat of the English-Saxon Kings, in which three Kings
were Crowned, from King, and Ton, for Town, q. d. Kings Town. Kinton, or Kenton
in Warw. i. e. Kines Town, from Kine and Town, which see. Kinulph, rather
Cenulph or Cinulph, a King of the West Saxons; from the AS. Cene, strong, bold,
and Ulph, help. Kirk Oswald, in Cumb. (i. e.) the Church of Oswald, a King and
Martyr, in whose honor a Temple was here erected, which bears his Name to this
day. Vulgarly Kirk Vzzald. Kirk Patrick in Scotl. that is to say, the Church of
St. Patrick. Kirton in Linc. from a Stately Church there erected by Alexander
Bishop of Lincoln, q. d. Kirk Town. Knevet, Nom. Gent. corrupted from the old
Name Duvenet, says Camden, which perhaps comes of the Fr. G. Duvet soft
feathers, wherewith Bolsters are filled. Knoc Fergus in Ireland, (i. e.) Mount
of Fergus; Careg Fergus, (i. e.) the Crag, or Rock of Fergus, so called from
King Fergusius. Knoc Patrick, in Irel. (i. e.) St. Patrick's Mount. Knolles
Pacis in Scotl. Duni Pacis, (i. e.) the Hills of Peace, from AS. Cnolle, the
top of a Mountain, and Pax, peace; see Downs in the Com. Names. Knolls, a
Surname, from the AS. Cnolle, the top of an Hill. Knotsford in Chesh. that is
to say, the Ford of King Canutus. Krich, a Surname, from the C. Br. Krisp,
curled, or twirl'd up. It answers the Lat. Crispianus, or Crispus.
L.
LAde, a Surname; Camden expounds it an Aquaeduct, or Conduit-Pipe, from the
AS. Lada, Water Lada, signifying the same; this from Water, Water, and Laedan,
to Lead. Lambert, formerly a Christ. Name, but now a Surname, either from the
Engl. Lamb, and the AS. Beorht, fair, as says Camden; or as Versteg. has it,
q. d. Lamb heart; having a gentle innocent heart like a Lamb. Kilian exp. it
Lang Werd, (i. e.) Long in favor, Islebius, Landbrecht, that is, a Breaker of
Land. Lambeth, in Surrey, formerly Lomehith, (i. e.) the Loam Port or Wharf.
But Loam for Mudd, not being found in Somner. I may draw it from Lamb hith (i.
e.) the Lambs Port or Wharf. Lancaster, the Shire-Town; better, as the
Inhabitants pronounce it, Loncaster; by the Scots Longcastell, from the River
Lon, and the AS. Ceaster, a Castle. Lancelot, a fictitious Christen-Name;
perhaps from the Teut. Lansz, or the Lat. Lancea, a Spear; or from the Belg.
Laeten, to Cast, q.d. an Horseman armed with a Spear. Lancels, in Cornwall, not
improbably from the old Fr. G. Lancelle, a Lancet. Landaff in Glam. (i. e.) the
Church upon the River Taff; a Bishop's See. Landulph, from the AS. Land, ones
Country, and Ulph, help, q. d. one that fights for his Country. Laney, Nom.
Gent. from the old Fr. G. yet used in Savoy, Lanoy, a kind of Hawk; see
Lanneret, or Lanard in the Com. Names. Lanfranc, from the AS. Land, a Land, and
Franc, Free, that is to say, made a Free Denizen of a place. Lange, in Lanc. in
the AS. Billangho, memorable for a signal overthrow given Captain Wade a Rebel,
by Ardulph King of Northumberland. Langport, in the County of Somerset, (i. e.)
the long Port. Langworth, in Linc. from the AS. Lang, long, and Weorth, for
Weorthig, a Village. Lanladron, Nom. Gent. perhaps from the C. Br. Lain, a
Sword, and Ladd, to slay. Lanthony, an ancient Abbey in Monm. q. Lanthodeney,
from Lhan an Abbey, or Ecclesiastical Place, and the River Hodeney, as says
Girald a Welsh Interpreter; also Lahn Devi Hodeney, (i. e.) St. David 's upon
Hodeney. Lan Vethlin, or Methlin, in Montgomer. (i. e.) Methlin Church; by
Antoninus, Mediolanum, q. d. a Town between two Brooks or little Rivers.
Lanwitham, a River in Cornw. perhaps from the C. Br. Llenwi, to fill up.
Latimer, a Surname; from the Fr. G. Latinier, a Latiner, i. e. He that can
translate any Tongue into Latin, for in the time of the Romans, Interpreters
were wont to turn every strange Tongue into Latin, that Language being known to
all in a manner, as Menagius relates it. Launston, in Cornw. a Contract of
Lanstaphodon, which in their Dialect signifies as much as St. Stephen's
Church. Law, a Scottish Surname, which among them signifies an Hill. Lawson, a
Surname, q. d. Lawrenceson, (i. e.) the Son of Lawrence. Lazzi, among the
ancient German Saxons, it signified Libertines, or such as were made free, said
Nithard. in his Hist. Francorum; drawn from the Teut. Freylassen, or
Freygelassen, made free. See Adhling. Lea, a River in Hertf. formerly Lygean,
i. e. Lyg-ea, or the River Lyg. Lechlade, formerly a Town in Gloc. in which
there was a famous Latin School, which with Crekelade, (i. e.) a Greek School,
King Aelfred removed to Oxford, when he built that University. Somnerus
supposes that this Town was called in the AS. Leuegelade, or Leuelade, and he
derives it from the AS. Leccian, to water, and Ladian, to Purge; see Crekelade,
or Creccelade. Ledbury, in Heref. from the River Ledden, and Bury, which see in
the Common Names. Lee, Ley, or Leigh, a Surname, either from the C. Br. le, a
place, or from the AS. Ley, Leag, Lege, Land unplow'd for some years, Lee, or
Ley as it is called in the North of England. Leeds in Yorkshire, in the AS.
Loydis, heretofore the Kings of Northumberland's Palace; not unlikely from the
AS. Leode, Teut. Leut, People; all from the Greek (...), (...), q. d. a
populous City. Leerdam, a City in Holland, perhaps from the AS. Laer, Gelaer,
empty, Teut. Lar, Lehr, the same, and our English word Dam. Leland, a Surname,
made famous by our famous Antiquarian of that Name; from the AS. Leag, a
Pasture, and Land. Le Herbert, in Merionethshire, (i. e.) Herbert's Way, from
Herbert an Earl of Pembr. that with much ado made his way over the Mountains
there. Leicester, the County Town. Matthew. Par. writes it Legecester; this
Camden surmiseth to be the same with Nennius's Caer Lerion: It may be derived
perhaps from the AS. Leagceaster, which again is derived from the AS. Leag,
which signifies Ground laid fallow, and ceaster, a Town or Castle, it being
built hard by a Common. Lemster, in Heref. heretofore called Leon Minster, from
a Lion, as some relate, which appeared to a Monk in a Dream; or from Line which
yields great increase in this place. Lemster, a Province in Ireland; in the
C. Br. Lein, by the Natives called Leighnigh, Ptolemy says, that it was the
Country of the Brigantes, Menapii, Cauchi, and Blanii; perhaps from the C. Br.
Llam, a leap, or jump, or Llammu, to leap, because it is full of Hills and
uneven Places. Leneham, a Village in Kent, from the old word Durolenum in
Anton. (i. e.) the water of the River Len, by adding the Termination Ham
signifying a Village. Lennox, a Province in Scotland, from the River Levin,
which by Ptolem. is called Lelalonius. Leodegar, a Christen-Name, q. d.
Leodgard, i. e. the the Peoples Guard, from the AS. Leod, People, and Guard,
which see in the Common Names; see also Luitgard, beneath. Leofhold, Versteg.
draws it from the AS. Leof, Love, and Hold, faithful. Leofric, an Eng. Sax.
Commander of the Mercii, who compassed the City of Coventry about with that
strong Wall, that was pulled down some years since; from the AS. Leof, love,
and Ric, a Kingdom, also rich, q. d. beloved of all, or rich in love. Leofstan,
a Christen-Name; Camden says that it is the Superlat. of Leof, dear. In the
AS. Leofsta, i. e. most dear: Or from the same Leof, dear, and Stan, a Stone,
q.d. a Precious Stone, or Jewel. Leofwin, a Christen-Name, from the AS. Leof,
Love, and Win, a Victour, or Winnan, to obtain, q. d. one that obtains the love
of every one. Leonard, a Christen-Name, from the AS. Leon, a Lion, and Aerd,
nature, that is to say, one that has a stout courage like a Lion. Leonegildus,
the Christ. Name, of a King of the Spanish Vice-Gothi, from the AS. Leon, or
Teut. Low, in the Plural Lowen, a Lion, and the AS. Gildan, to show, (i. e.)
he that makes a show of Lions for the People to see it: or rather from the AS.
Lean, Teut. Lohn, Dan. and Goth. Lon, a reward, and Gilfan, to give, (i e.)
such an one as pays his Soldiers according to their deserts. Leopold, or
Leodpold, either, as Camden has it, from the AS. Leod, People, and Uphold; or
as Verstegan, from the AS. Leod, Dear, also Love, and Hold, that is, He that
maintains Friendship and Concord It answers the Gr. Demosthenes. Leskerd, a
River in Cornwall, perhaps from the C. Br. Llefg, low or gentle, and Cerdd,
Music, namely from the gentle Humming noise it makes in its course. L'
Estrange, a Surname, from the Fr. G. L' Estrange, an Alien, a Foreigner.
Lettice, the Christ. Name of a Woman, from the Lat. Laetitia, Joy; It answers
to the Gr. Euphrosyne. Leveney, a River in Breckn, nigh to which was formerly a
Town, which Ptolem. calls Loventium, by adding thereto the AS. Term. Ey, for
Ea, water; perhaps from the C. Br. Llewa, to Eat, because by overflowing its
Banks it carries away some of the surface of the Neighboring Fields.
Leverton, a Village in Linc. q. d. Leofrie's Town, from Leofric an
English-Saxon the Founder of it. Leveson, a Surname, q.d. Leweson, i. e. the
Son of Lewis, which see. Levigilous, King of the Spanish Vice-Gothi; from the
old Belg. Leuwe, a Lion, and Gild, a Fellow, according to Junius. Levin,
formerly a Christ. name, but now a Surname; a contract of Leofwin, which see
above. Leviston, a Surname, a Corruption of the Christ. Name Leofstan, which
see above: or from Levins, or Leofwins, by adding Ston. Jews, a Port in Suss.
from the AS. Laese, a Pasture, it being surrounded on each side with good
Pasture Lands. Lewis, a Christ. Name, immediately from the Fr. G. Louis, or the
It. Luigi; among the Venetians it is called Aluise; all from the Teut. Ludwig,
the same; and this from the AS. Leod, Teut. Leute, People, and Wic, a Castle,
or Fort, (i. e.) the Safeguard, or Support of the People. Lewlin, a Christ.
Name frequent among the Welsh, q.d. like a Lion. It answers the Gr. Leon and
Leontius. Ley, a River in Essex, in the AS. Lygean, perhaps from the AS.
Licgean, to Lie; because it runs so softly, that one would think it stood
still. Leyden, a famous City in Holland, perhaps from the old AS. and C. Br.
Lug, or the AS. Lich, a Lake, and Dune, an Hill, q. d. an Hill environed with a
Lake or Lough, which see, and also Downs in the Common Names. Adr. Jun. draws
it from the Belg. Luyck, a Cloister, and Dun, an Hill, or from Lege Dunen, from
the lowness of the Hills. Leyton, in Essex, in the C. Br. Durolitum, (i. e.) a
Town upon the River Ley. Lhan Badern vaur, in Cardiganshire, that is to say,
the Temple of Badern, the Great, or St. Badern the Bishop. Lhanberon, in Cornw.
not unlikely from the C. Br. Lhan, a Church, and Herwa to fly unto, q.d. a
Sanctuary, or place of refuge. Libertas de Anstie, in Yorkshire, (i. e.) de
Ancienty, which comes from the Fr. Anciente, or the Lat. Antiquitas. Lichfield,
in Staff. a Bishop's See. Beda writes it Licidfeld, which signifies the Field
of dead Bodies, because a great many here suffered Martyrdom in Dioclesian's
days. It Is derived from the AS. Lice, or Teut. Lichnam, a dead Carcass, and
Field. Somnerus, draws it it from the AS. Liccian, to lick, and the same Field;
because it is as it were, licked by the River that runs by it. Lid, a River in
Devonshire, from thence Lidstow, a Market, and Lidford, a Village upon the Ford
of Lid; see Stow, and Ford, in the Common Names. Liege, from the Fr. Liege, the
Teut. Luttich, Luttig, or Luck; or the Belg. Luick, a City, and Bishop's See,
of the Eburones. See Leedes. Liffy, in Ireland, by Ptolem. Libnius, by Gyrald,
a Welshman, Aven Liff, that is to say, the River Liff. Lime, in Kent, by Anton.
it is called Portus Lemanis, by Ptolem. (...), a Port; whence Lime, a small
Port in the County of Dorset, derives its Name. Lin, a River in the County of
Nottingh. from the C. Br. Lhin, a Lake. Linn, King's Linn, or Linn Regis, a
famous Town and Port in the County of Norf. with water surrounding it, for the
Britains meant thus much by their word Llyn; and Regis was added to it, because
in the time of King John, and Henry the Third, the Inhabitants hereof valiantly
opposed the designs of some Rebels, maintaining their King's part to the last.
Lincoln, a Bishop's See; by Ptolem. and Anton. it is called Lindum, by Beda,
Lindecollinum, in the AS. Lyndecollyne, and Lind cyllon-ceaster, in the C. Br.
Lindcoit; from Llyn, a Lake, and the AS. Collyne, an Hill, because in the times
of the English-Saxons it was all, or the greatest part of it built upon a Hill.
Lindisfarn, heretofore a Bishop's See; in the AS. called Lindesfearona-ea, i.
e. the Isle of Lindisfarn, which is to this day called the Holy Island, from
some Holy men and Monks that dwelt there; perhaps from the AS. Linde, a Linden
tree, or Lindene, made of Linden, and Faer, an Entrance, or Fare, a way.
Lindsey, in Lincolnsh. the greatest Quarter of this County, so called from
Lindum, or Lincoln its chief City. Lionel, a Christ. Name, from Lion, with the
dim. Term. el, (i. e.) a young Lion, or a little Lion. It answers to the Gr.
Leontius. Lisard Point, in the County of Cornw. perhaps so called from some
likeness it has to a Lizard; see Lizard in the Com. Names. Lisse, a Surname;
from the Fr. G. Isle an Isle, by putting before it L' with the note called
Apostrophus. I suppose that it is rather derived from L'isle, a famous City in
Flanders. Listithel, in Cornw. by the Inhabitants Lest. Vthiell, by Ptolem.
called Vzella; the Town formerly stood on an Hill, but now in a Valley, so that
it might be so called from the C. Br. Vchel, high. Lith of Pickering, in
Yorkshire, (i. e.) the Liberty of Pickering, from the AS. Lith, a Member.
Lithquo or Linlithquo, in in Scotland, from the neighboring Lake Lin, which
abounds with Fish. Littleborough, in the County of Notting. (i. e) a little
Borough, or Town. Liuba, a King of the Spanish Vice-Gothi, not unlikely, from
the AS. Lufian, to love. Liver, a River in Cornw. perhaps from the AS. Lith,
Lither, Lither, or idle, because it flows calmly and slowly. Liverpool or
Lirpool, a Port in the County of Lanc. from the AS. Liferpoole, which comes
from Liver, which see above, and Pool, which see in the Common Names; because
it either is or was compassed about with Pools, or Ponds. Logh Cure in Scotl.
see Logh in the Com. Names. London, England's Epitome, a City and Port
inferior to none in Europe. In Tacit. Ptolem. and Anton. it is called
Londinum, and Longidinium, in Ammian. Lundinium, in the C. Br. Lundayn, in the
AS. Lundenceaster, Lundenbyrig, and Lundenyc, from the C. Br. Llong, Ships, and
Dinas, a City, in which sense it answers the Gr. Naustahmos, and Nauplia; or as
Somner has it, from the C. Br. Llawn^, full and populous, and the same Dinas,
a City. This famous City, no ways inferior to the greatest and most famous in
all Europe, for riches and greatness, in the time of the Britains and Romans
was an Archbishop's See, but at the Arrival of the Saxons, it was deprived of
this Honor, and, being made the Metropolis or Mother-City, and the
Archbishop's See, removed to Canterbury, it became only a Bishop's See.
Longobardi, a victorious People. At first they were Inhabitants of Germany,
after that of Pannonia, and lastly of Italy. Many suppose, that they were so
called from the length of their Beards, from the Germ. Lang, Long, and Bart, a
Beard. Some draw it from Allebaudi, Halberts, which they used in times of War;
See Halbert in the Common Names. Lonsdale, in Westminster. (i. e.) a Dale by the
River Lon. Loo, a River in the County of Cornw. perhaps from the lowness and
shallowness of the water, or from the old words Loo, Low, Logh, a Lake, (which
last see in the Com. Names) because perhaps it stands like a Pool. Loopool, a
Surname; from Loo, as above, and Pool; which see in the Com. Names. Lopp, from
the English to Leap, because, says Camden, it implies such an uneven place as
cannot be passed over without leaping; or from the AS. Loppe, a Flea, or Lop,
according to the Lincolnshire Dialect. Loquaber, or Logh Aber, in Scotland,
from Logh, a Lake, which see in the Com. Names, and the C. Br. Aber, the mouth
of a River. Lora, the Christ, Name of a Woman; from the obsolete word Lore,
which signifies Learning. Loring, a Surname, as much as the Fr. de Lorain, or
le Lorain, i. e. of Lorain. Lorty, a Surname, from the Fr. G. de l' Ortie, i.
e. of the Nettle; and this from the Lat. Vrtica, the same. Lothair, a Surname
from which came the Name Luther, according to Verstegan; from the Teut. Lauter,
famous. Lothbrook, a King of the Danes. Camden interprets it, Leather
Breeches. Lothild, or Clothild, or Clothildis; from the AS. Leode, Teut. Leute,
People, and Held, or Helduine, a Lady, q.d. a Lady much beloved of the People,
the Peoples Darling. Love, a Surname, from the Fr. G. Loup, a Wolf. Lovell, in
the Fr. Louvel, a Surname, the dim, of Loup, q.d. a little Wolf. Louvet, a
Surname, from the Fr. G. Louvet, a young Wolf. Lough Regit, in Ireland, a Lough
upon which stood a Town by Ptol. called Rigia, from the AS. Luh, or Teut. Logh,
a Lake. Lough, a River in Scotland, from the same root. Loughborough, in the
County of Leicester, from the AS. Lig, Lige, a flame, perhaps from some Fire
happening there; or from some Lough or Pool near the place, and Borough, which
see in the Com. Names. Louvre, a famous Palace of the King of France; from the
Fr. L'ouvre, (i. e) the Work or Fabric so called, (...), for the Curious
workmanship thereof. Ludfrid, Versteg. draws it from the AS. Leod, Teut. Leute,
the People, and the AS. Frith, Frede, Teut. Friede, Peace, i. e. one that
reformeth the Disorders of the People, and settles 'em in Peace. Ludgate, a
Gate of the City of London, q. d. Fludgate, from a little River that formerly
ran under it; or from the AS. Luc, false, and Gate, that is to say, a False
Port; or as the eminent Th. H. ingeniously surmiseth, from the AS. Lecd, the
People, and Gate, as Porto del popolo Romae, not from one Ludd a King of the
Britains, as is vulgarly believed from the Informations of several ancient
Chronicles. Ludovic, or Lodowick, a Christen-Name; see Lewis, above. Ludulph,
or Ludolph, from the AS. Leod, Teut. Leute, the People, and the AS. Ulph, Help.
Luitbald, Duke of Bavaria, from the AS. Leod, Teut. Leute, People, and Bald,
Bold; that is, valorous among, or for, the People. Luitbert, a King of the
Longobardi of Italy, from the Teut. Luit, now Leute, AS. Leode, the People, and
the AS. Beorht, famous or bright, q.d. Illustrious in his People, or the light
of his People. Luitgard, or Luidhard, a Bishop, Chaplain to Bertha Queen of
France, then Wise of Ethelbert, the first Christian King of Kent, from the AS.
Leode, Teut. Leute, formerly Luit, the People, and Guard, which see in the
Common Names. Luitprand, a King of the Longobardi of Italy, from the Teut.
Luit, now Leute, AS. Leode, the People, and our English Brand, i. e. Firebrand,
according to Aventinus, i. e. One that set the People at variance.
Lumbard-street, a Street in London, so called either from some Merchants of
Lombardy in Italy that lived here, or q.d. Lumber Street, that is to say, a
Street where old Garments or such like Lumber, was vented in former times; from
the Teut. Lump, or the Belg. Lompe, a Rag, or Tatter. Luxenburg, a County Town
in the Netherlands, perhaps from the Teut. Luchs, a Libbard, and Burg, a
Castle, or City, from the Plenty of those sort of Creatures there.
M.
MAb, a Surname, also the Name of the Queen of Fairys. I suppose, from the C.
Br. Mab, a Child, or a little Boy, for those terrestrial Elfs, are imagined to
take upon them the shapes of little Children, the better to invite the Eyes of
the Beholders. Mabel, a Woman's Christen-Name; from the Lat. Amabilis, amiable;
or, as some will have it, from the Fr. G. ma Belle, or the It. mia Bella my
fair one, my Darling. Macquire, in Ireland, perhaps from the C. Br. Magwyr,
barrenness. Machlin, Mechlin, in the Fr. Malines, and Teut. Mecheln; a County,
and Archbishop's See in the Netherlands, perhaps from the Belg. Maeckelen, to
pass over, to traffic, to wit from the great Trading of several Countries
thereto. Mac Mahon, an Irish Surname; by interpretation, a Bea^s Whelp. Madoc,
a Brit. Proper name, Camden draws it from the C. Br. Mad, good, and the Latin
Occa, an Harrow. Maedhart, a Woman's Christ. Name, q. d. Maiden Heart, from our
English Maid and Heart, or the Belg. Aerd, Nature, or disposition of Mind.
Magdeburg, a famous City in Germany, formerly the Metropolis; -- from the Teut.
Magd in the Pl. Magden, a Maid, and Burg, a City, or Fort. Maiden Bradley in
Wiltshire, from a Noble young Woman, a Virgin, who being seized with the
Leprosy her self, built here an Hospital for such as should be taken with the
like Disease for the future. Maidenhead, in the County of Berks, at first
called Southealington, after that Maiden hyth; so called from the Superstitious
adoring the head of a certain British Maid, one of the 11 Thousand Companions
of Vrsula. It was before called Southealington, from South, Ea, the Dim.
Termination ling, and Town, q. d. a small Town lying Southward by the waters
side; see Ea. Maidstone, in Kent heretofore Medweageston, (i. e.) Medways Town,
from the River Medway, running close by it; but by Corr. Maidstone. Mainard,
formerly a Christen-Name, but now a Surname. Verstegan draws it from Man, and
Heart, that is, one that has the Heart of a Man, i. e. stout hearted; or from
Man and the Belg. Aerd, Nature. Aventinus seems to draw it from the Teut.
Meine, mine, and the old Teut. hard, AS. Hord, a Treasure. Malc, in Ireland,
formerly Macolicum. Maldon, in Essex, by Tacitus and several others called
Camalodunum; by Anton. Camulodunum; in the AS. it is called Maledune, and
Mealdune, from Camulus, or Camalus, a God of the Britans, (the same with Mars
of the Romans,) and the AS. Dune, a Mount, or Hill. Malleverer, a Surname,
possibly from the Fr. G. Mal, evil, and Levrier, a Greyhound, or Hunter.
Mallobaudes, from the Belg. Mael, Teut. Mahl, a Meal, and the obsolete word
Behaud, an Upholder, from Hauden, now Houden, to uphold. Mallory, a Surname,
from the Fr. Mal, bad, and Lievre, an Hare. Mallovel, a Surname, from the Fr.
Mal, ill, and Lovell, which see above. Malmesbury, in the County of Wilts,
built by Malmutius a K. of the Britains, says Skinner, but questions whether
there ever was any such man. By the Brit. it was called heretofore Caer Bladon,
after that Ingelborn, then Maidulfesburg, from Maidulph, (a Scottish Saint and
Hermit that built an Abbey there, and opened the Public School,) and Bury, a
Town; whence for shortness it begun to be called Malmesbury. Beda calls it
Adelmesbirig, from Adelm Scholar to Maidulph, and the first Abbot of that Abbey.
Maidulph may be drawn from the AS. Maeden, a Maiden, and Ulph, help. Malpas, in
Cheshire, from the Fr. Mal, ill, and Pass, which see in the Common Names, in
the AS. it is written Depenbach, from Deope, deep, and Becc, Teut. Bach, a
Brook, q. d. a bad way, or deep passage. Mancester, in Warw. from the C. Br.
Maen, a Stone, and the AS. Ceaster, a Town, possibly from the great Quarry of
Stones there. Manchester, a rich Town of Trade in the County of Lancaster, in
the Neighboring places called Mancastle; derived from the C. Br. Maen or Mana
a Stone, and the AS. Ceaster, a Town. Mandevill, a Surname; in the Lat. Barb.
it is written Magna Villa, in the Fr. de Magne ville, from whence by corruption
Mandevill. Manfred, King of Naples and Sicily, from Man, and the Germ. Friede,
Frede, Peace, q. d. a Pacifyer of Men, or one, that makes it his Business to
keep his Subjects in Peace. Mannours, a Surname, (i. e.) of the Manors, from
the Fr. Manoir, a Manor, or Farm. Mansfield, in Nottingh. from the C. Br.
Maen, a Stone, and Field; or more simply from the old AS. Mangian, to Trade, or
Traffic, and the same Field, because it was, and is a place of great Trade.
Some report, that it gave name to the Mansfelts, Counts of Germany. Manwating,
a Surname, not unlikely from our word Man, and the Teut. Waren, Wehren, to
protect; see Ward in the Common Names. Mapletoft, a Surname, from the AS.
Mapul, a Maple, and toft, a tuft, or top. Maraboduns, (in the time of the
Emperors Tiberius, and Caligula) King of the Suevi-Marcomanni, in Germany;
from the AS. Maere, Mare, a Mare, and the Teut. Bott, Belg. Bode, a Messenger.
Marcomanni, a People of Germany, a Tribe of the Suevi, that heretofore took
into Possession part of Bohemia, and Moravia, and in the time of the Emperor
Marcus greatly invaded the Roman Empire, q. d. Markman, i. e. Men of the
Marches, from the AS. Mearc, Belg. Marck, Teut. Merck, a Mark, or Limit, and
Man, a man. Marcomirus, King of the Franks of Sicambria, from the Belg. Marck,
a Mark, and Meyer, a Major, according to Jun. and so it implies the same that
our word Marquess; which see in the Common Names. Margerie, some suppose, that
it is the same with Margaret, and if so, it may be drawn from the Lat.
Margarita, a Pearl; others derive it from Marjoria, or Marjorana, the Herb
Marjoram, which see in the Com. Names. Marlborough, in the County of Wilts,
from our word Marl, i. e. fat soil, and Borough; or rather from the AS. M^rl,
Chalk; for it stands upon a chalky, clammy Soil; or as some will have it,
from that fabulous Prophet Merlin. Marlow, in the County of Bucks; from Marl,
Chalk, and Lea, Ground, (which see in the Common Names,) or Ea, water.
Marmaduc, a feigned Christ. Name; as Camden says, from the AS. Mare Maehtig,
or the Teut. Mehu Machtig, (i. e.) more mighty; and Dux, a Captain, or our word
Duke. Marn, a County in Scotland, perhaps from the AS. Mara, Marches, or
Bounds. Charles Martel, that invincible French Captain; from the Fr. G.
Marteau, formerly Martel, a Hammer, or the It. Martello the same; and this from
the Lat. Marculus, a little Mallet; which derivation of his Name he vindicated
by his hammering the Saracens, at that time making War with the French.
Maseras, a King of the Spanish Suevi, from the Teut. Mause, a scarr, and
Treschen, to beat; so called, from the Scars he had in his Body. Mathasuenta,
Wife to Vitigis, King of the Ostro-Gothi of Italy; perhaps from the Teut. Matt,
slender, and the obsolete word Swenth, a Wench, according to Jun. See Wench in
the Common Names. Matison, and Madison, a Surname, (i. e.) the Son of Matthew;
or as the famous Th. H. rather fancies, the Son of Matilda, or Mathildis.
Mattiaci, an ancient People of the Netherlands, formerly the Inhabitants of the
Country now called Zealand. Adr. Junius draws it from Mat, or as they now write
it, Maet, a Mate, which was a familiar Appellation whereby they signified their
good will one to another. Maud, the Christen-Name of a Woman, the same that
Mathildis, which is drawn from the Belg. Maecht, a Maid, and Held, or Hilde, a
Lady; that is to say, a Maid of Honor, a Princess. Maugre, a Christen-Name;
see Maugre in the Common Names. Manley, a Surname, not unlikely from the Fr. G.
Mal, bad, and Lieu, a place, (i. e.) born in a bad Clime, or barren part of a
Country. St. Mawes, in the County of Cornwall (i. e.) the Church of St. Mawe,
an Irish Bishop. The Maze, a famous River of France, the Netherlands, and
Germany; see Mosa, beneath. Mean-Borough, also East, West-Mean in Hantsh. from
the Meanvari, a People mentioned in Beda; which possibly may be drawn from the
C. Br. Menn, a Wagon, Cart, or Coach, and Gwar, a Neck. Meares, a Surname;
either from the AS. Mere, a Marsh, or Mara, Marches, or Limits. Mead, a County
in Ireland, by the Inhabitants called Miith, by Girald, in Lat. Media, because
it is probably in the Middle of Ireland. Meckleborough, in the Teut. Mechel
burg, (i. e.) the Megalopolis, or great City of Germany; so called from the
largeness thereof, from Mickle, i. e. much, and Borough, which see in the Com.
Names. Medemenham; not unlikely from the AS. Medeme, mean, in another sense,
worthy, and Ham, a Village. Medeshamsted, the old Name of a Bishop's See, now
called Peterborough; from the AS. Maede, Med, a Mead, Ham, a Village, and
Steda, Stead, a place; to wit, from the Meads laying on each side thereof.
Medley, now Midgley in Yorkshire, in the AS. Medely, because it lies in the
midst as it were, between two Rivers. Hence the Ancient Family of the Midgleys
took its Name. Medway, in the County of Kent, perhaps from the Pastures and
Meadows it runs close by; see Mead, and Way, in the Com. Names. Somner
supposes it so called, because it runs through the middle of Kent; see Middle,
in the Com. Names. Melton Mowbray, in the County of Leicester, from the
Mowbrays, formerly Landlords thereof; and Melton, which comes either from the
AS. Meldian, to betray, or from the Eng. to Melt, i. e. from melting Metals,
for which Art perhaps it was heretofore accounted famous; or from the AS. Mele,
a Cup, because the place was perhaps famed for the Profession of Cup-making. Or
as Dr. Th. H. supposes, from Mell, which in Kent is yet used for a Mill; so
that Melton may be so called q. Mill-Town. Mentz, by Tacit. and Ammian. called
Magantiacum, by Eutrop. Moguntia. It Is a famous City of Germany, an
Archbishop's See, who is generally Elector of the German Empire. In the time
of Aurelian the Emperor, it begun to be for shortness, called Montiacum, and
after that Mentz, which name it still retains. Mephistophiles, an Hellish Imp.
Dr. Faustus's Page, q.d. Mephitophilus, (says Dr. Skinner) a lover of a rawmish
or sulphurous smell. Meraud, a Christen-Name of Woman frequent in Cornwall;
from the Fr. Esmeraude, by them called Meraud, with us Emerauld, which see in
the Com. Names. Mercia, the greatest Kingdom of the Heptarchy, called in the
AS. Mearclond, from Mearc, a Mark, or Limit; because it was bounded on every
side to keep it safe from the inroads of any of the other Six Kingdoms of the
English Heptarchy. Meredith, a Surname; from the C. Br. Merweyridd, the roaring
of the Sea; says Skinner. Merionethshire, in the C. Br. Sire Verioneth, in the
Lat. Mervinia, a County in Wales. Merkin, a dangerous Port in Cornwall, (i. e.)
Jove's Market, so called from the many Storms arising therein. Merlin, he whom
the Welsh cry up so much for the gift of Prophecy; from the Teut. Maehr,
Maehre, a Fable, whence Mahr Lein, a little Fable; these from the AS. Maere,
famous. This Etymology seems apt enough, if ever there was such a man, which I
am not so apt to believe, by reason of the many fabulous Stories which are
blown about concerning him. Mernerfridus, a Prince of the Turingi; Junius thus
expounds it, Meerner des frides, (i. e.) the Author of Peace. Merouee, the
Third King of the Franks. Adr. Jun. draws it from Meroua, a River in Holland,
where he assigns to the ancient French their first Seat and beginning. I might
also draw it from the Germ. Meyer, a Mayor, and Weg a Way. Merric, a Christ.
Name among the Welsh; Camden supposes, that it is a corruption of the Lat.
Mauritius, with us Maurice. Mersh Ware, in the County of Kent, (i. e.) in the
AS. Inhabitants of the Marshes, for so were the Inhabitants of the place called
Rumney Marsh formerly named, from Mersc, a Marsh, and Waer, a Man, in the
Plural Wara, Men. Merton, in Surrey, from the AS. Mere, a Marsh, and Dune, a
Bank, or tun, a Town. Merwald, a Christen-Name; not unlikely from the AS. Mere,
famous, and Wealdan, to rule; and so by interpretation it may signify, an
illustrious Prince, or Ruler. Merwin, a Christen-Name; from the AS. Mere,
glorious, and Win, a Conqueror, or Winnan, to conquer. Mesnill, or Menill, a
Surname; from the old Fr. Norm. Mesnil, an House; and this from the Lat.
Mansio, a Mansion, or place of abode. Metaris, heretofore in the C. Br.
Maltraith, a place, where the Waters Ebb and Flow upon the Coast. of Norfolk,
and not far from Lincolnshire, now called the Washes; perhaps from the C. Br.
Mall, corrupt, (i. e.) muddy, and Traide, a Passage, or Ford; this from
Treiddio, to Ferry over. Mews, a Surname, possibly from the Episcopal seat in
France, called Meaux. Michelgrove, in Suss. (i. e.) the great Grove; See
Mickle, and Grove, in the Com. Names. Micklethwaight, a Surname, from our word
Mickle, or the AS. Micl, much, and THeaht, washed, a Participle of the Verb
THean, to wash. Camden draws it from the said Micl, or Micel, great, and Hoit,
which, he says, signifies a Pasture; See Thwaight in the Com. Names.
Middleborough, in the Belg. Middelburg, a famous City in Zealand, so called,
because it stands in the middle of Walachia. Middleton, (i. e.) the Middle-Town
in Dorsetshire; formerly famous for an Abbey erected there by King Ethelstan,
for Expiation of the Murder of Edwin his Brother. Milburg, or Milborough, the
Christen-Name of a Woman. Verstegan draws it from the AS. and Eng. Mild, and
Burg, a Town, q.d. kind to her Towns-folk: or it may be derived from the same
Mild, and Borge, or Borh, a Bondsman, in a secondary sense. Mildred, the
Christen-Name of a Woman, from the AS. Mild, mild, and, the Teut. Reden, to
speak; or from the same Mild, and the AS. Rade, Counsel, (i. e.) mild in
Counsel. Miles, a Christen-Name, from the Lat. Milo, or from Milium millet; as
Fabius, from faba, a Bean, etc. Millet, the Diminutive of the Christen-Name
Miles, says Cambden. Some also draw it from the Fr. Millet; as Cicero, a
Cicere, i. e. a Pease. Milton, in the County of Kent, by some a Contract of
Middleton: Others draw it from the Lat. Mola, a Mill, q. Mill-Town; see Mill in
the Common Names. Minours, a Surname; possibly from the Fr. Mineur, a Miner, a
Digger in a Mine. Modbery, a Village in Devonshire, either from the AS. Mod,
Mode, Valor, and Bury, a Town: or, q. d. Mudbury, i. e. Muddybury; See Mud, in
the Com. Names. Moigne, a Surname. It alludes to the Fr. G. Moine, a Monk.
Mole, a River in Surrey; so called, because like a Mole, or Want, it forces
its passage under Ground, and thereby mixes its Water with the River of Thames.
Molesey, in the County of Surrey; from the River Mole, and the AS. ea, water,
or waterish Ground; q.d. Mole's Water. Molines, a Surname, formerly de Molines;
derived from the Fr. Moulin, or the It. Molino, a Mill. Molineux, a Surname: (i
e.) Molitor, a Miller; derived as Molines before. Monmouthshire, formerly
called Wentset, and Wensland, from the AS. Went, Setas, (i. e.) the Inhabitants
of the Country called Went, which is a Corrupruption of Venta, the name of the
chief Town in the County, and which was by the Britains called Caer Guent.
Leland, draws 'em both from the C. Br. Gwynn, white, which he might do perhaps
from the color of the Soil. It now takes its Name from Monmouth, the County
Town; memorable for the Birth of that invincible Prince, Henry the Fifth; which
in the C. Br. is called Mongwy, from the Rivers Munow and Wy, at the meeting of
which it is seated. And therefore called Monmouth; q. Munow's mouth.
Montchensey, a Surname; from the Fr. Mont Chesneux, (i. e.) a Mount beset, or
Planted with Oaks, says Skinner. Montfichet, a Surname; so called a Monte fixo,
from a Mount that stands firmly, unmovable; or from the Fr. Mont, a Mount, and
Fichet, a Graff. Montfort, a Surname, q.d. Fr. G. de Mont fort, (i. e.) of a
fortified Mount. There is also a Town in Holland of the same Name. Montgomery,
from Roger de Montgomery, E. of Shrewsb. that subdued the Country and built the
Castle: Born in France, and took his Name from Montgomery, in that Kingdom: So
called, q. Mons Gomeris, the Mount of Gomer. Monthermer, a Surname; By
interpretat. Hermer's Mount, or Mount of Hermer. Or Mons Eremitae, q.
Hermits-Hill, or Mount. Montjoy, a Surname, q. d. Mons Jovis, or Jove's Mount.
Skinner draws it from the Fr. Mont, a Mount, and Joye, Joy. See Joy, in the
Common Names. Montperson, a Surname; possibly a Contraction for Mont Peterson,
q. d. the Mount of Peter 's Son. Montross in Scotland, i. e. the Mount of
Roses; Some draw it from the Fr. G. Mont-Rosse, the Horses Mount; others from
Mount, and Ros, by the Britains taken for Heath. Montsorrel, in Leicestershire;
from the Fr. Mont, a Mount, and the River Sora that runs near it. Moorgate, one
of the Gates of the City of London; so called from a Marsh or Moor that
formerly was hard by it, but now dried up; and Gate. Moravia, in the Teut.
Mahren, and by Contraction Marn. It was heretofore the Seat of the Quadi, and
the Marcomanni; from which last, I suppose it had this Name: Or it may be drawn
from the AS. Maere, famous, for that the Marcomanni were renowned above any
other the Inhabitants under the Empire of Germany, for warlike Exploits;
witness their Conquest over the Roman Empire, in the time of the Emperor
Marcus, and their wasting even Italy it self with Fire and Sword, almost to the
very Gates of Rome. Morgan, a Christen-Name; from the C. Br. Mor, the Sea, and
Began, born; (i. e.) born by the Sea side. It was formerly, and not without some
color, taken to be the same with the Gr. Pelagius. Morice, a Christen-Name, in
Lat. Mauritius; this from the Lat. Maurus, a Moor; and this again from the Gr.
(...) dark, obscure. Mortimer, a Surname; from the Fr. Mort, dead, and Mer, the
Sea. Mortlack, a Village in Surrey, upon the side of the Thames, either q. d.
Lat. Mortuus Lacus, a dead Lake; or from the AS. Morth, Death, and Lac, a
Victim. Mosa, the Belg. de Mase, and Maes, the Teut. d'et Maasz, and in the Fr.
Meuse; it is a famous River, running through Germany, and the Netherlands.
Perhaps originally from the Belg. Maes, as, Maes-hout, a Maple-tree, from the
great plenty thereof growing upon the Banks of it. Mougrave Castle, in
Yorkshire; possibly from the Fr. Moult Grace, i. e. much Grace. Montague, a
Surname, q. d. Fr. de Mont Aigu, (i. e.) of the sharp top'd Mountain. Mount
Norris, a Fort in Ireland, erected by Charles Montjoy, in memory of the most
courageous John Norris, Knight, under whom Montjoy served as a Volontier.
Mowbray, a Surname; perhaps, from the Teut. Mow, an Heap, and Braede, by
Chaucer Bread, Bread. Muckelney, in Somersetshire, (i. e.) the great Isle,
caused by the meeting together of the Rivers Ivell and Pedrid; from the AS.
Micel, great, or Mickle as they say in Scotl. and elsewhere, and Ea, Water, or
Land encompassed with Water. Mullins, a Surname; formerly de Mullins; from the
Fr. Moulin, a Mill. Muschamp, a Surname; from the Fr. Mousche, a Fly, and
Champ, a Field; or rather, as the learned Th. H. tells us, from the Fr. Mousse,
Moss, q.d. Moss-Field.
N.
NAerdem, a City in Holland, memorable for a great Slaughter made by the
Spanish, contrary to their Covenant. It may be drawn from the Belg. Nae, Naer,
near, and Them for Dam, a Wear, q. d. a City upon the Wears; or from the same
Naer, near, and Deem, Demen, a Cows Udder. Naples, a famous City in Campania,
from the Fr. Naples, or the It. Napoli, and all from the Gr. (...), (i. e.) the
new City. It began to be so called in the time of the second Punick War, as
Livy writes. Neal, a Christen-Name; a Contract of the Lat. Nigellus. It is now
a Surname. Neath, in Glam. by Anton. called Vrbs Nidum; and the River Neath,
Nidus. Neccar, from the Teut. Necker by Flav. Vopisc. in the life of Marc.
Aurel. Val. Prob. called Nicer, or Nicrus; a famous River in Germany. Saint
Needs, in Huntingdon. (i. e) the Church of St. Need, who died in this Town; it
being before called Ainesbury, which might be taken perhaps from the AS. Again,
ones own, and Bury; which see in the Com. Names. Neene, the Name of a River,
according to Leland; it is corrupted from Avene, and this from Avon. Nelson, (i.
e.) the Son of Neal, which see above; or from Nell for Eleanor, and Son; (i.
e.) Eleanor's Son. Nemetes, an Ancient People of Germany. Ortelius says, that
the Sclavonians call all the Germans Nemiz, that the Turks call them Nimzi, the
Hungar. Nemet, and the Bohem. Nemec; and these perhaps from the Teut. Nehmen,
to take away, to steal, because this People lived by Robberies, Piracies, and
Rapines. Nese or Naese, a Foreland in Kent, q. d. a Nose of Land; from the AS.
Naese, Nese, a Promontory, or Nose. Nest, a Woman's Christ Name, frequent among
the Welsh: It Is supposed to be a Contract. or corrup. of the Lat. and Gr.
Agnes. Netherland, from the Belg. Netherland, or the Teut. Niderlandt; that is
to say, a Lower Land, with respect to Germany. Nevill, a Surname; from the Fr.
de Neuve ville, (i. e.) of a new Town. Newbottle, in Scotland, (i. e.) the new
Building; for the AS. Botle, signifies a Village or House. Newbury, in
Berkshire; that is, the new Town, raised out of the Ruins of Spinham, the old
Town; from whence it is, that part of the New is yet called Spinham: Derived
from our word New, and the AS. Borg, a Town, or Bury, or Borough. Newcastle, in
Northumberland, a Seaport Town. Before the times of William the Conqueror, it
was called Monckchester, because it appertained to Monks. It may be derived
from New and Castle. It answers the Fr. Neuf Chastel, and the Gr. Neocastron.
Newcastle under Lime, in Staffordshire, (i. e.) under the River Lime. Derived
as above. Newenden, in the County of Kent, in the C. Br. Caer Andred, in the
AS. Andred-Ceaster, also, Brittenden, i. e. the Valley of the Britains; from
whence the Hundred was called Sell Brittenden; for the AS. Den, signifies a
Valley, Syl, a Pillar; and Britten, a Briton, or Britain. Newmarch, a Surname,
formerly de New March; possibly from the Fr. Neuf, New, and March, a Market.
Newmarket in Suffolk, from our own words, New and Market. Newport, in
Hantshire; from our word New, and Portus, a Port. Nidderdale, in Yorkshire,
from the River Nidd, and Dale; which see in the Common Names. Neel, from the
Fr. Noel, and this, by a great Corruption, from the Lat. Natalis. Nokton, or
Noketon, in Linc. from Nook, that is, a Corner; and the AS. tun, with us, Town:
q. d. a Town in a Corner. Nonesuch, a Palace in Surrey; q. d. none like or
comparable to it. Norfolk, a County in England; q. d. North folk, (i. e.) Men
of the North, with respect unto Suffolk, (i. e.) South folk. Norham, or
Northam, in Northumberland, from North; and the AS. Ham, an Home or Habitation;
in the AS. it is called Ubbanford, either from one Vbba, the Founder thereof; or
from the River Vbba, and Ford; or was so called, quasi Ufan-Ford, i. e. the
upper Ford. Norman, q. d. Northman, i. e. a man of the North; for so were the
mixed Inhabitants of the Northern Countries, called, viz. Of Sweden, Denmark,
and Normandy; A People that continually were making Incursions upon France, the
Netherlands, and England, laying waste and spoiling many places thereof, even
to the Besieging of Paris, subduing England, Magna Graecia, and Sicily.
Normanton Fields, in Northamptonshire, corruptly for Dormanton Fields; from the
AS. Dormanceaster, i. e. the old Town of Dormford. Somner writes it
Dorm-ceaster, and derives it from the C. Br. Dor or Dwr, water, and withal
places it in Huntingdonshire. Norris, a Surname; probably from the Fr.
Nourrice, a Nurse. Northallerton, in Yorkshire; in the AS. Ealfertun, perhaps
from Elf, an Elf, Fairy, or Fiend; because it is thought that such terrestrial
Demons haunted this place, and tun, a Town; now called North-Allerton, or
Ealfertun, from its situation to the North. Northamptonshire, from Northampton,
the County Town thereof; which is so called from its Northern situation, (that
is with respect to Southampton,) and the River Anton, or Avon, according to
Camden. Northumberland, in the AS. Northan-Humberland, (i. e.) a Land on the
North side of the River Humber. Norwich, in Norf. a City and Bishop's See; in
the AS. Northyc, (i. e.) the Northern Bay, Harbor, or Castle; from the AS.
North, North, and Wyc, a Port or Castle. Nottingham, a famous County-Town, in
the AS. Snottengaham, from the AS. Snottenga, Caves, and Ham, an House or
Habitation. Novantes, an ancient People of Scotland, formerly Inhabitants of
the Country now called Galloway; perhaps from the C. Br. Nofio, to swim, and
Antur, having attempted, from Anturio, to attempt.
O.
OBotriti, or Abotriti, an ancient People of Germany, on both Sides of the
River Elbe, where now are the Dukedoms of Lunenburg and Megalopolis. Adr. Jun.
supposes them to be so called quasi, About riiters, or Abene reiters, that is,
Evening or Night-Riders, that is, such as on Horseback made inroads upon the
neighboring Nations despoiling them of their Goods, and laying waste their
Country. Ochy hole, a Cavern in Some. drawn from the C. Br. Ogo, a Cave; or from
the AS. Oga, terror, q. d. a place frightful to be looked into. Ockham, in
Surrey, a Village where William de Ockham, (Author of the Sect of Nominalists)
was born; perhaps q. d. Okeham, i. e. Oak-Town, from the abundance of Oaks
growing in or about it. Ockhampton, in Devonshire; from the River Ock, and
Anton, now Avon. Ockley, in Surrey, a Village; from the AS. Ac, an Oak, and
Lea, or Leag, a Field. Oder; see Viader, and Viadrus. Odoacer, King of the
Heruli, Rugii, Turcilingi, and at last of Italy, the same with Ottocar, or
Odgar; which see. Adr. Jun. writes him Haudovacrius, or Adovacrius; but wha^
Authors he has for it, I know not, saving his Supposition drawn from the Motto
written upon his Standard, houd u Wacker, which is by Interpretation, Hold, or
keep thy self watchful. It may also be drawn from the AS. Hold, trusty, and
Wacker, vigilant. Offchurch, in Warw. from Offa, King of the Mercii, and the
Builder thereof, whose Son, Fremund, was there interred. Oger, formerly a
Christen-Name, according to Camden, but now a Surname; perhaps from the AS.
Oga, terror. Okeham, in Rutland, from the AS. Ac, an Oak, and Ham, an House.
Okenyate, a small Village in the County of Shropshire, by the Romans called
Vsocona: Now it has its name from our word Oak and Gate, from some Oak growing
at the Gate; or because the Gate is made of Oak. Oker, a Surname, formerly
Okover, (i. e.) over Oak. Oldbury, in the County of Gloc. i. e. the old
Borough, see Bury in the Com. Names. Old Carlisle; see Carlisle. Old Perith, in
Cumberland, by the Romans called Petrian, from the Petreian Band that Quartered
there. The old Town in Herefordshire; in the C. Br. Castle Hen, the old Castle.
Old Winchester, in Northumberland; elsewhere called Vindolana, by adding
thereto the AS. termination Ceaster, a Town, is now degenerated into Old
Winchester. Oliver, a Christen-Name, from the Fr. Olivier, an Olive Tree. St.
Omer's, an University, from the Fr. St. Omer, a City over against Flanders, (i.
e.) the Church of St. Omer; or Omeropolis, the City of St. Omer. Ordevices, an
ancient People of Wales, from Oar Devi, (i. e.) upon the River Devi; for there
is a Tract by the Sea, which the Welsh to this day call Ardudwy. Ordulph, King
Edgar's Son, from the AS. Ora, a Port, and Ulph, help; or from the same Ulph,
and Ord, an Army; or from the Teut. Ort, a place, and the same Ulph, help.
Orial College, in the University of Oxford; Fuller surmiseth that it is so
called from its Oriental, or Eastern Situation; though I think rather q. Aurea
Aula, a Golden Hall, or Collegium Aureolum, (i. e.) a fair and stately College.
Original, a Christen-Name; I suppose the same with the Gr. Origenes, and Lat.
Origin. Ormond, in Ireland, by the Irish called, Orwow^n, that is, the Front of
Munster; see Munster. Ormus, a Haven upon the Persian Coast, famous in the time
of our Progenitors; now greatly impaired because of the Commerce or Tradings
being removed to another place; from the Gr. (...), an Harbor; because perhaps
it was the Harbor for the Ships, which Alexander the Great sent with his
Captains Onesicritus, and Nearchus to view the Shores of India. Orpington, or
Orpinton in Kent; perhaps from our word Orpin, a Plant so called, and Town,
from the abundance thereof thereabout. Osborn, from the AS. Hus, an House, and
Bearn, a Child; or Osborn, q. d. Hous-born; that is, born at home. St. Osith,
perhaps from the AS. Oath, ever, and Si'd, or Gesith, mild. Osmund, a
Christen-Name; from the AS. Hus, an House, and Mund, Peace. Osney, in the
County of Oxford, q.d. Ousney, from the River Ous, and the AS. Ea, Water, or
Land by the Rivers side. Osred, a King of Northumberland; from the AS. Os, for
Hus, an House, and Read, Counsel. Oswald, that Pious King of Northumberland;
from the AS. Hus, an House, and Wald, Power, or Wealdan, to rule, q.d. an
Householder, or Master of a Family. Oswaldsaw Hundred in Worcestershire, from
Oswald Bishop of Worcester, that begged the inspection thereof of King Edgar;
and the AS. Ea, water; quasi Oswald's Ea. Oswestre, in Shropshire, formerly
Oswaldstre, in the C. Br. Croix Oswald, Oswald's Cross; from the C. Br. Tree, a
Town, and St. Oswald King of Northumberland, that was here slain in Fight by
Penda, a General of the Mercii. Oswin, a Christen-Name; from the AS. Hus, an
House, and Winnan, to Win, or acquire; or rather from the same Hus, and Wine,
dearly beloved. Oswy, King of Northumberland, Founder of the Cathedral Church
at Litchfield, from the AS. Hus, an house, and Wie, consecrated, which comes
from the Teut. Weihen, or the Belg. Wiihen, Wiicn, to consecrate, or dedicate.
Otford, in Kent, memorable for an overthrow of the Danes; perhaps from a River
Ott, and Ford. Oaths, a Christen-Name; possibly from the Lat. Otho, though
Kilian derives it from the old Teut. At, Father. Ottadini, a British People,
that settled themselves in the County of Northumberland; possibly from the C.
Br. Vch Tin; that is, beyond the Tine. Otterey, in Devonshire, from Otter, and
the AS. Ea, water. Ottgar, King Edgar's Father-in-Law; perhaps, q. d. Oath
Guard, i. e. a Keeper of his Oath. See Odoacer, and Ottocar. Ottocar, a Puissant
Prince of Bohemia, Duke of Austria, and Lord of many other Dominions. Kilian
draws it from the old Teut. Oed^, untilled, and Acker, a Field; and takes it to
be the same with Odoacer. Some write it Ottgar, and draw it from the Teut.
At, Father, and Guard, q. d. his Father's Advocate. See Ottgar. Overborough,
in Luncashire; see Over, and Borough, in the Com. Names. St. Mary Overey, a
Street in the Borough of Southwark, beyond London Bridge, q. d. St. Mary Over
Ea, that is, St. Mary over, or on the other side the water. Ougthred, or
Vctred, formerly a Christen-Name, but now a Surname; perhaps from the AS. Uht,
early, the Morning Tide, and Redan, to give Counsel; that is to say, He that
gives seasonable Advice; or as the learned Th. H. tells us, from the Belg.
Hoch, high, and the AS. read, Counsel, (i. e.) noble Counsel. Oundle, or
Oundale, in the County of Northampton. It implies as much, as Avondale; from
the River Avon. Ousbourn, in Yorkshire, a little River, which runs into
Owse; See Bourn in the Com. Names. Martin Outwich, formerly St. Mary Otirwich
in London; not unlikely from the AS. Otyr, Oter, an Otter; and Wyc, a Dock, or
Wharf. Owdewater, or rather as the Belg. write it Oudewater; that is, the Old
Waters, a Town in Holland, famous for the Birth of Arminus the Divine; see Old
and Water in the Com. Names. Owen, a Christen-Name; Camden supposes it a
Corruption of the Gr. Eugenius. Owse, a River in Yorkshire, in Lat. Isis; which
Name is met with frequently in reading of History; which makes me think that
Owse and Avon were taken by the Britains for any River, or Water in general.
Oxford, a Bishop's See, and one of the two famous Universities of England; from
the AS. Oxenford, derived as the Gr. Bosphorus, or the Germ. Oschenfart, say
some. Leland will have it to be so called quasi Owseford, that is, the Ford of
Owse; which I take to be a better derivation of the Name.
P.
PAdstow, a Town in Cornwall, a Contract of Petroch-Stow, (i. e.) the Place, or
Church of St. Petroch, a British Saint. Pain, a Christen and Surname; possibly
from the Fr. Payen, which may be contracted from the Lat. Paganus, a Pagan. The
English Pale in Ireland, (i. e.) that part of Ireland wherein the English
formerly lived apart from the Irish by Laws of their own; probably it might
have this Name from the Pales or Stakes set round about it to keep off the
Irish Robbers. Pancerolt, a Surname; perhaps from the Fr. Pancerotte, a small
Paunch or Belly; see Paunch in the Com. Names. Parnell, a Contract of the Lat.
Petronilla, a Woman's Name. Parret, a River in Some. formerly called Pedrid.
Parry, a Welsh Surname, q. d. Ap Harry, i. e. the Son of Henry. Passelew, a
Surname; from the Fr. Passez l' Eau, from passing, or swimming, over the water.
Patison, q.d. Patrickson, i. e. the Son of Patrick. St. Patrick's Purgatory,
St. Patrick's Isle in Ireland, from the Lat. Patricius and Purgatory; which see
in the Com. Names. Patrington, in Yorkshire; by Antoninus, Praetorium, and by
corrup. Patrington, as the Italians have turned their Praetorium into
Petrovina. Paunton in Lincolnshire, by Anton. called ad Pontes, (i. e.) a Town
upon the Bridges. Paynell, (i. e.) Paganellus, a little Pagan, a Christ. Name;
see Pain above. Peagkirk, in the County of Northampton; from Peag, a a sacred
Virgin Sister to St. Guthlac, and Kirk; which see in the Com. Names. The Peak,
a Mountain in Derbyshire; Among us Peak signifies a jutting forth, and among
the Spaniards, the Mount in the Isle Tenariff, is called Pico, because perhaps
it has a sharp top like a Pike; see Pike in the Common Names. Pearson, a
Surname, q. d. Peter's Son, in the Fr. Pietre; from the Lat. Petrus, and our
Eng. Son. Peche, a Surname, from the Fr. Peche, a fault; or rather from Pesche,
fishing. Pedderton, in Somersetshire; heretofore Pedridan, from the River
Pedrid, formerly famous for the Court of King Ina, our first Saxon Lawgiver.
Peg, for Margaret; Versteg. draws it from the AS. Piga, a Girl. Pembroke, in
the C. Br. Pen Bro, a Mount or Head by the Sea. Pen, a Surname, from the C. Br.
Pen, an Head; in a secondary or figurative sense, The top of a Mountain. Pen, a
Village in Surrey, where the Britains received a great overthrow from
Xeniwalch, a West Saxon; and Canutus the Dane, from Edmond Ironside. It is
situate near to Wincaunton, which took its Name from our word Wine; or rather
from the AS. Winnan, to overcome, and King Canutus, that was there overcome;
Pen in the C. Br. as was said above, signifies an Head. Pencridge, or
Pancridge, in Staffordshire; perhaps from the C. Br. Pen, an Head, and Crug, a
Crag, Bank, or Ridge. Pendennis, in Cornwall; a Castle built by King Henry the
Eighth in the Port of Falmouth. In their Dialect it is called Pen Dinas, that
is, the Head of the Town. Pendle Hill in Lancash. from the C. Br. Pen, an Head,
as the Alps are called by the Latins, Pennini montes. Penigent, a Hill in
Lanc. from the C. Br. Pen gwin, (i. e.) from its Snow-white Top. Penmaen-maur,
a Mountain or Hill in Caern. by interpretation, the great Moor-head, or Top;
there is likewise, Pen-maen-bychan, i. e. the lesser Stony Top or Head.
Pennant, in Cornwall; (i. e.) in the C. Br. the Valleys Head. Penry, a Surname,
frequent among the Welsh, q. d. Ap Henry, i. e. Henry's Son; see Henry.
Pensans, a Town in Cornwall, i. e. the Head of Saints or Sands; either from our
word Saints, or Sands, and the C. Br. Pen, a Head; or from the same Pen, and
the Fr. G. Sans without. Penwith in Cornw. (i. e.) a Promontory on the left.
Percival, a Christen-Name, possibly from Perchevaal, a Village in Normandy,
which comes perhaps from the Fr. Perch, an Head, or Horn; and the old word
Val, a Valley. Perin, a Surname, formerly a Christen-Name; from the the Fr.
Pierrin, in the Lat. Petrinus, little Peter; for the termination in
diminishes. Perkin, a Surname; from the Fr. Pierre, Peter; and our diminut.
termination kin, q. d. little Peter, or Peter's Son; see Kin in the Com. Names.
Perpoint, and Pierpoint, a Surname of a noble Family; from the Fr. Pierre, a
Rock, or Stone, and Pont, a Bridge. Perrot, a Surname, from the Fr. Pierrot,
that is, Great Peter, this from Pierre, Peter, and the augmentative Termination
ot. Persho, in Worcestersh. vulgarly Parshoro, (i. e.) a Shore planted with
Pear Trees; for it is not far from the River Sabrina. Pertharitus, a King of
the Longobardi of Italy; perhaps from the Belg. Peer, an Horse, and Richten,
for Berichten, to teach; the Name implying as much as Horse-Courser.
Peterborough, in Northamptonshire; so called from an Abbey and Church erected
there formerly by Peada and Wulpher, Kings of the Mercii, in honor of St.
Peter. It is now a Bishop's See. Pevensey, in Sussex; from the AS. Peofen-Sea,
now by contraction Pemsey. Somn. writes it Paefena-Sae. Peverell, a Surname;
from Fr. Poivrel, or the It. Peverello, a small Peper Corn, these from the Fr.
Poivre, or the It. Pevere, Pevero, a Peper Corn. Philebert, a Christen-Name;
from the AS. Fela, the Belg. Veel, or the Teut. Viel, much, and Beorht, bright,
or splendid. Picardy, a Province of France; perhaps from the Fr. les Piques,
Pikes, and the Belg. Aerd, nature; they being mostly accustomed to fight with
Pikes. This Province had not this Name till the year of our Lord 300. The Picts
Wall, in Cumberland; in the C. Br. Gual, Gal, Bal, or Mur Sever; by the Scots
Scottish-Waith; by the English Inhabitants thereupon, Picts wall, Pehits wall,
or Keep wall, and the Wall by way of excellency; a very sumptuous work first
begun by the Emperor Adrian, and afterward continued by Severus. Piercy, a
Surname, according to Camden; not from piercing or darting out the Eye of a
King of the Scots, as Boethius relates; but from Pierce, which among the
Ancients was the same that Peter is amongst us. Pierce comes from the Fr.
Pierre, Sig. Peter, also a Stone. Pigot, a Surname; Camden says, that it
signifies a thing that is Speckled, and so may be derived from the It. Piga,
or the Lat. Pica, a Mag-Py, q. d. party-colored like a Mag-Py. The learned Th.
H. supposes that it comes from the Fr. Bigot. Pipinus, a King of France; Adr.
Jun. draws it from the Teut. Pipen, to make a shrill sound; It may be drawn
from the Fr. G. Pepin, a Pippin; or from Pie, a Foot, and Pein, Pain; as the
Gr. Oedipus. Pitchford, in Shropshire; so called from a Spring rising in a
private House, upon which Pitch continually floateth. Plaicy, in Essex; a
Placendo from pleasing, q. d. a pleasant place; as Placentia in Italy.
Plantagenet, a Surname; proper to the Dukes of Andium; and afterward to several
Kings of England; from the Fr. Plant Geneste, that is, a Plant of Broom, from
one of the Dukes of Andium; who, (to expiate the Death of his Brother, whom he,
to obtain the Empire for himself, had put to Death,) took a Journey into the
Holy Land, and every Night during his Journey, scourged himself with a rod of
Broom, for Penance. Pleasaunce, from the Fr. Plaisance, the It. Piacenza, or
the Lat. Placentia; so called from its pleasant Situation. Plegmund, an
Archbishop of Canterbury; perhaps from the AS. Plega, Plaga, Play, and
Mundian, to uphold. Plymouth, a famous City and Seaport Town in Devonsh. q.d.
the Mouth of the River Plim. Or it may be taken from the Gr. (...), the Tide.
Plonket, a Surname; not unlikely from the Fr. Blond, red-hair'd, and the Dim.
termination Ket. Poik, in Worcestersh. Camden writes it Powick, which may be
derived from the AS. Pol, a Pole and Wic, a Bay, or Fort. Poitevin, now Pelfin,
a Surname, q. d. Fr. le Poitevin, come of a Pict; or from Pictavia in France.
Pollard, a Surname, from the Fish called a Pollard; see Poll and Pollard in the
Com. Names. Or from our Eng. Verb, to Poll, or cut the hair. Polton, in
Cornwall; that is to say, Pool Town. Pont Eland, in Northumberland; from the
River Pontus; by the Romans 'twas called Pons Aelii. Pontfret, or Pontfract,
commonly called Pomfret, in Yorkshire, q. d. Lat. Pons fractus, the broken
Bridge. It is Historied that the Bridge was broken down by the vast Number of
People that met here to give a welcome to the Archbishop Wilhelm, King
Stephen's Nephew by his Sister; so that many did fall into the River, and had
been all inevitably drowned, but that a Tear which Wilhelm let fall, saved them
all. Portlock, in Summers. a small Harbor, q.d. the Ports Lock; see Lock in the
Common Names. Portland, an Isle in Dorsetshire; either from the Port Weymouth,
which is over against it; or from Portus, a noted Saxon Pirateer. Portland, in
Hantshire, anciently called Portsey, and Portchester; possibly heretofore
remarkable for some noted Port of Trade: from our old word Port, carriage or
behavior, and Land; which see in the Com. Names. Portslade, a small Village in
Sussex; q. d. a way Leading to the Port, according to Camden. Some derive it
from the AS. Sled, a Valley; that is, a Port or Haven in Valley or Bottom.
Portsmouth, a famous Seaport Town in Hantsh. q. d. the Mouth of the Port; see
Mouth and Port, in the Common Names. Powell, a Welsh Surname; q.d. Ap Howell,
i. e. Howell's Son; see Howell. Preston, in Lanc. q.d. Priests Town. Price, a
Surname; proper to the Welsh; q. d. Ap Rice, i. e. the Son of Rice. Prichard, a
Surname frequent in Wales, q. d. Ap Richard, i. e. the Son of Richard. Prindle,
a Surname; perhaps from the Lat. Praediolum, a small Farm, to which agrees
Camden. Probert, properly a Welsh Surname, q.d. Ap Robert, (i. e.) begotten of
Robert, Robert's Son; see Robert. Prodhow, or Prudhow Castle, in
Northumberland; by the Romans called Protolitia, or Procolitia, a Military
Fort. Prono, a God of the ancient Germans; perhaps from the Teut. Brandt, a
Brand, or Fire; for he is imagined to be the Germans Vulcan, or God of Fire.
Prud, a Welsh Surname, q.d. Ap Rhud, i. e. Rhud's Son; Rhud denotes one that
is red-hair'd; See Red in the Com. Names. Pudsey, a Surname; from the Fr. Puis,
a Well, and our word Sea; or the AS. Ea, Water. Pugh, a Welsh Surname, q. d. Ap
Hugh; that is, Hugh's Son. Pull hely, in Caern. in the C. Br. it implies as
much, as Salt Marsh. Putney, in Surrey, on the Bank of thee Thames; from the
Belg. Put, in the Plural Putten, a Well, and Ea, Water.
Q.
QVixot, Don Quixot, The noted Spanish Rhodomantado; from the Hisp. Quixotes
Terces, Armor for the Thigh; this again from the Lat. Coxa, the Hip; or it may
come from Quixada, Quixar, a Cheekbone, possibly so called from the greatness
of his Jaw bones, and leanness of his Cheeks. Quixar, may be drawn from the AS.
Ceac, Ceoca, a Cheek, or Cheekbone. Quinborough, in Kent, (i. e.) the Queens
Borough; a Castle built by King Edw. the Third in the honor of his Wife
Philippa of Hannonia.
R.
RAchisius, a King of the Longobardi of Italy; from the Teut. Raach, Revenge,
or Rachen, to revenge, (i. e.) an Avenger. Radbod, a King of Freezland, from
the AS. Rade, Counsel, and Bode, a Messenger. Radegisus, a King of the Gothi;
from the AS. Read, the Belg. Rood, or the Teut. Rot, Red, and Geisz, a Goat.
Jun. Radegonde, a Wom. Name; from the AS. Rade, Read, Counsel, and the Teut.
Gunnen, to favor; (i. e.) one that favors, or submits to good Counsel.
Radnor, old Radnor; in the C. Br. Pencrag, from its high top; perhaps from the
AS. Rade, a Road, and Ofer, or Ober, over. Radulph, or Rodulph; see Ralph,
beneath it. Raginbert, one of the Longobardi, Duke of Narvisium, in the year
701. perhaps from the Teut. Rechen, to avenge, or Raach, vengeance, and the AS.
Beorht, famous. Ralph, a Christen-Name; a Contract of Radulph, which is the
same with Rodulph; from the AS. Rade, Counsel, tell, and Ulph, Help, (i. e.) one
that assisteth in Counsel. Rams head, in Ireland; perhaps so called from the
likeness of a Ram's Head and Horns. Ramsey, in Huntingtonshire; from the AS.
Ea, Water, or an Isle, and Ram, q. d. Rams Isle. Randal, a Christen-Name;
Camden takes it to be a corruption of Ranulph, and derives it from the Teut.
Rein, Pure, and Ulph, Help. Ratcliff, in Middl. q. d. Red Cliff. Ravensbourn, a
River in Kent; from Raven, and Bourn; see both in the Common Names. Raulins, a
Surname; from the Fr. Raoul, Radulph, by adding the Patronymick Termination
ins, q. d. Ralph's Son, or little Ralph; see Ralph. Raymund, a Christen-Name;
from the Teut. Rein, Pure, and Mund, a Mouth, (i. e.) one that abstains from
wanton Discourses; or from the Teut. Ruh, rest, and the AS. Mund, Peace; (i.
e.) one that answers not again. Reading, in Berks, a Town of great Trade;
Camden draws it from the C. Br. Redin, Fern, which grows thereabouts in great
abundance. Leland supposes that it is thus named, from the meeting together of
other waters, with the River The, or Rhea. Reafan, the Banner, or Flag of the
Danes, from the figure of a Raven embroidered thereupon by King Lodbroke's
Daughter. See Raven in the Com. Names. Reccaredus, or Richaredus, a King of the
Spanish Vice-Gothi; from the AS. Ric Rich, and Read, Counsel; or from the Teut.
Reden, to say, and the same Ric, that is, one of a fluent and eloquent Tongue.
Rechilla, a King of the Spanish Swedes; from the Teut. Rechen, revenge, and
Ellen, to make have; that is, one quick to revenge. Reciswindus, a King of the
Spanish Vice-Gothi; not unlikely from the Teut. Rechen, to avenge, and
Geschwind, speedily. Reculver, in Kent; in the AS. Raculf. Redbridge, in
Hantsh. in the AS. Reed, ford, (i. e.) Reed-ford, or Reed-bridge. Redwall, or
rather Redwald, King of the East-English; from the AS. Read, Counsel, and Wald,
Power, i. e. one that bears Sway in Counsel. Reeve, a Surname; from the AS.
Refa, or Genefa, a Tax-Master, or Grave; see Grave in the Common Names.
Reginfred, Reinfred, or Rainfred; from the Teut. Rein, Upright, and Friede, or
the AS. Frede, Peace. Regni, an ancient People of Britain, that formerly had
the Shires, Surrey and Sussex, and part of Hantshire in Possession; not
unlikely from the C. Br. Rheg, a Gift, and Neges, a Messenger. Reinard, a
Christen-Name; from the Teut. Rein, incorrupt, and the Belg. Aerd, Nature, q.
d. Honestly minded. Reiner, a Christen-Name; from the Teut. Rein, unspotted,
and Ehr, Belg. Eere, Honor, i. e. one, whose good Name is unstained. Reinfraw,
in Scotland; Ptol. calls it Randuara. Reinhold, Rainhold, or Renald, a
Christen-Name; from the Teut. Rein, Pure, and Hold, Friendship, says Camden:
From the same Rein, and Held, a Nobleman, says Versteg. I might also draw it
from the same Rein, and our English Hold; that is, one, that holds fast his
Integrity. Remismundus, a King of the Spanish Swedes, q. d. Rumismund; from the
Teut. Ru^hm, fame or Report; and the AS. Mund Peace, or the Teut. Mund, a
Mouth; that is, famous for Peace, or Eloquence. Rene, Titular King of Naples
and Sicily, from the prefix Lat. Re, again, and the Fr. Ne, born, (i. e.)
reborn, born again; as to the Kingdom. Renimed in Middlesex; that is to say,
Running Mead, memorable for the rebellious meeting of the Barons against King
John. Repton, in Derbishire, a Town memorable for the overthrows of Aethelbald,
and Buthred, two Kings of the Mercii; not unlikely from the Teut. Rein, clean,
and the AS. tun, a Town, (i. e.) a clean Town. Rheadsdale, in Northumberland;
that is to say, the Dale of the River Rhead, or The. The Rhein, next after
Danubius, the most famous River not in Germany only, but in all Europe; from
the Teut. Rein, clear, pure, q. d. a clear Water; they used to wash and purify
newborn Babes therein, to try whether they were Genuine or no; or from the
Teut. Rinnen, to flow, or Runnen, to run. Rhese, a Welsh Christ. Name; Camden
draws it from the Teut. Riese, a Giant. It may also not improbably be drawn
from the C. Br. Rhesel, a Crib or Rack to put Hay in for Horses. Rhie, in
Sussex, a Seaport; from the Fr. Rive, a Shore, or Bank of a River. Rian, a
River in Scotland; at the Mouth of which was a Town, by Ptolem. called,
Abravanus, q.d. Aber Ruani, the Mouth of the River Rian, or Ruan.
Ribblechester, an old Town in Lanc. Ptolem. calls it, Ribodunum, and corruptly
Rigodunum. Ribell, a place in Lanc. whither the Tide comes; by Ptolem. called
Bellisama, and by adding the AS. The, a River, to the beginning of the old
Name, Bellisama, it comes now to be called Ribell. Ricciarius, King of the
Spanish Swedes, in the Year 48. not unlikely from the AS. Ric, or the Teut.
Reich, Rich, and the AS. Are, or the Teut. Ehr, Honor, that is, one greatly
honored. Rice, see Rhese. Richard, Versteg. draws it from the AS. Ric, or the
Teut. Reich, Rich, and our Eng. word Heart, that is, Liberal, or as we say,
open hearted. Some draw it from the same Ric, Rich, and the Belg. Aerd, Nature;
that is, one that has great natural Parts; others, from the AS. Rice, a
Kingdom, and Ward, a Keeper. Aventin. writes it Reichgard, from the Teut.
Reich, rich, and Guard, to keep. Jun. writes it Reichraht, i. e. a Rich
Senator, from the same Reich, rich, and Raht, Counsel, also a Senator.
Richborough, in Kent, formerly Richberge; in the AS. Repti muth, by Anton.
Rhitupis Portus; by Marcell. Rhutupiae Statio, all which are but little
dissonant one to another. Camd. draws it from the C. Br. Ryth Tusyth, (i. e.)
the Sandy Ford. Richmond, from the AS. Ric, Rich, and Mond, Peace, or Mund, a
Mouth, (i. e.) Peaceable, or Eloquent. Ricimerus, or Richimerus, a Swede by
descent, that most nefariously usurped the Roman Empire; either from the AS.
Ric, a Kingdom, and Mere, famous, or from the Teut. Reich, a Kingdom, and
Mehren, to increase. Ridvers, for shortness Rivers, in Heart. i. e. de Ripariis,
pertaining to the Banks; a Surname. Riegate in Surrey; (i. e.) the Gate, or
Course of the River Rye. Ring, a Surname; possibly from the AS. Hring, a
Circle, or Compass. Ringwood, Regnewood, or Rincewood, in Hantsh. formerly the
Metropolis of the People called Regni, q. d. the Wood or Forest of the Regni,
into which they fled for Protection, as wild Beasts into a Wood. Ripley, a
Village in Surrey, where William Ripley, the Chemist was born; from our word
Ripe, and the AS. Leag, Leg, a Field, or Pasture. Rising, in Norfolk;
heretofore noted for a Castle called Rising-Castle; from its rising or high
Situation. Rithy, a Surname; probably from the C. Br. Ryth, a Ford. Robert, a
Christen-Name; Camden draws it from the AS. Rade, Counsel, and Beorht, famous.
Versteg. says, that it was heretofore written Ruberiht, and Ruberight, and
draws it from the Teut. Rou or Ruh, rest, and the Termination Beright, i. e.
forward, or prone to any thing. It may be taken from the Teut. Roth, Red, and
Bart, a Beard. The Dutch write it Ruprecht, which may seem to come from Ruh,
Quietness, or Peace, and Pracht, Pomp, or Splendor. Roch, a Surname, in the
Fr. de le Roche; from Roche, a Rock. Rochester, in Kent, a Bishop's See; Anton.
writes it. Roibis, The Eng. Saxons Wroeceaster; and not many Ages since, it was
called Rewchester. It may possibly be called Rochester, from the Fr. Roche, a
Rock; and the AS. Ceaster, a Castle or City. Rodelinda, Wife to Pertharitus
King of the Longobardi of Italy; from the AS. and old Teut. Rade, Counsel, and
Lind, mild. Roderic, a Christ. Name, frequently given to the Spanish
Vice-Gothi; from the AS. Rade, the Teut. Raht, or the Belg. Raed, Counsel, and
the AS. Ric, or Teut. Reich, Rich. Rodoaldus, a King of the Longobardi of
Italy; derived either from the AS. Rade, Counsel, and Wald, Power, whence
Wealdan, to rule, (i. e.) he, that rules prudently; or from the Belg. Rood,
and Wald, a Wood. Roger, a Christen-Name; from the Teut. Ruh, Rest, and Guard, a
Keeper. Kilian draws it from the same Ruh, Quietness, and the Teut. Geren,
Begeren, to covet, or desire. Roiston, in Heart. from Roisia, a Pious Lady, who
in the time of the Normans, here set up a Crucifix, q. d. Roisia's Town.
Rolland, or Rowland, a Christ. Name; Camden draws it from the AS. Rade, or Rod,
Counsel, and Land; q. d. his Countries Patron or Counselor. Verstegan, from
the Belg. Row, Peace, and the same Land, that is, a Pacifier of his Country.
Rollo, a Duke of Normandy; perhaps from the Teut. and Goth. Roth, Red, and
Luwe, a Lion, (i. e.) a bloody Lion; hence styled the bloody Brother.
Romeswork, in Kent; a place near the Sea, where it is thought that Caesar the
Dictatour at his first Arrival in this Land, pitched his Tents; (i. e.) the
Work of the Romans. Romoaldus, one of the Longobardi, Duke of Beneventum; from
the Teut. Ruhm, Glory, and the AS. Wealdan, to reign, or Wald, Gealt, Power; or
from the Teut. Raum, Room or Space, and Wald, a Wood. Rosamund, a
Christen-Name; from Rosa, a Rose, and the Teut. Mund, a Mouth; from her
rosy-colored Lips. Rosland, a small Province in Cornwall; from the C. Br.
Ros, Heath, and Land; which see in the Common Names. Ross, a Foreland in
Scotland, the Seat of the ancient Cantae; perhaps from the C. Br. Ros, Heath or
Ling. Rotharis, a King of the Longobardi of Italy. Kilian draws it from the
Teut. Retter, a Deliverer; this from the Verb Retten, to deliver. Rotherfield,
in Sussex, formerly Rotheram; from the River Rither, or Rother, and Field;
which see: from hence also Rotherbridge. Rotterdam, a chief City of Trade in
Holland; Adr. Jun. interprets it, the Dam or Wear of Rota, or Roter, a small
River that runs hard by it, and disembogueth it self into the River Mosa; see
Dam in the Com. Names. De Rougemont, a Surname; from the Fr. Rouge, Red, and
Mont, a Mount. Rous, a Surname; from the Fr. Roux, red-hair'd. Routon- Castle,
in Shropshire; Anton. calls it Rutanium, whence Routon. Row, a Surname; our
North-Country-men pronounce it Raw; from the Fr. Rue, a Street, or Lane.
Roward, a Christen-Name; from the Belg. Rouw-Waerd, a Title of great Dignity in
Brabant, with Power not much less than that of a Dictatour of the Romans. It
may be compared to our Constable or Master of the Horse; from the Belg. Rouw,
Quietness, and Waerden, to Ward, or keep, q. d. a Defender of Public Concord.
Rowen, Daughter to Hengist the English-Saxon, Wife to Vortigern, King of the
Britons; not unlikely from the Teut. Ruh, or Belg. Rouw, Peace; and the AS.
Winnan, to acquire. Roxburg, or Roxborough, in Scotland, heretofore called
Marchidun, (i. e.) the Hill of the Marches, which see; as also Mark and Downs
in the Com. Names. It is now called Roxborough, possibly from some Rocks or
Crags adjoining. Rugii, a warlike People of Germany upon the Balthick Sea; Adr.
Jun. draws it from the Belg. Ruge, rough, hairy, probably from the natural
roughness of their Bodies; or because they were clothed with the shaggy Skins
of of Wild-Beasts; See Rough in the Com. Names. Rumney, or Romeney, in Kent,
formerly Romenal; perhaps from the Romans, that first Landed on that Shore. It
is also the proper Name of a Man. Rumsey, in Hantshire, in the AS. Rumseg,
memorable for a Nunnery of veiled Nuns, erected by King Edgar; perhaps from the
AS. Rum, Broad, or Large, and Saeeg, Sedge. Russel, a Surname; from the Fr.
Roux, Red, and the dim. Term. el, that is to say, somewhat Red; for the old Fr.
word Russel, signified formerly the same that Rosseau does now. Ruthin in Denb.
in the Lat. called Ruthunia, in the C. Br. Ruthun; perhaps from the C. Br.
Rhwth spacious, Broad. Ruthlan, in Flintshire; from the red Rock or Bank of the
River Cluyd, and Llan, a Temple, i. e. a Red Church. Rutlandshire, in the AS.
Roteland; from the Germ. Rud, or Rote, red, or ruddy, that being the color of
the Soil; and our words Land, and Shire; which see in the Common Names.
S.
SAcy Forest in Northamptonshire, q. d. Salsey, from the Lat. Salicetum, a
place where Willows grow. Saffron Walden, in Essex; from the great store of
Saffron, and Walden, which comes from the AS. Wall, a Trench, or Wall, and Den,
a Dale. Salisbury, alias Sarisbury, in Wiltshire, a Bishop's See, from the Lat.
Sarisberia; in the AS. Searisbyrig, or Searoburg, q. d. Dry Town; for the old
Town stood upon an Hill where no Water was, but it is now situate in a Vailey,
and a little Brook runs through the Streets thereof. See to Sear, and Borough,
in the Com. Names. Saltmersh, a Surname, by the change of one letter, from
Salt, and Marsh. Samond, a Surname; from St. Amand. Sampier, a Surname; from
the Fr. de Saint Pierre, i. e. of St. Peter. Sampoll, a Surname; from the Fr.
de Saint Paul, i. e. of St. Paul. Sandon, in Kent; (i. e.) Sandy Town; from
Sand and Town; which see in the Com. Names. Sandwich, in Kent; from Sand, and
Which; which see in the Com. Names. Sassem, a Village in Holland; Adr. Jun.
supposes that it is called so quasi Sachsen Hiem, the Saxons Home; for its
certain that the Saxons once subdued a great part of the Low Countries.
Saucheverell, a Surname; from the Fr. Saute, a Forest, and Chevrelle, a young
She-Goat. Saxon, in the AS. we find Seaxna THeod, the People of Saxony, and
Eald Seax, an old Saxon; from the AS. Seax, the Goth. Cimbr. Saks, or the Fr.
Th. Sahs a Poniard, which the Ancient Saxons always wore in stead of Swords.
Mer. Cas. draws the AS. Seax, from the Gr. and Pers. (...), a kind of short
Sword. These ancient Saxons were formerly divided into a threefold People;
namely, into the Ostphali, Westphali, and Angarii. Scales, a Surname; see Scale
in the Com. Names. It is the same with the It. de la Scala, and Fr. de l'
Eschelle, made famous by the Princes of Verona, and two most learned Monarchs,
the Father and Son, of that Name. Scandia, by the Inhabitants called
Schoenland; from the Teut. Schoen, Schon, fair, which may come from Scheinen,
to shine; q.d. a fair Land, or pleasant Country. Scarborough, a Port in
Yorkshire; from the AS. Scear, a Scar, and Burg, a Town, says Camden. Skinner
draws it from the AS. Scearp, Sharp, and the same Burg, (i. e.) a Town or Fort
by a sharp or picked Rock, the same, as Scharpenberg, in Brabant, and the Fr.
Montaigue. Scardale, in Devonsh. a Valley encompassed with Rocks; from the AS.
Scear, a Scar or Cape; or from Scearres, Scars, or Rocks; and Dale. Scarr, a
Surname; from the other Scarr; which see in the Com. Names, and Scarborough
above. Schiedam, a Town in Holland. Adr. Jun. calls it the Dam or Wear of the
River Schie; see Dam in the Com. Names. Schoon-haven, a City in Holland; from
the Belg. Schoon or Teut. Schon, fair, and Have, a Sheep Coat, Hoeve, a Farm,
or our Eng. Haven. Scots, Inhabitants of Scotland; also the Name of the People
called Scythae. Adr. Jun. draws it from our word to Shoot, q. d. Archers (...);
see Shoot in the Common Names, and Scythae following. Scythae, or Scythians.
Adr. Jun. and Voss. suppose that they formerly used the German Tongue, and that
they derived their Name from the Teut. Schieten, to shoot, or cast Darts, q. d.
die Schieters, the Shooters, by way of excellency. See Shoot, in the Common
Names. Seater, a God of the Germans; Verstegan distinguishes it from Saturn,
though without ground. Consult Verstegan, and see Saturday in the Com. Names.
Seaton, in Devonshire; that is to say, Sea town; and by our Ancestors called
Moridunum, from the C. Br. M^r, the Sea, and Dun, a Town. Sebald, or Sewald;
from the AS. Sae, the Sea, and Wealdan, to rule. Sebart, King of the
East Saxons, who was the first of that People that embraced Christianity.
Verstegan takes it to be a Contract of Sigebert. It may be drawn from the AS.
Sae, the Sea, and Beorht, famous; (i. e.) renowned for Sea-Conquests.
Seckington, in Warw. in the Saxons time, called Seccandune; from Secce, a
Fight, and Dune, a Town or Hill. Seghill, in Northumberland; from the AS.
Secce, a Fight, or Secg, a Warrier, or Sagene, a Sword, and our word Hill; or
from the AS. Srge, the Teut. Sieg, or the Belg. Sighe, Victory, and the same
Hill. Seimore, a noted Surname (i. e.) of St. More; from the Fr. de Saint Mor,
or Maur. Selby, famous for a great Convent, or Abbey, the Abbot whereof had the
Title of a Baron of the Realm; from the AS, Sell, Good, Convenient, and By, an
Habitation. Sellenger, a Surname, a Corr. of Saintleger, which comes from Saint
Leodegar; which see. Selrid, a King of the East Saxons; from the AS. Sell well,
and Read, Counsel, or Redan, to give Advice. Selsey, in Sussex; formerly a
Bishop's See; but that authority is now removed to Chichester, and the place
become of very small Consideration, from the AS. Seol, a Seol-fish, and Ea, or
Ige, an Isle. Semarc, a Surname, from Saint Medard. Semarton, a Surname; from
Saint Martin. Senly, a Surname; from Saint Lizy. Senilo, a Surname; from Saint
Loid. Sentlow, a Surname; from the Fr. Saint Loup, (i. e.) Saint Love. Seofrid,
a King of the East Saxons; from the AS. Seo, the Sight, and Frith, or Frede,
Peace. Sevenoke, or Senoke, in Kent; so called from 7 great Oaks that grew
there, but were cut down long ago. Severn, a River, in the C. Br. called
Haffren, in the Lat. Sabrina. Shaftsbury, in Dorsetshire; from the AS. Sceaft,
a Shaft, or Arrow; or as Camden will have it, a Spire Steeple, and Bury, a
Town. Shannon, in Ireland, Ptolem. calls it Senus, Oros. Sena, and in some
Copies it is written Secana, whence by corruption Shannon. Shaw, a Surname;
Camden expounds it a shady Forest; see Shadow in the Common Names. Sheal, a
Surname, by interpretation, a Cottage, not unlikely from the AS. Sceala, Shells
or Rings; because as Houses defend the Inhabitants, so Shells the Bird in the
Egg, and the Rind the Pap in the Apple. Shene, now Richmond, in Surrey, the
King's Country House, upon the shore of the Thames; so called from its shining;
See Shine in the Common Names. Or from the Teut. Schon, Fair. Sheppy, an Isle
in the County of Kent; from the AS. Sceap-Ea, or Sceap-Ige, i. e. the Sheeps
Isle, from Sheep that abundantly multiply therein; and therefore, not
unelegantly, called by Leland, Ovinia, from Ovis, a Sheep. Sherborn, in Dors.
from the AS. Scire-burn, i. e. the clear Fountain; see Sheer and Bourn in the
Common Names. Sherwood, in Nottingh. (i. e.) Sheer Wood; see Sheer, and Wood,
in the Common Names. Shipston, in Warw. (i. e.) the Sheeps-Town. Shobery, in
Essex; from the AS. Sceo, a Shoe, and Byrig, a Town. Shoreham, in Sussex; from
the AS. Scoreham, and this again from score, a shore, and Ham, an home; so
called, because it lies to the Shoreward; see Shore in the Com. Names. Shot,
Shut, or Shute, perhaps from the Verb to shoot; which see in the Com. Names. It
may likewise be taken from the Belg. Schot, the Fr. Escot, or our own word
Shot, i. e. a Reckoning or Club amongst good-fellows. Shrewsbury, the County
Town of Shropshire; from Shrubs and Bury: which see in the Com. Names. In the
Welsh it is now called ymwithig, from the pleasant situation thereof; as the
Lat. Placentia, or the Gr. Callipolis, etc. Sicambri, a People of the
Netherlands; Jun. draws it from the Teut. Suchom her, (i. e.) Look about thee;
which he supposes to have been a Motto wrought upon their Standard. Sichild,
Wife to Clothair, King of France; perhaps from the Teut. Sieg, Victory, and
Held, for Heldinne, a Noble Woman. Sidenham, a Village in Devonshire; perhaps
from the AS. Sid or Side, long, and Ham, a Village. Sigebald, a Christen-Name;
from the AS. Sige, or the Teut. Sieg, Conquest, and Bald, Bold; also swift,
says Verstegan, q. d. one that is quick in pursuit of Victories; or that
becomes more courageous than usually after a Victory obtained. Sigebert, King
of the East-English; from the AS. Sige, Teut. Sieg, Victory, and Beorht,
famous. Verstegan draws it from the same Sige, and Briht, advised. Kilian from
the Belg. Sighe, Victory, and Werd, worthy; that is, one worthy of the Victory.
Sigemer, Jun. derives it from the Germ. Sige, Victory, and Meyer, a Major; or
it may be drawn from the same Sige, and Mehren, to augment. Sigeric, from the
AS. Sige, Victory, and Ric, Rich, (i. e.) Rich in Conquests. Sighere, a King of
the East Saxons; from the AS. Sige, Victory, and Here, an Army. Sigismund, a
Christen-Name; either as Camden has it, from the AS. Sige, Victory, and Mund,
Peace; that is, one that procures Peace, yet so as by Victory; or as Jun. and
Verstegan write, from the Teut. Sieg, Victory, and Mund, a Mouth; that is, one
that conquers his Enemies by good words, or fair means. Silcester, in
Hantshire, by Nenn. Caer Segonte, q. d. the City, or Town of the Segontiacks;
Camden says, that the AS. Selceaster, denotes a great Town; yet I think it
rather implies, a fair Town. Silly Islands; Sulp. Severus calls them Sillinae
Insulae; in the Lat. Bar. Sorlinges, more frequently; the Greek Geographers
call 'em Cassiterides, namely, from the Stannaries, or Mines of Tin. Simberd, a
Surname; from St. Barbary; perhaps it was formerly read Simberb, which in
French is rendered de Saint Barbe, and this is the Dim. of the Fr. name
Barbare, with us Barbara, as before. Singlis, an Irish Surname; from St.
Gelasius. Sisebubus, a King of the Spanish Vice-Gothi, in the year 621; perhaps
from the Teut. Susz, sweet, and Butte, a Lip, or Cup. Sisenandus, another King
of the Spanish Vice-Gothi; not unlikely from the Teut. Susz, sweet, and
Sohnend, coming of the Verb Sohnen, to reconcile. Sitsilt, a Welsh Surname, now
Cecill. Siwald, heretofore a Christ. Name, but now a Surname; from the AS.
Sige, Victory, and Wealdan, to rule. Siward, a Christen-Name; Verstegan says,
that it was formerly read Sighward; from the AS. Sige, the Teut. Sieg, or the
Belg. Sighe, Victory, and Ward, a Keeper; that is, he that does not carelessly
lose the advantages of a Conquest. Siwe, a God of the Germans; perhaps from the
AS. Sige, or Teut. Sieg, Victory, which the Romans worshipped as a Deity.
Skeffington, the Name of a Village; from the AS. Sceap, a Sheep, and Town, q.
d. Sheeping Town, i. e. the Shepherd's Town. Skell, or Schell, a Surname; from
the AS. Sceale, a pair of Scales. Skrekingham, in Lincolnshire, corruptly for
Trekingham, i. e. the Place of three Kings; because three Danish Kings fell
here in Battle; from tree for three, King, and the AS. Ham, which signifies an
home or habitation. Smeth, or Smeath, a Surname; Camden expounds it, a Plain,
from the AS. Smaethe, smooth, even. Snell, a Surname; from the Belgic. Snel,
the Teut. Schnell, the It. Snello, or the Fr. Isnel, swift and nimble. Snowden,
in Caernarv. from Snow, and the AS. Den, a Den, or any receptacle; in the C.
Br. Craig Eriry, from Snow always seen upon the top thereof. Sole, a Surname;
Camden says that it signifies a Puddle, or Pool; yet Sol, in the AS. is put
for an Halter, or Stay. Somersetshire, from Somerton, that was formerly the
chief Town in the County; in the AS. Somertunscire, perhaps so called, because
of the Pleasantness of Dwelling in the Summer time. Southampton, a famous Port;
Anton. calls it Clausentum, from Clausus, and the River Anton: It is now drawn
from the same Anton, and South, to distinguish it from Northampton lying more
to the North. Leland calls it Avondunum, and draws it from the C. Br. Avon or
Afon, a Water, and the AS. Dune, a Bank, or tun, a Town. Southwark, in Surrey,
over against London, in the AS. Southerc, (i. e.) a Work or Building on the
Southside of London; see South in the Common Names. Spencer, formerly le
Despencer, a Surname of a Noble Family; from the Fr. le Despensier, that is, a
Steward. Spene, a Village in Berkshire; the old Town called by Anton. Spenae.
Stafford, a County Town; Somner. draws it from the AS. Stef, a Staff, and Ford.
Standard hill, in Sussex; so called, because William the Conqueror set up his
Standard on this Hill, before he joined Battle with Harhold; see Standard and
Hill in the Com. Names. Stanes, in Middlesex; from the AS. Stana, Stones.
Stanford, in Linc. from the AS. Stan, a Stone, and Ford, that is, a Stony Ford.
Stanley, a Surname; from the AS. Stan, a Stone, and Leag, a Pasture. Stanton,
from the AS. Stan, a Stone, and Town, (i. e.) a Stony Town. Stany-street, in
Surrey; that is to say, Stony-street. Stert, a Foreland in Devonsh. from the
AS. Stert, or Steort, a Tail; because like a Tail it is stretched out in length
into the Sea. Stert point in Somersetsh. (i. e.) a Tailed Promontory; from the
AS. Stert, Steort, a Tail. Stey, a Surname; from the AS. Stige, a Path; yet
Camden, and before him Aelfricus, render it a Bank, or Wear. Stigand, an
Archbishop of Canterburry, about the time of the Arrival of William the
Conqueror; perhaps from the AS. Stigend, or Stigand, coming of the Verb
Stigan, to climb; and surely none will except against his climbing that has the
good luck to see himself seated in an Archbishop's Chair, without a fall by
the way. Stiliard, in London, by the Thames side; Minsh. and the Learned Th. H.
take it to be so called from Steel, and Yard, because Merchants bring in and
set to sale great store of Steel therein. There is read also Style Yard, in
some ancient Writings, which may be taken from the Style, that parted it from
the next Street, that Carts, Coaches and such like Annoyances, might not
interrupt men there met together to commune about Merchandice. Stilico, perhaps
from the Teut. Still, quiet, and Leich, a Funeral. Stoke, a Surname, the same
with Stow, which signifies a Place, says Camden: yet I had rather draw it
from the AS. Stocce, the Trunk of a tree; see Zouch, beneath. Stoke Flemming,
in Devonsh. from a Noble Flemming, the Landlord hereof in times of yore, and
the AS. Stocce, the Body of a Tree. Stoneham, in Hantshire; see Stone and Ham,
in the Com. Names. Stonehenge, in Wiltshire; some surmise that the great Stones
seeming as it were to hang in this place, were set up for Monuments of some
famous Men that were there slain; from Stone and Hang: which see in the Common
Names. Stony Stratford, in Buck. q. d. Stony-street-ford. Stourminster, in
Dorsetshire; from the River Stowr, and a Minster, that formerly stood there;
from hence likewise Sturton, a Village, quast Stowe Town. Stow, a Surname; from
the AS. Sto, a Place. Stradling, a Surname, Corruption of Easterling; which
see, and Sterling in the Com. Names. Strasburg, a famous City in the Empire of
Germany; perhaps from the Teut. Strasz, a Way, and Burg, a City. Strathern, in
Scotland; from the C. Br. Straith Ern, i. e. a Valley by the River Ern, says
Skinner, though Straith is not found in Davis. Stratton, in Shropshire, (i. e.)
Street Town, or rather Strait Town, that is, a narrow, and strait Town, or a
Town in a Valley. Streanes hall, formerly famous for a Covent of
English-Saxons. Somner draws it from the AS. Streond, Strand, a Strand, or
Shore; and Heal, a Corner, or Healc, otherwise Hylc, a Bending, or Turning.
Sturbridge, in Kent; that is to say, the Bridge of the River Stur. Suevi, of
late Schwauben, formerly a most renowned People of Germany; perhaps from
Schweben, to move, q. d. a nimble, or active People. Suffolk, from the AS.
Suthfolc, that is, Folk, or People of the South, in opposition to those of
Norfolk. Suintilla, a King of the Spanish Vice-Gothi; not unlikely from the
Teut. Suenth, a Wench, by adding the Dim. Term. illa, q. d. little Wench; from
his pretty little Stature or Countenance. Sully, in Glamorg. an Isle; either
from Sully, the Lord of the Manor, or from the Silures, an ancient People so
called. Sureby, in Yorkshire; Ptolemy calls it (...) Gabrantovicorum; others
call it the Bay of Safety; q. d. Sure Bay. Surrey, from the AS. Suth, the
South, and Rea, a River, q. d. South of the River, as says Camden. It may also
come of South, and the Belg. Ricg, a Ridge; or from the Fr. G. Sud, the South,
and Rive by contraction Rye, the Bank of a River. Sureteyes, a Surname; from
the Fr. Sur Teyse, i. e. upon the River Teyse. Sussex, from the AS. Suthsex, q.
d. South Saxony. Suthred, the last King of the East Saxons; from the AS. Soth,
true, and Redan, to speak. Suthwell, in Not. (i. e.) the South Well. Beda
calls it Tiovul Fingacester, where St. Pauline, Archbishop of York baptized
the People of this Country in the River Trent. Sutton, a Village in Devonshire,
and elsewhere, q. d. South Town. Swain, formerly a Danish Christ. Name, but now
a Surname; from the old word Swain a Countryman, or Farmer; see Swain in the
Com. Names. Swaldale, in Yorkshire; from the River Swale, and Dale, a Valley.
Swanescomb, in Kent; either q. d. Swaines-camp, or Swaines-comb, i. e. the
Valley of Swain, a General of the Danes; that pitched his Tents here. Sweden,
formerly the Seat of the ancient Gothi, the Vandali, and the Suiones; from
which last in tract of time, the Country came to be called Sweden. Swithelm, a
King of the East Saxons; from the AS. Sith, greatly, and Helm, properly, an
Helmet, and by translation, Safeguard, q. d. one that protecteth others with
might and main. St. Swithin, Bishop of Winchester; formerly Switheahn; Camden
draws it from the AS. Sith, greatly, and Heah, or Heahn, high: It may also not
improbably be drawn from the Belg. Swith, Valiant, and Helm, an Helmet, and so
may seem to be a depravation of Swithhelm next above. Syncler, a Surname; from
the Fr. de Saint Claire, i. e. of St. Claire.
T.
ST. Tabb's, (i. e.) the Church of St. Ebba; see St. Ebba above. Tadcaster, in
Yorkshire; from the AS. Tade, a Toad, and ceaster, a Castle, perhaps because
the Ditch or Trench cast round it might abound with Toads. Tailbois, a Surname;
from the Fr. Tailler, to cut, and bois, a Wood, q. d. a Carpenter. Tamerton, in
Cornwall; formerly called Tamara; from the River Tamara, and by adding the AS.
tun, a Town, Tamerton. Tamworth, in Staffordshire; from the River Tama, and the
AS. Weorth, or Worth, an Isle, or Holme, also a Court, or Country House; as in
Germany, Keiserwert, and Bomelswert, (i. e.) the Isle of Caesar, and Bomelius.
Tancred, King of Naples and Sicily, of the Norman race; not unlikely from the
AS. THancgian, or the Teut. Dancken, to give thanks; it may also be drawn from
Danck, thanks, and Reden, to speak. Tanfara, a God of the ancient Germans,
whose most stately Temple Germanicus Caesar levelled with the ground. Jun.
draws it from the Article The, and Anfang, a beginning; perhaps he was among
them the same that Saturn was among the Romans. Tavistoke, a Town in Devonsh.
from the River Teav, and the AS. Sto, a place. Taunton, a sine Town in Some. q.
Thonton; from the River Thon, and Ton, for Town. Tees, a River in the
Bishopric of Durham, called by Ptolemy (...), or (...), and thence by
corruption Tees. Teifedale, in Scotland, (i. e.) a Dale by the River Tefy, or
Teviat. Teiguemouth, in Devonshire; that is the Mouth of the River Teigue.
Bishops Teiguton, a place of Refuge or Sanctuary in former times; a Village
upon the same River. St. Telean, a Welshman, Bishop of Landaff. I take it to be
a corruption of the Heb. Elias, or the Lat. Aelius; though some allusively, in
the respect of his Piety and Learning, have called him (...), that is, Apollo,
or the Son. Temesford, in Bedfordshire; (i. e.) the Ford of the Thames, and
Owse; see Thames below. Temple Bruer, in Lincolnshire; from Temple, and the Fr.
Bruyere, a place where Heath, Briars, etc. grow. Temple, a Surname, from the
Knights Templars, or Officers in the Temple of Jerusalem. Isle of Tenet or
Thanet, in Kent; Solinus calls it Athanaton, and from hence Thanaton, which may
come from the Gr. (...), death, because, as our Author relates, it kills
Serpents that are brought into it. Teringham, a Village, as also a Surname of a
Family; from the AS. THeorian, to faint, and Ham, a Village; or q. d.
Tiringham, because, being situate upon an Hill, the ascent is difficult, and
causes weariness. Terry, a Christen-Name formerly, though now a Surname only;
from the Fr. Thierry, and this very probably a Contract of the Germ. Theodoric;
which see. Teukesbury in Gloc. (i. e.) the Church of St. Teuke, an Hermit.
Teutobocchus, an ancient King of the Teutones, who with his Army was vanquished
by Caius Marius; in the Germ. he is called Theodway, from the AS. THeod,
People, and Wagian, Belg. Waeghen, to move, or put forward; or Theodweck, from
the same THeod, and the Teut. Wecken, to awake. Jun. writes it Stautebec, and
derives it from Stout, and Beak; which see in the Common Names. Thames, in
Latin Tamesis, a famous River; the Port of London; so called from the meeting
together of the Rivers Tame, and Owse. Thelwall, in Cheshire; from the AS.
THel, the Trunk of a tree, and Wall, a Trench. Theobald, a Christen-Name;
either, as Camden has it, from the AS. THeod, People, and Bald, Bold; or as
Verst. and Kiliam q. d. Belg. Theudbald, (i. e.) Bald Deughdelick, early
Virtuous or Valiant, from the Belg. Deughde, Virtue, or Valor, and Bald, soon.
Theodebert, from the AS. THecd, People, and Beorht, famous. Theodelinda, a
Queen of the Longobardi of Italy; from the old Teut. and AS. THeode, People,
and Lind, mild; whence Linden, to assuage. Theodohatus, King of the Ostro-Gothi
of Italy; from the AS. THeod, People, and Hatan, to hate, (i. e.) one that was
hated of the People. Theodomir, a King of the Spanish Swedes, from the AS.
THeod, People, and the Teut. Mehren, to augment, (i. e.) one that extends the
Limits of his Empire by adding more People or Countries to his own. Theodoric,
by Contraction Derrick, and in Fr. Thierry, in the Belg. Diderick, says
Versteg. from the Belg. Deughde, Virtue, and Ric, Rich. Camden draws it more
near, from the AS. THeod, People, and Ric, a Kingdom; also Rich. Theodulph, a
Christen-Name; from the AS. THeod, People, and Ulph, help. Theofred, Son to
Reciswindus, King of the Spanish Vice-Gothi, from the AS. THeod, People, and
Frede, Peace. Thetford, in Norfolk; from the River Thet, and ford. It was
heretofore a Bishop's See. Theudebald, a King of the Goths; from the Belg.
Deughde, Valor, and Bald, soon, (i. e.) valiant betimes. I may also draw it
from the AS. THeod, People, and Wealdan to rule. Theudes, or Thudo, a King of
the Spanish Vice-Gothi; from the AS. THeod, People. It answers the Lat.
Poplicola. Theudomar, an ancient German Name; from the Belg. Deughde, formerly
Theude, valor, and Meyer, a Major; or from the AS. and old Germ. Theod,
Theode, People, and the same Meyer, or the AS. Maere, famous, or the Teut.
Mehren, to augment; or from the AS. THeoden, to Master, and the same Maere,
famous. Thirlwall Castle in Northumberland; from the AS. THirl, a hole, (whence
THirlian, to make a hole through, to drill,) and Wall; Because the Scots in
their Invasion of England, made several holes or gaps in the Partition Wall
which the Emperor Severus built for the division of the two Kingdoms, for their
better convenience of entering and retreating. Thistleworth, in Middlesex,
formerly Gistleworth; from the AS. gisle, or the Teut. Gistel, a Hostage, and
Worth, a Court, or Hall, because the Hostages from Foreign Countries were here
kept by the Triumphant West Saxon Kings. Thor, the chief God of the ancient
Germans, equal to Jupiter of the Romans; either a Contract of Thunder, because
he was their God of Thunder; or from the AS. teran, to tear, because he may be
said to rend the Clouds; or from the Belg. Tieren, to cry with a loud voice.
See Thunder, Tear, and Thursday, in the Com. Names. Thorismundus, a King of the
Spanish Vice-Gothi; either from Thor above, and the Teut. Mund, a Mouth, (i.
e.) He that does as it were thunders with his voice, or speaks as
majestically as Jove himself: or contrariwise from the AS. THore, THure, a
Door, and Mund, Peace, q. d. the Gate of Peace. Thorney, in Hantshire; in the
AS. THorn Ige, the Thorny Isle; see Thorn, and Ea, in the Com. Names. Thory, a
Surname; either from Thor, the ancient Saxon and Germans Jupiter; or from the
Teut. Thore, a Door, or Thor, distracted. Thrasimund, a Christ. Name frequent
among the Longobardi of Italy; Kilian draws it from the Belg. Te Rasch, too
Rash, and Mund, a Mouth, (i. e.) one that speaks without deliberation.
Throckmorton, q.d. The Rock-Moor-Town. Tilbury, in Essex; Beda calls it
Tilabury, from the AS. Tilian, to toil, or labor greatly, and Burg, a Town; so
called, from the hard and even stony life of St. Ceadda, Bishop of the East
Saxons. Tindall, in Northumberl. (i. e.) a Dale or Valley by the River Tine.
Tine, in Lat. Tina, a River in Northumb. from Tin, which in the C. Br.
signifies narrow. If it may not come from our word Tiny or little; see Tiny in
the Com. Names. Tinmouth, in Northumberland; (i. e.) the Mouth of the River
Tine. Tipkins, a Surname; from Tib, for Tibald, or Theobald, and Kin, which
diminishes, q. d. Little Theobald; see Theobald, above. Tir-Conell, in
Ireland; q. d. Terra Cornelii, i. e. the Land of Cornelius. Tiroen, a Country
in Ireland; the ancient Irish called it Tir-Eogain, (i. e.) terra Eugenij, or
the Land of Eugenius. Tirrell, a Surname; in French de la Tourelle, (i. e.) of
a Turret: or as the Learned Th. H. tells us, from the Fr. Tiret, to shoot;
the first of this Name having been Archer to William the Second, when he went a
Hunting. Tivi, a River in Cardig. in the C. Br. Dwr Tivi, the Water of Tivi.
Tolestale, in Dublin in Ireland, (i. e.) the Toll-takers or Publicans Stall;
see Toll, and Stall, in the Common Names. Tongue Castle, or rather Thong Castle
in Kent; so called, because Vortigern King of the Britains gave Hengist the
Saxon so much Land here, as he could compass about with an Oxe's Hide cut into
as small Thongs as he could. Tooly, a Surname; if Camden's authority may be
relied on, it was formerly a Christen-Name, and a Corruption of St. Olave.
Torbay, a Bay in Devonshire; from the AS. Tor, a Tower, and Bay; which see in
the Common Names. Torcester, in Northamp. from the AS. Tor, a Tower, and
ceaster, a Castle, though Marian calls it Tovecester; as if it should come of
the AS. Toe, Tow or Flax, and ceaster, a Town. Torkesey, in Linc. in the AS.
Turcesige, for Trogesige, says Somner, from troge, a Cock-boat, and Ige, an
Island. Torold, formerly a Christen-Name, according to Camden, but now a
Surname; derived from the AS. Tor, a Tower, and Old, q. d. Old Castle. Tory, a
River in Caern. Ptolemy calls it Tobius. Totnes, or Totenais, in Devonshire;
from the Fr. Totene, the fish called a Polypus, which is often caught there.
Traith-Taff, in Glam. Ptolemy calls it Ratostabius; from the C. Br. Traith, the
Tide, and the River Taff. Tre-Baldwin, or Trefaldwin, in Montgom. that is the
Town of one Baldwin Bollers, the Landlord thereof; from the C. Br. Tree a Town,
and Baldwin. Treboeth, in Yorkshire; (i. e.) in the C. Br. The Burnt Town.
Tregenie, in Cornwall; from the C. Br. Tree, a Town, and Geneu, a Port. Gate, or
Entrance, so called from its being situate near Falmouth. Tregian, a Surname;
perhaps from the C. Br. Tree, a Town, and Giant, q. d. the Giants Town.
Tr^kingham, in Linc. from 3 Danish Kings there slain in Battle. Trent, a noted
River; Somner takes it to be a Contract or Corruption of the C. Br. Dar-went,
Dar-went, or Darent; see Darwent. Triboc^i, an ancient People of one of the
Provinces of Germany, now called Alsatia. Some do suppose that they had this
name from their love to Luxury; q.d. Trey bauchen, (i. e.) having three
Bellies, from the Teut. Trey, or D^ty, three, and Bauch a ^^l y, i. e. big
Bellied people. Glareanus, to wipe off the disgrace cast upon his Country by
such a derivation, draws it from Trey, three, and Buchen, Beech-trees.
Trino-bantes, an ancient British-People, that resided in Middlesex and Essex;
not from Troja nova, as say Chronologers, for we have nothing to do with the
Trojans; but, as Camden surmiseth, from the C. Br. Tre-nant, that is to say, a
Town in a Valley; for this Country is lower and lower, as it draws nearer to
the Thames, in the fashion of a Valley. Trisanton, in Ptolem. q.d. C. Br.
Traith Anton. (i. e.) the Tide of the River Anton. Tristram, a Christen-name,
perhaps for Tristan, which may come from the Lat. Tristis, sad; or it may be
the same with Turstan; which see below. Tru-Ar-Drait-Bay, in Cornwall, in the
British tongue, it implies as much as, the Bay at a Town built upon the Sand.
Trubridge, in Wiltshire; in the AS. Truthabyrig, (i. e.) a secure, or firm
Town; see True, Bury, Borough, and Bridge, in the Com. Names. Truro, or as they
say in Cornw. Trura, from three Rows, or Streets encompassed with two Rivers.
Tuisco, a God of the ancient Germans; in the AS. Tues, or Ties, from THean, in
the Theot. Thuagan, Thuahan, to wash, or Purge; q.d. the expiatory God; see
Tuesday, in the Com. Names, and Dutch in its place. We may also with some
probability draw it from the AS. THeod, People, q.d. THeodisc, (i. e.) the
People's tutelar God. Tulga, a King of the Spanish Vice-Gothi, in the Year 640.
perhaps from the Teut. Dolch, a Poinado, or Poynard. Tunbridge, in Kent, from
Town and Bridge; It answers the Gr. Gephyra. Turbervill, a Surname; q. d. de
Turbida Villa, i. e. of the turbulent Village. Turchill; Camden says, that it
was formerly a Christen-Name; however it is now become a Surname; and may be
drawn from the AS. Tor, a Tower, and Cild, a Child, that is, a Child born, or
found in a Tower. Turstan, formerly a Christen-Name, but now a Surname. Camden
derives it from the AS. Treoestan, the Superlative of Treo, true, faithful; or
it is the same with Tristram, above. Tutbury, or Sturesbury Castle in Staff.
perhaps from the AS. Stod, a Stallion, and Byrig, a Town; there being Plenty of
good Horses bred there. Tuttle Fields, formerly Tuthill Fields near
Westminster; from the AS. Stod, a Horse, and our words hill and Fields.
Twedale, in Scotland, (i. e.) a Valley by the River Twede, q.d. Twede-dale.
Twerton, in Devonshire, q. d. Twifford-Town, a Town having two Fords. Twiford,
in Northumb. that is to say, a twofold Ford. Twinamburn, now Christ-Church, in
Hantshire; so called, because it is situate between two Bourns or little
Rivers; see Two, and Bourn, in the Common Names. Twist, a River in Kent; so
called from its Twistings and Windings. Tyburn, a place near London, the
Public place for Execution of Criminals within London and Middlesex, not from
Tying, and Burning, as some will have it, but from the AS. Ty, Two, and Byrna,
in our old English Bourn, a small River; from two Brooks that formerly run
thereby, but are now dried up.
V.
VAdomarius, a King of the Alemanni, Cotemporary with Julian the Apostate;
perhaps from the Belg. Wade, a Garment and Meyer, an Overseer. Vahalis, or as
Adr. Jun. has it Vachalis, in the Belg. Waal, a River in the Netherlands; or
rather an Arm of the Rhine. Jun. draws it from the Belg. Waeghen, to waggle. I
had rather draw it from Wallen, to be troubled, or to flow to and again. Vale
of red Horse, in Warw. from the Figure of an Horse, in a Valley, on whose Neck
were red marks. Valley of White Horse, in Berkshire; so called from the form of
a Horse represented upon a white or Sunny Bank. Vandals, an ancient People of
Scandia, as also Germany, famous for their remarkable Conquests, even to the
Subversion of the Roman Empire; either from the Germ. Wandelen, Wandeln, to to
wander abroad; for coming from Sweden and Dane-Land, the remotest Parts in the
North, they extended their Victories over Spain and Mauritania. Adr. Jun.
derives it from the Dalii, a People of Scandia, q. d. Belg. Van De or Der
Dalen; or Teut. q.d. Von die Thalen, i. e. People that inhabit the Valleys.
Vannius, Cotemporary with Claudius Nero, a King of the Swedes; perhaps from the
AS. Wan, wan, or pale. Vaughan, a Surname; perhaps from the C. Br. Vachan,
little, small. Vaux, a Surname; from a Town in France of the same Name. Vbii,
an ancient People of Germany, that lived where the famous City of Colonia
Agrippina now stands; perhaps from the Germ. Ob, or Oben, above; that is to
say, the Upper People compared with those of the Low Countries. Vbsford, or
Vfford, a Village so called, (i. e.) the Ford of Vbba, or Vffa, the first King
of the East-English. Vchtred, a Christen-Name; Camden draws it from the Germ.
Hoch or Hoogh, lofty, and Read, Counsel. Velleda the Germans Sibylla; Kilian
draws is from the Belg. Veel, or the Teut. Viel, much, and the Belg. Leeden, or
Teut. Leiden, to suffer. Vernulph, a Goth that slew King Athaulph; Jun.
expounds it, an old beaten Soldier; from the Teut. Fern, Ferner, old, and Ulph,
help. Veromirus, Chief of the Teutones in Aug. Caesar's time; from the Belg.
Vere, passage by Water, and Meyer, a Major. I could also draw it from the Teut.
Werre, with us War, and Meyer, a Major; see War, and Major in the Com. Names.
Verulamium, a famous City of England, in the time of the Romans, out of the
Ruins whereof was raised St. Albans in Hertfordshire; perhaps from the C. Br.
Gwer, fatness, and Llonn, pleasant; from the pleasantness and fertility of the
place. Viader, or Viadrus, now Oder, a famous River in Germany; perhaps from
the breadth of its Current, viz. from Wider, or Wide, which see in the Com.
Names; Or from the Teut. Oed, or Oeder, without Inhabitants, because it runs
through a Land, where no body dwells. Viander, a City in Holland; from the
Belg. Wije, or Wiide, or the Teut. Weide, a Willow-tree; from the plenteous
increase of Willows, which all Holland, as being low and fenny, is full of.
Victericus, a King of the Spanish Vice-Gothi; from the Teut. Wicht Gewicht,
weight, and Reich, or the AS. Ric, rich. Vidishindus, another King of the
Spanish Vice-Gothi; from the Teut. Weide, a Willow, and Winden, to wind, q.d.
a Basket-maker. The Vizes, in Wiltsh. perhaps from our word to Devise; which
see in the Com. Names. q.d. a Castle built with much curiosity of Workmanship
and Art. Vipount, a Surname; formerly de Vipount; from the Fr. de Vieux Pont,
(i. e.) of the old Bridge. Visurgis, now Weiser, a famous Riv. in Germ, from
the Teut. Weisz, Weisser, white; from the whiteness of its Water. Vitigis, a
King of the Ostro-Gothi of Italy; from the AS. Wittig, or the Belg. Wittigh,
witty; which see, and Wit, in the Com. Names. Vitsan, a place upon the Fr.
shore over against Kent; not from the C. Br. Gwith, a partition, as Camden
surnmiseth, but corrupted from the English Whitesand. Vlpher, see Wulpher.
Vlphric, see Wulphric. Vlphstan, see Wulphstan. Vlric, for Vlphric; which see
above. Vlster, a large County toward the North in Ireland; in Lat. called
Vltonia and Vlidia, in Irish Cui Guilly, (i. e.) the County Guilly. It was
formerly the Seat of the Darni, Robogdii, Erdini and Voluntii; from which last,
it is probable, came the Names Vltonia, Vlidia, and Guilly. Vnulphus, a
Christen-Name; frequent among the Longobardi of Italy; from the Teut. Ohne,
without, and Ulph, help; (i. e.) forlorn. Vrdehead, in Scotland; from the AS.
Ord, an Edge, and Head, q. d. a piked Promontory. Ure, formerly Vrus, a River
in Yorkshire, which in the Romans time washed Isurium, a Town of the Brigantes,
which is now called Aldborough. Vrus was afterward by the English Saxons,
called Our, now Owse. Vrian, a Danish Christ. Name; the same with our Name
George; which see above. Vshant, in Cornw. the Romans called it Vxantissa
Insula. Vsk, a River in Monm. in Lat: Isca. Other Pendragon, a King of the
Britains; (i. e.) the Head of a Dragon; because he had upon his Standard the
form of a Dragon's Head, as the Romans also had in the last Ages of the Empire,
says Claudian. Other is derived either from the C. Br. Vthr, Other, to be
admired; or from the Gr. Eutherius. Vtrecht, a famous City and County in the
Netherlands, formerly a Bishop's See; in Lat. called Trajectum ad Rhenum, and
Vltrajectum, of which it is a Contract, q. d. the best Trajection, or passage
over the Rhine; Vltrajectum, from the People Wulti, or Wilti, and the old Belg.
Drecht, a Town, as some will have it; or because it was Vlpius Trajan the
Emperor's Trajection. Vxbridge, in Middl. formerly Waxbridge, because the Clay
is soft under foot like wax. Vxeter, in Staffordshire; a contract of Vtoxeter,
by the Romans called Etocetum.
W.
WAcho or Wacarius, a King of the Longobardi, in the year 500. either from the
Teut. Wacker, of a quick, sharp Nature; or from Wacher, a Part. of the Verb
Wachen, to watch. Wainfleet, in Lincolnshire, remarkable for the Nativity of
William Bishop of Winchester, the Founder of Magdalens College in Oxford, and
of a Grammar School in this Town; perhaps from Wain, the Contract. of Wagon,
and the AS. Fleot, a River. Wakeman, a Surname, q. d. Watchman, from the Verb
to Wake; which see in the Com. Names. Walarand, formerly a Christ. Name, but
now a Surname; from the AS. Walpian, to roll, and Rand, in the old Danish
Raund, and Rendur, a Shield, q.d. one that brandisheth his Shield. The Surname
Waldron is a Contract of Walarand. Walbert, or Gualbert, a Germ. Christen-Name;
from the AS. and Teut. Wall, a Wall, and the Belg. Berd, a Board; or from the
same Wall, and Beorht, famous. Wallbrook, a Street in London, from Lucius
Gallus a Roman Captain, that was slain there, and a Brook, which is now dried
up; q. d. Gallbrook. Walburg, the Christ. Name of a Woman; possibly from the
As. Wall, a wall, and Burg, for Borough, a Town; or from the same Wall, and
Borh, a Bail, or Surety; (i. e.) She that defends the Walls. Waldemar, a
Danish Christen-Name, from the old Goth. and Germ. Wald, Power, and the Teut.
M^hren, to amplify, that is to say, he that amplifieth his Dominions by
Victories; or from the same Wald, and the AS. Maere, famous. Jun. draws it from
the Teut. Wald, a Wood, and Meyer, a Major. Waldron, see Walarand. Waldwin, a
Christen-Name; from the AS. Wealdan, to rule, or Wald, Power, and Win, a
Conqueror, or Winnan, to Win. Walfleet in Essex, famous for good Oysters; from
the AS. Wall, a wall, and Fleot, a River. Walleys, or Wallis, a Surname; see
Walsh. Wallingford, in Berkshire; from the C. Br. Guall Hen, i. e. the old
Wall, by retaining whereof, and adding thereto Ford, the Eng. Saxons called it
Gualengaford, and Wallengaford, with us Wallingford, as before. Wallmer, in
Kent, from the AS. Wall, and Mare the Sea, q. d. a Wall for the Sea. Wallop, a
Brook in Hantshire; from the AS. Weallian, Germ. Wallen, Wa'llen, to bubble
forth, and Up, Belg. Op, upward. Wallsend, in Northumberland; (q. d.) the
Walls-end, in Lat. Vindobala and Vindomora, (q. d.) finis Valli, and finis
Muri, i. e. the Trenches End, and the Walls End. Wall-town, in Northumberland;
upon the Wall, formerly a Palace Royal, where Segbert King of the East Saxons
was baptized, by St. Pauline; from Wall, and Town. Walsh, a Surname, that is,
to say, a Welsh-man; see Welsh below. Walsingham, in Norfolk; from the AS.
Wael, a Weel, or Whirl-Pool, this from Waelan, to wallow, and Ham, a
Habitation, q. d. a dirty boggy Town, or from the AS. Waelipe, Southern-wood,
which grows plentecusly there. Walter, a Christen-Name; heretofore Waldher,
says Camden; either from the Teut. Wald, a Wood, and Herr, a Master; or from
the AS. Wealdan, to rule, and Here, an Army. Waltham, a Town in Essex,
memorable for a stately Abbey, the Abbot whereof was reckoned among the Barons
of Parliament; from the AS. Weald, Teut. Wald, a Wood, and Ham; which see in
the Com. Names, q. d. a Town standing by a Wood. It answers the Gr. (...), and
the Lat. Sylviacum. Wandle, a River in Surrey, from the C. Br. Gwaneg, a Wave,
from whence Gwanegn, to overflow, for the Ebbings and Flowings thereof.
Wandregisel, an Eng. Saxon Saint; from the AS. Wandrian, to wander; and the
Teut. Gesell, a Companion, q. d. a Companion of Pilgrims. Wandsworth, in
Surrey; heretofore Wandlesworth; from the River Wandle or Vandali, and Worth, a
Platform, or Village, or from the Dan. Vand, water, and the same Worth, (i. e.)
a Town by the waters side. Wansdike, in Wiltshire, the Limit of the West Saxons
and the Mercii; q. d. Wodens dike, the Ditch of Woden, or Odin, the God of the
Saxons, which was the Mercurius of the Romans; nigh to this is a small Town
called Wodensburg, (i. e.) the Town of Woden; see Wednesday, Wood, and Dyke, in
the Common Names. Wantage, a Village in Berkshire; perhaps from the AS. Wanta,
less, from the smallness thereof. Ware, in Hertf. from our Eng. Wear, which is
a Ditch made to keep off the overflowing of Water; see Wear in the Com. Names.
Warin, now a Surname; from the Teut. Gar, all, and Win, q. d. one that wins
always. Waring, a Surname; Spelman draws it from the AS. Warian, or Werigan, to
Curse or Back-bite. It may be drawn from the Waringi, a People in Germany,
opposite to the English Coast, in the time of Tacitus. Warnafred, the right
Surname of Paul, called the Deacon, a Chronographer of the Longobardi; from the
Teut. Warnen, to fore-warn, and Fried, or the AS. Frede, Peace, q. d. he that
exhorts unto Peace. Warwick, in the C. Br. Caer Leon, the Legions Camp, where
the Major of the Dalmatian Horse acted under the Command of the Duke of
Britain. Camden draws it from the C. Br. Guarth, a Safeguard, or Garrison, and
the AS. Wyc, a Port or City. Somner says, that it was formerly called Waering,
or Waering Wic, and derives it from the AS. Waering, a Wear, and Wyc, a Fort.
The Washes in Norfolk, so called because it is washed by the Tides dashing
against it, a Shore almost as dangerous as the Quicksands in Africa. Wassenaer,
the Surname of an ancient and noble Family in Holland. Adr. Jun. expounds it
Wasser Here, i. e. the Master of the Waters. Watling-street, one of the four
Circuits, dividing London in the midst as it were from South to North, either
from some man named Vitellian; or as Somner supposes from the AS. Wedla, a
Beggar, or Wedlian, to beg; because Beggars sat therein as their constant place
to ask Alms. It may also very probably be drawn from the Belg. Wenselen, to
roll, from its crooked Windings. Webba, a King of the Mercii, from the AS.
Webba, a Weaver. Wedon, in Leicest. Anton. calls it Bannoventa, the principal
Sea^ of the Bennoni or Vennoni. Welsh, or rather Welsh, from the AS. Wealh, a
Stranger, or Foreigner; and this probably from Gallus, a French man; for the
Gallo-Belgae and Brit. for a time used the same Speech. And it is manifest,
that the Franks that subdued Celtica, called the Gallo-Belgae, Wallones; and
that the Germans in the Neighboring Countries of Italy, called Lombardy, and
Gallia, on this side the Alps, the Welsh Land; and that the Fr. call our Wales,
Pais de Gales. Wells, in Some. a Bishop's See; so called from Wells, that
spring forth all over, after the manner of Pagase of the Macedonians, Susa
among the Persians, and Croia in Dalmatia; which all had their Names from
Springs or Wells. Wellingborough, formerly Wedlingborough, or Wodlingborough,
in Northamptonshire; from Wells that have a Medicinal virtue; or, if it ought
to be called Wedlingborough, from Waedla, a beggar, or Waedlian, to beg; (i.
e.) the Beggars Town; and if it ought to be pronounced Wodlingborough, from the
AS. Wod, Wood or Mad, and the Dim. Ling, q. d. the Town of People half Mad; to
wit from the impatience of infected People coming to the Wells for ease. See
Borough in the Com. Names. Wellington, in Some. (i. e.) the Town of Wells.
Welsh-pool, in Montgom. from Welsh, and Pool; which see in the Com. Names.
Wentsbeck, a little River in Northumb. upon which stood an old Town called
Glanoventa, (i. e.) a little River running into or out of the great River Went;
See Beck in the Com. Names. Were, a River in the Bish. of Durham; from the AS.
Weorg. Ptolemy called it Vedra, and Beda Wirus; and from hence comes
Weremouth, in the same Bish. and Monks Weremouth, which Beda writes Wiraumouth,
(i. e.) the Mouth of the River Were. Werminster, an old Town in Wiltshire,
heretofore Verlucio; from Ver, the beginning of the old Name, and Minster.
Werthrada, a Queen, Wife to Charles the Great. Jun. supposes that it comes of
the Germ. Werth, worth, or worthy, and Rade, Counsel. Westchester, a famous
Bishop's See; so called to distinguish it from Chester in the Street in Durham,
which lies to the East as this does to the West. The Eng. Saxons called it
Leaga ceasten, (i. e.) the Legions Town; because a Roman Legion quartered here.
Westminster, our Royal City in Middlesex; q. d. a Minster in the West.
Westphalia, a Country in Germany, from its Western Situation, and the Teut.
Fall, a Trap or Snare; because through the number and thickness of Woods, and
many Ditches, and Whirl-Pools, it was formerly a Place very fit to lay an
Ambuscado in. Westphaling, Nom. Gent. (i. e.) one come from Westphalia.
West-Seaxanric, (i. e.) the Kingdom of the West Saxons; for Seaxan, signifies
Saxons, and Ric, a Kingdom; See Saxon. Weymouth, a Port and little Mart-Town in
Dors. so called from the River Wey, and Mouth, that is, the Mouth of Wey.
Whaley, in Lanc. not unlikely from the AS. Weallian, to be full of Springs, and
Leag; a Field, or Pasture, q. d. a Field, well watered. Whealop Castle in
Westminster. Ptolemy calls it Gallagium, Anton. Gallatum. Wheelock, a Surname; from
the AS. Wioloc, Purple, says Somner, he means the Purple-fish, or rather a
Cockle, or Sea-Snail, which in Linc. they call Wilk; See Wilk in the Com.
Names. Wherf, or Wharf, a River in Yorkshire; from the Belg. Wervel, a
Whirl-Pool, or Wervelen, to run round about. Whitby, or Whiteby, in Yorkshire;
(i. e.) a white Town, or Bay, in the AS. Streanesheale; i. e. Streanes hall,
which see. Whitchurch, in Shropshire; from White and Church; which see in Com.
Names. Whitney, in Oxfordshire; from the AS. Hit, white, and Ea, a Water, or
Ige, an Island. Wibert, or Guibert, a Christen-Name; from the Teut. Weihen, or
the Belg. Wiihen, to consecrate, and Beorht, bright, also, light, q. d. Sacred
Light. Wiberton, a Town in Linc. from Wiburt, Wibert, or Guibert, an
English-Saxon Knight the Builder thereof, and Town, (i. e.) the Town of one
Wibert, that about the year 870. fought under Algar, in a Battle against the
Danes. Wickham, in Buckingh. rather Wicomb; from the AS. Wic, the winding of a
River, or a Port, and Comb, a Valley. Wickliff, John Wickliff, who so mawl'd
the Triple-Head, that he obtained from her the Title of Arch-Heretick; from the
AS. Hit, white, and Clif, a Rock, or Clift. Wien, in Lat. Vienna, the Court of
the Archdukes of Austria; perhaps from the Belg. Wtie, Wiide, or the Teut.
Weide, a Willow-tree; or, from the Belg. Wiien Wiihen, or Teut. Weihen, to
consecrate; because perhaps here was a Temple consecrated to some Deity in
times of Heathenism. Wierdale, in Lanc. from the River Wy, and Dale, a Valley.
Wigelinda, the Daughter of Pertharitus, King of the Longobardi of Italy; not
unlikely from the AS. Wiga, a noble Man, or Woman, and the Teut. Lind, mild.
Wight Isle, in the AS. Wuitland, and Wick-Ea, in the C. Br. Guith, which
denotes a Division, or Separation; because it is thought that this Isle was cut
off and parted from the rest of England by the force of the Sea. Wiggin, in
Lanc. commonly called Wiggon, in the AS. Wibiggin, from Wi, Sacred, or Wibed,
an Altar, and Biggin, or Bicgan, to build, q. d. Sacred Buildings. Wigmore, in
Heref. in the AS. Wigingamere, perhaps from the AS. Wine, praised, Geong,
young, and Maere, famous; though it may more immediately be drawn from the AS.
Wic, a Fortress, and Mor, a Moor. Wigod, formerly a Christen-Name, but now a
Surname; from the Teut. Weihen, or the Belg. Wiien, to consecrate, and God,
that is to say, consecrated unto the Lord. Wilberham, formerly Wilburgham in
Kent; perhaps from the AS. Wild, Wilda, untamed, Burg, and Ham; which see in
the Common Names. Wilbram, formerly named de Wilburnham; from the AS.
Wille-burne, i. e. a Well Spring, and Ham, a Village; q.d. a Town of Wells; as
Wells in Somersetshire. Wilcock, a Surname, from the obsolete Eng. Wald, for
Wood, and Cock; which see in the Common Names: Or, as the Eminent Th. H.
tells us, it is a Dim. of William, as the Nurse's Bilicock. Wilfred,
Archbishop of York, in the year 672. from the AS. Willa, the will, and Frede,
or Frith, Teut. Friede, Peace; that is, one, whose Mind inclines to Peace, and
quietness. Willebald, in the year 762. from the AS. Willa, the Will, or Willan,
to Will, and Bald, Bold. Willebrod, a Christen-Name, made famous by that most
holy English-Saxon, the first Bishop of Vtrecht, and Apostle of the Belgae.
Verstegan writes it Willebrord, or rather Wilberord, and expounds it an Active
will or Mind; for he says, that Berord denotes, one, that is Active: It may
be taken from the AS. Well, well, and Beord, Speech, q. d. well spoken; or from
the AS. Willan, to covet, and Breod, the Teut. Brodt, or the Belg. Broodt,
Bread; that is, a great lover of Bread. Willet, the Dim. of Will, as Will is of
William. William, in the Teut. Wilhelm, not, as Luther will have it, q.d.
Vielhelm, i. e. the Shield of many; nor as some would have it, q d. a voluntary
Defense, from Will and helm. But as Verstegan ingeniously, from Guild h^lm (i.
e.) one furnished with a guilt Helmet. Wilnolde, an Abbatess of Kent, in the
year 694. not unlikely from the AS. Willa, the will, and Nolde, she would not;
that is, one that doubts in Mind. Wilton, in Wiltshire; from the Brook
Willey, and Ton, a Town; q. Willy-Town, heretofore called Alan, therefore by
the Romans called Ellandunum. Wiltshire, in the AS. Wilsetta, either from the
Town Wilton, or the River Willy, and Setta, which signifies neighboring
Inhabitants. Wimbleton, in Sur. in the AS. Wibandune, which Somner writes
Wibbandune, and says it had this Name from one Wibba the Builder thereof, and
Dune, an Hill. Wimbleton seems to be so called q. Wimble-Town. Wimear, a
Surname, formerly Wydmear, says Versteg. from the AS. Wid wide, broad, and
Maere, famous; that is, one that is well spoken of by many. Wimund, a
Christen-Name; from the Teut. Weihen, or Belg. Wiien, Wi^hen, to consecrate,
and the AS. Mund, Peace; or from Wi, Sacred, and the Teut. Mund, a Mouth; that
is, one of chaste and undefiled Lips. Winanderinere, in Westmorland; perhaps
from the AS. Wine, Pleasant, Wad, a Ford, and Mere, a Marsh; or from the AS.
and Eng. Wind, or Winds, and the same Mere, that is, a Water often troubled,
and rolled on heaps with the Wind. Winburn, in Dors. in the AS. Wynburaham,
corr. from its old Name Vindogladia; in the C. Br. Windagledy, implying a Town
between two Glades, (i. e.) two Rivers, for the Britains used gladium pro Amne,
for a River or Brook; Winburn may be derived from the AS. Wine, Pleasant, and
Bourn, a Spring, or Rivolet. Winchcomb, in Gloc. remarkable for its Minster in
former times: In the AS. called Wincel-Combe, from Wincel, a Corner, and Comb,
a Valley environed on each side with Hills. Winchelsey, Old Winchelsey, in
Sussex, in the AS. Wincels Ea, from Wincel, a Corner, and Ige or Ea, an Isle.
Winchester, in Hantshire, a Bishop's See; in the AS. Wantanceaster, in the C.
Br. Caer Guent, which comes from Gwin or Gwen, white, q. d. white City, because
it is built upon a Chalky Soil. Windham, formerly Wimundham, in Norfolk, (i.
e.) Wimund's home; see Wimund. Windogast, a Durch Christen-Name; from the Belg.
Winnen, to get, and Gast, a Guest, (i. e.) one that through Civility wins the
love of his Guests, or Customers. Windsore, in Barkshire; in the AS.
Windele-shora, so called from the winding of the Thames at that place; see wind
and shore in the Com. Names. Wine, a Christen-Name; from the AS. Wine, Beloved.
Or it is a Contract of Winefred; so was Boniface the Eng. Sax. Apostle of the
Germans, called in his Mother Tongue; from the AS. Winnan, to get, and Frith,
Frede, Peace, q. d. a Procurer of Peace; it is also a Woman's Name. Winoc, a
Surname; from the AS. Winnan, or the Belg. Winnen, to obtain, and the AS. Aac,
or Ac, an Oak, that is, one that for his merits is rewarded with a Civick oaken
Garland. Winterton, in Norf. so called from its cold situation. Winwidfield, in
Yorkshire; so called from a Victory, which Oswin, King of Northumberland,
obtained here over Penda the Mercian. There is also Winfield, in Germany, where
Q. Varus, was slain with his Legions: From the AS. Winnan, to conquer, and our
word Field. Wischard, a Christen-Name; the Italians write it Guiscard, by
interpretation a Crafty Shifter, says Skinner, quoting an Anonymous Author for
it; but adds. I find not Wisch of this Signification, and therefore I chose
rather to draw it from the Teut. Wischen, or Belg. Wisschen, to purge, or wipe,
and the Belg. Aerd, Nature, q. d. one that is sincere. Wismar, by some called
Visomarus, King of the Vandals, and Founder of Weismar in Germany, a City upon
the Coast of the Balthick Sea. Jun. expounds it Wilse Meyer, i. e. a Wise
Major; see Wise, and Major, in the Common Names. Witekind, the Christen-Name of
the renowned German-Saxon that was Tutor to so many Princes, Kings, and
Emperors. He was the first of the Princes of that Nation, that embraced the
Christian Faith; from the old Teut. Wite, or the AS. Hit, Hita, white, and the
Teut. Kind, a Child. Kilian writes it Wide-kund, and draws it from the Belg.
Wiide, wide, and Kund, known. Withericus, by some called Videricus, a Goth,
Christ, Name. Adr. Jun, draws it from the Belg. Wither, or Wider, a Weather,
and Rich, q. d. Rich in Cattle, or Weathers; see Rich and Weather in the Common
Names. Withred, a King of Kent; from the AS. With, against, and Redan, to
counsel; that is, one that ever Contradicts others. Withringdon, in
Northumberland; from the AS. Witherian, to wither, and Dune, an Hill, q. d. a
dry Hill. Wivelscomb, in Summers. from the old Eng. words Weevel, for Weezel,
and Comb, a Valley with Hills on each side. Woden, a God of the Goths and
Germans, the same with Mars of the Romans; his Statue was set up with a
Panoply, or complete Armor, and a drawn Sword upon it, his Etymon agreeing
with his Figure; for it is derived of the AS. Wedan, the Belg. Woeden, or the
Teut. Wuten, to be Wood, or Mad, q. d. the furious God, that is, he that
inspired a warlike fury into the Minds of Men; see Wood, and Tuesday, in the
Com. Names. Woerden, a Town in Holland; from the Belg. Word, a Drake, and the
AS. Den, a Valley, or Den; perhaps from the plenty of Wild Ducks. Woldsbury, in
Wiltshire; from Would and Bury; that is to say, a Town amongst Hills; see Would,
and Bury, in the Com. Names. Wolfard, a Saxon Christen-Name; from the AS. Wulf,
the Belg. Wolf, or the Teut. Wolff, a Wolf, and the Belg. Aerd, Nature, (i. e.)
crafty and greedy as a Wolf. Wolfart, a Christ Name; from the Teut. Wol, well,
and the Belg. Vaeren, to be in health; or the same with Wolfard above, q.
Wolf-heart. Wolfgang, a Christ. Name; from Wolf, and the Belg. Gangen, to go,
q. d. a thievish sleering gate, like that of a Wolf. Verstegan writes it
Wulfang, and Welfeng, and draws it from the AS. Wulf, the Belg. Wolf, or the
Teut. Wolff, a Wolf, and the AS. Fengar, to catch, q. d. a Wolf-Catcher. Isleb.
writes it Hulfong, and derives it from the Teut. Hulf, or the AS. Ulph, help,
and Gang, to go. Wolfred, an Archbishop of Canterbury, in the year 816. either
from the AS. Ulph, Aid, and Redan, to give counsel, q. d. He that assisteth
others with his Advice; or from the AS. Wulf, a Wolf, and the same Redan, q. d.
one that instills into others cruel, and Wolf-like designs. Wolver Hampton, in
Staff. heretofore Vlfraneshampton, or Wulfraneshampton, from Wulfruna a Pious
Woman, that built an Abbey there. Woodreeve, a Surname; from the AS. Wude Gnefa,
a Wood Grave; see Reeve in its place, and Wood and Grave in the Com. Names.
Woodstock, in Oxfondsh. from the AS. Wude, a Wood, and Stoc, for Stop, a place;
or from Stocce, the Stock of a tree. Worcester, a City, and Bishop's See, in
the AS. Wegeornaceaster, and Wire-ceaster, which comes from Wire, a Forest, and
ceaster, a Town, in the Lat. Barb. it is called Wigornia; either from the
Wiccii, a People that once lived here; or from the said Wegeorna-ceaster.
Worsted, a Town in Norfolk, from whence Wool spun there is also called Worsted,
as Callico from the City Calecutt, where the best of this sort of Cloth is or
was made; Worsted may be drawn from the AS. Worth, a Hall or Village, and
Steda, or Sted, a Place. Wray, a Surname; not unlikely from the AS. Wreon, to
cover, or from Wraec, Wraece, Wreck of the Sea, the first of the name having
been cast upon some unknown shore, and so might acquire his Name. Wrexham, in
Denb. in the AS. Writtlesham, perhaps from the AS. Writhels, Wreaths, or any
thing that goes round, and Ham, a Village. Wroxeter, and Wreckceter, in
Shropsh. from the AS. Wrecen-ceaster. Neun. calls it Caer Vruach, and Ptolem.
Viroconium. It was formerly the chief City of the Cornarii. Wulfhad, Son to
Wulpher King of the Mercii, from the AS. Wulf, a Wolf, and Hade, a Kind; or
rather q. Wulpherhade, i. e. of the Kind or Nature of Wulpher, his Father.
Wulphelm, Archbishop of Canterb. about the year 930. from the AS. Ulph, help,
and Helm, an Helmet, (i. e.) a Protector. Wulpet, in Suff. that is to say, a
Pit of Wolves, from Wolf, and Pit; which see in the Com. Names. Wulpher, King
of the Merdii, Founder of the Minster of Peterborough, now a Cathedral Church,
from the AS. Ulpher, an Helper; see Help in the Com. Names; or from Ulph, help,
and Here, an Army. Wulphric, formerly Vlpheric, says Verstegan, from the AS.
Ulph, help, and Ric, rich, q. d. Rich in Help. Wulphstan, and Wulfstan, a
Christ. Name; from the AS. Ulph, aid, and the AS. Superl. Term. Stan, q. d. one
that assisteth greatly, in the highest degree.
Y.
YAle, a Tract of Land in Denb. perhaps so called from the River Alan.
Yanesbury in Wiltsh. remarkable for a Trench and Wall of Roman Workmanship,
which Vespasian perhaps cast up, or built: for Yanes may be a Corruption of
Vespasian, q. Vespasian's-bury. Yarborough, a Surname; from the obsolete word
Gerber, i. e. one that binds new mown Grass in bundles; this from the Fr.
Gerbe, or the Teut. Garb, a Sheaf, whence the Fr. Gerber, and Teut. Garben to
bind up in Sheaves; or it may be drawn from the Teut. Gerber, a Fellmonger.
Yare, a River in Norfolk, in the C. Br. Guern, which likewise is taken for an
Eldar-Tree, perhaps from the great abundance of such Trees; Or from the AS.
Gar, the ancient Name thereof. Yarmouth, a famous Harbor in Norfolk, (i. e.)
the Mouth of the River Yare, which in the AS. is written Jer, and Gar. Yarrow,
in the Bishopr. of Durham, memorable for the Birth of Beda, formerly called
Girwy, and Girway land, which in the AS. implies, a Fenny Land, from Gyras,
Geres, Fenns, or Ger, Mud. Yates, a Surname, from Yate, for Gate; which see in
the Com. Names. Ybell, a Welsh Christ. Name; by corruption from the Gr.
Eubulus. Yedburgh, in Scotland, upon the Confluence of the Rivers Yed, and
Tefie. Yelverton, a Surname; perhaps from the AS. Culfre, a Culver, and Tun, a
To^n; q. Culver-town. York, the next City in esteem to London, in England; in
the AS. Ever ric, and Eoferic; In the time of the Romans it was called Eboracum
or Eburacum, from the River Ure or Vrus, now called Owse, which washes it; as
the Euberones and Eureux, that are nigh the River Ourt. It is a place memorable
for the Death of two Emperors Severus, and Constantius Chlorus, as also for
the Nativity of Constantine the Great. Ystwich, in Card. perhaps from the C.
Br. Ystwith, bound up, from the barrenness of the Land, which gives but small
increase. Ythell, a Welsh Christ. Name; a Contract of the Gr. Euthalius.
Yutland, in the Teut. Iutland; a part of Cimb. Chersonesus, q. d. the Gothic
Land, or the Land of the Goths.
Z.
ZEaland, in the Belg. Zeeland, and Seeland, a Province both of the
Netherlands, and Daneland, the one was the Seat of the ancient Codani, the
other of the Mattiaci, q. d. in Eng. Sea Land, so called from its Situation;
because the Sea formerly washed it on both sides. Zouch, a Surname, (i. e.) de
la Zouche; the Fr. Zouche, denotes a Trunk of a Tree. Zutphen, a Town and
Country in the Netherlands, q. d. Southfen; see South, and Fen in the Common
Names. Zuyder Zee, between Zealand, and Holland, (q. d.) in English the
Southern-Sea, that is with respect to Holland, which it washes on the South
side; see South, and S^a, in the Com. Names.
Proper Names of Men and Women now commonly used, coming from the Hebrew,
Greek, and Latin, truly derived, with the Signification of the Name in the
Original; together with the Name, as it is both in Hebrew and Greek in their
respective Characters; very useful for Young Scholars.
A
AAron, the same in all Languages: In the Hebr. (...) which comes from the root
(...) a Mountain. In the Gr. (...), Lat. Aaron. By interpretation, belonging to
the Mountains. Abel, the same in all Languages. Hebr. (...), Gr. (...), Lat.
Abel. By interpretation, Vanity. Abraham, the same in all Languages. Hebr.
(...), which is derived from (...), father, and (...), high, God himself adding
the letter (...), that the name should signify a Multitude, he having promised
to Abraham a numerous issue. Gr. (...), Lat. Abraham, or Abrahamus; q.d.
renowned or honored Father. Adam, the same in all Languages: In the Hebr.
(...), from the root (...), he was ashamed. Gr. (...), Lat. Adam or Adamus. It
signifies originally, shame. Aeneas, the same with the Lat. Aeneas, which comes
immediately from the Gr. (...), which again may be derived (...), i. e. from
praise, q. d. praise worthy, or commendable. Agar or Hagar, from the Hebr.
(...), which comes from the Verb (...), to go on pilgrimage, to fly. Gr. (...),
Lat. Hagar. By interpretation, a Stranger, Traveller, or Pilgrim. Alexander,
from the Lat. Alexander, this immediately from the Gr. (...), which is drawn
from (...) to help, and (...) the Genesis of (...), a man; q. d. a manly or
valiant helper or assistant. Amon; in the Hebr. (...), Gr. (...), Lat. Amon,
all the same, derived more immediately from the Root (...), which in Niphal
signifies, to be true or faithful. Amos; In Hebr. (...), Gr. (...), Lat. Amos,
all the same; It signifies originally stout or strong (...), robustus fuit is
the radix of it. Andrew, derived from the Greek (...), or the Lat. Andreu,
which is again drawn (...), for his Courage and Manliness.
B.
BAptist, a Christen-Name of a Man; from the Gr. (...), or the Lat. Baptista,
i. e. a Baptizen, perhaps the first among the Greeks that used that Office,
they called Baptist, which might afterward by common use grow into a Proper
Name; as we often find Names derived from Office: for instance Usher, which
before was Noel, by being Gentleman Usher to King John, took his Name with his
Office. John the Baptist. Barbara, a Woman's Christen-Name; from the Lat.
Barbara. Barnabas, In the Syriack (...) Barnaba, Gr. (...), Lat. Barnabas,
derived from the Sir. (...) bar, a Son, and (...) nabi, comfort, q. d. the Son
of Consolation; for so he is called in Act. 4.36. (...), one main gift of a
Prophet being placed in Consolation and Exhortation. Bartholomew, in the Sir.
(...) Bartholomai, derived from (...) bar, a Son, (...), thole, hanging or
leaning downward, and (...) Majim, waters: q. d. the Son of a Water-drawer: Gr.
(...), Lat. Bartholomaeus. Benedict, a Woman's Christen-Name; from the Lat.
Benedicta idem. It signifies, she is blessed. Benjamin, of an Hebr. original,
from (...) ben, a Son, and (...) jamin, the right hand. q.d. the Son of my
right hand, i. e. as dear to me as my right hand. Gr. (...), Lat. Benjamin, all
the same. Bennet, a Man's Name, from the Lat. Benedictus, i. e. he is blessed.
Bettrice, or Beatrice, the Name of a Woman; from the Lat. Beatrix, She that
Blesses, a woman Blesser.
C.
CAesar; From the Gr. (...), or the Lat. Caesar, these from the Lat. caesaries,
that is, hair, wherewith he was born: or a caesiis oculis, from his Gray Eyes:
But most probably a caeso matris utero, from his Mothers Belly being cut before
she could be delivered of him. Charity, from the Lat. Charitas, this from the
Gr. (...), id. Catharine, the Name of a Woman, from the Gr. (...), so called q.
(...), i. e. pure or chaste. Christian, from the Lat. Christiana, i. e.
belonging to Christ. Christopher, from the Gr. (...), which is again derived
from (...), Christ, and (...), to suffer or endure; q. d. I bear Christ,
according to the Fable of St. Christopher's, carrying Christ on his back
through the Sea. He Preached the Gospel in Lycia, and was Beheaded under
Dioclesian the Emperor. Chrysostom, from the Gr. (...), or the Lat.
Chrysostomus; which are derived from (...), golden, and (...), a mouth, q. d.
golden mouth, so called, (...), for his extraordinary Eloquence. He was Bishop
of Constantinople in the year 401. Cicely, a Woman's Name, from the Lat.
Caecelia. Clare, a Woman's Name, from the Lat. Clara, clear. Clemens, a Roman
Name, signifying one mild and benign; from (...), glory, and (...), the mind;
Clemency being truly the glory of the mind. Gr. (...). Cornelius, derived to us
from the Lat. Cornelius, which may come from the Lat. Cornu, a horn; or more
likely q. (...), i. e. (...), a beam of the Son.
D.
DAniel, from the Hebr. (...), which is again compounded of (...), or (...), a
Judge, (which comes of (...), to judge) and (...), God; q. d. the judge of God.
In Gr. (...), in Lat. Daniel. David, from the Hebr. (...), which comes from the
Root (...) dodh, beloved, q. d. beloved of God. Gr. (...), Lat. David. Denis or
Dennis, the Proper Name both of a Man and Woman; from the Gr. (...), or (...),
q. d. belonging to Bacehus; these from (...) Bacchus, which is again derived
from Dia, one of the Islands of the Cyclades, consecrated to him after his
Marriage with Ariadne, and the City Nysas wherein he reigned; Or from Du or Die,
i. e. Lord, and Nysa by a Metathesis for Sina, q.d. Lord of Sina, says Lloyd.
Deodate, a Man's Name; from the Lat. Deod^us, i. e. given of God, or given to
God. Dorcas, a Woman's Name; from the Gr. (...). It signifies originally a wood
or wild Goat. Dorothy, a Woman's Name; from the Gr. (...), which is again
derived from (...) a gift, and (...) a Goddess; q. d. the gift of a Goddess.
E.
ELeazar, a Man's Name, from the Hebr. (...) Eliezer; this again from (...)
God, and (...) help; q. d. the help of God; or rather God of help, or help from
God. Gr. (...), Lat. Eleazar, id. Elisabeth, a Woman's Name, from the Hebr.
(...) Elischebah; this again from (...) God, and (...) in Niphal, he has
sworn; q. d. God has sworn. Gr. (...), Lat. Elizabetha, Eliza, or Elisabet.
id. Enos, a Man's Name; from the Hebr. (...) a Man, which comes from the root
(...) to be sick; for man is infirm and subject to many Diseases. Gr. (...),
Lat. Enos, id. Ephraim, a Man's Name; from the Hebr. (...) id. It signifies in
the original unfruitful. Gr. (...), Lat. Ephraim, or Ephraimus. Eve, a Woman's
Name, originally from the Hebr. (...) Chava, so called because she was the
Mother of all Living. Gr. (...), Lat. Eva, id.
F.
FElix, a Man's Name; from the Lat. Felix happy: It answers the Gr. Macarius.
G.
GAbriel, the Name of a Man; from the Hebr. (...) id. which is again derived
from the Root (...) to prevail, and (...) God, q. d. to prevail with God: Or q.
(...), i. e. the man of God. Gr. (...), Lat. Gabriel, id. George, the Name of a
Man; from the Gr. (...), and this from (...), the Earth, and (...), to incite
or stir up; q. d. a Ploughman or Tiller of the Ground. In Lat. Georgius.
Gregory, a Man's Name; from the Gr. (...), which may possibly be drawn from
(...) to watch, q. d. watchful, as was Gregory the Great, being almost in
continual study.
H.
HIerom or Ierom, the Name of a Man; from the Gr. (...), and this again
possibly, from (...) holy, and (...) a Law.
I.
Jacob, a Man's Name; originally in the Hebr. called (...) jahakohh; from the
Root (...) the heel; so called, because being twin-brother to Esau, he held him
by the heel with his hand in the Birth, which Hieroglyphick was afterward
verified in his supplanting his Brother, and getting the Blessing and
Inheritance for himself. James, the same with Jacob above. Jeremy, a Man's
Name; from the Hebr. (...), compounded of (...) to exalt, and (...) Jehovah,
the Lord; q. d. one that will magnify the Lord. Gr. (...), Lat. Jeremias, id.
Job, the Name of a Man; from the Hebr. (...) Ijob, this from the Root (...) to
endure injuries, or, suffer affronts, q.d. patient. Gr. (...), Lat. Job, or
Jobus, id. John, a Man's Name; originally in the Hebr. it was (...),
Jehochanan, or (...) Jochanan, compounded of (...) jehovah, the Name of God
Almighty, and (...) grace, which is again derived from (...) he has been
gracious; by interpretation as above it signifies, the grace of God. Gr. (...),
Lat. Johannes, id. Jonas or Jonah, the Name of a Man. Hebr. (...) Jonah (which
also signifies a Dove or Pidgeon), derived foom the Root (...) janah, he or it
oppressed or afflicted; for a Dove through its harmlesness becomes a prey to
the more Ravenous Fowls that with strength oppress it. Jonah signifies a
Dove-like temper of mind. Gr. (...), Lat. Jonas, id. Joseph, a Man's Name; from
the Hebr. (...) id. this from the Root (...), he has added. It signifies, he
does, or may add, pursuant to his Mother Rachel's desiring God to give her more
Sons. Gr. (...), Lat. Josephus, id. Josias, a Man's Name; from the Hebr. (...),
Ioschijahu, which is again derived from (...), fire, and (...) Jehovah, Lord;
q. d. the fire of the Lord. Gr. (...), Lat. Josias, id. Isaac, a Man's Name;
from the Hebr. (...), id. this from the Root (...), he laughed; the word Isaac
in the Original signifies, he shall, or, he will laugh. Gr. (...), Lat. Isaacus
or Isaac, id.
L.
LEttice, a Woman's Name; from the Lat. Laetitia, which signifies Joy, Gladness,
or Glee. Love, a Woman's Name; it is of an English Original, and rendered in Lat.
by Amorea. Lucrece, a Woman's Name; derived from the Lat. Lucretia, which was
the Name of the Roman Dame, that for the Rape committed upon her by Sixtus
Tarquinius, stabbed her self in the presence of her Husband, Father, and
others. Lucy, a Woman's Name; from the Lat. Lucia, which may again be derived
from the Lat. Luceo, to shine; or from Lux, light. Luke, a Man's Name; from the
Gr. (...), which is the same with Lucius of the Roman's, that is so called a
Luce, from the Light, this Name being usually given such as were born just as
the Sun rises.
M.
MAgdalen or Maudlin, a Woman's Name; in the Sir. (...) Magdeletha, that is,
florid, crescent or magnificent; this from the Root (...), he was great or
increased: Some say that Mary Magdalen was so called from Magdala, the name of
the Village where she lived. Gr. (...), Lat. Magdalene, id. Margaret or Marget,
a Woman's Name; from the Gr. (...), or the Lat. Margarita, a Pearl. Mark, the
Name of a Man; from the Lat. Marcus, which name among the Romans was usually
given to such as were born in the Month of March; though some, without any
ground (it being purely a Roman Name) go about to draw it from the Hebr. (...)
Marak, he polished or beautified. Martha, a Woman's Name; It seems to be so
called from the Hebr. (...), bitterness. Gr. (...), Lat. Martha, id. Mary, a
Woman's Name; originally (...) Mirjam. Gr. (...); from the Root (...), he was
sad, whence (...) she was sad. Now in the Gr. (...), and Lat. Maria, id.
Matthew, a Man's Name; in the Sir. (...) Matthai, from the Root (...) he has
given, whence (...) a gift; so that it is so called quasi Deo datus, i. e.
given of God. Gr. (...), Lat. Matthaeus, id. Michael, a Man's Name; from the
Hebr. (...), which is compounded of (...), who, the Adverb of Similitude (...),
and (...) God; q.d. who is like God? Gr. (...), Lat. Michael id. Moses, a Man's
Name; originally in the Hebr. called (...), Mosche, i. e. drawn out, the first
of the Name being drawn out of the water by Pharaoh's Daughter. Gr. (...), Lat.
Moses, or Moses, id.
N.
NAthan, a Man's Name; from the Hebr. (...), which originally signifies, he
gave. Gr. (...), Lat. Nathan, id. Nathanael, a Man's Name; the same in the
Hebr. compounded of (...), he gave, and (...), God, q.d. God gave him. It
answers the Gr. (...). Gr. (...), Lat. Nathanael, id. Nicholas, a Man's Name;
from the Gr. (...), which is again derived from (...), victory, and (...), the
People, q. d. a subduer or tamer of the People. Lat. Nicholaus.
O.
OLiver, a Man's Name; in Lat. Olivarius; perhaps from the Lat. Oliva; or the
Eng. Olive.
P.
PAul, first Saul, whence by the Hebr. called (...) Schaul, which comes from
the Root. (...) he begged; (as a Prisoner for Life;) and the word being of a
Latin original, is by interpretation Pusillus, a Dastard or Coward. Gr. (...),
Lat. Paulus, id. Peter, a Man's Name; from the Gr. (...), this again from the
Gr. (...), a Rock; for that our Savior said to the blessed Apostle of that
Name (he being before called Cephas) On this Rock will I build my Church, i. e.
on Peter. Lat. Petrus, id. Philip, a Man's Name; from the Gr. (...), and this
again from (...), a lover, and (...), a Horse; q. d. warlike, one that delights
in Horses. Lat. Philippus, id. Priscilla, a Woman's Name; of a Latin Original,
and may seem to come from prisca, ancient, this being a Diminutive thereof. Gr.
(...), id.
R.
RAchel, a Woman's Name; from the Hebr. (...), which originally signifies, a
she-Lamb. Gr. (...), Lat. Rachel, id. Rebecca, a Woman's Name; originally (...)
Ribhka, which comes from the old Root, now out of use, (...), of which comes
(...) bloody, or fatted, or pampered, as a Calf for the Shambles. Gr. (...),
Lat. Rebecca, id. Ruben, a Man's Name; from the Hebr. (...) Reubhen, i e. the
Son of Vision. Gr. (...), Lat. Ruben, id.
S.
SAmuel, a Man's Name; in Hebr. (...) Schemuel, i. e. heard of God; from the
Root (...), he heard, and (...) God; for that his Father Elcana begged the
first of that Name of God. Gr. (...), Lat. Samuel, id. Sarah, a Woman's Name;
from the Hebr. (...) Sara, which signifies as much as Lady or Princess. Gr.
(...), Lat. Sara, id. Simon, a Man's Name; from the Hebr. (...), he has heard;
which implies Obedience. Gr. (...). Lat. Simon, id. Stephen, a Man's Name; from
the Gr. (...), which is again derived from (...), whence (...), to crown with a
Garland, etc. It signifies a Crown or Garland. Lat. Stephanus, id. Susan or
Susanna, a Woman's Name; possibly from the Hebr. Noun (...), a Lily, it being
certainly of an Hebr. Original. Gr. (...), Lat. Susanna, id.
T.
THeodore, a Man's Name; from the Gr. (...), which is derived from (...), God,
and (...), a Gift; q. d. the gift of God. Lat. Theodorus, id. Theophilus, a
Man's Name; from the Gr. (...), which comes again from (...), and (...), I
love; q.d. beloved of God; or a Lover of God. Lat. Theophilus, id. Thomas, a
Man's Name; originally in the Sir. called (...) Thaumo, in Hebr. (...) i. e.
twofold: for this reason Thomas was called (...), of two hearts, because of his
doubting; he would believe, and he would not. Gr. (...), Lat. Thomas or Thoma,
id. Timothy, a Man's Name; from the Gr. (...), and this again from (...), to
honor, and (...), God; q.d. a Worshipper or Honourer of God. Lat. Timotheus,
id.
V.
VIncent, a Man's Name; from the Lat. Vincentius, this from vinco, to overcome;
or from vincio, to bind. Vrsula, a Woman's Name; from the Lat. Vrsula, which
originally sign. the little Bear, a Constellation so called.
Z.
ZAchary, a Man's Name; in the Hebr. it was called (...) Secharja, which sign.
the memory of the Lord. Gr. (...), Lat. Zacharias.
Observe that most, if not all, Proper Names of Men and Women, not found in
this Appendix, occurr in the preceding Etymology of Proper Names.

FINIS.

