A PLAIN DISCOURSE OF The Mercy of Having GOOD PARENTS* With The Duties of
CHILDREN that have such Parents.

Written by M. G.

Train up a Child in the Way that he should go, and when he is old he will not
depart from it, Prove. 22.6. Printed in the year 1668.

To the Honorable, the Lady A. W.
Madam,
YOur Honors constant and cheerful attendance to these plain Truths when
delivered in your Family, did then encourage me in that Work, and now to
present them to your Honor; not doubting but you will cordially receive the
Truths, though covered with an ordinary dress, and judge of them according to
the End for which they were written (which was the good of yours and your sweet
Childrens Souls) and the sincere desires that accompany them, that they may
prove effectual to that end.

What I have here written, your Honor can much more perfectly teach us by your
own experience, the Lord having by his gracious Providence made you the
Daughter of holy Parents, who prayed for you, instructed you, and from a Child
made you acquainted with the Scriptures; and blessing their Endeavors made you
a godly Child, and gave you the same unfeigned Faith that dwelt in your Father
and Mother; and made you now the gracious Mother of many sweet Children, whom I
hope the Lord will bless with his Grace, according to your earnest desires and
endeavors. Be incouraraged to trust God with them, and to believe that he will
bless them (being your Children, and the Grandchildren of those eminent godly
Persons) and bring them to know him, that they may be blessed for ever. Now the
Lord bless you, and the fruit of your Womb, that all your children may fear
him, and grant that his grace may run in your Family for ever; and that you and
all yours may be eternally happy, shall be the prayers of him that desires an
Interest in your prayers, and shall for ever be, Madam,

Jan. 1. Your Honors most faithful obliged Servant, M. G.

2 Timothy 1.5. When I call to remembrance the unfeigned Faith that is in thee,
which dwelt first in thy Grandmother Lois, and thy Mother Eunice, and I am
persuaded in thee also.


CHAP. I. The Text opened and an Observation raised and proved.
THe words (you see) are a part of Paul's Epistle to Timothy (his Son in the
faith, 1 Timothy 1.2.) which words may be considered in two respects:

First, Relatively, and that either, 1. In respect of the words foregoing, and
then they are the cause of Paul's Joy in the fourth verse, Paul remembering the
unfeigned faith of Timothy, was filled with Joy: From whence observe,

That Believers do exceedingly rejoice (especially those that have been
Instruments of their Conversion) when they see the Reality of Grace in the
Souls of others. Or,

Secondly, They may be considered in relation to the following words, and so
they are the reason of that Exhortation in the sixth verse, from which you may
observe these two things:

1 Observe. Paul had not exhorted Timothy to preach to others, but that he was
persuaded of his unfeigned faith.

2 Observe. Before you teach others, you must see that you have unfeigned Faith
your selves.

Secondly, Positively, as they are in themselves; and then the words contain
these two things:

1. Paul's remembering the unfeigned Faith of Timothy.

2. That it dwelt first in his Grandmother and Mother, which he mentions, first
for the comfort of Timothy, and his establishment; and secondly for the honor
of the Family. The end of the whole Discourse is to comfort and strengthen
Timothy, and to prepare him for the following Exhortations.

I shall now open the words.

Call to remembrance] That is, When I think of, or remember thy faith.

Unfeigned Faith] That is, real or sincere faith, faith without dissimulation:
You have the same word used in several places, as 1 Timothy 1 5. Of faith
unfeigned, that is, not hypocritical: 2 Cor. 6.6. By Love unfeigned, that is,
sincere Love. So 1 Pet. 1.22. Unfeigned Love. And Romans 12.9. Love without
Dissimulation, or pure Love; the same is spoken of the Wisdom of Christians,
Jam. 3.17. without Hypocrisy. So that you see that the word notes a real
sincere Faith, without hypocrisy or dissimulation.

Which dwelt, etc.] Not the same numerical faith, but the same specifical or
kind of faith; as if he had said, Thy Grandmother Lois, and thy Mother Eunice,
had the same sincere unfeigned faith.

From the words thus opened, I shall raise several Observations.

The first shall be from the Apostles mentioning the faith of his Grandmother
and Mother: Whence observe,

Obser. 1. It is a very great Mercy to be the Child of Godly Parents, of such
as have unfeigned Faith.

And that for these following Reasons.

The first Reason.
It is a great mercy to be the Children of believing Parents, because there are
many Promises made to such, which they may lay hold on, and plead with God; and
it is a very great mercy to have a Promise to plead with God: but the Seed of
the Righteous have such Promises; Exodus 20.6. But showing Mercy to thousands of
them that love me and keep my Commandments: That is, the Lord will be merciful
to the Children of those that love him. So Isa. 44.3. I will pour my Spirit
upon thy seed, and my blessing upon thine Offspring. The Righteous may plead
this Promise for their Children, and so may their Children for themselves; and
is not this a great mercy? You might have been the Children of such as have an
interest in nothing but curses, upon them and their Seed; but you have blessed
Promises to plead with God. Therefore it is a great Mercy to be the Children of
Godly Parents.

CHAP. II. Reasons to prove the Doctrine; Godly Parents pray for their
Children, Instruct them in the Scripture, and encourage them in all good.
The second Reason.
IT is a great mercy to be the Children of godly Parents, because such Children
have many Prayers for them, and are daily dedicated by their Parents to God; a
godly Parent considers the state of his Child, and prays earnestly for him;
he cries unto God as Abraham did for his Son I shmael; Genesis 17, 18. And Abraham
said unto God, O that Ishmael might live before thee! so says a Godly Father
or Mother, O that such a Son or such a Daughter might live before thee! and
though God bestows Graces upon some of their Children, yet they still continue
praying for the rest; as Abraham did for Ishmael, though he had a Promise that
the Seed of Sarah should be blessed, Genesis 17.16. A Godly man will not cease
from praying till all his Children be gracious, but cries out to God, to bless
all his Seed, and that for ever, as 2 Samuel 7.26. Let it please thee to bless
the House of thy Servant, that it may continue for ever before thee, and with
thy blessing let the House of thy Servant be blessed for ever; that is, bless
all my Seed, for by (house) is meant those that are born in his house, that
have a relation to him; and he prays that as long as any of them dwell upon the
Land of the Living, they may be blessed. So does Godly persons pray for their
Children; is it not a great mercy to have Parents that will daily offer
Sacrifice for us as Job did for his Children, Job 1.5. You might have had
Parents that would never have prayed for you, or if they had, had no Interest
with God, but you have such as pray often for you, it may be when you cannot or
do not pray for your selves, and is not this a great mercy? While wicked
persons dedicate their Children to the service of Satan, Godly Parents when God
gives them Children, dedicates them to the Lord, and by Faith give them to be
his Children for ever, as Hanna did Samuel, 1. Sam. 1.26, 27, 28. Therefore I
have lent him to the Lord, as long as he lives; That is the Child that God
has given me, I give to God, to Worship him for ever: Thus do all godly
Parents, when God gives them Children, they give them to Worship and serve God.
This will appear to be a very great mercy, if you consider how acceptable the
Prayers of the Righteous are to God, The Prayers of the wicked are an
Abomination, but the Prayers of the Righteous are a sweet smelling savor
before him, Prove. 15.8. God rejects the Prayers of the wicked, but receives
the Prayers of the Godly, the fervent Prayer of the Righteous a vaileth much
with God; God is far from wicked persons, but he hears the Prayers of the
Righteous, Prove. 15.29. Therefore it is a great mercy to be the Child of such
Parents.

The third Reason.
It is a mercy to be the Child of godly Parents, because such Children are
Instructed in good things, especially, in the knowledge of the Scriptures, and
the Fundamentals of Religion. As soon as the Child is capable of Instruction,
they begin to Instruct him, and acquaint him with good things, presently fall
to Instruct them in the Truth of God, and to make them acquainted with his
mind, they readily obey that command, Deuteronomy. 6 6 7. And these words which I
command thee this day shall be in thy heart; and thou shall teach them
diligently to thy Children, and shall talk of them when thou sit in thy
house, and when thou walk by the way, and when thou lie down, and when
thou risest up, Deuteronomy. 11.19. Psalm. 7.4, 5 6. that is, thou shall take all
opportunities to Instruct thy Children; a wicked man that rejects the Commands
of God out of his heart, is not like to teach them his Children, but godly
Parents that hide the Commands of God in their hearts, will be ready always to
teach them to their Children, the love they have to the Souls of their
Children, does oblige them so to do, and besides they have a love to the
commands of God, that engages them to spread them abroad as much as they can.
They deal with their Children as godly Eunice did with her Son Timothy, make
them from their Childhood to know the Scriptures, 2 Timothy 3.15. And that from a
Child thou have known the holy Scriptures, Consider that the Scriptures contain
the whole Mind of God, and have in them every thing that concerns our
Salvation; that they are the words of Eternal Life, and that they are able to
make you wise to Salvation, 2 Timothy 3.15. Wicked Parents leave their Children in
Ignorance, or Instruct them in Superstition and Vanity, but the godly Instruct
their Children in the Scriptures; Is it not then a great mercy to be the
Children of such Parents.

CHAP. III. They are instructed what sin is, made acquainted with Christ, with
Gospel Duties, with Heaven and Hell.
GOdly Parents in instructing their Children in the Scriptures, do take special
care to teach them the fundamentals of Religion, and those Truths that are most
necessary to Salvation, and these they paticularly instructs them in; and they
are such as follow:

I. They make them acquainted with sin; they do not lead them into sin, but
they teach them,

First, what is sin, that they may avoid it, they show them the Law of God, and
acquaint them with what is evil: They tell them that to lie is a sin, to swear
is a sin, etc. and bid them avoid them: And this is a mercy.

Secondly, They do not rest there, but they tell them also what an evil sin is;
they open to them the nature of sin, that it is a transgression of Gods holy
Law, that it is that which is contrary to God. They show them also the danger
of sinning, and the fruits and effects of it; that it is that which made God
cast our fore fathers out of Paradise, and it is that which made glorious
Angels become Devils: It is that which makes God cast his Creatures to Hell for
ever: It is that which brings all the misery that is in the World; Sin was that
that destroyed Sodom, and drowned the old World; and it is that that will
destroy every one that walks in it, it is a mercy to know this betimes.

Thirdly, They acquaint their Children with their natural Pollution, and tell
them what their condition is by sin, that they are all under sin, and by nature
in a lost condition, and if they do not get from that Condition, they will be
undone for ever, and so put them upon looking after deliverance, and is not
this a great mercy; for wicked Parents do neither tell their Children what is
sin, nor what an evil sin is; nor what their condition is by sin, till they
drop to Hell, therefore it is a mercy to have good Parents.

II. Godly Parents when they have acquainted their Children with sin, acquaint
them also with the Way and Means to be delivered from sin; they tell them that
there is a Fountain opened for sin, and for uncleanness; and that the Lord
Jesus Christ came into the World to save his people from their sins, Mat. 1.21.
That he is able to save all those that come to him, and will most certainly
save them if they believe in him; they describe the excellency of his Person,
that they may be taken with him, and lay open his Offices before them, showing
that he has satisfied for sin, and has conquered all the Enemies of our
Salvation, and that there is strength to be had with him to overcome sin; they
are always speaking to them of Christ and of his love to sinners: Showing the
riches and freeness of his Grace, and what perfect Salvation is to be had; and
these things take the hearts of their Children: whereas many Parents never
speak of these things to their Children. Therefore it is a great mercy to have
good Parents.

III. The Children of godly Parents are made acquainted with Gospel Duties, and
Ordinances, their Parents teach them, which are the duties of the Gospel,
(believing and obeying) and show them the necessity of performing them, (For he
that believes not, is condemned already) the fruitfulness and pleasure of
them, and the great benefits of them; which are, Peace of Conscience, Joy in
the Holy Ghost, and Everlasting Salvation: they acquaint them with the
Ordinances, and bring them to them, and show them how they must be performed,
that it must be in Spirit and in Truth; that the Heart must be engaged in every
duty. Many think that when they have repeated a few words, they have prayed: Or
when they have sat in Church or House, they have heard: Or when they have
received the Bread and Wine, they have received the Lords Supper, but a godly
Man teaches his that they must pray with Understanding, and that the heart
must be engaged in prayer, and that the Word and Sacrament must be mixed with
Faith; Therefore it is a mercy to have good Parents,

Fourthly, They acquaint them with Heaven and Hell, they lay the Glory of
Heaven before them, and tell them that all Tears are wiped from the eyes of the
Saints in Heaven, and that they enjoy God and are continually in his presence;
blessing and praising his Name: They tell them also, that none go thith^r but
those that are Holy, and that the Way is narrow, and few enter thither,
therefore they must strive. They acquaint them also with Hell, and the Torments
of it, that there is continually weeping and gnashing of teeth, that there is
an Everlasting fire: They tell them also, that the way is broad and many find
it, and that all that do not repent of their sins go thither, and so bids them
take heed of sin. Wicked parents are Ignorant, and leave their Children
Ignorant of them; Therefore it is a mercy to have godly Parents.

CHAP. IV. Other Reasons: they are encouraged in good, and discouraged from
evil; and prayed for by the godly.
The fourth Reason.
IT is a great mercy to be the Children of godly Parents, for they are exhorted
to, and encouraged in every thing that is good. Good Parents do not only
acquaint their Children with the commands of God, but do daily exhort them to
obey them; they tell them what are their duties, and diligently persuade them
to perform them, and they also encourage them in the performance of them: they
are not satisfied to acquaint them with Gods mind, but study all sorts of
Arguments to persuade them to Obedience. Wicked Parents do not exhort their
Children to Holiness, but at best to some outward Forms of Religion, and if
they find the power of Godliness in their Souls, they are apt to hate them, and
instead of Encouraging them, they discourage them; Therefore it is a mercy to
be the Children of godly Parents.

The fifth Reason.
It is a great mercy to be the Children of godly Parents; because such are
warned against all evil, wacht over least they should run to evil, and always
discouraged in whatsoever is evil: and if nothing will do, then they correct
them, knowing how God uses to bless the corrections of his Children, Prove.
22.17. Correct thy Son, and he shall give thee rest; yea, he shall give delight
to thy Soul, that is, God will bless thy due Correction, that thou shall find a
satisfactory Fruit arising from it, or however thou shall find rest in doing
the duty: Such Parents know that the rod and reprooss gives Wisdom, Prove.
29.15. Therefore, rather then their Children should spend their days in folly,
they will give them Correction, they love the Souls of their Children, and
therefore rather then they should be lost, they will correct them, following
the advice of the Spirit of God, Prove. 23.13, 14. Withold not correction from
the Child, for if thou beatest him with the Rod he shall not die; thou shall
beat him with the Rod and shall deliver his Soul from Hell; That is, God will
bless Correction to save the Child, and with Correction they Instruct them, and
pray over them, they know what a danger it is to be accustomed to sin, and
therefore they Principle them against sin, and correct them for sin, and this
is a special Mercy: But wicked Parents do not discourage their Children, nor
correct them for displeasing God, although they may Correct them overmuch to
please their own humor; Therefore it is a mercy to have good Parents.

The sixth Reason.
It is a great mercy to be the Children of godly Parents, because the Saints
are continually praying for them: I suppose that godly Parents do go
themselves, and bring their Children to the Society of godly People, and all
the Saints pray for them: Now this is a very great mercy, if you Consider how
the Saints Prayers do prevail with God, and how Often he hears them; and
answers them. Therefore it is a mercy to be the Children of godly Parents.

CHAP. V. Other Reasons; they have holy examples to teach them, they have the
benefit of their Fathers expertences, they are in Scripture called Blessed.
The seventh Reason.
IT is a great mercy to be the Children of Godly Parents, because such have
holy Examples laid before them: Good Parents take special care to say no
stumbbling-block before their children, but live up to the inst uction they
give them* They labor to be an example to their children in word, avoiding all
vain and foolish words; in conversation, walking holily according to the
commands of God; in Charity, that is, full of love and pity to poor creatures;
living peaceably with all, in spirit, upright and sincere in spirit, full of
zeal and fervency, in faith, having an holy unfeigned faith; in purity, being
pure in all their carriages, 1 Timothy 4.12. So Prove. 29.7. The just man walks
in his integrity, his Children are blessed after him: His upright walking, and
holy practices conduces to their happiness.

And further, they take care to bring their Children to such places and
companies as may give them holy examples; and there is nothing conduces more
to work good on others, than holy examples; especially the holy examples of
Parents conduce to the good of their Children: Wicked Parents give evil
examples to their children, they swear, curse, lie, cheat, slight the
Ordinances of God, drink to excess, riot, hate and persecute Gods children, and
run to all m^nner of wickedness, keep wicked company, and thereby teach their
Children to do so also; therefore it is a mercy to be the Children of good
Parents.

The eighth Reason.
The Children of godly Parents are in Scripture called Blessed; therefore it is
a mercy to be such children, Prove. 20.7. His Children are blessed after him.

The Ninth Reason.
It is a great mercy to be the children of good Parents, because such enjoy the
benefits of their Parents experiences; it is a mercy when men teach
experiences: such Parents will tell their children that they have tried sin,
and find it to be a great evil, that they tried the World, and found no
satisfaction, that all the pleasures of it are vain; that they have found much
satisfaction, much real joy and comfort in walking with God, and in obeying his
commands; that they have found the Lord Jesus to be a gracious Soul-satisfying
Redeemer; they tell them that they never saw the Righteous forsaken, nor his
seed begging bread, Psalm. 37.25. They tell them what joy and pleasure they have
found in holiness; and experiences are very prevalent to persuade Souls. Wicked
Parents have no such experiences to teach their Children, therefore it is a
mercy to be the child of good Parents.

CHAP. VI. Other Reasons; they have such as make Conscience of providing for
them, they are both spared and rewarded for their Parents good; their estates
got honestly.
The Tenth Reason.
TO be the Children of Godly Parents, is a great mercy, because such make
conscience of providing for the good of their childrens Souls and Bodies; they
are conscienciously bound to educate their Children in the fear of God, and to
match and settle them so as they may be encouraged in those hings: And so also
to provide for their bodies to breed them in honest Callings, and to leave them
as much outward Estates as they can, they are conscienciously bound to Improve
their Estates in an honest way for for their Children, Prove. 13.22. A Good man
leaves an Inheritance to his Children; strives so to do; however his Holiness
and Sincerity is an Inheritance to them; Believers consider that place
seriously, 1 Timothy 5.8. But if any provide not for his own; and especially to
those of his own house, (or kindred) he has denied the Faith, and is worse
than an Infidel; Infidels have a natural tie on them to provide for their
Families, but Believers have both a Natural and Conscientious tie to provide
for theirs; Therefore it is a mercy to be the Children of such.

The eleventh Reason.
It is a great mercy to have godly Parents, because God oftentimes rewards
Children for the good of their Parents, and withholds Judgments from seizing
upon them, upon the account of their Parents, Lev. 26.42. I will remember my
Covenant with Jacob, and I will remember the Land, verse 44. and I will not cast
them away, neither will I destroy them utterly; that is, upon the account of
their Godly Forefathers 1 Kings 11.34. Howbeit, I will take the whole Kingdom
out of his hand, but I will make him Prince all the days of his life, for
David my Servants sake, whom I chose because he kept my Commands, and my
Statutes. How is a Judgment withheld, and a Mercy bestowed upon the account of
the Godliness of a Father? so 2 Kings 10.30. Because thou have done well in
executing that which is right in mine eyes, thy Children to the fourth
Generation, shall sit on the Throne of Israel: so Prove. 20.7. The Just man
walks in his Integrity, his Children are blessed after him: that is on the
account of his Integrity. Personal goodness is a good means to bring Safety,
Honor, Wealth, and many comfortable blessings on Posterity; Therefore it is a
mercy to be the Children of such.

The twelfth Reason.
It is a mercy to be the Children of godly Parents, because their Estates come
with a blessing, they are gotten honestly, and so God blesses them; and a
little with a blessing, is better than a great deal that the wicked bath, Psalm.
3.7. A little that a Righteous man has is better than the riches of many
wicked: because God blesses the one, and curses the other; the one is got
justly, and the other unrighteously. Prove. 15.16. Better is a little with the
fear of the Lord, than great Treasures with trouble: That which is gathered in
the fear of God, though little; is better then great Possessions got wickedly,
for usually it comes to nothing, having a Curse going along with it: therefore
it is a mercy to be Children of godly Parents

CHAP. VII. Other Reasons; there is a curse on the wicked and their Seed; and
the children of Believers have an interest in the Covenant.
The thirteenth Reason.
It Is a great mercy to be the Children of good Parents, because the Seed of the
Wicked are under a curse, and God oftentimes pours down a curse upon them, on
the account of their Parents, Exodus 20.5. Visiting the sins of the Fathers upon
the Children: As for eternal Judgments, every one suffers for his own sins; but
for the Fathers sins the children are often punished in body, in goods, and
other things, which they had, and derive from their Parents, Numb. 14.33. And
your Children shall walk in the Wilderness forty years, and bear your whordoms.
So 1 Samuel 15.3. Smite Amaleck and utterly destroy all that he has, and spare
them not, but slay both man and woman, infant and suckling, Ox and Ass, Camel
and Sheep. Amaleck sinned, and his children suffer. So that you see it is a
mercy to be the children of good Parents.

The fourteenth Reason.
It is a great mercy to be the children of Godly Parents because such have an
interest in the Covenant of Grace, the Covenant belongs to the Faith (...)
their Seed, Genesis 17.7. (...) will establish my Covenant ^^een me and thee, and
thy Seed after thee, in their Generations, for an everlasting Covenant, to be a
God to thee, and thy Seed after thee. Jer. 32.39. where the Covenant is
mentioned, it is said to be for the good of them, and their Seed after them.
And although there are none saved but the faithful children of Believers, yet
all the children of Believers have an interest in the external part of ^^e
Covenant: They are to be baptized, Many of Gods people are not (...) my mind in
^^is, but I hope ^^ey will not be ^^nded with (...), for decla^^g my mind.
they have a foederal holiness, and that gives them a title to baptism, for
that does seem to be the direct ^^eaning of that place, 1 Cor. ^.14. For the
unbel^eving ^usband is sanctified by the ^elieving Wife, and the unbe^eving
Wife is sanctified by ^^e Husband; else were your ^hildren unclean, but now are
^^ey holy: This husbands san^^ifying of the Wife, or the ^^fe the Husband, is
not ^^ant real sanctification, for that they do not always do, though God makes
them instrumental to it sometimes; nor are their children made really holy and
gracious, but faederally holy, so that they may be baptized; which the children
of unbelievers have no title to, and this is a great mercy. Therefore it is
good to have godly Parents.

CHAP. VIII. Some Uses of the Point, by way of Information and Exhortation.
USE I.
THese Reasons that I have given to prove it a great mercy to be the children
of godly Parents, do contain in them the duties of Parents: Therefore let all
Parents look to it, that you pray for and instruct your Children, and provide
for them, and educate them in the fear of the Lord; will it not be a sad thing
when you come to die, to think that you have children that are no instructed in
Gods ways, or to see your children die ignorant of Christ? Therefore look to it.

USE II.
That we should all of us take special care to bring our selves under the
Covenant: How can any think of marrying, till you are married to Christ? and of
having children, till you are sanctified? Therefore strive to be holy, that
your children may have this mercy.

USE III.
Let such as are Parents walk holily before the Lord; lay up your prayers for
your children in heaven: Leave them holy examples: You have given them a sinful
nature, and have brought them to a sinful world, do what you can to make them
gracious, and and answer the desire of the Spirit of God Deuteronomy. 5.29. O that
there were such an heart in them, that they would fear me and keep my
Commandments that it might be well with them and their children for ever.

USE IV.
Do not be discouraged to breed your children in godliness, though it may seem
contrary to their outward profit, for the greatest good you can do them, is to
(...) care them, the fear of the Lord, ^^ov 14.26. In the fear of the Lord is
strong confidence, an^ his Children shall have R^fuge.

CHAP. IX. Another Use; The evil of a fained Faith showed in several
Particulars.
USE V.
LEt me exhort all Parents to take great care that their faith be sincere: for
as the unfeigned faith of Parents is a great mercy; so a fained faith of Parents
is a great Judgment, both to themselves and children: And that for these
Reasons:

The first Reason.
Because this brings them under a curse: Hypocrites are accursed, and they
bring their Children under a curse; therefore if thou love the Souls of thy
children, be real and sincere.

The second Reason.
Because the faired faith of Parents do prejudice them against Religion: they
see a contradiction in their profession and practices, and this prejudiceth
them against Religion; and though it will not excuse them at last, yet it is a
great Judgment; therefore let parents be sure to live up to that they profess,
or else they may prejudice their children against Godliness for ever.

The third Reason.
The fained faith of Parents is a great evil, for it breeds a searedness of
Conscience in them, always seeing nothing but the outward show of Religion, and
being brought up only in the outward form of it, never seeing any thing of the
Life and Power of Godliness, they grow secure and seared, and this is a very
great Judgment.

The fourth Reason.
It breeds a fained faith in them, therefore it is a great Judgment to have
Parents that have a fained Faith only: Hypocrisy is a Leven, ( Luke 12.10
Reware of the Leven of the Pharisees, which is Hypocrisy) and levens a whole
Family, and runs from one Generation to another; and when the Parents are
hypocritical, the children are apt to be hypocritical too.

The fifth Reason.
It is a great Judgment to have P^rents that have fained faith only, because
the children shall see an end of their faith, and usually a sad end, running to
open sin and profaneness, and this does the children more hurt than their
profession did good.

Upon all these accounts you see what reason Parents have to look that their
faith be not fained, but real and sincere: Try then the reallity of your faith:
look to the object of it, that the things you believe be right and true, or
else you will run your self, and lead your children to an error: look to the
nature of your faith, that it be sincere and real, or else you deceive your
selves, and ^^umble your children.

CHAP. X. Other Uses; Such should bless God, and labor to Improve this great
Mercy.
The sixth Use.
LET all the Children of such, admire the Proviof God, and bless him for it;
you might have been borne under a curse, and have had such Parents as would
have neglected your Souls and Bodies, and have breed you in the way of sin, and
have laid wicked Examples before you, but you have Parents that pray for you,
instruct you, and lay Holy Examples before you. Therefore bless and praise God
for his good Providence.

USE VII.
Let the Children of good Parents labor to Improve this mercy.

Directions to improve this mercy.
The first Direction. Improve this mercy by being willing to be Instructed,
pray to God for a teachable heart, take fast hold of Instruction; keep her, and
let her not go, for she is thy life, Prove. 4.13. be not weary of Instruction:
Read these following Scriptures. Prove. 5.11, 12. and.8.33. and 12.1. and 13.18.
and 15.32. Therefore be Instructed.

The second Direction. Improve this great mercy by a Cordial receiving of their
lawful Commands, and Corrections; do not let thy heart rise against the
corrections of thy Parents, but be ready to obey and submit: Read these
Scriptures, Ephesians. 6.1. Prove. 15.10. and readily embrace the commands and
corrections of your Parents.

The third Direction. Improve the mercy, by following their examples in what is
good, as they lay Holy Examples before you, so be you Holy in Words,
Conversation and Heart; you see them praying much, and doing good, and hating
sin; so do you also.

The fourth Direction. Improve this mercy by avoiding all their weakness,
covering them, knowing that they are such as they will be ashamed of, and
humbled for.

The fifth Direction. Improve this mercy by being thankful to your Parents,
always ready to serve them, and help them in what you can, and by being
thankful to God for them.

The sixth Direction. Improve this mercy, by taking care, and by using all
diligence to get the same Faith, that your Parents have; And so I am come to
the second Observation.

CHAP. XI. The second Observation, Reasons why the Children of Believers should
take care to look after the same Faith.
I Am come now to the second Observation from the Text,

Obser. 2. It should be the care of the Children of godly Parents, to get the
same unfeigned Faith with their Parents. This was Timothies happiness; that he
had the same unfeigned Faith with his Parents; you would not come behind your
Parents in Estates, Honor, and the like: Be sure then to be Good and Holy as
well as them, and as you would have their Estates, so get their Holiness, and
that for those Reasons.

The first Reason.
Children should take care to get unfeigned faith, because the Faith of their
Parents cannot save them, although the Faith of their Parents may bring down
many outward mercies upon them, and withold outward Judgments from them, yet
it cannot hinder Eternal Judgments from seizing upon them, if they walk in sin
and iniquity, Esau, a wicked Son of a Godly Parent must go to Hell;
notwithstanding the Godliness of his Parents, and so must all the wicked
Children of godly Parents, if they dye in their sins, every one is saved by his
own Faith; and as a wicked man's Child shall be saved if he Believe, for see
Acts 13.39. for by him all that Believe are justified; whither they be the
Children of wicked or good Parents; so no good man's Child shall be saved
without Faith, see Joh. 3.18. He that believes on him is not condemned, but he
that believes not, is condemned already, because he believes not on the Name
of Christ. Whosoever is saved; is saved by Faith, and that his own Faith; not
the Faith of his Parents: Therefore let the Children of Believers use all
diligence to get the same unfeigned Faith, with their Parents.

The second Reason.
The Children of godly Parents should take care to get Faith, because Faith is
not entailed on the Children of Believers, they do not convey Grace, as they do
corruption on his Children, for Faith is the gift of God, and although godly
Parents are often Instruments of working Faith in their Children, yet it is
given by the special hand of God; neither is God bound to give Grace to
Children for the godliness of their Parents, although he often Sanctifies such,
and hears the Prayers of Parents for their Children, yet he is a free Agent,
and bestows Grace on whom he pleases; and therefore we see that godly Parents
sometimes have wicked Children, and wicked Parents have godly Children, Ephesians.
1.5. Having predestined us to the Adoption of Children by Jesus Christ,
according to the good pleasure of his will; the will and pleasure of God is the
rule of his bestowing Grace. Therefore let the Children of Believers be careful
to get Faith.

The third Reason.
The Children of good Parents, should be careful to get Faith, because this
great mercy we enjoy, (of having Parents that are godly, that p^ay for us,
instruct us, correct us, bring us to the Ordinances, and give us holy Examples)
if we do not receive Instruction, increase our Condemnation at last. Therefore
be careful.

The fourth Reason.
Such Children should be careful to get Faith, for if they miss of it, they
will be without excuse, they cannot say but they have been offered Heaven, and
called upon to walk with God for ever, they cannot say but they have been
Instructed, reproved, exhorted to Good, Encouraged in it, and told of the evil
of sin, and d^horted from sin. Therefore see you get grace, or else you will be
without excuse and miserable.

CHAP. XII. Other Reasons; an use of reproof, the several ways that godly men's
Children forfeit their mercy.
The fifth Reason.
GODLY men's Children should be very careful to get Faith, because Satan is most
busy with such, he sees your Parents use diligence to save you, and sees you
are nearer Heaven, therefore he will bestir himself, and use all means to make
you miscarry, and he is a cunning Adversary. Therefore it concerns you to be
careful.

The sixth Reason.
Such Children should take care to get unfeigned Faith, because they are apt to
rest in the form and outward Profession of Religion; being bred up civilly, and
not suffered to run to any outward evil, and used to Ordinances: Satan
persuades them they are well, and makes them rest in a Form of Godliness
without the power of it, therefore let all such take care, and not trust in the
goodness of their Parents nor outward Profession, but get an unfeigned Faith
your selves.

Use.
If the Children of Godly Parents should be so careful to get unfeigned Faith,
this sadly reproves such as neglect it, and continue in sin, though they have
Parents that hate sin; how many such are there! If there be any weakness in
their Parents, they will Imitate them in that, but never look after their good;
they slight the Mercy of having good Parents, as if it was of no value; has
God given you these Mercies and will you abuse them? Are you so fair for
Heaven, and will not you strive to enter? God offers Heaven and will you refuse
it? There are three ways that I find in Scripture, and Experience, that the
Children of godly Parents depart from God and abuse this mercy, which I shall
lay down, that you may avoid them.

1. Way, Where the Children of godly Parents do not prove godly, they often
prove to be Mockers and Persecutors of Godliness, see Genesis 21.9, 10. Ishmael
(the Son of Godly Abraham) mocked Isaac; that is, persecuted him: We have many
sad Experiences of this, and is it not a sad thing to see persons Educated
righteously, persecute Religion? Certainly their condition is sad: Take heed
then of this.

2. Way. When godly men's Children do not prove godly, they g^ve themselves to
Worldly Pleasures. Esan the Son of godly Isaac, sold his Birthright for a mess
of Pottage, Genesis 25.31. How many Examples have we of godly men's Children,
selling Heaven and all their Privileges for the pleasures of this world, for
that is to loose everlasting pleasures, and to purchase everlasting so row.

3. Way. Many godly men's Children, not proving godly, do grow confident in
their own righteousness, and trust in their own gifts and privileges, resting
in a Form of Godliness, without the power of it; we may say of many as of them,
Romans 10.3. For they being Ignorant of Gods Righteousness, and going about to
establish their own Righteousness, have not submitted themselves to the
Righteousness of God. It is Ignorance that makes any trust in their own
Righteousness, this we are all apt to, aspecially such as have the form of
Godliness; therefore beware of this, and if thou art in any of these ways:
Consider these following partculars.

CHAP. XIII. Fourteen Considerations; to the Children of Godly Parents, that
are ungodly.
Consid. 1. Let all the ungodly Children of godly Parents consider, that God
never rejected them, but they despised the Covenant, neither was there any
necessity laid upon them, of departing from God.

Consid. 2. Let such consider that your own Consciences will condemn you, those
Consciences of yours, that are now seared, will one day condemn you, and make
you say ( Prove. 5.12.) How have I hated Instruction; and my heart despised
reproof?

Consid. 3. That all these mercies, the Instructions, Examples, and Ordinances,
which thou enjoyest, will rise up in Judgment against thee, and increase thy
condemnation.

Consid. 4. Let the wicked Children of Good Parents consider that they shall
hardly escape a curse here, for usually such as are bred in a godly manner, if
they be wicked and persecute Gods Children, or profane, God overtakes them
with some sad Judgments here.

Consid. 5. However such may escape here, they will be sure of the lowermost
part of Hell hereafter, for such (usually) know much, And he that knows his
Masters will and does it not, shall be beaten with many Stripes, Luke 12 49

Consid. 6. All men in their hearts will hate you, though wicked men endeavor
to draw you to sin, yet their Consciences tell them that your Fathers ways were
right, and and that you should be as they were: Therefore when you grow
Profane, you will be hated, and slighted of all-

Consid. 7. That you once stood fair for Heaven? you had the means of Grace,
and by sin you have forfeited all your mercies, and chose Hell rather then
Heaven.

Consid. 8. Let such consider the difference that will be between them and the
godly Children of good Parents, The Lord receives them into inward Fellowship,
so that they are Justified by Christ, Sanctified, and shall be glorified for
ever; but the wicked bring themselves under Condemnation, and are damned.

Consi. 9. Consider the Odium that is put upon such, they are called cursed;
cursed Esau and Ishmael: But the godly Children of good Parents are honored;
as Timothy was, so Isaac, Jacob, etc.

Consid. 10. Let such conder the Promises that are made to those that are good
Children, that receive Instruction, they are blessed, Prove. 23.28. He that
regards reproof shall be honored, yea, they that fear God, are blessed for
ever, but the rest shall be accursed and ashamed, Prove. 23.28.

Consid. 11. That if you that have had so much means of Grace prove wicked,
that none will pity you when you are in misery.

Consid. 12. Let such consider what a Blessed Foundation they have to build
upon, they have Blessed Promises, Instructions, Examples: Therefore if they
prove wicked, it must needs be very sad.

Consid. 13. Let such consider what a mercy it is to have such Parents, you
might have had wicked, but you had Parents that were godly, and you have heard
what a mercy it is, and how dare you to abuse it?

Consid. 14. How joyful a thing it would be to your Parents to see you fearing
God; and what a grief and trouble it is to their Souls, to see you walking in
sin, and un-reconciled to God: and if you have any Ingenuity in you, strive to
be Holy, that you may rejoice your Parents hearts. A foolish (or a wicked)
Child is a grief to his Father, and a bitterness to her that bare him.

CHAP. XIV. Some Directions to such, that they may come to be Godly.
I Hope by this time, that you are resolved to get the same unfeigned faith with
your Parents: And that you may improve this mercy, I shall propose these few
Direction.

Direction 1.
Let such Children of Godly Parents as would receive good by the mercy, highly
esteem the persons and goodness of their Parents; else they are not like to get
good by them.

Direction 2.
Let your ears and hearts be opened to receive their Instructions, and be not
weary to be instructed.

Direction 3.
Pray earnestly that God would bless the means that your Parents use for your
good, and sanctify the mercy to you.

Direction 4.
Lay hold upon the Promises that are made to the Seed of the Righteous, and to
Parents that use means to do their children good, and plead them with God.

Direction 5.
Get a sight of your sinfulness, and never rest till you are washed in the
blood of Christ.

Direction 6.
Examine the instructions and practices of thy Parents, by the word of God, and
receive them upon that account. For,

1. Gods Word is the Object of Divine Faith.

2. When temptation comes, all that we have received, if not founded on Divine
Authority, will fail.

3. If we do not try them by the word of God, we shall be apt to take up their
weaknesses as well as their goodness, their Errors as well as what is right:
therefore try them by Gods Word, and that will give them perfect authority.

Direction 7.
Inquire diligently after unfeigned faith in Christ.

CHAP. XV. An Unfeigned Faith described, and the description opened.
Question. HOw may I know whether my Faith be unfeigned?

Answer. I shall answer it by giving you a description of unfeigned faith.

Description.
An unfeigned faith is a grace wrought by the Spirit of God in the Soul of a
person, whereby the Soul apprehends the Lord Jesus Christ, as a willing and
sufficient Savior, and relies upon him for the pardon of his sins, and
everlasting Salvation.

Now try your Faith by this:

1. Is your faith a Grace wrought by the Spirit of God? Or is it a thing
flowing from your Nature? If you have not received your faith from God by a
supernatural work, it is not unfeigned; for faith is the gift of God, Ephesians.
2.8. For by Grace are ye saved, through Faith, and that not of your selves, for
it is the Gift of God.

2. Is it wrought in the Soul? That is not Faith that is only in the mouth, but
it must be in the heart.

3. The Object of Unfeigned faith, is the Lord Jesus Christ; If you believe in
any thing else, it will not do.

4. An Unfeigned Faith apprehends the Lord Jesus as a willing and sufficient
Savior; we can never trust in him, unless we apprehend him so.

5. A relying on him as such, and a trusting in him, and laying hold of his
mercies.

Now you must see that you be real and sincere in this, which may be
discovered, for Faith carries an evidence with it.

CHAP. XVI. The true Signs and Characters of an Unfeigned Faith.
I Am now come to the last Observation from the words:

Observe. An unfeigned Faith discovers It self to our selves and others. So Paul
was persuaded of Timothy's faith: Unfeigned Faith discovers it self to our own
Souls by these effects:

1 Effect. An unfeigned faith brings peace, satisfaction and joy with it to the
Soul, Romans 5.2. By whom also ye have access by faith into this grace wherein ye
stand, and rejoice in the hope of the glory of God. Romans 14.17. But the Kingdom
of God is not in meat and drink, but Righteousness and Peace, and Joy in the
holy Ghost; by Kingdom is meant the state of Grace.

2 Effect. Wherever there is sincere faith, it works love in the Soul to God
and all his Ordinances, Ways, and People. Gal 5.6. Faith which worketk by Love.

3 Effect. An unhypocritical faith, or a sincere faith, without dissimulation,
fills the Soul with zeal for Christ and his ways, that the Soul cannot endure
to see them abused, or to hear them evil spoken of.

4 Effect. An unfeigned faith begets a real hatred in the Soul to all sin and
iniquity.

5 Effect. A sincere faith begets an inward delight and pleasure in the Soul,
in Gods ways and Ordinances: Psalm. 119.97. O how love I thy Law! It is my
meditation all the day.

An unfeigned Faith discovers it self to others by these Signs:

1 Sign. An unfeigned faith makes the person that has it, constantly own and
appear for Christ and his ways.

2 Sign. An unfeigned Believer highly prizeth Christ, and all that is his.

3 Sign. Unfeigned faith discovers it self by a conformity to Christ's will,
which is 1. Universal to all his will, 2. Readily he need not be constrained to
obedience, 3. Constantly, in all places and companies, and at all times.

4 Sign. Where there is an unfeigned faith, there is a willingness to suffer for
Christ.

By these things you may try whether your faith be unfeigned or no.

USE.
Try your faith by these former effects, and never be satisfied till you have
an unfeigned faith: Take that advice in 2 Pet. 1.5, 6, 7, 8. Giving all
diligence, add to your Faith Virtue, and to Virtue Knowledge, and to Knowldge
Temperance, and to Temperance Patience, and to Patience Godliness, and to
Godliness Brotherly kindness, and to Brotherly kindness Charity: for if these
things be in you and abound, they will make you that you shall neither be
barren nor unfruitful in the knowledge of the Lord Jesus.

Now to Him be all Glory AMEN.

FINIS.

