THE Primitive Fathers NO PAPISTS: IN ANSWER to the VINDICATION of the NUBES
TESTIUM.

To which is added An Historical Discourse CONCERNING INVOCATION of SAINTS; In
ANSWER to The Challenge of F. Sabran the Jesuit.

Wherein is shown, that Invocation of Saints was so far from being the
Practice, that it was expressly against the Doctrine of the Primitive Fathers.

IMPRIMATUR

Liber cui Titulus, The Primitive Fathers no Papists, etc.

Ex Aedib. Lamb. Febr. 4. 1687. Guil. Needham R.R. in Christo Patri ac D.D.
Wilhelmo Archiep. Cant. a Sacr. Domest.

LONDON, Printed for Ric. Chiswell at the Rose and Crown in St Paul's
Churchyard, MDCLXXXVIII.

THE PREFACE.
I Have been so much larger in my Vindication of the Primitive Fathers than I
intended at first, that I would not have troubled the Reader with any Preface
at all, but that I think it requisite to give him some account of the length of
it. In the present Controversy with the Writers of the Church of Rome, we lie
under one great unhappiness, which our Forefathers were not troubled with in
their Contests with the Romanists; they were wont then fairly to own their
Popish Doctrines, and our Authors had nothing to do but to oppose them: but we
have not only the disproving of Popery upon our hands now, but must be obliged
also to prove the Popery it self upon them: We must now not only prove the
Worship of Images to be unlawful, but prove, that they worship Images.

This is that which has engaged me to be so large, for the Adversary I have to
do with is one of the new Stamp, one of the Assertors of the NEW POPERY, who
since they see they cannot defend the true old downright Popery, have set up
such a Popery as they think they can defend. Thus when they find how perfectly
inconsistent with the Honor of God, and how directly contrary to the Word of
God it is to give Adoration or Religious Worship to Images or Relics; they
are for salving all by bearing the Reader in hand that they do not do it: and
thus when we show them that their Purgatory-Fire is not only inconsistent with
the Account we have of the State of the Dead in the Holy Scriptures, but also
with the Account of it in the Primitive Fathers for six hundred years, they
have no other refuge than to tell us, that they do not hold a Fiery Purgatory.

This dissembling and betraying of their own Popery is that which has
occasioned my insisting so largely and distinctly upon these points, by which I
have effectually shown, that the Church of Rome does command and practice the
Adoration of Images and Relics, and that her Purgatory differs only from Hell
in the Duration of their Torments.

I did expect and hope I shall reap a double advantage from my care to expose
these things; the first of which is to confute my Adversary, and the other to
make it evident to the meanest Reader, how very unsincere the Representer is in
giving us the true State of their Popery. I am sure, that as to Purgatory,
about which he took the most pains to defend himself, I have invincibly proved
upon him, that he either did not understand the Doctrine of his own Church, or
did most unfaithfully dissemble it.

I hope I need not trouble my self to warn our People of the Confidence with
which these Romish Writers can write the most false and most disingenuous
things: if Confidence be all that is necessary to carry any cause, I must
confess that we should come off losers, because we cannot tell how to imitate
these men: however no one is ignorant that a Mountebank is but a Mountebank
still for all his pretending to Infallible Cures, to never-failing Remedies.

But we must allow our Adversaries this Assurance, since they have nothing else
to set off or recommend their Cause, excepting that which is a consequence of
it, their writing with a Contempt of us, and treating us scurrilously; but this
we can bear cheerfully enough, though reproach is uneasy to Mankind, because it
does so plainly speak out, that all Scholar-like Arguments are spent, and that
they have no other left to encounter us with.

Of this we have had a great deal of late, and I have had my share from them; I
will not animadvert further on it than to say, that their late Pamphlets
against us are so very abusive, as if they had been Written as well as Printed
by the Ditch-side. I do heartily forgive them, and believe all our Writers do,
and desire to make no other return to such Treatment, than to offer up hearty
Prayers to God, That He would bring into the way of Truth all those who have
erred and are deceived, and that He would frustrate the Devices of them, who
are endeavoring to deceive others.

THE CONTENTS.
AN Account of the Controversy about the Postscript to the Answer to the NUBES
TESTIUM with Sabran the Jesuit p. 2. About the Answer it self with the
Representer p. 4. His Vindication of the Nubes Testium against the Answerer,
shown to be very weak and very defective, from a Catalogue of Twenty seven
material Points and Charges against him, to which he has given not one word of
Answer p. 10. His vain attempt to clear himself about the stealing his Nubes
out of a condemned Author, shown to be made up of Confidence and Falsehood p.
18. F. Alexandre his Master proved to be also either a Compiler, or a Falsifier
of the Fathers p. 22. His Chapters in the Nubes about Schism, shown further to
have been altogether impertinent p. 25. His Coldness and Diffidence about the
Defense of his Chapter of the Supremacy, shown from his letting fall the
Vindication of all the numerous Quotations upon that Head, excepting Three, The
Defense of which is shown to be very vain His Defense of his Chapter about
Tradition, shown to be merely a giving us over again two or three Pieces of his
Old Testimonies in the Nubes p. 31. That the Primitive Fathers did look upon
the Scriptures as containing and handing down to us all matters of Faith, shown
further from Origin, Gregory Nyssen, S. Austin, and S. Hierom. p. 32. That the
Church of England does not symbolize with the Church of Rome, which gives
Religious Worship to the Saints on their Festivals, but with the Primitive
Church, who paid them only Civil Honor; proved from the Epistle of the Church
of Smyrna and S. Austin p. 35. His Defense of his Chapter about Invocation of
Saints, begun with Falsification of my Words p. 37. and built wholly upon that
false Supposal, That I had granted Invocation to have been practiced in the
Fourth and Fifth Ages p. 39. The Jesuit Sabran's Challenge about Invocation of
Saints, accepted and answered, Wherein is proved, That the Primitive Fathers
did not practice Invocation of Saints, during the Five first Centuries, from
the Acts of the Martyrdoms of S. Ignatius and S. Polycarp p. 41. from the
Liturgy of the first Christians in Justin Martyr, Tertullian, Clement's
Constitutiones Apostolicae, and S. Austin p. 42. that the Doctrine of the
Primitive Fathers for those Ages was directly against, and inconsistent with
Invocation of Saints, proved from Ignatius p. 45. from the Epistle of the
Church of Smyrna, and S. Irenaeus p. 46. from Clemens Alexandrinus, and
Tertullian p. 47. from Origin p. 49. from S. Cyprian, and Novatian p. 54. from
Lactantius p. 55. from S. Athanasius p. 56. from Hilary the Deacon p. 58. from
S. Basil, Gregory Nyssen and S. Ambrose p. 59. from S. Epiphanius p. 60. from
S. Chrysostom p. 61. from S. Austin p. 62. p. 62. The Jesuit's Confidence in
asserting in both his Letters that all the Fathers of the Fourth and Fifth
Centuries did teach Invocation of Saints, exposed p. 65. The Argument for
Invocation of Angels and Saints, from S. Ambrose disproved p. 67. The Jesuit's
Arguments for it answered, His first from S. Austin, shown to be directly
against himself p. 69. His second from Origin, shown to be as much, if not more
against him p. 71. His third from S. Basil, answered p. 72. His fourth from
Gregory Nazianz. answered ibid. His fifth from Gregory Nyssen answered p. 73.
His last from Theodoret answered p. 74.
Three Differences assigned betwixt what was practiced toward the Saints, in
the end of the Fourth and Fifth Ages, and what is practiced toward them by the
Church of Rome at this day p. 77. A Challenge to the Jesuit, if he intends to
reply p. 79. A horrid blundering Objection of the Representer's about
Invocation, displayed and confuted p. 80. The Defense of his Chapter about
Relics, shown to be disingenuous, and unreasonable Cavilling from S.
Athanasius p. 84. The whole of his Vindication upon this Head ruined, by the
proof of two things: first, That the Church of Rome does worship Relics,
proved from the Council of Trent, from Vasques, and Thomas Aquinas their Oracle
p. 85. Secondly, That the Primitive Church did not worship them, proved from S.
Hierom and Austin p. 89. The Purgatory of the Church of Rome, shown to be
inconsistent with the Belief of the Ancients about the State of the Dead, from
the belief of its being a place of torments p. 93. That the Compiler has
forsaken the Doctrine of his own Church by denying it to be a Place of Fire and
fiery Torments p. 94. That the Purgatory of the Church of Rome is such a place,
proved from Bellarmine, from the Council of Florence p. 98. from the Catechism
ad Parochos p. 101. from the Office for the Dead in the Romish Missal p. 103.
and from Cardinal Capisucchi's Interpretation of the Prayer in that Office p.
105. His Doctrine of the Three States of Men departed, and of Purgatory, shown
to be unserviceable to the Church of Rome, from S. Austin himself, who first
taught it p. 109. That the Ancients did pray for those in Heaven, and for those
in Hell, proved against the Compiler from S. Ambrose, p. 111. from the Canon of
the Mass it self p. 112. and from S. Chrysostom and S. Austin ibid. His great
disingenuity and false dealing about representing our Doctrine about the
Eucharist, laid open p. 113. The Insincerity of his Defense proved from Point
to Point, p. 116. That the Primitive Fathers did believe that the Eucharist
does in a proper sense nourish our Bodies, proved from Justin Martyr, Irenaeus,
Origin, Tertullian, Isidore of Sevil, etc. p. 118. A digression, wherein is
proved that the Editors of Rabanus Maurus's Works have abused the World by
putting in things which are not his, and leaving out Books which certainly
belong to him p. 119. His forsaking the Defense of his Proofs about Images,
shown to be unavoidable, since they do prove against himself p. 130. Directions
to the Compiler if he intend to reply p. 132. A recapitulatory Conclusion,
wherein is shown, in short, how far the Primitive Fathers were from being
Papists 133.
THE Primitive Fathers NO PAPISTS: IN ANSWER to the VINDICATION of NUBES
TESTIUM, etc.
WHat reception My Answer to the Nubes Testium found among the Members of the
Church of England, I am neither so curious, nor so vain to inquire, the
entertainment it met with among the Romish Party does very fully discover that
some people were very much galled, and very much incensed at it; for no sooner
was it published in Print, than I was told that the Clouds were gathering, and
that I should find them break in Thunder and Lightning upon me: I will not
trouble the World with the Stories and the Messages I had sent me about it; but
will only assure the Reader, that if big words, and great threatenings could
have done any good upon me, I had certainly been spoiled for ever venturing
upon Controversy again, or even upon defending what I had already written
therein.

But upon second thoughts I suppose it was, that my Adversaries found it would
be their best way to treat me as a Writer, and that it must be their care to
have some sort of an Answer made to those severe things I had charged the
Representer and the Jesuit with.

The Jesuit Sabran was the first that took the Field against me, and reason
good; since he had but a small Postscript of half a page to encounter; and
therefore after three Weeks time from the publishing of the Postscript at the
end of my Answer to the Nubes Testium, out comes his Letter of a Sheet and a
half to a Protestant Lord in defense of the Passage in his Printed Sermon,
which I had reflected on.

As Soon as I saw his Letter, I could not but smile to see them begin at the
wrong end of my Book to answer it, and to see them withal undertake the Defense
of that thing, in which they were opposed not only by us Protestants, but by
all the Men of Learning in their own Church: and therefore I needed not to be
much concerned, since I perceived I was engaged with an Adversary whom I might
answer as fast as I could write, who, instead of acquitting himself fairly of
the first and single charge against him, had blundered ignorantly into several
other mistakes; which I resolved to call him to account for, and therefore
immediately I wrote him an Answer, and got it dispatched so suddenly at the
Press, that there was but one day betwixt the publishing of his Letter to the
Protestant Lord, and my Letter to the Jesuit himself in Answer to it.

Whether the suddenness of my Reply, or the discovering to the World of his
further mistakes, was the reason of his passionate Reply, I cannot tell;
however I wondered to see a Jesuit who wrote with so much temper in the first
Letter, and resolved not to be provoked into insulting or scurrilous Language,
quite forget himself in the Reply he made to my first Letter; and in this Reply
which he published within less than a Week after his so solemn professions unto
the contrary to the Protestant Lord, to fall into such indecent heats and such
scurrilous language: but I can assure him, I was not moved by it, and did as
little mind as I did little deserve such impertinent language from him: All my
concern was to send him a second Letter, and to let him know that I was
resolved to make his Ignorance as apparent to the World, as his Sermon had
been, and to expose his confident mistakes and his bold untruths about the
fourteenth and eighteenth as well as the thirty fifth Sermons of St. Austin de
Sanctis.

I did in two days dispatch and print, and the next day sent him my second
Letter; to which I have not since received one word of Answer, and I suppose I
never shall; and I think that Jesuit is by this time convinced that it had been
better for him to have sat down at first quietly under the reproof given him in
the Postscript to the Answer to the Nubes Testium: since he has by his vain
attempt to vindicate himself, betrayed his Ignorance and his weakness so very
much to the World, and his Answerer has not omitted (in the second Letter
especially, wherein he had more room) to expose and publish it to the World,
and to convince all Readers what sort of Adversaries we deal with at present.

I thought my self obliged to make such a discovery of this Jesuit to the
World, because I did understand while I was engaged with him, that he does
appear wonderfully great in his own Eyes, and was as desirous of being thought
a very terrible Jesuit to the People in Wales, when he went thither, not long
since, filled with the design and pleasing thoughts of bringing in the Welsh
Nation by shoals into the Bosom of the Bishop of Rome's Church: but I question
not but before this time that Country has another very different Idea of him
and his Learning; and that they now see that his Ignorance is altogether as
great, as the Confidence with which he appeared and made such blustering among
them.

While I was thus engaged with Sabran the Jesuit, the Representer, or the
Compiler of the Nubes Testium (for he that wrote Popery misrepresented and
represented, is the same Person that stole the Nubes Testium out of Natalis
Alexandre) had got something ready against me, and was willing to be the
Jesuit's Second: that they might therefore divert me from meddling any further
with the Jesuit, who, they could not but see, had grievously overshot himself,
and yet if possible, was to make some sort of a creditable retreat; the same
day that the Jesuit published his Reply to my first Letter, the Representer
also appeared in Print against me, but in Masquerade, lest it should look a
little ungenerous, to fall two of them, and two such men of wonderful prowess
and skill, at the same instant upon one weak and unskilful Writer, if you will
believe the Representer: and as if he had been Secretary to a Committee of
Dissenters, and had Orders to draw up Articles of Popery against me, he
publishes from his Masters a Letter from a Dissenter to the Divines of the
Church of England, wherein I am complained of for no fewer than sixteen
Articles of Popery to be found in my Answer to the Compiler of the Nubes
Testium.

But I did no sooner see this pretended Letter from a Dissenter, than I was
satisfied, not only of the design, but of the Author of it, and to spoil the
design I immediately set to answering the Jesuit, that so I might put an
effectual end to the Controversy with him, and thereby be wholly at leisure to
attend my new Adversary in disguise. I was not deceived in my intentions, for
after the sending him my second Letter, I have not heard one word of the Jesuit
since, and now after above six Weeks expectations I think I may have leave to
believe that I have done his business, and have wholly rid my hands of the
Jesuit.

And lest the Representer should think I should despise him, because I might
not know him in his Dissenter's Masque, and that I should disdain to vindicate
my self against such a false and groundless Charge, I was careful in an
Advertisement at the End of my Second Letter which I was sending to his Friend
the Jesuit, to let him and the World understand that I knew him notwithstanding
his Disguise, and that I intended to give him a speedy Answer to that pitiful
cheat.

I was as good as my word, and did shortly after publish my Vindication against
the Popish-Dissenter's Letter, wherein I showed the great Knavery, the
intolerable disingenuity and frequent Calumnies and Falsifications up and down
that Letter, by which I am satisfied that I did sufficiently acquit my self,
and that if the Representer himself be not, yet the World is convinced, that he
ought to be ashamed of such mean and contemptible projects of defaming an
Adversary; that he had much better never to have meddled with such a knavish
Prank, as that pretended Letter was, since this piece of knavery had the fate
that attends all such unlawful and disingenuous actions, to do the Representer
and his Cause, now it is displayed, ten times more mischief, than it ever could
have done him service, had it continued (as he doubtless hoped it would)
concealed; for I can assure the Representer that I do not speak my own Opinion,
but that of abundance of people who are competent Judges of these things, and
of a great many worthy and Honorable Persons too, if I tell him, that he has
by that dissembling Practice quite sunk his Reputation, and is now and will be
looked upon as a Person of no Honesty, nor Conscience: and this I hope will at
last convince the Representer himself, that the publishing of that pretended
Letter has cost him very dear, has forfeited that thing which every good and
honest man values next to his Life.

I thought it not improper to give this State of the Controversy betwixt me
and the Romish Jesuit and Representer in relation to that Answer to the Nubes
Testium, which has been the Cause of all the dispute betwixt us, since it was
published unto the World, especially since those two Persons will be so much
concerned in this Book, which I am now writing: and it cannot be ungrateful to
the Reader to know the Characters of them, particularly of the Representer, who
has made so much noise in the World, and is the Person against whom this
Answer of mine is chiefly aimed.

For within some time after the publishing of his Letter from a Dissenter to
the Divines of the Church of England against me, he was pleased to lay aside
his Fanatical Masque, and to publish to the World in his own Name a formal
Vindication of his Nubes Testium with the pompous Title of The Primitive
Fathers no Protestants, or a Vindication of Nubes Testium from the Cavils of
the Answerer.

As Soon as his Book was brought to my hands, and I had cast my Eye on his
Title Page, I began to suspect that now he had stolen from his own dear self,
and that we should now be served up again with his 11th, 12th, 13th, and 14th
Chapters of his Second Part of a Papist Misrepresented and Represented, which
is no new thing with him; but upon the Perusal of his Book, I found that this
Title was only for Ornament sake, to help his Printer in the Sale of them, or
to use one of his own dearly beloved Elegancies, that this Title is much like
his Bartholomew-Fair-Narrative at the outside of a Booth, of which he gives
such a Critical Account in the first page of his Preface to his Third Part of
Popery Misrepresented and Represented, as would make one suspect that the
Representer uses to be very conversant at that Fair, and that he there picked up
most of those pretty Phrases, and fine Elegancies which appear up and down his
Pamphlets, and set them off so very much to the Generality of his credulous
Readers.

Well, but though the Representer did not formally set himself to show that the
Primitive Fathers were no Protestants, yet did he not do it effectually enough
in vindicating his Nubes Testium thoroughly from the Cavils of the Answerer?
this I know is that he will value himself upon, and therefore I come next to
examine whether, and how he has done that.

I must confess that when I saw his Title so promising and his Pamphlet so
small, I did expect that he would have kept close to his Vindication, and would
have come up fairly to me in every point and charge; but when I came to read
him, I found him spending page after page in general discourse nothing to the
purpose, and roving here and there, first into Oats's Plot, then quickly into
the Pulpits, then back into the defense, nothing but rambling and incoherent
Discourse, as if his business had been not to give a fair answer to an
Adversary, but to fill up six sheets of paper with something.

After I heard of his Intentions of vindicating the Nubes, I did not wonder to
find such rambling stuff in his Book, for I very well knew his Ignorance was so
great that it would be impossible for him to do it as it did require: the
collecting of the Nubes out of Natalis Alexandre, is no more than what might
have been done by a Bookseller's Apprentice, who brought so much learning with
him from School, as to be able to understand a Latin Author, and to translate
some passages of him into English: But to defend those passages, and to prove
they were not curtailed, nor abused, nor misunderstood, nor misapplied, did
require a knowledge and skill in the Writings of the Fathers themselves out of
whom they had been borrowed, and therefore the Representer was here at a loss,
was carried beyond his depth, and was hereby engaged in Matters he knew nothing
more of than what he found in his Master Natalis Alexandre, who not foreseeing
what answers would be made to his several quotations out of the Fathers could
not set down his Defenses of them, and therefore could not supply the
Representer in this Emergency, wherein he was so hard put to it by his
Adversary.

Yet notwithstanding all this, the Representer plucks up a good heart, and what
he wanted of Learning for this occasion, he seems resolved to make up with
Considence, and therefore talks with as much assurance in his Vindication, as
if he had the Fathers at his Fingers ends, and was resolved to carry the World
before him; but since he was so hardy as to venture once more into the Combat,
I think it fit to make up to him, and to let him know that I must stop him a
while, that we two may fairly and calmly examine what has been written and
said on both sides, and see whether things have been managed betwixt us, as
might be expected from those who understood what they were about, and had no
other design than to make Truth appear, which all men will be ready enough to
follow.

At the end of his Book he tells his Reader he has run through all the
Sections of his Answerer but one, and talks as if he had been as particular and
as substantial in his Replies as any Reader could desire; but to let the World
see the bold disingenuity of this Representer, and to display his Confidence
and his Ignorance alike, I must take a new method with such a pretender, and
let the World see how much of my Book he has not said one word to in defense
of the Nubes: his dexterity at dropping the defense of his thirty seven
Chapters of his Popery Misrepresented and Represented has been very well shown
in the View of the whole Controversy betwixt him and the Answerer; but such
things cannot put him to the Expense of but one blush: for in his Preface to
his last Piece of Popery Misrepresented and Represented he stands to it, that
as for the Misrepresentations no body can prove that he had not such
apprehensions of Popery while he was a Protestant; And for the Representations,
no body can prove that he did not therein give that account of Popery which he
had learnt in sixteen years Conversation among the Papists; and thinks this
answer sufficient, and a very good reason why he needed not to dispute: but the
World is by this time satisfied, that there is a better reason why he did not
dispute and defend his Characters, which is, because he had not learning enough
to do it.

And this perhaps will be his next answer to me, that in the Nubes Testium he
did only represent the Fathers Doctrine and Opinions, as he had learnt them in
Natalis Alexandre, and other Catholic Writers: but I will take care to shut up
that Door, by letting him know, that if he quote the Fathers themselves, and
either falsify, or misapply, or curtail their words, no man else is to be
answerable for them but himself, and that herein he is inevitably put upon
defending what he has quoted, and disputing that such and such is the true
sense of the words, and the doctrine of such or such a Father.

And therefore since I was so very particular in my Answer to the Nubes Testium
as to follow him from passage to passage, and to show him that such and such
passages were nothing to the purpose, that others were falsified, that a third
sort were misunderstood, and wretchedly misapplied, and gave my reasons and
Arguments for it all along; He ought either to have been as particular and fair
in his Vindication; or since he really was unable to do it, to have got some
Friends to have done it for him; but he is for doing all himself, and thinks, I
warrant him, that his Vindication will pass well enough upon the Generality of
Readers, since it is written with an air of Confidence, and with such an
assurance as certainly persuades the Readers, that he has the Truth on his side.

And therefore I think the greater obligation is upon me to expose such an
affected confidence, and I must beg the Reader's pardon if I begin a tedious
but new Method to clear this to the World, and show these two things. First a
Catalogue of abundance of material points and arguments in my Book, to which he
has offered no sort of Answer. Secondly, The Weakness and Vanity of all that
he has said in Answer to any parts of my Book. The clearing of these two
things will give a full Answer to his pretended Vindication, and will also, I
do not doubt it, put a full End to the Controversy about the Nubes Testium,
betwixt the Representer and Me.

As to the Catalogue therefore, I will place the several particulars as they
lie in the distinct Chapters and Sections of my Answer, but must begin with my
Preface, wherein I charged him in the first place with affirming not only what
was false, but what was more than he could know, to wit, that the Latin of his
Nubes Testium was out of such Editions as are most authentic; since I showed
it to be false from N. Alexandre's own Confession; and that he could not know
what Editions N. Alexandre did use, because N. Alexandre does not tell the
Readers what Editions he used in his Work, excepting Christopherson's Edition
of Eusebius, which all know to be far from being the most authentic. To this
severe Charge he gives no Reply.

I charged him also in the Preface with stealing the whole of his Nubes Testium
(excepting a passage or two) out of N. Alexandre. This is not denied by him;
and reason good, since every page of my Book did invincibly prove it; which
has so much enraged him against me. I charged him with stealing his Book out
of a forbidden Author, every one of whose Volumes used by him in that Plagium
had been condemned to the Flames by this present Pope two years before, and
with his standing Excommunicate by this Pope for his pains. This he durst not
deny any more than the other, since I had reprinted the Pope's Bull it self, by
which those Books were condemned, and the Representer for keeping and using
them Excommunicated by this present Pope.

Answer to the Compiler of the Nubes Testium, p. 4.
In my first Chapter I accused the Compiler first of quoting some passages, as
from the 34th, 45th, and 36th Chapters of St. Austin's third Book against
Cresconius, which are not to be found in those Chapters. To this I have not one
word of Reply.

2. In the same page I accused N. Alexandre of falsifying a notable passage of
S. Austin, and the Compiler of obtruding it upon the World so falsified. To
this not a syllable is offered in defense of either of them.

Answer to Nubes Testium, p. 7.
3. I accused N. Alexandre with falsifying another passage from S. Austin, and
our Compiler with putting it off so falsified. But to this not a word of Reply.

Compiler, when he was come to the point of the Pope's Supremacy, with giving a
false state of that Controversy betwixt us. To this I find no Reply.

Compiler with a deluding translation of the Decree of the Council of Florence.
To this I meet with no Reply.

N. Alexandre with affirming a gross untruth, in saying the Fathers did with a
Nemine contradicente, interpret the Rock in St. Matthew to be meant of St.
Peter; and I charged our Compiler for coming in for his share in it, in saying
indefinitely, that the Fathers teach, that Christ built his Church upon Peter,
whereas I showed there from Launoy and some Fathers themselves, that the
Generality of the Fathers, nay the almost unanimous consent of them was
directly against our two bold and mistaken Asserters: To this heavy charge our
Compiler in his Vindication was not able, or forgot to give one word of Reply.

Council of Florence of being notoriously guilty, either of Ignorance or of
Forgery in that Decree which they made, and our Compiler quoted for the Pope's
Supremacy; but our Compiler was not at leisure to say any thing in defense
either of that Council, or himself.

our Compiler with citing a passage as out of S. Basil's Comments on Esaiah,
which not only is not there, but the direct contrary to it is in that place,
and put down from thence by me in my Answer. To this not a syllable of Reply.

N. Alexandre and our Compiler of very egregious disingenuity about St. Basil's
Epistle, which I proved was directed to the Western Bishops, not to the Bishop
of Rome in particular; was sent to beg help and assistance from them, not from
the Bishop of Rome in particular against Eustathius. I proved also that it was
not through any Letter from Pope Liberius, but through a Letter from the
Western Bishops that Eustathius had formerly recovered his Restitution to his
See, and that the Oriental Bishops did not request that assistance from the
West, because they had not power enough of their own to have judged and deposed
Eustathius, but upon a quite different account. To all these particular charges
of disingenuity, and cheat, our Compiler durst not offer at one word of Reply.

them with falsehood in urging a passage in favor of the Pope from Gregory
Nazianzen, which did concern S. Basil and not the Bishop of Rome, as Elias
Cretensis, and Billius do assure us. To this we find no Reply.

N. Alexandre and our Compiler with prefixing impertinent and false Accounts to
the passage in Athanasius about Dionysius of Alexandria. No Answer is given to
this.

them both with perfect Romancing about the business of Julius's taking the
Cause of Athanasius into his hands, and of his citing him and his Enemies to
appear before his Apostolic Tribunal, and proved that it was false in every
part of it; I charged the Compiler with adding to the falsehood in saying
Athanasius appealed to the Bishop of Rome, with contradicting his own Master
who had written a Dissertation in which he showed that Athanasius did not
appeal thither, nay with contradicting his own next Testimony from Sozomen. To
this heavy load our Compiler has not a Word to answer.

both of them with great disingenuity in calling St. Chrysostom's Letter
directed to Innocentius his Letter of Request, and with their forgeries about
his presenting it: I charged them with wholly mistaking that affair. To this
not a Syllable of Answer or Defense.

both of 'em of Ignorance and Disingenuity for affirming that the Synod of
Capua had committed to Theophilus the Decision of the quarrel betwixt Evagrius
and Flavianus at Antioch, when the contrary was as plain as words could express
a thing; for laying that to St. Ambrose which he had not said. But this Charge
wants a Reply as well as the rest.

Answer from our Compiler himself whether he designed the passage from
Valentinian's Letter to prove the Bishops of Rome had power alone, or with
other Bishops of judging Matters of Faith, and the Cause of Priests or Bishops:
and showed him that if he designed only the latter, he was guilty of trifling,
if the former, that he was contradicted by his own Master F. Alexandre and by
the Clergy of France. But the Compiler is sullen and was too angry to give an
Answer in his Vindication to such an ensnaring Question.

our Representer and his Master with a false Assertion in saying the Council of
Constantinople did submissively desire the Confirmation of their Decrees from
Pope Damasus: but Natalis Alexandre is too far off, and the Compiler too sullen
to make a Defense.

Compiler with Impertinence in saying, the Heretics rejected Doctrines and
Practices because they were not in Scripture; I charged his Master with
egregious falsehood in saying the Heretics appealed only to Scripture; and
showed them that had either of them read that Chapter, nay but the bare Title
of that Chapter which they both quote in Iraenaeus in defense of what they so
falsely affirmed, they would have been ashamed of what they did; But I cannot
find a word of Reply to this.

Compiler with Ignorance in Chronology, and with contradicting his Master in
the very places he transcribes from, and gave the Instances of his placing
Vigilantius in the beginning of the fourth Century, whom his Master and all men
of Learning place a hundred Years later; of his placing Damasus and Julius in
the Third Century, who lived in the Middle of the Fourth Century; of his
putting Victor into the First Century, who flourished not till the Second
Century was almost at an end: and lastly, of the gross and intolerable Blunder
of putting Aerius in the middle exactly of the First Century, whereas he lived
not till Three Hundred years after. Our Compiler in his Vindication wanted not
only forehead to defend them, but ingenuity to acknowledge his Mistakes, and
therefore thought it were best to say nothing about it.

false Translation of a passage in Eusebius. To this not a Syllable of Reply.

our Compiler and his Master with making use of a passage in defense of their
Purgatory, which was direct Heresy. But not a word of Reply to this.

Our Compiler with abusing Gregory Nazianzen by an ensnaring Translation of his
words. To which our Compiler will give us no Reply.

N. Alexandre and our Compiler with abusing and quite perverting a passage from
St Ambrose by leaving out a Line which was connected to it, and would have
given light to the whole passage. To which no Reply.

them both with misunderstanding, and misapplying St. Ambrose's words about
Theodosius, I charged them of being guilty of the same toward all the passages
urged by them from S. Basil, S. Chrysostom, S. Hierom and S. Austin, but cannot
find a word of Reply to this large Charge in our Compiler's Vindication of
himself.

Compiler with disingenuity for curtailing and maiming the passage from
Gelasius Cyzicenus about receiving but a small portion of Christ's Body and
Blood. To which I meet with not one word of Reply.

gross Ignorance, or great disingenuity in saying that the Jews, Marcionites,
Manichees and Theopaschites had always showed themselves Enemies of holy
Images. No Answer to this.

Compiler with giving a false state of the Controversy about Images, with
palliating in talking only of respect to Images, when not only their Council of
Trent, but that second of Nice commanded a Worship of them, and their Index
Expurgatorius was so careful to strike out of any Author any thing that did but
offer to deny Adoration to Images; nay his own Quotations do prove as far as
they are able, that Images were to be adored. But to this I find not one
syllable of a Reply.

27. I challenged the Compiler to show that as they made use of the Figure of
the Cross in Constantine's time, so they adored it; that the Ancients did adore
the Image of the Cross, and paid that Latria to the Image of the Cross, which
the Church of Rome does now say, is due to it. But our Compiler is not at
leisure to answer Challenges, and therefore finds it the wisest way to say
nothing.

Thus I have given the Reader a Catalogue of a great many severe and very
considerable Accusations against our Compiler, and his Master Natalis
Alexandre, to which he has not given one Syllable of Reply, or made any
Defense for himself or Master against them, though they be charges that call
not only their Learning, but their Ingenuity and Honesty so often into
question; should I add to this Catalogue another of abundance of considerable
passages in my Book, which I put down to explain the true and genuine sense of
the several Fathers, and to confront those curtailed, misunderstood,
misappliea, and abused passages with which he had filled his Nubes Testium, to
all which I find no better or more Reply than to the former Catalogue in his
pretended Vindication; I should be forced to transcribe almost my whole Answer
hither: for this Representer has a considerable knack of his own to answer
Authorities by saying nothing to them; He does not in that whole Vindication
bear up fairly to any one Argument, or Authority urged in confutation of him,
but knows very well how to fence off any thing that does press home, by
stepping out of the way of it, and has got a peculiar Art first of abusing and
misrepresenting his Adversaries words or sense, and then of ridiculing them,
and making them for to appear absurd or unreasonable: and then this must pass
for a full answer, and a complete Vindication of himself.

After such an account of the Compiler's giving no answer, nor making any
defense against so very many severe charges; and of his skulking, and shifting
off all replying fairly to the rest of my Book: the Reader will be very
desirous to know about what it is that the Compiler has employed his six
sheets, and what he would mean by a Vindication of himself, if nothing be said
to so very many, and so very heavy charges: I come therefore to satisfy that
desire, and to show the Reader how very well the Compiler's Answer deserves the
name of a Vindication of the Nubes Testium from the Cavils of the Answerer; by
which false Title I do not question but it was his design to make people
believe that I had only carpt at a passage here and there, and never bore up
fairly to him; but this is but one of a great many of disingenuous tricks so
frequent with this Writer, as I have made it already sufficiently apparent from
the Catalogue of considerable things, to which he has given not a syllable of
Reply; and shall make it much more visible in the following part of my Book,
and prove there, that it was the Representer himself that was thus guilty of
that cavilling, of which he so falsely in his Title Page accuses me, that it is
he himself that is really guilty of cavilling only and catching at here and
there a passage in my Answer: and this will give the World a better knowledge
of the Representer, and discover with what disingenuity and confidence he can
both write, and affirm the most groundless things.

I have hitherto given account of that part of my Book, to which the
Representer has been pleased to return no sort of answer; I must now undertake
my second promise, and that was to discover the weakness and vanity of all that
he has said in answer to the rest of my Book.

He begins his Vindication, and certainly wrote it in a very angry mood, and
therefore we must pardon his running out into generals, and making such
frequent and odd excursions into matters that are wholly foreign to the
Controversy betwixt him and me, to which I am resolved to confine my self,
though his anger would not let him, but hurries him so much and so often quite
out of his way. I will set aside therefore his general talk, in which though
there is a great deal of malice, yet not one syllable of argument; I am never
at leisure to mind or to answer such stuff: but will pass to the first thing he
intends to reply to, which is my charge against him of stealing the Nubes
Testium out of Natalis Alexandre.

He acquaints his Reader, that I pretend to discover, that the greatest part of
the Nubes Testium is in Natalis Alexandre's History: but when he is got about a
dozen lines lower, then it is come to my discovering, that a great part of his
Testimonies are in that History; and in the next page to his only taking the
choice of those great numbers of Testimonies that are in N. Alexandre, and his
adding some others to them: I thought I had told him often enough in my Answer,
and I suppose those who have read my Answer to Nubes Testium do very well
remember, that I do not only prove that the passages of the Fathers in the
Nubes Testium are all of them (except one or two) to be met with in Father
Alexandre, but that they were all of them stolen from thence: and that I do not
charge him only with stealing some of his choice Testimonies thence, with
stealing a great part, or the greatest part of the Nubes Testium, but I did in
my Preface charge him more than once with stealing the WHOLE of his Nubes
Testium, with stealing ALL his Book out of Natalis Alexandre, without once
mentioning or hinting at Natalis Alexandre's History or Name through the whole
Book; with being the greatest Plagiary that has appeared on the stage in these
times.

And now what answer has he made to all this? Can he deny that the whole of
his Nubes is to be met with in Father Alexandre? No, that he does not deny? can
he disprove me, or will he deny that he stole that whole Book out of that
Historian? No, he dare not pretend to do that neither; since every page in my
Answer, did to his great vexation prove it upon him: What is it then that he
would be at, while he has not the face or confidence to deny the thing? his
business in his Vindication about this thing seems to be no other than to cast
a mist before his Reader's Eyes, to lessen his crime as much as he can, and
much more than he ought, by bearing them in hand, that the greatest part only,
and soon after, a great part, and (as if he were to lessen and diminish the
accusation gradually) in the next page the Choice only of the Testimonies in
his Nubes Testium were to be met with, and were borrowed from Natalis
Alexandre: but this trick will not do, nor shall this cheat pass upon any one,
that will read us both, since I did from the beginning, and do here again
accuse the Representer of stealing implicitly his whole Nubes Testium (except
a passage or two) out of Father Alexandre without one naming whence he stole it.

But perceiving that all this would not clear him, or remove the Imputation of
a very great Plagiary, under which he lay, he puts as good a face as he can
upon the matter, and now is for assuring his Reader, that he is so far from
being offended in being thought [he should have added, and being proved] a
Compiler, that he should have thought himself unwise, if he had done more than
compiled. This is pleasant stuff, and shows what metal some men are made of,
who can make that to be a Virtue in themselves, which all men else look upon to
be a very great disgrace: but such men are proof against a thing called
Modesty, and think nothing more necessary to defend any of their most
unaccountable actions, than by setting a good face to it.

But since our Compiler pretends here to the politic part, and since he does
just after own that he has not read the Fathers, and that it would be
ridiculous for him in his circumstances to have attempted to read them over; I
hope it will not be amiss if I can tell him of another and a better point of
prudence, and that is, that he should not in his Circumstances have meddled at
all with presenting the World with such a Collection out of the Fathers: I will
also give him my reasons along with it, because they that know nothing of the
Fathers themselves ought not to meddle in these things; because every one that
can translate Latin into English is not straitways an Adept, and fit to be
employed, or to employ himself in such things, because they that are ignorant
of the Fathers themselves, must rely wholly upon the credit and honesty of
those out of whom they collect, and can neither answer for the genuineness of
the Authors, nor the Sincerity of the Authorities, which they take wholly upon
trust; nor show that the Author out of whom they borrow, did not misapply or
misunderstand, or abuse the Fathers sense.

These reasons together ought to convince him that his excuse here is vain, and
that it had been his wisest way not to have meddled with such business, since he
owns his Ignorance in the Fathers themselves, and I have shown him that some
things else are requisite for a Man's setting up for a Collector of Authorities
out of Fathers, besides the ability of translating Latin into English. But the
Representer thinking by this time that he had got pretty well rid of the severe
accusation by the slight and art of pleading guilty, and giving a knackish
turn to the whole Matter, is now got into a merry mood, and cannot but send me
his thanks for giving the World notice of the Representer's having more
Consideration, than to take so much unnecessary pains as to read the Fathers
themselves in order to his publishing such a Collection of Testimonies out of
them.

I cannot but smile and can hardly keep from laughing out at such a Scene as
this: well then, since he is for thanking me for proving he was so great a
Plagiary, I cannot in civility but receive his Thanks, and assure him withal
that I am so very desirous and ambitious of doing things for which I can have
thanks from such Friends as he is, that I shall always be at his service upon
the same account, and at the service of all his Friends (to let him see how
grateful I am to him) and will make it my business to deserve his and their
Thanks, by finding out where they have been stealing their Books, and
publishing their Thefts to the World, as often as I can, that so I may have the
more of their Thanks.

But is this Man really serious in giving me thanks in this business? Can he be
hearty in sending me thanks for the discovery of that thing which has made him
ridiculous, and wholly contemptible in the Eyes of all Scholars, and I believe
I may add, in the Eyes of all those who have perused my Answer to his Nubes
Testium? I must profess that I look upon this as one of the most extravagant
things I ever met with in Print, and that I cannot refrain giving it its true
Name, and telling the World that I look upon it to be the very height of
Impudence, for a man to be so far from being ashamed, or from blushing at that
which lays him so open to the World, and makes him to be hist at, and
ridiculous to all men, as to thank him for it who made him such an Object of
Contempt and Derision.

But he has something more to urge in his Defense, and says he had Authority
enough for it, since I make F. Alexandre himself a Compiler, but never discover
the Author made use of by him in his History. Here I would gladly know, how
this can be any excuse to our Compiler that F. Alexandre himself is suspected
and believed to be guilty of the same crime: as to the reasons of believing F.
Alexandre also to be a Compiler, I did urge this one that he never, that I
could observe, does tell his Reader what Editions of the Fathers he made use
of, nor quotes the Page of the Author above once in a thousand Quotations. This
made me reasonably suspect that he did not deal with the Fathers themselves,
but with Coccius and Bellarmine and such Voluminous Quoters of the Fathers: and
I am since much more persuaded, and fully confirmed in the Justice of my
Suspicion by the enquiries I have made concerning him among Learned Men, but
especially from one extraordinary Person, who knows him very well, and has
given me a very good reason why we meet with the Greek Fathers always speaking
Latin in this Historian, and why he made use of Christopherson's Latin and
corrupt Translation of Eusebius in his History, who lived at Paris, and could
not want the convenience of the best Greek and Latin Edition of Eusebius.
However it is with him, I will offer F. Alexandre this choice, whether he
desires to have the Character of a Compiler, or of a Falsifier of the Fathers:
if he disdains to be thought a Compiler, I do here engage that I will at any
time prove it upon him that he has falsified several passages of the Fathers
in his History: but if he will not endure such an odious Character, he must
even sit down content with the other.

Upon the mention of the word stealing, the Representer is up in a rage again,
and is got raving into Oates's Plot, and therefore I must leave him swaggering
and tearing, and doing something worse than that for a page and a half, and can
rest my self awhile till he is got into his senses again, and returned to the
Controversy betwixt us two. He then tells his Reader that the other Crime I
called him to account for, was for making use of an Author in this Collection,
whose Books had been condemned by the Pope two years before.

This Crime he thinks to get clear off very easily, and therefore dispatches it
in a very few words. But since, says the Representer, for this he remitts me to
my F. Confessor, I Will even see to compound the matter with him as well as I
can. And did I then remit him to F. Confessor? Did I remit it to the Confessor
to decide whether the Pope had by his Breve condemned Natalis Alexandre's Books
to the Flames? Did I remit it to him to decide whether the Pope had by that
Breve forbidden the faithful of what condition or state soever under the pain
of Excommunication immediately incurred the keeping or reading any of those
Books? Did I remit it to him to decide whether the Representer, who had not
only kept, but transcribed and Printed part of those condemned Books, had
incurred or no that severe Sentence of Excommunication, which his Confessor
can no more absolve him from, than I can, since the Pope has reserved that
Absolution solely to himself and the Popes of Rome? Every syllable of this is
so utterly false and groundless, that I should admire at it in any other Person
than the Representer.

All that I said in relation to the Confessor was, that this bold contempt of
the Pope's Breve seemed to be a trial of Skill about Infallibility betwixt the
Compiler and the Pope, and that I would refer the Decision of this unto the
Compiler's Confessor; which any one else would have seen that I spoke it
Ironically, and was far from leaving it to the Confessor to decide whether the
Compiler did stand excommunicated for the pains he took in collecting and
Printing the Nubes Testium.

Every body knows of their brags of Discipline and of their professed Obedience
to the Pope in the Church of Rome: but this behavior of the Representer, and
of Sabran the Jesuit, whom I caught in the same Crime and Disobedience, will
satisfy most people how little some Men's Writings agree with their Practices,
and what little credit is to be given to their so much celebrated Discipline,
when those that make the greatest noise about it, are at the same time
discovered to be the most notorious Offenders against it.

Having dispatched all that he has offered in defense of himself about the
stealing his Book out of a forbidden Author, I cannot but ask him before we
part upon this point, whether it had not been better for him not to have meddled
any more with those things which were so evident that they could not be denied,
and so criminal that they could not be defended without the forfeiture of all
Sense of Modesty, as well as betraying a want of Learning.

He is now come to the Body of my Answer, and complains of my admirable Talent
of trifling in quarrelling him for beginning his Book with The History of
Donatus, and showing the Nature of Schism, and for my saying, That this was so
far from being a Chief Point, that it is no Point of Controversy at all betwixt
us. And upon this he falls to pitying me who had dwelt so long among Books for
losing my time, and then shows that a Chapter about Schism was not improper to
begin his Book with. But I would fain see this trifling proved; and will now
prove that he is the guilty person who has shuffled three Chapters together
here, and has not given us a true or fair state of the Chapters: I do own that
a Discourse about Schism might be a proper Introduction to a Controversial
Book, however I did show that what he advanced there was perfect trifling.

I have once already done it sufficiently, and must be forced in Vindication of
my self to do it again to let the World see who is the Caviller, and at whose
Door the trifling must be laid. His first Chapter was, that the Fathers accused
the Donatists of being guilty of Schism for making the wicked Lives of the
Members of the Church the reason of their Separation. My answer to this was,
that this can be no point of Controversy betwixt us and the Church of Rome as
he had made it, since we never urged the wicked Lives of some Members of the
Church of Rome, as the ground of our Separation from them: and what says our
Representer in Reply to this? Does he either prove, that that is a point of
controversy betwixt us, or that our Separation from the particular Church of
Rome is grounded upon the same matter that the Donatists was? No, we have no
reason to expect a fair Reply from him, who did not set down the state of this
Chapter at all.

The second Chapter was, that the Fathers teach against the Donatists that the
Catholic Church cannot fail. This I told him could be no Controversy betwixt
the Church of England and the Church of Rome, since we believe with the Fathers
that the Catholic Church cannot fail. Was this then the trifling I am accused
of? if it be, the Compiler had done well to have shown it, that so upon the
sight of my error I might have altered my mind: but this he thought fit not at
all to attempt.

His third Chapter was, that the Fathers taught, that whosoever breaks the
Unity of the Catholic Church upon any pretext whatsoever, is guilty of Schism.
Upon this I told him, that taking the word pretext for a groundless pretense, I
was of the same mind, and did believe the Donatists who acted so, to be guilty
of a Criminal Schism: but assured the Compiler withal that this could not be
matter of dispute betwixt us, who both assented to that doctrine of the
Fathers; and here it is my trifling must be discovered, and here he will have
me not only to differ from them, but from the Fathers: this is hard when I had
assented to that Chapter as set down by him and proved by the Fathers: but he
will have it that I am for making the breach of the Unity of the Catholic
Church not Schism, unless it be done causelessly; whereas the Fathers teach
there can be no just cause: I grant the Fathers teach that there can be no just
cause given by the Catholic Church; however that particular Churches can give
and do often give just cause for others to break Communion with them, is what
no Father will deny, is what the Church of Rome it self must grant, which has
not only broken Communion with us, but with the whole Greek Church, and yet I
suppose does pretend to show that she had a just cause for it. He has offered
hereupon nothing new in defense of his three Chapters, but some hard words, and
those I do not intend to reply to, but will pass to the defense of his Chapter
about the Supremacy.

I had charged him with giving a false and imperfect state of the Controversy
betwixt us in relation to the Pope's Supremacy; but this he is not willing to
defend, but turns it off with saying, that it only is so, if my word be to be
taken for it: but I had not only given him my word, but very good reasons for
it; and therefore since the Compiler has no mind to be meddling with reasons,
it would be uncivil to be importunate with calling upon him to disprove them.
That Chapter as it did concern the greatest point of Controversy betwixt us
and the Church of Rome, so it did require a great deal of canvasing, and admit
of a vast variety of dispute in it: I was careful to follow the Compiler
through it, and to debate and disprove every thing that was brought to support
the Pope's Supremacy in it: but our Compiler is not so civil to me, nor so just
to his Book in his Vindication, but forsakes the defense of every one of his
passages, and only seems solicitous to make a show; and that he may not be
accused of saying nothing at all in defense of his Testimonies, and in Answer
to a great many very severe charges in that Chapter, he serves us up again two
or three bits of his former passages, and that is all.

I told him his first quotation from Irenaeus was of no use; and gave him in
short my reasons for it, all the answer he makes is to give us anew a piece of
the same passage; and this with two or three scornful words, and crying good
and great! must be called defending, and we must be content with such from him,
since it seems the Man is not furnished with better, but if the old quotations
presented anew will signify any thing, they are at your service, but upon this
condition, that they may serve for a defense of themselves.

And such is his behavior as to the next passage from Optatus, which I showed
to have been very obscure, and that in affirming there was but one Cathedra in
the World possessed first by S. Peter, and after him by his Successors at Rome
it did not only contradict the other parts of his Writings, but all Church
Writers before and after him for hundreds of years, who make as many Cathedra's
as Bishops in the World, and I instanced in a most plain place in Tertullian,
which did assert the direct contrary to the Doctrine of that passage of
Optatus. All the Answer besides rude language to these reasons that I can
observe is, that it is a notorious fraud in me to pretend that the Father
maintains here, That the Chair of Rome was such, that the rest of the Apostles
might not have Cathedra's for themselves, whereas (says the Compiler) S.
Optatus no where affirms this, but only, that the rest of the Apostles should
not set up other Episcopal Chairs in opposition to this of Rome, or to contend
with it.

I believe I have considered this passage a little better than this confident
Gentleman, who perhaps never saw it any where but in Natalis Alexandre, or some
Romish Writer: and upon all the care I could take, I can see no reason for my
being accused of fraud in this thing: or for altering my opinion of its denying
Cathedra's to the rest of the Apostles. It first speaks of the Episcopal
Cathedra being bestowed on S. Peter at Rome, it immediately calls it the one
Chair, and requires such an Unity to be preserved by all in this one Chair, as
to forbid even the Apostles themselves to erect Cathedra's for themselves, and
makes it Schism to set up a Chair against this SINGLE Cathedra; and to secure
us from mistaking his meaning, it is just after this called the ONLY or SOLE
Cathedra. If all this be not enough to satisfy that he speaks here of a single
and ONLY Cathedra exclusively to any other Chair, I must confess I cannot see
what words could do it, since had it been as much his design here, as I verily
believe it was, to speak of there being but one single Cathedra in the World,
he could not have used more full and larger expressions to declare his sense.

And now if this was his meaning in this passage, which it certainly was,
notwithstanding the Compilers weak defense, what crime was it in me to show
that this was contrary to the rest of the Fathers, and what can be my fault to
assent rather to what was the general and certain doctrine of the generality of
Fathers, than to a small passage in S. Optatus, which does certainly contradict
all them. This account of that passage will, I doubt not, acquit me of that
hard thing I am accused of in the Opinions of all unprejudiced Readers: as for
the Compiler's Opinion I do not value it, and therefore am far from being
solicitous to gain it.

When I did in the next place declare my dissent to two affirmations quoted
from S. Hierom, I did, as it was just, set down the reasons of that my dissent:
my reasons the Compiler meddles not with, because it was too hard for him to
answer them, but thinks he has got advantage enough, and he makes triumphant
use of it, that I durst be so hardy as not to assent to any thing said by S.
Hierom, as if the words of S. Hierom were sacred, and one might as well deny
assent to our blessed Savior's words as to his; whereas had this ignorant
boaster but been conversant even in Bellarmine and Baronius, he might have
found them frequently enough setting aside the Authority and Interpretation of
a particular Father, of S. Hierom for example, whose expressions about
Presbyters and Bishops I do not believe this Compiler himself does subscribe
to, any more than I did to those mentioned above: but he is too ignorant in
these things, and therefore makes such tragical and womanish outcries about
things, for which he would certainly be laughed at by all men of learning, even
in his own Church.

Having made a little fluttering as to those three passages, he thinks he has
done very great feats, and therefore needed not to trouble himself to examine
the rest as they came in their order, but makes one answer to serve for them
all, by telling the Reader I only shift them off, and that the most eminent
Protestants did acknowledge that the Popes did exercise a like authority with
that which is attributed to the Pope by the Council of Florence: and so I am
shifted off, the reason of which is, because this Compiler is too ignorant for
such things, and since it would be ridiculous here to serve us up again the
passages themselves out of the Nubes in the Vindication, he has nothing more
for us: but thinks all is well if he can but bring in the Concessions of
Protestants; but suppose he could bring such Protestants in, why must we be
obliged to stand by what they granted or affirmed any more than he thinks
himself obliged to be set down by what some Schoolmen have said, whom he does
so frequently, nay always throw by as abusers or mistakers of the Church's
genuine Doctrine.

I used to wonder whence it came to pass that every little Romish Writer could
with so much readiness quote the Protestant Writers, insomuch that the most
trifling Pamphleteer would not fail to serve you up with a last course of the
Protestant Concessions. Thus the Antiquary of Putney, and the Maker of the
Ecclesiastical Prospectiveglass, and the Representer himself not only here, but
in his other Pamphlets are very punctual in quoting the Protestant Authors,
whom they have no more read, than the Alcoran in Arabic. But as soon as I saw
Brerely's Protestant Apology, I quickly discovered that this was the Armoury
out of which these doughty Writers did furnish themselves, and that this is the
Book out of which they all borrow, and very fairly take things upon his credit,
the truth or falsehood of which they know nothing of: but why should not such
men take their quotations as well as their Faith upon trust, and be as
confident about the truth of the first, as they are of the certainty of the
other? I will only tell our Compiler again, that I do no more pin my Faith upon
the groundless Concessions of some Protestant Writers, than he does his upon
the Concessions of some of his Church-Writers.

When he is come to his Point about Tradition, he is almost for thanking me for
giving him but little trouble by granting there almost all that he contended
for about Traditions, as I had granted as kind things in favor of the Pope. As
to any Concessions about the Pope I showed them to be false and groundless, in
my Answer to the Representer's Letter from a Dissenter, by which Answer I
question not but I have laid open sufficiently to the World the great Knavery
of the Representer in that matter: but here he is for charging me again in his
own Shape, what be had before accused me of in his Fanatical Disguise. I have
fully vindicated my self about my pretended Concessions as to Tradition, and
thoroughly explained in what sense I spoke of Tradition in my Book, and as fully
exposed the great Disingenuity of the Representer there: I do refer the Reader
for these things to my Vindication of my self in Answer to the Dissenter's
Letter, because I would not do like the Representer, transcribe one Book into
another.

In my Answer to the Nubes, I told the Compiler that his Testimonies about
Tradition did refer to matters of Discipline and Practice, which every Church
has power to retain or alter as she sees most expedient, and that if he
intended them for to prove that Tradition does hand down to us some Points of
Faith, which we are to receive, though they cannot be shown to be founded upon
the Holy Scriptures, I told him that Set of Testimonies would not do his
business, and was not to the purpose, and thereupon challenged him to produce
Fathers for that Point, promising him at the same time a fair Answer: But our
Compiler durst not offer to accept of the Challenge, dares not meddle with such
a thing; but if two or three bits of the Old Testimonies out of the Nubes may
be admitted, they are at my Service; and from these it is that he would fain
prove that even in matters of Belief, the Tradition of the Catholic Church is
the best Demonstration. What? better than the Express Testimony of Scripture it
self? Methinks our ignorant Compiler might have been contented to have made
Tradition only as good or equal to Scripture for the Demonstration of Faith,
which is the highest the Council of Trent it self durst rise in favor of
Tradition, and never pretended to mount Tradition so much above Scripture as to
make it the BEST DEMONSTRATION of Matters of FAITH. But when Ignorance and too
great a stock of Confidence meet together, such Assertions as these are
commonly the fruits of them. But for this extravagant Assertion he has a mind
to bring in Origin for a Voucher, who speaking concerning the Belief of
Christ's being the Son of God, says, that is to be embraced which by a
Succession from the Apostles is preserved in the Church by Ecclesiastical
Tradition: but in Answer to this, Is not that Truth and Faith concerning
Christ's being the Son of God expressly taught and held forth in the Holy
Scriptures; and which is more, does not Origin himself expressly tell us in this
very place (for our Compiler is for looking no further than his own Book) that
that Truth was to be learnt by us ab IPSO from Christ himself, whose Words,
Doctrine and Actions are used to be thought to have been the Subject of the New
Testament, which I take to be Scripture: and as this Doctrine was to be read in
the Scriptures, so it was delivered down from thence in Ecclesiastical
Tradition, which can mean nothing else than either that the Scriptures which
did comprehend that Faith, were delivered down successively from Age to Age in
the Church, or that this was always taught in the Sermons and Homilies of the
Fathers of the Church successively.

And to give our Compiler a better knowledge of Origen's sense about these
things, I will refer him to one Passage which I will set down and desire him to
consider of it: Origin in Leviticum, c. 7. Homilia 5. p. 144. Edit. Froben.
1536.
Origin in his Homilies upon Leviticus speaking of the Old and New Testament
tells us, that in THEM every word that appertaineteh to God [by which
Expression the least he can mean is, that every Point of Faith] may be sought
after and found out, and all Knowledge of things may be apprehended from THEM.
But if any thing does remain which the Holy Scripture does not determine, no
other third Scripture ought to be received for the Authorizing any Knowledge,
but we are to commit to the Fire that which remains, that is, we must leave
it to God, for in this present World God is not for having us to know all
things.

Our Compiler is next for having Tertullian on his side, but why does he not
then bring us something to prove it, or rather why did he not disprove what I
had produced for the Authority and Sufficiency of the Holy Scriptures from
Tertullian? He neither does the one, nor offers at the other, and yet this must
pass it seems for vindicating.

And just thus he serves me after; for when I in Vindication of S. Basil had
quoted him declaring for the necessity of Scripture-Evidence for Matters of
Faith, he says not one Syllable in Answer to it, but is for referring me to the
old Quotations out of Basil, Epiphanius and Lirinensis, which I had shown him
before were not to the purpose; which is such perfect trifling as none but such
a Compiler as he is would be guilty of.

He then falls to thanking me for saying in relation to the Testimony from
Gregory Nyssen, that we allow the Tradition of Antiquity to be highly useful
and necessary in the Interpreting or giving us the genuine Sense of Points of
Faith: all the Answer I will give him is, much good may it do him, however how
far that Expression was from doing us any hurt, or them any good, I have
abundantly shown in my Vindication, which I am loath to transcribe hither: but
that I may not be behind-hand in Civility for the Compiler's Thanks, I will
present him in Token of my Gratitude with a Passage or two from his Gregory
Nyssen and other Fathers, which I must recommend to his Consideration.

Gregory Nyssen in his Dialogue de Anima and Resurrectione lays it down for a
Position, which no Man ought to contradict, that in that only the Truth (...).
Greg. Nyssen Dial. de Anima and Resurrect. Tom. 2. P. 639. Edit. Paris. 1615.
must be acknowledged, which has upon it the Seal of Scripture-Testimony. And
in another part of his Works he calls the Holy Scripture (...), Idem in Orat.
de iis qui adeunt Hierosol. Tom. 2. p. 1084.
a true, or straight, and inflexible Rule.

S. Austin is as clear and full against our Compiler, while he assures us that
in those things which are laid down plainly in the Scripture, all those things
are found which concern Faith or Manners. In iis quae aperte in Scriptura
posita sunt, inveniuntur illa omnia quae continent fidem, moresque vivendi.
August. de Doctr. Christiana, l. 2. c. 9. Tom. 3. p. 17, 18.


S. Hierom speaking of the Heretics in his time, which made so much noise, and
pretended so highly to Apostolical Tradition, gives this severe Doom upon them,
but those things also, which they of themselves invent and [yet] feign to have
received as it were by Tradition from the Apostles without the Authority and
Testimonies of the Scriptures, the sword of God does smite. D. Hieron. in
Aggeum, c. 1. Tom. 6. p. 230. Edit. Basil. 1565.


I could give him several such Testimonies from other Fathers, but I will
neither trouble him or the Reader with any more at present, it will be time
enough to send him the rest when he has answered these. And will now pass to
his next Chapter and the Vindication of it.

But here it seems there was no need of any Vindication, for I am brought in as
one of their own side, for saying and granting that our Church does honor the
Saints in observing days in honor or memory of them: and I have the Compiler's
thanks for it here: we have had this Concession up once already, it made one of
the most terrible Articles of Popery against me in our Compiler's masquerading
Letter from a Dissenter to the Divines of the Church of England: In my Answer
to that scurrilous Letter I did sufficiently acquit my self and our Church in
relation to her Practice about Festival Days.

However our Compiler, now he has laid aside his Disguise, advances the same
Accusation against me in his own Person, but considering what Church he was of,
could do no less than give me Thanks for my Concessions: Well then, since this
Man is not ashamed of serving us up again the very same Objections which I had
already answered, I must even be forced to trouble the Reader with Repetition,
since the importunity of an Adversary that cannot blush, forces me upon it, and
must tell the Compiler a second time, that when our Church does set apart Days
for the commemorating of the Saints, which is all the Honor she either gives
or intends Them, she only appoints them for to bless God for the good and pious
Examples of his Saints and Martyrs, not to put up Prayers to the Saints
themselves, nor to offer Praises unto Them, but to their God, which was the
genuine Practice of the Primitive Church, as I showed from the Example of the
Church of Smyrna, in relation to S. Polycarp their Martyred Bishop. Our Church
pays no Religious Worship to the Saints themselves, but the Church of Rome does
not only worship them, but is very lavish and extravagant in it, as it were
easy to show: however as they of the Church of Rome are not imitated by us, so
neither have they the Example of the Primitive Church to defend their present
Practices.

We do with the Primitive Church honor the Martyrs and Saints, and have often
enough declared it to be such an Honor as was given to them in the Primitive
Times, and what that Honor was, S. Austin shall determine, who in answer to a
false Aspersion of the Manichees, of the Church's worshipping the Saints upon
their Festival Days and at their Monuments, told Faustus the Manichee, that the
Church did indeed worship the Martyrs, but that it was with no other Worship
than that of Love and Fellowship which is paid to the Colimus ergo Martyrs eo
cultu dilectionis and societatis, quo and in hac vita coluntur sancti homines
Dei. D. Aug. cont. Faust. Manich. l. 20. c. 21. in Tomo 6. Oper. August.
Holy Men of God while they are alive on Earth. That this was no other than a
civil worship or respect I hope will not be denied by my Adversary, since I
suppose he will not pretend to show, that mortal and frail men, while on Earth,
are used to have Religious Worship paid unto them, and solemn Prayers offered
up to them with all the external indications of devotion.

As to the Concessions which he pretends I have made, and supposes it here
again, because I did not particularly consider the Testimonies under that Head;
I must tell him a second time that I neither did grant all that he had
collected in the Nubes Testium upon that Subject, nor seemed to grant it, but
did set them aside as needless: and am, notwithstanding our Compiler, far from
joining with them in this Point, as he falsely would insinuate that I do: but
this is not the first of such wrongs done to me by this Compiler.

When he is next come to the Chapter about Invocation of Saints, he tells the
Reader that I appear with some disconfidence of my cause: and therefore (says
the Compiler p. 19.) though he pretended in the Title Page, that Antiquity for
the first five hundred years did not favor this, or any Doctrine of the Church
of Rome: here he has considered better on it, and therefore cutting off Two of
the Five, he says, we cannot show this to have been the Practice of the first
Three Centuries. So that here he is willing to give us the Fourth and Fifth
Ages, as Practicing the Invocation of Saints. The Compiler quotes for all this
the 43. page of my Answer to the Nubes Testium; and a little after tells the
Reader, that I grant that Invocation of Saints was practiced in the Fourth and
Fifth Centuries.

If ever I was surpized at the reading any thing in my life, it was at this
account of my Book against that Chapter in the Nubes; my memory of what I had
written and this account of it were so diametrically opposite, that I could not
but immediately look into my Book to see whether was in the fault, and quickly
found that this Compiler had need to have a very large forehead that would
venture at this, when my Book was in so many hands.

For first as to his saying, I have cut off two of the five Centuries, and only
insist on their being not able to show, that Invocation of Saints was practiced
in the First Three Centuries, it is very false: I neither cut off two of the
five, nor insisted upon the three first Centuries only, but said in that very
page and place quoted by the Compiler, that I would pass on to Invocation of
Saints, and see whether the Compiler did show this to have been the practice of
the Three first Centuries, and so on: does and so on here signify nothing? I
did intend it, and I question not but the World understood it to mean the two
next Centuries, to wit, the Fourth and Fifth in Controversy betwixt us: and
yet this Writer has the assurance to tell the World I had cut them two off.

He next tells them, that I am willing to give the Papists the Fourth and Fifth
Ages as practicing Invocation of Saints; and a little lower, that I have
granted that Invocation of Saints was practiced in the Fourth and Fifth
Centuries. This is just as true as the other, for to expose this bold falsehood,
I need turn over only to the next page in my Book, and transcribe what I had
said there, which I entreat the Reader to compare with what the Compiler says
of it here.

Speaking in defense of the Church of England's not practicing Invocation of
Saints, I have these very expressions; We have far more reason to reject
Invocation and solemn Prayers to Saints as Superstitious, since it is against
Scripture, and against the Practice of the Three first Centuries, AGAINST A
COUNCIL in the FOURTH CENTURY, and WANTS A PATTERN EVEN IN THE FIFTH and SIXTH,
and has NO EXAMPLE in ANY of the PLACES produced by our Compiler on this head.

With what face then could this man write that I had given up the fourth and
fifth Centuries? Who can believe that such men have in reality either Religion
or Conscience, that can with so much deliberation commit such a deliberate
wrong? Had he had any regard to Truth or Honesty, his Conscience must have
flown into his Face, and told him, that what he was then writing was a very
great injustice, and directly false. Good God! that men who make such show of
Religion, make such frequent appeals unto the God of purer Eyes, than either to
behold iniquity, or to let it go unpunished; that talk so often of a day of
Judgment, and severe reckoning, can do such things as must force the World to
believe, that they are not in earnest in these things! I must say, that the
Representer with some other Writers which I could name are very unhappy men,
since they either are embarkt in defense of a Cause which cannot be upheld by
better Arguments and Methods, or they do very great hurt to their cause in
defending a good cause with such unlawful Weapons.

But to return, the only excuse that can be made for him is, that he was
necessitated to it; for as to the three first Centuries he found there was no
manner of defense to be made for their Invocation of Saints thence, and that if
I did not grant him that the fourth or fifth Century practiced Invocation of
Saints, he should have nothing to say for his Church, or his Book, as to those
five hundred years which in the Title of his Nubes Testium he had appealed, and
pretended to. He was forced therefore, since I neither did grant him, nor could
do it, to set the best Face he could upon the matter; and to say, I had granted
that Invocation of Saints was the Practice of the Fourth and Fifth Centuries.

And upon this all is built that he has to say in defense of his Nubes in the
Vindication, and he sets very heartily to it with the assistance of his Friend
Monsieur de Meaux, and wonders how we can think those illustrious Fathers
should practice it, had not the same been a doctrine of the foregoing Ages: and
runs on in commending the Virtue and Learning of those Fathers: forgetting all
this while that he was guilty of begging the question, and which is worse, of
taking that as granted, which had been expressly denied him, that those Fathers
did practice Invocation of Saints: He should first have proved the thing, and
then he might have harangued upon it, but he begun at the wrong end, and since
he was not at leisure to disprove fairly and fully any of the Answers I had
given to his Nubes, but only by saying, that my distinguishing betwixt Requests
made to Saints, and Prayers solemnly addressed to them was a shift, and a piece
of Controversial Legerdemain, and serving us up with the old provision out of
the Nubes to confirm what he said; I should not trouble my self any further
with this Matter: but that I am called upon by his Friend F. Sabran the Jesuit,
and challenged to show a difference betwixt what was practiced by S. Austin,
and ALL the Fathers of his and the precedent Century, and what is now practiced
by the Church of Rome in relation to Invocation of Saints.

This I promised to do, as soon as the Controversy betwixt him and me about
the 35th Sermon of S. Austin de Sanctis was either ended or dropped: and since it
is dropped, and that matter by my second Letter to the Jesuit was (to use one of
his own expressions) made out against him beyond the possibility of a seeming
Answer; I will now be just to my word: and that I may more fully vindicate our
Church from that Schism the Jesuit lays to her charge upon this account, I will
beg leave of the Reader to enlarge a little more upon this point in order to
the further clearing of matters about it.

What is meant by Invocation it self is no matter of Controversy betwixt us,
their Council of Trent, and their Catechism afterward have sufficiently taught
this, and make it to be an offering up of Prayer to the glorified Saints, and a
calling upon them for their Prayers, Help and Assistance. I will not insist
upon the invincible arguments from the Word of God against such Invocation of
Saints, nor stay to show how both Old and New Testament command and direct all
our Prayers and Addresses to God, and how that there is not one Example of
Invocation of Saints in the whole word of God: but will pass to the Testimonies
and Writings of the Fathers, which they of the Church of Rome insist so much
upon. The Jesuit my Adversary has offered nothing new, but has assaulted me
with those passages out of the Nubes Testium which I had answered before, and
challenges me to show what the Church of Rome does more, or different from what
was practiced then by S. Austin, and ALL the Fathers of his Age, and the
precedent Century.

I will take leave in order to showing these things, to prove these four
Particulars, First, That Invocation of Saints is the Practice of the Church of
Rome.

Secondly, That it is the Doctrine of the Church of Rome, that it is good and
profitable to invocate Saints.

Thirdly, That Invocation of Saints was not the Practice of the Primitive
Fathers.

Fourthly, That the Doctrine of the Primitive Fathers was directly against, and
inconsistent with any Invocation of Saints.

The two first of these, to wit, that the Invocation of Saints is not only the
Doctrine but the Practice of the Church of Rome, I hope the Jesuit will give me
leave to suppose, since those things need no proving which are the daily
Practices of their Church, and the avowed Doctrine of every true Son of their
Church. I could else fill up two or three sheets with Collections out of their
Missals and Offices of the Virgin Mary to prove this thing plainly upon them:
but there is no need of it, and therefore I will begin the proof of my Third
Particular.

That Invocation of Saints was not the Practice of the Primitive Fathers. I
will deduce this methodically through the several first Ages, and show not only
what was the Practice of the Church in her Liturgy, but also the Practice of
the most eminent Fathers thereof.

later end of the first Century lived S. Ignatius, an account of his Practice
we meet with in that Relation of his Martyrdom, which was drawn up by Philo,
Gaius, and Agathopus, who attended him from Antioch, and were present at his
Martyrdom at Rome. Acta and Martyrium S. Ignatii. Edit. Usser. 1647.
In that account we can meet with no recommendation of himself in his greatest
distress, or of his Church, to any tutelar Saint or Angel, or to the Virgin
Mary; but upon his being condemned to be torn apieces by the wild Beasts from
the Emperor Trajan's own mouth we find him breaking out into joy, and giving
praises to the Lord for honoring him with those Chains the Soldiers were
putting upon him, and praying to Him for his Church of Antioch, and
recommending it with tears unto his Savior. When he was come to Rome, and was
met by the Christian Brethren there, they went to Prayers together, and made up
a Christian Assembly, with bended Knees praying earnestly to their blessed
Savior the Son of God for the several particular Churches, for a stop to the
Persecution, and for the mutual Charity of the Christian Brethren.

And as the Writers of this Martyrdom represent the glorious Martyr always
making his Addresses to God the Son: So after his Martyrdom, Ibidem.
they give the same account of their own Devotions, that they were offered up
with tears and bended knees unto the same Lord.

second Century we have the famous Epistle of the Church of Smyrna concerning
the Martyrdom of S. Polycarp, wherein we meet with an account of his Practice
in his Devotions. They inform us of his continuing instant in Prayer to God day
and night for the peace and Tranquillity of all the Christian Churches, and
have preserved us the very Prayer he used when he was tied to the stake to
suffer Martyrdom, which we find addressed wholly to God the Father Apud Eusebius.
Hist. Eccles. l. 4. c. 15.
through the everlasting High Priest Jesus Christ his only Son: not one
syllable, nor the least hint of any Romish Invocation of Saint or Angel, either
to assist, or defend, or recommend him unto God.

After this account of the Religious Practice of those two most glorious
Martyrs the Christian Church ever had next to the Apostles, I will set down in
the same Century Justin Martyr's account of the Christian Liturgy; where we
may justly expect to meet with a full relation to whom all the Services of the
Church were addressed at that time. His account is, that their Public and
Common Prayers, their Praises, and Justin M. in Apol. 2. Edit. Paris. p. 97, 98.
Thanksgivings for the good things of this life were offered up by their Bishop
to God the Father through his Son Jesus Christ, and the Holy Ghost. Here is no
mention in this very exact account of the Christian Service of any Prayers, or
so much as Wishes made to Angels or Saints; no footsteps of any Practice of
invocating of Saints, which is evidence strong enough that such things were not
then in being any where.

beginning of the Third Century, Tertullian in his Apologetic, Terull.
Apologet. c. 39. Edit. Franck. 1597.
acquaints us at large with the Practice of the Catholic Church, and the
nature of her Liturgy, and sets her out as offering up her Prayers with the
united Forces and joint requests of the whole Congregation unto God, as praying
to him for all Estates and Conditions; and in his account of their Love Feasts
in the same place he acquaints us, that they did not sit down to those Feasts,
till they had made their Prayers unto God, that as they begun them with Prayers
unto God, so they ended them with singing Hymns unto God. Not a syllable is to
be met with in Tertullian's Narration of the Customs and Divine Service of the
Church of God of the Third Century, about any Prayers to, or Invocation of
Saints, of any Praises to God and the Virgin Mary, or to God and any other of
the Angels or Saints.

Fourth Century we meet with a much larger and more particular account of the
Divine Service in the Christian Assemblies from the Book called Constitutiones
Apostolica, which bears the name of Clemens Romanus, but really belongs to some
Author of the Fourth Age. In this there is not only an account of their
Practice, but a very great many of the Prayers then used are put down at large,
every one of which we find directed to God alone, See Clementis Romani
Constitutiones Apostolicae, from the 25th Chapter of the 7th Book to the end of
the Eighth Book in Labbe's Councils. Tom. 1. p. 428, etc.
not the least mention or hint of any Invocation of Saints, of any Prayers to
the Virgin Mary, or any other Saint; and as all the Prayers of the Church then
in that Century, according to this Author, as well on all other days as the
Lord's day, as well in all other Offices and services of the Church as in the
Communion-Service it self were offered up only to God, so there is no desire or
Petition in them for any of the Saints aid, assistance or Intercession. All
which Circumstances together show how far Invocation of Saints was from being
the Practice of the Catholic Church in the Fourth Century, when in the Prayers
addressed to God alone, there was not so much as any mention of the Saints
Intercession or Aid, which are things so frequent now in the Church of Rome,
that they desire of God for the Merits of the Saints both spiritual and
temporal Blessings.

Practice of the Fourth Century so visibly, without any Prayers to, or
Invocation of Saints, so we are as certain that such Invocation or Prayers got
no footstep in the Public Offices of the Church, either during the rest of
this Century, or in the Fifth Century; of this we cannot desire a more certain
and satisfactory account than we have from S. Austin himself, about whom the
Jesuit Sabran has made so much stir, and does still insist upon it, that S.
Austin did invocate the Virgin Mary. S. Austin in his Books de Civitate Dei,
giving an account of the Service of the Church in his Age, and of what was the
Practice of the Church in relation to the Martyrs, tells us indeed, that the
Martyrs names were recited during the divine Service, but tells also as
expressly, that they were not then invocated by the Priest who did officiate
August. de Civ. Dei. l. 22. c. 10.
.

I have traced hitherto the Practice of the Primitive Church through the Five
First Centuries; I have insisted chiefly upon those Authors and Books which
present us with the Liturgies, which are doubtless the best and only Evidences
of the Practice of the Primitive Church for those Ages. I have not insisted
upon the Practice of particular Persons, excepting those two glorious and most
conspicuous Martyrs, S. Ignatius and S. Polycarp, whose Prayers I question not
were wholly conformed to the Public Services in the Churches in their time:
Had I done the same concerning the other Martyrs of the first and later Ages
that I did about them two, or had I been careful to urge the Practice of
particular Persons apparent in their own writings, I must have transcribed a
great part of the ancient Martyrologies, where we find all the Prayers of those
Martyrs addressed to God; and must have filled too many Pages with the
Instances of other particular Persons and Writers.

But I thought the other method of urging only the Liturgies of the several
first Centuries, as the fairest way of understanding the Practice of the
Primitive Church in those Ages, and I believe I have made it fully and
undeniably evident, that Invocation of Saints was not the Practice of the
Primitive Fathers.

As we are able to show from the ancient Accounts of the Churches Services,
that Invocation of Saints was not their Practice, so we are as able to show,
that the Doctrine of the Fathers of those first five Centuries was directly
against, and inconsistent with any such Invocation of Saints as is now
practiced in the Church of Rome: and this I shall the more largely insist upon,
because this is an Argument which they of that Church cannot evade, and this
does so firmly strengthen and back the other Argument against Invocation of
Saints drawn from the Practice of the Primitive Church.

And this one would think would stop their mouths, and make them lay aside
their Pretensions to Instances of Invocation of Saints practiced in the fourth
and fifth Centuries, to show them not only that Invocation of Saints was not
practiced then, but that the Doctrine of the first Ages and Fathers were
directly against, and utterly inconsistent with any such Invocation of Saints
as is practiced in the Church of Rome. And this is that which I will endeavor
to show from the Writings of the several Fathers, putting them down
methodically in their several Ages, to wit,

That the Doctrine of the Primitive Fathers was directly against, and
inconsistent with any Invocation of Saints.

Ignatius who lived immediately after the Apostles, in his Epistle to the
Philadelphians gives the Virgins of that Church his advice to direct all their
Prayers to the blessed Trinity: O ye Virgins (says he) have Christ Ignat. in
Ep. ad Philadelph. (...).
alone before your Eyes, and his Father in your Prayers, being illuminated by
the Holy Spirit. If they are to direct all their Prayers to the Father and Son,
I am sure it is against this Doctrine of S. Ignatius to practice Invocation of
Saints, and direct some of their Prayers to the Virgin Mary and other Saints,
which the Church of Rome now does expressly against this First Father's Advice.

Church of Smyrna in their Golden Epistle concerning the Martyrdom of S.
Polycarp, giving an Account of the Devil, and the Jews slandering them as if
they would have left Christ, and worshipped Polycarp, if they could but gain
his Martyred Body, expose that gross Calumny, by showing (...). Eccl. Smyrn. in
Ep. de Martyr. Polyc. p. 27. Edit. Usser.
that Christians could never leave Christ who had suffered all for them, nor
pay any Worship to any other Person, (or as the Old Latin Translation has it,
nor offer up the Supplication of Prayer to any other Person). If they could not
do it then, I suppose it is not grown more lawful to do it since.

S. Irenaeus in the same Century discoursing about the many Graces bestowed by
God upon his Church, and the great benefits done by the Church to the whole
World without either design of seducing, or desire of gain thereupon, says,
that as the Church does receive those Graces freely from God's hands, so she
freely ministers them, Nec Invocationibus Angelicis faciat aliquid, nec
incantationibus, nec aliqua prava curiositate, sed munde, and pure, and
manifest Orationes dirigens ad Dominum, qui omnia fecit, and Nomen Domini
nostri Jesu Christi invocans virtutes secundum utilitates hominum, sed non ad
seductionem perficit. S. Iren. adv. Haer. l. 2. c. 57. Edit. Feuardent.
and then tells us also that the Church does nothing by Invocation of Angels,
or Charms, or any such curious Art, but directing her Prayers purely and
manifestly to her Lord, who made all things, and Invocating the Name of our
Lord Jesus Christ does those Miracles for the good of Mankind, not for their
seduction.

As Irenaeus is plain for the Prayers being directed only to God and his
Christ, and does in express Terms deny that there was any Invocation of Angels
practiced in the Church then; so Clemens of Alexandria in the same Century, and
not long after him, is so express against any Prayers being then put up to
either Saints or Angels, that he defines Prayer it self to be, (...), a
conversing with God, which had been a very false definition, had Prayers then
been put up to Saints and Angels also. But Clemens had reason sufficient to
define Prayer in this manner to the Exclusion both of Saints and Angels, since
in the same Book he delivers it for the Doctrine of his time, that (...).
Clemens Alexandr. Strom. l. 7.
since there is but ONE GOOD GOD, both we and Angels ought to make our Prayers
to HIM ALONE for the obtaining of those good things which we want, and for the
continuance of those which we enjoy.

There are a great many more such Expressions to be met with in this Learned
Father, but this doubtless is able to convince any reasonable Person that in
Clemens's time the Doctrine of the Church was, that all Prayer or Invocation
should be offered up to the GREAT GOD ALONE.

next Century in the Doctrine of the Fathers herein, we can easily show from
the most considerable Writers of that Age.

Tertullian in his Apology for the Christians to the Roman Judges, gives an
account of the Practice of the Christians, that they did invocate the Eternal
God for the safety of the Emperors; and acquaints them withal, that They durst
not offer up their Prayers to any other. Nos enim pro salute Imperatorum Deum
INVOCAMUS Aeternum, -- Haec ab alio orare non possum quam a quo me scio
consecuturum, quoniam and ipse est qui SOLUS praestat, and ego sum cui
impetrare debetur, famulus ejus qui eum solum observo, qui propter disciplinam
ejus occidor, qui ei offero opimam and majorem hostiam, quam ipse mandavit,
Orationem de carne pudica, de anima innocenti, de spiritu sancto profectam.
Tertul. Apologet. c. 30.
I cannot (says he) pray for these things to any other, but to HIM at whose
hands I am certain of obtaining them, since it is HE ALONE that does afford
them, and I alone have a Right of obtaining them, that am his Servant, and
observe HIM ALONE, who am killed for his Religion, and do offer unto Him that
rich and best Sacrifice which He himself has commanded, Prayer proceeding from
a chaste Body, from an innocent Soul, and Holy Spirit.

In his Prescriptions the same Father tells us, Idem de Praescript. c. 33.
that the serving or Worshipping of Angels, brought in first by Simon Magus,
was reckoned to be Idolatry.

In considering these passages of Tertullian, I cannot believe that He, and the
Church of Rome are of the same Faith as to this very thing about Prayer. I am
sure this Doctrine of his is no less than Heresy in some parts of the World,
and that Tertullian, and the Honest Monk who translated S. Thomas of
Canterbury, or to speak more intelligibly Thomas a Becket's Life into English
Meter, were not of the same Church. Tertullian told the Romans, that the
Christians of his time offered up their Prayers to GOD ALONE for the Welfare of
the Emperors and Empire, and that it was contrary to God's Will for them to
offer up any Prayers to any other: but this Romish Monk was of another Church
sure, when he gives us a very different practice. It will be very acceptable to
give the Reader the Monk's Prayer, not only for the extraordinary nature of it,
but for the Saint's sake so famous in England. Having finished his Translation
of the Saints Life, He concludes all with this Prayer to the Saint himself.

To whom with all devotion now let ws heartily pray
and with this subsequent Prayer thus shall I end and seast
O Laureat Precious Martyr preserve the Church all way
our King with the Commynaltee, and send ws rest and pease
The Head Father of this Monastery with all his both more and less
Preserve of special grace, and pray for the queck and deed
which for the Church cause list gladly thy blod shede.
Vita cum Actibus Thomae Cant. Archiep. in English Meter, Translated 1497. in a
MS. in Bennet College Library.

I will pass on to the next Father, Origin, who will give us the fullest
account of the Doctrine of the Church, especially in that Treatise which he
wrote in defense of Christianity it self against Celsus, the eighth Book of
which Treatise is almost wholly spent in the proving, that all Worship and
Prayer are to be offered up to GOD ALONE through our LORD JESUS CHRIST. Celsus
the Heathen was of opinion, that inasmuch as the Angels did belong to God, men
ought to make Oblations and Prayers to them, that thereby they might obtain
their favor, and Intercession, and make them propitious unto them. Origin
rejects this Advice with indignation. Away (says he) with Celsus's Counsel,
that tells us we must PRAY TO ANGELS, and let us not afford the least ear to it
(...). ONO (...) THEO, (...) O NOGENEI (...), LOGO THEOY, (...). Origin. contra
Celsum, l. 8. p. 395. Edit. Cantabr. 1658.
: for [as for us Christians] we must PRAY TO HIM ALONE, who is GOD over all:
and we must PRAY to the WORD of GOD his only Begotten, and the Firstborn of
all Creatures; and we must entreat HIM, that He as High Priest would present
our Prayer (when come up to him) unto his God, and our God. And for the
procuring the favor of the Angels, he just after tells Celsus, that the way to
attain it was to lead holy Lives, and to imitate the Angels in their
uninterrupted service of God: assuring him withal that if by that means we have
God favorable to us, we have all his Friends, both Angels, Souls and Spirits,
loving and affectionate to us.

And before this in his Fifth Book against the same Heathen, upon Celsus's
inquiry what the Christians looked upon Angels to be, and his answer, that
though they were wont from their office to call them Angels, yet that they
found them named Gods in the Scriptures by reason of a certain Divinity in
them; Origin does prevent the Heathen's Assumption, that if they were such,
they ought to be worshipped, by telling him that the Scriptures did not give
Angels the Names of Gods, so as to command us to worship and adore them instead
of God who are ministering (...). PASAN (...) DESIN (...) PPOSEYN, (...)
ENTEYXIN (...) EYAPISTIAN (...) TO (...) THEO, DIA TOY (...), EPSYOY LOGOY
(...) THEOY. DESOETHA (...) AYTOY TOY LOGOY, (...), etc. Origin. contra Celsum,
l. 5. p. 233. Edit. Cantab.
Spirits, and bring down to us the Blessings from God. But that ALL
SUPPLICATION, and PRAYER, and INTERCESSION, and THANKSGIVING must be sent up
unto GOD ALMIGHTY, by the HIGH PRIEST who is above all Angels, and is the
LIVING WORD and GOD. And we must put up our Supplications also unto the WORD
HIMSELF, our Intercessions also and Prayers and Thanksgivings must be offered
up to HIM. But to invocate Angels is ABSURD, since we do not comprehend the
knowledge of them, which is out of our reach. And granting that the knowledge
of them (which is wonderful and secret) might be comprehended; this very
knowledge declaring their nature to us, and their several charges, would not
suffer us to presume so far as to PRAY unto ANY OTHER, but the GOD who is Lord
over all, and abundantly sufficient for all by our Savior the Son of God.

I cannot leave this so particular an account of the Church's Doctrine against
Invocation, without making an Observation from it, which is, that Origin does
make Invocation and Worship to be Synonymous here, and does confine them both
to the same Object, and shows, that whatsoever is invocated is worshipped, and
that since all Worship is peculiar to God alone, all Prayer upon that account
must be offered up to Him alone: and if this was the Church's sense at that
time, as we are hence certain it was, we can very justly gather from it, that
they were far from either practicing or teaching an Invocation of Saints or
Angels, who were for dedicating all Prayer to God alone: and we may also gather
this further from it, that where any other Fathers do deny any worship's being
paid to any Creature, they did by that very denial exclude all Invocation, or
Prayer being made to any, even the most glorified Creature, since Invocation or
Prayer is one of the chief parts of Worship. Origin himself, and other Fathers
after him (as I shall show at large) do make Invocation and Adoration to be the
same thing, and do prove the Divinity of our Blessed Savior from his being
Invocated or prayed to, which would have been a false and an absurd Argument,
had Saints and Angels been invocated at that time, and it would have proved too
much, since if our Savior is proved to be God from his being Invocated, all
the Saints as well as Angels were by the same Argument proved to be Gods, had
they been Invocated in those days. I will give the Reader his words, since they
are of such extraordinary moment herein.

Origin commenting upon that passage in St. Paul, How shall they call on [or
invocate] him in whom they have not believed, tells us, that the Jews did not
invocate Christ, because they did not believe in Him; and argues afterward,
that if Enos, Moses, Aaron and Samuel did call on, or invocate the Lord, they
did without doubt invocate Christ Jesus the Lord: for if (says he in proof
thereof) to call upon the name -- Et si INVOCARE Domini nomen, and ADORARE
DEUM, UNUM atque IDEM est, sicut INVOCATUR CHRISTUS and ADORANDUS est Christus,
and sicut offerimus Deo Patri primo omnium Orationes, ita and Domino Jesu
Christo, etc. Orig. In Ep. ad Romans l. 8. c. 10. p. 477, 478. Edit. Frob. 1536.
of the Lord, and to ADORE GOD, be ONE and the SAME THING; as CHRIST is
INVOCATED, so CHRIST is also to be ADORED; and as we offer to God the Father
first of all Prayers, so we do also to the Lord Jesus Christ; and as we offer
up supplications to the Father, so do we offer Supplications also to the Son;
and as we do offer Thanksgivings to God, so we do offer Thanksgivings to our
Savior; for we must pay ONE and the SAME HONOR to THEM BOTH, to wit, to GOD
the FATHER and SON.

I must obviate also before I leave Origin an objection commonly made, that in
these passages there is no mention nor denial of Prayers to Saints, nor no
forbidding of them, to which we can easily answer, that there is indeed no
mention of Prayers to Saints, but only of Prayers to Angels: but we argue a
fortiori from these places, that if Invocation be forbidden and denied to the
greater, it is thereby much more forbidden to the less; that if Invocation of
Angels which are the most glorious Creatures be forbidden, the Invocation of
Saints which are less glorious is forbidden in it: and we find the Fathers
using this very Argument against the Worship of any Creatures though never so
good, or so much glorified: we find Epiphanius urging this very Instance of
Angels not being worshipped against the worship of the Virgin Mary in the
Heresy of the Collyridians, If (says he) God will not (...); Epiphan. Haer. 79.
p. 1062. Edit. Petav. 1622.
suffer Angels to be worshipped, how much more will he not suffer her to be
worshipped that was born of Anna [to wit, the Virgin Mary?] It is but putting
the word Invocated instead of Worshipped (which Origin has already told us are
but two words for the same thing) and joining the rest of the Saints to the
Virgin Mary, and then we can argue against the Romish Invocation of Saints in
S. Epiphanius's words, If God will not suffer Angels to be Invocated, how much
more will he not suffer the Virgin Mary and the rest of the Saints to be
Invocated. The World indeed is since well mended in relation to the Virgin
Mary, and she has got the start of the Angels, and though in Epiphanius's time
the Angels were looked upon as above her, and more glorious Creatures than she,
or any other Saint; yet since that time she has got to be worshipped, and to
be advanced above all the Orders of the Angels in Heaven, the reason of which
is very plain, because since Epiphanius's days she was made Queen of Heaven,
which must needs advance her infinitely above the Angels, who are no better
than the Officers of Heaven, and the Ministers of that Court.

But we need no foreign help to baffle the Objection about Invocation of Saints
being not forbidden in the passages out of Origin against Celsus; if we do but
observe the passage it self, I mean that out of Origen's fifth Book against
Celsus, and the Antithesis in it, the Romish Objection will immediately vanish.
Origin having laid it down for a ground, That Angels were not to be worshipped
or adored, proceeds in the Antithesis to tell us who was to be worshipped, and
there delivers it for the doctrine of Christianity, that ALL SUPPLICATION, and
PRAYER, and INTERCESSION, and THANKSGIVING was to be made to GOD ALONE. That
this Answer did fully exclude Angels from any participation of Religious
Worship, the Romanists will grant; that it does also as fully exclude the
Saints from any participation of the worship of Invocation, is what does
evidently and necessarily follow from it, since if ALL PRAYER was to be made to
GOD ALONE, there is no more share for the Saints than for the Angels, but both
alike are equally excluded from having Prayer or Invocation made to either of
them.

S. Cyprian in his Book concerning the Lord's Prayer, urges the Duty of Prayer
to God throughout the whole Discourse, and is so far from mentioning or hinting
at any use of Invocation or Prayer to Saints or Angels, that he says, that to
pray otherwise Ut aliter orare quam docuit, non ignorantia sola est, sed and
culpa, quando ipse posuerit and dixerit: Rejicitis Mandatum Dei, ut Traditionem
vestram statuitis. D. Cypr. de Orat. Domin. p. 264. Edit. Paris. 1607.
than our Savior has taught us, is not only Ignorance but a Crime: since he
has laid it down [for a warning to us] and said; Ye reject the Commandment of
God, that ye may establish your own Tradition. We know very well that our
Savior taught us to Pray to OUR FATHER in Heaven: and if it be a Crime not to
follow his Directions, we are sure that Invocation of Saints is a Crime, since
that is a rejecting (to use St. Cyprian's application of the passage out of the
Gospel to the same purpose which he did) of our Savior's Commandment, and a
following the Tradition of the Church of Rome.

Novatian in his Tract concerning the Trinity, printed among Tertullian's
Works, does prove that Christ is God from his being Invocated. If Christ (says
he) Si homo tantummodo Christus, quomodo adest ubique Invocatus, cum haec
hominis natura non sit, sed DEI, ut adesse OMNI LOCO possit? Si homo tantummodo
Christus, cur homo in ORATIONIBUS MEDIATOR INVOCATUR, cum INVOCATIO HOMINIS ad
praestandam salutem inefficax judicetur? Si homo tantummodo Christus, cur spes
in illum ponitur, cum spes in homine maledicta referatur? Novatianus de
Trinitate, cap. 14.
be only a Man, how is he present every where being Invocated, since this is
not the NATURE of MAN, but of GOD, to be PRESENT in EVERY PLACE? If Christ be
only a Man, why is a Man Invocated in our Prayers to be a Mediator for us,
since the INVOCATION of a MAN to HELP or to SAVE us, is judged to be
ineffectual? If Christ be only a Man, why is Hope placed upon him, whereas
Trust in Man is cursed in Scripture? There is not one word in this short
passage, which is not only against Invocation of Saints being any Doctrine of
the Fathers, but does wholly ruin all the grounds for any Invocation of them.
For if a mere Man can neither be present every where, nor can help us with his
Mediation, nor ought to have hope placed in him; and yet every one of these is
required to be in Him that may be Invocated: then I am sure Invocation of
Saints, who are but Men, is both groundless, and to no purpose.

Lactantius in his Institutions contending for the Worship of the One sole God
of Heaven and Earth, and against any worship of Angels uses this argument, that
God alone with his Son has the Power over all things Solus habet rerum omnium
cum Filio suo potestatem: nec in Angelis quicquam, nisi parendi necessitas.
Itaque nullum sibi honorem tribui volunt, quorum omnis honor in Deo est.
Lactant. l. 2. de Origin Erroris, c. 16. p. 223. Edit. Lugd. Bat. 1660.
, that there is nothing belonging to Angels but the necessity of obedience, and
therefore they are against ANY HONOR being paid to THEM, all their Honor
being in God himself.

And in his next Chapter, Lactantius excludes Saints, as much as he does the
Angels here from any share of Worship, when he advises, that we should adore NO
OTHER THING, nor WORSHIP Nihilque aliud adoremus, nihil colamus, nisi solum
Artificis, Parentisque nostri UNICUM NUMEN.
ANY THING, but the ONLY DIVINITY of our Creator and our Parent.

This was the Doctrine of the Fathers of the Third Century of the Church, and
how little it is consistent with any Worship or Invocation of Saints, the most
ordinary Reader will apprehend: We must next inquire into the Doctrine of the
Fourth Century, and see whether theirs agree with what I have hitherto set down.

Athanasius the most famous Father of the Fourth Century, in his Fourth Oration
against the Arians, proving the Unity of the Father and the Son from that
passage in the Epistle to the Thessalonians, Now God himself and our Father,
and 1 Thessalonians. 3.11.
our Lord Jesus Christ direct our way unto you, gives this reason for it:
(...). D. Athanas. Orat. 4. contra Arianos, p. 259, 260. Edit. Commelini, 1601.
For one would not pray to receive any thing from the Father, and the Angels,
or from any of the other Creatures, nor would one say, God and the Angel give
thee this or that; but [one would pray to receive any thing] from the Father
and the Son, because of that Unity, and uniform manner of giving, that is
betwixt them two. For by the Son are all Gifts given, and there is no one
thing, which the Father does not work by the Son. After this the Father goes on
to answer the Objection from Jacob's praying to the Angel to bless the Lads,
and proves, that that Angel was no other than God the Son: and then to confirm
it, shows, that Jacob did invocate no body but God to deliver him from his
Brother Esau; that David did pray to no one but God for his deliverance, and
that he returned his Praises to GOD ALONE for the blessing of it: and
concludes, that it does not belong to any other person, but to GOD ALONE, to
bless and to bestow Deliverances.

I cannot read these passages of this excellent Father without reflecting upon
these extravagant Applications to Saints, and especially to the Virgin Mary,
which are so frequently or rather constantly to be met with in the Writers of
the Church of Rome; and can least of all forgive Cardinal Bona's Preface to the
Virgin Mary, which is such an undecent and almost blasphemous piece of
Courtship as is not to be paralleled in any serious and learned Writer of these
days, excepting F. Alexandre, who in the Conclusion of one of his Volumes tells
the Virgin Mary what wonderful things she had done for him, and how mightily he
was beholding to her, with a great deal more of such fulsom stuff. I am sure
such things were far from being the Practice of the Church in S. Athanasius's
time, since his Doctrine is so directly contrary to any such thing: and though
now what so common as God and the Virgin, God and such, or such a Saint help
you, Jesus, Maria, and the like; yet we see in S. Athanasius, that no
Christians were guilty of such an extravagancy as to say, God and the Angel
give you this or that: and as they did not then pray to Angels, or any other
Creatures (in which number the Saints must be included) so neither did they
offer up their Thanksgivings to any of them for any Blessings, whereas now
nothing is so ordinary as Praises to the Saints for this and the other blessing,
and scarce a Book can be writ without thanks at the beginning or end of it to
some of their Saints, or the Virgin Mary for their great assistance, and their
continual protection; and as if the Saints were equal with God, or did equally
communicate every blessing to a Writer, such or such a Book is said to be
written for the greater Glory of God and the Virgin for example; and I have at
this instant Cardinal Capisucchi's Book in my hands, which was written,
forsooth, ad majorem Dei, Deiparae ac S. Thomae Angelici Doctoris Gloriam, for
the Greater Glory of God, the Virgin Mother, and S. Thomas Aquinas. But such
things were neither so from the beginning nor of a long time after.

In the same Century Hilary the Deacon in his Comments on the Epistle to the
Romans, exposing the folly of those who were curious in searching out the
natural reasons of things, and the Courses of the Stars, and the Qualities of
the Elements, and yet did neglect the Lord of all those beings, gives us their
pretenses for it. They are wont (says he) notwithstanding when they are put to
the blush for their neglecting of God Solent tamen pudorem passi neglecti Dei,
misera uti excusatione, dicentes per istos posse ire ad Deum, sicut per Comites
pervenitur ad Regem. Age, nunquid tam demens est aliquis, aut Salutis suae
immemor, ut Honorificentiam Regis vendicet Comiti, cum de hac re siqui etiam
tractare fuerint inventi, jure ut rei damnentur Majestatis? Et isti se non
putant reos, qui honorem Nominis Dei deferunt Creaturae, and relicto Domino,
Conservos adorant, quasi sit aliquid plus quod servetur Deo. Nam and ideo ad
Regem per Tribunos aut Comites itur, quia homo utique est Rex, and nescit
quibus debeat Rempublicam credere. Ad Deum autem, quem utique nihil latet,
omnium enim merita novit, ad promerendum suffragatore non opus est, sed mente
devota. Ubicunque enim talis locutus fuerit ei, respondebit illi. Hilarious
Diacon. Commen. in Ep. ad Romans c. 1. apud Ambrosii Opera, Tom. 5. p. 174. Edit.
Froben. 1538.
, to make use of this miserable Excuse, that they can by these go to God, as
Men get to the King by his Officers. Well then! Is any Man so mad, or so
unmindful of his Safety, as to give the King's Honor to an Officer, whereas if
any have been found but to treat of such a thing, they are justly condemned to
be guilty of Treason? And yet these Men do not think themselves guilty who give
to a Creature the Honor of God's Name, and leave the Lord and adore their
Fellow Servants; as though there were any thing more, that can be reserved to
God. For, therefore do we go to the King by his Tribunes or Officers, because
the King is but a Man, and knows not to whom he ought to commit the Care of the
Commonwealth. But for God, to whom nothing is hid, and who knows the Merits of
all Men, there is no need of a Spokesman, but of a devout mind to procure his
favor. For wheresoever such an one shall address to God, He will answer him.

And this same Father in his Questions out of the Old and New Testament insists
upon the same Argument, telling the Heathens, That the Christians Christiani
autem -- UNUM DEUM colunt in Mysterio, ex quo sunt omnia, nec aliquid quod ab
eo conditum est, venerantur. Ipsum enim solum sufficere sibi and abundare
sciunt ad Salutem, non ignorantes, quia si Gloriam and Nomen ejus aliis
deputaverint, offendant eum, quia nullus Imperator permittit, ut cum Nomine
ejus Tribuni and Comites adorentur. Idem. lib. Quaestionum Vet. and Nov.
Testam. apud Augustini Opera in Appendice ad Tom. 4. p. 46. Edit. Colon. 1616.
worship ONE GOD in Mystery, from whom are all things, and do not pay any
Veneration to any thing created by him [here is no exception either for Angels
or Saints, much less for their Relics or Images] for they know that He alone
is abundantly sufficient for their Salvation, and are not ignorant, that if
they give his Glory and his Name to others, they offend Him, since no Emperor
does permit, that his Tribunes and Officers be adored together with Himself.

S. Basil did look upon Prayer to be so peculiar to God, that he defines Prayer
to be a Request of some good, which is made by pious Men unto God (...). Basil.
Homil. in Julitt. T. 1. p. 370.
: and his Brother Gregory Nyssen gives the same definition of Prayer which
Clemens Alexandrinus had, that It is a Conversing with God (...). Greg. Nyssen.
1. Orat. de Oratione, p. 715.
: and in another place gives us almost the same definition of Prayer that S.
Basil did, that Prayer is a Request of some good things Idem Orat. 2. de
Oratione Dominica, p. 724.
, which is offered with Supplication to God. Now had Prayers to Angels or
Saints beeen either the Practice or the Doctrine of this Age in which these
Fathers lived, both S. Basil's and his Brother's Definitions of Prayer had been
ridiculous and false, since they make Prayer peculiar to God alone, whereas it
would have been common to God and the Saints, had these been prayed to as well
as God in those days.

I need not insist much upon what Gregory Nyssen says in his Fifth Oration
against Eunomius, that we are commanded in the Word of God not to worship any
of those things which are created, but that we are to worship and adore that
Nature only, which is uncreate: since we have cleared this sufficiently above
from Origin and others.

S. Ambrose is the last Father that I will urge in this Fourth Century. He
agrees with the Precedent Fathers about the nature of Prayer, and does deny to
Angels and Saints the having any Prayers put up to them, in that short but
comprehensive passage: Notwithstanding THOU ALONE, O Lord, art to be INVOCATED,
THOU art to be ENTREATED, that thou Sed tamen TU SOLUS, Domine, INVOCANDUS, TU
ROGANDUS, ut eum in filiis repraesentes, D. Ambros. Orat. in Obitu Theodosii,
Tom. 3. p. 59.
would represent him [to wit the Dead Emperor Theodosius] in his Sons.

Fifth Century of the Church, and must inquire whether in this Age the Doctrine
of the Church was altered from what we have shown it to in the four precedent
Centuries in relation to the Worship and Invocation of Saints.

S. Epiphanius does make the Invocation of Angels to be the Heresy of the
Angelicks; but those people had very hard measure from that Father, if
Invocation of Saints was not as much a Heresy, since if it were lawful to
invocate the one of these two, the Angels ought to have had the preference,
since as they are God's ministering Spirits, they see and hear us, whereas the
departed Saints do neither see nor hear us.

The same Father in his Confutation of the Heresy of the Collyridians,
concludes fully against the Worship of any Creature. For neither is Elias to be
worshipped, though he is reckoned (...). -- APIA (...), KYPIOS PPOSKYNEISTHO.
Epiphan. Haer. 79. p. 1062.
among the living, nor John -- nor any other of the Saints. That ancient error
shall not prevail over you to forsake the living God, and to worship the things
which were made by Him. For they served and worshipped the Creature more than
the Creator, and became Fools. For if God will not have us to worship the
Angels, how much more would He not have us to worship Her that was Born of
Anna. -- Let Mary be had in honor, but let the Lord be worshipped. And in his
Confutation of the Heresy of the Arians, He does prove the Divinity of Christ
from his being Worshipped. For if (says he (...). Epiphan. Haer. 69. p. 755,
759.
) He be not true God, neither is he to be worshipped, and if He be a Creature,
He is no God; and if He be not to be worshipped, how comes it to pass that he
is called God? -- For it is a foolish thing to make a Creature God, and to
reject the first Commandment, which says, Thou shall Worship the Lord thy God,
and him only shall thou serve. Whereupon the Holy Church of God does not
worship a Creature, but the Begotten Son, the Father in the Son, and the Son in
the Father, with the Holy Ghost.

I appeal to all men of sense, whether this Argument to prove the Divinity of
Christ from his being worshipped had not been the vainest and most frivolous
that ever was used, had Saints or Angels been worshipped in those Days, had
they had Prayers put up unto them, which is the highest Expression of Worship.

S. Chrysostom does define Prayer as the rest of the Fathers had done before
him, and says (...). D. Chrysostom. Hom. 30. in Genesim.
that Prayer is a discoursing with God: and up and down his Works he does
frequently urge it upon Men to go directly to God himself, and to make their
Prayers unto Him. When (says he) we have any suit to make to Men, we have need
of expense and servile Flattery, and much hurrying hither and thither, (...).
D. Chrysostom. in Matthaeum, citat. a Theodoro Daphnopato in Eclogis in Tom. 7.
Operum Chrysostom. p 768. Edit. Savil.
and much contrivance. For it happens often that we cannot get straight unto
the Lords themselves to present our Gift, and speak with them, but it is
necessary for us first to procure an interest in their Servants and Stewards,
both by Gifts and by Intreaties' and by all other means possible: and then by
their mediation we may obtain our request. But it is not thus with God, for
there is no need of Intercessours for the Petitioners, nor is God so ready to
gratify our Petition, when entreated by others, as he is to do it when we pray
to him our selves.

I will but instance in One Father, St. Austin, about whom this whole
Controversy touching Invocation was begun betwixt me, and Sabran the Jesuit.
This Father in his Enchiridion to Laurentius, showing, that the things which
appertain to Hope, are all included in the Lord's Prayer, and that the
Scriptures pronounce him accursed, who puts his Trust in MAN, concludes from
it, that for that very Reason Ideo non nisi a Domino Deo petere debemus,
quicquid speramus nos vel been operaturos, vel pro bonis operibus adepturos. D.
Aug. Enchirid. ad Laurent. c. 114. Tom. 3. p. 73.
, we ought not to ask or pray to any other but our Lord God alone for whatever
we hope either to do well, or to be rewarded for after we have done so.

In another part of his Works, in the very last that he wrote, He asks this
question of the Heathen; Can we then believe that these Angels, whose
employment is to declare to Mankind the Will of the Father, Number igitur hos
Angelos, quorum ministerium est declarare voluntatem Patris, credendum est
velle nos subdi nisi ei, cujus nobis annunciant voluntatem? Unde optime admonet
etiam ipse Platonicus, IMITANDOS Eos potius quam INVOCANDOS. Idem de Civit.
Dei, l. 10. c. 26.
would have us be subject and serve any other besides Him, whose Will they
declare to us? the Platonician himself does give us herein the best Admonition,
That the ANGELS are to be IMITATED rather than INVOCATED.

If this Father was so very earnest against any Invocation of Angels, we have
reason to believe, that upon his own reasons urged above against placing any
Trust in MAN, he was as positive, if not much more against Invocation of
Saints, since according to him, the Angels who are so constantly employed in
the affairs of men, cannot but see and understand our wants; whereas the
Saints, according to Him, know nothing of us, and therefore cannot be Invocated
by us, except we are resolved to throw away our Prayers, and to pray to those
who do not hear us. It is his own Doctrine in his Tract about taking care of
the Dead, in which after several Arguments Pro and Con he concludes, Proinde
fatendum est, nescire quidem mortuos quid hic agatur. Idem de Cura pro Mort. c.
15.
That we must acknowledge, that the Dead are ignorant of what is done here upon
earth; He had just before this Conclusion argued, that if the dead had any
knowledge of things on earth, he should not have wanted the constant assistance
of his dear Mother Monica in his troubles: and that if (as the Scriptures
assure us) the Patriarchs themselves were ignorant of their Posterity, and knew
nothing of the Condition good or bad of the People of Israel: we have a great
deal of reason to conclude, that all the Dead were in the same Condition.

This certainly was that Father's Opinion, and this Doctrine I am sure is
perfectly inconsistent with Invocation of Saints, since it takes away the very
foundation it self on which Invocation is built, to wit, that the Dead do know
our wants, and do hear us, and are able to relieve us. I will conclude the
Testimonies upon this Head against Invocation of Saints with that severe
question which Hilary the Deacon put to those who were wont to worship the
Elements, because they believed that the Government or Patronage of men's lives
was entrusted with them. We demand of them, whether this be commanded or
ordered by God A quibus ut supra requirimus si mandatum est aut jussum a Deo,
quem etiam ipsi magnum and summum fatentur and negligunt. Si enim fieri debet,
ab illo mandari oportuit, qui Author eorum dicitur. Si autem ab illo non est
mandatum, praesumptio est, and ad poenam proficiet, non ad praemium, quia ad
contumeliam pertinet Conditoris, ut contempto Domino colantur servi, and spreto
Imperatore adorentur Comites. Hilar. Diacon. Quaestion. Vet. and Nov. Testam.
apud August. in Append. ad Tom. 4. p. 45.
, whom they themselves own to be Great and the Supreme, and yet neglect him. If
this thing must be done, it ought to have been commanded by Him, who is the
Creator of those Elements. But if it is not commanded by Him, it is a
presumption, and will bring us punishment, not a reward, because it is an
affronting of the Creator of all, to have the Lord contemned and his servants
worshipped, to have the Emperor despised, and his Officers adored.

It is but altering a few words in this passage, and we may put the same
question to the Church of Rome about their Invocation and worship of Saints. We
require to know, whether their Invocation of Saints be commanded and appointed
by God; for if Invocation of Saints ought to be practiced, it ought to be
commanded by him who made them Saints: but if it is no where commanded by him,
Invocation of Saints is a PRESUMPTION, and will bring a Punishment on their
Heads that practice it, since it is a Contempt and affront to God to have his
Servants made sharers with him in his WORSHIP.

Thus I have gone through the Doctrine of the Primitive Fathers down to St.
Austin's time in the Fifth Age of the Church, and have found their Doctrine to
be like their Practice: we had no reason to expect to meet with any Practice of
Invocation of Saints or Angels in their days, since we find their Doctrines so
fully and so unanimously against any such thing; I am not conscious to my self
of having either curtailed, or misapplied, or perverted one of all the passages
I have produced out of the Fathers of the Five Centuries; I hope the Reader
has carried them in his memory, that so he may help me to compare them with
what Sabran the Jesuit had the Assurance in both his Letters to say concerning
St. Austin, and the Fathers of his and the precedent Century, that Invocation
of Saints was taught by S. Austin, and ALL the Fathers of his Age, and the
Precedent Century.

And is all this certainly true? Yes surely, or else the Jesuit would have
scorned to have asserted it so boldly in both his Letters: but alas, it will
not prove so, since what I have collected out of the Fathers of the Fourth and
Fifth Centuries will prove this to be a scandalous falsehood; for to argue the
matter a little with him, did S. Athanasius teach Invocation of Saints, who
tells us, that no good Christian ever prayed to Angels, or any other Creatures
(of which number are the Saints) together with God, who proves the Divinity of
our Savior from his being Invocated? did Hilary the Deacon teach Invocation of
Saints, who does so very well expose the very ground of Invocation of going to
God by the Saints, and ridicules the Comparison drawn from Addresses made to
Temporal Princes by the mediation of their Officers, and shows, that the
comparison is groundless, since Temporal Princes are forced to make use of
their Officers in such things, because they are but men, whereas God knows the
Merits of all men, and therefore no need of a Spokesman to him?

Did S. Basil or Gregory Nyssen teach Invocation, or a Praying to Saints, who
define Prayer to be a Request for some good thing TO GOD?

These are the most noted Fathers of the Fourth Century; and for the Fifth, did
S. Epiphanius teach Invocation of Saints, who proves the Divinity of Christ (as
S. Athanasius had done) from his being worshipped; the most solemn expression
of Worship being Invocation or Prayer? did S. Ambrose after he rightly
understood the Christian Religion teach any such Invocation, who said, that GOD
ALONE was to be INVOCATED? Did S. Chrysostom teach it, who does so often exhort
to our going to God our selves, assuring us we shall be sooner heard when we
ask our selves, than when we ask by another; who does with the rest of the
Fathers make the Essence of Prayer to be a Discoursing with God? Did S. Austin
lastly, whom the Jesuit names, teach Invocation or Prayer to Saints, who says
expressly, that we ought to Pray to, or ask of GOD ALONE those things we hope
for?

I am so much accustomed to the Writers of the Church of Rome, that I do not so
much wonder as I otherwise should at the Jesuits asserting a thing so very
false with so much assurance: it is too frequent among them to challenge ALL
the Fathers, when perhaps not one in twenty is on their side, and therefore for
the Jesuit to assert, That all the Fathers of those two Centuries are for
Invocation of Saints, is merely a being in the fashion. But can he think to
impose upon us with such things? does he think that Confidence is enough, or
all that is necessary for the carrying of any cause? if he does, he shall find
himself mistaken, since there is too much learning in England to let such bold
and false assertions to pass upon and delude the people without control, or
putting a stop to them.

I need not aggravate, or further insist on the falseness of all that the
Jesuit said there; I had rather employ my self to vindicate the Fathers than to
expose him: and therefore in order to the doing that by answering all the
passages quoted out of them by the Jesuit to defend Invocation of Saints, I
will only request, that these two very reasonable Postulatum's may be granted
me.

First, That the Fathers of the Fourth and Fifth Centuries [about whom the
Controversy is betwixt me and the Jesuit] did know the Practices, and
understand the Doctrines of the Fathers of the Three preceding Ages of the
Church.

Secondly, That the Fathers of the Fourth and Fifth Centuries, had so much
learning as to understand, and so much sense as not to contradict themselves.

Both these Concessions are so very just, that I hope there will be no dispute
about them; I will then with the help of them begin the Examination of all that
the Jesuit has offered out of the Primitive Fathers in defense of Invocation
of Saints. And to let the Jesuit see I am not afraid of their best Arguments, I
will answer that one which is omitted, I wonder how by himself, but was not
only urged in the Nubes Testium, but is twice repeated by the Compiler in his
Vindication of the Nubes Testium. It is the passage from S. Ambrose's Book de
Viduis, wherein he says, Obsecrandi sunt Angeli pro nobis. Martyrs obsecrandi,
the Angels are to be prayed to, who are appointed for our defense; the Martyrs
are to be prayed to, whose Patronage we justly claim. This passage does make
the greatest show of any for the Church of Rome, however in answer to this we
tell them, that what S. Ambrose wrote in that Book, was not the Doctrine of the
Christian Church, which S. Ambrose did not understand when he wrote that Book,
being then but a Novice, as not only this passage about Angels, but some others
in it do very evidently show, and therefore this passage ought not to be
insisted on as the Doctrine of the Church then, since He doubtless did not at
that time understand the Church's Doctrines, nor ought it to be insisted on as
S. Ambrose's Opinion at least, since it is evident, that he did afterward
change his mind, when he understood Christianity better, and did then declare
his sense to be, that GOD ALONE was to be INVOCATED or PRAYED TO.

This Answer is fair, and cannot be reasonably gainsay'd, however since the
Jesuit and the Compiler will be angry at my saying S. Ambrose was a Novice, and
did not understand the Doctrines of the Christian Church, when he wrote that
Book; I will, to prevent their Cavils, offer some further reasons in defense of
that Answer I have just made. I will not insist upon the Concessions of their
own Learned Men of the Church of Rome, of Baronius for Example, who do own,
that S. Ambrose was a Novice, when he wrote that Book, and therefore did not
thoroughly understand the Christian Doctrine; I have better reasons, the chief
of which is, that this doctrine of praying to Angels and Martyrs, is expressly
contrary to the doctrine of the Church, and the Practice of it in St.
Irenaeus's time, who tells us, that the Church then made no use of any
Invocation of Angels; in Origen's time, who informs us, that the Church's
Doctrine was, that Angels were not to be PRAYED TO, nor Martyrs neither, but
that ALL PRAYER was to be offered up to GOD ALONE through our Lord Jesus
Christ; and in St. Athanasius's time, who lived but a little time before S.
Ambrose, and who shows us, that no Christian then did Pray to Angel, or Martyr,
or Saint, or any other Creature: but which is worst of all, this Doctrine of
praying to Angels is directly contrary to a Canon of a Council of Bishops at
Laodicea, held not above ten years before St. Ambrose's Conversion to
Christianity, by which Canon an Anathema is denounced against any person that
should Pray to Angels, and as if the Council Can. 35. Council. Laodicen. held
A.D. 364.
had a mind thoroughly to have secured all Christians from slipping into it,
they call the Praying to Angels a secret Idolatry and a forsaking of Christ.

This is sufficient to show, that Praying to Angels was far enough from being
either a Practice or a Doctrine of the Primitive Church, since it was accursed
and branded with the title of Idolatry; and to show further, that it was not S.
Ambrose's own Opinion, when he understood Christianity better, we need only
look into that Oration I quoted above, where he does expressly teach, that GOD
ALONE is to be Invocated and Prayed to.

Had the Compiler of the Nubes Testium known the true State and Doctrines of
the Primitive Church during the first four Ages, He would never have been
guilty of bringing in S. Ambrose for a Teacher of Invocation and Praying to
Angels, which the Church had not only always opposed, but had just before S.
Ambrose's own time accursed as secret Idolatry, and a forsaking of Christ: but
such passages as this, and downright Heresy sometimes are quoted, if they do
but promise any the least service to the defense of the present Doctrines and
Practices of the Church of Rome: Unhappy Church! that art forced to make use of
such, or to have none.

It is time for me now to attend the Jesuit, and see what he produces to show,
that Invocation or Prayer to Saints, was taught in the Fourth and Fifth Ages.

He begins with S. Austin, but so little is the Jesuit's Skill, and so ill his
Fortune, that he first quotes a passage that breaks the neck of his whole
design. For in that answer to Faustus the Manichee, who had objected to the
Christians the Worshipping of their Martyrs, he owns indeed (as the Jesuit
quotes him) that they did worship the Martyrs, but he tells him also, that it
was only with the Worship of Love and Fellowship, which is paid also to the
Holy Men of God while on earth. I ask the Jesuit therefore what Church ever
did, and whether even their Church of Rome does order Invocation or Prayers to
be put up to their Fellow Christians, though the most holy on Earth? Let him but
name me the Church that ever practiced or appointed this, and I will be his
Convert upon it, but since no Church in the World was ever so forsaken of God
as to command this, and since the worship paid to the dead Saints was the very
same that is paid to the Living Saints, it is evident to a Demonstration, that
there was nothing of Invocation in it, and consequently no Patronage for
Invocation of Saints from this place, but the direct contrary to it.

The Jesuit had in his Printed Sermon, and in his Letter to the Lord, quoted
two of S. Austin's Sermons, de Sanctis, for the same purpose; for the passage
in relation to the Virgin Mary out of the 35th Sermon, de Sanctis, I have
sufficiently answered that already, by proving that whole Sermon to be a
Forgery; and for the other passage out of the 18th Sermon de Sanctis, I told
him before that it is none of S. Austin's; and for the Passage it self set down
by the Jesuit in his Letter to the Protestant Peer it is almost word for word
in the 35th Sermon, de Sanctis, so that there was Stealing in the case, either
the 18th stole from the 35th, or the 35th served the 18th that Trick: but to
convince the World how little that Passage could pretend to be S. Austin's, or
near his Age, I will give the Reader that Piece which the Jesuit left out of
the middle of his Quotation; It is an Address to the Virgin Mary, in these
Words, Excuse us from what we fear, for thou art the ONLY HOPE of Sinners,
THROUGH THEE we hope for pardon of our Sins, and in THEE, O most Blessed
Virgin, is the Expectation Excusa quod timemus, quia TU es SPES UNICA
peccatorum, per TE speramus veniam delictorum, and in TE, Beatissima, nostrorum
est Expectatio Praemiorum. Sermon. 18. de Sanctis.
of our Rewards. This is such Doctrine, as had no Being in S. Austin's days,
and happy had it been for the whole Church, had such absurd Doctrine been
always kept out, and I am glad to see the Jesuit so much ashamed of it, as to
leave it out of the middle of his Quotation.

His next Author for Invocation of Saints is Origin, and which is still more
strange, his Eighth Book against Celsus, which, as I showed above, was
particularly written against the Invocation of Angel or Saint; but some men are
very unhappy, and it is a just Judgment that they that only steal from one
another should suffer, and be exposed for their Imprudence. What the Jesuit
quotes is, That if Men would gain the Favor of many, they were taught in
Scripture that thousands of thousands assisted before him: but what is all this
to the purpose? What is said here is, That the Angels assist good Men with
their Prayers, which is nothing at all to Invocation of Angels: nay the place
is so far from countenancing any such thing, that Origen's Design through that
whole eighth Book, is to show, that no Worship nor Invocation is to be offered
up to Angels or Saints, and upon Celsus's urging that Men should worship and
pray to the Angels that they might be propitious to them, Origin answers him
with a Detestation of his Counsel (as I have put it down at large above)
showing him that all our Prayers were to be offered to God, and for the
obtaining the Assistance of the Angels, he tells him, a Holy Life is the best
Means.

And is not this Jesuit then very skilful in these things? could any other
Person have had the face to quote that very place for an Instance and Proof of
Invocation of Angels and Saints, which was intended by the Author directly
against it. I believe the Jesuit never saw Origin himself, I entreat him to
look into that Page out of which his Quotation is taken, and then I am sure he
will see very good reason to thank me for saying no more to him upon this
Account.

His next Testimony is out of S. Basil's Oration upon the Forty Martyrs, that
whoever was in Affliction had recourse to them: whoever was in Prosperity,
betook himself likewise to them; the one that he might find Relief, the other
to beg continuance of his Happiness, etc. There was occasion for Craft in the
Translation of this Place, however I do not charge it upon the Jesuit who had
it from the Compiler, nor the Compiler who had it from Father Alexandre, nor F.
Alexandre himself who had it from Bellarmine, or some other of their Writers,
who all conspire in the same Abuse of S. Basil's Words. There is not a Syllable
for Invocation here, for S. Basil in this place to persuade the People to
frequent the Anniversaries of the Martyrs, tells them, that the Church of the
Martyrs, that is, where the Martyrs Bodies or Ashes were laid, was a ready help
to Christians, but how? Because those that came to offer up their Prayers at
the Memories of the Martyrs, had the assistance of the Martyrs Prayers, whom S.
Basil believed to join their Prayers to those that were put up at their
Memories; and upon this account it is that He says people betook themselves to
the Martyrs, not by praying to the Martyrs, as the Jesuit and the Romish
Writers would insinuate, but by frequenting their Assemblies, and by running to
the Churches of the Martyrs: for immediately after he plainly enough prevents
his being misunderstood, as though he was telling how the people prayed to the
Martyrs, by annexing this to it. Let your Prayers therefore ETA APTYPON (...).
S. Basil. Orat. 20 in 40. Martyrs, p. 459.
be put up or joined with the Martyrs Prayers. Here had been his place to have
explained himself if he would have had them to have prayed to the Martyrs: but
we see his direction was not that they should pray To, but WITH the Martyrs,
which is directly against Invocation of them: and therefore was cunningly, though
not honestly, left out of the middle of the passage, by the Compiler, and the
Jesuit after him.

That which he quotes next from Gregory Nazianzen about Cyprian, and Justina
the Virgin, that he while He was a Magician did tempt her to uncleanness, and
she escaped him by praying to the Virgin Mary, is every bit of it a sham, since
the learned men of the Church do own that there was no ground in History for
it, but that it was a perfect Mistake throughout.

As to the next Quotation out of Gregory Nyssen's Oration upon Theodorus of his
asking that Saint's Intercession for their Country, it is so plainly a
Rhetorical Apostrophe, as nothing can be more, and is put down in such familiar
Style, as if he was talking not praying to the Martyr, and to convince us that
it must be only a Rhetorical Expression or Request to the Martyr, he does
suppose the Martyr himself to be present there, and to hear what he said as
well as any of the Congregation did; and to help out that Supposition he
further supposes that the Martyr (wheresoever his Mansion was) had got leave to
come down, and be present at their Assemblies; all which are pleasant Fancies,
but are such as show that Gregory Nyssen would have thought it vain even to
have talked with, or called to the Martyr, had he not had leave to have been
present with them; which is further cleared from his desiring Theodorus to get
the rest of the Martyrs, S. Peter, S. Paul, and S. John to pray for the several
Churches planted by them; by which very Expressions he shows his belief that
they did not hear him, because they were not present, and therefore he was
forced to desire of Theodorus to do it. All which with more which I could add
out of this very Oration upon Theodore the Martyr, is absolutely inconsistent
with that Invocation of Saints which is practiced in the Church of Rome, by
which any Saint is called upon in any place, and in Ten thousand places at the
same time.

We must allow for Rhetorical Expressions, and Harangues, and ought not to
suspect that Gregory Nyssen does here contradict his own Doctrine, as well as
of all the Fathers before him, by which he makes Invocation or Prayer peculiar
to God, when he defines Prayer to be, (...), a Conversing with GOD exclusive to
Saint or Angel.

His next Quotation from S. Ambrose I have already answered above, where I told
the Reader that the Jesuit had omitted it, but that was partly a Mistake; but
the Jesuit himself is in the fault, for in his Margent here he puts Ambros. de
m. Cyprian, whereas it should have been Ambros. l. de Viduis. I never met with
such a blundering Margent in my days; had I not had the Nubes Testium to have
directed me, I should no more have understood his next Quotation from Theod. de
cur. grac. than I did this from Ambrose. The Jesuit either does not understand
how to quote an Author intelligibly, or has a very unlucky Printer: however H.
Hills ought not to have the blame, since his other Prints are just enough as to
these Marginal References.

The Jesuit then next quotes Theodoret's Words, in Sermon. 8. de Martyribus,
about the Temples of the Martyrs being frequented, and about the People praying
to the Martyrs upon all occasions. But to this we answer, That if the whole
Book, de Curandis Graecorum Affectionibus, be not deservedly doubted to be none
of Theodoret's, yet there is a very great Reason to believe that this Book
about the Martyrs has been tampered with; since in a Book of his, which is
unquestionable, we meet with Doctrines inconsistent with any such Prayer to
Saints as is made in the Church of Rome. I mean his Commentary on the 17th
Verse of the Third Chapter of S. Paul's Epistle to the Colossians, where upon
those Words, And whatsoever ye do in word or deed, do all in the name of the
Lord Jesus, giving thanks to God and the Father by him: He thus comments, For
because they [against whom S. Paul warns the Colossians] did command Men (...).
Theodoret. in 3. cap. Ep. ad Coloss. in Tom. 3. p. 359. Edit. Paris. 1642.
to worship the Angels, He enjoins the contrary, that they should adorn both
their Words and Actions with the Commemoration of Christ their Lord. And send
up (says he) Thanksgiving to God and the Father by HIM, and not by the ANGELS.
The Synod of Laodicea also in pursuance of this Rule, and being desirous to
cure that old Disease, made it a Law that none should pray unto Angels, nor
forsake our Lord Jesus Christ. Theodoret urges this same Canon of the Council
of Laodicea against the Worshipping of Angels spoken of in the 2d Chapter to
the Colossians.

So that if we may judge of Theodoret's True Sentiments about these things from
his undoubted Comments, we are very sure he was utterly against Invocation of
Angels, and consequently against Invocation of Saints, since the same Reasons
lie against them both, but are much stronger against the Invocation of Saints,
who must be allowed to be the less Glorious, and less knowing in humane Affairs.

But granting, notwithstanding all this, that Theodoret's Eighth Discourse
about the Martyrs is genuine, and that there have been no Frauds committed in
it, yet the Reason of his Praying to the Martyrs there will not defend the
present Invocation of the Church of Rome, since he makes the Martyrs to be
present at their Memories, and to hear the Requests made to them there; which
was not only his, but some other Fathers Opinions: and this cannot properly be
called Invocation, since the Saint is supposed to be within the Lines of
Communication, and all that passes to be no more than a Request from one Friend
to another; nor can it be called Prayer any otherwise than improperly as we use
it in Conversation, when one man prays another to do such or such a thing for
him.

And therefore though Invocation or Prayer be reserved in Scripture to God alone,
and was looked upon as such by the Primitive Fathers, yet were any man certain
that S. Paul, for Example, was present though invisibly in the same place he is
in, I do not believe it would be any more against Scripture for that Man to
pray S. Paul to assist him with his Prayers at the Throne of Grace, than it is
against Scripture for one Man here to pray another to do the same thing for
him; and I think such a Prayer or Request (call it whether you will) made to S.
Paul with those Circumstances ought on more to be named Invocation, than the
Prayer or Request made by one Christian to another upon the same account: since
all the difference betwixt the two Cases is only this, that the one is present
invisibly, the other visibly, but both equally present.

This Answer does not only satisfy for what is alleged out of Theodoret, but
is equally serviceable for some other such like passages quoted from S.
Chrysostom and others, all which are grounded upon that persuasion that had
gotten footing among them, that the Martyrs by God's permission, were present
at their Memories during the time of the Christians Assemblies there, as I
could very distinctly show, but have not room here to do it: if the Jesuit
would but read over again his own next quotation from S. Basil, he may see the
grounds for all that has been answered by me here.

I need not trouble my self to answer what he further quotes from S. Austin, of
whose Doctrine upon this point we have had a full account already, nor to take
any notice of his following Quotations, which concern the Relics of the
Saints.

What I have collected from the Practice and Doctrines of the Primitive Fathers
in my third and fourth particular is sufficient to demonstrate that as
Invocation of Saints was not the Practice, so it was expressly against the
Doctrine of the Primitive Fathers; so that Invocation of Saints was no more
countenanced by them, than it is by the Church of England, and we have all the
reason in the World to conclude that as they did not practice Invocation of
Saints, so they were no Papists, but of the same Faith with the Church of
England as to these things: and therefore the Church of England is not guilty
of Schism in separating from the Church of Rome upon occasion of Invocation of
Saints, since the Primitive Church practiced no such thing, and she is bound to
Communicate with the Primitive Church rather than with the Church of Rome, who
has been guilty of bringing into her own Practice This among other
Superstitious things, which every Orthodox Church is bound to refuse, or to
throw out and reform as soon as she is sensible of her Error.

And as for those Practices of Addresses to the Martyrs at their Memories cited
from S. Basil, S. Gregory Nyssen, St. Chrysostom, and Theodoret, and so much
insisted on by the Jesuit as being the same thing, and all that is practiced by
the Church of Rome toward the Saints and Angels; we can very easily prove a
vast difference betwixt what was done then, and what is practiced now by the
Church of Rome, and since the Jesuit does challenge me so often to show the
difference, I will answer his Challenge, and do assign only three Differences
out of more that I could offer.

The First Difference is that the Church of Rome does use a direct Invocation,
or formal Prayer to the Saints and Angels, as is apparent from hundreds of
places in their Missalls, Breviaries and Offices, whereas the Primitive Fathers
of the end of the Fourth and Fifth Century did not invocate or make Prayers to
the Saints, but merely such Addresses or Requests as are made from one Friend
to another: and this I do prove out of their own mouths, who make PRAYER to be
PECULIAR to GOD ALONE, and therefore would not contradict their own Doctrine by
their own Practice, which these Fathers had inevitably done, had they reserved
Prayer as proper to GOD ALONE, and yet offered Prayer or Invocation to the
Saints.

A second Difference is that, whereas those Requests were made at the Memories
of those Martyrs to whom they were presented, and who were believed to be
present there though invisibly at that time; the Invocations and Prayers to the
Saints in the present Church of Rome, are made not only in every place, but in
ten thousand different and most distant places to such or such a particular
Saint; which is virtually to ascribe to them an Omnipresence, an Attribute that
no finite Being is capable of.

The third Difference is that those Requests and Interpellations to the Martyrs
were neither commanded by the Primitive Church, Authorized by her General or
Provincial, or any other Councils, nor used in the Public Offices of the
Church; whereas; on the contrary, the Invocations and Prayers to Saints in the
Church of Rome are enjoined by the Roman Church, are authorized by her last
General Council of Trent, and used not only in the Public Offices of their
Church, but in the most solemn Parts of their Offices, in the Litanies of the
Church.

I could add more, but these are enough to show the vast difference betwixt
what is now practiced in the Church of Rome toward the Saints, and what was
done to them at the latter end of the Fourth, and in the Fifth Age of the
Church, which is the time of the Primitive Church in dispute betwixt me, and
the Compiler, and the Jesuit.

Thus I have been so civil as to accept the Jesuit's Challenge, and to make him
a fair and distinct Reply, and have been more civil to him than I ought to have
been, since according to the Law of Arms, I think the Challenge I made to the
Jesuit among the rest of the Romish Priests in England (to show me but one
Canon of the Catholic Church for the first six hundred years of the Church for
the Pope's Supremacy) ought to have been accepted and answered before any of
them were allowed to make any Challenges to me. But since it was impossible for
the Jesuit or any of them to produce such a Canon, and therefore to make any
Reply to that Challenge; I will at parting tell the Jesuit, that if he intends
to prosecute this Controversy about Invocation of Saints, it is my turn to
challenge, and therefore I do challenge him to show as fair and as
uninterrupted a Practice and Doctrine for Invocation of Saints, as I have
produced against it for the Four First Centuries of the Church, out of the
Liturgies and Genuine Works of the Fathers of those distinst Ages.

I must now return to the Compiler's Vindication of the Nubes Testium, and
should pass to the next Chapter about Relics, but that I must not forget to
take notice of a very terrible Objection against us in relation to this
Invocation, which I had like to have omitted. The Reader I suppose does
remember, that the Compiler had said, that I had granted that Invocation of
Saints was practiced in the Fourth and Fifth Ages of the Church, upon this he
very learnedly observes against me, that even one of the Four First General
Councils was held within the same time, without ever censuring it as an Error,
though even before that, this Practice is owned to have taken root in many
Places. This passage is very diverting, and shows with what an air of
confidence some men can write the most absurd things, and tack together the
most inconsistent: I had thought I had taught the Compiler a little more care
and circumspection when he meddles with Chronology-matters in my Answer to his
Nubes Testium, but I perceive nothing will do good upon him, nor learn him more
caution. Well then, since he is so wilful, and cannot be persuaded from making
such lamentable blunders in Chronology, he must even thank himself if he be
exposed for it, and lasht for it as he does deserve.

He first then observes, that even one of the Four First General Councils was
held within the same time, that is, within the Fourth and Fifth Centuries. By
this One of the Four First General Councils, I suppose, he means the Council of
Nice; and I must needs tell him, that he guessed very well to say, that that
Council was held within the time of those two Centuries, but that he had
guessed a great deal better if he had said, that even all the Four First
General Councils were held within that time; for there is no body that pretends
to any the least skill in Chronology, that would not have readily told him that
they were all four held and over within two Years after the middle of the Fifth
Century.

His next Observation is like this, he tells us, That this General Council did
not censure Invocation of Saints as an Error; if he means the Council of Nice,
as I before supposed he did, it is a very great Truth that that Council did not
censure Invocation of Saints as an Error, and there was a very good Reason for
it, and that was, because there was no such thing as Invocation of Saints
practiced in the Church when that Council was held, nor of above two hundred
Years after; but some men love to make wise Observations, though they miss their
aim too too often. Well! But what will the Compiler say, if I show him that
though not the First, yet One of these Four General Councils did censure
Invocation of Angels, (and consequently of Saints) as an Error, and as a most
gross one too? This I will do, that so he may curse his ill Fate for putting
him upon making such an untoward Objection against us, and learn for the
future, if he is not deaf to Advice, to look before he leaps into such
recoyling Objections.

The Council of Chalcedon does in her first Canon admit and approve of the
Synod of Laodicea, and makes the Canons of that Synod part of the standing Law
of the Universal Church: now among the Canons of that Synod we find the 35th
directly forbidding Invocation of Angels. I will set down the whole Canon, not
only because it was made by a Diocesan Synod of a great many Bishops, but
because it was confirmed by the Greatest and last General Council, consisting
of above Six hundred Bishops, in the middle of the Fifth Century, (which is the
Century most contested for betwixt me and the Compiler) and made by them a Rule
to the Catholic Church: and the Canon is this, That Christians ought (...).
Council. Laodicen. Can. 35. in Biblioth. Juris Canonici. Edit. Justel. 1661.
not to forsake the Church of God, and go into Conventicles and Invocate, or
pray to Angels, and make Meetings; all which are forbidden them: If any Man
therefore be found to give himself to this Secret Idolatry, let him be
accursed, for that he has forsaken our Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of God, and
has betaken himself to Idolatry.

The Compiler has still another Observation to be examined which is as good as
either of the other two: It is, That this Practice [of Invocation of Saints] is
owned to have taken root in many places, even before that [ Council of Nice]. I
will not accuse him here of a willful Falsehood, it is merely because he knew
not when that Council was held, that makes him write at this extravagant Rate:
I do not own that Invocation of Saints took root either before or within a
hundred Years after that Council: and the very first Instance of any Addresses
in Orations, or otherwise made to the Saints that any of the Romish Writers are
able to produce comes not within forty Years of that Council, so that our
Compiler is a very unlucky Man at these Chronology businesses, and should not
have ventured so rashly to crowd so many false, and such ridiculous things into
so small a compass: and though perhaps I shall have no Thanks for my good
Intentions, yet could I but in the least suspect that he and I should have any
further Controversy about these things, rather than he should go on in this
blundering blindfold manner, I would be at the Expense of presenting him with a
Chronology-Table, that so no more Paper may be spent in correcting or exposing
his Mistakes in Chronology. I entreat him to consider of it, and not to venture
at such things any more, except he is sure of an Adversary just as wise as
himself, and that has just as much Knowledge in Chronology and Antiquity as
himself: then indeed he may write on as he has done here, courageously without
the fear of being discovered, and they two may serve only to make diversion for
their Readers.

The next Chapter in my Book is about Relics, and here the Compiler takes me
up very quick, and says that I retire within the Three first Centuries, but for
the Fourth and Fifth that I dare not put the Cause [about Reliques] upon their
Verdict. And is not this very pleasant Matter? Suppose I had retired, which I
did not, for the Disproof of the Worship of Relics within the Three first
Centuries, and durst not stand to the Verdict of the Fourth or Fifth Century;
does not he himself remember that the Design of his Nubes Testium was to show
that the Fathers of the first five hundred years did teach and practice what
the Church of Rome at present does? And did not he pretend there to the
Tradition of the First Five Centuries? How then should I have betrayed or hurt
my pretenses to the same Ages, had I retired within the Three First Centuries,
and disproved him as to those Centuries. When a Man at Law pretends to have
five hundred years Prescription to the Toll (for Example) of some great Fair,
does not his Adversary sufficiently ruin his five hundred years Prescription,
if he can make it appear, that for three of the five hundred years there was no
Fair at all kept at that place, and therefore no Toll paid there? The Case
betwixt me and my Adversary, as set down by himself, is the very same, and yet
I must not be allowed to ruin his first five hundred years Prescription, though
I could prove, that there was no enquiry after, much less any worship of
Relics for three of those five hundred years. This is a very hard Case,
however the Compiler writes as if he feared no Colors, nor that any body would
dare to take up the Pen against him.

But I must bring him to a better consideration of these things, and inform him
that the Controversy betwixt him and me about Relics is whether they were
worshipped or no during the first five hundred years, and that I am so far from
retiring within the Three first Centuries, that I challenged the Fourth and
Fifth as well as the Three first as expressly rejecting and denying the worship
of Relics.

It is necessary for me to do this, since the Compiler confounding what I had
said in relation to the Fathers of the Fourth and Fifth Centuries with what we
do at present condemn the Church of Rome of, runs me down most grievously for a
page or two, for daring to censure what was then done about the searching and
treasuring up of Relics, though I had shown it to be expressly contrary to what
was the Practice of the three first Centuries, for which I suppose I ought to
have as great veneration at least, as for the Practice of the Fourth and Fifth.
Ay, but says he, don't you see what men he dares to censure, S. Basil, S.
Gregory Nyssen, S. Gregory Nazianzen, S. Chrysostom, S. Ambrose, S. Jerome, S.
Austin and Theodoret, and then grows very angry upon it, forgetting all the
while that he is as pert against what the Church of Antioch did to S.
Ignatius's body, the Church of Smyrna to S. Polycarp's; against what the Body
of the Clergy of the Church of Rome did expressly enjoin in their Letter to the
Clergy of Carthage; against what was done by all the Faithful of the first Ages
toward the Bodies and Ashes of all the Martyrs; against what the Great
Anchorite S. Anthony (as it is related in his Life, written by S. Athanasius)
did so often beg of the Bishops, that they would forbid their people to keep
the Bodies of their dead Friends unburied, censuring thereby the Custom of the
Egyptians [and I may add, of all those Fathers mentioned by the Compiler
against me] who before his time had begun what was so zealously practiced and
commended by those Fathers of the Fourth and Fifth Centuries, and is so angrily
contended for by the Compiler in his Vindication.

I will set down the whole passage, because it is so complete a defense of all
that I have written about these things, and is so full an Answer to all that
the Compiler does make so much noise about. S. Athanasius having related S.
Anthony's farewell Oration to his Brother Monks, and their great desire to stay
him with them, that so they might be honored with his ending his days among
them, tells us, that S. Anthony upon several reasons was utterly against it,
but especially for that presumptuous custom of Egypt, which he thus describes.
For the Egyptians Mos etenim Aegyptiis est, nobilium and praecipue beatorum
Martyrum Corpora linteamine quidem obvolvere, and studium funeri solitum non
negare: terra vero non abscondere, sed super lectulos domi posita reservare.
Hunc honorem quiescentibus reddi, inveteratae con uetudinis VANITAS tradidit.
De hoc Antonius saepe and Episcopos deprecatus est, ut populos Ecclesiastica
consuetudine corrigerent, and laicos viros ac mulieres rigidius ipse convenit,
dicens: Nec LICITUM HOC ESSE, nec DEO PLACITUM, quippe cum Patriarcharum and
Prophetarum Sepulchra, quae ad nos usque perdurant haec facta convincerent:
Dominici quoque Corporis exemplum oportere intueri jubebat, quod in Sepulchro
positum lapide usque ad resurrectionis tertium diem clausum fuerit. Atque his
modis vitium circa defunctos Aegypti, etiam si Sancta essent Corpora,
coarguebat, -- Haec justa persuasio multorum insitum evellit errorem, and
repositis in terra cadaveribus domino gratias pro bono Magisterio retulerunt.
D. Athanasii Vita S. Antonii Tom. 2. p. 482. Edit. Commelin. 1600.
have a Custom among them of wrapping up indeed in linen the Bodies of their
Virtuous Men, and especially of the blessed Martyrs, and of giving them Funeral
Rites, but they do not bury them in the Earth, but lay them upon Couches, and
keep them in their Houses. The VANITY of an inveterate Custom has taught them,
that this Honor is to be shown to the Deceased. S. Anthony had often
complained to the Bishops about this thing, and requested of them, that they
would by Ecclesiastical Censure cure the People of this Evil Custom; and He
himself was wont to chide both Men and Women very severely for it, telling
them, that it was NOT LAWFUL, and that IT was NOT PLEASING TO GOD, and that the
Sepulchers of the Patriarchs and Prophets, which continue to these days, did
convince these actions to be unlawful; and he bid them to consider the Example
of our Lords own Body, which was buried in a Sepulcher, and sealed up with a
Stone to the Third day on which he was to rise again. And by these means S.
Anthony did reprehend and put a stop to this Evil Custom of Egypt toward the
deceased, though it was to the Bodies which were Holy; -- and this just Reproof
did root out of many this inbred Error, and they having buried the dead Bodies
of their deceased Friends, returned the Lord thanks for the Good Admonition.

Our Compiler however is very earnest upon it, that what was practiced in the
latter end of the fourth and fifth Centuries toward the Relics of the Saints
and Martyrs is the very same, and no more than what is now practiced toward
them by the Order of the Church of Rome; and he builds this whole fancy upon
the equivocalness of some words and actions used then as well as now; but that
I may ruin this groundless pretense, and all his Jingling about words, I will
settle and prove these two things:

First, That the Church of Rome does command and practice the worship of
Relics.

Secondly, That for the First Five Centuries of the Church the Worship of
Relics was neither commanded nor practiced by the Primitive Church.

For the proof of the First, I need only insist on what the Council of Trent in
her twenty-fifth and last Session did decree about Relics, that the Bodies
and Relics of the Saints were to be worshipped, and a little after she
denounces an Anathema against all that should affirm, that Veneration and
Honor are not to be paid to Relics. That by Veneration and Honor in this
Decree Religious Worship is meant, may be cleared from the best Writers of the
Church of Rome, who use the words Veneration and Adoration promiscuously, and
in the same sense.

Thus Vasques the great Schoolman, Vasques in Par. 3. D. Thom. Disp. 112.
since that Council, in his Disputations upon S. Thomas, having proposed this
question, whether the Bodies and Relics of the Saints are to be VENERATED;
answers, that it is an indisputable Truth among the Catholics, that the
RELICS of SAINTS, whether they be any parts of them, as Bones, Flesh and
Ashes, or any other things that have touched them, or did belong to them, ought
to be ADORED and honored with Sacred or DIVINE HONOR: and a little after
concluding, that he had proved, that RELICS are to be ADORED, he next sets
upon explaining with what kind of Worship and Honor THE RELICS ought to be
VENERATED.

And S. Thomas himself before Vasques had thus promiscuously used the Words
VENERATION and ADORATION, S. Thom. Summa, Pars 3. Quaest. 25. Artic. 6. p. 65.
and whereas Vasques had put the Question whether Relics were to be
VENERATED, S. Thomas puts it, whether RELICS are to be ADORED, and as Vasques
had answered that they were to be ADORED, so S. Thomas answers his Question,
that seeing we VENERATE the Saints of God, we must also VENERATE their Bodies
and RELICS. And he does throughout that Article in his Objections and Answers
sometimes use the one, and sometimes the other, but more frequently the Word
ADORATION to express what Honor the Church did think due to RELICS.

I was more careful to make use of the Authority of S. Thomas herein, because
he is looked upon to be of such Sacred Authority in the Church of Rome, that
Sabran the Jesuit assures me that above one half of the Divines of the
Christian World [and those I am sure are at least all the Divines that are in
the Church of Rome] do own Him for Master, Reply to my I. Letter to him.
and bind themselves to maintain ALL He has taught. Well then, If the Case be
as the Jesuit represents it, I am certain to carry my Cause that the Church of
Rome does ADORE the RELICS of the Saints, since I am sure that S. Thomas
taught that RELICS ARE TO BE ADORED.

But without the Authority of S. Thomas, from whose Decision, the Jesuit told
me in his Letter to the Peer, that he would not swerve, though I had proved S.
Thomas altogether and certainly mistaken about that thing: I think we may prove
that by VENERATION the Council of Trent did mean the ADORATION of RELICS, if
they will but permit us to explain the meaning of the Decrees of that Council
by the standing Reformed Offices in their Church.

In the Twenty fifth Session of that Council, in their Decree about Images,
they do use the very same Words to express what Honor they will have done to
Images, that they had used immediately before for the Relics of the Saints.
VENERATION and HONOR are the Words employed in both the Paragraphs. Now to
find what that VENERATION means, which the Council of Trent appoints to be paid
to the Images, we need only look into their Good-Fryday-Service, and into their
Pontitical to find their Church's Sense. Missale Romans Feria 6. in Parasceue.
fol. 83, 84. Edit. Paris. in 8o. 1582.
In the Good-Friday-Service we meet with the Word ADORATION, and ADORED, about
the Honor paid to the Image of the Cross above Ten times; and that we cannot
mistake them, the Worship or VENERATION of the Cross is three times plainly
styled the ADORATION OF THE CROSS. In their Pontifical, to show what they mean
by VENERATION and HONOR in the Decree of the Council, it is given as the
Reason why the CROSS carried before a Legate should take the right Hand of the
Emperor's Sword (at the Reception of an Emperor with Procession into any
City) because, LATRIA, a DIVINE WORSHIP IS DUE TO THE CROSS.

This I question not will be able to convince all Men that VENERATION and
ADORATION are promiscuously used for the same thing, and that by appointing a
VENERATION to be paid to the RELICS of the Saints, the Council of Trent did
command that THE RELICS of Saints should be ADORED: and this is sufficient
for what I undertook to prove, That the Church of Rome does command the Worship
of Relics.

That she does practice the Worshipping of Relics is what I have next to
show; but this may be dispatched in a few Words, since every body knows that
their People in the Church of Rome are not behind hand in practicing what their
Church commands about Relics: and I suppose that this will be granted me,
That what the Church commands, the People may very lawfully do; and that they
do practice in all their Popish Countries the Adoration of Relics.

I must then prove my Second Particular, That for the First five Centuries of
the Church, the Worship of Relics was neither commanded nor practiced by the
Primitive Church.

To prove that the Worship of Relics was not commanded during that time, we
need only to appeal to the Canons and Laws of the Four General Councils held
within the Fourth and Fifth Century, wherein not a Syllable is to be met with
about any such thing: and they of the Church of Rome are as well satisfied as
we, that there is nothing in those Councils for their purpose about Relics,
and therefore do not pretend to show any Command for the Worship of Images from
any of those Councils.

And that the Primitive Church did not practice any Worship of Relics during
that time, is as easy to show from the Generality of the Fathers, who were
utterly against Worshipping the Saints themselves, and consequently much more
against the Worshipping any of the Mortal Remains of those Saints. I will only
insist upon two, who lived in the beginning of the Fifth Century of the Church,
S. Austin to prove that they did not then worship the Saints themselves, and S.
Hierom to show that they did not worship the Saints Relics. Colimus ergo
Martyrs eo cultu dilectionis and societatis, quo and in hac vita coluntur
sancti homines Dei. Aug. c. Faust. l. 20. c. 21.


S. Austin in answer to Faustus the Manichee who had objected to the Orthodox
their Worshipping the Saints, shows him the Falseness and Silliness of his
Accusation, by telling him, that the Church did indeed worship the Martyrs, but
that it was merely such civil Worship as is paid to Holy Men while they are
alive; and that I am sure was never hitherto accused of being Religious Worship.

And for the Relics of the Saints, when Vigilantius had objected to several
in the Church (as S. Hierom represents it) a Worship of Relics: S. Hierom
with his usual vehemence falls upon him, and asks him first, who ever adored
the Martyrs? [A Question that can very easily be answered in our days without
the danger of being called Madmen for our pains, as Vigilantius was for even
thinking that any of the Church should be so foolish as to worship the Martyrs]
and then he tells him that They did not WORSHIP the Saints RELICS, and were
so far from it, that they did not Worship or Adore even the Sun it self Nos
autem NON dico Martyrum RELIQUIAS, sed ne Solemn quidem -- non Angelos, non
Archangelos -- COLIMUS and ADORAMUS. D. Hieron. advers. Vigilant. ad Riparium.
, nay not the Angels, nor the Archangels. Here we see S. Hierom confuting the
Accusation of Worshipping of Relics, by showing that the Church did not
worship the Sun it self, nor the Angels or Archangels themselves, which are
Creatures so much above, and more Glorious than the dead Remains of any Saint,
and therefore must needs be much further from the giving WORSHIP to the Saints
Relics.

Having thus proved these two things, that the Church of Rome does worship
Relics, and that the Primitive Church did not, we ought to conclude as to
this Point about Relics, that the Primitive Fathers were no Papists, but
Protestants, since they did declare against the Worship of Relics as much as
the Church of England does, and did detest the Worshipping of them as much as
we can.

There is one Great Mistake that the Compiler must be rectified in, before I
leave this Chapter about Relics, and that is from the Community of Actions
and Expressions to gather that the same thing was done by some of the Fathers
toward the Relics, that is done now in the Church of Rome: He cannot be
ignorant that most of the External Expressions of Respect are common to Civil
and Religious Worship, and yet that no Body is so wild as to conclude from
thence that Civil and Religious Worship are the same thing.

When Abraham bowed himself to the ground before the Children of Heth, he used
the very same Gesture that he was wont to make use of in his Worship of God,
and yet I hope our Compiler would not have it concluded from the same Gesture
used upon both those Occasions, either that Abraham, when he bowed to the
Children of Heth, paid Religious Worship unto them, or that he, using the same
Gesture in the Service of God, paid only a Civil Worship unto Him. And yet This
is all that he builds upon, when he is so earnest about the thing, and would
confound Civil and Religious Worship, by showing what no Body denies, that
several of the Outward Expressions of Civil and Religious Worship are the same.
Whereas, notwithstanding the Outward Gestures be the same, we do easily know
Religious from Civil Worship, by the Object to whom it is paid, and by the
Professions of them who pay it.

And by this we are able to decide and resolve that Scruple which the Compiler
would fain raise about the Matter of Relics. The Primitive Fathers did
declare that they were against giving any Religious Worship to Relics, and
therefore when we meet with any extraordinary Expressions or Actions among them
which might otherwise appear to be Religious, we are obliged to look upon them
only as Expressions of Civil Worship by reason of the Declaration so often made
by them, that they did not worship Relics. But for the same Gestures or
Actions used by the Church of Rome toward the Relics or Bodies of the
Saints, we are obliged upon the very same Reason to look upon them as
Expressions of a Religious Worship or Adoration, since She has prevented our
taking them in the other Sense, by declaring and decreeing in her Council of
Trent that the BODIES and RELICS of the SAINTS are to be WORSHIPPED or ADORED.

And further to let him see this by an Instance used by Himself, He urges that
they used to touch and kiss the Relics of the Martyrs, and shows it from
Gregory Nyssen, which was the highest Expression of Respect used then toward
Relics: Now how far this is from being Religious Worship, in them, or the
same Kiss from being but Civil Worship in the Church of Rome, I have already
abundantly cleared, from the Professions made about Relics by the Primitive
Fathers, and by the Church of Rome in her Council of Trent.

I have insisted the longer upon this Business about the Relics, because the
Compiler himself did; and have taken the more care to clear the whole Matter
about the Worship of Relics, because He took so much pains to disguise and
obscure it, and by confounding Civil and Religious Worship, to bear the
credulous Reader in hand that the Church of Rome and the Primitive Church are
exactly the same in their Respect to Relics: and that the Church of Rome does
no more pay a Religious Worship or Adoration to Relics, than the Primitive
Fathers did: the Vanity and Falsehood of all which I have fully displayed, that
so the Compiler being driven out of this Hold, and being made ashamed of such
groundless Delusions and Distinctions, may even fall into the Old Track of
defending Popery, and speak out fairly the Sense of their Church about the
Worship of Relics, and defend with the Angelical Doctor S. Thomas Aquinas,
and his Disciples, (who, Sabran the Jesuit tells us, are above One half of the
Divines of the Christian World) that THE RELICS of the SAINTS OUGHT TO BE
ADORED.

He next undertakes the business of Purgatory, and finding that I had
invincibly shown, that the Primitive Fathers, notwithstanding their Prayers for
the Faithful deceased, did believe, that they were at the same time in a state
of Bliss, of Comfort, of Peace, of Joy, and Light and Tranquillity, nay in
Heaven it self; every one of which is utterly inconsistent with the Condition
of Purgatory believed and taught by the Church of Rome; He hopes to salve all,
by granting what he could not deny of the Primitive Fathers believing the
Faithful deceased to be in such a Condition, and reconciling all this to the
Belief of Purgatory in his Church.

To this purpose he tells us, that the supposing those Souls, for which the
Fathers prayed, to be in a State of Joy and Comfort, does most nearly agree
with the present Practice and Doctrine of the Church of Rome. I am glad to hear
this, and now I perceive there is none of those torments and burnings in the
Case, with which the people used to be frighted out of their Wits themselves,
and to scare one another: but the unhappiness is, this is too good news to be
true; and I doubt we shall find by and by that the Romish Purgatory is the very
same place that it used to be thought, and that it is just as hot, and as
tormenting and intolerable at this very day as it was six hundred years ago,
when those lamentable shreeks were so often heard from the poor Souls in
Purgatory: However since I suppose our Compiler knows himself not to have been
so careful of his Life as to imagine he shall escape calling at Purgatory, I
cannot discommend his making Purgatory as easy as he can, and his representing
it to be just such a place as he would with all his heart find it, when he
comes thither.

He endeavors to prove this agreement from that Prayer in the Canon of the
Mass used in their Church, wherein they pray God to grant to those his faithful
Servants who rest in the sleep of Peace, a Place of Comfort, Light and Peace.
In answer to which I will only tell him here, that this Old-Prayer in the Canon
of the Mass is directly against the present Church of Rome in the business of
Purgatory, and against what the Compiler has positively asserted a little
after this about Prayer not being made for those in Bliss, or those in Hell,
but only for those who could be relieved by the Prayers of the Living; as I
shall by and by show. In the mean time I will consider what he further offers
to prove this Agreement; and this is no other than to tell us over again, that
the State of Purgatory is agreeable to that Prayer, and then to describe it, by
telling us very gravely, that in Purgatory there is a kind of Rest and Quiet,
where the Interior Powers of the Souls are well ordered and composed; the
Understanding settled in the Light of Faith, the Will inflamed with the Love of
God, the Imagination undisturbed, and secure Hopes of once enjoying God,
filling the Souls with a happy Resignation and Comfort.

And is not this very Comical stuff? Certainly, all that read it will wonder
whence this Man comes to have so very nice and exact an account of the State of
Purgatory, as to know how every one of the Faculties of our Soul are employed
there. One would think he had been there already himself, or that somebody has
slipped out thence, and instead of going straight to Heaven had come to Earth
again, to inform the Compiler how things stand there, and how every one is
employed there; which brings into my mind that Dialogue of Lucian, which gives
us just such another account of the State of the Dead: I must confess I cannot
read such things without an Indignation to see grave men Romancing about things
so serious; and though I can bear well enough Sir Thomas Moor's Accounts what
people do, and how they are taken up in his Vtopia, yet I cannot forgive any
Christian that will bring such Comical Accounts into our Religion: and for any
Man to write at the rate the Compiler does here, and to give such a formal
account of things for which he can have no grounds, nor reasons, nor any
probability or possibility (without a divine Revelation) of knowing any of the
things he so confidently affirms, is to make another Vtopia, and to ridicule
the Christian Religion to the World.

I cannot find that the Compiler makes the nature of their Purgatory to be any
thing else than the Longing desire of those in it of seeing and enjoying God,
which longing desire does give them a most afflicting Anguish; from which they
are capable of being delivered and relieved by the Prayers of their Friends on
Earth. And he concludes, that this is all that is required in our Profession of
Faith, in which it is said, I hold that there is a Purgatory, and that the Souls
there detained, are relieved by the Suffrages of the Faithful.

I know the Compiler too well to trust him in these things, wherein he has
taken a great deal of pains to no purpose in the World, since it is very easy
to demonstrate, that He and F. Alexandre, with the other Expositors of the New
Popery have quite run away from the true old doctrine of their Church about
Purgatory; that the true Purgatory of the Church of Rome is as inconsistent
with that State of Light, Tranquillity and Comfort, wherein the Primitive
Fathers supposed the Faithful to be, as Light is with Darkness, Torment with
Ease, and the most exquisite Pain with Pleasure.

And this is what I will now prove, that the Romish Purgatory is a place of
Corment, wherein the Souls of those who are in it, undergo the same pains that
the damned do, and that there is no other difference betwixt Hellfire and
Purgatory-Fire, but that the one is Eternal, and the other but Temporal: and
this I am sure will discover the absurdity of all that our Compiler has said
here in his Vindication, and ruin the pretended agreement betwixt the Primitive
Fathers State of Joy and Tranquillity, and the Purgatory of the Church of Rome.

The Council of Trent was so shy, or rather so cunning, about the business of
Purgatory, that she only decrees in general terms, That there is a Purgatory,
and that the Souls detained there do receive Relief by the Prayers of the
Faithful, but especially Council. Trident. Sessio 25. de Purgatorio.
by the acceptable Sacrifice of the Mass; without telling us one word further
of the State, Nature, Condition or Place of this Purgatory, or any other
Circumstances that might explain the Nature of it to them, who, notwithstanding
these general ambiguous words, are bound to believe it as much as the Article
of the Trinity: So that either there is no way of knowing what this Purgatory
is, or we must gather the knowledge of the nature and condition of it from the
best approved Writers or general sense of their Church about it.

I could not but smile, I must confess, to find the Compiler to be so very shy
in his Vindication, and to be so afraid of having any body believe that there
is any thing of Fire in the Case when he is describing the nature of Purgatory,
since though he had forgotten it, yet I had not, how in his Nubes Testium he
makes the greatest show for Purgatory with his PURGING FIRE out of Gregory
Nyssen, with his PURGATORY FIRE out of S. Basil, and with his Baptism of FIRE
after Death, out of Gregory Nazianzen; but now in his Vindication, He has put
all the Three Fires out, and all this because though they did agree well enough
with Places of Light, yet there were no ways possible of making 'em Places of
Comfort and Joy; and therefore they deserved to be put quite out.

Of all the Writers I ever met with, I never observed any that would plunge
himself so grievously as this poor Compiler will; though he set himself never so
warmly to prove any thing, nay to be as earnest for it as if the whole of
Christianity did depend upon it; yet if afterward he finds that the matter is
or may be turned upon him, then farewell this or that Opinion, and all the
quotations for it into the bargain; he wipes his Mouth, gets into another Box,
and then talks or writes as if he had never affirmed, nay not heard of any such
thing.

Well then, since the Compiler is for throwing away all his quotations out of
the Fathers to prove Purgatory was a FIRE, I cannot make use of them, since he
has put them all out: but must inquire among other people to see what they make
the Nature of Purgatory to be. There is none so able or so probable to help me
herein as Bellarmine; One of the greatest Men their Church ever had. The
Cardinal in his second Book about Purgatory, examining the Nature of Purgatory,
concludes thus, It is certain, that in Purgatory as well as in Hell, there is a
Punishment Certum est 4to, in Purgatorio, sicut etiam in Inferno esse poenam
Ignis, sive iste Ignis accipiatur proprie, sive Metaphorice, and sive
significet poenam sensus, sive damni, ut quidam volunt -- ex Patrum
Testimoniis. Omnes enim IGNEN appellabant Purgatorii poenam. Bellarm. de
Purgatorio, l. 2. c. 10.
of FIRE. Whether this Fire be taken properly, or Metaphorically, and whether
it signify the Pain of sense, or of loss, as some will have it. This he did
gather, as he tells us immediately after in the same Chapter, from the
Testimonies of the Fathers: for ALL of them (says He) did call the Punishment
of Purgatory FIRE.

Here we find Bellarmine determining that Purgatory-Fire, and Hellfire, are
the very same by Nature: and the Title of his next Chapter is Ignem Purgatorii
esse Corporeum, that the FIRE of Purgatory is CORPOREAL, for the proof of
which, Idem ibid. l. 2. c. 11.
He urges, that it is Communis sententia Theologorum, the Common Opinion of
their Divines, that Purgatory-Fire is True and Real Fire, and of the same kind
with our Elementary Fire.

I have chosen thus to give Bellarmine's words in this Controversy, because he
does not urge his own sense or Thoughts only about the Nature of Purgatory, but
insists upon it, and tells us, that it is the COMMON JUDGMENT of their DIVINES,
that Purgatory-Fire is true real Elementary Fire: as before he had delivered as
a thing CERTAIN, that Purgatory-Fire and Hellfire are the same in kind.

But I need not content my self with Bellarmine and the Common Consent of the
Divines of the Church of Rome to prove that the Romish Purgatory is a Place of
Torments by Fire: I have better evidence for it, and such as our Compiler, nor
any of the New Expositors of Popery dare not refuse, if they will allow One of
their General Councils to be of as much Authority among them as another. In the
Account we have of the General Council of Florence, we find the Latins
continually contending for a Purgatory-Fire.

Thus in the History of what did immediately precede the First Session of this
Council at Ferrara (from whence, by reason of the Plague, it was removed to
Florence) we find a select number of twelve Latins and twelve Greeks, appointed
to meet, and debate of the chief points in Controversy betwixt the Greek and
Roman Church. The point about Purgatory was the first debated, where the Latins
at first word told their Churches sense, that by Purgatory they meant a Purging
FIRE, and throughout the whole debate we find them still using the term
Purgatory-Fire for to express their Churches sense about the Nature of
Purgatory: the Greeks are perfectly against there being any such thing as a
Purgatory-Fire; and their Opinions are distinctly set down in the Preliminary
Acts of that Council, which I will transcribe hither for to show, not only that
the Romans did believe Purgatory to be Fire, but also to let the World see,
that the Compiler, though he was for the Church of Rome in his Nubes Testium, is
since run over (in his Vindication) to the Opinion of the Greeks about
Purgatory.

The sense of the Latin Church is thus delivered, The Italians do acknowledge a
Fire even during this present World, and a Purging by Fire; They own also a
FIRE in the World (...), etc. Council. Florent. p. 28. Edit. Cossart.
to come, but not a Purgatory Fire, but an Eternal One: and that during this
World the Souls are purged by FIRE, and delivered thence [sooner or later]
according to every ones Sins, so that He which has committed many Sins is not
delivered thence till after he has been a long time purged; but he that was
guilty of but few sins, was the sooner absolved, the Church also (as has
already been said) helping them; and [lastly] that all are PURGED by FIRE.
Wherefore the Italians do take this FIRE to be TEMPORARY during this present
World, but ETERNAL in the World to come, and THIS TEMPORARY FIRE they name
PURGATORY.

After this the sense of the Greeks about it is immediately set down in these
very Words: But the Greeks think that there is NO FIRE but in the World to
come, [tho' they do own] a temporary Punishment of Souls [which they make to
consist herein] that the Souls of Sinners go into a Dark Place, into a Place of
Grief, where they are grieved for a time, and punished with the want of Divine
Light [or as our Compiler has expressed it, of seeing and enjoying God] but by
the Prayers and Sacrifices of the Priests, and by Alms they are purged, that
is, they are delivered out of that obscure Place and Affliction, and are
dismissed thence, but not in the least purged by FIRE, for the Greeks do not
own any Operation of Fire here with the Italians, but merely that Prayer,
Intercession, and Alms do operate and obtain that Deliverance.

After the setting down of both the Latins and Greeks Opinions in this manner,
I will end this with the Conclusion that was placed there in the Acts of that
Council immediately after them. This then is the Difference betwixt them; the
Greeks say there is a Punishment and Affliction, and a Place for this
Punishment, but that it is NOT BY FIRE: but the Italians [on the other hand]
say (...). Council. Florent. p. 28.
, that this Punishment and Purgation is BY FIRE.

This Account of the Sense of the Roman Church is so plain for a Purgatory
Fire, which differs only from Hell Fire in that the one is Temporary and during
this World, but the other Eternal in the World to come, that it would be very
vain to offer at any thing for the further clearing of it here: I must only not
forget to take notice of the Confidence of the Compiler, who will very
magisterially have the Greeks and the Latins to differ chiefly herein about a
Name; and is angry at me for saying the Greeks disown any such Place as
Purgatory: whereas it is as plain as the Sun, that the Greeks do disown
Purgatory, as it signifies a Place of Torment, wherein Souls are purged by
Fire, which he cannot but know was the Sense in which I used the word, and the
whole Church of Rome too, excepting a few Expositors and Representers, who
since they cannot defend the Doctrines and Practices of their Church, are
running away quite from them, and setting up a New Popery, which they think
they can defend.

The Passages I have produced out of the Council of Florence it self do
unanswerably show what the Latins do mean by Purgatory; and we find after all
the Debates and Contests in the Council that the Pope Eugenius insisted mostly
upon having it granted that those faithful who dyed in the state of the
Penitents, do GO into a PURGATORY FIRE, and after having been PURGED there, are
removed to the Society of them Council. Flor. Sessio 25. p. 494
who enjoy the Vision of God.

Another Authority I am able to produce, which if it be not equal, yet is next
to that of a General Council, from the Catechism ad Parochos, drawn up by the
Order of the Council of Trent.

Tho the Council it self was so sly about the business of Purgatory, yet the
Persons who drew up the Catechism did see it necessary to speak out more
plainly the Sense of their Church about the Nature of Purgatory; and therefore
upon the Fifth Article in the Apostles Creed about the Descent into Hell, when
they come to give the various Senses in which the word Hell is used, they tell
us it is first taken for the Receptacle of the Damned, wherein the Souls of
them are tormented with an Eternal and Unquenchable Fire. They next will have
it to signify Purgatory, and these are their own Words. Furthermore there is a
PURGATORY FIRE, in which the Souls of the Pious are Praeterea est PURGATORIUS
IGNIS, in quo Piorum Animae ad definitum tempus cruciatae expiantur, ut iis in
aeternam Patriam ingressus patere possit, in quam nihil coinquinatum
ingreditur. Catechism. ad Parochos, Pars 1. p. 50. Edit. Lugd. 1676.
TORMENTED FOR A SET TIME, in order to their being expiated, that so an
Entrance into their Eternal Country may lie open unto them, into which nothing
polluted does enter. And to let the World see they did not give their own Sense
herein, but that of their Church, they quote in the Margin the Council of Trent
it self for it, in the 25th Session about Purgatory: and tell us immediately
after, that Holy Councils [by which they must mean, that of Florence as well as
that of Trent] have declared for the Truth of this Doctrine, that it is
confirmed by the Testimonies of Scripture, and Apostolical Tradition: and
therefore the Parish Priest is to treat more diligently, and more frequently of
Purgatory, because we (say the Authors of the Catechism) are fallen into those
times, wherein Men do not endure SOUND DOCTRINE.

If the Times were thought so bad, when that Catechism was drawn up, what must
be thought of ours, when not only the Protestants will not endure this SOUND
DOCTRINE, but the Present Writers of the Church of Rome, the Bishop of Meaux,
his Vindicator, and the Compiler will no more endure this SOUND DOCTRINE of a
PURGATORY FIRE than the Heretics, but cry out so often that the Church does
not believe, that the Church does not teach a Purgatory FIRE. Whereas it is as
evident as that there is Day and Night, that this Catechism drawn up by the
Order of the Council of Trent, and confirmed by Pope Pius the Fifth, does not
only here deliver it as Sound Doctrine, that there is a PURGATORY FIRE WHEREIN
THE SOULS of the FAITHFUL are TORMENTED FOR A SET TIME, but in the next Page,
speaking of the Souls of the Faithful which departed this Life before Christ's
Resurrection, says, that they went not to Heaven, which was not opened to any
before Christ's Death and Resurrection, but that they were carried either into
Abraham 's Bosom, ( or as it NOW happens to those, who have something to
discharge when they dye) were expiated or purged by the FIRE OF PURGATORY.

But I have a better evidence than all these to prove, that by Purgatory the
Church of Rome does certainly mean a Place of Torment, wherein those Souls that
are detained in it undergo Fiery-Torments which differ no otherwise from
Hell Torments, but only in the Duration of them, that Purgatory Torments are
but for a time, but the other are everlasting: and it is no other than the
Office for the Dead in the Romish Missal.

In the Mass for the Dead the Offertory runs thus, O Lord Jesus Christ, King of
Glory! DELIVER the SOULS of all the FAITHFUL DECEASED from the PAINS OF HELL,
and from the BOTTOMLESS PIT: Deliver them Domine Jesu Christ, Rex Gloriae,
libera animas omnium fidelium defunctorum de Poenis Inferni, and de profundo
lacu: libera eas de Ore Leonis, ne absorbeat eas Tartarus, ne cadant in
Obscurum: sed signifer Sanctus Michael repraesentet eas in Lucem Sanctam: quam
olim Abrahae promisisti, and semini ejus. Missa pro Defunctis in Missali
Romano, fol. 51. Edit. Paris. in 8o. 1582.
from the MOUTH of the LION, that HELL may not SWALLOW THEM UP FOR EVER, and
that they may not fall into outer Darkness; but let thy Holy Angel Michael
convey them unto that Heavenly Light, which thou have promised of old to
Abraham and to his Seed.

This is the service of the Church of Rome at this very day for the Dead, the
only enquiry now to be made is, who these are for whom the Church of Rome is so
solicitous to have them delivered out of the Pains of Hell, and out of the
Mouth of the Lion, etc. And who can I better inquire of than our Compiler
himself? He shall be the Man, that the World may see how very fairly I deal
with my Adversaries. This Prayer then must be put up for one of these three
sorts of men, either for the Souls who are in Heaven, or for the Souls who are
in Hell, or for some Souls who are neither in Heaven, nor Hell, but in a middle
State or Place which their Church does call Purgatory.

Is this Prayer therefore used for the Souls in Heaven? No, says our Compiler,
for it is needless to pray for those that are in Heaven; there being no want
there at all, no want of Relief, of Refreshment [and consequently no
Hell Torments undergone by any Souls there] of Pardon; there being no Guilt
there of Sins. Is it for the Souls in Hell? No, replies the Compiler again, it
is as fruitless to pray for those in Hell, that State being wholly
irreversible: So that by his help we have light upon the Souls that are prayed
for there, and those are the Souls in Purgatory, which according to this
Prayer, undergo their Hell Torments, and are in a Condition nothing different
from the damned but merely in the Duration of their Pains, these Souls torments
being but temporary, but those of the damned eternal. And for the Condition of
the Place in which these miserable Souls are, we find it here represented in
this Prayer as the same with Hell, and we meet in this short Prayer with all
the Terms by which Hell is described to us in the word of God; so that there is
no danger of our mistaking the sense of the Church of Rome about Purgatory,
since we find it so plainly set forth in her Office for the Souls in it, as a
Place of Fiery Torments.

However to put this thing without the possibility of a Reply; that the
Compiler may see that it is not I alone who gather thus much out of that
Prayer, I will give the Reader an account of Cardinal Capisucchi's Opinion in
his 5th Controversy about the Words of this very Prayer which I have made use
of, and put down above.

The Cardinal first puts down the Opinion of them who look upon that Prayer as
offered up for those that are in Hell, who may come to be delivered thence as
Trajan the Heathen Emperor is said to have been: but This he refuses as most
false and erroneous upon the reasons commonly given in this Case. He next puts
down their Opinion that will have it to relate to those who are just a dying
and drawing on: but this Opinion he says is generally rejected, not only
because those that are only drawing on cannot be, with any propriety of Speech,
called the Souls of the Dead, but because the Custom of the Church is to use
this Prayer for those Souls which have many years ago left the Body. After
which He concludes, that this Prayer is used for those that are in Purgatory,
and gives us this Exposition of the Words of the Prayer, Deliver, O Lord, the
Souls of all the Faithful Deceased from the Pains of Hell, that is, from
PURGATORY-FIRE, WHICH IS HELD TO BE ALTOGETHER THE SAME WITH HELLFIRE, and
from the Bottomless-Pit, and from the Mouth of the Lion, that is, from the
Prison hid under Juxta haec singula illius Orationis verba exponi possunt, nam
dicitur, Domine, libera animas omnium fidelium defunctorum de poenis Inferni;
id est, a PURGATORIO IGNE, qui IDEM prorsus esse perhibetur, atque IGNIS
INFERNI, and de profundo lacu, de Ore Leonis; a Carcere nimirum sub Terram
abdito, ubi detentae expurgantur animae piorum. Ne absorbeat eas Tartarus: hoc
est ne amplius and diutius eas profundi illius Carceris Cavernae and vincula
remorentur, nec Inferni poenae tanquam fauces quaedam belluae immanis, saevae
and truculentae detineant; Unde IGNEM PURGATORIUM, cum sit IDEM qui IGNIS
INFERNI, appellat Ecclesia Tartarum. Ne cadant in Obscurum; id est, ne
obscurum, quas cadentes excepit, longius detineat. Fr. Raimund Capisucchi
Controversiae Theolog. selectae. Controversia 5ta p. 237. Edit. Romae 1677.
the Earth, wherein the Souls of the Faithful are detained to be purged; that
HELL may not swallow them up for Ever: that is, that the Receptacles and Bands
of that deep Prison may not stay them further or any longer: nor the PAINS OF
HELL, as the Jaws of some fierce, cruel and savage Beast detain them: Whereupon
the Church does call PURGATORY-FIRE Hell, because Purgatory-Fire and Hellfire
is the same; that they may not fall into outer darkness; that is, that this
Obscure Place may no longer detain the Souls which it receives falling into it.

Here is the Interpretation of a Great Cardinal of the Church of Rome now
alive, and which is more, the Chief Licenser of all Divinity Books at Rome, as
Master of the sacred Palace; one of the qualifications for which place
certainly is to understand the Faith and Doctrines of the Church of Rome. Here
we meet with him explaining that Prayer in the Mass for the Dead, as relating
to Purgatory, and calling it over and over again a place of Torment,
Purgatory-Fire, and declaring it to be the same with Hellfire.

I took the pains to peruse and transcribe that large passage about the
Exposition of this Prayer hither, because I could not call it to mind without a
secret Indignation, that this Cardinal Capisucchi, but two years before the
Printing of this Book (which was not then first written, but Reprinted) was one
of those who Licensed and so much commended the Bishop of Condom's Exposition,
in which we find an account of Purgatory perfectly inconsistent with what the
Cardinal had written in his Controversies.

In the Bishop of Condom's Exposition, we find these expressions about
Purgatory. This is what the Council of Trent proposes to our Belief, touching
the Souls detained in Purgatory, without determining Exposition of the Doctrine
of the Catholic Church. By the Bishop of Condom, p. 15.
in WHAT Their PAINS consists, or many other such like things; concerning which
this holy Council demands great moderation, blaming those who divulge what is
uncertain or suspected. Such is the innocent, and holy DOCTRINE of the
CATHOLIC CHURCH touching Satisfactions.

But for all Cardinal Capisucchi's Licensing and approving this passage in that
Exposition, He himself had written the direct contrary, when he makes the Pains
of Purgatory to be by Fire, and makes Hellfire and Purgatory-Fire to be the
SAME; and not only knew this to be, but published that it was the Faith of
their Church that does in that Prayer for the Dead call Purgatory Hell, because
Purgatory-Fire and Hell Fire were the very same.

All the defense that can be made for Cardinal Capisucchi, must be, that the
Bishop of Condom's words were restrained to the Council of Trent, which Council
it is certain did not determine any thing about what the Purgatory pains
consisted in; but this can by no means excuse him, since it is false that the
Bishop of Condom's words are confined to that Council, for he just after the
mention of the Council says, that what he had set down there about
Satisfactions [in this World, or in Purgatory] was the innocent and holy
Doctrine of the CATHOLIC CHURCH; which thing Cardinal Capisucchi did not only
know in his Conscience to be false, but had written the contrary to it, which I
suppose he is willing should be thought the truer of the two.

But granting that the Bishop of Condom's words had been restrained wholly to
the Council of Trent; Cardinal Capisucchi ought not to have Licensed or
approved that Bishop's Exposition, if he would have approved himself a sincere
Man: since he could not but know that this passage of the Bishop of Condom
about Purgatory was a perfect Juggle, and altogether unbecoming a Christian,
much more a Bishop; for though the Council had been so reserved about the nature
of the Pains in Purgatory, yet he knew too well that their Church, their
Catholic Church had plainly and fully determined about the nature of those
Purgatory Pains in her Office for the Dead, by which she had spoken her sense
intelligibly enough to the very meanest Capacities, that those pains are by
FIRE, by FIRE which is the SAME with HELLFIRE.

I will urge this thing no further, but only pray to God, that those great men
may repent of such unwarrantable actions, and of such arts which are altogether
a dishonor to our Holy Religion. I think I have very fully shown what I did
undertake for upon this business, to wit, that the Romish Purgatory is a place
of Torment, wherein the Souls of those who are in it, undergo the same pains
that the damned do, and that there is no other difference betwixt Hellfire and
Purgatory-Fire, but that the One is Eternal, and the other but Temporal.

Having shown all this so effectually from their approved Writers, from the
Council of Florence, from the Catechism ad Parochos, and from the Office for
the Dead in their Romish Missal, it would be the veriest loss of Paper, and the
greatest affront to Readers of any sense, to set formally here to the showing
how inconsistent this Romish Purgatory is with the Opinions of the Primitive
Fathers about the State of the Deceased Faithful, whom they believed to be
(when they prayed for them) in a State of Comfort, Joy and Tranquillity; if our
Compiler be not convinced also by what I have proved here, that there is really
no more agreement betwixt their Purgatory in the Church of Rome, and the State
of Bliss and Comfort of the Primitive Fathers, than there is between Light and
Darkness, betwixt Torment and Pleasure; I must tell him that I will never have
any further to do with an Adversary that is obstinate and resolute not to be
overcome; and therefore resolved not to be persuaded. I question not but this
account of Purgatory that I have given from such unquestionable Authority in
their Church, will no little discompose the Compiler, not only because it will
ruin all he contended for about Purgatory in his Vindication, but for a nearer
concern, because it shows, that the Compiler in giving such a contrary account
of Purgatory in his Vindication, either did not know the Doctrine of his own
Church about Purgatory, or did dissemble it, the first of which makes him
unable, the second unfit to write about these things, since Ignorance or
Insincerity are singly sufficient Bars against any Man's gaining Credit, that
will notwithstanding set up for a Writer.

Notwithstanding that which I have already demonstrated about the Romish
Purgatory's Inconsistency with any Opinions of the Primitive Fathers touching
the State of the Faithful deceased, ought justly to supersede all further
Controversy with the Compiler about Purgatory; yet since he offers something
further in Defense of himself and his Church, I will consider it briefly. He
says the Primitive Fathers did believe three States of Men gone off the Stage
of this World, and that the middle State (to wit, of them who were neither very
bad, nor very good) did suffer Temporal Punishment after their Death in order
to their thorough Purgation. We enquire therefore from what Fathers he proves
this, his Stock is small, and S. Austin is his only Author for all this, whom,
of all the Primitive Fathers, he ought least to have insisted upon, since S.
Austin is on every side, and is in for almost every of the different Opinions
about the State of the Dead, as I could easily show here, were it worth while.
We grant S. Austin did talk of three States of Men after this Life; but must
tell our Compiler withal that S. Austin was the First Father that begun this
Distinction, and therefore it ought to be of no consideration herein,
especially since it apparently contradicts the Doctrines of the Elder Fathers,
who did look upon the Dead in the two Conditions only of Good Men, who were
carried into Abraham's Bosom, and Wicked Men, who were hurried into the Place
of Torments. This I made sufficiently apparent in my Answer to the Nubes
Testium, particularly from S. Chrysostom, whose Third Homily upon the Epistle
to the Philippians, does evidently divide the Dead into Two States only; the
Righteous whom he makes to go, immediately after they have left this world, to
God, and to be possessed of Crowns and eternal Rest; and the Wicked, whom he
places among the Damned, and looks upon their Judgments alike irreversible. But
as S. Austin first talked of Three Conditions of Men after Death, so we own that
he talked of Temporal Pains after this Life, for the middle Condition of those
departed Souls; yet all this will do the Church of Rome no Service for her
Pargatory, since S. Austin is not only so very doubtful about any such Temporal
Pains after this Life, which plainly shows it then to have been no Doctrine of
the Catholic Church, but his Temporal Pains are wholly different from those of
the Romish Purgatory.

It is impossible to express any thing more doubtfully than he did this,
Enchiridion ad Laurentium c. 69.
That there may be such a thing (speaking of this his Notion about Temporal
Pains for some after this Life) is not incredible, and whether it be so or no,
it may be questioned, and either be found out, or lie concealed. And is not
this a pleasant Account of that thing for which the Church of Rome pretends to
the Tradition of the Catholic Church, and told the Greeks, at the Council of
Florence, that she had this Doctrine delivered to her from hand to hand
successively from S. Peter and S. Paul.

But these Temporal Pains S. Austin here spoke of are wholly different from
those of the Romish Purgatory: that the Pains of the Romish Purgatory are by
Fire, I have just now proved, whereas S. Austin's are no more (as is apparent
from the preceding Chapter) than an intense Grief with which Men are afflicted
or burnt for the loss of those things which they -- Salvus est quidem, sic
tamen quasi per ignem. Quia urit eum rerum dolor, quas dilexerat amissarum.
Idem ibid. c. 68.
loved very much here on Earth.

The last Argument our Compiler has for his Purgatory, which is rather
insinuated than urged barefaced, is, That since it is allowed the Fathers did
pray for the Dead, it must be only for them who want Relief and are in
Purgation, and neither for them who are in Heaven, nor for them who are in
Hell, for the former of which they are needless, and for the other fruitless.
And this is what F. Alexandre, our Compiler's Master, does speak out plainly.

But to ruin this Conclusion, I will prove these two things, That the Fathers
did pray for those they believed to be in Heaven; and That, secondly, they
prayed for those in Hell.

For the Proof of my first I will make use of our Compiler's help, who brings
in S. Ambrose praying for the Soul of the Emperor Theodosius, in his Nubes
Testium, and will, I suppose, still yield it me, that the Father did pray for
the Emperor's Soul. Now that S. Ambrose did at the same time believe that that
Emperor's Soul was in Heaven, is evident beyond contradiction, since he does,
in the same Oration, expressly affirm that the Emperor's Soul was then placed
in the Heavenly Jerusalem, which all People own to be Heaven it self. I could
prove further from the ancient Liturgies, that the Prayers of the Church were
made for the best of Men, for the Martyrs themselves, whom they of the Church
of Rome suppose to be in Heaven: but I need not stay to do it, however I will,
to take notice of that Evasion which S. Austin has taught them; who looking
upon it as an absurd thing to pray for the Martyrs who were fitter to pray for
us, and yet finding the Liturgies of the Church directly practicing it, had no
other way to answer the Practice of the Church, but by saying (as our Compiler
quotes him) that the Prayers of the Church, when put up for such as Martyrs,
were Thanksgivings, but for others were a Propitiation: which with all
Reverence toward S. Austin is a Fineness of too bold, and too groundless a
Nature, since had the Church intended only to praise God for the Martyrs, I
question not but she would have made her Intentions plain enough, by putting
down the Praises for the Martyrs as distinctly and as properly, as she would
the Prayers for others. I must not forget to prove this also from that Prayer
in the Canon of the Mass urged by our Compiler, wherein they pray not only for
those Servants of God, who have gone before them with the Seal of Faith, and
rest in the Sleep of Peace, but for ALL WHO REST in CHRIST, which does
comprehend all, even Martyrs as well as Saints, or Men of Lesser Sanctity, and
as it includes Martyrs, it prays for those whom the Compiler and his whole
Church believe to be in Heaven. But this Prayer is no more consistent with the
Doctrines of the present Writers of the Church of Rome, than it is with the
present Purgatory of that Church, which supposes the Faithful deceased to
endure Fiery Torments in order to Expiation, whereas this very Old Prayer
supposes them to rest in the Sleep of Peace.

That they prayed also even for the Damned is plain, from S. Chrysostom, who in
his above-quoted Third Homily upon the Philippians, did advise such Prayers
upon this Persuasion, that though they could not obtain a Release for them from
Hell, yet they would procure for them some Alleviation of Torments, some small
Relief: and S. Austin himself seems to be for the same thing, when he speaks of
the Prayers of the Living profiting so much, as either Aut ad hoc prosunt, ut
sit plena Remissio, aut certe tolerabilior fiat ipsa Damnatio. D. August.
Enchirid. ad Laur. c. 110.
to procure a complete and full Remission, or that their Damnation should be
made more tolerable.

Our Compiler cavils (before he leaves this Point) very rudely at me for saying
S. Chrysostom only advises the Oblation of Alms for the Increase of Happiness
to his Son's Soul; and does very scornfully ask me what means S. Chrysostom's
bidding him also pray for the discharge of his Son's Guilt? I can answer him
without such rudeness in a very few Words, That the Increase of Glory was the
sole Intention of his praying for the discharge of the Guilt of Sin: and that
the latter was wholly designed for the former.

Thus I have got through that Chapter about Purgatory, and have fixed all that
I had proved before in my Answer to the Nubes Testium, that the Fathers neither
knew of nor taught any such Purgatory as the Church of Rome does, and therefore
since they believed the Romish Purgatory no more than we of the Church of
England, they are no more Papists than we are in this thing.

When he is come to the next great Controversy about Transubstantiation, he was
resolved to divert himself, and his Reader, and in order to it by perverting of
my sense to make himself sport. He pretends to be mightily at a loss what I
would have the Doctrine of our Church to be about the Eucharist: and brings me
in first saying, Christ's Body is really present in the Eucharist, then that
it is the Body of Christ Figuratively only, but within four lines after, that it
is the Flesh and Blood of Christ ABSOLUTELY, without any addition of really or
figuratively: yet that in the next page it is not Christ's True Natural Body,
but his Figurative or Symbolical Body. So that he says, I play backward and
forward in declaring the Doctrine of our Church, and make the Sacrament to be
really Christ's Body, and yet to be Figuratively only (that is, really not) his
Body.

But does this Man believe himself in all this? Does he from his heart think
that I am guilty of all this confusion and contradiction about this thing? I am
well enough assured, that no Man of the least sense does find such stuff in my
Book it self, and therefore that the Compiler did not, but was forced to abuse
my sense, and falsify my words, in order to his ridiculing of them and me. For
as to the first passage about Christ's Body being really present in the
Eucharist, it was occasioned by my telling Him, that the Controversy betwixt
the Church of England and Rome, is not about a Real Presence, which the Church
of England did believe, when she looks upon the Consecrated Elements not to be
the Body and Blood of Christ themselves, but to be appointed by God to exhibit
to every faithful Receiver (not to every Receiver) the Body and Blood of
Christ. But for the Consecrated Elements themselves, she believes them to be
Figuratively only Christ's Body and Blood: the Reason of which I so often
inculcated, because BREAD and WINE CAN NO OTHERWISE BE THE BODY and BLOOD of
CHRIST, AND BREAD STILL AT THE SAME TIME; and therefore our Compiler ought to
blush at his great disingenuity when he brings me in contradicting those very
words within four lines of them, and says, I grant there, that It (that is, the
Sacrament) is the Flesh and Blood of Christ ABSOLUTELY, WITHOUT ANY ADDITION of
Really or Figuratively: whereas any Man else would have carried my meaning
along with him for so short a way as four lines, had I said so absolutely,
without any Addition of Really or Figuratively: but this is absolutely false,
for immediately after I had granted, as to Justin Martyr's words, that the
Consecrated Food was the Flesh and Blood of Christ, to prevent any such
misinterpretation of my words, as the Compiler would make notwithstanding it, I
added these very words: However to corroborate what we said above [which was,
that the Blessed Bread is the Flesh of Christ, but Figuratively only] it is
evident to a Demonstration, that This Consecrated Food was still Bread, and NOT
TRANSUBSTANTIATED into the Natural Body and Blood of Christ.

Did I here then say it was the Flesh of Christ absolutely, without any
Restriction or Explication of my words and sense? Is this the Candor that
becomes a Scholar? Is this the Sincerity that becomes a Christian? Is this the
Veracity of a Priest of the Living God? Well, Well, If this be answering an
Adversary, I perceive it is no matter whether it be true or false which we
write, nor whether it be right or wrong which we assert, so that we secure our
main design of ridiculing or abusing our Adversary.

That I might state the Controversy betwixt us and Rome aright in this great
point, I showed our Compiler that it was whether upon Consecration the Bread
and Wine were transubstantiated into that very Body and Blood of Christ which
was nailed and poured out upon the Cross, or whether after Consecration there
is no other substance there but the Natural Body and Blood of Christ. This I
told him we expect they should prove, and that it is to no purpose to bring us
only passages of the Fathers to show, that they gave to the Consecrated
Elements the Name and Appellation of the Body and Blood of Christ, and that
they said of the Elements, that they were Consecrated, made, or turned into the
Body and Blood of Christ, since we can demonstrate to them, that by the Body
and Blood of Christ which the Fathers said the Elements were made, they meant
always that Body of Christ, which (in contradistinction to his Natural Body
which he took from the Virgin Mary, and his Mystical Body, which is his Church)
we call Christ's Symbolical, or Figurative Body.

And therefore Our Compiler is miserably out in his Vindication, when he thinks
to carry his Cause by repeating only what he had put down more at large in his
Nubes Testium, and by supposing the very words of Body and Blood of Christ,
sufficient Reply to all I had said in my Answer to the Nubes. I did not say
only this means, and that signifies only so and so, as he would represent me to
do in answer to any thing that did seem strong against us, but did all along
give my Reasons for such things, till to repeat them further to the same
Objections, would have been more tedious to the Reader than me.

He talks as if the Fathers were clearly in their possession, and wholly on
their side, and therefore that he need not much concern himself in confuting
some untoward passages out of the Fathers, urged by us against
Transubstantiation, since he supposes the Fathers are on their side, and would
not contradict themselves: else surely we should find Him answering fairly to
our Objections, as I had done to all his. But this is not the Man's way, though
he is desirous it should be his Adversaries: but for himself he writes as if
the Controversy had not made one step forwards betwixt us two.

But to let the World be judge also what a sort of an Adversary he is, I will
very briefly run over his first Testimonies in the Nubes, and my answer to
them, and show how He does reply. To the passage from S. Ignatius, that the
Eucharist was the Body of Christ, I answered that it was, but that it could be
Figuratively only so, since Bread could no otherwise be the Body of Christ and
Bread still; to this he makes no Reply. In Answer to the passage from the
Council of Nice about not minding the Bread and Wine before us, but raising up
our minds by Faith to consider the Lamb of God offered by the Priests without
shedding of Blood, I showed him it meant only that Communicants should by Faith
represent to themselves the offering of the Lamb, and that had he but
transcribed on the rest of that passage out of his Master Alexandre, every one
would have seen at first blush, that by the precious Body and Blood of the Lamb
was not meant Christ's Natural Body, but his Figurative only, since the
Communicants are advised to take but a small portion of his Body and Blood; and
that though it is sense to talk of receiving little or much of the Elements, yet
that it is not sense to talk of taking a little or much of the True Natural
Body of Christ. To all which there is no Reply: and Reason good, since there
was not room for any.

And when, in the next place, to explain a very obscure Passage in S. Hilary, I
had produced a place that proved he did not believe any Annihilation or
Transubstantiation of the Elements, since he says it was Wine which they drank
in the first Institution of the Eucharist, the Compiler had nothing to reply
with, and therefore runs back, and makes much ado with the obscure Passage.

In answer to S. Cyril, he was told, that that very Passage (wherein the Bread
is said by Christ to be his Body) was proof sufficient that Cyril did not
believe Transubstantiation, since, as I had urged before, Bread can be Christ's
Body only Figuratively. To this he gives no manner of Reply; but when I had
further answered that Cyril had spoken as lofty things of the Chrism-Oyl, as he
does of the Eucharist, and that no Body, for all that did believe that the
Chrism-Oyl was Transubstantiated, though he said it was no longer bare or common
Oil; he asks me whether Cyril said that Oil is changed into the Body and Blood
of Christ? A Question so ridiculous, that I would forgive no Body the asking it
me that had three Grains of Sense. S. Cyril, if this Compiler knew any thing of
Him, does compare the Change in the Eucharist to this in the Chrism-Oyl, but I
would feign know how the one Change does illustrate or prove the other; when
according to the wise Masters of the Church of Rome, the one is changed in its
very Substance, but the other is not. It is a tedious thing to have to do with
People that know nothing of the Fathers themselves, but by a little Quotation,
which they make such a fluttering with, and as much noise as if they had read
them through, and understood them as thoroughly.

To his next Authorities from Gregory Nyssen about the Body of Christ being
received into our stomach, and making our Bodies Immortal by the Dispersion of
the Sacrament into our several parts in order to their being cured of that
poison which had affected every part, and made them Mortal. I showed him that
this was directly against them, since this nourishing of our Bodies in a strict
and proper sense cannot, without Blasphemy, be attributed to the Natural Body
and Blood of Christ. All the Reply he makes to this, is to ask, What need of
nourishing here in a strict and proper sense? My Answer is very ready, because
this was the general opinion of the Fathers, That our Bodies are nourished with
the Sacramental Body and Blood of Christ. This I did abundantly clear in my
Expostulatory Letter to Mr. Sclater of Putney, and made it the Instance of my
Second Corollary against Transubstantiation in that Book, Veteres Vindicati. p.
93, 94.
that to attribute a nourishing of our Bodies to the Sacramental Body and Blood
of Christ does altogether exclude their being Transubstantiated into the
Natural Body and Blood of Christ: and that the Fathers did attribute such a
Nourishment of our Bodies to them, I proved from Justin Martyr, who did assert
in plain terms, That our Flesh and Blood are nourished by the Consecrated
Elements being changed into our Substance; from Irenaeus and Tertullian, That
our Flesh is fed and nourished with the Body and Blood of Christ. I proved it
from Origin, who says, That the Eucharist, as to its Material Part, goes into
the Belly and is cast out into the Draught: from Isidore of Sevil, from
Rhathramn, and from our Saxon Paschal Homily, which proves that the Eucharist
is corruptible, for that it may be broke into several Pieces, grinded by the
Teeth, and cast out into the Draught. I will add to these but one other Proof
from Rabanus Maurus, who lived in the Ninth Century, and does not only tell us,
That the Sacrament is made to nourish our Bodies Sacramentum enim in ali mentum
corporis redigitur. -- Sicut ergo in nos Id convertitur, cum Id manducamus and
bibimus, sic and nos in Corpus Christi convertimur, dum obedienter and pie
vivimus. Raban. Maur. de Institutione Clericorum, l. 1. c. 31. in Tom. 6. Edit.
Colon. 1627.
; and that as it is converted into us, when we eat and drink it, so we are
converted into Christ's Body, when we live in a Godly Obedience: but he speaks
of it in the Poenitential (or Epistle, as Baluzius calls it) to Heribaldus as a
thing not at all questioned that the Sacrament, after it is received into our
Bodies, is consumed, and cast out into the Draught: Rabani Liber Poenitentialis
ad Heribaldum. c. 33.
which he had Reason enough to think, since, as he speaks in the same Chapter,
he did not believe that Body of Christ to be the same with the Body which was
born of the Virgin Mary.

And upon this I will beg leave to make a Digression to discover a double wrong
done to this great Archbishop, by the Romish Publishers of his Works at Colen,
1627.

Finding the Passage, which I had just quoted, quite lamed, by being part of it
rased out of that Manuscript, which Steuartius made use of in his Impression of
Rabanus's Poenitential among other Pieces: I had the Curiosity to enquire
whether the Colen Edition of Rabanus's Works had this Passage entire, and
whether those very Great Men, who had the care of that Edition, had been more
successful than Steuartius in procuring an entire Copy of that 33. Chapter in
the Poenitential: But when I examined their Edition, I was surprised to find
that their Edition did not only want that Passage, but that it wanted the whole
Book. I found indeed in their Catalogue of the Tracts in every Tome, mention of
Three Books to Heribaldus about Questions of the Canons touching Penance, but
this Poenitential was not there, but instead of it three Books upon the same
Subject which were not his, but Halitgarius's, as Baluzius tells Praef. in
Epist. Raban. ad Heribald. Edit. cum Reginone, Paris.
us for a thing certain: so that here we find that which was certainly
Rabanus's own Work quite left out, and that which was as certainly none of his
obtruded for his upon us. I cannot but look upon all this as an industrious and
contrived Piece of wrong, since such Great and Learned Men as Pamelius, and the
Bishop of Ipres, and Colverius the Regius Professor and Chancellor of the
University of Doway, who were jointly concerned in taking Care of this Edition
of Rabanus's entire Works, could not be all of them ignorant of Rabanus's
Poenitential, being published in a Large Quarto, with other choice Pieces of
Ancient Writers, by Steuartius at Ingolstad, but just Ten Years before. I
cannot but believe that the whole Poenitential was left quite out, and suffered
this for the sake of the Thirty third Chapter, which was directly against
Paschasius's Doctrine, and consequently against Transubstantiation.

The other wrong I have to complain of is, their leaving out too and depriving
Rabanus of the Tract he wrote concerning the Sacrament of the Eucharist, and
they are so careful not to have this discovered or suspected, that they do not
so much as mention this Tract in their Catalogue of those Pieces of Rabanus,
which they, after all diligent search, could not find in order to Print them
with the rest of his Works, though afterward among the Testimonies in favor of
Rabanus we find Arnoldus Wion out of his Second Book concerning the Archbishops
of Mentz, reckoning up, among Rabanus's Writings, A Treatise de Corpore and
Sanguine Domini, and a little after, another de Sacramento Eucharistiae, (which
he rightly says was Printed at Colen, 1551.) over against the mention of the
first Tract indeed we find a Marginal Note, which will teach us what is become
of that poor banished Tract, it is, that, in Pamelius's Opinion, that Tract,
concerning the Body and Blood of Christ, is Paschasius Radbertus 's Work, and
that it is accordingly extant among his Works: with this Information, I
consulted Paschasius's Works, and there found this Tract had got a New Owner,
Sirmondus having Printed it there as his, and all People, of the Church of Rome
especially, concurring with him herein, so that Mabillon, in his Preface to the
Fourth Age of the Lives of the Benedictine Saints, treating of Paschasius's
Works, makes not the least scruple of this Tract's being his, and does but once
mention its being Printed under Rabanus's own Name at Colen, 1551. but makes no
reflection upon it.

However, notwithstanding Paschasius's being in present Possession of that
Discourse, concerning the Body and Blood of Christ, and Sirmondus and Mabillon,
with the whole Church of Rome, (as I believe I may safely affirm it) looking
upon it as undoubtedly his: I am very well satisfied that this Tract is Rabanus
Maurus's, and that Paschasius has no Right at all to it, and will give the
Reader the Reasons of that my Persuasion. The first of which is, That the
Manuscripts, which I have seen, give it directly for Rabanus. I must begin with
one MS. which I have not seen, that which did belong to Cuthbert Tonstal Bishop
of Durham, from which this Tract was Printed at Colen the same Year, and by the
same Printer, that Printed Crabbe's Edition of the Councils. Joannes Quentel.
1551.


In that MS. as we see by the Printed Copy, it bore the Name of Rabanus de
Sacramento Eucharistiae: and so it does in a very fine ancient MS. belonging to
S. John's College Library in Cambridge MS. in folio, marked, A. 17.
, where at the Top of the first Leaf we find Rabanus's Name set to it in Three
very different and very Old Hands, and at the Head of every Leaf, almost of the
whole MS. his Name is written, as if they were resolved to prevent any one's
mistaking the Author of that Tract. And in another very ancient MS. which I met
with in Bennet College Library, there it bears the same Title, and the Tract is
thus entitled, Hic incipit Rabanus de Corpore and Sanguine Christi, This MS.
is in the 303. Volume, according to Dr. James of Oxford's Catalogue of MSS. in
Bennet Library, but is carelessly omitted by him, it is betwixt Guitmund and
Austin's Tracts upon the same Subject, and should have been number 8. in that
Volume.
and at the End of it, Explicit Liber Rabanus, which false Latin is so far from
discrediting the MS. that all Learned Men will, on the contrary, own that it is
a certain Evidence of the Great Antiquity of it.

But besides these MSS. vindicating this Tract to Rabanus, the very Passage at
the Beginning of it in Sirmondus's Edition (upon which they conclude it so
certainly to be Paschasius's) is evidently a mere Patch that does not agree
with the rest.

In the Colen Edition of this Discourse from Bishop Tonstal's MS. and in both
the Cambridge MSS. the Preface begins thus: Dilectissimo Filio and Vice Christi
praesidenti, Magistro Monasticae Disciplinae, alternis successibus veritatis
Condiscipulo, at the end of which Salutation every Body will allow me that
Salutem is understood. Let me but put it down then there, and we shall next see
how very finely this Preface runs in Sirmondus's Edition. Paschasius Radbertus
Monachorum omnium peripsema Placido suo Salutem, Dilectissimo Filio and Vice
Christi praesidenti, Magistro Monasticae Disciplinae, alternis successibus
veritatis Condiscipulo Salutem. Is not here plainly two Salutations, and
therefore two beginning of this little Epistle, which is just such a Solecism,
as if a Man writing a short Letter to a Friend should begin, Dear Sir, To your
self and all with you health in Christ, Dear Sir, To your self and all with you
health in Christ. Which thing discovers not only that this beginning about
Paschasius and his Placidus, is a downright Patch, that makes a gross Tautology
at the very entrance of the Preface, but that he was a very Bungler that forged
it, that could not invent something for his Paschasius to begin with, which
would suit with the rest of the Preface.

Another Argument I have against Paschasius's being the Author of this Tract,
and for Rabanus, taken from the Doctrine of the Discourse it self; which will
fully dispatch the Controversy. It is as known a thing that Rabanus Maurus did
hold, that the Sacramental Body of Christ was different from the Body which he
took from Mary, as that Paschasius Radbertus did hold, that they were both the
very same. This we learn from the MS. of an Anonymus (which Mabillon has since
found out to be Herigerus Abbot of Lob) concerning the Opinions of these very
men, in Sidney College Library in Cambridge: which tells us, that Paschasius
Radbertus Abbot of Corbey, does lay down from S. Ambrose, that the Flesh of
Christ which is received from the Altar, is altogether no other than that which
was born of the Virgin -- ponit ex Beati Ambrosii nomine, quod non alia plane
sit caro quae sumitur de Altari, quam quae nata est de Maria Virgin and Passa
in Cruce and quae resurrexit de Sepulchro, quaeque pro mundi vita hodie
offeratur. Contra quem satis argumentatur and Rabanus in Epistola ad Elgionem
Abbatem, and Ratramnus quidam libro composito ad Karolum Regem, dicentes aliam
esse vel testimonio Beati Jeronymi, qui dicit dupliciter dici Corpus Domini,
vel ex auctoritate Sancti Augustini qui dicit tripliciter. Liber de Sacramento
MS. in Sidney Coll. Library, in 4to. marked K. 3.6.
Mary, suffered upon the Cross, rose out of the Grave, and is daily offered for
the Life of the World. Against whom both Rabanus does sufficiently argue in his
Epistle to Abbot Elgio, and one Ratramnus, in a Book made for King Charles [the
Bald] saying, that the Flesh is not the same, either from the Testimony of S.
Hierom, who says, that the Body of Christ is twofold, or from the Authority of
S. Austin, who says, there is a Threefold Body of Christ.

Here we find the Opinions of these two Men as opposite as the two Poles, and
we find Paschasius so utterly against the Opinion of his Adversaries about a
Threefold Body of Christ, that in his Epistle to Fredugardus, he warns him not
to follow ineptias de tripartito Christi Corpore, those Fooleries about a
Threefold Body of Christ. I will then inquire with whether of these two Men the
Doctrine of the Treatise contended for does agree. Had Sirmondus but given us
the Chapters of this Treatise, and the Titles of 'em as distinctly as they are
in the Colen Edition, and in the two Cambridge MSS. the Title of the 15th
Chapter had decided this business, which is, that the Body of Quod tribus modis
Corpu-Christi appelletur.
Christ is so called three ways; but though his Title does not, yet his Chapter
does prove as well as ours the distinction of a Threefold Body of Christ: and
does begin with showing, that the Body of Christ is so called three ways, or to
make it more intelligible English, that there are three Bodies of Christ; which
the Chapter divides and makes his Mystical Body the Church, his Symbolical Body
the Eucharist, and his Natural Body which he took from the Virgin Mary.

Now who does not plainly see, that the Doctrine of this Chapter alone is
directly contradictory to Paschasius Radbertus's Doctrine, who was not only
against the distinction, but calls it foolery in his unquestioned Epistle to
Fredugardus, and therefore that this Tract, which so formally asserts it,
cannot be Paschasius Radbertus's. And on the contrary we see, that the Doctrine
of this Chapter does exactly agree, and is the very same with what the
Manuscript of Herigerus told us was the Doctrine of Rabanus in his Epistle to
Abbot Elgio, This is but what was the case of his other Tract left out by these
people, which in Steuartius bears the name of Liber Poenitentialis ad
Heribaldum, but Baluzius has very well proved, that its true Title is,
Epistola ad Heribaldum.
or Egilo, as others write it: And I must confess that this does almost
persuade me, that the Tract concerning the Sacrament of the Eucharist, and the
Epistle to the Abbot Egilo are one and the same thing under two names:
especially since I find that account from Augustine about the Threefold Body of
Christ, which Herigerus tells us was urged by either Rabanus, in his Epistle to
Egilo, or Ratramn against Paschasius, not in Rathramn's Book to Charles the
Bald, but in this 15th Chapter of this Tract almost word for word, as Herigerus
afterward puts it down in his Tract; but this only is a Conjecture, and let it
pass as such. I am sure I have sufficiently proved, that that Tract which the
Romish Party have ravished unjustly from Rabanus, was truly his, and not
Paschasius's.

I will take the leave, now I am in at this sort of writing, to animadvert a
little upon Sirmondus's Notes, upon that Tract in his Edition of Radbertus,
because it will further corroborate what I have insisted upon here.

In the Third Chapter of this Discourse (according to Sirmond's Edition, for it
is the 9th in the Colen Edition) Rabanus (for so I hope I may now call the
Author of that Treatise) has these Expressions about the Sacraments of the
Church: Now Christ's Sacraments in his Church are Baptism, Chrism, and the Body
and Blood of our Lord. Upon this Sirmondus in his Notes, not finding here the
seven Sacraments of his Church, but that four of them are disowned, tells us
very gravely, that Paschasius mentions only three of the seven Sacraments of
the Church for example sake only, and that it was not his business here to
treat of the number of the Sacraments. But this is not answering, but eluding
the place, and to show the Vanity of it: we will look into another of Rabanus's
Tracts, and see whether he is not of the same mind, when he is professedly
treating of the Sacraments of the Church. If we look then into his 24th Chapter
of his first Book of the Institution of the Clergy, we do find him using the
very same Expressions, and almost the same numerical words in his Explication
of the Nature of Sacraments (which is another Evidence, that this Tract is
really Rabanus's) and this too when he is instructing the Clergy professedly
about the Nature and Number of the Sacraments; for in that Book having treated
first of the Unity of the Church, and the three Orders of Clergy in the Church,
and those under them, and of their several habits, he comes to treat ( chap.
24.) of the Sacraments of the Church, and there it is that he says plainly,
that the Sacraments are Baptism, Chrism, and the Body and Blood of our Lord,
after which having treated distinctly about every one of them, he says ( chapter
32.) that having spoken sufficiently of the Sacraments of the Church, he would
there pass on to discourse of the Office of the Mass.

Rabanus in the 41. chapter of this Tract according to us (which is but the 15th in
Sirmondus's Edition) says in Explication of our Savior's words, Take and Drink
of this All of you, as well Ministers as the rest of the Believers. This
Doctrine being expressly against their taking the Cup from the Laity, Sirmondus
is very hard put to it in his Notes about it, and tells us, that John of
Louvain, and Bellarmine and others, think the place is abused; and that instead
of, Drink ye, it should be read, Eat ye; well it shall be so to please those
men; and now let us see how the period will run, Take and Eat ye all of this, as
well the rest of the Faithful as the Ministers, This is the Cup of my Blood of
the New and Eternal Testament, which is very pleasant stuff, and therefore
Sirmondus looking upon this emendation as too bold and unreasonable, has a
better way to solve the difficulty, and that is, that the rest of the Faithful
do indeed drink the Blood of the Lord, but that they did not do it under the
Species of Wine, but under the Species of Bread, by concomitancy, since they do
not receive a Bloudless Body.

But to expose the violence of such an Interpretation of Rabanus's words, and
to let all see how forced this is, we need only appeal to this Chapter it self,
nay, to the bare Title it self (which I am afraid Sirmondus did for that reason
omit) which tells us, that we do receive and offer Quod non alium calicem
accipimus, and offerimus hodie, nisi quem ipse Jesus in suis Sanctis manibus
accepit in Coena. Tit. c. 41.
at this very day no other Cup, but that which our Savior himself took into
his blessed hands at his last Supper: and there I hope Sirmondus will grant me,
that our Savior did make use of a real Cup, and that He did give it his
Disciples to drink, as the Church did, in Rabanus's time, give the Cup to all
the Faithful.

I need make no Apology for this large Digression, since it is a Justice we owe
to the Memories of those who did oppose Transubstantiation, when it was first
started into the World, and since it disarms our Adversaries of One Weapon,
which they use to employ against us, though it was really intended, by the Author
of it, for us: but I did it chiefly because of that popular Argument so often
in their mouths, which they use when ever they are urged with any Passage out
of the Fathers, or Church-Writers against their Transubstantiation. We grant,
cry they, that this Argument looks very promising for you, but, notwithstanding
this, the Father is consistent with himself, and certainly for us, and was
always looked upon to be so: we'll give you an Instance of it, no Body has
written things so plausible for you, and which, at first blush, seem so
perfectly inconsistent with Transubstantiation, as Paschasius Radbertus
himself, in his Treatise about the Body and Blood of our Lord, and yet who ever
doubted that Paschasius was of the contrary Opinion, and the greatest Man for
Transubstantiation the Church ever had?

Thus we see what Feats may be done merely by the supposing this, and such
Books, to belong to Paschasius, and such as he, and how they carry the Cause,
by looking upon this Book to be certainly Paschasius Radbertus's. For which
very Reason, and that mentioned above, I have taken some pains here effectually
to prove, that this Treatise was most certainly none of Paschasius Radbertus's,
but does certainly belong to Rabanus Maurus, the True Author of it.

It is high time to return to my Friend, the Compiler, and the Business of
Transubstantiation, and see whether he makes a better Defense for the rest of
his Fathers for Transubstantiation, than for those hitherto. To the rest of his
Quotations, from Gregory Nyssen, I showed him that that Father does compare the
Changes of the Water in Baptism, and the Oil in Chrism, and the Altar at its
Dedication to that of the Bread and Wine in the Eucharist: which plainly shows
he meant no more Change of the Substance of any one of these, than of the rest.
What he says to this is nothing but confusion, I did not only prove that the
Water and the Oil have a Virtue from Christ, but that the Father said they were
changed as well as the Bread and Wine, so that if the Change of the Bread and
Wine was more than a Change of Use and Quality only, theirs must be so too,
since he makes them all the very same: and it is too childish to urge that he
does not say the Water and Oil are changed into the Body of Christ, since we do
see he asserts the same Change in them all: and what matters it that he does
not determine into what?

He hopes next to secure S. Chrysostom, by saying, that I would fain evacuate
all the plain and positive Testimonies of that Father, by a doubtful and
obscure Passage out of his Epistle to Caesarius. But I have too fully shown in
my Answer to repeat it here, That those Testimonies from Chrysostom were not
plain, but very Allegorical, and not positive but very Rhetorical, as
reasonable People of their own side, must own, that consider them. And for the
Passage from Caesarius, I urged that alone against them, because it was so very
plain and so positive against Transubstantiation, and I will be judged by the
Reader whether I needed (though I easily could have done it, and was prepared) to
add any other Evidence to It, which runs thus. For as [in the Eucharist] before
the Bread is consecrated, we call it Bread; but after that by the Mediation of
the Priest, the Divine Grace has sanctified it, it is no longer called Bread,
but is honored with the NAME of our LORD'S BODY, THOUGH THE NATURE OF BREAD
CONTINUE IN IT STILL. I cannot discommend the Compiler for calling it obscure,
since it is the easier way to get rid of it, by saying so of it, than by
answering it.

To his Quotation from S. Ambrose I answered fairly, by showing him that S.
Ambrose, when he was at the height of his Illustrations from Scripture, to
prove a Change in the Sacrament, does yet not only compare the Change in the
Eucharist to the Change of a Man by Baptism, which every one owns is merely a
Change in Quality, but does positively assert, That the Elements were what they
were before Consecration, notwithstanding their Change into another thing;
which Passage the Compiler dare not meddle with, but only says, I give the
pretended Authority of this Father against them. But this is all the Man is
able to say, and this is his way of trifling, when he has nothing to answer
fairly with. Whereas the Passage I quote is in the very same Book some of his
own Quotations are taken from, and some of his Church were so sensible, that
the Passage I make use of, is directly against their Transubstantiation, that
they have struck part of it out of their Edition of S. Ambrose at Rome Si ergo
tanta vis est in Sermon Domini Jesu, ut inciperent esse quae non erant: quanto
magis operatorius est, ut sint quae erant, and in aliud commutentur, which last
part the Roman Edition has altered into, ut quae erant in aliud commutentur.
D. Ambros. de Sacramentis, l. 4. c. 4.
, which did entirely run thus, If there be therefore so great Power in the
Words of our Lord Jesus, as to give a Being to things which had none before,
how are they not much more powerful to make that things may still be what they
were, and yet be changed into another thing; which is quite altered by the
Romish Edition, which makes S. Ambrose to say, How are they not more powerful
to make, that those things which were, may be changed into another? Which is a
pretty way of getting the Fathers over to their Party.

After all he rallies up his scattered Forces, and shows them in a Body,
calling the Bread, Christ's Body, and saying it was changed into Christ's Body;
but since I have answered all that are out of genuine Authors already, and he
has nothing farther to say for them, I need not stand to make any Reply, but
refer the Reader to my Answer, wherein I had not only urged the Doctrines of
Antiquity, but several Practices out of It, perfectly inconsistent with any
Belief of Transubstantiation: but the Compiler was not so fair as to give one
Word of Reply to them; but it is his way, and there is no hopes of getting him
out of it.

In Answer to the Chapter about Images, he offers not one Word, but refers the
Reader and me, to a whole Discourse (as he calls it) which he had published in
Defense of that Chapter: But why must we be turned off to an Answer to a Third
Person? Is all I have laid to the Compiler's Charge answered there? If it be
not, To what Purpose am I sent thither? Well! To comply with this shuffling
Adversary, I did look there, and all that I found was, that he can treat much
Worthier Persons than I pretend to be, in the most contemptuous Manner. I had
thought my finding out where he stole his Book, and publishing it to the World,
had sharpened him more than ordinary against me, but by this Book I was
convinced of my Mistake, for in it I found him treating the Worthy Person he
was writing against, with the same opprobrious scornful Language, that he uses
toward me. Another thing I did learn there, That this Man can, with a very
good Grace, accuse others of that very thing which he is the most guilty in of
any Writer that I know; he accuses that Reverend Person continually of false
stating, and of not stating the Controversy about Images: and yet he himself
(as I proved it upon him) has not truly stated any one Point of Controversy
(except that about Invocation) through his whole Nubes Testium; has most
falsely stated, for Example, this about Images, for whereas their Council of
Trent has decreed the Worship of Images, he states the Matter, as if the
Church of Rome, and second Council of Nice were only for giving Respect to Holy
Images: and yet when he is got into his Cloud of Witnesses, as if no Body could
discover what he would be at, he falls to proving that the Christians did not
only adore the Cross, but the very Nails of it, and which is more, that they
were commanded by the Law of God to do it. Which were strong Proofs indeed,
especially for the Times in which the Authors of them are said to have lived,
but are such as show there is nothing so absurd but that some Men will be found
to assert it, and that there can be nothing so absurd, but that it will be
swallowed and quoted by such Authors as Natalis Alexandre, and our Compiler.

I had charged the Compiler with many other things, and his Church; not a
syllable of which is answered in the Discourse I am referred to: I had
challenged himself about the Worship of the Cross, and some other things, but
he was wiser it seems than to accept my Challenge, or to trouble himself about
that and forty such things laid to his charge: However, since he will not, I
must then take leave to tell him, that this was not vindicating his Nubes
Testium, but that his pretended Vindication does deserve the name of some
Cavilling Reflections upon the Answerer to the Nubes Testium, instead of that of
an Answer to Him.

If he intends to make any further defense of himself against this Reply, I
will tell him what scores he must clear, before I need to take further notice
of Him. I have drawn up the Catalogue of near Forty considerable Charges
against Him, which I must require him to reply to: and besides that, to go
regularly through the several Parts of this Reply to Him, if he would acquit
himself like a Scholar, or like an Honest Man in this Controversy: but above
all things I must not forget to put him in mind of getting a Chronology Table;
the want of which hitherto has done him such a scurvy deal of mischief: it
will prevent his stumbling so often in those things, and will prevent some
sharp Replies upon that account.

I have thus got through my Vindication of my self, and which I value much
more, of the Primitive Fathers, and have made it further appear how far they
were from joining with, or countenancing any of those Practices or Doctrines of
the Church of Rome, set down by our Compiler in his Nubes Testium. As to the
Supremacy of the Pope, I had little to answer, since the Compiler had so little
to say in his Vindication for it, but was forced to leave almost all I had
urged from the Fathers against it, without once touching it, but only picked at
a place here and there. One of his little touches at me I had like to have
slipped, I know not how, over; his saying, I impose sillily upon the Reader, when
in answer to the Objection made about no one's denying the Bishop of Rome 's
power of Excommunicating the Asiaticks, I had said, Every Bishop might deny to
communicate with any other Bishop or Church, against whom they had sufficient
reason: As if (says he) denying to communicate were the same thing as to
Excommunicate, to the doing of which an Authority or Jurisdiction over them who
are Excommunicated is required, whilst refusing Communion may be done without
any such power. Well then this Man shall have his Will, and I therefore tell
him, that by denying Communion, I meant a doing it authoritatively, that is, a
putting the other Bishop from them by Ecclesiastical Censure: but I must also
tell him, that an Authority or Jurisdiction over the persons to be
Excommunicated, is not required, but that an Equality of State with the other
persons is sufficient: and this of his is dangerous Doctrine, since every Greek
can prove their Bishops of Constantinople to have Jurisdiction over the Bishop
of Rome by this Argument since Photius's time, who did Excommunicate the then
Bishop of Rome, and the Bishops of that Church do continue to excommunicate
yearly to this day the Bishop and Church of Rome; and not only the Greeks, but
the French Bishops also, may by this Argument also be proved to be above the
Pope, since they so long ago (as Monsieur Talon told the Parliament of Paris
the other day) threatened the Pope, that if he came to Excommunicate them, He
should be Excommunicated himself for meddling in things he had nothing to do
with.

So that I suppose I shall hear no more of my imposing sillily about this
thing, nor the Compiler have any thanks for his untoward Observation.

Such little things will not serve to build that Supremacy upon, which is
pretended to by the Bishops of Rome.

And as the Primitive Fathers neither knew of, nor believed, nor therefore
could submit to any Supremacy of the Bishop of Rome for the first six
Centuries, so they were as far from the Romish Doctrines about Tradition,
grounding all Matters of Faith, as we do, upon the Holy Scriptures; and were as
far from Invocating Saints as we of the Church of England, and from the Belief
of Purgatory or Transubstantiation, and did detest the Worship of Images and
Relics as much as we can; so that since in all these Points their Doctrines
were contrary to the Doctrines of the Church of Rome, and their Practices
contrary to the present Practices of that Church, we are bound to vindicate
them to the world, and to inform our Readers that they were no more Papists as
to those Points mentioned by the Compiler in his Nubes Testium, than we of the
Reformation are: and therefore I have Reason to conclude my Defense, as I did
my last Book against the Nubes, with asserting it upon further Reasons, That
the Primitive Fathers were no Papists.

THE END.
Books lately Printed for Richard Chiswell.
A Papist not Misrepresented by Protestants. Being a Reply to the Reflections
upon the Answer to [A Papist Misrepresented and Represented] 4 to.

An Exposition of the Doctrine of the Church of England, in the several
Articles proposed by the late BISHOP of CONDOM, [in his Exposition of the
Doctrine of the Catholic Church.] 4to.

A Defense of the Exposition of the Doctrine of the Church of England; against
the Exceptions of Mons. de Meaux, late Bishop of Condom, and his Vindicator.
4to.

A CATECHISM explaining the Doctrines and Practices of the Church of Rome: With
an Answer thereunto. By a Protestant of the Church of England. 8vo.

A Papist Represented and not Misrepresented, being an Answer to the First,
Second, Fifth and Sixth Sheets of the Second Part of the [Papist Misrepresented
and Represented;] and a further Vindication of the CATECHISM, truly
representing the Doctrines and Practices of the Church of Rome. 4to.

The Lay-Christian's Obligation to read the Holy Scriptures. 4to.

The Plain Man's Reply to the Catholic Missionaries. 24.

An Answer to THREE PAPERS lately printed, concerning the Authority of the
Catholic Church in matters of Faith, and the Reformation of the Church of
England. 4to.

A Vindication of the Answer to THREE PAPERS concerning the Unity and Authority
of the Catholic Church, and the Reformation of the Church of England. 4to.

Mr. Chillingworth's Book, called [The Religion of Protestants a safe way to
Salvation] made more generally useful by omitting personal Contests, but
inserting whatsoever concerns the common Cause of Protestants, or defends the
Church of England: with an exact Table of Contents, and an Addition of some
genuine Pieces of Mr. Chillingworth's, never before Printed, viz. against the
Infallibility of the Roman Church, Transubstantiation, Tradition, etc. And an
Account of what moved the Author to turn Papist, with his Confutation of the
said Motives.

An Historical Treatise written by an Author of the Communion of the Church of
Rome, touching Transubstantiation: Wherein is made appear, That according to
the Principles of that Church, this Doctrine cannot be an Article of Faith. 4to.

The Protestants Companion, or an Impartial Survey and Comparison of the
Protestant Religion as by Law established, with the main Doctrines of Popery:
Wherein is shown, that Popery is contrary to Scripture, Primitive Fathers and
Councils; and that proved from Holy Writ, the Writings of the ancient Fathers,
for several hundred years, and the Confession of the most learned Papists
themselves. 4to.

The Pillar and Ground of Truth. A Treatise showing that the Roman Church
falsely claims to be that Church, and the Pillar of that Truth mentioned by S.
Paul in his first Epistle to Timothy, chap. 3. ver. 15. 4to.

A Sermon preached on St. Peter's Day, published with Enlargements.

A short Summary of the principal Controversies between the Church of England
and the Church of Rome, being a Vindication of several Protestant Doctrines, in
answer to a late Pamphlet, entitled [Protestancy destitute of
Scripture-Proofs.] 4to.

An Answer to a late Pamphlet, entitled [The Judgment and Doctrine of the
Clergy of the Church of England concerning one special Branch of the King's
Prerogative, viz. In dispensing with the Penal Laws.]

A Discourse of the Holy Eucharist in the two great Points of the Real
Presence, and the Adoration of the Host; in Answer to the Two Discourses lately
printed at Oxford on this Subject: To which is prefixed a large Historical
Preface relating to the same Argument.

Two Discourses; Of Purgatory, and Prayers for the Dead.

The People's Right to read the Holy Scriptures asserted.

The Fifteen Notes of the Church, as laid down by Cardinal Bellarmine, examined
and confuted. 4to With a Table to the whole.

Preparation for Death, being a Letter sent to a young Gentlewoman in France,
in a dangerous Distemper of which she died. By William Wake, M. A. 12mo.

The Difference between the Church of England and the Church of Rome, in
opposition to a late Book, Entitled, An Agreement between the Church of
England and the Church of Rome. 4to.

A Private Prayer to be used in difficult Times.

A True Account of a Conference held about Religion at London; Sept. 29. 1687.
between A. Pulton, Jesuit, and Tho. Tenison, D. D. as also of that which led to
it, and followed after it. 4to.

The Vindication of A. Cressener, Schoolmaster in Long-Acre, from the
Aspersions of A. Pulton, Jesuit, Schoolmaster in the Savoy, together with some
Account of his Discourse with Mr. Meredith.

A Discourse showing that Protestants are on the safer side, notwithstanding
the uncharitable Judgment of their Adversaries; and that Their Religion is the
surest way to Heaven. 4to.

Six Conferences concerning the Eucharist, wherein is showed, That the Doctrine
of Transubstantiation overthrows the Proofs of Christian Religion.

A Discourse concerning the pretended Sacrament of Extreme Unction; with an
Account of the Occasions and Beginnings of it in the Western Church. In Three
Parts. With a Letter to the Vindicator of the Bishop of Condom.

The Pamphlet entitled, Speculum Ecclesiasticum, or an Ecclesiastical
Prospective-Glass, considered in its false Reasonings and Quotations. There are
added, by way of Preface, two further Answers, the first, to the Defender of
the Speculum; the second, to the Half-sheet against the Six Conferences.

A Second Defense of the Exposition of the Doctrine of the Church of England,
against the new Exceptions of Monsieur de Meaux, late Bishop of Condom, and his
Vindicator. The FIRST PART: in which the Account that has been given of the
Bishop of Meaux's Exposition, is fully vindicated; the Distinction of Old and
New Popery Historically asserted, and the Doctrine of the Church of Rome, in
point of Image Worship, more particularly considered. 4to.

The incurable Skepticism of the Church of Rome: By the Author of the [Six
Conferences concerning the Eucharist.] 4to.

Mr. Pulton considered in his Sincerity, Reasonings, Authorities: Or a Just
Answer to what he has hitherto published in his True Account; his True and
Full Account of a Conference, etc. His Remarks; and in them his pretended
Confutation of what he calls Dr. T's Rule of Faith. By Th. Tenison, D. D.

A Full View of the Doctrines and Practices of the Ancient Church relating to
the Eucharist, wholly different from those of the Present Roman Church, and
inconsistent with the Belief of Transubstantiation: being a sufficient
Confutation of Consensus Veterum, Nubes Testium, and other late Collections of
the Fathers pretending to the contrary. 4to.

An Answer to the Representer's Reflections upon the State and View of the
Controversy; With a Reply to the Vindicators Full Answer; showing, that the
Vindicator has utterly ruined the New Design of Expounding and Representing
Popery.

An Answer to the Address presented to the Ministers of the Church of England.


