THE COUNCIL of TRENT No Free ASSEMBLY: More fully discovered By a Collection
of Letters and Papers of the Learned Dr. VARGAS and other Great Ministers, who
assisted at the said Synod in Considerable Posts.

Published from the Original Manuscripts in Spanish, which were procured by the
Right Honorable Sir William Trumbull's Grandfather, Envoy at Brussels in the
Reign of King James the First.

With an Introductory Discourse concerning Councils, showing how they were
brought under Bondage to the Pope.

By MICHAEL GEDDES LLD. and Chancellor of the Cathedral Church of Sarum.

LONDON, Printed for Brabazon Aylmer, at the Three Pigeons against the Royal
Exchange in Cornhil. MDCXCVII.

TO THE Right Reverend Father in God EDWARD, By Divine Providence, Lord Bishop
of Worcester.
May it please your Lordship,
HAD your Lordship no other Relation to the following Papers, which do so
plainly discover the absolute Bondage the Trent Council was in to the Pope, but
only that of your being universally acknowledged one of the ablest Champions
the Church of England, or any other Church ever brought forth against Popery,
over which your Victories and Triumphs are numbered no otherwise, than by the
many Combats you have had with it; that alone would have led me to the doing
both these Papers, and my self the honor of prefixing your Famous Name to
them: But when besides that, the Originals of these Papers were put into my
Hands by your Lordship, to be translated, and made public for the Service of
the Church, this afforded me so just a Pretense for the doing of it, that the
Ambition I have of owning to the World how much I have been beholden to your
Lordship, would not suffer me not to make use of. And having said this, I will
not interrupt your better Exercises by detaining your Lordship any longer, but
shall continue my Prayers to God, that he would be so gracious to his Church,
whose very Foundations are at this time so fiercely attacked, as to restore you
to perfect Health, and to grant you a long Life to defend Her against those
Enemies of Hers with whom she now struggles, with the same Success that you had
formerly against the Papists her standing Enemies. I humbly beg your Lordship's
Blessing, and am

Your Lordship's most humble, and M. GEDDES.

An Introductory Discourse of COUNCILS.
Quid enim minus deest Tyrannis, quam falsas pro veris causis effingere?
THE Letters I here publish, are an undeniable Evidence of the Council of
Trent's having been in such Bondage to the Pope, that tho it had been never so
well disposed, it was not in its Power to have reformed the Church: But to open
that Matter better, a short and faithful Account of the Encroachments that have
been made on the Authority of Councils by the Bishops of Rome, which here
follows, seems to be no improper Introduction to the reading of them.

The Catholic Church being a Society instituted by Christ, into which the
People of all Nations having submitted themselves to him as their Lawgiver,
were to be admitted; Christ must necessarily be supposed, at the same time that
he erected his Church into a Society, to have prescribed a certain Form of
Government to it, with a Power to make such Laws and Orders as should be
necessary to its Preservation; as also to punish such of its Members as should
obstinately deny any of the great Truths, or transgress any of the known
Duties, which upon their admission into it, they did solemnly promise and vow
to believe and observe.

Now this being supposed, which of the three Forms of Government, Democracy,
Monarchy, or Aristocracy, is the best, in having the fewest Inconveniences
attending it, about which People may wrangle to Eternity without ever coming to
any Agreement, is not the Question here; but the true Question is, Under which
of these Forms of Government Christ when he founded his Church did put it.

As to Democracy, it neither was nor could be the Form of Government under
which Christ put his Church, and that for this Reason, because that Form of
Government, if it can any ways subsist, must have its Subjects near together;
whereas Christ designed that his Church should spread it self over the whole
Earth, as it did over a great part of it within a few Years after it was first
founded.

As to Monarchy, it is true it might, if Christ had so thought fit, have been
the Form of the Government of his Church; but it is as certain that he did not
ordain it to be its Government, as it is, that the Apostles did not immediately
after his Ascension, change the Government that he had instituted; which if it
is a thing not to be imagined, Christ must then have put his Church under an
Aristocracy, it being very plain from the Scripture, that that was the Form of
Government the Church was under in the Apostles Days.

So the first time the Church after it was founded, acted as a Body that we
read of, was, when the Apostles and Elders assembled together to quench a
Dissension arisen among Christians concerning Circumcision, and some other
Mosaical Observances, Acts the 15th, in which Assembly it is plain, that the
Church acted as an Aristocracy: And tho it is most probable that St. James, and
not St. Peter, was the President of this Council, yet whoever was, it is
certain he did not preside therein as a Monarch, but as a Fellow-Judg with the
rest of his Brethren.

According to which Apostolical Pattern, the Pastors and Governors of the
Church who succeeded the Apostles, as often as there was occasion, used to meet
together in Councils to treat about the Affairs of their respective Churches,
making such Laws and Canons, and inflicting such Censures as the Necessities of
the Church required: All which was done without the least Syllable of the
Church having a Monarch set over it on Earth by Christ.

Thus the Church was governed in* all places for near 300 Years by Provincial
Councils of Bishops: Not that Presbyters, nay nor Lay-Christians were wholly
excluded from those Assemblies; the Lay-Members of the Church, when she is
under an Infidel Civil Government, being in the place of the Civil Magistrate
to her: nevertheless it is certain that the Bishops, as of a superior Degree to
Presbyters, had always the chief Authority in all such Assemblies, and had
probably a Negative upon the rest.

In the 4th Century, the Church being blessed with Christian Emperors, began to
meet by her Bishops in Ecumenical or General Councils, which was an Advantage
she had not before enjoyed, it not being a thing to be expected, that Princes
of a contrary Religion should suffer such Assemblies to meet under their Noses.

All which General Councils acted, and were justly esteemed by all Christians
to be the Supreme Legislative Authority of the Church: and they looking upon
themselves as such, condemned Heresies, and made Canons about Discipline; and
in a word, did every thing that belonged to the Ecclesiastical Legislative
Power; and that without ever taking the least notice of an Authority on Earth
that was superior to theirs, or of the Consent of any particular Prelates, as
necessary to the validating of their Determinations. On the contrary, those
Reverend Assemblies were all called by the Emperors, who in their Convocation
of them, appointed the Place where, and the Time when they were to meet,
sending some of the gravest of their Senators to assist at them, and protect
them; and dissolving them when they had finished what they were called to do.
All which was done without any Protestations having ever been made against it
by any Bishop, as an Incroachment upon his Ecclesiastical Prerogative. Nay,
those Councils were so far from dreaming of the Bishop of Rome's having that
Monarchical Authority in the Church which he now pretends to have, that that
Prelat, tho he had often and earnestly desired it, could never get one of those
Assemblies to meet in the West where his See was. And as to the Canons and
Determinations of those Bodies, they were so far from thinking that Bishop's
Consent to them to be necessary, that they made some not only without it, but
contrary to it: Witness the 30th Canon of the Council of Calcedon; in which any
one that will look into it, may plainly see what the Fathers in the 5th Century
universally, reckoned to be the Foundation of any Primacy, or rather
Precedence, that the Bishop of Rome had; and in case that Prelat happened to be
convicted by them of Heresy, they condemned him with the same freedom as they
would have done any other Prelat, as they did Honorius.

All which, if true, as it is a clear Demonstration that those Councils looked
upon themselves as the Supreme Legislative Authority of the Church, so the
Truth of the whole thereof is so manifest from the public Acts of those
Assemblies, that there cannot be a greater Instance of an invincible Hardiness
against the brightest Evidence than that the Roman Champions give, in affirming
the Pope to have always had the same Authority he now pretends to, and that he
exercised in the Convention of Trent over General Councils: His present
Pretensions being,

1. That the Power of Calling, Suspending, Translating and Dissolving General
Councils is solely in him.

2. That he is the sole Judge when the Calling of such Assemblies is necessary.

3. That he can give a Right to vote in them to Ecclesiastics who are not
Bishops, and to as many as he pleases, which he has actually done to great
Numbers of Abbots, and to the Generals of the Religious Orders, and to such
Cardinals who are but Deacons.

4. That none ought to sit and vote in a General Council, that have not on some
occasion or other taken an Oath of Obedience to him.

5. That he is to preside in them, either in Person, or by his Legates, and that
with such an absolute Authority, that nothing can be so much as proposed in
them, by any but by him or his Legates.

Lastly, That nothing that is done in them is of any Validity until he has
confirmed it.

Having named these Pretensions, it would be to affront the Reader, to offer to
prove to him, that the Assemblies that submit themselves to them, can have no
Authority, and that the Church in her Body Representative is made thereby, what
Cajetan says she is, the Pope's Servant or Slave, and not his Mother.

And as it is a thing worth any ones enquiry, how this great Change in the
Government of the Church was brought about, so to the best of my Observation,
it was by these following Steps, that the Popes ascended to this Pinnacle of
Ecclesiastical Tyranny.

1. As to the Power of Calling and Dissolving General Councils, the thing that
brought that into his Hands, was the breaking of the Roman Empire into several
independent Kingdoms and Commonwealths; by which means it coming not to be in
the Power of any one Prince, as it was formerly, to call all the Bishops to a
Council, the Pope seized upon it; and having once got it, he took care to keep
it as one of the chief Jewels of his Crown; for the sake of which, and diverse
other Advantages which accrued to the Papacy, by the breaking of the Roman
Empire into so many independent Principalities, the Popes will always take care
to keep those Principalities from ever consolidating again into one great
Monarchy: a Universal Monarchy being a thing the Popes will never trust either
their Catholic or Most Christian Son withal, how zealous soever they may
otherwise appear to be for their Religion.

A second Step toward this Ecclesiastical Tyranny, was the Pope's stretching
that Honorary Primacy of Order, that was given him in General Councils purely
on the Consideration of Rome's being the chief City in the Empire, to a Primacy
of Jurisdiction over those Assemblies; which was the easier done through that
prodigious Ignorance of ancient Ecclesiastical History which reigned for some
Ages in the West.

The third was, those gross Impostures of the Decretal Epistles which were
forged in the ninth Century, on purpose to advance the Papal Authority, they
being universally believed to have been written by the ancient Bishops of Rome,
on whom they were fathered.

The fourth was, the Western Church after its having broke off Communion with
all other Churches, coming to look upon it self as the whole Catholic Church;
by which means any Power that had been given to the Bishop of Rome, as
Patriarch of the West, was reckoned to extend to the whole Catholic Church.

But the last and great Step to these and all other Papal Usurpations was, the
great Lands and Revenues which were bestowed on the Roman See, upon the Fall of
the Lombards, by Charles the Great, and other Princes; which great Riches, with
the assistance of pious Frauds, chiefly of that Madness the Popes and their
Monks inspired Princes with, who stood in the way of their Ambition, of going
as far as the Holy Land to destroy themselves; these, I say, enabled that
Prelat to lay both Church and Empire at his Feet, the Ecclesiastics, if they
had been willing, not being able to cope with a Power which at one time or
other had trampled on most of the great Crowns of Europe: all which was to come
to pass, that the Scriptures might be fulfilled, which speaking of the
Antichrist that was to come, say, that after that which withheld, that is, the
Roman Empire, was taken out of the way, he was to sit in the Temple of God, as
God; that is, he was to oppress the Church as a Monarch or Tyrant, and was so
to bewitch the Kings of the Earth by his Sorceries, and the World by his lying
Signs and Wonders, as to be in a Condition to destroy all that would not take
his Mark upon them, by submitting their Souls and Bodies to his Tyranny.

But to return to the Popes Usurpations upon General Councils.

The first Council called by any Pope, that had the Title of General given it
by the Roman Canonists themselves, was that of the Lateran, convocated in the
Year 1123, by Calixtus the second, against the Saracens; of which Synod, tho
neither the Letters Convocatory, nor the Acts are extant, that we know of,
nevertheless there is no doubt to be made of its having been both called, and
absolutely governed by the Pope: but it is not so clear how or when it came to
be first styled a General Council, for it does not appear that it ever looked
upon it self as such, unless it was that the late Canonists would right or
wrong style it so, to have as early a Precedent as might be for the Pope's
having an Absolute Authority over such Assemblies. The same is applicable to
the second and third Lateran Synods, none of which can be called General
Councils, but by the same Bull that the Roman is called the Catholic Church.

The fourth Lateran Synod, convocated by Innocent the Third, in the Year 1215,
against the Waldenses, was called, it is true, as a General Council; Innocent
having in his Letters Convocatory commanded all the Bishops of the East and
West to repair to it: but when it met, tho very numerous, there was no Assembly
that it was less like than a General Council; for besides that it was in a
manner made up of Italians, the Abbots and Priors that sat and had Votes in it,
were above double the number of the Bishops, who being all jumbled together had
not one grain of Authority among them. The first Council of Lions, called by
Innocent the Fourth, in the Year 1245, against Frederick the Emperor, and the
second of the same place, called by Gregory the Tenth, in the Year 1274, and
the Council of Vien called by Clement the 5th, in the Year 1311, which are all
reckoned by the Roman Canonists to have been General Councils, were all but
motley Assemblies of Bishops, Priors, and Abbots, without any thing of
Authority, being called for no other end but to give some Countenance to such
things as the Popes had a mind to have done.

But the Latin Church, tho it was for some Ages under this Bondage, had not it
seems so far lost all sense of Liberty, as not to strive, when it had an
Opportunity put into its Hands, to recover it again. The Story of the Struggle
betwixt the Popes and Councils, which lasted several Years, as it is a thing
not improper to my purpose, so I hope it will not be ungrateful to the Reader,
who therein on the Popes Side, will meet with such a train of Falsehood and
Dissimulations, as is not, that I know of, to be met with any where else in
History.

Gregory the 11th, who had brought back the Papal Court from Avignion, where it
had been 70 Years, to Rome again, dying in the Year 1378, the Nobles and People
of Rome, knowing the Majority of the Cardinals at that time to be French, and
fearing that if they should choose a Pope of their own Nation, he might go back
to Avignion, did by force of Arms oblige all the Cardinals, before they came to
an Election, to take an Oath to choose a Pope who was a Roman, or at least an
Italian: Which the Cardinals having taken, they chose Bartholomew Archbishop
of Bar, who was by birth a Neopolitan, but had lived most of his time in
France, and who took the Name of Urban.

The Cardinals, at least the major part of them, as soon as they were at
liberty, leaving Rome, retired first to Anagnia, and afterward to Fundi; from
whence they writ to Bartholomew, conjuring him by all that was Sacred, since he
could not but be sensible that his Election, being a forced Act, was null, not
to pretend to be Pope. But Bartholomew was not to be persuaded out of the Papal
Chair now he was in it, which way soever he got into it. The Cardinals
proceeded to a new Election at Fundi, and chose Robert Brother to the Earl of
Savennes, and Cardinal Presbyter of the 12 Apostles, Pope, who took the Name of
Clement. Which two Popes, insisting on their several Rights, and not without
great show of Reason, both of them having had their Titles to the Papacy made
good by innumerable and undeniable Miracles wrought by the Saints under their
several Obediences, they thereby begun a Schism which lasted at least 40 Years;
and which in the End gave the Western Church an opportunity to recover her
Liberty in a great measure again, tho when she had it she was not able to keep
it long.

For the Christian Princes, who were near equally divided betwixt the two
Popes, growing weary of the Quarrels of so long a Schism, did all agree to have
a Council assembled at Pisa to find out some way to put an end to it. That
Council consisted of a great number of Cardinals and Bishops; and there were
present in it the Ambassadors of the King of the Romans, and of England,
France, Poland, Jerusalem, Sicily, Cyprus, and diverse other Princes. They being
assembled in the Year 1409, after having summoned both the Popes, who were at
that time Angelus Corarius called Gregory the 12th, and Peter de Luna called
Benedict the 14th, deposed them both upon their not appearing neither in
Person, nor by their Procurators, as incorrigible Schismatics, Heretics, and
as guilty of Collusion and Perjury, each of them having sworn to resign the
Papacy when the other should do it. They having thus declared the Roman See
vacant, obliged every Cardinal, before they would give way to their filling of
it again, to give it under his Hand, that in case he should be chosen Pope, he
should not dissolve the Council, until the Church was reformed both in its Head
and Members; making a Decree likewise, that in case any Cardinal that was then
absent should be chosen by them, his Election should not be published until he
had given the Synod the same Security. After which the Cardinals, who were 24
in number, proceeded to an Election, and chose Peter Philargi a Greek, the
Cardinal of the 12 Apostles, and who had studied Philosophy at Oxford, who took
the Name of Alexander the 5th. After whose Coronation the Council passed a
Decree, that another General Synod should meet in the Year 1412, in some City
to be named a Year before, and that in the mean time Provincial Councils should
be assembled in all Countries.

Alexander the 5th dying in ten Months after he was chosen, was succeeded by
Cardinal Tassa an Italian, who took the Name of John the 23d, and who, when two
Years were expired, did, in obedience to the Council of Pisa, call a Synod at
Rome; which, upon a pretense that there was not a sufficient Number of Prelates
for the celebrating of a General Council, he dissolved presently after it met.

But the Council of Pisa having, instead of extinguishing, increased the
Schism, by adding a third Pope to the two that were before, the Christian
Princes, after having obliged every one of the Three to take an Oath to resign
their Claim to the Papacy whenever the other two did it, forced John the 23d,
who was owned as Pope by most of them, to call a Council to meet at Constance
in the Year 1415, and to promise to assist at it in Person: Which Council being
met at the time appointed, and having presently discovered that John,
notwithstanding all his Promises and Oaths to the contrary, was at that time
caballing with Princes to maintain him in the Papacy; the first thing it did,
was to require John immediately to bind himself by Bulls, to observe the
following Orders. 1. That the present Synod should not be dissolved, until the
Union was perfected. 2. That it should not be removed from Constance. 3. That
he himself should not depart from thence till it was done. 4. That he should
constitute a Procurator, with full Powers to resign the Papacy in his Name.
And, lastly, That it should not be lawful for any Prelat to leave the Council,
or not to repair to it, but in case of Poverty or Sickness. To which Demands
John, the next Day after they were made, returned the following Answers. 1.
That the Council should not be dissolved until it had finished the Union. 2.
That it was nevertheless his Opinion, that it would be convenient to have it
translated to Nice in Provence, and for him to go thither to it in Person. And,
lastly, That he was resolved to make his Cession in Person, which he reckoned
would be more honorable both for himself and the Synod, than to do it by
Proxy. But the Fathers not being satisfied with this shuffling Answer, and
insisting upon having his Cession immediately under his Hand, he promised them
faithfully that they should have it next Morning; but before that came, he
stole out of Constance by Night in a Woman's Apparel, and was got to
Schafhousen, a Town then belonging to the Duke of Austria, (now one of the
Cantons) who had promised to protect him if he were once in his Territories.
From which Place he immediately wrote to the Council, to assure them that the
Reason of his having retired from Constance, was not to avoid the being obliged
to make a Cession, but on the contrary, that he might do it with the more
Liberty and Security, which he reckoned he might do at Schafhousen where he now
was. But his Letters to the King of Poland, and all the other Princes under his
Obedience, tho writ at the same time, were in a quite contrary Strain, in which
he endeavored to justify his having left the Council, because he and it were
both robbed of their Liberty, his Life having been likewise in great danger by
a Conspiracy which he had discovered; complaining likewise of the Bishop of
Salisbury, who had said publicly, and in the Emperor's hearing, that the
Emperor was superior both to him and the Council, none daring to reprove him
for such scandalous Doctrine.

The Council, when it came to hear next Morning that John had given them the
slip, was in great disorder, and continued under a great Consternation, till
the Emperor came amongst them, and assured them that he would protect them
against the Duke of Austria, and all the Enemies John was able to raise up
against them: The Fathers were likewise much confirmed by a Sermon preached to
them at that time by the Learned John Gerson Chancellor of the University of
Paris, who demonstrated to them, that being a General Council, they were
superior to the Pope, and might sit and act without him.

Pope John, who had too many Spies in the Council not to be acquainted with
every Word that was said in it, reckoning he was too near the Emperor at
Schafhousen, which is but four Leagues from Constance, removed from thence to
the Castle of Loufemberg; which tho he did in great haste, yet before he begun
his Journey, he declared, by a Public Instrument, that he was under no
Obligation to observe the Oaths and Promises he had taken and made at
Constance, having been forced to take and make them, by a Fear that was
sufficient to make any Act that it caused to be involuntary, pretending to
justify his having left Schafhousen, by having discovered that he was there in
danger of his Life, which he was willing to preserve; because should he be
murdered before the two Pretenders to the Papacy had made their Cessions, they
in all probability would never be persuaded to it.

When John left Schafhousen, the Cardinals who had been sent thither by the
Council to persuade him to come back, returned to Constance; and six of them at
the following Session, declared therein, that the Council now the Pope had left
it, was dissolved. Which bold Declaration gave occasion to the Fathers to lay
the Ax to the Root of the Tree, all of them, but particularly the Cardinal
Peter de Aliaco and John Gerson, maintaining thereupon, That the Pope being
inferior to a General Council, which the present Synod was, he could not
dissolve it without its own Consent; and accordingly in the next Session, at
which, with the Emperor, there assisted nine Cardinals and two hundred Fathers,
the Ambassadors of the Kings of England, France, Poland, Norway, Cyprus and
Navar, with several German Princes, being present, the following Constitutions
being read, and unanimously agreed to, were published by the Cardinal of
Florence; which Constitutions, being as the Magna Charta of General Councils, I
shall here set down at length.

In the Name of the Holy and Undivided Trinity, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost.
Amen.

THIS Holy Synod of Constance, being a General Council lawfully assembled in
the Holy Spirit, to the Praise of Almighty God, for the Extirpation of a
Schism, and the Union and Reformation of the Church of God, both in its Head
and Members, does, for the easier and safer obtaining of the said Union and
Reformation of God's Church, ordain, define, decree, and declare, as follows.

In the first place it declares, That it being lawfully congregated in the
Holy Spirit, is a General Council, and represents the Catholic Church; and
that having its Authority immediately from God, all Persons of whatsoever State
or Dignity, the Papal not excepted, are bound to obey it in all things
appertaining to the Faith, and the Extirpation of Schism, and the Reformation
of the Church in its Head and Members.

It furthermore declares, That whosoever, of what State, Condition or Dignity
soever, the Papal not excepted, shall obstinately contemn, and deny to yield
Obedience to the Commands, Statutes, Ordinances and Precepts of this Sacred
Synod, in any of the foresaid Matters, or in any thing that has or shall be
done relating to them, if he does not repent thereof, shall be subjected to
condign Penances; and if it be found necessary, recourse shall be had against
him to other legal Remedies.

The said Holy Synod does furthermore declare and ordain, That Pope John the
23d shall not remove or translate the Roman Court, or any of its Public
Offices, to any other Place from this City of Constance; nor shall directly or
indirectly compel the Officers of the said Courts to follow him to any other
Place, without the Consent and Approbation of the said Holy Synod; and in case
he has already done it, or shall do it hereafter, or shall issue forth any
Processes or Mandates against the said Officers, or any other Persons that
adhere to this Synod, or shall fulminate any Ecclesiastical Censures, or other
Penalties, against any such Persons, all such Censures shall be void and of no
effect; neither shall any Obedience be yielded to such nulled Censures,
Processes and Penalties: So that the said Officers may notwithstanding them
freely exercise their Offices in the said City of Constance, during the sitting
of the present Synod therein.

It furthermore ordains and defines, That all and every Translation of Prelates,
as also all Deprivations of them, or of any other beneficed Persons, Officers,
Administrators of Commendas; as also all Revocations of Donations, and all
Monitions, Ecclesiastical Censures, Processes, Sentences; and whatsoever Acts
are or shall be done by the said Pope John, or by any of his Officers and
Commissaries, to the Prejudice of the said Synod, from the Day it first met, or
of any that adhere to it, are ipso facto void and null, and are by the
Authority of this Synod declared so to be.

It does furthermore declare, That the said Pope John, and all the Prelates and
Persons who were called to this General Council, as also all that assist
thereat, have been, and at this time are in possession of an entire Liberty,
for any thing the said Council knows to the contrary. To the Truth whereof this
Sacred Synod calls God and Man to witness.

But the Council being sensible that these, and a thousand more such
Constitutions, after they should come to have a single Pope again with an
indisputable Title, would be too weak Cords to hold such a Sampson, if they had
not a continual Check upon him, to prevent the Church's relapsing into its
former Bondage, did wisely ordain that Councils should meet frequently, by the
following Decree.

THE frequent Meeting of General Councils, being the chief Culture of the
Lord's Field, for the extirpating of the Thorns and Briars of Heresy, Errors
and Schisms, and for the reforming of Abuses and Excesses, to the rendering of
the Lord's Vineyard fruitful, the long intermission of them disseminating and
nourishing all the foresaid Evils; all which both the Memory of Times past, and
the Consideration of the present State of Affairs, do plainly set before our
Eyes: For which Cause, we do by this perpetual Edict establish, decree, and
ordain, That General Councils be frequently held, and that the first do meet at
the end of five Years after the dissolution of this, and the second at the end
of seven Years after that: After which a General Council shall be perpetually
held, from ten Years to ten Years, in such Places as the Pope shall, a Month
before the Dissolution of every Council, but with the Consent and Approbation
of the said Council, appoint; and in case the Pope should deny to do it, the
Council is then bound to appoint it, that so by a certain Continuation, a
Council may be always either sitting, or in view within a certain Term of
Years; which Term it shall be lawful for the Pope to shorten, if there should
be occasion for it, with the Advice of his Brethren the Cardinals, but on no
Account to prolong it: Neither shall it be lawful for him, except in a case of
visible Necessity, as of a Siege, War, Pestilence, and the like, to change the
Place that has been appointed; and when he does it in such a case, it shall be
with the Consent of his Brethren the Cardinals, or of two thirds of them; and
he shall then assign some other Place, as near as may be with convenience to
the Place that was first appointed, and in the same Nation, in case the same
Impediments do not extend to all the Parts thereof; which if they should happen
to do, it shall then be called in the next Country to it; to which Place all
Prelates and others, who do use to be called to Councils, are bound to repair,
as if it had been the Place at first appointed: Which change of Place, and
abbreviation of Time, the Pope is bound legally and solemnly to publish, and
intimate a Year before the expiration of the Time that was first fixed, that so
the Prelates may all at the Time appointed repair to the Celebration of a
Council.

A certain Prelat, whose Name I have not been able to recover, foreseeing, it
is like, that this wholesome Constitution would in a short time come to nothing,
by the Power that was given to the Pope to change the Place that had been fixed
when there was a Necessity of it, of which Necessity he was the Judge, proposed
some Heads to the Synod, which had they been agreed to, and executed, would
effectually have secured the Church from a Relapse.

The first was, That neither the Pope nor his Cardinals should be allowed to
sit in a Council whose chief Business was to reform them, it not being fit that
any Man should be Judge in his own Cause.

The second was, That the Cardinals who had chosen John, knowing him to be a
most flagitious Person, ought to be severely punished for it, and not be
permitted to sit in the Council.

The third was, That the Cardinals who had of their own accord followed John,
when he stole out of Constance, ought to be expelled the Council, as they ought
also to be who had affirmed the Synod to be dissolved upon John's having run
away from it.

Lastly, That till the Power of the Pope and his Ministers was suspended and
retrenched, it was a vain thing to think of reforming the Church, either in its
Head or Members. I will not say that these Proposals were John Gerson's, tho
they do agree in the main with what we meet with in his Treatises writ on this
Occasion; but I think one may venture to say, they were things not unworthy
either of his great Piety or Learning.

Pope John, who was for leaving no Stone unturned, to keep in that beloved
Chair which he had so often sworn to resign, understanding that his present
Protector, the Duke of Austria, was about submitting himself to the Emperor,
one of the Articles whereof he knew would be, That he should deliver him into
the Hands of the Council, endeavored by large Promises to engage the Duke of
Burgundy in his Quarrel; with whom, that he might treat with the more privacy
and security, he stole away, with two Servants only, to Friburgh; and from
thence he removed to Brisac, at which Place the Nuncios who were sent after him
by the Council, with Powers to require him to sign a Procuration, in a Form
prescribed by the Synod, to resign the Papacy, overtook him; who having
demanded that of him, he promised that they should have his Answer next
Morning: But before that came he was gone, having stolen out of Brisac in the
Night; and the next news the Nuncios heard of him was, that he had been at
Newburgh, but had been frighted out of that City by a false Report he had met
with there, of the Emperor's advancing that way with an Army, and that he was
returned to Friburgh again; at which City the Nuncios having gone after him,
prevailed with him to sign the foresaid Procuration, but it was clogged by him
with such Conditions, as he knew very well the Council would never agree to:
Neither was he mistaken, the Council, when that Instrument was presented to
them by the Nuncios, rejecting it with Indignation as an Affront to their
Wisdom; and being grown weary of treating any longer with such a false
shuffling Man, gave order to have him proceeded against judicially, knowing
very well there would be Crimes proved upon him, for which, were there no such
thing as Schism, he would deserve to be deposed; Simony, Perjury, and a most
flagitious course of Life having been proved against him, by Witnesses against
whose Testimonies there could be no Exception. He was accused likewise of
having poisoned his Predecessor, and of having many times in Discourse
discovered, that he did not believe the Immortality of the Soul. After which
the Council, tho fully satisfied of his Guilt, yet that it might not be said of
them that they had condemned a Man for enormous Crimes, without having first
heard what he had to say in his own Defense, ordered his Process to be carried
to him by five Prelates, to see what he had to object against it; who having
waited upon him with it at Zell, found him very humble and tractable: he told
them he was so sorry for his having stole away from the Council as he did, that
if it had been God's Will, he wished that his Death had prevented his having
done it; and that as he had nothing to object to the Articles proved against
him in his Process, so he was prepared to submit to the Sentence of the Synod
thereon with a most profound Humility, desiring nothing so much as that they
would pronounce it speedily upon him: in which the Synod willingly gratified
him, having so soon as it had his Answer, passed a Definitive Sentence,
declaring him to be no longer Pope, and prohibiting all Christians any longer
to own him as such, or to give him the Title thereof, reserving to themselves a
Power of inflicting such other Punishments upon him as the Crimes he had been
proved guilty of deserved; making a Decree at the same time, That in case the
Roman See should any ways come to be vacant, that the Cardinals should not
proceed to the Election of a Pope, without the Consent of the Council; and that
neither Baltasar de Cossa, lately John the 23d, nor Angelus de Corario, called
Gregory the 12th, nor Peter de Luna, called Benedict the 14th, should ever be
chose Pope, or if they were, their Election should be void. Which Sentence and
Decree being carried to Baltasar de Cossa at Zell, he gave his Consent to them
by a public Instrument, taking an Oath never to do any thing to the
Contravention thereof.

The Council having thus laid John, who was the Pope they owned, aside; its
next business was to oblige the other two Pretenders to quit their Claims. As
to Gregory the 12th, who was owned only by a small part of Italy, after a great
many Doublings he was prevailed with to appoint a Procurator to resign the
Papacy in his Name; but not to the Council, which having been called by John,
he would not acknowledge, but to the King of the Romans: to which he was in good
hopes the Council would never have agreed; but he was disappointed, his
Resignation by his Procurator Charles Malatesti being accepted; at which
Gregory is said to have been so angry, as, notwithstanding he had a large and
honorable Maintenance allowed him, to have died quickly after of pure Vexation
within himself, for having put such a Power out of his own Hands into the Hand
of a Procurator.

But for Benedict the 13th, notwithstanding that Sigismund went into Spain on
purpose to persuade him to resign, and was seconded therein by the King of
Arragon, in whose Country he kept his Court, he would not promise to quit his
Claim, but upon such Conditions as he was certain would never be granted him;
and upon the King of Arragon's withdrawing his Obedience from him, he retired
to a Peninsula in the Kingdom of Valentia, called anciently the Chersonesus,
but at this time Rocha da Truna, where he lived several Years after he was
declared by the Council not to be Pope, without ever resigning his Title to it
but with his last Breath.

The Council being informed by Sigismund when he returned from Spain, that
Benedict was not to be persuaded to resign, did thereupon name a select Number
of Prelates to judge his Cause; and having summoned him to appear before them,
either in Person, or by his Proxy, in a hundred days, they sent two Monks of
Cluny to acquaint him with his being summoned, and to try whether now that he
was thrown off almost by every body, they could persuade him for the Peace of
the Church to resign: when Benedict first saw the Monks coming toward him, he
said aloud to his Courtiers, Come, let us hear what these two Synodal Ravens
have to say to us; to which one of the Monks returned this lively Repartee,
That it was no wonder if Ravens did come to a Carcass that was thrown out.

The Monks being returned to Constance without having been able to do any
thing, and the hundred days being expired, the Synod declared the Roman See to
be vacant; and having given Order to have it filled again, they joined a
Majority of other Bishops and Prelates to the Cardinals in the Election, making
a Decree at the same time, that the new Pope should not dissolve the Council
until the Church was reformed both in its Head and Members: in pursuance
whereof the Cardinals and other Prelates having on the 8th of November 1417.
entered the Conclave, on the third day after they were shut up they chose Odo de
Columna Cardinal Deacon of St. George, to the great Satisfaction of Sigismund
and the whole Council, who looking upon him as a devout simple Man, did not
doubt now that he was Pope, of his complying with what he had promoted so much
when he was Cardinal. But the Synod quickly found it self mistaken; for
notwithstanding Martin, which was the Name he took, complied so far with it, as
to appoint Pavia to be the City the Council at the end of five Years was to
meet at; nevertheless when he was spoke to by several of the Prelates, that they
might go on with the Reformation of the Church in its Head and Members, he told
them very gravely; that that was not a time for so good a Work; of which Answer
when the French Prelates complained to their King, desiring him to oblige Martin
to keep his Promise to them, in joining with the Synod to reform the Church;
the King sent them word, that if they had designed to have had the Church
reformed, they ought to have done it before they chose a Pope, since they might
very well have known that when that was once done, it would be neither in his
Power nor theirs to do it, as it was in the time of the Vacancy. The Synod's
new Pope is said furthermore to have given it a broad Intimation before he
dissolved it, how he stood affected to their Decrees, telling them on a certain
occasion, and that of his own giving too, that he intended to observe every
thing that had been conciliarily decreed by them, leaving it to them to judge
whether what they had decreed concerning a General Council's being superior to
the Pope was reckoned by him among their Conciliary Acts.

We are not told how the Council resented this early Distinction from their own
Creature, if it was ever made by him, there being no mention of it in the Acts
of the Council; but however that were, it is certain, that from the hour of his
Election he intended nothing less than to go on with Councils on the Bottom
whereon they had placed them: Nevertheless while Peter de Luna lived, which he
did several Years after the Council of Constance was dissolved, he was obliged
in Interest not to run down the Authority of an Assembly, on whose Authority
his own absolutely depended: So at the end of four Years after the Dissolution
of the Synod of Constance, Peter de Luna being still alive, he complied with
the Decree of assembling a General Council at Pavia, giving Intimation thereof
to all Christian Prelates, but in such a manner, that they had no reason to
think he would be angry with them if they did not repair to it. Which Council
after he had opened it by four obscure Legates, he translated presently to
Siena, upon a pretense that the Plague was in Pavia, that being one of the
Reasons for which the Decree of Constance had allowed him to change the
appointed place of a Synod: But the Legates not having been long at Siena before
they found themselves in a full Assembly of Bishops, and hearing of more that
were coming to them, Martin to chastise their Forwardness, and to prejudice the
World against Councils, as if the Plague had followed them wheresoever they
went, dissolved the Council of a sudden upon the same pretense on which he had
translated it thither from Pavia; which Pretense the History of the City of
Siena tells us was a mere Falsehood, nothing like the Plague having been at
Siena at that time. But Peter de Luna being not only alive, but having engaged
the King of Arragon, upon a Quarrel that was between him and Martin, to send
Ambassadors to Siena to maintain his Title to the Papacy, Martin was thereby
obliged to go on, showing some Respect to the Council of Constance, and so did
in Obedience to its Decree, at the same time he dissolved the Synod of Siena,
call a Council to meet at the end of seven Years at Basil; by which time,
considering Peter's great Age, he did not much doubt but that he would be in
his Grave; which Council, tho Martin lived to convocate, and to send a Legate to
it, he died just before the time it was to have met.

Eugenius the Fourth, who succeeded Martin, finding a Council called to sit at
Basil by his Predecessor, renewed the Convocation thereof; and to encourage the
Prelates to come to it, he named only the Year, but not the Day nor the Month
whereon it was to meet, constituting Cardinal Julianus, who was at that time at
the Head of an Army in Bohemia, his Legate to preside therein. Which juggling of
the Pope's having been observed by one Alexander a Monk, whose Name was high in
the Church both for his Learning and Piety, he in order to defeat Eugenius, who
having given the World some Satisfaction in calling the Council, was for
letting the Year appointed for its sitting both by the Synod of Constance and
his Predecessor, slip over quietly, repaired to Basil; and having called
together all the Ecclesiastics that were within and about the City, he
declared to them, that the time being now come for the celebrating of a General
Council, in Conformity to the Decrees of the Synods of Constance and Siena, in
their City, to which Synod all that have a right to vote in such Assemblies
were bound to resort, he reckoned he was obliged in Conscience to come and make
a public Declaration thereof upon the Place, that so it might be none of his
fault if it were not assembled as it ought to be, both to maintain the Liberty
of the Church, and to reform it in its Head and Members. But Eugenius having
taken no notice of what was done by a private Monk in a fit of Zeal, the
University of Paris, which, to give that Great and Learned Body its due, was in
those days the only standing Authority that on all occasions asserted the
Liberty of the Church, that the Pope might not dissolve the Council upon a
pretense of no Ecclesiastics having repaired to it when it was called by him,
dispatched some of its learned Members to Basil to promote its assembling,
writing at the same time to Sigismund King of the Romans, and most of the other
Princes of Germany, to send their Ambassadors and Prelates thither.

Eugenius being alarmed by so great a Body's interposing its Authority in the
Business, writ to his Legate Julianus, so soon as he had finished his work in
Bohemia, to repair to Basil in Person, and in the mean time to delegate some
Ecclesiastics to go thither, and open a Council to those that were so
clamorous to have one; and accordingly Julianus named John Palmar, an Auditor
of the Sacred Palace, and John de Ragusio the Procurator General of the
Dominicans, to go and begin the Council at Basil, which they did in the
Chapter House of the Cathedral on the 29th of July, but without entering upon
any Business of moment.

Julianus, who expected the poor Hussites would not have been a Breakfast to
his great and zealous Croisado, after having destroyed a few open Towns
belonging to them, was deserted by his whole Army, who, as if a pannick Fear
had seized them, dispersed all of a sudden, without having ever seen the face
of the People they had been raised by Indulgences to extirpate, leaving their
whole Baggage, which was very rich, behind them to the Hussites, who drove
Julianus to Basil to try whether he was able to manage a Council against them
with better Success than he had done an Army: But Julianus had not been many
days in that City, to which great numbers of Ecclesiastics and others had
flocked, before he received Orders from Eugenius to dissolve the Council, and
to intimate to the Prelates that he designed to call a Synod in a short time at
Bononia, at which he intended to assist in Person, alleging the following
Reasons for dissolving of that of Basil. 1. That there was not a sufficient
Number of Prelates at Basil to celebrate a General Council. 2. That that City
was infested with the Heresy of the Hussites. 3. That the Princes in its
Neighborhood were in War one with another. And lastly, that the Greeks, who at
present seemed well disposed to submit themselves to him, were rather for
having the Council at Bononia than at Basil.

Julianus, when he first received these Orders, notwithstanding he knew the
Pope's Reasons for dissolving the Council to be all false, seemed inclinable to
have obeyed them, having forborne for some days after to act as President: But
having observed that the Princes and Prelates that were at Basil were all
resolved, notwithstanding the Pope should pretend to dissolve it, to go on with
the Council, and that the Cardinals who were fled thither from Rome, would all
join with them therein, he did not only resume his Presidentship again, but was
so far from executing the Pope's Orders, that he seemed to go entirely into the
Interests of the Council against him; and having accordingly summoned all the
Ambassadors, Cardinals and Prelates that were at Basil, to assemble on the 7th
of December in St. Leonard's Church, it was there agreed that the first Session
of the Synod should be celebrated in the Cathedral Church on the 14th day of
the Month current; of which having ordered an Instrument to be drawn up, they
commanded it to be affixed to the Gates of all the Churches in the City.

The day of the Session being come, and all the Cardinals, Ambassadors and
Prelates being assembled in the Cathedral, Julianus after Mass made a long and
learned Speech to them; which being ended, the Bishop of Coutances ascended the
Pulpit, and with an audible Voice read the Decree of the Council of Constance
concerning the frequent Celebration of Councils, as also the Instrument of the
Nomination of the City of Basil, together with Pope Martin, and Pope Eugenius's
Letters of Convocation; after that they made several Orders about freedom of
Speech, and against such as should hinder any Persons from coming to Basil,
ordering likewise that the Prelates who assisted at the Council should enjoy the
full Profits of their Benefices, and naming the Notaries and other Officers of
the Synod.

Eugenius, who could not brook to have his Authority thus affronted, thunders
out from Rome a Bull of Dissolution of the Council, in which, besides his
former fantastical Reasons, he added that of the Synod's having invited the
Hussites, who were declared Heretics, to come and treat with them: He also
called a Synod at the same time to meet at the end of 18 Months at Bononia; and
another ten Years after that was dissolved, at Avignon, being content it seems
to supererogate in giving the Church two Councils at the distance of some time,
and which were to be celebrated in Cities under his temporal Jurisdiction, for
one that was in being and out of his Territories, upon the Bottom of the
Council of Constance, whose Establishment he reckoned would be broke by his
having called new Councils to meet, as he had now done. But Eugenius, after he
had given this bold Stroke, fearing left Sigismund, whom he knew to be a great
Friend to Councils, and who had his Ambassadors at Basil, might be displeased
with him for what he had done, writ Letters to him of the same Date with the
Bull of Dissolution, to satisfy him of the Necessity there was of calling a
Council at Bononia for the Greeks, who seemed to be disposed to submit
themselves to the Roman Chair. To which Banter, for it was no better, Sigismund
returned a severe Answer, bearing date the 9th of January, telling Eugenius in
plain Terms, That the Reasons he had given for his having dissolved the Council
of Basil, were all fantastical, it being a Jest to put off the doing of so
necessary a Work as the Reformation of the Church, upon a Surmise of the
Greeks, who had for some hundreds of Years been Schismatics, appearing to be
inclinable to unite themselves to the Roman See; desiring him also to consider
what would in all probability be the Consequence of what he had done, the
Fathers at Basil being resolved, notwithstanding his Dissolution, to sit and
act as a Council, and in so doing would be protected by all or most of the
Princes of Europe; concluding his Letter with this vehement Exhortation, We do
most earnestly beseech and require your Holiness, in our Lord Jesus Christ,
whose Business this is, that considering how what you have done, may tend to
the Subversion of the Christian Religion, you would immediately remedy it, by
writing to the President and Council, that they may proceed in the Name of the
Holy Ghost, in which they were called, to finish the Work they have in hand.
Neither was Sigismund mistaken in treating what Eugenius alleged concerning an
Union with the Greeks, as a thing given out only for a Color; Eugenius having,
after he had made this use of it, slighted the Business of that Union, when the
Greek Emperor's Ambassadors came from Constantinople on purpose to treat with
him about it; which he did to that degree, after it had been so far advanced by
his Predecessor, as to put an end to it. It is true, that Treaty was afterward
revived by him, and that with great Zeal; but when we come to that, we shall
see what was the Reason of it. Eugenius was writ to likewise by the Kings of
England, France, etc. who upon the Synod's Nuncios coming to their Courts, had
all declared themselves in its Favor, to revoke his pretended Dissolution of
it, that so he might prevent a Schism. And the French Clergy having been called
by their King at Bourgis for their Opinion in this Matter, did unanimously
declare themselves on the side of the Council, desiring his Majesty to espouse
its Quarrel, as the common Concern of the Universal Church.

The President Julianus writ likewise passionately to his Master, to revoke his
Bull that was so universally odious; telling him in plain Terms, that if he did
not do it, and that speedily too, he would raise such a Schism in the Church as
had never been seen in it before; concluding his Letter to him thus, I have
called upon Men on this Occasion, till I am hoarse; I will therefore now call
upon Christ, and beg him to look with an Eye of Pity on his forsaken Church,
which he purchased with his own Blood.

The Synod likewise, which was not willing, if it could have helped it, to have
broke with Eugenius, dispatched Nuncios to him, to entreat him to revoke the
said Bull, and to come to them in Person, or by his Legates, to assist at the
Reformation of the Church. To all which Remonstrances Eugenius turned a deaf
Ear, seeming resolved to venture all, rather than suffer Councils to go on on
the Foot of that of Constance; which, tho he never mentioned it, was the true
Ground of his Quarrel with the Basileans; and they being sensible that it was
so, now that they had so many Friends abroad, did set about establishing their
own Authority, by passing the following Decrees.

1. That the Sacred Synod of Basil, in having been assembled according to the
Decrees of the Councils of Constance and Siena, and with the Concurrence of the
Pope, was a lawful General Council.

2. That being a lawful General Council, all Christians of whatsoever State or
Dignity, the Papal not excepted, were bound to yield Obedience to it in all
Matters of Faith, the Extirpation of Schism, and the general Reformation of the
Church in its Head and Members.

3. That whosoever, of whatsoever State or Dignity, the Papal not excepted,
should deny to yield Obedience to the Statutes of any General Council, relating
to any of the forementioned Matters, deserve to be punished.

4. That it should not be lawful for any Member of the Council to absent
himself from it, or to depart from the City of Basil without leave of the
Council.

From which Decrees they inferred, That the Papal, nor no other Authority on
Earth had Power to prorogue, translate or dissolve the General Council of Basil
without its own Consent, or to hinder any Prelates from repairing to it, or to
oblige any that assisted at it to withdraw.

In virtue whereof they admonished Eugenius, within the space of three Months,
by a public Bull, to revoke his pretended Dissolution of them, and to come in
Person to the Council; or, being lawfully hindered, by his Legates; in default
whereof they threatened to proceed against him, as the Holy Ghost should direct
them for the Good of the Church.

Cardinal Julianus perceiving what a Storm Eugenius was like to raise against
himself and the Papacy, notwithstanding his Hoarsness, called upon him once
more, telling him in a very loud Note, That if he went on opposing the Council,
he would bring the Indignation of all Europe upon his Back, it being plain to
every body, that the Assembly of Basil was a General Council, by the same
Authority that he was Pope, that is, by the Authority of the Synod of
Constance; concluding his Letter to him thus; I have often declared and
protested, and I do it now again, in the sight of God and Men, That if your
Holiness do not change your Measures, you will infallibly be the Cause of a
most pernicious Schism.

Eugenius being taken dangerously sick at this time, the Basileans when they
heard of it, passed a Decree presently, That in case of a Vacancy of the Roman
See, it should not be lawful for the Cardinals to choose a Pope any where, but
in the Place where the Council was sitting: and fearing lest Eugenius might, if
he died, before his Death have named some Cardinals, they decreed likewise,
That since the multiplying of Cardinals was both prejudicial and chargeable to
the Church, it should not be lawful for the Pope to create any during the
Session of the Council; ordering at the same time a Leaden Seal to be made for
the Use of the Synod, which on the one side was to have the Holy Ghost in the
figure of a Dove, and on the other, The Sacred General Council of Basil: and
having constituted the Cardinal St. Eustathia Governor and Vicar of the City
of Avignion, and named Judges and Prosecutors in Matters of Faith, and all the
other Officers of a Court of Judicature, they passed a Decree, That no Person
belonging to the Council, could be called from it to the Court of Rome, or to
any other Place.

Eugenius beginning to fear lest the Council, which grew every Day stronger and
stouter, might, if he did not do something to mollify them, serve him as that
of Constance had done John the 23d, did, much against the grain of his own
Nature, and the haughty Spirit of his See, submit so far as to send three
Nuncios to them; who having in a public Audience made long Harangues of the
Mischiefs of a Schism, and of the great Power Christ had committed to the Pope,
were answered by the Fathers, and dismissed with this Message to their Master,
that the Sacred Synod could not treat with him, until by a public Bull he had
revoked his pretended Dissolution of it, and did either come in Person, or send
his Legates to preside in it. And the Prosecutors of the Causes of the Synod,
after that the Term in the Citation was expired, having demanded that Eugenius
should be pronounced Contumacious in order to their proceeding farther against
him, the said Nuncios humbly beseeched the Synod to suspend the passing of that
Sentence upon their Master; which at the Request of Sigismund was granted; and
sixty Days more were allowed to him to comply with what was required. During
which Term Eugenius sent other Nuncios with some Propositions of Accommodation,
the revoking his late Bull publicly, which the Synod insisted on, being a
thing of so hard digestion, that he did not know how to swallow it. The
Propositions offered by the new Nuncios to the Synod were, That Eugenius, if
they would revoke all the Decrees they had made against him, was ready to
revoke all in general he had said or done against them; and that if they would
consent to his having called a Council at Bononia, if the Bohemians should
refuse to come to that City, he was content to allow the Fathers some time to
treat with them at Basil, on condition that when the Term he had set them was
expired, they should immediately repair to Bononia: Against which City if the
Fathers had any just Exception, they might name any other City in Italy; and if
they would not agree to that neither, that they should then name twelve of the
most moderate Prelates of their own Body, in conjunction with the Ambassadors,
to be Judges of the whole Matter; who, if they should judge it to be most
convenient that the Council should sit in Germany, should name any City therein
for it except Basil.

The Fathers being extremely offended with these shuffling Propositions, told
the Nuncios, That they could not sufficiently admire at their Proposals, being
so involved and clogged with Reservations, as if the Matters they came to treat
with them, were not of a religious Nature, and to be handled with Integrity,
but were Matters of Trade or Commerce, and fit only to be treated about by
Hucksters: A most true Character of all that the Popes did to destroy the
Supremacy of Councils: Adding, That since Eugenius had not by any thing that
they had proposed, intimated his being ready to revoke his Bull of Dissolution,
but on the contrary seemed rather to seek to have it confirmed, they could not
therefore take any notice of their Propositions, but must go on with their
Proceedings against him, as a Contemner of the Authority of General Councils:
For the farther Security whereof they passed a Decree, That no Person should
hereafter be capable of being chosen Pope, who had not given his Consent and
Assent upon Oath to the Doctrine of the Synod of Constance concerning the
Supremacy of General Councils, and their being frequently to be assembled. The
last Term of sixty Days being expired, the Prosecutors moved again to have
Eugenius pronounced Contumacious; which the Fathers were hindered from doing by
Letters they received from Sigismund, assuring them of the Pope's having by a
Bull revoked his pretended Dissolution of them, and of his having likewise
named Legates to go to Basil; but who being hindered by some just Impediments,
had appointed Delegats to supply their place for some time; which Bull of
Revocation, as it pretended to be, bore date the 12th of Febr. 1433, and not
32, as it is in Bzovius: Wherein Eugenius after having pretended, that the
Causes why he had formerly dissolved that Council were all ceased, he commanded
all Patriarchs, Archbishops, Bishops, etc. within three Months after the Date
of the said Bull, to repair to Basil, there to celebrate a General Council,
promising to send his Legates to preside therein in his Name. Which Bull,
notwithstanding it was dispatched some Weeks before the last Nuncios went to
Basil, was never mentioned by them, whose Business was to try if the Fathers
would have been satisfied with less, who for that Reason knew nothing of the
said Bull, till they were afterward acquainted therewith by Sigismund, and the
Envoys of some German Princes; who, such as it was, had extorted it from
Eugenius: With which Bull when it was brought to the Synod by some Delegats,
the Pope not being able it seems to find one Prelat at leisure that was fit to
be his Legate on this Occasion, the Fathers were more incensed than ever against
Eugenius, for having offered, as if they had been an Assembly of Fools or
Children, to put an Instrument upon them; which by calling a new Council at
Basil, confirmed his having dissolved the present, as a Bull that revoked the
Dissolution that it confirmed. There was also a Passage in it, wherewith the
Fathers were highly distasted, which was, its giving Power to the Presidents
and Legates to dispatch the Affairs of the Universal Church with the Advice of
the Council; this they said destroyed the Authority of the Council at a blow,
and of Judges, made the Prelates to be only Counselors to the Presidents:
whereupon they having declared at large the ill Consequences which must attend
its being in the Pope's Power to dissolve or translate General Councils at his
Pleasure, and that the Belief of such Councils being the Supreme Authority of
the Church, was a Matter of Faith; and that Eugenius therefore for having
denied to hear them, deserved to be treated as an Heathen and a Publican, they
concluded that they would, after the Example of their Predecessors, die a
thousand Deaths, rather than betray the Authority of the Church by their Sloth
or Cowardice, in being satisfied with such an hypocritical Bull, or admitting
of Presidents with such an Authority as it gave them: and so having dismissed
the Delegates with their Bull, they went on with their Citation of Eugenius
with greater Heat than ever. And in their twelfth Session which was held on the
13th of July, after a long Invective against Eugenius's Obstinacy, they had
certainly pronounced him contumacious had they not been hindered by Sigismund's
Ambassadors, who desired sixty days more for him, by which time they assured
the Fathers the Emperor would be with them in Person: they decreed nevertheless
that at the Expiration of that Term, Eugenius if he did not comply with the
Synod, should be ipso facto suspended.

But if the Synod was angry with Eugenius for having offered to put such a
Trick upon it, Eugenius was no less angry with the Synod for having discovered
his Trick, and by a Bull bearing date the 26th of July, after having declared
them to be a most seditious Conventicle, he voided and nulled all Decrees,
Citations, etc. made by them against him and his Cardinals, commanding all
Christians upon pain of Excommunication not to have any regard to the
Basileans, or to any thing they did, being a pack of factious Spirits set on to
disturb the Peace of the World.

But this angry Bull was so far from terrifying the Council, that they had
certainly declared him Contumacious on the day of the Expiration of the last
Term, had not their Protector the Duke of Bavaria obtained 30 days more for
him; after the granting whereof, the Archbishop, of Spalato and the Bishop of
Cervina, the Pope's Nuncios, knowing nothing of what had passed, came to the
Council, desiring the Fathers not to pronounce Sentence against their Master,
the 60 days which had been allowed not being as yet expired. The Cardinal
Julianus told them thereupon, that they had not been acquainted, it seemed,
with the Council's having granted the Pope 30 days more, asking them whether
they had brought his Adhesion to the Synod or not: to which the Nuncios
returned no Answer, they having brought only a loose general Proposition of
revoking all that had been done by the Pope, provided the Synod would do the
same as to all that they had done against him, but without any particular
mention of the Bull of Dissolution, which the Pope could not endure to think of
revoking by a public Bull. This Proposition having been rejected with
Indignation by the Fathers, the Pope was so far provoked thereby, that he
published another Bull against them bearing date the 2d of September, Wherein
having taken notice of the Synod's having presumptuously cited him and his
Cardinals, he commands all Christians under pain of Anathema, to look upon the
said Citation, and all the Effects thereof as void and null, he having by these
Presents, in defense of the Dignity of his Holy See, declared them so to be.

But when the thirty days the Duke of Bavaria had obtained for Eugenius were
expired, the Synod assembled on the 10th of October with a full purpose to have
pronounced him Contumacious; which as they were ready to have done, News was
brought that the Emperor was just alighted, and was making himself ready to
come to Church to them: the Fathers overjoyed at the News went in a body to
wait upon him; who after he had received their Congratulations, going with them
to the Place of their Assembly, prevailed with them to suspend their Sentence a
Week longer, and when that was expired, he desired them to adjourn the passing
of it till the 8th of November; which day being come, the 14th Session was held
with great Solemnity, the Emperor assisting thereat in his Imperial Robes, and
with all his other Royal Insignia: Wherein the Fathers having at the Emperor's
Request allowed Eugenius ninety days more, they drew up several Forms of
Adhesion, leaving it to him which of them he would sign, requiring him
particularly, besides the Bull of Dissolution, to repeal and void the last
three Bulls he had published to their Prejudice.

Eugenius, notwithstanding the Council was thus hard upon him, dreading it now
that the Emperor was in it much more than he had done before, sent his Letters
of Adhesion to it; which having been presented to the Synod by the Archbishop
of Tarentum, and the Bishop of Cervina on the second of February, they were
after a strict Examination declared by the whole Synod to be satisfactory,
Eugenius having therein complied with every thing the Council had required of
him, declaring them to be, and since they met, to have always been a General
Council lawfully assembled, revoking his Bull of Dissolution, and other two
Bulls, denying the third of the 18th of the Calends of January to have been
his; he also with this named Legates to preside in the Synod in his Name. The
Legates with the Cardinal Julianus were Nicolaus Cardinal of the Holy Cross,
John Archbishop of Tarentum, Peter Bishop of Padua, and Luis Abbot of St.
Justin: who having on the 24th of April taken an Oath to act faithfully for the
Honor of the Council, and to defend all its Decrees, but especially the Decree
of the Council of Constance, of the Subjection of the Pope to the Coercive
Power of General Councils in all things belonging to the Faith, the Extirpation
of Schism, and the general Reformation of the Church in its Head and Members,
as also to give wholesome Counsel according to God and their Consciences, and
not to reveal to any Person how the Prelates voted, nor to depart from the Place
of the Synod without its Leave; they were admitted Presidents, but without
being allowed any Coercive Power, all Decrees and other Acts of the Council
being to be expedited as formerly under its own Seal.

Here we are told a very odd thing if it is true, which is, that tho these
Prelates were admitted Presidents of the Council as the Pope's Legates, and did
take the forementioned Oaths as Presidents, nevertheless that they took them
not in the Pope's, but in their own Name; a thing naturally so absurd, and,
considering how high the Spirit of the Synod was at this time, so incredible,
that it had need to be very well attested to be believed by any indifferent
Person: it seems much more probable, that those who had the Acts of this Synod
for near an Age entirely in their Hands, might be tempted to foist such a
Passage as this into them, especially considering that so great a Point as that
of the Pope's having acknowledged a General Council to be superior to him
depends thereon, than that such an Assembly should admit Men their Presidents
as the Ambassadors of a Prince, and at the same time allow them to take an Oath
of Fidelity to the Assembly in their own, and not in their Prince's Name. But
in whose Name soever these Oaths were taken, never were Oaths worse observed
than they were; the Presidents from the first minute they took their Place in
the Synod, studying nothing but how to blow it up, by creating Factions in it,
and gaining Prelates to the Pope by Promises of great Preferments.

Eugenius having been driven out of Rome at this time by the Colonna's and
other Citizens, to whom he had rendered himself extremely odious, the whole City
crying after him, Let new Taxes and the Inventors of them perish; when he came
to Florence, writ a very kind Letter to the Council, thanking them therein for
having so affectionately admitted his Legates Presidents, promising faithfully
for the future, to love them as Sons, observe them as Brethren, and to be bound
up with them in the Blessings of the same Sweetness by a fervent Love. But the
Synod knowing the Man too well to rely much on any Professions or Promises he
could make them, now it had brought him to its own Terms, would not be diverted
by a few good Words from doing what was necessary to the holding of him and all
his Successors to them: and whereas there were some who pretended that the Pope
had never given his Consent to the Decree of the Synod of Constance, which
declared a General Council to be superior to him, they resolved either to
remove that Objection, or to break with the Pope again, and accordingly on the
26th of June they made a Decree, declaring that a General Council derived its
Authority immediately from Christ, and that all Christians of whatsoever State
or Dignity, the Papal not excepted, were bound in Conscience to obey all its
Determinations in all matters appertaining to the Faith, the Extirpation of
Schism, and the general Reformation of the Church in its Head and Members. To
which Decree, coming upon them before they were well warm in their Chairs, and
while their Master was in very bad Circumstances, the Presidents gave their
Consent; so that howsoever it was before, the Supremacy of a General Council
had now the Pope's Consent to it.

The Council vainly imagining that it had by this Decree secured its own
Supreme Authority, and that of all future General Councils, since none
hereafter could without denying the Infallibility of the Church, call the Truth
thereof in question, begun to act as the Supreme Church Authority; sending two
Cardinals into Italy as the Legates of the Universal Church, to reconcile the
Princes and People thereof to Eugenius. The thing that made the Synod the more
forward to send this Embassy into Italy was, Eugenius's Adversaries making his
being an Enemy to the Council of Basil one of their chief Objections against
him, which the Synod now he had so affectionately and thoroughly adhered to it,
thought it self bound in Justice to remove. The Legates sent by the Synod on
this Errand, were the Cardinal of the Holy Cross, who was one of its
Presidents, and John Cervantes Cardinal Sancti Petri ad Vincula; the former of
which is said not to have consented to the forementioned Decree, which is just
as likely as that of his having taken the Oath of President in his own Name and
not in the Pope's, it being a very incredible thing that the Synod, if the
Cardinal had not consented to that their darling Decree, would have employed
him so soon after as their Legate, and especially in an Embassy, which was to be
a Precedent to all future Ages of a General Council's having Authority to send
Legates in the Name of the Universal Church.

But howsoever that were, the Cardinal with his Colleague having gone with that
Character to Rome, after having treated there with the Colonna's who had the
chief hand in driving Eugenius out of that City, he went to Florence, where
having caballed with Eugenius how to destroy the Council, he was sent back to
it again with Instructions that in a short time did its business effectually:
for as he was reckoned to be one of the most dextrous Statesmen of his time; so
his main business at Basil was to gain the Cardinals and great Prelates over to
Eugenius by Promises of higher Preferments: so the Cardinal Capronicus, whom
Eugenius had pronounced not to be a Cardinal, because tho he was named to that
Dignity by Martin, he had not been publicly declared by him before his Death,
and the Cardinal Julianus the President, and the Cardinal Cervantes, who were
the Pillars the Council chiefly stood upon, were all three gained over to
Eugenius by such Promises; the first being afterward created a Cardinal by
him, and the second made Cardinal Presbyter of St. Sabina, and the third
Cardinal Bishop of Ostium. Which tampering of Eugenius with the chief
Supporters of the Council, made it to be in every body's Mouth, that Eugenius
would certainly at last be too hard for the Council, he having more Bishoprics
and other great Preferments in his Gift than the Council had.

But as it was plain to every body, that Eugenius notwithstanding all his
solemn Professions to the contrary, still hated the Council mortally in his
Heart; so it was visible that he was continually hunting after some plausible
Pretense or other to dissolve it; or, which would be the same to his purpose,
to translate it into Italy.

And whereas the Greek Emperor had promised and swore by his Ambassadors, whom
he had sent to Basil, to come in Person, with his Patriarch and Clergy into the
West, to join with that Council in order to the reuniting of the two Churches;
Eugenius being sensible that the Greeks, if they should meet the Basileans any
where in a Free Assembly, would unanimously concur with them in establishing
the Supremacy of General Councils, that being a Doctrine the Greek Church had
not at any time ever in the least doubted of; he spared for no Pains nor Cost
underhand to divert that Emperor from being as good as his Oath, representing
the Synod of Basil secretly, by his Agents at Constantinople, as a factious and
divided Body of Men, that agreed in nothing but in an Intention of destroying
all Order and Government; and having entered into a close Negotiation with the
Emperor and Patriarch about that Affair, at the same time he pretended to join
with the Basileans, in persuading them to come to a Council in the West: he
urged them to insist upon having that Healing Synod assembled at
Constantinople, to which Place he knew no great Number of the Basileans could
repair; promising whenever it should be called, to send Legates to assist at it;
Eugenius, so he could but keep the Greeks and Basileans asunder, having no
Concern where that Council were held, or whether there were ever any such
Council or not.

The Synod being informed by its Legates at Constantinople, of this secret
Negotiation of Eugenius, and of his laboring all he could underhand by his
Agents, who had much more Money to sprinkle among the Greeks than they had, to
keep the Emperor and his Clergy from coming to them; they resolved, both for
their own Security and that of all future General Councils, to set about the
retrenching the great Riches of the Papacy, it being plain to every body, that
till that was done, it was not possible by Paper-Laws and Constitutions to keep
it long under the Government of an Assembly, that as it was a Body, had not one
Farthing to lay out for Public Services: And accordingly in its 13th Session
held on the 9th of June 1435, it passed a Decree, That for the future no Fees
should be paid to the Court of Rome for any Ecclesiastical Collations,
Institutions, Provisions, Confirmations, Elections, Admissions, Investitures,
etc. nor for Holy Orders, or any Offices, Benefices, Benedictions, Palls, etc.
And that no Annats or First Fruits should be any longer paid to the said Court,
any Custom, Privilege or Statute to the contrary notwithstanding. Ordaining
further, That whosoever should hereafter receive any such Fees, should incur
all the Penalties of Simony; and in case the Pope, who of all others was under
the strictest Obligation to observe the Decrees of General Councils, should be
guilty thereof, that complaint should be made of him to such Assemblies.

This Decree was violently opposed by the Papalins, who began now to appear as
a Party in the Council, as a Retrenchment that would disable the Papacy from
doing the Duties that were incumbent on it. To obviate that, the Fathers in
answer to it, promised, That if the Popes would but observe the Decrees of
General Councils themselves, and exhort all other Christians to do the same,
they would by some other ways which were less burdensome, provide a sufficient
Revenue for all the Occasions of the Papacy. They gave Eugenius likewise the
same Assurance of a sufficient Maintenance, upon the same Condition, by the
Nuncios they sent to him to satisfy him of the Justice and Necessity there was
of the Retrenchments they had made. We are not told what Answer Eugenius
returned to this Message; but whatever it was, the Synod was so ill satisfied
with it, that in its next Session held on the 22d of March 1436, after having
made several Regulations in the Election of the Pope, it drew up the Form of an
Oath to be taken by him so soon as he was chosen, and to be repeated constantly
at the High Mass of the Anniversary of his Election; the main Article whereof
was, That he should observe the Decrees of all General Councils, and
particularly those of the General Councils of Constance and Basil. Ordaining
farther, That it should not be lawful for the Pope to advance any that were
near akin to him to any Dignities or Honors either in the Church or State; or
to increase the Number of Cardinals above 24; among whom, for the Ease of the
Church, one half of the Revenues of the Papacy should be equally divided.

Eugenius, tho terribly enraged by these Decrees, yet had so much wit in his
Anger as not to break with the Synod upon Points he knew to be popular, but
chose rather to do it, upon the Point, where the Reconciling Council was to be
held. And in order thereunto he dispatched the Cardinals St. Crucis, and St.
Petri ad Vincula to Basil, with Instructions about it: Who being arrived there,
after having declamed against the forementioned Retrenchments and Regulations,
they mustered all their Pensioners together, to try if they could carry it, to
have the Reconciling Synod assembled in some City of Italy: But when it came to
be put to the Vote in what Country the said Synod was to meet, it was carried
by a great Majority that it should be at Basil; or if that could not be
conveniently, at Avignion; and if that could not be neither, in some City not
far from the Sea in the Duchy of Savoy: By which Majority, tho a very great
one, the Papalins, who now appeared in their own Colors, were so far from
being determined, according to the Custom of all such Assemblies, that they
voted either Florence or Vtinum, two Cities in Italy, to be the Place where the
said Synod was to assemble. And having done that, after a tumultuous manner,
they afterward passed it clandestinly into a Decree; which, right or wrong,
they would call a Decree of the Universal Council of Basil; to which Sham
Decree, not being able to get the Seal of the Synod, they clapped that of
Cardinal St. Petri. And having thus expedited it, they dispatched it
immediately by two Nuncios to the Pope for his Confirmation; which being
presently granted by him with both Hands, he sent it with all possible
Expedition, by the same Nuncios that had brought it from Basil to
Constantinople; with which the said Nuncios, as Ambassadors sent thither by the
Council, were to invite the Greek Emperor and his Clergy to the Celebration of
a Council in one of the Cities of Italy therein mentioned; sending at the same
time a Fleet of Galleys he had hired of the Venetians, to fetch them to it.
Which Nuncios being arrived at Constantinople, they were in great haste to have
an Audience; and having obtained one, they did, in the Name of the Ecumenical
Council of Basil, invite the Emperor and his Clergy to imbark upon the Galleys
they had brought for Italy, in one of the two Cities whereof the Pope and
Council were both agreed, that the Synod he had desired and promised to come
to, should be assembled. The Truth of which Invitation was confirmed, not only
by the Ambassador the Emperor had sent to the Pope, but by the Ambassador
likewise whom he had sent to the Council; both which Ministers having been
corrupted by Eugenius, were sent along with this Fleet to vouch for the Truth
of all that the Nuncios said. Which was done likewise, tho innocently, by the
Council's own Resident at Constantinople; who having heard nothing of the
Division the Pope had made at Basil, and knowing the Nuncios to be Members of
that Synod, had not the least suspicion of their being Impostors, till about a
Fortnight after that News was brought, that a Fleet from the Council, with its
Nuncios aboard, were come the length of Chios; the Report whereof was bore down
by the Nuncios at Constantinople, and their corrupted Vouchers, with an
astonishing Confidence, as a most impudent and groundless Lie set about on
purpose to disgrace them. But at the end of five Days the Council's Fleet
appeared before the City to confirm it; which having thrown the Papaline
Nuncios, who did not know what to say next, into a terrible plunge, the Admiral
of their Fleet who was the Pope's Nephew, had he not been hindered by the
Emperor's express Order, had taken an effectual Way to have helped them out of
it, by having gone out to Sea with an Intention to destroy the Council's Fleet
as a Fleet of Pirates. On the doing whereof the Nephew had set his Heart so
much, that he sent the Emperor back word, when he received his Order not to
stir from his Anchors, that he could not justify his not going out to Sea to
destroy those Pirates, being expressly commanded in his Commission to do it
whenever he met them. But the Emperor, who could not suffer his Coast to be
so affronted, ordered the Council's Galleys into the Port of Cygneum, giving an
Audience to the Legates that were on board them, who were the Bishops of Visoe
and Lausan; on the same Day they came ashore, by whom he was quickly convinced
of their being the Legates of the Council, and of the former Nuncios being
Impostors sent by Eugenius, and that the Decree they brought with them had been
made only by a small and boisterous Party in the Synod. But tho the Emperor and
Patriarch were both satisfied, that the first Fleet was sent by Eugenius, and
not by the Council; nevertheless they resolved to imbark upon it for Italy,
notwithstanding all that the Council's Legates could say and promise to persuade
them to go upon their Galleys, tho they, reckoning that the Greeks had been
gained by the Papalins by promises of great Succors, and Sums of Money, strived
to outbid them in both, assuring the Emperor, that the Council had all the
Western Princes on its side, and that Eugenius, if he was not already, would
certainly be deposed by the Council before he could get to Italy. But when they
found this would not do, their next Business was to dissuade the Emperor, since
he would not go with them, from going at all; telling him, it was no proper
time for him to seek to reconcile the Greek Church to the Latin, now that the
Latin was so divided within it self; and that therefore it would be his best
course to put off his Journey till he saw how the present Dispute betwixt the
Council and the Pope would end: In which Diligence they were seconded by all
the Greek Ecclesiastics who were named to go with the Emperor and Patriarch in
their Western Expedition.

But whatever it was that had determined them, on Eugenius's Galleys they
would, and did go, whom I shall leave sailing for Italy, and return to see what
the Council is doing. It being highly offended with Eugenius for having the
Confidence thus to make use of its Name and Authority, not only in
contradiction to what it had decreed, but with an intention to blow it up, and
with it the Authority of all future General Councils, on the last of July 1437,
they published a Monitory and Citation against him; wherein having accused him
of Ecclesiastical and Civil Maladministration, and of Simony, Prevarication
and Perjury, and of contemning the Authority of a General Council, it summoned
him to appear, either in Person, or, being lawfully hindered, by his Procurator
within the term of sixty Days, to answer to the Crimes he stood charged withal;
threatening, if he did not appear, to proceed against him for his Contumacy;
nulling at their next Session all Creations of Cardinals which were said to
have been made by Eugenius, as also the suppositious Decree that appointed
Florence or Vtinum to be the Place the Reconciling Council was to meet at.

But Eugenius, whose Affairs in Italy were in a much better Posture, while
those of the Council, by reason of the Emperor's Absence from them, and of his
being engaged in a War in Bohemia, were in a worse than when he stooped to make
an Adhesion to them, was so far from obeying this Citation, that by a Bull
bearing date the 16th of October, he translated the Council from Basil to
Ferrara, having so little regard to the Decree made by his Basilian Faction,
and which he had confirmed, and was at that time making use of at
Constantinople, as to name neither of the Places that are mentioned therein; of
which, tho it was a great Affront to them, we do not read that his Basilian
Partisans complained, that being a thing that Pensioners dare not do, tho never
so ill used by their Patrons. But tho those tame Creatures durst not resent
their having their Authority thus despised, the Council which was not under the
same Ties to Eugenius, so resented his having pretended to translate it, that
without allowing him one Day after the Expiration of the Term in the Citation,
they solemnly pronounced him Contumacious: After which, at the Request of the
Ambassadors, they granted him three Months to offer his Reasons, declaring his
pretended Bull of Translation to be void, and making several Regulations about
Appeals to Rome, and the disposing of Benefices, to the further retrenchment of
the Papal Revenues; and so soon as the said three Months were expired, they
solemnly declared him to be suspended from the Administration of the Papacy,
both in Spirituals and Temporals, and that the Administration thereof was
devolved to the Council; commanding all Christian Princes and Bodies, upon pain
of Excommunication to be ipso facto incurred, and all Ecclesiastics upon the
same Penalties, and those of Deprivation, and of being disabled to hold any
Preferments, not to yield him any Obedience for the future.

After the passing of which Sentence, the Doctrines of a General Council's
deriving its Authority immediately from Christ, and of all Christians, the Pope
himself not excepted, being bound to obey its Decrees, were by the Synod
declared to be Matters of Faith, as Eugenius for not believing them was
declared to be a Heretic, several of the Prelates having contended to have had
him declared Relapsed, that he might not be capable of a Pardon, tho he should
submit.

But as Eugenius was very far from any thoughts of submitting, so the Synod on
the 4th of May, the day appointed for passing the Sentence of Deposition upon
him, in a full Assembly declared Gabriel Condelmore, which was Eugenius's Name
before he was chosen Pope, to have mocked God and the World by his
Prevarications, and to be guilty of despising the Authority of this present and
all other General Councils, in having pretended to translate this of Basil
without its own Consent, and in having refused to appear when cited by the said
Synod, and for continuing contumacious and disobedient to the Commands of the
Church, and a Disturber of her Peace and Unity, and for being an incorrigible
Schismatic, and obstinate Heretic, a perjured Person, and a Dilapidator of
the Roman Pontificate, to have rendered himself unworthy of the Papacy, or of
any Title, Degree, Honor or Dignity whatsoever: for which reason the Sacred
and Universal Synod of Basil does pronounce and sentence him to be lawfully
deprived of the Papacy or Roman Pontificate, amoving, depriving and throwing
him out of the same, reserving a Power to it self to proceed yet further
against him, and prohibiting the said Gabriel upon pain of Excommunication to
style himself any longer Pope, and all Christians under the same Penalty any
longer to own or obey him as such.

After the passing of which Sentence, the Synod having observed that some of
its Members were stealing from it daily to Eugenius, who was prodigal of his
Preferments to all such Deserters, it passed a Decree that the Synod should not
be dissolved but with the Consent of two thirds of its sitting Members, nor be
hindered from going on with the Work it had in hand, and particularly that of
choosing a new Pope, whose Election they appointed to begin on the 60th day
after that whereon Gabriel was deposed, summoning all the Cardinals to come to
it, and nulling all Conventions, Pactions, Promises, Obligations and Oaths
which might pretend to hinder them: But not expecting that many of the
Cardinals would come, they ordered that 32 of the Prelates, or other
Ecclesiastics of the Synod, should be joined with the Cardinals, and have
Voices in the said Election: and in case the Person chosen by the said Electors
should refuse to accept of that Dignity, that they should have Power to meet
again and choose another, and so on till they had filled the Roman Chair;
prescribing the form of an Oath to be taken by the Pope that should be chose,
the main Point whereof was, that he should swear to be obedient to the Decrees
of all General Councils, and particularly to those of Constance and Basil.

After the passing of which Orders, the Synod finding it would be a tedious
Work for so great a Body as it was, to agree in the Nomination of 32 Electors,
it thought fit to commit the Nomination of them to three Persons, who were to
be of that Number themselves. The three were Thomas a Scots Cistertian Monk,
Abbot of Dondruina in Galloway, who had stickled hard to have had Eugenius
declared a Relapsed Heretic; and John of Segovia a Spaniard, and Archdeacon
of Villa Viziosa; and Thomas de Courcellis a Frenchman, and Canon of Amiens;
who being named by the Council, took Christian de Gratzregia a German, and
Rector of St. Peter in the Diocese of Vlm, into their Number; which four did in
a short time name the other 28, much to the Satisfaction of the Synod; which 32
with the Cardinal of St. Cecilia, the only Prelat of that Order then remaining
in the Council, did after five Scrutinies choose Amy the first Duke of Savoy
Pope, who had sometime before retired to the Desert of Ripoli, where with
several of his Nobles he lived as a Hermit.

I must here stop in the Account of this Transaction to reflect a little on
this Scots Abbot, Thomas the Cistertian Monk, who was chosen the first of the
three Electors. It is somewhat strange that none of the Scottish Writers speak
of him. It was a great Honor to that Nation to have produced a Man of so
eminent a Character, who upon so extraordinary an occasion was set at the head
of such a Business, which was in a great measure to be supported by the Credit
of those to whom it was trusted. One ought to think that both his Learning, his
Integrity, and his Judgment were very much distinguished, and yet I do not find
that he is known to the Writers of that Nation, tho the best they had, and one
of them the best that any Nation ever had, writ within a hundred Years of this
time. If Boethius and Lesley would take no care to preserve the Memory of a Man
who was so much concerned in such a Business, yet how he escaped the Diligence
of Buchanan, who must have valued him the more for it, is somewhat strange:
perhaps the case with him was like that of a Prophet who is not without Honor
save in his own Country; or so transient a thing is Fame and Reputation, that
he who in one Age was esteemed the Man of the first and most distinguished
Merit of a whole Council, is so forgotten in the next, that even those who have
labored much and with great Success, Buchanan especially, to raise the Value
of their Country, have not mentioned a Man that was so great an Honor to it,
and that within memory of the time in which they writ. But I now return to the
Sequel of this Matter.

The Synod, which was extremely well pleased with the Election, immediately
dispatched the Cardinal of St. Cecilia with 24 Prelates and Nobles, to acquaint
the said Duke with his being chosen Pope; who being persuaded by the said
Cardinal to accept of the Papacy, he took the Name of Felix, and after having
taken the forementioned Oath, was crowned with great Solemnity at Basil.

This Cardinal of St. Cecilia, who was commonly called the Cardinal of Arles,
for his having thus adhered to the Council to the last, is represented by the
Papalin Writers of his time, and by some Moderns, as a Monster made up of
Ambition and Revenge; Ciaconius in his Lives of the Cardinals, calling him the
great Reproach and Blemish of his Order: and yet for all that, this Monster of
a Cardinal was for his extraordinary Piety and Miracles beatified by Clement
VII. in the Year 1527, and has been ever since prayed to with Authority in
France, which was done by the Pope without taking any notice of his ever having
repented of his Adhesion to the Council of Basil; by which we may see what
Credit the Characters given by the Papalin Writers to their Adversaries deserve.

Felix so soon as he was crowned, dispatched Legates to all the great Courts, to
acquaint them with his being chosen Pope; by which tho Spondanus and other late
Writers will not have him to have been acknowledged, Sabellicus, Marinul, and
Nauclerus, who writ their Histories about that time, do affirm he was; and all
Writers both of that Age and since that time, do agree that he was acknowledged
by the King of Arragon, the Queen Dowager of Hungary, the Duke of Austria, and
some other Princes.

But howsoever the French King stood affected to Felix, it is certain he was a
Friend both to the Council he was chosen by, and to its Doctrines and
Reformations, the Doctrine of a General Council's being superior to the Pope
being at that time and ever since the Doctrine of the University of Paris; and
as to its Reformations, the Pragmatick Sanction, which was made after Felix's
Election, was taken out of them.

But to return to Eugenius, who having in the Year 1438 assembled his Synod at
Ferrara, he had it decreed in the first Session thereof, that it was a General
Council lawfully assembled, and that the Assembly of Basil was a Schismatical
Conventicle: after which having the News brought him of the Greek Emperor and
his Clergy's being landed at Venice, he sent the Cardinal St. Crucis and the
Marquess of Ferrara to invite them to come to the Council; to which, after
having been splendidly entertained by the Venetians, they repaired, and were
kindly received by Eugenius; who, tho he never reckoned himself secure of them
till he had them within the Walls of Ferrara, maintained them there seven long
Months, and at a vast Charge, before he assembled the Synod, tho it was then in
being, and had had some Sessions just before their Arrival.

But tho we are not told what it was that kept Eugenius so long from assembling
the Greeks in his Synod, one may, I think, venture to say, that it was nothing
but his being sensible that in their Principles the Greeks were much greater
Enemies to the Papal Supremacy than the Basileans, in not only holding that the
Pope was subject to a General Council, but in holding farther, that all the
Primacy he had was derived purely from the Constitutions of such Assemblies;
which, considering what use the Basileans would have made of Disputes in
Eugenius's own Synod upon that Point, made it not safe for him to incorporate
the Greeks into it, until he had by Bribing, Dieting, and some other Methods
that required time, made them either change those Principles, or till he had at
least brought down their Stomachs, which after they were in Italy, were visibly
too high for Eugenius's Business with them: for besides that the Greek
Patriarch had declared at Venice, that in case he found the Pope to be the
elder Man of the two, he would then reverence him as his Father, so if he was
much about the same Age, he would then treat him as a Brother, and if younger,
as a Son; so when the Pope before he landed at Ferrara, sent him word, that he
expected that he and his whole Clergy should at their first Audience adore him
and kiss his Foot, the Patriarch disdaining such a servile Submission, sent
back word, that as it was a thing he had never so much as dreamed of, so he was
resolved rather than yield to such a monstrous thing, to return home
immediately, without ever seeing the Pope: neither would he be persuaded to set
his foot on shore until the Pope had promised not to require that of him, or of
any of his Clergy.

And tho it was not possible for any Assembly of Men to depend more entirely on
a single Person than the Greeks did on Eugenius, both at Ferrara and Florence,
to which last City he removed them, on purpose to have them closer in his Pound
than he had them at Ferrara, from which Place some of the chief of the Greek
Bishops had attempted to have made their escape, none of them at either of
those Places having a bit of Bread to put in their Mouths, but what they had
out of the Pope's Basket; yet for all that Dependence Eugenius never had the
Courage once to propose to them the thing that was in difference betwixt him
and the Basileans, but was contented, for all the Charge and Trouble he had
been at, with having kept the Greeks from going to Basil, and with their having
made a general Acknowledgment of the Pope's being Christ's Vicar, St. Peter's
Successor, and Head of the Church, but with such a Limitation as made that
Acknowledgment to signify nothing as to the Authoritative Supremacy by a Divine
Right, which the Pope pretends to; the Greeks as much as they were mortified,
having absolutely refused to subscribe that Instrument, before they had it
expressly declared therein, that the Pope's Authority was such as was contained
in the Acts and Canons of General Councils: in all which there is nothing that
makes for that Authoritative Supremacy of the Pope, but a great deal to prove
that he had no Primacy above his Brethren, but what was given him by Councils,
purely on the Consideration of Rome's being the first City in the Empire.

Eugenius was not so weak a Man as to be imposed on by the Greeks, in a
Submission that was so limited as to signify nothing to his purpose, but rather
the contrary: but the Council of Basil being still on foot, he durst not for
fear of raising Disputes in his own Synod about the Papal Supremacy, press the
Greeks too hard on that Point; for had it not been for that, Eugenius would
have obliged the Greeks both to have kissed his Foot, and to have subscribed to
the Papal Supremacy after another manner than they did, or he would have
starved them for denying to do it.

Eugenius having dismissed the Greeks, yet that he might have the Name of a
Council still sitting on his side, so long as that of Basil was in being, upon
a fantastical pretense translates the Synod from Florence to Rome, where,
without ever having assembled it that we read of, he died in the Year 1446. the
Council of Basil, which upon the Plague's being in that City had translated it
self to Lausan, being still on foot, and Pope Felix still alive, tho not
acknowledged by so many Princes as he was at first.

But as Eugenius, notwithstanding he had done little else all the time he was
Pope than to struggle against the Establishment of the Supremacy of General
Councils, yet had never the Courage absolutely to condemn that Doctrine; so his
Successor Nicolaus, tho no great Friend to it no more than Eugenius, did never
once offer to attack it; on the contrary by the Composition he was obliged to
come to with Felix, he seemed rather to confirm than condemn the main of what
had been done at Basil.

Pius the Second, the most zealous Basilean while he was Aeneas Sylvius, who
succeeded Nicolaus, seemed to have given a Blow to that Supremacy, by a Bull
prohibiting all Christians upon pain of Excommunication to appeal to a future
General Council; and which, to make it the more formidable, he inserted into
the Bulla Coenae Domini, the Absolution from whose Censures is reserved to the
Pope; so natural it is for Apostates to outdo all others in Zeal against the
Party they have forsaken. But this Bull, tho designed every way to lessen the
Authority of General Councils in the Minds of People, yet since only future
General Councils, but not General Councils in being, were named in it, the
Constance or Basil Doctrine was not reckoned to be condemned thereby, the
Cardinals themselves not being so much prejudiced against those Assemblies, as
not to desire to see any more of them: for they being congregated in the
Conclave upon Pius's Death, drew up several Statutes which every one of them in
case he should be chosen Pope, swore to observe. The Statutes were, 1. That he
should continue the War against the Turks. 2. That within three Years after his
Election he should assemble a General Council. 3. That he should never increase
the Number of Cardinals above that of twenty four, nor prefer above one of his
own Kindred to that Dignity. 4. That he should dispose of no great Preferments
but in Consistory, etc. All which Statutes, tho they were sworn to at the Altar
by Paul the Second, who was chosen Pope at that time, both before and after his
Election, yet he was so far from observing them, that presently after he was
crowned he made a public Declaration, and forced all the Cardinals save one to
sign it, that he was not obliged by the Oaths he had taken to keep the said
Statutes; it being the Popes Prerogative to make Laws for others, and not to
have Laws imposed upon them. And as to the Statute of calling a General
Council, he was so far from any thoughts of doint it, that he made it one of
his chief Articles against Platina and the other Critics of Rome, that they
had threatened, upon his having persecuted them so barbarously for their
Learning, to solicit all the Princes of Christendom to have such an Assembly
called to keep the Papal Power within some Bounds.

Sixtus the 4th, who had probably taken the same Oath, before and after his
Election, that his Predecessor had done, seemed to be in haste to comply with
it; for in the first Year of his Pontificate he called a Council to meet at
Rome; but being solicited by the Emperor Frederick to assemble it at Vtinum,
where it would have more freedom, he was so little fond of having it any where,
that he dropped it, reckoning it is like that he had abundantly satisfied his
Oath, by having called such an Assembly, tho it never met. After which, tho
Sixtus had nothing farther from his Thoughts than to call a General Council,
his Heart being entirely set on advancing his obscure Family to Principalities,
to the promoting whereof he was very certain such an Assembly would no ways
contribute, nevertheless the insufferable Effects of that Ambition, and
particularly that of his having had his Hand so deep in the barbarous
Assassination of Julianus de Medicis in the Church at High Mass, made the
Florentines and others to wish for such a Synod, to curb and punish him for
such enormous Violences.

The Florentines having upon Sixtus's putting their Commonwealth under an
Interdict, and following that with an Army, on the account of their having
hanged the Archbishop of Pisa for being concerned in that Murder, and their
having imprisoned the Cardinal of Florence upon suspicion of his having been
privy to it, assembled a Synod of all their Prelates; they after having charged
Sixtus with that Murder, and commanded the Ecclesiastics not to regard his
Interdict, appealed to a General Council to have Justice done upon him.

The French King likewise being solicited for Succors by Lawrence de Medicis,
who had narrowly escaped being murdered at the same time, and in the same
place, with his Brother Julianus, called an Assembly of his Ecclesiastics and
Nobles at Orleance: In which it being agreed that the Pragmatick Sanction
should be restored, and Annats abolished, and a General Council called, the
King sent an Ambassador to Sixtus to require him immediately to call a General
Council, to deliver the Church out of the Bondage it was in, and to punish all
that had any Hand in the foresaid Murder; threatening, if he did not call one
presently, to join with the other Princes of Europe to do it. To which Message
Sixtus returned the common prevaricating Answer of his See, That he, and not
Secular Princes, was the Judge when the Calling of such an Assembly was
necessary; and that if the Times would give way to it, which to his great
Sorrow they would not, there was no Body desired to have such a Council called
so much as he did. Neither was there, during the Reigns of Innocent the 8th,
and Alexander the 6th, any talk of assembling a General Council, unless it were
by Princes now and then threatening the Popes with such an Assembly, and by the
Famous Savanorella, who writ to most of the Princes of Europe, exhorting them
with great Zeal to assemble a General Council, to preserve and reform the
Church, and to pull down the Abomination of Desolation, meaning the Pope, which
stood in the Holy Place. For which Zeal the Pope never gave over persecuting
him, until he had him, with three more of his Brethren, burnt at Florence as a
Heretics, who notwithstanding that, is to this Day reckoned by many of the
Roman Church to have been a Prophet, a worker of Miracles, and a Person of
extraordinary Sanctity. But upon the Death of Pius, who reigned but a few
Weeks, the Cardinals who had been most terribly tyrannized over by Alexander,
being for restraining the exorbitant Power of the Papacy, among other Statutes
they obliged themselves by an Oath, in case they were chosen Pope, to call a
General Council within two Years, in a place of Liberty: And it having been
found by Experience, that the taking of that Oath by a Cardinal was no tie at
all upon him when he came to be Pope, they swore farther, That they should
neither absolve themselves, nor give Power to any other to absolve them from
the Obligation thereof; and after having thus, as they thought, secured the
Meeting of a General Council within two Years, they proceeded to an Election,
and chose Julianus Ruvero, Cardinal of Ostium, a Prelat who loved War too well
to be obliged by an Oath to embarass the Papacy with Synods, and who
accordingly suffered not only two, but seven Years to pass without calling a
Council; and so he would seven score if he had lived so long, notwithstanding
his Oaths, had not a Council been called by some of the Cardinals at Pisa to
examine the Validity of his Election, and to punish him for his
Maladministration; and particularly for not having, according to his Oath,
called a Council within two Years; and which, had he never taken any such Oath,
he was bound by the Decree of the Council of Constance to have called. This
Pisan Synod was promoted chiefly by the French King, who was grown so weary of
seeing the Church and Christian State thus desperately Pope-rid, that he had a
Medal struck with this Inscription, Delebo Babylonis nomen, meaning Rome, a
Name none that have been angry with the Popes for these twelve hundred Years,
have ever missed to call that City by. Julius to strengthen himself against
this Pisan Synod, called one at the Lateran, a notable Place for Liberty,
throwing the blame of his not having called it sooner, upon the Wars and
Distractions of the Times, which were chiefly of his own creating: And as to
the Decree of the Council of Constance, he put that off by affirming, That it
had not been regarded in eighty Years; or if it had, the Distractions of the
Times would have justified him in not obeying it. Which Lateran Council, tho
called after this manner, and made up chiefly of a few Italian Prelates, is
reckoned by Bellarmine, and the other Court of Rome-Writers, only for its
having been in absolute Subjection to the Pope, to have been a General Council,
and such a one too as ought to be a Pattern for Tameness to all future Synods:
Nevertheless, excepting its being a Precedent for General Councils having
nothing of Authority or Liberty left them, it did nothing to the Prejudice of
the Constance Establishment.

After this of the Lateran, which was continued for some time by Leo the 10th,
there was no Council called by any Pope, until such another was convocated at
Trent in the Year 1545, by Paul the 3d; and after a Translation of three Years
to Bononia, was reassembled by Julius the 3d; and who before he would
congregate it, had the Emperor's Promise under his Hand, that nothing should be
done therein that he was not for having done. And after a Prorogation of 11
Years by Pius the 4th, an Assembly it was so fettered by the Popes under whom
it sat, that from first to last, nothing that looked like Liberty or Authority
ever appeared in it, the Pope that first called it having strictly charged his
Legates who were its Presidents, not to suffer any Point of his Authority to be
disputed therein, nor to publish any Decree in a Session, before they had sent
a Copy thereof to him, and to a Congregation he had erected at Rome, on purpose
to direct what was fit to be done at Trent; whose Resolutions being dispatched
to the Presidents, were punctually observed by them. These Presidents, besides
their having assumed a new Authority of proposing all that was to be offered to
the Council, and their having by a Band of Pensioners secured the major Vote to
themselves, if any Prelat had the Honesty and Courage to oppose any of the
Papal Designs, they did brow-beat and silence him in the roughest manner; and
in case the Synod should on any occasion prove Refractory, they had a Bull
always ready in their Pocket, impowring them to translate or prorogue it; as
they did twice upon frivolous Pretenses.

Now that this was the true State of the Trent Synod, in that Session of it
which was held under Julius the 3d, is proved beyond all contradiction by the
following Letters; of which, and the great Men they were writ by, I come now to
give some Account.

The following Letters were writ from Trent, during the Session of the Council
which was held under Julius the 3d, to Granvill then Bishop of Arras, who was
afterward the Cardinal Granvill, at that time first Minister to the Emperor
Charles the 5th, by Don Francisco Vargas, Doctor of Law, and Fiscal or
Remembrancer of the Exchequer to the Emperor, by whom he was sent to Trent when
the Council first met in that City under Paul the 3d; where having remained
till it was upon a false Pretense translated by that Pope to Bononia, he was
sent to that City to protest in the Emperor's Name, against its having been
translated thither: Which he did with so much Courage and Dexterity, as raised
his Name very high for an able Statesman; for which Reason when the Council
came to be assembled at Trent again by Julius, he was sent thither by the
Emperor to assist his Ambassadors in all their Negotiations with the Legate, who
at that time was the Cardinal Crescentius.

As to Vargas's Talents, were there nothing else to prove them to have been
extraordinary, the following Letters would abundantly do it; in which with a
great Variety of Learning, and a Noble Air of Integrity and Piety, is joined
such a strength and clearness of Judgment, as is hardly to be met with in any
of the Letters of the most eminent Statesmen now extant. I will not say,
because I read of another of the same Name who was Secretary of State to
Ferdinand the Catholic, that the Writer of these Letters is the Vargas meant
by the Spaniards, in their Proverbial Saying upon any Matters being so
intricate as to require a strong Head to be able to unriddle it, Averiguelo
Vargas, let Vargas dispatch it; yet this is certain, that our Vargas was looked
upon by the Emperor and all his Ministers, as the most dextrous Man at Business
of any Spaniard of his Time; upon whose having acquitted himself so much to the
Emperor's Satisfaction at Trent, he was presently after the Prorogation of the
Council, sent Ambassador by the Emperor to the Republic of Venice; from
whence, after having resided there some time, he was recalled, but with an
Intention of sending him thither again with a double Character of Ambassador,
both from the Emperor and his Son Philip; the Design whereof was, to have
helped Spain by that means, after it should come to be separated from the
Empire, to the Precedence of France: Which being a thing Charles had set his
Heart upon extremely, he pitched upon Vargas as the Person of all his other
Ministers, that was the fittest to manage so important and difficult a Point.
But tho the French were too wise a Nation to have such a Trick as that double
Commission was put upon them, and had too good a Cause to be baffled in it, in
so wise a Government as that of Venice; it was nevertheless acknowledged by
all, that Vargas said and did all that was possible in such a Case. So that Si
Pergama dextra, etc. And tho Ambassadors, and especially Spaniards, are not
very forward to extol the Abilities of the Ministers that are sent to assist
them in their Business; nevertheless we have Don Francisco de Toledo, who was
one of the Emperor's Ambassadors at Trent at the time when these Letters were
writ by Vargas, giving the following Character of him to the Bishop of Arras,
in a Letter bearing date the 1st of December 1551. What your Lordship writes
concerning your being satisfied with the Conduct of the Fiscal Vargas, gives me
great Content, knowing him to be one of the most Learned and best qualified
Persons of his Profession, and withal very zealous for his Majesty's Service,
and much devoted to your Lordship; your Lordship is therefore bound to favor
him with his Majesty, and to see that he be rewarded according to his Merits
and Services, which I shall take as a great Kindness, he being a Person for
whom I have a particular. Affection, being much beholden to him for the
Assistance he has afforded me, of which your Lordship takes notice: In a word,
he is certainly such an Original, as is not to be quoted again.

Father de Malvenda, who was likewise one of the Emperor's Ministers at Trent
at that time, in a Letter to the Bishop of Arras which I here publish, bearing
date February 27, 1552, says, In all our Encounters with the Legate, the Senior
Fiscal has still fallen upon wonderful Expedients; who being a Person of great
Learning, and withal much experienced in Affairs of this nature, has not, as I
am able to witness for him, been mistaken in any one Point. And in another of
his Letters, I publish likewise, bearing date the 12th of October 1551, he
tells the Bishop of Arras, The Fiscal is certainly such a Person as you take
him to be, that is, a Man of strong Sense and Judgment, and very serviceable in
giving such Directions as are necessary about the Council.

Now as Charles the 5th's Kindness for Vargas, whom he knew to have writ so
freely of the Corruptions and Abuses of the Church of Rome, and of the
Jugglings of the Popes and their Ministers, is an Evidence of his having, when
he reigned, been no great Bigot for Popery; so we have reason to believe, that
after his Retirement, when he came to make the study of Religion his whole
Business, he had his Mind so enlightened, as to discover both the Errors and
Corruptions of Popery, and the Truth and Beauty of the Protestant Doctrines so
far, as to have died in the Faith of the latter; of which, considering among
whom he died, and how much all the Monks and Friars of Spain, if it had been
so, would have been concerned to have suppressed it, tho a direct and positive
Proof is a thing not to be expected; nevertheless not only his Chaplain and
Preacher, but he likewise who was his Confessor at his Death, as also the
Archbishop of Toledo, who assisted him in his last Minutes with Ghostly
Counsel, being all accused, as they were, of being Protestants, is such an
Evidence of that Prince's having been of the same Religion, as an impartial
Mind can hardly know how to resist.

For, 1. As to his Chaplain and Preacher Augustine Cazal, who was Canon of the
Church of Salamanca, and is acknowledged by his Enemies to have been one of the
most Eloquent Preachers that ever Spain produced; he was taken up by the
Inquisition for being a Protestant in the Year 1558, and was with 13 more, who
died professing the Protestant Religion, burnt publicly at Valladolid in the
Year 1559. the unfortunate Prince Charles, and his Aunt Dona Joanna, who was
Governess of Spain at that time, being Spectators of that barbarous Execution.

2. His Confessor Constantine Poncius, who was Canon of Sevil, and a Person of
wonderful Piety and Learning, was likewise taken up by the Inquisition for
being a Protestant; who dying in Prison, the Inquisitors know best of what
Death, had his Bones and Effigies burnt publicly in the Marketplace of Sevil
in the Year 1560, as were also the Bones of the Learned Dr. Egidius Canon of
Sevil, who had been named by the Emperor to the Bishopric of Fortosa, who
either died, or was murdered in the same Prison, eighteen being burnt alive at
the same time for being Protestants: on which occasion the Writer of the
History of the Inquisition says, That had not that holy Tribunal taken care
thus to put a stop to those Reformers, the Protestant Religion had run through
Spain like Wildfire, People of all Degrees and both Sexes being wonderfully
disposed at that time to have embraced it. Nay, the Author of the Pontifical
History, who was present at some of those Martyrdoms, and particularly at that
of Herrezulo, says, That had those Learned Men been let alone but three Months
longer, all Spain would have been put into a Flame by them.

Lastly, Bartholomew de Caranza, a Dominican Friar, who had been Confessor to
our Queen Mary, and who upon her Recommendation was preferred to the
Archbishopric of Toledo, having assisted Charles with his Ghostly Counsel in
the last Minutes of his Life, was not many Months after confined to his Palace
by the Inquisition in the Village of Tordelaguna, upon suspicion of his being a
Protestant; from which place, after a Confinement of seven Years, he was
removed to Rome, and committed to the Castle of St. Angelo, where he remained a
close Prisoner ten Years, and was condemned at last as one suspected of Heresy.
This Archbishop was reckoned one of the most learned Divines of his time, and
as such, was sent by Charles the 5th to the Council of Trent, where he both
preached before that Synod, and writ a Treatise of the Personal Residence of
Bishops and Pastors; he published likewise a Compendium of all the Councils,
and a large Catechism in Spanish, which was printed in Flanders: of which
Archbishop, and the three forementioned Martyrs, I think one may truly say,
that they were Persons every way qualified to have reformed a corrupted Church
after the best manner. But that God, after he had raised up such great Men, to
have done so excellent a Work, should suffer a barbarous and inhuman Court thus
to destroy both their Persons and all the Effects of their holy Labors, is a
Mystery of Providence, whose Ways, tho always righteous, are many times great
Depths.

To these Evidences of Charles the 5th's having died a Protestant, I shall only
add, that his Grandson Charles Prince of Spain, who had lived some time with
him in his Monastery, was afterward imprisoned by his Father Philip, and, as
was generally believed, was put to death by him, as a Favourer of Protestants;
and what Mezeray a Papist says thereof in the Reign of Francis the Second, is
remarkable.

At Philip's Arrival in Spain, he caused a great many to be burnt in his own
Presence at Sevil and Valladolid of those they call Lutherans, both Men and
Women, Gentlemen and Ecclesiastics, as likewise the Effigies or Fantom of
Constantine Ponce, Confessor to Charles the 5th: we must not wonder that he
scrupled no more the defaming his Father's Memory, since if we will believe
some, he would have made his Process too, and have burnt his Bones for the
Crime of Heresy, nothing hindering him from it but this Consideration, That if
his Father were an Heretic he had forfeited his Estates, and by consequence
had no right to resign them to his Son.

Sandoval in his Life of Charles the 5th, takes great pains, by false
Relations, to clear his Hero from this Suspicion, as by saying, that Charles
when the Archbishop of Toledo came to him, would not, tho he had desired to
see him, so much as speak to him. But as Spondanus well observes, there is
little Credit to be given to what Sandoval writes of that Emperor, who under
the Title of his Life, designed to write only an Encomium of him. And that it
may not look strange, that the Bishop of Arras, who when he was Cardinal
Granvill, was for his Bigotry for Popery, called in Flanders the Prince of
Papists, should be so much a Friend to Vargas, who had writ his Mind so freely
to him concerning the Corruptions of the Roman Church, and the Jugglings of the
Popes and their Ministers, the Reader is to know that that Prelat changed his
Temper as to the Affairs of Religion with his Master; he who was the chief
Champion for Popery under Philip the 2d, having, after these Letters were writ
to him, pushed on his old Master Charles the 5th, to invade the Papal
Territories with a strong Army, in order to strip the Pope of all his Lands and
Temporal Jurisdictions; which was accordingly attempted by the Duke of Alva, at
that time Viceroy of Naples.

But to return to Vargas: When he was at Trent, he writ oftener than once to the
Bishop of Arras, that there was no Business to be done there, the Legate being
only the Executioner of the Orders that came from Rome; so that if there was
any good to be done, which he much doubted of, it was to be done at that Court.
Philip the Second accordingly, when the Council, after a Prorogation of 11
Years, came to meet again under Pius the 4th, sent Vargas his Ambassador to the
Pope, with whom we are told he labored hard to have asserted the Liberty and
Authority of the Council, and to have had those Mischiefs remedied that he had
formerly complained of at Trent. The Pope, says Mr. de'l Isle, who was the
French Ambassador at Rome at the same time, at an Audience I had of him,
complained of a long Debate he had with the Ambassador Vargas about the words,
Proponentibus Legatis, which Vargas would have had so altered, that the Bishops
might not be deprived of the liberty of proposing what they had a mind to in
the Synod; The Pope told me, says de'l Isle, that he put him off at last by
telling him, that he had something else to do than to dispute about what Case
and Gender Words were of: Which was a pleasant way of putting an end to a
Debate whereon the Authority of the Council so much depended. But the truth is,
Vargas was a Person the Pope was too angry with to treat him civilly, as we are
told by the same French Ambassador, who says, Mr. Vargas has a Mark set upon
him at Rome on the account of the Dispatches that have been made by him both in
Spain and at Trent, wherein he had complained of the Pope's having the Council
in subjection to him, and had exhorted the Prelates thereof to assert their
Liberties: With which, says he, the Pope is much offended, and resents it
highly against him.

The Count Brocard, who was sent by Pius to the Court of Spain upon
extraordinary Business, was commanded at the end of his Instructions to solicit
vehemently the calling home of Vargas, as a Person no ways acceptable to his
Holiness: But when Pius found he could not get him to be recalled, he courted
him to that degree, as to gain him at last, if Pallavicino may be believed, to
write in defense of his Authority to the Spanish Bishops that were at the
Council; but before he was brought to that, if he ever did it, we shall find
him writing to the same Prelates, to do things which must have incensed the Pope
more against him than all that he had ever said or done before.

For whereas the Spanish Bishops (who at the opening of the Council under Pius
had all insisted on having the present Council declared to be a Continuation of
the former, and to have in all its Acts the Title of Ecclesiam Vniversalem
repraesentans given to it, and on having the words proponentibus Legatis not
used) were all, except the Pious and Learned Archbishop of Granada, grown slack
in the prosecution of those Points; the Ambassador Vargas did thereupon write a
long Letter to that Archbishop, who was his particular Friend, which was to be
communicated to all the rest of his Brethren, wherein he earnestly exhorted
them to resume their former Zeal, and either to carry those important Points,
or to withdraw from the Synod; or in case that should be thought too much, to
get the Determination of them at least deferred until the Ambassador should
come to them; declaring every thing that had been done to the detriment of
those Points, to be both of its own nature void, and never to have been enacted
by any Lawful Authority.

When this Letter was writ, which was not many Months before the end of the
Synod, Vargas was undoubtedly still of his old Principles for which the Pope
was so angry with him; and accordingly Pallavicino, whose Resentments, right or
wrong, are always the same with the Pope's, reflecting on that Letter, says,
Thus Learning, when accompanied with a disturbed Mind, can betray People into
such Errors, as they could never have fallen into had they been ignorant: And
having nothing else to object against Vargas and his Friend the Archbishop of
Granada on this occasion, he accuses the former of not being so nobly
descended as the Spanish Ambassadors to the Court of Rome used to be; and the
latter of not being so good a Gentleman as the Bishop of Salamanca, who was
Brother to the Duke de Infantada.

Pallavicino reflects likewise severely on Vargas upon the account of a Speech
that was made by him before the Pope, concerning the Nature and Use of General
and National Councils, at a Meeting of all the Ambassadors, except the French,
that were then in Rome, saying, As it commonly happens to an unseasonable
Ostentation of Parts, so Vargas was rather laughed at as a vain Man for that
Discourse, than praised for it as a Man of Learning. But as to what Pallavicino
says of Vargas's having in that Discourse inveighed stoutly against National
Councils, I do not believe it, any farther than that he might reflect perhaps
upon that which the French threatened to call about that time, and that for two
Reasons; 1. Because this Speech was spoke by him sometime before the writing of
the forementioned Letter, when it is certain he had not swerved from his old
Principles contained in the following Letters; one whereof was, That if the
Church was ever to be reformed, it must be done by National and not General
Councils, from which, as they are now under the Government of the Pope, nothing
but Mischief and the Establishment of Abuses was to be expected. 2. Because
Pallavicino was angry with him for that Discourse, which, if an Invective
against National Councils in general had been any part of it, he would never
have been.

Hitherto we have heard nothing of Vargas but what was all of a piece, and
tended to the asserting of the Liberty and Authority of the Council, in
conformity with what is delivered by him in the following Letters. But as it is
too common for People, who, by an extraordinary Dexterity in Business, have
raised themselves to high Posts, to do things rather than be tumbled down from
them, which they would have abominated the very thoughts of while they were in
their low Stations; so this great Minister, finding after he had by his eminent
Abilities raised himself to the most honorable Employment of the Crown of
Spain, that by his noted and singular Zeal for the Authority of the Council,
and particularly by his late Letter to the Bishop of Granada, he had drawn the
whole Indignation of the Vatican on his Head, so that he must either tack about
and do something to mollify the Pope, or venture to be crushed by him, by
bidding him an open Defiance; his Ambition, if Pallavicino may be believed,
unhappily prevailing over his Integrity, he made a short turn, and of a Veteran
Champion for the Council against the Pope, became a Champion for the Pope
against the Council, or at least against the soundest part of it, and with
which he had been so long united: of which sudden Change Pallavicino gives us
the following Account.

The Spanish Prelates being resolved to have Bishops declared by the Council to
be an Order of Men of Christ's immediate Institution, which is a Doctrine the
Popes will dissolve an hundred Councils rather than give their Consent to; Pius
in order to prevent the Storm which the denial of that Point to the Spaniards
would in all probability raise in the Synod, called a select Number of
Cardinals, and among them the Ambassador Vargas, to consult about the best way
of diverting it. With which unusual Civility and Confidence of the Pope Vargas
was so far overcome, that he was persuaded by him to write a Treatise in
defense of his Authority. With which after he had read it, Pius was so well
pleased, that not being content with Vargas's having writ the Heads thereof to
Trent, he dispatched a Courier thither on purpose, the day after the Heads were
sent thither, with the whole Treatise, expecting great matters from it in that
Juncture: Which Treatise, tho Pallavicino says it was afterward printed, and
the Bibliotheca Hispanica speaks likewise of a Treatise printed by Francisco
Vargas, whose Title was De Episcoporum Jurisdictione, and Pontificis Maximi, I
have never been able to compass the sight of, nor to meet with an account in
any Book, nor from any Person, how those two Jurisdictions are stated in it;
wherefore all that I can say of it, is, that if to curry favor with the Pope,
Vargas has therein made Bishops not to have their Authority immediately from
Christ, then he flatly contradicts himself, having positively affirmed the
contrary in several of the following Letters.

Pallavicino, who is the only Writer I know of that takes notice of this great
Change in Vargas's Principles, tells us farther, That when the putting an end
to the Synod was fiercely opposed by the Count de Luna, the Spanish Ambassador
at Trent, the Pope being much troubled at that Opposition, was assured by the
Ambassador Vargas of that Count's having no Order from his Master for what he
did; and that Vargas having writ a very earnest Letter to the Count about it,
showed a Copy of it to the Pope; who being extremely pleased with it,
dispatched it to his Legates, to choke the Count with it if he went on with his
Opposition. Which Instance of Vargas having changed his Measures, whatever the
former may be, we have great reason to believe is false, notwithstanding Father
Paul agrees with Pallavicino as to the main of it: for besides that Spondanus
writes positively, that Vargas upon the Count de Luna's having writ to him
about that Business, did tell the Pope roundly, That the Council must not be
dissolved, since all the World was for having it continued; and that being
asked by the Pope what he meant by all the World? he answered, Spain; whereupon
the Pope, in railery, advised him to buy Ptolomy's Geography, and to send it
into Spain, to teach his Countrymen that Spain was not all the World: I say,
besides this, it is certain that Philip was so highly displeased with the Pope
for having put an end to the Council so soon, that he had like to have broke
with him upon it.

This is all I have been able to meet with in History relating to Dr. Vargas,
the Writer of the 25 following Letters, and a Treatise about Councils.

But besides Vargas's 25 Letters, and other Papers, which are all Originals, I
do here likewise publish three of Don Francisco de Toledo's, who was the
Emperor's Ambassador at the Council, and one of the Archbishop of Sacor, who
in the printed Catalogues of the Trent Bishops, is called Archiepiscopus
Turitanus; and three (together with a Memorial) of the Bishop of Oren, who is
called in them Episcopus Auriensis; and one of the Bishop of Astorga; and three
of the Bishop of Pamplona, and six of Father Malvenda's, who was both one of
the Emperor's Ministers, and Divines at that Council: Which Letters are all
Originals, and were all writ in Spanish at that time from Trent to the Bishop
of Arras, and do all agree in affirming, That the Council had nothing of
Liberty or Authority in it; and that there was nothing done at Trent, but what
the Pope was pleased to order.

There are, besides these I have published, several other Letters of Don
Francisco de Toledo's, writ with his own Hand, which is so wretched a Scrawl,
that there is no reading of it; the three of his I publish being writ by
another Hand, but signed by himself: As also several Letters of the Bishops of
Badajoz, Pamplona, Elna, Jubin, Segovia, Algueir, Arvorca, all writ at the same
time from Trent to the Bishop of Arras; and which, tho all Originals, and very
legible, yet having nothing in them relating to the Council, or any other
Public Affairs, I did not think it necessary to trouble the World with them.

Now as I do reckon that it will be no easy matter for any one, after his
having read the following Letters and Papers, to judge the Conventions which
were at Trent under Paul the 3d, and Julius the 3d, to have been Assemblies
that had nothing of Liberty in them: So to satisfy the Reader that it was the
same with the Convention which was held at the same Place under Pius the 4th, I
have added a Letter of Monsieur Lansac, who was at that time Ambassador to the
Council from the Crown of France; and one of Monsieur Xainctes, a Doctor of
Sorbon, who assisted at it as a Divine, which are both printed in French, in
the Instructions and Missives, etc.

To conclude: tho the Doctrine of the Synods of Constance and Basil, of a
General Council's being superior to the Pope, has never as yet been condemned
by any Roman Council that pretended to be Universal, yet through that
Doctrine's being discouraged at Rome, the great Fountain of Preferment, as a
thing savouring of Heresy, as also through the Power the Popes were suffered to
exercise in the Synods of Florence, the Lateran, and this of Trent, such
Assemblies are no less in Bondage to the Pope, than they could have been, had
all Councils owned him to be their Absolute Lord and Master. Of which the Court
of the General Inquisition at Rome was so sensible, that in a Decree published
by it, in a Congregation held before the Pope in the Year 1659, it declared,
That the deciding of Controversies of Faith or Manners of the Universal Church,
belonged ONLY to the Judgment of the Sea of Rome, not fearing ever to be
questioned for such high Prerogative Doctrine by any future General Council.

It is now time to bring an Introduction, that has grown already perhaps too
long, by reason of the variety of the Matter that I thought fit to bring within
it, tho as short as I could, to a Conclusion. But before I end it, I know it
may be expected that I should give an Account of the Letters and Papers that I
do now publish in a Translation.

They are all Originals, the Seals of most remain; the Subscriptions and
Directions show it, beyond the possibility of Contradiction. They are writ in
Spanish, most of them fair enough to be read, tho some are very hard to be
read. They were put in my Hands by that most Eminent Divine Dr. Stillingfleet,
now the most worthy Bishop of Worcester; who upon my return from Portugal,
finding that I had made my self well acquainted with the Spanish Tongue, having
stayed many Years there, desired me to be at the pains to translate them. I
soon found what a valuable Treasure I had in my Hands, and therefore asked him
by what Conveyance they came into his Hands. He told me they were communicated
to him by the Right Honorable Sir William Trumbull, one of his Majesty's
Principal Secretaries of State, to whom they had descended among his
Grandfather's Papers, who had been Envoy in the Reign of King James the First
at Brussels for 15 Years, where he had got those Letters. It is probable he had
them from the Posterity of some of Card. Granvill's Secretaries, to whom he had
trusted the keeping of them, and with whom he had left them when he withdrew
from the Netherlands. It seems he bought them from them, but under absolute
Engagements not to publish them during their Lives. He himself was a most
zealous Protestant, which he has derived to all that have descended from him;
and he came into England from his Foreign Employment, about the time that
Father Paul's History of the Council of Trent was first printed in London. That
was the most proper time for publishing these Letters, and must have
established the Credit of the Celebrated History, beyond all Attempts to
detract from it. There is no Memorial left in his Family of the Reasons why he
did not then publish them: yet since I understand from one, on whom I can well
depend, who has read the Register of all his Letters during his Ministry, that
he was full of hearty Zeal for the Protestant Religion, which appears in every
Letter, and in all the Advertisements and Advices offered by him, there must
have been some very important Reason that restrained a Man so full of Zeal for
that Cause, from publishing these Papers in the properest and fittest time in
which ever they could have appeared. It may be supposed, that whosoever gave
them to that worthy Minister, took great care to have it concealed: For the
putting such things in the Hands of one whom the Court at Brussels esteemed a
Heretic, and which must have given such a Wound to an Interest to which those
Princes were so much devoted, must have past for an impardonable Crime; and in
a severe Government this must have ruined those who were suspected of having
done it. And since it might have been possible to have traced back a thing that
was but threescore Years past, it might have been found out who could have had
these Papers in their keeping, and by consequence have given them to the Envoy
of England. It is therefore reasonable to believe, that whosoever delivered
those to him, had a Promise of absolute Secrecy during their Lives: And this
seems to be the Reason why so zealous a Man used so great a Reserve in so
important a Matter. Since that time the want of practice in Castilian has made
them less read; and there are so few of the mechanical People of this Nation
who understand that Language, that I had no encouragement to print them in
their Original Language. I neither could fall on one to copy them, nor hear of
a Printer who could compose, or a Corrector of the Press to whom I could trust
that piece of necessary Labor. Therefore tho I know it is a preposterous thing
to publish a Translation before the Originals themselves are printed; yet since
a Spanish Book could have no great vent in this Kingdom, and I could not
contrive a way how to make the correct printing it practicable, I do now
publish these, not doubting but they will be speedily printed beyond Sea in
their Original Language: for I have, according to the Order I received from
that most Learned Prelat from whom I had them, returned them back to the Noble
Owner of them, who will no doubt preserve them with care, and show them to such
curious Persons as may desire to see them; and who I hear is putting the
publishing them, as well as the translating them, into another Language, into a
very good Method, as well as unto good Hands; which is suitable to the great
Zeal he expresses for the promoting of Learning, in which he is such a Master,
as well as a Patron, and to his Affection to the Protestant Religion, of which
he has given so many eminent Instances.

The CONTENTS of Dr. Vargas's LETTERS to the Bishop of Arras, and other Papers.
Of his Letter, and Note of the 7th of October 1551. THE Legate behaves himself
like a Man distracted; he threatens to leave Trent; accuses the Emperor of not
being so good as his Word; yields at last to the Suspension of some Doctrines.
The Pope and his Ministers abhor and dread nothing so much, as the coming of
the Protestants to the Council: They seek to abuse the World, by pretending
they would gladly have the Protestants come, when at the same time they are
contriving all the Ways they can to hinder them. The Ambassadors of the King of
the Romans voted, that the Cup in the Sacrament belonged to the People by
Divine Right. The Cardinal of Trent voted, that it ought to be allowed to the
Germans. The Council enjoys no manner of Liberty. An Answer is returned to the
French King's Protestation. The Legate stopped the Embassador's Mouth, when he was
urging him to give way to a Reformation; with mention of a Letter, wherein the
Emperor had promised the Pope, before the Council met, that nothing should be
done in it, but what his Holiness would have done. Vargas interprets the
Promise so as to make it no Bar to the Emperor's endeavoring to procure a
Reformation. The Liberty the Pope takes is such, that it could properly be
called nothing, but a Sickness of the Mind, or a Fury. Page 1, 8. Of his Letter
of the 12th of October. A Session had been celebrated with great solemnity. The
Answer to the French Protestation, and the Powers of the Envoys of the Elector
of Brandenburgh were read therein. The Article sub utraque was suspended. The
Envoys of Brandenburgh made a pious and learned Speech, and submitted
themselves to the Council. The Legate endeavors to hinder the Protestants from
coming to the Council, by refusing them a safe Conduct. The Bishops are never
acquainted by the Legate with any thing, till it is ready to be pronounced.
Things are passed hand over head. The Bishops made the Pope's Tools to confirm
his Pretensions, in a Clause in the Answer to the French Protestation; and not
being aware of it, condemned all the French and Spanish Pragmaticks. The Canons
of Reformation were so trivial, that they deserved to be laughed at. Vargas
despairs of the Council's doing any Good to the Church. 11 Of his Letter of the
13th of October. The Legate is continually starting new Difficulties. 10 Of his
Letter of the 28th of October. The Divines are employed in Disputing. The
Protestants are on their way to Trent. The Legate declares, that a Reformation
was not for the Council to dwell on; and that after the next Session it should
meddle with nothing of that nature. Things are handled so in the Council, that
it is not to be expected that either Protestants or Roman Catholics should be
satisfied with any thing it does. Nothing is done but what the Pope orders;
which is so visible, that the Protestants cannot but be hardened by it. The
Pope presuming on the Emperor's Friendship, acts unaccountably in the Council.
The Legate pumps a Memorial out of the Bishops, and sends it to Rome. Vargas
much discontented to see things so carried. Page 20 Of his Letter of the 12th
of November. No hopes of any Reformation. The Bishops are acquainted with
nothing, nor know not what they vote for. The Council will produce nothing but
Scorn and Confusion. The Pope and his Ministers will let all go to wreck,
rather than reform Abuses. No good to be done at Trent without a Miracle: The
Church will be thrown into a worse Condition by the Council than she was in
before. The Protestants, if they come to the Council, will be hardened in their
Opinions, by what they will see done there. 25 Of his Letter of the 26th of
November. The Legat's Behavior is astonishing; he presumes on the Emperor's
Friendship, and on his Ministers acting so timorously; he treats the Bishops
like so many Slaves. No less than a Miracle can do any good thing in the
Council. The Emperor tires himself in vain in negotiating with the Pope and his
Ministers. The Bishops are displeased with the Legat's exorbitant Proceedings.
Nothing to be expected from the Council, but what would prejudice the Church,
and advance the Court of Rome. The Legate endeavors by a Trick to settle the
Business of Benefices, in case they shall be lodged in the Bishops. Care must
be taken that the Good of the People, and not only the Profit of the Bishops
may be considered in the collation of them. Vargas is against having any thing
handled in the Council, where the Legate does what he will, and the Pope has any
Interest. Nothing but Mischief can be expected from General Councils, while
they are thus under Bondage. If ever the Church is reformed, it must be done by
National Councils. The Legate to prevent the Churches being ever reformed, is
for having it declared Unlawful for National Councils to meet without the
Pope's Consent, and Legates in them. No hopes of any Remedy from the Council.
The Pope in great haste to have the Council suspended. A Copy of the Decrees of
Doctrine not to be had. The Decrees sent to Rome before they were published,
upon the Divines having contradicted some Doctrines in them. Page 29 Of his
other Letter of the same date. The Decrees of Doctrines not settled till the
Eve of the Session. The Bishops gave their Placets to them, without
understanding them. The Divines of Lovain and Cologn contradict some of the
Doctrines that had been decreed in a hurry: If this should come to be known, it
must ruin the Authority of the Council for ever. The Pope and his Ministers
deserve to go to the Bottom for giving such Offenses; and others to go with
them for suffering such things. The Legat's Design in putting off Doctrines
thus to the Eve of the Session, was that he might the better shuffle the Pope's
Pretensions into them without being observed. The Council enjoys no Liberty.
The Legate seeks to establish the use of Commendas; he hectored the Bishop of
Verdun, for calling the Reformation they were about, a pretended Reformation.
The Electors much displeased with the Legat's Behavior. A sad Complaint of the
Pope and his Ministers, for handling things appertaining to God as they do, and
of no bodies having the Courage to oppose them. Nothing will be done at Trent,
but the confirming of Abuses instead of reforming them. The Legat's whole study
is, to promote the Profits of the Court of Rome. Page 47 Of his Letter and Note
of the 28th of November 1551. The Legate extremely disordered by the Divines
having contradicted some of the Doctrines that had been decreed; which was the
Reason why no body could have a Copy of those Decrees: he endeavors to satisfy
the Divines. Vargas wishes the Confusion the Pope and his Ministers are in on
this occasion, may open their Eyes; but does not expect it should, because
nothing can do it but a Miracle. The Legate begins to wheedle the Divines;
promises they shall be consulted with for the future before any Doctrines shall
pass; he reports that Affairs do not go well with the Emperor in Germany, and
is glad of it. Upon enquiry it is found, that the Doctrines that had been
decreed, were altered, as being erroneous. The Electors are much scandalized at
this. This Error, nor nothing else but a Miracle can convert the Pope and his
Ministers. The Electors of Mentz and Triers are affrighted by Stories the Legate
buzzes into their Heads. 52, 55 Of his Letter of the 7th of December. The Legate
is still starting new Difficulties to hinder the Protestants coming to the
Council; he denies to admit them, unless they will first submit themselves to
the Council. Vargas contradicts him therein. P. 58 Of his Letter of the 18th of
December. The Electors of Mentz and Triers seem resolved to leave the Council:
The Legate is glad of it, that he may have a Pretense to suspend the Council. 62
Of his Letter of the 24th of December. Vargas is surfeited with the Business of
the Council. The Electors will expect the Emperor's Answer before they leave
Trent. He promises to write his Thoughts concerning the Suspension of the
Council, by the next Opportunity. 63 Of his Letter of the 29th of December. The
Council no sooner met, than the Pope and his Ministers were contriving either
to dissolve or suspend it; they were most for a Suspension, for the following
Reasons: 1. That they might still abuse the World with vain hopes of their
intending to do something. 2. That they might gratify the French King. 3.
Because they could throw the Blame thereof with more ease upon the Emperor. 4.
Because they should thereby hinder the Protestants from coming, which they much
dreaded. Should the Protestants come to the Council, it will become infamous to
all the World, if the Legate takes not other Courses. 5. They hoped that if the
Council were but once suspended, it would be hindered by some Accident or other
from ever meeting again. Lastly, They feared that the Council, if there should
happen a Vacancy in the Roman See whilst it was sitting, would interest it self
in the Election of the Pope. Vargas gives several Arguments against both the
Suspension and Dissolution of the Council, provided it may not be suffered to
canonize Abuses. No Reformation is to be expected from a General Council, nor
by any other ways but by a Miracle, or by making a Schism. No hopes of the
Council's taking new Measures. Page 65 Of his Letter of the 1st of January
1552. The Electors seem still resolved to go Home; the Legate is glad of it.
Nothing talked of but the Suspension of the Council. 77 Of his Letter of the 2d
of January. The Bishop of Venosa is recommended to a Bishopric in Spain. His
honest Character. 79 Of his Letter of the 9th of January. The Ambassador
solicits the Legate for a safe Conduct for the Protestants. The Legate sends the
Emperor's Memorial to Rome. Nothing done in the Council but by the Pope's
Order. The Legat's Heart much set on suspending the Council; and labors to
shut a Door for ever against Reformation. 80 Of his Letter of the 10th of
January. Duke Maurice's Ambassadors spoke with great freedom. The Legate is
angry with the safe Conduct that was offered by Vargas; he will die sooner than
give way to any Reformation. The Pope and his Ministers dread the coming of the
Protestants, and wish the Disturbances in Germany may be increased. The Legate
pretends that the Emperor is content to have the Provision to Benefices
settled, as he would have it done; which is false. Vargas would have the Church
rather endure its present Grievances patiently, than by seeking to have them
redressed in the Council, to shut a Door for ever against Reformation. The
Legate still keeps the Bishops in Ignorance, who are acquainted with nothing
till it is ready to be decreed. Page 83 Of his Letter of the 13th of January.
The Legate does all he can to send away the Protestants that are at Trent, and
to hinder the rest from coming: He will not suffer the Council to make use of
its own Seal but when he pleases; his keeping the Seal of the Council is not to
be endured: He is zealous for carrying some pernicious Clauses he had foisted
into the Doctrine of Order, and is for lodging all Benefices in the Pope. 86 Of
his Letter of the 19th of January. The Legate is obstinately resolved to avoid
having any Congress with the Protestants: He labors to divert it, by either
raising some Disturbance in the Council, or by suspending it. Vargas knowing
the Legate would throw the Blame of all his own Miscarriages upon the Emperor,
desires he may be defeated, by having public Instruments taken of what shall
happen of that kind. The Legate had foisted several pernicious Clauses into the
Doctrine of Order, which were first observed by Vargas. The Legate was driving
at things which would make all the World tremble, and himself too, were he not
given over to a reprobate Sense. Page 97 Of his Letter of the 20th of January.
The Legate declares he will treat no more of a Reformation: He is for having the
suspended Doctrines determined, or (which will be much the same) resolved into
Canons: He labors to get all the Pope's Pretentions established: Instead of
remedying, he seeks to ruin things; he had added a Clause that determined the
Pope superior to a Council, and another that made Bistops derive their
Authority immediately from the Pope, and not from Christ: He called the Bishop
of Oren, Heretic, only for saying he was doubtful of those Points. These
Designs of the Legat's first discovered by Vargas, the Bishop of Cologn
declares, that the Legate would destroy the Papacy by seeking to advance it by
such means. Several of the Deputies being sensible that the Council enjoyed no
Liberty, seemed resolved not to go any more to the Congregations. 100 Of his
Letter of the 25th of January. The Legate at last grants a safe Conduct, but not
the same with that of Basil. The Envoys of Wittemburgh present their Powers,
with a Confession of their Faith, and several Heads of Reformation. The Legate
put into a Rage thereby. Nothing done at Trent but what the Pope orders. The
Legate hectors the Bishops that have the courage to contradict him in any thing:
He called the Bishop of Oren, an Heretic. The Council must end in a Tragedy.
The Legate has ill Designs. 90 Of his Letter of the 28th of January. Vargas
acquaints the Bishop of Arras with his coming to Court in a day or two, to give
the Emperor a full information of things. Page 108 Of his Letter of the 26th of
February. Vargas returns from Inspurg to Trent. The Ambassadors are satisfied
with the Dispatch he brought. He makes the Prelates sensible of the Bishop of
Arras's Kindness to them. The Cardinal of Trent in a great passion, but softened
by Vargas. The Bishop of Ampudia commended. The Legate is jealous of Vargas. 109
Of his other Letter of the same date. The Legate gives out that the Emperor was
for having the Council suspended, which was false; he is close plied by Vargas;
he opposes a Reformation, and pretends the Italian Bishops will not be
persuaded to stay at Trent much longer. 112 Of his Letter of the 28th of
February. The Spanish Bishops begin to mutiny, and send Deputies to the
Ambassador, to complain of the Legat's not acquainting them with any Business,
and of the Council's enjoying no Liberty. The Deputies are hindered by the
Ambassador and Vargas from going to the Legate, for fear of raising a Storm, who
was himself at the bottom of this Mutiny. The Pope is angry with Vargas for
what he had said and done at Trent, who values not his displeasure. 117 Of his
Letter of the last of February. The Legate gets some of the Prelates over to his
side, and endeavors to dissolve the Council. The Spanish Prelates continue
their Juntos, and are for a Reformation. The Legate was never without Powers to
suspend the Council. The Pope and his Ministers are apprehensive the Spaniards
will join with the Protestants to procure a Reformation. Page 121 Directions
concerning the Government of a Council, and the Office of an Ambassador. The
present Council differed from the Ancient General Councils almost in every
thing; which were all called by the Emperors, and enjoyed an entire Liberty,
having all the Ecclesiastical Legislative Power lodged in them; the Pope had
only an honorary Presidency in them, his Presence at them being not judged
necessary. The very Being of a General Council consists in enjoying an entire
Liberty. General Councils are upon expiring, if not already expired. No
Footsteps of any of the Essentials of a General Council appeared in that of
Trent, especially not those of Liberty and Authority: Nothing could be proposed
in it but by the Legate; nothing was done in it but what was ordered at Rome;
the Pope's Pensionaries themselves could not deny but the Council was in
Bondage. The Legate would have the Trent Synod governed after the Pattern of the
Lateran under Leo the 10th, and would not suffer it to have the Title of
Ecclesiam Universalem repraesentans, but instead thereof had added
Proponentibus Legatis, which was a new thing; he added likewise to the Canons
the words, Salva semper in omnibus Sedis Apostolicae Autoritate.

The Legate, out of an ill Design, erects three Classes to meet in different
Places at the same time, and makes the Bishops vote so as is most for his
Purpose: He votes himself very irregularly; he hectors and exposes the Bishops
that vote not as he would have them. Vargas wonders with what Face or
Conscience the Legate could use the words, Dicant Patres libere. Matters of
Doctrine were determined without a due discussion. Diego de Mendoza, the
Emperor's Ambassador, upon the Doctrine of Justification having been published
in a hurry, desires the Legates to consult some of the most famous Universities
about Doctrines before they determined them; which the Legates would not consent
to. He also complained that the Council enjoyed no Liberty, and threatened the
Legates with more German and Spanish Bishops. The Legates, after the Decrees
concerning Original Sin had passed, read the Pope's Brief to confirm them.
Nothing done in the Council, but what was ordered at Rome. The Legates having
pumped the Bishops, dispatched their Pretensions to Rome. They seek to confirm
Abuses instead of reforming them. The World would have reason to thank the
Legates, if they did not do all possible Mischief to the Church, since they did
what they would at Trent. They were always sure of the major Vote, by reason of
their great number of Pensionaries. All the Officers of the Council were the
Pope's Creatures, and had been named by him. Vargas fears the Trent Council
will, instead of doing any Good, do a great deal of Mischief, and thinks it
would be better to wait God's leisure for reforming the Church, than to have a
Council meet; which, as the Pope had ordered things, were able to do nothing
toward it. The Trent Council had no effect, but to mortify Roman Catholics,
and to make sport for Protestants, and to destroy the Authority of all future
General Councils. Julius's Design in sending but one Legate and two Presidents
to Trent, was to make his Authority the more Monarchical.

The Emperor is bound, as the Protector of the Church, to see that the Council
enjoy an entire Liberty: His Ambassadors at the Council are to see that the
Bishops do not vote rashly, and that there be but one Classis. The Ambassadors
must be present at all the Assemblies. It is well if among a hundred Bishops,
there are twenty that understand any thing of Divinity. The most famous
Universities ought to be consulted about Doctrines that are to be determined.
Votes ought to be weighed rather than numbered. The Ambassadors must not suffer
Doctrines which are praeter Fidem, to be determined. The Council being wholly
at Rome, and only the execution of it at Trent, the Emperor's Ambassadors at
those two Places must hold a constant Correspondence. Since the Pope's Legates
have always a Brief in their Pockets to suspend or translate the Council,
whenever they shall judge it convenient, the Ambassadors ought likewise to have
their Instructions what to do in such a case.

Page 127, 149
Dr. Malvenda's Letters to the Bishop of Arras.
His Letter of the 12th of October 1551. The Legate precipitates Matters
strangely; he puts off the Discussion of the Doctrines to the last Day, that
there may be no time for treating about Reformation; he is absolute in the
Council. Whatever the Pope would have done at Trent relating to Reformation,
must be signified to others besides the Legate. It is convenient, for the Honor
of the Council, that the Legate should not receive his Orders so publicly from
Rome. The Legate dreads the coming of the Protestants. Page 157 His Letter of
the 8th of November. Some Account of the Bishops assembling, etc. 164 His
Letter of the 22d of November. He fears the Council will do more Harm than
Good. The Divines are not consulted. Nothing of Majesty in the Decrees of the
Council. A high Character of Vargas. He is unwilling to believe that the Legate
has Orders from Rome to do such shameful things. 166 His Letter of the 19th of
December. The Electors of Triers and Mentz seem resolved to leave the Council.
169 His Letter of the 16th of January 1552. The Envoys of Wittemburgh and
Strasburgh ought to be gratified. The Legate starts Difficulties in every thing.
Don Francisco commended for caressing the Envoys of Duke Maurice. 170 His
Letter of the 27th of January. Several great Points of Reformation had been
proposed by the Envoys of Wittemburgh. The Bishops not being allowed to propose
any thing of that nature, desire to have leave to speak to all those Heads
particularly. The Legate had foisted Clauses into the Doctrine of Order, which
would make the Pope superior to a General Council. Page 172 His Letter of the
26th of February. The Dispatch that was brought by Vargas was extremely well
ordered. The Legate will do all he can to defeat it: He expects the Pope's
Answer. It is madness to think that there can be any Alteration made at Trent,
in the Resolutions which come from Rome. He wishes the Pope's Ministers a
better Mind than they had hitherto discovered. 178 Don Francisco de Toledo's
Letter of the 1st of December. 1551. to the Bishop of Arras. The Legate puts off
all Business to the Eve of the Session. A high Character of the Fiscal Vargas.
The Divines speak according to their Seniority. 180 His Letter of the 20th of
December. The Bishop of Arras is no stranger to the Legat's Methods. The
Electors are dissatisfied with themselves for having come to Trent, and are in
haste to leave it. The Pope will not be sorry for their going home. 183 His
Letter of the 7th of February. The Bishop of Vienna dies at Trent. The Legate is
much indisposed: The Cause of his Illness, was the News he had from Rome of the
Pope's making use of some of the new Cardinals. Page 184
The Bishop of Oren's Letters to the Bishop of Arras.
His Letter of the 12th of October 1551. The Ambassadors of the King of the
Romans voted, that the People had a Divine Right to the Cup in the Sacrament.
No Zeal for a Reformation in the Pope's Ministers. They had told the Prelates
that they must be content with what they should be pleased to allow them, and
not ask for more. Such as touch upon a Reformation, are heard with a very ill
Grace. 186 His Letter of November 28. and Memorial. The Matter of Benefices
turned to a Reformation. The Legate was for establishing Commendas; he abuses
the Bishop of Verdun for stiling the Reformation they were about, a pretended
one, and will not suffer him to speak for himself. The Elector of Cologn is
much scandalized thereat: He asks Oren thereupon, whether he thought the
Council enjoyed any Freedom? The same Elector complained afterward of the
Council's enjoying so little Liberty, and of nothing being done toward a
Reformation; and of the Divines being so much slighted. Oren fears there may be
some Disturbance in the Council, if the Legate does not change his Methods.
Nothing done for the Benefit of the People. The Bishops will be blamed for not
having reformed things, and for having done nothing for the People, tho it be
none of their fault; and will have reason to fear they may be stoned when they
return home. Page 189, 191 His Letter of the 20th of January 1552. He justifies
himself against his Majesty's Letter, which blamed him for his absence from the
Council. The Ambassador charged with being the Cause of it, whose Leave he had
for being absent. He complains of the Bishop of Arras, for having consented to
his being affronted. The Ambassador is uncivil to the Prelates. 234 His Letter
of the 24th of January. The Ambassadors of Maurice and Wittemburg proposed
several good Heads of Reformation. The Bishop of Oren is for answering
particularly to them. 195 The Archbishop of Sazer's Letter of the 2d of
December 1551, to the Bishop of Arras. He is willing to serve God and his
Majesty in the Council; but tho he takes a great deal of Pains, is able to do
nothing toward it. 197 The Bishop of Astorga's Letter of the 26th of November
1551, to the Bishop of Arras. A Session was held, wherein several Decrees were
passed against some new Errors. Other Decrees relating to Reformation were
pronounced. Decrees against Heresies will signify little, if the Abuses
occasioning them be not redrest. 198
The Bishop of Pamplona's Letters to the Bishop of Arras.
His Letter of the 29th of January 1552. He desires the Bishop of Arras's
Favor, to be exempted from the Subsidy granted by the Pope to the King of
Spain; and why. Also concerning his paying 400 Ducats for keeping a Pension.
Page 200 His Letter of the 20th of February. He writes about a Dignity in the
Church of Pamplona, that ought to be conferred only upon a Canon. He is
informed that it is to be sold at Rome to him that will give most; but desires
his Majesty and the Bishop to prevent it. He desires to be made Captain of a
Band of Pensioners, in order to discharge the Subsidy. He thanks him for
several Favors. 202 His Letter of the 27th of February. He desires the Bishop
to write on his behalf to the Legate, to prevent his being wronged, which in the
time of a Council would be a Deformation rather than a Reformation. The Pope
has no right to dispose of Preferments in Navarre. He desires the Bishop's
Favor against the French Licentiate, who abuses the Royal Authority. Vargas
brought word of his Majesty's being against proroguing the Council. 206 Mr.
Lanssac's Letter of the 7th of June 1562, to the Queen Mother. The Pope
promised to leave every thing to the Council, but is not so good as his word;
nothing done in it but by his Order: His Pensioners and Officers make a great
Majority in the Council, who are resolved never to yield to any Reformation.
The Articles of Reformation deferred, and why. Page 208, 210 Dr. Xainctes's
Letter of the 15th of June 1563, to Dr. D'Espence. It is enough to kill an
honest Man, to see what Courses are taken in the Council to hinder a
Reformation. The French are laughed at by the Pope's Creatures in the Council
for their Sincerity. The Spanish Prelates are zealous to have it declared, that
Bishops derive their Authority immediately from Christ: The Papalins will not
endure such a Declaration. A Passage of Justinian with relation to the Council.
210
The Bp of Arras's Letters to Dr. Vargas.
His first Letter. He commends the Doctor's prudent Conduct, and thanks him for
the Light he helps him to as to the Affairs of the Council: He desires their
Correspondence may be so managed, as not to give Offense to the Ambassadors. p.
212 His Second Letter. He magnifies the Doctor's Abilities and Service, and
promises to return an Answer to all the Points mentioned in the Doctor's
Letters. 213 His 3d Letter of the 19th of January. He commends the Doctor's
great Vigilance; he thanks him for the true and exact Information he gave him
of Affairs, and promises to serve him with the Emperor. ibid. His 4th Letter
of the 9th of November. 1551. He excuses his not sending Answers sometimes. The
Legate huddles things strangely. His Comfort, when things go ill, is, that all
is in the Hands of God. He blames the Protestants. He solicits the Pope's
Nuncio and Legate to yield to some necessary things. Their Correspondence is
carried on privately. He would have all Worthy Men considered for their
Service. 214 His 5th Letter of the 5th of March 1552. He despairs of the
Protestants going to the Council. The Papists being sensible that the Pope and
his Ministers would never yield to any thing of a Reformation, are as much as
the Protestants for having the Council suspended. It is to no purpose for the
Emperor to embroil himself with the Pope, by urging him to give way to a
Reformation, since no Fruit can be expected from such Endeavors. The Pope, if
urged to that, will either suspend or translate the Council, to the great
prejudice of the Authority of such Assemblies. His Majesty will write to his
Ambassadors concerning the Germans Pretensions. He recommends Secrecy as to all
things relating to the Council. Page 218 His sixth Letter. He promises to
return an Answer to all the Doctor's Letters, and to do him all the Service he
is able. 220 His first Letter to Dr. Malvenda, of the 16th of February 1552. He
magnifies Vargas as an extraordinary Minister, by whom he understood the Merits
of Malvenda, and the Bishop of Castellamar. The Spanish Prelates are without a
Physician. 221 His second Letter. He complains of the Obstinacy of the Pope's
Ministers, and of the Legates precipitating things so, that it was not possible
they could be duly discussed. He was glad to hear that he had signalized
himself. The safe Conduct very defective. 222 His first Letter to the Bishop of
Oren, of the 1st of February 1552. His Majesty is very much vexed at the
Absence of some Bishops from the Council. His Ambassador uncivil to the
Prelates. He commends the Bishop of Oren for his Zeal in Business. 226 His
second Letter of the 9th of November 1551. He complains of their being forced
in many things to comply with the Pope's Ministers; and that to desire a
Reformation of the Abuses of the Court of Rome, was to knock all Business on
the head at once. Page 228 His third Letter. Tho he uses all diligence in what
is for the Service of God, yet the Iniquity of the Times is so great, that what
is convenient cannot be done. 230 His Letter to the Bishop of Pamplona. He
promises to answer his Desires concerning several Affairs, with all good will.
231 His Letter to the Archbishop of Sazer. He praises him for his Diligence in
the Affairs of the Council, and wishes him a suitable Reward. 232 His Letter to
Don Francisco de Toledo, of the 6th of March 1552. He remits himself to a
Letter he had writ before, and wishes him all Happiness. 233
Tractatus a Doctore Varga conscriptus contra hanc Clausulam perniciosam a
Legato in Doctrinam Ordinis intrusam, editus e Manuscripto; scil. Nam ut illa
sub uno supremo rectore varios and diversos ministrantium continet ordines, ita
visibilis Christi Ecclesia summum ipsius vicarium, pro unico and supremo capite
in terris habet, cujus dispensatione sic reliquis omnibus membris officia
distribuuntur, ut suis quaeque in ordinibus and stationibus collocata munera
sua, in totius Ecclesiae utilitatem, cum maxima pace and unione, exequantur.
Page 237 Tractatus alter ejusdem Vargae contra eandem Clausulam, editus e
Manuscripto. 242

The following Letters are all addressed thus; To the most Illustrious and
Reverend Lord, the Bishop of ARRAS, of his Majesty's Council of State. The
Cesarean Court.
The Names of the Persons mentioned in the following Letters.
THE Pope Julius the Third. The Emperor Charles the Fifth. The French King
Henry the Second. The King of the Romans, Ferdinand Brother to the Emperor. The
King of Bohemia, Maximilian the Son of Ferdinand. The Bishop of Arras, Antonius
Perenottus, who was afterward Cardinal Granvil. The Legate, Marcellus
Crescentius, a Cardinal. The Presidents, Sebastianus Pighinus Archbishop of
Siponto, and Aloysius Lypomanus Bishop of Verona. The Cardinal of Trent,
Ludovicus Madrucius; the Cardinal of Jaen, Petrus Paciecus. The Emperor's
Ambassadors, the Count of Monfort for Germany, Don Francisco de Toledo for
Spain, and Gulielmus a Pictavia for Flanders. The Elector of Mentz, Sebestianus
ab Hausenstain; the Elector of Triers, the Count Eysemburg; the Elector of
Cologn, Adolphus de Schawemburg. The King of the Romans Ambassadors, Fredricus
Nasau Bishop of Vienna, and Paul de Gregorianis Bishop of Agram. The Envoys of
Duke Maurice, Wolfius Colerus, and Leonardus Badehornus. The Envoys of the Duke
of Wittenburgh, Johannes Pleniagorus, and Johannes Eclin. The Envoys of
Strasburgh, Johannes Sleidan, etc. The Archbishop of Sazer, Salvator Alexius;
the Bishop of Pamplona, Alvarez Moscoso; the Bishop of Guadix, Martinus Ayala;
the Archbishop of Granada, Petrus Guerrero; the Bishop of Venosa, Alvarez a
Quadra; Bishop Jubin, John Jubin a Franciscan Friar; the Bishop of Verdun,
Nicolaus Psalm. The Dutch Divines, Johannes Groperus, Ruardus Tapperus,
Ambrosius Pelargus, etc.
ERRATA.
PAge 14. line 7. read there is. P. 16. l. ult. dele together. P. 37. l. 5. put
comma after it. P. 38. l. 25. r. punished by. P. 42. l. 4. no new Paragraph. P.
57. l. 17. dele comma after Divines. P. 64. l. 19. r. Inconveniences. From P.
127, to 147. over all the odd Pages, for Office of an Ambassador, r. Government
of a Council. P. 135. l. 14. put; after expiring. P. 147. l. 24. put a Period
after Councils. P. 152. l. 23. dele that. P. 154. l. 31. put comma after
pleases. P. 178. l. 26. r. Sheep. P. 181. l. antepen. for if r. of. P. 197.
Run. Tit. r. Letter. P. 205. at bottom, r. There follows. P. 211. l. antepen.
r. ceperat. P. 219. l. 27. put the comma after which. P. 237. l. 3. r.
intrusam, editus. P. 239. l. 19. put; after destructionem. P. 242. l. 8. r.
quisquam in. P. 246. l. 16. r. provinciis, Episcopos.

NB. Dr. Vargas's Letter beginning P. 90. should have been put in before P.
108. And the Bp of Oren's Letter at P. 234. should have been placed after P.
194.

THE Council of TRENT Plainly discovered Not to have been a Free Assembly.
Dr. Vargas's Letter of the 7th of October, 1551, to the Bishop of Arras.
Most Illustrious and Reverend Lord,
I Write this, knowing how desirous your Lordship is to be acquainted with all
that is done here, and that I may have the less to write hereafter.

Having received his Majesty's and your Lordship's Dispatches, which, coming
thorough your Lordship's hands, were as full and well ordered as we could have
wished them, I went immediately to speak with the Legate. The Conclusion we
came to, and which was passed yesterday in the General Congregation (for such I
suppose it will be pronounced to have been at the Session) was, that the
Article, sub utraque, with all its dependencies, should be suspended until the
second Session after this that is now to be celebrated; the First being to be
held after forty Days, and the Second on the 25th of January; neither was it an
easy thing for to obtain those few Days. It would ask much time, to relate all
that has passed in this Affair, and the difficulties that were started about
it. The Legate was like a distracted man, and being transported beyond all the
bounds of negotiating, among other things he threatened to be gone immediately,
not being able to endure to see the Council thus affronted, by having matters,
after they were handled, and ready to be determined, suspended thus. He told us
farther, that this was done for no other end but to delay business, for that
otherwise, the Council ought to have been advised thereof before it had
proceeded so far; concluding, that this did not at all agree with what his
Majesty had writ, before he came to Trent, with a great deal more such stuff;
to all which, though I returned him satisfactory answers, which I need not repeat
here, there was no reducing him to Reason.

This Dispute having lasted three Days, the Legate condescended at last to what
is abovementioned, and though we struggled hard not to have had the term fixed,
but to have had that left to the Council, we were not able to obtain that of
him. In fine, that we might not come to an open rupture with him, which we were
very near doing, we were forced to accept of what is granted, hoping that it
may be sufficient time for the Protestants to come in, and for his Majesty, if
he should judge it convenient, for to treat with the Pope, either to prolong
it, or to give some orders about it.

Not doubting of the Legate's having used very brutal methods, that being a
thing he knows full well how to do, whenever he judges it to be necessary, I
was always of the mind that we ought to stand our ground, to see whether he
would offer any thing that was to the purpose; but perceiving, that this matter
went to his very Soul, and fearing lest we might thereby hazard the whole
business, we were glad to agree to what is done, which I take not to be much
amiss.

Don Francisco, who takes a great deal of pains, managed this Affair with his
customary Prudence; the granting of a safe Conduct is likewise agreed to,
notwithstanding there were several that opposed it; nevertheless, fearing what
might happen, it was thought convenient that Don Francisco, should speak to all
our Prelates, before the General Congregation met yesterday: We shall do all we
can to have it dispatched according to his Majesty's Directions, as it is fit
it should.

Your Lordship may be satisfied of what I know to be true, and have writ
formerly, which is, that there is nothing in the World the Pope and his
Ministers abhor and dread so much, as the coming of the Protestants to the
Council; for we can plainly perceive that they are not themselves, nor in a
condition to treat about any Business, when they are brought to touch on that
Point. This is the true reason of their making so much haste, and of their
having been so unwilling to grant what is abovementioned, being in continual
dread least something should rise from under their Feet to disturb them, and of
Peoples coming hither, who may, to their great mortification, deliver their
Minds freely against Abuses, and some other things.

So that in truth it is their whole business to abuse the World, by pretending
that they do hope, and wish that the Protestants would come, when at the same
time they are contriving all the ways they can think of to shut the Door
against them: This, so far as I can understand, was the reason likewise of
precipitating the Doctrine of Justification, as they did: and whereas they
cannot tell but that the Protestants may come hither, so were they but certain,
that they would never come, I cannot tell what they might do.

As to your Lordship's wondering at the Electors not having observed this, and
at their having suffered things to go so far; to speak the truth, it is what I
have likewise wondered at, and the more, since I was told, that the
Ambassadors of the King of the Romans had voted the Communicating under both
Species to be of Divine Right, and that the Cardinal of Trent gave a great many
Reasons, why the Germans ought to be dispensed with therein: As to the Elector
of Mentz, to whom he of Triers is entirely resigned, he was of another mind,
having declared that it would be no advantage to grant that to them, for which
he is highly extolled by the Pope's Ministers and others, as he of Trent is
strangely run down for what he said, by several Reports they have spread abroad
of him.

For among the other Non-Liberties of this Council, this is one, That whoever
offers any thing that is not grateful to the Legate, or that does not suit
exactly with some People's Prepossessions, he is reported to have spoke ill,
and to think worse, and to have taken what he said out of I do not know whom.
And thus most things are handled here with great prejudices. Mentz follows the
Legate in every thing almost which is much for his honor, and for Triers he
votes always as Mentz does.

As to my self, I can say it, that before I knew any thing of the Protestants
being to come hither, I was still of the Opinion, that at least the two
Articles of the Communion, and the Marriage of the Clergy ought to be deferred;
as your Lordship may see in the last Letter I wrote to you in haste of the ^d
Instant; could I but have timely notice of things, I should be able to do your
Lordship more service, for which, till that is done, I must be excused: But as
I have declared that to be my Opinion, so I do remember, that having once spoke
thereof to the Bishop of Verdun at a Congregation, the said Prelate approved of
it, as did also the Count de Montfort when I communicated it to him, and who I
believe spoke of it to Don Francisco, who thereupon writ about it, and by that
means it came into his Majesty's Dispatch, where I was glad to see it, as I was
also to see it in your Lordship's Letter. I shall, in obedience to your
Lordship, take all the care I can to prevent irregular proceedings here; for
there are several matters which the Legate ought to treat with more
Deliberation, than he has hitherto handled things; I pray God give them Grace
to understand this.

Should the Protestants come hither, they will expect, I suppose, to be heard
as to the Matters which are already determined, no less than to those that are
not, as indeed it is but reasonable they should; and the rather, that we may
thereby encourage them to come: Now as they will choose some to speak in their
name, so it will be convenient, in my mind, that the Catholics should appoint
some to answer them, and that they may satisfy them without wrangling, let
them have their several Days allotted, but so that the Protestants may still
continue Plaintiffs.

I take notice of this, because there are some here, who are obstinately of
Opinion, that none but the Protestants are to be suffered to speak to Matters
which are already decided, and that they are only to be heard. Now if this
course is taken, as it will give but little satisfaction, so it will not be
much for the Honor of the Synod, for there is the same reason for answering
them, as there is for hearing them; and does not their saying that the
Protestants shall be heard in Matters which are already determined, only in
order to their being instructed, and their disputing here about things as if
the Protestants were present, demonstrate that this course ought to be taken;
for since most of the things have been determined by former Councils, were it
not on such an occasion as this, it would not be lawful for Catholics to
dispute about them; so that if this course is not take the Protestants will
come hither to little purpose, neither can they properly be said to come to a
Council, but to be brought before a Court. There is one thing that ought to be
well considered of, which is, whether it will not be convenient, when the
Protestants are come, not to have the Sessions so thick, lest by determining of
things wherein they are concerned, they may be provoked to remonstrate, out of
despair of not being able to do any thing: And whether it will not therefore be
the best way to hear both them and the Catholics upon all the Points in
Controversy between them, and after that is done, to have all determined in
one Session, as was done in the Council of Constance with the Heresies of
Wickliff; which course, as it will make things seem to be maturely considered
and digested before they are decreed; so it will prevent such miscarriages as
have been committed in some Matters.

Your Lordship may be pleased to consider what is fit to be done in this, and
all other Points, for whatever you shall judge to be most convenient will
certainly be so. I have not neglected to speak of this wherever it was proper
to do it; and as I have met with several that do approve of it, so it appears
to me to be a very considerable thing, and which may be of some advantage to
us, in order to defeat the Legate's Designs about the present Suspension, which
was the cause of my mentioning it at this time.

As to the French King's Protestation, there will no Decree be pronounced upon
it, but the Answer they have sent to the Legate from Rome will be returned to
it, which I am told is very well framed, and is agreeable enough to what his
Majesty has writ concerning it, being a mean betwixt pronouncing a Decree, and
being silent, though in effect it is much the same with a Decree; the Synods
having thereon declared it self to be universal, which, to prevent provoking,
was in my Opinion convenient enough. I am confident, had we solicited to have
had a Decree, that was substantial but not rigorous, that we should never have
been able to have obtained it, nor to have settled the point with the Pope and
his Ministers, the Legate having been ordered, some Days ago, not to give us
any Answer about it; and the Answer which is said to have been here four Days,
was yesterday read and approved of in the Congregation

As to the Provisions they are here very busy about them; I have formerly writ
something concerning them, and we shall now see quickly what will be done
therein; the Wheat is come already, which has not been so dear here of late, as
it was last Year, when I wrote to his Majesty and your Lordship about it. That
of the Guard is a good thing, and Don Francisco will write how well it is taken
here: It was a good Bargain your Lordship made with the King of the Romans
about Flesh, it being in that and Bread they exact the most, and whereof I was
the most apprehensive. Don Francisco takes care of this as he does of every
thing else, in which I give him all the assistance I am able, which is
something the greater by my being so much in my Lord Cardinal's favor; I pray
God it may succeed.

Your Lordship does by your daily Favors and Kindnesses, and by the particular
care you take of my Person and Advancement, run me so deep into your debt that
I can only say, that I do kiss your Lordship's Hands a thousand times for it,
and do wish to live, that I may by my Services discharge the Debt in part I am
owing to your Lordship, whose I am, and will be all the days of my life; so
that your Lordship, in taking care of my Concerns, takes care of your own. As
to the success, let God do what he shall judge to be most convenient, and if I
do not prosper, let my own ill fortune, or want of Merits, and not your
Lordship be blamed for it, from whom I have already received that Kindness,
whose most Illustrious and Reverend Person and Estate may our Lord preserve and
prosper for many Years, as I desire.

I kiss your Lordship's Hands. Doctor Vargas.
From Trent the 7th of October, 1551.
The following Paper is a Note writ with Vargas's own Hand, but without his
Name or any Date to it.
DON Francisco, I believe, must have writ concerning the Copy of a Letter
wherewith the Legate endeavored with great secrecy to have stopped his Mouth
when he was urging him to give way to a Reformation; in which Letter, if it is
true, his Majesty did assure the Pope, That nothing should be done in the
Council but what he had a mind to have done in it, and that he would oblige the
Prelates to hold their Tongues, and to let things pass without any opposition.
Don Francisco being astonished at this, acquainted me therewith in great
Anxiety; I immediately told him, that I questioned whether what the Legate had
said was true or not: but supposing it were, it signified nothing, since it was
not to be literally understood, as the Legate, who made a great Secret of it,
pretended; that Letter having been writ by his Majesty before the Pope had
granted his Bull for the continuation of the Council, when it was writ on
purpose, to bring the Pope for to grant it; and instead of exasperating him, to
satisfy him with good words, that he should run no risk thereby: which his
Majesty continues still to do, the times being such as will not suffer him to
act otherwise with him: not that ever his Majesty intended thereby that the
Pope should be suffered to do such things, as would bring all to ruin, but
only to do such things as are reasonable, in leaving, as there should be
occasion, the Reformation of Matters to the Synod. Now provided the Pope would
do nothing but what is convenient, notwithstanding he knows full-well how to do
other sort of things, and which are no ways profitable, his Majesty might very
safely offer and promise what he does in that Letter, which is undoubtedly to
be understood with that condition; since neither could his Majesty have any
other meaning therein, nor could the Pope, without forgetting himself, desire
any thing more of him. What I then said, I say now again, and that without
doubting of its truth in the least: though, at the same time, I do heartily wish,
that the Pope may neither by this, nor by any other way have any opportunity
given him of taking more liberty in such matters than he already uses, Quae
proculdubio ad mentis aegrotationem and animi morbum usque pervenit, ita ut non
nisi insania and furor quidem appellanda sit: I do suppose the Legate likewise
presumes much upon this Letter. I do leave it to your Lordship, whether there
be any thing in this, wherewith I ought to be acquainted.

This Promise of the Emperor's, That if the Pope would re-assemble the Council,
he would suffer nothing to be done in it, but what the Pope would have done,
notwithstanding all that Vargas has here offered in its Justification, does
very much reflect both on the Emperor and the Pope: On the Emperor, because at
the same time he made the Pope this promise, he was promising the Protestant
Princes of Germany a free General Council; and on the Pope, for requiring such
an unreasonable promise before he would venture to re-assemble the Synod; so
that whether the Emperor kept his word with the Pope or not; it is certain, the
Pope* when he called the Council in expectation that he would have done it,
never intended, notwithstanding all his and his Legate's Godly professions to
the contrary, that the Council should enjoy any thing of liberty or authority.

Dr. Vargas's Letter of the 12th of October, 1551, to the Bishop of Arras.
Most Illustrious and Reverend Lord,
AS I was going on Saturday Morning to the Session, your Lordships of the 8th
Current came to my hand, with which I received the favor that is customary;
the Session was celebrated with greater Solemnity than any other Session from
the beginning of the Council had been; the Offices being long, it lasted eight
hours, the rest of the time was spent in an Oration, spoke by the Archbishop of
Sazar, which was a very good one, and in pronouncing the Decrees, and in
reading the Answer to the Protestation, and the Suspension of the Article sub
utraque, with all its dependencies, and the Powers of the Electoral Marquess of
Brandenburg, and in hearing an Oration spoke by the Chief of his Envoys; which
Oration was both pious and learned, the Envoy having declared therein, that his
Master did, by virtue of the Powers he had exhibited, submit himself to the
Council; the Powers, as well as the Speech, were elegantly worded; and
notwithstanding he did not specify wherein he was willing to submit himself to
the Council; yet in promising to accept of all that his said Envoys shall
consent to, and approve of, they were received with Congratulations; which has
so far removed a doubt we had, that matters are like to go on better than we
expected: Nevertheless, in case there should be a change, what his Majesty has
commanded, and your Lordship writ to me about, is well ordered. I here send
your Lordship a Copy of the Acts, notwithstanding I know they are sent by Don
Francisco to his Majesty. I have nothing to add, to what I writ to your
Lordship on the 7th Instant, concerning what has passed since, only that things
have fallen out as I said they would; two or three of which I would not have
had done, and which, I think, ought still for to be remedied.

The first relates to the business of the safe Conduct; for seeing they are
willing to grant one, as it is but just they should, I could wish it were
something fuller, and as near to that which was granted to the Bohemians, as
the times will permit: It being such a one that the Protestants desire, and as
must deprive them of all excuses for not coming hither: Such a one would
likewise be agreeable to that of his Majesty's, which, mutatis mutandis, is the
same with that of Basil; that Clause only being left out, which gave the
Bohemians leave to Celebrate their Religious Offices in locis hospitiorum
suorum, etc. And the following Words, Sic tandem ut ab eadem Synodo occasion
quorumcunque excessuum aut delictorum ab eis antea sive modo veniendo, manendo
aut redeundo commissorum aut committendorum minime puniantur, being put before
the Clause, Si quispiam, etc. which, in truth, is no more than is necessary to
secure them from being punished for their Heresies: Neither does it amount to a
Permission, but only a Toleration; so that they shall not be punished for any
Crime, but by Judges, appointed from among themselves, which is granted in the
Clause, Si quispiam, etc. in the safe Conduct of Basil.

The safe Conduct having been thus ordered, was sent by Don Francisco to the
Legate, who, as your Lordship will see, has changed the whole form thereof,
having reduced it to a very small compass, which cannot but give great offense
to the Protestants, who therein have no promise made them, not to be punished
for the offenses of their Religion, which for the removing of Scruples ought to
have been done; and the rather, because they are not allowed the Exercise of
their Worship; it seems likewise to give the Judges, that are to be appointed
over them a Power of taking cognizance of all Crimes they have committed or
shall commit, even savouring of Heresy: Neither is it said that the Judges
shall be appointed from among themselves but only in general, Quod possint
deligere Judices sibi benevolos, which may very well raise such scruples in
them as may hinder them from ever coming hither, since they will never consent,
that they shall be liable to punishments, by any Judges purely on the account
of their Religion; neither will they fail to say, that this was done with a
design.

The Clause likewise, quantum ad ipsam sanctam Synodum spectat, may very well
make them jealous, since the Synod ought to promise for the Pope the Emperor
and all other Princes and Prelates, that they shall enjoy an entire security,
as was done by the Synod of Basil, and especially since they have promised his
Majesty so to do: they ought likewise to suspend the Decrees of the Council of
Constance, made in its 9th Session; and that of Sienna, as was done in the safe
Conduct that was granted to the Bohemians, that being a thing the Protestants
have much in their thoughts, and who, by their insisting thereon, have much
retarded his Majesty: and the truth is, the Synod in a case of this importance
ought not to grudge them words, but ought without descending to niceties, or to
what is enough, or not enough, for to grant them an entire security: All which
things ought, in my judgment, for to be remedied, and so they shall, if the
Legate will, as he ought to do, let me see the safe Conduct before it is
pronounced. But as I have formerly writ your Lordship, considering that he
grants this with a very ill will, I do not at all wonder at his acting therein
as he does, and at his contriving a thousand ways for to hinder those people
from ever coming to the Council.

As to the Prelates, where is no need of taking any notice of them, they being
no ways concerned in that matter, the Legate having never so much as acquainted
them with it, all things appearing well to them at first sight, and who knowing
nothing of matters until they are just ready to be pronounced, pass them
without any more ado.

On which occasion I told Don Francisco, before Dr. Malvenda, who is an honest,
learned and judicious Man, that since the Legate had promised, that if his
Majesty was not satisfied with this, he would grant such a safe Conduct as he
should desire, it was fit it should be done, though it would have been better
that it had been done already without such a great expense of time, and
spinning out of business by delays. Your Lordship may be pleased to take this
matter into your care; and as it will be well if the Protestants will be
satisfied with what is already done, so it is expedient to try presently
whether they will or not, that if they should not, his Majesty may return the
safe Conduct as he would have it: I pray God they may here comply with that
freedom they have said they will: I have been the longer upon this, because it
appears to me to be an affair of great moment.

The second thing wherewith I am displeased, is in the answer that was given to
the Protestation beginning at Quod vero testatur; in which the Pope, for his
own ends, has made the Council a party in the authorizing of his affairs, and
in defending of his pretensions against all the Pragmaticks, which have been,
or may be made in France concerning Benefices, and other such matters? this the
Council ought by no means to have been brought to have done, for besides what
his Majesty has writ hither concerning such points, the Pragmaticks of France
about which there have been such great debates, are matters they are too little
acquainted with, to take upon them to approve or disprove, or pronounce any
thing against them Synodically; it being neither convenient nor just, that the
Synod, which knows nothing of those affairs, having never examined them nor
brought them into judgment, should, handover-head, pronounce any thing about
them. This is a matter that will in all likelihood irritate the French, to
write against a Clause thus pronounced by the Synod by the Pope's managery: For
whatever some may think, the Pragmatick of France was not entirely abrogated in
the last Lateran Council, the Concordate which was pronounced in the same
Session, having been granted in lieu of it, and after such a manner that the
exchange did not amount to an absolute Abrogation, neither was what was done in
that Council about this affair ever agreed to by the French, any otherwise than
as it was a confirmation of their Pragmatick, of which I shall say no more, but
that it was founded on the Council of Basil, which is still received and
defended as authentic by the whole Kingdom of France, and the University of
Paris, and that it depends likewise on the first Pragmatick made by St. Lewis,
King of France.

Farthermore this is a thing that in my opinion is very prejudicial to his
Majesty's Pragmaticks, and to those especially which were made lately at
Madrid, against Strangers having any Benefices, and about several other
matters, all which, considering the present necessities, were justly and
piously framed: but they who were not at all pleased with those Pragmaticks,
have, by bringing the Council to condemn those of France, given a blow to those
of Spain likewise, by reason of the great affinity there is betwixt them; though
of the two those of Spain may be the most righteous.

But though now it is pronounced, there is no remedy for it, nevertheless I am
willing to let your Lordship see how things are carried here, and what the
Pope's aims are, who seeks to authorize all his own pretensions by the Council,
and of what importance it is I should speak of things beforehand, in order to
make them to be understood, for the Prelates, as I have observed formerly,
unless they are told of things, and that not superficially, and as they have
hitherto been advertized of them, will never examine them so as to fall into
the true account of them. In fine, this will not be the last thing we shall
have to warn us of the necessity there is thereof; there are several other
things I am not at all satisfied with, which were carried here with the same
slight Pope Paul made use of in the answer he gave to Don Diego de Mendoca, and
in all probability by the same hand: And is not this a blessed beginning of a
Council?

3. There is a thing I would gladly have had done which was that one or more of
the Articles they have pronounced had been suspended with the rest, but there
is no remedy for that now, and so it is to no purpose to complain of it.

As to the Canons of Reformation, I have nothing to say of them, but only that
they are of so trivial a nature, that several were ashamed to hear them; and
had they not been wrapped up in good language, they would have appeared to the
whole World to be what they are; and if God does not prevent it, I do not see
but that all other things will be carried here at the same rate; Don Francisco
has showed me what his Majesty has wrote to him about this affair: which he had
done sooner, had he not been hindered by extraordinary business. I can only say
that matters have gone therein to a tittle as I writ to your Lorship they
would: As to what your Lordship writes, about its being convenient, since the
Protestants are to come, not to have the Sessions so thick, and to have all the
Lutheran Articles determined together; it is a thing that appears to me, every
day more considerable, being furnished with arguments to answer all they are
able to object against it. Some days ago I told Dr. Malvenda as much, who was
very well pleased with it; telling me, that he had thought of it several times,
and I was just now told by him that he had spoke of it to the Elector of
Cologne, who liked it very well, and has writ to your Lordship about it; it is
an affair that deserves to be well considered, and being judged by all to be
expedient, the Pope must be treated with about it, in time; neither will the
observation thereof be any innovation in the course of proceedings, but only an
enlargement of the Session, so as to provide for what may happen, that when the
Protestants do come, matters may be so ordered as shall be found proper both
for their remedy and the authority of the Synod. I am extremely glad to hear
that his Majesty is coming nigher to us; for besides, that it will be no small
satisfaction to me to have your Lordship so near; his Majesty's Presence may
give some life to affairs here. Don Francisco, who is a Person of great
judgment, prudence and dexterity, manageth things very well, and has been at a
great deal of pains to obtain this Session. I must beg it of your Lordship to
acquaint him with this account I give of him, that so he may be sensible how
much I am his friend both in private and public.

The Archbishop of Sazar takes a great deal of pains too, and is a very good
instrument in all disputes that happen betwixt the Ambassadors, and the Legate,
and Presidents, and is besides very serviceable in the Synod at the
Deputations; for which reason it but just that your Lordship should show him
favor, and do him all the good Offices you are able. Don Francisco has, I
believe, writ particularly concerning this; and if your Lordship has, with my
Letters, received the Sermon, it is in sending it, that I have done him the
greatest service.

I kiss your Lordship's hands a thousand times, for the favors and kindnesses
you are always doing me; in return for which, I can only repeat what I have
often said, That I desire to live only to serve your Lordship, and to pay part
of what I owe you. May our Lord preserve and prosper your most Illustrious
Person and State for many years, as I desire.

I do kiss your Lordship's Hands. Doctor Vargas.
From Trent the 12th of October, 1551. P. S. About twelve days ago the Bishop
of Jacomelo came hither as the Pope's Commissary. If he were one that had any
shame in him, the unworthy trick he served me both here and at Bononia, to
ingratiate himself with Pope Paul, would have hindered him from ever having
showed his face any more in this place. The Pope had need watch him narrowly,
he having, since he came hither, in order to gratify the Emperor, and to curry
favor with me, expressed himself much dissatisfied with him: Of which I take
no notice, that I may make him sensible of my Resentment; for till your
Lordship wrote to me the other day concerning him, I had never troubled my self
with him; nevertheless, he has a great many Eyes upon him; and, God be praised
for it, that so great a Mischief did not succeed.



Dr. Vargas's Letter of the 13th of October, 1551, to the Bishop of Arras.
Most Illustrious and Reverend Lord,
DON Francisco having given his Majesty and your Lordship a full account of all
that passed in the Session, I shall only tell you that it was very solemn, and
that we have been at more pains than can be imagined to bring it about: Don
Francisco managed all things with his customary prudence and dexterity; which,
considering the difficulties, of the Legate's creating, he is to encounter
withal, had need be more than ordinary: I can easily perceive that they
understand here what part I have had therein; however, I did nothing but what
was my Duty in making the Relation. The Archbishop of Sazar made a very good
Speech, and much to the satisfaction of all good People; he does us great
Service here, and is excellently well qualified for such affairs; besides, he
helps Don Francisco to Intelligence in all his Negotiations. It is but just
therefore that your Lordship should favor him, in doing him some good Office,
which will be taken well by every body. If I can, I will send your Lordship a
Copy of the Acts, notwithstanding Don Francisco, who does not use to neglect
such things, cannot have forgot to do it. May our Lord protect and prosper your
Lordship's most Illustrious and Reverend Person and State for many years, as I
desire.

I kiss your Lordship's Hands. Doctor Vargas.
From Trent the 13th of October, 1551.
In a Note enclosed in this, he writes: Your Lordship will receive another
Letter that is something fresher than this, which, for a certain Reason, I
would not send by the Dispatch.

Dr. Vargas's Letter of the 28th of October, 1551, to the Bishop of Arras.
Most Illustrious and Reverend Lord,
THough I am sensible how much your Lordship is employed in perusing the
Dispatches of this Session, and of your business being much increased by the
late Change that has been made in the Court; nevertheless, since it will not be
long before we have another Session, it is necessary that any thing that his
Majesty would have done therein, should be prepared.

They are at present employed here in hearing the Divines every morning and
evening upon the matters of Penance and Extreme Unction: They are a great many,
and several of them very Eminent, but chiefly those who were sent from all
Parts by his Majesty, who in the Disputations have showed themselves to be
great Men. I was overjoyed at Dr. Malvenda's acquitting himself so well, who
discoursed both learnedly and elegantly, and to the great satisfaction of all
that heard him.

They of Lovain appear to be great Scholars; and for the Dean, he is certainly
a wonderful Man, being as Reverend for his Learning, as he is for his Person;
who, as he is the Father of all the rest, so the Greatness of his Worth is so
conspicuous, that his Majesty cannot do less than order him to have the first
place, next after the Pope's Divines, allotting the second place to Dr.
Malvenda; and for the rest, the ranking of them may be left to Don Francisco:
They have all satisfied the World of his Majesty's having made a judicious
Choice in sending such Persons: And for Friar Melchior Canus, he is a Person of
so great Learning, Piety and Prudence, that should the Protestants come hither,
as it is said they intend, they will meet with that in him that will satisfy
them.

The Cardinal of Trent is informed by a Letter he has received from Duke
Maurice, that there are forty Horsemen on their way hither, among whom are
eight Divines, and two Lawyers, besides two from the Duke of Wirtemberg; and
that they may be here in five or six Days, this News does not a little alarm
some that are here; and if it is true, the Protestants must not, it seems, much
regard the defects that are in the safe Conduct. I pray God it may be so;
though, for my own part, for the Reasons I have formerly given your Lordship, I
shall never believe they will come, before I see them here.

When I left Castile, the Council thereof put a Memorial into my hands,
containing several things they desired to have redressed; which, together with
one of my own drawing up, I sent to his Majesty, at my first coming to this
place; Since which time I have never spoke of it, waiting still to see how
things would go, and what would be done to satisfy the Bishops in the first
Session; as also to know his Majesty's pleasure concerning it: Let me therefore
entreat your Lordship to put his Majesty in mind of it, and to acquaint me with
what he would have done; that is, whether he would have us speak, and to what,
and when, or how, or if he would have us continue silent. I can assure your
Lordship the Legate has declared, That nothing more shall be done, relating to
a Reformation, after the next Session; all the time that remains being to be
employed about Matters of Doctrine: By this your Lordship may see, how little
Don Francisco's having spoke to him since the receipt of his Majesty's last
Letters, signifies.

I am extremely sensible that a great many things of a very high nature, are
handled here so slightly, and after such a manner as gives great discontent to
People; and for to speak the truth, I cannot see how either Catholics or
Heretics can be satisfied with what is done here; and as for the latter, I
doubt they will be much exasperated by what will be done in the next Session,
in which they intend to revive the matter of Justification; and when they come
to treat of Contrition and Satisfaction, for to determine them a second time.

But now whereas this Council was Assembled chiefly for the sake of a
particular Province, I should be glad that so far as it is possible, as things
are advanced, the determination of this, and of some other Doctrines might be
suspended until the Arrival of the Protestants, who are now said to be on
their way. Your Lordship may in this and all other matters, give what Orders
you shall judge to be most convenient.

All that is done here, is done by the way of Rome; for the Legate, though it
were necessary to save the World from sinking, will not depart one tittle from
the Orders he receives from thence, nor indeed from any thing that he has
himself once resolved on.

He has told several, and Don Francisco and me among the rest, that he will put
an end to the Council by July; and that there shall be but five Sessions more;
that is, the two which are already appointed, and three more.

God is my witness how willing I, who have now been here seven years, am to see
it at an end, that so I may return to my own corner again; nevertheless I am so
desirous, to see some of those fruits of this Council which we expected, and
which indeed are so necessary, that I would be contented, if I had several
lives, to employ them all therein.

I am not at all satisfied with what has been done in reference to a
Reformation, neither do I hope to see much more done therein; for I can plainly
perceive that the Legate has the very same Aims and Resolutions that the
present Pope had, who both when he was Legate here, and since he was Pope,
presuming on his Majesty's friendship, has done things without fear, that were
really astonishing, never doubting of his being able to carry whatever he had a
mind to. I do observe that the present Legate discovers this, infinitely more
than the former ever did; he having given us to understand, that the
Reformation is not a thing to be dwelt on; and that all that is to be done
therein, will be concluded in this Session, the remaining time being to be
wholly employed about Doctrines.

Don Francisco, after he had received his Majesty's last Letter, which was such
as I wished it, spoke excellently well, and with all possible earnestness: The
Legate's Answer to him was, That he would do a great Service, if he could
persuade the Bishops to give in Memorials to him, of what they would be at, and
of the Impediments of Residence, instead of desiring things at random. Don
Francisco having thereupon spoke to several of the Prelates to do it, they
accordingly gave in their Memorials to him; who having reduced them all into
one, he delivered it to the Legate, who sent it to Rome to have the Pope's
thoughts of it. God knows how much it afflicts me to see things done so openly
to the prejudice of the authority of the Synod, and of his Majesty's honor
too; the Legate might certainly, if he pleased, do such things more privately,
and less to the dishonor of the Council, so as not to give People, and
especially the Protestants, occasion to talk thereof, who, I doubt, will be
much hardened by such doings. I am fearful lest the Legate should, under a
pretense of Friendship, impose on Don Francisco, the Legate being immovably
determined as to every thing that he will do; neither are his Intentions in
this affair the same with his Professions; all that he drives at in this
matter, being only to have wherewith to stop the mouths of the Prelates, to
keep them from speaking about other things; the bringing of the Prelates to
speak to the Impediments of Episcopal Residence, having been the artifice from
the beginning: To speak the truth, Don Francisco takes a great deal of pains,
and manages things after as good a manner as can be imagined: we shall see how
this business will end. For my own part, I am extremely discontented, but I am
not able to do more, though I know I very often do more than I am well able; as
well in matters they consult with me about, as in other things, I am informed
of: And this I am certain your Lordship believes of me. Your Lordship will be
acquainted with the whole of this Affair by Don Francisco, who has sent a Copy
of the Memorial he gave in. May God direct things better than some would have
them, and protect and prosper your most Illustrious and Reverend Person and
State for many years, as I desire.

I do kiss your Lordship's Hands. Doctor Vargas.
From Trent the 28th of October, 1551.
Dr. Vargas's Letter of the 12th of November, 1551, to the Bishop of Arras.
Most Illustrious and Reverend Lord,
AS I was about to write this, your Lordship's of the 10th Instant, which I had
long wished for, came to my hand: But when I consider the multitude of Business
your Lordship is involved in, it is much rather to be wondered at, that your
Lordship's Dispatches do come so quick as they do, than that they come so slow:
So that all that can be said is, That we must have patience, and desire his
Majesty to let us have his Answers for our direction here as quick as it is
possible, that being no more than is necessary.

At present I have little to write, in relation to the Pope's Ministers, in the
managery of the Council, and the business of Reformation, having already
acquainted your Lordship therewith; only I see no hopes of any remedy, neither
am I able to divine, where these matters will stop: I shall know more when this
Session is over, and shall take care to acquaint your Lordship with all that
shall occur.

Notwithstanding we have but three Days to the Session, a Reformation is no
more talked of here, than if it were a thing never to be mentioned again: And
as for the Legate, he goes on still in his old road, consuming of time to the
last hour in Disputations, and Congregations, concerning Doctrines, and will at
last produce something in an hurry in false colors that looks plausible: by
which means they have no time to read, and much less to understand what they
are about: So that it is not to be expected that any thing that is done here
should produce ought but scorn and confusion.

Words and Persuasions do signify but very little in this place, and I suppose
they are not of much greater force at Rome, those People having shut their
eyes, with a resolution, notwithstanding all things should go to wrack, not to
understand any thing that does not suit with their interests. So that by what I
can perceive, both God, and his Majesty, are like to be very much dishonored
by what will be done here; and if things should go on thus, and be brought to
such an issue as the Pope and his Ministers aim at and give out, the Church
will be left in a much worse condition, than she was in before: It will
therefore be expedient, after this Session is over, and matters are become more
desperate, if that is possible, than they are at present, to set about applying
some remedies, by taking some other methods.

I am sensible of the great pains your Lordship is at in doing all good Offices
both at Rome, and with the Nuncio, in order to inform the Pope aright, and to
bring him to alter his measures: I pray God he may be prevailed with to do it,
though, for my own part, I shall reckon it a Miracle if he is, and shall thank
God for it as such.

In the mean while, I shall, after your Lordship's Example, comfort my self
with the thoughts of what God oftentimes uses to do, when things are reduced
to such a desperate estate, that no humane prudence is sufficient for them;
which we may the rather hope for in this case, because God's Honor, and the
Reformation of the Church, are immediately concerned in it: But after all, God
only knows, after what manner such a remedy will be applied, and whether by
such ways as we think it will, and desire it should.

As to the Protestants coming hither, I do not know what to say to it; only if
other methods are not taken here, their coming will be to no purpose, and they
will return worse than they came; and especially if they should be such persons
as your Lordship is informed they are: God may nevertheless, notwithstanding
all their Rebellions and Determinations, bring them hither, to enlighten both
themselves and others as to their duties; for which reason, as there are
several that do wish they were here, so there are others who cannot endure to
hear of their coming, and much less to see it.

The two Protestants that are here already, do pretend to have no other
business but to provide Lodgings for the rest, though I rather think they are
sent before as Spies: The Bohemians having taken the same course at the Council
of Basil, who, after a great many Offers, would not venture to come, before
they were advised by two they had sent before, Rem agi serio, nec subesse
dolum: The meaning of which may easily be understood. It is reported that
Melancthon and the rest of them, appeared obstinate and resolute in their
Errors at the Assembly of Wittemburg; if that is true, there is but little
hopes of reducing them, neither will I ever believe they will come, before I
see them here.

The Divines continued their Disputations till the last day of the last month;
and since the second Instant, the Bishops have been Voting upon the Articles
that have been proposed to them. So that according to the course the Legate
takes, they will have done in five or six days; and after that, the time that
remains will be spent in forming the Decrees; which being done, the Bishops
will return to give their Votes to them, and pass them into Doctrines.

Your Lordship may see by this how they intend to employ the time that is
behind, though nothing is more certain, than that thorough the artifices and
methods that are used, to engage people, and thorough the Council's having no
strength left, it being totally deprived of its authority and freedom by the
Legate, who has taken it all entirely into his own hand; if a Session were to
last half a year, it would be the same thing as it is now, so that we shall
have no cause to wonder at any thing that shall be done here, but shall have
great cause to be thankful for what they shall leave undone.

Dr. Malvenda had been very ill of a Catarrh, but is now pretty well again, he
has not deserved to be sick, and is a person for whom I have a very great
kindness.

I kiss your Lordship's hands a thousand times, for what you have done in
relation to my particular affairs; and I do rely so much on your friendship,
that I take but little care of them my self.

I have not as yet been able to recover the Money which was assigned me at
Naples toward the defraying of my Charges; the Goods which used to be remitted
to me, having been hindered from coming by reason of the Ways being stopped by the
War; so that I am, and have been much pinched with want.

I have writ to Secretary Vargas concerning it, and that he would be pleased to
send me such a Dispatch, as that which was sent to Don Francisco de Toledo for
the recovery of his eight thousand Ducats; I must beg it of your Lordship to
promote this, as also to write to the Viceroy to remit that Money to me
immediately; which though a small thing for him to do, would be of great
importance to me, considering how the Times are, and the Charge I live at here.
The Lord prosper and preserve your most Illustrious and Reverend Person and
State for many years, as I desire.

I kiss your Lordship's Hands. Doctor Vargas.
From Trent the 12th of November, 1551.
Dr. Vargas's Letter of the 26th of November, 1551, to the Bishop of Arras.
Most Illustrious and most Reverend Lord,
I Have already writ to your Lordship at large, as I do now again, our affairs
requiring I should do so. His Majesty's Dispatches, which were very proper, and
such as I wished them, being arrived, Don Francisco has been to speak with the
Legate. It would be a tedious business to Relate all that passed between them;
for which Reason, and because Don Francisco, himself must have writ an account
of it; I shall only tell you, that the Legate behaved himself on this, as he
has done on all other occasions, and as we expected of him, Perfricuit nempe
frontem insigniter.

Your Lordship may be satisfied, that there are not words to Express the pride,
disrespect and shamelesness, wherewith he proceeds in these affairs; for being
persuaded that we act timorously, and that his Majesty will be cautious how he
does any thing, that may Minister occasion to any alteration, or that may
disgust the Pope; he says and does things that astonish the World, treating the
Prelates that are here as so many Slaves, protesting and swearing when he is
displeased, that he will be gone immediately, by which means he carries
whatever he has a mind to. And as there is no likelihood of his ever changing
his behavior; so the success and end of this Synod, if God by a Miracle does
not prevent it, will be such as I have foretold; I say by a Miracle, because it
is not to be done by any humane means; so that his Majesty does but tire
himself in vain in negotiating with the Pope and his Ministers, Nam surdo
canitur and lapis decoquitur. The fruit of his Majesty's Dispatch is such as I
guessed it would be; that is, it has made the Legate much worse than he was
before, who has since hammered out such an Infamous Reformation (for it
deserves no better Epithet) as must make us fabula and rifus populo. I am not
able to express how much it troubles me to see God and his Majesty, thus
Dishonored, Sed res ipsa loquitur; the Prelates that are here do likewise
resent it highly, many of them reckoning that they wound their Consciences by
holding their Tongues, and by suffering things to be carried thus; and who though
they have hitherto with much ado been kept by some Offices that have been done
them from doing their duties; so that two Sessions have passed as your Lordship
sees; I am persuaded nevertheless, that if other courses are not taken, that no
Offices will be able to Restrain them much longer, they are so extremely
scandalized.

The Legate was not to be persuaded to treat about any thing that was in the
Memorial; and as I have writ before, it would be well if he could never be
brought to it: For whenever he shall condescend to do any thing, it will
certainly be for the advantage of the Court of Rome, and to the prejudice of
the Church, and especially of his Majesty's Kingdoms.

Every body does not see the Legate's design in the business of Benefices with
Cure, which he is very forward to talk of; having of his own accord declared,
that the Pope will never give his Consent to it.

For the Legate being sensible, that many of the Bishops, for their own
Interest, are extremely desirous to have it pass, he hopes they may be brought
to make such a bargain with him as he drives at, and as the present Pope, when
he was Legate here, aimed at likewise: who proposed it to the Bishops, offering
them the Collation of all Benefices with Cure, provided, the Expeditions did
all pass at Rome, and the Pope be re-imbursed, by having all other Benefices
lodged in him, which is the thing they grasp at: Now this being a most
inconvenient and abominable bargain, the Legate, of his own accord, declares
that the Pope will never agree to it; which, if I have any Judgment, he says
for no other end, but to put the Bishops in mind to desire it of him: For the
clearer understandng of which matters and practices, I writ to your Lordship on
the 13th Instant, my thoughts of the Memorial, and of other affairs; now if
this matter of Benefices should come to be treated of here, we ought, in the
first place, to put the Pope's Ministers upon showing what right his Holiness
has to collate to any Benefice whatsoever; and having brought them to that, I
will undertake to demonstrate, from the Principles and Foundations of the Law
of God, and of Nature, and of Men; and from the ancient usage of the Church,
and from good policy, that he has no manner of right to it; and all this
without doing Injury to his Dignity, and the plenitude of his Power. But the
Pope having now by degrees and force, got all into his own hands, he gives the
World to understand that all is his, and that what any body else has, is what
he is willing to give them. From hence it is that the wretched Canonists, I
meam some of them, do either out of fear, or flattery, or both, style the Pope
Dominus beneficiorum.

Now in the handling of this affair, if the provisions of Benefices should be
lodged in the Bishops, care must be taken that flesh and blood be not allowed
so much liberty as it has been accustomed to; but that it be so ordered as to
partake of the ancient usage, either by Examination or some other way that
shall be judged most convenient, that so an eye may be had therein to the
profit of the Churches and the Sheep, and not only of the Bishops.

But this being a matter of so great moment, and which cannot be treated of in
these times, but to the prejudice of the Church, and especially of Spain, the
best way, now the Pope carries every thing he has a mind to, will be not to
meddle with it at all, but to reserve the handling thereof to a better time,
Quo purgabit Dominus filios Levi; which purgation must come, and that with a
severe Scourge; or till God shall provide other remedies, which may be applied
at some time or other; it being impossible that a thing so violent, and so
fraught with Abuses, should hold long; the whole Nerve of Ecclesiastical
Discipline being broke, and the Goods of God made a perfect Trade, and
Merchandise. As to the Head of reviving Provincial Councils, which is in the
Memorial, it has put the Legate in a great Disorder: This is one of the things
that was put in the Memorial, without my advice, who do pretend to understand,
what the Pope and his Minister's Pretensions are in that matter; for that being
a thing the Church has so often done, and still has authority to do, it ought
not to have been proposed here as a new matter; but such Councils ought to be
called frequently, as was the custom in former times. This is a thing of that
Importance, that I have often, and I will always say it, That the Restoration
of the Church is chiefly to be expected from the reviving and celebrating of
Provincial Councils, the Ruin thereof having proceeded from the Cessation of
them, which, among other Effects, would prevent Secular Princes, being brought
under necessity of meddling with things, to the Violation of the Ecclesiastical
Immunity; in which, if some Remedies are not found out for their great
Necessities, and some holy and lawful Courses for the obtaining of Justice,
they cannot forbear concerning themselves: I say this of Provincial Councils,
because the Celebration of such as are general, is, as we see by Experience,
like the Ludi Seculares, to be brought about but once in an Age, if so often;
and when one comes to be celebrated, it is done in such a manner as we now see;
insomuch that, this which is now sitting here, must totally undeceive the
World, so as to convince it; that by reason of the Opposition and Industry of
the Popes, to engross all to themselves, nothing of Reformation is ever to be
expected from a General Council.

Now they being sensible that General Councils, by reason of the Discords of
Christian Princes, and through some other Causes I have formerly given, are thus
in bondage, they do all they are able to hinder the reviving of Provincial
Synods, except the Pope's Legates or Vicars are present at them, that so they
may leave no breath in the Church, nor in any of its Members, to the exclusion
of all Remedies, and all talk of them. The Pope that now is, when he was here,
had his Pretensions about this thing; and had he gone on as he began, he had
certainly carried them, having been seconded therein by several: And there was
a certain Prelate, who, in a General Session, had the Confidence to say on that
Occasion, That the Councils of Toledo were all held in contradiction to the
Apostolical See, with a great deal more such stuff, which gave no small offense
to a great many, those Councils having been so famous, and of so great
advantage to the Church: He that spoke this was the Bishop of Jano, who has
been since made a Cardinal, and as they write at the Nomination of his Majesty;
who, though a Person of great Honor, spoke this, because he knew it would be
grateful to the Legates, and would make way for his promotion: I have said
this, because I would not have things wherein the Pope and his Court have such
great Interests and Pretensions, to be decided or handled here, since it cannot
be done but to our great prejudice, and to the great detriment of the whole
Church, which at present has neither strength nor courage to resist; and if God
do not remedy it, I do not see when it will: This is a thing I am positive in,
it being what I owe to the Service of God, and his Majesty, to whom I desire
your Lordship to Communicate this, and whatever else I do in discharge of my
Office, it being of moment to his Majesty's Kingdoms, Spain especially, that it
should be done.

The Legate, among other Chapters of Reformation, did pretend to put these that
follow; which being so prejudicial, and to Spain especially, we with much ado
prevailed with him to let them alone till his Majesty was first consulted. Don
Francisco must have writ at large about this matter; I will nevertheless write
my Opinion thereof, and what I said of it here, that notwithstanding the second
and third look like something; they are really of no moment, and yet under
their color the rest must be received; and by that means, that which is so
much wished for, will become incurable.

The first Tonsure, let Canonists say what they will, is not, nor never was
properly an Order, but a Sign or a Door whereby to enter into Orders; for,
according to the Master of the Sentences, St. Thomas, and all other Divines,
where there is no Character, one cannot properly be called a Clerk, as there is
not in the first Tonsure; neither is all that the Canonists, and Innocent the
Third say thereof, to be taken strictly, but in a large sense: The first
Tonsure being really no other than a Novitiate, having been instituted only for
such, as did actually serve in the Church, and were dedicated to the Divine
Service; for which reason, the Consent of Secular Princes was necessary to the
giving of it; it appearing just, that such Ministers should enjoy some
Exemption; but at this time, that whole matter is run into such disorder, that
nothing of the said Institution is now observed, to the exceeding great
prejudice of the Commonwealth; every one that will now, may wear a Crown for
Sixpence and two Clips with a Cissers, and so plead an Exemption from the
Royal Jurisdiction, committing all the Crimes they please without fear of
Punishment: The true Remedy for this is, to put such a stop to it as is
necessary, and not to be satisfied with having this Exemption taken from all
Clerks that shall Marry; as also to have new Orders made about the Habit and
Tonsure: Concerning which, the Canonists have made strange work, having made
many Jests as well as Falsehoods to pass for current Truths. When I speak of the
Canonists, I speak as a Thief of the Family, being sensible of the Abuses which
have been authorized by them in the Church, either out of Ignorance, or for
some base End; for which reason, what I say of them ought to be the more
regarded. There are three Remedies for this: The first is, That the first
Tonsure shall be of no advantage to any that are not actually employed in
Divine Service, as has been said. The second is, That the first Tonsure shall
never be given but together with the Order of Subdiaconate, which, since the
Time of Innocent the Third, for it was not so before, has been an holy Order,
and that otherwise the Crown shall be of no benefit. The third is, That the
first Tonsure shall be of no advantage to any, that are not Ordained to some
holy Order within a year, as it is said to be at Venice; the two first are the
most proper Remedies, there being no need of having more shaven Crowns, unless
it be to increase Mischiefs, to disturb the Commonwealth, and to carry Causes
and Money to Rome; what they drive at in this matter, being ne quoquo modo
minuatur Messis illa aurea ad quam Stratocles and Democlides sese mutuo
invitare solebant, sic nempe joco Tribunal and Curiam appellare consueverunt:
But in case it cannot be thus remedied, as I do not believe it will, it not
being a thing to be expected, that the Pope and his Officers should ever give
their Consents to it. It will then be convenient to let it remain as it is; and
that the rather, because Princes, upon their not having suffered the Council to
remedy it, may remedy it themselves; for his Majesty may, without any Scruple
of Conscience, redress it in his own Kingdoms, by punishing his Lay-Subjects;
for such they are in reality, there being neither Law nor Reason for their
being exempted from the Royal Jurisdiction; neither can they help themselves by
any thing that has been Ordained by the Church to which they do not belong,
notwithstanding all the Disputes that have been about them betwixt the
Ecclesiastical and Secular Jurisdiction.

The 4th Chapter is extremely prejudicial, and is levelled chiefly at his
Majesty and his Kingdoms; about which there are so ancient and laudable
Constitutions, Privileges, Instruments and Customs in Spain already, that the
Legate cannot carry what he pretends to, without wronging, if not subverting
all those Constitutions, and all the Styles of the Councils and Chanceries,
such as the taking cognizance of the Violences and Outrages committed by
Ecclesiastics, and Banishing them the Kingdom, when they hinder the Royal
Jurisdiction, or disquiet and disturb the Commonwealth, and commit heinous
Crimes, and have none to punish them for them, or transgress the Orders of
Madrid concerning the not bestowing of Benefices and Pensions upon Strangers,
or for offending against any of the Pre-eminency of those Kingdoms, etc. To act
thus, being the Defense and Conservation of the Kingdoms, and the Rights
thereof, and not the using of Coercive Jurisdiction upon the Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction and Immunities. All which matters, if I am not mistaken, are
thoroughly handled in some Books I have composed here, which hereafter may be
made public. In which Causes we must be sure to be always upon our guard with
the Legate, who is certainly a grand Architect, having a strange Faculty of
seeming to give something, when he gives nothing; and of laying up Matter for
Plea, which must hereafter help the Court of Rome to Money, which is the main
End he drives at in this Reformation.

The 5th Chapter, which speaks of the Immunity, ought likewise to be
considered; lest, instead of remedying what the Secular Jurisdiction and
Commonwealth do at present suffer thereby, they, by seeming to yield
something, destroy all, by giving a Power to the Prelates to send Laics to
their Prisons; and having taken cognizance of their Crimes, to join with the
Secular Judge in punishing them. Now this is a fetch, no Man but the Legate
could ever have dreamt of. What is pretended to, and desired in this matter,
being that heinous Crimes may not be committed, without being punished, by the
Ecclesiastics, Secular and Regular, at every turn defending their Churches,
and the Criminals that have fled to them, with Arms, and a thousand other
Methods. Now to put down Sanctuaries wholly, would appear too rigorous,
considering the Derivation they have from the Law of God, or from the Cities of
Refuge that were under the Old Testament; or as Abulensis well observes, that
were at all Times, and in all Nations, that all might not be like the Laws of
Draco, nothing but Blood. And St. Austin in his Civitate Dei observes, That
when Rome was taken by the Christians, that they offered no Violence to the
Heathens, that had taken sanctuary in the Churches. All this notwithstanding,
things are visibly reduced to such a pass that some course must be taken to
prevent the manifold Disorders that flow from these Immunities, that so there
may be Punishments; and that the Commonwealth may be preserved in Peace, which
is the end of Secular Magistrates: For which reason, the Emperor Tiberius, as
Suetonius relates in his Life, was so much offended at the manifold Crimes that
were committed under the shelter of the Sanctuaries, which were dispersed all
over Italy, that he dissolved them all at once.

We are now to see how the forementioned Inconveniences may be so remedied,
that the Words of our Lord, My House is the House of Prayer, but you have made
it a Den of Thieves, may not be verified in this Case. It is no easy thing to
find a remedy for it; but if Churches must still enjoy their Immunities, it
will be necessary that neither Seculars, nor Regulars, nor no Ecclesiastical
Judges, shall defend any Church or Offender, that is in it, with any other than
Spiritual Arms, which are the only Arms that belong to them; neither must it be
lawful for them to make any manner of resistance, or to lock their doors, or
to give any other Impediment to the Secular Judges, whom they must restrain by
Religion, and not by Force: For, besides the raising of Tumults, there are
other Reasons why it should not be lawful for Ecclesiastics to defend their
Churches with Arms, as their not knowing what they defend; or whether the Case
be such as can claim Sanctuary; or whether the Secular Judges may not lawfully
take the Offender out of the Church, there being Cases wherein they may do it
without having recourse to the Ecclesiastics. It ought farthermore to be
declared, That no person guilty of Forethought Murder, Wounding, or any other
such Crime, is to have the benefit of a Sanctuary; neither ought all Churches,
Monastries, and Chapels, to enjoy that privilege, but only some particular
Churches that shall be appointed.

This is what I have to offer, at present, concerning the foresaid Chapters. As
to which, and every thing else, his Majesty may Command what he shall judge to
be most convenient; and whatsoever shall appear so to your Lordship, will
appear the same to me: Nevertheless, there is one thing I will be positive in,
which is, That we do but tire our selves here in vain, since without a Miracle
nothing wherein the Pope and his Court have any Interests or Pretensions, can
be determined here, but to our great prejudice: For notwithstanding they have
in a manner cancelled all former Laws, and under a pretense of dispensing with
them, have dissipated them: They are not willing nevertheless, that there
should be any new Laws made against Abuses, for fear of offering too much
Violence to People's Conscience; or lest that after they are made, Secular
Princes should oblige them to observe them. Of the truth of all that has been
said, what has passed concerning the Exemption of Chapters, which ought to have
been quite taken away, that so there might be something of Order and
Discipline; and that they who are the Head, should not be made the Feet is a
sufficient Evidence. Which Decree of the Council will be interpreted by the
Rota, not to comprehend any Chapters that enjoy an Immemorial Prescription, or
that were exempted at the Erection of the Church, or that were defending their
being exempted at the Court of Rome, at the time when that Decree was
pronounced: By which Exceptions the Decree is laid flat upon the ground, being
nothing, in truth, but a matter of Money and Lawsuits; for the Chapters upon a
bare Allegation of any of those things, without any manner of proof, will be
protected by that Court; and such of them as were never in the solid possession
of any such Exemption, shall give the Bishops trouble enough, if they shall
offer to call them in question. God knows how sensible I was of this, and of
what was most convenient to have been put into this Decree; which, as your
Lordship may remember, was, that all those Evasions should have been pulled up
by the roots, that so no Gate might have been left open for tricks; for I would
fain know why Prescription, Immemorial Possession and Erections, should hinder
the Church, or the Legislator, from reforming Abuses, and from doing what is
most expedient for the Commonwealth: For, from the time that Abuses may be
defended by Immemorial Custom, a door is shut against all Remedies for the
future, and all Sins may plead Prescription. In a word; the Legates acted in
this, as they do in every thing else; that is, they would not suffer the Court
of Rome to be deprived of so great a profit; and for that reason did, according
to their Custom, favor the Chapters against the Bishops; pretending, as an
Auditor of the Camara, who is since made a Cardinal, said once publicly, That
the Honor of the Apostolical See was supported by the Chapters. Your Lordship
may see by this how well they know what they do, and what likelihood there is
of having any thing redressed here. I have sent your Lordship a Memorial of the
Council of Castile, which was made before this Council was called; as also the
Pragmatica of Madrid: Which orders no Benefices or Pensions to be bestowed upon
Strangers, with several other things. This Memorial was put into my hands by
the Council, and I sent it with another as big or bigger to his Majesty in the
Year 1545.

Vainly imagining at that time that something might have been done in earnest
at Trent, and that the time of our redemption was come; but since it would now
only trouble your Lordship to read it, I forbear to send it to you, but shall
cite Things out of it as there shall be occasion, being prepared whenever your
Lordship shall command it, and there shall appear any hopes of its doing any
good, to write a Book upon the same Subject, if it shall be thought necessary.

There is one thing I am always positive in; which is, That whatsoever Spain is
in possession of, and does justly defend, that she ought not to suffer it to be
called in question, nor seek to have it granted by the Council, no not though
it were free, and much less from such a Council as this; for it is our business
to be always Defendants, and not Plaintiffs, and especially considering how
things are carried here, where it is plain the Pope and his Ministers will
carry whatever they have a mind to, though never so much to our prejudice. This
is what I have always said and advised.

Your Lordship will see by this, that the first Chapter of the Memorial that
was delivered to the Legate, relating to Benefices, with Cure, was not well
weighed, it being prejudicial to Spain, which ought to keep it self upon the
Defensive. Whoever he was that drew up that Memorial, was not thoroughly
acquainted with these Affairs, as appears by his having said that the Rule of
Language ought to be observed, as if that were the whole business or the sole
Reason why Benefices should be bestowed only on the Natives: Whereas, in truth,
it is an Institution founded on Divine, Natural, and Humane Justice; that as to
all sorts of Benefices, the Natives ought to be preferred to Strangers,
notwithstanding they do understand the Language, which besides ancient Custom,
has several Grants to confirm it. This, with several other Prescriptions for
the obviating of Frauds, shall at some time or other, be published in the Books
which I have writ concerning these Affairs; the last of which are in defense of
the said Pragmatica; the first confirming it by the Common Law of Nations, and
the second by the Municipal Laws of Spain.

This is all I shall say of Reformation, and as to their way of handling
Doctrines, I have a great deal to say of it; I gave your Lordship some time ago
an account of the Legate's Conduct here, but I have now some thing to add: It
troubles one to see how those matters are managed and determined here, the
Legate doing whatever he has a mind to, without either numbering or weighing
the Opinions of the Divines and Prelates, hurrying and reserving the substance
of things, which ought to have been well weighed and digested to the last
Minute, the Major part not knowing what they are a doing, I mean before the
fact; for believing that Christ will not suffer them to Err in their
Determinations, I shall bow down my head to them, and believe all the Matters
of Faith that shall be decided by them; I pray God every body else may do the
same: But what is chiefly to be noted, is, That the Eminent Divines that are
sent hither by his Majesty, namely the Dean and Professors of Lovain, Persons
so famous for Learning and Piety, are never called to the making of the Canons
and Doctrines, nor suffered to see, whether there be any thing amiss in them.
This is a great fault, and is much complained of, to the great discredit of all
they do, a great many taking occasion from thence to have no great regard for
their Decrees, fearing they may hereafter minister Matter to Controversies.

It is necessary his Majesty should write warmly concerning this matter to his
Ambassador, namely Don Francisco, commanding him to concern himself earnestly
therein; for it is a shame that things should be carried thus, and such great
and eminent Divines should be brought from the end of the World, only to
Dispute one hour in a Session without being ever so much as thought of after
that is over; whereas when Matters of Faith are to be determined, they ought to
be examined with great Application, and people ought to tremble when they are
about to define new Articles, or to declare such as have formerly been
determined by the Church, and not to pass them as they do in a hurry; the
Pope's Ministers being for making Articles of Faith of diverse Disputable
Opinions, and against declaring other things which would be of great Moment, in
remedying the Abuses which are crept into the Aministration of the Sacraments:
As to all which, the Pope and his Ministers are, for the forementioned and
other Ends, continually upon their guard; and they having got the Managery and
Authority of the Council entirely into their hands, do reckon they have got a
great prize in Carrying things as they do: So that if God does not by some
extraordinary Ways provide for his Church, there is no hopes left of ever
seeing it either united or reformed; for what was it but such doings as these,
and the taking no care to reform innumerable Abuses, that has destroyed so many
Provinces and Kingdoms; and it is Justly to be feared, that what is done in
this Council, may endanger the destroying of the rest. But that the Church
should be reduced to this estate, and that Heresies should so much prevail, is
the accomplishment of what St. Paul says in the 2d Chapter of his 2d Epist. to
the Thessalonians: Unless a Departure come first, etc. Which words are applied
expressly by St. Anselm and others to the Church of Rome, on account of the
forementioned Vices and Abuses, which we now see by Experience: which Text,
though it has other Interpretations, may God bestow better things on us than we
deserve. The Legate runs on, precipitating things as I writ your Lordship
formerly, whose design at present is to finish what remains of the Sacrifice of
the Mass, and of the Sacrament of Order, in the Session of January; intending
in two Sessions more to conclude the whole business, dispatching that of
Matrimony in the first, and in the second that of Images, the Veneration of
Saints, the Monastical Vows, and I do not know what other things, and so
conclude.

I have it from a good hand, that four days ago he received a Letter from
Cardinal Maffeius, who sent him word that the Council would be shut up in May,
and that he needed not therefore to lay in provisions for any longer time. Your
Lordship may be pleased to Join this to what has formerly been written to you,
to the same purpose. I must tell you farther, that this Council drawing so near
an end, is what all people rejoice at here exceedingly there being a great many
who wish it had never met; and for my own part, I would to God it had never
been called, for I am mistaken, if it do not leave things worse than it found
them.

The Report of the Naturalization, sent by the King of France to the Legate
with 6000 Ducats, is true; for the Legate himself has talked of it, boasting of
the esteem he is in with Princes, and slighting the Naturalization was sent to
him by his Majesty, which he was heard to say was a thing of no value. Your
Lordship may see by this how good an Imperialist he is, and how likely it is
that he will favor France in the Treaties which are now on foot; I pray God
these things may end well; and that after having been at so much charge, we be
not entangled in new Troubles. I send your Lordship the corrupt Canons of
Reformation; but for those relating to Doctrines, I do not know whether you can
have them, having been told by one of the Deputies, that it is not possible to
get a Copy of them from the Secretary of the Council: which makes us believe
they are first to be sent to the Pope to be considered on, upon the account I
acquainted you with, in a former Letter. So soon as I can have them, they shall
be sent to your Lordship, who, I am sensible, is very desirous to be acquainted
with every thing that passes here. Your Lordship does well in letting no body
know that I inform you of these matters, it not being my intention therein to
take any body's Office from him, but only to serve your Lordship, as I am bound
to do: And so, at this time, I write to no body but your Lordship and Secretary
Vargas, leaving others to the Embassador's Dispatches. May our Lord preserve
your Lordship's most Illustrious and Reverend Person, and prosper your State
for many years, as I desire.

I kiss your Lordship's Hands. Doctor Vargas.
From Trent the 26th of November, 1551.
Dr. Vargas's Letter of the 26th of November, 1551, to the Bishop of Arras.
Most Illustrious and Reverend Lord,
THE reason why I enlarged so much in my former, was, that I might comply with
my Duty, in informing your Lordship of all that passes here; what at present
offers, is, that matters of Doctrine are strangely precipitated, in not being
examined as they ought, as I have writ formerly, the eminent Divines that are
here not being suffered to have any hand in them.

The Decrees of Doctrine were not finished till the Night before the Session,
so that a great many Bishops gave their Placets, to what they neither did, nor
could understand; the Divines of Lovain and Cologn, who came hither with their
Elector, as also some Spanish Divines, being much dissatisfied with several of
those matters, have publicly declared they were so; Don Francisco and I having
had some Discourse about it, it was thought fit that I should speak to the
Elector of Cologn, to learn how it was. I did so, and was told by the Elector,
that it was very true, and that if the Legates went on handling and determining
Doctrines after such a manner, they would probably have Catholics as well as
Lutherans for their Adversaries. I desired that these things might not be made
public, and that he would take care to prevent the like for the future,
desiring him to send his Majesty an Account of what had happened; he promised
to do so, and to treat with the Ambassador and me about all Affairs; adding,
that notwithstanding his Divines were impatient to be gone, and for having him
with them; that he would not do it without having first obtained leave of his
Majesty.

The business of a Reformation proceeds so at present that it is not possible
it should go worse, so that all we do here is to spend time to no purpose,
unless, it be to reduce Germany to a worse estate than it was in before.

Don Francisco has told me something of Dr. Canus's having spoke with the
Divines of Lovain, who have since been observed to be more tractable than they
were; so far as I can understand, this is a very bad business, and should
things of this nature come once to be so public, that Instances might be given
thereof in particular Cases, it must totally ruin the Credit of all that has,
or shall be done here, and must hinder the Council, from ever being received
either in Flanders or Germany. Pray see what occasions the Pope and his
Ministers give, and how well they deserve to go to the bottom, and we along
with them.

Some are of Opinion, that the Legate's design in putting things off thus to
the last, is, that there may be no time left for a Reformation; but I am apt to
think they are mistaken, for though it is most certain, that a Reformation is a
thing that makes the Legate stark mad, nevertheless I conceive they have a
farther design, in their ordaining and decreeing Doctrines so, which is, that
they may have the better opportunity to shuffle their own Pretensions into
them, as also to avoid the declaring and establishing other necessary Matters;
for though it is only in such things, that we say the Holy Ghost assists them,
so as not to suffer them to err, they do not care for meddling with them.

If I should but allow my self time, and liberty to make Remarks upon all that
has been done here, I could discover abundance of things, and particularly,
what it is the Legates do drive at; but since the doing thereof is not very
necessary, because your Lordship, e're long will see it very plain, and I my
self am something scrupulous I shall say no more.

As to the mighty freedom the Council injoys, your Lordship is to know, that
the Legate having proposed the Canons of Reformation in the last Congregation,
and being very earnest for the passing of one, which would have clearly
approved of the most pernicious abuse of Commendams, which have hitherto been
authorized only by the Ignorance, and I do not know what, of Gratian, and the
Canonists, several of the Prelates declared how much they were dissatisfied
therewith, and among others, the Bishop of Verdun, who is a good pious Man,
said, That this would be an unprofitable Reformation, and both unworthy of the
Synod, and unsuitable to the Exigencies of the Times, Commendams being the
great devourers of the Ecclesiastical Revenues, calling it farther, A pretended
Reformation; the Legate having treasured all this up, fell upon him afterward
with very rude Language, and which was contrary to that Regard and Liberty,
which, si Diis placet, the Council ought to enjoy; calling him a Boy, an
impudent raw Man, with a great many other hard names, neither would he suffer
him to offer one word in his own defense, telling him with great heat, that he
knew how to have him chastised, and so the Bishop remained as if he had spoke
some horrid Blasphemy against God, no body, Don Francisco happening to be
absent, offering or daring to speak one word in his favor.

A great many, but especially the Electors, are much scandalized at this
Behavior; he of Cologne, when he spoke to me of it, told me a great deal more
to the same purpose, and by what I hear commonly discoursed among them, it is
not unlikely that the Prelates may at some time or other come to break with the
Legate, for I am told, they say already, that there is no more of a Council
than the Legate is pleased to allow.

By what I have said in this and my former, it is easy to perceive, how
necessary it is that his Majesty should apply himself, with all possible warmth
and expedition to oblige the Pope and his Ministers to take other Measures, and
to mind a Reformation as they ought to do; that so the tricks which we may
otherwise expect to meet with in the next Session may be prevented, and that
what has cost his Majesty so much to support, may not come to nothing, which
his Majesty, through the Iniquity of the Times, the Heat of the War, and for
the sake of the Pope's Friendship; and several other causes, is deeply
concerned to look after.

It is really a matter of amazement, to see how things appertaining to God are
handled here, and that there should not be one to contend for him, or that has
the Courage to speak in his behalf; but that we should be all Canes muti, non
valentes latrare, and look on and suffer the Miseries of the Church to become
incurable, and Germany to be quite lost, Abuses to be authorized, and his
Majesty to be thus dishonored after he has been at so much pains, and has made
use of all his Power, and has made promises to procure a Reformation by a free
Council, whereas the Authority not only of this, but of all Councils for the
future, is utterly destroyed: If I should not complain of this, and take care
frequently to represent it, I should neither be a Christian nor do my Duty to
my Prince, I, thanks be to God for it, and the whole World being sensible of
the Sincerity of his Majesty's Endeavors in this affair, and of his not having
been wanting on his part, to reduce all people to their Duties to the Public.
I pray God prosper his Endeavors, that so this blind Generation of people may
be brought to repent, and to be wise at last.

When any thing more shall offer, and I shall be satisfied that there is no
remedy to be expected here, I shall then advise what I shall judge to be most
convenient, which I shall deferr till that time.

Affairs do look so very ill here, that for the future I could wish that his
Majesty's Name and Authority might be made use of in this place, as sparingly
as it is possible; and that it be never done, but when there is an extreme
necessity for it: For there do not want other ways whereby his Ministers may
oblige the Legate and Prelates that are here to do what is convenient, without
telling them that his Majesty commands it; I leave this with your Lordship, to
judge whether there is not something in it.

As to the Reformation they are now hammering upon; all that I shall say of it,
is, That in being extremely prejudicial to, and unhappy for us, it will be much
for the advantage of the Court of Rome, which will be sure to value it self
upon tricks; so that nothing shall be done, but what shall serve to create
Lawsuits, and to confirm Abuses: Such as the continuing of Titular Bishops,
whom they ought to abolish; for besides the mischiefs they do, the creation of
such is contrary to the Canons, they being much the same with the
Choro-episcopi, who were anciently taken away by Pope Damasus; as also the
continuing of Conservatories, which are the bane of the World; and which do so
much disturb the Peace of the Commonwealth, by occasioning frequent Disputes
about Jurisdictions, to the spending of vast Sums of Money: But for the same
Reasons for which Abuses ought to be abolished, they take care to establish
them, and after such a manner as is most for their advantage. I do pray
heartily that our Lord would be pleased to remove these and all other such
Abuses, since we are fallen into such Times; that though we had some hopes
given us of having them redressed, yet through the Legate's carrying whatever
he has a mind to, those hopes are now all vanished.

The Article of Reserved Cases in matters of Doctrine, is a thing I could say a
great deal more of, than I am willing to write. May God remedy things, and
preserve and prosper your most Illustrious Person and State for many years, as
I desire.

I kiss your Lordship's Hands. Doctor Vargas.
From Trent the 26th of November, 1551.
Dr. Vargas's Letter of the 28th of November, 1551, to the Bishop of Arras.
Most Illustrious and Reverend Lord,
IN a Letter I writ to your Lordship two days ago, I gave you an account of
what had passed here concerning some Matters of Doctrine with the Divines of
Lovain and Cologne; that business has put all things here into a terrible
Confusion: The Legate, though he does all he can to dissemble it, being in
great disorder about it; for he must have no Eyes, if he does not see what he
has done; and into how great a Confusion he has brought things by his Violence,
which very well deserves to be called by another name.

This, as I intimated in my last was the Cause why he would not consent to the
giving out of any Copies of those Doctrines and Canons, having been advised by
Don Francisco not to do it, until such time as the business was made up, and
quieted; and the Legate himself now wishes that they were corrected as to some
particulars: both which things are worth observing.

Yesterday, and the day before, the Legate sent for the Divines to satisfy
them, and to put an End to this business; I am of opinion it will be patched
up, though not so, but that a scarr will still remain; neither will it be
possible to prevent its taking Air, so far as not to furnish the Heretics with
a great deal of discourse.

This, as indeed every thing else that is done here, furnishes his Majesty, in
my judgment, with a fair opportunity of representing Matters nakedly, and as
they are, to the Pope; together with the great Inconveniences which must
necessarily attend, their not taking other Courses in all matters than they
have done hitherto: For if he be governed by Reason, it is not possible, but
that this business must have had some effect upon him; and I am apt to think,
that God permitted this on purpose to make them ashamed, in order to the
opening of their Eyes; according to what is said in the Psalms, Imple facies
eorum ignominia, ut quaerant nomen tuum: I pray God they may once begin to
understand; though, for my own part, as I have always said, it is more than I
expect, if it is not done by a Miracle. His Majesty must by no means lose such
an opportunity as this; which if closely and warmly pursued, may be of great
advantage. The Legate being sensible thereof, told Don Francisco yesterday,
when he spoke to him, that he would give some new Orders about the Divines, and
that for the future they should be still consulted with and employed on all
such Occasions; and I do not doubt, but that in order to help himself out of
the difficulties he is at present entangled in, he will do something to sweeten
them, I shall not fail to advise your Lordship of all that shall occur. Our
Lord preserve and prosper your most Illustrious Person and State for many
years, as I desire.

I kiss your Lordship's Hands. Doctor Vargas.
From Trent the 28th of November, 1551. P. S. The Legate reports that the
Affairs of Germany are turning against his Majesty; and that the Army which was
before Magdeburg is now on its March toward France; reporting likewise, I do
not know what other Stories of Maurice, and of the Embassies.

I cannot tell what to pray for, but that God would do better for us than some
people wish. I do not believe a word of all this News; and for no other reason,
but because they report it.



The following Paper is a Note writ with Vargas's own Hand; but without his
Name, or any Date to it.
WHat I writ to your Lordship on the 1st Instant, I spoke of the other day to
Don Francisco, and of the Caution and Secrecy wherewith it ought to be managed;
and that in order to advise his Majesty thereof, we ought, doing it with
convenient secrecy, to inform our selves concerning that affair by the three
Deputies, the Archbishop of Sazar, the Archbishop of Granada, and the Bishop of
Guadix; who being spoke to, said the same I had writ to your Lordship: And
whereas Don Francisco did thereupon intend to have spoke craftily to the
Legate, to hear what he said of it, that he might be able to give his Majesty
the fuller Information thereof: I dissuaded him vehemently from doing it, on
account of the Inconveniences that might attend its being talked of, before we
knew his Majesty's mind about it: I do suppose he has done so, and has writ to
his Majesty concerning it, that being undoubtedly the best course in matters of
so great moment. The importance of this being such, that through it, and the
great unhappiness of the Times, and Affairs being on such terms as they are,
and the Councils being so debilitated as to have nothing of strength in it; so
far as I am able to divine, there will be no remedy either for what is past, or
for what is to come, if God does not put his immediate Hand to it, and convert
the Hearts of those People, which, as I have often said, is a thing I have no
hopes at all of; because I do not see how it can be done by any other way than
by a Miracle. Now if it should not be thought expedient for to make use of this
at present, as indeed considering how things stand, it does not seem to be; it
may then be laid up for another time, when it may be of some advantage; for
however there may be some, who, to satisfy their Consciences, so far as is
convenient, will write thereof; yet it will be done so, as to defend its Truth,
without taking any notice of the mischief that may follow thereon.

I have likewise acquainted Don Francisco with what the Elector of Cologne told
me of their having corrected and supplied several Doctrines, wherewith his
Divines, and those of Lovain, had found fault; and how though it appeared to
him a very ill business that they should have given occasion to the doing of
any such thing; nevertheless, since it had been done, to correct it was the
lesser Evil: Whereupon Don Francisco made the Deputies examine the Doctrines;
which after they had done, two of them, viz Sazar and Guadix, found two other
passages added in conformity of what the Elector had told me, the Archbishop of
Granada being in that matter of another Opinion. Don Francisco must, I believe,
have writ at large concerning this; which, let it be as it will, is a very bad
business; and being understood to be so by the Electors, I do not know what may
be the consequence thereof.

Don Francisco has writ an account likewise of the Electors; that is, Mentz and
Triers talking of leaving this place, and of the Fears Mentz is possessed with;
this is a thing his Majesty is concerned to take care of: Since if they go
away, it will put an End to all. To this I offered two Things: the One was,
That I had spoke and writ also to your Lordship of this pretense of Mentz's,
before there was any sign of any Tumults in Germany; he having said before
that, That since the French did not come to the Council, it ought to be
suspended. The Other was, That I did not doubt of the Legate's having been the
first Mover in this, who takes care to fill Mentz with Fears, and to confirm
them in him; the chief Reasons that are given by the one and the other being
the same; so that I do verily believe, that whatever Mentz says concerning
the Council, is what the Legate has put into his head, excepting what relates
to a Reformation, wherein he agrees with the rest: Your Lordship must consider
what is fit to be done in a matter of so great importance.

I could never learn what the Doctrines were that were changed and corrected by
the Legate upon the German Divines, contradicting them after they had been
Enacted by the Council: Which change and correction, though it was never known
to any Protestant, so far as I can learn, until now that these Letters have
discovered it; nevertheless, it must necessarily have always had the same
effect on the Roman Catholics that know of it, that it has now upon
Protestants; which is, That General Councils are either fallible in their
Determinations of Doctrines; or else, that the Convention of Trent, whose
Decrees were altered for being Erroneous, must not have been a General Council.

Dr. Vargas's Letter of the 7th of December, 1551, to the Bishop of Arras.
Most Illustrious and Reverend Lord,
DON Francisco has acquainted your Lordship with what passed here concerning
the Powers and Instructions of the Envoys of the Duke of Wittenbourg, and those
of Strasbourg, and the other Cities; of all which he has sent you a Copy: And
has given you an account likewise of the Legate's Pretensions, and of what
passed betwixt them; as also of what I said on that occasion to the Legate,
who, I am sensible, abhorrs the Coming and the Congress of the Protestants; and
if I am not deceived, will raise all the Difficulties he is able for to hinder
it.

What the Legate pretends, is, That in conformity of what has been concluded in
the Diets, and which though it had never been promised, would have been in it
self reasonable: The Protestants, before they are admitted into the Council,
ought by an express Act to submit themselves to it, and to that End ought for
to have other Powers; those which have been exhibited by them, not being to be
endured, both for the said Reason, as also on the account of some Clauses that
are in them; namely, that where it is said, In eo compareant, deliberent and
concludant indictum hoc Concilium (prout multis jam habitis imperii Comitiis
decretum est) libere, legitime and Christian celebretur: And where it is said,
Reformationes tam spiritualium quam secularium instituantur: And where it is
said at last, Denique alia omnia faciant and omittant, quae nos ipsi facere ac
omittere possemus and debemus, idque secundum instructionem quam a nobis
praescriptam habent: And where it is said, Quodcunque autem Consiliarii nostri
supradicti nostro nomine sic agere aut perficere juverint id firmum ratumque
habebimus, etc.

Now what I have to offer, and did in effect say to Don Francisco, and
afterward to the Legate, concerning this Affair, is, That a matter of so great
moment ought not to be precipitated, without having first given an account
thereof to his Majesty, that so he may order it, as he shall judge to be most
convenient; and shall signify to us, what the Duke, and the others, have
promised in and out of the Diets; and whether the Powers that are sent by them
do agree with their Promises; or whether they are obliged to send others, and
by an express Act to submit themselves to the Council. Furthermore, that his
Majesty may see whether by what has been concluded in the Diets, and promised
by the Princes, he can justify his compelling them in due time to accept of
the Council, and of what shall be determined therein; but so, that That
obligation may continue, though he does not urge them to do it in this place.
Neither can it be truly said, that their Powers, and the Propositions which
have been made by them, are contrary to the Synod; since, in fact, they do seem
to approve of it, and submit to it, rather than impugn it; notwithstanding
their having put in some Clauses, which may hereafter serve for Subterfuges.

It is furthermore to be considered, That it is one thing to admit Catholics,
who must come qualified as such; and another to admit Heretics, to whom the
Council and his Majesty have granted a safe Conduct: Who coming, staying, and
going back Heretics, may treat and speak their Minds freely; as the Bohemians,
who returned home without coming to a conclusion, did in the Council of Basil,
which afterward sent Legates to treat with them. So that such of the
Protestants as have not either in or out of the Diets obliged themselves to
submit to the Council, cannot be directly or indirectly compelled to do it,
without violating the safe Conduct, and the security that has been given, for
to say what they please, concerning their Opinions and Errors, without being
punished for it: For to tell them that they must first acknowledge the Council
to be lawful, is, in effect, to bid them begone, and to tell the rest that
they are not to come hither.

Furthermore, Though it is but just, that all lawful means should be used to
bring them to submit themselves to the Council in all things; nevertheless, if
they will not do it, they cannot, if not otherwise obliged, be compelled to it.
Now they have a safe Conduct granted them; but they ought rather, as there is
occasion, and so far as it may be done without danger, for to be caressed, that
so they may not, with the suspicions they have already, have matter given them
for more, so as to hinder them from coming hither, to the ruining of a business
about which so much pains has been taken. But besides this, there is another
difficulty in this Affair: which is, how the Synod, their Powers being such as
they are, shall receive the Wirtenbourg and other Envoys; and whether they
shall be allowed to sit. The Legate, and some others, having declared
resolutely, That unless they do submit after the Example of the Envoys of
Brandenbourg, they shall have no Seats granted them, because the Allowance
thereof would be to incorporate them into the Synod. On which occasion I told
the Legate, that such as were received on a safe Conduct, had their
Peculiarities; and that he could not deny them a Seat, where the granting
thereof was not repugnant to the Authority of the Council, and of the Acts
thereof; as it was not, at the Disputations, and at the Sessions, to hear what
was pronounced. And whereas had the Duke come in Person, they would not have
suffered him for to have stood, but would have assigned him a convenient Seat
in the fore mentioned Places, the Congregations of the Bishops being excepted;
that he ought therefore, since the Duke is a Prince of the Empire, to do the
same to his Envoys, since it might be done without any prejudice to the Synod,
or without incorporating them into it; for that, properly speaking, the Body of
the Synod consists only of the Prelates, who are the Judges, the Ambassadors
not being of its Body, but are only joined to it by way of Assistance; and so
do neither add to, nor take from its Substance, being there only to make it the
more authoritative and solemn: Telling him farther, That he ought to do all
that is in his power to win, and not exasperate the Protestants. Of all which,
I reckoned it to be proper to give an account to your Lordship, that so we may
have a Resolution come quickly concerning it. May our Lord protect and prosper
your most Illustrious and Reverend Person and State for many years, as I do
desire.

I do kiss your Lordship's Hands. Doctor Vargas.
From Trent the 7th of December, 1551.
Dr. Vargas's Letter of the 18th of December, 1551, to the Bishop of Arras.
Most Illustrious and Reverend Lord,
I Have received your Lordship's of the 13th Instant, I had so much longed for,
and do hope your Lordship will be pleased to let me have your Answer, by his
Majesty's next Dispatch: Though as things go here at present, I do not know how
this Synod may end.

Don Francisco having writ concerning Mentz and Triers, being resolved to leave
us, and upon what terms that affair stands, I shall not trouble your Lordship
with it at present, but shall by the next Currier, notwithstanding I do not see
how I should be able to give so exact an account of things as Don Francisco,
write you my Thoughts of them, telling you what I judge to be most convenient.

The Legate being much altered, and the time not come as yet for Pighino to
have a Cardinal's Hat, they declare, that there is nothing to be done but to
suspend the Council, having I do not know what other Imaginations in their
heads. This, if I am not deceived, being the opportunity they have waited for:
However, I hope God will provide for us, and his Majesty will not fail to do
what is necessary, and especially in not suffering the Electors to go, or at
least not him of Cologne: For if there should be no persuading them to stay to
the last, when they might all return home together, they may very well go one
after another from hence.

There is another Article that ought to be maturely considered; which is, how
to prevent the Councils being closed; or, which will be the same, from being
suspended for an hour: Which is an affair wherein both his Majesty's interest
and honor are deeply engaged: they are here very intent upon some other
things, that they do not speak of. I do heartily wish that these Affairs may
not disturb his Majesty, to the increasing of his distemper. May God put his
hand to all, and preserve your Lordship's most Illustrious and Reverend Person,
and increase your State for many years, as I desire.

I kiss your Lordship's Hands. Doctor Vargas.
From Trent the 18th of December, 1551. P. S. Your Lordship's Letters have been
delivered to those to whom they were addressed, who do all kiss your Lordship's
Hands, but particularly the Archbishop of Sazar, who desired me to acquaint
your Lordship with the sense he has of the favor your Lordship did him therein.



Dr. Vargas's Letter of the 24th of December, 1551, to the Bishop of Arras.
Most Illustrious and Reverend Lord,
GOD give your Lordship many happy Christmasses: I should have been glad to
have done this in Person; but since that cannot be, your Lordship will, I hope,
accept of my Will, which is the same your Lordship has for several years known
it to be; than which, I can say nothing that can endear it more.

I kiss your Lordship's Hands for the favor of your Letter of the 20th
Instant, and for having acquainted me with your being in Health; which was the
best News I could receive. May God preserve it to your Lordship, as I desire;
which is a necessary Prayer, considering how your Lordship is overwhelmed with
Business; neither can your Lordship be otherwise than surfeited with these
Affairs; for I am sure I am abundantly.

The Electors have taken a better Resolution, not to make any change without
his Majesty's License; which though they do still insist to have, we shall
nevertheless have the more time to answer them, and to receive Orders from
Court: Concerning which Affair, since Don Francisco has writ at large, there is
no need of my repeating it. Nevertheless, being informed that he has writ so to
his Majesty, and has given his Opinion in an Affair of so great moment, though
I cannot do it by this Currier, I will in a little time acquaint your Lordship
with my Thoughts of it; though considering the perplexity thereof, and the
conveniences there are on both sides, it were much more advisable to hear,
than to speak concerning it. Don Francisco being a Man of Integrity and
Prudence, and withal very Zealous for his Majesty's Service, cannot but speak
well in all that he writes: Nevertheless, this is an affair of that importance,
that he had need look narrowly into it, that treats about it, that so God's
Service and his Majesty's Honor, which go hand in hand, may not suffer
thereby, and especially considering, to what terms things are brought. May God
direct and ordain what is most expedient for his own Service, and preserve and
prosper your Lordship's most Illustrious and Reverend Person and State for many
years, as I desire.

I kiss your Lordship's Hands. Doctor Vargas.
From Trent the 28th of December, 1551.
Dr. Vargas's Letter of the 29th of December, 1551, to the Bishop of Arras.
Most Illustrious and Reverend Lord,
I Do here perform what I promised your Lordship in mine of the 24th Instant,
which was to write to you concerning the Suspension of the Council, which is
now so hotly talked of here, desiring that what I write, may be communicated to
his Majesty.

Now though considering in what forwardness things are here it is possible I
may have little to say that will be of any importance, and considering how your
Lordship keeps up with all business, I may have nothing to offer that will be
new to you: Nevertheless I shall, as in duty bound, acquaint your Lordship with
my Thoughts thereof; which though at present they may not, may hereafter
signify something. I do not know whether, by reason of the copiousness of the
Subject, I shall be able to be so short as I desire.

The Pope, as your Lordship very well knows, has all along pretended to two
Things: The first and chief is to have the Council suspended; and in case he
failed of that, then to make all the haste he could to bring it to an end,
thereby to free himself from such a Yoke. I formerly acquainted your Lordship
with the Pope and his Ministers, being hard at work to bring this about, the
Legate having publicly declared that the Council might end by May:
Nevertheless the Suspension, if feasible, is the thing they chiefly desire, and
are laboring hard at this time to compass; and that for the following Reasons.

1. Because if they should prosecute and put an end to the Council, they will
not then be able to avoid the encountering of one of these two Dangers; either
of being obliged to consent to such a Reformation as is necessary; which rather
than yield to, they will suffer all to go to wrack, or else they must give over
pretending any longer, that it belongs to the Pope to reduce Germany, and
reform the Church: Whereby they will justify Princes in applying proper
Remedies to their own Kingdoms, by all just and holy Ways; which they reckon
will be prevented, by not putting an end to the Council; because till that is
done, they will still be able to gull the World, with their having an intention
to do great matters, and will, according to their common practice, go on,
imposing upon People with fair words and false colors.

2. By suspending the Council, the Pope may hope to gratify the King of
France, and procure his friendship so far, as to make an advantageous Peace
with him; whereby his Court will hope, to draw the same Profits from that
Kingdom, as they did before the Breach.

3. Whatever is done therein, they will be sure to lay it all at his Majesty's
door; and will give it out, that they were not the Cause of it. This they are
at this time laboring hard to bring about, by reducing matters to such terms,
as may give some color to that pretense.

4. By suspending the Council, they will hinder the Protestants from coming to
it: Which is a thing the Pope and his Ministers cannot endure to think of,
being sensible to what straits they will be reduced thereby: Since the Presence
of those people will oblige them either to carry things after another manner
than they have done hitherto, or will make them infamous to the whole World;
neither was it any thing but this, that occasioned the Council's having met so
frequently as it has done: So that we may very well have People coming hither,
when the Council is drawing near its End.

5. They imagine that by delays, and gaining of time, they may compass their
Ends; and that the Council being once suspended, some accident or other may
intervene, which may hinder it from ever meeting any more; or that God, as some
wish, may take away his Majesty, which I trust in his Mercy he will not do, his
Life, at this time, being of so great importance to the Church, and to all
Christendom.

Lastly, Because if they should put an End to the Council, though they should
be able to do it in a short time, yet they cannot tell how it might succeed; or
whether the Pope might not be thereby hindered, from doing what he judges to be
most convenient for himself and his Court; and if, during that time, there
should happen to be a vacancy of the Holy See, whether the Council might not
intermeddle therein, with more vigor and justice, than it did the last time, by
reason of the doubts and differences which were then on foot. Now they reckon
they shall be freed from that danger by suspending the Council, which will, in
effect, be the same as to dissolve it; and the Cardinals will, for their own
interests, be sure to further a thing wherein, if there should be a vacancy,
the Papacy is so much concerned.

For these and other Reasons it is, that the Pope and his Ministers are so
desirous of having the Council suspended; nevertheless, that they may not break
with his Majesty, nor seem to have done it themselves, they do not desire to
appear to have been the Authors of it, and would have it thrown upon his
Majesty; being, so far as I can perceive, in great hopes, that the Electors
growing sick of the great charge they are at here, will be for going home in a
short time; neither are the Legate and Presidents less desirous of having that
done, on account of their own private interests.

The Elector's design in this, I mean those of Mentz and Triers: For as for
Cologne, who is an extraordinary Person, he referrs himself entirely to his
Majesty, is of another nature; who being such great Princes and Prelates, and
Servants of his Majesty, are willing to return home to look after their own
particular Concerns; the Rumors they hear of the Tumults in Germany, making
them judge it necessary that the Council should be suspended; and the rather,
because without the concurrence of France they reckon a Council cannot be
celebrated to any purpose; or so as to be received by the Germans: This makes
them to be very earnest to be gone; and it is probable they are at this very
time soliciting to have leave.

What remains to be considered, is, Whether it will be as convenient for his
Majesty, as for the Pope, to have the Council suspended; considering the
present posture of Affairs, and the Rumors of Germany: It appearing to be to
little purpose to hold a Council for that Province, which will never make such
a Reformation as is necessary, and that too without the concurrence of France:
Moreover, it cannot be for his Majesty's honor that a Council should end as
this will in all probability, and that in a short time: I say, this may make it
appear to be the wiser course to have the Council put off to a better time,
than for to have his Majesty involve himself in new difficulties. This, and
diverse other things, must be well understood by such as observe them with zeal
and prudence, and as are desirous to direct and serve his Majesty; as to which,
I am sure I am not wanting. Now this being supposed to be a business of great
moment, and that has considerable difficulties and inconveniences on both
sides, that must make my judgment about it, to be conditional; and so far
doubtful, as to reckon that That will be most expedient, which his Majesty
shall command, and which shall seem to be so to your Lordship; which, whatever
it is, I shall always approve and follow.

What I have to offer, if no new Matters or Necessities do arise, which may
require the taking of new Measures in reference to the Affairs of Germany; or
if no other Methods should be found out, or if there be no Secrets, as there
are commonly with Princes, which may persuade the contrary; I say, what I have
to offer under all these Restrictions, is, That this is not a time to admit, or
so much as to speak of a Suspension; it being much more convenient,
notwithstanding all the difficulties and disturbances in Germany, to have the
Council prosecuted; and since the Council cannot be suspended without going
backward, in the present state of affairs, this seems to be the best decision
of the doubt. Since the suspension thereof, if I am not deceived, will be
attended with inconveniences that are greater beyond all comparison, than the
prosecution thereof will be; notwithstanding it should make no such Reformation
as is pretended, and is necessary, our sins, and the iniquity of the times, not
giving way to it. In which case, I still speak so, as upon no terms whatsoever
to give way to the Pope and his Ministers deforming, under a pretense of
reforming, for to canonize Abuses: and doing all the mischiefs I have formerly
taken notice of at large to your Lordship; in none of which, from the
beginning, I have been overseen or deceived. And as I have always, as your
Lordship very well knows, urged these matters, so I do it still with greater
instance.

Now the thing that is chiefly to be attended to herein, is, the End of this
Suspension both at present and for the future; the End, as the Philosopher has
it, being what moves the Agent. To this we must apply what has been above
noted; viz. That as it is for the Service of God, that the Council, instead of
doing good, should not be suffered to do mischief: So it is likewise for his
Majesty's honor, that it should not end, as we have reason to fear it will,
which may make it seem advisable to give way to its being suspended or put off
to a more convenient time.

This is really such a difficulty, that I do not well know what to say to it;
only that it would have been a happy thing that this Council had never met,
which is no more than what I have often wished and declared, by reason of the
many mischiefs it has already done, and is still doing: But there is no undoing
what is once done, unless those people could be brought to recant, which they
will never be brought to, though you should cut their Throats for refusing; and
as it is to no purpose to think of that, so it is to as little purpose either
in this or any following Age to hope for any thing of a Reformation from a
General Council, or for to see any better Order therein, than there is in this;
no, not though the French and all other Christian Princes were agreed, it not
being to be done without making a Schism or some great Breach, unless God
should be pleased to remedy things by some other way, or for to work a Miracle;
which we have no reason to expect, since there is no necessity of it; God
having made his Church a perfect Commonwealth, by having endued it with Power
sufficient to remedy all such matters, if through vile Abuses, and an
insatiable Thirst after Empire, she had not reduced her self to such a state as
she is in at present, or if they who ought to watch were not fallen asleep; and
whosoever shall go about to persuade himself that things are otherwise than
thus, does but deceive himself; as they do also, that expect that the World, as
it is at this time divided, and every Prince is gaping and contending after
Empire, that there should ever be a right understanding among them. Plato
assuring us, that where things are so, it is in vain to hope for Peace: which
is never to be expected, until all is brought under one Government. The same
Truth is confirmed to us likewise by Experience; witness the manifold Miseries
which have befallen the World since the beginning of the decay of the Empire:
Which being considered, I do not see what can be hoped for at this time or
hereafter.

All this being premised, what remains, is to enquire into this matter so far
as his Majesty's honor is concerned therein: Which I do reckon to be so
closely linked to the Service of God, that there is no separating them without
bringing all to ruin. What occurrs to me at present, why the Council ought not
to be suspended, is,

1. Because a Suspension is earnestly pursued by the Pope and his Ministers;
which, if there were nothing else, is reason enough for his Majesty's being
against it: there being nothing plainer or better known to the World, than that
their Designs and his Majesty's are quite contrary to one another in these
matters.

2. Because let a Suspension be brought about as it will, his Majesty must bear
the whole blame of it, and be charged with all the ill consequences that shall
attend it: For they will be sure, according to their old craft, to make it his
Majesty's, and not his Holiness's doing.

3. Because the suspending thereof, after it has sat so many years, and has had
so many Debates and Sessions, will create a great deal of talk, and must make
sport for the Heretics; who will not fail to say thereupon, That his Majesty
gave way to it, either because he was not able, or did not care to humor the
Pope.

4. Because any Suspension, and especially if it should be at the next Session,
must, in my judgment, tend as much to his Majesty's dishonor, as it will be in
favor of the French, who cannot be obliged by any thing so much as that; for
they will reckon that their having protested against the Council both here and
at Rome, was what caused it to be suspended; neither will there be much notice
taken of its having been prosecuted for some time, after that was done, so long
as the French have gained their point at last, which was the Suspension of the
Council; so that unless there should be an extreme necessity in relation to
God's Service: This alone, in the present state of his Majesty's affairs, is
sufficient to hinder him from giving his consent to its being done.

Lastly, If there should be a Suspension, it will be necessary that some
Prelates should still remain here, who, if they should be all Spaniards, the
Churches in Spain will be left desolate; neither will their remaining here
signify any thing, if they are not a considerable Number: Besides, as
whenever that happens, it will undoubtedly involve his Majesty in new Troubles
and Engagements, so it will not be possible to assemble the Church so again; or
if that could be done, there will then be no more ground, but rather less to
hope for any thing of Reformation than there is at present, since people will
be quite tired out with the length of it. We ought not therefore to deceive our
selves, by promising our selves things, which no humane Prudence will suffer us
to hope for.

Having taken notice of the inconveniences which will attend the suspending of
the Council: I come now to set down the Advantages which will accrue to his
Majesty by having it prosecuted, notwithstanding it should not make such a
Reformation as is necessary.

Now in all that I offer on this Head, I do still suppose, that his Majesty
will, as he has done hitherto, still continue to solicit his Holiness by all
necessary Offices, that things may not be carried here at such a scandalous
rate as they have been hitherto; and that he will take care that no occasion be
given to the Council for to disperse it self, upon the Prelate's speaking their
Minds freely, or denying their consent to such matters as are not convenient,
which is a thing that may very justly be feared.

The first Advantage is, That since the times will not give way to more, a
Council will still have been celebrated by his Majesty: And in having done
that, notwithstanding all the Disputes, Wars and Contentions to the contrary,
his Majesty will have gained his main Point; and there will be but few who will
know the truth of matters, and especially in succeeding Ages.

2* Though there should not be such a Reformation in all things as is
necessary, there will be in all matters of Doctrine; and it will be a great
Point to have all such matters decreed and made perpetual: For suppose the
Heretics should seek out flaws in the Council to excuse their not receiving
it, that will be no new thing; and it is probable they would do the same, if
the whole Church were reformed; but they will not last long, after the Church
has done all that was in her power: For after this is once done, his Majesty,
and other Christian Princes, will have wherewith to compel the Heretics, when
any good juncture shall happen, or when they shall judge it to be convenient:
And for other things, Remedies may be found for them.

3. After the Council has done all it can as to Doctrines, if through the
opposition of the Pope and his Ministers a Reformation cannot be obtained,
which I do verily believe they will never consent to, neither in a Council nor
out of one: Besides, that his Majesty will, by what he has done, have
discharged a great Duty; he will also be better able to justify his calling
Provincial Councils, and his making use of all other just and pious Methods,
for the remedying and reforming of his Kingdoms, than he would be otherwise:
That being no more than what has been done formerly, and may, in the judgment
of all pious and learned Men, be repeated again.

4. By how much the War goes on increasing, there is the greater necessity of
the Council's being continued, in order to the prosecuting of one of the chief
Ends for which it was assembled; which was the making of Peace among all
Christian Princes: For which, and several other good Reasons, it is no way
convenient, that the Council should be suspended; for besides, that to suspend
it, is in effect the same as to dissolve it; so in case of a vacancy of the Sea, and of several other things, it will be expedient the Council should be
kept on foot.

Lastly, To continue the Council till the War is at an end, is of great moment;
that being, in my judgment, one of the best means his Majesty can make use of
to keep the Pope, whose friendship at this time is so necessary, firm to his
Engagements: It being evident from the usual inconstancy and mutability of that
Court, and from several other things, which are well known to your Lordship, of
how great importance it has been to the Service of God, and to the public
Good, that the Pope has been obliged to preserve this Union.

But if, after all that has been said, his Majesty should be compelled either
thorough the Changes and Tumults of Germany, or the War in Italy, or the
Departure of the Electors, upon its being necessary for them to repair home, or
for some other Reasons to consent to a Suspension; it will then be convenient
to consider, Whether the time of the Suspension ought not to be limited, which
I take to be a thing of great importance.

But if upon what is here represented, a Resolution should be taken to have the
Council continued, so as not to suffer the Suspension thereof to be so much as
mentioned; we are then to consider, when it will be convenient it should end;
which is a thing his Majesty must be sure to take care of, and to see that That
be so ordered, as may best suit with his affairs; and the Elector's occasions,
upon whose Presence here very much depends; as also whether the Protestants
will come or not; and whether it may be convenient, that the Atricle de
Communione sub utraque specie, which is now suspended, should be determined in
the next Session; which ought not to be, no nor that of the Marriage of Priests
neither: both which ought to be put off to the very last Session. In which, by
what I can perceive, and his Majesty must see it likewise, there will be
trouble enough, through the Pope's laboring all he can for several weighty
Causes, to have the Council quite locked up; or whether it may not be most
convenient to leave those Articles to be determined by another Council, which
may be named, though it were never to be celebrated, that so there may still be
a door left open, and something that is dispensable for the public Good; of
which nature all such things are, as are not of Faith: For who knows but
Germany may come to be in such a state, that these things may suffice to reduce
it, as it did in the case of the Bohemians.

And since there is no likelihood of the Council's not ending after the same
fashion, as it has proceeded: Besides, that it will be for his Majesty's honor
that those Articles should not be determined, it will likewise prevent his
Majesty's being compelled to execute those Decrees of the Council before he is
ready for it; and may also prevent the Lutherans being so far irritated and
provoked as to listen to the Persuasions of the French; which is a thing ought
to be carefully looked after.

May our Lord direct all things, as he knows to be most needful, and guide his
Majesty, who employs himself wholly in his Service, into what is most
convenient; and may he likewise preserve and prosper your Lordship's most
Illustrious and Reverend Person and State for many years, as I desire.

I kiss your Lordship's Hands. Doctor Vargas.
From Trent the 29th of December, 1551.
Dr. Vargas's Letter of the 1st of January, 1552, to the Bishop of Arras.
Most Illustrious and Reverend Lord,
THree days ago I writ your Lordship my Opinion at large concerning what we
are doing here, to which I have little to add, only, that though I have thought
much on these Affairs, yet considering they are matters of great Importance,
and there are great Inconveniences on all sides, it is possible I may be
mistaken in them; so that as I have said formerly, I shall then reckon my
Judgment of them, something, when I shall understand that your Lordship esteems
it so.

The Electors of Mentz and Triers, seem to be fully determined to leave this
place, so soon as they have received his Majesty's Answer, which Don Francisco
has promised they shall have in a few days; who, though they are both Prelates
of great Honor, are much out in this matter, and will be more so, if they
should go without his Majesty's leave: For it has made a wonderful change in
the Synod, they who are glad of it, whom we need not name, talking thereof, and
reporting it after such a manner, as plainly discovers what they have in their
Hearts; all their talk now being of a Suspension, or Dissolution of the
Council, and of the Legate's being ready to depart, and of Pighinus's being to
remain here: All which makes it necessary for us to have his Majesty's Commands
immediately, which though I do not know whether they may be able to stop the
said Electors, will nevertheless, smooth things very much to us.

The Elector of Cologne, who has got great Honor here, by having on all
occasions demonstrated himself his Majesty's Servant, and who deserves to be
thanked for it, will, I doubt, be apt to be influenced by the other two,
whereas, if he would still remain here, the other two's going would trouble us
the less, who though they pretend Necessity, and to have a good Intention in
what they do, have not considered this Affair as they ought to have done, and
how great a Change it would make here, and how prejudicial it might be to his
Majesty's Affairs in this present juncture; and how the French, who will be
glad of it, will make use thereof to their advantage. I shall be in pain till I
know your Lordship's Thoughts concerning this, which I am in likewise to see
your Lordship so overwhelmed with Business, at a time when the World is turned
upside down. May our Lord put his helping hand to things, and preserve and
prosper your most Illustrious and Reverend Person and State for many Years, as
I desire.

I kiss your Lordship's Hands. Doctor Vargas.
From Trent the 1st of January, 1552. P. S. I have forbore to write some things
to your Lordship, which will be communicated to you by Monsieur Vargas. May God
grant your Lordship many happy Years.



Dr. Vargas's Letter of the 2d of January, 1552, to the Bishop of Arras.
Most Illustrious and Reverend Lord,
I Do remember that I have on several occasions represented to your Lordship,
the Person, Merits, and Services of the Bishop of Venosa, and particularly what
he did at Bononia, and afterward in this place, where he continued two Years,
till he was called away by the Cardinal Jaen, who assured him it was for his
Majesty's service, for the promoting whereof he is now returned hither again;
and who being a Spaniard, and the Son of Spaniards who were Servants to his
Majesty, he cannot endure his present Bishopric, which is at the provision of
the Pope, and which I suppose he designs, for just Reasons to resign, he not
being able, while he holds it for to do much. I do therefore most
affectionately entreat your Lordship for to prevail with his Majesty to bestow
one of the two Churches that are now vacant in the Kingdom upon him; they are
the Churches of Aguila and Cotron, and are worth 700 Ducats a piece, for
besides that he deserves it, and a great deal more, it will be taken well by
every body, that his Majesty remembers him, and so it will be a kindness to a
great many, and will much animate those that are here. Were your Lordship but
acquainted with this Bishop, there would be no need of recommending him to you,
for he is certainly both one of the ablest and best men that I have met with.

Dr. Velasco is able to give you an Account of him, and whatever he shall say
of him, will certainly be true; so not doubting, but that your Lordship will do
this Favor to all, and to me in particular, I will say no more, only that if
we did any thing when we made the Protestation at Bononia, and that I escaped
with my Life, it was owing, under God, to this Bishop: In which Affair he
pretended to nothing but to serve his Majesty, for which reason, after I had
made the Protestation, he came hither like an honest man as he was. Our Lord
preserve and prosper your Lordship's most Illustrious and Reverend Person and
State for many Years, as I desire.

I kiss your Lordship's Hands. Doctor Vargas.
From Trent the 2d of January, 1552.
Dr. Vargas's Letter of the 9th of January, 1552, to the Bishop of Arras.
Most Illustrious and Reverend Lord,
HIS Majesty's Dispatch came as full to the purpose as could be desired, or
might be expected, coming through your Lordship's Hands, in which I do receive
a full Answer to all the Letters I have writ to your Lordship, which having
been many, and some of them very long, one so employed as your Lordship is, and
especially at this time, could not have answered them particularly without
giving himself too much trouble.

An Account of what has passed with the Legate, and on what Terms things are
here having been writ by Don Francisco, I shall forbear writing thereof, only
as to the safe Conduct I have drawn it up as I think it should be, having
retained the substance of that of Basil; as I have also a Memorial concerning
the Provisions of the Crown, about which the Legate has declared he will have a
tug with us: They were both delivered to the Legate by Don Francisco, who is
now soliciting them, as he does every thing wherein his Majesty is concerned:
The Legate, so soon as he had them, dispatched them to the Pope; without whose
Approbation, as near as the Session is, he will not determine what shall be
done in them, and especially being so well disposed as he is for the
Reformation they contain: To which I take him to be so averse, that he will die
sooner than agree to it: Nevertheless, he is at present in a great straight,
the sight of his Majesty's determination having filled him with fears, the
suspension he had set his heart on so much being thereby defeated, the Synod
being to go on; besides, things are not so altered in Germany, as some people
desired; and the Electors are to remain here, and the Protestants do intend to
come to this place: Which last, is a thing the Pope and his Ministers are not
able to dissemble their being displeased withal; who though I cannot tell what
they may do, I am certain I have often writ it to your Lordship, that they will
never do any thing to any purpose, if not soundly pressed and terrified into
it. I pray God that may be able to do it, that we may have no more struggling
with them.

As to the matter of Benefices with Cure, Janus has writ that his Majesty, so
that they be but well ordered, will be satisfied without having them declared
to be Patrimonial; and whereas the Legate gives out, that his Majesty has some
design therein; it is certain he himself has one, and that is very well
accommodated to the doing of nothing to the purpose, and who will reckon he has
carried his Point, if the drawing up of that affair be left to him, for he will
be sure to lodge the provision to them in the Pope, and abounding with words
and sophistry, will open a brave field for the future. Don Francisco must have
writ at large concerning this matter; all that I have to say thereon is, what I
have formerly writ to your Lordship, which is that I am not, nor will ever be
for having matters of so great importance, and whereon so much depends, handled
and established after such a manner, which would have no other effect, but to
shut a door for ever against all future remedies. Whereas it is much better for
us to suffer our present Grievances to remain as they are, and to wait for the
Remedies which God at some time or other will help us to, than by being
discontented with them, to shut a door against them by those insignificant
things the Legate has in his thoughts, which, so far as I can perceive, are
contrary to the things his Majesty desires, and as is plain from a Letter I
have seen that was writ to Don Francisco, to what it is said he told Janus.
Wherefore if your Lordship is not of another opinion, the thing to be done, in
my mind, is, That his Majesty must insist on having Benefices declared to be
Patrimonial, without descending to any particulars; which if it cannot be done
in this Session, the Legate must be spoke to, to adjourn it to the next, that
we may have the more time to treat about it, and may obtain more from the Pope
than we can expect to have from the Legate. It will likewise be necessary,
before we come to treat thereof again, to consider well what course we are to
take therein; for notwithstanding the Prelates are all honest Men, and of great
Zeal; nevertheless if we do not take care to prevent it, we shall have the
Legate satisfying them with things which many of them do not understand, and
others cannot fall into the account of in so short a time as the Legate will
allow them, who puts every thing off to the Vespers of the Session.

It is furthermore convenient, that we should begin now to consider, what will
be fit to be done at the end of the Synod, whenever it shall happen, and to
provide against Accidents, and particularly concerning some things that relate
to the Authority of the Council and his Majesty's Service: About which, as I
shall not fail to employ my Thoughts, so I shall at sometime or other acquaint
your Lordship therewith, whose most Illustrious and Reverend Person and State
may God protect and prosper for many years, as I desire.

I do kiss your Lordship's Hands. Doctor Vargas.
From Trent the 9th of January, 1552.
Dr. Vargas's Letter of the 10th of January, 1552, to the Bishop of Arras.
Most Illustrious and Reverend Lord,
I Writ yesterday to your Lordship, as I do now again in haste, referring you
to what Don Francisco has writ concerning the whole Business, and particularly
about the Speech that was made this Morning by Duke Maurice's Ambassadors, who
spoke with much more freedom, than the Pope and his Ministers would have had
them to have done: It is to be feared, that if those Ambassadors do insist on
their Pretensions, that such a Rupture will follow thereupon, as will oblige
them to depart, and hinder the other Protestants from coming hither, with which
the Legate will be very well pleased, only he does not care that the scandal
thereof should fall upon the Pope and his Ministers: It will be convenient
therefore, that we should make it plain to all the World, that his Majesty was
no ways accessory to it, as I writ to your Lordship on the 20th of the last
Month. We must therefore do all that we are able to prevent it, that so we may
see what sort of Reformation the Pope will be pleased to give us, though, as I
have often writ to you, I have little hopes of ever seeing any good done either
by him or his Legate; neither do I see any cause to change my Thoughts of them.
As for the Legate, he will do all that he is able, to hinder the granting of
such a safe Conduct as is desired; and before he will conclude any thing, he
will be sure to consult the Pope about it.

Your Lordship may now judge whether I was much mistaken in the account I gave
you of the Legate's having got the Seal into his possession, with which he does
not care to trust the Synod; than which, as nothing in the World can be more
unreasonable, so it lets everybody see, that the Synod is not for to exercise
any authority: And whereas the Legates were formerly earnest for to have the
Synod return an Answer to the Kings of France and Portugal; now they do not
care they should write to any body, neither do I see how they can do it, now
the Legate has got the Seal into his possession; for let them write to whom
they will, he will never let them have the Seal, As the Universal Church
assembled. Now should the Protestants fall into the account of this, as I do
believe they will, I do not know what Effects the want of that Title may have
in the safe Conduct: It is therefore necessary that his Majesty should order
what is most convenient, and that the Legate be acquainted with his
determination.

As to what remains, having it before my Eyes, as I have formerly writ, that
this Synod must end tumultuously and ingloriously, for that reason, and for the
security of his Majesty's honor, it is necessary that we should be provided,
against what may happen; concerning which, after this Session is over, I shall
write what occurrs to me: As to Maurice's Ambassadors pretending, that the
Bishops ought to be Absolved from the Oath they have taken to the Pope, and
that the Pope ought to submit himself to the Council; I have said privately,
they have no good intention therein, but do design thereby to maintain their
Heresy. Now if the Pope would but yield to this as it is reasonable he should,
such a course might be taken, that he should suffer nothing thereby, and the
Protestants would then be left without excuse. But this is a thing not to be
expected; for the Pope and his Ministers will sooner suffer their Throats to be
cut, than part with an inch of their Pretensions; so that if we do end in a
Tragedy, it will not be a thing to be wondered at. I shall not fail to give an
account of all that passes to your Lordship, whose most Illustrious and
Reverend Person and State, may God preserve and prosper for many years, as I
desire.

I do kiss your Lordship's Hands. Doctor Vargas.
From Trent the 10th of January, 1552. P. S. This Letter was writ in such
haste, that I do not know whether it can well be read, or whether I have done
that well I pretend to do therein.



Dr. Vargas's Letter of the 13th of January, 1552, to the Bishop of Arras.
Most Illustrious and Reverend Lord,
WE are strangely embroiled by the Legate, who seeing the Ambassadors of
Maurice, and of the other Princes here; and hearing there are more on their
way, his Soul is ready to leap out of his Body, to send those that are here
home, and to keep the others from coming: To which end he is, to our great
trouble, daily starting new Difficulties and Delays concerning those of
Wirtembourg and Strasbourg; who, if they would depart, would gratify him very
much, that being the thing he is driving at, being sensible, that by giving an
Audience to those Ambassadors, which he cannot now well excuse, he shall open a
door to the rest, a thing both his Master and he do abhor the thoughts of, and
are doing all they can to hinder; to which purpose he is continually starting
new Difficulties about the safe Conduct, denying the Seal also to the Council,
which is never to use it, but when he shall think fit, and doing it after such
a manner, as astonisheth every body that observes it. Don Francisco has pressed
him very hard to have it dispatched in this Month, but he takes little notice
of what he says to him; and is so much disordered, as not to seem to value the
Protestants one farthing.

Farthermore, he is extremely sollicitous to have the Session suspended; and
should he so manage affairs, as to have it done at his Majesty's request, it
will be his Masterpiece: There is no doubt to be made of this being the thing
he aims at, whose intent therein is quite different from that of the
Protestants, though they may both have the same issue; it being notorious that
the thing he drives at, is to prepare a way for his so much desired Suspension;
after which the Council would quickly break up, and the Protestants, who are on
their way, would return home, to his great satisfaction.

Don Francisco and I have had several Consults about this, and some other
Affairs; an account whereof he must have writ to you; as also of his desiring
to have leave, in case they should suspend the Council, to protest in his
Majesty's Name against it. The Case is disjunctive, thus: Should they suspend
the Session at the request of his Majesty, and the Council should happen
afterward to be dissolved thereupon, or some new Difficulties should arise,
they will in that case be sure to throw all the blame upon his Majesty, as they
have always designed to do. On the other hand, Should his Majesty order the
Session to be celebrated at the time appointed, and the Protestants who were to
follow the Ambassadors of Maurice, should not be arrived; in that case they
will not fail to put his Majesty in the wrong.

Being sensible that this is their Plot, I acquainted Don Francisco with it, as
I did also with my Opinion about it; which is, That his Majesty should do
neither the one nor the other, but should leave it to the Protestants, who have
not as yet desired any thing of the Council to Petition for it: And as it would
be a happy thing if the Legate would but give them the hearing in such a case;
so if they are to do it, it is necessary that his Majesty should speedily
acquaint us with what he would have done in this affair; as also in the
business of the Elector of Brandenbourg, whose Envoys, as Don Francisco must
have writ, do begin to talk of returning home; which they will certainly do, if
their business is delayed much longer.

As to the Seal, which the Legate denies to give to the Synod; as it is a
prodigious thing, so I think it is absolutely necessary to have it remedied;
for besides, that the Protestants will undoubtedly lay hold thereof, it is in
it self so great nonsense, for it deserves no better title, as ought not to be
endured.

As to the affair of Benefices, Don Francisco has with much ado prevailed with
the Legate, not to propose what he intended, at the next Session. This is a
thing that gives me no small trouble; for I do see plainly, that the Legate is
taking that course to compass it, I formerly hinted to your Lordship.

But the thing, of all others, that gives me the most trouble, is the Legate's
pretending, that he is informed by Janus, that his Majesty is contented to have
the Affair settled as the Legate would have it; notwithstanding the contrary
plainly appears from his Majesty's last Dispatch, about which I had taken so
much pains; his Majesty having therein by no means allowed, that the Provisions
to Benefices with Cure should be lodged in the Pope: His Majesty's meaning in
those words, That they shall consider, treat of, and conclude some way, etc.
and that they shall be given to such as are worthy, being, that it shall be
done by some way, if it is possible, that is equivalent to their being made
Patrimonial, by a mature Consideration and Discussion of the Matter. Now in
case they were to be lodged wholly in the Pope, and the Settlement thereof were
to be worded according to the Legate's interpretation of Janus's Letter, there
would then be no need of treating or concluding any thing about it, which his
Majesty has ordered to be done; for it would certainly be both the most
senseless and prejudicial thing that ever was passed; as I have formerly
declared, having opposed the Legate in what he would have done therein; having
likewise writ my Thoughts thereof to your Lordship, his Majesty having
commanded me to do so when there should be occasion.

Finally, This Point we are on at present, is the most substantial and
dangerous thing that can be as to the coming and departing of Protestants, as
to the doing of any thing here to the purpose, and as to his Majesty's
compassing his Ends, and reaping some fruit of his great Labors, and as to the
ruining and disgracing of all. But let things go as they will, I shall have
this comfort, That his Majesty, if they do not go well, will be no ways
accessory to it, and that it will be manifest to God and the whole World, that
it was the Pope and his Ministers having endeavored to engross all to
themselves, without having any regard to the remedying of what is amiss, that
has been the Cause of it; which Remedy may God himself give to his Church, and
preserve and prosper your most Illustrious and Reverend Person and State for
many years, as I desire.

I kiss your Lordship's Hands. Doctor Vargas.
From Trent the 13th of January, 1552.
Dr. Vargas's Letter of the 25th of January, 1552, to the Bishop of Arras.
Most Illustrious and Reverend Lord,
THE Session has been celebrated with the Suspension of the Doctrines, but
without doing any thing in the business of Reformation: It being impossible to
come to a conclusion with the Legate, about any thing of that kind; which,
considering how he manages and carries Matters here, I do reckon to be no great
damage.

The Legate has at last pronounced the safe Conduct, and your Lordship will
easily imagine what pains we have been at to bring him to it: He pretended to
add some Clauses, and take away others, which cost us a great deal of trouble:
Insomuch that we do reckon that we have done a mighty Business, in having
procured it in the form you see it in, and, in truth, we were very near having
come to a Rupture with him about it. I pray God the Protestants may be
satisfied with it, since abating some things which were not convenient, and
others we were forced to qualify, because there was no possibility of
persuading the Legate to yield to them; particularly that concerning the free
Exercise of their Rites, which was by his Majesty's Order so qualified, as only
to amount to a Toleration, so as not to be liable to be punished for any
Excesses in the Matters of their Religion, etc. but without granting them an
express License, as the Council of Basil did to the Bohemians; as also the
manner how they were to handle their Controversies; for there being no
possibility of bringing the Legate to admit of that Clause of the Council of
Basil, we were out of pure necessity forced to let it pass as it is, which I
hope will give content, it being said, Et signanter quod causae controversae
tractentur; which as it implies as much as the Protestants desired, so in
having used only the word tractentur, they will not be obliged thereby to
submit to the Decrees of the Pope, or to any such matters; there did not want
those who were very earnest, to have had the word judicentur added; which would
have extremely exasperated the Protestants, because thereby the Council would
have been made their Judges; which was all that the Legate ever pretended to:
But this, and several other such things, were opposed by those of our Party,
Dr. Malvenda, notwithstanding his indisposition, behaving himself therein to
admiration: I say, these Particulars abated, this safe Conduct is the substance
of all that they desired, and the same with that of Basil.

After we had overcome these, and several other Difficulties, the Legate was
for having the Clause, that contained the Pope's promise for to run thus: Pro
sanctissimo Domino nostro; about which, after there had been a great deal of
stir, at last we agreed that neither the Pope nor his Majesty should be named
in it, but that it should run thus: Pro principibus tam ecclesiasticis quam
secularibus; so that it was the Eve of the Session before we came to an
agreement how it was to be, the Legate having insisted upon having the words
quantum in nobis est added to the Clause of Security, which we got by pure dint
of Reason to be left out.

This is all that relates to the safe Conduct, which, in point of security, and
other things, is as full as the Protestants can desire to have it; unless to
justify their pretenses, they are for finding flaws in every thing.

Don Francisco has taken a great deal of pains to satisfy Duke Maurice's
Envoys, but to little purpose; who do still insist on this, That they cannot
exceed their Commission, in yielding to the change of one Title, in the safe
Conduct of Basil: His Majesty must be pleased to concern himself in this, and
not for to suffer all to depend on those to whom he gave but little safe
Conduct for what they did yesterday in the General Congregation, in which they
proposed all that they had given in before to our Ambassadors, with the
addition of some other bold things.

In the Congregation that was held yesterday, and in that of this morning, the
Envoys of Wirtembourg having presented their Powers, delivered in therewith a
Book of their Confession, and certain Heads of their Pretensions; a Copy
whereof I do here send your Lordship: It would be a large History to relate all
that has passed with the Legate, before we could get him to admit these people;
of which Don Francisco, who did, and is still doing all that is possible, must
have writ at large: for, the truth is, we had a very hard tug of it.

As for the Legate, since his having heard the Propositions which were made and
spoke to by the Envoys, he does things that are astonishing; for besides, that
he made the Synod before they were heard for to enter a Protestation, of which
I here send your Lordship a Copy, he would needs have had it repeated again at
the public Session, till I convinced him of the inconveniency thereof, as I
did also of several other things, by telling him that it would be much better
to let the doing of it after such a manner alone, and not to add any Clause to
it that was odious; which I obtained of him, and so it passed as it is. With
this I do reckon the War is actually begun; for that after the granting of this
safe Conduct, and the security it promises, Melancthon and his Companions,
will have nothing to plead in excuse for their not coming hither, and that
speedily too, the next Session being ordered to be held on the 15th of March;
after which time I believe it will be impossible for us, without breaking with
the Pope, to obtain a longer term, he and his Ministers being in a terrible
fright through their imagining, that our aim in these delays is to procure a
Reformation: But as I was always satisfied of what was his Majesty's intentions
therein, I was much more so by his last Letters concerning this delay and the
next Session. On the 20th Instant I acquainted your Lordship with what had
passed here, in reference to the Doctrine of Order, and with some Clauses being
therein, that are extremely prejudicial to the Church, in general, and in
particular to the Rights of Bishops, Provisions of Benefices, and the Dignities
and Patronages that belong to Princes in Cathedral Churches, and, above all, to
his Majesty. The Clause which destroys all these, and both condemns the
Primitive Church, and obstructs all Remedies for the future, I do here send
your Lordship, as I do also the whole Doctrine, which has several such
pernicious Clauses in it; to all which I have set a mark. Now as I do not think
there is any thing of greater importance than this is, so it is visible the
Legate has set his heart extremely upon it, and is very angry with the Prelates
for being aware thereof; and who for that reason finding, that he should not be
able to pass it in the hurry of a Session, he has ordered the Doctrines to be
put to the Vote the next day after to morrow, his Soul being ready to leap out
of his Body to carry this Point, with all its pernicious consequences; whereof
the chief is, That all Power will be given to the Pope. I have already
advertised Don Francisco thereof, who is prepared to do all that he is able to
hinder it; Nevertheless, I am still afraid that the Legate may carry this
point, he having boasted already that he has given more to the Apostolical See,
than was ever given to it by any that were before him. But besides what has
been said of the importance of these matters, their having never been discussed
or proposed must be insisted on, to put a stop to the Legate; who if suffered
to do it in this, may take the same course in all other things; for since these
matters have been suspended till such time as the Protestants have been heard,
there is no reason why they should be concluded and agreed on by the Synod,
before that has been done, since that must defeat the Suspension, and the
Protestants will be heard in a Cause that is pre-judged. Now all that can be
done here, serves only to gain time; the Remedy being to be had nowhere but at
Rome, where his Majesty must do all he can with the Pope, to put a stop to this
business: God grant he may succeed in it. For I can see such things preparing,
that unless we will be content to suffer great Mischiefs to be done both to the
Church and his Majesty, this Synod must end in a Tragedy: And what a miserable
thing is this, that in such a Prince's time, such things as these should be
suffered to be carried on with so great Violence, by the Legate, who affronts
and threatens all that have the courage to oppose him in any thing, and who,
the other day, called the Bishop of Oren an Heretic: For my own part, I cannot
imagine how such Excesses as these come to be endured, unless it be for our
greater confusion.

It would be a long work to lay open the Reasons and Ground of all these
Matters; but your Lordship, who has so quick an insight into things, will, from
what I have writ here, and on other occasions, understand what my Thoughts are
of them; and will see, that a short and speedy Remedy is absolutely necessary
to the things we are here toiling about: For the obtaining whereof, and that I
might give your Lordship an account of all that passes here, was what disposed
me to write so much at this time, when a multitude of Troubles and Business do
so oppress me, as will scarce allow me time to breathe in, to the endangering
of my health.

I forgot to tell you that the Legate being obliged to it by the great noise it
made, has so far quitted the Clause, which would have given to the Pope a
superiority over Councils, as to temper it, by putting only uno, for unico and
supremo capite; whereas it ought entirely to have been left out, as an
importune and unseasonable thing at this time, and in this place; for what
occasion is there in the treating and discussing the Doctrine of Order, to make
any mention of Jurisdiction; and what can be more impertinent than to be always
thus inculcating the Pope's power; which, though great, is not such as the
Legate pretends it is: For which reason the Legate would not suffer, nor so
much as hear, of the Name of Basil being put in the safe Conduct, where it is
said, Praxis Christi and primitivae ecclesiae; notwithstanding the whole of
what was contained in that passage, is put into it. I shall not fail, according
to my duty, to advise your Lordship of all that is done here, whose most
Illustrious and Reverend Person and State may our Lord prosper and continue for
many Years, as I desire.

I kiss your Lordship's Hands. Doctor Vargas.
From Trent the 25th of January, 1552. P. S. Don Francisco intends to write
speedily, in whose Letters your Lordship will meet with a full Relation of all
Affairs: This I do for your Lordship, having writ to no body else at this time.

I must return to put you in mind, that it is necessary the forementioned
business should be carefully looked after; for the Legate has very ill designs
going on, and appears to be resolute in them; for he goes about Negotiating for
Votes as if his Life lay at stake, which he looks upon as a very honorable
Employment; I know the Presidents, particularly he of Verona, do not think well
of this, and are much against adding those Clauses, and that principally which
says, Unius dispensatione, etc. no such thing having ever been done before;
but the Presidents are things, the Legate makes as little account of, as he
does of other people.



Dr. Vargas's Letter of the 19th of January, 1552, to the Bishop of Arras.
Most Illustrious and Reverend Lord,
HIS Majesty's Dispatch is just now arrived, and is as full as was necessary,
or as I could have desired, or as might be expected, coming through your
Lordship's hands. Don Francisco, after our having had some discourse together
about the execution thereof, immediately dispatched away this Express, which is
in such have, as will not suffer me to enlarge; neither is it necessary I
should, since Don Francisco has done it.

I am, and that for good reasons, extremely sollicitous to know what his
Majesty would have done in case the Legate should not be persuaded to comply
with what he desires: For though it is true, that he can have no reason for his
refusing to do it, he nevertheless continues very obstinate, seeming to be
resolved, by one way or other, to hinder or avoid any Congress with the
Protestants: in which affair we shall be sure to have trouble enough with him.
I pray God it do not end in such a disturbance, as he desires, and is now
laboring to raise, upon his being defeated of his so much desired Prorogation,
by his Majesty's having got the determination of the Doctrines to be suspended,
as it was reasonable they should, and that without having the Session put off,
which would have been attended with several inconveniences I need not here
take notice of, having some days ago acquainted your Lordship with them.

In case the Legate should not be prevailed withal, but should persist in his
obstinacy, as he is like enough to do, and that after a boisterous manner, when
he once comes to see how much the Pope's and his own Reputation are concerned
therein; it will then be necessary for his Majesty's honor, that we, on our
part, should be so provided for a disturbance, as to be able to make it
notorious, that his Majesty is not to blame for it: For whenever any such
contention shall arise, in the end, the Pope will be sure to throw the fault
upon his Majesty; whom we ought therefore to take care to vindicate, which we
may do easily, and without giving offense, by keeping our selves always upon
the Defensive, or by having no great regard to the Pope's friendship; from
which, if it hangs by so slender a thread as this is, we can never expect any
great matters: For should the Synod be interrupted on this occasion, it will be
of great moment to us, and especially as to the Affairs of Germany, to make it
manifest to God and all the World, that his Majesty was no ways the Cause of
it; whose Honor, notwithstanding his Endeavors have proved abortive, will be
maintained thereby. As to the first of these ways, if it is taken, we must
manage it as well as we can with the Legates: But for the second, we must wait
till we have his Majesty's Answer about it; which the sooner it comes, the
better it will be. Your Lordship may be pleased to consider likewise, Whether
it would not be convenient, to prepare the Prelates for to oppose the Legate in
his designs; and that the Envoys of Wirtenbourg and Strasbourg should present
their Propositions in a Congregation, before the meeting of the Session, that
so the Prelates may know the better what they are to insist on; that in case
any disturbance should happen, public Instruments may be made thereof; that
what is done may not be left in Words, and private Transactions with the
Legate, who will afterward be sure to deny all, and will so disguise things as
to make them appear as he would have them. Farthermore; if the Legate should,
notwithstanding all we can do to prevent it, create some disturbance, either by
not holding a Session, or by celebrating of one, and carrying his Point therein
by a majority; for I have formerly told your Lordship what Work was going on
here; it will then be convenient, that our Ambassadors should have a public
Instrument prepared, which shall in few words, and a civil style, contain the
whole force and substance of the Business; which Instrument may be delivered to
the Legate and Presidents, either at their own Houses, or in the Synod, at a
Congregation, or at the Session when the Legate shall begin to move the Points
he is driving at. It being expedient both for God and his Majesty's Service, if
this should come to end in a Tragedy, that there should remain some public
Instruments thereof, to testify the truth of Things, to the present and all
future Ages.

Your Lordship may be pleased to consider what is fit to be done; for whatever
your do prescribe, will certainly be most convenient. I have enlarged more than
the haste the Currier is in, could well dispense with. I shall ere long give
your Lordship an account of a Business you will be astonished at, which is the
Legate's having foisted several Passages into the Doctrine of Order, which must
of necessity ruin all: Of which, before I observed it, and spoke of it, there
was not one that fell into the Account; and indeed, considering how things are
managed here, I do not at all wonder at it. By which means, and by the brutal
Violences, Pretensions and Obstinacy of the Legate, things are running into
such a state, as must in the end, if I am not mistaken, make both himself and
the whole Earth for to tremble; or if it does not make him, it must be because
he is given over to a reprobate sense, as, in truth, he seems to be abundantly
in every thing that he does: The Lord remedy things, and preserve and prosper
your most Illustrious and Reverend Person and State for many years, as I desire.

I kiss your Lordship's Hands. Doctor Vargas.
From Trent the 19th of January, 1552.
Dr. Vargas's Letter of the 20th of January, 1552, to the Bishop of Arras.
Most Illustrious and Reverend Lord,
THis very Afternoon I writ to your Lordship; the reason of my now Writing to
you again, is to acquaint your Lordship with what they are doing here. Don
Francisco has spoke to the Legate; and your Lordship may easily imagine, that
what passed between them was exorbitant and like the Legate; however, they came
at last to the Conclusion I mentioned in my former: Viz. That the Doctrines
should not be determined; but as to the Canons of Reformation, the Legate, to
this hour, is not to be persuaded to pronounce them; that being a Work he is
not at all fond of; and when we desired him to take time to consider of it, and
to give us his Answer to morrow; he declared he would not treat about it any
more.

Don Francisco, who is very sincere in his Actings, has since talked with me
about it, desiring to know what I thought of it. I told him I was of opinion
that it ought to be insisted on, so as to oblige them to pronounce the Canons
of Reformation, that so his Majesty's Orders might be observed in all things;
and that this might be made a Session, by having passed some judicial Acts: As
also, that we might defeat the Legate, whose drift in all this is to make way
for a Suspension; which, being the design of what he is doing, is a sufficient
Indication of his having no reason on his side. Wherefore we are resolved to
have another pull with him to morrow about it, and not to give over until we
have obtained it, if it is possible.

I am still afraid the Legate will compass his Ends; and though they may not
determine the Doctrines, yet that they will finally resolve them into Canons by
the way of Deputation, which will be much the same. I pray God they may never
do it, nor be suffered to pronounce any Doctrines that are so dangerous, or any
thing that is not convenient; since it is plain, that all they drive at, is to
get all the Pope's Pretensions established, under the Doctrines of Order; and
so, instead of healing, to destroy and ruin all: those being Matters which
were never so much as proposed or disputed on in the Council; neither is it
fitting, as things stand here, that they, or any thing else of the same nature,
should be meddled with in this Synod.

The Pope's Power, not only as to its Formality, but as to its Matter and Use,
is, and has always been capable of being so ordered, as is judged to be most
for the Edification of the Church. Now there are Clauses put into the
Doctrines, which do not only pretend to condemn some Opinions in their
Heretical sense, but in a sense also that is maintained by Catholics: For
example; that the Ordination of Priests, or of the Ministers of all superior
and inferior Orders, is a Sacrament, and belongs only to Bishops, is a
Catholic Doctrine: Yet for all that, in the condemning of that Proposition of
Luther's, That all Men are equally Priests; and, that there is no other
Ordination, but that of the consent of the People; the Doctrine, That there is
a Right in the People to appoint this or that person to minister in a Church,
ought not to be condemned, it having been the ancient Usage of the Church,
through several Ages, for Ministers to be appointed, and for Dignities and
Benefices to be conferred by the Election of the Clergy and People; so as never
to have any Rector or Prelate imposed upon them against their will: the Justice
whereof is proved by St. Cyprian from Examples in Scripture, and is derived
from a Divine Right. Now, notwithstanding this way of Electing, by reason of
the Contentions and Disturbances wherewith it was many times attended, has been
laid aside; nevertheless, it has never been so far condemned, as not to be
capable of being restored again in part, or in whole if the Church should think
good. Farthermore, there are several actual Rights, that arise purely from that
ancient One; namely, all Patronages belonging to Princes in Cathedral Churches;
which, if there should be occasion, I will undertake to prove, that they do not
hold them by that Title the Popes pretend they do: For which reason, the Legate
does not care that they should be so much as mentioned, but is laboring all he
can to have a Doctrine condemned in such a sense, that must, in effect, destroy
them. And as in doing this they will condemn an ancient Custom of the Universal
Church, so they will thereby shut a door against all future Remedies, by giving
all to the Pope, to the introducing of more Abuses; and that after such a
manner, that how necessary soever it may be to oppose them, there will be no
doing of it; and so the World shall be left without any hopes of ever seeing
things redressed.

The Disputes about this Affair have been loud and warm, by reason of the
Legate's endeavoring to carry this and every thing else he has a mind to by
Threats and Terrors.

The Legate pretends likewise to add a Clause, which would finally determine
the Question of the Pope being superior to a Council; in which he has been
contradicted by some of the Disputants, who alleged that there was no occasion
for meddling with such matters at this time, and that it could not be done
without giving great scandal, and raising a mighty broil: And the Bishop of
Oran happening only to say, that he was doubtful in the Point, and for that
reason desired some farther time to consider of it; he was taken up by the
Legate after a most insolent and injurious manner: who told him thereupon, That
whoever was doubtful in the Faith, was a Heretic; and that he was a Heretic
for having said what he did: All which the Bishop suffered with a great deal of
patience. By this your Lordship may see how things are carried here, and in
what things they place Faith.

Besides what I have observed, there is another Clause behind, which will be
extremely prejudicial; it is that wherein the Legate pretends that no Bishop or
Prelate has any Right, in any Case, immediately from God, but that they derive
all their Rights purely from the Pope's Grants and Dispensation; and that all
Offices, Benefices not excepted, are solely at the Pope's disposal.

Now is it not a pleasant thing to have people, at a time when they should be
redressing and removing ancient Abuses, laboring to establish such things as
these, and to bestow all upon the Pope? As it is plain they are from the
passage Cujus dispensatione, etc. in the Clause I send you with this.

Now what may truly and reasonably be allowed the Pope, is, That he is Prince
and Vicar of the Catholic Church, or the first Bishop to whom all others are
subject and subordinate; but not so, but that other Priests and Bishops do
derive their Right from God, and not from the Pope, who, without a just Cause,
has no Power either to deprive them, or to diminish any of their Rights; every
Bishop in his Cure having as much Power from Christ as is necessary to the
discharge of his Office, though with the forementioned Subordination and
Subjection, this is the Doctrine of St. Austin, Cyprian, Chrysostom, Gregory,
Bernard; in a word, it is agreeable to the consent and interpretations of the
Church; neither was the contrary ever asserted by any but Parasites, who were
the People that have started all such matters of Benefices and Jurisdictions.

For as Paternity is an Economy belonging to a person, which cannot be taken
away without a just Cause, though the subject thereof is in subjection to a
Prince; so a Prelate, who is a Father and Pastor, is not deprived of his proper
Rights by being subject to the Pope: So that to go about to establish an
Hierarchy in the Church upon any other bottom than this, is, in effect, to
confound and destroy it, and to subject it to more inconveniences than can be
imagined: Nevertheless the Pope, if he could carry this Point, though all
things else were ruined, and whatever was done in the ancient Church,
condemned, would find his own Account in it; for after that, there would be no
possibility of ever having any thing redressed.

I was the first that discovered this Plot, which I communicated to Don
Francisco and others, as was proper; by which means, it is now understood by
every body to be both an impertinent and pernicious Clause, which ought neither
to be proposed, nor so much as mentioned any more: Nay, some of the Deputies
have been so eager to have it quite laid aside, as to declare, that they will
not meddle with any business till that is done.

The Legate is at work with his tricks, asking all people why they are for
depriving the Pope of his Power; behaving himself at such a rate, that some of
the principal Deputies are for going no more to the Congregations; that is, of
the Deputations, since they enjoy no liberty, and are affronted when they are
there; and the Bishop of Cologne, who is one of them, has said, That in case
the Legate should carry those Points, he will destroy the Papacy thereby; and
he certainly spoke true, in that it would run a very great risk. Now if these
Contentions should be brought into the General Congregation, and not be
remedied, we shall have business enough to employ our Thoughts about. I was
willing to give your Lordship an account of this, as in duty bound; as also to
let you see how necessary the Suspension of the determination of those
Doctrines is, as well for the sake of the Protestants, as that we may have more
time for to take breath, for the preventing of such Inconveniences, and to
keep such great Disorders and Violences from being established; to the hindering
whereof, the Congress of the Protestants will be of no small effect; who, when
they come, may perhaps agree to do what the Legate does not think of.

Our Lord remedy things, for there is great need of it, and protect and prosper
your most Illustrious and Reverend Person and State for many years, as I desire.

I do kiss your Lordship's Hands. Doctor Vargas.
From Trent the 20th of January, 1552.
The Clause of the Doctrine in the Sacrament of Order.
Hanc autem unam Jerusalem de coelo descendentem merito appellari posse, quod
per antiquam Jerusalem veteris ecclesiae ordinatissimam politiam adumbratam ad
coelestis Jerusalem formam and exemplar exacta fuerit; nam ut illa sub uno
supremo Rectore varios and diversos ministrandi continet ordines, ita visibilis
Christi ecclesia, summum ipsius vicarium, pro unico and supremo capite, in
terris habet, Cujus dispensatione sic reliquis omnibus membris officia
distribuuntur, ut suis quaeque in ordinibus and stationibus collocata munera
sua, in totius ecclesiae utilitatem cum maxima pace and unione exequantur.

To the purpose of the forementioned, the Congregation having desired the
Opinion of one of the gravest and most learned among the Prelates, viz. the
Bishop of Guadix concerning these Doctrines: He, by a Note, sent them it, as
follows.

Hesterna nocte perlegi doctrinam, nam semel antea legeram, in qua licet multa
been dicantur, habet tamen nonnulla falsa, and multa dubia: scatet opinionibus,
ob idque censerem consultius fieri si dimittatur: ne dubia obtrudantur pro
certis a sancta Synodo.

But the Legate, after he had read this, urging him vehemently to declare his
Mind more particularly; he did not care to do it any otherwise, than as it is
in the following Note.

Non est quod mihi occurrat magis clarum and particulare, super doctrinas, quam
id quod dixi, scilicet, mihi non placere ob causas dictas, quae sufficientes
and particulares satis videntur, de quibus poterit sacra deputatio judicare:
tum etiam, quia cum doctrina non sit necessaria, ad Synodales determinationes,
and vix concludi possit sine offendiculo opinionum quae a Catholicis tenentur,
ut jam experimento didicimus, non possum non refutare doctrinam prolixam and
hujusmodi periculis expositam, ne dicam obnoxiam.

I forgot to tell your Lordship that the Legate has on this occasion made 20
Deputies, reckoning in himself and the two Presidents, which is a thing that
has made a great deal of sport: His Intent therein is, That having already
given their Votes at the Deputation, they should not Vote again in the General
Congregations: than which nothing can be more unreasonable; for notwithstanding
the Deputies may be good Men, and may have given the Legate some trouble;
nevertheless there are some of that Number, who had better be heard in the
Congregations, than in the Deputations; which is a thing every body falls into
the account of.

Vargas, besides what he writ in his Letters to the Bishop of Arras against
this pernicious Clause, writ at the same time a short, but learned Paper
against it in Latin, which is published in the Appendix, and from its Original
MSS.

Dr. Vargas's Letter of the 28th of January, 1552, to the Bishop of Arras.
Most Illustrious and Reverend Lord,
YOur Lordship will be acquainted by Don Francisco's Letter to his Majesty,
with my being to come to Court: It is a thing I would gladly have excused, had
not Don Francisco been so resolute, that it is necessary for his Majesty's
Service that I should go, to give his Majesty and your Lordship an account of
what is doing here, and to represent several things, which cannot be done so
well by Letters. It will easily be believed, that my chief encouragement to
undertake this Journey, is the opportunity I shall have thereby of kissing your
Lordship's hands, a thing I so much desire.

I shall part from hence in two days; and being no very good Traveller, shall
be two days by the way. Don Francisco having writ at large, and I being, if it
shall please God, to wait upon you so soon, I shall not enlarge at present, as
I intended to have done after the writing of my last, before this Journey was
thought of. The Lord preserve and prosper your Lordship's most Illustrious and
Reverend Person and State for many years, as I desire.

I kiss your Lordship's Hands. Doctor Vargas.
From Trent the 28th of January, 1552.
Dr. Vargas's Letter of the 26th of February, 1552, to the Bishop of Arras.
Most Illustrious and Reverend Lord,
I Arrived here safe and well, praised be God for it, by Dinnertime, on Sunday
last, being the 21st Instant; but so loaded with the Favors and Obligations,
not to mention the former, your Lordship was pleased to lay upon me, that it
will not be possible for me, should I live a thousand years, ever to discharge
so great a debt.

May God preserve your Lordship as we, and I in particular, stand in need he
should, and give me ability to endeavor to satisfy that debt in part; who,
whatever I am, or shall be, shall always acknowledge your Favors, and employ
my self wholly in your Service: But since that can never amount to the payment
of so great a debt, I do kiss your Lordship's hands a thousand times, and
particularly for your writing to every body concerning me as you do; whereby
you do me so many Favors and Kindnesses, that I can say no more of them, than
I have said already.

So soon as I arrived here, I gave an account of my Negotiation to the
Ambassadors, who, as your Lordship will understand by their Letters, were well
satisfied with the Dispatch I brought; and I did acquaint Don Francisco
particularly with the Obligations he is under to your Lordship, for the special
care you take of his Concerns, and the esteem you have for his Person; of all
which he is extremely sensible, and is undoubtedly much your Lordship's
Servant, and withal as honest and well-deserving a Person as you take him to
be.

I have likewise told all the Prelates and learned Men that are here, how much
they are beholden to your Lordship, for the particular care you take to lay all
their Merits and Services before his Majesty; for which, being sensible how
much they are indebted to you, they do kiss your Lordship's hands; recommending
you, together with his Majesty, to God in their Sacrifices and Prayers: I have
likewise acquainted them with the particular good Offices you do them, which
has given them great content: By which means, and that of his Majesty's
religious Conduct, the Prelates seem to be much animated to serve God and his
Majesty, and to execute whatsoever shall be judged convenient: being much
troubled to see the delays and artifices that are used by the Legate, and at
his giving them no part in any business whatsoever: but that being no new
thing, they bear it the better.

Being in haste, I could not stay to dine with the Cardinal of Trent; who,
being sollicitous to know of me, what was done concerning his own and some
other Affairs, I told him how it had been ordered, acquainting him with some
other things as I thought convenient, and particularly with your Lordships and
the other Ministers being his Friends, as I was his Servant: Which though he
readily acknowledged, yet the account I gave him of the Treaty, put him into
such a Passion, as obliged me to say all I could to soften him again; assuring
him, upon his saying that he would in a short time go to Court himself; that
when he did, your Lordship would satisfy him in all Points, and let him know
how much I am his Servant: With this he seemed to rest satisfied; so, I
suppose, he will not be wanting to us in our present great Dearth, and
especially at this time, when the Pope's Ministers are so untoward, as your
Lordship sees, and as I have writ they are.

When I parted from Court, the Bishop of Ampudia accompanied me a Mile or two
out of Town, giving me an account of the Troubles he is in, and of his
Intention for to have come to this place; he is a Person I never saw before,
but he appears to me to be a very honest Man; but it is enough to recommend him
to your Lordship that he is a Prelate. I gave him the best directions in his
business I was able, advising him to make all the haste he could to Trent; and
having thus recommended him, I must beseech your Lordship for to dispatch him;
for besides, that he may do us some service here, it will be a deed of Charity
to relieve an oppressed Prelate.

The Legate is full of Fears and Jealousies, lest I may have made such a
relation of affairs to his Majesty and your Lordship, as is not for his
purpose; who having desired to speak with me, gave me to understand, how much
he was his Majesty's Servant, and that he did not know how the things, we spoke
of, had been taken by the Pope; it would require much time to recount all that
passed in this Conversation, only he spoke as one that was extremely jealous
both of the Pope and his Majesty, and that was willing to give me some general
satisfactions: I answered him the best I could, without doing any prejudice to
the truth in general terms; with which he appeared to be satisfied; which I did
to soften and dispose him the better to do business, and to make him sensible
how much he is beholden to his Majesty and your Lordship; whose most
Illustrious and Reverend Person and State may God preserve and prosper for many
years, as I desire.

I kiss your Lordship's Hands. Doctor Vargas.
From Trent the 26th of February, 1552.
Dr. Vargas's Letter of the 26th of February, 1552, to the Bishop of Arras.
Most Illustrious and Reverend Lord,
WHen I arrived here, the Legate's heart was so set upon the Suspension, as if
his Life had been engaged in it; he and his creatures talking of nothing else,
and giving it out, as a thing that his Majesty desired, to the great grief of
several of our Prelates: but things are now changed from what they were, and
the Legate, by his behavior, does sufficiently manifest what he has in his
thoughts; the Ambassadors and I having met about the present affairs, they
ordered what should be said to the Legate, appointing Don Francisco according
to custom to speak to him, which he did, a full account whereof your Lordship
will meet with in their Letters.

The main of it was to undeceive the Legate as to the Suspension, and to
acquaint him with the Answer his Majesty would have given to the Protestants
when they come, and with the manner how he would have them proceed here at
present, in disputing concerning Matrimony, without resolving and decreeing the
Matters that are suspended, both for fear of hindering the Protestants from
coming, and because it was so ordered at the last Session.

Your Lordship will easily imagine how the Legate resented this, who going
continually armed with artifices, and the end he aims at, would come to no
conclusion, pretending the time is too short to dispute about Matrimony, and
that without breaking Order, the resolving and decreeing of what has been
already handled, and was suspended, could be put off no longer; telling us at
last, that he was content to wait a few days to see whether the Protestants
would come or no; which, it is said, he granted, that he might have time to
acquaint the Pope with that whole affair; without whose Order he dares not do
any thing: But as to his Resolution, there was no possibility of bringing him
to change it; nay, we had much ado to keep him from concluding the suspended
Matters immediately, though we represented to him of how ill consequence it
would be as to the Protestants coming hither, and who, whatever happened, would
take occasion from thence to excuse themselves, if the first thing that was
done after their Arrival, was contrary to his Majesty's Order: And as to the
Clauses he has set his heart so much on, we shall be sure to have trouble
enough with him about them.

And whereas the thing the Legate aims at, is to make this Affair subservient
to his Pretensions, or to some disturbance or other; he told Don Francisco and
me, that these being Matters that were agreed on in December, he must hold a
Session, and go on with them; but in case the Protestants should come, that he
would then suspend every thing; so that it was to no purpose to begin to
dispute about Matrimony, since they had not time to conclude any thing about
it: To which I returned him such an answer as I thought proper, doing it with
all the address and dexterity that I am master of: With which, though he seemed
to be convinced, he afterward resolved to go on with what he had purposed:
Upon which I plied him very close, representing to him the necessity there was
of prosecuting the Council, and in order thereunto to begin to dispute about
Matrimony, notwithstanding they should determine nothing therein; not but that
some Articles relating to it might be proposed and resolved, leaving the rest
to another Session. This I would have had done, that there might be nothing
that looked like a Suspension, to the defeating of the Legate, who knows very
well what he drives at; he said, if the Synod must do something, he would have
them enter immediately upon the Answer that is to be returned to the
Protestants: I told him, I was not of his mind; for that since the Protestants
had not demanded an Answer, there was no need of making so much haste with it;
telling him farther, That if what was done did not appear to be what his
Majesty had ordered, it would serve only to provoke the Protestants; and as to
the course he was so much for, if that were taken, his Majesty would certainly
be blamed for it.

This is the present posture of Affairs; not but that the Legate,
notwithstanding he has his Instructions what he is to do, is full of Fears and
Suspicions, imagining that we design to promote some things, that are no ways
agreeable to his Pretensions; and who being armed to carry the said Clauses,
and against a Reformation, is, so far as I can judge, desirous to have all
things suspended, in order to the having of but one Session more; reckoning,
that by having all things decreed together, he shall stave off a Reformation,
and promote a total Suspension, which is the thing he chiefly aims at: For the
reason, why he will not proceed at present, though desired by every body, is
his being sensible that his Majesty is against a Suspension, and would have the
Synod prosecuted, and what is reasonable done therein; and whereas should the
Protestants come hither, the determination of all things would then be
suspended for some time; so that the next Session would be celebrated without
doing any thing: This, though it would do well enough for the Protestants,
would not agree with what the Legate drives at.

My Opinion in this case is, That since the Legate cannot be brought to do what
we would have him, that it would be the least inconvenient to suffer some days
to pass over, and not to begin as the Legate would have us; and if it could be
done, it would be convenient that some time before the Session, they should
begin to dispute about Matrimony, though they should determine nothing therein;
and in case the Protestants do come, that a Session be held by all means, which
that it might have something to do, nay employ it self about Canons of
Reformation; to the obtaining of which, it will be necessary to ply the Pope
close; for if that is not done, the Legate will jog on in the same beaten road
he went in the last Session; which will be a very sad thing, and especially
considering the report that is spread abroad here by the Legate and other Papal
Ministers, of the Italian Bishops, whom they have entirely in their hands,
being resolved to depart. Were we but certain that the Protestants would come,
we should easily surmount all our present difficulties; your Lordship must
judge what is fit to be done herein, and let us have your Commands; for
whatever you shall order will be most convenient.

I have here met with a Report of the Pope's intending to translate the Council
to Mantua; and though I do not believe there is any ground for the Report, I am
apprehensive, lest the Pope finding himself pressed hard by both Protestants
and Catholics, may strike up a Peace with the French; and I am very much
mistaken if he and his Ministers are not at this time plotting some bold thing,
which nothing but Fear will keep them from executing: For which reason, it is
convenient your Lordship should consult with his Majesty about an Order, that
so we may be provided for any thing that may happen. May God direct all, and
preserve and prosper your most Illustrious Person and State for many years, as
I desire.

I kiss your Lordship's Hands. Doctor Vargas.
From Trent the 26th of February, 1552. P. S. I entreat your Lordship to let me
know his Majesty's Thoughts of the discourse I had with him, when he dispatched
me, and I kissed his Hands; but though considering how he was prepared, by what
your Lordship had told him of me, I may easily know what he would say: Yet
there is one thing I do not know, which is, How I shall be able to recompense
your Lordship, unless it be by acknowledging it all my days.



Dr. Vargas's Letter of the 28th of February, 1552, to the Bishop of Arras.
Most Illustrious and Reverend Lord,
IT is but three days since I writ at large to your Lordship; what has since
happened, is, a considerable Number of Spanish Bishops having assembled
together in a Convent; sent four Deputies to Don Francisco and the Legate; I
happened to be with Don Francisco when they came to him; their business was to
acquaint him with their being much dissatisfied, at their not being acquainted
with any thing that was done, the Legate having never consulted with them
whether it was convenient to proceed; adding, that both they and the Council
were affronted, by having so little account made of them, and by being allowed
so little liberty, with several other things to the same purpose; telling us
farther, that they intended to go to the Legate, and expostulate the matter
with him. To all which, Don Francisco returned them a very discreet Answer,
acquainting them with the things his Majesty had desired, and with the Legate's
unreasonableness in not granting them, nor suffering the matters relating to
Matrimony to be disputed; which, though they had come to no Resolutions about
them, ought to have been done for the satisfaction of the World; and that the
Conduct of the Legate and Presidents was such, that nothing could be offered in
its Vindication; dissuading them nevertheless from going near the Legate, who
being fixed by a Resolution he had received from the Pope by a Currier, their
waiting upon him would be to no purpose, unless it were to raise a storm, or to
furnish him with an advantage for the carrying on of his Pretensions: He
assured them farther that the Legate should quickly be acquainted with their
business; and that it should not be long before they should speak to him about
this, and several other matters: concluding, that since we had all the same
aims, we ought all to act jointly. So with much ado, for they appeared very
resolute and obstinate, he prevailed with them not to go near the Legate, in
which I assisted him all that I was able. Now though I do not doubt of the
Prelate's having gone into this with a good zeal; nevertheless, in this
juncture, I must needs say, it was not according to knowledge. I heard
something of this business before it broke out, being informed that one of the
chief Prelates, and who was the person that first moved it, and brought all the
rest into the Combination, had been persuaded, or to speak more properly,
gulled into it, by one of the Presidents; it was he of Verona, who put them
upon complaining to Don Francisco and the Legate, of things being delayed as
they were; which was done for no other end, but to furnish the Legate, who was
the chief contriver of it, with an opportunity, to pretend, that now the
Prelates began to complain and mutiny, it was full time to have the suspended
Doctrines resolved and determined; and that seeing there was not time
sufficient for the discussing of all the Doctrines relating to Matrimony, they
must go on with that of Order, which is the disorder he has set his heart so
much on.

The Legate is hard at work to persuade the World, that his Majesty, though he
pretends to be against a Suspension, but would have the Council proceed and
hold a Session, does, by delaying things, promote it all he can, hoping by
means of the Protestants for to compass his Ends. God knows how true this is,
as he does also, what aims and designs the Pope and his Ministers have in their
heads, who must not, at this time a day, think to play such a game, as they are
playing, without being discovered.

We hear the Pope has sent the Legate a severe Reprimand, for having admitted
the Protestants, and for having suffered things to run into such a confusion;
so that it is plain, their chief business at this time, is to shut the gate
again, and either to stave off the Congress, or to put an end to it as soon as
it is possible, by getting the Clauses in the Doctrine of Order decreed and
keeping the Prelates from consenting to handle the Doctrines of Matrimony
until the end of the Session. On which Clauses, the Legate's Soul is set so
much, that he is underhand Negotiating hard for Votes; so that we have still
cause to fear, that he may carry his Points at last: He has been informed, that
my late business with his Majesty was to consult with him about those Clauses;
he had this Information from a Spanish Prelate, whom he named when I was gone;
I am certain I never spoke of it to any body, and do still endeavor to conceal
it, so far as is convenient: This Intelligence disturbs the Legate extremely,
making him very pensive.

I am informed likewise, that the Pope very much complains of me, in some
Letters from Rome, for having been so active in procuring an Audience for the
Protestants, but chiefly for what I did in the safe Conduct, in getting the
Clause Pro sanctissimo patre nostro, which was put in by the Legate, for to be
struck out, and for having on that occasion denied that he was superior to a
Council; having said then, that there was no reason for the Synod's suffering
of such words, or for its acknowledging any such superiority: But having been
told since, that I had no other intent in that whole matter, but only to
prevent the Protestants taking offense, and some other inconveniences, and
that I did not touch on those Controversies, I hear he is pretty much quieted
again; but let that be as it will, for it is no great matter if he is angry; it
is certain the Legate, to excuse himself, has made strange relations of things
in his own favor: What he writ to Janus concerning Don Francisco, being false
to my knowledge. Don Francisco, in my mind, proceeds with great moderation,
being careful how he says or does any thing that may give distaste. We must
wait to see what will be the issue of this, which we shall now know quickly:
And, in the mean while, we must beg it of your Lordship, that we may be
acquainted with all Emergencies, and may have his Majesty's positive Orders for
what he would have done: And that we may know in time whether the Protestants
do intend to come hither, all that is to be done here, depending much on that,
that so we may have our Instructions ready. Your Lordship has had my Opinion
already of all these affairs: Our Lord preserve and prosper your most
Illustrious and Reverend Person and State for many years, as I desire.

I kiss your Lordship's Hands. Doctor Vargas.
From Trent the 28th of February, 1552.
Dr. Vargas's Letter of the last of February, 1552, to the Bishop of Arras.
Most Illustrious and Reverend Lord,
ON the 26th and 28th I writ to your Lordship, giving an account of what had
passed: What at present offers, is, That we are hourly involved in new
difficulties, the Legate not being himself until he has carried his Point; who
has not got only the Italians, who are of his own Sect, but several of our
Prelates likewise on his side; who have been persuaded by him, that his
Majesty, for some end that he tells them, is for delaying the Council so much,
that if he could have his will, it would never end: And notwithstanding the
major part of them, and all of them that are Men of understanding, do know the
truth of this matter, and do see plainly what the Legate would be at, and that
all he says and does is trick and artifice, things are nevertheless reduced to
the foresaid terms: And whereas the Legate's Soul is ready to leap out of his
Body, to have the Clauses of the Doctrine of Order passed and determined; he
promotes every thing that tends to that end, on purpose to shut the door
against the Protestants; being much troubled at his having given an Audience to
Maurice's Envoys and those of Wittemburg; for which, as I am informed, he has
had a severe Reprimand from the Pope: For which reason, and that there may be
no Session held, after the suspended Matters are once determined, or else that
he may have some color for raising a disturbance, he will not suffer the
Doctrine of Matrimony to be handled, designing thereby to bring the Synod under
a necessity of determining the suspended Doctrines, or to bring about some
other End he has in his eye: For he pretends, that if a Session is not held for
the determining of those Matters, that the Italians will be gone, neither will
it be in his power to keep them much longer at Trent: Though there is no body
but knows, that whenever they depart, it will be, because he has ordered them
to go, in order to dissolve the Council: All which, though they may perhaps be
only brutal pretenses given out according to his custom, for the carrying and
compassing of his designs; nevertheless, considering on what terms things are
here at present, and how the Pope and his Ministers, since the Congress with
the Protestants, are changed from what they were, and the Apprehensions they
are under of the Spaniards insisting on having a Reformation, and the great
Agony they are in till the foresaid Clauses are determined; it may justly be
feared, that they will by one way or other bring about the Dissolution of the
Synod: Which will certainly be done, if they can but get the said Clauses
determined, because in them they will have gained all that they desired; and
after that, will never stand in need of any more Councils for to serve their
Pretensions: And in case they should not be able to carry those Points, they
will then, to rid themselves of this Yoke, that is upon their Neck, and of the
Fears they will be under, when they shall find that they are not able to bring
the Synod to do all the mischief to the Church and to the authority of the
present and all future General Councils, that the Pope and his Ministers would
have them, they will then perplex and confound all: which is a most deplorable
thing.

This being premised, the Legate, either because he has received Orders from
the Pope, by the Currier that came yesterday to him from Rome, or because he
himself thinks it fitting, and knows certainly that the Pope will approve of
it, is resolved on Monday next come sevenight, to assemble the Council, to
treat of and resolve the Matters that are suspended, and finally to determine
them, he having declared that he has waited long enough for the Protestants;
who, since they are not come all this while it is not to be expected that they
will come at all; and for that reason it is convenient to hold a Session for
the determining of the said Matters: Upon which notice, the Ambassadors have
proposed two ways, who, as your Lordship will understand by their Letters, are
doubtful which of them they had best take; The one is, not to oppose the
Legate any more, since though those Matters should be resolved, if there should
be a necessity of it; or in case the Protestants should come, the determination
of them may be prorogued to a farther time: The other is, to speak freely to
the Legate, and to let him know that they are ready to agree with him in what
he would have done; on condition, that he will deferr the Session for some
time, that so all that remains may be determined at once: That way of these two
your Lordship shall approve of, or any other you shall pitch upon, shall be
reckoned by me to be the most convenient. But as things stand, since we are not
able to do more, the first of those ways appears to me to be the least
inconvenient; which is, to let those things pass without opposing them; and my
reason is, that we shall thereby prevent our running a risk of what the Legate
has always ready for us; viz. the Prorogation of the Synod, which he has power
to make, whenever he shall judge it to be most convenient; besides, now there
are such Disputes and Tragedies raised among the Prelates, who, as I have
observed, are much divided in their Opinions, meeting together, though for
different Ends, in Junto's; the raising of Tumults being an art the Legate and
Presidents have to perfection; witness what they did, to hinder his Majesty's
Orders from being observed, and to keep the Synod from disputing of Matrimony,
though it had not proceeded to any determination about it; which was done by
them on purpose, to dispose things so, as to lead the Synod necessarily to the
doing of the business they drive at: All which makes the first way appear to me
to be the least inconvenient. A Prorogation, however it is brought about, will,
in my opinion, be attended with several inconveniences: the chief whereof will
be, its opening a gate to the total Suspension of the Synod, which is the thing
the Pope and his Ministers have always drove at: All which is offered by me,
with a salvo to the Protestants coming hither before the Session is held, or to
our being certain that they will come in a short time; in which case, out of
respect to them, the Session ought to be deferred. Finally, let what will
happen in this way, his Majesty will be justified, and the Papalins will have
no color to suspect him any longer of those things they have said of him
continually: But the great difficulty we shall have to struggle withal, if
this course be taken, will be how to prevent the passing of the Clauses of
Doctrine; it being to be feared, that the Legate has so managed his affairs, as
to have the major Vote on his side: The arrival of the Protestants, though it
might create new difficulties, would help us out of the streights we are in at
present; and were we but certain that they would not come, and had thereupon
Orders to hold a Session for to determine the foresaid particulars, we should
be able to clear matters thereby, in giving the Pope, his Ministers and others,
to understand plainly how ill they have guessed at his Majesty's intentions,
which are open to God and the World; and that it has been their designs, and
the fears arising from them, that have been the unhappy instruments of
involving us in so many difficulties about the Clauses.

I have always, let what would happen, desired that a Session might be held,
for the determining of the Points of Matrimony, as his Majesty had very well
ordered; even though the Protestants did not come, as a great many are now very
confident that they will not: But whereas what the Legate has now done, was a
thing I never thought of; so it troubles me extremely, because we cannot hold a
Session now as I desired, without complying with his designs, unless some other
business could be found in part to supply the place of that which ought to have
been the business of that Session, or the Legate could be persuaded to suffer
the Canons of Reformation to be pronounced therein; to which, considering how
he has ordered matters, I believe it will be impossible to bring him. All which
notwithstanding, if we should be able to do no more, it will be convenient to
hold a Session; and should the Protestants but come, that would answer all.
Your Lordship must judge what is most expedient to be done, and advise the
Ambassadors thereof in time, to prevent our being reduced to such streights, as
we shall not know how to get out of.

What I mentioned above of some Prelates meeting in Junto's, is what I
acquainted your Lordship withal in my Letter of the 28th; since which time
they have assembled again in the Monastery of Saint Lawrence, and have spoke
their minds at large; which Meetings have furnished matter for a great deal of
talk, and have filled the Legate and others with jealousies: Whose intentions,
though they may be good, and which notwithstanding they endeavor to conceal, I
know are the same I communicated to your Lordship; that is, to Petition for a
Reformation, and some other things of the same nature; nevertheless, their
assembling so in this juncture of affairs, without acquainting Don Francisco
with their designs; notwithstanding, they pretend to do nothing, without
informing him thereof, is a great indiscretion, and a very ill thing. I have
declared my thoughts of it to several people, and did advise Don Francisco to
find some smooth way to remedy it; I say a smooth way, because they are a great
number, and a multitude is a dangerous thing: It must therefore be done with
mildness for fear of exasperating them, which would but provoke them to take
more liberty; and I do not doubt but he will do it with his customary prudence;
when any thing else shall offer, I shall not fail to advise your Lordship
thereof. I have added this, that your Lordship, by joining it to the rest, may
see that there is matter prepared for the Diligences your Lordship knows of:
Whose most Illustrious and Reverend Person and State may our Lord protect and
prosper for many years, as I desire.

I kiss your Lordship's Hands. Doctor Vargas.
From Trent the last of February, 1552.
THIS following Treatise of Councils having been writ by Vargas, immediately
before the Re-assembling of the Trent Synod by Julius the Third, is an Evidence
of that Synod's having had as little liberty in its first Session under Paul
the Third, as it had in its second under Julius the Third; which Vargas's
Letters tell us, was none at all. And as to the Authority of Vargas's
Testimony, it is the same as to both those Sessions, he having assisted at them
both from the beginning to the end, as one of the Emperor's Ministers.

Directions concerning the Government of a Council, and the Office of an
Ambassador.
THough this is a Subject of a large Extent, I shall endeavor to reduce it
within as narrow Bounds, as I am able: And that both the disease and the remedy
may the better be discovered, which is my intent, I shall derive matters from
their first Principles, and knowing to whom I speak, that I may the better
peform the service I owe to God and his Majesty, I will deliver my Thoughts
freely. Now an Universal or Ecumenical Council, which are the same, being the
thing I am here to treat of, supposing every Council, wherein the Pope or his
Legates do assist, may, whatever is done therein, by reason of its Effects, be
said to be General or Universal; nevertheless, when we speak of General
Councils by way of Excellency, we understand those Assemblies which are
reckoned to have been such, for their having been famous, and of great
authority, and celebrated in a place of Freedom by the Convocation and
Concourse of all Nations. So from that of Nice, which was celebrated in the
Time of Pope Sylvester, to that, that was in the Time of Adrian the Second;
there were eight Councils, which were, for the foresaid Reasons, reckoned to be
General, they having been all Assembled by the Emperors, and had all the Pope's
Legates present in them, the Pope in person having never assisted at any of
them: And so notwithstanding the Popes did both during that ^ime, and since,
assemble diverse Councils at Rome; however they might style them General; they
have never been reckoned so, but in comparison of the others, have still been
held only as domestic or particular Councils.

After the Eighth Synod, that of Constance is reckoned to have been the Ninth,
which was very famous, and of great benefit to the Christian Commonwealth.

The next was that of Basil, wherein there were hot Dissentions betwixt
Eugenius the Fourth, and the Fathers assembled therein. Eugenius celebrating a
Council at Florence at the same time: This does somewhat disturb the reckoning;
for there being two Councils at the same time, and an Altar against an Altar,
one of them must necessarily have been illegitimate. So that they who hold that
of Basil to have been valid, I mean after Eugenius had broke with it, there
being no question of its validity before that rupture, do reckon it to have
been the Tenth Council, as they who condemn that of Basil, as a Conventicle
that brought forth a Basilisk, do reckon that of Florence to have been.

All which notwithstanding, in the last Edition of the Councils, he that made
the Collection, does either rashly, or because he would do it, call that of
Florence the Eighth General Council, having either never seen, or forgot the
Eighth Synod, that was in the Time of Adrian the Second, not daring to put that
of Constance in that Number, because it established the Authority of a Council
above the Pope: For which reason Leo the Tenth assembled a Synod at the
Lateran, in opposition to it, and to that of Basil, which though he was pleased
at every Turn to style Universal, has never been admitted into that Number; and
as it was only an Oeconomical, and not an Ecumenical Council, so we feel to
this Day of what Disadvantage it was to the Church; besides Truths which have
been once established by Councils, namely that of Constance, can never be
shaken afterward, it not being possible that what was once a Truth, and
dictated by the Holy Spirit, should ever be otherwise.

Now according to this reckoning our Council of Trent, must be the Eleventh
Synod, notwithstanding neither the Pope, nor his Legates are willing to have it
reckoned so, who at the opening thereof were in a great perplexity, how to rank
it.

This is the Account of the Universal Synod; for albeit there were Councils
celebrated by the Apostles, and from which all succeeding Councils do derive
all their Authority: This reckoning commences nevertheless from that of Nice,
which consisted of 318 Fathers; because Christians from the Time of
Constantine, have had the Liberty to assemble together, after that of Nice,
from which the Canons of General Councils do commence; the Councils of
Constantinople, Ephesus and Chalcedon were celebrated, which four having been
venerated by St. Austin, and St. Gregory, as the four Gospels, does not lessen
the Authority of the following Councils that were lawfully assembled.

This being premised, the way of proceeding in past Universal Councils comes
now to be observed, and that in order to discover, how different it was from
the procedure of this present Council, and how great Inconveniences do follow
thereupon; the way of convocating, prosecuting, and finishing, being quite
contrary in those, and this Council.

All the Eight General Councils having been called by the Emperors, the
Fathers enjoying an entire Liberty in the prosecution of them, and the whole
Authority being lodged in the Body of the Council, and if the Pope's Legates
did at any time delay their coming, the Council, if there was an urgent
Necessity, did its Work without them, as appears from the Definition of the
Eighth Council, made before the Arrival of the Legates, which runs thus. Having
long expected the Arrival of the Vicars of the Elder Rome, and it not being
just to wait any longer for them, it appearing to us an absurd thing to neglect
the lost Church of Christ, by such delays, we do of Necessity denounce, etc.
The same is to be met with in the Gests of the Second Ephesine Council, which
after having advertized Julius a Bishop* Hilarious a Deacon, and Dulcitius a
Notary, the Vicars of Pope Leo, that the Council was to assemble next Day,
desiring them therefore to make haste to come to them; upon their not appearing
when they were expected, Talasius Bishop of Caesarea, said, Besides that our
remaining in this City is a great prejudice to the most Religious and Holy
Bishops, and their Churches, the most Pious and Christian Emperor would have
us to hasten the End of this Synod, that so he may be acquainted with what
shall be decreed therein; Wherefore the Synod having done what was proper and
convenient for it, in having invited the Vicars of the most Holy Friend of God
Archbishop Leo, I am of opinion, that since they have refused to assemble with
us, that we ought not to use any farther Delays. This is to the purpose, as to
what is doing here at this time. Finally, whatsoever was offered, and commanded
to be observed by Universal Councils, being for that reason of inviolable
Authority, it did not want the Confirmation of the Pope to give any thing of
Validity to it; neither was it for that, but for other honest and just Ends,
that they first began to make use of that Confirmation; there being no reason,
why what is determined by a General Council, by the Direction of the Holy
Ghost, should have its Truth in suspense, so as to depend on the Will of any
Person: for what is once true, must be always so. This is manifest to all but
Parasites, or such as seek by Tricks, utterly to destroy the Authority of
General Councils, of which a great deal might be said, had I not something else
in my Eye at present; I shall therefore only observe that the Argument drawn by
those People, on which they lay so much stress from Pope Leo, and his Legates
contradicting the Council of Chalcedon, as to what it had ordained relating to
the Chairs of Constantinople and Alexandria, is not of so great Weight as they
imagine, and represent it to be in their Histories, seeing that Council,
notwithstanding that Contradiction, did still adhere to its Determination, and
which after having been observed for several Years, was at last confirmed by
the Sixth General Council: but to return to the Direction of General Councils.

There was, as has been already observed, an entire Liberty in them, their
whole Authority being lodged in the Body of their Assembly: as is plain from
the Councils themselves, the Pope's Legates having no other than an honorary
Presidence in them, and the privilege of voting first; the Presidents Vt
interloquerentur and definirent, being named by the Emperor, and styled
Judices discretivi, as is plainly to be seen in the Council of Chalcedon, and
in the Eighth Council also, in which, in the first Action they spoke as
follows: Our Emperors have sent us their Servants, and who are called his
Senators, to be discreet Hearers of all that shall be transacted. After which
the Fathers celebrated the Council, and spoke and determined matters with an
entire Liberty: So that as we have no reason to doubt of their having been
assisted by the Holy Ghost in all their Determinations, we have as little
reason to doubt of the Council it self, having ordered and governed every
thing: for besides that the thing is reasonable in it self, it is no more than
what is of Divine Right, and was expressly determined by the Council of
Constance.

It is manifest likewise from the Council of the Apostles, in which St. Peter,
as we see, notwithstanding he was the Prince and Universal Pastor of the
Church, did not preside with Authority, or a co-ercive Power; on the contrary
it is plain, that the whole Power was in the Assembly; and as in the fifteenth
of the Acts, the Determination was pronounced by James; so it is said there,
that Peter rising up in the midst of the Brethren, said, etc. which Action of
standing up, is an Argument of his not having pretended to an Authoritative
Presidency, for if he had he would have sat, and not have rise to speak, as is
well observed by Abulensis, though Turrecremata, and others of his Stamp, do
interpret this as they think fit; the same appears likewise from the Council
mentioned in the thirteenth of the Acts, where it is said, when Samaria had
received the Word of God, they sent Peter and John, etc. To which, and a great
deal more, Turrecremata, Cajetan, and others of their Party give a general
Answer, that St. Peter did that purely out of Humility, which how much it is to
the purpose, let any one judge: It is however undeniable, that by this way of
proceeding, those inconveniences we do now labor under were prevented, every
thing being done with great Authority and Liberty.

Upon the great Declension of the Empire, after the Eighth Synod, the Judices
discretivi who were sent to Councils by the Emperors, ceased; who being
Laics, had never any Vote in them after that, the naming of Persons to perform
the Office of those Judges, whom they called Presidents, and that without any
prejudice, to the honorary Presidency of the Pope's Legates, remained in the
Body of the Council, where according to Andreas, and Baldus it was always of
right; whose Authority, if there were nothing else, is sufficient to prove it;
but besides, that it was practiced by the Council of Constance, which was the
Ninth Synod, in its Ninth Session; as it was also in the Seventeenth Session of
the Council of Basil, which admitted the Pope's Legates on such conditions, as
kept their Presidency from being coercive, than which nothing is more
remarkable and modern, and which ought to have been observed in this present,
and all future Councils; The very being of a General Council after it is
lawfully assembled, consisting in the Liberty, wherewith all matters of faith
and manners are handled therein, and the deciding them openly in peace, and not
in corners, by unlawful methods; for it is when matters are thus handled, and
defined, that Councils are inspired by the Holy Ghost in their Determinations:
those Words, It seems good to the Holy Ghost, and to us, being applicable
only to General Councils, however the Pope may arrogate them to himself in
Person, or in conjunction with his College of Cardinals; for as Abulensis in
his Presace to St. Matthew, well observes, nothing is more certainly necessary
than an entire Liberty in Councils; for the want of which, the Second Ephesine
Council, though lawfully assembled, was not reckoned a Council, and was
accordingly revoked by the Council of Chalcedon.

And so when the numerous Council of Photius was objected to Nicholas the
First, he made answer, we do not follow the Councils of Nice, and Chalcedon,
and the Synodical Constitutions of the Holy Fathers, and other Councils, on
account of the great Numbers of Bishops that were present at them, but we do
reverence their free, just, and divinely inspired Determinations: So Agatho
likewise writing to Constantine concerning the Fathers that were to assemble in
the Sixth General Council, tells him, that there ought to be a Promise of
impunity, and a license granted to all to declare their minds freely, that so
their faith might be published to the World, and that none ought to be
discouraged or hindered, from speaking their thoughts, either by threats or any
other methods: a great deal more might be added to the same purpose, namely,
what was writ by St. Leo to Theodosius the Emperor, concerning the Second
Ephesine Council, if what has been said were not sufficient; from all which, as
the Authority and Majesty of General Councils is manifest, so it would still be
more conspicuous, if we should go to the bottom of the Power that was lodged in
Synods, so as to lay open how great it was, and of what sort of People they
consisted, and what Authority they exercised over all, and what was every ones
part in hearing and obeying: but I know not by what fate of the Commonwealth,
if I may so speak; those Assemblies are no fallen from that height of
Authority, every thing in them being so altered and disjointed, that no
Footsteps of their Ancient Majesty are to be discovered in them: so that for
the punishment of our sins, they seem to be just upon expiring that having
happened to them, which seems to be the natural Condition of most humane
Blessings, in having had their Infancy, their Youth, and Old Age which is
always succeeded by death; I say this, because in the whole conduct of this
Council of Trent, there does not appear the least footstep of any of the
forementioned Essentials of a General Council; on the contrary, the most
pernicious and effectual Methods that can be contrived, have been taken to
destroy Liberty totally, and to rob Councils of that Authority, which in case
of great storms, used to be the sheet-Anchor of the Church, by which means they
have cut off all hopes of ever having any Abuses that infest the Church
redressed, to the great disparagement of all past, as well as future Councils,
from which no good is ever to be expected. For as St. Austin in his Tract of
the Epicureans, and Stoics, speaking of St. Paul's preaching at Athens, says
that the whole Multitude is threefold, and consist of Believers, Mockers, and
Doubters, so it is not possible for us to express, and much less to exaggerate,
of how pernicious consequence the conduct of this Council has been; in which
under the Title of directing it, the Pope's Legates have so managed matters,
that nothing but what they have a mind to can be proposed, discussed, or
defined therein, and that too after such a manner as they would have it, or as
it comes ordered from Rome, whither they are sending every hour for Directions,
so that at the same time they talk of liberty, they are destroying it by their
Actions, all the liberty that is here being only imaginary, so that their
naming of it, is nothing but cheat and banter; which is so notorious, that
several of the Prelates, even among the Pope's Pensioners, have not the face to
deny it, but do with other holy Men lament things being brought to such a pass;
and though the iniquity of the Times, and the present Posture of Affairs may
keep them from declaring so much, it cannot keep them from sighing to see
things go as they do.

I come now to prove the Truth of what I have said in general, from particular
instances in this Council, it being necessary to the curing of the Malady, for
to understand it.

In the first place, the Pope's Legates have made use not only of an honorary
Presidency, which ought not to be denied them, but of an authoritative and
coercive one; following in every step the Council of Lateran, that was
celebrated by Pope Leo the Tenth, which they would gladly canonize, naming it
at every Turn, as if it had been a General Council, and such a one too as
deserved to be a pattern to all others; whereas in truth it was only a
Domestic Synod: however it being for the advantage of their pretensions to
have this Synod managed after the same manner as that was, its conduct hitherto
has been the same, to the great prejudice of the Authority of the present, and
all future Councils, as appears from several instances, namely from the Legates
not suffering the Clause of Ecclesiam Universalem repraesentans, to be inserted
into the Decrees; adding instead thereof, and inculcating that of
Praesidentibus eisdem tribus Apostolicae sedis Legatis, which is a new thing,
and has a Mystery in it: but above all, from the clause they have inserted into
the Canons of Reformation, which is, Salva semper in omnibus sedis Apostolicae
authoritate; which is telling the World in plain terms, that what the Pope does
not like, shall signify nothing: for notwithstanding, the Power of dispensing
when there is just cause, is always excepted, yet the Legates knowing it would
be more for their advantage to have it expressed, they had it done: but this
being notorious to every Body, and having formerly had occasion to speak of it,
I shall prosecute it no farther.

2. Whereas the Design of the Legates was so to manage all matters, that
nothing but what they had a mind to, and was in their secret Commission, should
be able to pass, they erected three Classes, one for each Legate, in which such
of the Prelates as were most in their favor were to report matters; now these
three Classes meeting in sundry places, at the same time, to treat of the same
Subject, the Legates did manage that to their advantage, with an Artifice
beyond what is to be imagined, their Design therein being to pump the Prelates
so before hand, as to find how they intended to vote; and having discovered
that, the three Legates, did according to their Custom cabal together at Night,
and having conferred Notes, took their measures accordingly, in either going
on, or in sending advice to Rome, or in negotiating with People, by certain
methods that they have, to change their minds; and this they have done so
often, that it is now taken notice of by every body; neither can there be any
course more pernicious or more destructive of the liberty of the Council, and
what makes it the worse is, that it is done forsooth under a pretense of
Religion, and that things may be the better examined: Quia falli, labi, decipi,
humanum est, sed sub specie Religionis turpissimum atque execrabile.

Farthermore, The Legates, by the help of the discoveries they make in their
several Classes do learn what things they may propose in the General
Congregations, and when it is best to do it; and so when they judge it to be
most for their purpose, they have Matters disputed in a particular Congregation
by the Divines, to have them ready when they shall think fit to propose them in
a General Congregation, which they do commonly suspend upon some pretense or
other till they have consulted Rome; which being done, the Legates do very
artificially conduct Matters, as they have ordered them; that is, such Matters
as they have a mind to have determined: For as to those that are not approved
of, they are by some means or other stifled, notwithstanding the whole Council
is for their being passed.

Farthermore, There are several Inconveniences in their way of Voting; for the
Legates, when they judge it to be for their advantage, that every one should
declare his Opinion at large, do permit them to do it; but when it is most for
their purpose, that they should only say placet or non placet to any thing they
have proposed, they then oblige them to Vote so. In the ancient Roman Courts,
as Aulus Gellius tells us in the 7th Chapter of his 14th Book, there were two
ways of making Laws, either per discessionem, or per sententias singulorum
exquisitas; of which the last was most in use, and is certainly the best way.
The way of Voting in former Councils, was, That every one was permitted to
speak his mind freely; and notwithstanding they who have writ thereof, do
observe, that the Synods did many times answer to what was proposed to them
with placet or non placet; it is nevertheless to be considered, that when
nothing is to be done in a Session, but only to pronounce the Decrees, which
are already agreed on; in that case there is no inconvenience in answering with
placet, which prevents the Action being spun out to an unnecessary length,
though, at the same time, the Prelates were left to their liberty to Vote
otherwise if they pleased, and to approve or contradict as they thought good;
which is all we know of the way of Voting used in the ancient Councils, our
Writers being silent as to that which is of greatest moment, which are the
Congregations, that were antecedent to the Sessions; and wherein Matters were
examined and concluded, and whereon indeed the whole stress of the business
lay; all that was done in the Sessions being only to publish what was before
agreed on: In which Congregations, if every Prelate was not permitted to Vote
singly, and to speak his Mind freely, it was an imposition upon them; and the
Fathers, who were there as Judges, must have appeared only as Parties, in being
compelled to answer to what was proposed with credit or non credit: As to which
Point, there have been here so great prejudices, and so little liberty, that it
would be a long business to set down the whole thereof.

Farthermore, The Legates formerly contented themselves with an honorary
Presidency in Voting first, and delivering their Opinions of things, as the
other Fathers did; whereas having now usurped an authoritative and coercive
Presidency, they ought not to Vote in any case, nor to deliver their Opinion,
but to propose only, and suffer every one to Vote freely; to act otherwise
being an imposition, and a pre-judging of the Cause, and a means of Terror; in
which, as in every thing else, great Excesses have been committed: the Legates,
having many times, when they have proposed a thing, declared their Opinion of
it, giving their non placet to things before the Fathers could give their
placet; nay, in the middle of Voting, when they have observed any Prelate not
to Vote as they would have him, they have taken upon themselves to speak to it
before another was suffered to Vote, doing it sometimes with soft Words, and at
other-times with harsh, letting others to understand thereby how they would
have them Vote; many times railing at the Prelates, and exposing them to scorn;
and using such methods as would make one's heart bleed to hear of, and much
more to see: So there was one, who in the face of a General Congregation,
called all the Prelates Vulpeculas, who were for having the Clause, Universalem
ecclesiam repraesentans added; which could not be obtained, to the great
detriment of the Council, and the great reproach of those who were called so;
all which, notwithstanding the Legates go on still with their dicant Patres
libere; which, considering how they carry things, I wonder with what face or
conscience they can pronounce those words.

Farthermore, Passions and hard Words are not wanting here, and that among some
of the Cardinals; from which, no less than from their agreement, the Legates
derive advantage, the honor of the Apostolical See, and the Pope's pleasure
and displeasure being daily set before the Prelates to intimidate them.

Farthermore, In the ordering of the Decrees which they were to pronounce in
the Sessions; and which, considering of how great moment they were, ought to
have been discussed, with a close attention, the Legates took a course, that
was extremely dangerous and prejudicial. For whereas, after having disposed
Matters according to their importance, the Decrees ought to have been composed
some days before the Prelates did assemble, and to have been seen and examined
particularly by every one of them, that so they might have understood what they
were about, and whether there were any thing amiss in them that was so far from
being observed, that the Legates having assembled the Prelates in a General
Congregation, the night before the Session, read the Decrees to them, as they
and their friends had been pleased to frame them. By which means, and by their
not being understood by a great many of the Prelates, and others not having the
courage to speak their Minds, and others being quite tired out with the length
of the Congregation, the Decrees were passed; and having concluded many things
after this precipitate manner, they pronounced them next day; which, whether
they were prejudicial or not, let them see to it: We, for our parts, who saw
and observed all those doings, cannot but lament, both our own condition and
the lost authority of Councils.

Farthermore, Notwithstanding we are to believe, that in Matters of Faith,
which have been decided by them, the Holy Ghost would not permit them to fall
into any Error; we are nevertheless, as I observed before, to consider with
what authority and discussion, such Matters ought to be determined, and how few
of those that were here, were qualified for that work; for among those who had
a decisive Voice, I do not believe there were Twenty; and for the other learned
Men and Divines that disputed, they had only the Hearing given them. It was
upon the Decrees being thus prepared and decided, that the Ambassador Don
Diego de Mendoza, when the Legates were in such haste to pronounce the Decree
of Justification, sent a Prelate to acquaint them with three Things: The first
whereof related to his Majesty; the second to himself; and the third to the
Bearer. The first was, That before they pronounced a matter of so great
importance, for to consult the Universities of Paris and Lovain about it. The
second was, That if they went on at this rate, his Majesty would send such a
number of Bishops to the Synod, as would not suffer them to carry things so.
The third was, That there neither was, nor had been, any thing of liberty in
the Council. To the first they answered, That they would die a thousand Deaths
sooner than yield to a thing, that would be so great a dishonor to the
Council: the Bishop replied, That he did not see that there could be any
inconvenience in the Legate's consulting those Universities; and he might, if
he would have said farther, nor in the Council it self having done it, and that
the World would never have condemned them for it. For since, as I have
observed, great Maturity and Discussion is necessary in all such Cases; and
Universities are Bodies that cannot go to Councils, as particular Men may; it
was but just, that those two Universities being so famous, should have been
consulted; the taking of whose advice, would not have hindered the Synod from
determining what the Holy Ghost should have dictated to them: In fine, the
Legate, without taking any farther notice of that message, caused the said
Decree to be pronounced, as it is: And as to the other two Points, any body may
guess what sort of Answer he returned to them.

Farthermore, In the Session wherein the Decree of Original Sin was pronounced;
the Legate, without having consulted or said a word to the Synod thereof, did
all of a sudden read the Pope's breve in confirmation of that Decree; a thing
they have never since offered to do. By which we may see plainly, what account
they make of the Council; giving the World by that Act to understand, That the
Decrees are therefore valid, because they were confirmed by the Pope; without
whose Confirmation, notwithstanding their being agreed to by the Council, they
would have been of little authority: This, though a thing of great consequence,
passed, without any Prelates offering to open his mouth against it.

Farthermore, It was much insisted on, that the Reformation of Abuses should go
before Matters of Doctrine; all the Mischiefs having sprung from Abuses, they
being the things that support the Heretics, and keep them in countenance; and
it being thereupon agreed, that they should go hand in hand; the Legates, that
they might seem to comply therewith, begun with the Abuses of Scripture; and
being brought at last to treat of Abuses in Practice, they decided so little
therein, and that too with so many limitations, that it had been much better
they had done nothing in it: It being visible to the whole World, that all that
was done, was done at Rome; which was rejoiced at and boasted of here, and that
on purpose that the World might be made sensible, how little the authority of
the Council signified, as to the redressing of things that are amiss.

Farthermore, As the Legates were continually fencing off a Reformation made by
any other way than that, so being desirous to pump out of the Prelates what the
things were they pretended to; at the beginning, as if they had designed to
make a mighty Reformation, and as if the day of Salvation had been come, they
entreated all the Prelates, but chiefly the Spaniards, to deliver them in
Memorials for their instruction of such things as they would have reformed: the
Prelates believing that all would be remedied, did very innocently acquaint
them with all that was in their thoughts; by which trick, the Legates having
discovered all that the Prelates and Provinces desired, they sent an account
thereof immediately to Rome, as was understood afterward: This the Prelates
did, notwithstanding they were warned by one beforehand, of what would be the
consequence of it.

Farthermore, As the Legates do nothing but with tricks and dissimulation, so
in the Session that was held here after such an irregular and tumultuous a
manner, they made use of an artifice which is now notorious to every body; for
having the Pope's breve always privately in their Pockets to make use of as
there is occasion, upon some Prelates having on the day of the last Session, in
their opposition, unadvisedly said, that the Pope knew nothing of that matter;
for that if he had ordered it to be so, it would have been another thing; the
Legates thereupon immediately produced the Pope's breve, and by ordering it to
be read publicly, did stop the mouths of those Prelates, and gave a color to
what was done; making a Jest afterward of their having taken the Prelates at
their word: Such over-reachings as these have been their principal study in
most matters.

Farthermore, As it was the Legates drift, so far as they were able to canonize
the Abuses of the Court of Rome, and so to weaken the Authority of the Council,
that the Prelates should not have the courage to treat freely about
Reformation, they never gave them leave to treat thereof any other way, than as
has been mentioned; it being their whole business to make a Party, as if what
they were about were a huckstering matter, or were the compounding of a
Lawsuit, in all which courses it is certain the Holy Ghost did not assist,
striving still to authorize Abuses, and giving the World to understand, that
the Pope is gracious in granting them any thing, as if all were his own, taking
Abuses, though never so pernicious, and splitting them as they thought good; by
which Artifice, that part of the Abuse which was approved of by the Synod
becomes perpetual, and for the part that was reprobated, they will according to
their custom find ways to defeat its condemnation. To which end the Legates
have given the Fathers to understand, that they have a Golden Bull which shall
approve of all that shall be done: Now let any one judge whether this be a true
way of celebrating a Council, or of making a Reformation: for upon this foot it
was debated here, that the Reformation might be made at Rome, as it is in
effect, and not by the Council, nothing having been done here, but what was
ordained at Rome; so that if every thing, that is any ways prejudicial to the
Council is not done here, the World has reason to thank them for it.

But besides all this, and the Synods not having the managery of it self, there
is nothing can be so much as to put the Vote without the consent of the
Legates; who notwithstanding, by reason of the great Number of Pensioners which
the Pope has here, are always sure of a Majority, do nevertheless make use of
strange Tricks in their conduct of the Council: Besides, by having made their
own Creatures, the Secretaries, Notaries, and all the other Officers of the
Council, they have made it thereby a body, Tot habens aedituos uti sacrae aedis
custodes, and without any thing of Soul or strength in it; Whereas all those
Officers ought to have been appointed by the Council, and especially the
Notaries; for otherwise what security can the Council have, that they will
write down any thing, that they do not know to be agreeable to the Pope and the
Legates; or at least that they will not stifle the Truth, or express it so as
shall amount to the same: So if they who made the Protestation at Bononia had
not had Notaries, and Witnesses of their own, they would have suffered
sufficiently on that occasion.

This is the course that has been hitherto taken in the Council of Trent, which
is employed rather in struggling with the Pope and his Legates, who seek to
ingross all to themselves, than in reforming and remedying the Evils, under
which the Church groans. I pray God it do not increase them by the course it
takes, which is by Artifice and Dissimulation, so far to reduce the whole Synod
to the Will of the Pope, that it shall be the same thing for the Pope alone to
deliberate of things at Rome with his Creatures; as for the Fathers here
assembled to do it, which is the truth of the matter, the Council being really
at Rome, and at Trent nothing but the Execution of it: The substance of all
that is done here, being sent hither determined from Rome, and being what the
Pope with the Cardinals deputed there, to that purpose, and who do meet
together continually, have determined beforehand. So that it may be truly said,
that we are here in a Convention of Bishops, but not in a Council; I wish these
be not the last days: Whether things will continue to be carried on thus, to
the End of the Council I know not; but I do very much suspect they will, and
that for this reason; because they cannot be put into a better way for the
Pope's purposes, and his Legate's who is coming, who supposing he were willing
to remedy things so far as it is possible to do it by the way they are in; yet
considering the times, and the present posture of things, it is by no means
convenient, to run the risk of it; for which reason diverse are of opinion, that
since no remedy can be expected, it would have been much better not to have
celebrated a Council at this time, but to have waited until God had put the
Christian Commonwealth in a better disposition, than it is in at present, or
till this period, which cannot last long, had been over, than to have
celebrated one after this manner with so little fruit, to the great sorrow of
Catholics, the scorn of Heretics, and the prejudice of the present and all
future Councils, and what makes me immovable, in such thoughts of the conduct
of this Council is, the very Legation that is sent hither by his Holiness being
so contrived, that nothing could have been invented more proper for compassing
of his designs, in having sent but one Legate, with two presidents: For which,
though they give another color, neither have I seen their Powers; it is
manifest, that their design therein, is to reduce all to a Monarchical Order
and Authority; and to have all Affairs managed by one sole confident, to
prevent the differences that might arise betwixt three Legates; whereas since
their business here is to preside; had it not been for that reason, they would
all three have been called so: It is true, that the word Legate, signifies an
Ambassador of the Pope, or of any other Prince; nevertheless, according to the
Style of the Court of Rome, and of modern Lawyers, none but Cardinals are
styled Legates a latere; others though employed in the same business, being
called by other Titles, as Nuncio, or as these are here Presidents, from their
business, which is, to preside; which Title they take care frequently to
inculcate; that they may be thought to observe the ancient Custom of the
Apostolical See, of sending three Legates to Councils; notwithstanding two of
them have not the same Authority with the third: After the same manner the
Senate sent Ten Ambassadors to Caesar, when he was fighting with the barbarous
Nations to be Councillors to him, with whose assistance and advice he did
great things: Pompey in the piratical War had likewise twenty Five Legates sent
to him; the Ancients using so to join some with those they sent to govern
Provinces, that it was doubtful whether they were their partners, or only
their companions.

Of the Office of an Ambassador in the Government of a Council.
IN case things should be carried in the Council, as they have been hitherto,
as we have reason to believe they will, it will then be necessary to find some
remedy for it; and by later cares, if not to revoke, at least to repair things
so far as may be: which though it is a duty incumbent on all, it is His
Majesty's concern, after a special manner, who as he is Emperor is Advocate of
the Church, and Protector of the Council, and the Executour of its Laws, and
is bound to see that the Council enjoy an entire Liberty and Security; neither
can time or custom prejudice that Authority which a Council derives immediately
from Christ: nay, the Council it self cannot part with it, or with any branch
thereof to the Pope; no more than the Pope, or the Emperor, so long as they
hold their several Dignities, can make one to be their equal or superior: For
according to the Philosopher, an inferior, so long as the differing Terms do
subsist, cannot partake of that which is above it, which is an Axiom approved
of by the common Vote of all Writers: Wherefore since the Ambassador above all
others, is to take care of this, he ought to have ample Powers given him by His
Majesty, that so with them and his own Endowments, he may be able to transact,
speak, persuade, dispute, countenance and direct, with that prudence and
dexterity, as shall be needful on all occasions.

For though certain Rules may be given in several cases, a great many must be
left to prudence, in which after the manner of Gladiatours Council is to be
taken upon the Spot: For where instructions cannot be given for all
Emergencies, many things must be left to the Fidelity of the Persons that are
employed according to Seneca, in his Epistle to Lucillus.

A great deal might be said in General of the Office of an Ambassador, and of
his main business, and of the care he is to take of Religion, and Reformation;
but that being what every prudent Man may understand; I shall descend to
particulars.

The principal thing I have to say, is, that the Ambassador must be sure to
remember what the past conduct of this Council has been; that so being sensible
of former Irregularities, and Inconveniences, he may know how to find out a
remedy for them, and to govern himself according to the old saying, Piscator
ictus sapit, every head of such things being as an instruction to him.

Farthermore, besides the care the Ambassador is to take, to maintain the
liberty of the Council, and to encourage such as speak with a good zeal, he
must take heed to what is proposed in the Congregations, observing who it is
that proposes, and what he may propose to himself therein, or to what end he
proposes it: and what will be the consequence of doing it, or of leaving it
undone; the substance of all his business consisting in these four things: The
discussion of all which, as it requires a great application, so the Ambassador
must be sure never to be absent, from the Congregations, and Sessions, that so
things may not be carried as they were, when there was no Ambassador here for
some time, and who was out of the way, when his presence was most wanted, which
was when the Legates withdrew themselves.

Farthermore, the Ambassador must engage the Prelates that are sent here by
His Majesty, not to deliver their opinions presently in any case, that is
proposed to them, and not to speak to things till after they have concerted
them among themselves: for by having commonly voted rashly, and before they did
well understand the matter, and what may be the consequence of it, they have
given the Legates an advantage, to carry whatever they had a mind to.

Farthermore, the Ambassador must after the Prelates have considered the
matters, that have been proposed, assemble them together to consult, that so
they may go united as one body to the Congregations; without which they may
labor their hearts out, without doing God or His Majesty any service; it being
impossible that they should do business well, if that course is not taken.

Farthermore, the manner, time and place, where the Ambassador is to assist,
ought to be all well considered of. The course that has hitherto been taken
here having proved abortive; for what can the Ambassador being present only at
the public Sessions signify, all things being so determined and settled before
they came there, that they want only to be published: for it is in
Congregations that the stress of the business lies, in which matters have been
carried as I have intimated, at none of which the Ambassador ever assisted,
neither would they admit him to be present at them, or if they should give way
to it, it is not possible for him to be at them all three at once, and much
less will they admit him to be present at the Congregations, wherein matters
are argued by the Divines: Now matters being thus conducted in the private
Congregations; the Ambassador assisting as he uses to do, at the public ones
can signify but very little; matters when they are brought thither, being in a
manner already determined, so that the Ambassador knows nothing of what
passes, but by relation; and as for the learned men appointed by His Majesty to
be of his Council, they can never know any thing any otherwise, having never
been suffered to be present at any of the General Congregations, at which they
ought to assist of right; as to which Affair that a better Order may be settled,
is plain from the course that has been taken by other Princes here, and from
the course that was taken by the Kings of Spain in former Councils, namely
those of Constance and Basil.

From what has been said it is manifest, that the Ambassador must by no means
suffer the Legates to have their several Classes, that being a thing of most
pernicious consequence, and destruction of the liberty of the Council, as I
have observed before: For as it is reasonable that he should assist at all
Congregations, that so nothing may be proposed therein without his knowledge
and approbation; so that there is the same reason for his being present, at all
the private Congregations which are appointed by the Synod, though the Persons
they are to consist of should be named by the Legates: For if he is not present
when things are proposed therein, and handled in those Congregations, how is it
possible for him thoroughly to understand them, or to perceive what the Legates
aim at in them, or which is the same what their Creatures drive at to whom they
many times give Orders to propose things and to speak to them. For till this is
done His Majesty's Ambassador is directly excluded, and the Legates will carry
whatever they have a mind to, as they have done hitherto.

Farthermore, Since whatsoever is determined in Matters of Doctrine, ought to
be done with great Maturity, and a severe Discussion, and never but when the
urgent Necessities of the Commonwealth do cry to have it done; otherwise
Disputes and Schisms, that are not easily removed, may follow thereupon, as is
acknowledged by all; namely, by John Gerson in his Tract de Examinatione
doctrinarum; it is therefore the business of the Ambassador to bring things
into another method than they are in at present: For as I have observed before,
of an hundred Fathers assembled together any-where, it is well if twenty of
them are Divines, and capable of understanding such matters, the greater part
of them, though otherwise good Men, being unlearned; and those that are
learned, are so in other Faculties; or if they understand any thing of
Divinity, it is but at second-hand. From hence it is, that some, in my
judgment, with good reason have affirmed, that the Synod after it is assembled,
ought to name some learned and eminent Divines, and to allow them, though they
are not Bishops, a decisive Voice, and that for the stricter Examination of all
Matters of Doctrine, that are to be defined; it is fit likewise that they
should consult the most famous Universities, as I have said before, and as the
Ambassador would have had them to have done, before they pronounced the Decree
of Justification, and not to have so much regard to the Plurality of Voices,
Quia stultorum test Philosopho infinitus est numerus, as to the weight of the
judgment of eminent Men, to whom this business ought to be committed by the
Synod. Hinc illud Plinii junioris dictum, de quodam Senatus consulto, aut
quadam Senatus sententia, loquentis; quod quamvis sibi non probari significans,
sed hoc pluribus inquit visum, numerantur enim sententiae non ponderantur.

Farthermore, Though the Ambassador must be careful not to quarrel with the
Prelates, namely the Legates; but above all, not with the Pope, and who must
for that reason be careful to manage affairs with dexterity and modesty;
nevertheless, he must not always sit silent in the Congregations, but must at
once with modesty and vigor declare what he judges to be most convenient; and
must encourage and oppose as there is occasion, Ut intelligant omnes illum os
habere, ipseque tanti principis legatus minime videatur asymbolus. There being
nothing that can in reason countervail the Exorbitancies he will suffer, being
the Emperor's Ambassador, and much less the great Bondage the Bishops are
brought under.

Farthermore, The Ambassador ought, in my opinion, to take care not to suffer
Doctrines quae sunt praeter fidem, to be determined; and the rather, because
there are some in great haste to have it done, that so there may be some means
of Reconciliation with the Lutherans left: I take this to be a thing of the
greatest importance, considering that the Heretics, who are coming now to
reduce themselves, which may God of his infinite Goodness give them grace to
do, will be willing to have some color given them, for their Obedience and
Reduction. The Articles that are proper for that purpose, and over which, being
of a positive Nature, the Synod has power to do what it pleases are manifest.

Farthermore, Since, as I have observed before, the Council is in effect
celebrated at Rome, there being nothing here, but the execution of what comes
determined from thence, his Majesty's chief care and vigilance must therefore
be employed at Rome; and that there be such an agreement and correspondence
settled betwixt his Ambassadors, that they who are there may advise and direct
those that are here, and they that are here may do the same to those that are
at Rome, advising one another particularly of every thing of moment, or that
may be any ways prejudicial: For let the Legates dissemble as much as they
please, it is manifest, things will be concluded here, as they are ordered by
the Pope and his Deputies.

Farthermore, For-as-much as I have observed before, it is a thing of dangerous
consequence, that the Notaries of the Synod should be all the Legate's
creatures, the Ambassador must endeavor to bring the Synod to name such to
that Office, as it shall judge to be fit for it; and that the Prelates that are
here from his Majesty, and the other Nations, do either name their own, or
agree to name some in general.

Finally, Whereas Pope Paul, from the beginning, gave a Brief to the Legates to
suspend or translate the Council, when, or to what place they should think fit;
which Brief they kept secret till they had occasion to use it; it would
likewise be expedient, that the Ambassador, besides his ordinary Instructions,
should have a secret Power in form from his Majesty, to protest against any
Suspension or Translation, which the Legates may offer to make; since such a
case may happen as did before, and matters may fall out so, that it may be a
great prejudice to us not to have such a Power ready. A great many more things
may happen, for which no Rule can be given beforehand, it being impossible
they should all be comprehended in Instructions; and must therefore be left to
the prudence and diligence of the Ambassador, who can have no such
instruction; as the observing of past miscarriages: The security and guard his
Majesty is to give to the Council, is likewise a thing of great moment to its
liberty, and to prevent exorbitancies: This and every thing else that is
necessary, may his Majesty with his holy zeal and ardent desires find out; and
withal, such a remedy for the Church, as he has for a long time been
laboring to procure; and may he provide such things as are convenient for the
Service of God and the Reformation of the Christian Commonwealth: His Majesty,
under God, being the Supporter of all the hopes and confidence, that the World
has, of ever seeing things better than they are.

Dr. Malvenda's Letter of the 12th of October. 1551, to the Bishop of Arras.
Most Illustrious and Reverend Lord,
THE Reason why I have been so long in returning an Answer to your Lordship's
Letter of the 29th of September, was, the extraordinary Business we have always
just before the Session, when we are employed in correcting and altering the
Decrees, and in informing the Bishops, by whom Affairs, but especially the
Matters of Doctrine, which are to be placed before the Canons, are communicated
to us very late; so that notwithstanding the substance of those Doctrines may
be sound, which it is well if it is; nevertheless, considering that they are to
correct them upon a bare hearing them read upon the Eve of the Session, that
must, in my opinion, hinder them from having that Authority and Majesty, which
such Matters do use to have: I pray God give them Grace to mend this.

The Reason why they do thus precipitate such things, are these two, in my
judgment.

1. The Divines, in the handling and discussing of such Matters, no less than
the Fathers afterward, are guilty of great Ostentation, affecting to speak
much, to the spending of a great deal of time. It being common to have people
commended here, for having spoke an hour, an hour and an half, and sometimes
two hours: which they are now about remedying for the future.

The Other is the Legate and his Faction industriously putting off the
Examination of Doctrines to the very last day; which they do on purpose, that
there may be no time left for the promoting of any Doctrines relating to a
Reformation; unless they be such, as they are willing to have passed: And as
nothing can be more palpable than this, so we are not to hope ever to see it
remedied; It being notorious that the Legate is so absolute in the Council,
that though the Pope himself should be brought to yield to the carrying of
things otherwise than they are; that he would oppose him in it, knowing he
would gratify both his Master and the College therein: Of which, the
difficulty he made in the suspending of the Article sub utraque was a clear
instance: having threatened on that occasion, that he would be gone, etc.
notwithstanding he was sensible at the same time, how necessary it was to do
it, and had received the Pope's Order for it; who, as your Lordship writes,
appears willing to comply with his Majesty in such things: In which, if he is
real, it would be convenient, that whatever the Pope is willing to have done
here for the good of Christendom, and the remedying of Germany, may not be only
signified to the Legate, but that he be made to understand that his Majesty and
his Ambassadors here are acquainted with his Holiness having ordered it to be
done; that in case any such difficulties as the former should be started, they
may be known to be of the Legate's own creating, who, I suppose, will then
rather choose to yield, than take the whole Odium of such things upon himself,
or this will at least make the redressing of such matters much easier than
formerly they have been.

What I have to add, is, That though it is not fit that any thing should be
done here without the Pope's being first acquainted therewith, nor indeed
without his consent; it might nevertheless be expedient, that the doing thereof
should be managed with all possible secrecy; in order to prevent the Lutherans,
if they should come to know of it, reflecting upon the liberty of the Council,
and the freedom that the Prelates enjoy, who might safely enjoy more without
having any thing pass to the prejudice of his Holiness.

The Elector of Cologne is arrived here very seasonably, who will be very
useful to us in the direction of Affairs. I have already had some discourse
with him, and have acquainted him with the truth of the business relating to
the Suspension of the Article sub utraque: I have likewise, in the Name of the
Ambassador, told the Elector of Mentz, what his Majesty's mind is in relation
to that matter, and how necessary it is for the good of Germany, and for the
bringing of the Protestants hither, beseeching him as a Prince of the Empire,
who very well understands its Wounds, and desires its Cure, to favor us
therein at the Deputation; he promised, but with some difficulty, to do so, but
has never spoke a word of it since, having been frighted by the Legates
threatening to be gone, since the Council was robbed of its liberty, by having
Articles suspended after they had been handled: Adding, That if Matters were
suspended upon his Majesty's writing to have it done; that that would give some
color to what the French had said already of the Council, and of its being
assembled for no other purpose but to serve the Ends of some particular
persons. By such methods as these it is that the Legate, who is a very subtle
Man, and much versed in business; finding that Elector to be jealous and
irresolute, does so manage him, as at least to make him hold his tongue.

But notwithstanding I did plainly perceive how it was with that Elector, I did
not let him know so much; but* on the contrary, extolled his good Intentions,
and the Answers he gave me concerning the Progress of our Affairs, and his
Majesty's Service; encouraging him all I could to promote and countenance them.
Though, after all, considering the Temper of the Man, I do not think it will do
much good upon him, unless the Elector of Cologne, who appears to be much more
resolute and fixed, should be able to influence him, I wish he may.

We took care to inform the Electors of Mentz and Triers of what his Majesty
had wrote hither, before the Arrival of Don Francisco, concerning Parma, and
with all I knew, relating to Piedmont, and the taking of the Ships at Sea. I
did it so, that they declared to me, that they were of opinion that not only
the Empire, but all Christendom were so deeply concerned in the Evils, which
must attend a Breach with France at this time, that they ought to lay all other
business aside, and apply themselves wholly to the procuring of a Peace with
this domestic Enemy. By this I plainly perceived how they stood affected;
which put me upon representing to them the French King's baseness, in having
broke his word, by beginning a War contrary to his promise, and in having
called in the Turk, and for endeavoring to hinder the Progress of the Council;
and that for no other reason, but to prevent the Quiet of Germany: that being
the thing in the World that he dreads the most, being sensible that a General
Union of the German Princes must necessarily defeat all his ill designs; no
less than those of his Cousin the Turk: this is the substance of what I told
them at that time.

I do here send your Lordship all that is printed of the last Session; what was
done here yesterday, your Lordship will be informed of by Don Francisco's
Letters to his Majesty; the sum whereof was, the Decrees relating to Doctrines
and Reformation, the submission and reception of the Procurators of
Brandenburg, the safe Conduct, and the Answer that was given to the French: The
safe Conduct I had never seen, before I heard it read yesterday in the Pulpit;
and neither the Fiscal nor I, for we were together, were satisfied with it. At
night I was told by Don Francisco, that the Legate had promised to grant such a
safe Conduct, as his Majesty should judge necessary; which, though it may not
give content, yet will make it better.

The Fiscal is certainly the person your Lordship takes him to be; that is, a
very judicious and sensible Man, and very serviceable in giving such directions
as are necessary in a Council; and he is withal much your Lordship's Servant.

The Answer that was given yesterday to the French, so far as I could
understand it, by hearing it once read, was satisfactory; it was at least good
Latin, and withal gentle and paternal; and for this last reason very fit and
proper for a Council.

I cannot omit putting your Lordship in mind, that when his Majesty desires
that any thing should be delayed here, it will be necessary to give us timely
advice thereof to prevent the difficulties which may otherwise be raised by the
Legate, who ought likewise to be acquainted with his Majesty, having ordered
some things which have been handled and treated on for to be altered. This, if
it is possible ought to be done effectually.

I have been told by the Elector of Cologne, who, I suppose, has communicated
the same to your Lordship, that it would be expedient that henceforward,
nothing that is here treated of and decided should be published, before the end
of the Council: For besides, that such matters would come out with the more
authority for being all published together, it would prevent the Decrees having
Books printed against them by the Protestants in Germany and England; and who,
if they should come hither, would not hear their doom at the first Session, but
might be entertained with hopes till the last: But though the Elector of Mentz
does approve of this* and I my self am of the same mind; I am nevertheless
afraid, that the Legate will start such difficulties against it, particularly
its not having been the course that has been taken from the beginning of the
Council, that it will not be practiced.

In the next Session the Sacraments of Penance and Extreme Unction will be
handled; they were proposed yesterday, and will consist of at least Twenty
Articles: I do wish from my heart that they would proceed more slowly until
the Protestants arrive, that so they may not, when they come, find all things
as good as determined: But however that may happen, they will be heard from the
beginning to the end, which will make some amends for what may have been before
determined against them: This makes me wish that the Protestants would make
haste to come hither; but let them come when they will, it will be bad news to
the Legate and his Party, who, for that reason, are willing to believe, that
they will never come, for they are all in a terrible fright to think of the
freedom they may take to speak concerning Manners and Discipline.

I do not find there is any care taken about my Maintenance, notwithstanding I
am at more charge than any of my Companions, being continually upon Duty. I
leave it to your Lordship to judge whether it is not fit I should have some
provision made for me; for what a disgrace would it be, if it should come to be
known that I have been so long neglected. Wherefore if Erastus has done nothing
in it, I must beg your Lordship's assistance therein.

The breaking out of the War has, I suppose, put a stop to Malgesa's Journey to
France; for as I have writ to him, he can have no business there now, unless it
be to ransom Prisoners: My Lord Bishop of Castellamar kisseth your Lordship's
hands a thousand times.

The Lord prosper your most Illustrious and Reverend Person, and augment your
State, as I desire. In this you may trust me.

I kiss your Lordship's Hands. P. de Malvenda.
From Trent the 12th of October, 1551. P. S. Your Lordship will understand by
Don Francisco's Letter, that the Frenchman who brought the Protestation here
was present at the reading of the Answer to it, though he does not pretend to
carry it; I am apt to think we may have an Appeal, or something like it, at the
next Session; it would be convenient therefore in case there should be one to
know what his Majesty would have done upon it: For whatever his Majesty shall
order, will be faithfully executed by Don Francisco, who is a person extremely
well qualified for the business of a Council.



Dr. Malvenda's Letter of the 8th of November. 1551, to the Bishop of Arras.
Most Illustrious and Reverend Lord,
NOtwithstanding I am still very much indisposed by the Air of these Mountains,
and the fatigue of Books, I could not forbear bidding your Lordship welcome
into our Neighborhood; where, though I shall not be able to converse with you
but by Letters, nevertheless the thoughts of having you so near is a great
comfort to me in this solitude.

I doubt not but your Lordship has had an account of all that passed here, and
of the Divines having spoke, and how well one of our Doctors might have excused
treating the good Dean so coursely as he did, in favor of the Articles
proposed by the Legate; which Doctor, notwithstanding I, as in reason bound,
gave place to the Dean, pretended to speak before him; but that matter is now
remedied, if no other Orders come about it. In the Morning the Bishops begun to
assemble to give their Votes; they will first treat whether it is fit to choose
Deputies presently, for to form the Canons, upon which the Bishops are
afterward to deliver their Opinions; or whether the Bishops are first to
deliver their Minds upon the Articles, and the Canons are afterward to be
framed according to their sentiments; and being made, are to be returned, to be
read and finished by the Fathers: The first is the shortest way; but the second
having a greater appearance of liberty and authority in it, will, I believe, be
taken; not but that there are those who do stickle hard for the first way. The
Soldiers passed through this City yesterday; I saw but a part of them, who,
though they had but indifferent Pikes, appeared to be good Men.

The Cardinal of Trent is very kind to me; which being on your Lordship's
account, I desire you, when you write to him, to thank him for it.

I kiss your Lordship's hands a thousand times for the favor you have showed
to Dr. Velasco, as he writes me; for which, though it is your Lordship's custom
with all that deserve so well, I return you many thanks.

Meusy, when he passed through this City, was above two hours in the Cardinal's
House, but did not exchange a word with any of his old friends. Don Francisco
complains very much of it; but when he returns, I shall reprimand him for us
all. May our Lord preserve your Lordship's most Illustrious and Reverend
Person, and increase your State, as I desire.

I kiss your Lordship's Hands. P. de Malvenda.
From Trent the 8th of November, 1551. P. S. I beseech your Lordship to Command
my Business to be dispatched, for I do sustain great damage by its not being
expedited.



Dr. Malvenda's Letter of the 22d of November. 1551, to the Bishop of Arras.
Most Illustrious and Reverend Lord,
I Had my Pen in my hand to have writ your Lordship the reason why I had not
answered the four last Letters I have received from you, when a fifth from your
Lordship, with a Copy of English Verses in praise of Father Bucer coming to my
hand, hindered me from doing it at that time. What I was then about to write,
was, That I had been troubled fourteen days with a Catarrh, not of the
pituitous sort, which is incident to Students, and does commonly purge by the
Mouth and Nostrils, but of that sort, which running down from the Head through
the Spondals to the Neck and Shoulders, afterward spreads it self over the
Sides, which has brought me so low, that your Lordship would scarce know me:
Its Pains were most violent in the Night, and were increased by Sleep, and
chiefly in the Side I lay on, though some Nights ago it was most violent in the
opposite Side.

Hitherto it rather increases than abateth seizing me now sometimes by Day. I
believe Exercise would spend the Humor, and do me good; which, for want of
Time and Walks, I cannot have here: I do find a Fit of it coming upon me at
this instant. I writ some days ago to Gregory Lopez, there being no Physician
of any note in this place: but I have not as yet had any Answer from him. I
hope your Lordship will pardon me for not having as yet returned an Answer to
the Bankers of Besanzon, considering that till my Distemper does abate, I am
not able to apply my self to any business. As there will not want those that
will write of this Council; so, for my own part, I pray God it may not do more
harm than good, and especially to the Germans that are here; who seeing how
little liberty it enjoys, and how much it is under the dominion of the Legate,
cannot possibly have that respect and esteem for it, as is convenient: For I
can perceive that they are much scandalized, as the Prelates are also, to see
so many learned Men brought by his Majesty from Spain and Lovain only to
deliver their Opinions in one hour, which may be done as well by one of a
superficial Learning, as by a Fisher, an Echius or a Pighius; those learned Men
having never been called to the making of the Canons, no, nor Doctrines,
notwithstanding its having been proposed to the Legate by some Bishops, and
particularly by him of Verona, that they should be called to it.

It is certainly a great load upon some people's Consciences, to consent to the
having the weightiest affairs of Christianity handled after such a manner; and
that after his Majesty has brought Great Men from Countries where they did much
good, no use at all should be made of them; the truth whereof your Lordship
will easily perceive, by the little or no Majesty, that is in the style of the
Doctrines; and which is so different from that of Justification, though even in
that there is something left out that might have been said. This is very much
resented by Gropperus, the Provincial and others: but I am told by some that
there is no remedy for it, they being resolved to have all they did at Bononia
established here. But as my Distemper, which has now held me thirteen days, has
hindered me from seeking to remedy this, so my continuing still ill was what
made me acquaint your Lordship with it.

The senior Fiscal discovers himself to be much your Lordship's Servant by the
kindness he shows me; he is a Person that thoroughly understands all that is to
be done here, and is abundantly sensible of all that I have said above
concerning the small fruit, if there is not a change in the face of affairs,
that is to be expected here.

I can never persuade my self that this comes all from Rome, because it would
be a great shame if it did. Your Lordship may believe, that they imagine here
that we are for delaying matters; which, judging of us by themselves, they
think the Times do oblige us to. I can write no more, my Pains not suffering me
to do it. May our Lord preserve your Lordship's most Reverend and Illustrious
Person, and increase your State.

Your Lordship's Servant kisseth your Hands. P. Malvenda.
From Trent the 22d of November, 1551.
Dr. Malvenda's Letter of the 19th of December. 1551, to the Bishop of Arras.
Most Illustrious and Reverend Lord,
IN a Letter I writ to your Lordship three Days ago, I gave you an Account of
my indisposition, since that I received one of the Thirteenth, wherein your
Lordship expresses, as you do on all occasions, a great inclination to do me a
kindness, which is a favor I set greater value upon than my recovery, of which
Dr. Gregory Lopez now assures me, and do begin to find it in part, nevertheless
my ill Nights and broken Sleep, will not suffer me to be^ieve all that they
tell me

The Letter your Lordship writ to the said Doctor came very seasonably, the
Doctor esteeming it a great favor, as I do also, it being all concerning my
health. It has been a great trouble to me in my sickness, that I have not been
able to negotiate with the Electours, with whom I might have done some service;
I hear, he of Mentz is resolved to depart, who will be followed by the other of
Triers; Mentz would be glad that there were no Answer given to the Captain that
he has sent, and I am of the mind, that His Majesty and all that are about him
will not be able to keep him much longer here, or to cure him of the fears he
is in of those ungovernable People; Wherefore the best way would be to let them
both go, leaving their Votes and Powers in the Council with him of Cologne, who
is to remain. For should it be known here, that the Electours departed without
having had an Answer, and leave from His Majesty, the opinion they have here of
His Majesty's Authority would be much lessened thereby, both by the Electours
themselves, and the rest of the Germans; but whatever is done, it is expedient
that an Answer be presently returned to the Electours, and to Don Francisco,
who, as in all other Affairs, has taken a great deal of pains in this, which he
has conducted as he ought to have done; Cologne continues as yet very firm, I
pray God his Companion's Example have no ill influence upon him; Gregory Lopez
kisses your Lordship's hands. May our Lord preserve your Lordships most
Illustrious and Reverend Person, and increase your State.

I kiss your Hands. P. de Malvenda.
From Trent the 19th of December, 1551.
A Letter of Dr. Malvenda's of the 16th of January, 1552, to the Bishop of
Arras.
Most Illustrious and Reverend Lord,
WIth the Letter was delivered to me by the Laquey, I received a great favor,
not having received one for several Days before; your Lordship seems to think,
that I am perfectly recovered; whereas, in truth, I have worse Nights now, than
when the Physician left me, which he did fifteen Days too soon for my health;
but notwithstanding, I paid him magnificently, considering my Poverty, and how
Erastus uses me, I could not keep him here any longer. I am in your Lordship's
debt, for the Money you ordered to be given to the Posts, which so soon as I am
able shall be repaid.

Notwithstanding I do not, nor am not able to stir abroad, unless it be now and
then to Don Francisco in the Night. I am informed nevertheless of all that
passes, and when timely advised of things, do give my opinion.

As to the Envoys of Wittemburg, and Strasburg desiring to be heard; it is a
thing in my mind, that cannot in reason be denied, after having granted them a
general safe Conduct; and who, though they should desire to have the Session
prorogued until they were heard to all things from the beginning, ought to be
gratified therein, and that without requiring a submission of them, or any
other devices of the Legates: for these being the first, it is of a great
moment, that they should have no cause of complaint or discontent given them;
your Lordship may believe me, the Legate is upon his Tricks, starting
difficulties in every thing, and studying how to intimidate our Ministers to
that Degree, that they shall not have the Courage to propose any thing that is
difficult to him, of whom in the most easy and indifferent things, they have
reason to be jealous.

Don Francisco takes a very good way, in my mind, with the Envoys of Duke
Maurice, in respecting and caressing them as he does, in which he is assisted
by Cologue, and Trent: It is very necessary to use Artifice with them, as well
as with their Master when he comes, for to put them into a good Temper, and to
oblige the Papalins to hear them, and not to hunt after pretenses to drive them
away* And so, though, as I have said, I cannot treat with them; I shall
nevertheless do all I can, and being once recovered shall not be wanting in
doing my Duty.

The Theologues fall here like leaves, but the Bishops hold out well; it is
certain that our Nation, which is the greater part of this Junto, do want a
Physician of their own Country very much, a great many of them having died for
want of such a one. Our Lord prosper your Lordships most Illustrious and
Reverend Person.

I kiss your Lordships Hands. P. de Malvenda.
From Trent the 16th of January, 1552. Monsieur Gallo has acquainted me with
your Lordships kindness to him, both in words, and otherwise, which favor he
places partly to my Account, but I have told him that he must attribute it to
his own worth, and your Lordships disposition to such as he is.



Dr. Malvenda's Letter of the 27th of January, 1552, to the Bishop of Arras.
Most Illustrious and Reverend Lord,
DON Francisco's Letter to His Majesty will acquaint your Lordship, with the
great struglings they have had here with the Legate before the Session was
held, as well about the Audience of the Envoys of the Dukes of Wittenburg, and
Maurice, as about the safe Conduct, and the Clauses thereof; Ubi in singulis
est multum diuque laboratum; in which, as indeed in all other Affairs, the said
Ambassador takes much pains, having with a wonderful dexterity, carried a
point in the business of the Marquess of Brandenburg, contrary to the good
liking of several of the Fathers. In all which encounters with the Legate, the
Senior Fiscal has still fallen upon wonderful Expedients, who being a Person
of great Learning, and withal much experienced in Affairs of this Nature, has
not been mistaken in one single point, as I am able to witness for him, who
though still very weak, have been present at all the Consultations of the said
Ambassador and Fiscal.

Among the things proposed by the Envoys of Wittemburg, there were several
great points of Reformation, and I am told, and do see it, that a great Number
of the Prelates, since they are not permitted to propose any thing of that
Nature themselves; are glad at their having been proposed by others, which they
hope may give occasion to the reforming of several Abuses, in giving His
Majesty a handle whereby he may urge his Holiness for to consent to it, by
telling him, that since those Abuses and Points of Reformation have been now so
publicly proposed to the Council, that all Christendom must ring of them, the
Council cannot after that with a good Conscience, or in Honor, so far neglect
its Duty, as not to redress the most important of them, and which are so gross,
Ut in oculos etiam puerorum incurrant; His Majesty ought by no means to lose
such an opportunity as this, of pressing home those matters, and the rather,
because he can lose nothing by doing it, though he should have a deaf Ear
turned to all his Remonstrances.

There is one thing I cannot forbear acquainting you withal, which though it
ought not to be spoke of here for fear of spoiling the Game we are now playing
with the Protestants, ought to be treated about with Duke Maurice when he
comes. It is that his Envoys and Lawyers who are here, do not only propose
their Doctrines, and the Reasons they have for believing them, but do likewise
propose Laws which they would have observed, in requiring the Council to
pronounce it self superior to the Pope, and to declare all the Prelates
thereof to be absolved from all the Oaths they have taken to him, etc. Now if
when they proposed such things as these, they had at the same time promised to
submit in all points to the judgment and determination of the Council, when
possessed of such an Authority and Freedom, their having done it might then
have been tolerable, and not altogether unreasonable; whereas for them, at the
same time, they propose such Laws, to exempt themselves from the Jurisdiction
of the Council, by making the Scripture the sole Judge of all their
Controversies, appears to be both unjust and arrogant. It being a bold thing in
them in my opinion, and an indication of their intending to propose nothing
here, but what has been said by their Writers, that so having given their
Masters some satisfaction by their having come to the Council, they may return
home with the same opinions they brought, giving no other Power to the Council,
than that of speaking to their matters. I thought it convenient to acquaint
your Lordship with this, that if you should think fit you might treat with
Maurice, and the other Protestants about it.

The Procuratour Gualby, has writ to me to put your Lordship in mind of
allowing something, out of the vacant Benefices of Arragon, for the maintenance
of Students; it is certainly a very good thing, and ought to be looked after,
so that your Lordship will do a thing worthy of your self in promoting it.

The Bishop of Castellamar kisseth your Lordships hands, and desires me to let
you know, that it is my being here, and the knowledge he has of your Lordships
being oppressed with business, that hinders him from writing to you. I must
tell your Lordship, that he is one of the Prelates that handles the matters of
Doctrine, and the Controversies that are about them, with great Learning and
Accuracy; and who has had a long banishment here, I must therefore entreat your
Lordship to lay the Merits of this Prelate before His Majesty; and in case he
can have neither the Bishopric of the Canaries, nor that which will be voided,
to fill it, that he may be translated on the first occasion to some Church in
Spain, which, being His Majesty's Chaplain, with so great Merits and Services,
he very well deserves.

I cannot say I am well, having bad Nights still, by reason of a pain in my
Kidneys, and I am so much broken, that I doubt I shall not recover my strength
quickly.

Don Francisco has writ to His Majesty to acquaint him, with the great want the
Prelates that are here, and especially the Spaniards, are in of a Physician of
our own Nation, and with some of our Theologues, having died here for want of
such a one; I am told he will desire to have Doctor Gregory Lopez sent hither,
who I believe will be glad of the Employment: I need not tell your Lordship how
much I am indebted to the said Doctor, for the Journey he took hither at your
Lordship's Command; I do therefore beseech your Lordship to promote his coming
hither again, all you can, and the rather, because the Doctor is so near, and
the Council is not like to sit long: I hope His Majesty will not deny this
request, which is made to him by the whole Council in a manner. The Lord
prosper your most Illustrious, and Reverend Person, and increase your State,

From Trent the 27th of January, 1552. I had forgot to write to you concerning
the Disturbance that is raised here by a Clause in the Doctrine of the
Sacrament of Order, into which without ever having had it disputed, or so much
as communicated to the Prelates, they have foisted in the Authority of the Pope
above the Council, making as if there were no Office in the Church, Bishoprics
not excepted, that are not of his donation and distribution, in contradiction
both to the usage of the Primitive Church, and to the Truth of things: But
notwithstanding this business -- when it was pressed by the Legate, had a stop
put to it by a suspension of those matters, I am informed that the Legate
designs to bring them speedily upon the Stage again, and particularly that
Clause, which will be of so great prejudice not only to Germany, which after
the Pope's Authority is once declared to be superior to that of Councils, will
never have any regard for such Assemblies, but to all that part of Christendom
likewise, which follows the Conclusion of the Synods of Constance and Basil,
which the University of Paris, and the whole Kingdom of France do. I am of
opinion, that so weighty a matter as this is, ought not to be handled Ex
incidenti, but De proposito; and at the End of the Council, though considering
the inconveniences which will attend its being any ways determined, it would
certainly be the best course not to meddle with it at all. But the Legate
seeing a great many Dominicans here, and a great Number of Spanish Prelates,
who do generally follow St. Thomas, he is very earnest to have it proposed
again; hoping he may be able to carry it in the Council: It is certainly a very
unseasonable thing, so that it would be well if there were an Order against
meddling with it in this Conjuncture, since the determination thereof will
infallibly drive away the Lutherans, and destroy the Authority of the Decrees
of the Council in a great many Provinces; I do suppose Don Francisco will write
to His Majesty about this.

I do kiss your Lordship's Hands. P. de Malvenda.


The Difficulties I have mentioned, with greater which are expected upon the
Arrival of the Protestants, and the Legate and his Creatures customary
opposition, have made Don Francisco for to judge it necessary, since the Court
is so near, to send the Senior Fiscal to it, to inform His Majesty, and your
Lordship at large how things stand here, as a Person who knows well how to do
it, and how to take time by the forelock. I will tell you one thing that is
certainly true, which is, that if the said Fiscal should be persuaded to take
this Journey, the desire he has to see your Lordship, will be his main
inducement to it; and so I do believe he may depart from hence in two Days.



Dr. Malvenda's Letter of the 26th of February, 1552, to the Bishop of Arras.
Most Illustrious and Reverend Lord,
YOur Lordship, in what you say of the Fiscal, is certainly in the right, it
being no more than what I have always known of him. I am in his debt for the
good Office he did me, in reciting the Calendar to his Majesty, wherein I do
believe that might happen to him that is said of Cicero, the Flower of Orators,
that he was come to the Lees; nevertheless, I thank him as much as if he had
drawn nothing but pure Wine out of it.

The Resolution he has brought is extremely well concerted, and the most
convenient for our affairs that could possibly have been made; and it appears
so to the Elector of Cologne, to whom I reported it, as it did also to Mentz;
nevertheless, as your Lordship will see by Don Francisco's Letter, the Legate
will do all that is possible to defeat it, and especially if the Lutherans
should come: He seems to have begun it already, by having adjourned the
Congregations until he has received an Answer from the Pope, and for to
imagine that we shall ever have any alteration made here, in any thing that
comes determined from Rome, is to look after the fifth Foot of a Ship. I have
from the Elector of Cologne acquainted the Ambassador with the Message that
was sent him by the Legate; which was, That he believed the Council would not
proceed, notwithstanding he labored all he could to keep it on foot: He has
begun likewise to drop some words, as if the Italian Bishops would not be
persuaded to tarry any longer, if a Session were not held; when, at the same
time, it is manifest, that it is he that hinders it by delays: Pray God grant
them a better mind, than I have hitherto been able for to observe in them.

Whatever your Lordship shall do for the Bishop of Castellamar, will certainly
be well bestowed, as will also what you shall do for Father Abbot.

Upon Doctor Olivares going with the Queen, We gave over all hopes of having
Gregory Lopez sent to us, which was no small trouble to the Council, in which
the Bishops have distempers enough, but have not one Physician to take care of
their health. I begin now, God be praised for it, to recover in earnest, though
I have a defluxion still that falls every Morning from my Head down into my
Neck with no small pain, which growing every Day less I take to be a good sign:
Erastus when he was here, promised that when he returned from Spain, he would
dispatch that business of mine; I must therefore entreat your Lordship to
command him to remember it, that it may according to his promise be dispatched
by the next Currier that goes to Spain. May our Lord preserve your Lordship's
most Illustrious and Reverend Person, and increase your State.

I kiss your Lordship's Hands. P. Malvenda.
From Trent the 26th of February, 1552.
Don Francisco de Toledo's Letter of the 1st of December, 1551. to the Bishop
of Arras.
Most Illustrious Lord,
THE multitude of business we have always, just before the Session, and the
shortness of time we are allowed to do it in, hindered me till now from
returning Answers to your Lordships Letters; which I shall now do to them all
four of the 9th, 12th, 20th, and 23th of the last Month: As to the first, which
gives an account of your Lordships being come with your Family in health to
Inspurg; your Lordship has no Servant that can rejoice more at it than I do;
nay, I speak modestly in not affirming that I do rejoice more than any of them,
as well for some reasons I have formerly intimated; as, because the nigher I am
to your Lordship I am the better satisfied, and especially if it should so
happen, that I should be commanded to come to Court, your Lordship having
promised you would remember me, whenever the Affair of Pomblin shall come to be
treated of, which, for some reasons I have formerly given your Lordship, I do
infinitely desire to see concluded to the satisfaction of both Parties; I can
tell your Lordship nothing that is new relating to that business no body
knowing the whole Merits thereof, and all that has been done in it for several
Years, so exactly as you do: Wherefore being sensible how well your Lordship
stands affected to the concerns of the Duke of Florence. I will not spend words
in supplicating, but shall remit the whole thereof to the prudence and justice
wherewith your Lordship manageth business; and so expecting your Lordships
Commands about it, I shall say no more at present.

As to the precedence of the Doctors that are here, in His Majesty's Name, we
shall follow your Lordship's Order therein, it having formerly appeared to us,
to be very inconvenient for His Majesty's Service, that there should be any
differences or disputes among them; and being still of the same mind, we do at
this time observe that Order: Monsieur de Poitours, and I, whenever there was
the least pretension betwixt them, having formerly commanded them to speak
according to the Seniority of their Degrees.

I have performed that Office to the Electours, His Majesty commanded, which
Order I know your Lordship must have seen, by the advice you gave thereof,
since the doing whereof I am informed, they are all extremely satisfied with
His Majesty's Will in that point.

As to what your Lordship writes concerning your being satisfied with the
Conduct, of the Fiscal Vargas, it gives me great content, knowing him to be one
of the most learned and best qualified Persons of his profession, and withal
very zealous for His Majesty's Service, and much devoted to your Lordship. Your
Lordship is therefore bound to favor him with His Majesty, and to see that he
be rewarded according to his Merits and Services, which I shall take as a great
kindness, he being a Person for whom I have a particular affection, being much
beholden to him for the assistance he has afforded me; if which your Lordship
takes notice. In a word, he is certainly such an Original as is not to be
quoted again. I have made your Lordship's Apology, and in case I succeed I
shall advise you of it.

As to the affair of the Houses, I was busy about it some days before I
received your Lordship's Letters, which commanded me to take care, that the
Synod was not imposed upon by the Taxers; with whom, as also with the Country
People, I have labored to concert things, and have brought it near an issue;
and having granted both to the Citizens, and the Conciliaries all that they
pretended to, I have erected a Court to give satisfaction to all Parties for
what is past, the Deputies whereof are at this instant going about in great
Unanimity to view the Houses, which they tax in Conformity to an Agreement we
are come to. I take all the care I can in this and every thing else, to
satisfy the Prelates, and not to suffer the People of the Country to exact
upon them. Our Lord protect and prosper your Lordship's most illustrious Person
and State.

Your Lordship's Servant. Don Francisco de Toledo.
From Trent the 1st of December, 1551. I have suffered extremely by Dr.
Malvenda's Sickness. I trust in God he will by the Assistance of Dr. Gregory
Lopez recover his strength again, so as to make compensation.



Don Francisco de Toledo's Letter of the 20th of December, 1551. to the Bishop
of Arras.
Most Illustrious Lord,
I Have received your Lordships of the third Instant, to which, being very
short, I have little to return in Answer, only that I kiss your Lordships hands
a thousand times, for the favor you did me therein, in acquainting me with
your health, which being the best News I can receive, I should be glad to hear
of it hourly. Erastus passed through this place, but made no stay, being in
haste, as he told me, to be at Milan. His Journey has furnished the Prelates
that are here, with matter for a great deal of Discourse, who though I have
assured them they are mistaken in their Guesses about it, will not believe me:
I am waiting for His Majesty's Answer to all that I have laid before him, if it
does not come quickly we shall be involved in great difficulties, having a
great many things to think, and treat of before the Session, and shall have but
little time to do it in. I am sensible that there is no need of putting your
Lordship, who understand the Legate's method so well, in mind of this,
nevertheless for my own satisfaction, I could not forbear desiring it. The
Report that the Electours are about departing has made a great change here, of
which my thoughts are, that as they are neither satisfied with themselves for
having come hither, nor with their having stayed, so it is to be feared that
they will make use of this, or some other occasion to go away. Now this of
their staying or going being a matter of so great moment, it will be necessary
that we should presently know His Majesty's Mind about it; but your Lordship is
too sensible of the Weight of this Affair, not to employ all your diligence
therein. The Legate has dispatched a Currier to his Holiness about this change,
who I dare say will not be sorry at their going away. Our Lord protect and
prosper your Lordship's most Illustrious Person and State.

Your Lordship's Servant. Don Francisco de Toledo.
From Trent the 20th of December, 1551.
Don Francisco de Toledo's Letter of the 7th of February, 1552. to the Bishop
of Arras.
Most Illustrious Lord,
I Have nothing that is new to write to your Lordship; only that the Bishop of
Vienna, Ambassador to the King of the Romans, died here yesterday of an
intermitting Fever* which begins to spread in these parts; he died Christianly,
having ordered his Body to be carried to his own Country, which for the present
is deposited here in the great Church, to which it was accompanied by the whole
Synod, excepting the Legate, who was hindered by his indisposition from
assisting at the Solemnity: I sent to know how he did, and had word brought me,
that he has for seven or eight Nights been troubled with a fit of a Fever,
which has brought him low, and that he is extremely melancholy and
discontented: he has locked himself up, and does not care that any body should
see him: I am apt to believe, the jealousies he has conceived of the Affairs at
Rome, are the chief Cause of his Illness. For I am told he has received advice,
of the Pope's making more use of some of the new Cardinals, than he would have
had him: Which, knowing the easiness of the Pope's temper, has put him into a
great fright. I must entreat your Lordship again to dispatch the Fiscal with
all possible expedition, for the reasons I have formerly given, as I do also,
that you would send Dr. Gregory Lopez to us quickly, who is every day more and
more wished for here by the Prelates, who are in great want of him.

The Electour of Triers is extremely earnest for a license to go home, and has
desired one of His Majesty; if he does not feign he is very much indisposed,
and who, though he was never very eloquent, is now less than ever he was, being
neither able to speak, nor understand a word, that is said to him. May our Lord
preserve and prosper your Lordship's most Illustrious Person, and increase your
State.

Your Lordship's most obliged Servant. Don Francisco de Toledo.
From Trent the 7th of February, 1552.
The Bishop of Oren's Letter of the 12th of October, 1551, to the Bishop of
Arras.
Most Illustrious and Reverend Lord,
YOur most Reverend Lordship has just cause to thank God, for your having got
so able a Minister, to conduct and countenance the Affairs of this Holy
Council, which do now begin to have some life in them; neither have we any
reason to fear, but that God, who now begins to restore his Church to life
again, by the Ministry of our Lord the Emperor, will restore His Majesty's
Health, that so he may be able to do things that will force his Enemies to
confess that God is on his side.

The Session that was celebrated yesterday, was so full of Grandeur and
Holiness, as to give us fresh hopes, of which since the Ambassadors must have
given an account, I have nothing to say, but only that God did certainly
inspire His Majesty in commanding the Communion, Sub utraque specie, and of
Infants, to be suspended, which being things whereon so much stress is laid in
those Provinces, it would have been a great Error for to have determined them
in the first Session, without having heard the Protestants: The Ambassadors of
the King of the Romans have given us a great deal of trouble in this matter, by
having affirmed that to be of Divine Right, as your Lordship must have been
informed; nevertheless, by their having since submitted themselves to the
correction of the Council, that danger is over.

The Messengers of the Marquess of Brandenburg, have given us great
satisfaction, whose Master, by having submitted himself in earnest to all the
determinations of the Council, has given a good Example, so that should the
Count Palatine, Maurice and Wittenburg, but do the same when they come, we
should recover perfect hopes of remedy.

Every thing has been done in this Session, that His Majesty had ordered, and
in my judgment as was most convenient, only one thing excepted, and against
which I gave my Vote, which was its being declared in the last Canon, that
Sacramental Confession is necessary to be made before the Celebration, which,
though in it self very just and certain; nevertheless, since we are in the next
Session to handle Sacramental Confession, and to argue whether Vocal Confession
is necessary, and whether it is of Divine Right, and who is the Minister
thereof. I say, since all this is then to be treated of and determined, I was
against having had it declared in this Session, that Confession was daily
necessary, and the rather, because it has not as yet been declared to be so
annually. For though it is probable, that they who are to argue it, pro and
con, may make no difficulty in that point, nevertheless I was for having every
thing that related to Sacramental Confession determined in the next Session;
First as to all its Generals, and afterward as to all its particulars, whereas
the Protestants will now say, that there is no room left for them to dispute
about it, since it is already declared in this to be necessary: but since my
Vote did not take effect, I will believe that what has been done was best.

As to what concerns a Reformation, His Majesty's Assistance will be found to
be necessary to it, who must set himself about it in earnest, both with the
Pope and the Fathers, for if he does not, we shall have our Wounds only skinned
over, but shall have the rotten Core left to the corrupting of all quickly
again; for my own part, I cannot see nor perceive any thing that looks like
warmth for a Reformation in the Presidents; On the contrary, they have told us
plainly that we must accept of what they will be pleased to give us, without
offering to speak a word for any more; this is enough to let your most Reverend
Lordship see, what is most convenient to be done for God's, and His Majesty's
Service, and you are to know farther, that the Prelates here are all very much
troubled to see, with how ill a Grace, People that say any thing of a
Reformation are heard.

The Answer to the King of France, and the safe Conduct of the Protestants, are
conformable to what His Majesty had ordered, and so shall every thing be to the
Commands he shall send. God preserve your Lordship's most Illustrious and
Reverend Person, and increase your State.

Most Illustrious and Reverend Lord, Your Servant, The Bishop of Oren.
From Trent the 12th of October, 1551.
The Bishop of Oren's Letter of the 28th of November, 1551, to the Bishop of
Arras.
Most Illustrious and Reverend Lord,
IN your Illustrious Lordship's last Letter to me of the Ninth of November, I
received a signal Favor, as I shall always do in knowing, that I am capable of
serving your Lordship. It was a great Service of His Majesty, the Ambassadors
acquainted us withal, viz. His Majesty's having ordered, that nothing be
treated of that shall be to the prejudice of the Prelates, by which means all
the Discourse that was here about Benefices, is turned to other matters, which
they call a Reformation, as your Lordship will see by the Canons which are sent
by the Ambassadors, of which we accepted; because as your Illustrious Lordship
had wisely advised, it is necessary we should tread warily, and at present
accept of what they will give us. But the mischief is, that they are sensible
of this our patience, and so do discover little or no inclination for to do any
thing, that deserves the Name of a true Reformation; notwithstanding, as your
Lordship well observes, several things might be done, that would be of great
advantage to the People, and would be no prejudice to His Holiness, or to his
Court: May God remedy things, under whom, unless His Majesty and your
Illustrious Lordship do labor very hard, there will be no remedy left for the
Church.

I have presumed to advise your Illustrious Lordship, of what at present
occurs, upon your having given me leave to do it; and because I am willing to
prevent disturbances in this holy Junto, so long as they will do any thing for
the good of the Church: For, though, I do hope there will be no such
disturbance; it is requisite, nevertheless, that His Majesty and your
Illustrious Lordship, should be acquainted with every thing, great and small,
that happens here, that you may be the better able to judge, whether, what
shall be done, shall be agreeable to His Majesty's Service; for which I remit
you to the Memorial I have sent.

I need not acquaint your Illustrious Lordship, with the great Obligations I am
under, to be a most humble Servant to the King of Bohemia, and how I am engaged
beyond all others, to wait upon him to kiss his Hand; and so having after the
Session was over, obtained leave of the Legate, and the Ambassadors for six or
seven Days, I do intend to go as far as Mantua, with the most Eminent Cardinal
of Trent, and, though we shall not spend many Days in going and coming, I
thought fit to give your Lordship an account thereof, to let you know that I
shall not be absent above seven or eight Days, during which time, nothing will
be treated of here. May our Lord preserve your Illustrious Lordship's Person,
and increase your State.

From Trent the 28th of November, 1551. There is here a Catalan Bishop for the
Bishop of Giron, who is called Bishop Jubin, he is a very good Scholar, but
very poor; your Illustrious Lordship may inform your self concerning him, by
some that know him: I am of opinion, a Benefice in Catalonia would be well
bestowed upon him. I have presumed to recommend him to your Illustrious
Lordship, knowing him to be a good Scholar. I do likewise request your
Illustrious Lordship to remember the Bishop of Vesca, when Tortosa shall be
disposed of, he has been here a considerable time, and is Son to a Servant of
His Majesty's, and deserves all that can be given him.

Most Illustrious Lord, I do kiss your Most Reverend Hands. Your Servant, The
Bishop of Oren.



A Memorial of the Bishop of Oren.
WHat the Bishop of Oren says is, That whereas His Majesty has ordered, that
in the Affair of the Provision of Benefices, nothing should be done to the
prejudice of the Prelates, and has likewise sent hither several Heads relating
to a Reformation, in order to have them decreed; that, notwithstanding, among
the said Heads there are some particulars, that are not very reasonable,
nevertheless they are such as are not of the substance of the Reformation of
the Church.

There was one Chapter the Legate was for having enacted by the Synod, which
was that, that ordered that no Bishopric nor other Benefice, should be given
in Commendam to any Person not of full Age, which though in it self a very just
thing; many of the Fathers were against having decreed, because it would seem
to approve of Cardinals, Laics, and others, provided they were of full Age,
holding of Benefices in Commendam: For which reason most of us were of opinion,
That, that Head ought not to be passed into a Decree, lest under a color of
condemning Commendams we should establish them. There was a certain Bishop,
styled the Bishop of Verdun, who is a Suffragan of Triers, who speaking of the
Reformation said, that this Chapter did not appear to him to be convenient,
calling it farther a pretended Reformation; for which words of a pretended
Reformation, the Legate fell foul upon him the other day, mortifying him with
hard and severe words, before all the Fathers, telling him among other things,
that he did not understand what he said: The Bishop was silent, but having
offered the other day to speak, and to have said something in his own
justification, the Legate commanded him to hold his Tongue, and not to speak to
any thing, but what he should command him to speak to: The Bishop made answer,
that at this rate there was nothing of liberty, and that having obtained leave
of His Majesty, by whom he was sent hither, he would be gone; the Legate told
him he should not go, but should do what they commanded him: This passed at a
Congregation, at which all the Ambassadors were present.

The Archbishops of Cologne and Mentz talked much to one another about it, and
he of Cologne turning about to the Bishop of Oren, who sat near him, said, my
Lord Bishop tell me the truth, Do you think there is any thing of liberty in
this Council? The Bishop of Oren made answer, Your Lordship asks me a dangerous
question, and which I cannot presently answer, only, that a Council ought to be
free. Whereupon he of Cologne replied, My question to you is, whether this
Council appears to you to be free? To which he of Oren answered, I do beg your
Lordship not to press me any farther on that point, in this place, promising to
let him have my thoughts of it at his own House. After which the Electours
began to speak to one another again, and as I do suppose about the same Affair.

The other day the Archbishop of Cologne resumed the Discourse thereof again at
his own House, expressing great dissatisfaction at the Councils enjoying so
little liberty, and at there being no remembrance almost of a Reformation, and
at the small account was made here of the learned Men, and Divines, who have no
hand in the Canons, but by delivering their opinions in public concerning
Heresies; whereas, that the chief Divines should be called, and advised with
about the framing of the Canons, is a thing that we do all desire. So that it
is to be feared, that if in the next Session, they are not more in earnest
about a Reformation, than hitherto they have been, that either the Electours or
some others, who do not reckon it to be convenient to suffer things to go on
thus, will raise a disturbance; every body being displeased at nothing being
done toward the Reformation of the Church, no not in such things as might be
reformed without doing any prejudice to his Holiness, and but very little to
his Court, and which would be of great advantage to the People; to the great
reproach of all us Bishops, from whom the World expects Canons of Reformation,
though in truth, we can give them nothing but what the Legate pleases.

I thought fit to advise hereof, being apprehensive of what may happen, if at
the next Session they do not treat about more substantial matters: For though I
do not doubt but that the Electours, and others, will do whatsoever His Majesty
shall order, it is convenient nevertheless, that His Majesty should be advised
of such things, as may hereafter be of very ill consequence; and whereas the
Legate, when he shall come to see how much respect is paid to His Majesty's
Order, may suffer nothing to be spoke to, but as he shall think fit, he having
on all such occasions threatened to be gone, and throw all up; it is therefore
necessary for the preventing of a disturbance, that his Holiness should be
urged with great warmth to send something to us, that will be of some advantage
to the People, it being a burning shame to throw the blame of all this upon the
Bishops; who though they may not truly be in the fault, will be reckoned to be
so, and it will be but just in the People, if we do not treat about their
interest, more in earnest, than we have done hitherto, for to stone us when we
return home.

It is agreed, that the Affair Sub utraque specie, shall be handled with that
of Order, and the Sacrafice of the Mass in the next Session, and since the
Lutherans, whom we expected are not as yet come; it would be convenient, That
that of Sub utraque specie, should be adjourned to the last Session: His
Majesty may command whatsoever he judges to be most expedient This serving only
to advise of things, to the best of my understanding, as a faithful Servant.

The Bishop of Oren's Letter of the 24th of January, 1552, to the Bishop of
Arras.
Most Illustrious and Reverend Lord,
WHat we durst not, it seems, offer relating to a Reformation, has been
delivered at large in a public Congregation, by the Ambassadors of Maurice
and Wittemburg, who among a few bad things, delivered so many that were good,
that it was well the People did not hear them: by whom several Heads of
Reformation having been proposed, we the Bishops do desire to have leave to
answer them Chapter by Chapter, reckoning we may thereby be able to do service.
I do acquaint your Illustrious Lordship with this, because I hear the Legate
and others, are for having us answer all that relates to a Reformation, only in
general, that we may not be able to do any thing but what they shall judge
convenient; but as the returning of such a general Answer will signify little
or nothing, so could we but be suffered to answer every Head particularly, we
might then do something to the purpose, and which we cannot do otherwise,
because we shall never have any such matters proposed to us to speak to again.
Your Illustrious Lordship will easily discern this to be a matter of great
moment, for were we but permitted to answer particularly to every Head, we
should not despair of doing God good service thereby: We have not been able,
notwithstanding most of the other matters were suspended, to obtain any Canons
of Reformation from the Legate in this Session, God grant he may not put us off
at the next Session likewise; wherein he will treat concerning Matrimony, with
those that were passed formerly, he should now have passed; whereas since he
goes on so briskly with other matters, it is but just that those of a
Reformation should keep pace with them; but I must tell your Lordship again,
that all would be remedied were we but suffered to answer the Protestants,
Chapter by Chapter. I shall not enlarge, remitting your Illustrious Lordship to
what the Ambassadors writ the Morning after the Session. May our Lord preserve
your most Reverend Lordship's most Illustrious Person, and increase your State.

Most Illustrious Lord, I kiss your Most Reverend Lordship's Hands, Your
Servant, The Bishop of Oren.
From Trent the 24th of January, 1552. As to the Affair of the Son of the
Marquess of Brandenburg, should we advise his Holiness to dispense with him, we
shall thereby furnish him with weapons against our self, for that after having
counseled him to dispense in so weighty a case, to the revocation of a Decree
of this Council; we must with a very ill Grace complain of him afterward, if
he should revoke smaller matters: let his Holiness therefore do it himself
without engaging us in it.



The Archbishop of Sazer's Letter of the 2d of December, 1551, to the Bishop of
Arras.
Most Illustrious and Reverend Lord,
I Have received your Lordships of the Ninth of the last Month, and have
likewise seen that your Lordship writ to Don Francisco; and I am told by the
Senior Fiscal, how inclinable your Lordship is to do me a kindness, for all
which I kiss your Lordship's Hands a thousand times; esteeming your Lordship's
concern for me to that Degree, that it is sufficient to animate me, and to make
me insensible of all the Troubles I undergo, which is an effect it will always
have upon me. What I do here is little to what I desire to do, which desire is
the thing that is esteemed by these Gentlemen; for, in truth, Affairs here are
so entangled, and perplexed with difficulties, that though I have taken much
pains, I have just done nothing: Nevertheless I go on serving His Majesty with
a good Will, being sensible that he aims at nothing but God's Service. I shall
enlarge no farther, there being others that do not fail to give your Lordship
an account of things, neither will I supplicate your Lordship, particularly as
to my own concerns, being sensible how forward your Lordship is to do me any
kindness, which I beseech your Lordship to do me at this time with His Majesty,
that so he may not forget me on this occasion, though there were no other
reason for it, but only to satisfy the World, who have entertained an opinion,
that His Majesty designs to do great things for me. Our Lord preserve and
prosper your Lordship's most Illustrious and Reverend Person and State for many
Years.

I kiss your Lordship's Hands, Your Servant, The Archbishop of Sazer.
From Trent the 2d of December, 1551.
The Bishop of Astorga's Letter of the 26th of November, 1551, to the Bishop of
Arras.
Most Illustrious and Reverend Lord,
KNowing your Lordship receives advice daily of all that passes here, I have
not sent it to you, but being ambitious of beginning to serve your Lordship in
something according to my duty; not to be tedious, the Session was held
yesterday, being the twenty Fifth; wherein several Decrees were passed against
the Errors sprung up in our days, relating to the Sacraments of Penance, and
Extreme Unction. So that considering the shortness of the time, and the variety
of matters which have been handled, I think they have labored hard, and I do
suppose your Lordship has the same thoughts of them. Certain decrees relating
to a Reformation have likewise been pronounced, on which Subject they have not
done so much as was convenient for the Reformation of the Catholic Church, and
for the removing of the Offenses which gave occasion to Peoples falling into
Errors: We for our parts, did all they would give us leave to do, though not
so much as was necessary, or as we desired to have done, to my great trouble; I
do therefore beseech your Lordship, to let His Majesty know how little Decrees
against Heresies will signify, if the great Abuses which were the occasion of
them be not redressed. This is a thing His Majesty ought to go about with that
zeal and warmth, wherewith it was handled in a Congregation of this Council;
and the rather, because as the hopes we have given us, that His Majesty will
take care of such things are a great comfort to us, so they have kept us from
making that opposition that was necessary for People who are to give an account
to God of what they shall do here; I do not write to His Majesty concerning
this, because I do not care to be troublesome, and do reckon it to be the same
thing to acquaint your Lordship therewith. I do beg it of your Lordship that
you would make use of my service, since there is nothing I am so ambitious of,
as of serving you in all things, whose most Illustrious and Reverend Person may
our Lord preserve, and increase your State for his own holy Service, and the
good of the Church.

D. V. S. Your most assured Servant. The Bishop of Astorga.
From Trent the 26th of November, 1551.
The Bishop of Pamplona's Letter of the 29th of January, 1552, to the Bishop of
Arras.
Most Illustrious and Reverend Lord,
AFter having writ the Letter that goes with this, as they do both with the
Senior Fiscal, who I am certain will deliver them: My being sensible how much
you delight in being kind to your Servants has encouraged me, to beg some
farther Favors of you.

The case, most Reverend Lord, is, in Spain they demand the Subsidy, which the
Pope granted to His Majesty on the fruits of the Churches, for the Year 1549
only; which ought accordingly to have been raised out of those fruits. Now,
most Reverend Lord, in the Year 1549, I neither was a Bishop, nor dreamt of
being one, it being the 27th of June 1550, on which day my Church was proposed
at Rome, before I was a Bishop. Now it appears to me to be a very hard thing,
that they should make me pay for that, that I never enjoyed, and that he that
received it, who, was Don Antonio de Fonseca, my Predecessor, should be
excused; and especially considering, that he has still more from the Bishopric
than I have; to this they answer, that I must pay the Subsidy, and afterward
come upon him for it. Now what reason can there be, for my paying what I do not
owe, and if I do pay it, whereon shall I have to live? It would certainly be
much more just, considering how the Bishopric is loaded, and my great Poverty,
to exempt me from that Subsidy; there not being a Bishop in Spain, that has so
many reasons for to be exempted as I have; I must therefore supplicate your
Lordship to favor your Servants as you use to do, when there is so much cause
for it.

Another thing, is, His Majesty was pleased to let me keep the Pension of
Carthagena; but in consideration thereof commanded me to pay 400 Ducats to one
Espinola of Genoua; and whereas I paid the said Ducats in broad Money, the
Bishop of Carthagena will not pay me, but in Ducats de Camara according to
their ancient Value; notwithstanding by an Order that I saw, His Majesty
commanded him to pay Don Sancho de Castilla, His Majesty's Chaplain, in broad
Money; and I am told by Dr. Malvenda, likewise, that he is commanded by His
Majesty to pay all that he is in Arrear, since he had that Bishopric, in large
Ducats; I must therefore entreat your Lordship to procure such an Order for me,
which I shall esteem as a signal Favor. May our Lord prosper your Lordship's
most Illustrious and Reverend Person, for many Years, and increase your State,
as your Servants desire.

Most Illustrious Lord, I kiss your Most Reverend Lordships Hands. Your
Servant, The Bishop of Pamplona.
From Trent the 29th of January, 1552.
The Bishop of Pamplona's Letter of the 20th of February, 1552, to the Bishop
of Arras.
Most Illustrious and Reverend Lord,
I Have by diverse Letters acquainted your Illustrious Lordship with what has
passed concerning a Dignity, called the Hospitalery in the Church of Pamplona,
which became void by the Death of the Licentiate Don Martin de Aguierre, a
professed Canon of the Order of St. Austin; to which Dignity in conformity to
the Statutes, and Rights of the said Church, I did by my Vicar on the 7th of
December last, collate Don Martin de Sant Ander, a Man of a good Life, and
Learning, and withal a Preacher. I have likewise informed your Illustrious
Lordship, how great a prejudice it will be, not only, to the said Church, but
to the City, and whole Kingdom, if that Dignity should be given to any one that
is not a Canon, the deceased having founded a College for fourteen poor
Students, who are to have their Lodging, Diet, and Teaching gratis, which was a
very necessary Work, there not being a Study in the whole Kingdom: The
Foundation of the College was laid before I left Pamplona, so that there
wanted nothing but his Holiness, and Majesty's consent to it: Now the greatest
part of this Endowment, being raised out of the Revenues of the said Dignity,
should any one that is not a Canon be preferred to it, the College will come to
nothing; Whereas, if a Canon has it, it will hold. Farthermore, all the
Dignities of Pamplona, being regular, should this be given to one that is no
Canon, he will receive the profits, without doing the Church any service;
since, without being a Canon he cannot go into the Quire, and so will be as a
Woolf in eating the profits without serving God.

Now having received information that the said Dignity is exposed to Sale at
Rome, to see who will give most for it (a very honorable Reformation for the
Council we are in) I could not both for His Majesty's Service, and the
discharge of my own Conscience, forbear acquainting His Majesty therewith,
supplicating him to defend his own Patronage, and not to suffer the said
Church, City, and Kingdom, to have such a wrong done them, on which occasion,
and to kiss your Illustrious Lordship's Hands, I have sent this by a Servant,
and with it a Memorial to his Majesty, in which I give him a full Account of
the case; wherefore, I must beseech your Lordship, notwithstanding the Bishop
may not deserve it, to let the said Holy Church, and Kingdom, for to have your
favor, and that you would not deny it to them, that so they may never forget
your Illustrious Lordship in their Sacrifices and Prayers, as their
Benefactour, which, as your Lordship's Servant, and Prelate of the said Church,
I do promise you they shall not. But besides the Conclavist, whom I mention in
the Memorial, I hear that Senior Balduino Monte, his Holiness's Brother,
pretends to give that Dignity to I do not know whom. Your Illustrious Lordship
would do me a great favor, if you would be pleased to write to him, that the
Church of Pamplona, and the Ordinary thereof may not be wronged, which kindness
would be very much inhansed, if His Majesty would write likewise to the said
Baldwin about it, and would charge his Ambassador, Don Diego de Mendoza, to
look after it. I beseech your Lordship to have compassion on the Bishop, who is
your Lordship's, and that holy Church, City, and Kingdom's Creature.

I had writ thus far when your Lordship's Letter of the 17th instant came to my
Hand, by the way of Dr. Malvenda, with which I received a signal Favor, and
which is greater than I am able to express, in understanding thereby how well
disposed your most Reverend Lordship is to do me any kindness; May God give me
strength to be able to serve your Lordship, as much as I am bound, and am
willing to serve you. As to the Letters to which your Lordship has received no
Answer, to that which was of greatest importance, I returned an Answer by the
way of Dr. Malvenda, and to the first by the Bishop of Oviedo, and it goes to
my very Soul, that your Lordship did not receive them.

As to the Dignity, having as your Lordship will see, writ concerning it,
before I received your Lordship's Letter, I have nothing to add, but only to
supplicate your Lordship again, to do me the Favor therein that I have desired.

And as to the Subsidy, the best way that I can think of for the payment of it,
is to make me Captain of the Band of one and twenty Pensioners, with the seven
thousand Ducats I am owing to them, and with my great Poverty, and the other
Debts I have upon me; and if this will not do, for the payment of what I do not
enjoy, I believe a Letter from your Lordship, to the Bishop of Lugo, might go a
great way toward it, to whom your most Reverend Lordship may be pleased to
write, that since my Predecessor Don Antonio de Fonseca, received all the
Fruits of those Years, and who at this time receives more Rent out of the
Bishopric than I do, that it is but just that he that owes it, and not he who
does not, should pay it: As to what your Lordship writes concerning the Shedule
of Carthagena, I do kiss your Lordship's Hands for that Favor, and do beg it
of your Lordship, that you would command it to be done, wherein your Lordship
will do me both a favor and justice, and that without doing any injury to the
Bishop: I do likewise kiss your most Reverend Hands, for the Kindness you
promise to do me with the Legate, and with some other Persons; and I do beseech
your most Reverend Lordship, when you write to the Legate, to mention the
Church of Pamplona to him, and that it may not be wronged: I am much pleased
with the last Article, in your most Reverend Lordship's Letter. I pray God the
dispatch the Fiscal is to bring, may be for his Service, and that of His
Majesty, and the quiet of Germany. May our Lord prosper your Lordship's most
Illustrious and Reverend Person, and increase your State.

I kiss your most Reverend Lordship's Hands. Your Servant, The Bishop of
Pamplona.
From Trent the 20th of February, 1552.
Here follows half a dozen Lines writ with the Bishop's own Hand, which I was
not able to read.

The Bishop of Pamplona's Letter of the 27th of February, 1552, to the Bishop
of Arras.
Most Illustrious and Reverend Lord,
BY the letter I sent to your most Reverend Lordship, by my Servant, I
acquainted you with the wrong they are about to do the Bishop of Pamplona, and
to whom a greater cannot be done, and not to him only, but to that Church, and
Kingdom, on an account of the College; but being sensible how forward your
Lordship is to do favors, I cannot forbear begging of you; Nam ut placet
Chrysostomo, petentis negligentia reprehenditur, ubi de dantis misericordia non
dubitatur: For which reason I do return to supplicate your most Reverend
Lordship for to stand our friend; and since delays in such cases are very
dangerous, I who am your Lordship's Creature, would esteem it a great Kindness
if you would be pleased to write to the Legate about this Affair, and to let
him know how unreasonable a thing it is, in the time of a Council, instead of a
Reformation, to help us to a Deformation, and especially, when the Bishop of
the place is serving God, and His Majesty at it, and at a greater expense than
he is able to bear; it will be necessary likewise, that your Lordship should,
with His Majesty's Letters, write one your self to the Ambassador Don Diego de
Mendoza, which if it is not dispatched quickly will, I fear, come too late.

And that your most Reverend Lordship may have a perfect knowledge of the
wrong, that will be done thereby to the Bishop, the Church, and the whole
Kingdom; your Lordship is to understand, that in former times, when Navarre was
under petty Kings, who had scarce Bread to put in their Mouths, the Popes never
offered to dispose of any Preferment therein, and especially in the Cathedral
Church, in all which times there is no President of their having done any such
thing; and shall we now, when under so powerful a King, and who is so well
able to defend his Kingdoms, endure to have such things imposed upon us, as
those petty Kings would never have suffered? Now were there nothing else but
this, I think, it is enough to engage your Lordship to defend me, and that
Kingdom.

I forgot to tell your Lordship in my former, that the French Licentiate is my
Enemy, though I do not know for what, unless it be for his being a friend to
Verio, who is one of the Council, and besides Archdeacon, and Canon of the
Church: This Verio having forgot that it is his Office to do justice, and
hinder all Violences, abuses the Royal Authority, in doing them himself, and
in having turned a Procuratour for all desperate Causes; with whom, being armed
with the Royal Authority, no body dares contend. I beseech your Lordship to
write to the said French Licentiate, to favor my Causes so far as they are
just, and not to do the contrary, who being a Creature of your Lordships, as I
am likewise, ought for that reason to do me justice. I must entreat your most
Reverend Lordship not to be offended with my Letters since I have no other
Patron to succor me in my Necessities.

The Fiscal Vargas has since he arrived here, been so taken up with business,
that he has scarce suffered any body to see him: But being yesterday at the
Sermon which was preached by the Archbishop of Granada; he told me by the bye,
and in general, upon my asking him what resolution he had brought, that His
Majesty was against any change, or having the Council prorogued; nevertheless,
we do no more since his Arrival than we did before, but do still continue here
idle. May our Lord prosper your Lordship's most Illustrious and Reverend
Person, and increase your State.

Most Illustrious Lord, I kiss your Most Reverend Lordship's Hands. Your
Servant, The Bishop of Pamplona.
From Trent the 26th of February, 1552.
Mr. Lanssac the French Ambassador at the Council of Trent's Letter to the
Queen Mother of France.
Madam,
FOR to tell you the truth, I have not met here with the Execution of the good
inclinations, the Pope the last time I saw him assured me of, who told me, he
would leave the handling, and determining of all things entirely to the
Disposition of the Council, without interposing therein himself, to which I
found all quite contrary: Nothing being handled or proposed here, but at the
pleasure of the Legates, and who do nothing but what they are commanded to do
from Rome; and who, when they have proposed any thing, of the sixty Bishops
that are here, thirty being Spaniards, and the rest Italians, our small
handful, who in my judgment are Men of great knowledge and zeal, and well
affected to a through Reformation, if they offer any thing that the Legates do
not like, are interrupted, and their opinions not followed, every thing being
carried by a Majority, which the Spaniards and Italians are, and that a great
one, most of which are either the Pope's Pensionaries, or interested in some
Office in the Court of Rome; and who do for that reason knock all the good
intentions of the rest on the head; being resolved never to yield to a
Reformation, so that I have no hopes of seeing this Council produce the Fruits
that I desire, unless you should be pleased to send hither a considerable
Number of our Prelates; and unless the Ambassadors of the Emperor, and King
of Spain, and the other Princes do speak a little more briskly than they have
done hitherto.

Your most humble Subject, and Most obedient, and Most obliged Servant. Lanssac.
From Trent the 7th of June, 1562.
A Passage in a Letter of Mr. Lanssac, bearing date the 19th of July, 1562, to
the French King.
WE have deferred the proposing of the Articles of Reformation; we that are
here being sensible, that they will never grant any thing, that is prejudicial
to the Profit or Authority of the Court of Rome; besides, the Pope is so far
Master of the Council, by having the Major Vote at his Devotion, thorough his
Pensionaries; that let the Emperor's Ambassadors, and we, remonstrate never
so much, they will do nothing but what they please, as Your Majesty will
understand by the Canons we send you, as well of Doctrine as Reformation, which
were published in the last Session, being the 16th present.

Dr. Xaincte's Letter to Dr. d' Espence.
Mr.
YOU were never so inspired, as you were in not coming to this place, where I
am apt to think, the base Courses that are taken here, to obstruct a
Reformation, might have killed you. The French do carry themselves more
sincerely and virtuously than the rest, who do for that reason laugh at them
when they see them in trouble. When we arrived here, they were handling the
Sacrament of Order, on which occasion the Spaniards pressed hard to have had it
declared, that Bishops were instituted by Christ, and were by Divine Right
superior to Presbyters, in which the French joined with them: But the
Italians, in order to hinder the Establishment of that Doctrine, crowded no
fewer than twelve Titles for the Pope into one single Canon, by which they
pretend that he is the only Bishop instituted immediately by Christ, and that
all other Bishops have no Authority but what they derive from him; there is not
one here that does not wish himself in the Sorbon, though it were with hazard
of his Life. It is not possible for me, to relate minutely to you all the Acts
that I have seen, and have been informed of in this Council.

From Trent the 15th of June, 1563.
Justinianus a Noble Venetian, in the fifteenth Book of his Venetian History,
speaking of this last Session, of the Trent Council, says: Religionis causa in
Tridentino Concilio parum prosperos successus habebat, ob dissentientes animos,
coecamque Praelatorum ambitionem; solus autem Cardinalis Lotharingius vir
pietatis studio, and dicendi art clarus, quae ad Dei honorem, and veram
Ecclesiae reformationem essent, suadebat: cui plerique ex Concilii patribus,
humanarum potius rerum quam divinarum curam habentes, refragabantur, variisque
opinionibus sancta Synodo dissidente nil quod rectum, sanctum, piumque foret,
decerni potuit: omniaque confusione and coecitate, plena erant, tantaque
praelatos ambitio coeperat, ut nulla apud eos fidei Religionisque pro vera
Ecclesiae reformatione, ratio haberetur.

The following Letters though they have no Name to them, being Copies, and some
of them no Date, are plainly the Bishop of Arras's, in answer to some of the
foregoing Letters.

A Copy of a Letter of the Bishop of Arras to Dr. Vargas.
Magnificent Sir,
I Have perused your Letters of the 19th, and 20th Instant, and that of the
25th also, with which I received a Copy of the Doctrines, and of the safe
Conduct, and the Act of the Protestation made in the Congregation; you always
reason so prudently, as to give us great light in what we are to do here,
wherein you do me a singular Favor; for which, as I have writ formerly, I
shall not fail to have a just consideration: It is convenient, that what you
write hither, should be so managed, that it may not give offense to any; it
being a thing of great importance to His Majesty's Service, that there should
be a good correspondence and entire agreement among his Ministers at Trent. We
are waiting to see what the Ambassadors will write concerning the said
Session, and till that is known, I have nothing to add, but that I am always
ready to be employed by you, and to do whatsoever is convenient for such as you
shall recommend for their labors in the Council; who shall be acquainted with
the good Accounts you give of them. Our Lord preserve you.

Inspurg.
A Copy of a Letter of the Bishop of Arras to Dr. Vargas.
Magnificent Sir,
I Am informed by Don Francisco's Letters, of the good Offices you do in all
things, relating both to public and private Affairs: The bearer hereof, who is
of the Emperor's Council, and was his last Ambassador in France, goes to
Trent, on no other Errand, as you will understand by him, but only to speak to
the Electours: I shall not enlarge at present, in answering your Letters, since
no body can tell, as yet, what will be done in that matter, to which you desire
to have an Answer; and it is possible it may take another way: I shall
hereafter advise you particularly how it will be, and will return Answers to
all the points in the said Letters, this dispatch being in such haste as not to
allow me time to do it. Our Lord preserve you.

Inspurg.
A Copy of a Letter of the Bishop of Arras to Dr. Vargas.
Magnificent Sir,
YOU reckon, His Majesty's having been satisfied with what you offered, is a
full Answer to all the Letters you have writ to me; which, as you observe, have
been many and large: You will understand by the dispatch, this goes by, all
that is here; I shall not therefore enlarge, neither in truth can I do it,
though I were willing, being at this time so besieged by business, that I have
not one moment of leisure, and so can only kiss your Hands, for your great Care
and Vigilance, and the Trouble you give your self in writing to me
particularly, concerning all that occurs, which is always done by you with a
Zeal conformable to your great Prudence and Learning; for which you may rest
satisfied, I have a just Esteem, neither am I wanting in representing it, as I
ought to do, to His Majesty, in order, to acquaint him, with those who are most
serviceable to him, that so he may take care to prefer them: I do heartily
wish, he may on this or some other occasion remember you as he ought; I pray
God the success may answer my wishes, which if it do, I am certain you will be
contented. Our Lord preserve you.

Inspurg the 19th of January.
A Copy of the Bishop of Arras's Letter of the 9th of November, 1551, to Dr.
Vargas.
Most Magnificent Sir,
I Do all I can, that you may have quick Answers to your Letters, but by reason
of His Majesty's having so much business on his Hands, as he has at present,
you have them not many times so soon as I do wish you had; and though at this
time, the badness of the ways, and our being so much employed in raising an
Army, might excuse our not doing of it, nevertheless the Answers to the
Ambassadors, do want only to be seen by His Majesty; and I will do all that I
am able, that they may be dispatched in a few days.

What you write of the Legate, and Presidents precipitating of things, is very
true, who do huddle things strangely, that are of the highest importance to the
Church of God, of which the Legate gave a clear proof, in having contended so
much, against having the Communion Sub utraque deferred, and in having
determined many things in the Session, which ought to have been adjourned
until the Arrival of the Protestants, who are now on their way: But the
mischief of all is, that they do all those things for purposes, that are flatly
contrary to the purposes they ought to have; precipitating the Divines so, that
they have not time for arguing of matters as they ought to do.

His Majesty has writ to his Ambassadors to have all these things remedied, if
it is possible: The Legate may reckon as he pleases, but I am of opinion, that
for all the haste he makes, he will be obliged to prolong his Term of July, and
that for some Months. There goes likewise a particular Answer to Don Francisco,
in relation to a Reformation.

The Memorial you speak of, I have not as yet been able to find, I imagined
Velasco had had it: We must therefore leave it to you, to answer it as well as
you can in general, for want of a particular information thereof.

It is a lamentable thing to be so sensible of Mischiefs, as to see them
plainly, and yet not be able to remedy them in the Circumstances we are in; My
only consolation is, the consideration of my having done all that I was able,
and of all things being in the Hand of God: Who many times, when People do in
humane Prudence despair of things, puts his Hand to them, and brings them
about: Now my being of opinion, that we are at this time, in such an Extremity,
is what raises such hopes in me.

Some of the Protestants are now on their way, and some, as you write, are come
already; nevertheless, by their secret workings in their own Countries, I do
see plainly, that this is all a piece of Roguery lodged in the Hearts of their
Doctors I do all the Offices, I can think of, with the Bishop of Imola his
Holiness's Nuncio, and that, in order to bring the Pope to yield to some things
that are necessary; I do likewise solicit the Legate that is here, who being
an honest Man, cannot forbear acknowledging, that the Affairs of the Council
ought to be taken otherwise at Rome, than they are: Where, if they would, they
might consent to the doing of a great many things, that would be of advantage,
and particularly to their own Authority, and that without doing any body a
prejudice.

There is not a Soul that knows any thing of the Letter you writ to me
privately, nor of your having sent me the Papers, which our Ambassadors were
so slow in sending: I had heard of what had passed from a thousand particular
Persons, before their Letters arrived: I shall take care, that the good Offices
you do me, shall be no prejudice to you, and am glad that we are so near one
another, that we may almost shake Hands.

As to your own particular Affairs, I have always done, and will always do you
all the good Offices that are in my power; I pray God they may succeed
according to the good Will they are done withal: I was glad to hear from you,
of Dr. Malvenda's having acquitted himself so well; and as to the Doctors of
Lovain, I know they will give a good account of themselves, and you will find
them to be both excellent and modest Men. I have writ to the Archbishop of
Sazer, to make him sensible of the good Office you have done him: God knows how
desirous I am that all worthy Men, that do service, should be considered for
it; and of my disinterested intentions in such cases, I have Dr. Malvenda for a
witness, so that you may rest satisfied, that so often as there is occasion, I
shall not fail to put His Majesty in mind of the concerns of that Archbishop: I
have likewise writ Don Francisco an account of the Testimony you gave of his
diligence and managery. Our Lord preserve you.

From Inspurg the 9th of November, 1551. The safe Conduct is come defective
enough, being very far from such a one as is necessary, to satisfy the
pretensions of the Protestants; I will do all that is possible, to oblige them
to consent to it, but if that cannot be done, it must be returned to you again.



A Copy of part of the Bishop of Arras's Letter of the 5th of March, 1552, to
Dr. Vargas.
Magnificent Sir,
I Have seen all that the Ambassadors have writ to His Majesty, as also what
you have writ at large, and with great Wisdom, in your Letters about the same
business; what you have offered, is well adapted to the Terms we were on when
you were here; but the State of Affairs is much altered since that time, for we
have now no hopes of the Protestants going to the Council, who having entered
into a Conspiracy, do seek to gain the People to their Devotion, by telling
them that the Council goes on, without giving them the hearing, and denies them
many things which it might lawfully grant; by which means, things are thrown
into such a terrible Confusion, that the Catholics, as well as the
Protestants, are for having the Council suspended; among other things saying
openly, that they do not care to be judged by one Nation, and that, though the
Council should be continued never so long it would never make such a
Reformation as is necessary, nor will have any other effect, but the lessening
of the Authority of Councils; and that in case His Majesty should do his Duty,
in urging to have such a Reformation, he will undoubtedly embroil himself
thereby with the Pope: But supposing there were no harm in that, so long as His
Majesty does nothing but what is his Duty, and convenient for the Service of
God: The worst of all is, that no fruit can be expected, from any such
endeavors, since they will thereupon either translate or dissolve the Council,
as they shall think most convenient, to the robbing of Councils of that
Authority, which is the only refuge, and remedy, the Church has when disturbed
by Controversies about Religion; it being most certain, that the Germans on the
Terms they are on at present, will not only not receive this Council, but they
will pretend that they are released from the Observation of the Interim, which
was to last only till the definition of a Council, and will impugn this, and
that with too much color among their own People, who are not rightly informed
of the Authority of the Church; for the Council to which the Controversy was
remitted, not having adjusted it, there can be no agreement: And as it is
certain, that they will insist on their Religion, so His Majesty will die
sooner than consent to it. For which, and several other Reasons which have been
weighed by His Majesty, he is come to a resolution to write to his Ambassadors
about it.

As to what you write to me particularly, I have communicated it three several
times to His Majesty, who continues fixed, not to do any thing therein, without
the advice of his Ambassadors, whom he will have to send their opinions to him
in writing; which considering, that his Ambassadors are Men of Integrity, and
will keep whatever is done secret, he takes to be the best Course. This is made
still the more difficult, by the present State of things, in which, if the
resolution his Majesty has taken has its effect, there will be no necessity of
entertaining any thoughts of that other Course.

It would do well therefore, that you should propose what you have to offer, as
a thing I had writ to you about, or spoke to you of when you were here, and
that you should write likewise to His Majesty, desiring that your Letter may be
kept secret, and recommending Secrecy as to all things that are done at Trent.
In fine, now we are on these Terms, you must not fail to employ all your
industry and diligence, that what His Majesty is compelled by the iniquity of
the times to condescend to, may be done, as much to his advantage as it is
possible.

The following part is lost.
A Copy of a Letter of the Bishop of Arras to Dr. Vargas.
Magnificent Sir,
DEsigning to return Answers, to all the Letters I find my self indebted to you
for, when His Majesty does the same to his dispatches, I shall not enlarge in
this, which I write only on the occasion of Secretary Erastus going to Trent,
to advise you of my being in health, thanks to God for it, and extremely
desirous to have something wherein I may serve you; which whenever any
occasion shall offer, I shall do with an entire good Will. Our Lord preserve
you.

A Copy of a Letter of the Bishop of Arras of the 16th of February, 1552, in
answer to a Letter of Dr. Malvenda of the 27th of January, 1552.
Magnificent Sir,
I Was overjoyed at my coming to know the Fiscal Vargas by sight, and
discourse; and though I had always reckoned him a very able Minister, yet I do
now find him to be a much greater Man than I thought he was. I have been
informed by him of all the difficulties you have encountered with, as well in
the business of the safe Conduct for the Protestants, as in the Propositions
which have been made: The Legate must not certainly have studied the Affairs of
Germany much, nor the Books that are wrote therein, that he is so much offended
at what they have said in the Council: The said Fiscal carries His Majesty's
entire resolution as to all Affairs, which he knows very well how to report. He
has acquainted me with the pains you have taken, notwithstanding your sickness
would not allow you, to do what you would have done otherwise. I was glad to
hear him speak so well of the Bishop Castellamar, of whom you know I had a good
opinion before: That Prelate may rest satisfied, that whenever there is
occasion, I shall not forget to represent his Merits to His Majesty; I pray God
it may be of advantage to him. Being desirous to do something for the Study of
Barcelona, I ordered a Memorial to be given in about it some days ago, in
conformity of what the Procuratour Gualby had writ to me concerning it.

Before we left Ausburg, I desired His Majesty to give Dr. Gregory Lopez leave
to go to a place whither I would gladly have sent him, but could not obtain it,
His Majesty alleging, that the Court having no other Spanish Physician, but
him and Olivares, could not possibly spare him; and much less can it be
expected now that His Majesty should give way to his going to the Council,
since the Queen of Bohemia has with great importunity got Olivares to go with
her.

It is a wonderful thing to me, that so many Spanish Prelates should not have
brought a Physician with them; or that being so near to Italy, they should not
all this while have sent for some Eminent Doctor, who I suppose might have
made a good business of it. I do assure you I have done in this all that was
possible for me, and I can do no more. Our Lord preserve you.

From Inspurg the 16th of February, 1552.
A Copy of the Bishop of Arras's Letter of the 9th of November, 1551, in answer
to two Letters of Dr. Malvenda's of the 12th of October, and the 8th of
November, 1551.
Magnificent Sir,
I Find my self two Letters in your debt, the last of which came to me, since I
arrived here; where, if any thing can make me dispense with the Commodities of
this place, it will be my being so near Trent, that we can almost shake Hands
together.

I am infinitely glad, that the Session was celebrated with so much Authority;
but the thing that troubles me, is, the resolution they are come to about the
ways of proceeding, having left the old known Methods, and which is worst of
all there is no remedy for it; for though they know well enough what would be
most convenient, they will never yield to it; so that without running a great
risk, we shall not be able to procure it: The business of the Communion Sub
utraque, might very well have been remedied, without having made such a Noise
about it, or without our having writ concerning it from hence, for we do not
know what to write, until we have received advice of things from you; and the
Legate, if he had pleased, might have remembered, that His Majesty, when the
Council sat formerly at Trent, writ that the matters that are chiefly
controverted, might not be handled till a convenient time, and that his
Holiness writ likewise to his Legates, to follow His Majesty's directions as to
things of that Nature. For as you know very well, Papers which must be read by
His Majesty before they are dispatched, cannot be expedited, as they might be
otherwise; and so the Answers to the Embassadour's Letters, though they have
been writ some days ago; yet by reason of His Majesty's not having as yet seen
them, they cannot go by this occasion; but I shall take care to send them as
soon as it is possible.

It would have had much more Authority, if the Fathers had first delivered
their Minds concerning matters, and the decrees having been formed thereupon,
had been returned to them again to be voted by them, than the taking the second
Course, you instance in; but it being now too late to procure that, there is no
mention of it in His Majesty's Letters. It would likewise, considering the
Necessities of the Times, have been most convenient not to have had the Decrees
published till the End of the Council; but the contrary Custom being now
introduced, by their having done otherwise in the former Sessions, it will be
to no purpose to urge what is proposed by Cologne, notwithstanding, it was the
Practice of all the Ancient Councils; for we must be content to take things in
the State they are in, and make the best we can of them.

I was glad to hear from the Fiscal Vargas, of your having signalized your self
so much, by the Oration you made: The Divine who would have taken place of the
Dean, might very well have excused giving People occasion to talk of him. Don
Francisco has writ concerning it, and has excepted you by Name: His Majesty nor
none else having ever imagined, that such a pretense could have been started by
any body; it being most certain that they are all His Majesty's Ambassadors,
as well those of Flanders, as those of Spain, being all equally the Servants of
the same Master, and sent on the same Errand.

I am not unmindfull of your particular business, having spoke several times,
both to Erastus, and Secretary Vargas about it; so that if you have not had a
return, you will have one by the first opportunity; I have told them often,
that if those returns were made by the ordinary ways, His Majesty, whose
ceremonies, and opinions, you are no stranger to, would be best pleased with
them.

I cannot forbear showing great respect to Dr. Velasco, as well upon his own
Account, as upon your Commendation of him. I have received the Book of the
Decrees which have been passed in this Council, for which I kiss your Hands;
those of the last Session were sent me by Don Francisco, of which to speak the
truth, I have the same opinion that you have, it being impossible, as they
precipitate matters, to have them discussed in so short a time, as they ought
to be. If there were any persuading of them, to take the most convenient
Courses, there are several Articles ought to be deferred till the Protestants
come: We shall see, whether, what His Majesty writes concerning such matters
will be able to remedy things a little for the future.

The safe Conduct is very defective to the purposes of bringing the Protestants
to Trent, and of keeping them there. Our Lord preserve you.

From Inspurg the 9th of November, 1551. We know not what to advise in case the
French should return to the next Session, as I suppose they will, if not
hindered by Varillas's departure, to whom if they should say any thing, an
Answer may be deferred, as it was before, till the next Session; as to an
appeal, I do not see any ground they can have for it, since no Decree has been
made to provoke them to it, but only an Answer returned to them; but in case
they should appeal, a futuro gravamine, they may, as I have said, be answered
afterward; this is all the advice we can give from hence, until we see what
they have said, and in what form, this being a matter that will require to be
considered thoroughly, as to every word of it.



A Copy of a Letter of the Bishop of Arras in answer to a Letter of the Bishop
of Oren's of the 20th of January, 1552.
Most Reverend Lord,
I Have received two Letters from your Lordship, the first whereof is full of
Complaints, upon what His Majesty had writ to your Lordship, and the second is
a retractation, of the suspicion you had of the Ambassador.

Now as there is nothing that troubles your Lordship, that does not give me
pain, so I do assure you, His Majesty's Letter to you gave me a great deal; I
do not say this to excuse my self, who being His Majesty's Minister am bound to
obey him, and especially when after having endeavored to satisfy him, he
commands me absolutely to do it; after which I did not think fit to make any
farther reply, knowing certainly that if I had done it, I should have made the
business worse, His Majesty being in so great a passion at that time, that a
reply would have served only to have increased his Choler.

The original of all this, was, His Majesty's having been informed, that there
were three of the Prelates absent from Trent at once, the Bishop of Segovia
having absented himself without leave, and the Bishop of Placentia being gone
to Venice only for Pastime.

Now His Majesty being zealous in all the concerns of Religion, and being
extremely desirous of reaping some fruit of this Council, which, though it may
not be so much as is necessary, yet that it may be as much as can be had; and
that on his part, and theirs who are employed by him, nothing should be wanting
that is necessary toward the procuring of a Reformation; he commanded those
Letters to be writ, by the dispatch that went to the Ambassador, who I do
assure your Lordship, never writ one word concerning that Affair to His
Majesty, neither am I able to tell, by what way he was informed of it, there
being a great many People, who speak to him of things upon such slight Grounds,
that one would wonder they are not ashamed to do it.

Your Lordship's Letter being come to hand, I took care to communicate so much
of it as was convenient to His Majesty, saying several things besides, of which
your Servant can give you an account.

The Lady Dona Maria de Lara had spoke to me about it, as she has likewise very
well, as she can do in all things, to His Majesty, neither was Secretary Vargas
wanting in doing your Lordship good Offices therein, so that His Majesty is now
satisfied, who said, the foundation of his anger having been the Prelates going
from Trent, without his Embassadour's leave, since you were not concerned in
that, he had nothing more to say; only, that he will not have you, nor none of
the Prelates that are at Trent on his account, to absent themselves from so
good a Work for one Moment.

It amazeth me that the Ambassador, who is so civil and well bred a Person in
all things, should be rude to you and the rest of the Prelates; I can only say,
that upon my own account, I cannot allow, a certain carelessness in Behavior
to be reckoned a great fault in Men of business; I my self when my head is full
of business, being apt to commit such Errors; and when he chooses to go on
foot for exercise, or some other convenience, the Bishops if they please may
easily rid themselves of such of his Servants, as have the impudence to go
where they ought not.

As to business, it is certain your Lordship handles it, with a necessary Zeal,
and an earnest desire of doing God and His Majesty Service, for which you
cannot have a better Rule, than to follow what the Ambassadors shall tell you
is His Majesty's Will, who have instructions from hence as to all points: At
present I have nothing more to add, only to tell you, that your Lordship
hereafter will not have any Cause given you to complain; and that in me you
will always find a most affectionate Servant, and whom you may freely command
as such. With this I end, beseeching our Lord to preserve your most Reverend
Lordship.

From Inspurg the 1st of February, 1552.
A Copy of part of a Letter of the Bishop of Arras of the 9th of November,
1551, to the Bishop of Oren.
Most Illustrious and Reverend Lord,
WIth your Lordship's Letters of the 12th of the last Month, and the 3d
instant, I received the customary Favor, of being acquainted with your being
in health, of which now we are so near, I hope I shall hear frequently to my
great satisfaction. As I am ambitious to serve His Majesty in any thing, so I
am chiefly in matters relating to the Council, about which, God is my witness,
I do all that I am able; and as I rejoice extremely at any thing that is right
being done therein, so I am extremely troubled, when I see things done there on
purpose to obstruct the Reformation of God's holy Religion.

I do all I am able to bring them to be favorable to the Germans, that, as
your Lordship in your great prudence knows very well, being a thing of great
moment, and about which I have taken more pains, than can be imagined. So that,
notwithstanding, I see things done every day, that do no ways please me, I
comfort my self with the thoughts of my having done all that I was able, having
been wanting neither for will, nor pains.

We aim all at the same mark, which is to have things remedied as is necessary,
to which Work there are great obstacles, of which, though we are very sensible,
we are forced for fear of bringing all to ruin, to dissemble our knowledge of
them: I have seen your Lordship's Memorial, and Don Francisco's also, which he
sent to His Majesty upon the informations he had received from the Prelates.

It is not His Majesty's intention, that the Prelates should lose any thing
they are in possession of, that is not offensive, or to the prejudice of the
Church of God, neither do I believe it is Don Francisco's; but so it is, that
there are many things to be wished, and it would be happy if they were granted,
which if his Holiness were pressed to do, would make a breach, that would be
attended with greater inconveniences, than any thing that is done; it is
therefore necessary, that all such matters be very tenderly handled, since to
speak to have all the Exactions and Abuses of the Court of Rome reformed, does
certainly knock that and all other business, on the head at once. We must
therefore seek, and that obliquely too, to get some things removed, which give
great offense, and are of advantage only to some particular Persons, but are
prejudicial to the public, even of Rome it self; for should we do any thing
otherwise than thus, that is contrary to the Gusto of the Romans, they will
immediately upon it, put a stop to all business; I cannot at present enter upon
particulars, but shall only tell you, that we have had several Conferences upon
what Don Francisco has writ concerning those Affairs.

The following part is lost.
A Copy of a Letter of the Bishop of Arras to the Bishop of Oren.
Most Illustrious and Reverend Lord,
REferring my self to the Answer, that is returned by His Majesty to the
dispatches from Trent, relating to the last Session, I will not enlarge at
present, in my Answer to your Lordship's Letter, of the 25th of the last Month,
only that I have received your Paper, concerning what passed betwixt the Legate
and Verdun, and some other matter relating to that contention.

We are not wanting to use all possible diligences, as we have done hitherto,
that things may be prosecuted with you, in such ways as are most convenient for
the Service of God, and the public good of Christendom. But your Lordship
cannot but see, that the iniquity of the times, and the present Posture of
Affairs are such, as will not give way to our doing of what is convenient, we
must therefore be contented, and tread with great Caution, and Circumspection,
for fear of breaking all in pieces, which would be yet worse, than what they
do: Your Lordship's prudence must needs know this, better than I who am here
can tell you: I shall not therefore trouble you with a longer Letter, but do
referr you to Erastus, the bearer, who is able to give you a particular Account
of all that offers here. I cannot omit assuring your Lordship, that in me you
have as good a Servant as you can desire, and that I shall esteem your Commands
to serve you signal Favors. Our Lord preserve you.

A Copy of a Letter of the Bishop of Arras to the Bishop of Pamplona.
Most Reverend Lord,
I Have received your Lordship's Letters, of the 20th, and 26th of the last
Month, and that also you sent to me by your Servant, which is all over very
fine, and I kiss your hands a thousand times for it; your Lordship cannot but
be sensible that you need not use any Complements with me, but that you may
freely employ me on all occasions; there being nothing that can make me more
your Servant than I am already.

As to the injury you write they are about to do you, in the matter of
Hospitalery of Pamplona, I will take care that all possible diligences, shall
be used for to remedy it: I have ordered a Letter to be writ in His Majesty's
Name to Don Diego de Mendoza his Ambassador at Rome, in conformity to what you
desired. I do not use to write to Senior Balduino, having no acquaintance with
him, but to make amends for that, I will write my self to Don Diego; who alone
having His Majesty's commands for it, can do as much as if we wrote to them
all. I have writ to the Legate by this dispatch, as you desired me, and shall
write likewise to the French Licentiate as you command me, and that after such
a manner, as shall oblige him to use all the diligences that are in his power;
and if there is any thing either in this or any other Affair, I shall not fail
to employ my self therein, with an entire good Will; as to the Subsidy I will
write to the Bishop of Lugo, as you have desired, and will take care to have
the Schedule relating to Carthagena dispatched, as you have directed; and in
order thereunto have commanded a memorial to be presented some days ago to
Secretary Erastus, to whom if you your self writ concerning it, it would not be
amiss. Our Lord preserve your Lordship.

Inspurg.
A Copy of a Letter of the Bishop of Arras to the Archbishop of Sazer.
Most Reverend Lord,
I Have nothing to return in answer to your Lordship's Letter of the 2d
instant, but to praise the Offices and Diligences your Lordship uses in the
Affairs of this holy Council, as comes certified from all hands: May our Lord
reward your Lordship according to your deserts, and put it likewise into His
Majesty's heart, to remember those who have labored hard, and do still
continue to labor, as your Lordship does, at so great a Charge, and
Incommodities, both to their Persons, and Estates; I do assure you, I am not
wanting, in representing all these things to His Majesty, and particularly as
to your Lordship's concerns; as I shall not fail to do on this occasion,
wishing that His Majesty may show you as much Favor, as I desire my self. I
shall be always, whenever you shall command me, most ready to serve you with an
entire Will. Our Lord preserve you.

Inspurg.
A Copy of a Letter of the Bishop of Arras to Don Francisco de Toledo.
Illustrious Lord,
HAving writ to you the other day, by the Person who is sent by His Majesty to
speak to the Electours, in answer to a Letter, I was in your debt, and not
having since heard from you, and dispatching this in great haste, with the
resolution His Majesty is come to, concerning the Affairs at Trent, as you will
see by the dispatch; and I have nothing more to say, but to remit my self to
that, kissing your Hands a thousand times, and praying to God to protect and
increase your Illustrious Person and Family, as I desire.

From Inspurg the 6th of March, 1552.
A Letter of the Bishop of Oren's of the 20th of January, 1552, to the Bishop
of Arras.
Most Illustrious and Reverend Lord,
BEfore I went to Mantua, to kiss the most Serene King, and Queen of Bohemia's
Hands, I writ to your most Reverend Lordship for leave to go, which I desired
likewise of the Legate, and the Ambassador Don Francisco de Toledo: To whom I
declared, that unless he would give me leave in His Majesty's Name, that I
would not stir out of the Gates of Trent; who thereupon granted me leave before
several Prelates, and other Persons, commending me for going to kiss their
Highness's hands, to whom, besides their being His Majesty's Children, I owed
so much Service: So that, had I been going to serve the King of France, I could
not have made more Complements, nor have begged leave more earnestly. I
returned to Trent again in Eight days, and having accompanied their Highnesses
to Bolson, was commanded by the King to officiate to him at Christmas, which I
did, and returned to Trent again before New-years-day, to the first
Congregation: Neither was I ever absent from so much as one Congregation, from
the time the Council made me a Deputy; at which I have several times assisted
Eight hours together to serve God, and His Majesty; in recompense for all which
trouble, and for having served their Highnesses, I have an angry Letter sent me
by His Majesty, on Account of that absence, blaming me equally with the rest of
the Prelates, that have been absent: Who ever he was that gave this information
to His Majesty, must have had a strong inclination for to have me condemned,
having forgot to tell, that he gave me leave, and that I went to serve His
Majesty's Children, and that I have never once been absent.

My Lord, I know very well, from whence all this comes, and that it can be from
none but the Ambassador, who is jealous of my having advised His Majesty of
what has been done here about Benefices, and some other things;
notwithstanding, I never wrote any thing to his prejudice, neither indeed could
I do it. I am nevertheless sensible, that let me do never so much Service, His
Majesty shall never hear of it; whereas, if I should commit any fault, I must
never be pardoned for it; all this I suffer in prudence, which, without it, I
should not be able to endure.

I have supplicated His Majesty to order your most Reverend Lordship, to
command an information to be taken, whether I did not publicly ask leave of
the Ambassador, to kiss the King, and Queen of Bohemia's Hands, and whether he
did not grant it me, and whether I have taken any pains here, or done any
service, or whether I have been so much as once faulty, of which when His
Majesty shall come to be informed, he will be sensible, how ill a thing he did,
who said, I have nothing else to write, but that three of the Prelates are
absent, without telling how, or for what, and that on purpose to make His
Majesty angry with me. Besides, I being so much your most Reverend Lordship's
Servant, have cause to complain of your Lordship likewise, for your having
consented to my having been thus affronted in the middle of a Council, and that
to me who deserved favors and thanks, an angry Letter from His Majesty should
be delivered instead of them, for it would have been just to have known first
what I had to say for my self.

I must desire your most Reverend Lordship, to acquaint His Majesty with my
being certain, that Don Francisco de Toledo is none of my friend, though for no
other reason that I can think of; but because he cannot endure, that any Person
besides himself, should advise His Majesty of any thing.

I shall likewise esteem it a great Favor, if your most Reverend Lordship
would let me know how I must behave my self, in the way we are treated by the
Ambassador; who, whenever he pleases commands us to go to his House, and to
accompany him thither on foot. On which occasions he walks before, and the
Prelates follow him in the Crowd of his Pages and Servants, and as it does not
look very well to see a Company of Ancient Prelates, as it were dragged along
by his Livery-men, so it is inconvenient likewise in seeming to lessen the
Liberty and Authority of the Prelates; not but that if I were sure it were for
His Majesty's Service, I would be ready to do it upon my Knees, but if it is
not, I desire your most Reverend Lordship to let me know so much. Our Lord
preserve your most Illustrious Lordship's most Reverend Person, and increase
your State.

Most Illustrious Lord, I do kiss Your most Reverend Hands. Your Servant, The
Bishop of Oren.
From Trent the 20th of January, 1552.
Tractatus a Doctore Varga conscriptus contra Clausulam perniciosam a Legato in
Doctrinam Ordinis intrusa meditus e Manuscripto.
IN Doctrina de Sacramento Ordinis, cap. 3. displicet nobis vehementer illa
Clausula: Nam ut illa sub uno supremo rectore varios and diversos ministrantium
continet ordines, ita visibilis Christi Ecclesia summum ipsius vicarium, pro
unico and supremo capite in terris habet, cujus dispensatione sic reliquis
omnibus membris officia distribuuntur ut suis quaeque in ordinibus and
stationibus collocata munera sua, in totius Ecclesiae utilitatem, cum maxima
pace and unione, exequantur.

Primum quod cum de Christo dixerit, sub uno supremo Rectore, de vicario ipsius
dicit, unicum and supremum caput; quibus verbis plus aliquid tribuitur vicario
in terris, quam ipsi Christo in coelis; majus nempe est esse unicum quam esse
unum; esse unicum and supremum, quam esse unum supremum; esse caput, quam esse
Rectorem. Deinde quoniam falsum est, summum Pontificem esse unicum caput,
quemadmodum enim omnes Apostoli erant capita Ecclesiarum; ita and Apostolorum
successores, licet summus Pontifex caput sit. Sic Amos 6. dicuntur optimates
capita Populorum, sub uno tamen summo capite.

Praeterea cum hoc capite agatur de Hierarchia Ecclesiastica, multo aptius
diceretur vicarius Christi hoc loco, supremus Ecclesiae Rector, aut Hierarcha
quam caput: sic enim and Metaphoram fugimus, quod in Doctrina quoad ejus fieri
potest servandum est; and totius comparationis decorum servamus, dum sequentia
antecedentibus quadrant.

Praeterea illud gravius est quod subjungitur; cujus dispensatione, etc.
laeditur namque imprimis, Ecclesiae jus, nam and tempore Schismatis quando
Concilium congregatum, existentibus variis and ambiguis Pontificibus, potest
ipsum Concilium divino jure omnia Ecclesiae officia providere, praesertim quae
fuerint necessaria ad pacem Ecclesiae componendam; and vacant etiam sede si
oporteret aliquod Ecclesiae officium inteterea provideri sine dubio dispensatio
summi Pontificis non expectaretur.

Laeditur quoque Episcoporum jus ad quorum providentiam usque ab Apostolis,
minorum officiorum dispensatio pertinuit, inconsulto and Romano Pontifice.
Laeditur tandem jus patronatus omnium Laicorum and principum, and magistratuum
secularium, qui, si eorum officiorum quorum sunt patroni dispensatio and
distributio ad summum Pontificem, jure divino pertineret, co-argui possent,
quasi in divina jura irrupissent, si inconsulto Romano Pontifice, unum
quodlibet in Ecclesia officium dispensarent; itaque in Concilio quod paratur ad
Schismata and Scandala Ecclesiae tollenda, non debet Doctrina tradi, quae
etiamsi vera esset, apperit manifestam viam, ut nova Schismata, and scandala
oriantur.

Add huc, quod cum haec clausula quasi de facto loquatur; videtur probare usum
quotidianum in officiis distribuendis, quem emendatiorem Ecclesia Dei hodie
desiderat.

Postremo si ingenue fateri volumus, quod verum est, nec de facto nec de jure,
dispensatione Romani Pontificis omnibus membris officia distribuuntur; non de
facto quidem, quum manifestissime constat, multa Ecclesiae officia legitime per
alios quam per summum Pontificem administrari; de jure vero ante omnia
exploratum est, quod retro diximus, post Apostolos multo tempore optimo jure
sine summo Pontifice, non officia minora modo, verum and majora fuisse
administrata; nec damnari potest antiquitas, tanquam Romani Pontificis
potestatem usurpaverit. Item cum haec causa inter Episcopos and summum
Pontificem fuerit aliquando controversa, nonnulli menses ex Conventione
Episcopis contigerunt; in quibus si officia Ecclesiastica distribuant, jure suo
utuntur. Falso igitur Doctrina traderet, omnibus Ecclesiae membris
dispensatione Romani Pontificis officia distribui: Praeterquam quod potestas
vicario a Christo collata, in edificationem est, non in destructionem pro
ratione and Evangelio, non contra rationem, and Evangelium; fieri autem non
potest ut unus summus Pontifex omnibus membris ubique in toto Orb, officia sua
recte and convenienter distribuat: nullo igitur pacto credendum est a Christo
accepisse potestatem quam rite and ad Ecclesiae utilitatem administrare non
potest; accepit nempe claves regni coelorum; quare ea poterit quae regnum
coelorum apperiunt, at non ea quae regnum coelorum claudunt?

Ejusdem propemodum farinae est illa altera clausula in eodem capite; postremo,
insigniter desipiunt and Dei regulas confundunt, etc. and illa item, inferiorum
haec divina potestas ad eos potius divina institutione spectare videatur, etc.
quo Doctrina omne jus patronatus aboletur quorumcunque principum and aliorum
Laicorum: Deinde jus Ecclesiarum eligendi sibi praelatos, and alia officia
multa tollitur.

Quo tamen jure olim Universae Ecclesiae fruebantur: Et nunc etiam aliquae
utuntur. Non itaque ad Episcopos hujusmodi electio aut nominatio divino jure
pertinet, nec eminenter ad summum Pontificem Quod si diceretur, Confirmatio
electionis ad Episcopos and summum Pontificem spectare res haberet
probabilitatem quandam; sed quod electio and nominatio divina institutione
pertineat ad Episcopos and summum Pontificem, ne verisimile quidem est.

Sunt autem praeter has aliae Causae, propter quas cum haec tum illa superior
clausula sit expungenda; prima Causa est, quod hujusmodi doctrina, quae
videlicet in his clausulis traditur est importuna tempori in quo de recipiendis
Lutheranis Ecclesia angitur, and parturit donec si fieri potest reformetur
Christus in illis, nulla autem doctrina a Concilio prodire posset, quae eorum
animos magis abalienaret, nec ulla alia est, quae illis plures occasiones and
calumniandi and obloquendi suppeditaret. Itaque abstinendum est in praesentia
ab ea doctrina quae cum maxim invidiosa Lutheranis, sic minime Catholicis est
necessaria.

Secunda causa est, quod illa doctrina est importuna loco, cum enim duplex sit
in Ecclesia potestas, altera ordinis, altera Jurisdictionis, Hierarchia quidem
quae ex diversa ordinis potestate constituitur hujus loci propria est, ubi de
ordinis Sacramento agitur; illa vero Jurisdictionis suum locum habet; nempe
tunc cum de Ecclesiae potestate definietur. Id si intelligunt adversarii,
intelligent autem sine dubio, calumniabuntur hujusmodi particulas esse in
doctrina obtrusas and assutas aliunde, industria aut astutia potius humana, a
qua summopere abhorrere debet Christiana simplicitas, quae in doctrina
Catholica populo exhibenda semper a majoribus nostris servata est. Idque eo
magis calumniabuntur adversarii, si in priore illa clausula, considerarint, de
Deo in coelis duo solum esse posita, quibus coelestis Hierarchia constare
videretur: Unum erat quod illa coelestis sub uno supremo rectore ageret;
alterum quod varios and diversos ministrantium ordines contineret: Ratio autem
comparationis postulabat, ut in Ecclesiae Hierarchia quae ad illius exemplar
exacta in terris dicitur, eadem duo explicarentur quae in exemplari sunt
posita; illud autem quod adjicitur, cujus dispensatione omnibus membris, etc.
cum non fuerit in coelesti illa Hierarchia constitutum, videtur esse in terrena
Hierarchia praeter comparationis naturam de industria suppositum. Ita quae de
summi Pontificis potestate and dignitate in reliquis Conciliis habentur, non
existimabuntur esse ex rerum consequentia definita, sed vel adjecta vel intrusa
obiter -- patribus quasi oscitantibus and dormientibus.

Postremo causa est quod utraque res difficilis and perobscura sit, nec omnibus
perspecta and cognita; indignum profecto est ut sine disputatione Theologorum,
and examine, tanquam per insidias Prioribus subgeratur; ut nullo habito
doctorum Theologorum consilio de hisce rebus definiant, quae magna egebant
disquisitione, deliberationeque: Quo fit ut Conciliorum in tradenda doctrina
mirum in modum labefactetur Authoritas, dum hujus Concilii exemplo credentur ea
firmiter credenda populo Christiano proposuisse, quae nec disquisita prius a
Theologis sunt, nec disputata: At testatur Lucas in Actis Apostolorum, factam
esse magnam conquisitionem in Concilio, quando tamen and praesidebat Petrus;
and Paulus, and Jacobus, and Johannes intererant: Quod si Apostoli in re etiam
levi quae illis erat per Revelationem explorata, priusquam definirent,
adhibuerunt disquisitionem non parvam, quam absurdum est, bone Deus, ut
doctrina ingeratur a Concilio in re valde difficile, nulla praecedente doctorum
Theologorum disquisitione?

Tota igitur illa doctrina est de hoc loco tollenda, ut vera esset, at ne vera
quidem est, quantum animi nostri conjectura colligere possumus; nec existimet
quisquam; in Apostolicae sedis invidiam haec dicta esse, illam nempe si qui
maxim veneramur; quinetiam ut hujus sanctissimae sedis dignitatem and
authoritatem tueamur, nimirum quam a Christo jure optimo vendicat, nolumus
quicquam in Ecclesia doceri, quo hujusmodi Authoritas contaminetur:
Contaminatur autem, si aut ementiti, aut certe ambigui humanae potestatis
tituli, cum veris certisque divinis per hominum prudentiam confundantur; igitur
qui illam doctrinam volebat ingerere, Apostolicae dignitatis violator
existimandus est, nos potius defensores.

Tractatus alter ejusdem Vargae contra eandem Clausulam; e Manuscripto editus.
HAEC Doctrina definit multum, quia dum plurimum intenta est in statuenda
Hierarchia, secundum Jurisdictionem* nil statuit in Hierarchia Ecclesiastica ex
part ordinis quae maxim impugnatur ab Haereticis, and vere sacer principatus
(undecunque respiciamus) est; and hoc sufficeret declarare ad confutationem
Haereticorum. Praeterea cum nihil sit disputatum de modo istius Hierarchiae,
quantum ad Jurisdictionem supremae Hierarchiae, nec in canonibus aliquid de eo
discernatur, videtur importune satis hic tractari: Praeterea quod Catholicos
non aedificat haec clausula, and Ecclesiae adversariis multum dabit scandalum,
imo and doctis and piis viris. Quare nec loco, nec tempori videtur servire, imo
multum nocere posset si sic poneretur: Ideo judicio meo supersedendum omnino
esset ab hujusmodi determinatione, tollendamque omnino hanc clausulam censerem,
de qua rectum judicium absque longa and diligenti tractatione sancta Synodus
dare non debet, neque potest; quod si quis intendens in me calumniam, dicat;
quid ergo, tu in dubium revocas summi Pontificis potestatem, quasi res esset
quae novo egeret scrutinio? Absit, imo sentio cum Ecclesia Catholica, esse
Christi, and Petri legitimum successorem, and Ecclesiae praesidentem: Modus
tamen and usus suae potestatis a variis vario modo intelligitur, and quidem
sine fidei Catholicae praejudicio: Illud vero quod in clausula hac dicitur and
affirmatur, ad usum and modum se extendere, and non solum ad statuendam
potestatem, quis non videt: Quare non est, ut dixi, quod sic perfunctorie res
tractetur alioqui gravis, and inter doctores Catholicos controversa; quod ne
quis putet id gratis a me dici, extremis, ut aiunt, digitis, Clausulae sensum
attingam; principio comparatio ista quae fit Dei ad summum Pontificem, in
Hierarchiae principatu ut hic ponitur, multis posset videri immodica, insolens,
and non multum Christiana, nec Evangelica, and ideo quodam modo ingrata Deo
videri possit, qui maximos suae Ecclesiae praesidentes, ministros voluit
nominare and esse; qui major inter vos erit minister, etc. Add quod plus
videtur tribuere summo Pontifici, quam Deo: Nam Deum appellat summum rectorem,
Pontificem autem summum and supremum caput: Imo plus videtur dicere qui dicit
summum caput, quam qui summum rectorem; nam qui capitis nomen tribuit, subinde
tribuere videtur, regimen, influentiam, superioritatem, and absolute
necessariam dependentiam and colligantiam omnium membrorum inferiorum ad ipsum;
qui autem rectorem dicit solum docet superintendentiam and superioritatem; item
cum Christus sit caput supremum Ecclesiae militantis sicut triumphantis, ipse
nempe movet, influit thurismata gratiarum atque donorum in Ecclesia per
spiritum sanctum suum qui in ea praesidet; ipse baptizat, ungit, consecrat,
ordinat, facit Presbyteros and Episcopos, and hanc and visibilem politiam ipse
statuit, quantum ad principaliora sua membra: Attendite vos, inquit Paulus
Episcopis provinciae Ephesinae, Universo gregi vestro, in quo posuit vos
spiritus sanctus, Episcopos, regere Ecclesiam Dei; consequitur Christum
proprie, and vere, and per se, caput unicum and supremum Ecclesiae visibilis
esse, Ephesians. 1. Ipsum dedit caput super omnem Ecclesiam, quae est corpus
ipsius, and plenitudo ejus qui omnia in omnibus adimplet: Si igitur ipse est
supremum caput in Ecclesia militante, quomodo absolute, and sine limitatione,
dici potest quod summus Pontifex habeatur pro uno and supremo capite: Pugnat
nempe pluralitas cum unitate, and duo, and suprema, sine limitatione dici
nequaquam potest, maxim quando comparatio est inter Deum and creaturam, inter
dominum and servum, inter summum Hierarcham and ministrum: Fugienda ergo sunt
illa vocabula, quae in scriptura and sanctis antiquis patribus, non leguntur,
ut scandalo possint esse infirmis and Ecclesiae adversariis, ne sanctum
pontificatus nomen apud vulgus suum magis traducant, quam huc usque
traduxerunt, dicentes pro sui ingenii pervicacia, summum Pontificem cum Christo
de primatu contendere: Praeterea falsum aliquibus valde videtur, quod sicut
Deus praesidet in coelesti Herarchia, ita papa in Ecclesiastica. Nam a Deo sic
dependent omnia, ut si ipse non esset, omnia in nihilum redigerentur, nec
haberent illius Hierarchiae parts esse neque ordinem, eo quod pro arbitrio
ejus, mutari possunt, and si ille volet everti. Ipse dixit and facta sunt, etc.
At non sic in Hierarchia Ecclesiastica, nam papa defuncto, imo licet per tempus
absens existeret, aut seeds vacaret; ordines tamen and thurismata mansissent in
Ecclesia, nec subinde prorsus rueret, and subverteretur Ecclesiastica politia;
add quod pro arbitrio suo subvertere non posset Episcopatum aut Presbyteratum,
ordines in Ecclesia, ex quo a Deo visibiliter status isti sunt constituti; add
etiam quod cum potestas ipsius sit ministerialis, and ad Ecclesiae regimen
externum nec non and ipsius Ecclesiae utilitatem a Deo collata, certis regulis,
certis limitibus, and repagulis debere contineri, nemo qui Evangelium, and
antiquitatem Ecclesiae novit, ignorant. Dedit nempe Deus illi, sicut aliis
Apostolis, potestatem non ad destructionem sed ad aedificationem, ut Apostolus
docet 1 Cor. etc. Ad haec cum secundum multos Catholicos doctores papa
incorrigibilis and Ecclesiae manifestus dilapidator est, corrigi possit, and in
contumacia ab ipsa Ecclesia and Synodo generali deponi; quomodo in regimine sic
indistincte comparari Deo potest, cum ille idem ipse sit, and anni ejus non
deficiunt, nec est qui possit ei in sua Hierarchia resistere; hic vero possit
ab hominibus in disciplina contineri: Et quod propter Haeresim hoc possit
fieri, ab omnibus asseritur Theologis, tandem a sua Hierarchia judicatur, quae
haec statuit, and in eum exequi jure possit.

Praeterea, cum casu mortis, aut longae absentiae papae aut schismatis, Synodus
generalis illa potestate quam immediate a Deo habet creaverit Episcopos,
deposuerit, ordines and alia officia distribuerit, uti in Concilio
Chalcedonensi, and Constantiensi, and aliis generalibus Synodis, and
provincialibus etiam, legimus esse factum; Synodus nempe X Toletana deposuit
Episcopum Bracharensem, etiam Concilium Triburiense deposuit alium; non ergo
tam exact ista dependent a dispensatione summi Pontificis, ut hic ponitur.
Constat quoque ex Ecclesiae antiquitate, juxta generalium Conciliorum antiqua
instituta, in multis provinciis. Episcopos promotos esse cum electione cleri,
and assensu populi, and finitimorum Episcoporum, and maxim Metropolitani,
nullo habito recursu ad primam sedem, ut patet ex Synodo Toletana XII and
orientalibus Ecclesiis antequam vitio Schismatis laborarent, quomodo ergo stare
potest clausula illa, Cujus dispensatione singula officia, etc. Accedit his,
quod licet designatio particularis personae ad Episcopatum fateamur semper ab
eo dependisse, simul cum materiae limitatione prout modo fit, tamen ordo ipse
Episcopatus pariter and potestas and Jurisdictio, eo ipso quod Episcopus
designatur and Ecclesia applicatur a Deo immediate habere, multi docti
affirmant: Quare quod ad tale jus consequitur, etiamnum habebitur, habebit
plane, quamvis subordinatum summo pastori, non quidem ad libitum suum, sed pro
utilitate Ecclesiae moderatum; Episcopus ergo divino jure distribuit officia,
beneficia, ordines in Ecclesia sua, cui praeficitur, postquam praefectus est;
nec potest sine causa jure hoc, quia divinum est, Episcopus abdicare.

Non videtur ergo Clausula illa eo modo quo jacet simpliciter, vera esse; quare
propter haec, quae magis ac magis, si opus fuerit, corroborabuntur, and alia
quae consulto, ut brevitati studeam, omitto, Clausula haec videtur mihi omnino
a Doctrina expungenda; quod si in tantum arridet Hierarchiam Ecclesiasticam,
tum quantum ad ordinem, tum etiam quantum ad Jurisdictionem attinet statuere,
quod mihi etiam valde gratum est, sub hoc tenore videtur mihi posse statui.

Doctrine haec a Varga confecta desideratur.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 64. for conveniences, r. inconveniences. P. 107. for ship, r. sheep. P.
108. for if, r. of. And the Letter of the 25th of January, printed before one
of the 19th, and another of the 20th of the same Month.

Books Printed for B. Aylmer, at the Three Pigeons in Cornhill.
THE Works of the most Reverend Dr. John Tillotson, late Lord Archbishop of
Canterbury, containing Fifty four Sermons and Discourses on several Occasions;
together with the Rule of Faith. Being all that were published by his Grace
himself, and now collected into one Volume: To which is added, an Alphabetical
Table of the Principal Matters. Price 20 s.

The Holy Bible, containing the Old Testament and the New; with Annotations,
and very exact parallel Scriptures. To which is annexed the Harmony of the
Gospels; as also the Reduction of the Jewish Weights, Coins and Measures, to
our English Standards. And a Table of the Promises in Scripture. By Samuel
Clark, Minister of the Gospel. Printed in Folio on a very fair Letter; the like
never before in one Volume. To which is newly added a very exact and useful
Concordance. Price 1 l. 10 s.

The Works of the Learned Isaac Barrow, D. D. late Master of Trinity College
in Cambridge. Published by the Reverend Dr. Tillotson, late Archbishop of
Canterbury. The third Volume. Containing Forty five Sermons, upon several
Occasions.

A brief Exposition of the Apostle's Creed; by the same Author; (Never before
printed, being very different from his Volume of Sermons on it:) to which is
added, his Exposition of the Lord's Prayer, and the Ten Commandments, etc. in
Octavo. Price 4 s. 6 d.

A Defense of the Blessed Trinity. By the same Author. Never before printed,
in Octavo. Price 1 s.

The Four last Things; viz. Death, Judgment, Heaven, and Hell: Practically
considered and applied. By W. Bates, D. D. in Twelves. Price 2 s.

A Seasonable Vindication of the Blessed Trinity. Being an Answer to this
Question, Why do you believe the Doctrine of the Trinity? Collected from the
Works of the most Reverend Dr. John Tillotson, late Lord Archbishop of
Canterbury: And the Right Reverend Dr. Edward Stillingfleet, now Lord Bishop of
Worcester. By W. Asheton, D. D. Price 1 s.


