WISDOM JUSTIFIED Of Her CHILDREN; OR, TWO SERMONS Sometime Preached in
Cockshutt Chapel, in the County of Salop, and lately at Brightling in Sussex,
On MATTHEW. XI. XIX.

And now at the Request of Friends Enlarged, and Published.

By WILLIAM GEARING Minister of the Word.

LONDON, Printed for Henry Eversden under the Crown-Tavern in West Smith-field.

MDCLXVIII.

Unto His much Honored Friends, THOMAS COLLINS OF Socknersh in the County of
SUSSEX. ROBERT CORBET AND THOMAS CORBET OF STANWARDINE in the County of SALOP,
Esquires.

And to the Virtuous Gentlewomen their Wives.

WILLIAM GEARING Dedicateth this ensuing Discourse AS A Public and Perpetual
Testimonial of his Cordial gratitude for their Great Respects Manifested to him.

WISDOM JUSTIFIED OF HER CHILDREN.
MATTHEW. 11.19. But Wisdom is justified of her Children.


CHAP. I.
IN this Parable we may see how far God intends the Salvation of wicked men,
and notwithstanding man's stubborn perverseness against the salvation of his own
soul, God uses all means for man's conversion, mercy and judgment, goodness
and severity; and wicked men make ill constructions of Gods gracious dealings
in matters concerning their own souls.

Let us open our Saviors similitude, both showing and aggravating the
stubbornness of wicked men against him: our Savior calls for diligent
attention, verse. 15. because he is speaking of some weighty matter which
concerns his hearers, he says, He that has ears to hear let him hear. As
the ear is higher than the Tongue; So it is a greater dignity to hear the
wisdom of others, than to vent our own.

In the 16th verse our Savior cries out, But whereunto shall I liken this
generation? By Generation, here understand this kind of men, meaning the
Scribes, Pharisees, and other stubborn Jews, who rejected the Counsel of God
against themselves, Luke 7.29. Gods Counsel and purpose is to save man by
Christ, but they rejected the Counsel of God, and sought salvation by the
righteousness of the Law: our Savior answers himself in the next words, It
is like unto Children sitting in the markets, and calling to their fellows, and
saying, we have piped unto you, and ye have not danced, we have mourned unto
you, and ye have not lamented: here is the Comparison it self.

I. Some think this was a play among the Hebrews, invented for the instruction
of Children in point of manners. Children were to divide themselves into two
Companies; the one side were pleasant and Musical, Piping and Dancing, as if
they were Celebrating a Marriage-day: The other Company were Mourning, Singing
sad Elegies and doleful Ditties, as those that Solemnized a sad Funeral of some
departed Friend: and among these Children there were some Peevish and froward
Mopes that did Cross and hinder their play, nothing could give them content:
when they were Piping and Dancing, and making some Pleasant Pastime, they were
not pleased with them, but were Peevish and Froward, crossing them in their
Play. The end of this Pastime was to show unto them.

1. The inconstancy and mutability of this world; how sometimes men are in a
pleasant condition, all things fall and go well with them, and then they Pipe
and Dance for joy: anon they have cause to mourn, things go ill with them, then
they weep and are sad -- or

2. To show the diverse condition of men in this world: some are altogether
pursued with troubles in this life, and spend their days in Mourning and
Weepping and daily Vexation: others are laden with this worlds goods, and they
spend their days in Mirth and Jollity. This is the opinion of some Expositors.
But,

II. Others think there was no such play among the Hebrew Children, but that
this is spoken here as an allusive supposition of such a Play among Children.
As if Christ should have said. This generation is, as if Boys should Sing, Pipe
and Dance, Mourn and Weep, and some froward Children are not affected with
them, do they what they can to please them.

In verse. 18. Our Savior makes application of this to the stubborn Scribes and
Pharisees, For John came neither eating nor drinking, and they say he has a
Devil; the son of man came eating and drinking, and they say, Behold a man
gluttonous, and a Wine-bibber, a Friend of Publicans and Sinners,

John came neither eating nor drinking. 1. John did not live an ordinary vulgar
life, but an extraordinary, peculiar, austere kind of life; he separated
himself from all humane society, he lived not in Towns and Cities, but in a
solitary Desert.

2. His meat, drink, and apparel was different from others: he was not gaudy in
his apparel; he wore not costly raiment, nor drank he wine out of Bowls, as
those that are in Prince's Courts: but his Clothing was made of Camels hair,
and he was girded with a Linnen-girdle, and his best cheer was Locusts and Wild
honey.

3. John's Preaching was very harsh and severe; he was not a son of
Consolation, but a Son of Thunder, crying out to the Pharisees and Sadduces, O
generation of vipers, who has warned you to flee from wrath to come, etc. Now
the ax is laid to the root of the trees: therefore every tree which brings
not forth good fruit, is hewn down, and cast into the fire, Matt. 3.7, 10. If
ye be fruitless hearers of the word, God will cut you down, and cast you into
hell fire: if ye repent not, ye are damned, the wrath of God is coming upon
you, there is no hope for you, O Generation of Vipers! In this John is compared
to the Children that mourned. Now see what effect it wrought in the hearts of
the Pharisees: did this generation lament at John's Preaching? No, his course
of life, and manner of Preaching did not at all please them. They thought him
to be a Madman, a Doctor of despair, a Damnation-preacher, sending all to hell
to whom he preached: for Though John came neither eating nor drinking, they say
of him, he has a Devil. O the blasphemy and perverseness of these wicked
miscreants! they thought so.

1. Either because his manner of living was so uncouth in solitary places, as
men that were possessed with Devils would live in wildernesses, or among graves
and burial-places -- or,

2. Because the Scribes and Pharisees doubted whether John and his Doctrine
were from God or the Devil: they perversely would say the worst -- or,

3. Because he was so rigid and terrible in reproving sin: he thundered against
sin in his Sermons in such a manner, that they took him to be no other than a
mad man.

The Son of man came eating and drinking. Our Savior compares himself to the
Children that did pipe and dance, verse. 19. The Son of man came eating and
drinking. (1) Christ's manner of life and conversation was a pleasant, sweet,
familiar, ordinary course, so as not approving, hardening or heartening men in
sin: he differed from John in these things.

1. Christ did not shun the Society of men; yea, not the worst kind of men
among the Jews, even the Publicans and Sinners, he did eat and drink among them.

2. His food and apparel was as the ordinary sort of peoples was: he went to a
feast at Matthew's house, and dined with Simon the Pharisee, he went also to a
marriage at Cana in Galilee, at which feasts men are most merry.

3. Christ did much differ from John in his Preaching and reproving sin. The
Son of man was a Son of consolation, I am come, says he, to save sinners, to
seek and save that which was lost. Son be of good cheer, thy sins are forgiven
thee. He came to preach mercy, righteousness and salvation, to allure, and with
a gentle hand to draw men from sin to holiness; likewise in his reproofs he was
more mild and sweet than John was, he had mild severity in his reprehensions:
this was Christ's piping and dancing, his sweet and gracious way to win men to
himself. But did the Scribes and Pharisees dance after Christ's pipe? See how
blasphemously they miscalled him, they say, Behold a man gluttonous, a
Wine-bibber a Friend of Publicans and sinners, (1) Such a one as did allow men
in such riotous courses, a soothing flatterer of ungodly men; for so the word [
Friend] is here to be understood, a Friend of Publicans and sinners.

CHAP. II. From hence I shall draw diverse conclusions.
1 THat Christ uses diverse means, and works after diverse manners to convert
and save untoward, stubborn, perverse sinners; he pipeth and danceth, this is
for mercy, he has compassion on us under our miseries and sinful infirmities:
he mourns and lamenteth, and denounces judgments against the obstinate
sinner: sometimes he makes use of the whip of the Law, as Christ came into the
Temple with Whip-cords: Sometimes he strives to allure and draw men with the
cords of Love; he becomes all things to us; he does apply himself as it were
to the crooked conditions of stubborn sinners to draw them to himself.

2. Hence ye may note the variety of gifts in Ministers for the conversion and
edification of men. Some are Boanerges, like John Baptist; some Barnabas's,
like Jesus, and both for the Salvation of men's souls. As God did furnish
Bezaleel and Aholiab with skill and wisdom for the building of the material
Temple. Exodus 35.30, etc. So likewise in raising up Instruments for the service
of his Church, he furnishes men with diversities of gifts for the same, for
the perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the Ministry, and for the
edifying of the body of Christ.

3. Note the horrible perverseness of men in making ill constructions of Gods
using various means for their good: they disgrace the preaching of the Law, and
abuse the preaching of the Gospel, and so by their own wilful corruption do
more ensnare themselves in their infidelity and impenitency; therefore wicked
men shall be their own judges, how just God is in their damnation, and they
left inexcusable. I come now to the words of the Text. But wisdom is justified
of her children. As if he should have said; neitheir John's mourning nor piping
is altogether in vain, though the Scribes in their obstinacy reject the wisdom
of God, and will neither dance nor mourn: Though wicked men stubbornly defame
and disgrace Christ in his truth and ordinances, and bring up an evil report
upon the ways of Religion and Holiness; yet there are some poor Publicans and
sinners that dance after Christ's piping, and lament after John's mourning,
such as receive and entertain wisdom, that stand for Religion, that justify
God in his truths, and ordinances by faith and obedience, Wisdom is justified
of her Children.

CHAP. III.
SECT. I. The main conclusion which I shall draw from these words, and which I
shall insistion, is this,
THat there are some that justify wisdom in the worst of times. 1. What is
meant by Wisdom. 2. What by Justifying. 3. Who are the Children of Wisdom.


I. We are to enquire what is here meant by Wisdom.

1. By wisdom some understand Divine Providence: it is confessed that the
Wisdom of God is admirable in all his Providential Transactions: but no ground
appears from the context, that this can be the meaning of Wisdom in this
place.

2. By Wisdom some understand Christ himself, who is called the Wisdom of the
Father, and in whom are hid all the treasures of Wisdom, Colos. 2.3. The
Scribes and Pharisees looked upon Christ as an unlearned man, as a simple
Carpenters Son: believers looked on him as their treasure of Wisdom, they
embraced him as the Messiah.

3. By wisdom some understand God's purpose and Counsel of saving man by Jesus
Christ, and this is called the Wisdom of God, 1 Cor. 2.6. Howbeit we speak
Wisdom among them that are perfect, etc. We speak the Wisdom of God in a
Mystery, even the hidden Wisdom, which God ordained before the world unto our
glory, verse. 7. None but the Infinite Wisdom of God could find out this way for
the Salvation of Mankind.

4. Others by Wisdom understand true Religion, the external means of Salvation,
and of Faith in Christ, as the Preaching of the Gospel, the use of the
Sacraments, and all the ways and courses which God uses for the conversion of
men to Christ, as the preaching of the Law, the preaching of the Gospel, etc.
Some men are pleased in having the terrors of the Law preached to them,
therefore he provideth a John to preach that, and he must mourn: others are
pleased with the preaching of mercy, of Free Grace; therefore God sent his Son.
Some are are pleased with an austere life, God therefore gave austerity of life
to John: others again delight in popularity and familiar converse: Christ is
very affable and familiar. God sets up mourning, set up dancing, and both to
bring men to Repentance. That you may see this is the meaning of wisdom in this
place consult, Luke 7.29. And all the people that heard Christ, and the
Publicans, justified God, being baptized with the baptism of John, verse. 30.
But the Pharisees and Lawyers rejected the Counsel of God against themselves,
being not baptized of him, They rejected (...), the Counsel of God determining
to save by his Word and Ordinances: and then follows this very Parable and
similitude mentioned before my Text in Matthew. And the Lord said, Whereunto
shall I liken the men of this generation? and to what are they like? They are
like unto Children sitting in the market place, and calling one to another, and
saying, we have piped unto you, and ye have not danced; we have mourned to you,
and ye have not wept: for John the Baptist came neither eating bread, nor
drinking wine, and ye say he has a Devil. The Son of man is come eating and
drinking, and ye say, Behold a Gluttonous man, and a Wine-bibber, a friend of
Publicans and sinners: But Wisdom is justified of her Children. The Scribes and
Pharisees rejected the external means of salvation, counted the preaching of
Christ foolishness, would not be baptized; but many Publicans and sinners
repented at John's preaching, believed Christ and his Doctrine: so that the
several ways that God takes to bring men to Christ, is meant by wisdom in this
place.

SECT. II.
II. We are to enquire what is meant by justifying? Wisdom is justified, etc.

1. Justification is taken sometimes for Commendation: Wisdom is justified, (1)
It is highly admired, commended, praised. Godly men do highly commend and
praise God in this way of Salvation through faith in Christ: the Saints do
admire God's Wisdom in contriving such an effectual way of saving mankind: in
contriving a means to satisfy offended justice by an infinite and plenary
sarisfaction, and yet manifest his Free Grace, Love and Mercy. Mavelous in
the eyes of Saints is Gods Wisdom, Love, goodness, Justice, Mercy in Christ.
The Phasees slighted this Wisdom of God, called it Heresy, and the Greeks
called it foolishness; but believers cry out, O the depth of God's Wisdom in
the Gospel!

2. Others understand the word [ justified] thus, it is received by the godly,
and approved as the only safe way to salvation. No other Jacob's ladder to
climb up into the third heaven by, nor door to truth, life and righteousness,
but Jesus Christ set forth in the Gospel. Believers do with joy dance after
Christ's piping, and lament when John mourns, though the wicked Pharisees
reject Christ's righteousness, and the preaching of the Gospel, as things unable
to salvation.

3. To be justified is to be cleared from all false imputations: what
blasphemous imputations did the malicious Pharisees lay and fasten upon Christ?
A Wine-bibber, a Glutton, a Friend of Publicans and sinners, a Samaritane, a
Devil, an ignorant Carpenters son. So Chrysostom and others do interpret the
words thus: seeing the Wisdom of God tries all ways, and neglects no means
conducing to the conversion of sinners, he tries by mourning, tries by
dancing, he tries by preaching terror, he tries by preaching free grace and
mercy, he tries by love, he tries by severity; he tries by promises, by
threatenings, by denouncing woes and curses, and yet men remain obstinate and
impenitent Rebels against the Counsel of God: the wisdom of God is now
justified, (1) Is absolved, is altogether excusable, and free from their
detractions and false imputations, their eternal perishing is from their own
stubbornness. So to this very day, how do profane men lay upon Religion, and
the holiness of Christ shining in the conversations of the godly, false,
bitter, and scandalous crimes and imputations? yet true believers do free
Christ, Religion and Holiness from these calumniations. Though they account
Religion to be a Moopish and Foolish thing, and call holiness preciseness,
indiscretion, overmuch strictness, yet the godly will justify Religion to be
an excellent thing, and say that Wisdom is the principal thing, Prove. 4.7.
Though the Pharisees disgrace Christ, and call him the Carpenters son, yet
Peter will justify him to be the Son of the living God: They call him Glutton,
Wine-bibber, Devil, but the Saints will justify him to be the holy One of God,
the Lamb of God without spot, to be undefiled, separate from sinners, to be the
God of Gods, and King of Kings.

4. To justify in our common phrase, is to maintain what a man speaks or does;
A man uses to say, I will justify my words and actions: so godly men will
plead for wisdom, stand to Christ and his ways, and will maintain Religion
against all oppositions, and contradictions.

SECT. III.
3. Who are meant by the children of wisdom?

It is an Hebraism: by children of wisdom are meant wise men, godly men. As in
Scripture by children of disobedience are meant disobedient persons, wicked and
ungodly men; so by children of wisdom, thosse that are truly wise, every godly
man, every man in Christ will justify the wisdom of God in Christ, justify
Religion, justify God in his ordinances, truth and holiness.

This point may be strongly proved from Scripture. See with what an undaunted
courage Peter and John did justify Christ before all the Jews, both Rulers and
people, who had charged them not to mention the name of Christ, Act. 4.10, 11,
12. Be it known unto you all, and to all the people of Israel, that by the name
of Jesus Christ of Nazareth, whom ye Crucified, whom God raised from the dead,
even by him does this man stand before you whole. This is the stone which was
set at naught by you builders, which is become the head of the Corner. Neither
is there salvation in any other; for there is no other name under heaven given
among men whereby we must be saved, and verse. 20. We cannot but speak the
things which we have seen and heard. We are Resolved to do it, we cannot but do
it. The profession of Christ and his Gospel was accounted Heresy, and
believers were accounted factious and schismatical, yet S. Paul would justify
it to be the only way and worship of God: for thus says he to Felix, Act.
24.14. after the way which they call Heresy, worship I the God of my Fathers.
What holy resolution had the three noble children in the cause of God's
worship: A stately Idol is advanced by Nebuchadnezzar, and All are commanded to
worship this dead stock, solemn Proclamation is made to this purpose: hereupon
come in a company of Informers, such as are ready on all occasions to do the
Devil service, they come and accuse the Jews, verse. 9. They come in a
flattering way, O King live for ever, and verse. 12. There are certain Jews,
whom thou have set over the affairs of the Province of Babylon, Shadrach,
Meshech, and Abednego; These men O King, have not regarded thee, they serve not
thy Gods, nor worship the golden Image which thou have set up. As who should
say, under correction, your Majesty is mistaken in setting these men in such an
eminent place, and they are very unthankful for this preferment: These men O
King, regard not thee, nor worship thy Gods. Hereupon they are called to
examination, and the King himself takes cognizance of the cause, verse. 13. Then
Nebuchadnezzar in his rage and fury (which is no fit qualification for a Judge
or Ruler) calls for them to be brought before him; and then puts them to
interrogatories, verse. 14. Is it true, O Shadrach, Meshech and Abednego? Do ye
not serve my Gods, etc. Now if ye be ready, that at what time ye hear the sound
of the Cornet, Lute Harp, etc. ye fall down and worship the Image that I have
made, well: but if ye worship not, ye shall be cast the same hour into the
midst of a fiery furnace: and who is that God that shall deliver you out of my
hand? Martial Law! He speaks thus in effect, Have you any God greater than my
Gods? and seems to rely more upon his own strength than upon the strength of
his Gods: therefore he says, who shall deliver you out of my hand? he was
puffed up with his many great victories, that he is forgetful both of God and
man But see their answer, v. 16.17. They answered and said to the King, O King
we are not careful to answer thee in this matter. If it ^e so^our God whom we
serve is able to deliver us from the burning fiery furnace: and he will deliver
us out of thy hand O King, but if not, be it known unto thee O King, we will
not serve thy Gods, nor worship thy golden Image which thou have set up: as if
they had sa^d, we know the worst of it, it is death, and we are ^o^ sollic^tons
to avoid the penalty of this Law, we are not careful to answer thee in this
matter: this is the preface or exordium. The substance of their answer
consists in two things. 1. Their submission to the will of God for their
deliverance from the fiery furnace, wherein they assert the power of God. who
was able to do it, verse. 17. In answer to the King, who said, who is able to
deliver out of my hand? If it be so. 2. Their full resolution, notwithstanding,
though God in his wisdom should see it meet not to deliver them, yet to keep
close to God, not to fall into so fowl a sin, though they were thrown into a
fiery furnace. Be it known unto thee, O King, we will not Worship thy Gods,
etc. So Daniel would justify God in his Worship in the most stormy times, who
with a most holy resolution opposed the Kings Decree, the malice of the Nobles,
and the severity of the Kings punishment, all these could not draw him from
praying to his God, Dan. 6.10. When there was great dispute who Christ should
be, and some said, John Baptist, others Elias, others Jeremias, others one of
the Old Prophets, Peter resolves the doubt, Thou art Christ, the son of the
living God, Matthew. 16.14, 16. As men at this day: some say the holiness of
Christ is niceness; others preciseness, others faction; others Singularity: but
what do the children of wisdom say? it is the life of the Son of God.

CHAP. IV. In the prosecution of this point I will first show how men are said
to justify wisdom.
1. LEt us consider how we justify God in Christ, take it in that acception.

1. When we adore, and to astonishment admire the unsearchable wisdom of God,
in the contrivance of the way of Salvation in and by Christ, discovered in the
gospel. Gods wisdom is admirable in all his works, in his creatures, O Lord,
how manifold are thy works, in wisdom have thou made them all! Psalm 104.24. In
the formation of man in the womb of his mother, in all his providential courses
there are unsearchable depths of wisdom: but now in contriving of man's
Salvation by Christ, this is the choicest part of Gods wisdom: the Apostle
cries, O the depth! S. Paul cries out, Great is the Mystery of Godliness, God
manifest in the flesh, (...)
etc. The Angels admire this manifold wisdom of God, they desire to peep or pry
into it, 1 Pet. 1.12. None but infinite wisdom could find out such a course as
could non plus men and Angels; a way for the satisfaction of infinite justice,
and yet for the glorifying of infinite mercy: here is infinite merit, yet
infinite free grace.

2. We justify Christ the wisdom of the Father, when we take him to be the
Lord our Righteousness, denying the best things in our selves. Herein the
Pharisees and moral men reject Christ, and the children of wisdom embrace him.
S. Paul by his own confession, Phil. 3.7, 8. was a Singular Pharisee, touching
the righteousness of the Law blameless: yet he willingly threw away the mantle
of his legal obedience, and wr^pt himself up ^n^ the garments of Christ's
righteousness. Christ without good works justifies believers, the righteousnest
which is by faith, not that which is by the Law. A man trusting to his good
works, is like a naked body wrapped up ^n a net, where every one may plainly see
his Nakedness. God sees the nakedness of Pharisees through their praying and
fasting, and Almsgiving: to trust to any thing but to God in Christ, is to
deny, not to justify wisdom; it is to patch up salvation, to put an old piece
to new garments, and so make the rent the worse. How many ways do Papists
reject, not justify Christ? all their distr^ctions cannot salve it: to run to
other sacrifices, and not to rest in Christ's Sacrifice, this is not to justify
Christ: to run to the Saints, and not to Christ, is not to justify Christ, but
to deny him to be the only Mediator to Intercession: to make a conjunction
between Christ's merits and ours, that he must do a part, and we must merit the
rest, this is not to justify Christ as a perfect Redeemer; this is to deny
Christ to be the only way to life eternal, and the only door at which the
righteous enter in; We may join to these, moral men, that content themselves
with a negative holiness, and empty heartless duties, who have (as Luther
speaks) a Pope in their belly, and go no farther for Righteonsness and
Salvation than their own duties: this is to deny Christ, not to justify him;
such men make a Christ of all their performances, of their outward restrained
holiness, and (put all together) make a justifying Christ of these menstruous
rags. But the children of Wisdom cry out, None but Christ's Righteousness. As
the spirit answered the Exorcists commanding them to come sorth, Jesus I know
and Paul I know, but who are ye? Act. 19.15. So do all the children of wisdom
say in point of justification, Jesus I know, and his righteousness I know, but
as for duties, good works and merits, who are ye? Remember this, that our
Savior only, not our obedience, can enable us to stand before the justice of
God: the Children of Wisdom cry out to Christ, To wh^m shall we go? Thou have
the words of Eternal Life.

3. When we yield to Christ our entire obedience, this is to justify Wisdom:
We then justify him to be a King, and set him upon the throne of D vid his
Father, as it is Psalm. 2.12. Kiss the son, lest he be angry: by our submissive
Kiss of Faith, Obedience and Love, we acknowledge Christ to be the Son of God,
and King of his people. When Great Emperors and Noble Kings held Popes
Styrrups, and kissed the Popes Feet in token of Obedience unto his Unholy
Holiness, they then Professed Obedience to Antichrist, and exalted him in the
place of God. Then do we set up Christ in his own place, when Kings, Elders and
People, do cast down their Crowns before the throne, saying, Thou art worthy, O
Lord, to receive Honor, and Glory, and Power, Rev. 4.12. There are two things
in it, first, their professed Subjection to Christ, in ascribing to him his
tribute of Glory and Honor. 2. Their justification of Christ, Thou art worthy
O Lord, of all Glory, etc. This is more than the Pharisees would do, they would
not kiss the Son of God, but blasphemed him, opposed him, and derided at him.
The Jews made him a King but it was in mockery, when they put upon him a purple
robe, and a reed into his hand; neither would they throw down their
righteousness before him, thinking Christ not worthy of their tribute. So unto
this day, all impenitent sinners do rebel against the Crown and Dignity of
Jesus Christ, they will not Subject themselves to Christ's Scepter, and the
Government of his Spirit according to his word, they will be lawless, and live
as they list, they will not vouchsafe to throw down the weapons of Sin, Pride,
Drunkenness, Uncleanness, etc. and their stubborn wills and unruly affections;
Jesus Christ in the judgment of an ungodly world is not worthy of these
things; so all ungodly men do deny to justify Christ the King of Kings. The
Centurions Servants justify and acknowledged him their Lord by their willing
obedience to his quick commands, when he said come, they come; go, they go, do
this, and they do it: So the Children of wisdom do justify Christ in yielding
cheerful obed^ence to him in all his commands: when he says do this or that
duty, they do it: when he says, Abstain from this or that sin, no temptation
can easily withdraw them. Thus the Spirit of Christ is the intelligentia
movens, as Aristotle speaks of Angels, whirling about the Sphere of their daily
conversation. When we obey Christ, we put a Kingly Crown upon his head, in
suffering him to rule us, to subdue our hearts unto him, and do not cherish any
contrary motions to his Spirit, when we will not go against his Spirit, and his
Word, as Balaam said to Balak, Though he would give me his house full of silver
and gold, I cannot go beyond the Commandment of my God, to do less or more.

CHAP. V. II. Let us consider Wisd^m in another acception, understanding
there^y Holiness, Religion the truths and Ordinances of Christ, and so the
Children of Wisdom do justisie Wisdom.
1 WHen their love to Religion, Truth and Holiness brings them out of love with
the world, when their embracement of these things divorceth their hearts from
all outward things for Christ and for his Truth and Religion sake. By our
Self-denial we justify wisdom to be the principal thing, to be more worth than
all the world, to be better than Riches, Honors, the Favors of great Persons,
Pleasures, and all worldly preferments, that Christ is the only gain,
accounting all these things below to be but dross and dung. When the Children
of Wisdom can willingly suffer the loss of Riches, Liberty, Preserment, Life
and all they have for Religion, for Christ, for a good cause and a good
conscience, then do they justify to all the world that these things are dearer
to them than their own sives, our sufferings for Religion is our Magnifying of
it; to be condemned for righteousness sake is to justify righteousness:
suffering Christians are the Honor of Religion, and the glory of Christ. Thus
Moses justified wisdom; he parted with the best things that Egypt could give,
and contented himself with the worst condition of the Israelites: this shows
that he justified Christ to be better, yea, the sufferings and reproaches of
Christ to be better than all the treasures of Egypt. The Pharisees would not
thus justify Christ; self-denial, and their popular outward Pharisaical
holiness could not stand together: it is said of them that they loved the
praise of men more than the praise of God, and so would not be Disciples of
Christ, as if it had been dishonorable for them: as Salvian in his time
complained long agone, Siquis ex nobilitate converti ad deum coeperit, statim
honorem nobilitatis amitteret: Religion makes men ignoble, and base in the
worlds eye. So again it is spoken of the Pharisees, that they durst not openly
to profess Christ, lest they were cast out of the Synagogue, they durst not
justify Christ. So still, in all generations too many earthly men do justify
and have applauded the world above Religion and Holiness, but yet still wisdom
ha^h been justified of all her Children.

2. When we stick to Religion, to the Worship and Service of God, then do we
justify wisdom: when we resolve to serve God in his own way; let all commands
and threats affront us, yet then will we stick to Gods testimonies, and to the
pure worship of God. Thus Daniel stuck to Gods Service against the decree of
the King that contained a months Atheism in it. Dan. 6.7. He had rather be
torn asunder with a whole Den of Lions, than be drawn to worship a man in stead
of God: he would pray three times in a day to his God, though the King, whose
Favorite he was, would cast him out of favor, and all the Princes and
Presidents soug^^ thereby to ensnare him. Though the wicked mock such as hear
the word, pray, and perform all the parts of Gods worship more frequently than
themselves, yet the Children of wisdom will justify ^t; rejoicing as the
Psalmist speaks of the Sun, to run their course daily of Gods Service: the
children of wisdom are not like some Seamen, that boast they can sail with all
winds; they can do nothing against the truth, they like wisdom best, though it
does not always se^ve their own ends and occasions, they hold on in the way of
Religion, as a Traveller riding in earnest business, that must go on in his
way, whether fair or foul, in company or alone: go they must, yea, run whom
Christ draws; and in that way they fear no Lions, nor to be slain in the
Streets, because they hold it needful that they go, not needful that they live:
and when the Children of this world are resolved to be nothing, but what they
are ready not to be, that they may be fitter for those in high places, whose
persons they have in admiration for advantage sake, the Children of wisdom do
abhor all inconstancy in Religion, or any thing which may argue the least
unfaithfulness to the Lord Jesus Christ, the Prince and Captain of their
Salvation: Religion is as a garment which covers them, and for a girdle
wherewith they are girded continually. To the Children of the world; Religion
is as the Philacteries, upon the skirts of their garments, but far from their
heart, but to the Children of Wisdom, it is (as the Corinthians to Paul) In the
heart to live and die together.

3. We justify wisdom when as the Children of Wisdom do just fie one another,
by loving one another for their graces and holiness, by standing for them, when
the wicked by opposition or disgrace do labor to beat them down: when we make
much of them, when the world trampleth upon them, and looks upon them as the
filth and offscouring of the world, we justify wisdom; they are beloved of
us, because they are beloved of Christ; we honor them, because they honor
God; we stick to them, because they stick to God; we rejoice in them because of
the graces of God in their hearts and lives. This is to justify God his image,
his holiness, to justify Christ in his members: in owning them we own Christ,
as it was said of Lot, in entertaining of strangers, he entertained Angels into
his house; so in loving, honoring, delighting in Gods people for holiness
sake, we do it to Christ himself. When men are ashamed of Paul the Prisoner of
Christ, when men regard not holiness, nor esteem of men for their spiritual
worth, but deal with them as the malicious Pharisees with Christ's Disciples,
cast them out of their Synagogues for believing in Christ, this is not to
justify, but to condemn and deny Christ in his members. Scaliger tells us of a
tree, unto which when a man comes, ramos constringit, it closes her leaves
and branches, but when he departs ramos pandit, then it ope^eth her leaves
and branches. Many men are like this tree; when godly men who have the reproach
of Christ upon them, come near them, and do desire their favor and help, and
their conditions be made known to them, they shrink up themselves, and are
inwardly vexed, counting it a disgrace to have such come near them, but when
they are gone, they begin to be pleasant. This is an adulterous generation,
that are afraid to justisie Christ in his members, so would they do even to
Christ himself.

4. We justify wisdom, when we live according to the Power and Putity of that
Religion we Profess, when our lives are a Grace or Ornament to Religion, when
we live according to those things we believe, and make open profession to the
world we do believe them, we profess our selves to be the members of Christ,
let us justify Christ our Head by our obedience to him: we profess our selves
the Spouse of Christ, let our conversations justify Christ our Husband; we
profess our selves the Sons of God, let us justify him to be our Father in all
Holiness and Purity, his Image in us must justify it. We profess Religion, let
us justify Religion by expressing the Power of it in our lives and
conversations, that we may clear Religion from the false imputations and
slanders, which the enemies of Religion and godliness cast upon it. You know
how apt the world is to blame Religion; they are ready to say, and do say, none
are worse than Professors of Religion, their Religion is nothing but words and
shows, and empty forms, we had rather deal with Papists, or with any other than
with these men, they are so unconsc^onable: the world is full of those
slanders: let us justify our Religion by walking as becomes the Gospel. It is
not our duties that do so much justify Religion, but it is our holy, just,
pure, unblameable and fruitful conversation, this justifies our Religion, and
Christ by it: this makes men to Justify us, and say, God is in them of a
truth: it makes the Christian Religion lovely and beautiful even in the eyes of
the profane. If our Religion be only in words, in duties, in outward forms, we
condemn Religion, and condemn Christ, and Justify the slanders which the
wicked Rabble do cast upon the profession of Christianity.

5. We justify wisdom in justifying God in all his Divine-truths in his
commands, by pure and entire obedience to all as well as to any one command: we
condemn God in disobeying but one command in his promises, by cleaving to God,
even then when to present sense Gods Providence seem to cross his promises; we
justify Gods faithfulness and truth in his word, -- in his three tenings, when
we tremble at his word; we justify Gods justice in truths concerning hell,
when we leave such courses as hurry men thither: we justify God in truths
concerning heaven, by setting our faces, hearts and courses upon and toward
heaven: in his truth concerning the day of judgment, by loving, and looking
for the appearing of Christ, when in all these we live as men that do believe
there is an heaven and hell, death and judgment to come; but the children of
disobedience do belie God in these things.

CHAP. VI.
MOreover, the Children of wisdom do justify wisdom in the worst of times: the
children of this world take Religion to farm, they will be tenants at their own
will, not at their Lord's; they will hold it no longer than themselves please,
and throw up all in a bad year, and when they think their bargain too hard,
they lay the key under the door, go their way, and leave their Lord to go look
his rent; when persecution arises because of the word, by and by they are
offended, and in time of such temptation they fall away, Matthew. 13.21. But to
the children of wisdom, Religion is their Freehold, their Feesimple, a
purchase bought even of Christ himself, who has a good title, and will not
deceive the purchaser: but though in the opinion of a worldling he sells dear,
yet such a penny worth as he that knows the worth of it, will part with all that
he has for it, rather than go without it. When Christ and Religion are in a
triumphing posture, then will worldly professors take branches of Palm Trees,
and go forth to meet Christ, and with the multitude, cry Hosanna to the son of
David, Blessed is he that comes in the name of the Lord, Hosanna in the
highest; but if once they find Christ to be apprehended, and led away to the
Highpriests Palace, and there to be spit on in his face and buffetted, they
will with Peter deny him, and say we know not the man, and if this be not
enough they will bind it with an oath, that the world may be satisfied they are
none o^ his company: but the children of wisdom do receive the Gospel with much
affliction: If the Gospel be in a suffering condition, they will be partakers
of the afflictions of the Gospel according to the power of God, 2 Timothy 1.8.
when they took up Religion, they were resolved that some trouble would meet
them in that way, and will now stick to it, though they lose all that they have
for it. The Religion of worldlings is as the dew, which is but sudor terrae,
the earths cold sweat, that is soon licked up; the Religion of the true
Christian is as rain from heaven, that sticks by the earth; the one wets not a
fleece, the other waters the ground: the one serves only for frogs, snails,
and Grasshoppers; the other soketh the root, and makes it to bring forth herbs
meet for them by whom it is dressed, and receives a blessing from God, Heb.
6.7.

CHAP. VII. The Reasons of the point.
1 TAking wisdom for Gods way of Salvation in and through Christ, there is
great wisdom to justify this.

Reas. 1. Because the only wise God has thought this to be the only way and
means of Salvation: The way of God is of all ways the most justifiable; in the
wisdom of God there is not the least shadow of folly: Gods wisdom, yea the
whole glory of God cannot appear in any way more than in the work of Redemption
in and by Christ. Is not this unconceivable wisdom to contrive a way how an
Infinite God should become a finite Creature, how he that was an Immortal God,
should become a mortal man; how an eternal God should become a Child of an hour
old; a blessed God become a curse; a most holy God should have a world of sins
imputed to him, and die for the eternal salvation of sinful man: how offended
justice should be satisfied, yet infinite mercy be fully shown. All this is
manifested in Christ; this must needs be the plot of the only wise God,
contrived within the breast of the Ancient of days. Had Angels and men been
assembled to contrive a way of Salvation, they would have tortured themselves
with poor plots, and would never have thought of such a full, adaequate,
infinite way of Salvation as this. Godly men have eyes to pry into this
glorious mystery of godliness, therefore with all acceptance and admiration do
justify it. Pharisees and other carnal wicked men are blind, and so do not
justify the wisdom of God in Christ.

2. Because wisdom's children do clearly apprehend an absolute impossibility of
Salvation by any other means without Christ: every broken heart that has a
real sight and sense of sin as the greatest evil, will see there is no hope of
salvation in himself: all that he can do to merit life and glory is nothing:
his best things, parts, duties, moral virtues, and natural persections, are
mere nothings, are dross, dung, menstruous clothes, fig leaves, they see all
that they can suffer to satisfy offended justice is nothing; it is not so much
as the payment of a farthing for the debt of a thousand pounds: sin being of an
infinite nature, is of infinite demerit; and infinite satisfaction must be
made, which no finite Creature can do: they see the suffering of the torments
in hell to eternity cannot satisfy, those that are already cast into prison,
cannot satisfy the utmost farthing: so again, they see there is nothing in
them can move and incline God to mercy without Christ: of themselves they are
nothing but children of disobedience, masses of sin, sinks of corruption, a
very hell, as the Martyr called himself. These real and through apprehensions of
their condition, and extreme inability of getting salvation from themselves
does force them to justify God in Christ, and his way of saving them in and
through Christ: the soul says, there is no name under heaven by which I can be
saved but by Christ: there are infinite merits, infinite righteousness in him;
there is no thing in Christ but is lovely in Gods eye, and moving him to mercy.
I will go out of my self, and rest upon Christ; I will take him for my only Say
our, for the Lord my Righteousness; from him alone will I draw my life, my
righteousness, my salvation, and if I perish, I perish, I will cling close unto
him, I do allow of no Savior but him; miserable Saviors are all my duties,
legal righteousness, moral perfections, only Christ has fulfilled all
righteousness, only Christ has satisfied, I justify him to be my only
Savior; It is the sense and sight of Christ's worth excellency and necessity,
makes the children of wisdom to justify Christ Jesus: Pharisees and Carnal men
are void of both.

3. It is great equity the children of wisdom should justify wisdom; for
Christ came to justify them, to take off all accusations which the Devil
lays to their charge: all that he did is to justify them; he became man,
became a curse, was subject to death to justify them: he rose again for their
justification: he intercedeth at the right hand of God to justify them; his
merits, his graces all are for their justification: he was accused, condemned,
executed to justify them, besides the unsearchable treasure of his mercy, the
unvaluable privileges derived from him to them. O ye children of wisdom! do
your sins accuse you? Christ justifies you. Do your sins cry vengeance,
vengeance? his blood cries mercy, mercy. So Devils accuse you day and night
before God, and plead hard against you for your destruction, Christ justifies
you, and rebukes that accuser of the brethren. When your consciences vex you
with accusing and condemning thoughts, Christ justifies you, purifies and
pacifieth your consciences: your duties and performances at the best are full
of imperfections, much corruption and defilement adhereth to the best works of
the best men, Christ fills them up with his righteousness, and so makes them
well-pleasing, and acceptable works and performances unto God. Furthermore,
remember how one day Christ will justify all his members before men, Angels,
and Devils, and wipe off all those aspersions that have been cast upon the
children of wisdom for godliness sake, as faction, pride, singularity,
hypocrisy: Christ will then free godliness and godly men from these calumnies
and aspersions, and he will make men know to their shame and sorrow, it was
Religion, godliness and holiness the very wisdom of God himself, which they
branded with such ignominious titles: if these things make any deep impression
upon your souls, you will be enforced to justify God's wisdom in Christ Jesus.

4. Another reason is drawn from God's end in saving man by Christ, which is,
that men should magnify his wisdom his love, his goodness in contriving such
an infinitely perfect way for salvation by Christ. God himself justified Christ
when he glorified him: Christ justified himself, when he was justified in the
Spirit, that is, the Divine Nature of Christ justified the Humane Nature, which
was perfectly united to his Divine. The Prophets, Apostles, Angels and Saints
do justify Christ: All heaven do justify him, when they throw down their
Crowns, and give all honor, power and glory unto him. We justify Christ, set
him up, magnify God in him, when we make him our righteousness, and by faith
lay hold upon him, and stick close unto him. God loses the glory of his wisdom
and mercy, and Christ loses the glory of his love, when men reject him, as if
God's wisdom were folly and weakness, as if Christ were not able to save to the
uttermost: in rejecting Christ and his righteousness, we do frustrate God of
his gracious end.

CHAP. VIII.
II. I now come to the other acception of wisdom, and will give you reasons why
Godly men ought to justify Religion and Holiness and all the ways of God.

BEcause God fully poflesseth the hearts and minds of the children of wisdom,
truths of God than other men: the secrets of Gods counsels, of Gods Kingdom;
the mystery of godliness is manifested to them; they behold the Glory and
Majesty of God Shining in the Truth and Purity of Religion; they know the
infinite consequence of the things of Eternity, the blissful reward of
Holiness; how dear every tittle of truth is to God; they foresee the dangerous
effects upon such as start aside from the way of truth, Religion and heavenly
wisdom: this keeps and engages their hearts to follow God, and to hold to
his truth, and to justify his ways. Why are men so fearful in a good cause for
a good God? It is because the truths of God are not so deeply rooted in their
hearts, they are not soundly principled in these things. If cloth be not well
wrought in the Loom at first, though it show fair in the Loom, it will shrink
much when it comes to the wetting. The cause why many shrink in the wetting in
time of suffering, is because their hearts were not well wrought, at first, not
fully possessed with the excellency of true Religion, and heavenly wisdom.

2. Because there is nothing in wisdom, in true Religion, but what is
justifiable, Therefore let us see what Religion is. Religion is that form and
rule by which God has taught us how to know him, and serve him. 1. How to know
him: Religion is the knowledge of God, and in this knowledge of God eternal
life does consist, says our Savior, John 17.3. Indeed we can never serve him
rightly, If we do not know him rightly; service is a fruit of love, S.
Augustine says, Sciri aliquid aut credi potest, and tamen non diligi: Diligi
autem, quod neque scitur neque creditur, non potest. We may know or believe a
thing, yet not love it, but we cannot love that thing which is neither known
nor believed by us. -- 2. As Religion teaches us to know God, so likewise how
to serve him. And this same service that it teaches, partly it concerns his
own worship in duties of piety, partly of conversation with men in duties of
equity and mercy. Gods worship is a main duty that Religion teaches: it
teaches both whom to worship, and how to worship: it shows us both the true
God, and the true way how to serve him. Some worship the false god for the
true. S. Paul says of the Gentiles, that instead of the Creator, they gave
glory to the Creature, Romans 1.25. Many that worship the true God, worship him
in a false manner, for they follow not his rules, but their own inventions: we
must not only, verum Deum colere, sed vero cultu colere, worship the true God,
but also worship him in a right manner. If otherwise, it may either be said of
us, as our Savior to the Sycharitish woman, you worship you know not what; or
as to the Scribes and Pharisees, you worship you know not how; teaching for
Doctrines men's Traditions: Religion teaches both whom to worship, and how to
worship. Again, as it is a Rule for Gods worship in duties of piety; so for our
conversation among men in duties of justice and mercy. Religion were no
Religion, if it taught not this too; if it taught not justice as well as
holiness; Charity as well as devotion, Diliges Deum, Thou shall love the Lord,
that is the first and the greatest precept that it gives; but yet diliges
proximum too, Thou shall love thy neighbor; this second, says our Savior, is
like unto the former, for the precepts must needs be like, because the objects
be alike. Man was made in the likeness of God, therefore the precept we have to
love man, must needs be like the precept we have to love God: they be so like,
says S. John, as the one of them cannot consist without the other. 1 John
4.20. Gregory says well, Sicut per amorem Dei amor proximi gignitur; sic and
per amorem proximi amor Dei nutritur. As the love of God begets the love of our
Neighbor; so also by the love of our Neighbor is the love of God nourished.

Religion teaching all this, it must needs be an Art worth the Learning: an Art
indeed, So Du Plessis calls it, Morney.
Ars salvum faciendi hominem; the Art of saving men's souls. All the Arts in the
world are not able to teach this. There has been a strife among the Artists,
as there was sometime among the Disciples, which should be the greatest among
them, to which of them priority and pre-eminence should be given, Lactantius
says, it was so among the Philosophers, and Orators of Greece, but the
Philosophers got the pre-eminence, because they were generally reputed,
Animalia sapientiae, wisdom's creatures. Orators only taught artem been
dicendi, the art of speaking well; Philosophers artem been vivendi, the art of
living well: and this must needs be more excellent than the other, quoniam been
dicere ad paucos pertinet, been vivere ad omnes, because to speak well
belongs to a few, to live well pertains to all, and that was it Philosophy
professed. But what Philosophy falsely vendicated, Religion may justly
challenge; for Religion is indeed that Art that teaches to live well. He
lives well, that lives ever, and that Religion teaches; it teaches such a
way of living here, as will afterward bring us to live for ever: the way to
everlasting salvation is taught and trodden out to us in the precepts of
Religion: seeing none of all the other Arts can teach this, this is more
excellent, and more worth learning than all. Moreover, Religion does not only
teach us to live thus, but tie us to live thus, And so much the very Notation
of the word will give; it is called Religio, a religando, says Lactantius,
which signifies to bind again, quod hominem sibi Deus ligaverit, and quasi
pietate constrinxerit; because by Religion, as by a bond, God does as it were
bind and tie us to himself. Religion then you see, is of a binding nature, it
does not only teach but tie; ties us to do by practice, what it teaches us to
do by precept. Now Gods Religion is an holy, pure, and undefiled Religion, as
the Apostle says of the Law, the Law is holy, just and good: So Religion has
nothing in it but what is good even for us, and what is holy and just; in every
precept of Religion there is equity and goodness. The ways of wisdom are
pleasantness, and all her paths are peace: godliness is profitable in this
life, and in the life to come: it is Religion makes a people happy and
flourishing, why then should we be ashamed of it? What ashamed of holiness, of
goodness, of truth, of blessedness? What have men to show for heaven but his
truth? What treasure does God betrust his Church withal but his truth, which he
esteems dearer than heaven and earth? What is the way to heaven but holiness?
Now shall we expect that Gods ways should be mercy and truth, if his truth be
not embraced, and his holiness not followed after? What does the Lord require
of man but to do justly, and to give to God and men their due? This the
Children of Wisdom behold in Wisdom, and therefore will justify it. I know not
through what Spectacles the world looks upon Religion, and holiness, that
they so slightly esteem it, as unpleasant, and unprofitable. If there were
folly in Wisdom; if any thing unworthy a man's praise, imitation, love and
liking, there were some show of Shrinking from it: but who can charge the
wisdom of God with folly? who can espy spots or darkness in the Sun? who can
espy blame in Gods holiness, or error in his most glorious truth? The
Ephesians could stand for their Diana, the Philistines for Baal zebub the God
of Ekron, wicked men can stand for their Lusts, Worldlings for Mammon,
Heretics can stand for their Errors; and shall God have none in all the world
to stand for him, and justify heavenly Wisdom?

CHAP. IX.


1. When men justify themselves by their good works, their civility, their
legal righteousness. The Scribes and Pharisees were the Peevish Children that
would neither dance nor mourn after John and Christ: these did, and all Moral
men do condemn the wisdom of God in saving man by the righteousness of Jesus
Christ; this is to depose Christ, and to set the Crown of Salvation upon their
heads, making themselves their own Saviors; their menstruous clothes more
glorious than the Robe of Christ's righteousness, their fig leaves more than the
garments of salvation, which God has made for them, and put Christ out of his
Office, making a Christ of themselves; what blaspemy is it of the Papists, who
place the Virgin Mary above Christ, and most blasphemously pray to her to
command her Son to do this or that for them? Thou Mother of God, command thy
Son to hear me. There is the like blasphemy found in the hearts of all civil
moral men; they do place their righteousness above Christ's righteousness, as if
that should command God to open the gates of righteousness, that they may enter
in thereat. O vain men! be proud of your own folly, and wrap your selves up in
your rags, and build as high a tower of duties as you can, and lay stone upon
stone, duty upon duty, good work upon good work; the day is coming when God
will justify this wisdom, and tumble you headlong, O ye self-justitiaries,
with all your righteousness into hell: your Tower of duties will be but a Babel
of eternal confusion, and not one stone, not one duty, shall be left upon
another, that shall not be a very abomination of desolation.

2. We condemn wisdom, when we backslide from our professed Religion, abjure
Christ in his truth; set up error instead of truth, or follow profaness and
embrace the world in stead of holiness, and embracing Christ. Is not this a
justifying of profaness, a justifying of error and of the world, and a
condemning of Christ's Religion, truth and holiness? Now consider, 1. This is
an upbraiding of Christ, as if he were not bountiful enough to engage the
hearts of men to follow him; as if Great Diana of the Ephesians were far more
excellent than the Lord, or the Jews Queen of Heaven were better than the
blessed God of Heaven.

2. It is an upbraiding of his truth, as if the traditions of Scribes and
Pharisees, the vain janglings and disputes and errors of corrupt minds were
better than the Oracles of God, and the Counsels of God displayed in his word
in justifying the errors and traditions of men, what do we but condemn the
Wisdom of God for foolishness it self? yea my Brethren! Backsliders do the
greatest mischief in the world: they do not only condemn Christ and Religion
themselves; but as the Scribes and Pharisees did suborn false witnesses to
accuse him; So backsliders do suborn others to condemn Christ and Religion,
they harden their hearts against Christ and his ways. There are many in hell
perhaps, O Thou backslider, that curse thee for their condemnation, they had
not spoken evil of Religion, nor condemned godliness as they did, had it not
been for thy Apostasy.

3. We condemn Christ, when we will not suffer him to rule and reign over us as
King and Lord; when we draw away our neck from the yoke of his holy and
righteous Law. We put a Kingly Crown upon the head of Christ when we obey him,
and suffer our whole man to be ruled by his Spirit according to his word: but
disobedience is a deposing of Christ, a depriving him of his Kingly Crown. We
will have no King but Caesar, said the wicked Jews, when Pilate condemned
Christ to die; and profane men cry, we will have no King but our Lusts, or the
Devil rather; our Lusts are his Law, our fulfilling them is subjection and
obedience to him. Oh, how many are there that perform one part of obedience to
God, and think that enough! If they have some show of godliness, it is without
justice and honesty, they have no care of their word and promise: if they have
honesty, it is without piety; they make no conscience of prayer in their
closet, nor in their family, they can dispense with it a week, a month or two
perhaps together: if they have any good desires and purposes, they come to
nothing, Whence that saying, There are more good purposes in Hell than in
heaven: not as framed there, but as carried thither for want of being effected
upon earth. Are there not many that are superficially good, but really evil?
Abel and Cain, both Sacrificed, and both to the same God: the Publican and the
Pharisee, both did the same Act, they prayed, and in the same place, the
Temple, and to the same Lord; yet was Cain rejected, and the Pharisee not
justified, because, though they performed the same act, yet not with the same
heart and will.

4. A scandalous profession of Religion, is a condemning of wisdom; a
scandalous conversation gives not only a lie to our profession: but also it
justifies the foul aspersions which wicked men cast in the face of Religion,
and the Professors of it. Strictness of Religion is termed by profane men
hypocrisy. It is said of David's gross sins that he caused the enemies of God
to blaspheme: thus does every loose professor, he causes the way of God to be
evil spoken of, Religion is ill reported of for his sake. Chrysostom has a
comparison: If an Orator make an ill speech, or an Artificer a bad piece of
work, Men will not condemn Rhetoric for his Duncery, nor Art for the Workmans
want of skill. But it is otherwise in Religion, if professors live ill, then
men presently blame religion, as if that were the cause of lewdness. Salvian,
lib. 4. brings in the heathen thus railing upon Christ for the wickedness of
those that professed themselves to be Christians, Sancta^ab illis fierent, si
Sancta Christus docuisset. Lo, what manner of men they be that worship Christ:
it is false that they have a good Law, as they say they have; for if their
Master taught them well, they would live holily: if they learned good things,
themselves would be good: doubtless such is the Sect, as are the Sectators and
followers of it. A little after, he brings in the Pagans thus speaking, Vide
Christianos, etc. Look upon the Christians, see what they do, and by that you
may easily know what Christ their Master teaches them. By this we may collect,
how ill the bad lives of Christians made Pagans judge of the Christian
Religion, and by consequent what a shadow the evil conversation of professors
may occasionally cast upon their profession, though in it self never so pure
and glorious. So then when wicked men do blaspheme God by reason of your
flagitious and filthy lives, you defame the Christian name, and are the
occasion of their horrible blasphemy. Moreover hereby you give the wicked
occasion to condemn all the godly; they are all so, is the worlds Logic:
hereby also you block up the way, and keep off others from the profession,
hardening and justifying the wicked in their sins.

5. Men condemn wisdom, when they draw Arguments from outward blessings, that
God approves of their courses, which his word condemns. As Leah called her
fifth son, Issachar, as a reward from God, for giving her maid to her husband,
Genes. 30.18. So these men take wealth and honor too kindly from God, abusing
both his patience and bounty, by looking upon them as a reward of their
wickedness, and bless God for that for which they are indebted to the Devil.
Thus when through covetousness the shepherds of Israel made Merchandise of the
flock of the slaughter, slaying them, yet not holding themselves guilty, they
sold them, and said, Blessed be the Lord for I am rich, Zech. 11.4, 5. As
impious Domitian thought the gods favored Sacrilege, because he had such a
good gale of wind and weather, after he had robbed their temples; so these men
think God likes well enough of prosperous wickedness, because he does not
presently avenge it.

6. When men bear themselves upon their civil behavior in opposition to
religion, they condemn wisdom. It is pity so fine a thing (and in these days,
so rare a thing) as Civility, should be so much abused, as we should have
occasion to find-fault with it. But by experience we find that even Civility
(the counterfeit of grace) has given occasion to profaness to rise up in arms
against Religion. This is dangerous both to the Civil man himself, and to
others. To himself, because he uses it as a strong fence to ward off religion:
he justifies himself, and condemns true wisdom, because he sees not that
black outside in himself, which perhaps is visible in some professors of
religion. And because he seems near to the Kingdom of God, he never cares to
come to it, being like a parallel line, that keeps a scantling with the way
of wisdom, but never meets with it. It is dangerous to others, because (as
one well notes) he objecteth himself as a Paragon to the view of the world, to
pull down the price of true wisdom. Thus as the Egyptian sorcerers by
counterfeiting the miraculous works of God, hardened the heart of Pharaoh: so
the mere civil man, by some resemblances of good actions without holiness, is
an occasion that many do contomn true wisdom, and condemn the generation of
Gods Children. These are the days wherein civil and moral men do justify
themselves, because though they be not really good, yet comparatively (and in
their own eye especially) they are less evil than many professors. But proud
Moralists are either ignorant of, or else they disdainfully overlook those
choice excellencies that are in the Children of Wisdom: and therefore if they
are not Atheists in profession (which gives a large scope to worldly wisdom)
they incline to Popery, which puts on a garb of Ceremonious gravity, but never
troubles the Conscience with the power of true wisdom. Such a kind of religion
as this, may make him carry the fruits of the land of promise upon a dry staff,
as the Spies did, but never to bear them from a living root.

CHAP. X. Now let us consider the aggravations of this sin of condemning wisdom
any manner of way.
1 BY condemning the wisdom of God in Christ, you make the wisdom of God who is
only wise, to be foolishness, as if you could have found out a better way then
of Salvation by Jesus Christ. You vilify the infinite merits, righteousness,
and sufferings of Christ, an infinite Savior; as if your prayers and negative
holiness were of more merit than Christ: yea, you play Pilate, you set in
judgment, and condemn Christ.

2. In condemning true wisdom and holiness, you condemn your own happiness; for
holiness is the way to happiness, you condemn your life, your comforts, your
grace, your glory, your redemption, your adoption, your own souls.

3. Ye that condemn Wisdom, you shall be condemned in your own Consciences:
thus it was with Judas, and thus it was with Spira after he had been at Mass,
and read his abjuration of the truth, he thought he heard a direful voice
speaking to him in these words; Thou wicked wretch! Thou have denied me; Thou
have renounced the Covenant of thy obedience, have broken thy vow: hear
Apostate, bear with thee the sentence of thine eternal damnation. What was this
but the dreadful voice of his accusing Conscience for denying Christ and
condemning Wisdom? With what horrors, griefs, impenitency and despair are
their souls filled that deny Christ and condemn religion, they are no other
than men living in hell. What tongue can express the inward horrors of Judas
for betraying Christ? What the High Priest said to him, the same did his
conscience, did God say to him; so that out of a cursed envy of the condition
of the damned, he hung himself. Oh! how does God many times deny to such
persons all hopes of mercy, all power to repent, to believe, that they might be
recovered out of that sad condition? Thus Spira said of himself; My heart now
is estranged from God, I cannot call him Father, all good motions are quite
gone; my heart is full of hatred and blasphemy against God; I grow more and
more hardened in heart: I cannot believe, I cannot Repent, I cannot Hope. At
the time of their death, when in the anguish of their souls they shall call for
mercy, pardon, and the salvation of their souls; mercy, pardon, and salvation
shall be denied them.

4. Christ will not own them before his Father, who condemn Christ and his
ways: though they should scrape acquaintance with him, Lord we have prayed,
prophesied, and professed thy name, yet he will say to his Father. Father I
know them not, Christ will neither know them, nor any of their religious Acts,
nor acknowledge any thing they have done for him. As the Psalmist speaks of
dead men, They are forgotten, and out of mind, and their place shall be known
no more: so it is with such as shall condemn wisdom, and deny Christ, when they
shall cry Lord, Lord, have we not done this? He will be ashamed of such as call
him Lord, before his Father. Chrysostom on that place [I know you not] said,
he had rather be stricken through with a thousand thunderbolts, than to hear
Christ say, I know you not. Christ will not own any good work, or good duty of
theirs, who have condemned or denied him and his ways; all their prayers shall
be forgotten, as if they had never prayed; yea, all their duties shall but
aggravate their torment: he will say to his Father, Give double torment to
those that have condemned wisdom, and yet prayed to Thee in my name.

5. Christ will accuse them before his Father: These are the persons that would
not feed me when I was hungry; that when I was thirsty, would give me no drink;
that being a stranger, took me not in; that when I was naked, Matt. 25.40, 41.
clothed me not, that when I was sick, and in prison, visited me not: these
are the men, that did basely condemn my ways, and shamefully deny me before
such and such men: This is Judas, that betrayed me into the hands of the Jews:
These are the persons, that by their cowardice or covetousness betrayed my
truth, my worship, my religion into the hands of sinners. Brethren! I know, you
abhor Judas his fact, and would not for a world, stand in Judas his coat before
God at the day of Judgment: Let me tell you, to betray the truth of Christ, to
condemn true wisdom, will be reputed as great a sin in that day. Nay, Christ
will not only accuse such, but he will cast them out of his presence, and
destroy them before the blessed presence of his father; he will cast them out
from the presence and from communion with Angels and Saints into hell torments.
Depart ye cursed of God and Christ, ye that condemned Religion, Depart ye
cursed of Angels, and of your own Consciences into hell torments. What is that
worm there that never dies, but thy Conscience of denying and condemning
Wisdom?

6. Consider the hainousness of the fact, what a sin it is to condemn Wisdom
and Religion? In denying Wisdom, you deny Christ himself, in condemning
Religion, you condemn him: It is his religion, his truth, his worship, his ways
which you condemn; therefore in condemning these, you condemn Christ himself:
You condemn him whom God the Father has justified and glorified, and witnessed
a good confession of him before men; This is my well beloved Son, in whom I am
well-pleased: you condemn Christ whom all the Angels adore; it is their glory
to be his Ministering Spirits: in condemning him, you condemn the infinite love
of God; for, so God loved the world, that he gave his son: you deny the Lord of
glory, the Prince of life, the King of Kings, the only Savior: You reject the
blood of Christ, his blood which is more worth than rocks of Pearl, than
mountains of Gold, yea, more than if God had given an heaven full of Angels, or
a world of Creatures for you. O what a great sin is it to condemn him who has
bought Thee with his own blood, who suffered the wrath of God for us, and
purchased many glorious privileges for us? To deny or disown a friend that
has been kind and bountiful, it is shameful; for a Child to deny his Father,
it is unnatural: but for a man to deny or condemn Christ who died for him,
condemn his redeemer and Savior, it is worse than unnatural, if worse can be.

7. Look upon the goodness of wisdom, A man can have no better than God's truth
to maintain, and to acknowledge the word of life and salvation: no outward
means but the Gospel to bring us to Salvation: to condemn these, we condemn the
means of salvation. The men of Sodom shall rise up in judgment against the men
of Bethsaida, the men of Niniveh against the men of Capernaum, because they
repented at the preaching of Jonas: the Bastards of Babylon shall rise up
against the daughters of Zion in judgment; the Papists shall rise up in
judgment against many Protestants, for they will not condemn nor betray the
Cause of Antichrist: but these men put Christ to open shame, and expose the
wisdom of God to a world of contempt in the midst of a crooked and perverse
generation.

CHAP. XI. An use of exhortation to justify Wisdom.
own you; then beware of condemning wisdom; plead for his truth, justify
wisdom, reliove the members of Christ, boldly and freely testify what ye hold
and believe in matters of religion, constantly affirm, this is Christ's
Doctrine, this is Christ's Religion, this and none else is the pure worship of
God in Christ: Witness a good Confession with your mouths, what ye believe in
your hearts of Christ and his Doctrine. It is not an Arbitrary duty, but
necessary. If an Arian should ask, what believe thou concerning Christ? Thou
must answer, I believe him to be very God, though all the world were Arian: or
if a Papist should ask Thee concerning Christ in the Sacrament? Thou should
answer, I believe He is not there bodily. Some think it enough, if they believe
Christ's truth and Religion in their hearts; and as for outward affirmation and
justification of it in plain words, it is rather superfluous, at least
Arbitrary, not necessary. No: this is not sufficient; A man that believes in
his heart, his mouth must show forth his faith. If he be persuaded in his
heart, that this is truth, and that is truth he must testify it in his words.
As the Apostles; they believed in heart, that Christ was the Messiah, was the
Christ, and they did confess it with their tongues, Thou art Christ the son of
the living God, This is Jesus, the God of glory, the Prince of life, whom the
Jews slew, and hanged upon a tree. S. Paul did believe the Resurrection, and he
did justify the Doctrine of the Resurrection before a whole Council, Act.
23.6. Many account it a piece of singular Wisdom, either to silence, or to
dissemble the truth; they had rather be accounted Wise and Wicked, than Simple
and Religious: they had rather be esteemed as Neutral between Christ and
Antichrist, than openly to confess and justify him, veritas s^lummodo
abscondi erubescit; truth only is ashamed to be hid: If you believe that
Religion which you profess, you must be ready to justify it before all the
world. Be ready to speak for Christ upon all occasions, to plead for his Gospel
and Worship in all places. Our Savior, wheresoever he came, would in all
companies, in all places, upon all occasions testify himself to the people.
All Paul's preaching and writings were nothing else, but a confession and
testification of Christ. S. Bernard reckons the name [ Jesus] to be found
five hundred times in Paul's Epistles, as who could not speak of Christ
sufficiently: his Tongue, his Pen; the Pulpit, the Prison, the Bar, the
Judgment hall, preached Christ.

CHAP. XII. Of the special seasons when we ought to justify Wisdom.
NOw let us consider the special times when we ought to justify Wisdom.

1. When men shall attempt to draw us off from Christ and his Religion, then
must we justify wisdom. Had we Balak to offer as much to us as to Balaam, an
house full of Silver and Gold; or as the Devil did to Christ, all the glory and
riches of the world, if he would but fall down and worship him; so to us, if we
will fall from Christ, our profession, his truth and holiness: if then we
answer from the heart Crucified to these things, as Balaam did from the tongue
(his heart longing after the proffer) we will not go beyond the word of the
Lord for an house full of Silver and Gold; this wonderfully justifies wisdom.
Such as justify Christ and Religion do look upon these outward things with
contempt and scorn, when as men that condemn wisdom, look upon them with
admiration and affection, judging themselves men, if they can get these things
below. When the Emperor Valens offered Basil great preferments, telling him
what a man he might be, Basil answered, offer these things to children not to
Christians; they are but bables in a Christian's esteem. So when some bade,
stop Luther's mouth with preferment, one of his Adversaries answered, Germana
illa Bestia non curat aurum, That German Beast cares not for Gold: his Spirit
was too Divine and Heavenly to be tempted with Gold: Earthly hearts would soon
have been taken with such offers.

2. When wisdom is vilified, and Religion is in disgrace, contempt or trouble;
then for a man to stand for Christ and Religion, this is a time to justify
wisdom: when the more disgrace is cast upon Religion, we burn with greater Zeal
and love to Christ. Shimei and Mephibosheth were both tried in David's troubles:
while David was in his prosperity, both honored him, but when Absalom rebelled,
and David was fain to flee for safety; yet then Mephibosheth sticks close to
David, and Shimei showed his false heart railing upon him. So long as Christ
was working miracles, feeding the people miraculously with loaves, he was
followed, and justified by them to be a Prophet, or Elias, or the Messiah: but
when Christ was vilified before Pilate, and misused, then they condemned
Christ, and cried out, Away with him, Crucify him, Crucify him. When Religion
is at the lowest ebb, clad with disgrace, trouble and contempt, this is a time
for a Christian to justify wisdom.

3. When the truth's of God are overborn with errors and Adversaries, then to
stand for the truth o^ God is to justify wisdom. When we stand resolutely for
the least truth of Christ as the Godly Bishops, and other holy Martyr's did in
Queen Mary's days, Quisquiliae veritatis sunt pretiosae.
that died (many of them) for truth's of a lesser size, so dear was truth unto
them. Herein the Children of Wisdom do resemble God, who prizeth the least
tittle of his word, as dearer than heaven and earth. It was a noble resolution
of Skammah, he would not suffer the Philistines to have so much as one piece of
ground in the land of Israel, 2 Samuel 23.11. A resolute Christian, that loves
truth, will not suffer the enemies of truth to get the least ground of truth;
uno absurdo dato, mill sequuntur, Let but one absurdity be granted, a thousand
will follow. The children of wisdom know but one Lord, one Faith, one Gospel in
truth and indeed; if any other be obtruded, they reject it as spurious. Gold
cannot endure the least quantity of Latten to be mixed with it, nor Silver of
Tin: No more will truth endure the least mixture with any adulterous wares; nor
will the children of wisdom take Alchymy for current Coin, although it bear the
Stamp of the King's Image and Superscription. If once they discover this
Stratagem of Saran, or any of his Ministers, they will not give place by
Subjection (or admixtion) no not for an hour, that the truth may abide with
them. In this case it was that S. Paul ( Gal. 2.5.) withstood not only those of
the Circumcision, but even the holy Apostle Peter, and that to his face, who
though free from error in Doctrine, yet gave offense by his practice in favor
of the Jewish Ceremonies, and went not with a right foot according to the truth
of the Gospel, but admitted those obsolete Rites to approach too near it. A
little chink in a ship may let in water enough to sink a Ship of a thousand
Tun: so if heresy get in never so little within the Ship of the Church, it may
soon sink it into the Sea of Error. If Charles Martel, and Pipin his Son be
admitted to steer with the Kings of France, they want but the Popes title, or a
New coined distinction to get an absolute Sovereignty: so the unsound Christian
knows, if he can but introduce a companion that will prove a Rival, that in the
end will thrust truth out of doors.

4. When Christ and Religion is forsaken by the greater multitude in the world,
yea, within the verge of the Church, then is a time to justify wisdom.
Religion in its purity is condemned by the most as humorous, factious, as a
singular way. Now for a man to Swim against the strong stream of the multitude,
to walk in the way of Religion, though he walk alone without Company, this is a
time to justify wisdom. Thus one Elijah justified God and his worship against
a whole Kingdom of Idolaters: one Micajah against four hundred false Prophets:
Christ and his Apostles withstood the whole Jewish Synagogue. When the
multitude go against Christ, he looks that his Disciples should go against
them: If the multitude be profane, they must be strict, and not live according
to the course of the world. If the multitude of the Jews follow the traditions
of the Elders, the Apostles must follow the Rule of God's word. We are not to
follow the multitude, but to follow the Lamb whithersoever he goes: the
multitude leads to hell, Shall we follow them? It is for beasts to follow the
herd, for an Hog to follow the herd of Swine, for an Ox to follow the drove. It
is the poorest argument in the world to do as the most do: Seneca could say,
argumentum est turpissimum turba, to plead you must do as the multitude do, is
the basest Argument of all other. The multitude do resolve with Hushai (but for
a worse purpose) to worship the rising Sun: and Absalom shall now be as much
esteemed and honored by them, as ever David himself was, when at the highest:
2 Samuel 16.18. Of any Religion they are ready to say, as he of Absalom, whom all
the men of Israel shall choose (although with rejecting their true liege Lord)
his will I be, and with him will I abide. It was a courageous speech of Luther,
being urged with the Authority of the Fathers in a point of controversy. Quid
si mill Augustini, mill Chrysostomi, mill Hieronymi hoc asserant, Ego tamen
veritatem loquar. What if a thousand Augustines, a thousand Chrysostoms, a
thousand Hieroms do assert this or that, yet notwithstanding I will speak the
truth. Godly men, like the wise men, will follow Christ, as they did the Star
leading them to his place, their, way is like the way of the Mariner, guided by
the heavens, More syderum mortalibus iter perficere, Senec.
not by the course of the world, as Seneca speaks of a good man.

CHAP. XIII.
SECT. I.
Singularity and private humor, is the brand that the world puts upon
godliness, and upon godly men, to be singular and humorous: but I shall show
you, that neither godliness is singularity and humorousness, nor are godly men
singular and humorous. Now to justify wisdom, when the world goes a contrary
way, is neither singularity nor humor: and here,

1 COnsider what the profane multitude calls singulatity: because good men
will not lie and swear as they do, carouse and drink as they do, and will not
run with them to the same excess of riot, therefore profane ones call this
strictness, preciseness, singularity. Profane persons are acted by the Devil,
that wicked Spirit, that rules in the air, and in their hearts; and godly men
are acted by the Spirit of God: Now because God's people are not led by the
Devil as they are, into open profaness, or secret wickedness, therefore they
are accounted strict, singular, precise: because they follow the thing that is
good, and not that which is evil, therefore they are singular. The very light
of nature, and the morality of heathen men was bitter against the common course
of the world: one of the Pythagorean sacred rules was, per viam publicam ne
ingredere, Trace not the common steps of the rude multitude. Godly men choose
the green and clean way of wisdom, and will not walk in the fowl and dirty way
of the world, is this singularity? How many are there who by following the evil
examples of the men of the world, do come to be defiled therewith. We read
Genes. 30.37. How Jacob put himself into a breed of spotted sheep. He took rods
of green Poplar, and of the hasel and chesnut-tree, and pilled white strakes in
them, and made the white appear which was in the rods, and he set the rods
which he had pilled before the flocks in the gutters in the watering trough's
when the flocks came to drink, that they should conceive when they came to
drink when it was breeding time; and conceiving before the party-colored rods,
they brought forth party-colored Lambs. Such be the examples of evil that we
see in the multitude before us, they be like Jacob's party-colored rods; and
these examples lying in our eye do make us many times to do like them. Indeed
the world is spotted, as Jacob's Lambs were spotted; there are both great and
little spots to be seen upon it. You may look upon some that have great spots
upon them, tainted with odious, and great sins; spots of adultery in their
eyes, spots of drunkenness in their faces, spots of blasphemy upon their
tongues, spots of blood and oppression in their hands; spots of pride and
vanity upon their backs. A man that professes any religion, would blush to
have any of these spots seen upon him. There are also spots of a lesser size,
such as are not so odious and foul as those be, yet the children of wisdom must
keep themselves from these too, even from the least of them all. The common
Religion is the Pharisees Religion; if there be no gross sin we can be accused
of, we th^nk all is well enough. There be a kind of Serpents that be called
Hemorrhoides, of no great bigness, for they be not a foot long: yet if a man be
stung with them, he bleeds at his ears, eyes, nose, mouth, gives not
overbleeding till he dies: such be the sins that the multitude count but little
sins; yet as little as they be, they cost the shedding of Christ's blood: and
they will cost us the best blood we have, unless we repent us of them the
sooner. There be two main evils in those same little sins that we speak of. 1.
Though they be little, they be many, what they want in weight, they make up in
number; therefore says S. Bernard, Nemo contemnet quia parva, sed timea^ quia
plura: No man will contemn them because they are little, but let him fear them,
because they are many. 2. Those same little sins, they do always make way for
greater: entertain one such evil Spirit, he will bring in seven with him worse
than himself.

SECT. II.
II. COnsider, that godly men are to be a peculiar People, and they ought to be
separate from the course of this world. There ought to be an endeavor after
the same gradual distance between a godly man's course and the course of the
world, as between the life of Angels and of Devils. That phrase of the Apostle
is remarkable, Apeculiar people, zealous of good works, Tit. 2.14. A godly man
must be a fiery zealot for holiness, for strictness according to Gods word, and
must be Zealous against all manner of sin, and the course and vanities of this
present evil world, he remembers the exhortation that speaks to him and all
Christians, as unto Children: Whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are
honest, whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever
things are lovely, whatsoever things are of good report, if there be any
virtue, if any praise, to think on these things, that is, so to think of them,
(...).
as to do them: he laboreth in all good things to be best, and to incorporate
(...), into every branch of his calling and practice, that he may be sound, (if
not in name, yet) indeed, an Aristarchus; an Aristobulus, the best Governor,
the best Counselor, the best Neighbor, the best Christian. He that striveth
to have his name among the thirty of David's worthies, must labor to be one of
the first three, or else he may be excluded the Catalogue of the thirty, 1 Samuel
23. The Zealous man is like John, who in running to Christ's Sepulcher, out-ran
Peter, he esteems himself nothing, if he strive not to keep pace with the
best, or at least to follow them in view, when he cannot keep Company with
them. What an unreasonable thing is it to call a man for strictness, singular
or humorous? it is as if a man should call a rich Diamond or precious stone, a
vile base stone; because it is singular and better than a whole heap of
Peble-stones; or count gold to be but vile metal, because it is not so base as
dung; Whereas one Pearl is worth a thousand Pebles. It is a Noble Speech of
Cyprian in one of his Epistles: Ne attendas numerum illorum; melior est unus
timens Deum, quam mill impii. Do not thou regard the number of the wicked,
Better is one man that fears God, than a thousand wicked Persons, God's
Children are compared unto Jewels, the wicked unto dross; Jewels are not
common, a man may see thousands of Pebles before he can see a Rich Diamond; you
can go no where almost, but you may see swarms of drunkards, multitudes of
swearers, vile persons even as common as Pebles, but how rare a thing is it to
find a godly man among thousands of men! Run ye to and fro through the streets
of Jerusalem, and see now and know, and seek in the broad places thereof, if ye
can find a man, if there be any that executes judgment, that seeks the
truth, Jer. 5.1. A just and upright man is a rare jewel, hardly to be found.
Hence the whole Company of Believers, are named a little flock, the whole
Company of those that shall be saved, are said to be very few.

SECT. III.
III. IT is no singularity to follow Christ, who is the Captain of our
Salvation: Soldiers that break their Rank, are the disorderly and singular
men, not those that trace the steps of their leader. Godly men do trace Christ
step by step, though not passibus aequis, and are fearful to break their Ranks.
The wicked Rout are rather disorderly and singular men, that will not follow
Christ, whom they acknowledge to be the Captain of their Salvation: he chooses
the clean and pure way, but they like not of it. Godly men do follow a
multitude, therefore holiness cannot be termed singularity. They have the
Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs, all the Saints of God before them, Clouds of
witnesses, many thousands of them, and every one of them is worth ten thousand
of others. Yea, and if those high examples of all those glorious worthies be
too low for them to follow, they will propound to themselves an higher example
than all the former, even Jesus himself, the Author and finisher of their
Faith. Hence, as one observes, in Scripture are propounded to us the examples,
not only of wicked Heathens, which we must avoid, and of Pharisees and
Publicans, whom we must exceed, but of the most holy and perfect Saints, to
whom we must strive to come up as close as we can: yea, the Lord not only sets
before his Children, his Elect Angels that did not err, and his most
accomplished servants on Earth, but even the Lord Jesus himself, who did not
err, and God our Father who cannot err, that no Servant of his may set down
to himself any scantling in holiness. Now is this singularity, when one poor
Godly man shall have so many high and eminent examples before him.

There is but one way to heaven, beaten with the feet of Christ and all his
Saints, holiness is that only way, and that way is but a narrow way, therefore
strictness in a man's course is very necessary: as the Mariners at Sea have but
one North-star to steer their courses by to their appointed haven, is it
singularity then to sail by that Star? let me demand of you that condemn godly
men of singularity, because they justify wisdom and Christ in the purity of
Religion: if Christ should come personally to you, and ask this question of
you, will you follow me whithersoever I go? there is no doubt but you would
answer him, yes verily; and we are ready to follow thee. Certainly, the way
that he would show you, is this way of holiness, which you do now condemn for
singularity and preciseness in the Children of Wisdom. Th^n follow Christ
prosperously with an undaunted resolution, and in an holy derision laugh at the
false judgment of the world, crying godliness down for singularity. Do as S.
Paul did, when the Corinthians censured his plain preaching, with me it is but
a small matter to be judged by you: it is less for godly men to be judged by
the world: your life of holiness does as far exceed the natural capacities of
wicked and ungodly men, as their reason exceeds the Imagination of Beasts,
Behold therefore O ye Children of Wisdom, and justify Wisdom.

SECT. IV.
IV. THat cannot be singularity, as long as it is according to the public
Rule of every man's conversation, and this is the pure word of God, the Rule of
pure Religion binding every one to obedience, both in judgment and practice:
so that though all the world lie and live in darkness, and refuse to have the
word of God to be a lantern to their seet, and a light unto their paths, yet if
there be any one godly man, that takes the word of God to be a Lante^n to his
steps, and holds it close to his feet, to guide him in his course, he is not to
be condemned for a singular man, though he follows not the examples of the
multitude which err from the word. To work, and walk by a General Rule, is no
singularity, though but one man in many thousands do so: Examples of multitudes
of men cannot satisfy conscience: it is only the right Rule that must direct
and satisfy the conscience. What our Divines hold against the Papists, and
some of the Papists with them in matter of judgment, is true of practice: That
one private godly man is more to be believed and followed in his judgment than
the Pope and a General Council, if he has better reasons and the Scriptures on
his side: one private m^n may be Orthodox, sound in judgment, When the Pope
and his whole Council may be Heterodox and erroneous: as it was in the days of
Athanasius, when the whole world was infected with Arianism, he only was
Orthodox; the same may be said of practice and conversation; that man is to be
followed, that lives according to the Rule of the word, though we see millions
of men to go another way: he that has the Scriptures for the foundation of his
judgment and practice, cannot be a singular man; such a one makes both the
will and Commandment of God, his ground, and rule of obedience, he does it
because God requires it, and as he will have it to be done, he will look to
his warrant, as well as to the work that is done by him. But the profane
multitude steer another course, they are like self-willed Servants, that must
have their own will and way, or else will do nothing; or do it so, that it were
better they had done nothing, thus under color of obeying God, they obey their
own wills. If others (like themselves) prescribe them a course of obedience,
and a fear toward God after the precepts of men, here they will be very
forward. Blind obedience and a blind faith, are the two paths in which they
walk; they fear not the ditch, till they have fallen headlong into it.
Historians have observed, that none have been so great innovators in matter of
Religion, as Usurpers of the Civil Power, not have any been so great
oppressors of the people in Civil affairs, as those who entrench most upon the
Divine Majesty in the things of God, and none have been more willingly obeyed
than the greatest oppressors: for the statutes of Omri are kept, and all the
works of the house Ahab, Micah 6.16. Omri (who had been General, and was after
made King of Israel, in the camp, to be revenged on Zimri that slew his Master)
did worse than all the Kings that were before him; an^ afterward Ahab his Son,
did evil in the sight of the Lord, above all that were before him. These
besides the golden Calves of Jeroboam, worshipped Baal, in which Idolatry the
people readily trod in the steps of their Leaders, (although to their own
destruction) having now a liberty granted them to adore which of those Idols
they pleased.

SECT. V.
V. THat pure Religion and strictness of conversation cannot be proud, humorous
singularity, let them that say so, be Judges themselves. Take wicked profane
loose men that scoff at holiness, and condemn holy men, let them I say be
taken, when they are most serious, when they are best able to judge of things:
Do not take wicked men, when they are in their passion, when their lusts are
stirring, when they are in health, when they are in a calm mood: but take them
when they are sick, when they apprehend themselves going down to the Chambers
of death, and going to appear before the great Judge at his Tribunal, take them
then when Conscience is like to speak truth to them, and mark such men at such
times, what they then wish and heartily desire, and what in their Consciences
they then most approve of: Oh! then the most Swinish drunkard, the greatest
scoffer at Religion and purity will be on the godly man's side, and could wish
it were with them, as it is with one such a poor godly man, whom they derided
for a proud, humorous, factious, singular animal: then conscience sets up a
consistory for Christ, and furnishes all things requisite to true judgment,
and being rightly instructed, tells him more than seven watchmen that sit in an
high tower, and will be sure to give in a true verdict, Ecclus. 37.14.
Therefore according to the judgment even of wicked men themselves, when they
are most themselves, and best able to judge, it cannot be an humor of
singularity, that acts the godly man in the way of holiness against thousands
of profane persons: such would never approve of holiness then, if they thought
it were singularity.

CHAP. XIV. Now let us consider the reasons why godly men had need to be
singular against the multitude, in purity of Religion and Conversation.
1. BEcause the example of the multitude is dangerous and fallible, the Pope
and his Council, the Devil and his adherents. Most men do err from God and his
ways; most people run post to hell; the way of the multitude is the broad way,
and the end of that way is destruction; the world walks in darkness, and at
the end of their walk is the place of outer darkness; therefore there is no
safety to do as the most do, to follow a multitude to do evil: it will be no
comfort to any one to be damned with the multitude. Most men are yielding men,
carried away by every word and wind, they consider not what is fit and
warrantable to be done; if they see others do so, if they be pressed by others
to do so, they presently yield. The multitude are for any Faith, or Religion;
yea, for any practice that others will persuade them to; especially if
plausible, or such as carries not abhorrency in its forehead: they count it
their wisdom and their glory, to do as their Company does, and to be as they
are: any fashion, behavior, action, faction, course, or custom, except what is
truly good, will suit well with the disposition of the most.

2. Because this strict, or (to use the worlds phrase) th^^ singular way, is
one of the best evidences of a man's election to eternal life: Gods people are
a very small number in compar^son of the multitude, a very little flock in
respect of the Goats. The going against the multitude, the following Christ in
strictness, argues a man to belong to that very little flock, because few do
so, and most go in the broad way. Then again it is said; the way is narrow, and
the gate is strait that leads unto life, and few there be that enter in
thereat: a pure, strict, precise, holy conversation, is this narrow way. There
are many by-ways, but one right way: as in shooting a man may miss diversely,
either by shooting under, over, or wide, on this side, or on that, but one way
to hit the mark: the Covetous with his great bags, the ambitious with his high
looks, the drunkard with his full Cups cannot enter in at the strait Gate.

3. Because every step of a man's life is either to heaven or to hell, and every
action is a drawing a man nearer heaven or hell; the world thinks not so;
they imagine not how fast they are posting to one of those two places, but
godly men know it, and therefore they will have a main care of the steps of
their conversation, though the world be careless, and little mind it, till they
are dropping into hell; the godly will be careful of the smallest matters that
concern their souls, like thrifty worldlings, that will not lose the least
opportunity of the smallest gain, but will lay hold upon it, if the least
profit present it self to them; to covet the best gifts, and to be greedy after
grace is not blameworthy, but a desirable blessing; and ambition to be above,
and to get beyond others in Spiritual advancements, whereby God may more
delight in us (so the heart be not puffed up) is not a blemish, but an honor;
here is no fear of a nimium (as one says) where no care is enough.

4. Because a godly man works for Eternity, therefore he works by God's
Divine Eternal Rule, not by the examples of most men. All the conditions of man
in this life are for Eternity, every act of sin is for Eternity; every holy
action is for Eternity, therefore it concerns men to take heed to their ways:
the multitude thinks not so. Apelles being asked why he was so curious in
painting, and spent so much time about a piece of work, answered, Ego
Aeternitati Pingo, I paint to Eternity: men will judge of my Painting (said he)
an hundred years after I am dead. A godly man will give Thee the like answer,
Thou wonderest at my strictness and frequency in holy duties: Oh! I work to
Eternity, I preach, I hear, I pray for Eternity, I live for Eternity; my
actions shall be judged many years after my death: did you frequently and
seriously think, that all your actions are to Eternity, how strict, how holy,
how zealous, how singular would you be.

CHAP. XV.


Consider this, all ye that confess Christ now, and justify wisdom, that
Christ will confess and own you before men: it was an honor to John Baptist,
when Christ justified him before men, Mat. 11.9, 10, 11. What went ye out to
see? A Prophet? Yea I say unto you, and more than a Prophet: for this is he of
whom it is written, Behold I send my Messenger before thy face, which shall
prepare thy way before thee. Verily I say unto you, among them that are born of
women, there has not risen a greater than John the Baptist. What if the world
now condemn you for a company of fools, Christ will one day justify you to be
the true Children of wisdom, and damn the wise generation of Carnal men for
mere Idiots: yea, they that now condemn you, shall then justify you; then will
they say, we fools count them wise; we accounted their life madness, and their
end to be without honor: but now they are numbered among the Children of God,
Sap. 5.4, 5, 6, 7.
and their Lot among the Saints, therefore have we erred from the way of truth
and the light of Righteousness has not shined unto us, and the Sun of
Righteousness rose not upon us. We wearied our selves in the way of wickedness
and destruction, etc.

Moreover, Christ will own those that have stood for him, as his Members,
Friends, Subjects, Servants, as they have acknowledged him to be their God,
Lord, King, Master, and will present them to his Father: These are the
Children, the faithful Servants whom Thou have given me. It were great honor
if a Prince should take a man by the hand, and before the King, and all his
people should acknowledge him to be his faithful Servant: So it will be a very
heaven to be acknowledged by Christ at the last day. Christ will testify
before his Father and the holy Angels what they have done for him, what they
have suffered for him. Father, behold these men that stand here before thee,
have suffered reproaches for my Namesake, they were hated, reviled,
persecuted, put to death for my sake. When many thousands shamefully denied me,
and cowardly deserted my opposed cause, and my persecuted Religion, These men
stood close to me, esteeming the reproaches, hatred, imprisonments, cruelties
of the world for my sake, greater riches than all the honors, preferments,
treasures of all the Kingdoms of the earth; and joyfully suffered all, rather
than my name should suffer. As he will testify what they have suffered, so
likewise what they have done for Christ. These men fed me when I was hungry,
gave me drink when I was thirsty, clothed me when I was naked, visited me when
I was sick and in prison: O ye my blessed Angels, Behold them, and rejoice over
them, and bid them welcome into their heavenly Mansions. The giving of a cup
of cold water to a Disciple shall then be acknowledged, how much more the
giving away of thy estate, thy liberty, and the laying down thy life for
Christ's sake.

Christ will also before Angels, Saints, Devils, and wicked men, and the whole
world, declare them the Blessed of his Father, and glorify them with the same
glory, wherewith he is glorified.

1. He will declare them Blessed: Come ye Blessed my Father. Those that
justify and confess Christ in an evil time, are looked upon by an evil and
adulterous generation, as unhappy, lost, miserable and undone men, as the dross
and offscouring of the world: Christ will then declare them to be the only
happy and blessed men. Come ye blessed, blessed of God my Father, Blessed of me
your Savior, Blessed of all my holy Angels, Blessed of all that are blessed:
yea, so highly blessed, that all the wicked themselves shall then envy at your
blessedness: ye were before blessed in the promise, but now ye shall be blessed
in the fruition; you shall see the full accomplishment of the word and promise
of God.

2. Then will he glorify them with his own glory. Come ye, inherit the Kingdom
prepared for you: heaven was made for you, all heavens glory was prepared for
you: This glory, this happiness, these Mansions, These Everlasting habitations
were prepared for you: my Throne and Kingdom is yours, you shall sit down with
me upon my Throne; my inheritance is yours, ye are joint heirs with me, you and
I will divide the heavenly inheritance between us; ye are fellow-kings with me,
you and I shall be happy, glorious, and rejoice together as long as eternity
lasts.

Finally Christ will justify them before their Enemies, who now load them, and
the way of Christ with all the base calumnies, their malicious hearts can
imagine, and their tongues can vent. They condemn the generation of such as
justify wisdom, as factious, humourists, as rebellious, and enemies to Caesar,
though God's faithful Servants, and Caesar's loyal Subjects. The wicked make
the godly unworthy to live; so they are to be among a crooked generation: they
likewise condemn religion in power, as hypocrisy and indiscretion; Now the
Lord will justify them before their enemies. Know ye O mine Enemies, ye
Children of Belial, that these are my faithful Servants, they are my dear
Children, they did but what I commanded them; that which you termed hypocrisy
in them was the pure religion; and what you counted rashness and indiscretion
in them, was true Zeal and heavenly wisdom. Then will Christ avenge them of
their Enemies before their faces, he will damn the revilers, scoffers, and
opposers of his people, before their faces, and will cover those with shame and
confusion, that did put his people to open shame for their justifying of
wisdom, and for their confessing of his Name, and their sincere profession of
Religion; and the shame and confusion of their enemies will make the glory of
the Children of wisdom the more splendent and conspicuous.

Now the Saints are judged, censured, and condemned by the world, Now they are
reproached and vilified by the world; but there is a time coming when the
despised Saints shall sit upon throns, and judge Angels, and the whole world.
All ye that now scoff at the godly, ye shall on that day tremble before them:
you that now despise them in your heart, shall then lie and even lick up the
dust of their fee^. Christ will put such glory on all his Saints, that the
world shall admire at Christ in so doing, 2 Thessalonians. 1.10. When he shall come to
be glorified in his Saints, and admired in all them that believe, Oh! then, how
will the wicked cry out, Behold, how God does honor and glorify yonder men,
whom once we derided and daily mocked for their preciseness! What glorious and
blessed creatures are they become! Oh, that our heads were as high as their
heels! How are they Crowned with glory, and we clothed with shame; they have
Crowns of righteousness and immortality about their heads, and we have chains
of everlasting darkness about our heels!

Some have put this question, whether the wicked shall then know the godly with
whom they have lived upon earth. Some answer, It is more then probable, that
the children of Belial shall then know the children of wisdom, with whom they
lived, whom they reproached, mocked, scoffed, condemned for their holiness.
This very man whom I despised; lo, how he is glorified? Oh, what a difference
is there now between me and him; He is a glorious King, and I a condemned
Prisoner for evermore. But it is overmuch boldness to assert, that the wicked
shall have a particular knowledge of those very godly men, whose persons they
had in derision for their holiness, seeing it is enough to their great
confusion, to behold the whole army of glorified Saints in the Kingdom of
heaven, and their own consciences shall then witness to them; that these were
the Children of wisdom that justified wisdom; that these were the righteous
Servants of God, and themselves were wicked, and such as were the Servants of
sin and Satan: Yet it is not denied, but their personal knowledge of the very
men whom they did despise and condemn for their godliness, would much conduce
to the greater confusion of the children of disobedience. That speech of
Chrysologus is considerable. Dives magis uritur Lazari gloria, quam proprio
incendio, The rich man is more tormented with beholding the glory of Lazarus in
heaven, than with the sense of his own burning in hell. This will aggravate the
torment of the damned, when they shall behold the transcendent glory of those
very particular persons whom they vilified, and had in derision. But let us
leave this question to the decision of the Great-day.

CHAP. XVI.
NOw to conclude, let me excite all the Children of Wisdom to live by faith,
then will you justify wisdom in the worst of times; the futurity of your
glorious reward requires a continued acting of faith, lest you draw back your
hands from the plough, and your hearts off from the ways of Wisdom; for be
sure, He or they, who resolve to justify wisdom, must expect to meet with high
discouragements, nothing can swallow up these discouragements, but faith acted
and exercised, which (like Moses's Rod) easily devoureth all these Egyptian
Serpents. The world will discourage you from serving God, Oh, pity thy self,
said Peter to Christ; so the world to thee, Pity thy ease, thy liberty, thy
estate, thy pleasures, thy honor. Your worldly callings will hinder you from
walking in the paths of Wisdom; you will lose your time, your profit, if you
spend so much time in religious duties. All the wicked in the world will
discourage you by their taunts and contempt. What needs so much praying and
hearing? Lo, we are set up and thrive in the world, who do not as you do; your
very senses will discourage you from the Service of God: you see and hear that
no profit is gotten by serving God, you see how they who serve not God, grow
rich and great in the world. All within you, and all without you will endeavor
to pull you back from Wisdom's gates. Wherefore you have great need to act
faith continually, faith must be a continual evidence to you of things not
seen, then will it cry to you, Do you not see heaven, the crown, the kingdom,
the glory which is set before you? See you not Christ condemning and putting to
open shame and destruction, all such as deny and condemn true Wisdom? Unless
faith be thus acted, and you walk from day to day by faith, you will never be
faithful to the death. It is faith acted, which makes a man (as Chrysostom
said of Job) a man of Adamant, a man of Flint, a man invincible, not to be
moved. There is nothing more stirs men up to diligence in Gods service, then
the belief and expectation of a glorious reward. Every man propounds to
himself in all his undertakings, Quid habebo? What shall I have? All the world,
godly men, wicked men. Judas said, When he was betraying Christ, What will you
give me? What shall we have, said Peter to Christ, because we have left all and
followed thee? Wherefore when men see no likelihood of rewards, and do not
believe there is any, they despise to do service. Unbelief is the r^ot of all
profaneness; men of no Faith are men of no Religion; their neglect of Prayer,
hearing the Word, and other Pious Exercises, are evident tokens of their
unbelief that God cannot or will not reward them, or rather that God is not. It
is the most monstrous contradiction in the world to believe there is a God and
not to serve him, to believe the rules and precepts of Wisdom and not to
justify it, to believe there is an heaven for a reward and not to seek it. It
is men's unbelief that makes men have the Servants of God in contempt, and to
make a scorn of them, and to count them fools and madmen for their holiness.
They do not for the present believe that the godly are the Sons of God, heirs
of heaven, and shall be Kings of Glorious State; hereafter they will wish they
had lived their lives, whom they poured scorn and contempt upon. It is men's
unbelief that is the root of Apostasy from the paths of Wisdom, they march over
into the tents of Devil, and fight under his banner, run from Christ and his
Service to embrace this present evil world, because they see no present good,
profit nor happiness in serving God.

FINIS.

