Imprimatur, Liber cui Titulus [An Answer to the Compiler of the Nubes Testium,
etc.

October. 11. 1687. Hen. Maurice Rmo in Christo P.D. Wilhelmo Archiepiscopo Cant.
a Sacris.

AN ANSWER TO THE COMPILER OF THE Nubes Testium: Wherein is shown That
ANTIQUITY (in relation to the Points of Controversy set down by Him) did not
for the first five hundred years Believe, Teach or Practice, As the Church of
Rome does at present Believe, Teach and Practice.

Together with a Vindication of the VETERES VINDICATI From the late weak and
disingenuous Attempts Of the Author of Transubstantiation Defended,

By the Author of the Answer to Mr. Sclater of Putney.

LONDON, Printed for Henry Mortlock at the Phoenix in St. Paul's Churchyard.
1688.

THE Introduction.
WHen I first entertained the thoughts of answering this Collection of Nubes
Testium, I must confess that I could not begin the doing it without some aw,
and dread of the Author thereof: I was so afraid of encountering with a man of
those parts and learning he was said to be of, that I was for leaving the
answering his book to men of equal parts and learning: And I was very fearful
of meddling with the man who wrote the best book that ever was writ, or ever
would be written for their cause (as a Learned young Squire was pleased to say
of his Papist Misrepresented and Represented) not knowing but this Nubes
Testium might be the Second best book in the world, and therefore too gigantick
for me to grapple with.

But I took courage notwithstanding such a Character of the Author, and looked
upon the Squires Saying as one of his Complements to his New Church, and that
Honor and Hopes were things so surprising and dazeling to his Worship, that
it is no wonder they made him speak something becoming his New Great self: for
as to that Book of Representations and Misrepresentations every body saw, but
those who were resolved to wink hard, that his excellent Answerer has
sufficiently exposed that book, and shown how much more of paint and cunning
than of Solidity and Sincerity was to be seen in it; and for this Book under my
hands I question not but that I have let the Reader see, that it is the true
second part of the Representer, who has served Antiquity and the Primitive
Fathers in this Nubes just as he did in his other book the Church of England,
and her present or late Writers.

For the Matter and Authorities out of which this book is made up; One would
have believed that a Man who had presented the world with so large a
Collection, was very conversant in those Fathers he here makes use of; and for
my part I should have had such an opinion of him, could he but have kept his
own Council a little better, and not have bragged that the Latin of his
Authorities was out of Preface to Nubes Testium near the end of it.
such Editions as are most authentic: But when I came to examine things, I
quickly perceived, (to say no worse of it) that this Collector said more than
he knew, since the present French Historian Natalis Alexandre, out of whom this
whole Nubes Testium (excepting a very few passages) is wholly stole, does not
acquaint his Reader, that I can observe, what Editions of the Fathers he makes
use of: And reason good, since I believe he saw very little more than our
Compiler the Fathers themselves, but did very fairly take upon trust: And which
is more F. Alexandre tells his Reader in his Preface to his first volume that
he makes use of Christophersons Translation of Eusebius's History, which the
Men of this age I am sure do not believe to be the most Authentic; If our
Compiler (for he that steals a whole book without once mentioning whence he had
it, deserves no better a title) of the Nubes Testium do, there is no help for
it.

It was by remembering this last passage in Natalis's Preface, and comparing it
with our Compilers Brag about his Editions of the Fathers being the most
authentic, that I came to discover our Compilers haunts, and found him to be
the greatest Plagiary that has appeared (I believe) on the Stage in these times.

I will not trouble my self to prove this charge upon him here, since I do it
abundantly in my Answer it self, where I follow him from passage to passage,
and show not only the book, but the very pages in Natalis Alexandre from
whence he steals.

But I have a much worse thing to lay to our Compilers charge here, than the
Ungrateful Plagium it self, and it is, That he has stole this Nubes Testium
out of an Author, every one of whose Volumes, (that are made use of by our
Compiler) had been condemned to the flames two years before, and forbidden by
the supreme Authority in this Church.

I cannot but look upon this as a great instance of our Compilers Sincerity: In
his Papist Misrepresented and Represented He gives this Character of his
Papist, That he is one who is ready to behave Papist Misrepr. and Repr. c. 18.
p. 22.
himself toward his Chief Pastor [the Pope] with all Reverence and submission,
never scrupling to receive his Decrees and Definitions, such as are issued
forth by his Authority with all their due Circumstances, and according to the
Law in the Concern of the whole Flock: and this, whether He [the Pope] has the
Assistance of a Divine Infallibility or no, etc.

Here our Compiler did not characterize himself, nor is this I am sure any
Picture of his, for notwithstanding all this smooth discourse in that Chapter
about the Pope, He does in this book act directly contrary to it; F.
Alexandre's books to the twelvth Century inclusively were ordered to be
examined, and the Pope committed the examination of them to some of his
Cardinals joining with them some peculiar Divines, who together did agree
unanimously that F. Alexandre's books deserved to be prohibited and condemned;
upon this the Pope did not only by his Breve condemn those Books, but did
forbid the keeping as well as reading of them, did inhibit all the faithful of
what condition or state soever; under the pain of excommunication immediately
incurred the Printing, TRANSCRIBING, READING or USING ALL or ANY of THOSE
BOOKS: and yet our Compiler had the Courage, notwithstanding the
Excommunication denounced, and incurred by him, not only to KEEP and TO READ,
but to PRINT, TO TRANSCRIBE and TO MAKE USE OF SOME of THOSE CONDEMNED BOOKS.

I cannot see how our Compiler will answer this his contempt: and this seems to
be a trial of skill betwixt the Pope and Him about Infallibility; if the Pope be
Infallible (as I believe our Compiler used to think See for this his 18th chap.
concerning the Pope in his Papist Misrepres. and Repres.
him) then our Compiler is in a miserable condition; but if our Compiler be the
Infallible, (as He had need to be that acted thus point blank against the
Pope's mature and most Solemn Decree) then the Pope himself is in a very simple
Condition; I leave the Decision of the Point to the Romish Priests in England,
who confess our Compiler.

But least our Compiler should evade the severe charge laid against him, by
pretending all this is but a dream and an Invention of us Protestants; and that
I may gratify the Curiosity of those who never heard of, or saw this severe
Breve against Natalis Alexandre, I will here put it down, and translate it so
as that my English Reader may understand it also.

INNOCENTIUS P. P. XI. ad perpetuam Rei memoriam.
Cum in Lucem prodierint quidam libri, Authore fratre Natali Alexandre, Ordinis
Praedicatorum Parisiis impressi, videlicet alii in sexdecim volumina distributi
and a primo usque ad duodecimum seculum inclusive editi, sub titulo, Selecta
Historia Ecclesiasticae capita, and in loca ejusdem insigniora, Dissertationes
Historicae, Chronologicae, Criticae, Dogmaticae; alii vero in quatuor opuscula
divisi sub Titulis, Summa S. Thomae vindicata: Dissertationum Ecclesiasticarum
Tr^as, etc. Dissertatio Polemica de Confessione Sacramentali, etc. contra
Launoianas circa Simoniam observationes Animadversio; Quamplures autem ex
Venerabilibus sratribus nostris S. R. E. Cardinalibus ad eorundem librorum
examen una cum nonnullis in Sacra Theologia Magistris a nobis specialiter
del^cti, auditis dictorum Theologorum, matureque discussis sententiis, omnes
libros praedictos, (si ita NOBIS placeret) probibendos and condemnandos esse
unanimi consensu censuerint: Hinc est quod nos creditum nobis a Domino
pastoralis curae atque vigilantiae munus quantum nobis ex alto concoditur,
salubriter exequi cupientes, de eorundem Cardinalium Consilio, ac etiam motu
proprio and ex certa scientia ac matura deliberatione nostra, deque APOSTOLICAe
POTESTATIS PLENIFVDINE omnes sineulos libros supradictas tenore praesentium
damnamus and reprobamus, ac LEGI seu RETINERI prohibemus, ipsorumque librorum
OMNIVM and SINGVLORVM Impressionem, DESCRIPTIONEM, LECTIONEM and VSVM OMNIBVS
and SINGVLIS Christi Fidelibus etiam specifica, and individua mentione and
expressione dignis, SVB POENA EXCOMMVNICATIONIS per contrafacientes ipso facto
ABSQVE ALIA DECLARATIONE INCVRRENDA, a quae nemo a quoquam praeterquam a Nobis,
se^ Romano Pontifice pro tempore existente, nisi in mortis articulo constitutus
absolutionis beneficium valeat obtinere, omnino interdicimus. Volentes and
Apostolica Authoritate mandantes, ut quicunque libros praedictos, vel little
aliquam penes se habuerint, illos seu illum statim atque praesentes literae eis
innotuerint, teneantur tradere atque consignare locorum Ordinariis, vel
haereticae pravitatis Inquisitoribus, qui exemplariae sibi sic tradita illico
fl^mmis aboleri curent, in contrarium facientibus nonobstantibus quibuscunque.
Vt autem istae istae praesentes Literae omnibus facilius innotescant, nec
quisquam Illarum ignorantiam allegare possit, Volumus and Authoritate praedicta
decernimus illas ad valvas Basilicae Principis Apostolorum ac Cancellariae
Apollolicae, etc. Datum Romae apud Sanctum Petrum sub Annulo Piscatoris die
decimo Julii 1684. Pontifi^atus nostri anno octavo, etc. In the Nouvelles de la
Republique des Lettres for the month of October 1684. p. 260, 261, etc.

INNOCENT the Eleventh, POPE, for the PERPETUAL MEMORY OF THE THING.
Whereas certain Books have been published, the Author Br. Natalis Alexandre a
Dominican, printed at Paris; some of which divided into sixteen Volumes
[deducing the History of the Church] from the first to the twelvth Century
inclusively are put forth under the Title of Select Heads of Ecclesiastical
History, with Historical, Chronological, Critical and Dogmatical Dissertations
upon the more famous parts thereof; others divided into four Tracts under the
Titles of St. Thomas's Sums vindicated, a Triade of Ecclestastical
Dissertations, etc. a Polemical Dissertation concerning Sacramental Confession,
etc. an Animadversion upon Launoy's Observations about Simony. Having made
choice of many of our Reverend Brethren the Cardinals, together with some other
Doctors in Divinity for the examination of the said Books, and having heard,
and thoroughly examined the said Divines Opinions, they did unanimously give
their Judgment, that all the abovenamed Books (if it seemed good to us) should
be prohibited and condemned. Hereupon being desirous to discharge carefully
that Pastoral charge committed to us by our Lord, as well by the Counsel of the
said Cardinals, as of our own proper motion and certain knowledge and mature
deliberation, and also by the PLENITUDE OF APOSTOLICAL POWER We do DAMN and
REPROBATE by virtue of these presents ALL and EVERY of the abovenamed Books,
and we do forbid their being either READ or KEPT, and we do altogether inhibit
ALL and EVERY of the FAITHFUL of what condition or quality soever, the
PRINTING, TRANSCRIBING, READING, or USE of all and EVERY of the said Books,
under Pain of Excommunication to be incurred ipso facto WITHOUT ANY OTHER
DECLARATION by any that act contrary to this our Decree, who shall not be
absolved (except AT THE POINT OF DEATH) by any person besides our self, and the
Pope of Rome for the time being. And We will, and command by our Apostolic
Authority, that if any persons have all or any of those said Books in their
custody, they shall deliver and resign up those Books, or that Book, as soon as
these our present Letters shall be made known to them, unto the Ordinaries of
the places [where they live,] or to the Inquisitors, who are to take care that
the Copies so delivered up to them be immediately condemned to the flames, any
Canon or Custom to the contrary notwithstanding. And that these our present
Letters may more easily come to the knowledge of all persons, and none may
pretend ignorance of them, We will and decree by our Apostolic Authority, that
these Letters be affixed to the Doors of the Church of St. Peter, and of the
Apostolic Chancery, etc. [the rest concerns only the securing of this public
notice.] Given at Rome at St. Peter's under the Seal of the Fisher, the tenth
day of July 1684. being the eighth year of our Pontificate.

I have not room or leisure here to make Reflections upon the odd management of
the Pope toward this poor Dominican, who does not refrain complaining In his
Preface to his Pars 1. sec. 15. and 16.
that such a Tempest should be raised against him, and nothing said to the
Prelates of France, to the Doctors of the Sorbonne, who all taught and wrote
the same that he had done in any of these Books concerning the Pope's
Jurisdiction or Infallibility: Nay, that he should be condemned for writing
that, which this Pope himself had approved of in his Approbation of the Bishop
of Meaux's Exposition. I think NATALIS ALEXANDRE ought to be added to the
Instances of the Sincerity that was used in the APPROBATION of that Book of the
Bishop of Meaux, for which, tho he himself had thanks, yet it seems others must
have Lashes and Curses for holding and asserting the same Doctrines that De
Meaux does there. As for our Compiler, what condition soever he may look upon
himself to be in, notwithstanding his frequenting the Romish Chapels, I must
assure him that He is by the drawing up of this Nubes Testium, become one of
us, that is, lies under the Pope's Curse, and that he has laid himself open to
the malice of his Enemies of his own Party, who now may inform the Pope's
Nuncio against him, and prove the Charge severely enough against him from this
Answer, which he has drawn upon himself.

Having done with the Compiler; before I conclude my Introduction, I must not
forget to be civil to a late Adversary who was pleased to do me the Honor to
lead me in Triumph with the Excellent Dean of C. As he afforded me a place in
his Introduction to his TRANSUBSTANTIATION DEFENDED, so I was resolved to
provide him a room in mine, and not to troub^^ my book with one that nibbles
only at half a Page in the Veteres Vindicati or Expostulatory Letter to Mr.
Sclater of Putney.

He is very angry at my Argument about determining the THIS in the Proposition,
THIS IS MY BODY, to mean Bread, and takes me to task about my Logic, as if I
had never looked into one or had forgot it: I suppose my crime is, that I did
not talk Metaphysically, and argue in Mood and Figure, and skirmish with my
Dilemma's and Sorites'es, with Idea's and Predicates, with Identicals and
Tautologicals; which are things very edifying and extremely instructive to a
Common Reader. As to my Ignorance therefore in Logic, I cannot help it at
present, but will, when I am a little better convinced of my wants therein,
than our Author has been able to do it: but for miscalling the Sorites an
Induction, and not putting my Propositions in Mood and Figure, I must tell him,
that I had two pretty good reasons, the one was, because I would not, and the
other, because I durst not.

I would not, because I believed that Induction was a word better known to the
Generality of Readers than Sorites, and that a plain rational way was more
convictive to a Common Reader, than to disturb him with my Majors and Minors,
with my Ergo's and Predicates, if I could fairly avoid them. I durst not, for
fear of the Poet, for I could not but remember, how very angry the Poet was
with a very learned Answerer for arguing too closely, how he twitted him with
ergoteering, and called him Grim Logician, and I was therefore so afraid lest
when he next fell to Hind-and-Panthering, and to sorting out his beasts, I
should have been made a Beast for my pains, and have been nicknam'd Isgrim the
Logician, to distinguish me from his other Isgrim.

These reasons I hope will be accepted, if not, as soon as I know it, I will
think of better: And in the mean time look after the Vindication of my Argument
to determine the THIS in our Saviors words to mean Bread; (...) Vindicati, p.
57.
I was saying above in that page which this Gentleman carps at, that if I could
prove that the THIS in those words was Bread, that Proposition must not be
taken in a literal ( or if he pleases in a proper) sense: And I did endeavor
to clear it thus, That which our Savior took into his hands (when he was about
the Institution) was Bread; That which He blessed was the same thing that he
had taken into his hands; That which he brake was the same thing that he had
blessed; That which He gave them when he said it was his Body, was that which
he had broken; But that which He broke, which he blessed, which he took into
his hands was BREAD: Therefore it was Bread, which he gave his Disciples; and
by THIS is meant This Bread. Veteres Vindicati, p. 57.


This Induction I said was so fair and so clear that I was sure Mr. Slater
could not evade it.

This my Answerer calls mighty boasting, and will needs have it that the
Induction is a mere fallacy and Illusion, and which is as obliging, tells me,
it proceeded from Ignoratio Elenchi, Ignorance of Argument or Proof. But how I
pray? Why, after he has run me down with a Kitchin-boy, and forced me into an
Absurdity, as he I warrant him, good man, thought he had; He very gravely
assures me that it could not be Bread, because it was then changed. Before we
make one step further, I must ask him what Church he is of, this I know he will
be angry at, but it is necessary, because he either is not of the Church of
Rome, or does not understand his own Church. I am enquiring what is meant by
the Word THIS at the beginning of the Proposition, THIS IS MY BODY, and
collected that it was Bread, because that was the Subject of our Savior's
Discourse and Actions immediately before: But this Gentleman answers me that it
could not be bread because it was then changed, that is, to reconcile him and
his Church together, the Bread was changed, and it was not changed. It was not
changed, says the Church of Rome, since the change ensues the pronouncing the
whole Proposition of THIS IS MY BODY. It was changed says the Answerer to me;
But whether before or at the pronouncing of THIS he has not told us. I cannot
but desire of him, who is so civil as to send me to read Logic again, that he
would condescend so far as look into the Council of Florence, and see by whose
words and when the Change of the Bread is made in Consecration. Let him look
into Turrecremata's Discourse there to convince Council. Floren. Pars 2.
Collatio 22. Number. 5, 8. p. 1143, 1153. in Tom. 13. Council. Edit. Cossart. 1672.
the Orientals that the Change is only made by the pronouncing of our Lords
own words, THIS is my Body, and then tell me whether he is still of the opinion
that by THIS cannot be meant the Bread, since it is already changed.

As this is enough to show not only the weakness of his answer, but the
Silliness of his argument from Raw Flesh, and Water, and Sacramental Bread, so
what follows will as fully discover his disingenuity: After I had spoken of the
clearness of my Induction, I urged my Argument further, Veteres Vindicati, p.
57.
that if by THIS is not meant the Bread, I desired to know what it was
exclusive to Bread; And further, how the Bread could be by the words, THIS IS
MY BODY, converted into the Body of Christ, if the Bread was not mentioned
here, nor meant by the word THIS.

This part of the Argument our Answerer durst not undertake, but very fairly
slips it over though connected to the Induction. and falls to upbraiding me, as
if I was for being the Great Champion of the Protestant Cause, and derides my
next words about my saying this matter and argument was so demonstrative, that
I could not but stand amazed that Men who pretend to reason could refuse it; as
if what he had said had fully answered the demonstration ( as he calls it) when
as he had not the face to say one word to the latter, and stronger part of it.
This is just as if one in the Schools could say, Nego minorem to the first
Syllogism of his opponent, and not one Syllable to the following Syllogisms
wherein the Argument it brought to a Head, and yet brag that he had not only
answered, but exposed his Opponent.

And so he deals with me about my Remarks upon this thing. I observed that though
our Savior did not say plainly, This Bread is my Body, yet he said according
to St. Luke and St. Paul, This CUP is the new Testament in my Blood, which
passage I thought and said did fully determine, that the Bread was as much
meant in the This is my Body, as the Cup was in the This is my Blood in St.
Matthew and St. Mark. This the Answerer will not allow, but goes as weakly to
work about disproving as any Adversary could wish. He begins with an excellent
Observation that the word This in the Proposition, This Cup is the new
Testament in my Blood, is joined to the word Cup, by a known Figure. I will lay
him all I shall be worth this year, that there is never a Schoolmaster in this
City can tell me by what Figure it is that THIS is joined to Cup, and for my
part I have forgot my Rhetoric as well as Logic if there be such a Figure:
And am afraid it is some Metaphysical not Rhetorical Figure: But to leave this
ridiculous stuff, what he would say is, that by this Cup is meant That which is
contained in the Cup: And pray who ever denied this, and how does this disprove
me? His only business is to bewilder himself, I brought that plain passage in
St. Paul, This Cup, to determine what was meant by the THIS in the Obscure one
in St. Matthew; He is for carrying it back, and for illustrating the plain Text
by the obscure one, which is such a sottish sort of management, as will perplex
Controversy to eternity, and make every thing alike obscure.

His further Answer is, that if we explain the words This Cup, etc. to mean
This Wine is my Blood ( as it most certainly ought to be) then the words in
this sense will be contrary to the Rules of Humane discourse, as he says he
shows p. 33, 34. of his Book.

I have looked there, and desire every one else that has a mind to read two or
three Pages about nothing. I will only answer that our sense of the words is
only contrary to his Rules of Discourse; and that since He was not the Master
of Language to our Savior, to teach him how to express himself, we will be
ruled by our Savior's words, and the phrase of the Eastern Nations when our
Savior conversed in the world, and not by this pragmatical Master of
Mataphysical Ceremonies.

He has had enough of this Remark, and therefore lets the other pass quietly,
wherein I observed that as our Savior after Consecration called the Wine the
Fruit of Matthew. 26.29.
the Vine, so St. Paul does not less than three times call the Bread after
Consecration Bread. I have promised in my Book, and therefore should have shown
here against my Adversary, that not only our Savior's and the Apostles
expressions cannot be understood otherwise than to mean by THIS the Bread, but
that St. Ignatius and Justin, Irenaeus and Origin, and twenty other Fathers do
say of Bread, that It is the Body of Christ, which it cannot be any otherwise
than in a figurative sense: but since I am told I shall have occasion to wade
deeper into this Controversy, I shall reserve it for a further opportunity, if
the Superiors have a mind to have the Antiquary of Putney set forth once more
in his true Colors. But this, as He and They can agree it, I will only tell
him here, that I hope in God I am able, and that I am sure I am willing to make
good the Charge drawn up against him in the Expostulatory Letter.

I have but one word more to my Answerer, that he is very disingenious in
saying that I have a Reserved Distinction of Christ's Natural and Spiritual
Flesh and Blood; whereas if any one will take the pains to consult that place
which he refers to in my Book, he will find that the Distinction is not mine,
but the Fathers Veteres Vindicati, p. 102.
and that by Spiritual was meant Christ's Sacramental or Symbolical Body, as he
might have seen often enough in that Book.

This is all that concerns me in that Introduction to TRANSVBSTANTIATION
DEFENDED; I shall not trouble my self with the rest of the Introduction, or
with the Book, I will only tell him, that he is fallen into the hands of one,
who it is forty to one will spoil his ever putting out his Second Part against
that Incomparable Discourse; but that if he does, and brings any thing against
me ( as he threatens to do) in that Second Part worth answering, I will take
care to return him the civility of an Answer, and only desire him that he would
manage what he says there with a little more care, clearness and ingenuity; or
else I may be persuaded not to throw away my time in answering such weak and
silly objections as He has made against me here.

AN ANSWER TO The COMPILER of the Nubes Testium.
CHAP. I. Concerning the Donatists.
SECT. I.
THE Compiler of the Nubes Testium, having undertaken to show, in the thirty
seventh Chapter of his Papist Misrepresented and Represented, the great
improbability of any Innovations being made by the Church of Rome in Matters of
Faith, was almost willing in that place to have made it evident from the
Unanimous Tradition of the Primitive Fathers of the first five hundred years
especially; for which good purpose He was making up his Collections, as he
tells us Papist Misrepres. and Repres. p. 57.
, but finding the Matter to increase much beyond expectation upon his hands, He
did reserve them for another Occasion, and has now acquitted himself of that
obligation in the publishing of this Book.

In his first Book he was very solicitous with abundance of words to remove the
false slander (as he would have it thought) of Novelty affixed to his Church;
in this Book He is as desirous of doing it by an Abundance of Quotations out of
the Primitive Fathers, and thereby of throwing it among us of the Reformation.

Since Novelty in Faith therefore is such a Scandal, as all, that are
Christians, are for clearing themselves from; we of the Church of England are
very willing to join issue with this Compiler, and to refer the Judgment of the
Points of Controversy betwixt us and the Church of Rome, set down by him in
this Book, to the Writings of the Primitive Fathers: that so after a fair and
true stating of the particular Points in debate, and the calling in of the
Testimonies of the first Fathers; the learned and unlearned part of the World
also may see whether of the two Churches of England or Rome deserves the charge
of Novelty, and whether of them, after all this dust that has been raised,
must be content to wear this hated badge of Novelty and Innovation. Since the
One of them must of necessity do it in this great Division of Doctrine, and
Difference of Practice, that is so visible betwixt them.

I shall proceed in the Method used by the Compiler, and fairly examine how,
and whether the Testimonies from Antiquity (all which (excepting two or three)
our Compiler has, without making the least mention of it, borrowed from
Natalis Alexandre) do declare for, and illustrate the present Doctrines and
Practices of the Church of Rome.

Our Compiler begins his Book with an Account of the Donatists Schism and
Heresy; which He has collected out of Natalis Alexandre's Account of them in
his Pars prima Seculi quarti, from page 30 Natalis Alexandri Selecta Historiae
Ecclesiasticae Capita, etc. Paris, 1679.
.

I shall not trouble my self with any Observations upon that Account of the
Donatists in this place; nor my Reader with any dissent about the beginning of
this Schism, betwixt the Learned H. Valesius and Father Alexandre; but proceed
to the first charge against the Donatists, and the Fathers Opposition to it;
Who did (as our Compiler tells us) maintain against those Schismatics; That in
the Church of Christ there are both good and wicked men: That her Faith remains
Pure and Uncorrupted, notwithstanding the Sins of her corrupt Members, and that
their wickedness is not sufficient Motive for any to desert her Communion Nubes
Testium, page 2.
.

For the Proof of this our Compiler cites the Testimonies of St. Cyprian, St.
Austin, St. Hierom, and St. Austin again, every syllable of which Quotations
are taken out of Natalis Alexandre's thirty eighth Dissertation against the
Donatists In his Pars secunda Seculi quarti.
; the first from page 173. of that Dissertation, the second from page 174. the
third from page 175. the last from pages 178, 179.

I wonder how this Gentleman came to begin this Book with the Business of the
Donatists. The Title Page of his Book tells us, that his Collections concern
the chief points of Controversy at present under debate; now this is so far
from being a chief point, that it is no point of Controversy at all betwixt us
at present: He that has been so much concerned in the Debates of late, cannot
but very well know, that this thing of the Wickedness of some Members in the
Church of Rome has not been insisted on, or ever urged as the Reason of the
Division betwixt us and them. And indeed it would have puzzled me to have
guessed, what this business of the Donatists was now started for, and what
service it would do these Gentlemen of the Church of Rome, had I not found in
Father Alexandre himself Dissertatio tricesima octava, in Pare secunda Seculi
quarti, page 158.
, that those Proofs of the Fathers were as severe upon the Lutherans and
Calvinists (among one of which parties I know they rank us of the Church of
England) as upon the Donatists themselves.

But this is such a misty Consequence, as I confess I cannot see through, or
penetrate into it; the Fathers taught, that none ought to forsake the Communion
of the Church for the wicked lives of any members thereof, and that the
Donatists were Schismatics for forsaking it upon such an account; these Proofs
by consequence (says Father Alexandre) hold as strong against our modern
Schismatics, but how I pray? do the Calvinists and Lutherans make the bad
lives of some Papists the reason of their Separation from them? It was great
pity that F. Alexandre does not show where they do; because without the doing
it, he makes this the pitifullest Consequence I ever read, and very unbecoming
one that sets up for a Writer of Panoplies against all Heretics.

Our Compiler should not have omitted, how this business of the Donatists
reaches us, but should have even borrowed the Consequence to have mawled us
with it, as well as he does the Quotations from the Dominican: but perchance He
has found by dear experience, that such Consequences will not down here in
England, and therefore was so wise as to omit it, and to leave Him, that made
it, to defend it.

Since then the bringing in of this Error of the Donatists was to no purpose
in the World, but very silly, and very ridiculous, if designed against us, nor
consequently the Testimonies of the Fathers about it, I should now pass on to
his next head; but before I do that, I will here observe to the Reader, that
our Compiler is so exact a Transcriber of his Master, Father Alexandre, that,
where the Master is guilty of fault, he is not ashamed of being so too: F.
Alexandre quotes St. Austin, l. 3. cont. Crescon. c. 34, 45, 36. I have perused
those Chapters, but cannot find those passages there; however our Compiler is
happier, for he finds them exactly there, or else takes Father Alexandre's word
for them; I leave it to the Reader to judge whether is the more probable.

I cannot but complain here of that Father himself also, that in his other
Dissert. 38. Pars secunda Seculi quarti, p. 178, 179. Nubes Test. p. 5.
Testimony from St. Austin he has dealt unfaithfully with his Reader, he does
omit in the middle of the Quotation some considerable Names without giving any
notice of it by a Mark of distinction where the sentence is broke off. St.
Austin in this place is taking to task an Objection of the Donatists against
the Church, for the Wickedness of some Members thereof, particularly of some
Bishops of Rome, whom they accused of having been Traditours, and of having
offered incense to the Heathen Gods. He answers their Objection by telling
them, that it did not at all prejudice the Catholic Church, Prorsus
qualescunque fuerint, [ here Not. Alexandre and our Compiler leave off]
Marcellinus, Marcellus, Sylvester, Melchiades, Mensurius, Caecilianus, atque
alii quibus objiciunt pro sua dissensione quod volunt, [now they begin again]
nihil praejudicat Ecclesiae Catholicae toto terrarum orb diffusae: nullo modo
eorum innocentia coronamur; nullo modo eorum iniquitate damnamur. D. Aug. de
Vnico Bapt. cont. Petilian. c. 16. p. 342. Edit. Erasm. 1528.
what sort of men soever Marcellinus, Marcellus, Sylvester and Melchiades
[Bishops of Rome] Mensurius, Caecilianus [Bishops of Carthage] and the rest
were, to whom they in defense of their Schism did object what things they
pleased, that their innocence would not crown us, (whose then I pray are the
merits that are in the Treasury of the Church, and to what purpose are they
kept there) nor their wickedness damn us. An Answer that does at once ruin the
Papal Infallibility and Supremacy, and therefore was the more likely to be
concealed by one of that Church. I do not lay the accusation against our
Compiler also, because he, good man, was, I believe, purely passive in the
thing, and if he is here unfaithful to St. Austin and to the Reader, it is
because his Guide was unfaithful to him.

SECT. II.
The next Error of the Donatists is about the failure of the Church, in
Opposition to which our Compiler tells us, Nubes Testium, p. 6.
that the Fathers maintain, That the Catholic Church cannot fail, as being
assisted by the Spirit of God.

I am as much at a loss about this point of Controversy as I was about the
first; I have not met with any of our Writers that are for proving or
asserting, that this Catholic Church can fail, and am thereby pretty well
assured, that it is none of the Tenets of our Churchmen, that the Catholic
Church can or has failed; and I am as certain that it is none of the Doctrines
of the Church it self; so that I must beg this Gentleman's pardon, that I
cannot believe, that this opinion of the failure of the Catholic Church is one
of the chief points of Controversy at present under debate: I am so far from
being of that faith, that I think it not only ridiculous, but false, to assert
that there is any Controversy betwixt us about the failing or not failing of
the Catholic Church; and I cannot but observe that our Compiler, who is so
careful in the Appendix to his Collections to gather the Concessions or
Assertions of Protestants about the points and heads of Controversy in his
Book, either forgot to produce their Assertions and Concessions concerning this
and the precedent point, or was not able to produce any, which I am the more
ready to believe, because I look on the thing as impossible.

If then, not withstanding this Gentleman, there really be no Controversy
betwixt us touching this head, both parties believing that the Catholic Church
by reason of our blessed Lord his promised assistence cannot fail; it will very
readily be granted, that all the citations out of the Fathers, upon this head
against the Donatists, do not in the least affect or concern the Church of
England, since she detests that Error of the Donatists as much as any other
Church can.

I need not therefore examine the particular passages, since, granting them all
the strength and evidence they are produced for, they are not at all against
the Church of England. I will only inform the Reader, that the passages for
this point are taken out of the same Volume, and the same Dissertation of
Natalis Alexandre See Dissertatio 38. ^^rs secunda Seculi quarti, p. 182, 186,
164.
that the former were borrowed from. I must except the first quotation from St.
Cyprian, which does not occur in that place, but is, I question not, borrowed
from some other part of N. Alexandre's works: I must observe also that our
Compiler does in the first Testimony Nub. Test. p. 6.
from St. Cyprian exactly transcribe the Errors of his Guide, and that the
Guide himself either did not look into St. Austin for this passage, but very
honestly copied some Romish Friend of his, or was more than half asleep, when
he was writing this passage thence: without one of these I cannot see how he
should put reges for regna, and virtutis for fortitudinis in the beginning of
it. I have looked into two or three Editions for this thing, and find them
exactly agreeing in this place, and directly against the Guide and the Compiler.

SECT. III.
The last crime of the Donatists set down by our Compiler is their Schism, Nub.
Test. p. 10.
upon which he says, the Fathers unanimously declare, that whosoever breaks the
Unity of the Catholic Church, upon any pretext whatsoever, is guilty of
Schism, etc.

I am so far from the humor of making disputes or quarrels in things wherein
there ought to be none, and so desirous of reaching that part of his Book which
does contain matter of real Disputes betwixt us, that I shall here assure our
Author, that taking the word Pretext here in the sense wherein it is commonly
used among us, for a false show or groundless pretense, I am perfectly of his
Father's mind, that it is destructive of Salvation causelessly to break the
Unity of the Catholic Church; and that the Donatists, who acted thus, were
really guilty of a Criminal Schism; but I must withal assure our Compiler,
that I cannot see how this can be made matter of dispute betwixt us, who both
agree in asserting the same thing with those venerable Fathers, or how this can
any way affect or concern the Division that is at present betwixt us and the
particular Church of Rome; that Church tells us, that they separate from us
upon grounds which make such a Separation absolutely necessary, and we prove
against them, that our Reasons for not communicating with them are much more
absolutely such, and that Communion with them upon the Terms fixed by their
Council of Trent were destructive of Salvation, and therefore by no means to be
espoused.

Our Compiler has gathered a great many Authorities of the Fathers upon this
head, to every one of which we of the Church of England do very heartily
subscribe, and are at the same time able from Scripture and Antiquity to
justify our necessary separation from the Bishop and Church of Rome. I
heartily wish those that allowed this Book to the Press and all the Romish
Missionaries in England would consider the quotations on this point of Schism,
from St. Cyprian especially, and above the rest, that about the aliud Altar,
which was always so odious in the Catholic Church, and will be so, while there
is a Church of Christ on Earth.

All the passages upon this head, except two or three, are to be found with the
very same mistakes in them, in the same Volume and Dissertation of Natalis
Alexandre Dissertatio tricesima octava, Pars secunda Seculi quarti.
, the first with a foolish consequence about Calvinists sympathizing with the
Donatists tacked to the end of it, in p. 187. the next with the rest in page
187, 188, 189, 223, 191, 192, 193, 194, 195, 230, 196. The passage from St.
Austin in p. 230. in Not. Alexandre Nubes Test. p. 20. Not. Alex. p. 230.
is very much abused, non eo ad daemonia; sed tamen in part Donati sum, is not
all that Saint Austin says here, it is much fuller in him; and Father Alexandre
had showed himself an ingenuous man, if instead of putting in Luther and
Calvin's name there, after Donatus, which is nothing to the purpose, he had put
in what should have been there, and let us see the Text of St. Austin, which
runs thus, nec eo ad adoranda daemonia, non servio lapidibus, sed tamen in
part Donati sum. I wonder why F. Alexandre should be so much afraid of this
passage; though we do object to his Church, as a most grievous crime, the
giving religious worship to Saints and Angels, and their Images, yet he cannot
but know that we do not lay to their charge the worshipping of Devils, which we
are very glad our selves that we cannot do.

But I begin to suspect strongly that Father Alexandre and our Compiler are
very near akin, that our Compiler has made the same use of N. Alexandre, that
Alexandre himself has done of others: that which inclines me very much to this
Opinion is, that Father Alexandre never tells us, that I have observed, what
Editions of the Fathers he used, nor quotes the page where one may find his
quoted passage above once in five hundred passages (I believe) through all his
Volumes.

CHAP. II. Concerning the Pope's Supremacy.
SECT. I.
AFter twenty pages spent about matters that do not at all concern our present
Controversy, we are come to that which must be allowed not only to be a
Controversy, but the greatest of any that are now on foot in the World, and
which has been and is the cause of all those tyrannical pretensions and
uncanonical impositions which do at present divide the Christian World. The
Pope's Supremacy is that point which the Members of the Church of Rome,
especially the Vltramontaines, are so careful to defend, and we of the
Reformation to oppose.

Our Compiler being now come to a point of debate does not forget his art of
palliating, which was so very serviceable to him in his Misrepresentations and
Representations of Popery. He cannot but know (and therefore ought to have
avoided it) that this loose talk about Successor of Peter, and Center of
Catholic Communion does not reach the Pretensions of the Bishops of Rome, nor
fully and fairly declare what Power, Jurisdiction and Authority, in and over
the Catholic Church those Bishops challenge as their right.

To let him see how loosely he manages this debate betwixt us, I can with
putting in two or three necessary words subscribe to all our Compiler says for
the Pope, and yet be as far from owning the Pope's Supremacy, as the Church of
England is or ever was. The Fathers teach, Nub. Testium, p. 22.
says our Compiler, that Christ built his Church upon Peter: so say I too, if
by Fathers here be meant two or three of them, and not the Fathers unanimously
(as he has it before) or generally. That the Bishop of Rome is the Successor
of Saint Peter, is what I can also grant, and that That See is the Center of
the Catholic Communion, if I may but put in here what is absolutely necessary,
while possessed by an Orthodox Bishop, and that whosoever separates himself
from it (I add, professing the true Faith, and possessed by a Catholic
Bishop,) is guilty of Schism. I can, I say, subscribe (though I do not) to all
this, without any Obligation in the least of believing the Pope's Supremacy:
all that our Compiler puts down here, reaching no farther than a Primacy of
Order, does not at all suppose in the Popes any Jurisdiction or Authority over
the Catholic Church.

Since then our Compiler seems to be afraid of setting down a true account of
this Controversy betwixt us by mincing the matter so much about the Pope's
power, I must borrow of him his last Quotation under this head, the Canon of
the Council of Florence, and set that down as the true account of their
Doctrine concerning the Pope's power, and then not only show our reasons, why
we dare not submit to it, but that all the Testimonies our Compiler has put
down (from F. Alexandre, except two or three) under this head do not prove the
Pope's Supremacy, as it is stated by their General Council of Florence.
Diffinimus Sanctam Apostolicam Sedem and Romanum Pontificem, in universum orbem
tenere Primatum, and ipsum Pontificem Romanum Successorem esse Beati Petri
Principis Apostolorum, and verum Christi Vicarium, totiusque Ecclesiae Caput,
and omnium Christianorum Patrem ac Doctorem existere; and ipsi in Beato Petro
pascendi, regendi ac gubernandi universalem Ecclesiam, a Domino nostro Jesu
Christo, plenam potestatem traditam esse, quemadmodum etiam in Gestis
Oecumenicorum Conciliorum, and in Sacris Canonibus continetur. Council. Florent.
Pars 2. Collatio 22. p. 1136. Edit. Cossart.
We define (says the Canon) that the Holy Apostolic See and Bishop of Rome is
invested with the Primacy over the whole World, and that the Bishop of Rome is
the Successor of Saint Peter, Prince of the Apostles, and that he is the true
Vicar of Christ, and Head of the whole Church, and the Father and Doctor of
all Christians, and that the full power of feeding, ruling, and governing the
whole Church was given to him in St. Peter, by our Lord Jesus Christ, as it is
expressed or contained in the Acts of General Councils, and in the Holy Canons.

The Reader will very easily see what a great difference there is betwixt this
account of the Pope's Supremacy and that set down by our Compiler; and yet this
Gentleman would be thought to be an exact Stater of the Controversy betwixt
us, and to have represented fairly what the Doctrine of the Church of Rome is
concerning their Popes Power and Jurisdiction. I hope I am out of the danger of
being made a Misrepresenter, while I charge that only upon them as their
Doctrine, which has been defined by one of their General Councils, which is
the greatest strength and countenance that any Doctrine is capable of among
them.

This then being the true state of their Doctrine concerning their Popes Power
or Supremacy, and that which I would call naked Popery, I am sure I have
Commission from the Church of England to declare, that she cannot, without
betraying the Rights of all Bishops, and the Interest of the Catholic Church,
espouse the Doctrine of the Pope's Supremacy; which we of her Communion do
believe is altogether without foundation either from Scripture or Primitive
Antiquity.

It will not be consistent with that brevity I have confined my self to in this
Answer, to go through our several arguments against this usurped Supremacy of
the Bishops of Rome. I am only desirous to consider, in short, whence they
have this their extraordinary Power, which they do as extraordinarily contend
for: there are but Three Sources whence they can pretend to derive it; either
that it is from the Law of God set down in the Scriptures, or from the Laws of
the Universal Church to be seen in her Code; or, lastly, from the favor and
authority of secular Princes; the first of these is that which they commonly
claim and insist upon; the second is what this Canon of the Florentine Council
does challenge also in the Conclusion of it; though our Compiler is so sly in
the translating of it, as if the Canon meant only that the Bishop of Rome
should govern the Universal Church according to the Acts of General Councils,
and to the Holy Canons; whereas it is plain, this Canon speaks not of the
Exercise, but of the Original of the Pope's Power, and of the Testimonies for
it in the Acts and Canons of the General Councils; but F. Alexandre himself
taught our Compiler to translate thus Dissertatio quarta, Par. prima, Sec.
prim. p. 398.
; and truly, I think, he ought to have the Reputation of first finding the
Gallican Liberties in this Definition of the Council of Florence, which Council
was not usually thought to have been such a friend to the Gallican Liberties,
witness what the Cardinal of Lorrain is said to have spoken of it in just such
another Council at Trent: but the Men of this age are strangely set upon making
new discoveries; this age found out that the Libri Carolini, nor the Council of
Frankfort were not against the Image-council of Nice; that Bertram was as true
a man for Transubstantiation as Paschasius Radbertus that first (in all
probability) forged it; and our Not. Alexandre must come in for his share for
discovering that greatest thing the French Clergy are so earnest upon in this
Definition of the Council of Florence.

SECT. II.
The places of Scripture that are urged by the Church of Rome to prove the
Divine Institution of the Pope's Supremacy are very few, that of St. Matthew
with another from St. John: Not. Alexandre our Compiler's Guide does insist
upon them for the proof of the Pope's Supremacy. One would expect that they
should be very clear and very full Texts, that are brought to confirm such a
Portentous Authority as the Papal Supremacy appears to be.

St. Matthew does relate Matthew. 16.18, 19.
that upon St. Peter's having confessed our Savior to be the Son of the living
God; our Savior should say unto him, Thou art Peter, and upon this Rock I will
build my Church, and the Gates of hell shall not prevail against it; and I will
give unto thee the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven: and whatsoever thou shall
bind on earth shall be bound in heaven, etc. Here they tell us that our Savior
built his Church upon St. Peter, who is the Rock mentioned here, and that he
was thereupon invested with all Church power, the power of the Keys, which
power and government was by him deposited with his Successors the Bishops of
Rome.

In answer to this we say that there is nothing extraordinary or particular for
St. Peter here, because He is not the Rock mentioned here, nor had the power of
the Keys committed to him any otherwise than in common with the rest of his
fellow-Apostles: as our Savior put the Question to all the Apostles, so St.
Peter answering it in the name of them all, had the promise of, or received
this power of the Keys in behalf of them all, and for their common use of
them. Since then this place of Scripture is not sufficiently evident, or clear
for the purpose, both parties claiming an interest in it for their contrary
senses; and we avouching that it is absolutely against St. Peter's being either
Rock, or having any particular extraordinary power, if it be considered with
its relation to the context before, and to the rest of the Gospels and
Epistles; either this passage of St. Matthew as obscure must be set aside as
useless toward the proof of a Supremacy; or They of the Church of Rome must
convince us, that the Unanimous Consent of Fathers did always interpret this
place of Scripture in favor of St. Peter's Supremacy. This thing one would
think they were very able to do, since they are so ready to say they can, and
to assert that the Fathers did unanimously interpret the Rock mentioned in this
passage to be the Person of St. Peter. Thus our Compiler Nubes Test. p. 22.
very gravely tells us, that the Fathers teach that Christ built his Church
upon Peter, and this F. Alexandre had taught him to say, who certainly had
considered the thing very well, when he Dissert. 4. P. 1. Sec. 1. p. 274.
tells us, that the Fathers did with a Nemine contradicente Quocirca Sancti
Patres Communi suffragio, etc. Ibid. p. 274.
interpret the Rock to be meant of St. Peter.

Ignorance among all people is allowed to alleviate a crime, and a blindfold
implicit transcribing of a Writer's sense must be allowed to be very near
allied unto it, or else our Compiler ought to be treated as a person guilty of
very disingenuous and unjust behavior toward the memory of the Fathers: F.
Alexandre however, who taught our Compiler to publish so gross an untruth, is
by no means excusable; for should we allow him to be ignorant in the Fathers
own writings, and to have transcribed this bold untruth out of Bellarmine
Accedat [ speaking of Peter 's being the Rock] consensus Ecclesiae totius, and
Graecorum ac Latinorum Patrum, etc. Bellarm. de Romano Pontifice, l. 1. c. 10.
or some other of their Writers, yet He cannot be ignorant, I am sure, how
fully his learned Countryman, the famous Monsieur Launoy, has examined the
sense of the Fathers and Ecclesiastical Writers upon this Text of St. Matthew;
how distinctly he has put down the four different Interpretations of the Rock
in this Text, the first of which makes it to be the Person of St. Peter, the
second makes it to be all the Apostles with their Successors, the third
teaches that it is the Faith confessed by St. Peter, and the last, that the
Rock here is the Person of Christ himself Launoii Epist. ad Guil. Voellum apud
Part. 5. Epistolarum, p. 4, 11, 18, 38.
. Natalis Alexandre cannot but know how invincibly this most learned Sorbonist
has shown, that the Generality of Fathers and Ecclesiastical Writers are for
the third Interpretation, which makes the Faith confessed by St. Peter, and not
St. Peter himself, to be the Rock on which Christ's Church was built: that a
great many are for the fourth Interpretation, that says, the Rock was Christ
himself. This last Interpretation falling in with the third (for Christ or the
Faith confessed concerning Christ come to the same thing) may be with most
reason called the unanimous Consent of the Church-Interpreters that the rock
here is not Peter; whenas there are but a few of those Fathers for the first
Interpretation, and most of their expressions capable of the second, and not
inconsistent with the third Interpretation.

So that if the Interpretations of above fifty Fathers and Ecclesiastical
Writers, among whom we muster no fewer than eleven Popes and two Synods, are to
be admitted against that of three or four Fathers; We are sufficiently secured,
that the Interpretation of the Rock in this Text, its being the Faith confessed
by St. Peter concerning Christ (which is espoused by the Church of England) is
true and Catholic: that to interpret it of St. Peter's person is to contradict
the Stream of Catholic Antiquity, and consequently that there is no ground
from this Text of St. Matthew for the Supremacy of St. Peter or the Bishops of
Rome.

I suppose it will not be expected here that I should set down all these
numerous Authorities which the excellent Launoy has with so much industry
collected to prove that by the Rock in this Text is meant the Faith confessed
by St Peter, I will only put down one or two passages of the Fathers omitted
by him, that the World may see that that excellent Person has not exhausted
the Subject, nor produced all the Proofs of those Authors whom He sets down.
The first shall be Epiphanius (omitted by Launoy) who brings in our Savior
saying to St. Peter, That upon this Rock of unshaken (...). Epiph. adv. Haer.
L. 2. T. 1. p. 500. Edit. Par. Petav. 1622.
Faith I will build my Church. St. Chrysostom tells us that our Savior said,
upon this Rock, not upon Peter, for he built his Church not upon the man Peter,
but upon the Faith (...). D. Chrysostom. Sermo de Pentecoste, p. 233. in T. 6. Edit.
Ducael, 1636.
which He had confessed.

As to the latter part of this passage from St. Matthew, to wit, about the
promise made to St. Peter of having the Keys bestowed upon him, I am sure it
is very far from doing the Romanists any service, since it is abundantly plain,
that when our Savior after his Resurrection came to perform the promise he had
made here, He did bestow the Power of the Keys equally among the Apostles,
without preserring one Apostle above another, or giving to one a greater share
in the Use of the Keys than to the rest; so that if St. John's Gospel be but
as Authentic as St. Matthew's, we are fully secured that this Power of the
Keys was equally given in Saint John S. John 20.21, 22, 23.
, and therefore equally promised in St. Matthew to all the Apostles. It were
very easy to show from abundance of the Fathers Expressions, that there is
nothing in this promise peculiar to St. Peter. Origin tells us, that what was
promised here was common to the rest of the Apostles Quod si dictum hoc, tibi
dabo claves regni coelorum, caeterisque quoque commune est, etc. Orig. Tr. 1.
in Matt. p. 39. Edit. Freb. 1530.
; and Saint Austin informs us somewhere, as I have met with it quoted, that as
St. Peter made the Confession in the name, and as the mouth of all the
Apostles, so He received this promise in the behalf of all, as representing
them all.

But if any contend, that this promise was performed as soon as spoken, and
therefore that there was something extraordinary and particular to St. Peter
here since he is here invested with those Keys which the rest of the Apostles
had nothing to do with, nor were admitted to any share in them till just
before our Savior his Ascension: our Answer is very ready, that the rest of
the Apostles did certainly here receive the same power of the Keys, that they
will have St. Peter invested with; because in the next Chapter but one Matthew.
18.17, 18.
to this our Savior speaks to all the Apostles as already invested with this
power of the Keys: which Assertion of ours the Generality of the Fathers are
so far from opposing, that the abovenamed In Ep. ad Vallantium.
Learned Sorbonist Monsieur Launoy has with prodigious pains demonstrated that
St. Peter did receive the power of the Keys in the name of the Apostles, their
Successors, and the whole Church, and that the Catholic Church is the
proximate Subject of all Church Power; This he has evidenced from the
concurrent Authority of at least Launoii Ep. ad Hadrian. Vallantium in Par.
secunda Epp.
seventy Fathers and Ecclesiastical Writers, among whom we find eight Councils,
three Universities, one Learned King, our Henry the Eighth, eleven Popes and
two Rituals, from above two hundred Testimonies (as I think I may safely say
it) out of these Writings. So that if these passages from St. Matthew, about
the Rock and the Power of the Keys be not invincibly demonstrated to be
directly contrary to the Romish Pretensions, and their urging St. Matthew's
Expressions for their Popes Supremacy be not hence proved to be extravagantly
unreasonable and perfectly groundless, I must even say that it is utterly
impossible for the wisest man in the World to prove any thing even from the
best Evidences, and that the Decree of their Council of Trent, That Scripture
be interpreted by the unanimous consent of Fathers, is the foolishest order in
the World, if so many and so great Testimonies be not able to rescue these two
passages of St. Matthew from the abusive Interpretations of the Popes Vpholders.

The other place of Scripture alleged by them to prove the Divine Institution
of St. Peter's Supremacy is that of St. John S. Joh. 21.15, 16, 17.
, wherein our Savior bids St. Peter thrice to feed his Sheep and Lambs. From
this place they say (F. Alexandre among the rest) that the chief care of the
Church, and a sacred Principality in it over all conditions as well Apostles as
others was conferred upon St. Peter by our Savior: but this is much easier
said than proved, since the natural sense and a fair interpretation of the
words extends no farther than a repeated command of feeding Christ's Flock,
which has nothing of extraordinary in it, since the rest of the Apostles had
had the same Injunctions, though not in the same terms, laid upon them; and
farther if this place must be forced to settle something upon St. Peter, it
will make him not the chief, but the sole Pastor of the Catholic Church,
since here, just before his Ascension, our Savior gives his Commands, and
commits the Charge of his whole Flock to St. Peter alone: and this is the sense
wherein the Council of Florence seems to have taken these words in St. John,
when in the Canon I set down above it defines, that the full or whole power of
feeding, P. 9.
ruling and governing the whole Church was given to the Pope in St. Peter.

If this be their sense therefore, I desire to know of these men what is become
of the charge given to the rest of the Apostles of going to teach (which is the
same with feeding) all Nations, which includes old and young, Sheep and Lambs;
I would be informed also what there is more either of Authority or Charge in
this passage, than in that general Commission in St. Matthew Matthew. 28.19, 20.
: and farther, I would fain know, whether this Commission here about feeding
the Sheep and Lambs does cancel that solemn and general one to all the
Apostles in the Chapter next before that, from whence we have this passage
about Sheep and Lambs Joh. 20.21, 22, 23.
.

Perhaps some may be so impudent to avouch that it does cancel the other, and
some men's Opinions, I am sure, do oblige them to believe it: however we must
tell such that St. Paul was not of their Opinion, for when he had sent for the
Elders of the Church of Ephesus to Miletus Acts 20.17, 28.
, He honors them with the Title of Bishops; whereas, according to these men
they were no Bishops, but St. Peter's Curates; He tells them that the Holy
Ghost had made them Pastors of their Flocks, which must be a mistake in St.
Paul, since these Elders could not be the Holy Ghost's Pastors, while they
were only St. Peter's Curates, and no Pastors at all.

And St. Peter himself is as far from these men's fancies; he would not
otherwise have been so forgetful of himself as to call the Bishops among the
dispersed Jews his fellow-Pastours; whereas, according to these men, Those
Elders were so far from being Christ's Bishops, that they were but his own
Curates, they were so far from being his Equals (as he says they were 1 Pet.
5.1, 2.
) that they at most were but his Servants sent by him to feed their several
flocks: but enough of this.

Both parties of the Romanists, as well those that from this place make St.
Peter prime Bishop, as those that make him sole Bishop of the Catholic Church,
appeal to the Fathers in defense of their several Interpretations, and thither
we are very willing to go with them, and to be judged by the Fathers what is
the true sense and import of these words.

St. Cyprian, in his Tract concerning the Unity of the Church (according to
Pamelius's Edition) speaking concerning the Apostles, says, that every of them
were Pastors, yet the flock but one, which was to be fed by all the Apostles
with their unanimous and united endeavors Et Pastores sunt omnes, sed grex
unus ostenditur, qui ab Apostolis omnibus unanimi consensione pascatur. D.
Cypr. de Unit. Eccl. Edit. Pamel.
; and the same thing this excellent Father says in his Epistle to Stephen,
Bishop of Rome, ( whom He calls his Brother) that though they were many
Pastors [ they two among the rest] yet that the flock was but one, which they
were to feed, and therefore that it was Nam etsi Pastores multi sumus, unum
tamen gregem pascimus, and oves universas, quas Christus sanguine suo ac
passione quaesivit, colligere and fovere debemus. Cypr. Ep. 68. Stephano, p.
178. Edit. Oxon.
to be their care to secure and preserve all those Sheep which Christ had
purchased by his bloody Passion. In this Epistle one may see the true state of
the Catholic Church, and of Episcopal Dignity at that time, how little they
thought then of the Bishop of Rome's being either the Prince of Bishops, or the
sole Bishop in the Church, when St. Cyprian -- Cui rei nostrum est consulere,
and subvenire, frater charissime, qui divinam clementiam cogitantes, and
gubernandae Ecclesiae libram tenentes, sic censuram vigoris peccatoribus
exhibemus, etc. Idem, Ibidem, p. 176, 177.
tells Stephen, Bishop of Rome, that it was every Bishop's Province to take
care, lest any damage should accrue to the flock of Christ through Heretics
and such evil Workers, since they [the Bishops] were in common entrusted [not
He at Rome alone or above the rest] with the Government of the Catholic Church.

St. Ambrose, speaking of our Savior's bidding Peter to feed his Sheep, Quas
oves and quem gregem non solum tunc beatus suscepit Petrus, sed and nobiscum
eas suscepit, and cum illo eas nos suscepimus omnes. D. Ambrosius, de Dignitate
Sacerdotali, c. 2. p. 386. T. 4. Edit. Erasm.
says, that St. Peter did not receive alone those Sheep and that flock, but
that he did receive them in common with the rest of the Pastors of the Church,
and the Pastors also with him.

St. Chrysostom, in his Dialogue, persuading St. Basil to undertake the
Pastoral Charge, assures him that (...), -- (...). D. Chrysostom. de Sacerdotio, c.
1. p. 15. in T. 4. Edit. Ducaei.
thereby he should show his love toward Christ, if he would feed his flock,
since it was recorded in Scripture, if thou love me, feed my flock.

St. Austin baffles the Opinions of both parties of the Romanists in a very
few, but very expressive words Et cum ei [ viz. Petro] dicitur, ad OMNES
dicitur, Amos me? Pasce oves meas. D. August. de Agone Christiano, c. 30. p.
550. in T. 3. Edit. Erasm. 1528.
, When it is said to Peter, it is said to all Pastors, love thou me? Feed my
Sheep.

There is nothing more evident in Antiquity, than that the Bishops of the
Catholic Church, looking upon themselves as the Apostles Successors, and
entrusted by them with that care and charge of the flock of Christ, which they
themselves had from Christ himself, thought themselves obliged by their station
in the Church to feed, to preserve, and to watch over the flock of Christ,
remembering, that as Christ committed to them that great charge, so He would
require as strict an account of their discharge thereof.

And the Bishops of Rome were so far in those days from taking too much upon
them, or pretending to a peculiar or sole charge of the Catholic Church, that
it is evident from those first times, that the term of Brother, Colleague, and
Fellow-Bishop passed mutually from them to others, and from others to them,
witness the Synodical Epistle of the Synod of Antioch against Paulus
Samosatenus Apud Eusebius. Hist. Eccles. l. 7. c. 27.
, the Epistle of St. Cyril and the Synod at Alexandria to Nestorius Council. T.
3. p. 395. Edit. Cossartii.
; and several of the Epistles in St. Cyprian; and the learned Monsieur Launoy
has produced the concurrent Authority of about forty Popes, who in their
occasional Letters to other Bishops used the term of Brother or Fellow-Bishop,
and thereby owned them their Fellow-Pastours in the charge and government of
the flock of Christ J. Launoii Epist. ad Formentinum apud Par. 5. Epp. p. 27,
etc.
.

If notwithstanding all this, any inquire to what purpose then was this
threefold question and charge to St. Peter, though it is answer sufficient to
tell them, that they have nothing to do to be so inquisitive, yet since they
are, I do refer them to St. Cyril of Alexandria on this place -- (...). B.
Cyril. Comment. in Joann. l. 12. p. 1119, 1120. Edit. Par. 1638.
, where they will find that this threefold question about his love to Christ
was, to put him on making satisfaction for his threefold denial of Christ; and
that the charge of feeding the Sheep was as it were a restoring him to his
Apostolical Function from which he might seem to have fallen by his grievous
denial of his Master.

I have thus proceeded through all the places that are alleged for to ground
the Papal Supremacy upon Scripture; I think I have abundantly shown, that none
of these three places does in the least favor such pretensions, since not
only the comparing these with other places of Scripture, but the almost
Unanimous Consent of Primitive Fathers and Ecclesiastical Writers (who
interpret them in favor of all the Apostles against St. Peter) does prove, to
the perfect silencing of these pretensions, that such a Supremacy has no
foundation in Scripture; and if it has none there, it is in a sad condition,
since if Christ himself did not make the Bishop of Rome his Vicar, all the
General Councils in the World together cannot make him such: I am sure St.
Luke, who tells Theophilus Acts 1.1, 2.
that he drew up his former Treatise about all that our Savior did till his
Ascension, does no where tell us that he did this, but does in the next verse
tell us in effect that he did the direct contrary, while he speaks of his
charges to the Apostles whom he had chosen.

I cannot omit the observing here, that as none of these places of Scripture do
prove any Supremacy for St. Peter, so neither do they prove any Primacy or
Prerogative for him: as they equally concerned all the Apostles, so they
equally distribute any honor among them, without preferring one above another:
This Observation I do make for the sake of those Gentlemen in France
especially, who though they have with unanswerable arguments baffled the
extravagant pretensions of the Romish Courtiers, yet do allow the Bishop of
Rome to be Christ's Vicar, instated by him in the Primacy over the whole
Church; I would only recommend to such the Consideration of the Fathers
Interpretations of the places of Scripture cited above, and these three short
passages in Antiquity; the first from St. Cyprian, who, speaking about the
nature and government of the Catholic Church, says, that there is but one
Episcopacy in it, whereof every particular Bishop of the Catholic Church had
an equal share and the full power of that Function Episcopatus unus est, cujus
a singulis in solidum pars tenetur. Cyprianus, de Unit. Eccl. p. 108. Edit.
Oxon.
.

The second is St. Chrysostom's, who, speaking of the Apostles, tells us, that
they were all ordained Princes, [or Primat^^ If any would have it so] by our
Savior -- (...). S. Chrysostom. Tom. 8. p. 115. Edit. Savil.
, not [temporal] Princes, to receive each his Nation or City, but [spiritual
Princes] entrusted IN COMMON ALL TOGETHER with the Care and Government of [the
Catholic Church throughout] the World.

The last shall be that of a Pope himself (which is more with some people than
the Authority of a Thousand Fathers, and let it be so here) who in an Epistle
to a Bishop of Arles compares Episcopacy to the Trinity Nam dum ad Trinitatis
instar, cujus Vna est, atque Indivisa Potestas, Vnum sit per diversos
Antistites Sacerdotium; Symach. Ep. 1. ad Aeonium Arel. apud T. 4. Council. p.
1291. Edit. Cossart.
, and says that as in the Trinity there is but one inseparable power, so
Episcopacy is but ONE [though] in the hands of particular Bishops: I hope those
that own the Athanasian Creed, where we are taught that in the Trinity no
person is greater or less than another, but that the three Persons are
coequal, will for the future believe with Pope Symmachus, that in the
Episcopal Office no Bishop is greater or less than another, but that all the
Bishops in the world are coequal; and then I am sure all Christians will
believe with us, that there was no Superiority, nor Supremacy, nor, Primacy,
communicated by our blessed Savior unto any one of his Twelve Apostles.

SECT. III.
Having fully ruined their pretensions from the Holy Scriptures for the
Supremacy; I come next to inquire, whether the Laws of the Universal Church
have declared the successive Bishops of Rome to be Christ's Vicars, to have the
Primacy over the whole World, to be Heads of the Universal Church, and to have
the plenary power of governing and feeding the whole Church. What Laws the
primitive Church for the first six Centuries made for the Government and
Discipline of the Catholic Church are to be found in the Code of the Canons of
the Universal Church, consisting of the Canons of the four Ecumenical Councils
of Nice, Constantinople, Ephesus and Chalcedon, and of the five diocesan Synods
of Ancyra, of Gangra, of Antioch, of Ncocaesarea and of Laodicea, confirmed and
admitted by the Council of Chalcedon to be part of the Laws of the Universal
Church, and afterward by the Emperor Justinian in Novel. Constable. 231. de Can.
Eccl.

We desire therefore to be informed how many of these Canons (which were-looked
upon as of Sacred Authority, not only by the Emperor Justinian, in the Novel
just cited, but by a Pope, Gregory the Great Et sic quatuor Synodos Sanctae
Vniversalis Ecclesiae, sicut quatuor Libros Sancti Evangelii recipimus. Greg.
M. Ep. 49. l. 2. p. 717. Edit. Froben. 1564.
) or which of them do constitute the Bishop of Rome Primate over the whole
World, or Vicar of Christ, or Head of the whole Church, or Father and Doctor
of all Christians, or do confess that Christ had entrusted him with the plenary
Power of governing the Universal Church.

I will not trouble my self to show in particular how such and such Canons
place the Discipline of the Church in Provincial or Diocesan Synods, any one
that looks into them will see these things evident enough: they therefore that
talk of those Canons making the Bishop of Rome supreme, must either be such as
never read them, or are men of no conscience and integrity.

To put a quick end to this pretense, though I will not challenge our Compiler,
because he perchance does not know what the Code of the Universal Church means,
yet I do here challenge all the Romish Priests in England to show me but one
Canon in this Code Published by Justel.
(which has so great a number, no fewer than two hundred and seven Canons in
it) that does constitute the Bishop of Rome Primate over the whole World, Head
of the Catholic Church, and the Father and Doctor of all Christians; or
confer upon him the full power of governing the whole Church: nay, farther, I
challenge them to produce any Canon or Canons hence, that do assert that the
Bishop of Rome is Primate over the whole World, Vicar of Christ, Head of the
whole Church, Doctor of all Christians, and that he had the whole power of
governing the Universal Church committed to him in St. Peter by our blessed
Savior. I will make one step farther; I challenge all of them to show those
Canons, or that Canon in this Code of the universal Church, which does suppose
the Bishop of Rome to be either Primate over the World, Vicar of Christ, Head
of the whole Church, Doctor of all Christians, or to have had the plenary
power of governing the whole Church given him by Christ.

This challenge so fair, so plain and so full, I leave to the Reverend Fathers
Consideration, and in the mean time I will take the liberty (since I have very
good grounds for it) to declare and assert to their as well as our people, that
there is no Law of the Catholic Church for the first six hundred years, nor
ever a Canon in the Code of the Laws of the universal Church, that does either
constitute, or assert, or suppose the Bishop of Rome to be that Primate, Vicar,
Head, Doctor and universal Pastor, which the Council of Florence says he is;
and that the Council of Florence founding their Definition for the Pope's
Supremacy upon the Acts and Canons of General Councils, were notoriously guilty
either of ignorance or of forgery, either of which is more than sufficient to
ruin their having any esteem from us: and as for the Title of Vicar of Christ,
which they do now glory so much in, One of their own Communion, the Learned
Monsieur Launoy Launoii Ep. ad Mich. Marollium, p. 29. apud Par. 3. Epp.
assures us, that for above a thousand years after Christ there was scarce a
Bishop of Rome to be met with, who either said he was or wrote himself Vicar of
Christ, so far were they in those days from thinking themselves to be the true
or only Vicars of Christ, their custom then being to write themselves Vicars
of St. Peter.

SECT. IV.
These are some of the Reasons why we cannot believe or submit to the Papal
Supremacy; if neither Scripture, nor the Laws of the universal Church be for
it, we believe it is no crime in us not to be for it; if both Scripture and
those Canons be directly against it, (as it has in part, and might have been
more fully shown) it certainly is no sin in us to be against it too; nay, so
far from being a sin, that it would be a very great one not to be so.

It will appear by this time, I believe, needless to most people to examine
what our Compiler from F. Alexandre does produce from Antiquity to help out
this groundless Supremacy: one advantage, I hope, I shall reap from what has
been observed hitherto on this head, that I need not at all be copious in the
refuting his Testimonies which are brought to prove a Supremacy from St.
Peter's being called by some Rock of the Church and Prince of the Apostles,
from Appeals being made to the Bishops of Rome, and from the necessity of their
confirming all Councils to make them obligatory to the Church. I shall inform
the Reader, before I begin with the particular Testimonies of our Compiler,
that they are generally stolen from Natalis Alexandre's fourth Dissertation in
his Pars prima Seculi primi.

His first Testimony from Irenaeus is of no use Nubes Test. p. 22. ex Not.
Alexand. p. 297.
, since it only proves that there was a Church planted at Rome by the joint
endeavors of St. Peter and St. Paul, which passage makes directly against a
Supremacy, except our Compiler can prove that St. Peter and St. Paul were but
one individual man: as to the potentior Principalitas there, they have been
told often enough, that it relates to the Civil State, Rome being the Imperial
City, whither business brought all people, Christians as well as others. The
next obscure passage from Optatus Nub. Testium, p. 23, 24. Not. Alex. Pars
secunda Seculi quarti, p. 225. cum Pars prima Seculi primi, p. 283.
does indeed seem to prove that there is but one Cathedra in the World
possessed by St. Peter, and after him by his Successors at Rome: but I have
these objections against Optatus taken in this sense; first, that he is made to
contradict himself, since in his first Book against this same Parmenian -- Nec
Caecilianus recessit a Cathedra Petri vel Cypriani, sed Majorinus, Opt. Milev.
l. 1. c. Parmen. p. 38. Edit. Paris. 1631.
he speaks of the Cathedra of St. Cyprian, as well as of that of St. Peter; and
in the same Book, against the same Schismatic, showing how the people stuck to
Caecilian against Majorinus, he tells him -- Conferta erat Ecclesia populis
plena: erat Cathedra Episcopalis: erat Altar loco suo, in quo pacifici
Episcopi retro temporis obtulerunt, Cyprianus, Lucianus, and caeteri: sic
exitum est for as, and Altar contra Altar erectum est. Idem, l. 1. contr.
Parmen. p. 41, 42.
, that the Church was full of people, where the Episcopal Cathedra was, and the
Altar whereon Cyprian, Lucian, and other peaceable Bishops, had offered: that
the Donatists were Schismatics, who separated from the Church, and set up
Altar against Altar. Secondly, That he is made to contradict all Church Writers
before and after him for hundreds of years, who make as many Cathedra's as
Bishops in the World; and every of these Bishops to be Successors to the
Apostles, who had committed to them in common by our Savior the Care and
Government of the Catholic Church; as I have fully shown above. I will name
but one Father, and he an African too, Tertullian, who bids Percurre Ecclesias
Apostolicas, apud quas ipsae adhuc Cathedrae Apostolorum suis locis
praesidentur: -- proxima est tibi Achaia, habes Corinthum -- Philippos --
Thessalonicenses -- Ephesum -- Romam. Tert. de Praescrip. c. Haeret. c. 36.
the Heretics take a view of all the Apostolic Churches, in which the very
Chairs the Apostles used are possessed by the Bishops in their several places,
after which he reckons Corinth and Philippi, Thessalonica and Ephesus, and Rome
it self. So that I think it plain enough, that there were other Cathedra's
besides that at Rome, and therefore that cannot be the only one; and this
makes me farther wonder at what Optatus talks about the Unity of this Chair at
Rome being such as that the rest of the Apostles might not have Cathedra's for
themselves; I cannot but say that this obscure passage is false as well as
groundless; and that if Optatus wrote it himself, (which some question,
Illyricus Flacii Illyrici Catalogus Testium Verit. l. 4. p. 194. F. Genevae,
1608.
for one, in his Catalogus Testium Veritatis) he had very little considered the
Scriptures and Fathers before him: and I hope it is no crime to affirm this of
him, who gives such a reason for St. Peter's being called Cophas, who does
swerve from the ancienter Fathers so very much in giving the Succession of the
Bishops of Rome; and, which is more, does faulter in his account of the
Donatists Schism, a thing which begun so near his own time, and does confound
the two Donatus's, as Monsieur d'Aubespine owns in his third Observation upon
him; but enough of this passage.

I will only observe farther, that as Optatus calls St. Peter, Head of all the
Apostles, so do others give as great Titles and as honorable Compellations to
other Apostles. Hesychius, for example, (as Photius has it, Cod. 275.) calls
St. James, the Bishop of Jerusalem, Head of the Apostles (...), etc. Photii
Biblioth. Cod. 275. p. 1525. Edit. Haeschel. 1612.
. I must also tell our Compiler, that Socius in this passage is a little more
than Contemporary: Optatus calls the Bishop Syricius, our Fellow-bishop, which
was a very rude thing to one so much a Prince above them, and a false one too,
if there were but one Cathedra, and consequently but one Bishop in the World,
Syricius at Rome.

The four next little passages from St. Cyprian Nubes Test. p. 24, 25. Not.
Alex. p. 276, 293.
(the first of which is directly against our Compiler) have been sufficiently
considered in the Interpretations of the Rock in St. Matthew. I shall not
trouble my self with saying much to his Synodical Epistle of Nubes Test. p. 25.
Not. Alex. p. 290.
the Sardican Synod, which was for giving to the Bishop of Rome a power of
granting the revision of causes already judged in the Provincial Synods: this
very attempt of this Synod is sufficient to show that the Bishop of Rome had no
such a power before that time. I will not enlarge here, though I easily might;
he that desires to see the Romish Pretensions for Appeals founded upon the
third, fourth and fifth Canons of this Western Synod sufficiently baffled,
ought to consult our Excellent and most Learned Dean of St Paul's Origines
Britanicae Chapter 3. p. 142, 143, etc.
; and, after him, the very Learned Du Pin in his second Historical Dissertation
De Antiqua Ecclesiae Disciplina Dissertationes Historicae, Sect. 3. p. 103,
104, etc. at Paris, 1686.
. I will only say, that this Synod's Canons were admitted to no Authority in
the Church, because they were not admitted into the Code of the universal
Church, which is answer sufficient to our Compiler, who pretends to prove this
Supremacy from the first six Centuries. I will only remark, that if the
Sardican Synod could, or did take away from Constantius the Emperor the power
of granting the revising and rehearing of Causes which had been already judged
in Provincial Synods, because he was an Arian, It should not upon the same
reasons have granted or given that power to the Bishops of Rome, since the very
next Bishop to Julius turned Arian, Liberius who confirmed the Council of
Sirmium, and during his Exile before his Arianism, Felix who was put into his
place was an Arian also, as St. Hierom does assure us D. Hieron. Catalogus
Scriptorum Illustr. in Acacio, p. 297, 298. T. 1. Edit. Basil. 1565.
; so that in endeavoring to avoid one Rock, they split upon another. The best
answer any one can make for these their Canons is, that they were only a
present temporary provision limited to Julius his time, who was a Catholic,
against Constantius, who was an Arian.

The next instance Nubes Test. p. 25. Not. Alex. p. 298.
about Irenaeus his writing to Victor, with F. Alexandre's silly Remarks before
and after it, is so far from being for, that it is one of the clearest
instances in Antiquity against the Pope's Supremacy: When the Controversy
about the celebration of Easter began to grow warm, there were several Synods
gathered about it in Palestine, Pontus Eusebius. Hist. Eccles. l. 5. c. 23. Edit.
Vales.
, Rome, France, and other places, and from them all together, not from the
Bishop of Rome or his Synod, did proceed (...). Eusebius. Hist. Eccl. l. 5. c. 23.
the Ecclesiastical Rule of celebrating Easter only on the Lord's day. This
Rule or Determination it is probable Victor was desired to transmit to the
Asiaticks, thereby to bring them to a consent in practice in this Thing. The
Asiaticks refused upon the grounds set down in Polycrates his Letter to the
Bishop and Church of Rome; which was so highly resented by Victor, that he
immediately does that which he seems to have threatened them with before in his
Letter to them, and excommunicates the Asiatick Churches. This practice of his
was so far from being consented to, or approved by those Bishops who were
agreeing with him about the matter of the time of keeping Easter, that they all
immediately Eusebius. Hist. Eccles. l. 5. c. 24.
fell upon him for his extravagant irregular action, and do not only exhort
him, as Valesius translates, but command him (as I think a compound from (...)
ought to be translated) to mind those things that are for promoting Peace,
Unity and Charity toward their neighbors; and Eusebius tells us in the same
place, that several of those Letters were to be seen in his time, wherein the
Bishops had so severely checked and reprehended this Bishop of Rome, and he puts
down part of that from Irenaeus, which F. Alexandre and our Compiler make use
of. I think this behavior does not very clearly prove the Supremacy of the
Pope, and this would certainly have been very unaccountable carriage toward
Christ's True Vicar, who had full power of governing the whole Church: the
truth is, they knew of no such person in those days, he was not born into the
world till near a Thousand years after them.

But says our Compiler from F. Alexandre (and this is a pert saying among a
great many among us) Irenaeus does not deny the Bishop of Rome's power of
Excommunicating the Asiaticks: it is true, he does not, and which is more, he
could not, since every Bishop in the Catholic Church, and therefore he at Rome
among the rest, might deny to communicate with any other Bishop or Church,
against which they thought they had sufficient reason for such a suspension of
Communion.

One thing however I would commend to his and F. Alexandre's consideration, and
that is, that this Action of Victor's was so little valued in the Catholic
Church, that it does not appear that any Christians did thereupon refuse
Communion with the Asiaticks; which is a great commendation truly of that
Bishop's management, but a certain evidence of the Opinion of the
Ecclesiastics of those days concerning the Bishop of Rome's Power.

The next Quotation Nubes T. p. 25, 26.
from St. Basil's Comments ad cap. 2. Isaiae is not from F. Alexandre, so that
here our Compiler doubtless would take it amiss, if he be not allowed to have
something of his own, and to have perused St. Basil for example; but the great
unhappiness is, that he must not be allowed it, since he either borrowed this
passage from some other friend, or made it himself, there being no such passage
in that Commentary of this Father upon the second of Isaiah; and which is more
unhappy still, there is the direct contrary to it, for St. Basil -- in Domo Dei
quae est Ecclesia Dei viventis, cujus Fundamenta in Montibus Sanctis: est enim
aedificata supra Fundamentum Apostolorum and Prophetarum, unus ex Montibus erat
Petrus, etc. S. Basil. in cap. 2. Esa. Vol. 1. p. 869. Edit. Par. 1618.
speaking of the Church of God, that its Foundations are upon the Holy
Mountains, says that St. Peter is one of those Mountains, and that the Church
of God is built upon the Foundation of the Apostles and Prophets.

As the first passage is guilty of falsehood, so the second Nub. Test. p. 26. N.
Alex. p. 304, 305.
from St. Basil is guilty of very egregious disingenuity. Certainly F.
Alexandre borrowed this passage from some such Writer as Bellarmine, and never
consulted the Epistle it self, or he could not have been guilty of such
disingenuous dealing: had he read the Epistle, he might have seen, that as it
is directed to the Western Bishops, so it did desire from them (not from the
Bishop of Rome only, or more than the rest) help and assistence in their
present afflictions caused by this Eustathius and others. There are two reasons
set down in the Epistle, why they did desire this help, the first of them is
because that Eustathius Eustathius his business to Rome was not to appeal, but
as Legate from the Synod of Lampsacus (as Du Pin assures us, Dissert. 2. p.
163.) to draw Liberius to communicate with the Semiarians.
coming to Rome, and having imposed upon Liberius and the Western Bishops (in
Synod perhaps) with him so far as to be admitted to communion, had obtained
their Communicatory Letter to testify the Orthodoxy of his Faith, upon his
producing of which to the Synod of Tyana he had been restored, and thence had
the opportunity of ravaging the Churches, and dispersing his Impieties, and
therefore they desire that as their Letter was the cause of his being restored,
and thereby enabled to do them such mischief, so they would from thence
Quoniam igitur isthinc vires accepit laedendi Ecclesias, ac publicandae suae
impietatis fiducia, quam VOS dedistis, ad subversionem multorum usus est,
necesse est ut isthinc quoque veniat malorum istorum correctio, scribaturque
Ecclesiis, quibus quidem conditionibus ad Communionem susceptus sit: simul vero
adjiciatur, quomodo jam immutata sententia gratiam a PATRIBVS, qui tum erant,
acceptam irritam reddat. S. Basilii Ep. 74. ad Occident. Episcopos. p. 875,
876. Edit. Par. 1618.
vouchsafe them a Cure for this spreading Evil: the other reason is, because
that what they at home said against Eustathius was said to proceed from a
private pique or a contentious humor Quae nos enim loquimur, multis suspecta
sunt, quasi propter privatas quasdam contentiones metum, ac pusillanimitatem
illis incutere velimus. Vo^ vero, quanto ab illis habitatione remotiores estis,
tanto plus apud plebem habetis fidei. Idem Ibidem. p. 874.
, and therefore St. Basil in their name desires their Letter who lived so far
off, and would thereupon be considered as disinteressed persons, and have the
greater credit among their people.

I appeal to any man of sense, whether any thing can be more evident than that
it was not Liberius alone who gave Eustathius that unhappy Letter; and that the
Community of Western Bishops were desired (not he at Rome alone) to help them
in their distress; and lastly, that they desired this help, not because they
had not power enough of their own to have judged and deposed Eustathius, but
because they were desirous to use the least invidious Method of ridding their
Communion of him by getting a great number of the Western Bishops to condemn
his Opinions, and to exhort the faithful not to communicate any longer with
him. Had our Compiler but translated the two words Occidentales Episcopos in
the beginning of this Testimony, there are few Readers, but would have seen the
cheat.

The next Testimony of Gregory Nazianzen's Nub. Test. p. 27.
, which says the faith confessed by St. Peter was the foundation of the Church,
ought in prudence to have been omitted, since it is directly against our
Compiler: the next passage from him does not concern the Bishop of Rome (as our
Compiler Nub. Test. p. 27. N. Alex. p. 289, 290.
from F. Alexandre does most falsely assert) but St. Basil, as Elias Cretensis,
and Billius in their Comments upon him assure us.

The following story about Dionysius of Alexandria is nothing to our Compiler
Nub. Test. p. 27, 28. N. Alex. p. 300, 301.
or F. Alexandre's purpose, since here is nothing done, but what any Bishop
might have done, and which is more, nothing done by the Bishop of Rome himself,
but by a Synod then met, when the complaint was made against Dionysius, and all
the share the Bishop of Rome has in this affair (besides his suffrage) is
only to be the Synods Secretary in drawing up this Letter, and sending their
Opinion (...). D. Athan. de Synod. Arimin. and Seleuc. p. 707. Edit. Commel.
1600.
to his namesake at Alexandria: and therefore our Compiler is very much to be
blamed, but F. Alexandre much more for their impertinent, and false accounts
prefixed to this passage from Athanasius.

What credit in Ecclesiastical History Natalis Alexandre may have beyond Sea, I
cannot tell; if all his twenty five Volumes be of the same strain with his
first, I must needs say that he was fitter to write Romances than
Church History, for certainly no man (whose talent does not lie wonderfully
that way) could with so much art have dressed up the story about Dionysius, or
with so much address and formality have told the next story of Julius's taking
the Cause of Athanasius into his hands, and of his citing him and his enemies
to appear before his Apostolic Tribunal, and yet ground this formal story upon
a bit of Julius's Letter (as he calls it) to the Orientals, which has not one
syllable of any such thing in it: first, here is nothing here of Julius's
taking the Cause of Athanasius into his own hands, but the contrary to it is
evident from Sozomen, who writes that, upon the Eusebians prevailing against
the Orthodox Bishops in the East, and deposing them, all the Western Bishops (
He at Rome among the rest) did very kindly receive Athanasius when he came into
the West, and did take upon themselves the hearing and Judgment of his Cause
Sozom. Hist. Eccl. l. 3. c. 7. Edit. Vales.
: secondly it is as false that there is in this Letter any citation of St.
Athanasius and the Orientals before the Apostolic Tribunal. As false as this
account is, our Compiler Nubes Test. p. 28, 29. Not. Alex. p. 302, 303.
ventures upon F. Alexandre's credit to transcribe and vend it for true
History, and which is more to add to it, by telling us that Athanasius appealed
(upon his deposition by the Eusebians) unto the Bishop of Rome; whereas his own
Master F. Alexandre puts it down for his first Conclusion (in his Dissertation
concerning the Cause of Athanasius) that Athanasius did not appeal to Julius
Bishop of Rome Not. Alex. Dissert. 21. in Pars 3. Sec. 4. p. 329.
: nay his own next Testimony from Sozomen says that Julius, being satisfied
Sozom. H. E. l. 3. c. 10. Edit. Vales.
there was no safety for Athanasius in Egypt, invited him to Rome, which is
evidence enough he had not appealed thither.

What our Compiler designs from this passage about Athanasius, and the three
next Testimonies from Sozomen Nub. Test. p. 28, 29, 30. Not. Alex. p. 302, 303.
, Socrates Nub. Test. p. 28, 29, 30. Not. Alex. p. 302, 303.
and Theodoret Nub. Test. p. 28, 29, 30. Not. Alex. p. 302, 303.
is to show the custom of Appeals to the Pope. In answer to which I say, first
that there is no evidence that Athanasius did appeal to the Pope; next I say
that this Letter drawn up by Julius was in the name (and therefore spoke the
sense) of a Synod of Wostern Bishops at Rome; this thing Athanasius himself
informs us of, for after he has put down the Letter (penned by Julius) to the
Orientals, he says that after that the Synod at Rome (...) etc. D. Athan.
Apolog. 2. p. 58
had wrote that Letter by Julius the Roman Bishop, the Eusebians still
persisted in disturbing the Churches; farther, it is evident from this
Synodical Epistle (as I hope I may now call it) (...) Julius did not pretend to
any Judgment of the cause himself in particular as Bishop of Rome, which our
Compiler from F. Alexandre does very falsely assert, since in this Letter the
complaint is, that the Orientals had in this affair about Athanasius acted
against Canon, in that they had not written to all the Western Bishops ((...)
Idem Ibidem. p. 586. B.
are their own words, which according to our wise Guide and his Transcriber
must be translated, to the Bishop of Rome) that so it might have been
determined by all together, Occidentals as well as Orientals what was just and
necessary in this affair: lastly, (as I partly observed above) the Bishop of
Rome was so far from being owned or thought the sole Judge in this affair, that
Sozomen tells us. -- (...) -- (...) -- (...)PPO'S'AYTOY'S (...) 'AYTO'N (...)
DI'KN. Sozom. H. E. l. 3. c. 7. Edit. Vales.
that upon St. Athanasius, and the other Bishops being deposed by the Eusebian
Faction, the Bishop of Rome, and all the Western Bishops looked upon these
practices of the Eusebians as wrongs done to themselves, and therefore did
receive St. Athanasius, who came to them, very kindly, and took upon themselves
the hearing and judging of his Cause.

This was such a mortification to Eusebius (the Ringleader of the Arian
Faction) to see Athanasius received to Communion, and the hearing of his Cause
espoused by the Body of the Western Bishops; that he (...) 'AYTO'N (...). Idem
Ibidem.
wrote to Julius of Rome, that he would take upon himself to be Judge of what
had past against Athanasius at Tire: the design of which Letter could certainly
be no other, than either to make a Division among the Western Bishops, if the
Bishop of Rome should hearken to such a thing, or to have served for a pretense
to have thrown out Athanasius again, should he be restored by the Bishop of
Rome's Sentence, when opportunity served, because this Judgment would have been
against the Laws of the Church which appoints such Judgments to be managed
Synodically.

Socrates and Sozomen upon this business speak of a Canon (which the present
Writers of the Church of Rome urge often enough) that no Acts of the Church
should be valid, which were made without the Approbation of the Bishop of Rome:
They both seem to ground what they write upon Julius's Letter to the Orientals,
and upon that passage in it, wherein Julius asks them, whether they did not
know, that the Custom is, that we ought first to be written to, that what was
just might be determined hence -- (...). Ep. Synod. apud Athan. Apol. 2. p. 586.
: if They did ground their words upon that Letter they are guilty of two great
mistakes, first, in saying there was such a Canon, whereas the Letter it self
pretends to no more, than that there was such a Custom: secondly, They are
much more mistaken in thinking the Letter to be Julius his own, when as it was
a Synodical Letter penned only by Julius, and by ut primum NOBIS scribatur was
meant the Western Bishops whose the Letter was, and not Julius the Bishop of
Rome in particular.

This answer I think is fair and sufficient, but if any one will
notwithstanding this have Julius to speak here of himself, I refer him for an
answer (not very creditable to that Bishop) unto the Learned Monsieur Launoy,
who Launoii Ep. ad Jac. Bevilaquam p. 269, etc. 273. in Part. 6. Ep.
will show him, that Julius went upon a great mistake, since there is no Canon
in the Code of the Universal Church, nor in the ancient Code of the Church of
Rome, that makes any mention of such a thing.

The next Testimony of the Pope's Authority in restoring Paulus of
Constantinople, Asclepas and others to their Bishoprics is taken from Socrates
and Sozomen Nubes Test. p. 30, 31. Not. Alex. p. 303, 304.
. How far from accurate in these affairs those two Historians are, I have just
shown, and how little they are to be followed or credited in this account about
Paulus is what the Learned Valesius in his Observationes Ecclesiasticae Valesii
Observationes Eccles. in Socr. and Sozom. l. 2. c. 3.
upon them has made apparent from St. Athanasius, whose Authority in this
business must be of infinitely greater value than Socrates and Sozomen, since
He lived at the very same time, and they two so many years after this business.
There is no evidence in Antiquity that these Bishops appealed to the Bishop of
Rome: it is very plain from Athanasius Vide Valesii Observationes Eccles. in
Socrat. and Soz. l. 2. c. 6.
that these Historians give a false account of the several banishments and
restitutions of Paulus for example, and it is as certain from him (...) [viz.
Paulus CP.] (...) -- (...). D. Athan. Ep. ad Solitar. Vit. agentes. p. 630.
that Paulus could not come to Rome, nor was restored by Julius, since
Constantius had in this his third exile put him in chains, and banished him to
Singara in Mesopotamia, and afterward removed him to Emesa; so that he could
not be at Rome, nor be restored by that Bishop (upon his Profession of the
Nicene Faith, as Sozomen tells the story). He that will compare Athanasius, and
these two Historians, will find perfect Confusion in the latter; but if he
grudge so much pains, he may find it very sufficiently done by Valesius in his
second Book of Ecclesiastical Observations upon these two Historians.

The next quotations from St. Chrysostom Nub. Test. p. 31, 32.
are only some of his Rhetorical flights, his Opinion against any Superiority
in St. Peter over the rest of the Apostles we have had above p. 25.
. I will pass therefore to his Letter of Request (forsooth) to Innocent the
First Nub. Test. p. 32, 33. N. Alex. p. 307, 308.
, that he would repeal the Sentence of the Synod ad Quercum against him, and
order him to be restored to his See. But how little this History helps the
Papal Supremacy, these few Observations will show.

First, that Chrysostom did appeal from that Synod ad Quercum (not to the
Bishop of Rome, which they of his Communion should prove, but) to a General
Council, as is apparent not only from Sozomen Sozomen. H. E. l 8. c. 17. Edit.
Vales.
but from this Epistle it self -- ac mill appellante Judices -- and paratum,
praesente orb universo, quaeque objecta diluere. D. Chrysostom. Ep. apud Palladium
de Vita Chrysostom. p. 5. in T. 2. Chrysostom. Edit. Duc.
to Innocent. Secondly, that Chrysostom sent the same Epistle to Venerius
Bishop of Milain, and to Chromatius of Aquileia Scripsimus ista and ad Venerium
Mediolanensem and ad Chromatium Aquilegiensem Episcopum. Vale in Domino. Idem
Ibidem.
: so that if this Epistle prove any Prerogative for Innocent, it will prove the
same for Venerius and Chromatius, and that I am sure is no help toward a
Supremacy. Thirdly, That this Letter was not sent to Innocent in particular,
but to some other Bishops Haec igitur cogitantes omnia, Domini beatissimi a^
Reverendissimi dignum vestrae constantiae and congruum robur, ac studium
sumite. -- Ne igitur immanis ista confusio cuncta percurrat -- scribite precor,
and authoritate vestra decernite, etc. Idem Ibidem.
with him, which I take to be the Bishops of his Diocese, (as the Letter to
Venerius did, I suppose, concern the Bishops of his Diocese, and that to
Chromatius all that were under his Jurisdiction) and therefore yields no
assistence toward the proving a particular Prerogative for Innocent in this
case. Fourthly, That Innocent did not pretend to give Judgment in the Quarrels
betwixt St. Chrysostom, and Theophilus, but told St. Chrysostom Ad haec
rescripsit -- Innocentius -- dicens, oportere conflari aliam irreprehensibilem
Synodum Occidentalium and Orientalium Sacerdotum, cedentibus Concilio amicis
primum, deinde inimicis: Neutrarum quippe partium, ut plurimum, rectum esse
Judicium. Innoc. Ep. apud Palladium. Ibidem c. 3.
, that there must be a Synod, which neither side could take exceptions at, of
Oriental and Occidental Bishops together to put an end to this business: upon
which account Innocent did request of Honorius to call a Western Council, which
the Emperor Non tulit ultra Innocentius Pontifex, indignitate summa permotus,
scripsitque ad Honorium Imperatorem. -- Motus his literis Princeps praecepit
Synodum Occidentalium Episcoporum congregari, and cum in unam sententiam
concurrisset, ad se refer. Congregati Italiae Episcopi Imperatorem orant, ut
scriberet Arcadio Fratri suo, ut juberet Thessalonicae Concilium fieri, quo
facilius possent utraeque parts Orientis Occidentisque concurrere. Palladius
in Vita D. Chrysostom. p. 6. in T. 2. Operum Chrysostom. Edit. Ducaei.
readily did, and this Synod did beseech the Emperor to write to his Brother
Arcadius, that he would appoint a General Synod at Thessalonica, where the
Western and Eastern Bishops might meet and pass a final Judgment upon this
Affair of St. Chrysostom.

How far this Account is from proving any thing extraordinary about Innocent is
what the meanest Reader will readily apprehend. I will not inquire of our
Compiler, because I believe he knows nothing of the business, but I do of
Father Alexandre in what Edition of St. Chrysostom he found this Epistle
called Libellus Supplex, and where he read that St. Chrysostom presented it
(upon his knees I suppose they would have it, as Letters of Requests use to be)
to Innocent; for that must be the sense of F. Alexandre's porrexit Innocentio
I. Pontifici Romano: I desire our Compiler to send F. Alexandre word, that He
that will be guilty of such tricks; must either be no Scholar, or no honest Man.

The two next Authorities from Vincentius, and St. Ambrose Nub. Test. p. 33. N.
Alex. p. 298, 299.
are of too little value to deserve much consideration, that of Lirinensis
supposes other Bishops to have equal share in the Care of the Church, while it
calls them the Colleagues of the Bishop of Rome; and for St. Ambrose about
feeding the sheep, that Text has been sufficiently secured, and cleared above
p. 22.
: and I need be no longer upon the next passage from his Epistle to Theophilus,
but that I cannot pass over the ignorance and disingenuity of our Compiler and
his Master F. Alexandre upon this point Nub. Test. p. 33, 34. N. Alex. p. 307.
: They tell us, that the Synod of Capua did commit to Theophilus the decision
of the quarrel betwixt Evagrius and Flavianus at Antioch; which is very false,
for it is expressed as plain in this Epistle, as words can do it, that the
decision of that business was committed to Theophilus and the Egyptian Bishops
-- Cum sancta Synodus cognitionis Jus unanimitati tuae, Caeterisque ex Aegypto
Consacerdotibus nostris commiserit, etc. Ambros. Ep. 78. T. 3. p. 233. Edit.
Frob. 1538.
who were in Synod to determine that affair: They tell us also that St. Ambrose
owns that Theophilus ought to give an account of his Decision (not of the
Cause, as our Compiler mistakes his Master) to the Sea Apostolic, and that his
Decision would be of no force or obligation, if the Bishop of Rome did not
ratify it; the folly of which is sufficiently exposed from the Determination
of the Synod of Capua it self, which utterly ruins this foolish talk, when it
did commit the final Decision of that business to a Synod of Egyptian Bishops,
without taking the least notice of the Bishop of Rome; and they have as little
ground, for what they so boldly affirm here, from St. Ambrose's Epistle, since
all that St. Ambrose (who had been consulted in the business by Theophilus)
directs here is that his opinion is that they would advise with the Bishop of
Rome in this affair; that so what was decided by them in Synod, might have a
general reception.

His next Authorities are much more unfit for the proving such great things as
the Florentine Council says of the Pope: Nub. Testium. p. 34.
none but a very short-sighted person would quote the Comparison of St. Peter
and Plato (which passage is not in St. Hierome as set down by our Author)
since no one ever made or believed Plato to be such a Prince over the
Philosophers, as the Church of Rome says St. Peter was over the Apostles and
the whole Church Nub. Test. p. 34, 35. Not. Alex. p. 281, 282.
. The business of the Council of Jerusalem, with St. Hierome's leave, makes
more for the honor of St. James, Bishop there, than of St. Peter, since he
concluded the debates, and the Canon was drawn up in the very expressions
prescribed by him: and I must confess that, as to the next passage from St.
Hierome Nub. Test. p. 35. Not. Alex. p. 283.
about a Head constituted among the Apostles, since I find nothing in the
Gospels or in the Acts of the Apostles that either our Savior did appoint, or
the Apostles elect or constitute Peter Head of the Apostles; I cannot believe
it, though St. Hierome does affirm it, especially since his being made the
Apostles Messenger, Acts 8.14. is so home an Evidence against it.

The next Testimony Nub. Test. p. 35. Not. Alex. Par. 2. Sec. 4. p. 190.
proves only that St. Hierome acted as every good Christian ought, in keeping
to the Faith and Church of Christ, against the Heretics, that he acted as
every Presbyter ought, when he consulted his own Bishop, whether he might use
the term Hypostases about the Trinity. The two last Testimonies from him do not
deserve a word of answer, and therefore I will pass to those from St. Austin;
the two first Nub. Test. p. 37. Not. Alex. p. 284.
passages from whom are directly against our Compiler; the rest are too weak
for his designs, and to very little purpose, since as to the first Nub. Test.
p. 39.
of them, several other C^urches as well as that at Rome did enjoy the
prerogative of having an Apostolical Chair; and as to the next Nub. Test. p.
39, 40. Not. Alex. p. 308.
, it was very expedient the Africans should try all means, and use all helps
that could be got to suppress a growing Heresy; and for the third Nub. Test.
p. 40. Not. Alex. p. 309.
, it was customary enough for other Bishops to call Bishops to Synods, the
History of the first ages, of St. Cyprian in particular, will put this out of
doubt; the last Nub. Test. p. 40, 41. Not. Alex. p. 309.
falls in with the second, and therefore I pass it, and ought to do so by
those of St. Cyril, since they Nub. Test. p. 41.
were answered sufficiently above in the Interpretation of the Rock.

Having spent so much time about the Testimonies hitherto, I will make the more
haste through the rest; there are but one or two lest that can give us much
occasion of an Answer; that about Nestorius had need to have a Preface to make
it look great for the Pope, as if Nestorius could not be excommunicated but by
his Authority; and Cyril did excommunicate him by virtuo only of the power
given him by that Pope Nub. Test. p. 41, 42. Not. Alex. p. 309, 310.
: whereas it is certain from Saint Cyril's own Letter to Coelestine, that
before then, (upon Dorotheus his having denounced in the presence of Nestorius
an Anathema Cyril. Alex. Ep. ad Coelest in T. 3. Council. p. 341. Edit. Coss.
against all that should say the Virgin Mary was the Mother of God) not only
the people of Constantinople, but almost all the Monasteries with their Abbats
had lest off communicating with Nestorius, and that St. Cyril himself had
already broke off Communion with him, but does not publicly denounce
Excommunication against Nestorius, till he had consulted with Coelestine in the
thing (...) ETA' PAPPSI'AS, (...). Idem, Ibid.
, who upon the hearing of Nestorius his great Error, did send an Answer to
Cyril, wherein he tells him that They ought to excommunicate Nestorius, if he
did not recant his Error, and therefore gave Cyril leave to join his Authority
to his own, and in their names to excommunicate Nestorius (...) 'EEI S -- (...)
'OPHEI'LO EN' -- (...) -- (...)SOI (...), etc. Coelest. Ep. Cyrillo.
What is cited next from the Council of Ephesus signifies nothing at all, but
what the Pope's Legate said there, signifies much less, since this is a
Controversy that is not to be decided by what this Pope or that Legate said:
passing therefore what either Coelestine or his Legate say here Nubes Testium,
p. 42, 43. Not. Alexan. p. 310, 311, 312.
, or Pope Leo's Legate at Chalcedon Nubes Testium, p. 44. Not. Alexan. p. 312.
, and the little passage of the Council there as of no strength, I am come to
that passage from the Emperor Valentinian's Letter, which speaks of the Bishop
of Rome 's having power to judge of Matters of Faith and the Cause of Priests
or Bishops.

I only ask our Compiler Nub. Test. p. 44, 45.
, whether he designs from this passage to prove that the Bishop of Rome had
such a power of judging Matters of Faith, and the Causes of the Clergy alone,
or in Conjunction with other Bishops: if he designs only the latter, no body
does oppose a Synod's having power of Judging and examining such things; but if
he will have the Bishop of Rome alone to have full power over such Matters and
Controversies, See Nouvelles de la Republ. des Lettres for the Month October,
1684. p. 262.
I cannot but refer him to his own Master F. Alexandre, who was so earnest and
so vigorous to have the Proposition censured (which is in the Hungarian Censure
of the Propositions of the Clergy of France) which teaches, that it does belong
to the Apostolical See alone by divine; immutable Ad solam Sedem Apostolicam
divino and immutabili privilegio spectat de Controversiis Fidei judicare.
privilege to determine in Controversies of Faith: against which extravagant
Proposition it is said that Father made a Discourse of two hours long, which
pleased Monsieur Colbert so well, that he sent him a present of a hundred
Louidores. This Doctrine of the sole power of the Pope in Judging Controversies
of Faith is so odious to the Clergy of France that they call it the Heresy of
the Jesuits; and the Sorbonists, who wrote the Notes upon the Hungarian
Censure of the four Propositions of the Gallican Clergy, tell the Clergy Notae
in Censuram Hungaricam Quatuor Propositionum Cleri Gallican^, p. 16. in
Richerius's Vindiciae Doctrinae Majorum Scholae Parisiensis.
of Hungary, that there is nothing so directly contrary to the most plain words
of Scripture, to the most evident Testimonies of the Fathers, and the Practice
of the whole Catholic Church for above a thousand years, as the Doctrine of
the Pope's having sole power. in Judging Controversies of Faith; so that, I
hope, if I cannot, those Authorities may convince our Compiler, that he had
better let this Testimony alone. I will pass the two next Testimonies, and tell
our Compiler, that, as to the Council of Constantinople, they did not
submissively desire (as our Compiler Nub. Test. p. 46. Not. Alex. p. 306.
and F. Alexandre do most falsely assert they did) the Confirmation of their
Decrees from Damasus, Bishop of Rome: there is nothing in this Epistle of
Damasus to ground such a thing on; and, which is more, it is certain that they
did desire of the Emperor Theodosius (...). Prosphoneticus Concilii C. Pnd.
Imper. Theodosio in T. 2. Council. p. 945. Edit. Cossart.
, who had convened this Council, that H E would confirm their Decrees.

Thus I have gone through all the Testimonies collected by our Compiler, and,
instead of answering the last, to wit, the Definition of the Council of
Florence in the method I have done those hitherto, I will conclude against it,
that as I have shown above, that there was no ground from Scripture nor Canon
of the Universal Church that did in the least countenance what the Council of
Florence did define concerning the Pope; so neither does any of the instances
picked up by our Compiler confirm or illustrate that Decree, and therefore we
have reason to say that the Pope's Supremacy had neither countenance nor being
during the first five hundred years after our Savior.

CHAP. III. Concerning Tradition.
SECT. I.
THE business of Tradition is that which our Compiler undertakes next to
defend: I cannot understand to what purpose He takes so much pains to tell us
the Gnostics Heresy with that of the Marcionites and Valentinians, since, I
hope, none of those Heresies are chargeable now upon us, no not that worship of
Images which was among the Gnostics, and is to be heard of in a Church now in
the World: We could wish all our Neighbors were as far from any thing
bordering on those Heresies; we do heartily desire, that as they do not believe
in Thirty Gods, with the Valentinians, so they were as far from having thrice
thirty Objects of Religions Worship.

I heartily wish our Compiler had read that second Chapter of Saint Irenaeus
his third Book against the Heretics, which he Nubes Testium, p. 48. Not. Alex.
Dissertatio decima sexta adversus Valentinian^^ etc. in Par. secunda Seculi
secundi, p. 349.
from F. Alexandre quotes to a very false purpose; if either He or F. Alexandre
himself had read this third Book of Irenaeus, had read but this second Chapter;
nay more, but the very Title of it; our Compiler would not have talked so
sillily about those Heretics rejecting the received Doctrines and Practices of
the Church, because they pretended they were not in Scripture, nor F. Alexandre
Not. Alex. Ibidem, p. 348. Praenotandum tertio hanc fuisse Veterum Haereticorum
indolem ut solas ad Scripturas provocarent.
, have put down such an egregious falsehood as to say, the Heretics, in defense
of their Tenets, appealed only to Scripture, when the very Title of this
Chapter in Irenaeus tells us, that the Heretics would be ruled neither by
Scripture nor Tradition in their Disputes with the Church Quod neque
Scripturis, neque Traditionibus, obsequantur haeretici. Titulus, c. 2. l. 3.
Irenael adv. Haereses.
I will set down here the beginning of the Chapter it self, because it is so
like the prattle of a sort of people now in the World, who would be very angry
to be called Heretics. When (says Irenaeus Cum enim ex Scripturis arguuntur,
in accusationem convertuntur ipsarum Scripturarum, quasi non recte habeant,
neque sint ex authoritate, and quia vary sint dictae, and quia non possit ex
his inveniri veritas ab his, qui nesci ant Traditionem. Non enim per literas
traditam illam, sed per vivam vocem. D. Irenaeus adv. Haereses, l. 3. c. 2.
Edit. Fevardent.
) you argue against these Heretics from the Scriptures themselves, they
quickly fall to accusing them, that They are not right, that they are not of
Authority, [a Romanist would have added, without our Church's approbation,]
that things are set down variously, and that there is no finding the Truth out
of them by those who are ignorant of Tradition, since It was delivered by Word
of mouth, not by Writing.

But to proceed to his new point of Controversy Nubes Test. p. 48. Not.
Alexan. p. 351.
, our Compiler tells us, that the Fathers maintain, that the Tradition of the
Catholic Church is to be received, and that Her Constitutions and Practices
are not to be rejected, though not found expressly in Scripture.

How loose a Writer our Compiler is, the World has been sufficiently informed
by the Answers to his other pieces; in this point. He is resolved to act the
same person, while he so gingerly puts down part of the Debate betwixt us, and
suppresses the rest of it.

To state therefore the Controversy about Tradition (if there really be any)
betwixt us, He should not have put down that for the account of the Debate
herein betwixt us, which is agreed to by both sides, nor should have omitted
that wherein we really disagree, and that is about the Scriptures being a
certain and perfect Rule of Faith without the help of Tradition, which the
Council of Trent has made to be of Equal Authority with the Scripture.

What our Compiler has set down is no Controversy betwixt us, since we do
declare that the Tradition of the Catholic Church is to be received, we do own
that by This we received the Holy Scriptures, and know how to separate the
Scriptures from Apocryphal or Supposititious Writings; and we profess also that
we are willing and ready to receive any Doctrine not written, that has as
perpetual, unanimous and certain a Tradition as the Doctrines written in
Scripture have; that we only wait for their proving that any of those
Doctrines they would obtrude upon us have been thus Universally delivered: so
that herein is no Controversy betwixt us; and if by Constitutions our Compiler
means those about Matters of Discipline and Government, and by Practices the
Rites and Ceremonies, of the Church; He knows, or least ought to know, that it
is the Doctrine of our Church, that there is no necessity of express Scripture
for the Constitutions and Practices which she enjoins in order to the more
regular and decent service of God. So that here again He sees we are agreed,
and therefore what he has put down here as a Point at present under debate
betwixt us, is really none at all.

But if He mean here Constitutions of Points of Faith necessary to Salvation,
let him undertake to produce Fathers (when he pleases) for that point, and I do
here promise him an Answer: what He has collected under this head are not to
that purpose.

For as to his two Nubes Test. p. 48, 49. Not. Alexan. p. 358-360.
first Authorities from Irenaeus, they are taken out of that very book wherein
St. Irenaeus (as he tells him who put him upon writing against the
Valentinians) undertook to confute that Heresy from -- In hoc autem tertio
[Libro] ex SCRIPTVRIS inferamus ostensiones, ut nihil tibi ex his quae
praeceperas, desit a nobis. Iren. Pref. in Lib. 3. adv. Haeres.
the Scriptures themselves. I wish some in the World would but imitate him, and
not be angry at us for being solicitous and earnest for the same Method. In
this Book Irenaeus takes notice of the extravagant humor of the Heretics,
that they would be confined to no Rule, nor submit either to Scripture or
Tradition D. Iren. l. 3. c. 2.
.

By Tradition here this Father meant the preaching of the Christian Faith, and
the Delivery of the Apostles Creed Hanc praedicationem cum acceperit and hanc
fidem -- Ecclesia diligenter custodit -- and consonanter haec praedicat ando
docet and tradit, quasi unum possidens os. D. Iren. adv. Haer. l. 1. c. 3.
, every Article of which is expressy contained in the Holy Scriptures, so that
this cannot be of any service to them, since both sides agree, that the Creed
is but a Summary of the Holy Scriptures, which Creed he says was unanimously
without any variation believed, taught and delivered from hand to hand in every
Church.

There is a passage in this third Chapter urged indeed by F. Alexandre Not.
Alex. p. 359.
, but more prudently omitted by our Compiler, which, I think, may with
abundance of reason be turned upon the Romanists by us in all points of
Controversy betwixt us, as well as it was by St. Irenaeus against the
Heretics of his time. He arguing against them that there were no Bishops in
the World that either taught or knew of any such things as they held, urges
them with this argument, That if the Apostles had known of any such hidden
Mysteries -- Etenim si recondita Mysteria scissent Apostoli, quae seorsim and
latenter ab reliquis Perfectos docebant, His vel maxim traderent ea, quibus
etiam ipsas Ecclesias committebant. Valde enim perfectos and irreprehensibiles
in omnibus eos volebant esse, quos and Successores relinquebant, etc. St. Iren.
c. Haer. l. 3. c. 3.
which they were to teach the Perfect only in private and unknown to the rest
of their Disciples, they would most likely have delivered them to those to whom
they committed those Churches they had planted; enforcing it with this reason,
because they certainly would be very desirous that those to whom they left
their Churches and their Episcopal Charge, should be very perfect and
irreprovable in all things, which they could not be, if they wanted those
secret Mysteries the Heretics did pretend to.

And in the same manner may we urge against the Church of Rome, that if the
Apostles had known of such things as Purgatory, Praying to Saints, and the
Lawfulness of Worshipping Images, and the like, they would certainly either
have put them down in their own Writings, or would have delivered them to those
to whom they left their Charges, that so we might have seen and heard of these
things among them as frequently and as unanimously as we do of the Tradition of
the Apostles Creed.

But to return, and put a short Answer to these Quotations: the Tradition here
spoken of was about the Apostles Creed; the Tradition here is what the Apostles
had preached, and what the Apostles preached is the very same that they
afterward by the Will of God and the Request of Christians (as Eusebius Hist.
Eccl. l. 3. c. 24.
, for example, does inform us about three of the Gospels) committed to Writing.
This is what Irenaeus himself says particularly in the first Chapter of this
Book Non enim per alios dispositionem salutis nostrae cognovimus, quam per eos,
per quos Evangelium pervenit ad nos, Quod quidem tunc praeconiaverunt, postea
vero per Dei voluntatem in SCRIPTVRIS nobis TRAVIDERVNT, Fundamentum and
Columnam Fidei nostrae futurum. St. Iren. adv. Haer. l. 3. c. 1.
, that we had no other knowledge of the Economy of our Salvation than by the
Labors of those by whom we first received the Gospel; which Gospel indeed at
first They DELIVERED by PREACHING, but afterward by the Will and Appointment
of God committed It to WRITING, that IT might be the Foundation and Pillar of
our Faith, [and so of our Salvation.]

If those Divine Writings be of that Efficacy as to found and stablish us in
the True Faith, thither in God's name let us have recourse, and learn what the
Apostles taught by what they writ. We have not the least ground or intimation
from this Father of any Doctrines necessary to Salvation not written, or
forgotten to be penned by the Apostles among the rest. We have his Opinion
directly against any such secret Traditions. In a word, if it were God's Will,
that the Apostles should commit to writing the same Word of Salvation that they
had preached, I cannot see how it should come to pass, that some part of it
should be written and another not. If it were all written, I am sure our
Compiler is besides the Cushion, and the whole Church of Rome as much.

What I have said here is not only answer sufficient for what is out of
Irenaeus, but for the two next Testimonies from Origin Nubes Test. p. 50, 51.
Not. Alexan. p. 365, 366.
, the latter of which speaking so very honorably of the Scriptures, is a very
unfit one for the Church of Rome's purpose, and would have been omitted, had
either F. Alexandre or our Compiler read the whole Tract they so readily quote.
The last from Origin Nubes Test. p. 51. Not. Alex. p. 366.
and those from Tertullian Nubes Test. p. 52. Not. Alex. p. 367.
relate only to Ecclesiastical Rites; as for Tertullian's not disputing with
the Heretics from Scripture Nubes Test. p. 54. Not. Alex. p. 369.
, it was not from the Imbecility of Scriptures for such purposes, but upon
other accounts, one of which was, that they had nothing to do with the
Scriptures; all the World knows the Reverence Tertullian had for the Fullness
and Sufficiency of the Scriptures to all purposes, when Adoro Scripturae
plenitudinem, -- Scriptum esse doceat Hermogenis Officina. Si non est scriptum,
timeat Vae illud adjicientibus aut detrahentibus destinatum. Tertull. advers.
Hermogen. c. 22.
He said he adored the Fullness of the Scripture, and bids Hermogenes to have a
care of the Woe denounced against those that added or took any thing away from
Scripture, if he could not show that what he taught was to be found in the
Scriptures. And the same We can show of St. Basil, who as he does plead
Tradition without express Scripture for the Practices and Constitutions of the
Church with the rest of the Fathers, as our Compiler has quoted him Nubes
Test. p. 55, 56. Not. Alexan. p. 375, 376, 377.
; so he is as earnest as any of the Fathers for the Sufficiency and Authority
of the Written Word as to Matters of Faith, and in his Sermon about True Faith
(...). S. Basil. Sermo de vera Fide, T. 2. p. 251.
, declares it to be a manifest deviation from Faith, and a sign of Pride,
either to reject any part of the Scriptures, or to add to them, since Christ
had told us, that his Sheep would hear his voice, and not a Stranger's.

Our Compiler is very exact in his next quotation, and Nubes Test. p. 57. Not.
Alexan. p. 377.
gives us book and page, but instead of thanking him, we must thank F.
Alexandre, who helped him to them, but should have remembered himself to have
quoted Oration instead of Book; the place from Gregory Nyssen however might
have been spared, since the Tradition he speaks of is that of the Apostles and
Evangelists, and That we are sure was written in the Scriptures, but allowing
this Tradition to be an unwritten one, it is not about a point of Faith, but
the Interpretation of it, wherein we allow the Tradition of Antiquity to be
highly useful and necessary.

The first Authority from Epiphanius Nub. Test. p. 58. N. Alex. p. 351.
is not against us, who do not require express Scripture for every custom, but
admit of Tradition as Authority sufficient in such a case: and in his next all
that he contends for is that it was a Tradition of the Church to pray for the
dead; and Nub. Test. p. 58. N. Alex. p. 378.
that the Holy Ghost did teach partly by the written word, and partly by
Tradition, which last part of his words if it be stretched to speak of matter
of Faith is more than can be allowed to Epiphanius, since the first Fathers
teach the direct contrary, as I could have shown from Tertullian and others as
well as I did from Irenaeus. St. Austin's places Nub. Test. p. 59, 60. N. Alex.
p. 380, 381, 382, 383.
as relating to Ecclesiastical Practices and Constitutions are answered above;
that from Vincentius Lirinensis relates to the same: the last from St.
Chrysostom Nub. Test. p. 61. N. Alex. p. 354.
speaks of the times of the Apostles themselves, whose Preachings as well as
Writings were the very same, did proceed from the same Holy Spirit, and
therefore were of equal Authority: and for what he adds about the Tradition of
the Church, that when it is offered to us, we should enquire no farther; it
does certainly refer only to Practices and Customs of the Church, since as to
matters of a higher nature, to wit, those that concern our Faith and Salvation,
He makes Scripture-Authority absolutely necessary, and teaches us not to say
any thing of our own heads without the Testimony of the Sacred Inspired Writers
for this very reason (...). S. Chrysostom. Hom. in Ps. 95. p. 1042. Tom. 3. Edit.
Ducaei.
because if we affirm or say any thing without having [ the Authority of]
Scripture for it, the understandings of our Auditors waver, one while
assenting, another while doubting, one while rejecting our discourse as
frivolous, another while admitting it, but as probable at most; but when once
we produce the Written Testimony of God's Word, we confirm our own discourse,
and fix and settle the Understanding of the Auditors. I hope our Compiler when
he has read this, will have another notion concerning the Authority of
Tradition. We do admit it as to Discipline and Practice with the Primitive
Fathers, but as to points of Faith and Doctrines of necessity to Salvation we
do require with them the Written Testimony of the Word of God, or an Universal
uninterrupted Tradition as clear as that by which we receive the Scriptures
themselves.

CHAP. IV. Concerning Invocation of Saints.
SECT. I.
HOW little the Church of Rome is able to produce Universal Tradition for those
points of Controversy which we at present contend about is what our Compiler's
next head comes now to show. That there is no foundation in Scripture, no
command for, nor Practice of Invocation of Saints, or paying any Religious
Worship to them or their Relics is what they are forced to grant; they must
then have recourse to Tradition, and show us from that, what they were not able
to do from Scripture it self, that the Church of God always practiced and
taught such a Worship of Saints and Relics as the Church of Rome does now
teach and practice.

Our Compiler begins this point with an account of the Heresy of Vigilantius,
as F. Alexandre calls it; this account he has borrowed out of that Fathers In
Par. 1. Sec. 5. c. 3. p. 50, 51, etc.
account of the Heresy of Vigilantius; and every syllable of the Testimonies
under this head for above twenty pages together out of the same Friend
Dissertat. 5. in Panoplia adv. Haereses Sect. 5. in Par. 2. Seculi quinti.
: He tells us that in the beginning of the fourth Century Vigilantius began to
teach his pestilent Doctrines: but this is a mistake of our Compiler, who has
placed Vigilantius here by the same figure that he puts Damasus and Julius
Append. to Nub. Test. p. 191.
in the Third Century, Victor in the first, and Aerius exactly in the middle of
the same Century: Vigilantius lived in the beginning of the fifth Century, when
the quarrel betwixt him and St. Hierome began; we are not at all concerned in
this quarrel any farther than to stand by that Doctrine and those Practices
which were most agreeable to the Scriptures the Foundation of Faith.

The Differences betwixt us and the Church of Rome in these points are so well
known, that I need spend no time about showing wherein they are: it is
sufficient to advertise that they of that Church teach and practice the putting
up prayers to Saints and Angels, paying Religious Worship to them, prostrating
themselves before Relics and the like; every one of which we refuse upon
reasons which from Scripture, and the purest Antiquity seem invincible to us.

The Church of Rome will have what she teaches and practices in these things to
have been the Constant Practice and Original Tradition of the Whole Church of
Christ: and this is the thing which lies upon them to prove, and this is what
we demand, that they would show us from the Writings of the Fathers, that the
Invocation of Saints, and Worship of them and their Relics was the Practice
of the Universal Church in the first, second, third and fourth Ages of the
Church: the Practice of the Three first Centuries is that which they know we so
much value, and insist upon, and therefore always demand Evidences thence of
any Doctrine or Practice, when Tradition was certainly freshest in their
Memories, and the Fathers in best capacity of knowing the sense of Scriptures,
and of the Apostles.

Our Compiler will not be the man serviceable to us in such demands: As to
honoring the Saints in observing days in honor of them, he knows we do it,
and therefore needed not to bring passages from the latter end of the fourth
Century and the fifth Nub. Test. p. 63, 64, etc. N. Alex. Disser. 5. in
Panoplia. in Par. 2. Sec. 5. p. 279, 281, 283, etc.
, to prove it was then practiced in the Church; he might very easily have shown
such a Practice from the first Ages of the Church.

But I will pass on to Invocation of Saints, and see whether He shows this to
have been the Practice of the Three first Centuries and so on; and here Alas
his Authorities fail him, and he is not able to produce us one: for his
passages from St. Cyprian and Origin Nub. Test. p. 67. N. Alex. p. 305.
do only prove what is generally piously believed that the glorified Saints do
intercede for the Church Militant: and the two next Nub. Test. p. 68. N Alex.
p. 308.
from the fourth Century prove no more: But what is this to Invocation of
Saints, is there no difference betwixt our praying to them, and their
interceding for us?

The next Authority from Nazianzen Nub. Test. p 69. N. Alex. p. 309.
cannot do it, since all know this to be a Rhetorical Apostrophe; and his
other Orations show that this thing of addressing their discourse or wishes to
the Saints was now but in its infancy, (...) (in his third Oration against
Julian addressing himself to Constantius) does invincibly prove that it was far
from being a settled belief then, that the Saints could hear or perceive
requests put up to them: nor does any of his following Authorities Nub. Test.
p. 70, 71, etc. N. Alex. p. 311, 312, etc.
from Gregory Nyssen, Chrysostom, Ambrose prove any more than an
interpellation or Request to the Saints, that they would do that which they did
believe they were always a doing, that is praying for the distressed here on
earth: none of his Testimonies proceed so far as to prove any formal Prayers
like those now used in the Church of Rome; they look much liker the Requests
from Equals, or familiar Friends; let but any one compare the Speech of Gregory
Nyssen for example Nub. Test. p. 70.
where he applies himself to Theodorus the Martyr, with the Devotions of the
present Church of Rome to the Saints, and he will easily see the great
difference betwixt the Prayers used now during Divine Service, and the Requests
then made in their Orations.

So that we of the Church of England are still where we were, notwithstanding
our Compiler, we dare not practice Invocation of Saints, because we believe
Prayer, or Religious Invocation to be peculiar to God alone, who will not give
his Glory Isa. 42.8.
to any other; who in any of our necessities has directed us to call upon him
Psalm. 50.15.
and has promised that he will deliver us: we believe our blessed Savior knew
his Father's mind better than all the men in the World, who ordered his
Disciples, and us by them, to put up our Prayers to Our Father (not to this or
that Saint) that is in Heaven.

We do not follow the latter Ages of the Church in their Interpellations to
Saints, because as we are sure that they had not Scripture to ground their
Practice upon, so we are as certain that they had not the Example of the first
Ages to guide them into such Practices. But we are farthest of all from joining
with the present Church of Rome, which has turned the Interpellations and
Requests used to Saints in the fifth and sixth Centuries into formal Prayers
and Services, and has put her Prayers to them into the most solemn parts of
her Devotions, into her Litany for instance; so that if we could not admit of
using such Requests to Saints, because groundless and without Example, we have
far more reason to reject Invocation and solemn Prayers to Saints as
Superstitious, since it is against Scripture, and against the Practice of the
three first Centuries of the Church, against a Council in the fourth Century,
and wants a Pattern even in the fifth and sixth, and has no example in any of
the places produced by our Compiler on this head.

This is sufficient to show, that what our Compiler has produced from the End
of the fourth, and from the fifth Century does not defend or reach up to the
present Practices of the Church of Rome in this point, since there is so great
a difference betwixt Interpellations put up in Rhetorical Orations and
Homilies, and Prayers used in the very Litanies themselves; betwixt Requests
not put up in the Liturgies of the Church, nor commanded any where in Antiquity
for those first five hundred years of the Church; and Prayers formally put into
the Liturgies of the Church of Rome, and as strictly commanded to be used by
all her members. In Origen's time we are sure that the Doctrine of the Church
was that no worship nor adoration [nor consequently no Invocation] was to be
paid to Angels -- (...) [viz. Angelos] -- (...). -- (...). Origin. contr.
Celsum l. 5. p. 233. Edit. Cantabr.
because all prayer, supplication, intercession and thanksgiving was to be
offered up to God Almighty by the high Priest, (our Lord Jesus Christ) and it
was looked upon as an absurd thing to invocate Angels [or Saints, for the same
reason holds for both] who had no knowledge of the particular affairs of men.

As this was the Doctrine of the third Century, so as soon as Invocation of
Angels began to take root in some parts of the Church in the fourth Age, the
Council of Laodicea ( which was confirmed by the General Council of Chalcedon)
in her 35th Canon did command that no Christians should leave the Church of
God, and go and Invocate Angels, and did anathematize any that (...). Can. 35.
Conc. Laodicen. p. 53. in Bibliotheca Juris Canonici Veteris. Edit. Justel.
1661.
should be guilty of this secret Idolatry, and did interpret it to be a
forsaking of Christ.

I cannot but observe upon this Canon, that Theodoret interpreting the
eighteenth verse -- Quocirca Synodus quoque quae convenit Laodiceae, quae est
Phrygiae Metropolis, lege prohibuit NE PRECARENTVR ANGELOS: and in hodiernum
usque diem licet videre apud illos and eorum finitimos Oratoria Sancti
Michaelis. Theodoret. in Ep. ad Coloss. c. 2.18. p. 766. Edit. Lat. Paris. 1608.
of the second Chapter to the Colossians, which speaks about the Worshipping of
Angels, makes this Canon to forbid the praying to Angels; and farther that they
that were so fond of this Superstition were forced to leave the Churches
wherein it seems Invocation of Angels (much less of Saints) was not to be had,
nor any such Practices in their Liturgies. I will conclude this Chapter and
discourse with St. Austin, who speaking of the honor due to the Martyrs, says
that they did not erect Temples to them as if they were Gods, but appointed
Commemorations of them as dead men, whose Spirits are with the Lord; that they
were named in their place and order, but not Invocated by the Priest, who
sacrificed Nos autem Martyribus nostris non Templa sicut Diis, sed Memorias
sicut hominibus mortuis, quorum apud Deum vivunt Spiritus, fabricamus --, suo
loco and ordine NOMINANTVR, non tamen a Sacerdote qui sacrificat, INVOCANTVR.
Aug. D. de Civ. Dei. l. 22. c. 10.
.

SECT. II.
The very same Arguments that I had against the Invocation of Saints, I must
also use against the paying any Worship to their Relics: if the Saints
themselves were never admitted by God into any share of his Worship, we cannot
think their bones or ashes were: if the first ages of the Church never robbed
God of his Honor by dividing of it betwixt him and his Servants, we have much
more reason to believe that they would not impart it to the mortal Remains of
those Servants. This we are certain of, that in all the accounts we have of the
History and Writers of the first ages of the Church, when she certainly was in
her greatest purity, we find nothing of their solicitude about searching for
the Bodies and enshrining the Relics of Saints, not a syllable about any
worshipping of them, or seeking to them for help, and deliverance from
diseases, or troubles.

The Apostles and Virgin-Church of Christ had undoubtedly as great a value, and
as large apprehensions of the vast merit of the first Christian Martyr St.
Stephen, as any age since can have for any Martyrs, or ought to pretend to: and
yet we find them only decently interring their Martyred Brother, no care about
getting Relics, or mangling his Body to have fingers, teeth or toes to show
in order to be kissed and prostrated to; such foolish and Superstitious Actions
were the issue of more degenerate and fancifull times.

When the blessed Martyr Ignatius had according to his intense desire finished
his course with Martyrdom, and was delivered a Prey in the Amphitheatre to the
cruel Lions, who devoured all of him, but some hardest bones, the Brethren then
attending his Martyrdom took up those Sola enim asperiora sanctorum ossium
derelicta sunt; qua in Antiochiam reportata sunt, and in capsa reposita sicut
thesaurus inappreciabilis. Martyrium S. Ignat. p. 6. Edit. Usser. 1647.
most valued bones, carried them to his beloved City, and buried them there.
And not long after, when his Fellow-bishop St. Polycarp had glorified his
Redeemer in the same way, and the faithful, notwithstanding the inveterate
groundless malice of the Jews, had gathered up all the bones that the fire had
left, they committed (...). (viz. Polycarpum) (...). Eccl. Smyrnensis Epistola
de Martyrio Polycarpi, p. 28. Edit. Usser.
those bones, which they valued more than costly Pearls or Gold, to burial, and
celebrated with Joy and Praises the Birth day (as the Church then called the
day of Martyrdom) of this Saint in Memory of him, and such as had in the same
victorious fights finished their courses, and for an incitement and preparation
to all that were to combat in such bloody encounters.

I cannot pass here the observing of that in this Golden Letter of the Church
of Smyrna, which will give us the true sentiments and innocent practices of the
then Christians: the Devil and the malicious Jews by his instigation persuaded
the Prefect to deny the Christians leave to take and bury the body (...) (viz.
Diabolus) (...). Eccl. Smyrn. Epist. de Martyrio Polycarp. p. 27. Edit. Usser.
1647.
of this blessed Saint Polycarp (after the Executioner had done that office
upon this Saint which the fire would not) lest they should leave their
Crucified Savior, and fall to worshipping of him.

This cheat and malice of the Devil and his Instruments the Church of Smyrna
take notice of in this Epistle, and show that spite and ignorance together were
the Causes of this Calumny (...). Ibidem.
since Christians never could leave the worship and service of Christ who had
suffered all for their sins, nor pay any worship or adoration to any other
person (or as the Old Latin Translation has it, nor offer up the supplication
of prayer to any other person): The Son of God (say they) we worship and adore,
but his Martyrs we justly love, as being not only his Disciples, but
Imitatours of his Sufferings, we love them for that very great good will which
they have showed to their King and Master.

I have often wondered how they of the Church of Rome who read this Epistle
either dare practice the Worshipping of Saints or Relics, or can pretend to
say that Antiquity did do the same; I am sure this Apostolic Church of Smyrna
was so far from it, that they make it the spite and malice of the Infernal
Fiend, and the Devilish Jews to say they would, and I am as sure that it is
little less to say they did worship Saints or Relics.

But to return to the Grave of that glorious Martyr, we find his bones
committed to the Earth; after which it was the Care and Practice of the Church
to dispose thus of the Bodies of their Martyred Brethren, and so very careful
the Church was in the first Ages in this point, that the Clergy of the Church
of Rome Et quod maximum est, corpora Martyrum aut caeterorum si non
sepeliantur, grande periculum imminet eis, quibus incumbit hoc opus. Cleri Romans
ad Cler. Carth. Ep. 8. inter Cypriani. Ep. p. 18. Edit. Oxon.
in their letter to the Clergy at Carthage, among a great deal of good advice
about Discipline, and other things, speak of this, as a thing of greatest
Concern, that the Bodies of their Martyrs should be carefully buried by those
who had the charge of that business, and make it a dangerous fault in these
persons to neglect their duty herein.

After this account of the Practice of the first Ages of the Church about their
care of the dead Martyrs and Brethren, Let us now see whether our Compiler can
show us the Practice of the Church to be contrary to what we have here set
down, and whether he can show that the Primitive Church did use those Acts of
Worship, those Prostrations and Kissings, those Processions and Resorts to them
for Cures and Assistence in Distresses, (which are now the ordinary stated
Practices in the Church of Rome) during the three first Centuries, which He
knows we always insist upon, and demand as the surest Witnesses of the
Doctrines and Practices of the Apostles and the Church from the beginning.

Our Compiler is not able to produce even one Instance of any Relics of
Saints treasured up in order to cure Maladies, or be prostrated unto: but that
he may not appear quite destitute of a Testimony from those purest Ages of the
Church, he brings us in the old Chair of St. James Bishop of Jerusalem; but how
comes this to be the Relic of that Saint, were St. James and his Chair Nub.
Test. p. 75. N. Alex. p. 231.
so near akin as to be both of a piece? the world is very low with such
people, when they are forced to bring in old Chairs instead of the Saints
Bodies, or any parts of them; but let it pass for a sort of a Relic, does it
appear from Eusebius (out of whom the quotation is brought) that the Christians
then worshipped it, carried it about in solemn Processions, or that it was
resorted to for Cures, or that it did any great Cures? This our Compiler should
have shown, and without it, I must tell him that this is worse than trifling,
because we are now about the Defense of the present Practices of the Church of
Rome, by showing that the Primitive Church practiced the same.

But F. Alexandre told him, and he does tell us, that the Faithful of the
Church of Jerusalem did show great Reverence to this Chair: it is true, Valesius
his Translation (which Father Alexandre follows here, though Christopherson is
his man at other times) says this; but the Mischief is, Eusebius himself does
not; what Eusebius says is, that the faithful at Jerusalem were wont, and to
that day did show to all Comers the (...). Eusebius. Hist. Eccl. l. 7. c. 19.
Chair it self which St. James sat Bishop in: which, I think, is pretty
different from Valesius his translation about showing great reverence to the
Chair it self; as to the Honor they then paid to the Memories of the Saints
themselves, it was but what was highly just, and that wherein they are imitated
by us, as well as any other Christians.

His next Testimony from St. Cyril Nub. Test. p. 75. Not. Alex. p. 232.
of Jerusalem is so far from being for them, that, I think, it may and ought to
rise up as a Witness against them; for when God had given such a virtue to the
bones of Elisha, as to raise a dead man, and when that Miracle was wrought by
God's permission, can our Compiler show, or dare any of his Church pretend to
do it, that the Jewish Church did thereupon take up and enshrine the Prophets
bones, that they appointed Processions to them, or did command the Worship of
prostration or kissing to be paid to them, or that they used to frequent his
Monument for the same or like Miracles?

This they ought to reflect upon, and to consider how far the Scriptures are
from mentioning, or the Jewish Church from practicing any religious and
superstitious addresses to those bones, notwithstanding so extraordinary a
Miracle effected by them. How happy had it been for the Christian Church if
Christians had kept within the same bounds, and not given such a helping hand
to the Superstitions and Idolatries of after ages by their hunting out and
searching so much for the Ashes and Remains of the Servants of God, some of
whom had been buried above a thousand years before?

This therefore we must grant to the Members of the Church of Rome, that
Superstition taking root in the end of the fourth Century of the Church, a
great part of Religion began to be placed in searching for Martyrs bones, in
building Churches where they found or fixed them, especially when they found
that God was pleased at those places (I dare not say by those ashes and bones)
to work Miracles, upon which they did pay an Honor to those Relics; but that
they did worship them as they now do in the Church of Rome, is what themselves
so often deny, St. Hierome Nos autem non dico Martyrum Reliquias, sed ne Solemn
quidem -- non Angelos, non Archangelos -- colimus and adoramus. D. Hieron. adv.
Vigilant. ad Riparium.
in particular, who contended so earnestly for them with Vigilantius.

Had the Church of Rome stayed here, and not proceeded so much farther in these
things, I do not see that we could have broken Communion with them upon such an
account; and therefore I need not examine by retail his Testimonies from the
latter end of the fourth and fifth Centuries, the design of which he himself
makes only to prove that the Fathers kept the Relics of Saints with Respect
and Veneration, and believed that God often wrought Miracles by them: which we
do grant the Fathers of those latter ages did, and might do it too, as long as
they kept (as they said of themselves that they always did) from paying
Religious Worship unto them: but we say withal, that what the Christians of
those Ages did about these things does no ways defend the present
Extravagancies of the Church of Rome, the excesses wherein about Relics are
come to that Scandalous height, as to make the learned men of their own Church
ashamed of them.

As to the Practice of the Church of England, which inquires not after, nor is
solicitous about the Relics of Saints, this may be said in her Defense, that
she finds no Practice or Command about any such searching after the bones of
the Dead in any part of Scripture of either Testament, but that their whole
care then was to commit them to their Sepulchers in hopes of a future
Resurrection, and never to disturb their Ashes; and therefore she thinks it
must needs be her greatest commendation, that she is more careful to imitate
what she finds written and practiced in the Scriptures themselves, than to
imitate what the fourth Age of the Church began to practice, when the Church of
Christ was near four hundred years old: The Holy Scriptures themselves are the
Rule of her Faith, and for any Apostolical Practices she inquires among them,
who lived with the Apostles or nearest to them; among whom finding nothing of
any searching for Relics, or any Miracles done by them in those first three
hundred years, she is resolved to practice what the Christians of those first
and purest Ages did, rather than what after-ages did, wherein plenty and
prosperity let loose the reins to some peoples fancies, and made that a part of
Religion which was never any before.

CHAP. V. Concerning Prayers for the Dead.
SECT. I.
THE next point under debate that our Compiler presents us with is that about
Prayers for the Dead. Aerius (he says) condemned Praying for the Dead, and that
the Fathers practiced it, and owned it as advantageous to the Souls departed:
Every word of which we freely grant, how then is this a Controversy betwixt us
at present under debate? They of his Church have been so often told of, and
shown the vast difference betwixt the Prayers used in the Primitive Church, and
those by the present Romish Church, that I cannot but wonder that they are not
ashamed of still urging the Prayers of the Ancients, and making them the
grounds of their Belief of a Purgatory.

We always grant that Antiquity practiced Praying for the Dead, so that our
Compiler's Testimonies borrowed from F. Alexandre's forty first Dissertation
Not. Alex. Dissertatio quadragesima prima in Par. secunda Sec. 4. p. 392, etc.
are mustered up to no purpose, since they are brought in here to prove that
which no one denies. That which is a real Controversy betwixt us (if our
Compiler durst have spoken out as his Master F. Alexandre does, who urges all
the Testimonies Purgatorium esse, in quo expientur animae justorum --: and
Preces Ecclesiae ipsis illo in statu prodesse, Traditione -- demonstratur. And
then he sets down: the Authorities which our Compiler borrows, p. 392.
our Compiler sets down for the Proof of Purgatory it self) is, whether there
is such a place as Purgatory, and whether consequently we ought to use Prayers
for the Souls in it, or can help them out thence by the saying of Masses here:
and this is that which we demand of them to prove, that either the Scriptures
taught, or the Primitive Church believed that there is a third state or place
called Purgatory, wherein the souls of those who died in the favor of God were
(in order to the satisfying the Justice of God for the temporal punishments due
to those sins, the eternal Punishment whereof God had already remitted before
death) to endure fiery torments equal to those in Hell, till they had fully
satisfied God's Justice, or their Friends had obtained a release of part of
those torments for them, and got them released thence into the place and state
of justified Souls; and we demand farther of them to show, that the Word of God
(supposing that it did teach, and Antiquity believe a Purgatory) did injoin or
commend the Prayers of the Living for the Souls of their deceased Friends in
Purgatory, or that it did any where declare that such Prayers would be
advantageous to the Souls in Purgatory, and could release them thence; and we
demand of them lastly to show, that Antiquity for the first three hundred, nay
five hundred years, did ever use Prayers for the Release of the Souls of their
deceased Friends out of this Purgatory.

This is the true state of the Controversy betwixt us; we deny that the Word
of God does teach any such thing as a Romish Purgatory, or that Antiquity
believed any such place, we deny that either the Scriptures did enjoin or
commend, or that Antiquity did use Prayers to deliver the Souls of their
deceased Friends out of the flames of Purgatory: as for the mistaken passage in
the Maccabees, which is also against their Tenets, they know we do not own it
for Scripture.

They of the Compiler's Church do affirm the contrary, and therefore why did
not he go regularly to work to disprove us? why did not he bring us the
passages of the Primitive Fathers which show they believed Purgatory, and the
Prayers which were used then for the release of those miserable souls out of
the fiery torments of Purgatory, if there were such a belief of Purgatory and
such Prayers used, as are now in the Church of Rome, during the first three or
five hundred years? But this is that which they are never able to do; and
therefore, instead of keeping close to the point under debate, and proving
either a Purgatory or Prayers used by the Primitive Church for release of Souls
in Purgatory, they slip the Debate, let fall the Question, and fall a proving
of that which no body denies, that the Fathers in the first ages used Oblations
and Prayers for the Dead; never considering in the mean time that those Prayers
and Oblations were used by the Ancients for the very best of men, for their
Martyrs and Saints, for the Virgin Mary herself, that they were put up for
those whom they believed to be in a state of Light, and Joy, and Comfort; than
which what can be farther either from the Doctrine or the Practice of the
present Church of Rome? We do confess withal that these Prayers were offered
up also for pardon of sins; but neither will this reach the case of the Church
of Rome, since these prayers for pardon of sins were generally for those who
were in a state of Rest and Comfort, and there is not a word in them for
deliverance from pains and torments undergon in Purgatory.

SECT. II.
Thus in the Testimonies themselves which F. Alexandre, and after him his
implicit servant the Compiler, have heaped up under this head; the first of
them Nub. Test. p. 85. Not. Alex. Dissert. 41. in Par. 2. Sect. 4. p. 392.
from (the pretended) Dionysius, makes the Bishop offer Prayers over the dead
for pardon of sins of humane infirmity, and that he may be placed in the Region
of Light: but if our Compiler had read the whole Chapter he from F. Alexandre
quotes, he might have seen the Services and this Prayer was put for one, who
was a Holy Servant of God, who was by death at an end of all Combats, and was
already in joy and settled hopes (...). Dionys. de Eccles. Hierarch. c. 7. p.
407. Edit. Antuerp. 1634.
waiting for a blessed Resurrection: not a word of which is consistent with
being in the flames and torments of the fire of Purgatory, or could be said of
one who was now a purging in them.

And so the next from Tertullian appears not to be different, especially since
all are agreed that Martyrs themselves were herein commemorated Nub. Test. p.
85. Not. Alex. p. 394.
; and for the Refreshment prayed for in the second quotation, it did relate to
that state of Sequester, wherein Tertullian thought the Souls of the most holy
were detained till the day of Judgment, and not at all to any Purgatory. The
next from St. Cyprian Nub. Test. p. 85, 86. Not. Alex. p. 394, 395.
relates only to the same that Dionysius's did. The following Testimonies from
Arnobius and St. Cyril Nub. Test. p. 86. Not. Alex. p. 395, 396.
prove only what has been hitherto granted that they then prayed for the
dead, but say not a word of delivering them from Purgatory.

But though these Testimonies hitherto promised but little service, the next
that follows from Gregory Nyssen Nub. Test. p. 87. Not. Alex. p. 396.
seems to make amends for them, when it speaks of the dead making satisfaction
in the furnace of the purging fire in order to their being received into bliss.
Had our Compiler ever seen, or his Guide himself had observed what Monsieur
Dalle Dallaeus de Poenis and Satisfactionibus, c. 7. l. 4.
has collected about this Ignis Expurgatorius of Gregory Nyssen, they would
both of them have been ashamed of urging this for a Proof of Purgatory, since
it is too evident from those passages which Dalle has collected, to which it
were easy to add more, that either Gregory Nyssen was fallen into that
destructive Error of Origin that all men should be purged by fire, and finally
saved, or that the Heretics, who held that abominable opinion, have foisted
these things into his books; which is a charitable Opinion, however not so very
probable, since this destructive Error runs through a great part of his works:
if any one scruple this, I desire him to peruse that Chapter in Dalle, or if he
would not be at so much pains, to peruse but one passage which Dalle has
omitted to put down, and that is the end of his Dialogue, de Anima and
Resurrectione, where he will find him concluding of the most wicked persons,
whose vices had wholly overrun their Souls, that however upon their being cured
and purged in those purging fires, they should attain to incorruption and life
and grace and Glory, etc. but too much of this wicked Error.

That I may not however leave this Father lying under the Guilt of teaching the
Romish Purgatory as Bellarmine, from him Father Alexandre and our Compiler,
will have him, as well as of teaching that of a final Purgation which is
certainly in his Works; I desire our Compiler, by himself or Friends, to peruse
that Oration of Greg. Nyssen, de Mortuis, which he quotes: there they will find
that Father showing the Unreasonableness of fearing death, or lamenting the
death of their friends from this reason especially, because they are at rest,
and freed from all trouble, fear and danger. What evil is there (says this
Father (...), etc. Greg. Nyssen. Oration de Mortuis, T. 2. p. 1054. Edit. Paris.
1615.
) in the thing it self, that we should be so troubled at the death of our
Friends? is it a fit cause for grief, that they are entered upon a life free
from Passions and from trouble, where no danger of wounds or stripes, no fear
of dreadful fire, nor of any of the Calamities from Earthquakes, Shipwrecks
and such afflictions which they are altogether free from: And he runs on with
showing their state to be infinitely more happy than ours; which he could never
have done, had he believed a Roman Purgatory; and though He thought them free
from most of the Afflictions which torment and disquiet us here, yet he must
have excepted the danger and dread of fire, since if he was of the Romish
Opinion, he must believe that some of the Dead had not only reason to fear
Fire, but did really feel it in order to their expiating the temporal
Punishment of their sins.

The next Authority from St. Basil Nub. Test. p. 87. Not. Alex. p. 397.
about a purging Fire devouring the sin confessed, cannot relate to Purgatory,
since the Father does not refer this devouring of sin after Confession to a
state after this life, but speaks of it as an effect consequent to Confession
of sins, which Confession is not thought to be an employment in the grave, or
possible after our departure hence: and which is more, the Father himself means
by this purging Fire, the Holy Spirit of God, which when Confession (as the
Father allegorizes) has made sin as it were dry straw, does devour it, as Fire
does dry stubble, and he explains himself so in this same Comment -- (...),
etc. S. Basil. Comm. in c. 6. Esalae, p. 988. T. 1. Edit. Paris. 1618.
when he makes the purging fire to be that same fire wherewith Cleophas and his
brother-disciple's hearts were inflamed, while they talked in the way with our
Savior.

St. Gregory Nazianzen's Testimony Nub. Test. p. 87. Not. Alexan. p. 397.
had better been omitted, since there is too much reason to believe that it
falls in with that from Gregory Nyssen about the final Salvation of all men
after a severe Fire, because he applies that last Baptism by Fire to the
Novatian Heretics, who are not thought by our Compiler's friends to call at
Purgatory, and were believed by the Primitive Christians to have cut themselves
off (by their Schism and Heresy persisted in) from ever coming into the
Kingdom of Heaven: however to do Gregory Nazianzen all the right we can, we
must say that he ought not to be charged with that destructive Origenian
Error, since he speaks so doubtingly of it, (...), a perhaps, does not use to
speak a man's belief, but a guess or doubt: and therefore, I think, our
Compiler is at his old game, when he so ensnearingly and slily translates this
passage, in the next life they may come to be baptized by Fire, which is far
from discovering to an unwary English Reader any doubt of St. Gregory's of the
thing; whereas He himself says only, that there PERHAPS they will be baptized
with fire, the last, most painful and enduring Baptism, which does [or will]
devour the gross matter as hay, and consume the lightest and most frail sins.

Eusebius is next produced Nub. Test. p. 88. Not. Alexan. p. 398.
to tell us of the Prayers put up for the Soul of the Emperor Constantine the
Great, but can our Compiler or any friend of his show either that Eusebius
said, or did believe that Constantine was then in Purgatory, or that those
Prayers were put up to deliver him from thence? He was so far from believing
that Emperor's soul in such a miserable tormented condition, that in this very
Eusebius. de Vita Constable. l. 4. c. 71.
Chapter he speaks of the tabernacle of his most happy Soul: and the people
were so far from putting up prayers for that purpose, or believing his Soul to
be in such a miserable state, that they had Medals in honor of his Memory
Eusebius. de Vita Constable. l. 4. c. 73.
, on the one side of which was a representation of a hand from heaven lifting
him up thither, whereby they certainly believed that his blessed Soul was in
Heaven.

Epiphanius his Testimony is to no purpose, Nub. Testium, p. 88.
since it only shows in general that prayers were used for the dead, does not
prove in particular that these prayers were to rescue Souls out of the flames
of Purgatory. Not. Alexan. p. 398.


SECT. III.
We have next three or four large passages from St. Chrysostom, the first
testimony from whom Nubes Test. p. 88, 89. Not. Alexan. p. 398, 399.
does prove not only that they prayed for the Just, but for the Wicked also:
however there is nothing here to determine that they then believed a Purgatory,
or that the help they intended their deceased friends by their prayers was a
deliverance from the torments of it; there is that in this same Homily which is
evidence enough against it, where St. Chrysostom, speaking of the Husbandman's
rejoicing when his corn is dissolved in the earth, because he is assured it
will then grow up, compares the burial of the righteous to such a sowing in the
earth, and would have Christians rejoice when the faithful put off their
earthly houses, and are thus, as it were, sown in the earth, to grow up into
Immortality S. Chrysostom. Hom. 41. in 1. Epist. ad Corinth. in T. 5. in N. T. p.
466. Edit. Ducaei.
: after which (if I apprehend him right, as I am pretty certain I do) he
compares our being sown (to keep to his Metaphor) in the grave to the other
sowing, by which we are brought into the world, and shows the mighty advantage
of the first above the other; that to our being sown -- (...) [viz. (...)]
(...). Idem Ibidem.
or born into the world succeed death and labors, perils and cares, whereas,
if we have lived well, Crowns and Rewards do immediately succeed our being sown
in the grave; that corruption and death are the consequents of our being born
into the world, whereas Incorruption and Immortality, and ten thousand other
happinesses (among which I hope no body will reckon Purgatory) are the
attendants of the death of the righteous.

The second Testimony does endeavor to show that the faithful do receive
benefit by the Prayers put up for them Nub. Test. p. 90. N. Alex. p. 399.
; but how does our Compiler, or any of his Party show that this benefit was the
deliverance of those faithful from the flames of Purgatory? Had either our
Compiler, or his Guide himself but given themselves the trouble to peruse this
Homily, which they both quote, they could not have avoided the reading that,
which utterly ruins any such groundless thing; there they would have found this
holy Father dissuading the Christians from a bewailing the Dead in General, and
how he reasons against it: he allows them to bewail the wicked not only when
dead, but while alive, because they live in a continual Rebellion against God,
and are shut out from his Kingdom; but for the just, he would have Christians
to rejoice not only while alive, but when they are dead (...), etc. D. Chrysostom.
Hom. 3. in Ep. ad Philip. in T. 5. in Nov. Test. p. 31. Edit. Ducaei.
. because they are blessed as soon as translated hence, because they are gone
TO CHRIST, and are always with their heavenly King, but much more after their
decease, when they no longer by Faith or at a distance see him, but enjoy him
face to face, etc.

I appeal to any man of sense, whether there is a word that tends toward the
teaching a Purgatory here, I appeal to all men, to our Compiler himself,
whether any man could express his Mind more directly against a Purgatory than
this Father in this place, when he tells us that the righteous, when they die,
are happy, go to Christ, and are ever with their heavenly King, whom they enjoy
by faith indeed here, but as soon as they are translated hence, see him face to
face.

The next large passage from the same Father Nubes Test. p. 91, 92. Not. Alex.
p. 399, 400.
does but prove the same, out of which our Compiler has cunningly left out
what relates to the oblations being offered for the Martyrs themselves: and
here again I must tell our Compiler, that his Guide either never read this
Homily he quotes, or acts very disingenuously in bringing St. Chrysostom's
words to prove a Purgatory; against which he is as express as words can make
him, when he shows that to lament the death of the righteous is as ridiculous
as if we should bemoan (...), etc. D. Chrysostom. Hom. 21. in Acta Ap. p. 201. in T.
3. in N. T. Edit. Fr. Duc.
one invited to a Kingdom, and tells them, how the Angels at the death of the
faithful are sent from Heaven to call their fellow servants, and to bring him
to Christ's heavenly Kingdom, and he concludes that the faithful is not to be
lamented, since his Soul, leaving this earthly tabernacle, hastens straight
unto the Lord.

I will observe here that as some of the Fathers, St. Chrysostom among the
rest, did believe that their prayers were available to the righteous by gaining
for them some accession of glory D. Chrysostom. Homil. 3. in Ep. ad Philip. p. 32.
, so they were of opinion that they would procure some alleviation of torments,
some small assistence for the wicked, and therefore did practice and advise the
offering up of them for those eternally miserable Souls: He that will peruse
St. Chrysostom's third Homily upon the Epistle to the Philippians, will see
this very evident, and may also see there, notwithstanding this, how far that
Father was from believing such a state or place as Purgatory.

I need not insist on his last Testimony from this Nub. Test. p. 92. N. Alex.
p. 400, 401.
Father, which does not reach so far as the other three toward our Compiler's
purpose, since it only advises the oblation of Alms for the increase of
happiness to his Sons Soul, but I would not omit giving our Compiler a little
farther advice here, that he would look over this Homily, and then he will
leave this passage out of his next book for Purgatory, as well as he has left
the Vision of Perpetua out of this: in this Homily he may see how St.
Chrysostom urges his old reason for their not bewailing the death of the
righteous, because as soon as they are departed, they have clean escaped all
dangers, and do with safety possess an everlasting happiness.

In one word, whosoever will look into St. Chrysostom himself may very
evidently see how he divides the dead into two conditions only; the righteous
which die in the favor of God, go, according to him, immediately unto their
Lord, are immediately possessed of Crowns and eternal Rest, and a complete
security from any thing of pain, danger or trouble: the wicked and such as die
in sin he places among the damned, for whom, though he did hope and believe
that, by the Alms and Prayers of their Friends, they might have some small
relief, some little abatement of torments, yet he does teach that their
Judgment is irreversible upon this invincible reason (...). D. Chrysostom. Homil. 3.
in Ep. ad Philipp. p. 31. Edit. Fr. Duc.
because there is no hope for them who depart loaded with the guilt of sins,
that they can get rid of the guilt of those sins, after they are gone off the
stage of this world: while they were on earth, God might wait, and expect that
they would repent and become better; but when they are once gone off hence
(...) unto the place of the damned, or state of the dead, there is no hopes of
gaining by repentance any release, since in this place or state there is no
confession of sins to God, for which St. Chrysostom quotes the sixth verse of
the sixth Psalm according to the Seventy. It were easy to bring a hundred
places out of that Father, that speak the same thing, but I have already
gathered more than enough to show that St. Chrysostom's Doctrine is utterly
inconsistent with the Romish Purgatory.

SECT. IV.
I will now pass on to the rest of our Compiler's Testimonies, the first of
which from Theodoret Nub. Test. p. 92. N. Alex. p. 401.
brings us no news, nor proves any thing for him: nor the next to it from St.
Ambrose Nub. Test. p. 92, 93. N. Alex. p. 402.
though it makes a great show: it is granted that St. Ambrose in this
(anniversary) funeral Oration spoken so long after Theodosius his death, does
fall to praying for Rest for Theodosius, that his Soul may ascend to Heaven
whence it came, and there be out of the power of death; and is so passionately
earnest upon it, that he would not leave him, till by his Tears and Prayers he
had brought him unto the Mountain of the Lord, where He might enjoy Life for
evermore. But does all this prove that St. Ambrose did believe that the
Emperor's Soul was in Purgatory, or that Theodosius was in a miserable
condition, for whom he seems to be so earnest with his Prayers and Tears? He
that will affirm this must be as much a stranger to St. Ambrose as our brisk
Compiler is: I will confine my self to this very Oration, which had Natalis
Alexandre himself ever read, he would not have brought this passage in for a
Proof of Purgatory, since it does so often appear (in every page but one I dare
avouch it) that St. Ambrose did look upon Theodosius as already in glory, and
enjoying perfect happiness.

Thus within ten lines of the beginning of this Oration he says Et ille quidem
abiit sibi in regnum, quod non depesuit, sed mutavit, in tabernacula Christi
jure pietatis ascitus, in illam Jerusalem supernam, ubi NVNC POSITVS dicit,
sicut audivimus, etc. D. Ambr. Orat. de Obitu Theodosii T. 3. p. 53. Edit.
Erasm. 1538.
that Theodosius was now gone into his heavenly Kingdom, being admitted for his
Piety unto those Mansions in heaven, which Christ said he would go to his
Father to prepare, into the heavenly Jerusalem where he is now placed, etc.
and a little farther he brings in the Soul of this great Emperor replenished
Ergo decedens e terris Pia Anima, and Sancto repleta Spiritu, quasi
interrogantibus iis, qui sibi occurrerent cum sese ad sublimia and superna
subrigeret, dicebat, Dilexi: -- interrogabant Angeli vel Archangeli quid egisti
in terris? (Occultorum enim SOLVS Cognitor Deus) dicebat, Dilexi. Idem Ibidem.
p. 56.
with the Holy Ghost, mounting up into Heaven, and telling the Angels and
Archangels ( who were according to St. Ambrose ignorant of things below, and
therefore did inquire of him) that the love of God had been his employment here
on earth: and after this falling upon the mention of the Rest of Sabbath for
the People of God, St. Ambrose Feriatus his seculi curis Theodofius se ereptum
gaudet, and elevat animam suam, atque ad illam perpetuam dirigit Requiem. Idem
Ibidem. p. 58.
tells his Auditors, that Theodosius being now wholly rid of worldly cares
does rejoice that He is taken from them, and employs his Soul only upon the
thoughts of the eternal Rest for blessed Souls: and again he Absolutus igitur
dubio certamine fruitur NVNC Augustae Memoriae Theodosius Luce Perpetua,
Tranquillitate Diuturna, and pro iis, quae in Corpore gessit, munerationis
divinae Fructibus gratulatur: ergo quia dilexit -- Dominum Deum suum, meruit
Sanctorum Consortia. Idem Ibidem. p. 58.
tells them, that Theodosius being freed from uncertain fight, did THEN ENJOY
perpetual Light, and a never-ceasing Tranquillity, and that he did enjoy and
rejoice in the Communion and Company of the Saints in Glory.

I could add more, were not this more than enough to let the world see the
intolerable disingenuity of our Compiler, and his Guide F. Alexandre, who will
needs have St. Ambrose to be here praying Theodosius his Soul out of Purgatory,
whereas it is as plain as any thing can be expressed, that St. Ambrose did
believe that from the very moment of his death that Great Emperor was with God
in Bliss and perfect Tranquillity.

The next Testimony from this Father Nub. Test. p. 93. N. Alex. p. 402.
is to as little purpose, and had F. Alexandre himself (for as to our Compiler,
he honest Soul with an humble piece of implicitness sets down just what his
Master had) but set down also the line which is immediately before, and
connected to, this Testimony, he might have saved me the trouble of answering
here; St. Ambrose having told Faustinus that we ought not to be so much
concerned for the Accidents of this World, put down for an example the
Casualties of several famous Cities near them then in dust, and never like to
return to their ancient splendor; and then begins to compare these with the
loss of his Sister, who as the Father urges -- Haec autem ad tempus quidem
erepta nobis MELIOREM ILLIC VITAM exigat, itaque non tam deplorandam quam
prosequendam Orationibus reor. D. Ambros. ad Faustinum. Ep. 8. l. 2. Edit.
Erasm. 1538.
, is but taken from us for a while, and does there enjoy a much happier life,
so that (here our Compiler's Testimony comes in) he ought not so much to bewail
her as to follow her with his Prayers. If she did enjoy a much happier life, I
am sure she was not then in the flames of Purgatory.

In the next Testimony Nub. Test. p. 93. N. Alex. p. 402.
St. Hierome commends Pammachius for his great Charity, and for his designs of
building a public Hospital, and thereby cherishing as it were with odours the
Soul of Paulina his departed Wife; St. Hierome however was far from thinking
her Soul in Purgatory flames, when just before he ends the Epistle, he speaks
of her -- illa cum sorore Paulina DVLCI SOMNO fruitur. D. Hieron. Ep. 26. ad
Pammach. T. 1. fol. 76. Edit. Erasin. 1524.
as then enjoying a sweet sleep, or blessed Rest.

What St. Austin Nubes Test. p. 94, 95. N. Alex. p. 402, 403.
did in relation to his Mother Monica is far from proving that he did believe
her in any Purgatory; in the very heat of his praying to God for her, that He
would not enter into Judgment with her, he owns Ne intres cum ea in Judicium.
Superexultet Misericordia Judicium --. Et Credo JAM FECERIS QVOD te rogo, sed
Voluntaria oris mei approba Domine. D. Aug. Confess. l. 9. c. 13.
his belief that God had ALREADY DONE for Her ALL that He did pray for; and
excuses this his Practice with a Request that God would approve of the
Free Will Offerings of his Lips. I cannot but admire the foolishness of
applying the next quotation (out of the twelfth Chapter of the ninth Book of
Confessions) to prove a Purgatory; surely when St. Austin desired all, that
should hereafter read what he then wrote, would remember his Mother at God's
Altar, it was not to pray her out of Purgatory; if it was, I am sure she has
had a sad time of it to lie there so long; notwithstanding which, I do not
believe that, when F. Alexandre read this passage, or our Compiler after him,
they were so civil as to put St. Austin's Mother into their Prayers among them,
whose deliverance out of Purgatory they daily pray for in their Church.

I need not trouble my self with answering the rest of the passages Nub. Test.
p. 95, 96. N. Alex. p. 403, 404.
from St. Austin, not one of which does in the least insinuate a Romish
Purgatory: would our Compiler but read St. Austin himself instead of Natalis
Alexandre, Monsieur de Meaux, and such people, I am certain he would be of the
same mind. I am sure St. Austin's Opinion was, (as it may be seen for example
at the End of that thirty second Sermon, which our Compiler himself quotes Nub.
Test. p. 96, 97. N. Alex. p. 404.
) That we ought to believe Permittantur itaque pia corda charorum de suorum
mortibus contristani dolor sanabili, and consolabiles lachrymas fundant
condition mortali, quas cito reprimat Fidei Gaudium, Qua credunt Fideles,
quando moriuntur, paululum a Nobis abire and ad MELIORA TRANSIRE. D. Aug. Sermon.
32. de Verbis Apostoli. p. 277. Edit. Erasin. 1528.
that when the faithful die, and depart hence, they leave us only for a
little while, and pass unto the enjoyments of a much happier state than we are
in here on Earth.

Isidore of Sevil's Testimony is of no value here, since He lived with, and
after Gregory the Great, in whose time we own that a Purgatory began to be
believed, and its flames to be blown up first.

As to the Practice of the Greek Church Nub. Test. p. 98. N. Alex. p. 411, 412.
who pray still for the Dead, it is as direct an Argument as could be urged,
that the Ancients never believed a Purgatory notwithstanding their praying for
the Dead, since the Greek Church who imitate them in those Prayers did after
the pretended Union in the Council of Florence, and to this day do disown the
being or belief of any such place as Purgatory, and charge the Latins with
inventing it.

I will not trouble my self with any Observations upon Antiquity on this
account, I desire the Reader only to observe that the Prayers put up by the
Ancients were for the best of Men, for the Martyrs themselves, for those whom
they believed to be at Rest, in perfect Tranquillity, and with the Lord in his
heavenly Kingdom, and therefore I think we ought to interpret those Wishes and
Alms and Prayers for them as testifications only of their Hope and of their
Belief, that though they were gone hence, yet that they were still alive in the
Lord; and of their Love to them, whereby they did hope that by their Prayers
and Alms they could procure for their departed Brethren an increase of glory. I
will conclude this point of debate with a passage out of that Letter In the
Collection of Pieces at the end of Dr. Burnet's History of the Regale, p. 205,
206.
which the late most famous Antiquary Monsieur Spon wrote to Father Le Chaise,
the present French King's Confessor, wherein he tells him, that though He had
a vast number of Epitaphs of the first six hundred years, yet he could never
find any mention made for the Remedy of Souls, which the Modern ones wish or
desire for the Deceased, and that in all the ancient Bas-Reliefs which he had
seen, He could never observe any Representation of Purgatory.

CHAP. VI. Concerning Transubstantiation.
SECT. I.
THE next point under debate our Compiler sets about is Transubstantiation,
wherein he entertains his Reader with a long story about Berengarius, and the
Synods against him. I question not but a great many of the Readers of the Nubes
Testium have looked upon the Author thereof to be an extraordinary learned man
for his quoting so great variety of very curious, and very rare Authors, but I
can assure them, that, had he had that Ingenuity which Pliny the younger
requires in a borrower, he must have set Natalis Alexandre's name at the
beginning, and at the end of his tedious story, for out of his Dissertation de
Causa Berengarii it is, that our Compiler has furnished his Reader's with the
large account of Berengarius.

To what purpose all this stir about Berengarius is made, I cannot understand,
since we do freely own that that excellent and orthodox person was opposed by a
great many of those who passed for learned men in those days; and that the
Bishops of Rome falling in with the faction against him made such a noise with
Synods about him, and forced him to subscribe Confessions, the First of which
under Nicholas the Second was not only a sottish, but a blasphemous one; and
therefore our Compiler had the wit not to put it down in his Collection. It
were easy to show, how little these Confessions agreed with one another, but
especially with the present sentiments and practices of the Church of Rome, but
that is too large a Subject to be undertaken here? As to Berengarius his being
opposed by the Learned Men of his time, from which our Compiler would gather
the certainty of his having been in a great Error; if this be a good Argument
that Berengarius was in the wrong, it will hold as strongly, that
Transubstantiation it self is an error, since that doting Monk Paschasius
Radbertus (who first dreamt of, and exposed this Monster to the world) was
opposed as much by the Learned Men of his time. If Adelmannus Nub. Test. p. 100.
, Hugo p. 102.
, Lanfrank p. 104.
, and Durand p. 103.
wrote against Berengarius; Joannes Scotus Erigena and Rhathramn (who both
wrote at the command of the Emperor Charles the Bald) Amalarius, and Walafride
Strabo, Rabanus Maurus and Heribald with others wrote and taught directly
against the Novel Opinion of Paschasius: so that should we compare the Writers
which wrote for that Doctrine which Berengarius afterward taught, with those
that wrote against him, all Learned Men will grant that Berengarius had vastly
the advantage of his Adversaries, since those who wrote for his Doctrine
against Paschasius did so far excel in Learning those that did oppose him,
since the Scotus's, the Rhathramn's, and the Rabanus's were men of infinite
more worth and learning than the Adelman's, the Durand's, and the Lanfrank's,
the last of whom tells the formal silly story about two Heresies Lanfran. de
Euch. Sacr. in Tom. 6. Biblioth. PP. p. 203, 204. Edit. 1624.
started about the Flesh of the Son of Man, which the Sacramental Bread was to
be converted into, and makes the Council of Ephesus to have been procured for
the suppression of those two Heresies; which is such a forged and ridiculous
piece of stuff, as shows what learned Adversaries Berengarius was like to have,
when the most learned of them all is guilty of such ignorance.

It is not worth while to confute either Lanfrank's, or any of the other
Author's Arguments against Berengarius set down by our Compiler: he knows we
do not derive our Doctrine from Berengarius, and he might know, would he
consult our Protestant Writers, that we have evidently shown that Berengarius
was no starter of a new Doctrine, but that what Berengarius stood up for in the
Eleventh Century, had always been the Doctrine of the Catholic Church: and
this some of his own Church are so far satisfied of, that One of them, who is
said to be a person of very great note in France at present, did but the other
day show in an historical manner, that the Belief of our Church concerning the
blessed Eucharist was the Belief of the Catholic Church for a thousand years
after Christ, and that we ought not to be obliged to believe their
Transubstantiation, since it wanted what they themselves made necessary for any
Catholic Doctrine at the Council of Trent, the Tradition, to wit, of the
Church of all Ages.

Setting then aside their objecting to us Berengarius in the Eleventh Century,
and our objecting to them Paschasius Radbertus in the Ninth Century, whose
opinion was so learnedly and so invincibly baffled by the famous Rhathramn
as soon as it made any stir in the World; let us pass on to that, which we both
so eagerly contend for in this point, the Sentiments and Doctrines of the first
six Centuries about the Eucharist.

I think the Controversy might be sufficiently determined from Scripture it
self, where the Eucharist is so often noted by Breaking of Bread in the Acts of
the Apostles, and St. Paul does so often call it Bread after Consecration: but
since our Compiler waves all proofs from Scripture, and appeals to the Doctrine
and Belief of the Primitive Fathers of the first six hundred years, I am very
willing to attend his Motions, and to join issue with him herein.

The Question betwixt our Church and theirs may be stated in a very few words,
it is not whether Christ's Body be really present in the Eucharist, which he
knows we declare to be our Opinion, since we believe that the consecrated
Elements do by the appointment of God communicate to every faithful Receiver
the Body and Blood of Christ: but the real debate betwixt us is, whether the
Bread and Wine upon Consecration are transubstantiated into that very Body and
Blood of Christ which was nailed and poured out upon the Cross, or in other
words, whether after Consecration there is no other Substance there but the
Natural Body and Blood of Christ. This they of the Church of Rome affirm, and
this is what our Compiler must prove to have been the Belief and Doctrine of
the first six hundred years, if he intends to convince us.

Our Compiler has amassed together so great a number of Testimonies upon this
point, with which he fills up forty pages, that should I oblige my self to a
particular Examination of every one of his Testimonies, it would make a book as
large as all I shall gather against his whole Treatise; I will therefore, to
shorten my task, but much more to deliver my Reader from a tedious repetition
of the same Answers to those Testimonies which speak only over again what was
said before, answer those that are of most moment and Authority, and refer the
rest unto the same classes with them.

He is very careful to follow his Guide, Natalis Alexandre, out of whom he
transcribes every syllable of his Testimonies for forty pages together, except
two small passages out of St. Austin, which do not occur, as far as I have
observed, in that long Dissertation; yet is so cunning very often to curtail
those parts of the Testimonies which he thought, I suppose, did speak too broad
against them.

SECT. II.
The Compiler Nub. Testium, p. 109. Not. Alex. in Par. 3. Sec. 11, and 12.
Dissertatio 12. p. 476.
and his Guide also begin with St. Ignatius, who is quoted bringing in the
reason why the Heretics abstained from Communion, because they did not confess
that the Eucharist was the flesh of Christ. I have sufficiently answered this
passage in my Preface, by turning it upon my late Adversary, from the Authority
of Irenaeus -- eum PANEM in quo gratiae actae sint CORPUS esse DOMINI SVI.
Iren. adv. Haer. l. 4. c. 34.
who explains the Eucharistia here by Bread which had been blessed, and Origin
Orig. contra Celsum, l. 8.
who speaks of the Christians having a Bread which was called Eucharistia; so
that we say that the Eucharist or Blessed Bread is the Flesh of Jesus Christ,
but that this must be figuratively only, since Bread can no otherwise be the
Body of Christ and Bread still at the same time.

The second Testimony from Ignatius falls in with the first, so that I must
pass to our Compiler's next Nubes Test. p. 110. Not. Alex. p. 479.
from Justin Martyr, the strength of which lies only in his saying, they were
taught that the consecrated food was the Flesh and Blood of Jesus Christ; We
have already granted that it is; however, to corroborate what we said above, it
is evident to a demonstration that this consecrated Food was still Bread, and
not transubstantiated into the Natural Body and Blood of Christ, because St. --
(...), EXS (...) TPE PHONTAI (...). Just. Mart. Apolog. 2. p. 98. Edit. Paris.
1636.
Justin says at the same time and in the same sentence, that our bodies are
NOVRISHED by that very consecrated Food; to affirm which of the Natural Flesh
of Christ is impious and detestable.

St. Jrenaeus Nubes Testium, p. 111. Not. Alex. p. 485, 486, 487.
must be answered in the same way, since when he says, that the Bread is the
Body of Christ and the Cup his Blood, he does also tell us -- Sic and nostra
corpora ex EA [ viz. EVCHARISTIA] NVTRITA and reposita in terram and resoluta
in ea, resurgent in suo tempore. St. Iren. l. 5. c. 11. Edit. Fevard.
that the Body of Man is nourished by that same consecrated Bread and Wine, and
urges it for an argument that our Bodies shall rise again, because they have
been nourished by the Body and Blood of Christ: every syllable of which is
directly against any Transubstantiation.

The two Testimonies from St. Cyprian Nub. Test. p. 111, 112. Not. Alexan. p.
497, 501.
are of no weight, since they only call this Sacrament the Body and Blood of
Christ, as all the rest hitherto have done: And thus our Compiler has brought
us through the three first Centuries of the Church, those Golden Ages, whose
Testimonies we so much value and admire; out of whom the Reader may see, that
he has not brought one passage which is not directly against himself. He
begins the next Centuries with the Council of Nice Nubes Testium, p. 112. Not.
Alex. p. 506.
which says but what Ignatius did, when it calls the Eucharist the Body of
Christ: as to Her farther Testimony from Gelazius Cyzicenus Nub. Test. p. 113.
Not. Alex. p. 506, 507.
, about not minding the Bread and Wine before us, but raising our minds by
Faith to consider the Lamb of God offered without shedding of blood by the
Priests; the sense of this passage is no other than, that Communicants by Faith
should represent to themselves the Offering of the Lamb of God, and that
receiving the precious Body and Blood of that Lamb of God; they should believe
them to be the Pledges of their Resurrection: and had our Compiler but had the
Ingenuity to have transcribed the two next lines to these out of his Master,
Father Alexandre, Every one would at first blush have seen, that, by the
precious Body and Blood of the Lamb of God which the Faithful were to receive
here into their mouths, was not meant Christ's true Natural Body, but his
Figurative or Symbolical Body, the consecrated Propter hoc enim neque multum
accipimus, sed parum, ut sciamus quod non ad satietatem, sed. ad sanctimoniam
sumimus. Gelas Cyzic. in Not. Alexandri, Disser. 12. in Par. 3. Sec. 11, and
12. p. 507.
Elements of Bread and Wine, since they are advised to take but a small portion
of his Body and Blood, remembering that they did receive not to satisfy nature,
or to fill themselves, but to sanctify themselves: it is sense to talk of
receiving little or much of the consecrated Elements; but, I am sure, it is far
from it to talk of taking a little or much of the true Natural Body of Christ.

Eusebius's first Testimony Nubes Test. p. 113. Not. Alex. p. 510.
will not serve our Compiler's purpose, since People do not use to celebrate
the memory of that thing which is really present it self at the same time, and
therefore the Sacrifice spoken of in this Testimony is only a Commemoration of
that Sacrifice on the Cross once offered, and the Opposition here is put
betwixt this commemorative Sacrifice, and those legal signs and figures which
did not contain or exhibit the Truth it self; and not betwixt the natural Body
of Christ, and the Sign or Figure of it: for Eusebius does in another part of
this Work (...). Eusebius. Demons. Evangel. l. 8. p. 380. Edit. Paris. 1628.
tell us that our Lord commanded to make use of Bread for the Symbol or Sign of
his Body. The next Testimony from him ( Nub. Test. p. 113. Not. Alex. p. 518.)
falls in with Ignatius and the rest.

St. Hilary Nub. Test. p. 114. Not. Alexan. p. 519.
has expressed himself in the next Testimony in a manner very different from
the Fathers that were before him, to reconcile him with whom, I think, his
words ought to be extended no farther than to denote that in the Eucharist we
do really receive the Body and Blood of Christ; I am sure He did not believe
any Annihilation of the Elements or any Transubstantiation of them, when in his
Comments on St. Matthew, observing that Judas did not communicate with the rest
of the Apostles at the first Institution of the Eucharist, he gives the reason
of it, because he was not fit to drink Neque sane bibere cum eo poterat, qui
non erat bibiturus in regno, cum universos, tum bibentes ex vitis istius
fructu, bibituros secum postea polliceretur. D. Hilar. Commen. in Matthew. Canon.
30. p. 435. Edit. Erasm. 1523.
with our Savior then, who was not to drink with him in his Kingdom; which
thing our Savior had promised that all the rest should, who did then DRINK of
the FRVIT of THIS VINE. If it was Wine which they drank in the first
Institution of the Eucharist, it was certainly Bread which was broken by our
Savior, and eaten by them.

The following large Testimony from St. Cyril Nub. Test. p. 114, 115. Not.
Alexan. p. 524, 525, 527.
of Jerusalem, which speaks of the Bread's being the Body of Christ, and that
we ought not to look upon it after Consecration as naked and common Bread, is
what we all believe as well as any Romanist: however, though we must not look
on it after Consecration as common Bread, yet we may look upon it as blessed
Bread; and though we must not look on it then as naked Bread, yet we must look
on it still as Bread, or else instead of saying that it was not common Bread,
St. Cyril must have said that it is not Bread at all; which thing he was as far
from thinking as from saying here, where he tells his Auditors, that (...). D.
Cyril. Catech. Mist. 4. p. 237. Edit. Par. 1640.
under the Type or Symbol of Bread, they were made Partakers of the Body of
Christ, and under the Symbol of Wine, they did receive his Blood.

There is no man, who has read Cyril himself, that can be ignorant how in the
Mystagogical Catechism, next before this quoted by our Compiler, St. Cyril
speaks as great and as extraordinary things of the Chrism-oil for Confirmation,
and yet I never met with or heard of that Person, who believed that either
Cyril himself, or any body else upon his words, did believe that the Oil was
transubstantiated when it was made Chrism.

St. Basil's Authorities Nub. Test. p. 116. Not. Alex. p. 528.
are not worth considering, since they only made this Sacrament to be the Body
and Blood of Christ, and to be more excellent than the Sacrifices of Bulls and
Goats; which is denied by none of us. The next large passage from his Brother
St. Gregory Nyssen Nub. Test. p. 116, 117. Not. Alex. p. 530.
makes directly against our Compiler, and so would every Reader have seen, had
our Compiler but had the honesty to have set down the whole passage of Gregory
Nyssen, as his Master F. Alexandre had done. The design of the whole passage is
to show, how man that consists of two parts, body and soul, may in both of them
become immortal; for the soul, He makes its being joined by Faith unto Christ
to be the means of its attaining Salvation and Immortality; but for the body,
which had been poisoned and made mortal by sin, Gregory Nyssen makes the
Reception of the Body and Blood of Christ into our Stomach, and the Dispersion
of the Sacrament into our several parts, to be necessary to our Bodies being
cured of that poison which had affected every part of our bodies, and to their
being made immortal.

All this is but what Irenaeus said so long before, and this nourishing of our
Bodies in a strict and proper sense cannot without Blasphemy be attributed to
the Natural Body and Blood of Christ.

The next passage from the same Father in our Compiler Nubes Test. p. 118. Not.
Alex. p. 532, 533.
is made up of Scraps out of a fair large quotation in his Master F. Alexandre,
and cannot be fairly and clearly understood without the rest, which however I
shall not trouble my self to set down, since it falls in with the reasoning of
the first Testimony from this Father, and the Answer to that is as suitable to
this last.

As to the last Testimony from Gregory Nyssen Nubes Test. p. 118. Not. Alexan.
p. 537.
, I grant that this Father speaks of a Change in the Elements, in order to
their being made the Body and Blood of Christ, but that He means no change of
the substance of these Elements of Bread and Wine, but merely a change of their
Quality and Virtue, is evident from his Comparisons of the change in this
Sacrament to the changes of Water in the other Sacrament of Baptism, of a
Priest upon Ordination Greg. Nyss. Orat. in Baptism. Christi, p. 802, 803. Ed.
Par. 1615.
, of an Altar upon its Dedication, of the Oil for Confirmation; none of which
is believed by any man of sense to be transubstantiated, but only to receive a
change of their Use, Quality and Virtue; and therefore this last Instance of
our Compiler's from this Father is very impertinent, since in that very Oration
about Baptism, the change of the Elements in the Eucharist is made use of as
one Instance among the rest of a change made in Virtue and Quality only.

He that will be at the pains to read that Oration over will find it as
evident as the Sun at midday, that when Gregory Nyssen talks of the changes
there, He neither means nor contends for any other change than that which we
believe does happen to the Elements upon Consecration, to wit, a change in
their Use, Quality and Virtue.

Our Compiler has mangled also the next Testimony from Ephrem Syrus Nubes
Test. p. 118. Not. Alexan. p. 541.
, but to no purpose at all, since notwithstanding all his care, Ephrem Syrus is
as express against their Doctrines as we can desire, He teaches here, that the
Receiving of the Body and Blood of Christ is to be procured by Faith, which
this Father makes the Instrument of conveying them to us; which is sufficiently
plain against our Compiler's Church, which will have the Wicked to receive the
Body and Blood of Christ as well as the Faithful.

The two next Testimonies from St. Optatus and Gaudentius Nubes Test. p. 119.
Not. Alexan. p. 550, 552.
are not against us; they fall in with St. Ignatius, and are considered there;
and, which is more, are confirmed by our Compiler's second Testimony Nubes
Test. p. 119. Not. Alexan. p. 552, 553.
from Gaudentius, which acquaints us, that it was consecrated Bread (and
therefore Bread still) which our Lord gave to his Disciples, and said, This is
my Body Cum PANEM consecratum and VINVM Discipulis suis porrigeret, sic ait,
Hoc est Corpus; Hic est Sanguis meus. St. Gaudent. Tract. 2. in Exodus
.

SECT. III.
Having hitherto observed with diligence our Compiler, and examined
particularly his several Quotations for Transubstantiation, I should be as
tedious to the Reader as troublesome to my self, if I should take the same
method in examining the rest of his Testimonies which do follow; and indeed
there will be little occasion for it, since the rest of his Quotations upon
this Subject are either very vain or very much forced, to make an appearance
for Transubstantiation. It would be very irksome to answer particularly every
one of his numerous Quotations from St. Chrysostom Nubes Test. p. 120, 121,
122, etc. Not. Alexan. p. 554, 555, 556, etc.
: it is almost a sufficient answer to say, that they are every one of them
(except the two small ones out of his Book, De Sacerdotio) taken out of his
Homilies, wherein all Learned Men know and own that that Father did indulge too
much to the warmth of his fruitful fancy, and to the very heights of Rhetoric
and Eloquence: and therefore those towering expressions must be allowed for as
rhetorical flights, and those passages (which seem the nearest to the Doctrine
of Transubstantiation) must be taken in a figurative sense, because spoken
allegorically, and many of them with a very big hyperbole. I would desire of
any man of Learning and Ingenuity whether he thinks St. Chrysostom did believe
himself, or would have others to take him in a literal sense in most of the
Quotations set down by our Compiler, when (for example) He talks of their
seeing Christ's Garment; when He tells those that were desirous of seeing
Christ's shape, form, clothes and shoes, that they did see him, that they did
touch him, and that they did eat him; when He talks of the Tongues of the
Communicants being purpled or dyed with our Savior's tremendous Blood; when He
talks of their not only touching and eating our blessed Savior, but of their
fastening their teeth into his Flesh.

I must confess that I cannot (though F. Alexandre and from him our Compiler it
seems could) transcribe these passages without a sacred horror, and that I
cannot but think that Holy Father did wonderfully transgress the Rules of true
Eloquence, since, I think, such extravagant expressions are apter to excite a
horror of the Thing, much more than a Love of Christ in our Hearts. However,
after all these rhetorical, hyperbolical and figurative Declamations, we are
very certain that this good Father was far from believing a Transubstantiation;
since in a point of Controversy, and in cold blood as it were, when he was
securing his Friend against the Apollinarian Heresy, He does urge the
Continuation of the Elements of Bread and Wine in their own proper substance
after their Consecration for an Argument against that Heresy D. Chrysostom.
Epistola ad Caesar. Monachum.
; which thing He could not have done, had He believed himself, that the
Elements of Bread and Wine upon Consecration were transubstantiated into the
Natural Body and Blood of Christ.

I need not spend more words about the Testimonies from our Compiler's next
Father, Saint Ambrose, the first Nubes Test. p. 128, 129. Not. Alexan. p. 579.
of which only runs a Comparison betwixt this our Sacrament and the Jews
Manna, and, very deservedly, prefers the first as most beneficial. As for the
rest of the Testimonies from this Father Nubes Test. p. 129, 130, 131, etc.
Not. Alexan. p. 579, 580, 581, 582, 593, 597.
: to be brief, I say, that we own a change in the Elements of Bread and Wine
upon Consecration, and that St. Ambrose does fitly call in the Omnipotence of
God to prove it, since we believe that all the Powers in the World were not
able to institute this Sacrament to such a purpose, were not able to give to
Bread (which was common before) upon the pronouncing of a few words and
Prayers, the Virtue and Efficacy to communicate to a faithful Receiver the
Body and Blood of our Savior, all the benefits of his meritorious Death and
Passion; That St. Ambrose contended for, nor meant any other change is evident
from the 4th Book, (if his,) de Sacramentis, where contending in the same
manner, and upon the same Topic, for a change, He demands to know Si ergo
tanta vis est in Sermon Domini Jesu, ut inciperent esse quae non erant, quanto
magis operatorius est, ut sint quae erant and in aliud commutentur, D. Ambros.
de Sacram. l. 4. c. 4.
whether the Word of God, which was able to give those things a Being which had
none before, was not much more able to make these Elements to continue what
they were [which must be as to their Substance] and yet to change them into
another thing [which must be as to their Quality and Use:] and this St. Ambrose
farther proves, when quickly after this He compares the change in the Elements
to that of a person baptized, whom no body believes to be changed as to his
Substance, but only as to the Quality and Disposition of his Soul and Life. I
will add no more than that in this same fourth Book, de Sacramentis; this
Father Fac nobis hanc Oblatioonem -- acceptabilem, quod est Figura Corporis and
Sanguinis Domini nostri Jesu Christi. D. Ambr. de Sacr. l. 4. c. 5.
calls this Sacrament the FIGVRE of the Body and Blood of our Lord Jesus Christ.

The following Testimonies from St. Hierome are easily answered, by telling our
Compiler Nubes Test. p. 133, 134. Not. Alexan. p. 598, 599, 602.
, that the Body of Christ which the Priests are said to make is his Sacramental
or Figurative, not his Natural Body; to say, a Priest can make the Natural Body
of Christ, is, I think, too horrid to be owned by any that pretend either to
Christianity or common sense: and this Father does sufficiently explain
himself, when he says Nos autem audiamus PANEM, quem fregit Dominus, deditque
Discipulis suis, ESSE CORPUS Domini, etc. D. Hier. Ep. ad Hedib.
, that the Bread which our Lord brake and gave his Disciples is his Body.

I do not see one Testimony from St. Austin worth staying upon, we all believe
that the faithful do eat the Flesh and drink the Blood of Christ, but there is
not a word in all of them Nub. Test. p. 135, 136, 137, etc. Not. Alex. p. 614,
615, 617, 622, etc.
about the Bread and Wine's being transubstantiated; and no wonder, since among
the Fathers there is not One more direct against Transubstantiation in forty
places of his Works than St. Austin; I will but mention one very short passage,
but so plain and so direct as ought to be sufficient to have prevented the
Romanists ever bringing St. Austin on the stage as a Patron of, or Friend to
their Transubstantiation: it is from his Book against Adamantus, where He tells
us Non enim Dominus dubitavit dicere, Hoc est Corpus meum, cum Signum daret
Corporis sui. D. Aug. con. Adam. c. 12.
that our Lord made no difficulty to say, This is my Body, when he gave his
Disciples the Sign of his Body.

St. Isidore Pelusiota's Testimony Nub. Test. p. 140. N. Alex. p. 676, 677.
has been answered too often to take up any room here. And those Quotations
from St. Cyril of Alexandria might have been spared also, had our Compiler
known the Design of them Nub. Test. p. 140, 141, 142. N. Alex. p. 678, 679,
681, 682, 684, 685, 686, 687, 688, 690, etc.
St. Cyril's design in those Books (out of which F. Alexandre and from him our
Compiler have gathered all the Testimonies in the Nubes Testium) was to prove
that the Humanity of Christ is personally united to his Divinity, and He urges
Nestorius with this Argument among the rest, that in the Eucharist we are made
Partakers of the Life-giving Body of Christ, that no flesh could have such a
power but what was personally united to the Eternal Word of God.

This is the purport of St. Cyril's reasoning hence, and now what is all this
toward the proving that the Bread and Wine are transubstantiated into the
Natural Body and Blood of Christ? where is there a word in all these large
passages set down by our Compiler that speaks any such thing? There are some of
these very passages which are so far from helping to prove a
Transubstantiation, that they do suppose the direct contrary: I will instance
only in that of the (...). Cyr. Alex. in Joann. l. 11. p. 1001. Edit. Par.
1638.
Son's being united to us by the Mystical Eucharist, or as it is expressed in
the fourth Book of his Comments upon St. John, That by the Eucharist we do
receive the Son of God himself -- (...). Idem in Joan. l. 4. p. 364.
in us. If there be Transubstantiation either taught, or believed here, then by
the Body of Christ we receive the Body of Christ, and the Body of Christ is
made the Instrument of conveying to us the Body of Christ; which is admirable
stuff, but such as the Romanists must own, who say that the Eucharist is the
Natural Body and Blood of Christ. I cannot insist longer on such an absurdity,
but must pass on to the Testimony from Proclus Nub. Test. p. 146. N. Alex. p.
698.
which is directly against our Compiler, since it is the Presence of the Holy
Ghost, and not of the natural Body and Blood of Christ that (according to him
(...) 'AYTO Y (...) etc. Proclus CP. de Trad. D. Litur. p. 581.
) makes the Elements to become the Body and Blood of Christ.

The next Authority from St. Leo ( Nub. Test. p. 147, ex N. Alexandro, p. 700.)
is not worth considering; And as to the other Quotations from the Homilies that
go under the name of Eusebius Emisenus the Semi-Arian Nub. Test. p. 147, 148,
149. N. Alex. p. 710, 711, 712.
, I answer that were they really His, yet They ought not to be admitted in this
Controversy, but since they are certainly believed by our Writers, and owned
by the Romish Writers not to be the Work of Eusebius Emisenus, and since it is
uncertain when these Homilies were first drawn up, We cannot admit Them to any
Authority or place within these six first Centuries, and therefore need not
trouble our Readers with any Answer unto them.

The last Passages from Isidore of Sevil Nub. Test. p. 150. N. Alex. p. 714,
715.
speak nothing to the purpose of a Transubstantiator: we grant that Christians
are obliged to offer the same Sacrifice which Christ instituted; and that
Sacrifice was a Commemoration of his most meritorious Passion (to be undergone
the next day) for all men: but how Transubstantiation can be proved hence is
what I am far from being able to see. I am sure St. Isidore was of the contrary
Opinion, when speaking of the Eucharist, He said that the Substance -- Sicut
Visibilis Panis and Vini substantia exteriorem nutrit and inebriat hominem: ita
Verbum Dei, qui est Panis Vivus, participatione sui Fidelium recreat mentes. S.
Isidor. Hispal. apud Rathramni Lib. de Corp. and Sang. Dom. p. 120. Edit. Par.
Boileu. 1686.
of the Visible Bread and Wine does nourish and exhilarate the outward man,
(that is, our Bodies), as the Word of God, the Living Bread does nourish the
Souls of the faithful Communicants.

SECT. IV.
I have now gone through all the Testimonies produced by our Compiler in order
to the proving that Transubstantiation was as much the belief of the first six
hundred years of the Christian Church, as it is now of the Church of Rome; and
I cannot but appeal to the Reader, how little these numerous Testimonies have
advantaged the Roman Cause, and how far any of them has been from proving the
belief in those best days of the Church of any Transubstantiation: it had been
easy for me here to have produced abundance of passages out of those Fathers
which our Compiler has quoted, and out of other Eminent Fathers whom he has
omitted, to evidence how far Antiquity was from knowing, or believing any such
monstrous thing as Transubstantiation; I could not only have produced their
Opinions, but their Practices also upon Record directly against any
Transubstantiation, as, for example, the making Plasters of the Eucharist;
their mingling the Consecrated Wine with their Ink, to make their Subscriptions
more authentic and solemn; their burying the Eucharist with their Dead; their
ordering the Eucharist to be burnt, if kept till it were stale or moldy; but
as I have not leisure nor room here to produce those convincing Authorities of
the Ancients, so neither need I to insist farther on these Practices which
speak so loudly, how far the Christian World was then from believing the
Eucharist to be (through Transubstantiation) the Natural Body and Blood of our
blessed and glorified Savior.

I cannot however pass by without a Remark that Practice of burning the
Eucharist, if It had been kept too long. This was formally provided here in
England (for Example) in the Tenth Century near a Thousand years after Christ
by the thirty eighth of the Canons of our Church Docemus etiam, ut Sacerdos
semper habeat praeparatam (prout opus fuerit) Eucharistiam, and hanc in
puritate custodiat, caveatque ne inveterascat. Sin diutius reservata fuerit
quam oportuit, and ut nauseam pariat, comburetur tunc in puro igne, etc. Can.
38. sub Edgaro apud Spelm. Concilia Tom. 1. p. 452.
made in King Edgar's Reign; And yet, to let the world see what a sort of
Enemies Berengarius met with in the very next Century; when that Champion for
the Primitive Doctrine about the Eucharist urged upon his Adversaries a Matter
of Fact, that the Eucharist was corruptible, whereas the Natural Body and Blood
of Christ were owned by all to be incorruptible: Guitmund the Archbishop of
Aversa (who was one of his Antagonists) denies very briskly the matter of Fact,
and falls most outrageously Berengarius dicit: caro Christi incorruptibilis
est, Sacramenta vero Altaris, si diutius serventur, possunt corrumpi. VIDENTVR
ENIM PVTREFIERI. (now follows the Reply) O calumniosa lingua, o lingua
blasphemiis assueta: promptior ad extorquendam superbe de Scripturis Dei suam
perditionem, etc. Guitmundus Archiep. Avers. de Verit. Euchar. l. 2. p. 228,
229. apud Tom. 6. Biblioth. PP. Edit. Par. 1624.
upon Berengarius for it, and exclaims without measure against his calumniating
and blasphemous Tongue, and goes on railing against poor Berengarius, as if he
had been guilty of the most impious falsity: whereas if Berengarius's Tongue
was blasphemous for urging a matter of Fact, which the Practice of the Church
had given sufficient Testimony to, in ordering the Eucharist to be burnt that
was corrupted, I am sure Guitmund's Pen was not inexcusable to say no worse of
it, but altogether unbecoming a Christian, much more an Archbishop.

I will stay no longer upon this Point which has been so much, and so
invincibly exposed; if any desire farther satisfaction herein, I must refer him
to our late Treatises on that Subject, and if he would see Transubstantiation
proved not to have been the sense of the Primitive Church in a lesser compass,
I refer him to the twenty fifth Chapter of Veteres Vindicati in answer to Mr.
Sclater of Putney.

CHAP. VII. Concerning Images.
SECT. I.
I Have now left upon my hands but one other of the Points at present under
debate: it is a point which gives so much offense to a great part of the World
who are Christians, and is such an Obstacle to a greater part who would or
might become Christians: I speak of the Worship of Images, which they of the
Church of Rome contend so much for, and which we of the Reformation cannot
contend too much against. Our Compiler ushers in this Controversy with a large
account about the warm debates for and against Images in the Eighth and Ninth
Centuries of the Church: his Margin to this account is so painted with
Authorities for all he says in it, that it would look like envy, and a piece of
very ill nature to deny his being very well read in the History of those times,
were I not very well assured that all this is but borrowed, and that this
ungrateful Plagium ought to be exposed, and the world told, that this formal
Account, and these Marginal Notes are all taken out of his old Master F.
Alexandre Natalis Alexandri Seculum 8. Cap. 2. Artic. 1. de Iconoclastarum
Haeresi, p. 65, 66, 67, 70, 71, etc.


I must do our Compiler however this right to let the Reader know that He
discovers something more of Discretion in this Account than his Master himself:
our Compiler Nub. Test. p. 151.
begins his account with telling his Reader that the Jews, Marcionites,
Manichees and Theopaschits had always showed themselves professed Enemies of
Holy Images: but his Master F. Alexandre tells us a greater piece of news, that
the Gentiles as well as Not. Alex. ibidem, p. 65. Gentiles, Judaei,
Marcionitae, Manichaei, Theopaschitae jam olim Sacris Imaginibus bellum
indixere, etc.
Jews, Marcionites, Manichees and Theopaschits had of a long time, or (as our
Compiler translates jam olim) always been enemies of the Holy Images. I think
this about the Pagans being such enemies to Images is a Discovery, and a thing
which few people would have thought or hit on: but so it is, if we may believe
F. Alexandre, and therefore his Transcriber was to blame not to let his English
Reader hear of it, that so he might know, whom we herd with that are such
enemies to Images, and that he might upon occasion call Protestants either
Pagans or Iconoclasts, since they are all of a humor, and in the same faction
against Holy Images.

It is not my business to examine this account of the Quarrels in the Eighth
Century about Images: it is owned that in that Century as one part of the
Church by a large Council of Bishops did put a stop to, and utterly forbid the
making and Worship of Images, which was an Evil then creeping into the Church;
so after them another Synod at Nice did endeavor to undo what those religious
Bishops had appointed, and did command that Images should be put into Churches,
and be worshipped there: But it must be remembered also that this last
Conventicle of Nice was despised by the Western part of the Christian World,
and her Definitions condemned in a Council of three hundred Bishops at
Frankford under Charles the Great, who himself, or some by his Command, yet not
without his Royal Assistence did with so much learning and accuracy fully
confute all the Pleas and grounds for Images made use of by that Conventicle at
Nice.

And as to our own Nation so far were They from submitting to what had been
enacted at Nice, that, when the Emperor Charles the Great transmitted hither
the Definitions of the Synod at Nice to Offa King of Mercia, Hoveden --
Imagines Adorari debere, quod omnino Ecclesia Dei execratur. Contra quod
scripsit Albinus [ Alcuinus r.] Epistolam ex authoritate Divinarum Scripturarum
mirabiliter affirmatam; illamque cum eodem libro ex Persona Episcoporum, ac
Principum nostrorum Regi Francorum attulit. R. Hoveden, Annal. Pars 1. p. 405.
Edit. Wechel. 1601.
tells us that the Church of God [here] did abominate and abhor what they had
enacted at Nice about the Adoration of Images, and that the famous Alcuin wrote
and carried a Letter in the name of the Bishops and Princes of England to that
Emperor, wherein from the Sacred Authority of Scripture Alcuin baffled the
Adoration of Images.

Passing therefore these things as nothing to the purpose of the present
debate, which should be to show that Images were not only used, but adored
within, and during the first six Centuries after Christ: We challenge our
Enemies to show that the Church of God in those first ages did not only use,
but worship Images.

Our Compiler manages the beginning of his account so slyly and in his old way,
that I question not but most of his credulous and unthinking Readers do
thereupon believe that Images were always used in the Catholic Church, and
always worshipped by Her. The Jews (says he) Marcionites, Nubes Test. p. 151.
Manichees and Theopaschits had ALWAYS showed themselves professed Enemies of
Holy Images, and had been industrious for the suppressing them among
Christians. But in the year 723 the Jews with an unusual fury declared War
against them, etc.

I appeal to all Learned men, whether most men would not hence believe that
Images had always been used and worshipped in the Primitive Church; and I do
not see why all that read him should not believe the same, since it is very
natural for every one to argue thus with himself; that the Holy Images could
not Always have been opposed by the Jews, Marcionites, and the other Heretics,
except they had Always been used and worshipped in the Church. If then our
Compiler did thus believe himself, and had a mind to convey the same belief
unto his Readers, I must tell him, that for all his reading of Father
Alexandre's Books He discovers a great deal of ignorance in this thing, since
what He writes here is a notorious falsehood: but if he pretends that his
meaning only was that since Images were used in the Christian Church, they had
always been opposed by those Jews and others, I must then assure him that He
deals most disingenuously, and uses too much craft for an Honest Writer, while
He suppresses that in this account, which could only keep his Readers from
believing a gross untruth.

If our Compiler would do the Controversy about Image Worship any true
service, and keep within his own bounds, the Belief and Practice of the first
five hundred years of the Church, He must show, that, for those five hundred
years as well as since, Images were not only used but worshipped by the
Christians in their Assemblies.

How unable either our Compiler, or his Master Father Alexandre are to show
such a worship of Images then, is hence apparent in that they are not able to
produce any Author for the first three hundred years of the Church that speaks
of Images either used, or worshipped in the Church of Christ during that space
of time: I know our Compiler quotes Tertullian Nub. Test. p. 160. N. Alex.
Dissertatio 6. be in Sec. 8. p. 628.
but He is very unhappy in it, since all the world knows, that know any thing
of Antiquity, that Tertullian was so a far from speaking of the use of Images,
or the Lawfulness of them among Christians or any people else, that he was
against the very art of painting and making Images, and looked upon it as
utterly unlawful, and universally forbidden Idolum tam fieri, quam coli Deus
prohibet -- Propter hanc causam ad eradicandam scilicet materiam Idololatriae,
Lex Divina proclamat, Ne feceris Idolum: and conjungens, neque similitudinem
eorum quae in coelis sunt, etc. Toto mundo ejusmodi Artibus interdixit Servis
Dei. Tert. de Idololat. c. 14. Edit. Franek.
by God: and farther that place of Tertullian which our Compiler alludes to
(for he does not give us Tertullian's, but his Master F. Alexandre's words)
speaks not of any Image, but of a mere emblem engraven upon a Chalice.

As to the three Testimonies Nub. Test. p. 154, 155. N. Alex. p. 627, 624.
about the Statue of our Savior set up before her door by the Woman whom our
Savior cured of the Issue of Blood, our Compiler might very well have spared
them, since Eusebius in the very next words to his account of it tells us
(...). Eusebius. Hist. Eccl. l. 7. c. 18. Edit. Vales.
that it was through her heathenism that she did this, and that upon the same
ground the Painted Images of our Savior and Peter and Paul were in many hands,
which a heathenish gratitude had taught some to make to show their respect to
them.

All the following Testimonies about the Transient Sign, or Figures of the
Cross used by Constantine the Great and afterward Nub. Test. p. 155, 156, 157,
etc. N. Alex. in Panoplia Seculi septimi, p. 67, 68, 69, 70, 76, 71, 64, 65,
77, 78, etc.
are to no purpose, since our Compiler cannot show withal that they were
worshipped; if he could, why did he not; let him show that as they used in
Constantine's time the Figure of the Cross, so They adored it; let him show
that the Ancients did practice what the Church of Rome now does, that They
adored the Image of the Cross, and (which is far more according to themselves)
that Latria was paid to it, which the Church of Rome now says Crux Legati, quia
DEBETVR EI LATRIA, erit a dextris, etc. Pontificale Romanum, p. 480. col. 1.
Edit. Romae, 1611.
is due to it.

That the Reader may see the direct contrary Practice betwixt the Church of God
in those days, and the Church of Rome at this present, I will produce only St.
Ambrose's account of Helena the Mother of Constantine's finding at Jerusalem
the Cross on which our Savior was crucified; He tells us -- Invenit ergo
Titulum, REGEM ADORAVIT, non LIGNUM utique, quia hic GENTILIS est ERROR and
VANITAS IMPIORUM. Ambros. in Orat. de Obitu Theodosii, T. 3. p. 61. Edit.
Erasm. 1538.
that upon her finding the Title, (by which she knew our Savior's Cross from
either of the other two) She ADORED the KING of Heaven, not THE WOOD OF THE
CROSS, [ which would have been in Helena, and in it self] is a PAGANISH ERROR,
and the VANITY of the IMPIOUS. By these words I question not but St. Ambrose
meant that to have Adored the Cross, would have been downright Idolatry: and
yet our Compiler has furnished us (in defense of Image Worship) with two or
three Fathers which are of the opposite Opinion: his St. Asterius Amasenus Nub.
Test. p. 163, 164. Not. Alex. Panopl. Sec. 7. p. 71.
is so far from thinking it an Impious Vanity to adore the Cross, that He (if
we may believe the Romish Writers and the second Synod at Nice, for there is
nothing of this Oration in Rubenius's Edition or in the Biliotheca Patrum of La
Bigne) says that Christians are COMMANDED by the LAW of GOD to ADORE the CROSS
-- Apparet Signum [viz. Crucis] Quod ex PRAESCRIPTO LEGIS Christiani ADORANT.
Asterius Orat. de S. Euphemia. in Nubes Testium, p. 164.
. We are very unhappy that we could never see this Command in the Law; could we
but see it, or had St. Ambrose ever dreamt of such a Law, neither He nor we
would call Adoration of the Cross Idolatry: but this of Asterius is too gross
and too absurd to deserve a word of answer.

As Asterius said the Adoration of the Cross was commanded, so Paulinus
Nolanus, another of our Compiler's Vouchers, assures us Nubes Testium, p. 168,
169. Not. Alex. Panopl. Sec. 7. p. 61, 62.
that it was practiced yearly at Jerusalem, when at every Easter the Bishop of
that Church did produce the Cross (on which our Savior suffered and which was
kept by Him) to be ADORED by the People; and his third Author, (...) Nubes
Testium, p. 172. Not. Alex. Panopl. Sec. 7. p. 66.
Rusticus Diaconus, to clear the Point tells us, that the WHOLE CHVRCH
throughout the WHOLE WORLD did without any Contradiction or Dispute ADORE the
NAILS -- Clavos and Lignum venerabilis Crucis, Omnis per totum mundum Ecclesia
absque ulla contradictione-adorat. Rust. Diac. in Nubes Test. p. 172.
with which our Savior was fastened, as well as the WOOD of the HOLY CROSS on
which He suffered.

I question not but every one that reads these passages will admire how things
came to be so much altered; or rather, how St. Ambrose and this Paulinus (who
were Contemporaries for some time) should give us such diametrically opposite
accounts about the Adoration of the Cross. I will only desire the Reader (that
I may deliver him from his admiration) to observe, that Paulinus in this very
Epistle tells us, that the place from whence our Savior ascended into Heaven
could never after our Savior's ascension be paved with Marble or any thing
else, but that the Earth threw it all off, and that the footsteps of our
Savior are plainly to be seen there; and (which is a better Story) that though
the Bishops of Jerusalem did give an infinite number of the pieces of the Cross
to Pilgrims and others, who begged them of those Bishops; yet that the Cross it
self is (to put it into our Compiler's translation) nothing at all diminished,
but remains as entire as if never touched or mangled. I hope this will give the
Reader enough of Paulinus, whose Epistle I have once read over, but hope in God
I never shall again. As for Rusticus Diaconus, I will return no other answer
than that those who know any thing of the State and Practices of the Church for
the first six Centuries, know very well that what Rusticus says, is not (to
speak softly) the greatest Truth.

Though Paulinus Nolanus is not worth the vindicating, yet I cannot but tell
our Compiler that he wrongs Him very much, when He says Nubes Test. p. 166,
167. Not. Alexan. Dissert, 6. Sec. 8. p. 631.
after F. Alexandre, that the blessed Trinity was described in Mosaic work in
a Church built by this Paulinus: whereas there is no such thing mentioned by
Paulinus there in that Epistle, nor ought it, or can it be gathered from the
Verses set down by F. Alexandre and our Compiler; since, though the Son might
be represented by a Lamb, and the Holy Ghost by a Dove, there was nothing to
represent God the Father, except these wise Gentlemen will have him represented
by a Voice, which is a little too odd, and a Voice too hard a thing to be
painted.

The rest of our Compiler's Testimonies within the first six Centuries prove no
more than the use of Nub. Test. p. 160, 163, 164, 165, 172. Not. Alexan.
Dissert. 6. Sec. 8. p. 629. 630, 631, 632, 633.
Painting in the Churches the Saints and the Martyrs Sufferings, and some
Scripture Histories, all which is nothing to the purpose, except he could prove
(which he is far from being able to do) that those that brought those Paints
into the Churches were as careful to worship them, as the Church of Rome now
is. However, we must inform the Reader, that as this Custom of having Paints
and Images in the Churches was without any Command from Scripture and without
any Example of the Church for the golden Ages thereof, the first three hundred
years; so neither was it universal, but met with great opposition. In the
beginning of the fourth Century the Council of Illebiris in Spain commanded
that there should be no Pictures in any Church Placuit Picturas in Ecclesia
esse non debere Council. Eliberit. can. 36. in T. 1. Council. p. 974.
; and the Story of St. Epiphanius in the end of this Century is sufficiently
known, who coming by chance into a Church which had a Veil over the door
painted with the Picture of our Savior or some other Saint, tore it to pieces,
and gives this reason for his doing so (in his Letter to the Bishop of
Jerusalem) because Cum ergo hoc vidissem in Ecclesia Christi contra Autoritatem
Scripturarum hominis pendere Imaginem, scidi illud, etc. Epiphan. Ep. ad Joann.
Episc. Hierosol. apud Hieronymi Opera, Tom. 2. p. 58. Edit. Paris. 1533.
it was against Scripture to have the Picture or Image of any person hang in a
Christian Church. But afterward Custom by degrees brought these Pictures into
most Churches, and the ignorant people began to worship, and fell to adoring
them in the sixth Century; which one of the Bishops of the Church, Serenus of
Marseilles, taking notice of, broke down the Pictures and Images, and cast them
out of the Church. This was taken notice of by Gregory the Great, and though he
would not have had him to have broken the Images, yet Et quidem Zelum vos, ne
quid manu factum adorari possit, habuisse laudavimus, sed frangere easdem
Imagines non debuisse judicamus. Greg. M. in Ep. 109. l. 7. Edit. Frob. 1564.
he commends his Zeal against their being worshipped. I think his Authority
sufficient to end this point of Controversy betwixt me and the Compiler: He
does in this Epistle fully declare himself, that he would have the people kept
by all means from giving any worship to Images, and recommends only an
Historical Use of them for the Ignorant Tua ergo fraternitas and illas servare,
and ab earum ADORATV populum prohibere debuit: Idem, Ibidem.
: He is of the same mind in his next Epistle to this same Bishop, Serenus; and
though at this day in the Church of Rome Images are set up not only for an
Historical Use, but to be worshipped; yet I am sure from his own Pen, that
Gregory the Great's Doctrine was, that Images were placed in the Churches for
an Historical Use only, and NOT TO BE WORSHIPPED Frangi vero non debuit, Quod
NON ad ADORANDVM in Ecclesiis, sed ad instruendas SOLVMMODO mentes fuit
Nescientium collocatum. Idem Ep. 9. l. 9.
: and Gregory concludes his Directions to that Bishop; that if any body would
have an Image made, He should not hinder it; but for the paying Adoration to
Images, He should by all means hinder and forbid it; and He advises him to
admonish Et si quis Imagines facere voluerit, minime prohibe: Adorare vero
Imagines, omnibus modis DEVITA. Sed hoc solicit fraternitas tua admoneat, ut
ex visione rei gestae ardorem compunctionis percipiant, and in ADORATIONE
SOLIVS OMNIPOTENTIS SANCTAE TRINITATIS humiliter prosternantur. Idem, Ibidem.
his Charge, that upon the sight of those representations they would raise up
in themselves suitable affections, and with humility prostrate themselves to,
and pay all their Adoration to the OMNIPOTENT BLESSED TRINITY ALONE.

Such passages as this I have just mentioned, to which I could add many more
out of Antiquity, do so much affect me, that I cannot enough wonder at the
Index Expurgatorius of the present Church of Rome Index Libror. Prohibit. and
Expurgandorum, p. 234. Edit. Madriti, 1667.
, which commands Solus Deus Adorandus to be struck out of the Marginal Notes of
Humfredus's Latin Translation and Edition of St. Cyril of Alexandria's Comments
upon Esaias Cyrillus ex Verse. Humfredi Basil. 1566. p. 258.
; and out of the Marginal Notes in Robert Stephens Bible printed 1557.
Serviendum Soli Deo Index Expurg. p. 99.
; whereas both these passages are the very words of our Savior himself,
Matthew 4.10. I would fain know of any Romanist how this is not virtually and
in effect to command that that Verse in the Gospel should be struck out, though
it contains our Savior's own expressions, who should surely be allowed to
understand his own Religion as well as the Managers of the Index Expurgatorius.

And for what relates to the Cross it self, they have Index Expurg. p. 47. col.
2.
ordered that non ut Adoremus (not that we should Adore it) should be struck
out of Masius his Learned Commentary upon Joshua 22.28. These are things so
very notorious that my wonder increases, and my admiration at those people, who
(notwithstanding all this) would fain have us believe, that they do not worship
the Cross it self: when not only their PONTIFICAL, and their SERVICE on
Good Friday, teach and show that they of the Church of Rome adore the Cross,
but their Index Expurgatorius is so careful to strike out of the Indexes to
the Fathers Works any thing that does but appear to thwart or contradict such
worship.

If the Church of Rome does not worship Images, why is she so careful to
strike out Index Expurg. p. 311.
of the Index to St. Hierome such innocent passages as these, Adorare Statuas
vel Imagines, Cultores Dei non debent; the Worshippers of God ought not to
ADORE Statues or Images; Imago una tantum veneranda, One only Image, [to wit,
God the Son, the express Image of his Father] is to be worshipped. Why does the
poor Index suffer here, and not St. Hierome in whom Nos autem unum habemus
virum, and VNAM veneramur Imaginem, quae est invisibilis and omnipotentis Dei.
D. Hier. in Ezekiel. l. 4. c. 16.
these very expressions are?

If the Church of Rome give no Adoration to Saints or Angels, why does her
Index Expurgatorius command such passages as these following to be struck out
of Index Expurg. p. 52.
the Index to St. Athanasius's Works, Adorari solius Dei est, nullius autem
creaturae; Adoration is to be paid to God alone, and to no creature with him;
Angeli non sunt Adorandi, Angels are not to be Adored; Creatura nulla adoranda,
nulla invocanda, immo eam adorare Arianorum and Ethnicorum sit; No creature is
to be adored or invocated, to adore which would be to play the Arian or the
Pagan: I would fain know why the Index to his Works must be dealt so severely
with, while Athanasius himself is guilty (if there be any crime in them) of
every expression in the passages which are condemned by the Index Expurgatorius.

Let any one but look into St. Athanasius's third Oration against the Arians,
and He may there find this Great Father ( upon occasion of his mentioning St.
John 's offer to worship the Angel) speaking out (...). D. Athanas. Orat. 3.
contra Arian. p. 204. Edit. Commel. 1600.
plainly enough, that God alone is to be adored, and that the Angels (since
they are but Creatures) notwithstanding their Excellencies are in the number of
Worshippers, not of the worshipped. In his Epistle to Bishop Adelphius He
himself says, (what the Index to him did but transcribe,) That we do not adore
any Creature; God forbid (says the Good Father -- (...). D. Athan. Ep. ad
Adelph. p. 331.
that we should, since this would be the same sin that the Arians and Pagans
are guilty of; but we do adore the Lord of the Creation, the incarnate Word of
God.

If the Church of Rome does not adore the Martyrs and their Relics, why does
her Index Expurgatorius strike out of the Index to St. Hierome, Non adorantur
Martyrs, Martyrs are not to be adored; Adoramus Solum Deum, honoramus
Reliquias Martyrum; We adore God alone, and honor only the Relics of the
Martyrs: The Managers of the Index Expurgatorius ought to have considered, that
if there be any crime in these passages, St. Hierome himself ought to answer
for them, since it was He that said, Christians did not adore the Martyrs Quis
enim, O insanum caput aliquando Martyras adoravit, quis hominem putavit Deum,
etc. D. Hier. c. Vigilan. T. 2. p. 122.
, much less their Relics.

Either the present Writers of the Church of Rome are not serious and in
earnest with us, or they think our eyes shut, and that we do not see some of
their Books: it is very vain to talk (as our Compiler does) of respect only
and honor to Saints and their Relics and Images, when we see that any thing
which offers to deny Adoration to all these is condemned by their Autentick
earthly Purgatory, the Roman Index.

I will insist no farther on these scandalous things, but hope I may, under the
Protection, and after the Example of Gregory the Great, conclude, not only
against Images, (as Greg. M. Ep. 9. l. 9.
He did,) but against every Creature animate or inanimate, that NO RELIGIOUS
WORSHIP is or can be due or given to any of them, because of that saying of our
blessed Savior: Matthew. 4.10.
Thou shall WORSHIP THE LORD THY GOD, and HIM ONLY shall thou SERVE.

CONCLUSION.
HAving now gone through all our Compiler's Collections, and answered all his
Testimonies that were of moment, or came within the first six Centuries, I have
nothing left but his Appendix upon my hands; but since He owns whence he
borrowed this Appendix, and all Scholars know how solidly Bishop Morton
answered the whole of Brereley's Apology, I need not trouble my self with
answering any little parcels of it; Having answered our Compiler's Collections
out of the Fathers themselves, and shown that they neither taught nor believed
nor practiced what our Compiler would have them to have done; the Appendix is
not worth considering; since, if any Protestants did confess that the Fathers
believed and practiced as the Church of Rome now does, they were mistaken, as
has been sufficiently proved; but if they did not (as I think it were easy to
show) They are abusively brought in here, being Witnesses against, not for, the
Church of Rome.

I always looked upon it so servile a thing to flatter or court a Reader for his
good opinion or approbation, that, as I dislike it in our Compiler's Preface,
so, I am resolved to keep it out of my Book as well as Preface. All I entreat
of the Reader is, that he would read without Prejudice and judge impartially
betwixt this Answer and the Nubes Testium; and then, I believe, he will see
very good reason for that which I will conclude with, That the Fathers of the
first five hundred years did neither believe nor practice (in relation to the
Points at present under debate) what the Church of Rome at present does believe
and practice.

POSTSCRIPT.
HAving a little room lest here, I cannot employ it better, than to take notice
of a very great cheat put upon His Sacred Majesty as well as the rest of the
Auditors by F. Sabran, in his Sermon before the King at Chester in August
last: Sermon preached at Chester before the King, August 28. and Printed by
Henry Hills.
He told his Auditory, that he followed the Advice of St. Austin, when he did
recommend himself to the most blessed Virgin's Intercession, and did advise
them to do the same: and he quotes for this Saint Austin's 35th Sermon, de
Sanctis; whereas it is confessed by all men of any Learning, that this Sermon
was not St. Austin's; the very Title of it is sufficient to convince all that
know any thing of Antiquity, Sermo in Festo Assumptionis Mariae, does not at
all agree to any thing that is near St. Austin's time: the Benedictines of
Paris have cast it into the Appendix, as spurious, and tell us In Praes. Sermon.
208. in Append. Tom. 5. p. 343. Edit. Par. 1683.
that in their Manuscripts it wants the name of any Author; but the Divines of
Louvain tell us, that in several MSS. which they used in their Edition of St.
Austin In Praes. Sermon. 83. in Apend. T. 10. p. 631. Colon. Agripp. 1616.
this Sermon, de Sanctis, was entitled to Fulbertus Carnotensis. It is certain
it was not writ by St. Austin, or within two hundred years after him, from St.
Isidore's being quoted in it, who lived in the beginning of the seventh
Century; it is probable that it does belong to Fulbertus, who lived not till
past a thousand years after Christ: So that I have reason to conclude that F.
Sabran was guilty either of great Ignorance or of notorious disingenuity, who
would ascribe to the venerable St. Austin this notorious forgery, and lay that
brat to St. Austin, which their own Divines do, and cannot but, own to be
altogether illegitimate; and therefore F. Sabran, now he cannot but see his
great error, ought to undeceive the Members of his Church, that so we may have
no more boasting from them of this egregious cheat, as if it were the genuine
issue of St. Austin.

THE END.
Books printed for and sold by H. Mortlock, at the Phoenix in St. Paul's
Churchyard.
A Letter to Mr. G. giving a True Account of the Late Conference at the D. of
P. in Quarto.

A second Letter to Mr. G. In Answer to Two Letters lately published concerning
The Conference at the D. of P. in Quarto.

VETERES VINDICATI, In an Expostulatory Letter to Mr. Sclater of Putney, upon
his Consensus Veterum, etc. wherein the Absurdity of his method and the
Weakness of his reasons are shown: His false Aspersions upon the Church of
England are wiped off, and Her Faith concerning the Eucharist proved to be that
of the Primitive Church. Together with Animadversions on Dean Boileau's French
Translation of, and Remarks upon Bertram. In Quarto.


