THE CHILDREN OF Abraham's Faith, Who are Blessed, Being found in Abraham's
practice OF Burying their Dead In their own purchased BURYING-PLACES, Are not
to be Reproved; But therein are justified in the sight of God, and the practice
of Holy Men in former Ages.

Printed in the Year 1663.

HOly men of God both acted and spoke as they were moved of the holy Ghost in
all ages, whose testimonies stand as an outward Witness of the inward and
spiritual Life of righteousness that was in them, which in all ages was
opposed by the contrary spirit of the World, which the children of disobedience
are led by; and this is the ground of difference, they being led by a Spirit
opposite to God and his children of obedience; and as the spirit of the World
in them that are led by it, acts them differently from the Children of God; so
does the Spirit of Truth act its children contrary to the children of the
World, and their practice stood in all ages as living Witnesses against them,
and that Spirit they were led by, and is written for our learning and
edification, on whom the ends of the World are come, which is to know an end of
that spirit's leadings in us, which leads from God into the World that lies in
wickedness, and its fashions and customs which are heathenish, sensual and
devilish; and thus being taught by the Spirit of God, our actions stand
Witnesses against the vain conversation and traditions of the World, and
condemns and judges that Spirit now as ever it did in the days of old, whereby
they became sufferers in that day; as for the same Testimony we are become
sufferers in this day.

But blessed are they that suffer for righteousness sake, who keep the Word of
God's patience in this his day; they are, and shall be kept by the power of the
Word of Life, til all that which rises up against them, be brought down under
them, that God alone may be exalted over all, and they in him, treading upon
the high places of the Earth, and all its vain shows of holiness, which are
but the inventions and traditions of those who are erred from the Spirit of
Truth, and from the practice of the holy men of God, who were separated from
the World by the Life of righteousness which they lived, and so dyed the death
of the righteous, which was a death to all that which separated from the Lord;
and so being dead to sin, were alive to righteousness; which Life immortal
stands a Witness in all ages against the idolatry and superstition of the
present times they lived in, bearing a true testimony against them in life and
death; and the mortal body or tabernacle being dissolved or laid down, the
living Spirit in their Brethren leads them to inter or bury their bodies apart
in their own burying-places (as was the practice of the holy-men of God in
former ages) bearing a testimony against the idolatry and superstition of
hallowed ground, and Popish Consecrations, and vain traditions, which the
living Spirit of the party deceased, whilst in the body, stood a Witness (for
God) against; and now being out of the body, yet in the union with his brethren
in the body, cannot fulfill and satisfy the will of the contrary spirit, and
therefore it is disturbed and tormented about the dead body, and exceedingly
rages in many places; and as the Devil did strive with Michael about the body
of Moses (who was a faithful servant of God in his life, and the God of his
life would not suffer the wicked spirit to satisfy his will with his body being
dead) and the Angel brought not a railing accusation against him, but said, The
Lord rebuke thee. So you may see what Spirit it is that is to be rebuked by the
Lord, that spirit that strives against his Servants, and beats, rages and
strikes them, and sometimes takes away the dead body from them for a time, til
the Lord rebukes them, and then they have let it go to be laid in its own place
of burial, which when it was alive, might purchase or contribute to for that
end, to be laid in, being dead.

You may see the children of Heath were not so unreasonable to Abraham, as to
hinder him to bury his dead after he had bought their Land for that purpose;
and is it not a shame to be called Christians, and to be in practice more
unreasonable then Heathen? Is it not high time to separate from such a
generation both in life and death; and finding such unreasonable dealing while
we are in the body, it must needs be a grief to us if we were necessitated for
want of a place, to leave our dead bodies to their courtesy; and if there were
nothing else, it were sufficient to cause us to provide for our selves, and not
stand to the mercy of that spirit whose cruel hatred has slain the body being
alive, we cannot expect should decently bury it being dead; for we have had
experience of the contrary; And therefore as we have denied that Spirit that
would slay the body because of its Religion, so also have we denied the Worship
that spirit leads into, and the place which that Spirit has consecrated and
set apart to worship in, and that Way, that Worship, and that place we cannot
uphold, for the Lord is against it, and them that uphold it, that Worship (I
say) and Worshippers that would kil^* persecute or spoil the goods of those
that cannot for Conscience sake worship with them; and against them, their
Spirit, their Worship and their place, we are gathered forth by the Spirit of
the Lord to stand faithful Witnesses against, and in patience and
long-suffering, through the love of God, are made willing to endure what he
shall permit the evil spirit to act against us for the trial of our Faith, and
the glory of his power that has kept us hitherto, and is able to keep us to
the end* in which I and the rest of his Flock all lying down in his Will, are
safe; into which safety the desire of my soul is, that all who seek after
righteousness may come.

M. W.
London this 4 th of the 6 th Month, 1663. From him who has tasted of the good
fruit of the Land of the living, and would that all might eat and live in him
who is eterlife in
This is written for the satisfaction of such as are unsatisfied touching the
burying of the people in scorn called QUAKERS, in their own burying-places; the
which read with moderation, as follows.
FIrst, you may read that Abraham and Jacob did buy two parcels of ground, that
it might be their own possessions for the burying of their dead, Genesis 23. 16,
17. Josh. 24. 32, 33. Now that Abraham and Jacob, and the rest of the holy men
of God, were led and directed by the Spirit of God, I hope none dare deny;
therefore why should it be a strange thing to any that the Quakers (so called)
have purchased parcels of ground for the burying of their dead, seeing it is
proved that the holy men of God did so above 1600. years ago, and the Spirit of
God is the same, and changes not; so the Quakers (so called) are not out of
the way, but in that good old way as Abraham, Isaac, Jacob and Moses walked in;
therefore let it be no strange thing.

2 dly, You may read that Abraham and his Wife, Jacob and Isaac and his Wife,
and Leah, with many more, were buried in their burying-places after they had
bought them, as you may read Genesis 49. 30, 32. Now Abraham, Moses and Jacob,
with the rest of the holy men of God, were no new Upstarts, but old, grave,
godly men, of a great Age, as you may read Deuteronomy. 34. 16, 17. Genesis 47. 28, 30.
Therefore why should any account the Quakers (so called) young upstart people
for burying their dead in their own burying-places? And if any do account them
so, they may as well account Abraham the faithful, Isaac, Jacob and Moses so,
with the rest of the holy men of God; therefore far be it from any so to do.

3 dly, You may read that Moses the great Prophet of the Lord was buried in a
Valley in the Land of Moab, and he did quake and tremble at the Word, or the
voice of God, therefore why should it be a strange thing if any of the people
(called Quakers) are buried in a valley, and quake and tremble at the Word or
Voice of God. Now whether any did call Moses a Quaker, I know not; but this I
know, many are in scorn called Quakers only for doing that which Moses did; and
I believe if Moses were now living, he would be called a Quaker by this
generation. The proof of Moses being buried in a Valley, and that he did quake
and tremble, read Deuteronomy. 34. 6, 7. Heb. 12. 21. Act. 7. 32

4 thly. You may read that Samuel the servant of the Lord was buried in his own
house at Ramath, and all Israel assembled together (not to hinder him to be
buried there) but to bury him there, as you may read Sam. 25. 1. and mourned
for him; therefore why should any endeavor to hinder the people called Quakers
to bury their dead in their houses, or near their houses, seeing the Servant of
the Lord was buried in his house, as is proved? Therefore why should any
endeavor to hinder them to bury their dead, as the true Prophets and dear
Children of God did, in their own possessions?

5 thly, You may read that Joshua the servant of the Lord was buried in the
border of his inheritance, on the North-side of the Hill; and the son of Aaron
was buried in the Hill of Phineas which was given him; therefore why may not the
people called Quakers bury their dead without offense in their own inheritances
wheresoever it is, either on a Hill, or in a valley, or in or near a house, or
in a Garden, seeing Moses, Joshua, Aaron's son, Samuel, and Christ Jesus, with
many more, were buried in such places, as you may read Josh. 24. 28, 29* 33.
Joh. 19. 41. Therefore you have no just cause to be offended with the people
called Quakers for so burying.

6 thly, You may read that Uzziah the King (who did uprightly in the sight of
God) was buried with his Fathers in the field of the burial, (mark) not in any
place called Church or Churchyard, but in the field of the burial: Therefore
let it not be a strange thing that the people called Quakers do deny to bury
their dead in the places called Churches or Churchyards; for Abraham refused to
bury his Wife in any of their Sepulchers, though earnestly desired so to do,
but buried her in his own burying place; and King Uzziah with many more, were
buried in their own burying-places, and not in places called Churches or
Churchyards, as you may read Genesis 23. at large, Chron. 26. 33. Josh. 24. 25,
33. Now I believe it was far from the heart of King Uzziah to hearken, or in
the least to condescend to any is hinder the burying of their dead in their
burying-places, which was their own possessions, but I rather believe did
justify their so burying, and was buried himself in the Field of the Burial,
which is before proved. Therefore far be it from the hearts of any to desire a
Law to be made to hinder the Quakers (so called) to bury their dead in their
inheritances, which ought to be preserved by the Laws of the Land; and far be
it from the hearts of any to make any such Law, because their practice in so
burying; was the practice of the holy men of God, agreeable to the Word of God
which was in the beginning, as it is recorded in the Scriptures of truth, which
holy men of God spoke forth as they were inspired by the holy Ghost, to be
read, believed and practiced, and to wait to have them fulfilled, and not to
make a Trade of them, as they are made of, for dishonest gain.

7 thly, You may read that Jacob (being 147. years old when he dyed) did desire
his sons to carry him out of Egypt to be buried in the burying-place, and did
engage them so to do, being a far way, which they did accordingly, as you may
read Genesis 47. 28, 30. Genesis 50. 12, 13. Now Jacob was not unsensible, but very
sensible in so doing* none I hope dare say otherwise: Therefore if any of the
Quakers (so called) before they dye, do desire their Friends to bury them in
their burying-place wheresoever it is, which was the desire of the party
deceased, (being called a Quaker) why should it be a strange thing, seeing
Jacob did desire such a thing!

Now lest any say, I judge all to be heathenish people that bury in your places
called Churches and Churchyards, or that I persuade all from burying there: My
answer unto such is this, I am very cautions in so judging all, but shall leave
all judgment unto the Lord God of Heaven and Earth, who will judge every one
according unto the doings of every one; and as every one is persuaded in the
particular, in the heart of every particular, by God's Witness, which is God's
Light shining in the heart, so let every one do in the thing; and if any of you
make choice of your places called Churches or Churchyards for the burying of
your dead, or for any other use, it is fit you should keep them up, and repair
them upon your own cost and charges, and take heed of taking any goods from
such who make no use of them, for in so doing you will do such great wrong, and
such that steals, cannot enter the Kingdom of Heaven, who breaks the
Commandment of God. Therefore it is dangerous, take heed of so doing, and this
I truly know* having perfect knowledge of them, the Quakers, so called, are
taught by the Principle of God, which is a noble Principle, not to require, beg
or desire any thing of you to keep up, or repair their burying-places, which
are their own inheritances, very well walled, or very well paled, except such as
are yet unready, which in time are intended so to be made up on their own cost
and charges, and so are not your places called Churches or Churchyards your
own inheritances, neither walled nor paled in many places in England and Wales,
for Swine have been seen in some of your yards in this County; and some say the
people called Papists claim them to be their places, and that they built them,
and that they will keep them up upon their cost, if they shall have them, as
some say: But I shall not contend for them, they are of age, let them speak for
themselves; only this J may say, and in so saying none will have just cause to
be offended. There is a Cross of Wood or Stone, or in painting, in the inside
or outside of the most of them, or in the yards belonging unto them, if not
all, and you that are called Protestants that casually go there, take notice
whether it be not so; then is not that the mark of Popery? J leave it to you to
judge, and say as the wise man says, A word to the wise is enough. So if you
look upon your places convenient for the burying of your dead, be contented
with them, and let the people called Quakers have their liberty to bury their
dead in their burying-places, which are their own possessions, which they are
very well contented with, which is proved to be according to the Word of God as
it is recorded in the Scriptures of truth, acted above 1600 years ago.
Therefore let this satisfy all such as are unsatisfied touching it; much more
might be written, but this may satisfy in short, being written by one who
desires the good and welfare, and prosperity of all that desire to know God
and his Way; well known unto those that are in perfect knowledge with God, but
unto the World by the Name of

FRANCIS GAWLER.

FINIS.

