Imprimatur.

Feb. 3. 1692. Ra. Barker.

Advertisement.
Two Books published by the same Author.
THE Frauds of the Monks and Priests, set forth in Eight Letters lately written
by a Gentleman in his Journey to Italy, the third Edition, in Octavo.

Observations on a Journey to Naples, wherein the Frauds of Romish Monks and
Priests are farther discovered, by the same Author.

Bedae Venerabilis Opera quaedam Theologica, nunc primum edita, nec non
Historica antea semel edita; accesserunt Egberti Archiepiscopi Eboracensis
Dialogus de Ecclesiastica Institutione, and Adhelmi Sireburnensis Liber de
Virginitate, ex Codice Antiquissimo Emendatus, in Quarto.

L. Annei Flori Rerum Romanarum Epitome, Interpretatione and Notis Illustravit
Anna Tanaquilli Fabri Filia, Jussu Christianissimi Regis in usum Serenissimi
Delphini, in Octavo.

A SHORT HISTORY OF Monastical Orders, In which the Primitive Institution OF
MONKS, THEIR Tempers, Habits, Rules, AND The Condition they are in at Present,
are Treated of.

By Gabriel d' Emillianne.

LONDON, Printed by S. Roycroft, for W. Bentley, in Russel Street
Covent Garden. 1693.

TO England, Gabriel d' Emillianne.

THE PREFACE.
I Must desire my Reader to observe here three things concerning this Book.
First, What were the Motives which induced me to write it; Secondly, The
Methods which I observed in it; and Thirdly, The Reasons I have to dedicate it
to the English Clergy.

I. Several of the Order of Gray and Black Friars, having had the confidence in
the late King James's Reign, not only to flock by Troops from beyond Seas into
England, but also to appear publicly in their Monkish Habits, and a great many
others of different Colors preparing to follow. The People here was not in a
little amazement to see these new Faces, while the Papists were very busy in
combing the Fox's Tail to make it appear finer, and magnified every where the
pretended Holiness, both of these Monks and of their Habits. The good
Protestants did only laugh at them, but the wiser sort inquired who they were,
and in what Book one might have a sufficient notice of them. There were indeed
some Latin Books which treated of Monks, and also some French and Italian; but
besides that, all these were written in Foreign Tongues, unknown to the most
part of the vulgar sort of People; they were almost all of them written in a
Popish way, and by Monks, who had not forgot to be kind to themselves. There
wanted then an English Book to give a sufficient and true information about
this matter. A learned Doctor in Divinity undertook, at that time, to do it,
whose Pen would have, without doubt, far outdone mine, had he perfected the
Work which he had begun. But these mimical Faces of Monks, having disappeared
in the late happy Revolution, and the Doctor's applications being required
another way, he thought fit to leave off, and I was desired to try what I could
do on this Subject, both with shortness and impartiality.

II. These Two Parts I have endeavored to make good, having briefly related
the times of the Institution of each Religious Order, their Founders, their
Tempers, their Habits, and given a short Abstract of their Rules. I have made
use both of Protestant and Popish Authors, amongst whom I have endeavored to
retrieve the Truth. After each Rule, I have treated of those Monks who do
profess the same, according to the times of their respective Foundations,
excepting only some few, who are under the pretended Rules of St. Austin, and
have taken the Name of Regular Clerks, whom (because they are so newly hatched)
I have placed after the Mendicant Friars. After these you shall find a little
Treatise of Nuns, and another of Military Regular Orders. All these Treatises
might have been more enlarged, each of them affording very plentiful matter;
but I have chosen to he short, and to relate only what might give a sufficient
notice of them. I am further now to inform my Reader of some Reasons I had to
dedicate this small Performance to the Venerable Clergy of the Church of
England.

III. First, As I cannot sufficiently praise God for his great Mercy in calling
me to be a Member of this Holy Church, so I I thought I could not honor enough
those who are the Pillars, and the chief Ornaments of it. Secondly, Having many
particular Obligations to several of the Clergy, I hoped they might perceive in
this Dedication of my Book to them, though in General, the earnest desire which
I have to be thankful. But what inclined me yet very powerfully to do it, was,
that being not altogether ignorant of the great disturbances which the Monks in
all Ages, almost from their first Establishment in this Country, Caused amongst
the English Clergy; nay, of the violent Usurpations, Slanders, Tyrannies,
Persecutions, and Oppressions wherewith they so devilishly attempted the total
Destruction both of Churches and Church men, I thought it would well suit with
the Honor of the Reformation, if I should bring in these Monks as vanquished
Slaves, and lay them at the Feet of the Protestant Clergy, who, at last, by
God's Grace and Mercy have so gloriously triumphed over them. The Church
History is full of the bold and malicious attempts of the Monks against the
English Secular Clergy; and it will not be, methinks, amiss to relate here some
few instances among so many, to verify what I have said before.

One of the first who declared against the Clerical State, was Dunstan. The
Monks, who always reverenced him as their great Support, Patron and Favourer,
ceased not to extol him to the Skies* and went so far, as to assert, that he
had been Martyrol, Eccl. Cant.
sanctified in his Mothers Womb; and they made so much noise with Lies, and
pretended Miracles, that he was easily made a Saint in the Church of Rome.
However, several good Authors speak otherwise Osbernus. Park, Ant. Brit. in
vita Dunst.
of him, that he had been a very debauched Youth, excessively inclined to Women,
and a great lover of Magical Arts, wherewith he bewitched to that degree,
Alfgina, Princess of the Royal Blood, that she could not live separate from
him. Osbernus.
Therefore that she might enjoy continually his Company, she caused a House to
be built near the Church of St. Mary at Glascow, where the Hypocrite Dunstan,
to deceive the World, had built a little Cell for himself. When she died, she
left to him the whole disposal of her Estate to be given to Pious Uses,
thinking thereby to In Legend. Dunst.
atone for her great sins before God. Dunstan builded with the Money five
Monasteries, and richly endowed them, making himself Abbot of the best of them.
Which which was also, they say, the first that Stephan Birkington.
was built in England. Nevertheless he did not build them out of any love for
Solitude, for during the Reigns of seven Kings, under whom he lived, he almost
never stirred from great Lords Houses, or from the Court. He at first refused a
Bishopric that was offered him, rather out of Pride, or some other End, as may
be supposed, Osbernus. Joh. Capgr.
than out of Humility, because some while after he accepted two of them, to wit,
that of Worcester, and that of London, both which he possessed at once, without
the least scruple of Conscience. He was made at last Archbishop of Canterbury,
and got so far into King Edward's favor, that nothing was done, either in the
Kingdom or in the Church, without his consent, or rather without his Order. He
made use at first of the great power he had at Court, to advance to Bishoprics
some of his own Relations, who, to please him, were become Monks. Sim. Dunel.
Rog. Hoven.
Amongst those were Oswald and Ethelwald, the first of whom was promoted to the
Bishopric of Worcester, and the other to that of Winchester. In which having
succeeded, he undertook to promote the Affairs of the Monks, to the great
prejudice of those of the Clergy. Thus Dunstan being a very lustful man, hated
(as such usually do) Lawful Marriage; and seeing that the Clergymen, in that
time, were permitted to Marry, he undertook to force them to forsake their
Wives and Children, and to turn Monks. Oswald and Ethelwald joined with him in
the same design; and all of them having unanimously forged several false
Accusations and Calumnies against those of the Clergy, who refused to take the
Monastical Habit, they turned them out of their Churches, Prebendaries and
Colleges. The offended Party carried immediately their Complaints to the King,
who appointed Commissioners to examine their Cause in the Chapter of the Church
of Winchester, of which the Monks had already possessed themselves in the year
963. The Judges being fully convinced by the just Reasons of the Clergy, were
upon the point to pronounce in favor of their re-establishment, when the
Monks, thinking they had no time to lose, made use of this crafty Device. They
hid one of their Gang upon the Roof of the Hall where the Assembly was kept,
who cried out with all his strength through a hole, not being seen, Non been
sentiunt qui Presbyteris favent, Those who speak in favor of the Priests are
not in the Right. Then the Monks, clapping their Hands, called out this was the
voice of an Angel, and that they needed no other Judgment, but what Heaven it
self had pronounced. The Commissioners were so much terrified at it, that
against all Justice and Reason the Clergy*men were cast, and lost the right of
their Cause. After this Dunstan and his Agents observed no longer any
moderation toward the Secular Clergy, but used them with all sort of violence.
The King himself at their solicitation, persecuted them utterly, and commanded
them to be chased out of all Cathedral Churches and Colleges. In a Letter which
he wrote to Dunstan, to Oswald and to Ethelwald, he expresses himself in these
words, I have the Sword of Constantine in my hand, and you that of St. Peter;
let us join them together, and drive the Lepers out of the Camp. (viz. the
Churchmen, who lived in the state of a Lawful and Honest Marriage) So let us
cleanse the Sanctuary of the Lord, and henceforward receive none to the
Ministry of the Altars, but the Children of Levi, who said to his Father and
Mother, I know you not, and to his Brethren, I know not who you are, etc.
(Understanding in this last Clause the Monks, who had renounced their Relations
and Families, to live with more ease and less care in the Cloisters) The three
Bishops had no sooner received this Letter, but like Ravenous Wolves* they fell
upon that Flock, which, as good Pastors, they should have protected, and
unmercifully oppressed it. They builded with their Spoils, during the Reign of
that King, XLVIII. Monasteries, and richly endowed them. The affairs of the
Monks having suffered some decay under the Reign of the following King, Dunstan
took upon himself to restore them under King Edward, in the year 975. He
assembled for this purpose, a National Council in the East of England. But
having had no success in it, he assembled another in Wilceria or Calne, where
he refused to dispute against Beornelmus, a Scotch Bishop, and a very learned
man, and one well versed in Scripture, who offered to prove by it, the
lawfulness of the Marriage of Priests. And indeed the Assembly begun already to
be persuaded by the strength of his Reasons, when a fatal and deplorable
accident carried the Cause in favor of Dunstan. The House in which this great
Assembly was met, sunk, and there were buried in its ruins almost all the
Chiefest both of the Clergy and Nobility of England. The Monks alone had the
good luck to escape; who published immediately that Heaven had espoused their
Cause, had wrought a Miracle for their preservation, and avenged them of their
Adversaries. But several Authors of great sense do accuse, not without Reason,
this Dunstan and his Monks of a Plot, no less Treacherous and Abominable, than
was that of the Gunpowder Treason, to have undermined this Building, and made
it ready to fall upon this Assembly, in case their Affairs did not take that
turn which they desired; in which case it was an easy thing for the Monks to
make their escape. For as Bishop Parker wisely observed, How is it possible to
believe that God would have wrought Miracles to maintain the cause of those who
had refused to be tried by the Authority of his Holy Word? Nevertheless so sad
an accident gave the Victory to the Monks over the Secular Married Clergy,
whose places they continued to usurp, almost during six hundred years, until
King Henry the VIII. exterminated them in a lesser time, and with more facility
than Dunstan had for establishing of them. I come now to give you some
instances of the Pride and Sauciness of Monks, in oppressing the English
Unmarried Clergy

Lanfrank, a Benedictine Monk, and Abbot of St. Stephen, of Caen in Normandy,
having been raised to the Dignity of Archbishop of Canterbury, in the year
1070, he immediately introduced his Brethren the Monks, into the Cathedral
Church, who in process of time, by the great power they had at Court, were
admitted to give their Votes in the Election of the Archbishops, together with
the Suffragan Bishops, Chief Prelates, and Great Canons of that Diocese. But
being afterward grown Insolent by the Possession of the Relics of Thomas
Becket, they pretended to have alone the power of Electing the Archbishop with
exclusion of the subordinate Bishops and Clergy; and not only so, but they had
the brazen Face to send Commands peremptorily to the Archbishops, obliging them
to do or undo what they listed. We have a famous example of both in the Life
Balduinus, Archbishop of Canterbury, related by Parker in his Britannick
Antiquities. First concerning his Election, it is said that the Suffragan
Bishops, and the chiefest of the Clergy of that Province being assembled to
join with the Monks in the Election of a Successor, to Richard, Archbishop
then deceased, the Monks refused to admit them. The Bishops had recourse to the
Royal Authority; but the Monks having only laughed at it, they were obliged to
address themselves to the Pope, who seeing the justice of their cause, sent
immediately his Letters to confirm them in their right of electing together
with the Monks. The Day for the Election being agreed upon on both sides, the
Prior of the Monks, out of a fantanstical Humor, absented himself from the
Assembly, and the Bishops with the others elected unanimously Balduinus for
their Archbishop. This Balduinus was a Cistercian Monk, a pious and learned
man, of a sweet and moderate temper, and very acceptable to King Henry the II.
Notwithstanding this, the Monks protested against this Election, as having been
made by the Bishops and the King's Council, and prepared themselves already to
cut out much work for the King at the Court of Rome. This Prince very unwilling
to have any thing more to do with the Popes, saw himself obliged to use some
means or other of accommodation, to pacify the Monks. He desired the Clergy to
be so kind for his sake, and for the love of Peace, as to consent that the
Monks should likewise Elect the Archbishop, provided they would promise to
choose the same person, who was already chosen by the Bishops, viz. Balduinus.
They assented to it, and the Monks showed themselves so much the more willing
to comply herewith, because he who was proposed to them, was a Monk, hoping he
would be always very favorable to them. But this Baldwin, who was a very
honest man, either out of gratitude toward the Bishops, who elected him first,
or because he could not see without horror the injustice of the Monks, in
oppressing the Secular Clergy, showed himself quite otherwise affected than
they did expect. He declared himself a Protector of the Episcopal Authority,
and to re-establish it more effectually, he undertook, with the help of the
King, and with the Pope's permission, to build a Church at Hackington in honor
of Thomas Becket, and to establish Parker Antiq. Brit. in Vita. Balduini.
there some Secular Clerks and Prebends, with a design to meet there very often
with the Bishops. He was at the same time willing to introduce Secular Priests
into the Church of St. Stephen, usurped formerly by the Monks. But these made
so great cries and complaints of it to the Pope, as also of the New Church
which the Archbishop caused to be built, that this Pope at last granted them
their request, sending a reiterated Order to Balduinus to re-establish the
Monks in St. Stephen, and moreover to pull down the New Church at Hackington,
the sight of which the Monks could not bear. It was then demolished to the
ground, and the Materials of it were transported to Lambeth, which Balduinus
had bought of the Monks, and where he gave beginning to a Palace, and to a
Church for the Archbishops there. Nevertheless, he could not bring them to
perfection, being hindered by the badness of the Times, and the continual
opposition of the Monks.

Park. Ant. Brit. in Vita Hub.
Hubert, Archbishop of Canterbury, undertook to make an end of both about the
year 1194. For this purpose, he deputed several Abbots to the Monks of
Canterbury, to entreat them at the King's desire and his own, to permit that he
might go on with the building of the Church, as a Work purely intended for the
Glory of God, and of his Saints. They no sooner heard of it, but they fell in a
rage, and conceived a mortal envy against Hubert. They raised a thousand
Calumnies at the Court of Rome against him, and succeeded so well in their
devilish designs, that an express Order of the Pope came to the Archbishop for
demolishing wholly the Church of Lambeth, whose building was continued at his
own charges, and suspending from any Clerical Office, all those Clergymen who
should be so bold as to celebrate therein the Divine Service. The Chapel was
then pulled down, and the Archbishop having undertook to build another at
Maidstone, the Monks opposed likewise, and hindered him herein. However at last,
for what fancy I know not, being come a little off from their ill humor, they
were pleased, at the King's Request and of the Lords of the Kingdom, to permit
the building of a Church at Lambeth, provided they might prescribe these
Conditions, viz. that the Revenue of that Church should not exceed the sum of
an hundred pounds sterling per annum, nor the number of Canons, that of twenty:
That neither Orders should be Conferred, nor Bishops Consecrated, nor Abbots
blessed in it: That the Archbishop should not have power to make there Holy
Chrism, or Holy Oil, nor to officiate in it Pontifically. These are part of the
unworthy Conditions which Archbishop Hubert was obliged to submit to, and which
show plainly the insolence of Monks against the Secular Clergy. I shall give
here one instance more of the same.

Park. Am. Brit. in Vita Steph. Langton^.
Hubert, Archbishop of Canturbury, was no sooner fallen a sleep, but the Monks
fearing lest the King should meddle with the Election, assembled themseves at
Midnight in their Chapter, and elected without the Royal Assent, Reginald their
Subprior for Archbishop, obliging him to take an Oath, that he would
immediately depart for Rome, and declare to none his Election until his arrival
there. But Reginald had no sooner crossed the Sea, but he divulged what his
Brethren had done in his favor. The Monks having had notice of it, were very
much offended at it, and for a revenge had recourse to the King, asking his
leave to proceed to another Election. This Prince, giving them good words,
desired they would elect John Gray, Bishop of Norwich, which the Monks (enraged
against their Subprior, whom they called a Traitor) did very willingly, and he
took possession of the Archiepiscopal See, with the usual Ceremonies. But as
soon as the news of this double Election was brought to Rome, Pope Innocent
took occasion from that inconstancy of the Monks, to make use of his Authority
in annulling them both, and obliged the Monks of the two Factions, who were at
Rome for the support of their Partics, to Elect Cardinal Stephen Langton, a
very pious and learned English man, but whom he supposed to be very much in the
Interest of France, where he had his first Education, and as Cardinal, more yet
in the Interests of Rome, against those of his own Country, which he had left
being very young. These Monks, who the most of them had sworn to the King with
Sacred and Inviolable Oaths (as they termed them) that they would never yield
to any thing prejudicial to John Gray, made no difficulty at all to break them,
to please the Pope. In the mean while, the Bishops used all their endeavors at
Rome to obtain the restoration of their lawful right of Electing their
Metropolitan; but the Pope rejected them shamefully, and confirmed again in
spite of the King, and of their Remonstrances the Monks in their Usurpation.

Vide Math. Westminst. ann. 963, 964, 967, 968, 969, 1071, 1077, 1089. Fullar
Church Hist. an. 938. Will. Malm. p. 31, 139, 141. Hoveden. p. 163. Knighton,
p. 2351, 2615.
I might relate several other Instances of the Fradulent and Violent
Usurpations of Monks and Friars upon the Secular Clergy, and how at all times
they endeavored to oppress it, not only in the Church of Canterbury, but in
all the other Churches of England, Scotland and Ireland; but this would make a
Book, and not a Preface. Therefore I choose to stop here, entreating only my
Reader to make this one Reflection more, that when, in King James' time the
Monks began to hope for their re-establishment in these Kingdoms, these Holy
Penitent Friars, out of a Spirit of Mortification, not only did pitch upon the
most delightful places, of Great Lincolns Inn Fields, of the Savoy, of St.
James' Park, etc. where they builded Monasteries; but also were seen at the
Temple, at the Black and White Friars, nay at Westminster Abbey to make
Projects, and to take Dimensions for the rebuilding of their Convents, not
despairing to see themselves in a short time in a condition to turn both
Prebendaries, Canons, and Ministers out of these Churches; so impatient they
were already to come to a Contest with the Clergy. This may be sufficient to
show that I had some Reason to dedicate this short History of Monks, (who ought
to be considered as an Anticlergy) to the Clergy it self, and to that Clergy,
which, by God's great Blessing, is become a just Terror, and a Scourge to them.

RELIGIOUS ORDERS Which are Treated of IN THIS BOOK.
OF St. Paul of Thebes in Egypt, who was the First Hermit. page 1 Of St.
Anthony First Abbot, p. 6 The Order of Tabennisiens, or of St. Pacomius, p. 8
The Order of the Eustasiens, p. 11 The Order of St. Basil, p. 14 The Order of
the Studites, p. 21 The Order of St. Austin, p. 23 The Congregation of Lateran
in Italy, p. 33 The Congregation of Regular Canons of St. Savior in Italy, p.
36 The Congregation of St. Georges in Alga at Venice, and St. Georges in
Sicily, p. 37 The Regular Canons of the Holy Sepulcher, p. 39 The Congregation
of Regular Canons of St. Genvieve, p. 40 The Congregation of Regular Canons of
St. Victor, p. 42 The Congregation of Regular Canons of St. Rufus in Dauphine,
p. 43 The Congregation of our Savior in Lorrain, ibid. The Congregation of
Regular Canons of Windesem in the Low Countries, p. 44 The Congregation of
Regular Canons of the Holy Cross of Conimbria in Portugal, p. 45 Of some other
Houses of Regular Canons, p. 46 The Order of the Hermits of St. Austin p. 48
The Orders and Rules of Cassianus, Caesarius and Isidorus, p. 51 The Order of
the Williamites, p. 54 The Order of the Zambonites, p. 55 The Order and Rules
of St. Benet, Patriarch of the Monks in the West, p. 57 The Order of St. Benet,
p. 59 The Order of Cluny p. 91 The Congregation of Mount Cassin, p. 94 The
Order of Camaldoni, p. 95 The Order of Valombrosa, p. 98 The Order of
Sylvestrins, p. 100 The Order of Grammont, p. 101 The Order of Carthusians, p
102 The Cistercian Order of Bernardins, p 108 The Order of Feuillans* p. 110
The Order of the Humbled or Humilies, p. 112 The Order of Celestine, p. 114 The
Order of the Olivetans, p. 116 Some other Orders of St. Benet, and Congregation
of St. Maurus, p. 118 Of the Orders of St. Hierom, p. 121 The Hermits of St.
Hierom, p. 122 The Congregation of the Hieronimites of Montebello, p. 123 The
Reformation of Lupo d' Olmedo, p. 124 The Congregation of Hieronimites of
Fiesole, p 125 Of some Religious Orders which follow the Rule of St. Austin, p
127 The Order of St. Anthony, ibid. The Order of Premontre, p. 130 The Order of
Gilbertin^s in England, p. 133 The Ord. of Maturines or Trinitaries, p. 135 The
Order of Mercy for the Redeeming of Captives, p. 138 The Order of Armenians,
ibid. The Order of Servants of the Virgin Mary, p. 139 The Order of the Hermits
of St. Paul, p. 140 The Order of Jesuiti, p. 141 The Order of St. Ambrosius in
the Wood, p. 142 The Order of Apostolins, p. 143 The Order of the Brothers of
Charity, called otherwise St. John of God, or Ignorant Friars, p. 144 The Order
of the Holy Cross, called Cruciferi in Italy, p. 146 The Order of Dominican
Friars, p. 147 The Order of Carmelites, p. 153 The Order of Unshod Carmelites,
p. 156 The Order of St. Francis, p. 158 The Order of Minors Friars, called
Sabbotiers, or Wooden Shoe-Beares, p. 172 The Order of Minors Conventuals, p.
173 The Order of Capucines, p. 174 The Order of St. John of Penitency, p. 176
The Order of Minimes, or Good Men, p. 177 Of some Orders of Regular Clerks, and
Fathers of Common Life, p. 184 The Order of Divine Love or Theatins, p. 185 The
Order of Somasks, p. 187 The Order of Jesuits, p. 188 The Order of the Fathers
of the Oratory, p. 207 The Order of the Fathers of Well-dying, p. 209 The Order
of Minor Clerks, p. 210 The Order of Barnabites, or Regular Clerks of St. Paul,
p. 211 The Order of the Holy Ghost in Saxia at Rome, p. 212 The Congregation of
Hermits of Madam Gonzague, p. 214 The Fathers of Christian Doctrine, p. 215 Of
some Religious Orders which have been suppressed, or united to others, or of
which the Authors, the time of their Institution, or Habits are not well known,
p. 216 The Order of White-men, ibid. The Amedys, or Friends of God, p. 217 The
Order of Fontavellane, p. 218 The Beggars, Beggins, and Begines, p. 219 The
Penitents, p. 220 The Habits, and of the Tonsure or Shaving of Monks, p. 223
Treatise of NUNS.
OF Marcella, First Founder of Nuns, p. 235 Regular Canonesses of St. John of
Lateran, ibid. Regular Canonesses of the Holy Sepulcher, ibid. Regular
Canonesses of St. Austin, ibid. Regular Canonesses of the Low Countries, ibid.
Regular Canonesses of Mons. ibid. Regular Canonesses of Colen, p. 236 Regular
Nuns of St. Agnes at Dort, ibid. Bighines of Amsterdam, ibid. Nuns of the Good
Jesus, ibid. Nuns of St. Caesarius, ibid. Congregation of Women of the
Christian Doctrine, ibid. Congregation of Our Lady, p. 237 Hospitaler Nuns of
St. John of Jerusalem, ibid. Hospitaler Nuns of the Holy Ghost, ibid. Black
Nuns, ibid. Order of Women Servants, p. 238 Nuns Knightesses, or Sword-bearers
of St. James, ibid. Nuns of Tabennisia in Egypt, ibid. Nuns of St. Basil, ibid.
Acoemetes, or Studites Nuns, ibid. Women Hermits, p. 239 Nuns of St. Anthony,
ibid. Benedictine Nuns, ibid. Benedictines of Cluny, ibid. Benedictines of
Chesal Benoist, ibid. Benedictine Nuns of Mount Calvary, p. 240 Benedictines of
Camaldoli, ibid. Carthusian Nuns, ibid. Benedictine Nuns of Citeaux, ibid.
Military and Knight Nuns of the Order of Calatrava, ibid. Gregorian
Benedictines, ibid. Ambrosian Benedictines, p. 241 Benedictine Nuns of St.
Columbanus, ibid. Nuns under the Bishops Rules, ibid. Benedictine Nuns of the
Order of Feuillans, ibid. Benedictine Nuns of Mount Olivet, ibid. Nuns of
Premontre, ibid. Dominican Nuns, p. 242 Nuns of the Redemption of Captives,
ibid. Nuns Servites, or Servants of the Virgin Mary, ibid. Nuns Hermits of St.
Austin, ibid. Nuns Hermits of St. Hierom, ibid. Nuns of Cassianus, ibid. Nuns
of St. Isidor, ibid. Carmelite Nuns ibid. Reformed Barefooted Carmelite Nuns,
p. 243 Nuns of the Immaculate or Unspotted Conception of the Virgin Mary, ibid.
Franciscan Nuns, ibid. Nuns of the Third Order of St. Francis, p. 144 Third
Order of Penitent Nuns of St. Francis, ibid. Reformed Nuns of the Three Orders
of St. Francis, ibid. Capucine Nuns, p. 245 Recollettes, ibid. Penitent Nuns of
the Order of St. Francis in Germany, ibid. Nuns Sack-bearers, p. 246 Nuns
Urbanistes, ibid. Nuns of St. Francis of Paula, ibid. Nuns of the Visitation of
the Virgin Mary, ibid. Order of Urselines, or Jesuitesses p. 247 Order of the
Ten Virtues or Delights of the Virgin Mary, called the Annunciade, p. 249
Another Order of Annunciade, called Coelestes, p. 252 The Order of Clarisses,
ibid. Order of Katherine of Siena, p. 254 Order of Repenties, or Penitent
Sisters, p. 257 Hermaphrodite Order both of Nuns and Monks of Fontevrault, p.
258 Hermaphrodite Order of St. Briget, for both Sexes, p. 260 Hermaphrodite
Order of Gaustalla, p. 271
Treatise of Military Regular Orders.
THE Order of Knights of St. John of Jerusalem, alias of Rhodes, now of Malta.
p. 277 The Order of Templars, p. 278 The Knight-Order of Montjoye p. 281 The
Order of Avis in Portugal. ibid. The Order of St. Lazarus, p. 283 The Order of
Calatrava, in Spain. p. 284 The Order of Knights of Alcantara, p. 285 The Order
of Knights of St. James, p. 286 The Order of Teutonick Knights, Marrianes or
Sword-bearers, p. 287 The Order of Christ's Militia, p. 288 The Order of
Knights of the Virgin Mary in Italy, p. 289 The Order of Knights of Montesia,
or Brothers of our Lady, p. 290 The Order of Christ's Knights in Portugal,
ibid. The Knights of St. Georges of Corinthia, p. 291 List of the Orders of
Knights instituted by the Popes, p. 292 The Conclusion of Military Orders, and
of the Order of the Dragon, p. 293 A Conclusion of the whole Work, p. 297
The Monastical Rules Contained in this Book.
RVLE of the Tabennisiens, or of St. Pacomius, p. 8 Rule of the Eustatiens, p.
10 Rule of St. Basil, p. 16 Rule of St. Austin, p. 25 Rule of St. Benet, p. 59
Rule of the Trinitaries, p. 136 Rule of St. Francis of Assise, p. 159 Rule of
St. Francis of Paula, p. 178 Rule of the Jesuits, p. 193 Rule of St. Briget, p.
260
A SHORT HISTORY OF Monastical Orders, IN Which the Primitive Institution of
Monks, their Tempers, Habits, Rules and the Condition they are in at present,
are treated of.
CHAP. I.
Of the Original of the Monks.
THOSE who have applied themselves to find out the Original of the Monks, do
generally agree, that it only proceeded from the Persecution wherewith the
Church from time to time has been afflicted; the Christians at such times
Niceph. lib. 8. cap. 39.
retiring into Solitudes, Forests and Mountains, where they accustomed
themselves to live.

Soz. Mist. of the Church, An. 300.
Paul of Thebes in Egypt, at the time of the Persecution which Decius caused,
fearing to be declared Christian by his Brother in Law, and to be delivered
into the hands of the Pagans, who would have put him to death, fled away into a
Desert, about the year of our Lord, 260. and hid himself in a Cave at the foot
of a Rock. His Necessity and the Beauty of the Place keeping him there; he at
last so much delighted in it, that he never left it during his life. He lived
there without any conversation with men, and only upon the fruit of Palms. He
died there, being an hundred and thirteen years old, having past eighty eight
of them in this Desert, entirely unknown to the last day of his Life, when St.
Antony wandering from one Desert to another, found him by chance, assisted at
his Death, and buried him. This Antony was an Egyptian, and great Lover of
Solitude. Having got several together, who followed his Example, he brought
them to live in common in little Cells or Cabins near one another, and became
their Abbot. So that, as Paul, the Theban, is acknowledged to have been the
first Hermit, so is Anthony to have been the first, who took upon him the
quality of an Abbot, or Father of a Monastery. He died in the 105th year of his
Age, in the year of our Lord 361. after having past the better part of his Life
in Solitude.

Nevertheless it was not the Example of these two great Men, which only
conduced to the so much filling of several of the Eastern Provinces with Monks
or Solitaries: But also the Pagan Philosophers helped much to the advancement
of this new kind of Life, and perhaps gave the first Model of it.

Anno Dom. 300.
Constantine the Great having restored to the Church that Peace which his
Predecessors had taken from it, the Christians found themselves by that means
in more liberty to converse with the Gentiles. Now there being at that time
certain Sects of Pagan Philosophers, who made a great noise in the World; some
of them having even sequestered themselves from all humane Commerce, nay quitted
their Wives, Children and Possessions; in a word, affecting to despise all
things to give the better Proofs of the excellency of their own Philosophy;
Some Christians, who saw that this sort of men captivated the people, and
passed in their Opinions for Admirable and Divine Persons, so being an Obstacle
to the Conversion of the Gentiles, undertook to show them, that the Philosophy
of the Gospel was by no means inferior to theirs. They fancied they had found
the Precepts of it in St. Mark, chap. x. verse. 29. where it is said, Thereis no
man that has left House, or Brethren, or Sisters, or Father, or Mother, or
Wife, or Children, or Lands for my sake and the Gospels, but he shall receive
an hundredfold, and eternal Life. Interpreting therefore this very rigorously
according to the Letter, and not in the sense in which it ought to be
understood, they left all these things, and returned into those dismal
Solitudes which before had been their abode in time of Persecution: Where they
covered themselves with great Frocks to distinguish them from other Christians,
in like manner as the Pagan Philosophers were different from other Men by their
great Robes with Fringes. This was that which made people to call them
Philosophers; and that sort of Life which they professed, Philosophy. Thus it
is that Sozomen, a very ancient Author, and great Admirer of that Monkish sort
of Life, speaks of them. Here (says he) is what I could learn of the wonderful
life of these holy Solitaries, who are the Philosophers of our Religion. The
same Author relates a great many Miracles wrought by the Monks; whether it were
that God was willing by that means to give a kind of approbation of the
simplicity of their hearts; or that the Church, being then, as it were, in its
infancy, he continued to confirm the Truth of the Gospel by Miracles wrought by
those persons, who made the greatest show of Religion: Or lastly, Whether they
were in those times men as subject to illusions as there has been since:
However great numbers of Vices and Errors which crept in amongst the
Solitaries, plainly showed that this condition of Life was not in itself holy,
and that even one day, it might prove the fatal Gate by which infinite
Novelties might be brought into the Church. For some of them thought that
Prayers were not acceptable, unless offered up in solitary places, or at least
in Gardens apart from the Cities. Others maintained, That man could never
arrive to perfection without renouncing Marriage; and that to please God, it
was absolutely necessary to abstain from eating any thing that had life, and
even from Bread it self. Lastly, Others were of opinion, that a Christian was
obliged by his condition, not only to mortify, but even to destroy Nature by
indiscreet Severities. Not to speak of many who zealously mistook virtue;
witness him who shut his eyes Ammonio Test.
because he would not see his Father and Mother, who came a great way to visit
him: And another, who being desired to accept a Bishopric, cut one of his Ears
off, and threatened to cut out his Tongue also if they continued to press him
any farther, that by that means he might be incapable of exercising the
Functions of it. Others practiced a great deal Vid. Cassian. Coll* Patr.
of such like folly, as may be seen in the Ancient Authors to which I refer my
Reader.

CHAP. II.
The Etymology of the word Monk, and how many sorts of Monks there already
were, about the middle of the Fourth Age.
THE word Monk derives its Original from the Greek word (...), Solitary. St.
Hierom disputing with a Monk, who lived in a City, from the Etymology of this
Name, said, Quid facis in Urbibus, tu qui solus es? What do thou do in
Cities, who art called Solitary? I find that there was already in the East four
sorts of Monks or Solitaries about the middle of the fourth Age.

The first was of those who, following the example of Paul, the Theban, and
first Hermit, retired into Deserts, living without the least communication, in
Caves betwixt Rocks, or in the middle of Forests. The second were those who
lived in Cells at some distance one from another: They met together on certain
days of the week to pray, which meetings they called Synaxis or Communion. They
there heard the short Sayings and Apothegms of their Elders, and of those whom
they thought the most advanced in the perfection of a Monastical Life. The
third were those who lived in common in a Monastery, under the direction of one
Abbot, whom they obeyed as their Father; (Abbot, being a Syriac word which
signifies Father.) Each Abbot had a particular Rule, such as his Prudence or
Humor suggested to him. Lastly, The fourth sort of Monks, were those who lived
in Congregation. Paoomius was the first who instituted one of them, that is to
say, who made one Rule to be observed in several Monasteries. His Monks were
called Tabennisiens, from the first Monastery which he founded at Tabennese in
Thebais; and all the other Monasteries acknowledged this House as the Mother
and Chief of the whole Order. In like manner Eustatius, Bishop of Sebaste,
about the same time instituted a Congregation of Monks, who spread themselves
in Armenia, Paphlagonia and Pontus. He gave them a Rule, wherein he marked out
to them the whole manner of their Life, the Food they were to abstain from, the
Habits to be worn by them, and other like practices. Now since these are
properly those sorts of Congregations which we call Religious Orders, and which
I intend to treat of, I shall begin to set forth the Tempers and Rules of these
two Orders, the Tabennistens and the Eustatiens, which are the two first which
I could meet with in ancient Authors.

CHAP. III.
Of the Orders of the Tabennisiens, and of the Eustatiens.
SINCE what I have to say of these two Soz. Hist. of the Church. Tom. 3. l. 3.
c. 14.
Orders, is borrowed from Sozomen, I shall make no difficulty to cite my Author,
nay, even to set down word for word what he has said concerning them. His
account of the first is as follows, Pacomius the Chief, and Institutor of the
Monks, called Tabennisiens, flourished in the same place (in Egypt) and at the
same time, (Anno 350.) His Monks are clothed with Skins, as was Elias, to
resist, like him, the concupiscence tending to Pleasure. It Is said the
differences which are remarkable in their Habits have something mysterious in
them, and relation to some secret of their Holy Philosophy. They wear Casoks
without Sleeves, to show their hands are never to be ready to do evil; and
Hoods, to signify they ought to live in the same simplicity or innocncy as
Children, who have on their Heads Caps of the same Fashion. The Girdle and a
sort of Sash which they wear, admonished them that they should be always ready
to serve God. It Is said Pacomius, at first, lived by himself in a Grotto, but
that an Angel commanded him to assemble some young Monks together, and to teach
them that Rule which he would give him. It Is added moreover, That the Angel
gave him a Table, which is to this day in the hands of those Solitaries, in
which it was ordered him to suffer every one to eat, to drink, to fast, to work
according to their abilities; to oblige those who eat, to harder labor than
those who fast; to build many Cells, to lodge their Monks in each, to make them
to eat in a common Refectory in silence, with a Vail on their Heads: That they
ought to wear little Woollen Caps, adorned with red Nails; to sleep in their
Clothes upon Chairs instead of Beds: To receive the Sacrament every first and
last days of the Week, having first ungirded themselves, and left off their
Garments made of Skins; to pray twelve times in the Day, and as many in the
Evening, doing the same in the Night; to sing a Psalm before Grace at Meals; to
divide the Congregation in four and twenty Companies and to denominate each of
them from the four and twenty Letters of the Alphabet, ordering that the letter
I should be given to the most simple amongst them, and the Letters Z and X, to
those who were most perfect. These are the Rules which Pacomius gave to his
Disciples, who multiplied in such numbers, that there were thirteen hundred of
them in the place called Tabennese, the others being dispersed into Egypt and
Thebais.

As for the Eustatiens, Sozomen gives this account of them at the end of the
same Chapter. It Is said that Eustatius, Bishop of Sebaste in Armenia, has
instituted an Order of Monks, and given them Rules. Some will have him to be
the Author of the Ascetica, attributed commonly to Basil of Cappadocia. They
say that too great Austerity carried him into very extravagant Observances, nay
quite contrary to the Rules of the Church. Some nevertheless endeavor to clear
him of these Imputations, and cast the blame upon some of his Disciples, who
condemn Marriage, despise married Priests; who fast on Sundays, and cannot
abide those that eat Flesh; who instead of clothing themselves as the others
do, have invented a new and extraordinary Habit, and brought in a world of
other Novelties. They say that a great many Women, deceived by their
Discourses, and infected with their Errors, have separated themselves from
their Husbands, and not being able afterward to keep themselves Chaste, have
committed Adulteries. It Is farther said, that some of them have cut their Hair,
and put themselves in Men's Apparel. The Bishops about Gangres, the metropolitan
City of Paphlagonia, being assembled together, have excommunicated those who
were the followers of such Maxims, unless they did recant. Since that time,
they say, Eustatius changed his Habit, and did not appear clothed otherwise
than the other Priests, being willing to show that what he did was not out of
Pride, but out of a desire to attain greater perfection. Thus far Sozomen of
the Order of the Eustatiens.

CHAP. IV.
Of the Progress and Propagation of these two Orders, the Tabennisiens and the
Eustatiens.
THE Devil was too much concerned in the establishment of Monastical Orders,
not to make it his business in that very beginning to promote them. He made use
of some Instruments of Wickedness to divulge, that an Angel brought this Rule
from Heaven to Pacomius, in like manner as the Law of God was given to Moses
upon two Tables of Stone. But there is a great deal of difference betwixt these
two Laws or Rules. The Law given to the Israelites contains nothing but what
is well-becoming the Holiness of God, who is the Author of it; whereas Pacomius
his Rules are in many particulars very defective, not to say ridiculous. For
what virtue had those Garments made of Skins toward the repressing of
Concupiscence? Were they not rather very fit for the increasing of it? What was
the meaning of those Caps with red Nails? likewise of those Veils which they
were to have on their Heads at Meals? In placing three in each Cell; did not
this give them an occasion to break their silence? And that which seems to me
yet more unreasonable, the distinction they made between raw and imperfect
Monks, and the more perfect and great Wits; was it not enough to discourage
them which were marked but with an Iota, and to puff up the others with a great
deal of Pride, who were esteemed worthy of the Letters Z and X? How then can
any one imagine that God could be the Author of such Whimsies, which even
Humane Prudence has corrected in following Ages? For indeed we do not find any
such practices observed in the Cloisters now a days. But it must be
acknowledged, that to give better credit to men's Inventions, there is no way
more effectual, than boldly to give out, that they come from Heaven.
Nevertheless this Order had so good success, that Pacomius saw himself in a
very short time Father of above nine thousand Monks, who lived under his Rule,
as well in Deserts as Monasteries. We do not find at this time any Monastery
which follows that ancient Rule. St. Hierom translated it into Latin, and it is
to be seen at the end of Cassian's Works. Palladius also makes an abridgment of
it in the Lauzaick History. Pacomius lived at the beginning of the first
Century, and died in the year 405. I come now to speak of the Order of the
Eustatiens, which multiplied also considerably, but withal apparently shows,
that the Monastical Life went not very far without becoming a source of Errors
in the Church, being already of it self a kind of Schism, though under a
pretense of greater Perfection. Amongst the Errors wherewith the Eustatiens
were charged, were these, That they condemned Marriage, despised married
Priests, had their meetings in private Houses, and had invented a new and
unaccustomed sort of Garment. This was the reason why the Bishops, about
Gangres, assembled in a Provincial Council, thundered with Anathema's against
all the Monks of their Jurisdictions, who adhered to such practices. This shows
plainly, that Marriage was so far from being prohibited to Priests in those
times, that they were counted Heretics who thought themselves obliged to
Celibacy, or would be distinguished by any Habit, different from that of the
Laics or secular Clergy. Eustatius humbled himself, or at least feigned so to
do, left all his Practices, and the Monastic Habit. I leave now the Roman
Catholics to judge, if their Monks be not guilty of such, and greater
Innovations, and whether the Church of England had not great cause to cut them
off from its Body, having so good an Example of an Age, which excepting some
few Errors into which they were fallen, did not in purity come behind that of
the Apostles.

CHAP. V.
Of the Order of St. Basil.
BASIL, Priest of Caesarea in Cappadocia, being persecuted by Eusebius, his
Bishop, withdrew himself to a solitary place in Pontus, where he applied his
mind wholly to Pious Studies. Great numbers of Solitaries having Vadianus lib.
de tribus terrae partibus.
met with him there, he undertook to instruct them, and converted his Desert
into a Learned School of Divinity and Philosophy; being also very careful to
bring them up in the practice of Christian Virtues. Therefore he gave them
Rules, not much unlike to them which are prescribed in Colleges and well
governed Accademies. Notwithstanding, that Rule which is commonly attributed to
him, is so Hospinian. de Orig. Monachat. lib. 3. c. 95.
different from St. Basil's style, and so variously related, that there is
ground enough to doubt whether he indeed wrote it. In some Copies it has but
35 Chapters, in others 95; and again in some others even a 100. Gregory
Nazianzen, who was contemporary with him, his Fellow-scholar, and great Friend,
mentions not a word of it in the Elogy which he wrote of his Life and Death;
though he takes notice withal of several little Works of St. Basil of lesser
moment than this Rule is. However, solitary Life is quite otherwise represented
there, than that Monkish one, accompanied with Vows, and a world of
Superstitions amongst the Romanists now adays. This Rule is writ by way of
Dialogue, in which Basil answers the demands of his Disciples, and is so
large, that it makes alone a great Volume. Therefore to give a less tedious
draught of it to my Reader, I thought fit to separate what is in it purely
Monastic, from the common Duties of Honesty or Christianity, which belong to
all men; to the end that one may see what the Monastical Institutions have
added to the Gospel. I shall then, for an example, leave the First, the Second
and the Third Chapters which enjoined them to love God with all their Hearts,
Soul and Strength, and their Neighbor as themselves: The fifteenth, which
commands that they should serve God with upright hearts, and all fervency of
affection; the 75th which bids them to hate Sin, and make Gods Law their
delight; and all the rest of that kind, which containing the most eminent
Duties of Christian Life, ought not to be looked upon as Rules given by Basil
to Monks only, but as the Law of God and Jesus Christ his only Son, given to
all of whatsoever condition they be. I shall likewise omit certain common
Duties of Society, which do generally belong to all well-ruled Houses and
Families, as the 16th Chapter, commanding, that he who is the head of them
ought to consider himself as Gods Minister; the 59th bidding the Steward to be
trusty and honest; for why should these and other such be called Basil's Rules,
which are common dictates of Reason, or obligations binding, even those, who,
by a very improper distinction, are called Seculars and men of the World? Thus
have I ordered the matter, and reduced that great Rule, which goes commonly
under the name of St. Basil, to 25 Chapters, that seem to relate more to a
Monastic Life.

The Monastic Rule of St. Basil, contained in 25 Chapters.
THE First commands the Monks to live together for the sake of Mutual Help,
Comfort, Instruction, Exercise of Virtue, Efficacy of Prayer and Security from
Danger.

The 2d. That none, without trial, be admitted into their Fraternity.

The 3d. That they should dispose of their Wealth to the Poor and Needy.

The 4th. That Children, with the consent of their Parents, in presence of
Witnesses may be admitted.

The 5th. That stinted Measures be set down for their Eating and Drinking.

The 6th. That their Apparel be plain and decent, and that they wear a Girdle.

The 7th. That next to God they be obedidient to their Superior.

The 8th. Declares the good qualities which their Superiors ought to have.

The 9th. That the Superior of the Monastry, first reprove the Offenders with
meekness and gentleness; but if they prove obstinate, and will not be
reclaimed, then he is to account them as Heathens and Publicans.

The 10th. That he suffer not the least Offense to pass unreproved.

The 11th. That they confess their Faults to those who are the Dispensers of
Holy Mysteries.

The 12th. That they should possess all things in common.

The 13th. That men of Estates render to their Kindred what is their due, and
the remainder to the Poor.

The 14th. That none that are entered, return to their Parents Houses, unless to
give them instructions, and that to be done by the permission of their
Superiors.

The 15th. That whosoever Defames, or patiently hears his Brother Defamed, be
Excommunicated.

The 16th. That no man do his own will in the Monastery, or the least thing
without the Superior's leave.

The 17th. That they debar no man from entering into the Convent upon trial, nor
give them any offense.

The 18th. That the measure of Eating and Fasting be set by the Superior.

The 19th. That he who scorns to receive a Garment, when presented him, ought
not to receive it when he afterward asks for it.

The 20th. That those who, by their own Fault, do not come to Dinner at the
fixed time, ought not to eat till the next day at the same hour.

The 21st. That none ought to give the least thing to the Poor, but by the
hands of those which are ordered for that Office.

The 22d. That they should be careful of the Utensils appertaining to the
Monastery, no less than if they were the Holy Vessels belonging to the Altar.

The 23d. That they must apply themselves to Handy-works, that so they may be
helpful to others.

The 24th. That in token of humility they wear Sackcloath, and speak with
moderation.

The 25th. That the Monks are not to discourse alone with Women.

Besides these twentyfive Chapters, there is another wholly Monastic, but
which is only proper to him who is the Director of the Nuns. That when he
confesses a Nun or Recluse, he ought to do it with decency in the presence of
the Abbess.

These are Basil's Monastical Institutions. His Order flourished particularly
in the East, where almost all those who lived in Monasteries or Cells followed
his Rule. It increased to admiration afterward; but since these Countries are
fallen into the hands of Infidels, the most part of those Monasteries have been
destroyed. Nevertheless it is to be seen with some splendour in Greece, where it
has still continued since the separation of that Church from the Romish. These
Monks wear Black Clothes, plain, and without any Ornament, consisting in a long
Casock, and a Author of the Hist. of Religious Habits.
great Gown with large Sleeves. They wear on their Heads a Hood which reaches
to the Shoulders. They wear no Linen, sleep without Sheets upon the Straw, eat
no Flesh, fast very often, and Till the ground with their own hands. There are
also some Monasteries of the Order of St. Basil in Sicily and Calabria, of
which that of St. Savior of Messina is the Chief, and was founded in the year
1057. by Robert Guiscard of Normandy. It has the pre-eminency over all the
others: They use in their Office the Greek Tongue, though some in Spain make
use of the Romish Breviary, being also somewhat different from the Greeks in
their Habits. There are also some Monasteries of St. Basil in Italy, whereof
the Principal founded by Nilus, near Tivoli or Tusculum, is called Crypta
Ferrata. But at present, those, as well as the other Italian Monks are very
much corrupted. We see likewise Monks of St. Basil in Germany, who differ also
from the others in the Color and Fashion of their Habits: They wear a long
Casock, a Patience or Scapulary, a Frock with large Sleeves, a Hood or
Caputium, and over it a broad flat Cap. They are much esteemed amongst the
Germans, and pass amongst them for very Religious Persons. All these Monks,
besides the Rule of St. Basil, who is very copious in his Precepts, and
prescribed almost nothing else but the Duties of Christian Life; have also
their particular Constitutions, which have been established, refined, and
changed from time to time by their Superiors or General Chapters. So that if we
compare them now with the ancient Rule attributed to St. Basil, we shall see a
strange difference, which demonstrates the Corruptions and Novelties of the
Greek and Latin Churches.

Of the Order of the Acaemetes or Studites.
Moren. Dict. Hist. ex Niceph. l. 15. c. 23. vid. l. 16. c. 17.
THIS Religious Congregation was established in the year 459, at Constaminople,
under Gennadius's Episcopacy. They were called Acoemetes, no Sleepers, or such
as lived without sleep; because they were day and night employed at Church to
sing praises to God. It seems they had undertaken to follow St. John Chrysostom
his advice, which he gives even to all Laymen, to pray to God during the
Night, having established amongst them a continual Prayer, and succeeding one
another by turns in the Office of singing Psalms. They were likewise called
Studites from one Studius, who founded for them, at Constantinople, the
Monastery of St. John the Baptist. It Is unquestionable that the Abbot Hosp. de
Orig. Men. l. 3. c. 8.
Alexander was their Founder, notwithstanding what Nicephorus says, that it
was Marcellus; who in truth was only the Restorer of this Order. The Acoemetes
opposed stoutly Acacius, Patriarch of Constantinople, whom Pride had made to
revolt against the Church. This happened in the year, 484. But in the following
Age they did not prove so true to the Church. They went after Novelties, and
under pretense of defending the Orthodox Faith, were engaged in the Opinions of
Nestorius, and therefore were condemned at Constantinople, by order of the
Emperor Justinian, and at last expelled their Monastery by Constantin
Copronimus. They hoped to meet with more kindness at Rome, and sent thither two
of their Monks, Cyrus and Elogius. Pope John the 11th assembled in the year
532. a Council, where they were condemned, it having been then decided, that it
should be said that one of the Persons of the Trinity had suffered in the
Flesh. The Acoemetes maintained the contrary, and their Opinion was a modish
one, cunningly brought in by the Nestorians, to conceal the better their
Errors. They had at that time several Monasteries in the Eastern Countries,
which were destroyed by the Saracins: And nothing remains now of that Ancient
Order but the Name.

CHAP. VI.
Of the pretended Monastical Rules of St. Augustine.
THE New Orders of the Roman Church, to get themselves Reputation and Credit,
have not been wanting to make their greatest efforts to persuade the Ignorant
People, that the most Famous Men, who anciently flourished in the Church, have
been the Institutors of their Rules and Orders. After this manner the Regular
Canons and the Hermits, called Augustinians, pretend that this great Doctor of
the Church writ and professed the same Rules they do; imitating in that the
Heronimitains, who have violently forced St. Hierom on their side. The truth
is, that St. Augustine having been made Bishop of Hippo Hospin. de Orig. Mon. l.
6. c. 11.
in Africa, lived in common with his Canons in a separate Cloister near the
Cathedral, according to the almost general and worthy costom of the Bishops of
those times; and which continued some considerable time after* But nevertheless
they were not Monks by this manner of living, being obliged neither to
confinement, nor to Monastic Vows and Practices. So St. Augustine lived with
his Canons, whom he brought up as in a Seminary, where they were instructed in
the practice of Piety, and in the studies of Philosophy and Divinity, to render
them capable to take upon them the administration of the Churches whereto they
might be called, either as Pastors or Bishops. It Is then in vain that the
Religious Congregations of St. Augustine, who continue still in the Church of
Rome, and who have other very different Constitutions, pretend that this was
the Original of their Orders. Furthermore, St. Augustine wrote no Statutes or
Rules; and at most we find but some Precepts which he wrote, perhaps for some
pious Women, who lived in society with his Sister. Notwithstanding as the three
Rules, which falsely bear the name of St. Augustine, serve at present as a
foundation to several Religious Orders of the Roman Church; I will therefore
here briefly relate the substance of them.

The First Rule under the Name of St. Augustine.
Ex Prosp. Stellar. Fund. and Regul. Ord.
1 Chap. THAT the Monks ought to possess nothing in particular, nor call any
thing their own.

2. That the Wealthy, who become Monks, ought to sell what they have, and give
the money to the Poor.

3. That those who sue for the Religious Habits, ought to pass under trial
before being admitted.

4. That the Monks ought to substract nothing from the Monastery, nor receive
any thing whatsoever, without the permission of their Superior.

5. That the Monks ought to communicate to their Superior those points of
Doctrine which they have heard discoursed of out of the Monastery.

6. That if any one is stubborn toward his Superior, after the first and
second correction in secret, shall be denounced publicly as a Rebel.

7. If it happens, that in time of persecution, the Monks are forced to retire,
they ought immediately to betake themselves to that place where their Superior
is withdrawn.

8. If, for the same reason, any Monk has saved something belonging to the
Monastery, he shall give it up, as soon as possible, into the hands of his
Superior.

9. That the whole Fraternity shall oblige themselves, under their hands, to
observe this Rule.

The Second Rule under the Name of St. Augustine.
Chap. 1.
IT IS there commanded to love God and our Neighbor, and in what order the
Monks ought to recite the Psalms, and the rest of their Office.

2. They ought to employ the first part of the Morning in Manual Works, and the
rest in Reading. In the Afternoon they return again to their Work till the
Evening. They ought to possess nothing of their own, not to murmr, but be
obedient in all things to their Superior; to keep silence in eating: The
Saturday is appointed to provide them with necessary things, and it is lawful
for them to drink Wine on Sundays.

3. When they go abroad, they must always go two together; they are never to
eat out of the Monastery: They ought to be conscientious in what they sell, and
faithful in what they buy.

4. They ought not to utter idle Words, but work with silence.

5. Whosoever is negligent in the practice of these Precepts, ought to be
corrected and beaten, and those who are true observers of them must rejoice,
and be confident of their Salvation.

The Third Rule under the Name of St. Augustine.
IN the Prologue, the Monks are ordered to love God and their Neighbor, and in
the Chapters to observe the following things.

1. They ought to possess nothing but in common.

2. The Superior ought to distribute every thing in the Monastery with
proportion to every ones necessity.

3. Those who bring with them any thing into the Monastery, ought immediately
to render it common to all.

4. They must not incline their hearts to temporal Fortunes and Honors.

5. Those who bring Estates with them into the Monastery, ought not therefore
to be more puffed up with Pride than the others.

6. They ought to honor God in one another, as being become his holy Temples.

7. They must attend to Prayer at Canonical hours.

8. The only business at Church is to pray, and if any have a mind to do it out
of the time of Canonical Hours, he ought not to be hindered.

9. They must perform their Prayers with attention, singing only what is
appointed to be sung.

10. They ought to apply themselves to Fasting and Abstinence with discretion.

11. If any one of them is not able to fast, he ought not therefore to eat
between Meals, unless he be sick.

12. They must mind what is read to them while they are at their Meals.

13. None ought to be envious to see the Sick better treated than the others
are.

14. None ought to find fault, if somewhat more delicate be given to those who
are of a weaker constitution.

15. Those who are upon recovery, ought to make use of comfortable things.

16. When recovered, they ought to return to the common observance.

17. They ought to be grave and modest in their Habits.

18. Whether walking or standing still, they ought never to be far from their
Companion.

19. They ought to express modesty and stayediness in their outward behavior.

20. They ought not to cast a lustful Eye upon Women, nor wish to be seen by
them.

21. They ought not, being at Church, to harbor any thoughts of Women.

22. When it is known that a Friar courts any Woman, after having been
forwarned several times, he ought to be corrected; and if he will not submit to
correction, he must be turned out of the Monastery.

23. All Correction must be inflicted with Charity.

24. They ought not to receive Letters nor Presents in secret.

25. There must be in the Monastery, a Vestry or common place to lay up their
Habits in; and they must be contented with those Habits that are given to them.

26. All their Works ought to be rendered common.

27. If some of their Relations send them Clothes, it shall be in the power of
the Superior to give them to whom he pleases.

28. That he who concealeth any thing as his own, be proceeded against as
guilty of Robbery.

29. They ought to wash their own Clothes, or have them washed by others, with
license of their Superior.

30. The Bathes, and all sorts of Medicines, ought to be allowed to the Sick,
as the Superior and the Physician shall think sit; and those Friars who
complain of inward sicknesses, must be believed upon their words.

31. They ought not to go to the Bathes, unless in company of two or three
appointed by their Superior.

32. The Sick shall be committed to an Attendant, whose care must be, to demand
from the Steward all necessary things for him.

33. Those who are in any Office, ought to serve their Brethren without
grudging.

34. There ought to be every day an hour set, to take Books out of the Library;
and it is not permitted at any other time to take any from thence.

35. Those who have the care of Clothes and Shoos, ought to give them, without
delay, to those that want them.

36. The Monks ought to shun all Lawsuits and Contentions.

37. Those who have done any injury, or given offense to any of their Brethren,
ought to ask them forgiveness, and spare for nothing to be reconciled.

38. If one have given ill language to another, he ought immediately to remedy
it with sof^^^ words.

39. If the Superior has made use of too ha^^ (...) in giving Correction, he
is n^^ (...) beg excuse, for fear of diminishing (...).

40. That they ought to obey him who is Head over them, but especially the
Elder or Priest, who has the care of the whole Monastery.

41. The Superior ought in his Corrections, when his Authority is not
sufficient, to have recourse to that of the Elder or Priest.

42. That the Superior ought not to pride himself of his Dignity, but ought to
have all the Qualities of a good Father toward his Inferiors.

43. That the Monks ought to observe these Rules out of love, and not out of
slavish fear.

44. That this Rule ought to be read once a Week in presence of the Monks.

A Reflection upon these Three Rules attributed to St. Augustine.
Polydorus l. 7. c. 3.
THEY were all of them written in Latin, but the style of the two first is so
different from that of the third, that it is an easy thing to judge, that they
never came from the hand of the same Author. Erasmus Hosp. de Orig. M^n. l. 6.
ad calcem 3. Reg.
and Hospinian find these two first so silly, and unworthy of St. Augustine, that
they fear not to say, that to attribute them to him, is to do him an injury.
For the third they don't deny indeed, but St. Augustine might be the Author of
it; but they say, that it is probable that he never wrote it for his Clergy, or
for Monks, but perhaps for some pious Women, who lived in common, under the
conduct of his Sister; and that it is certain (as they give sufficient proofs
to believe it) that either the Regular Canons, or the Augustinians, willing to
attribute them to themselves, have changed all the Terms and Exercises therein
contained, which were proper to Women, putting into their place expressions
proper to Men. I refer my Reader to that learned Dissertation which Hospinian
has made of it, and I have quoted in the Judicium Erasmi de St. Augustini
Monachatu and Regulis.
Margen: Where he shall see also the opinion of Erasmus about St. Augustine, as
to his having been a Monk, and of the Sermons which they pretend he wrote to
the Hermit Brothers. He makes it appear as clear as the day by the menness of
his Style, by the false Concords and faults of Syntax, and by the absurdities
which are therein contained: And he proves, by invincible reasons, that
although St. Augustine, after the example of St. Basil, St. Hierom, and other
eminent men retired sometime into solitude to study, he was nevertheless
neither Monk nor Hermit: Notwithstanding, speaking of the aforesaid Rules of
St. Augustine, I shall not omit to treat of the Religious Orders which follow
them, and bear the name of this Holy Doctor. To this end I shall speak, first
of the Regular Canons, and afterward of the Hermits of St. Augustine.

CHAP. VII.
Of the Order and Congregations of Regular Canons of St. Augustine, and first of
the Congregation of Lateran in Italy.
THE Church of St. John Lateran has had for some Ages, Regular Canons to
officiate in it. Those of the Congregation, which is erected under his name,
falsely maintain, that they were established there from the very time that it
was built by Constantine; and that Gelasius afterward brought from Africa
Disciples of St. Augustine, who had been used to live in Common in the Church of
Hippo: But the truth is, that the Regular Canons of Lateran, such as they are
at present, were not introduced till the year 1061, by Pope Alexander the
Second, who having found that the Canons had left the Canonical Observances,
sent thither Regular Canons from St. Frigdian of Luca, who there established
the novelty of their Institution, and this Congregation Father Molinet, Reg.
Canon of S. Genev. at Paris, in his Hist. of Reg. Canons.
was then called St. Frigdians. Pope Boniface the Eighth, in the year 1295,
seeing that the Regular Canons led an abominable life, drove them from St. John
of Lateran, and sent them back to Luca, from whence they came, and put in their
places Secular Canons. They lived thus in the Secular State till the year 1446,
when Eugenius the Fourth, a great lover of Monks, made thirty of them with a
Prior, come again from St. Frigdian, and reestablished them in the possession
of the Church of Lateran, ordering that the Congregation should be
henceforwards called by the name of St. John of Lateran; but Pope Sixtus the
First drove them away again from thence; and reestablished the Regular Canons,
where they are continued to this very day. To quiet these poor Monks, so
shamefully expelled, the Church of our Lady of the Peace in Rome was given to
them. Notwithstanding this hard blow, they lived still in a Body, called the
Congregation of St. John of Lateran, and they possess yet to this day in Italy
a great number of Monasteries. Their Habit is a White Woollen Casock, which
reaches to their Heels; and over it they have a kind of a Surplice, which they
call a Rochet, made of Linen, having the form of a Shirt, for which they are
now commonly called in Italy Shirted Fathers, or Fathers of the Shirt. They
gravely pretend to have their origin from the Apostle St. James, the Greater,
and from St. Mark the Evangelist, or at least from Hospin. de Orig. Mon.
St. Augustine: But indeed the Canons of those times, which they would have for
their Fathers, were very different in their practices from what these are. They
frequently applied themselves to the study of the Holy Bible, were Helps and
Suffragans to the Bishops, preached and taught in public, and were not bound
to their Profession by Monastical Vows; whereas the Regular Canons of Lateran,
and other like Congregations of whom we are to speak hereafter, are no more
than a lazy sort of Fellows, who spend idly their lives, thinking to have
performed all the Canonical and Apostolical Duties, when they have sung in
their Quire, at some stated hours, a certain number of Psalms and Prayers; who
make a Vow of Obedience, and will have into the bargain that their Superior
shall command nothing but what they list, a Vow of Poverty; being well assured
before of a good provision which is already made for them: And lastly a Vow of
Chastity, till they find an opportunity to satisfy their Lustful Inclinations.
Their Scandalous Lives were the reasons of their being so often chased from St.
John of Lateran; and yet they continue still the same in those many
Monasteries, which this Congregation is in possession of at this present time
in Italy.

Of the Congregation of Regular Canons of St. Savior in Italy.
IT begun under the Pontificate of Gregory Du Molinet Reg. Canon of St. Genev.
in his Hist. of Reg. Canons.
XII, in the year 1408. This Pope, of his own accord, gave permission to some
Hermits, of the Order of St. Augustine, who lived in the Monastery of St.
Savior, situated near Siena, to pass into the Order of the Regular Canons, and
to wear the Rochet or Shirt upon a Gray Coat, with a Cloak of the same color,
made after the manner of that of the Carthusians. They retired afterward to a
place called Eugube, where they founded a Monastery in an Hermitage consecrated
to St. Ambrose. Francis Gislerius, Prior of St. Savior's Monastery at Bologna,
to whom that of St. Mary, of Rheno, with its whole Congregation was united,
called them into his Convent, to restore in it the Regular Discipline. They
obtained afterward, from Pope Martin V. to establish themselves in all the
other Monasteries, who would receive them, and to form them into a
Congregation. But it happened, after some debates with Gislerius particularly
about their Habits, that they agreed all together at last, both the Ancient and
the New Monks, to wear the same Habit, to wit, a White Casock, and upon a
Linen Rochet a White Woollen Scapulary. This Congregation, from that time,
increased very much in Italy, where they have now above forty three
Monasteries; and amongst the others, that of St. Peter ad vincula, at Rome.
They are called also Scopetini, from Scopeto, Albertus Crantz. l. 3. c. 15. and
l. 7. c. 50.
near Siena, which was the place of their Original. They lead now a very loose
life, and with much reason may be applied to them, what Albertus Crantzius said
of the Canons of his time, Monstrum sine Exemplo, Regularem sine Regula,
Canonicum sine Canone. They are become extremely wanton in their Habits, and
wear fine Points of Venice and Flanders Laces at the Bottom and Sleeves of
their Rochets, Surplices or Shirts.

Of the Regular Congregations of St. George's in Alga at Venice, and of St.
George's in Sicily.
THIS Congregation had its beginning in Alega or Alga, two miles from Venice,
Du Molinet Hist. of Reg. Can.
being instituted by Angelo Corraro, and Gabriel Gondelmaro, who were both made
Popes afterward, the First under the name of Gregory XII, and the Second under
that of Eugeny IV. These two Gentlemen being moved by a desire of a more
perfect Life, retired into the Monastery of St. George in Alga, and there they
followed the Rule of having all things in common, but did not bind themselves
by any Vows. Laurence Justinian was not slow to join himself to this Society,
and was afterward made General of it. This Order increased so much under his
Government, that many Collegiate Churches desired some of its Canons to come
and teach them the Observances practiced in St. Georges in Alga; to which
Monastery Gregory XII, who passed from thence to the Pontifical Chair, and had
made it already the Chief of a Congregation, had given Statutes extracted from
the Constitutions, which by Pope Benet XII, were formed for Regular Canons:
Insomuch, that several Collegiate Churches, to the number of thirteen, amongst
which was that of St. Savior of Lauro, at Rome, joined this Congregation. It
spread it self also into Portugal. Pope Pius V. in the year 1569. obliged those
of this Order to conform themselves to the other Regular Canons, by making the
Vows of Poverty, Chastity and Obedience. Their Habit is a long Casock under,
with Buttons, and over that a blew Frock with large Sleeves, a broad Scarf on
the Shoulder, and a Cap all of the same color. There are also some Monasteries
of this Order in Sicily, only they have undertaken to outdo the others in
austerity of Life. Their Garments, though of the same color, are yet a great
deal shorter, and very like to an Hermetical Habit; they go besides with a big
Pilgrims Staff in their Hands, and long Beads, with Sandals on their Feet, and
a Cap on their Head.

Of the Order of the Regular Canons of the Holy Sepulcher.
Du Molinet Hist. of Reg. Can.
THIS Order of Regular Canons did anciently possess, in the Holy Land, several
Churches, and after the Revolutions, which happened there, passed from thence
into Italy, where they fixed their abode in the Kingdoms of Naples and Sicily.
There is to be seen yet, at this day, the rich Monastery of St. Andrews, near
to the Town of Piazza. They follow the Rule of St. Augustine. It Is said that
Godefroy of Bullen, having conquered Jerusalem in the year 1099, instituted the
first Religious of this Order. He committed to their charge the keeping of the
Holy Sepulcher, from whence they had, and have yet their Name. Their ancient
Habit was a black Casock, a white Rochet over it, with a black Cloak, upon
which wear, on the left side, five black Crosses. They wear also a long Beard,
and a Cap after the Eastern fashion. There are also now some Monasteries of
this Order in the Low and Northern Countries, as in Polonia, Silesia, Moravia,
Bohemia and Russia, but with some difference in their Habits.

Of the Congregation of the Regular Canons of St. Genevieve of Paris.
Du Molinet Regular Canon of this very Congregation in his History which he
made of it.
THIS Congregation had its Original about the year 1615, in the Abbey of St.
Vincent, of Senlis, under the protection of the Cardinal La Rochefoucault,
Bishop of the same City; who being nominated by Louis XIII, to the Abbey of St.
Genevieve of Paris, called thither from St. Vincent of Senlis, Father Charles
Faure, with eleven of his Religious, to bring thither the Reformation. They
established it there with so great success, that it passed thence into several
other Monasteries; and this Congregation is at this time composed of above a
hundred Monasteries, under one Superior General, who is Abbot of St. Genevieve.
There is a good number of fat Priories and Livings, which depend on it, and
which serve as a back Door to those of these Monks, who are weary of their
Confinement, being drawn from thence to officiate in them, and where they are
no longer obliged to the Monastical Duties. It Is also chiefly for one of these
good Morsels, or to be advanced in the preferments of their Order, that the
Regular Canons of the Abbey of St. Genevieve, of Paris, who are continually
exposed to the Eyes of their General, play the Hypocrites so well. At Paris
they call them the Fathers Dormans, or Sleeping Fathers, because they
continually keep their Eyes shut as if they were asleep. Several suffer
themselves to fall as they go to the Quire, not minding where they set their
Feet; and this too great affectation without doubt diminishes much of that
esteem which one might have for their modesty. Their Habit is a white Casock, a
Surplice, a long Fur with a square Cap; and in Winter time, to keep themselves
warmer, they wear over their Rochet a great black Cowl with a Hood, instead of
the Fur and the square Bonnet.

Of the Congregation of the Regular Canons of St. Victor at Paris.
Du Molinet in his Hist. of Reg. Can.
THE Abbey of St. Victor had its rise from a little Chapel built without the
Walls of Paris, whither William of Champeaux Archdeacon of the Church of our
Lady, retired himself about the year 1110, with some of his Disciples. Louis le
Gros, who esteemed much his Virtue and Merit, seeing him, resolved to embrace
the Order of the Regular Canons, caused them, whom he had lately founded at
Puiseaux near Pluviers in Gatinois to come join themselves to William of
Champeaux and his Companions under the same Rule and Habit. There are to be
seen in France about thirty four Monasteries, which form the body of the
Congregation, of which the Abbey of St. Victor is the Chief. All the difference
that there is between the Regular Canons of St. Genevieve, and these, is, that
the former carry their Furs on their Arms, and these on their Shoulders.

Of the Congregation of St. Rufe in Dauphine.
Du Molinet Hist. of Reg. Can.
THE Congregation of St. Rufe, was also formerly but a little Chapel, without
the City of Avignon, where four Canons of the Cathedral Church of the same
City, retired themselves there to live in the exercises of a Regular Life; and
this House of St. Rufe, became afterward the Chief of a powerful Congregation,
composed of a great number of Monasteries. But this Abbey having been ruined,
the Religious transferred themselves to a place near Valence, and afterward
were placed in the Town it self, where they are to this day. They wear a white
Robe, and on the top of it a linen Scarf, for a sign of their Profession.

The Congregation of our Savior in Lorrain.
Idem ut supra.
IT had for its Institutor, Father Fourrier of Matincourt, and was confirmed by
Urban VIII, in the year 1628. These Canons wear a linen Scarf over a black
Robe, and have many Monasteries in Lorrain.

Of the Congregation of the Regular Canons of Windesem in the Low Countries.
Du Molinet Hist. of Reg. Can.
THE Regular Canons of the Chapter of Windesem, who having spread themselves in
Flanders, Holland and Low Germany, drew their Original from a Society of Clerks
gathered together by one Gerard Groot, at Deventer, in the Diocese of Utrecht,
toward the end of the 14th Age. They applied themselves to, and got their
livelihood by transcribing Books. This Gerard Groot, on his Deathbed, ordered
his Disciples to render their Society more fixed, that they should put
themselves under a Religious Rule, and make solemn Vows. After several
consultations upon this affair, they resolved at last to take the Rule of the
Regular Canons, rather than that of any other Order, as being more agreeable to
that Clerical-state which they professed. They began then to build a Monastery
near the Town of Zwol, in a place called Vindeseut, with the consent of William
Duc of Gueldres, and of the Bishop of Utrecht, in the year 1386. They sent, in
the mean while, six of their Body into a House of Regular Canons to be informed
of their Rules and Practices; and in the year following they all took the
Religious Habit of that Order. Their Fame being spread in all the Neighboring
Countries, many new Monasteries were founded for them, and several old ones
desired to be Reformed by them, so that in a very short time they had 83
Convents, the greatest part whereof have been since abolished by the true
Reformation of Religion, which, by Gods blessing, happened in Holland and in
Germany. They founded also in the Low Countries about fourteen Monasteries of
Nuns, and were the Directors of them. This Congregation has yet several famous
Houses. They wear a black Camail over their Rochet, and in the Summer at Church
the Surplice and the Fur on their Shoulders, as those of St. Victor at Paris.

Of the Congregation of Regular Canons of of St. Croix of Conimbria in Portugal.
Du Molinet Hist of Reg Can.
THE Monastery of the Holy Cross near Conimbria in Portugal, Chief of this
Congregation, was founded in a place where the Royal Bathes were, by one
Tellon, Archdeacon and Canon in the Cathedral Church of the same Town. He sent
two of his Disciples to France, there to be instructed in the Rules and
Practices of the Regular Canons; and he afterward, by their means, established
the same observance in his Monastery of the Holy Cross, and in all the others
who joined with this to the number of nineteen. These Regular Canons were
founded in the year 1527, and reduced to a strict Observance of the Cloister
and Silence. They wear a Surplice without Sleeves, which they turn up upon
their hands, and a Fur upon their Shoulders.

Of other Houses of Regular Canons.
Du Molinet Hist. of Reg. Can.
THERE are yet other Congregations and Houses of Regular Canons, as that of St.
Mark at Mantua, which was founded in the year 1205. It has but two
Monasteries, one at Mantua, and the other at Nesco near Padua. The Congregation
of the Valley of Scholars, which was founded by four Doctors, and several of
their Scholars in a Valley encompassed with Woods in the Diocese of Langres. It
stretched is self very much into France, and the Low Countries, and in Germany;
but in France it has been incorporated into that of St. Genevieve. We see yet
several Abbeys of Regular Canons, who have diverse Priories depending upon them
and wear different Habits, as those of St. Maurice of Angoun in Suitzerland:
They wear a read Camail over their Rochets. Those of Chausterneubourg in
Austria, who wear Furred Caps on their Heads. Those of Mont St. Eligius near
Arras, who are dressed in a Violet Color. The Cathedral of Pampelune is
officiated by Regular Canons, and in the same Diocese there is the famous
Priory of Ronceaux, where the Emperor Charlemain placed a College of Regular
Canons, to take charge of an Hospital which he founded, to receive the Pilgrims
that should pass by those remote places, as well those of France, who should go
to St. James, as those of Spain who traveled to Rome. They are dressed in Black,
and wear a little white Scapulary very strait, which comes down to their
middle; they wear also a kind of a Cross, of a green Stuff, made in the form of
an F. to signify that they are of an Order belonging to Hospitals.

Of the Order of the Hermits of St. Augustine.
THE Fathers of this Order do boldly derive their Original from St. Augustine:
They pretend that this Saint being at Milan, retired there into a Monastery,
and that passing afterward into Africa, he brought thither along with him 12
Friars, whom he established not long after near his Episcopal Church of Sic
Erasm. and Hospin. consent.
Hippo, living together with them. But to speak truly, this is no better than a
story, contrived by these honest Monks, who have vanity enough to attribute to
themselves an antiquity to which they have no title. I need give no other
warrant for what I say, than Vid. Possid. Vita St. Aug.
Possidonius, who wrote the Life of St. Augustine, and makes no mention of them.
It Is also acknowledged by the Learned, that those seventy six Sermons written
to the Hermits (Ad Fratres in Eremo commemorantes) and supposed by the
Augustinian Fathers to be the Works of this holy Doctor, are only the
productions of some Impostor. Having weighed every thing very impartially, one
shall find that the Order of these Augustinians was in the beginning formed of
several Heremitical Congregations, which were spread in several places under
different names, and especially of the Williamites, and Zambonites. Pope
Innocent IV. did form the design of this Union; but Death having prevented him,
this Work was reserved to Alexander IV. Nor was the great St. Augustine, though
dead many Ages before, wanting to promote it with his utmost power. He appeared
(say they) to this Pope in a Dream, under a dreadful Figure, having his Head as
big as a Tun, and the rest of his Body as small as a Reed. This made Alexander
IV. understand, that he ought to put in execution the project of his
Predecessor. He gave them the pretended Rules of St. Augustine, Artheur des
Habits des Ordres Religieux.
joined them in a Body under one General, ordering them to wear the same Habit,
to wit, a long Gown with broad Sleeves, a fine cloth Hood, and under these
black Garments other white ones, and that they should ty^ about their Middle a
leathern Girdle, fastened with an Ivory Bone. This Order being confirmed by the
following Popes, so prodigiously increased, that a very little while after they
had above 2000 Convents of Men, and 300 of Women. Being afterward fallen from
Moreri His^. Dict.
their Observances, (which is the common fate of all the Religious Orders of the
Church of Rome) Father Thomas of Jesus, of the House of Andrada, laid the first
Foundations of a Reformation in Portugal, about the year 1574* Louis of Leon
established it in Spain, Father Andreas Dies in Italy, and Father Francis Ame^
carried it into France, and it was confirmed by Clement VIII. in the year 1600.
The following Popes consented, that the three Congregations of France, Italy
and Spain should have each a Vicar General, who should depend on the General of
the Augustinians. They are one of the four Orders which are now called Mandians
or Beggars, from their begging Alms from Door to Door, though indeed it is a
shame that they are suffered so to do, having all of them (some few Religious
of St. Francis excepted) more than sufficient yearly incomes for their
maintenance. The Reformed Augustinians wear Sandals, and are called Unshod, for
distinction sake, from those who have not received the Reform, and go Balaeus
Centuria 4. c. 17.
under the name of great Augustinians. These last passed from Italy into England
in the year 1252. and at their arrival a raging Sickness broke out in London,
and spread into the whole Kingdom, as a presage of the great evils which these
Monks should cause one day in England. There is a great number of other
Congregations that follow the Rule of St. Augustine, of whom I shall speak in
another place. Now having said that the Augustinians drew their Original from
the Williamites and Zambonites; I shall only treat here in few words of these
two ancient Orders of Hermits.

Of the Orders and Rules of Cassianus, Caesarius and Isidorus.
Moreri*
JOhn Cassian was born at Athens, and lived in the Fifth Age. He passed the
first years of his Youth in the Monasteries of Palestina, where he had great
familiarity with the Abbot Germanus, and they went together into Egypt, where
they lived seven years: After he became a Disciple to St. John Chrysostom, by
whom he was ordained a Deacon; and after the death of this holy Prelate, he
went to Rome, from whence in the year 410. when this City was taken by
Alaricus, he took his way to Marseilles, and was there ordained a Priest by
Bishop Venetius. He afterward founded there two Monasteries, one for Men and
the other for Women, professing himself amongst them a Monastic Life. He wrote
there his Books of Collations or Conferences of the Fathers of the Desert, viz.
of those Hermits whom he had seen in the Wilderness of Palestina, which he
dedicated to several eminent Vide Cassiani Opera in Bibl. Patr. Vol. 7.
men. He had already written the Institutions and manner of life of the Egyptian
Monks, and it is very probable that he proposed them for a pattern to his own
Monasteries, having left no other written Rule besides. This Cassianus died in
the year 448. and is now looked upon very strangely by the Papists; some of
them chiefly at Marseilles and in Provence, worshipping him as a Saint, and
others holding him for an Heretic, who followed the errors of the
Semipelagiens.

Caesarius, Archbishop of Arles, lived in the Sixth Age, and was brought up in
his Youth in the famous Monastery of the Lerins, which was at that time the
most renowned School Moreri Dict. Hist.
for Learning, where he made a considerable progress in his Studies. We have of
his Works forty six Homilies, some Letters, an exhortation to Charity, a
Treatise of the Ten Virgins, some Rules for Nuns* which he wrote in favor of
Caesaria, his own Sister (who lived in a Monastery founded by him) and are to
be found in the VIII Tome of Bibliotheca Patrum. It Is said that Tetradius his
Nephew, wrote by his direction another Rule for Monks, which is also to be seen
there. As for the first which is attributed to Caesarius, it is so like to some
spiritual instructions which St. Austin wrote for some devout Women, who lived
together with his Sister, that some few words only being changed, it seems to
be the same, Prosp. Stell. Fund. and Reg. Ord.
Muta quaedam Verba Caesaris, and habes totam Regulam Augustini, says Prosper
Stellarius of it. So that we may suppose he borrowed it from this Holy Doctor,
and therefore I shall leave it out here, having given a draught of St.
Augustin's Rule page 19. For what belongs to the Rule of Tetradius for Monks,
which is likewise by some attributed to Caesarius, it is a piece so full of
faults and nonsense, that it is a shame to pretend that either of these Learned
Men was the Writer of it; and I think it rather to be the Composition of some
silly ignorant Monk, who had the good luck to bear the same name. There being
now no Monasteries that do profess this Rule, nor any that I know that ever
professed it before; it would be superfluous to relate it here.

As for Isidorus, Archbishop of Sevil, there is a Rule for Monks inserted in
his Works, collected by one James du Bruel, Benedictine Monk of the Abbey of St.
Germain des Prez at Paris; but finding it no where else, nor the least mention
made of it in the Catalogues which Baronius, Tritemius, nay which Ildefonsus
his own Disciple has left us of Isidorus's Writings; I am apt to think it
might have beeen the contrivance of some good Friar, who was perhaps desirous
to make the World believe that Isidore was a great Patron and Master of
Monastic Life. Moreover several have been mightily mistaken in thinking that
the directions which the ancient Bishops wrote for their own Clergy were Rules
for Monks: And indeed this Isidore might have written some such thing for his
Canons, which the Monks afterward have attributed to themselves.

Of the Order of the Williamites.
SOME do pretend that this William, Institutor of the Williamites, was a Duke
of Aquitain, Earl of Poitiers, and Disciple of S. Bernard. Having no Children,
he passed from a military to a Monastic Life, about the year 1150. under Pope
Eugeny III. and having left his temporal Estate, he came to Rome, where he put
on an Iron Cuirasse, and three big Iron Chains upon his naked Body. In this
equipage he took a journey to Jerusalem, and from thence to St. James in Spain.
In his way to Jerusalem agin he was taken by the Saracens; but being released
from captivity some time after, he landed in a little Island near Tuscany,
where he lived some while with great austerity in the Woods, as the Hermites
do. He went from thence to Rome, from Rome to Centumcelles, and from thence to
Rimini; and being at last returned into his own Country, he erected there many
Monasteries, where he gathered a great number of Hermits, who were dispersed up
and down in solitary places, and who, bewitched by the apparent holiness of so
great a man and Traveller, joined themselves to him, leaving off their former
Vocations. They were from his name called Williamites, and wore a black
Garment. This William having left his Hermits came to Paris, where he laid the
foundations of a Convent of Mendicant Friars.

Of the Zambonites.
Moreri Hist. Dict.
THE Order of the Williamites being almost wholly ruined, was about an hundred
years after renewed by one John Bon, born at Mantua in Italy. He was a young
man, very rich and very dissolute, who had given himself to all sorts of
Pleasure and bad Companies. Being fallen dangerously ill, he made a Vow, that
in case he should recover, he would become a Monk. He was as good as his Word,
being restored to his health again, gave his Estate to the Poor, and withdrew
himself into a Grotto, not far from Cesena, which is a Town in Flaminia, where
he afflicted his body with strange mortifications. It Is said, that for to
overcome the great Temptations of the Flesh, which plagued him, he was wont to
cut Canes or Reeds in small pieces, and to stick them in betwixt his Flesh and
his Nails. Having thus made himself admirable by the strictness of his
observance, many flocked to him to live under his direction, for whom he
founded several Monasteries in Flaminia and in Umbria, and they were called
from his name John-Bon Friars, or Zambonites. Lastly, Their Founder, after
having taken much pains for establishing the Hermetical Life, died at Mantua in
a little Monastery, which the Mantuans his Countrymen had built there for him
in the year 1222.

CHAP. VIII.
Of St. Benet, Patriarch of the Monks in the West, of his Rule, and of his
Order.
S. Greg. lib* 1. Dialog.
BENET was the Son of a Roman Senator of an Anician Family. He was born at
Nursia in Italy, in the year 480. and he stole away very young from his Parents
in the times of the Troubles and Wars of the Emperor Justinian, to retire into
a Wilderness. He made choice of a Desert called Sublac, distant forty miles
from Rome, and practiced there an Hermetical Life, being only assisted by a
Monk, whose name was Romanus. He was afterward invited by the Monks of a
Monastery in the Neighborhood, to come and take upon himself the care of their
Society, which he did: But these wretched Monks being soon weary of him, and
having even endeavored to poison him, he retired himself to Mount Cassin,
where he pulled down an old Temple of Apollo, and built upon its r^ins a
Monastery for Monks, desirous to establish in the West the same manner of
living which Basil had begun in the East. Pope Gregory, who for what reason I
know not, was called the Great, has written the Life of St. Benet in his
Dialogues. Benet founded himself twelve Monasteries, which were endowed and
enriched by the liberalities of many Roman Lords and Ladies, particularly that
of Mont Cassin, ^olat. lib. (...).
which according to Volateran's Testimony had yearly a revenue of above 40000
Golden Crowns, which was a prodigious sum of money in those times. Superstition
(as Hospinian very wisely observes) does render men not only liberal, but
prodigal in those new worships which they do invent, while they have nummed
hands for the true Works of Charity which God does command, as is the relief of
those who are truly poor. This made the Superstitious and Zealots of those
times, give to those new Monks, not only Houses and Farms, but Buroughs, Towns
and Provinces also, whereof they became very willingly the Masters and
Governors, giving so early a rare example of that Holy Poverty which they did
profess. Benet died in the year 542, and in the 62d of his Age. He wrote a Rule
for his Monks, which some do attribute to (...) lib. ^0.
Gregory III. It Is divided into 73 Chapters, in which, amongst many fine
instructions and practices, one sees also much Superstition mingled. I will
relate here, as briefly as may be, the substance of what is contained in each
Chapter.

The Rule of S. Benet.
Ex Prosp. Stellar. Reg. S. Benedict.
THE Prologue contains an Exhortation of Benet to his Monks to bring them to
the practice of Obedience, and of these his Rules, by which he said they should
infallibly come to God, and promises if they found any thing hard, the
practice thereof will make it easier. He takes here upon him the quality of a
Master and good Father who speaks to his Child; Hear my Son the Precepts of thy
Master, and incline thy heart to the Admonitions of thy Father, etc.

Chap. i.
He speaks here of four sorts of Monks, first of Coenobites who live in a
Monastery under the same Rules and Abbot. 2. Of Anachorets or Hermits. 3. Of
Sarabaites, who were a sort of People following only their own Wills. 4. Of
certain Vagabond Monks who had no place of abode, and declares that his Rule
belongs to none but the Coenobites, whom he exalts above the rest.

Chap. ii.
He describes here the good Qualities which an Abbot ought to have, who he
says in a Monastery does represent the person of Jesus Christ.

Chap. iii.
That in important Affairs the Abbot ought to call all his Monks to Council,
even the youngest, because, says he, God often reveals to them what is best.
And after having heard every ones opinion, he ought to put in execution what he
shall think best.

Chap. iv.
He treats here of the Instruments of Good Works, which he reduces to LXXII
Precepts, which are the most eminent Duties of Christian Life; of which the
first is to love God with all ones heart; and the second to love our Neighbor
as our self, etc. He says that the Monastery is the proper place to put them
in execution.

Chap. v.
He commands Obedience, without delay, to their Superiors.

Chap. vi.
He commands here silence; and giving a very bad interpretation to that Verse
of the 38th Psalm, Humiliatus sum, and silui a bonis, says, that only for the
love which one should bear to silence, one ought sometimes to abstain from good
and edifying Discourses

Chap. vii.
He speaks here of Humility, of which he assigns twelve degrees, which he says
did compose that mysterious Ladder that appeared to the Patriach Jacob. The
first degree of Humility, according to him, is to fear God, and to think him
always present. The second, Not to love to do his own Will. The third, To
submit himself to his Superior in all Obedience for the love of God. The
fourth, To suffer with patience all sorts of injuries for the love of God. The
fifth, To discover all his most secret faults and sins to his Abbot. The sixth,
That one ought to be content with the meanest things, and the most abject
employments. The seventh, To think meanest of himself. The eighth, To do
nothing but what the common Rule of the Monastery, and the example of the
Ancients give them a president for. The ninth, To speak nothing unless being
asked. The tenth, Not to laugh easily. The eleventh, Being obliged to speak, to
do it without laughter, with gravity, in few words and a low voice. The
twelfth, A Monk ought not only to be humble in heart, but also in behavior,
and that in all places he ought to hang down his Head and his Eyes toward the
ground: He promises to him who shall have surmounted all these degrees of
Humility, to arrive at that perfect Charity which drives away fear; but he does
not see that there are some false steps, which shows him to be no great Divine.

Chap. viii.
He appoints the hour when the Monks ought to rise in the Night to go to
Church, to wit, at the eighth hour, that is, according to our way of reckoning,
two hours after Midnight.

Chap. ix.
He orders the Office, and the number of Psalms which the Monks ought to sing
in the Night, during the Winter.

Chap. x.
He orders the same Office for the Night in Summer.

Chap. xi, and xii.
He settleth the Divine Office for Sunday-night.

Chap. xiii.
He appoints the Night Office for the days of the Week.

Chap. xiv.
He prescribes the Office for Holydays, during Night.

Chap. xv.
In what time they ought to sing Alleluia.

Chap. xvi, xvii, and xviii.
He ordains the Office of the Church for the day, and will have them every week
sing through the Psalter.

Chap. xix.
That the Monks, singing at Church, ought to remember they are in the presence
of God, and of his Angels.

Chap. xx.
That they ought to accompany their Prayers with a profound and inward respect:
That the Common Prayers ought to be short, and that they go out of the Church
all together, when the Superior gives the sign.

Chap. xxi.
If the Congregation is numerous, it must be divided by tens, with a Dean over
each, to be chosen from amongst the Brethren of the best life.

Chap. xxii.
After what manner the Monks ought to sleep, to wit, all in one place, or
divided into several rooms by tens or twenties, with their Deans. A Lamp must
burn in the place where they sleep all night. They ought to sleep clothed,
with their Girdles on: The youngest must not have their Beds near one another,
but be mingled with those of the Ancients.

Chap. xxiii.
If a Monk be rebellious, disobedient, proud, or a murmurer, after secret
admonitions and public reprehensions, he ought to be excommunicated; and if
for all this he does not mend, then to be corporally chastised.

Chap. xxiv.
That for light faults they ought to be excommunicated the Table, that is to
say, they must eat alone, and after the others have done.

Chap. xxv.
That for great faults they be excommunicated from the Table, from the Prayers
and all Assemblies.

Chap. xxvi.
That he, who without the permission of his Abbot, keeps company with
excommunicated persons, be himself excommunicated.

Chap. xxvii.
What care the Abbot ought to have of those who are excommunicated.

Chap. xxviii.
After any one has been mildly and sharply corrected, and does not amend, that
then the whole Congregation pray for him, after which if he persist obstinate,
that they expel him the Monastery.

Chap. xxix.
If he that has been expelled, returns and promises to amend, that they shall
receive him thrice, after which he shall be admitted no more.

Chap. xxx.
That Children, and those who understand not what Excommunication means, be
punished by fasting, or be whipped.

Chap. xxxi.
He sets down the good Qualities which the Steward of the Monastery (called by
him the House of God) ought to have.

Chap. xxxii.
The Abbot ought to commit the Habits and the Goods of the Monastery to certain
Monks, who shall look well after them, and keep an Inventory of them.

Chap. xxxiii.
The Monks ought to possess nothing at all as their own in particular, but
every thing in common.

Chap. xxxiv.
All things ought to be distributed according to every ones necessities.

Chap. xxxv.
The Monks ought to serve weekly by turns in the Kitchen, and at Table. They
ought, during their week, to wash the Feet of the others, and on Saturday to
clean all the Plates, and the Linen which served to wipe the Feet of their
Brethren.

Chap. xxxvi.
Care, above all things, must be taken of the Monks that are sick. There shall
be for them an Apartment by it self, with an Officer to serve them. The use of
the Bathes and of Flesh is permitted to them, till they be well again.

Chap. xxxvii.
The Austerity of the Rule ought to be moderated to Children and old Men, who
shall have leave to breakfast in the morning.

Chap. xxxviii.
Reading ought to be appointed during their Meals. He who reads is to begin on
the Sunday, and so to go on the whole Week. Special Prayer ought to be made for
him at Church, that God would be pleased to take away from him the Spirit of
Pride. The Monks must eat with silence, and wanting any thing, must ask for it
rather by a sign, than by word of mouth.

Chap. xxxix.
He grants to his Monks two different Dishes at Dinner, with some Fruits, and
one pound of Bread; leaving to the direction of the Abbot the diminishing or
increasing the quantity of their Food according to the Season, their Labors
and Ages, and all without any superfluity. He forbids eating meat to all but
the sick.

Chap. xl.
He set down the measures of Drink, and allows a certain measure of Wine, which
they call Hemina.

Chap. xli.
He orders the hour for Meals, both for Summer and Winter, at Dinner and Supper.

Chap. xlii.
He will have a Spiritual Lecture to be read every day before Evening Prayers,
after which they are to be very silent in the night.

Chap. xliii.
He orders punishments for those who come late to Church, or to the Table,
making them to sit in a place appointed for the Lazy-ones, taking from them
their portion of Wine, or depriving them of their whole allowance.

Chap. xliv.
Punishments are also ordered for excommunicated Monks, to wit, to prostrate
themselves with their Faces toward the ground, without the Church-gate, every
time that the Friars go to sing their Prayers.

Chap. xlv.
Those who commit any fault in singing, ought to humble themselves immediately
before all.

Chap. xlvi.
Those who commit any fault in any other place, or break any thing, ought to
come presently, of their own accord, and accuse themselves of their
transgression before the Abbot, and the Congregation.

Chap. xlvii.
The Abbot ought himself to take the care of giving the signal for to go to
Church, and no body ought to sing or read there without his leave.

Chap. xlviii.
He orders times both for Working and for Reading. Three hours in the Morning
ought to be employed in working with their Hands, and as many in the Afternoon.
They must spend two hours in reading after the Morning-work is over.

Chap. xlix.
He treats of the observance of Lent, in which time he recommends particularly
the exercise of all sorts of Virtues, and he attributes to presumption and sin
all the Penances inflicted without their Superiors leave.

Chap. l.
Those Monks, who by reason of their Laboring or taking a Journey, cannot meet
at Prayer-time with the others, ought to say the same at the appointed hours,
wherever they be.

Chap. li.
Those Monks who go out upon business, and can return the same day to their
Monastery, ought not to eat abroad without the leave of their Abbot; if they
do, they are to be excommunicated.

Chap. lii.
The Church ought to be looked upon as a place only designed for Prayer, and
accordingly no other use must be made of it.

Chap. liii.
All Guests or Strangers ought to be received into the Monastery, as if they
were Christ himself. They ought first to go with them to Prayer, then to adore
Christ in them by an humble prostration at their Feet, which the Abbot and the
Monks must wash. But above all, they ought to make much of the Poor. All the
Guests must be admitted at the Abbots Table, in an Apartment by it self for
that purpose, and he ought to break his fast to keep them company.

Chap. live.
The Monks ought to receive neither Letters nor Presents without the permission
of their Abbot.

Chap. lv.
He setleth the Clothes which his Monks ought to wear.

Chap. lvi.
When there are no Strangers in the Monastery, the Abbot may call some of his
Monks to his Table.

Chap. lvii.
The Workmen, who live in the Monastery, ought to exercise their Arts with all
humility, and the Money that comes from their Works must be common.

Chap. lviii.
He speaks of the reception of the Novices; that they ought to be tried by
denials, hard words, and other ill usages some days before they enter the
Monastery. They ought to make a whole year of probation; during which time
these Rules shall be read to them every fourth month, and then they shall be
admitted to profess, by which they ought to promise stability amongst the
Monks, the conversion of their Lives and Manners, obedience to God and to his
Saints; and if ever they do any thing contrary to these Rules, they must expect
no less than eternal Damnation. They ought to put, as it were, their Seal to
this Promise, by saying three times this Verse of the 118th Psalm, Suscipe me,
Domine, secundum eloquium tuum, and vivam; and non confundas me ab expectatione
mea. After which they shall go and prostrate themselves at every Monks Feet,
and so they are received as Monks. They must give their Estates to the Poor, or
to the Monastery; considering, that from that very time they have not the
disposal even of their own Bodies, and so they must be clothed with the
Monastic Habit.

Chap. lix.
He prescribes the manner of presenting Children to the Monastery, as well of
the Nobility as of the Poor. The Parents must make the demand in behalf of the
Child, and present him to the Altar, by reason they are too young to do it
themselves. Afterward the Parents must oblige themselves by Oath, and before
Witnesses, that they will never give, nor permit to be given to them any
temporal Estate, to the end they may take from them all occasion of leaving the
Monastery

Chap. lx.
If any Priest requires to be initiated a Monk, after having proved him by
delays, that he be received; that they make him sit near the Abbot; but he
shall be subject to every observance of the Rule, and he ought not to presume
to exercise any Sacerdotal Function, without the permission of the Abbot. That
the same thing be proportionably observed toward the Clerks.

Chap. lxi.
He orders that they permit those Monks, that are Strangers, who desire to make
any stay in the Monastery, to remain there; and if they serve to edification,
they may be entreated to fix there their continual abode.

Chap. lxii.
Those Monks, who shall at the request of the Abbot be ordained Priests, ought
not thereupon to grow proud, but shall be subject to the Rule, to the Deans,
and to those who shall be set over them; otherwise after a due correction, in
the presence of the Bishop, they must be expelled the Monastery.

Chap. lxiii.
He establishes the Order of Precedence amongst the Monks, which shall be
according to the time of their Profession. The first comers shall have the
first place, and the youngest, that is to say, those who come last, shall give
place in all things to their Seniors.

Chap. lxiv.
The Abbot must be elected by all the Congregation, with the plurality of
Voices. And he describes the good Qualities, which he, who is proposed for
Election ought to have, and what he ought to consider, or do, after being
elected.

Chap. lxv.
The Superior of the Monastery ought to be elected by the Abbot, who may also
depose him in case of disobedience.

Chap. lxvi.
He requires that they give the Office of Porter of the Monastery to a wise old
Man, who can receive and give an answer; that he be diligent to open the Gate.
And that he may take away from the Monks all pretense of going out of the
Monastery, he would have, if possible, Water, a Mill, a Garden, an Oven, and
all other Mechanic Arts within the Monastery.

Chap. lxvii.
The Monks who go a Journey, ought to recommend themselves to the Prayer of
their Brethren, and they must be prayed for when they are returned, for any
transgression they might have committed during the time of their being out of
the Monastery.

Chap. lxviii.
If a Monk be commanded any thing impossible, after having represented the
impossibility of it with all humility to his Superior, yet if he persists in
his command, the Monk must at last obey, and rely upon the assistance of God in
the performance of it.

Chap. lxix.
That they ought not to defend or excuse one another faults in the Monastery.

Chap. lxx.
It Is not permitted to any one to strike, or to excommunicate without the
permission of the Abbot. Nevertheless, every one may, upon occasion, correct
the Children with discretion.

Chap. lxxi.
The Monks are exhorted also to a mutual obedience one toward another,
provided they do not neglect the Commands of their Superiors; and if any of
their Superiors is angry with them they ought to prostrate themselves at his
Feet till his anger be over.

Chap. lxxii.
That in every thing they do, they ought to be possessed with a good Zeal, and to
esteem nothing above the love of Christ.

Chap. lxxiii.
He ends his Rule in saying, that all the observance of Justice is not
contained in it. He exalts the Holy Scriptures, and says, That every Page of
the Old, as well as of the New Testament, is a Just Rule of Humane Life. He
recommends to his Monks the reading of the Fathers, particularly the Collations
of Cassian, and the Rule of St. Basil; and says, That his own Rule is no more
than a small beginning of perfection, which opens the way to a far greater.

CHAP. IX.
Reflections upon St. Benet's Rule.
ALthough this Rule has been extremely exalted by the Popes of Rome, who have
declared that it was dictated to St. Benet by the Holy Ghost himself;
nevertheless, they who do rightly consider it, will easily find, that besides
many superstitious and false Doctrines comprehended in this Rule, the lxix
Chapter is very cruel and inhumane, the lxviii very rash and presumptuous; and
that every where this Benet, who was of a high and imperious Spirit, endeavors
to establish his tyrannical Authority over his Monks, under pretext to have
them obey Christ; and establishing, as he does in the liii Chapter, a Kitchen
apart for the Abbot and Strangers, Qui nunquam desunt Monasterio, of whom the
Monastery is never empty, as it is specified in the same Chapter, and for whose
sakes he must always break his fast; it follows from thence, that he took a
particular care of his own Belly, and that of his Successors the Abbots, being
resolved to observe but very seldom the Fasts. I have very often had the honor
to eat with the Abbots of the Order of St. Benet in France and in Italy, and do
well know with what superfluity and delicacy they treat themselves on the
account of this part of that Rule. As for St. Benet, as I cannot speak so
positively of him, let us hear what his own Disciples have said of him. He
orders in the xxxix Chapter a pound of Bread to each Monk for his Dinner, of
which a part must be reserved for Supper; and in the following Chapter, he
gives them a measure of Wine, which he calls Hemin. But the Fathers of Mount
Cassin, in their Declarations on this Rule say, That this portion of Bread is
exorbitant, the pound of Declar. Cassin. in Reg. S. Ben. super cap. 39.
the Monastery of Cassin being of thirty three ounces and an half, therefore
they would have given to their Monks no more than what is necessary. Cum pondus
librae ut habuimus a Monasterio Cassinensi, sit unciarum triginta trium and
semis: ut vix tantum panis unus Frater die un^ manducare possit, volumus
consuetudinem nostram observari, ut scilicet apponatur panis quantum satis est.
As to the measure of Wine granted by St. Benet, the Fathers Benedictines of the
Congregation of St. Justine, have also found it excessive, and will therefore
have no more Wine In lib. Constable. S. Just. in cap. 11. Reg. S. Ben.
given to the Monks than it is competent. Quia (ut Monasterio nostro Cassinensi
praecipimus) Hemina Vini multo plus quam communi necessitati unius Monachi
sufficiat, ideo de Vino damus unicuique quantum sufficiat. There are also some
who will have that St. Benet ordered a couple of Pullets to each of his
Religious for Dinner, which agrees, say they, with that expression of his in
the xxxix Chapter. Duo pulmentaria cocta Fratribus sufficiant, where by the
word Pulmentaria may be meant (as they suppose) Pullets. We see then by the
Testimony of the Religious of that Order, that their St. Benet was very
extravagant in his measures, and perhaps he did it for to hinder his Monks from
murmuring at the good Cheer he made himself. For what belongs to the Poverty
which he so often preaches in his Rule, one may easily see what was the
practice of it by the opulency of the Monastery of Cassin in St. Benets time,
of which I have already spoken in the eighth Chapter. And a while afterward
the same Monastery of Cassin fell into so great a poverty, that it alone
possessed but Prosp. St^ll. Disquisit. in Reg. S. Ben. fol. 404.
IV Bishoprics. II Dukedoms. XX Counties. XXXVI Cities. CC Castles. CCC
Territories. CDXL Villages. CCCVI Farms. XXIII Seaports. XXXIII Isles. CC
Mills. MDCLXII Churches.
All which, either to the Spiritual, or Temporat Part, appertained to the
Monastery of Cassin. This was to renounce the World rightly, while so many
thousands of poor people died with hunger in Italy, as one may gather from the
public miseries of that time. A Reflection capable to draw Tears from the Eyes
of all honest men, if one consider with what artifice the Devil seduced these
men, under a pretense of a falfe Piety. For the most wicked, and those who had
committed the greatest extorsions, in giving a Present to the Monastery of
Cassin, thought they had sufficiently satisfied for their sins. I have found in
Prosper Stellartius his History of Monastical Rules, a Title of the Abbots of
Mont Cassin, where may be seen nine degrees of Humility perfectly well expressed.
I have here related them word for word as it is in my Author. Prosp. Stell. de
Monast. Cassin. fol. 404.
Tituli Abbatis Monasterii Cassinensis.
1 Patriarchae Sacrae Religionis; 2 Abbas Sacri Monasterii Cassinensis: 3 Dux
and 4 Princepts omnium Abbatum and Religiosorum: 5 Vice-Cancellarius Regnorum
utriusque Siciliae, Jerusalem and Hungariae; 6 Comes and 7 Rector Campaniae,
Terrae Laboris, Maritimaeque Provinciae: 8 Vice-Imperator and 9 Princeps Pacis.
Titles of the Abbots of Montcassin.
1 Patriarch of the Sacred Religion: 2 Abbot of the Sacred Monastery of Cassin:
3 Duke and 4 Prince of all Abbots and Religious: 5 Vice Chancellor of the
Kingdoms of both the Sicilies, of Jerusalem and Hungaria: 6 Count and 7
Governor of Campania, and Ferrra di Lavoro, and of the Maritime Province: 8
Vice-Emperour and 9 Prince of Peace.


They want but three steps more to arrive at the top of that Ladder of Humility
which St Benet has built in his Rule. All the favor which one may show to St.
Benet in this place is to excuse his intention, and to say that when he
permitted his Monks to possess so much in common, he did not foresee the ill
use they would make of it, and to what excess of delicacy and pride it would
carry them.

CHAP. X.
Of the Progress of the Order of St. Benet since the year 543, to 940. When
begun the first Reformation.
S. Greg. lib. 2. Dial.
BENET, when living, sent two of his most beloved Disciples, Maurus and
Placidus, one into France, and the other into Sicily, for to found there some
Monasteries. They made there in a short time a wonderful progress by the
favorable disposition of several great Lords, who did help them in their
design. It happened also beyond Benet's intention, and by a particular providence
of God, who draws good from evil when he pleases, that some years after his
death, many of his Monasteries became well endowed Colleges, wherein Youth were
instructed, and Sciences did flourish. Because as in that time the most part of
Europe was not yet converted to the Christian Faith, or was lately brought over
to it, there was need of good learned men to convert and confirm the people in
the Doctrine of the Gospel. The Christian Princes, considering Trithem. lib. 1.
cap. 6. de Monast. and Monach. Bened.
the advantages of retirement for Studies, and that Benet's Rule did contain,
for the most part, Statutes very proper for the administration of a College,
they founded many Monasteries of his Order, with the intent they should teach
in them not only their young Monks, but all others who would come there to
board. Hence it was that the manual labor which, according to St. Benet's
Rule, took up the best part of the day, was shortened, if not quite released in
favor of the Students; and those who had not wit enough in their heads to
apply themselves seriously to studies, and to compose Books, found enough in
their Fingers to Transcribe, Bind and guild them. This in a very short time did
furnish all the Monasteries with excellent Libraries, that were a great help to
their Studies, because Printing not being used in those times, all Books being
in Writing, were extreme dear, and those Seculars, who had not the advantage of
the Libraries of Monks, were not able to have many. This gave then fair
opportunity to the Religious of becoming learned, and what encouraged them more
yet, was, that on the account of their Learning, they were called to
Bishoprics and other Ecclesiastical Dignities, even to the Papacy it self. In
an old Table of the greatness of the Order of St. Benet, I find 28 Popes, 200
Cardinals, 1600 Archbishops, 4000 Bishops. The principal Monasteries where
Studies and Learned Men did flourish with great reputation, were those of
Fulda, Milan, Hirsauge, Auxerre, St. Martins of Treves, Hirsfeld, Rheims, St.
Gall, St. Denis, Wissembourg, Malmesbury in England, Corbie, Neubourg,
Altendorf, Luxevil, and a great many others, the relation of which might prove
perhaps too tedious. Trit. Chron. Hirsaug.
In a word, if we believe Tritemius toward the year 840. almost all the
Monasteries of the Order of St. Benet were learned Academies and Schools, in
which were taught not only Divinity and Philosophy, but also Mathematics,
Music, Rhetoric, Poetry, the Hebrew, Arabic, Greek and Latin Tongues. These
were the Golden Ages of the Monks, very different from those of our times. It
was then that the Abbeys of the Order of St. Benet became so rich by the great
and noble gifts which the Princes and great Lords gave them, as an
encouragement to the learned. By which means the Abbots became themselves great
and mighty Lords, and got Brusch. lib. de Germ. Monast.
magnificent Titles. The Abbot of Augia the Rich, in Germany, has yearly 60000
Golden Crowns, and in his Monastery were received none but Princes, Earls and
Barons. The Abbeys of Weissembourg, of Fulda, and of St. Gall in Germany, do
possess yet^innumerable riches, and their Abbots are Dukes and Princes of the
Empire. One of the Abbots of St. Gall entered into Strasbourg on a public
occasion with a Retinue of 1000 Horse. Should I treat here in particular of all
the Abbeys of the Order of St. Benet, this could not be done without making a
great Volume. They were formerly above 15000 in number, but they are now a
great deal more. As the intentions of those who founded Monasteries were very
various, I shall here relate some of the principal motives which gave rise to
these Foundations.

CHAP. XI.
What were the motives to the Founding of so many Monasteries.
SOME, as I have already said, had a motive thereto, the making atonement for
their Extorsions, Paricides and Robberies, and hoped they had done it in great
measure, by employing part of what they had pillaged or stolen, in founding
Monasteries; such was the infatuation of those times. Others indeed carried by
a truly noble Spirit and good Zeal, founded many of them to favor Virtue and
Letters; witness Oswaldus King of England, who founded several, Ut inventus in
Beda lib. 3. cap. 3. Hist. Eccles.
iis bonis Literis and Moribus imbui ac erudiri posset, to the end that Youth
should be instructed in them, both in Learning and good Manners. Not very long
after, the False Doctrine of Proper Merit, and of applying the Merits of one man
to another, having crept into the Church, the most impious and wicked undertook
to lay foundations, with this infamous Bargain, that while they gave themselves
up to all sorts of Crimes and sinful Courses, the Monks should pray and merit
Heaven for them and their Posterity. A fourth reason which persuaded a great
many persons toward the end, particularly of the tenth Century, to found
Monasteries, was a false Opinion they had imbibed, that the World would come to
an end with that Age. This does appear by the old Charters of Donation of those
Stum. in Chron. l. 5. c. 2.
times, of which this is one. In Dei Nomine perpetrandum est unicuique hominum,
quam vel^citer tempora caduca praetereunt and futura appropriant. Ideo penset
unusquisque apud semetipsum si habeat unde aliquid de facultatibus suis
tribuere valeat ad venerabilia loca pro remedio animae suae, ut in sempiterna
requie cum Beato Petro and Andraea Paradysum mereatur possidere, quia illis
datis rebus suis mercati sunt Regnum Coelorum -- in hac itaque promissione ego
N. N. valde compunctus trado, etc.

A Fifth Reason, was the Dreams, Visions and apparitions of Spirits, Signs and
pretended Miracles. God himself (say they) to show that nothing was more
acceptable to him than that life which men professed in Monasteries, permitted
the Devils to torment those, who after their entering into the Monasteries,
would be so unwise as to go out again. Upon which a Grave and Learned Author
makes this short Hosp. l. 4. de Orig. Mo^. c. 26.
and ingenious reflection, Voluit enim Diabolus cultum Monasticum observari, non
deseri. That the Devil was too much concerned in Monkery not to make it his
business to promote it with his utmost power. So then all these Visions and
Miracles were nothing but deceits and Diabolical illusions.

Refert Cuspinianus.
Lastly, Great numbers of other persons were moved by their own silly Fancies
and capricious thoughts, to found Monasteries, as may be seen in several
Charters of the old Foundations. I will relate here one or two Examples to this
purpose.

Agnes, Wife to Leopold Marquess of Austria, being very importunate with her
Husband for the foundation of a Monastery, the Veil which she had on her head
was carried away by the wind into a neighboring Forest; and Leopold going a
hunting some years after, in that very place in the Wood where he found it,
built a Monastery.

The great and powerful Monastery of the Vines, in the Diocese of Constance,
was founded by a Caprice, yet more curious, in the year Brus. lib. ^ des Germ.
Monast.
800. A Countess called Irmentrude, being informed that a poor Woman was
delivered of three Children at a Birth, reproached her with Adultery, saying,
that it could not be otherwise, and that she deserved the severity of the Law.
This same Lady was delivered the year following of twelve Children, all alive,
in the absence of the Count her Husband, who was gone into the Country. Fearing
then lest the rash Judgment which she had passed upon the poor Woman, might
justly fall upon her self, she ordered, being willing to conceal the thing from
her Husband, that only one of these little Children should be kept, and the
rest drowned in the River. The Woman who was entrusted with that cruel Office,
was by chance met by the Count on his return from the Country, who asked what
she carried in her Apron? She answered, It was little Puppies which she went to
drown. The Earl was very importunate to see them, and the Woman being so very
much pressed, discoverd the whole mystery to him. He seeing these eleven little
Children, all living, gave order that they should be brought up in a Country
House, without giving notice of it to the Lady Countess, who remained still in
the belief that her Orders had been executed. Six years after the Earl made
these eleven young Lords, richly clothed, to come before their Mother, who
asked her smiling, whether she knew them. The Countess finding her self guilty
in her Conscience, and not questioning but these were the eleven Children whom
she had sent to be drowned, fell at her Husbands Feet, asked pardon for her
Fault, which was immediately granted her: And for an acknowledgment of so great
and special Providence of God toward these Children, as well as to atone for
the Crime of their Mother, he converted his Palace of Altorf into a Monastery,
that was afterward endowed and enriched by the liberalities of several other
Princes.

CHAP. XII.
Of the Reformations and Congregations of the Order of St. Benet, and first of
that of Cluny.
THE great riches of this Order having introduced Luxury into it, the noble
ardour of Learning, which during some time caused all the glory and splendour
thereof, did insensibly decay, and Good Manners, the almost inseparable
companions of Studies, had no better Fate. So that toward the end of the ninth
Age, this Order was fallen into an abominable remissness; and it was in the
year 912, that Oden, Abbot of Cluny in Burgondy, in the Diocese of Macon, a man
learned indeed, but a great Hypocrite, and a Counterfeiter of Miracles,
undertook to repair, or rather to give a new Life to the ancient observances of
the Order. He begun with his own Monastery of Cluny, where he established the
Reformation, which was imitated by above two thousand Monasteries, and rendered
Cluny so famous, that from time to time, Monks were elected thence to govern
the Church of Rome. Alfrede, Queen of England, was very diligent to translate
this Reformation of Cluny into her Kingdom, for by her means it was established
there the same year that it begun in Cluny. This Vermin extended it self, under
pretense of Piety, into all the Kingdoms of Europe; but it was in effect the
work of the Devil, who has always mightily endeavored to establish
Monasteries; and rather than to suffer them entirely to perish, seeing how much
they have already profited him in introducing new Doctrins and damnable Maxims
into the Church, he would bear with a reformation. It was manifest that God had
no hand in this, since a while afterward these new Reformists fell into a
relapse worse than the former, of which Petrus Abbas Cluniaci lib. 6. Epist. 7.
Peter, Abbot of Cluny, mightily complains in these terms. Our Brethren, says
he, despise God, and having past all shame, eat Flesh now all the days of the
week except Friday, not only in secret but in public also, boasting of their
sin like those of Sodom. They run here and there, and as Kites and Vultures
fly with great swiftness where the most smoke of the Kitchen is, or where they
smell the best Roast and Boiled. Those that will not do as the rest, them they
mock and treat as Hypocrites and Profane. Beans, Cheese, Eggs, and even Fish it
self can no more please their nice Palates; they only relish the Fleshpots of
Egypt. Pieces of boiled and roasted Pork, good fat Veal, Otters and Hares, the
best Geese and Pullets; and in a word all sorts of Flesh and Fowl do now cover
the Tables of our holy Monks. But what do I talk? Those things are grown now
too common, they are cloyed with them. They must have something more delicate.
They would have got for them Kids, Hearts, Boars and wild Bears. One must for
them beat the Bushes with a great number of Hunters, and by the help of Birds
of Prey, must one chase the Pheasants and Partridges, and Ringdoves for fear
the Servants of God (who are our good Monks) should perish with hunger. This
Order is to this day very powerful, and to the Monks one may apply word for
word, what Peter of Cluny said of those of his time, of whom I spoke just now.
The Abbey of Cluny is the Head, and the Abbot the General of the whole Order.
There was a great dispute heretofore Chronic. Cassin. lib. 4. c. 62.
betwixt the Abbot of Mont Cassin and that of Cluny about the Title of Abbot of
Abbots, the which this last pretended to have; but this was ended in the
Council which Pascal the XI held at Rome in the year 1117. For the Chancellor
John having asked whether those of Mont Cassin received the Rule of St. Benet
from those of Cluny, or those of Cluny from Mont Cassin, it was answered, that
not only the Bores, of Cluny, but also all the Monks of the Latin Church had
received it from the Monastery of Cassin. This was it which carried it in
favor of the Abbot of Cassin; and truly 'twas a pretty dispute amongst the
Monks, which discovered very much the depth of their humility. For what relates
to the Habit of the Monks, it is a great Frock with a black Hood over a white
Garment.

Of the Congregation of Mont Cassin, formerly called of St. Justina.
THE Monastery of St. Justina at Padoua, in the Venetian Territory, being much
fallen from its first Splendour, they had resolved at Rome to introduce in it
the Olivetan Monks. But the Republic of Venice did so much with their
Remonstrances in the year 1408. that Pope Gregory XII did approve that Louis
Garbo, a Noble Venetian, then Prior of St. Georges in Alga, should pass from
the Canonical to the Monastical Order. He was made Abbot of St. Justina, and
applied himself so successfully to the Reformation, according to the Rule of
St. Benet, that many Monasteries of Italy had recourse to him, and asked for
some of his Disciples to come and instruct them in the same Discipline: So that
in a short time the Congregation of St. Justina of Padoua was Mistress of a
great number of very rich Monasteries. That of Mont Cassin was also united to
it in the year 1504. and Pope Julius II ordered, for the glory of both the
Names, that the whole Order should be henceforwards called the Congregation of
Mont Cassin, alias of St. Justina. I have put it here before some other
Congregations, though more ancient, because Garbo, its Founder, had his
instructions of Reformation from the Order of Cluny. Their Habit is a fine
large Casock with a Scapulary, a long Gown or Frock curiously folded on the
top, with a large Hood and Sleeves; they wear also a Clerical Cap. From their
Habit which is all black, they are commonly called in Italy Black Monks. They
have great need now of another Reformation, being very much disordered. They
have very few learned men amongst them, being only possessed with the imaginary
greatness of their Order.

Of the Order of Camaldoni.
THE Second Reformer of the Order of St. Benet was Romuald, born at Ravenna of
Noble Parents. Being twenty years old he became a Monk, in a neighboring
Monastery, where seeing the remissness of his Companions in the observance of
their Rule, he undertook to reform them, and made his Institute to be received
in several Monasteries of Tuscany, Venice and other places of Italy. Being one
day in conversation with an Earl Ribaden. Jesuist in Vita S. Romuald^.
called Maldoli, he told him of a Vision which he had in a Dream in the Night. I
saw, said he, a Ladder that reached from your Field on the Mount Apenine, to
Heaven it self, and men clothed in White, as we are, to go up to God. The good
man believed the Dream, and willing to make it good, gave his Possession to
Romuald, who built there in the year 1009. about twenty Cells for Hermits
(which place is called to this day the Sacred Desert) and some miles lower a
Monastery where the Monks lead an easier life, and furnish the Hermits on the
top with all necessaries. I have given to the public a description of these
two places, and laid open the Frauds of these Monks in the third of my Letters,
page 119. One ought nevertheless to confess that these Hermits of the Sacred
Desert, and the others of the same Habit, who have all set their Hermitages in
places frightful to Nature, are the Religious of Italy, who live with more
austerity and retirement from conversing with the World. But their illusion is
yet the greater, that they believe themselves to be in those dismal solitudes
as in well secured Havens of Salvation, and, as Pharisees, are fully conceited
with their own holiness and merits, preferring in such manner the foolish
imaginations of their hearts, to all the good works which one may practice in
the World with less vanity, and more edification of his Neighbor. As for those
Monks of Camaldoli, who make a body of a Congregation by themselves, they are
now in the same depth of Corruption as the other Italian Monks. Romuald their
Founder lived 120 years, and died in the Monastery of Val di Castro in the
Marsh of Ancona in the year 1027. They wear white Clothes, to wit, a Casock, a
long Scapulary and a Hood, and a stately Gown with large Sleeves. But the
Hermits wear only short Clothes, viz. a Casock, a Scapulary and a Hood.

There is yet in Italy another Congregation of Hermits of St. Romuald, called
otherwise of the Mount of the Crown. Paul Justinian, a Noble Venetian, begun
their establishment in the year 1520, founding a Monastery ten miles from
Perugia in the midst of the Apennin, on the Mountain of the Crown, and
dedicated the Church of it to the Savior of the World, in the year 1555. They
differ but little from those of Camalduli, and in the year 1523 there was a
kind of union amongst them. Their Habit is a short Casock, a Scapulary, and a
Cloak on their Shoulders which falls a little lower than their Knees, the whole
being of a white Wool. It was superfluous indeed to found an Order so like to
that of Camalduli, had not this Paul Justinian had the vanity so common to
those Founders of Orders, to make himself the Head of a Party.

Of the Order of Valombrosa.
JOhn Gualbert, who is the Founder of it, having taken the Religious Habit in
the Monastery of St. Miniat, against the Will of his Father, continued some
time there in the exercises of a Monastical Life; but he did so much abhor
Simony, wherewith almost all Italy was infected at that time, that seeing how
the Abbot of St. Miniat made a Trade of it, he left his Monastery and went to
Florence, where he declared, with a loud Voice, in all the public places of
the Town, that the Bishop of that place, and his Abbot were both great
Simoniacks. After which, fearing the vengeance of these two Prelates, he fled
secretly to Camaldoli; from whence, after having lived there some while with
the Hermits, he retired himself into another Solitude of the Apennin, called
Valombrosa, from the shadow which the high Firtrees cause there. He was
received there by two Hermits, and many others having joined him, he became the
head of them; he laid under the Rule of St. Benet in the year 1040 the
foundations of an Order, which took its name from that place. He built several
Monasteries in Italy, and reformed many others. His death happened in the year
1073, in the Monastery of Passignan. The Popes Alexander the II, and Gregory
the VII confirmed this Order, and himself was made a Saint. His Monasteries
were only poor Cottages, and he could never bear that Monks should build
stately Habitations. Being gone one day to visit the Monastery of Muscet, he
told the Abbot Surius tom. 4. d^ Vitis Sanctor^m.
severely, Thou have raised thee a Palace with an expense that might be
sufficient to give a maintenance to a great many poor. One might now justly
make use of the same reproach to all the Abbeys of this Order, because there is
never a one but is very stately built; and that of Valombrosa it self is more
like to a Royal Palace, than to an Humble House for Monks. So does this Order
receive their condemnation from the Mouth of their own Founder. These Monks
were formerly clothed as those of Camalduli, and differed only in the Blew
Color which they wore. They changed it afterward into a Dark Violet, and
enlarged their Habits after the manner of the Monks of Cassin. They are now
very loose Livers, and possess several Monasteries in Italy.

Of the Sylvestrin Order.
THE Congregation of Sylvestrins began to be established in the year 1269 at
Montefano, near Fabriano in Italy, by Sylvester Gozolini, Gentleman of Osimo,
in the Marsh of Ancona, and Canon of the Cathedral Church of that Town, who
having been present by chance at the opening of a Sepulcher, where he saw the
frightful and stinking dead Body of one of his best Friends, buried there some
days ago; he conceived so great a slight against this present Life, that
forsaking all worldly things, he retired into a Solitude to apply all his
thoughts to God. Many persons did follow his example, to whom he gave the Rule
of St. Benet. His Congregation was approved by the Sea of Rome while he was yet
living. After his Death, which happened in the year 1280, it was confirmed by
several Popes; and a great while after Sixtus the V. reformed many abuses that
crept amongst them. They are Clothed like the old Monks of Valombrosa, whose
Rule they follow also. They differ only in the Yellowish and Peach Color which
they wear. This made me to insert them in this place.

Of the Order of Granmont.
THIS Order had its beginning from one Stephen, born in the Province of
Auvergne in France in the year 1076. This Gentleman was brought up by Milon,
Archbishop of Benevent, after whose Death, seeing he had lost his Fortune, he
resolved to lead a solitary Life; and having visited many Hermitages, that he
might learn the Eremetical Trade, he fixed at last his abode on the Mountain of
Muret near Limoges, which was all covered with Woods, being then thirty years
old. He wrote there a Rule, or rather a Rapsody, consisting of several things
got together from the Rule of St. Benet, from that of Regular Canons, and of
what he could find most superstitious in the Hermits manner of Life, which he
proposed to his Disciples as an infallible way to Heaven. It was confirmed by
several Popes; and afterward, by reason of its too great austerity, moderated
by Innocent the IV, in the year 1247, and again by Clement the V. in the year
1309. So that what some Popes did approve as most holy, some others did condemn
as very rash and indiscreet. This Stephen wore an Iron Cuirass on his Naked
Body, slept in a Wooden Coffin, laid some feet deep into the ground, without
any Bed or Straw in the bottom of it. He bent so often his Knees, that the skin
of them became hardened as that of a Camel; and so often he kissed the Ground
that it turned up his Nose. After his Death, the Monks which he left at Muret
were chased thence by those of the Order of St. Austin; and one Peter, native
of Limoges, Disciple and Successor of Stephen, having asked a Sign from Heaven,
to know where they should fix their abode, they heard a Voice in the Air, which
said thrice, at Granmont, Granmont, Granmont, which is high a Mountain near to
Muret. The Papists say it was the Voice of an Angel, but it is more likely to
be that of the Devil, who is always very busy in establishing Superstition.
They made then their application to Henry the I. King of England, who ordered a
Church to be built for them there, which was dedicated to the Virgin Mary; and
from this Mountain, called Grandmont, the whole Order took its name. They are
only spread in France. They wear a harsh and pricking Tunick, and over it a
long Gown of thick Cloth.

Of the Order of the Carthusians.
Polyd. l. 7. c. 3. Genebrard. in Chron.
THE Carthusian Order was instituted in the year 1080, according to some
Authors, and in the Opinion of some others in 1086. on the occasion, as it is
said, of a very strange accident. A Professor of the Vincent lib. 26. c. 82.
University of Paris, very commendable, not only for his Doctrine, but also for
the apparent integrity of a Good Life, died, and as he was burying, he sat
upright on the Bier, and cried with a lamentable Voice, I am accused by the
just Judgment of God. Which putting all the Spectators into a strange fright,
the Enterment was deferred till the next day, when the Dead cried again, I am
judged by the just judgment of God; for which Cause they put off the Burial yet
one day longer: At last the third day being come, in the presence of a great
multitude of people who were assembled together, the Dead again cried with a
terrible Voice, by the just Judgment of God am I Condemned. One Bruno being
present at this sight, and taking occasion, from this adventure, to make a fine
Discourse to the Assembly, he concluded, that it was impossible for them to be
saved, unless they renounced the World, and retired themselves into the
Deserts; which he executed immediately with six of his Companions, going into a
frightful place, called Chartreuse, amongst the Mountains in the Diocese of
Grenoble, where he was assisted with all things by the Bishop of that place
named Hugues, who afterward became one of his Disciples. They built in that
horrid Desert, only habited by wild Beasts, little Cells, at some distance each
from another, where they lived in silence, leading a very rigid Life. They
proposed to follow the Rule of St. Benet, adding thereto several other Hospin.
de Orig. Mon. lib. 5. c. 7.
great Austerities. Hospinian has related all their ancient Observances in
nineteen Articles, which are these following.

1. To wear continually a Hair-Cloath on their naked Skin.

2. Never to eat any Flesh-meat, no not in case of a desperate Disease.

3. Never to buy any Fish, and to eat none except it be given to them.

4. To eat only Bread made of Bran, and to drink only Water mingled with a
little Wine.

5. To eat nothing on Sundays and Thursdays but Cheese and Eggs, Tuesdays and
Saturdays, Pulse, and only Bread and Water the other days of the Week.

6. They ought themselves to prepare their own Victuals, and to take their
refection alone.

7. The Christmas Week, Easter, and Whitsunday Holy Days, with some few others,
are excepted from this observance, in which they eat twice a day in common.

8. They ought to remain in their Cells, give themselves to Prayer and Reading,
and likewise to Manual Work, and particularly to Transcribing of Books.

9. They ought to keep almost a continual silence.

10. They must recite the smaller Prayers of the Canonical Office, privately in
their Cells, at the ringing of the Bell.

11. Morning and Evening Songs, together with the Masses, ought to be performed
at Church those days when they do eat in common.

12. It Is not permitted to them to say Mass every day.

13. None of them is permitted to go out of the Monastery under any pretense
whatsoever, except the Prior, and the Proxy for business.

14. They ought to be satisfied with a very little space of ground about their
Cells; after which, let the whole World be offered to them, they ought not to
desire a foot more.

15. Such a number of Cattle is permitted to them, which they ought not to
exceed.

16. There ought to be in a Charter House, twelve Monks only, one Prior,
eighteen Convert Brethren, and some few Servants.

17. The entrance of their Cloisters, and of their Churches also is forbidden
to Women.

18. They never admit to Penitence those that leave once their Order.

19. They are all Clothed in White, except their pleated Cloak, which is Black.

These practices were put in Writing, not by Bruno, but by those of his Order,
and confirmed afterward by Alexander the III. in the year 1174. This Order is
almost the only one of the old ones in the Church of Rome that continued
without a Reformation, pretending that they never went so much astray as the
others, though it fails very much in living up to the strictness of their first
institution. St. Bernard complained in his time of the Magnificency of their
Buildings; and now adays notwithstanding their Vow of Poverty, they may
contend in Riches with the most powerful Princes in the World. They have got
the name of being very good Husbands, and what has yet more contributed to the
conservation of their Riches, was, that the Superiors of this Order never took
upon themselves the Title of Abbots, but were always called Priors. So that
when the Abbeys, by an agreement with the Popes, were put in Commands, the
Charter-houses, which were not called by that name, were not comprehended
amongst them, and consequently nothing of their Revenues was taken away from
them. Furthermore, these Monks, being seldom seen at the Courts of Princes,
were more free from Envy, and less thought on. Ex lib. G^nstit. Curthus. in c.
36. Reg. S. Benedict.
The cruel and inhumane prohibition of eating Flesh, even with the loss of their
Lives, is yet now adays observed amongst them with this little but malignant
restriction, that Flesh ought to be presented to those who are thought to draw
near their end. If they do accept of it, and recover from Sickness, they are
deprived for ever of any active or passive Vote, they can never come to any
degree of Superiority, and are looked upon as infamous men, who have preferred a
morsel of Meat to a precious Death before God. See here the excess of
Superstition and diabolical Illusion to which these poor Christians are now
arrived. As for what concerns Fish, which they should never eat, but when
presented to them, they do not only buy those of the best sort, but spare
neither cost nor trouble to fetch it from the remotest parts, in revenge, as it
seems, of the prohibition they are under of eating Flesh. This Order has
spread it self, not only in France, where it had its original, but also in
Italy, Germany, Spain, and in all other Countries subject to the Papacy, where
stately Charter-houses are to be seen, all endowed with vast Revenues. They
passed into England in the year 1180, where they became, in a short time,
extremely rich. One may see in many* Charter-houses in France, Pictures
representing the pretended martyrdom of their Monks here in the beginning of
the Reformation. They adore them as Saints; and, these excepted, they have but
very few others in their Order; and it is even observed, that they work no
Miracles, because, they say, their Saints in Heaven are still so great lovers
of that silence, and retirement which they professed on Earth, that lest they
should give an occasion to the great concourse of People, who would go on their
account and trouble the solitude of their Brethren, they chose rather to do no
Miracles.

Of the Cistercian Order, called otherwise Bernardins.
RObert, Abbot of Molesme, weary with the abominable and wicked Life of the
Monks of the Monastery, withdrew himself with one and twenty of his Religious,
as from a Sodom, into the Solitudes of Citeaux, five leagues distant from the
City of Dijon in Burgundy, where he founded a Monastery, which was afterward
by Oto the I. Duke of Burgundy, endowed with considerable Revenues. There the
Monastical Discipline seemed to take its first vigor again; and by the Pattern
of these Religious, many others undertook to reform themselves, acknowledging
the Abbot of Citeaux for Chief of their Religion, which, under the Name of the
Place where it had its beginning, spread it self afterward into all Europe.
They follow St. Benet's Rule, with some Constitutions, which Stephen the III,
Abbot of this Order, wrote with the consent of his Brethren, and were called,
Charitatis Chartae, and Confirmed in the year 1107, by Pope Urban the II. They
bound themselves to so rigid an observance, that many at first could not bear
with it, and deserted quite the Monastical Habit. But their Hypocrisy had so
good success, under the Pontificate of Innocent the II, that their Monasteries
became extremely rich by the great Donations bestowed on them. They are also
called Bernardins, because St. Bernard, native of Burgundy, fifteen year after
the foundation of the Monastery of Citeaux, went there with thirty of his
Companions, and behaved himself so well to their own humor, that he was some
time after elected Abbot of Clairvaux; which Monastery was founded by Robert of
Molesme, in the Diocese of Langres, where the same observance was professed.
This Bernard founded himself afterward above 160 Monasteries of his Order; and
because he was so great a Propagator of it, his Monks were called from his
Name, Bernardines. They had no Possessions at first, and lived only of Alms,
and by the Labor of their hands; but a very little while after, they became,
as well as the other Monks, Idolaters of Riches, and applied themselves wholly
to get possessions. Their Riches entailed on them all sorts of Vices; and
although this Order was already a Reformation of that of St. Benet, it self was
afterward several times reformed. Nevertheless it must be acknowledged, that
it has produced formerly great men, who by the advantage of their retirement,
applied themselves to Letters, and were raised to Bishoprics and
Ecclesiastical Dignities in the Church of Rome; but at present, Luxury and
Laziness, the Mother of all Vices, have so much got the upperhand, that their
more serious application, is to the taking of their pleasures. Nevertheless,
one sees to this day, almost in all Europe, Abbeys of this Order, which do
acknowledge Citeaux for their Mother, and him who is Abbot thereof for their
General. This Plague did infect England, almost in its very beginning. They had
there a Monastery in the year 1132, at Rishval. They wore at the beginning a
Black Habit, but it was changed by Bernard, Abbot of Clairvaux, into what it is
now, viz. a White Casock with a narrow Patience or Scapulary, and a black Gown
with long Sleeves when they go abroad, but going to Church they wear it White;
and pretend that the Virgin Mary appeared to St. Bernard, and commanded him to
wear, for her own sake, such white Clothes.

Of the Sacred and Reformed Order of Citeaux, called Feuillans.
De Thuy Traitte des Religions.
FAther John de la Barriere, a French Gentleman, was the Author of this
Reformation. Being twenty one years old, he was made Commandatory Abbot of a
Monastery of St. Bernard, called Feuillans. He held this Abbey in commendam,
during eleven years, after the manner of other Commendatory Abbots, without
exercising any other Function, but that of receiving his Revenues. After which
it came into his thoughts to make himself a Monk, under the Rule and the Habit
of Citeaux. He put this design in execution in the Monastery of Eunes, and
thence he retired to his Abbey of Feuillans, where, being witness of the
disorders of his Monks, he undertook to reform them. But these bony Friars,
seeing him begin the Reformation in the Kitchen, with a great courage opposed
him, threatening to break his Head and Shoulders is he went on with such work.
Nevertheless, Father John was never the more disheartened for this, and by his
Constancy won at length some of them to his Party, which became in time the
strongest, and chased those who would not reform, from the Monastery. The Idem
u^ supra.
new reformed Monks lead there (as says a Popish Author) a more Angelical than
Humane Life, abstaining not only from Flesh, Eggs, Fish, and from all
Milk-meats, but also from Oil, Salt, and Wine, living only on Bread, Pulse and
Water. Pope Gregory the XIII. being informed of this Institution of the Abbot
of Feuillans, sent to him a Brief of Congratulation, and founded at Rome a
Monastery for his Monks. Since this, Sixtus the V. and Clement the VIII.
favored them very much, and their Congregation got ground, particularly in
France. But they are now fallen very much from their former observances. They
boast themselves of being under a special Protection of the Virgin Mary, in
whose Honor they are all Clothed in White.

Of the Order of the Humbled or Humilies.
THIS Order was founded in the year 1162. by some Gentlemen of Milan, who were
detained in a very hard Captivity under the Emperor Conrade, or according to
some others, under Frederick Barbarossa. These Gentlemen having put themselves
all in White, came before him and fell prostrate at his Feet, which moved him
so much to compassion, that he gave them permission to return into their own
Country. They continued still to wear there the same Habit wherewith they had
obtained their liberty; and having taken the Name of Humiliati, began some
Congregations, which growing every day bigger and bigger, a Gentleman, called
Guido, who was their Chief, ordered them to live according to the Order of St.
Benet. There have been, particularly in the State of Milan, several rich
Monasteries of this Order. The Cardinal Charles Boromeo was the last Protector
of it, who seeing their abominable lewdness, undertook to reform them. But
these Monks, not willing to be redressed, persuaded one of their Gang, called
Hierom Donac, to murder him. This desperate Fellow fired a Gun at the Cardinal,
who being a little out of his reach, he missed him; and being apprehended, was
immediately sentenced to Death, and executed for his barbarous attempt. Pope
Pius the V. justly incensed at such a bloody Villainy intended against one of
his Cardinals, did quite abolish that Religion in the year 1570* They wore
white Clothes, and their Superiors were called Provosts. The Bull of Abrogation
of this Order is expressed in such terms, that make a true representation of the
detestable Life, which the most part of the Monks of the Church of Rome lead to
this day in their Cloisters. There is an enumeration of all sorts of Crimes and
Sacriledges which can be imagined. If the Popes do not undertake to abolish
these, it is not for want of reason for the doing of it; but because these
Monks, for their money, have powerful Protectors at the Roman Court, to whom
they pay yearly very big Pensions, and against whose Lives they have not
attempted yet, as the Humiliati did against that of Cardinal Boromeo their
Protector. 'Twas observed when this Order was abolished, that only seventy
Monks were found in ninety Monasteries, which they did possess.

Of the Order of the Celestins.
PEter Celestinus was born in the year 1215, at Isernia, a Town in the Kingdom
of Naples: Scarcely was he come to be sixteen years of age, when he left his
Fathers House and fled into a Solitude. Some years after he went to Rome, where
he was Ordained Priest, and then he became a Monk in a Monastery of St. Benet.
From thence he withdrew into one of the Grotto's of Mont Moron in the year
1239, and lived there several years, for which he was called Peter of Moron. He
gave beginning to the Monastery of the Holy Ghost at Majella, which is the
Chief of the Order established by him afterward, and confirmed in the Council
of Lions by Gregory the X. under the Rule of St. Benet. After the death of
Nicholas the IV. the Roman See having been vacant two years and three months,
by reason of the Competition and Intreagues of the Cardinals; this Peter was at
last, upon the motion of Cardinal Latinus, elected Pope in the year 1294. They
went to search for him in his Solitude, where they found him busy in plowing
the ground. He was, with much ado, wrought upon to accept of the Pontificate,
but yielded at last, came riding upon an Ass to Aquila, where he was
consecrated in the presence of above 20000 people. He took the name of
Coelestinus, and was the fifth of this Name. But his Genius proved soadverse to
the Pride and Stateliness of the Roman Court, that having drawn thereby upon
himself the hatred of the Cardinals, and being moreover very simple and of
little wit; one of those Gentlemen the Cardinals had the cunning to persuade
him to abdicate the Popedo^ on his behalf; which he did, and the new Pope was
called Boniface the VIII. But poor Celestin had no sooner deposed himself, but
his wretched Successor, fearing lest, for his apparent Holiness, he should be
recalled, made him to be apprehended, and put in a stinking loathsome Dungeon
near Anagni, where he died in the year 1296. Boniface disannulled a great many
things which the deceased Pope had established for the grandeur of his own
Order, and took from it the Monastery of Cassin. Clement V. made him a Saint in
year 1313. Some are of opinion that Peter Damianus established this Religion, a
long time before Pope Celestin, about the year 1078, and that the Habit of
those Monks was of a Blue or Celestial Color, whence they were called
Celestins. They wear now a White Casock, with a Patience, a Scapulary, a Hood
and a Cowl, all black. They possess now in France about twenty Monasteries.
It Is an usual expression in that Country for a great Coxcomb to call one a
pleasant Celestin.

Of the Order of the Olivetans.
JOhn Ptolomaeus, Gentleman of Siena, in Italy, a Learned Lawyer, desirous to
give himself wholly to devotion, retired to a ground of his own, called Accona,
distant fifteen miles from the Town, having drawn along with him two other
persons who followed him in his retreat in the year 1313. Their Congregation
increased in a little while, and because they professed no written Rule, and
made no Vows, guided only by the zeal they had for Jesus Christ, they were
accused before Pope John the XXII, who held his Seat at Avignon, as Innovators,
Enemies to Monastical Vows. This Pope referred their Cause to the Bishop of
Aresse, who commanded them to follow the Rule of St. Benet. (This happened in the
year 1319.) and to go Clothed all in White, viz. to wear a Casock, a Scapulary
and a long broad Cowl with large Sleeves. He ordered besides this, that their
Congregation should be called by the name of St. Mary of Mount Olivet, and that
the Church of their Chief Monastery of Accona should bear the same name. About
that time John Ptolomaeus having proposed to himself St. Bernard, Abbot of
Clairvaux, for a Pattern, would be called of his name Bernardus. He died of the
Plague in the year 1348, and it is unknown where his Body was laid. His
Religious are called, yet to this day, Olivetans. They live in a Congregation,
and have perpetual Regular Abbots, though their abode is but triennial in the
same Monastery. They have divided their Abbeys into six Provinces, which do
elect, by turns, the General of the Order. These Monks are so much disordered,
that several Popes, to remove so great a Scandal, had a mind to abolish them
entirely, as 'twas done to the abovementioned Humilies; but their Protectors
have been so powerful, and so well paid, that they have ever till now averted
this Storm from their Heads.

Of some other Orders of St. Benet, and Chiefly of the famous Congregation of
St. Maur in France.
TO put an end to the Orders which follow the Rule of St. Benet: I say that
some are to be seen yet in the East, as in the Valley of Josaphat and in the
Indies, who differ only in Clothes. The first wear a Hood and a Cowl of a
readish Color, and after the use of Eastern Countries, a long Beard. The
others, to wit, the Indians have a black short Casock, with a white Scapulary,
and a white Cloak over it that reaches to their Heels.

There are also many Reformations of the Order of St. Benet in Germany, in
Lorrain and in France; but among others, that of St. Maurus in France is very
remarkable. It was erected by Pope Gregory the XV. in the year 1621, upon the
motion of Louis the XIII. King of France. Father Desiderius De la Cour, native
of Lorrain, was the first, who went about it very earnestly; and the first
Monastery, where this Reform took place, was that of the White Cloaks (or Blanc
Manteaux) at Paris. Pope Urban the VIII. confirmed this Congregation in the
year 1627. It increased so much, in so short a time, that one may reckon now
two hundred Monasteries in France belonging to it. They are divided into six
Monastical Provinces, each of which is governed by a Visitor. They have a
General besides, who keeps two Assistants or Helpers, and lives in the Abbey of
St. Germain des Prez at Paris. The Abbots and Superiors of the whole
Congregation meet together with their Deputies in a General Chapter every third
year, and there they make their Regulations, which are joined with the
Declarations upon their Rule, and ought very strictly to be observed. This
Congregation would have spread its Branches yet farther, if King Louis the XIV.
by a piece of Policy, unwilling to see any Private Body to grow so strong, had
not put a stop to it. He would not permit them to reform many other Monasteries
which are yet very loose and corrupted, and had rather to see them Secularized,
as 'twas done lately to the Abbeys of Enee and Savigni near Lions, than to have
them incorporated with these Reformed Monks. They are extremely Rich, being
very good Husbands, and partly because they want Monks to fill their
Monasteries. The French Nobility, being now a*days Enemies to a lazy Life, the
meanest sort of people only sue for to be received amongst them. This
Congregation has however produced some great men in this Age, famous by their
learned Moreri Dict. ^ist.
Works, to wit, D. Hugues Menard, Lucas d' Achery, John Mabillon, Gabriel
Gerberon, but scarcely could they produce as many others of this kind amongst
them. The length of their Office at Church, taking up the best part of their
time, is perhaps the cause of their ignorance. The Jesuits are very troublesome
to them, because by the great power they have at Court, they get to themselves
several of their Abbeys and Priories. This is the reason, why in some points,
one sees St. Ignatius of Loiola cutting, with long Shears, St. Benet's Purse.

I shall say no more of the Monastical Orders that follow the Rule of St.
Benet, only this, That several other Monasteries of Benedictine Monks are to be
seen here and there dispersed, who are not reformed, and do not live in a body
of a Congregation, but all of them lead so corrupted and wicked lives, that
they may be considered, wherever they are, as the plague of all honesty and
good manners.

CHAP. XIII.
Of the Orders of St. Hierom.
IT IS very certain that St. Hierom governed, a long while, the famous Monastery
built at Bethlem by the devout Paula, but it was by the good example of his
life only, not leaving any thing in Writing that might be serviceable, after
his death, to the Monastical Government. So that the Orders which bear, in our
days, St. Hierom's Name, are not to be called so for their following his Rule,
but because they have chosen this great Doctor for their Patron and Protector.
It Is very true also, that some time before he entered the Monastery of Paula, he
had retired himself to the most desert places of Syria, to get more freedom
from Worldly Affairs, and to apply himself the better to Study and the
Contemplation of Holy Things. But then, and afterward he did it with a perfect
liberty of Spirit, without determination to any Place, Exercise or Pract^ce of
Virtue by any Vow, nor distinguished himself from others by the singularity of
his Habit. Prosper Stellarius, an Augustinian Monk, who has collected the
Rules of the Founders of Religious Orders, makes no mention of any of St.
Hierom. It Is Hosp. de Orig. Mon. l. 4. c. 4.
probable, says Hospinian, that some Ages after the death of St. Hierom, some
persons' out of an ill-guided Devotion, undertook to imitate his manner of
living, and formed a Congregation that went under his Name; but one cannot say
in what time precisely, nor who were the Authors of it. True it is only that
they did it very unluckily, their Institute being extremely different from the
manner of Life of this Holy Man, witness what Polyd. Veig. l. 7. c. 3. de
Inventione Rerum.
Polydore Virgil says of them, that they did not trouble much their heads
about Learning, and were singular in their Habits, wearing brown Clothes, a
plaited Coat over their Casocks, a mysterious leathern Girdle and wooden Shoes.
All which is no where to be found, in what we read, of St. Hierom or of his
Disciples.

Of the Hermits of St. Hierom.
THEY had their beginning in Spain. One Thomas, who passed from Italy into
Spain, was their Institutor. Seeing that the Congregation of those who came to
live under his Discipline was very much increased, he resolved upon many things
for its establishment, and made choice of St. Hierom for his Guide and
Protector. Gregory the X. confirmed it in the year 1374, gave them the Rule of
St. Austin to live by, and consented it should be called the Congregation of
the Hermits of St. Hierom. Their General makes his abode in the Monastery of
Lupiana, in the Diocese of Toledo. Their Habit is a Casock, a Scapulary, and a
plaited Cloak of a swarthy brown color, being like, in the rest, to the other
Hermits of St. Austin.

Of the Congregation of Montebello.
SOME years after the Confirmation of this Order in Spain, to wit, in the year
1380, another Order, like to this was founded in Italy, by Peter Gambacorta,
native of Pisa, at Montebello. This Gentleman, once falling into the hands of
Highway-men who robbed him and used him very ill, his Pious Exhortations and
Christian Remonstrances moved him so much, that he drew them from their sinful
course of Life, and to resolve to become Penitents. He proposed to them St.
Hierom for a Pattern hereof, and obtained their pardon from the Duke of Urban.
This Congregation bing much increased, its first Monastery was founded at
Montebello, under the Pontificate of Urban the VI, and the Order got the name
of Hermits of St. Hierom* Gregory the XII. approved of it, and Pius the V. tied
them to Monastic Vows, under the Rule of Saint Austin, because they made none
before, and left their Monastery when they pleased. They have a Convent at
Rome, called St. Onophrius, near the Gate of the Holy Ghost. Their Habit is a
Casock, a Scapulary and a short Cloak, of a Linen Color; they carry also in
their Hands a Pilgrims Staff, and have wooden Sandals on their Feet, and go
barelegged.

The Reformation of Lupo d' Olmedo.
THE two forementioned Congregations of Hermits did not continue long in the
fervency of their Institute. This was the cause that Lupo d' Olmedo, a Spanish
Friar of the same Order, considering the abuses which had crept into it,
undertook to reform the Congregation of Spain, whereof he was the General; and
to render his Religion yet more commendable, which was before subject to the
Rule of St. Austin, he drew so many Documents out of the Writings of St.
Hierom, which seemed to relate to Monastical Life, that he framed of them a
Body of Constitutions, which he presented to Martin the V. who did like them,
and consented that the Institutions of St. Hierom should serve to govern an
Order that wore already his Name, and had him for their Patron. But so stout a
resistance was made on the side of the Order, that for fear of bringing things
to sad extremities, they thought ^it at Rome to leave them in their former
Condition. Lupo d' Olmedo, who was a proud Person, and a great lover of his own
Inventions, was extremely displeased at it, left his Order, and retired amongst
the Carthusians. Some while after he left them likewise, and went about again
to found a new Religion, according to those Rules which he had drawn from St.
Hierom, which Order was called the Congregation of St. Isidore. He died at Rome
in the year 1433. Philip the II. caused all the Monasteries of this New Order
to be reunited to the old one. They are Clothed as the others, except only
that their Casock is white, and their Cloak broader, after the Monastical
Fashion.

Of the Congregation of Fiesole.
AT the same time that Lupo d' Olmedo made it his business to reform the
Congregation of Spain in the year 1407, an Italian Gentleman, called Charles,
or according to some, Rhedon, Count of Granello, who addicted himself wholly to
a solitary Life, gathered a great many persons together, who had the same
design, and fixed his abode upon the ruins of the old Town of Fiesole, near
Florence. He gave them at first the Institutions of Lupo d' Olmedo; but
Eugenius the IV. put them afterward under the Rule of Saint Austin. Several of
these Monasteries are to be seen yet in Spain and in Italy, where they lead a
very loose Life.

CHAP. XIV.
Of some Religious Orders which follow the Rule of St. Austin.
I Have already treated of the Congregations of Regular Canons, and of the
Hermits or Monks of St. Austin, who pretend to have been instituted by this
Holy Doctor himself: I shall speak now of those who pretend only to his Rule:
And first

Of the Order of St. Anthony.
IN the year 1089, a Contagious Sickness called the Sacred Fire, which was a
kind o^ a very dangerous Leprosy, having spread it self into several parts of
Europe; those of the Province of Vienna in France had at last their recourse to
the Relics of St. Anthony the Egyptian, which were transported (as they say)
from Constantinople thither by one Joceline, of the House of Poitiers. The
Papists (whom the Devil has taken always great care to encourage in the
Idolatrous Worship of Saints) say, that whoever did call upon him, was
delivered from the Sacred Fire; and contrariwise, those who blasphemed, or took
the Name of St. Anthony in vain, were immediately by the Saints unmerciful
vengeance, delivered up to it. This gave occasion to one Gaston Frank, in
company with some other persons, to institute in the year of our Lord 1095, the
Religion of St. Anthony, whose principal care was to serve those sick, who were
tormented by the Sacred Fire. He founded a famous Monastery at la Motte near
Vienna, where lives the General of this Order. They follow the Rule of St.
Austin, and their Habit is a Casock, a Patience, a plaited Cloak, and a black
Hood. They have this mark T of a blew Color on the left side of their Clothes.
The Papists do represent Saint Anthony with a Fire kindled at his Side, to
signify by this, that he delivers people from the Sacred Fire. They paint
besides, a Hog near to him as a sign, that he cures the Beasts of all Diseases;
and to honor him in several places, they keep, at common charges, a Hog, which
they call St. Anthony's Hog, and for which they have great veneration. Many
others will have St. Anthony's Picture upon the Walls of their Houses, hoping
by that to be preserved from the Plague. And the Italians, who did not know the
true signification of the Fire painted at his Side, thought that he preserved
Houses also from being burnt, and they call upon him on such occasions.

As for the Anthonian Friars, they know so well to make use of the Power of
their Saint Anthony, that when they go a begging, if one does refuse what they
ask for, they threaten immediately to make the Sacred Fire to fall upon him.
Therefore the poor Country People to avoid the Menaces and Witchcrafts of these
Monks, present them every year with a good fat Hog a-piece. Some Cardinals and
Prelates endeavored to persuade Pope Paul the III. to abolish these wretched
begging Friars, Quaestuarios istos Sancti Anthonii, qui Sebast. Frank in Chron.
page 468.
decipiunt Rusticos and Simplices, eosque innumeris superstitionibus implicent,
de medio tollendos esse. But they could not compass their good design; and
these Monks do subsist yet to this day in several places, though the Sickness
of St. Anthony's Fire be now very rare.

Of the Order of Premontre.
NOrbert was born of a very great Family in the Country of Cleves, where his
Father was Earl of Gennap. He begun the establishment of this Order in the year
1120, at a place which has been called since Premontre, in the Bishopric of
Laon, framing a mixture of a Monastical and Canonical Life. He followed chiefly
the Rule of St. Austin, and his Order was confirmed by Pope Honor the II. and
Innocent the III. He was made afterward Archbishop of Magdbourg, and obtained
for that See the Title of Primate of Germany. The Monks of Premontre, to get a
greater esteem in the World, published, after the Death of their Founder, that
he had received his Rule, curiously bound in Gold, from the hand of St. Austin
himself, who appeared to him one Night, and said thus to him, "Here is the Rule
which I have written, and "if thy Brethren do observe it, they, like "my
Children, need to fear nothing at all "in the Day of Judgment. These Impostors
added moreover, That an Angel showed to him a Meadow, where he was to build his
first Monastery, which from thence was called Pre Montre, that is the Showed
Meadow. Their Hypocrisy was so great in those beginnings, that their Order
spread it self into Siria, Normandy, Flanders, England, Spain, and other
Countries. They wear a white Casock and a Rochet over it, with a long white
Cloak. Pope Honorius the IV. having granted to the Fathers Carmelites the use
of a white plaited Cloak, those of Premontre complained of it as of a great
scandal and wrong done to them. This notwithstanding, the Carmelites carried it
in spite of their Teeth; and under pretenses of several Apparitions of the
Virgin Mary, kept their long white Cloaks. The Abbots of several Orders, and
particularly those of St. Benet, having obtained the Pope's permission to
officiate in Pontificalibus, with the Miter, the Crosiers-stasf, and the Ring,
as the Popish Bishops do; the Abbots of the Order of Premontre refused to make
use of these Marks of Vanity. They agreed together, in case any of them were
raised to the Dignity of a Cardinal, or to the Popedom it self, never to leave
their Religious Habit, and that none of them should accept of any Dignity or
Degree whatsoever, without having first the license of their General Chapter.
They made several other Regulations, which they joined to the Rule of St.
Austin. This Order had moreover this peculiar to it, That wherever they
sounded a Monastery for Men, they had the cunning to build another for Women
next to it. But the infamous Correspondencies which they kept with them, and
the great Scandals that arose from thence, moved Conradus, Prior of Martello, a
very honesty Gentleman, to use his utmost endeavors for the suppressing of
those Female Monasteries. They made then a Declaration in the year 1273, by
which, after having acknowledged that the Women were worse than the most
venomous Aspicks and Dragons, and that there was no malice comparable to
theirs; they resolved thence forwards not to look upon them, but as upon so
many mischievous Beasts, and declared they would have no more to do with them.

Robert, Bishop of Lincoln in England, having ^al. Cent. 4. c. 11.
undertaken to bring the same Reformation into the Monasteries of Premontre, in
his Diocese, wrote concerning it to Innocentius the IV. but this Pope, bribed
with great sums of money by the Monks, would not consent to it. The Bishop made
bold to write to him a second time, and had for Answer. Brother, thou have
discharged thy Conscience, why art thou angry at my Condescension? I have
pardoned them; is thy Eye bad because I am good? This was a neat application of
the Holy Scripture! These Monks of Premontre did not apply their minds to study
at the beginning of their Institution, and therefore were tossed about by the
other Monks as ignorant Friars; but now they have established Schools amongst
them.

Of the Order of Gilbertines in England.
GIlbert was born in Lincolnshire, deformed of Body, but he made up this defect
by the excellency of his Wit, and a great application to his Studies. Having
been sent into France for his instruction, he became there a great Master of
Superstition; and being returned into his own Country, great numbers both of
Men and Women flocked from all parts to him to hear his Doctrine. He caused to
be built for them, in a short time, thirteen Monasteries, in which were
reckoned 700 Monks, and 1100 Women, who lived together, separated only by a
Wall. He begun his Order in the year 1148, and went into France again to inform
Pope Eugenius the III. of his Statutes, who approved them, and his Order. He
returned into England very well satisfied with his negotiation; and having made
a Rapsody of the Rules of St. Austin and St. Benet, he prescribed it to his
Followers, who, for his Name, were called Gilbertines. This Hermaphrodite
Order, made up of both Sexes, did very soon bring forth Fruits worthy of it
self; these holy Virgins having got almost all of them big Bellies, which gave
occasion to the following Verses. Bal. cent. 3. cap. 25. de Script. Brit.
Harum sunt quaedam steriles, quaedam parientes,
Virgineoque tamen nomine cuncta tegunt.
Quae Viz. The Abbess.
pastoralis baculi dotatur honor,
Illa quidem melius fertiliusque parit.
Vix etiam quaevis sterilis reperitur in illis,
Donec ejus aetas talia posse negat.
Though some are Barren Does, yet others,
By Friars help, prove teeming Mothers.
When all to such Lewdness run,
All Is covered, under Name of Nun.
The Abbess, in Honor as She' excells,
Her Belly too, more often swells.
If any She proves Barren still,
Age is in fault, and not her will.


These Nuns to conceal from the World their Infamous Practices, made away
secretly their Children; and this was the Reason, why at the time of the
Reformation, so many Bones of Young Children were found buried in their
Cloisters, and thrown into places where they ease Nature.

Of the Order of the Mathurines, or Trinitaries.
THIS Order carries the name of its Institutor or Founder, who was John of
Matha, born in Provence in France in the year 1154. He followed his Studies at
Aix, and at Paris, where he took his Degrees; and being afterward made Priest,
he retired himself near Meaux, in a place called Cerfroid with an Hermit, whose
name was Felix, with whom he led a solitary Life. Having been both admonished
(as the Papists say) in a Dream to go to Pope Innocent the III. accordingly
they went. This Pope having had the same Vision, waited for their coming. A
hideous Phantom (they say) while he was saying Mass, appeared to him the day
before, all in white, with a Cross half Red and half Blew on his Breast,
holding with his Hands two Slaves bound in Chains; and this Vision made him
resolve to establish an Order, whose care should be to go and redeem the
Christian Captives, detained in Slavery by the Infidels. Having then conferred
with the two Hermits, he made them take an Habit like to that which the Phantom
appeared in, while he was at the Altar; and having gathered great Alms, he sent
them to redeem, with that money, several Captives; which undertaking having had
a good success, many others followed their example, and Monasteries were
founded for them, where they professed the Rule of St. Austin. Their Order was
confirmed in the year 1207, under the name of the Redemption of Captives. John
Matha founded at Rome the Convent of St. Thomas of Formis, where he died in the
year 1214. This Order was received in England in the year 1357, and was called
the Order of Ingham. Besides the Rule of St. Austin, which they profess, they
have particular Constitutions approved by Pope Innocent the III. whereof the
following are the chiefest.

Principal Statutes of the Order of the Holy Trinity for Redemption of Captives.
Prosp. Stell. lib. de Reg. Ord. Rel. p. 438.
1. All the Estates or Goods that fall legally* to them, are to be divided into
three parts; the two first whereof shall be employed in works of Charity, both
toward themselves, and those that are in their service, and the third shall be
applied for the Redemption of Captives.

2 All their Churches ought to be dedicated to the most Holy Trinity.

3. They ought to acknowledge the Solicitor or Proctor of the Monastery for
their Superior, who shall be called Father Minister of the House of the Holy
Trinity.

4. They must not ride on Horseback, but on Asses only.

5. Fasts are ordered four times a Week, unless they be Holy Days.

6. They ought to eat Flesh only on Sundays and some Holy Days.

7. All the Alms given to them for the redeeming of Captives, ought to be
faithfully employed for that purpose, except only as much as is necessary for
the charges of their Journey.

The rest of their Constitutions are only about the Economy of their Convents,
the manner of keeping their General Chapters, and the election of their
Superiors. As for the Church Office, it is declared that they ought to conform
themselves to the Regular Canons of the Abbey of St. Victor at Paris.

The Monks of this Order have played so many tricks, under the Cloak of their
holy Institution, that they have lost their credit, and do scarcely meet now
a*days with people that will entrust them with their Moneys for the Redemption
of Christian Slaves from the hands of the Infidels. They have nevertheless some
Monasteries here and there, particularly in France.

Of the Order of Mercy.
Author des Ord. Rel. Fig. 92.
THIS Order was instituted about the year 1218, for the same end as the
preceding, viz. for the Redemption of Captives. James, King of Arragon, was
moved to its establishment by Raimond of Pennafort, and Peter Notaseus, who
first received in the King's presence, by the hands of the Bishop of Barcelona
the Religious Habit of this Order, was made General of it in the year 1230.
Gregory the IX. confirmed it under the Rule of St. Austin. Their Habit is a
Casock, a Scapulary and a white plaited Cloak; and they wear on their Breast a
Scutcheon, with a White Cross in a Red Field.

Of the Order of the Armenians.
Zoz. l. 3^ c. 14.
THESE Monks were founded in Armenia, by Eustatius, Bishop of that place, an
Heretic about the year 320. They professed since, the Rule attributed to St.
Basil. But being driven from the Mountains of Armenia, they retired into Italy,
where they built some Monasteries, of which, the Chief is that of St.
Bartholomew of Genoua. Changing their Country, they changed also both their
Habit and Rule; and putting themselves under the Order of St. Austin, took the
Constitutions of St. Dominick to be ruled by. Bal. cent. 4. de script. Brit.
They are Clothed almost like the Dominicans, except their Patience or
Scapulary, which is black. They passed into England in the year 1258.

Of the Order of the Servants of the Virgin Mary.
Sabell. Enne 9. lib. 7.
THE Institutor of this Order, was one called Fudert, a Florentine Physician,
who having applied himself with some Merchants to an Eremetical Life, he gave
them the Rule of St. Austin, with some amendments to it. That which contributed
very much toward the establishment of this New Order, was that famous
imposture of the Picture of the Annunciation of the Virgin Mary, whose Face
these notorious Cheats published to have been drawn by an Angel. There is yet
to be seen the Chief Monastery of this Order. Innocent the IV. refused his
approbation to it, but several Popes, after him, gave them as many privileges
as they could Wish. They have yet in Italy about fifty Convents. Formerly at
Paris, our Lady of Billetes was a Convent of this Order. These Religious wear a
black Habit, with a Cosock, a Scapulary and a Cloak of the same Color. This
Order begun in the year 1233, and according to some other Authors in 1304; and
again, others say in 1285. It Is now fallen into a great corruption of Life and
Manners.

Of the Order of the Hermits of St. Paul.
Autheur de l' Hist. des Habits des Ord. ^el.
THE Body of Paul of Thebes, surnamed the first Hermit, having been transported
into a place near Buda in Hungary, about the year 1215. One Eusebius
instituted, out of Reverence toward him, a Congregation of Hermits, who took
his Name. Urbanus the IV. denied them the Rule of St. Austin, which they did
ask, but it was granted them since by Clement the V. in the year 1308. Many
Convents, of this Order, were to be seen in Hungary, which have been wholly
ruined by the Turks. This Religion did belong particularly to the Hungarian
Nation. These Monks wear white Clothes, a long round Scapulary, and over it a
short Cloak of the same Stuff. They go barefooted with Sandals.

Of the Order of Jesuati.
THIS Congregation was instituted by John Colombinus, Gentleman of Siena. He
was a Married Man, and his Wife a very devout Woman, did continually exhort him
to be charitable to the Poor, and to mind Godliness more than he did. At last
their Devotion passed into Superstition, and they resolved to live separated
one from another, not for a while, as St. Paul approves Man and Wife sometimes
to do, but for ever; and preferred a retired Life in a Cloister, before all the
good they did in the World to the Poor. Many followed their example; and
Colombinus having formed a considerable Congregation Sab. Enne 9. l. 9.
of people, who had abdicated their Wives, Pope Urbanus the V. honored him so
far, as to give him, with his own Hands, the holy Habit of Religion in the year
1366, and the Popes, his Successors, were not wanting to approve and confirm
this Order. These Monks do profess St. Austin's Rule, observing moreover some
Constitutions which John of Tossignan, a Religious of the same Order left them.
They were called Jesuati, because they had almost continually (and upon every
trifling occasion too) the Holy and Ven^rable Name Hosp. de Orig. Mon. l. 4.
of Jesus in their Mouths. They were also called Apostolic Clerks, and were
obliged to recite 165 times a day the Lord's Prayer, and as many Ave Maria's
instead of the Canonical Autheur de l' Hist. des Habits des Ord. Rel.
Office, abstaining from saying Mass. Their Churches being almost all dedicated
to St. Hierom; Alexander the VI. ordered that they should be called Hieronimia^
Jesuati. Their Habit was White, upon which they wore a Tawny Cloak, a White
Hood, and a big leathern Girdle with Sandals. This Order changed several times
its Constitutions, and at last, for its Scandalous Disorders, was by Mor^ri.
Pope Clement the IX. quite abolished in the year 1668.

Of the Order of St. Ambrose in the Wood.
THE Religious of this Order were ancienly called Barnabites, from the name of
St. Barnaby; but being fallen into a declining Condition, they wanted
Restorers. In the year 1431, three Gentlemen of Milan did re-establish this
Order in a Solitary Place, where it is said St. Ambrose did in former times
apply himself to Contemplation, and to the Composition of his Books; from
whence it was called afterward of St. Ambrose in the Wood. They do officiate
according to the old Ambrosian Rite. The Cardinal Charles Borromeo reformed
them a second time. They follow the Rule of St. Austin, and wear an Hermetical
Habit of a redish Color, with a Patience and a plited Cloak.

Of the Order of Apostolins.
Autheur de l' Hist. des Habits des Ord. Rel.
SOME say (without reason) that the Apostle St. Barnabas having preached the
Go^pel at Milan, laid the first draughts of this Religion, and that it was
afterward perfected and made Illustrious by St. Ambrose, from whence it got
(they say) the name both of St. Barnabas and of this Holy Doctor. In the
Countries of Ancona and of Genoa, they were called Apostolini; and in
Lombardie, by reason of their apparent Holiness, Santarelli. They have been
once united with those of St. Ambrose in the Wood. But their hypocritical Life
having broken at last into open disorders, they were by a Bull of Urban the
VIII. almost exstinguished. Their Habit is a Scapulary sewed together, a
leathern Girdle of a Tawny Color, wearing in Winter a narrow Cloak of the same
Color.

Of the Order of the Brothers of Charity, called otherwise of St. John, of God,
or Ignorant Friars.
Autheur de l' Hist. des Habits des Ordres.
THESE Friars are Hospitalers, and make Profession to wait on the Sick. They
have no Schools amongst them; and if any Priest do at any time desire to be
received into their Order, they are so great Enemies of Learning, that for two
or three words of Latin, that he perhaps has learned to say Mass with, he must
subscribe that he shall never pretend to any Preferment or degree of
Superiority amongst them as long as he lives. One John, a Porteguese, born at
Monte Major, in the Diocese of Evora, whose strict Life in appearance, got him
the name of John of God, was the Founder of this Religion. He was in his Youth
a Shepherd, and being 22 years of Age, he listed himself for a Soldier amongst
those that were sent to the relief of Fontarabia. From thence he passed into
Germany, and then returned into Spain; from whence he went to travel into
Africa. Being returned to Grenada, a Sermon which Father d' Avile made, wrought
so much upon him, that he tore his Hair and beat his Breast in a dreadful
manner, crying with a loud voice along the Streets, The naked man follows
Christ naked. The people taking him for a Mad Man, carried him to a Mad House,
where he was kept close and bound. Some while after he was released, and went
in Pilgrimage to our Lady of Guardloupe, and then returned to Grenada, where he
took a House, and entertained the Poor, giving them Meat, Drink and Lodging,
going every day a begging for them, and crying aloud, Do Good Works, my
Brethren, for God's sake. He gathered copious Alms, wherewith he built a
considerable Hospital in Grenada. But his Zeal carried him so far, that being
not able to bear any longer such hardships, he was overwhelmed at last, and
died in the year 1550, aged 55. Some of his Brethren went to Rome, and founded
there an Hospital by the permission of Pius the V. who gave them Bulls for the
confirmation of their new Order, and put them under the Rule of St. Austin.
These Friars are Clothed with a Casock, a Patience, a narrow Hood, and wear a
Bag on their Shoulders, in token of their Office of going to beg for the Poor,
Sick and Prisoners. One might also, here in England, make a Religious Order of
those Basket-men, who are kept for the service of the Prisons.

Of the Order of the Holy Cross, called Cruciferi in Italy.
Panv. Chron.
THIS Order was Instituted, or at least Reformed, by one Gerard, Prior of St.
Mary of Morello at Bologna, and confirmed in the year 1160, by Pope Alexander
the III. who brought these Religious under St. Austin's Rule, and made some
other Constitutions for its government. This Religion fell into a very corrupt
State after the year 1400, and its Monasteries became a prey to several Roman
Prelates. Nevertheless Pope Pius the V. bewitched by these Monks, restored them
their former Possessions again: But as anciently they were so well established
by an Alexander, another Pope of the same Name, Alexander the VII, did quite
abolish their Religion in Italy, in the year 1656, giving the Estates they had
in the Venetian Territories to that Republic, to carry on the War against the
Turks. They wore a Casock and a Patience, a long Gown, a Hood made in the form
of a Cap, their whole Habit being of a Skie*colour. There are some Monks of
this Order Autheur de l' Hist. des Habits Rel. number. 62, 63, 64, 65.
yet in the Low Countries, and in Portugal; and they did possess formerly a
great many Convents in Syria. But they are diversely clad, according to the
different* Countries wherein they live, wearing a Cross on their Habits, or in
their Hands. Some Authors do Moreri. Vide Portecroix Dict. Hist.
affirm, that Godfrey of Bullen, after the Conquest of Jerusalem, instituted
this Order; and some others fetch it as far as from the time of the Apostles.
But these two Opinions want Proofs.

Of the Order of Dominican Friars.
DOminick, the Institutor of this Order, was born at Calahorta, a City of
Arragon, in the year 1170. His Mother dreamed when Hosp. de Orig. Mon. l. 6. c.
4, 5.
she was with Child of him, that she bore in her Belly a Dog (some say a Woolf)
which carried in his Mouth a lighted Torch, whereby the whole World was put in
a general conflagration. This was a fatal presage of the barbarous and cruel
Humor of this Dominick, and of the bloody Massacres which he and his
Disciples, as hellish Furies, should be Authors of through all the World.
Dominick was an indifferent Scholar, and being made Canon of the Church of
Osimo, went to Rome to offer his Service to Pope Innocent the III. for the
extirpation of the Albigenses. From Rome he passed into Languedock, where he
laid the foundations of his Order, and was made Inquisitor against Heretics.
The Albigenses, whom some do pretend to have been the Vaudois, were a People
who would not worship the Beast, nor bend their Knees to Belial, though charged
by the Papists (to render them the more odious) with several impious Doctrins
which they never held. 'Twas chiefly against them that Dominick vented his
rage; and he had so good success in his wicked design, by his Preachments, that
he stirred up almost all the Popish Princes to arm in a Croisade against these
poor Albigenses; and to work more charitably their Conversion, they, at his
Persuasion, murdered, in a short time, above a hundred thousand of them.
Dominick, proud of the success of his Expedition, found it no hard matter to
establish his Order; which took so readily, and suited so well the Genius of
the Church of Rome. It was then approved by Innocent the III. and afterward
confirmed by Honorius the III. in the year 1216. He submitted it to the Rule of
St. Austin, but Dominick added to it some particular Constitutions. He made
three Divisions of his Order. The first was of those, who made it their
business to apply themselves, with him, to Preaching, and the Conversion of
Heretics, for which he would have them to be called Preaching Friars. The
second was of the Nuns, who lived enclosed in Monasteris. The third was a Troop
of merciless Fellows, whom he maintained to cut the Throats of Heretics when
he was a Preaching; he called them the Militia of Jesus Christ, and prescribed
them a manner of living different from that of the Laity. These having at last
routed the Heretics out of their own Country. several persons of both Sexes
joined with them, and were called afterward Brothers and Sisters of the
Penitence of St. Dominick. Pope Innocent the VI. approved their Rule about the
year 1360. They do not tie themselves so strictly to Poverty and Obedience as
the Preachers do. The Principal Statutes of the Preaching Friars are, that they
ought to possess nothing of their own, nor any Estate in common, being obliged
to live only by Alms. Their General Chapter is to be kept every year. They
ought to fast almost seven months in the year, to eat no Flesh, unless in
Sickness, to wear no Linen, and to shun all conversation and familiarity with
Women, to keep silence in some places, and at certain hours. Their Buildings
ought not to be Stately, but becoming a Monastical State. Their chief employ is
that of Preaching. The General of their Order is called Magister Ordinis,
Master of the Order. The Dominicans were called formerly Brothers of the Virgin
Mary, by reason of the superstitious Worship they paid to her, of the
Confraternities of the Rosary, which they established in Honor of her, and of
the Saturdays which they wholly Consecrated to Her. What gave much credit to
this Order Hosp. ibid. ut supra.
was, that Dominick having persuaded Pope Honorius the III. to establish the
Office of the Master of the Sacred Palace at Rome, to whom only was committed
the interpretation of the Holy Scripture, and the Censure of Books; he was the
first who filled this place, which was asterwards conferred successively upon a
Religious of the same Order. Oh! the fine Interpreters of Holy Scripture, whom
Papists are bound to believe, not having the power themselves to read it. The
Inquisition wherewith they were entrusted, rendered them extremely formidable.
But what served yet more to abuse the simplicity of credulous People, and
brought them to favor this New Order, was, the Cheats, Impostures, Frauds and
lies of this Dominick, who left no stone unturned for Hosp. l. 6. de Orig. Mon.
c. 6, 7.
the advancement of it. Hospinian, in his Book of the Original of Monks, has
set them forth in two whole Chapters, to which I refer my Reader. I shall only
relate here a Vision of this great Saint, by which he may judge of Apol. Dom.
in vita Ganct. Dom.
the rest. He was once (says he) ravished as St. Paul to the third Heaven,
where he saw Jesus Christ and his Mother the Virgin Mary surrounded by great
numbers of Monks, and Religious of all Orders, his own excepted: Which sight
made him extremely ashamed and troubled. Jesus Christ seeing him so much
concerned, bid him to come nearer to himself, and asked him the reason of it.
Dominick told him his anxious thoughts very freely. Then Jesus asked him if he
was desirous to see the Children of his Order; with all my heart, said
Dominick; Jesus immediately commanded his Mother to open her long Royal Robe,
and Dominick spyed an innumerable number of his Religious, whom she cherished
under it as her dear Children, far above the others. Are not these very fine
Visions!

These Pestiferous Dominicans spread themselves all over the World, and about
the year 1494, were already reckoned above 4143 Anth. tit. 23. c. 11. parag. 1.
Convents of this Order. From that time they continued to increase more and
more, building every day new Monasteries. They have inherited, from their
Founder, a Spirit of Cruelty; and the Popes, to whom they were always very
useful, have mightily favored them. They have afforded to the Church of Rome
several Popes, great numbers of Cardinals, Archbishops and Bishops; and the
Inquisition against Heretics does still continue in their Hands. As for the
observance of their Rule, it is now quite down. They possess every thing in
common, and have besides that, every one their own money. They observe no Fasts,
eat Flesh every day, lie in good Feather-beds, wear Linen, and keep constant
company with lewd Women: The most part of their Convents are so many stately
Palaces, etc. Father John Michaelis applied Moreri.
himself to reform this deformed Order at the beginning of this Age, and some
few of their Convents did embrace the Reformation; but the loosest sort amongst
them, by the great power they have at the Court of Rome, have put a stop to it.
The Reformed Friars, as well as those who are not so, are governed by one and
the same General, and wear the same Habit, except that the former have it made
with a courser Cloth, and cut narrower: It consists in a white Casock and a
Patience, and over this Patience they wear a Hood all of the same Color; but
when they go abroad, they put over their white Clothes a black plited Cloak
with a black Hood. This is one of the four Mendicants, or begging Orders of
Friars, who to satisfy their infamous Lusts, and to fill their Guts, are the
devourers of the substance of the Poor.

CHAP. XV.
Of the Order of Carmelites.
THE Friars of this Order, who were anciently called Hermits of Mount Carmel,
say that the Prophet Elias was the first Carmelite, and the Founder of their
Congregation, though he never left them any written Rule. But this Title of
Antiquity, to which they pretend, is denied to them by the Papists themselves.
The true time of their Foundation Joan. Stock. Ang. Dom.
was in the year 1122, by Albert, Patriarch of Jerusalem. He gathered together
some Hermits, who lived dispersed here and there upon Mount Carmel and in
Syria, and gave them a Rule; which is nothing else but a collection out of that
which is attributed to St. Basil. He caused a Monastery to be built for them,
near a Spring of Water, called the Fountain of Ely, and a Church, which he
dedicated to the Virgin Mary. He gave them one Brochard for their Superior. In
the disorders of Palestina, the Saricins having chased thence the Christian
Princes; this Order which was already much multiplied, passed into Europe with
its Rules and Statutes. Pope Honorius the IV. having made some alteration in
their Habit, ordered that they should be called Brothers of the Virgin Mary,
and gave them the same Privileges of the other Mendicant Friars. Pope Innocent
the IV. having taken them under his Protection, mitigated their Rule, tied them
to Monastical Vows, which they never made before, and commanded them to blot
out of their Rule this important ^al. in vi^a Innocent. 4.
Clause, Ut de solo Servators salutem sperarent, that they ought to hope for
Salvation from Christ alone: Which having done, he granted them any thing that
they listed, to leave their Solitudes and come to live in the Towns, to hear
the Confessions, to make the God of Bread, and to worship Idols, etc. Pope John
the XXIII. exempted them from Episcopal Jurisdictions, and from Purgatory. He
pretended for this, that the Virgin Mary had appeared to him before he was made
Pope, promising to raise him to that High Degree of Honor, upon condition,
that he should confirm to her Brothers the Carmelites, the changes which
Innocent the IV. had made in their Rule, and that he would exempt them from
Idem in vita Eugen.
Purgatory. Insuper me, and Filio meo jubentibus privilegium hoc dabis, ut
quicunque Ordinem meum intraverit a culpa and poena liberatus in aeternum
salvus fiat. By express command of me and of my Son, thou shall grant this
privilege, that whosoever enters this my Order of Carmelites, shall be free
from guilt and punishment of their sins, and eternally saved. Idem ibid. ut
supra.
Urban the IV. gave three years of Indulgence to those who should call the
Carmelites Brothers of Mary, though they never were related to her. Eugenius
the VI. mitigated their Rule again, giving them permission to eat Flesh as a
reward for having burnt alive one Thomas, Brother of their own Order, for
saying that the abominations of the Church of Rome were grown to such a hight
of corruption, Hosp. ibid. ut supra.
that it needed a Reformation. The Franciscans having obtained great Indulgences
every year at the Feast of their St. Francis, which brought them a world of
Oblations and Alms; the Carmelites, yet more cunning Fellows, obtained an
Indulgence, and full remission of all Sins for those who should go and visit
their Churches, or hear one of the Sermons, which they make in Honor of the
Virgin Mary every Saturday. The number of their Convents is extremely
multiplied. They were already so much sallen from their observances about 50
years after their Instituon, which was in the year 1270. That one Nic. Gallus
sagittae igneae. c. 5.
Nicolaus of Narbona, who was the seventh General of their Order, having
publicly reproved them for their Hypocrisy, Incest, Sodomy, in a word, for
all the most enormous Crimes, and seeing he was not able to recall them to an
honest Life, he forsook them at last as desperate pestilent men, and retired
into a Solitude, after having governed five years their Order. If they were so
abominable while they were yet but a Green Wood, what may one think they are
now when they are a Dry Stick; and in this wretched Age in which we live? These
are the beloved Brothers of the Virgin Mary of Mount Carmel, the Holy Children
of the Prophet Ely! They wear a Casock, a Scapulary, a Patience and a Hood of a
Brown Color, a white plited Cloak and a black Hat.

Of the Order of the Unshod Carmelites.
Hist. des Ord. and Hab. Rel. number. 61.
HERE a Woman called Theresa, gave Laws to Men. She was born at Avila, a Town
of Spain, from noble Parents, in the year 1515. Being twenty years of Age she
entered a Monastery of Carmelite Nuns; and a good while after formed in Avila a
little Convent, under the Name of St. Joseph, where she began the Reformation
of her Order, with so great success, that besides seventeen other Monasteries
of Nuns, which she built and governed, several Convents of Men took her for
their Mother and Mistress, and obeyed her Statutes. Moreri Dict. Hist.
Pius the IV. confirmed and approved her Rule in the year 1562. She died in the
year 1582, and was made a Saint by Gregory the XV. in the year 1622. Father
John, of the Cross, was the Instrument she made use of for the Reformation of
the Convents of Men. These Friars wear the same Habit as the forementioned
Carmelites, but of a very course Cloth, and go barefooted, from whence they
are called Unshod Carmelites. When they sing at Church, they pinch their Noses,
to mortify by that, the Pleasure which might arise from an harmonious Song.
This Order is very much multiplied in Spain and in France, to the great sorrow
of the Brothers of the Virgin Mary, whom this Reformation does not please, for
fear they should be one day compelled to embrace it. By which means they would
lose the Poltron Title which they have long deserved of Carmes en Cuisine, or
Kitchen Friars. Lastly, This Theresa, who reformed them, was a great
Hypocondriack, Fanatic, and pretender to Revelations. She composed, her self,
a large Book, full of Phancies of a deluded mind, which serves at this day for
a Guide and Direction to Spiritual and Devout Papists, and which they believe
more than the Gospel.

CHAP. XVI.
Of the Order of St. Francis.
FRancis was born at Assisy in Umbria. He was a debauched Youth, and having
robbed Hosp. de Orig. Mon. l. 6. c. 8.
his Father, was disinherited, but he seemed not to be very much troubled at it;
and even stripped himself of all his Clothes, saying he would follow Christ
naked, and have Mart. Pol. in Chron.
him alone for a Father. He retired himself in the year 1206, to a little
Chapel near Assisy, called our Lady of the Angels. There having entertained a
strong Fancy, that Christian Perfection did consist in possessing nothing at
all in the World, he undertook to live the poorest of all men. This resolution,
and all his outward practices of Poverty, drew to him, in a short time,
Admirers, and at last Followers and Companions, of whom he made himself the
Head, prescribing them the following Rule, which consists of twelve Articles
only.

A Summary of the Rule of St. Francis.
Chap. i.
Prosp. Ste^. Fund. and Reg. Ord.
He says that the Rule and Life of the Brothers Minors (so he would have those
of his Order called) is to observe the Gospel, under obedience, possessing
nothing as their own, and in Charity. Brother Francis promises obedience to
Pope Honorius and his Lawful Successors, and to the Romish Church; and commands
the other Religious to obey himself and his Successors.

Chap. ii.
He prescribes the manner of receiving Novices after a year of Noviciate; after
which it is not allowed to them to leave the Order. He sets down the Habits,
both of Novices, and Professed Friars, permitting only to the later to wear a
Hood, or Capuchon.

Chap. iii.
He will have his Friars to make use of the Roman Breviary, and the Convers, or
Lay-Brothers to recite every day for their Office seventy six Pater Nosters. He
orders them besides Lent, to fast from All Saints to Christmas, and to begin
Lent at Twelf-tide. He forbids them to ride on Horseback without an urgent
necessity; and will have them in their Journeys to eat of whatsoever is set
before them.

Chap. iv.
He forbids very strictly to receive any money, directly or indirectly.

Chap. v.
They ought to get their Livelihood by the Labor of their Hands, receiving for
it any thing but money.

Chap. vi.
They ought to possess nothing of their own, and when their Labor is not
sufficient to maintain them, they must go a begging, and with the Alms they
collect, help mutually one another.

Chap. vii.
They ought to confess to their Provincial Ministers those sins, the absolution
of which is reserved to them, that they may receive from them charitable
Corrections.

Chap. viii.
The Election of their General Minister, and of their Guardians or Superiors,
ought to be made in a General Chapter or Assembly, which is to be held every
third year about Whitsunday.

Chap. ix.
They ought not to Preach without leave of the Ordinaries of each Diocese, and
of their Superiors.

Chap. x.
He prescribes the manner of admonition and correction.

Chap. xi.
They ought not to enter the Monasteries of Nuns, nor to be Godfathers of any
Child.

Chap. xii.
They shall not undertake to go into foreign Countries, to convert the
Infidels, without leave of their Provincial Ministers. He bids them to ask of
the Pope, a Cardinal for Governor, Protector and Corrector of the whole Order.

St. Francis his Will and Testament.
Prosp. Stell. fund. and Reg. Ord.
HE orders that the Friars, following his Example, do honor the Churches, the
Priests, and the Divines. That those who enter his Order give before their
reception, all their Estates and Goods to the Poor; that they apply themselves
to work with their Hands; that they ought not to purchase recommendatory
Letters at the Court of Rome; that wherever they find any Friar who has left
their Order, or is become an Heretic, they ought immediately to apprehend him,
and, bound in Chains, to drag him before their Cardinal Corrector; that they
ought continually to carry his Rule about them, and make neither addition or
diminution to it. Lastly he gives his Blessing to them all.

This is the Rule, and the last Will which Francis left to his Disciples. Which
far from being an observance of the Holy Gospel, is Hosp. de Orig. Mon. l. 6.
c. 11.
rather, in several points, a manifest transgression of it, and a Snare of the
Devil to catch Souls, as the learned Hospinian proves in his History of Monks.
This Francis (says he) does not promise obedience to God or to Jesus Christ,
but to the Pope, who is Antichrist; and the other Friars do promise it to
Francis, the grand Author of Superstition. Francis instituted three different
Orders, the first of the Minors in the year 1206, whom he obliged to three
Vows, and who are divided now into Conventuals, Observantines, and Capucins;
and are again subdivided into other branches. The second of Nuns, in the year
1212, who are likewise divided into Conventuals, Observantines and Capucines,
etc. The third in the year 1221, which was common to both Sexes, and did not
oblige to any confinement, permitting every one to live at home in his own
Hermitage. From this third Order, was derived afterward another Religion,
which, to its Rules joined Confinement in a Cloister, as the Conventuals. A
large Book would scarcely be enough to relate all the Reformations,
Separations, Unions, suits at Law, Disputes, changes of Habits, and of Rules
that have happened in this great Hosp. de Orig. Mon. lib. 6. c.
Order; and one might also write another Book of the Frauds, Lies, pretended
Visions, and false Miracles, which Francis and his Disciples have contrived for
the advancement of their Order. I shall set down only some few here for the
satisfaction of my Reader.

Frauds and Impostures made use of for the Propagation of this Order.
FRancis carried by an ardent desire of enlarging an Order, whereof he was the
Founder, sent into all the parts of the world some of his Religious to
establish it every where. These cunning Fellows seeing the necessity they laid
under to get readily the favor and good will of the People; because having
neither Money nor Foundations for their Maintenance, in case of delay, they
would have been in great danger of Starving, they betook themselves to the
shortest and most efficacious way, which was to publish a great number of
Miracles, which they said their holy Founder had done, and did yet daily in
favor of those who were liberal to them of their Alms. They showed long Lists
of blind People, to whom this Saint had restored their Sight, of Deaf restored
to their Hearing, of Lame made to Walk; in a word, of all Sicknesses healed by
him. In another List there was to be seen all that were possessed with Devils,
whom he had delivered; all the Captives Miraculously set at Liberty; Lastly all
the Dead rising to Life again. Like, in this, to the Mountebanks, who, to get
more money in the places where they intend to stay awhile, show the Golden
Chains, Medals, Privileges, Certificates, and also whole Lists of People
Healed (they say) by them in foreign Countries, whither it is not so easy to go
for information of the Truth. The Disciples of Francis had then a very fair
play, nor were they wanting to value much the impression of the Sacred Wounds
imprinted on the Body of their holy Founder. Thus runs the History, or rather
the Fable of it, as it is related in the Book of the Conformities of this
Order, which is held by the Church of Rome for such a truth, whereof one cannot
doubt, without becoming an Heretic; as it is declared by several Bulls of the
Popes Gregory the IX. Alexander the V. Nicholas the III. and Benet the XII.

Francis tired, both by his Travels and Preachings, withdrew himself, two years
before his Death, to Mount Alverne, one of the highest of the Apennine in
Italy, to give himself there wholly to contemplation. He fasted there at his
arrival forty days in honor of St. Michael; and having applied his mind to
search what might be more peculiarly pleasing to God, he thought this could not
be better done, than in suffering in his Body the same pains which Jesus Christ
had suffered on the Cross. Christ was so much pleased with this thought of
Francis, that he came down from Heaven, and appeared to him in form of a
Seraphim nailed to a Cross, and made the same prints on the Side, Feet and
Hands of Francis, which he had upon his own Body. Liber Conformitat. Ord. S.
Francis* fol. 228.
It Is said in the same Book of the Conformities, that not only St. Francis's
Hands and Feet were pierced, but the Nails appeared visibly in them. Secondly,
That the Heads of these Nails, though they should have been like in Color to
the Sinews and Flesh of which they were formed, yet were all Black. Thirdly,
The Heads of the Nails were longish, and beaten down, as if they had been
forged with a Hammer. Fourthly, The Stigmata's or Marks were printed in the
most Brawny and Cartilaginous parts. Fifthly, The Nails, though composed of
sinews, were hard and solid as Iron. Sixthly, The Points of the Nails went
quite through, a considerable length on the other side. Seventhly, Though these
Nails of Flesh went through both Feet and Hands, these Members were not for
this deformed or shrunk. Eighthly, The Nails were separated from all the Flesh
round about, insomuch that pieces were put between to suck up the Blood which
came out from the Wounds. Ninthly, The Nails did move, and yet could not be
plucked out of the Feet and Hands of Francis. Tenthly, These Wounds, during the
two years which he lived after, did not throw out any corrupt matter.
Eleventhly, The Wound on the side of Francis, was perfectly like to that of
Jesus Christ. Lastly, It was a continual Miracle, that notwithstanding the
great quantity of Blood which issued from all these Wounds, he could live so
long afterward.

Lib. Consor. fol. 230, 231.
This is indeed a very wonderful Story, in proof of which in the same Book of
Conformities, the Devil comes in as an Evidence, who thus answered a Priest who
had adjured him, That there were only two in Heaven thus marked, Christ and
Francis. Bonav. in vit. Sancti Francisci. c. 15.


Another Witness of it is Pope Gregory the IX. who being in some doubt of this
History, was visited by St. Francis, who appeared to him in a Dream, and
reproached his incredulity. The same happened to an unbelieving Friar of the
Order of St. Francis, whom he bid to feel his Wounds as another Thomas.

Idem Bonaventura.
A Noble Roman Lady, seeing an Image of St. Francis, in which the Limner had
forgot to express the Sacred Stigmata, was so much troubled at it, that
immediately, by the Ministry of Angels, who would humor the Piety of this
Lady, the Image appeared with all its Wounds.

Idem Bonaventura.
A Canon, whose name was Roger, refusing to believe the Stigmatization of St.
Francis, was by a Divine Vengeance Stigmatized himself, and felt intolerable
pains in his Hands, Feet and Side, until he had acknowledged and confessed his
Fault.

Author Scalae Dei.
A Dominican Friar lodging in a Convent of Franciscans, where he saw the Image
of Saint Francis with the Stigmata, was so much incensed at it, that he rose in
the Night and blackned it all over; but in the Morning the Image (by a Miracle)
appeared handsomer than the day before. The Dominican still more vexed, went
the following Night with a Knife to scrape out the Marks, but by God's
permission, there sprang out from the Prints so much Blood, that it was not
possible to stanch it, till such time as he had made satisfaction to the
Franciscan Friars; who full of tender Compassion, obtained by their prayers his
pardon from St. Francis.

Lib. Confor. fol. 2.
It was not only upon the account of the Stigmata, that these cunning Friars
glorified their holy Founder; but they published moreover that the Virgin Mary
had brought very often her Child Jesus from Heaven, throwing him into his Arms
to kiss.

Ibid. fol. 18.
They dared also blasphemously to publish, that their St. Francis was greater
than John the Baptist and all the Apostles, for reasons which they alleged.

Ibid. fol. 231.
Brother Lion, who had been Companion of St. Francis, was no less busy than
the others to bring Grist to the Mill. He did protest (if we will believe him)
that he had seen several times his Holy Father raised up on high in the Air
while he was at Prayer.

Ibid. fol. 66.
A rich Merchant saw in a Dream St. Francis to go out of the Sacred Side of our
Lord Jesus Christ, holding the Standard of the Cross in his Hand, and followed
by an innumerable multitude of Friars. He was so much moved by this Vision,
that he gave his whole estate to the Franciscans (who began already to be weary
of their poverty) and became one of their Order.

Anton. tit. 24. 6. 7. ss. 2.
I cannot forbear relating here one of these sorts of Miracles that happened here
in England. Though the recital of it may seem long, yet, I hope, not tedious.
The Friars Minors of St. Francis having passed into England, and taking their
way toward Oxford, were compelled by the Rains and ill Weather, to take
shelter in an Abbey of the Order of St. Benet, situated in a Wood. A young Monk
espying them, and taking them by their ridiculous Habit, to be some Juglers,
ran immediately to give notice of it to the Abbot, who in hope of having some
good sport with his Monks, bid them come in. But they having made them
understand they were poor Friars who came to implore their Charity, the Abbot
and the Monks commanded they should be thrust out of Doors. There was only a
young Monk, who taking pity on them, conveyed them secretly into a Hay*loft,
and there gave them Bread and Beer, recommending himself to their Prayers.
After which he went to Bed, and in his Sleep he saw Jesus Christ sitting upon a
bright Throne, who with an angry Look and a terrible Voice said, Go and bring
before me all the Monks of this Monastery. Which being performed accordingly,
he saw on the other side a poor Beggar coming in the Habit of the Brothers
Minors (it was St. Francis himself) This man made his bitter complaints to
Jesus Christ, saying, Just Judge, the blood of my poor Brethren, which these
wretched Monks have spilt this Night, as much as in them lay, by denying them
Bread and Shelter in so great extremity; the blood, I say, of my poor Brethren,
who have left all for thy sake, and are come hither to seek the Souls which
thou have redeemed by thy Precious Death, demands vengeance for so great a
cruelty: They have denied thy Servants what they were ready to grant to
Morris-dancers, as they took them at first to be. Then Jesus Christ, in fierce
Anger, said to the Abbot, What Order art thou of? He answered, of St. Bennet.
Christ turning himself to St. Benet, said, What this Abbot says, is it true? No
Lord, answered the Saint, He is a destroyer of my Religion, he and his
Companions; because I have ordered in my Rule, that the Abbot should receive
all the Strangers, of what condition soever, to his Table, and these have
denied them the most necessary things. Then Jesus Christ commanded them to be
hanged that very hour on a Tree, which was in the midst of the Cloister. After
which looking on the Monk who had exercised mercy toward the poor Religious of
St. Francis, he demanded of him of what Order he was. This Fellow seeing in
what manner the Benedictines, his Brethren, had been treated, said with fear
and trembling, That he was of the Order of that poor man who stood by. Is it
true, Francis (said Christ) is this Monk of thy Order? Yes, answered Francis,
he belongs to me, and I receive him now as mine; and as he was embracing of him
with all his strength, the Monk awaked, and almost besides his Senses, run to
the Abbot to tell him his Vision, but he found him strangled and black as a
Coal in his Chamber. From thence he went to the Apartment of the other Monks,
whom he found in the same manner without life, and their Tongues hanging out of
their Mouths. This Tragical Accident, being divulged all over England, caused
the Religious of St. Francis to meet with a better reception. I pass over, in
silence, a great number of such Fables, forged by these Hypocrites to extend
and advance their Order, and to get Benefactors to it. Nevertheless this was so
successful to them, that their Order, like an ill Weed, grew a-pace; and
Francis himself, while living, had the satisfaction to see one day in his
Convent of our Lady of Portiuncule Bonavent. in Legenda c. 4.
in Italy, 5000 of his Monks sent to a General Chapter. (It is to be observed,
that two Deputies only of each Convent are sent thither, by which one may
easily make a computation of the number of their Convents at that time) But it
would not be so easy a thing to do it now, being increased, as I may say, to
an infinite number. I come now to the chiefest branches of this Order.

Of the Minor Friars, called Sabbotiers, or such as wear Wooden Shoes.
THE Order of the Minors of St. Francis, being extremely multiplied in forty
years time, there arose a Sect amongst them, under pretense of Reformation,
about the year 1250. They took the name of Observantines, professing thereby to
be stricter in their Rule than the others were, who they said went astray. But
this Sect or Reform having been suppressed in its beginning, it sprung out
again in the year 1316, in some Provinces, and increased considerably. They
were called Minors of the Observants, and the others from whom they separated,
Minors of the Conventuals. These last persecuted, to the utmost of their power,
the Reformed, and offered them a thousand indignities. This made them to have
recourse, for protection, to the Council of Constance in the year 1414 There
they had their demands granted; and one Bernard of Siena, having joined himself
to them, got them a great deal of Reputation by his Hypocrisy. For this Reason
they do acknowledge him, in a manner, for their Founder, and are in some
Countries, from his name, called Bernardines. He built, while he was living,
above twenty Convents in Italy. They were to receive no Money, to eat no Flesh,
to wear Wooden Shoes, from whence they are called to this day in Italy
Socc^lanti. They Petrus de Cruce Hispanus Minorita.
wrote several defaming Libels against the Conventuals, calling them Unjust,
Destroyers of the Rule of St. Francis, Profane, Impious, Public Sinners, etc.
The Conventuals, on their side, were not wanting to attack them as bitterly,
calling them Apostates, False Doctors, Hypocrites, Cheats, etc. Thus these
wretched Monks told one another what they were. Now indeed these pretended
Reformers have nothing wherewith to reproach the Conventuals, being, at least,
as loose as they. They possess great number of Convents in the Popish
Countries. They wear a Casock of course Cloth, a narrow Hood, a big Cord for a
Girdle, whose ends hang down full of Knots, and a short Cloak on their
Shoulders, tied on the forepart with a wooden Clasp. Those who Mereri. Dict.
Hist.
in France are called Recollects, are of the same Order, and under the same
General, as well as the Order of the Unshod in Spain.

Of the Order of the Minors Conventuals.
THESE Conventuals are properly those of the Minors, who would not receive the
forementioned Reformation. They have a great number of Convents very stately
built; the First and Chief whereof is that of Saint Francis at Assisy, a Town
in the Province of Umbria in Italy. They have Money of their own, both in common
and in particular, wear Stockings and Shoes, and make much of themselves. Their
Habit is a long and large Casock, of a very fine gray Stuff, with a large gray
Capuchon that covers their Shoulders and Breasts. They gird themselves with a
delicate Cord curiously knotted in several places, which, they say, has virtue
to heal the Sick, to chase away the Devil, and all dangerous Temptations, and
serve what turn they please. They wear, when they go abroad, a long gray Cloak,
and a Hat of the same color; but being at home, when they Preach, they have a
square Cap as the Doctors.

Of the Order of the Capucins.
Moreri. Dict. Hist.
THEY are so called from the extraordinary form of their Capuchon or Hood.
Matthew Basci, Minor Observantin Friar, of the Duchy of Spoleto in Italy, and
Religious of the Convent of Montefalconi, confidently affirmed in the year
1525, that God had spoken to him, and commanded him to observe a stricter
Poverty. He retired then into a Solitude, by the Popes permission, and some
others, to the number of Twelve, who, believing his Vision, joined with him.
The Duke of Tuscany gave them an Hermitage in his Territories, and Clement the
VII. approved this Congregation. Pope Paul the III. confirmed it in the year
1535, gave leave to establish it every where, granting them a Vicar General
with Superiors, whom they called Guardians. Some say the first Convent of this
Institute was built at Camerino, by the Duchess Catherine Cibo, under the
Reign of Charles the IX. The Capucins were received in France, and had first a
Convent at Meudon, which the Cardinal of Lorrain had built for them. Henry the
III. ordered another to be built at Paris, in the Suburbs of S. Honor. They
have nine Provinces in that Kingdom, or ten, comprehending that of Lorrain; and
a great many are built daily for them still in those Countries, where
Superstitious Popery does Reign. Although their Rules and Constitutions look to
be very austere, as they are set down upon Paper, nevertheless they have found
the Art to render the practice of them very sweet and gentle, and they would
not change the liberty they have to ramble up and down in Towns, and in the
Country to Secular Houses, with the richest Foundations of the Monasteries of
the Order of St. Benet, nay not with the Purse of the Jesuits.

Of the Order of St. John of Penitency.
Autheur de l' Hist. des Habits des Ord. Rel. number. 70.
THIS Order flourished in the Kingdom of Navar, near Pampelona, and depended a
great while on the Bishop of that Town. But the Prior being come to Rome,
bestirred himself so effectually, that Gregory the XIII. having taken it from
the subjection to the Bishop, and granted to it some Constitutions; it is now
subject to a Provincial. These Friars go barefooted, and are Clothed with a
short Casock of a thick reddish Cloth, and a Scapulary, and a Cloak of the
same Color, with a leathern Girdle, bearing in their Hands a big Wooden Cross.

CHAP. XVII.
Of the Order of the Minimes.
Mereri Dict. Hist.
THIS Order was instituted by one Francis of Paula, a Town of Calabria in
Italy, where he was born in the 1416. His Father John Martolilla, and his
Mother Vienna, obtained him (they say) from God by the intercession of St.
Francis; and for this reason would have him to bear his Name. About the year
1428, being but twelve years old, he took the Religious Habit of St. Francis,
in the Town of St. Mark. But a year after he fled into a Wilderness, and there
gave himself wholly to a Solitary Life during six years, after which he
returned to Paula, his own Country; and having gathered there several persons,
he framed a Rule for them, which was confirmed in the year 1473 by Sixtus the
IV. and other Popes, and would have his Religious to be called Minimes, that
is, the least of all. Louis the XI. King of France, having heard of his holy
Life, sent for him into France, in hopes, by that means, his Life should be
prolonged. This King being a Superstitious Bigot, received him very kindly; and
because he was a very simple and ignorant man, he used to call him the Good
Man, which Nickname passed to his Disciples, who were called Good Men. He
commanded a Convent to be built for them at the end of Plessis-Park, near
Towers, where Francis of Paula died in the year 1507, aged Ninety one. Leo the
X. made him a Saint in the year 1519, and King Francis the I. was at the
charges of his Canonization (there being no Saint to be had at the Court of
Rome without money.) They wear an Habit of a tawny Color, a Capuchion, and a
Patience round at the bottom, and leathern Girdle. The Rule which Francis of
Paula wrote for his Disciples, is comprehended in Ten Chapters, the substance
whereof is as follows.

The Rule of St. Francis of Paula.
Chap. i.
Prosp. Stell. Fund. and Reg. Ord. Rel.
THE Minime Brothers ought to observe the Ten Commandments of God, and those of
the Church. They make a Vow to obey the Pope, Francis of Paula, and his
Successors; and besides the Vows of Poverty and Chastity, they make another of
a Continual Lent.

Chap. ii.
It is prohibited to receive into his Order young Persons under eighteen years
of Age; and none is admitted to profess but after one year of Noviciate.

Chap. iii.
He orders both the Habits, and the Tonsure or Shaving of his Friars, and will
not suffer them to ride on any thing but an Ass.

Chap. iv.
He sets down what they call the Divine Office, which ought to be conform to
the Roman Breviary. They must recite it aloud at Church, not Singing, or with
Notes, but as if they were counting Numbers. The Convert Brothers shall recite
for their Office seventy seven times the Lord's Prayer, and as many Ave
Maria's, and the Oblat Brothers fifty two. These Oblats have no Votes in the
Chapter, and are only the Servants of the others. They promise fidelity to the
Order, make the four Vows; but notwithstanding this, can touch and carry Moneys
about them, and go alone abroad with the permission of their Corrector or
Superior. The Religious ought to confess their Sins, and receive the Communion,
at least, once a Week, and every Holy Day in the year.

Chap. v.
They ought to bear great respect to their Superior, called by him Corrector;
never go abroad without his leave, and a Companion, who ought to be to them as
an Under-Corrector. They must not enter the Convents of Nuns, and no Woman must
be permitted to enter their own Convents, unless they be of the Royal Blood, or
Founders of some of their Monasteries. They ought not to touch, or carry about
them any Money, nor go to Law for any Temporal Concern.

Chap. vi.
He forbids them to eat Flesh, Eggs, Butter, Cheese, and any thing else coming
from Milk, except in case of Sickness, in a separate place, where no body shall
come in without leave of the Superior.

Chap. vii.
Besides the Fast of Lent, he orders another from All Saints to Christmas, and
every Wednesday and Friday of the year, unless they be in a Journey, or Sick;
and they ought not to eat out of their Convent without leave. They ought to
entertain Strangers kindly, but no Meat must be served to them, but Lent-Fare.

Chap. viii.
They ought to give themselves to Prayer, keep silence in the Church, in the
Cloisters, in the Dorter, in the Refectory; and from the beginning of the Night
till the next day after Sun risen. A particular reception, and better
entertainment must be made to the Prelates of their Order.

Chap. ix.
He orders the manner of choosing the Superiors, both General and Particular,
the Seniors or Ancients, the Confessors, the Preachers, and other Officers of
their Monasteries.

Chap. x.
He will have the Superiors of his Order to be called Correctors, a Corrigendo,
because it belongs to them to give Correction. He will not have them to go
abroad during the time of their Correctoriate, without a very urgent necessity.
He prescribes the time for holding their General Chapters, to wit, every third
year. He forbids the making any addition or change in his Rule; promises
eternal Life to those who shall observe it. Lastly, He will have his Order to
be put under the Protection of a Cardinal.

Of the other Rules of Francis of Paula, and of the increase of his Order.
FRancis of Paula did not only write this Rule for Men, but in imitation of
Francis of Assisy he composed two others, one for the Nuns, which comprehends
as many Chapters as the first, and in substance is the same, changing only some
points relating to Men, and placing in their room some others fit for Women.
The other is common to both Sexes, and does not oblige to confinement in a
Cloister: They may live in the World, at their Relations or in their own
Houses, promising only obedience to the Reverend Fathers Minimes. The greatest
part of this last Stellar. Regula 3. Minimorum. c. 6.
Rule is made up of Superstitious Practices, in a heap of Prayers and Ave
Marias, which they must recite every day. They ought every one of them to wear
a Girdle or Cord with two Knots: This is their chiefest mark of distinction;
and when they are disobedient to their Fathers Minimes, they chastise them by
taking from them the Cord, which is not given to them again, unless they be
humble and submissive. Dying without the Cord, there is no Mercy, no Heaven
open for them. They do promise in their Profession, to promote with the utmost
of their power, the honor and advantage of the Minimes Order. Thus these Good
Men, (so are called the Fathers Minimes,) have found the way with folded Arms,
to get Glory and Wealth; and to exercise their Empire, not only in the
Monasteries of their Order, but in secular Houses also, and wherever their Cord
can reach.

The Order of Minime Friars is very much dilated, particularly in France, in
Italy, and in Spain, where they are called the Fathers of the Victory, by
reason of a great Victory which one of their Kings got (as he thought) by the
intercession of Francis of Paula: Though their name of Minimes, should make
them remember what they ought to be, to wit the least of all: Nevertheless,
they go to Law very often with the Capucins, and other Religious, for the
Precedence, when they march in the Processions. They have likewise found the
way how two sweeten their Quadragesimal Life, (for which they make a solemn
Vow) by going by turns, three or four Months in the Year, to Eat Meat in the
Apartment appointed for the Sick, not having any other Sickness, but because
this Quadragesimal Life does not well agree (they say) with their Stomachs: In
such manner all these grand projects of an ill grounded Sanctity, do ordinarily
vanish in Smoke.

CHAP. XVIII.
Of some Orders of Regular Clarks. First, Of the Fathers of Common Life.
I Was willing to make an end of the Mendicant Orders; now I come to some
Congregations of Regular Clarks, some of which I left behind, though they be
more ancient than the last, whereof I have spoken; amongst those are the
Fathers of Common Life. One Gerard Legrand, having finished his Studies in
Author de l' Hist. des Habits des Ord. Rel^g. Number. 9.
the Sorbonne at Paris, returned to Deventer, a Town of the Low Countries, where
he had his Birth: He contented himself with the degree of a Deacon, not willing
to be raised to the Dignity of a Priest. Besides the frequent Sermons which he
made, he instituted a Congregation of several Clarks or Churchmen, who
instructed Youth both in Learning and good Manners. And forasmuch, as every one
of them got his Substance by his own Labor, and especially from Copying of
Books, Florentius, who partly had the care of this Society, said one day to
Gerard, How much better would it be for us, to make all one Common Purse, and
to live together in Common. This proposal pleased Gerard, and meeting with no
opposition, the Congregation of the Clarks or Brothers of Common Life, had its
beginning first in the Town of Deventer, and was established afterward all
over Low Germany. It was confirmed by several Popes. Gerard died in the year
1384, and Florentius in 1400. These Clarks are Seculars, and make no Vows.
Their Clothes are very like to those of the Black Monks, of the Order of S.
Benet, only their Hood and Sleeves are something narrower.

Of the Order of Divine Love, or Theatins.
Hospin. Hist. Mon. l. 6. c. 68.
UNder the Pontificate of Clement the VII. some superstitious Men having
withdrawn themselves into Gardens, to apply their Minds better (as they
thought) to the Exercise of Prayer, and other Practices of Devotion, they were
by ignorant and deluded People, called the Company of Divine Love. One Peter
Caraffa joined with them, and showed so much of outward Humility, that not
only, he refused the Bishopric of Brundusium, offered to him by the Emperor
Charles the V. but left that of Chieti or Theate, which Pope Julius the II. had
given him. Having then lived some while amongst them, He, and four others more,
one of whom were called Cajetan, undertook to give new Life to the Order of
Regular Clarks, which was already very much degenerated. To that purpose,
having brought all their Estates into a Common Purse, they applied themselves
wholly to sing at Church, to Meditation and Prayer; therefore they were called
Regular Priests: And because Peter Caraffa had left his Bishopric of Theate,
to embrace this sort of Life, they were called Theatins; and also by reason of
their Habit, being so like to that of the Jesuits, they had in some Countries
the name of Theatin Jesuits. Bobadilla the Jesuit relates, that under the
Generalship of Lainez, they desired to make but one Body with the Jesuits; but
that finding them too remiss and proud, they would not grant their request.
Pope Paul the III. offered the Dignity of a Cardinal to John Peter Caraffa, and
that great despiser of Bishoprics, thought it was too good a Bit to refuse it.
He accepted of it then very willingly, and being returned to Rome, he took
again the Bishopric of Theate, which happened to be vacant, and of which he
had formerly divested himself by Humility. He accepted also of several
Employments of State; and the Papacy at last. He took the name of Paul the IV.
in remembrance of Paul the III. who gave him the Cardinals Cap. He was justly
reproached, for having like a cunning Fox refused the lesser Honors, to
advance himself to the greatest of all, which is the Papal Chair; the Hosp.
ibid. ut supra.
Character which Hospinian has given us of him isthis: In Pontisicatis summo
egregius hic Divini Amoris socius, mundi contemptor, and splendoris antiqui
Clericorum Ordinis Restaurator, tantum pecuniis accumulandis studuit, totusque
belli quam pacis amantior, Arma, Caedes, and Incendia meditatus est per omnem
Europam in Christi Ecclesiam. This holy Monk of Divine Love, this great
despiser of the World, and restorer of the ancient splendor of the Clerical
Order, set his Heart so much on heaping up Riches, and more desirous of War
than Peace, he carried Fire and Sword through all Europe against the Church of
Christ. His Order of Theatins subsists yet to this day in Italy, where they
enjoy the great Privileges, which their Founder granted to them. They wear a
Black Habit as the Priests, and go sometimes with a Cloak, and other times with
a Black Chamber Gown, and a square Cap on their Heads.

Of the Order of Somasks.
Author de l' H^st. des Ord. and Habits Rel. Number. 11.
ABout the year 1531. another Congregation of Regular Clarks had its beginning.
Hierom Emilian a Noble Venetian, was the Institutor of it, and the Town of
Somasks, between Milan and Bergamo, where the first Foundation of this Religion
was laid, gave to it its name. In the year 1546. the Cardinal Caraffa united it
to the Order of Theatins, whereof he was the Founder; but in the year 1555.
being Pope, he separated them. The following Popes took care of this new
Congregation, and Pius the V. gave to them the Monastery of S. Majol of Pavia,
and put them under the Rule of S. Austin in the year 1568. Sometime since, the
Fathers of the Christian Doctrine, established by Caesar Bus in Avignon,
petitioned to be united to the Somasks, which was granted them by Paul the V.
in the year 1616. The head of the Order being called General of the Regular
Clarks, of the Congregation of Somasks, and of the Christian Doctrine in France.
They are Clothed with Black Cloth as the Priests, and wear a Hat. They have the
most part of their Convents in Italy, and in some places public Colleges,
where they teach Youth as the Jesuits do.

Of the Order of the Jesuits.
Ignatius Loyola a Spaniard, laid the Foundation Hoc testantur Hossaeus and
Salmanazar Jesuitae.
of this Order, about the year of o^^ Lord 1540. He was of a Fierce and
Barbarous Temper, and being but a Youth, threatened to cut off a Limb from him,
who the least displeased him, coming very often to Blows. He never quitted this
cruel and inhuman disposition, and even inspired his Order Ex Hosp. de Orig.
Jesuitarum l. 1. c. 1.
with it. He followed at first Military Employments; but having received a Wound
in his Thigh, at the Siege of Pampelone, he left the Wars, and happening one
day to read a Book full of Lies, called by the Papists, the Flowers of the
Saints; and amongst other things, being in a fixed consideration of the high
esteem Men had for being Founders of Orders, he thought it would not be lost
labor, if he became also the Forger of one. But as he was very Ignorant, which
must needs be a great obstruction to his design; he resolved, as stupid as he
was to Study, and with strength of Application acquired tolerable Knowledge. He
improved it at Salamanca, and it was there, that appearing publicly in an
extravagant Habit, and Preaching in the Streets without leave of the Bishop, he
was delivered to the Inquisition, to examine his Doctrine. But he was found very
firm in all the Errors and Impieties of Popery, and therefore let out of
Prison, and had in more Honor than before: This gave him encouragement to go
to Paris, where he applied himself again to Study, and was made Master of Arts.
His Hypocrisy increasing more and more, he betook himself to beg Alms from Door
to Door, and taught Youth for nothing, getting by this means, the esteem and
love of the meanest sort of People: Nay, some Gentlemen drawn by his Example,
joined with him, and became his Companions, and all together made a Vow to
Renounce the World; and to go to Jerusalem, to Preach there to the Turks, and
draw them to the Errors of Popery. But first, They resolved to go to Rome and
receive the Ribad. in Vita Sti. Ignat.
Popes Blessing, as also Priestly Ordination. The Jesuits say, that their
Ignatius being near the City of Rome, God the Father appeared to him visibly,
and desired his Son Jesus Petrus Masfaeius l. 2. c. 5. Vitae Sti. Ignat.
Christ, who was laden with an heavy Cross, to take a special care, both of him
and of his Companions. Christ promised him he would not fail, and told
Ignatius, he would be favorable to him at Rome. Ego vobis Romae propitius ero.
This made them to take the name of the Pater Annibal C^dretus Jesuita.
Company of Jesus, because the Eternal Father, had given them (they say) for
Companions to his Son, who acknowledged them to be such: The good disposition
wherein they found Paul the III. at Rome made them to resolve not to lose time,
but to establish their their Society before they went to Jerusalem, and they
elected unanimously Igantius for their General. After ten years of Generalship,
he made as if he should be glad to be dispensed with and quit it; but being
sweetly forced to a longer continuance in it, he wrote his Book of Spiritual
Exercises, which (some say) he had taken out of the Abbey of Montserrat, where
he made some abode, at the beginning of his Conversion: The Society increasing
daily, Ignatius undertook to explain further, the form of his Institution, and
having brought it to certain Heads, he had them approved by the Pope. He died
of a burning Fever in Turrianus Bobadilla.
the year 1556, aged 65 years, having founded almost an hundred Houses of his
Order. Some Jesuit Authors say, he was very often tormented by Devils, and that
he boasted before his Death, how much good he had done to the Church of Rome;
as also of having extremely enriched his Society, showing further, how heartily
sorry he was to part from it in so Flourishing a Condition.

Of the Rule of the Jesuits.
THe most rigorous Statute of the Jesuits, is that which forbids the
publication of their Rule; and Pope Paul the III. by a Bull of the year 1549,
permits the General of the Jesuits to Excommunicate, to put in Prison, and
also to employ the secular Power, Hosp. de Orig. Jesuit. l. 1.
for chastising as he pleases, all those, of what quality or condition soever
they be, who shall dare to manifest their Constitutions to the Public. Why so
great a precaution accompanied with so much severity, but because (says
Hospinian) they are ashamed, that one should know the base and filthy things,
which they practice secretly? Omne enim quod honestum In quaest. Utriusque
testamenti.
soitur, publicari non timetur (says S. Augstin) Nevertheless this Rule having
been Printed at Lions in the year 1607, with the design to distribute Copies of
it in their Colleges, Novitiates, and Profest-houses, they could not take their
Measures so well, but some of them Prosper Stellarius Fund. and Reg. Ord. Hosp.
de Orig. Jesuit lib. 1.
are fallen into secular Hands. Prosper Stellarius, Hospinian, and others do
relate it at length in their Works: I might also have inserted it in mine, was
it not of too great a bulk. Therefore, I have chosen rather to give first an
Idea of it in general, and then to set down some principal Points, which I have
observed in the perusing of it. As for the Idea in general, I say, that as
Mahomet has taken something of all sorts of Religions, to make up his own; in
the same manner Ignatius Loyola, and all his crew, have made a Rapsody of all
sorts of Monastical, and Collegiate Rules, to compose that of their Order. It
is for the most part Hosp. ibid.
filled with nothing but human Traditions, Hypocrisies, Idolatries, and devilish
inventions, which are required therein; as to run over all the World, to
endeavor to draw not only the Infidels, but all the Christians also (if it be
possible) to their Idolatrous Worship, the Sacrifice of the Mass, the Worship
of Saints, etc. To extend, (as much as in them lies) the Dominions of
Antichrist, who is the Pope, and to infect the whole Earth, with the Venom of
their perverse Doctrins: This is the general design of their Institute: And as
for the Rules belonging to the internal direction of their Houses or Convents,
they are a great part of them Superstitious, Impious or Silly Practices.
Nevertheless I must confess, that the external Government of their Order, for
policy and cunning to compass their ends, of heaping Riches and Power in the
World, has not met yet with its like upon the Earth. I shall relate here
Commpendiously of their Rules, only as much as is necessary, to prove both the
one and the other.

Some Rules of the Jesuits, drawn from their Common Rules.
RUle 2. They ought to be present every day at the Sacrifice of the Mass, (to
abuse the People with their Hypocrisy.)

Rule 4. They shall twice a year renew their Vows after a general Confession,
(these rash Vows, the frequent infraction whereof makes them yet more
Sacrilegious.)

Rule 12. They ought not to sleep with the Windows of their Chambers open, (for
fear of catching cold.)

Rule 14. None of those who are designed for Domestic Employments, ought to
learn either to Read or Write, that so they may serve Christ with Humility and
Simplicity, (as if to Read or Write, was contrary to that.)

Rule 16. They are not to Eat nor Drink between Meals, for fear of prejudicing
their Health, (a motive of great perfection!)

Rule 19. They ought to keep themselves very clean, Cleanliness being counted a
great instrument of health, and of much edification to their Neighbors, (the
Temporal Motive is set before the Spiritual.)

Rule 35. Being at Table, they ought not to salute any but the Superior, (a
piece of civility worthy to be made a Rule of!)

Rule 40. They are not to ask Council of any Stranger, without leave of their
Superior, (so fearful are they of being better instructed.)

Rule 41. They shall meddle with no business, even, of Piety, without leave of
the Superior; they shall not promise their assistance toward it; Nay, not so
much as show themselves inclinable to it, (who ever heard of forbiding to be
inclinable to Piety?)

Rule 44. If any of their Jesuits go to speak with a Prelate, or Person of
Quality, they ought to tell their Superior, what has been discoursed of,
(because they are sent thither as Spies.)

Rule 38. They ought not to discourse abroad, of what is done in their Houses;
and shall show to no Body the Rules and Constitutions of their Order, (those
who do evil love Darkness.)

Rule 39. None shall communicate to Strangers, the Spirital Instructions,
Exercises and Meditations of the Society, (were they good, what harm is there
in it?)

Statutes drawn out of the Provincial's Rules.
Chap. I.
THE Provincial or Superior of a whole Province, may dispense with all sorts
of Rules: (There is the Jesuitical dispensing Power.)

Chap. II.
Four Counselors or Consultors, as they call them, are to assist him with
their Counsel, in the concerns of the Society, (observe the Policy.)

Chap. III.
It belongs to him to Nominate all the Prefects, and Subaltern Officers of his
Province, (the Superiors, and Rectors of Colleges, or professed Houses only
excepted) and he is to take a special care, to have some young Jesuits brought
up early in the management of Temporal Affairs, that so the Society may be
better served. (Politic)

Chap. V.
It shall be declared to those who are expelled the Society, that they are no
longer bound, to the observance of the simple Vows they have made. All the
difference which is between a simple Vow and a solemn one, is, that the first
is a Promise made to God, before three or four Witnesses only, and the latter
is done in the presence of a greater number. They pretend to have the power of
dispensing with the first, but not with the other; as if the greater number of
Witnesses enforced a Promise, so as to make it indissoluble, (Cursed Doctrine of
Jesuits!)

Chap. vi.
He shall not permit any to learn the Hebrew Tongue, unless he be well
persuaded first of their stedfastness in the Jesuitical Divinity, and humble
enough to make a good use of it. (viz. to those who are so well rooted in the
Errors of Popery, that there is no danger they should part from it.)

Chap. live.
The Society obliges every Jesuit to follow its particular Opinions, in matters
of Divinity and Philosophy, (as if the Jesuitical Cloth had the virtue to
influence Heads with new Opinions.)

Chap. cxxxiv.
Those who are unfit to learn Scholastic Divinity and Philosophy, must apply
themselves to study Cases of Conscience: (One may guess thereby, what Divines
their Casuists are.)

Chap. xiv.
Rule 121. The Provincial is to begin his Visitation, in each of their Houses
and Convents, at the Church, to see if the Holy Sacrament (their Idol of Bread
kept in a Box) is not rotten, or worm-eaten; and also in what condition their
Relics are; and during the time of this function the Churchdoors are to be
kept shut, (that Seculars may not see the fair Objects of their Adoration.)

Chap. xv.
Rule 31. He must in his Visitation examine particularly, if their Jesuits be
ready for all sorts of Executions and Enterprises. (Kings and Princes take
heed.)

Statutes drawn out of the Rules of the Prefect, or Superior of Profest-Houses.
Chap. i.
HE must inflict on the Jesuits, Rule x. none but ordinary Penances, such as
are, to Eat at a little Table by themselves, to Eat under the Table, to kiss
the others Feet, to recite some Prayers in the midst of the Refectory, and such
like things, (these are the Penances of the Jesuits, who deserve Heaven or
them.)

Ibid. Rule 2. He shall as well as the Provincial, have the power in his House
to dispense with the Rules, Constitutions and Decrees of general Chapters,
(here is again the Dispensing Power.)

Chap. iii.
Rule 30. He may now and then, send his Jesuits to beg Alms from door to door,
('it is not enough for them to have good Possessions and Incoms; they must
besides go and ravish the Bread of those who are truly poor, asking of it for
themselves.)

Ibid. Rule 36. He is to read the Letters that are brought to his Jesuists, and
to read those that they send abroad, (great policy to preserve their Society,
and know what ever is done or passes abroad.)

Chap. iv.
It declares the great care they ought to take of Souls in Preaching Popery,
and hearing Confessions. (The Devil is very much obliged to them.)

Chap. vi.
Rule 69. They ought to receive no Money in trust, unless of those to whom they
are much obliged, and cannot be resused. (They will do no service, but to those
from whom they have received some.)

Chap. vii.
Rule 77. He must endeavor to keep the Friends they have, and to gain the
Hearts of those, who may be disaffected to the Society; particularly if they be
persons of Quality, (because they are more able to promote their Temporal
concerns.)

Ibid. Rule 78. He ought to show himself very grateful toward the Founders,
and Benefactors of the Society, (so much do the Pagans and the Publicans.)

Chap. viii.
He shall express his Charity toward the Travelers of their own Society, to
receive, and to treat them with all kindness, and good Offices imaginable: (The
rambling Jesuits ought to be very well entertained.)

Ibid. Rule 83. They ought not to exercise Hospitality toward any other
Strangers, except it be those whom they have been much obliged to, who would
otherwise take it very Ill, (Hospitality so much recommended in Scripture, is
banished from Jesuits Houses, unless it be for themselves.)

Of the other Rules of the Jesuits in General.
IT would be too great a Volume, should I in this manner run over all the Rules
of this Society; but I will be content to say, That part of these Rules aims
only at establishing the Authority of, and Subordination to other Superiors.
Some are for the direction of their Studies and Colleges, others for the
Government of their Novitiates and Profest-houses. Others again are for their
Diet, and their Habits. It Is not possible to express the great care they ought
to take of their Health. The Means they use to that purpose, are admirable.
Regulae Praefecti sanitatis.
They have in every Convent a Prefect, or Overseer of Health, whose care and
Application is continually to Study the way of promoting the same. A part of
his Office is to examine, if the Meat which is prepared for the Fathers Jesuits,
is good and well dressed. He is to look that they be not prejudiced in their
Health by bad Air; by too much Heat, Cold, immoderate Labor, or by too great
Application of Mind; and ought to give notice of it to the Superior, that he
may remedy it. One cannot but see in all these Rules, the extrordinary great
love which the Jesuits have for their own Bodies; and one would think, they do
not believe another Life hereafter. There is moreover amongst these Rules, a
great Catalogue to be seen of the Masses, which their Priests ought say, and of
the Rosaries or Beads, which, those who are not Priests, ought to recite every
Month, and every Week for their Benefactors, as well living as deceased, to get
more of them, if possible may be. Every Jesuit Priest is also obliged to say
one Mass every Month, and those who are not Priests, one Row of Beads, or the
third part of a Rosary, for the Reduction of Heretics, especially those of the
Northen Countries. (They do not say for their Conversion, but for their
Reduction, being all one to them, whether this be effected by way of
Persuasion, or by Fire and Sword) They do declare in many places of their Rule,
that to teach Youth, to preach the Doctrins of the Romish Church, to execute
Missions, to assist sick Persons on their Deathbeds, to hear Confessions, and
to extend, as much as lies in them, the Popes Spiritual Domination, ought to be
the chiefest employments of the Society. They give directions for that purpose,
and make an express Vow of the last, which they call a Vow of Obedience to the
Pope, or of Mission. The Subjects who do compose this Company, are considered
five different ways, either as Professed of four Vows; or as Spiritual
Coadjutors, who are Priests; or as Moreri. Dict. Hist.
Temporal Coadjutors, who are Brothers; or as Masters and Students; or lastly,
as Novices. They have particular Rules for all these Degrees and Conditions.
The General is above Part. 5. Constit. c. 3. and Part. 6. c. 1.
all these Orders, and they give to him the Glorious Titles of God's Legate,
Vicar of God's Republic, which is the Order of the Jesuits. His Generalship is
perpetual, and he is only Hosp. de Jesuit.
subject to the Pope. His chiefest business, besides the Government of his
Order, is to find out all sorts of means of rooting out the Heretics, Enemies
of the Sea of Rome, and to take away the Lives or Dominions of those Princes or
Kings, who are not under its obedience.

Of the Increase and Power of the Jesuits.
THIS Society favored by the Popes, as wholly devoted to them, did so much
multiply, and so fast, that Father Ribadeneira, a Jesuit, having made a
Catalogue of their Provinces, Colleges and Religious Houses in the year 1608.
(to wit, seventy years after the Foundation of their Order) reckons 31
Provinces, 21 Professed Houses, 293 Colleges, 33 Novitiates, other Residential
Houses 96. But since that time they are so much increased, that there is no
Religious Order so much dilated, so abundantly favored with Privileges, so
Rich and so Powerful as theirs: A Book in Folio would not be enough to give to
the Public the History of it: I shall only say in general, that they are
spread all over the World; and in those Countries where they have not the
liberty to appear in their Jesuitical Habit, they keep themselves there
Incognito, in great numbers, and leave no stone unturned to compass their
intreagues and ill designs. All their Houses and Colleges are Hosp. Hist.
Jesuit. lib. 2. 6. 5.
very stately and curiously built. Pope Gregory the XIII. gave them in Rome,
against the Orders of the Senate, a whole Island, or quarter of the Town, where
they pulled down all the Houses, turned out all the Owners, the Widows and the
Orphans, to build there a College. The same Pope gave them 25 Tuns of Gold
toward the raising of it. They maintain there 500 Jesuits, of all the parts of
the World, who are the chief Emissaries of the General, and as so many
Mastiff-dogs ready to be let loose, at his pleasure, upon those whom they call
Heretics. King Louis the XIV. was no less liberal toward this Order in his
Kingdom, where he caused to be built every where stately Palaces for them;
while Spain, Germany, Poland, Italy, and the other Popish Countries, have
suffered these Vulturs to gnaw their Entrails, and become fat upon them.
Rodolphus Hospinianus, a very grave and faithful Author, has left us four
Books of the Jesuitical History. He treats in the First, of the Origin, Name,
Habit, and Rules of the Jesuits; he handles in the Second, the Increase and
Power of this Order; in the Third, he exposes to public view, the wicked Acts,
Frauds, Impostures, and Bloody Counsels of the Jesuits, both in Portugal and in
France, the Conspiracies, Troubles, Seditions, Parricides, horrid and enormous
Crimes, which they have committed in England, Scotland, Bohemia, Hungary,
Moscovy, Poland, etc. Lastly, His Fourth Book does very plainly represent their
Doctrine of Killing and Deposing Kings and Princes; their Equivocations and
Contradictions. I shall not spend time to relate them to my Reader here in a
Country where their Artifices and Devilish Enterprises are so well known; I
will only set down a curious Piece, related by the same Author in his Fourth
Book, which is their form of Consecrating and Blessing those Murderers, whom
they have persuaded to lay Violent and Sacrilegious Hands on Kings. Here is
word for word the order of it.

Ceremonies of the Consecration, Blessing, and Sanctification of Regicides by
the Jesuits, extracted out of a Process, Printed at Delphes, by John Andrew.
Hosp. de Doct. Jesui^. lib. 4.
HE who is so unhappy as to be persuaded by the Jesuits to assassinate either a
King or a Prince, is brought by them into a secret Chapel, where they have
prepared upon an Altar a great Dagger, wrapped up in linen Cloth, together
with an Agnus Dei. Drawing it out of the Sheath, they besprinkle it with Holy
Water, and fasten to the Hilt several Consecrated Beads of Coral, pronouncing
this Indulgence, That as many Blows as the Murderer shall give with it to the
Prince, he shall deliver so many Souls from Purgatory. After this Ceremony,
they put the Dagger into the Parricides Hand, and recommend it to him in this
sort. Thou chosen Son of God, take the Sword of Jephte, the Sword of Sampson,
the Sword of David, wherewith he did cut off the Head of Goliath, the Sword of
Gideon, the Sword of Judith, the Sword of the Maccabees, the Sword of Pope
Julius the II. wherewith he cut off the Lives of several Princes, his Enemies,
filling whole Cities with Slaughter and Blood: Go, and let Prudence go along
with thy Courage, let God give new strength to thy Arm. After which they all
fall down on their Knees, and the Superior of the Jesuits pronounces the
following Exorcism. Come ye Cherubins, ye Seraphims, Thrones and Powers, come
ye holy Angels, and fill up this Blessed Vessel (the execrable Parricide) with
an immortal Glory, do ye present him every day with the Crowns of the Blessed
Virgin Mary, of the Holy Patriarchs and Martyrs. We do not look upon him now as
one of ours, but as one belonging to you. And thou, O God, who art terrible and
invincible, and have inspired him in Prayer and Meditation to kill the Tyrant
and Heretic, for to give his Crown to a Catholic King, comfort, we beseech
thee, the Heart of him whom we have Consecrated for this Office; strengthen his
Arm, that he may execute his Enterprise; cloth him with the Armor of thy
Divine Power, that having performed his Design, he may escape the Hands of
those who shall go in pursuit of him; give him Wings, that his holy Members may
fly away from the power of the impious Heretics; replenish his Soul with Joy,
Comfort and Light, by which his Body, having banished all fear, may be upheld
and animated in the midst of Dangers and Torments. This Exorcism being ended,
they bring the Parricide before another Altar, where hangs the Image of James
Clement, Dominican Friar, who with a venomous Knife killed King Henry the III.
This Image is surrounded with Angels, who protect him and bring him to Heaven.
The Jesuits show it to him, and put afterward a Crown on his Head, saying,
Lord, regard here thy Arm, and the Executer of thy Justice, let all the Saints
arise, bow, and yield to him the most honorable place amongst them. After
every thing so performed, he is permitted to speak to none but to four Jesuits,
who are deputed to keep him company. These Fellows are not wanting in their
Discourses to tell him very often, that they perceive a Divine Light that
surrounds him, and is the cause why they bow to him, kiss his Hands and Feet,
and consider him no more as a Man, but as a Saint. Nay, they make a show as if
they did envy the great Honor and Glory which does attend him, and say,
sighing, Oh that God had been pleased to make choice of us instead you, and
given us so much Grace, that, as you, we might be translated into Heaven,
without going into Purgatory. Here Is the end of the Ceremony, and of the Order
of these Fathers, who call themselves the Company of Jesus.

Of the Order of the Fathers of the Oratory.
Moreri. Dict. Hist.
THIS Congregation of Regular Priests, was Founded at Rome, by Philip Neri, a
Florentine Secular Priest in Italy. He gathered a Company of Ecclesiastics,
who applied themselves to the exercises of Clerical Life, and got a great Name
in the World. They begun their practices in the year 1550, but their Order was
not confirmed till twenty five years after, by Gregory the III. who gave to
Philip Neri the Parochial Church of St. Mary in Valicella, called now La Chiesa
Nuova. He built there a Convent, where he passed almost his whole Life, not
going out but to visit the Seven Churches. In imitation of him, Peter of
Berulle instituted at Paris, the Congregation of the Fathers of the Oratory of
Jesus. He was peculiarly encouraged to it by Cardinal Gondi, Bishop of Paris.
Pope Paul the V. approved this Congregation in the year 1613, and since it has
spread it self very much in France, and in the Low Countries. These Priests
have this for the end of their Institution, to honor as much as lies in them,
the Infancy, Life and Death of our Savior Jesus Christ, and of the Virgin
Mary, to whom they render an Idolatrous Worship. They have several times a Week
meetings, to which they invite Seculars also, to make them meditate in their
Churches, called by them Oratories (from whence they have got the Name of
Fathers of the Oratory) on what the Virgin Mary has done while she was yet a
Child; with what Diligence she went to School, with what Modesty she played with
the young Girls of her Age; on the great Respect she had toward the Priests,
bowing to them in the Streets; and running in such manner over all the Actions
of her Life, till her Death, with particulars, which were never known by
Scripture or ancient Tradition; they believe they have performed great
exercises of Piety, by Preaching to the Seculars three or four hours at each
meeting, upon these and such like matters. They make it also their business to
teach Youth in their Colleges, to Preach and to go on Missions. They make no
Vows, and can very easily go out from their Society to possess some good Living
offered to them. They are generally much beloved by all sorts of people for
their Honesty, and Affability, but mortally hated by the Jesuits, who have
persecuted them extremely in these last Times, accusing them of favoring the
Opinions of Jansenius; but indeed it is because they are their Rivals, and they
fear, lest the Papists, weary at last of their tyranny and impieties, should
one day give their Houses and Colleges to the Fathers of the Oratory. They are
Clothed like secular Priests, viz. with a long black Casock, a Girdle and a
long Cloak of the same Color. This Order has produced several, both learned
and honest men, according to their Principles.

Of the Order of the Fathers of Well Dying.
THIS Religion is instituted to serve the Sick, and comfort them in their
Dying-Hour. Those who do compose it, are Regular Moreri. Dict. Hist.
Clerks. Camillus of Lelis, was the Author thereof. He was born in the Land of
Abru^so, in the Diocese of Chiety in Italy, called Buccianico, and having past
the first years of his Life in being a Soldier, he resolved to employ the last
in serving the Poor in the Hospitals, and comforting Dying People. Four of his
Friends joined with him in the same design; and their new Religion was approved
by Pope Sixtus the V. in the year 1584. but upon condition, that they should
follow some Ancient Rule. These good Fathers being not very well pleased with
it, as desirous to have the Honor of being the Founders of a distinct Order,
continued still their former practices. In the mean while Sixtus the V. passed
to another Life; and Gregory the XIV. who succeeded him, confirmed this
Congregation in the year 1591, making it free and independent. It Is called the
Congregation of Regular Clerks, serving the Sick. Their Habit is Clerical, with
a Cross on their Breast, and another upon their Cloak on the Right Side of
Tawny Color, with a great flopping Hat upon their Heads. They have several
Convents in Italy.

Of the Order of Clerks Minors.
Moreri. Dict. Hist.
THE Regular Clerks Minors, owe their establishment to Austin Adorn, a Genman
of Genoa. He set up their first Congregation at Naples in the year 1558, with
two other Gentlemen of the family of Caracciola, Austin and Francis. The
Constitutions of their Order were approved by Paul the V. in the year 1605.
They have a Convent at Rome at St. Laurence in Lucia, where their general abode
is; and a College at St. Agnes of Piazza Navona. They are Clothed as Secular
Priests, only with a courser Cloth.

Of the Order of Barnabites, or Regular Clerks of St. Paul.
Auth. des Hab. des Ord. Rel.
THIS Congregation was approved at Bologna, by Pope Clement the VII. in the
year 1533. and by Paul the III. in 1535. James Anthony Morigias, Bartholomew
Ferrara of Milan, and Francis Mary Zaccaria of Cremona, began to establish it
by a Famous Preacher, called Seraphim, who persuaded them to read diligently
the Epistles of St. Paul, for which cause they took the name of Clerks of St.
Paul. They are called likewise Barnabites, either for their great devotion
toward that Saint Barnab^, who founded the Church of Milan, or because they
made their first Exercises in a Church of Regular Canons, Dedicated to this
Saint. This Congregation is much increased since, and has produced great men.
They have several Colleges in Italy, and some in France, Savoy, and other part.

Of the Order of the Holy Ghost in Saxia at Rome.
Monsieur de Thuy Etats and Empir.
IN the year of our Lord 1198, Pope Innocent the III. caused to be built at
Rome, the staely and famous Hospital of the Holy Ghost in Saxia or Saxony,
(which place was so called, because formerly the Saxons, a people of Germany,
had their Quarter there) and endowed it very richly for the relief of the Poor,
Sick and other Indigents. He ordered a Rule for all the Brothers and Sisters
who would enter that Order. In this year 1564, Father Bernardinus Cirilli,
General of the same, Reformed it. This Rule commands all the Brothers and
Sisters to live in Obedience and Chastity, possessing nothing as their own, and
above all to be careful of the Sick. They make their Promise and Vow in such
manner. I, such one, give and offer my self to God, and to the Blessed Virgin
Mary, to the Holy Ghost, and to my Lords the Poor Sick, to be their humble
Servant as long as I live; I promise to keep Chastity by the grace of God, and
to live without possessing any thing as my own; and to you, my General Master,
and all your Sccessors, to pay you all Obedience, and to take a faithful care
of the Incomes for the Poor. Then the Superior gives him this Answer. For the
Vow which thou have made to God, to the Virgin, and to our Lords the Poor Sick,
we receive thee, and the Souls of thy Father and Mother, to participate of the
Masses, Fasts, Prayers, Alms, and other good Works, which are, and shall be
done in the House of the Holy Ghost. God make thee partaker of them, as we all
hope. Know also, that the House of the Holy Ghost promises to give thee Bread
and Water, and an Humble Robe. This said, the Superior takes a Cloak, on which
is a Cross, and putting it on his Shoulders, says to him, In virtue of this
Sign of the Cross all evil Spirits be expelled from thee, and Christ Jesus
bring thee to his everlasting Kingdom.

This Congregation has several Hospitals in diverse parts of Christendom, of
which that of Rome is the Chief. The General Chapters are kept there, and each
Hospital is obliged to render an account there by the Duputies of its
Administration. Supposing a Religious of this Order be found in possession of
any thing, as his own, when he dies, he is not to be buried in Holy Ground, but
he is looked upon as one excommunicated. They wear a Black Sacerdotal Habit,
with a White Cross on their Breast, and another upon their Cloak on the left
Side.

Of the Congregation of the Hermits of Madam Gonzague.
Monsieur de Thuy Etats and Empir.
FRancis of Gonzague, fourth Marquess of Mantoua, going to one his Country
Houses, and passing near an Old Wall, on which was painted an Image of the
Virgin Mary, his Horse was so much frighted at it, that in curvetting it threw
his Master on the ground. A Gentleman of his Retinue, called Hierom Regnini,
seeing the Marquess all bruised with his fall, fell immediately on his Knees,
and made a Vow to the Virgin, that if his Master did recover, he would in that
very place lead an Hermetical Life: Which thing having succeeded as he desired,
he went about to perform his Vow, and the Marquesses Lady caused a Monastery to
be built for him; where several other Gentlemen joined together, and
established a Rule amongst them, which was confirmed by Pope Alexander the VI.
They make no profession, and none of their Observances does bind upon pain of
Mortal Sin. They have a General, and about threescore and ten Monasteries, the
Chief whereof is that of Gonzaga, in which are twelve Hermits. This
Congregation began under Pope Innocent the VIII. and the Empire Maximilian the
First.

Of the Fathers of Christian Doctrine.
Moreri. Dict. Hist.
THIS Religious Congregation was founded by Caesar de Bus, born at Cavailon, a
Town of Provence in France. The end of this Institution was, to Catechize the
People, in imitation (as they say) of the Apostles, teaching them the Mysteries
of our Faith, and together the gross Errors of Popery. Pope Clement the VIII.
approved this Congregation, and Paul the V. did the same, in the year 1616. He
obliged these Teachers or Doctrinaries ^o make Monastical Vows, and united
their Company to that of the Regular Clerks of Somask, to make, together with
them, one Body, under the same General. Since that time, by a Bull of Pope
Innocent the X. granted in the year 1647. the Priests of the Christian Doctrine
were disunited from the others, and had a French General for themselves. Thuy
possess several Convents and Colleges in France. There is likewise in Italy
another Order of the Fathers of the Christian Doctrine, who do acknowledge for
their Founder, Cardinal Charles Borromeo, who instituted them at Milan in the
year 1568.

CHAP. XIX.
Of some Religious Orders which have been suppressed, or united to others, or
of which, the Authors, the time of their Institution, or Habits are not well
know.
First, Of the Order of the White Men.
IN the year 1399, under the Pontificate of Boniface the IX. a certain Priest,
came down from the Alps into Italy, followed with a great multitude of People.
He was Clothed all in White, had very modest Looks, and Hosp. the M^n.
by his Speech one might have taken him for a Saint. He deplored with loud and
very sensible Expressions, the miserable Condition of Mankind, and Preached
Repentance for Sin. He was going directly to Rome, with hopes to remedy the
evil, first in the place where he thought Religion suffered the most. In his
way by Lucca, the Apennine, and Tuscany, great crowds both of Men and Women, of
all Ages and Conditions followed him, and took White Clothes likewise on their
Backs. They lay in the night time in the Fields like Sheep, and did Eat
together, what ever place they came at, of the Provisions they carried along
with them. Several Italian Princes, even Bishops joined with this Priest, who
carried a great Wooden Crucifix in his Arms, which they say, wept for the Sins
of the People; and when (by human Artifice or Diabolical Illusion) it shed
Tears, all that went along made great Cries, and asked pardon for their Sins.
This Crucifix is kept yet to this day at Lucca, in a very Rich Chapel, with
great Honor and Worship. This numerous Troop having rested themselves some
days about Viterbo, Pope Boniface the IX. who feared lest this Priest had a
design to come and pull him out of his Pontifical Throne, sent Companies of
Soldiers, who brought him before him bound in Chains. The Pope made him
immediately to suffer a cruel Death, and so having smitten the Shepherd, the
Flock was dispersed, every one of the White Men returning with speed to their
own Homes aagain.

Of the Amedyes, or Friends of God.
A Certain Man who took the name of Friend of God, Born in Portugal, came in an
Heremitical Habit into Lombardia; where he fixed for a while his Habitation, at
a place called St. Mary of Br^scia, toward Cremona. From thence he passed to
Rome, and made his abode in Monte Aure^, called now St. Peter in Montorio. He
went for a great Contemplative Man, and for a Prophet, who had many Visions.
From him this Congregation took the name of Friends of God, or Amedees. They
wore gray Clothes and Wooden Shoes, had no Breeches, girding themselves with a
Cord. They did possess 28 Convents in Italy, and their Congregation begun in
1400. But Pope Pius the V. united it partly with that of Clervaux or Cisteaux,
and part of it with the Wooden Shoe*bearers or Soccolanti.

Of the Order of Fontavellane.
De Thuy Etats and Empires traitte des Religions.
ONE Rodolphus persecuted by a temporal Lord, withdrew himself between two of
the highest Mountains of the Appennine, Mount Latria, and Mount Corvo. He got
there in a short time, (as it is usual to Hermits) the name of a great Saint,
and Followers, and had there a Monastery built, under the name of the Holy
Cross. But his Order after his Death, being fallen from its Observance; a
Father of Camaldoli reformed it, and being deformed again Pope Pius the V. took
occasion from thence, to put their Abbey in Commendam, and gave it to the
Cardinal of Rovere, Brother to the Duke of Urbain, who put in it the Fathers of
Camaldoli, who are still there.

Of the Beghards, Beghins, and Beghine.
Hosp. de Orig. Mon. l. 6. c. ^2.
THEY had their beginning in Germany, and in the Low Countries, toward the end
of the 13 Age. They made profession of Monastical life, under the name of the
third Order of St. Francis. An Italian called Hermanus, and according to some
others, one Dulcinus with his Wife, were the Authors of it. They preached
publicly against the Pope, and the Pride of the Church of Rome, which they
said was not the true Catholic Church. By reason of these Opinions, contrary
to the Sea of Rome, they were called also Opinionists, and the Papists charged
them immediately, (as they are wont to do, those who not side with them) with
Thousand abominable Crimes, which therefore ought to be very suspicious.
Bonifacius VIII. and Clement the V. whom they chiefly attacked, did condemn
them, Annihilate their Order, and Excommunicate all those, who after the
Dissolution should endeavor to reestablish it again. They were also called
Fraticelli, and Brothers of Poverty, for the strict Profession they made of it.
Besides these Orders, there is mention made in some Authors of several others,
viz. Of the Lazy-ones, of the Ignorants, of St. Joseph, of St. Peter, of the
Looking-glasses, of the Ladder of God, of the Valley of Josaphat, of the
Penitents, of Purgatory, and of some others, of which I find nothing almost but
the Names, and give me no sufficient matter, wherewith to entertain my Reader.
I am apt to believe however, that the Order of Purgatory, which I have named,
is none other, but some Congregations of Seculars in Italy, who meet at certain
days in the Week, to pray for the Souls in Purgatory. As for the Penitents, you
may be better informed of it by what follows.

Of the Penitents.
Moreri Dict. Hist.
THESE are certain Devouts, divided into several Confraternities, particularly
in Italy; who make profession of a public Penance, at some prescribed times in
the year. The custom was established in the year 1260, by an Hermit, who went
to Preach in the City of Perugia in Italy; that the Inhabitants were on the
point to be buried, under the Ruins of their own Houses, which were ready to
fall upon them, unless by a speedy Penitence, they did appease Gods Anger. All
his Hearers very much frighted, having put on Sackcloth, armed with Whips and
Disciplins, went Processionally along the Streets, beating severely their
Shoulders for the expiation of their Sins. This Sort of Penance, was afterward
practiced in some other Countries, and particularly in Hungary, during a raging
Plague, wherewith the whole Kingdom was miserably afflicted and wasted. But
some while after, it occasioned a very dangerous sect of Flagellants or
Whippers, who running by Troops, naked to the Wast, put their Backs all in a
gore Blood, publishing that this new Baptism of Blood (so they called it,)
blotted out all Sins, even those that they might commit hereafter. These were
abolished, but the Confraternities of different colors were confirmed, and are
to be seen to this day in Italy, and in those Territories of France which
belong to the Pope, where they make their Processions, especially during the
holy Week, disciplining themselves publicly in the Streets. Henry the III.
King of France, having seen in the year 1586, the Procession of the White
Penitents at Avignon, desired to be admitted into it; and seven or eight years
after, he established one like to it at Paris, in the Church of the
Austin-Fryars, under the Title of the Annunciation of our Lady. The most part
of his Courtiers listed themselves in it, and failed not to be present with him
at the Processions of the Confraternity; where he did assist himself without
Guards, Clothed all in White Linen Holland-cloth, in the form of a Sack,
having two holes answering to the Eyes, and a long Capuchon or Hood hanging
behind. To this Habit was fastened a Discipline of Line, as a Mark of his
Penitent State, and upon his Shoulder he had a Cross of White Satin, upon a
Tawny Velvet Ground. Mainbourg Jesuits in the History of the League.
It Is observed in the History of the League, that the King practiced these
public Devotions, to destroy the Opinion which the People had, that he
favored the King of Navarre and the Protestants. Nevertheless, this did not
hinder the Papists, from persuading St. James Clement, a Dominican Friar, to
Murder him, giving him a desperate Wound, with a Poisoned Knife in the Belly,
whereof he dyed the 2 of August, in the year 1589.

CHAP. XX.
Of the Habits, and of the Tonsure or Shaving of Monks.
I Have set down at the end of each Order, what Habits those Monks wear, and in
what Form and Color they do differ one from another, according to the Fancy of
their Founders. Now I must further more explain to you what a Capuchon, a
Scapulary, a Patience, a Force, a Plited Cloak, the Scandals, and the
Monastical Crown are.

The Capuchon in its first Institution, was no other thing but a Sack, which
the first Penitents wore upon their Heads, with one Corner in, after the manner
of the Colliers here in London. But our Monks have brought it at last, to the
form of a Hood, and is of the same Stuff with their Habits. It is a very
commodious contrivance, because when they are hot, they cast it back upon their
Shoulders, and when they are cold, they draw it very deep on their Heads, to
keep their Ears warm: Some have it so curiously Wrought, that three Women at
work can hardly make one in four days. Speaking of it in a Spiritual Sense,
they call it the Helmet of Salvation; Galeam salutis, and believe, that the
Devil has not the Power in that Harness, to suggest to them ill Thoughts. Some
Monks, as the Benedictins, the Augustinians, the Dominicans, etc. wear it very
broad, and hanging down almost to the Calf of their Legs, to extend the more on
their Bodies the virtue of this holy Garment. The Capucins contrariwise, have
the tail of their Capuchion turned right upwards, which makes them (they say)
more Terrible to the Powers of the Air, and uniteth them more immdiately to God.

The Scapulary is a piece of Stuff, divided length-ways in half, (and sowed to
their Capuchion) which reaches before and behind, almost to their Feet. It Is
called Scapulary, a Scapulis, because it covers their Shoulders, and in the
Spiritul Sense, it is an Armor against the Devil, Impenetrable to all the
Arrows of his Malice.

This Scapulary, when first contrived, was an Habit for work, whereof almost
all the In Catalogo testium veritatis f. 214, 215.
Peasants made use formerly, working in the Fields; because this covering their
Stomach, Back and Shoulders, and having no Sleeves, it left their Hands and
Arms freer for work. Now as the Monks were obliged in the ancient Ex Libro ante
annos 540. scripto, and edito ab H^tt. Anno 1520
times to work with their Hands, St. Benet and the other Institutors of Monks,
gave them the Scapulary to wear, Scapulare propter opera tantum.

But as for the Monks in our days, who have preferred Idleness before Working,
they might also go without a Scapulary. When the execrable Regicide James
Clement, a Dominican Friar, went to kill Henry the III. he hid hisgreat Dagger
under his great Dagger under his Scapulary, and made it serve in such manner,
to an use very different from its Institution.

The Patience is only another name, to signify the two sides of their
Scapulary; the part which is one their Backs, is called the Hinderpatience, and
that one their Breast the Forepatience. This word is in expression of their
Sufferings, because one of these Monks, having once by chance stretched his
Scapulary, together with the Capuchion on the ground; they ingeniously observed
that it represented a kind of a Cross, and very luckily for them, they
published that they were the Imitators of Jesus Christ, bearing after him their
Crosses in this World. And, indeed who can doubt but these Scapularies being
for the most part of a very fine Cloth or Linen, be very heavy Crosses to
these poor Monks?

The Frock or Cowl, is a Stately Gown with large Sleeves, which the Monks wear
over their other Habits, when they go to Church, or to work in the Towns. In a
Spiritual Sense, it is the Protection of God Almighty, that Surrounds them
(they say) on every side.

The Cape is a long Cloak, plited round about the Neck, and without Sleeves, of
which some Friars make use in stead of the Frock. The Carmelites particularly
wear such Garment, because (they say) it represents better ^he Cloak of the
Prophet Elijah, who they pretend to have been the Founder of their Order.

The Sandals are Wooden-shoes or Clogs, which render them (they say) like to
the Apostles.

The Monastical Crown, is a Circle of Hair, which the Barber leaves to their
Heads, when he Shaves them.

Beda l. 5. c. 22.
Beda, in the first Book of his History, Chap. 22. says, that the Monks and
Priests have their Heads Shaved, and leave above the Ears a Circle of Hair, in
the form of a Crown, to represent the Crown of Thorns of our Savior; and that
this Crown is a warning to them, that they ought to imitate Christ in his
Sufferings, and bear patiently all sorts of Affronts and Injuries for the sake
of his Name. Hosp. de Orig. Mon. l. 111. c. 8.
And in truth (says Hospinian,) these good Monks and Priests are put very hard
to it, and suffer every day a great deal of Shame, for the Cause of Christ
Jesus, and of his Holy Gospel. Alas, how are they to be pitied, these holy
Martyrs of the Popish Church, sleeping as they do till Noonday, upon good Down
Feather-Beds! How weary, how tired are they in cutting up the Partridges, the
Snipes, the Pheasants, and others Dainties, wherewith their Tables are covered!
Oh the Sharp Thorny-Crown, that so cruelly afflicts their tender Heads! How
kind, how human were the Barbarous Jews, who drove the Crown of Thorns into the
Sacred head of our Lord Jesus; in comparison of those unmerciful Barbers, who
Shave every Week or Fortnight, the Heads of Friars and Monks; and moreover, to
accumulate misfortunes, wash them with sweet and odoriferous Waters!

Isidorus and other Authors, give another Explication of the Monastical Crown.
They Isidorus l. 2. c. 4. de Officiis. Rabanus l. 1. de Instit. cleric. c. 3.
Hugo l. 2. de sacram. Durand. in Ration. l. 2.
say, that it represents the slight which the Monks ought to make of the things
of the World, by losing all their Hairs, except only a small Portion, which
they reserve for themselves, to wit, that little Circle about the Ears. This
Circle notwithstanding, according to them, is a Royal Crown, that raises them
above all other Christians, as much as Kings are above their own Subjects. It Is
very true, (goes on my Author Hospinian) that these Fellows wear a Royal Crown
on their Heads, since they are exempted from all Jurisdiction and Power of the
Magistrates, when all the others are bound to obey. Nay, they are above Kings
and Princes, to whom they are become formidable, and are adored by those of
their party, like Gods. Having already gathered for themselves, almost all the
Riches of the Universe, they may well boast themselves of their Frugality, and
of the contempt of Wordly things, which they so insatiably purchase.

Rupertus l. 2. de offic. c. 24.
Rupertus says, that the shaving of Monks makes them in a manner bald, to
honor Jesus Christ Crucified on Calvary, which is by him interpreted, A bald
Mountain. Calvi sunt, quia scilicet Christus in Calvariae loco Crucifixus est.
This is a good reason (says my Author) and worthy of a great Divine.

Lastly, Bellarmin adds another Mystery to it, and says, that this Crown is a
mark of Penitence and of Conversion. And my Author follows him closely, and
pretends the Monks have neither right nor title to it, since there is no People
where lesser signs of true Repentance and Conversion to God, are to be found
than amongst these wretched Monks, notwithstanding all their Shavings and
Benedictions.

I shall conclude this matter, with saying, that the Monks of the Church of
Rome, do attribute so much Holiness to their Shaving and Habits, that they
think they may with folded Arms go to Heaven, and therefore do neglect the true
practices of Justice and Piety, which are approved by God, and commanded in the
Gospel.

TREATISE OF NUNS.
CHAP. I.
Of their Original, Vail, Shaving, and Grates.
IT is an easy thing to observe, that there has been formerly two sorts of
Nuns, or Virgins, Consecrated to God. The First and most Ancient begun almost
in the times of the Apostles; and as Prudent Virgins, endeavored by the Grace
of God, and with all Humility and Freedom followed St. Paul's advice, in
keeping their Virginity, not reckoning it an extraordinary merit in themselves,
nor being bound to it by a solemn Vow, and without condemning Marriage, which
they often embraced after several years of Virginity, as not being accounted
infamous for so doing: Such were the Virgins of the Purest Times. As for the
Second Sort of Nuns, who make Vows, they ought to acknowledge their Original
from Eustatius, an Heretic, who put into their Heads, as foolish Virgins, that
there was no Salvation to be hoped for in a Married State; and bound them by
Vow, to keep their Virginity. This happened about the year of our Lord 330. And
it was likewise about the same time, that some Virgins and devout Women of the
First Order, viz. of those who made no Vows, in imitation of the Hermits and
Monks of Thebais in Egypt, joined together and enclosed themselves in
Monasteries. This Eastern Novelty passed also some years after Erasm. in vita
Hier.
into the West. Some Priests of Alexandria in Egypt, flying from the Arian
persecution, retired to Rome, and informed the Noble Widow Marcella with this
kind of Life, which pleased her so much, that having gathered together several
Roman Ladies, she persuaded them to live in common, and took upon her Hierom.
in Epit. Marcell.
self their conduct. After the example of so great Ladies, what appeared at
first very ignominious for its Novelty, became more Tolerable, and even
Honorable; and in several places were built Monasteries for Widows and Virgins
Consecrated to God. The Vail which was in use for all the Women in the
Primitive 1 Cor. 11.
Church, and wherewith St. Paul says, they ought to be covered at Church, in
reverence to the Angels, was appropriated to those who did retire into
Monasteries, as an Habit that was to be particular to them, and their
distinction from those who lived in the World. Some time since, the Councils
which were held, and particularly that of Valence held in France, in the year
378, made very rigorous Statutes against the Veiled Virgins, who should go out
of their Monasteries to Marry, ordering not to receive them so easily to
Penitence: Nevertheless there was yet a Door open for them. But Pope Innocent
the I. by a very indiscreet Zeal, and contrary to that Meekness Epist. Decret.
2 Can. 12.
of the merciful Jesus, who is ready to receive Sinners at the first moment of
their Conversion, ordered in the year 407, that after such a fault as this,
they should not be received to Penitence before the death of the Husband whom
they had taken; and if they died first, they still lay under the sentence of
Excommunication. This Law was confirmed since by several Synods; and every
thing going still worse and worse in the Church, the Marriages of Nuns were
quite dissolved, and those who contracted them, both Man and Woman were burnt
alive. By such means the Nuns were, at last, forced to keep their Virginity
against their Wills. In the mean time, St. Benet, having given, as it were, a
new Life to Monkery in the West, Scholastica, his Sister, Founded a great many
Monasteries for Women, whereof she made her self Abbess, and gave them the same
Rule which her Brother had written for Men. The following Ages, as more
abundant in Superstition, did also abound more in Monks and Nuns, who made
solemn Vows, and the shaving of Women, that was in use only in some Egyptian
Monasteries, which had borrowed it from Pagan Virgins, was brought also into
the West. St. Hierom in his Letter to the Virgin Eustochium, 1 Cor. 11.
calls it the Devil's Work. St. Paul at least says, That it is a shameful thing
for a woman to go shaved. However the Nuns, a great deal wiser than this holy
Apostle, did in progress of time attribute to their cutting off their Hair, to
their Vails, and mimical Hababits, a holy Virtue, and more than a baptismal
Grace. But this, notwithstanding their Habits, remaining always whatever really
they were, to wit, pieces of Cloth without that imaginary sanctifying Virtue,
these Nuns remained still exposed to Temptations so much the more violent and
shameful, as their enterprises were rash and unwise. Some bad circumstances,
which happened very often, showed enough that they were only Virgins by force;
taking all occasions to converse with Men. Therefore the Bishops thought
necessary to raise up their Walls higher, and to order that they should speak
to no body but through Iron Grates, being kept as close as the Prisoners in
Newgate. Oh shame! Now Pagans and Infidels must know that Christian Virgins,
that they may secure honesty of Life, ought to be kept in Irons. And let the
Papists be thanked for the confusion which reflects from their infamous
practices upon the whole Body of Christendom. As for the Government of Nuns,
some of them are under the Direction of the Bishops, in whose Diocese they are,
and others under the Obedience of the Generals of the Orders of Men, who
profess the same Rule as they do. The former have Secular Priests for their
Confessors, and the later, Fathers of their Order.

CHAP. II.
Of the Orders of Nuns in General.
WOmen being at least as much inclined to Superstition as Men, they no sooner
saw a Monkish Order to spring up, but they undertook to appropriate it to their
Sex, building for themselves Monasteries, thereby to imitate, as far as they
were able, the extravagancies of Men; nay, outwitting them in forgeries of
Revelations, Apparitions and Miracles, to get ^ame in the World, which (they
say) they had left. As they do profess to follow the same Rules of the Monks,
leaving only out what is not agreeable to their Sex, and do acknowledge the
same Founders of Orders for their own, wear the same Names, and Habits of the
same Color; it would be superfluous to labor, methinks, to set down at
length, one by one, all the Orders of Nuns. Therefore I shall only give you
here a short Catalogue of their Names, and Times of their respective
Foundations, reserving only at the end, to relate more at large some few of the
said Orders more worthy the Observation of my Reader.

A Catalogue of the Foundations of Nuns.
MArcella, a Roman Lady, is looked upon as the first Founder of a Claustral
Life, and the Mother of Nuns, both in the East and in the West. She lived at
the end of the third Age, and died in the year 410.

The Regular Canonesses of St. John of Lateran, were Founded about the same
time, as the Fathers of the same Order, by Pope Gelase in the year 440; under
the Rule of St. Austin.

The Regular Canonesses of the Holy Sepulcher at Jerusalem are of a very
ancient Foundation, and were renewed in France in the year 1620, by Mother Mary
of St. Francis, formerly Claudy du Moy, Countess of Chaligny.

The Regular Canonesses of St. Austin were Founded by a Scotch Gentlewoman,
called Bridget, in the year 615. Being extraordinary beautiful, she begged
(they say) of God, that he would be pleased to take away her Beauty, upon which
she lost one of her Eyes.

The Regular Canonesses of the Low Countries, Germany and Lorrain were Founded
by the Princess Waltrude; she lived in the year 650.

The Regular Canonesses of Mons in Hainau^t, are Nuns only in the Morning, and
go a visiting in the Afternoon in a Secular Dress, and Marry when they please.
They do acknowledge the Lady Gertrude for their Founder.

The Regular Canonesses at Colen are much like the former, and were Founded in
the year 716, by Plectrude, Duchess of Austrasia.

The Regular Nuns of St. Agnes at Dort, were established in the year 1326.

The Beguines of Amsterdam, derived their Name from Beg, a French Princess,
who Founded there a Monastery for them, having taken her self the Religious
Habit; she died in the year 698. They have several other Monasteries in the Low
Countries, under the Rule of St. Austin, and can Marry when they please.

The Nuns of the Good Jesus at Ravenna, were instituted in the year 1506, by
Marguarita Rusci, an Italian Gentlewoman, to match the Priests of the Good
Jesus, for whom she had Founded a College. They wear great Beads on their Necks.

The Nuns of St. Cesarius were founded by him, when he was Archbishop* of
Arles, toward the year 478. They are Clothed in White, with a Black Vail on
their Heads, and observe the Rules which their Founder wrote for them, which
are almost the same with those of St. Austin.

The Congregation of the Women of the Christian Doctrine, were instituted at
Milan, by Cardinal Charles Borromeo, in the year 1568, whose duty is to
instruct those of their own Sex, both in the Christian and Popish Doctrine: They
are submitted to the Rule of St. Austin, and are of two sorts, some of them
being under a Claustral Confinement.

The Nuns of the Congregation of our Lady, were Founded in the year 1616, by
Mother Alix, of the Presentation, born in Lorrain.

The Hospitaler-Nuns of St. John of Jerusalem were introduced at Rome, in the
Hospital of St. Mary Magdalen in the year 1080. There the Women who will go a
Pilgrimaging to Jerusalem, do receive their Blessing and Passports. Pope
Gelasius was the first that approved this Institution. These Nuns were reformed
in France, in the beginning of this Age by Mother Gaillote de Vaillac, and are
called Reformed Hospitalers.

The Hospital-Nuns of the Holy Ghost, were founded in the year 1198, by Pope
Innocent the III. who built the Hospital of the Holy Ghost in Saxia at Rome. He
committed it to Men and Women, to take care of the Sick of both Sexes, and
prescribed them Rules. They have on their Clothes a White Pidgeon, surrounded
with Beams, to represent the Holy Ghost. Some Nuns, like these, are to be found
in the Low Countries, who are under the Rule of St. Austin.

The Black Nuns are also Hospitalers, going to Nurse the Sick at their own
Houses; they are paid for it, and bring that Money to their Convents.

The Order of Women Servants was instituted long before by a holy Woman called
Fabiola, in the year 390. They did oblige themselves to serve the Sick, and
procure them every thing necessary that they wanted.

The Order of the Nuns Knightesses, Swordbearers of St. James in Spain, was
established there by King Ferdinand, about the year 1170. There Office is to
lodge and provide with necessary things the Pilgrims who go to St. James in
Galicia. They are under the Rule of St. Austin. Their Clothes are Black, and on
the Right Side of their Robe they have a red Sword, hilted with a Sea-shell.

The Nuns of Tabennesia, in Egypt, had for their Institutor the Abbot Pacomius.
His Sister having been one day to visit him, he denied to speak with her until
she had promised to lead the same Life as he did. Which having consented to, he
had a Monastery built for her, where she was Abbess over a great many Women, in
the year 340, and observed the Rule which her Brother gave her. They were
Clothed all in Black, with Crosses upon their Vails, and at the bottom of
their Robes.

The Nuns of St. Basil were instituted about the year 340, by Macrina his
Sister, under her Brothers Rule. Some of them are called Canonesses of St.
Basil.

The Acaemetes or Studites begun at Constantinople in the year 459, but were
wholly destroyed when the Turks made themselves Masters of those Countries.

Some Women Hermits, in imitation of St. Anthony, were seen in Egypt in the
year 318, under the direction of a holy Woman, called Syncletica; and likewise
at Jerusalem, under the Abbess Mary, in the year 325.

Some others, who follow the Rules of St. Anthony, are to be seen yet in
Ethiopia. They were instituted in the year 1325, by Mother Imata. They have on
their Heads a kind of a Turbant, made with a striped Calico, and on their
Shoulders a little Cloak of yellow Skins of Goats. The rest of their Habits are
either Yellow or White, not minding much the Colors. They get their livelihood
by their Prayers, which they sell for Money, or by their Works, and are very
charitable to the Poor. They never enter the Church no more than the other
Women of that Country. They are for the most part very chaste; but it being not
accounted any great shame in those Countries to get Children, they likewise
oftentimes get great Bellies.

The Benedictine Nuns were Founded by Scholastica, St. Benet's Sister, who gave
them her Brothers Rule in the year 530.

The Benedictine Nuns, of the Order of Cluny, were instituted by Odo, Abbot of
Cluny, about the year 940.

The Benedictines of the Congregation of Chesal Benoist, were reformed about
the year 1520, by Mother Tovars, Abbess of St. Mary of Charentan.

The Reformed Benedictines of the Congregation of Mount Calvary, were founded
by Mother Anthony of Orleans, Princess of France, who died in the year 1618.

The Benedictine Nuns of the Order of Camaldoli, were instituted by one
Romauld, who was also the Founder of the Monks of the same Order, and died in
the year 1027.

The Carthusian Nuns do follow the Institutions of St. Bruno, but acknowledge
Mother Beatrix, a French Woman, for their Founder, in the year 1309.

The Benedictine Nuns of the Order of Citeaux, were Founded by Humberlina,
Sister of Bernard, Abbot of that place. She run from her Husband, and became
Nun her self in the year 1118.

The Military and Knight Nuns of the Order of Calatrava and Alcantara, were
rather for Vanity than for Piety, instituted by Eleonora Gonzales in the year
1219, under the Rules of the Order of Cisteaux. They wear a white Gown, and a
Scapulary with the marks of Knighthood of Calatrava on the Breast, viz. a green
Cross under a green Pear Tree: How wisely that Order of Knights of Calatrava
was instituted by the Kings of Cassiglia, to fight against the Moors, is
sufficiently known: But how sillily it was also purchased by Women, every one
may judge.

The Gregorian Benedictines were Founded by Pope Gregory the Great, under the
Rule of St. Benet, in the year 594. They wear white Clothes.

The Ambrosian Benedictines say, that they owe their Institution to St.
Ambrose, but in process of time embraced the Rule of St. Benet. They have white
Garments with a black Vail.

The Nuns of St. Columban, under the Rule of St. Benet, were Founded by
Burgundo Fare, Sister to the Bishop of Fare, in the year 615. They are all in
White.

The Nuns under the Bishop's Rules, were Founded by Eloy, Bishop of Noyon, who
made a Convent of his own House at Paris, and maintained in it 300 Women. Their
Habit is Black, with a White Cloak upon it.

The Benedictine Nuns of the Order of Feuillans, were Founded by Mother
Margaret, of Polastron, in the year 1588, in imitation of the Masculin Order,
Instituted by John de la Barriere. They have white Clothes and a black Vail.

The Benedictine Nuns of Mount Olivet, were Founded by a Woman, called Frances
de Pontianis. After forty years of a Married Life, St. Peter the Apostle (they
say) appeared to her, and made her a Nun, giving her the Vail with all the
usual Ceremonies; and St. Benet coming in the very nick of time, gave her his
Rule. She died in her Monastery of Torre di Speculo at Rome, in the year 1440.
They are Clothed all in Black.

The Nuns of Premontre, were Instituted in the year 1121, in imitation of the
Monks of the same Order, under the Rule of St. Austin.

The Dominican Nuns, were by one Dominicus Instituted about the year 1206, who
Founded four different Orders of them, as he had done of his Monks, under the
Rule of St. Austin.

The Nuns of the Redemption of Captives, had their beginning from Mother Mary
du Secours, who died in the year 1288.

The Nuns Servites, or Servants of the Virgin Mary, in imitation of the Friars
of the same Order, were Instituted by Mother Juliana Falconieri, who died in
the year 1341.

The Nuns Hermits of St. Austin, were Instituted a little after the Friars of
the same Order.

The Nuns Hermits of St. Hierom, do falsely boast their Origin from this holy
Doctor. Their Order was Confirmed, and perhaps Founded by Pope Gregory the XI.
in the year 1374.

The Nuns of St. Cassian are said to have been Instituted by him at Marseilles,
or at Autun, a Town in the Duchy of Burgundy, about the year 440. They were
since put under the Rule of St. Austin.

The Nuns of St. Isidor had for their Founder Florentina his Sister, in the
year 598. She put them (as some say) under the Rule which Isidor her Brother
gave her, tho such a Rule is no where to be found.

The Carmelite Nuns begun in Syria, a little while after the Foundation of the
Fathers Carmelites, which was in the year 1122.

The Reformed Barefooted Carmelite Nuns, do acknowledge one Theresia a very
superstitious Woman for their Mother: She begun this Reformation in Spain, and
died in the year 1582.

The Nuns of the Immaculate or Unspotted Conception of the Blessed Virgin Mary,
were instituted in Portugal, in the year 1484, by Mother Beatrix of Sylva. They
wear blew Clothes, having upon their Scapulary, the Image of the Virgin Mary,
bearing the little Jesus in her Arms, who kills with a long Spear a Dragon,
under the Feet of the Virgin. Pope Innocent the VIII. approved it in year 1439,
and gave them the Rule of Cisteaux. After the death of Beatrix, the Nuns left
their Rule and took that of St. Francis: Some while after they took again that
of Cisteaux, and in the year 1511. Julius the II. made them to make another
jump to that of the Franciscans.

The Franciscan Nuns, were instituted in the year 1212, by Francis Assisi, and
had one Clara, a very superstitious and deluded creature for their Mother. Some
are very dissolute in their Manners, and go under the name of Franciscan Nuns;
others are very strict in their Observances, and from that Clara are called
Clarisses. They have some Sisters Servants, who go a begging for them, and are
reputed of the third Order of their St. Francis.

The Nuns of the Third Order of S. Francis, in the year 1221, were by him
instituted, and did consist indifferently of Unmarried and Married Women, who
had left their Husbands. He gave them a milder Rule than the former, being
allowed to live single, or two or three together in their own Houses. They wear
gray Clothes with a black Vail, are girded with a Cord, and go barefooted.
There is yet another Congregation of the Third Order, confined in Cloisters,
and Founded in the year 1405. By Mother Angelina of Terms, Countess of
Civitella in Italy, who lead a very rigid Life.

The Third Order of Penitent Nuns of St. Francis, in which all sorts of Women,
Married or Unmarried, Widows, Honest or Dishonest, who desire to lead a
penitent Life are received, was reformed by Mother Clara Frances of Besanocn,
who died at Paris in the year 1627. They are a kind of Capucines, and wear long
gray Clothes.

The Reformed Nuns of the Three Orders of St. Francis, had their beginning from
Sister Colette, in the year 1410, she pretended to several Apparitions of God
to her on that account, and brought her Nuns to a very austere manner of Life,
as lying on the Straw, going barefooted, wearing very course Cloth. She died
full of Superstition at Ghent, in the year 1447.

The Capucines are also a Reformation of Nuns of St. Francis, made by Mother
Mary Long, in the year 1538. They live of the Alms which are brought to their
Convents, are independent upon the Bishops, and subject only to the Fathers
Capucine: They have nothing of their own but a Breviary, a Wooden Cross, and a
Whip or Discipline. Upon a new Habit they patch always a piece of an old one.
They touch no Money, but have a Temporal Father that receives, keeps, and spends
it for them. Except their Vail, which is black, their Habit is the same as that
of the Fathers Capucine.

The Recolettes were founded in the year 648, by a Spanish Gentlewoman called
Benedicta, under the direction of the Bishop Fructuosus. But they were
afterward by the Popes put under the Rule of St. Francis, and Clothed as the
Capucines, except that their Clothes are longer, and they have a Scapulary.

The Penitent Nuns of the Order of St. Francis, in High Germany. After having
lived some while in their Monasteries, they go into the Woods, and live single,
or two together, in a little House, with a little Chapel, after the manner of
the ancient Hermits, eating almost nothing else but Herbs and Roots. They have
a short gray colored Gown, girded with a Cord, go Barefooted or with
Wooden-shoes.

The Nuns Sack-bearers were established in France by St. Louis King of France,
in the year 1261, at the instance of his Mother Blanca. But both the Nuns and
the Friars of the same Order, were suppressed before his Death. They were
Clothed with Sacks, and obliged to a strange odd sort of Life.

The Nuns Urbanistes, under the Rule of St. Francis, were instituted by
Isabella Sister to St. Louis King of France, with the Title of the Humility of
our Lady: She took her self the Religious Habit amongst them, and was made a
Saintess by Pope Leo the X. in the year 1521. The Nuns of St. Francis of Paula:
Two Spanish Women, Mary and Francis of Lucena, founded this Order in the year
1495, following the Rules of this Francis, and except the black Vail on their
Heads, they wear an Habit like to that of the Friars of the same Order.

The Nuns of the Visitation of the Virgin Mary, were instituted by Francis
Sales Bishop of Geneva in the year 1610, who writ Rules for them, which were
approved by the Popes, and in his Life he could reckon above 30 Cloisters which
followed his Institutions. They did afterward very much increase, particulary
in France. They have black Clothes, and a little Silver Cross on their Breasts.

Of the Order of the Vrselines, or Jesuitesses.
THIS is the Female Order of the Jesuits. A young Italian Woman called Angela
of Bressia, of a mean Family, published that hor deceased Sister appeared to
her in a glorious State, with several other holy Virgins, who came down from
Heaven to Visit her, and a Voice was heard saying, Angela thou shall not dye,
before thou have instituted a Nunnery of Virgins like these. It was in all
likelihood the Voice of the Jesuit, because this Angela having declared her
Vision to her Confessors, who were Fathers of that Society, they forgot nothing
to persuade her, to put in Execution what she was commanded from God. And as
Ignatius Loyola made a Vow before the Institution of his Order, to go rambling
to Jerusalem, so did likewise this young Woman, upon which she was struck stone
Blind. But this did not hinder her from going thither alone Barefooted, and
living on Alms. (And it was a Miracle indeed, that she could find the way so
well.) Being returned from Jerusalem to Venice, by another Miracle she
recovered her Sight, and other new Visions coming one upon another, to forward
her design of founding an Order, She went at last about it, and found
immediately 76 young Women, ready to embrace her Institution. This unanimous
resolution L' Auth^ur des Habits des Ordres Relig.
of so many at once, seemed to a Popish Author a very great Miracle, though it
was indeed the wise disposition of the Jesuits, who had prepared them long
before for it. A College was then founded and richly endowed for them, where
they began to teach the Women, according to their capacities, as Moreri Dict.
Hist.
the Jesuits do the Men. Their Congregation was first approved in the year 1572,
by Pope Gregory the XIII. at the instance of the Cardinal Charles Borromeo,
Archbishop of Milan, and of Paul Leon, Bishop of Ferrara. Upon this pattern
Magdalen Lullier Lady of St. Beuve, inspired by the Jesuits, founded in the
year 1611, the Urselines in France, and Pope Paul the V. approved their
Establishment and Constitutions. Their first Monastery there is that of Paris,
from whence they have spread themselves through the whole Kingdom, where they
instruct the young Girls, and take Boarders. They are called Urselines, from a
holy Virgin called Ursula, and Daughter (they say) to a King of great Britain,
who suffered Martyrdom, according to some Authors, near Colen on the Rhine,
with Eleven thousand young Ladies, who went to wait on her. I shall not stand
to reharse the History of it, which seems very fabulous, and is variouly Vide
Supplement of Moreris Dictionary at the word* Ursule.
related: The Urselines have also several Convents in Suitsserland, Germany, and
elsewhere. In some places they are confined to their Cloisters, and in others
they have liberty to go abroad, and keep every where an intimate familiarity
with the Jesuits.

Of the Order of the ten Virtues, or Delights of the Virgin Mary, called also
of the Annunciade.
JEAN Queen of France, of Valois, Daughter of Louis the XI. and Spouse of Louis
the XII. King of France, having been repudiated, left the Court full of
discontent, and retired herself in the Duchy of Berry, withdrawing all her
thoughts from the World, which had proved so unfaithful to her. The direction
of her Conscience being in the hands of two Fathers, Cordeliers, who were her
Confessors, they were not wanting to make use of her good Dispositions,
endeavoring to persuade her, that the greatest honor which she might render
to God, was to build some Convents of Nuns of their Order, like that of the Ave
Maria at Paris, Founded by Queen Charllotte of Savoy, her Mother. But this
Princess, either by a greatness of Soul which she had from her Birth, or to get
more reputation in the World, would not hearken to their proposal, for the
propagation of an Order already established; but undertook to found a new one
of her own invention, pretending for it a Revelation, manifested to her by a
Special Voice of the Virgin Mary. The Fathers Gilbert and Nicolas her
Confessors, seeing no hopes for their Order, took at last upon themselves to
help the Princess in her new design, and after to go and look out four Women
for her, upon Condition that they should ^e likewise their Confessors and
Directors. They had the good luck to bring a great number of young Ladies, of
the best Families of Bourges, and by order of the Queen, they composed a Rule
for them, the chiefest business whereof was to honor with a great many Beads
and Rosaries, the ten principal Virtues or Delights of the Virgin Mary. The
first of these Delights and Comforts, was when the Angel Gabriel annunciated to
her the Mystery of the Incarnation, for which these Nuns took also the name of
the Annunciation. The second of these Delights was, when she saw her Son Jesus
brought into the World. The third, when the Wise Men came with Presents to
worship him. The fourth, when she found the Child Jesus, Qestioning the Doctors
in the Temple. I shall not stand to relate the rest, which any one may easily
imagine. Now, for what belongs to our Order of Nuns, the business was, to get
the Confirmation of it in the Court of Rome. They met there with much coldness,
on the side of Pope Alexander the VI. and of the Cardinals, who in hope of
getting a great sum of Money from the Princess, showed themselves very unwilling
to grant it. Upon which Father Gilbert, a subtle cunning Man, was obliged to go
to Rome, where he played them a trick of Cordeliers Craft. He having bribed with
Money the Cardinal John Baptist, Ferrier Datary, and great friend to the Pope:
This Man went in a Morning to frighten the Pope, and his Brethren the
Cardinals, telling them that the glorious Martyr S. Laurence, and S. Francis
had appeared to him, and strictly charged him, to get under pain of their heavy
Displeasure, the Rule and Order of the ten Virtues or Delights of the Virgin
Mary confirmed. The Pope and the Cardinals yielded immedately to it, and this
Confirmation was made the 14 of February, in the year 1501. Leo the X.
confirmed it again in 1517. This Order has been increased very much since in
France, Flanders, and other parts. They wear a gray Habit, with a red Scapulary
and a white Cloak, and have for a Girdle a Cord with ten Knots, in remembrance
of the ten Delights, of the Virgin Mary.

Of another Order of the Annunciade, called Celestes.
THIS was founded at Genoa in Italy, by a Lady of Quality in the year 1600, and
was called of the Annunciade, as making profession of honoring particularly
the Mystery of the Incarnation. There Statutes are like enough to those of
France; but they differ in color of Habits, the Nuns of Italy having them
white, with a Scapulary and a Cloak of a blew color, from whence they are
called Celestes. They receive indifferently into their Convents Widows and
Maids, and do possess many Convents in Italy, where the Genteelness of their
Habits is an enticing Charm to young Ladies.

Of the Order of Clarisses.
Hospin.
THE Institutrice of this Order was one Clara. She was born at Assisy in Italy,
and became a very Superstitious Maid. She went a Pilgrimaging to Jerusalem, to
Rome, and to St. Michel of Mount Gargan, and after much rambling, came
acquainted with Francis of Assisy, and entered into great familiarity with him.
He persuaded her to leave her Father and Mother, and to come under his
Discipline: She followed the advice, and fled from her House one night to
Portiuncule, where this Francis was with his Friars, who received her with
lighted Torches, and great Devotion. There having cut the Hairs off her Head,
she showed herself in this condition the next day, to her Relations who came to
look for her, and by the Vow she said she had made, took from them all hopes of
bringing her home again: She withdrew herself afterward, by Francis's advice
to the Church of St. Damian, and there gave beginning to the poor Maids, called
from her name Clarisses, in the year 1225. So the Brothers Minors of the Order
of St. Francis, acquired to their great satisfaction a Female Order for
themselves; but Gregory the IX. seemed for a while to take delight in crossing
of them, commanding they should not visit the Nuns. But the Holy Clara did
remedy it, and by her Prayers and Intercessions prevailed so much with this
Pontiff, that she made him to recall his Anthonin Paragr. 4.
Decree. She applied herself to the practice of extraordinary Penances, that
spoiled her Constitution, and rendered her very Sickly, bearing also in this
World, the just Pain of her indiscretions. She obtained the Title of the
greatest poverty for her Order, from Innocent the III. and the Opinion of her
Sanctity being spread very far, there were seen both in the Country and in the
Cities, great numbers of Monasteries built for the reception of Women, who
would imitate her Hipocrisy and Superstitions. From that time, this Order, as
well as the others, has increased more and more in the Countries Subject to
Popish Tyranny.

Of the Order of St. Katherin of Siena.
THIS Katherin was born at Siena, a City of Tuscany in Italy. She saw in a
Dream, being yet very young (according to the Relation, she has made herself
of it) the Founders of several Religious Orders, and amongst the others, St.
Dominick holding a Lilly in his Hand (as he is usually painted.) All these
Saints exhorted her to choose a Religion, in Anthonin tit. 23. c. 14. Paragr. 1.
and 4.
which she might render a greater Service to God; and Katherin ran rightly to
St. Dominicus, preferring him before all the others, and begged of him the
Religious Habit of his third Order, which he held in his Hand; and it was
granted her. She was so strangly affected by this Vision, that she afterward
entered that Order, against the Will of her Father and Mother. She was extremely
forward, in the outward practices of Penance, Disciplining her self every day,
even to drawing Blood with Iron Chains, for the Souls in Purgatory. Christ
Jesus (says the Legend of her Life) came very often into her Chamber to visit
her. He brought sometimes along with him the Blessed Virgin Mary his Mother,
sometimes St. Dominic, St. Mary Magdalen, St. John the Evangelist, the Apostle
St. Paul, and other Saints, who came by turns to Chatter with her. And one day
Jesus Christ appeared to her, and at the request of the Virgin Mary, who was
there present, took Katherin visibly for his Wife, giving her a very fine
Ibidem in eadem Legenda.
golden Ring, with four precious Stones, and a very rich Diamond in the midst.
The Witnesses of this Marriage, were St. John the Evangelist, St. Paul, and St.
Dominic, who all the while the Ceremony lasted, sung very Ribaden. in his
Legend.
Melodiously the Psalms of David. All this blessed company being returned to
Heaven, Katherin was left alone with the Ring on her Finger (a sign that there
was nothing of a strong imagination in the whole matter) and she wore it all
her Life long. This holy Virgin being once in Prayer, desired Christ Jesus her
Husband, to take from her, her own Heart, and to give her a new own pleasing to
him. The Divine Bridegoom, not willing to deny her any thing, came near, and
making an Incision into her left Side, plucked out her Heart. So that Katherin
remained for some while without any Heart, until being another day at Prayer in
the Chapel of the Sisters of the Penitence in the Church of the Dominican
Friars of Siena, a Celestial light surrounded her in a moment, and our Lord
Jesus was seen holding in his hand a red shining Heart, and coming near to
Katherin, put it in the Incision which he had made before in her Side; saying,
My Dear, I have taken from thee thy heart, according to thy desire, here I give
thee mine, by which thou shall live. Which having performed, he closed up again
the Wound, and disappeared, but the Scar remained visibly in it, lest any body
might question the truth of this wonderful Operation. Another time Christ Jesus
appeared to her, and Bathed her whole Body, with his own precious Blood, that
sprung out of his Wounds: And another time again he Clothed his dear Spouse,
with a Robe which he drew out of his Sacred Side, all died with his Blood.
Since that time, Katherin did not feel any cold in her Body, even in the midst
of the bitterest Winters. All these and other such like Miracles, which were
daily performed in favor of this Saintess, did not serve a little toward the
increase of her Order. Several young Women joined themselves to her, followed
her practices, and would afterward be called from her name, Nuns of St.
Katherin of Siena. They have yet abundance of very stately and rich Monasteries
in Italy, but are not so unmerciful to their Bodies, as their holy Foundress
was to here is. This is the Female Order of the Dominican Friars.

Of the Order of Repenties, or Penitent Sisters.
JOHN Tisseran, a Franciscan Friar of Paris, Founded in the year 1494, the
Order of Penitent Sisters, in honor of St. Mary Magdalen. He was a great
Preacher, and honest Man. After he had pierced by his Sermons Mor^r^ Di^^. Hi^^*
to the quick, the most hardened Hearts, and converted several debauched Women,
he formed this Institution, that they might retire thither, who by Gods Grace
had forsaken their Sins. He caused a Monastery to be built, and above Two
hundred of these Women offered themselves to come in willingly, and some of
them were permitted to go a begging about for the rest: Such was their
condition in the year 1500, when Louis Duke of Orleans, who was since the XII.
King of that name, gave them his Palace of Orleans, where they had their
Habitation, till in the year 1572, when Queen Katherin of Medicis transferred
them elsewhere. Pope Nicolas the IV. approved this Order, and granted so many
Indulgences, and Blessings to it, that the number of lewd Women increased very
much at Paris, seeing the way so easy to go to Heaven, by entering those
Monasteries, after having led an abominable Life. This Order passed from France
into Italy, where a great many of these Convents are to be seen, they do not
stay now till these debauched Creatures come and surrender themselves
willingly, but they force them to go in, and being Whipped for several days, till
they promise amendment, they are admitted at last to the Holy Habit of that
Religion. If Popery does ever return to London, these Nuns may find a fine
Monastery ready for them in Bridewel.

Of the Order of the Nuns and Monks of Fontevrault.
THIS is an Hermaphrodite Order of both Sexes, and the weaker Sex does command
the other. It was Founded in the year 1100, some while after the Celebration of
the Council of Poitiers, by Robert d' Arbrissel. He was first Archdeacon of
Rennes, and received a particular Mission from Pope Urbanus the II. to go and
instruct the People by his Preaching. He did it accordingly, and with such
success, that seeing himself followed by Crowds both of Men and Women, he built
for them Cells in the Woods of Fontevrault, three Leagues from Saumeur, on the
Confines of Poitou in France. Afterward having set the Women apart, he formed
that famous Monastery, chief of the whole Order, the Abbels whereof is General,
and commands the Men. Pope Paschal approved of it, and his Successors granted
to it fine Privileges. There are reckoned amongst the Abbesses of that place
fourteen Princesses, five whereof have been of the Royal Branch of Bourbon.
Robert d' Arbrissel by subjecting in such manner Men to Women, pretended to
honor the holy History, releated in St. John Chapt. XIX. where it is written,
that Christ being on the Cross, recommended his beloved Disciple St. John to
the Virgin Mary, and commanded him to acknowledge her for his Mother. This
Order is under the Rule of St. Benet, Robert having only added some
Constitutions to it. They have about 60 Monasteries in France: The Nuns wear a
black Habit, with a white Vail, and being at Church, a long black Gown with
large Sleeves. The Monks are all in black as secular Priests, but upon their
Casock they have a Camail, as the French Bishops, at the bottom of which hang
two little square pieces of the same Stuff, one before and the other behind.

Of the Order of St. Briget, for both Sexes.
BRIGET Queen of Sweedland, and Widow, in the year 1360, went to Rome to Pope
Urban the V. to obtain from him the confirmation of a new Order of both Sexs,
which she had instituted (she said) by express command of Christ himself. The
Pope received her very kindly, because she was esteemed as a Saint, and endowed
with the Gift of Prophesy. He confirmed her Order, at the first request she
made for it. Her Institution was in this manner: The Monasteries were built
double. In one half, which was separated from the other by a Wall, were
enclosed the Maids and the Widows, under the dir^ction of an Abbess, and the
other half was Habited by the Men. The Church was so contrived, that it served
both for the Men and the Women, the Monks having the inferior part of it, and
the Nuns the Superior. The Men were to take care of the Spiritual matters, and
the Women of the Temporal. Their Monasteries had generally great Revenues, but
for want of them the Nuns were to work for their living, and that of the Monks;
both M^n and Women were to obey the Abbess. Now since the Rule which St. Briget
brought to Urban the V* to be confirmed, was written and given to her by Christ
himself, as it was acknowledged by this Pope and all his Successors, who
pretended to be the infallible Oracles of Truth; methinks I cannot well forbear
to relate something of it, to the end that Protestants may not be altogether
deprived of the Knowledge of this new Gospel.

The Rule dictated by Jesus Christ himself. in Honor of his Mother the Blessed
Virgin Mary.
Chap. i.
CHRIST says in this Chapter, that Humility, Chastity and willful Poverty,
ought to be the first beginning of this Order. That both the Monks and the
Nuns, ought to possess nothing of their own, not so much as a Farthing, neither
touch with their Fingers Gold or Silver, unless it be in their works of
Embroidery, with the Permission of their Abbess.

Chap. ii.
Christ prescribes the Form of their Beds, Blankets, Bolsters and Pillows.

Chap. iii.
Christ sets down all the Habits and Vails of the Nuns, both for Summer and
Winter: Orders that their Vails be pinned with three Pins, and that there be on
the top of them, a little Crown of white Linen, spotted with little pieces of
read Cloth, cut after the form of drops Blood.

Chap. iv.
Christ will have these good Sisters to recite every day, in honor of the
Virgin Mary his Mother, an Office of three Lessons, with many Ave Maria's, and
Salve Regina's; every Saturday, to have a Mass sung of the Virgin Mary; and lo
here is the Prayer which Christ has himself composed, and will have them to
recite in honor of his Mother. We beseech the O most gracious and bountiful
Virgin Mary, Queen of the World, and of Angels, to refresh the Souls in
Purgatory, to obtain Remission for Sinners, and Perseverance to Just Men, and
to preserve us from all evils, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Chap. v.
Christ does order the hours in which Silence is to be kept, viz. from the
beginning of the Night, till the Mass of his Blessed Mother be ended the next
Morning.

Chap. vi.
Christ forbids the Men to enter the Monastery of his Nuns.

Chap. vii.
Christ sets down which days the Seculars may come to Discourse, and Converse
with the Nuns at the Grate, viz. on Sun-days and Holy Days.

Chap. viii.
Christ prescribes the Fasts of the year, and will have them to fast with Bread
and Water on certain days, especially on the Eves before the Holy Days of the
Virgin Mary. And those days which are not Fasts, they shall Eat Flesh-meat only
at Dinner, and at Supper Fish, Eggs, Milk and other such things.

Chap. ix, x.
Christ gives Rules for the reception of Novices, and sets down very exactly
all the Ceremonies to be performed by the Bishop in their Consecration, and all
the Prayers which he ought to read in giving them the Religigious Habit and
Vail.

Chap. xi.
Christ will not have above sixty Sisters in each Monastery, and in those of
Men thirteen Priests only, in the Honor of the thirteen Apostles, the
thirteenth whereof is St. Paul; besides them there shall be four Evangelists or
Preachers, to represent the four Doctors of the Church, St. Ambrose, St.
Austin, St. Gregory and St. Hierom. There shall be moreover eight Convers
Brothers to serve the Priests. So that (says Christ) reckoning the sixty Nuns,
the thirteen Priests, four Evangelists and eight Convers Brothers, all these
together make up the number of the thirteen Apostles and seventy two Disciples.

Chap. xii.
Christ declares here what Habits the Priests, the Evangelists and Convers
Brothers are to wear. They must be all of a gray Color; but the Priests shall
have on their Cloak a piece of red Cloth cut like a little round Wafer or
Host, as a memorial, that they are to sacrifice every day my Body in the Mass.
As for the Evangelists, they shall wear on their Cloaks little pieces of red
Cloth cut in form of Tongues, because the Holy Ghost has filled them with
Wisdom and Understanding. And the Convers Brothes shall have on theirs a white
Cross, with five little pieces of red Cloth, in honor of my five Wounds.

Chap. xiii.
The Abbess (says Christ) shall be elected from amongst the Sisters, and be
their Mistress; because the Virgin Mary, my Mother, in whose honor this Order
is Instituted, after my Ascension into Heaven, was the Head and Queen of my
Apostles and Disciples.

Chap. xiv.
The thirteen Priests shall wholly apply themselves to Divine Service and
Prayer.

Chap. xv.
The Nuns, the Priests, and the Convers Brothers ought to confess their Sins,
at least, three times in the year.

Chap. xvi.
They shall receive the Holy Sacrament every Holy and Solemn Day, and the most
Devout every Saturday.

Chap. xvii.
Christ orders Penances, and Fasts for delinquent Sisters.

Chap. xviii.
He orders a special Punishment for those, who dying shall be found to have
something of their own.

Chap. xix.
Christ will not have them to receive any Present from their Friends or
Relations.

Chap. xx.
All the Regular Places of a Monastery ought to be built, before the Nuns and
Monks come to live in it. Christ regulates the Foundations and Revenues of each
Convent, and how the Oblations made to them ought to be employed.

Chap. xxi.
Christ orders Thirteen Altars in every Church, a Chalice for each Altar, and
two for the great Altar, with a precious Box to put his Body in. The Relics of
Saints must be shut up in Golden and Silver Boxes. He goes on with the other
Ornaments of the Church.

Chap. xxii.
Christ forbids to receive the Nuns to Profession before eighteen years of Age,
and the Men before twenty five.

Chap. xxiii.
My Mother (says Christ) having divided her time into three parts, one for
praising God with her Mouth, the other to serve him with her Hands, and the
third for her Corporal Necessities; so likewise ought the Sisters to divide
theirs, viz. in praising God, attending to work, and supplying the wants of
their Bodies.

Chap. xxiv.
Christ does not allow to his Nuns, any difference in Eating and Drinking,
being to be served all alike.

Chap. xxv.
Christ orders Iron-Grates, a Turning-Box, to slip every thing necessary into
the Monastery. The Priests shall not enter the Apartment of the Nuns, unless it
be to carry the Sacrament to the Sick, or to bury them when they are dead.

Chap. xxvi.
The Bishop of the Place shall have Jurisdiction, and Right of Visitation in
the Monasteries, both of Men and Women. No Monastery, of this Order, ought to
be built without the Pope's Consent. When this Rule has been confirmed by the
Pope (says Christ) some Benedictines or Bernardine Monks must be desired to
take the trouble to settle and appoint the Chastisements for the Transgression
of this Rule: The Ceremonies for Burials, what the Bishop ought to observe in
his Visitation, and in what case he is permitted to enter the Monastery, and
what is wanting to this Rule, must be supplied by St. Benet's and Bernard's
Rules.

Chap. xxvii.
Christ Commands a Coffin shall be placed at the Church-gate, to the end that
the Sisters looking on it, may be continually mindful of Death.

Chap. xxviii.
Christ promises all kind of Helps to this Order, and abundance of Graces and
Blessings to those who shall maintain the observance of it.

Chap. xxix.
The most part of this last Chapter is employed by Christ, in giving directions
to Briget, how she shall make the Pope and all the World believe, that this
Rule comes immediately from himself. He says, that the Pope shall sufficiently
know by the Wisdom of these Rules, that they proceed from him; and in case he
should question the truth of it, she ought to produce three Witnesses, viz. a
certain Bishop whom she knows, a Monk, and a Priest of her own Country, who
will serve fully to convince him. Christ promises to be very liberal of his
Blessings toward those Cities, Provinces, and Kingdoms who shall be so happy
as (...) contain Monasteries of this Order. He says, that if one does ask him
why he did not give this Rule, nor had it Confirmed before the Creation of the
World? The Reason is, because he was not pleased to do it (Observe how a
foolish Woman makes Christ, the Eternal Wisdom to speak; as if God's
Omnipotency could reach to give a Rule to Monks and Nuns, and have it confirmed
by a Pope, before the Creation o^ the World.)

Lastly, He concludes this Fine Chapter with these Words, worthy of
Observation; Thou, Briget, to whom this Rule is given, shall take care to bring
it to the Pope. I am he, who, when I commanded my Disciples to go to a Town,
and thence to fetch me an Ass, could have made it come to me without their
help, by my Almighty Power. And I could cause now, in a moment, that this Rule
should be brought to the Pope, and be Confirmed by him; but it is Just, that
for greater Spiritual Labors, the Soul should receive a more ample Reward.
Thus does this Rule end, dedicated to Saint Bridget by Christ himself. I have
extracted it from Hospinian; and even for fear of being too long, I have left
out several things which would seem very ridiculous. One may sufficiently see
by what I have here related, how blind the ^gnorance of those Times was. This
Order, notwithstanding the fair Promises which Christ (if we will believe
Popish Lies) made of heaping Blessings upon the Kingdoms, Provinces, Cities,
and Persons who should Found such Monasteries, did not increase in that
measure, which this Bridget did hope for; some few only were seen to start up
here and there in Sweedland, and some few others were built in England, the
first whereof was at Richmond, in the year 1414.

Of the Order of Guastalla.
THAT my Reader may understand better, in what excess of misery these Monkish
Orders, composed both of Men and Women, do end at last; I have reserved for
this place the Order of Guastalla. It was Instituted in the year 1537, at
Mantoua in Italy, by a Countess called Guastalla, at the instigation of Brother
Baptista, of Cremona, a Dominican Friar, and was made up of Monks and Nuns,
who, to overcome Fleshly Lusts, did lay together a Monk with a Nun, in one and
the same Bed, putting a big Wooden Cross between both, which (as they gave out)
had the Virtue to quench Rebellious Concupiscence. But this Cross being but a
very low Auth. ^lv. p. 27.
Wall of Partition, and several scandalous disorders and works of Darkness
arising from this foolish Institution, this infamous Order came to an end at
last, being destroyed all over Italy.

A TREATISE OF Military Orders Regular.
HAVING treated of Monastical Orders, I thought I could not well forbear from
saying something of those Military Orders, who are under Religious Rules and
Vows; setting aside the others, which for distinction from these are called
Secular; as is the Noble Order of the Garter in England, that of St. Michael in
France, of the Annunciade in Savoy, of the Golden Fleece in Spain, and others
who do not properly belong to Monastical History. The most Ancient, and also
the most Famous of the Military Orders Regular, is that of St. John of
Jerusalem, which went likewise formerly under the name of Rhodes, and now under
that of Malta.

Of the Order of Knights of St. John of Jerusalem, alias of Rhodes, now of
Malta.
Moreri.
THIS Order was a very small thing in its beginning. Some Merchants of the City
of Melphi, in the Kingdom of Naples in Italy, who Traded into the East, got
permission from the Calif of Egypt to build for them, and for those of their
Nation, who came in Pilgrimage into Palestina, a House at Jerusalem, paying for
it a yearly Tribute. Some while after they built also two Churches, that of the
Virgin Mary, and that of St. Mary Magdalen, the first for the Men, and the
other for the Women who went thither a Pilgrimaging. This design encouraged
some others to do the like, who Founded likewise a Church, and an Hospital, in
which care was taken of the Sick, and of those who went to visit the Holy
Places. In the year of our Lord 1099, the Christians, under the conduct of
brave Godfrey of Bullen, made themselves Masters of Jerusalem, and the
Hospitalers Brothers of St. John did not a little help Hospinian.
toward it: For observing that the Turks began to lose ground, and to yield to
the vigorous attack of the Besiegers, they fell unawares on their Rear, and
with the help of all the other Christians of the Town, they forced the Guards,
and opened the Gates of the City to the Besiegers. One Gerard Tune was then
their Director, or Grand Master, who having also signalized himself in the
great fight at Ascalon, King Godfrey gave, for a Reward to the Hospitalers,
great Estates and Possessions, to put them thereby in a condition to exercise
Hospitality, and resist the Barbarians that should osfer any injury to Pilgrims
on the Highways. King Baldwin, Successor to Godfrey, loved and favored them
mightily; and it was under his Reign, in the year 1104, that they took the
Religious Habit, to wit, a black Casock, and over it, on the left Side, a white
Cross, with eight Spikes, obliging themselves by Vow, to receive, treat, and
defend Pilgrims; and also to maintain with force of Arms the Christian Religion
in their Country. They followed St. Austin's Rule, except in the Cononical
Office; being obliged, instead of it, to recite every day a certain number of
Pater Nosters. Gerard Tune added to it likewise some particular Constitutions.
About the year 1118, the Ruin of the Christian Affairs, in the East, forced the
Hospitalers to leave Jerusalem; and after the surrender of this City they
retired themselves to Margat, and thence to Aeri, which they defended with
great valor, and followed John of Lusignan, who gave them in his Kingdom of
Cyprus, Limisson, where they staid till the year 1310. And in that very year
they ^ook Rhodes, under the Command of their Great Master F^ulques, of
Villaret; and the following year they defended it against an Army of Saracins,
with the assistance of Ame the IV. Earl of Savoy. The Hospitalers took from
hence, the name of Knights of Rhodes; but were chased since from thence by
Solomon, who took it from them in the year 1522, after a brave Defense. Rome
offered i^s Bosom for their retreat, and Pope Adrian the VI. gave to that Order
the City of Viterbo; and six years after, the Emperor invited them to take
possession of the Island of Malta, in the Adriatic Sea, to cover his Kingdom
of Sicily from an Invasion. They defended valiantly this l^ttle Island against
the Turks, under the Command of their Grand Master John de la Valette Parison.
These Infidels, after the loss of four Months time, of 78000 Cannon Shots, of
15000 Soldiers, and 8000 Seamen, retired with great Confusion. Both the Town
and the Island have been since very strongly fortified. The Order was composed
of eight different Nations; but since the separation of the English from the
Church of home, there are only seven. The first is that of Provence, the Head
of which is Great Commander of that Religion: The second is that of Auvergne,
and its Chief is Marshall of the Order: France is the third, whose Chief is
the Grand Hospitaler: The fourth is Italy, the Head of which is Admiral: The
fifth of Arragon, has the Charge of Great Conservator: Germany is the sixth,
and has that of Great Bailiff of the Order: The seventh is Castiglia, the Head
whereof i^ Great Chancellor: England was formerlv the sixth, and the Chief of
it was Great Turcopolier of the Religion, that is, Colonel of the Horse.
Whosoever desires to be received into that Order, ought to prove his Nobility
for four Generations, as well by his Mothers side, as his Fathers; to be twenty
years old, and born in Lawful Marriage, except the Natural Sons of Kings and
Princes. Amongst the Knights, some have Grand Crosses, who alone can pretend to
the Dignity of Grand Master, who is the Superior and Sovereign of Malta. There
are also Knights Servants, taken from very good Families. The Courage both of
the one and the other does increase every day amongst the continual dangers of
a Bloody War against the most formidable Empire of the Universe, and they are
the Bulwark of Christendom on that side against the Turks. From the year 1099,
to 1663 they have had sixty Grand Masters.

Of the Order of Templars.
Moreri.
THEY began in the year 1118 at Jerusalem: Hugo of Paganis, Geofrey of St.
Omer, and seven others, whose Names are unknown to us, Consecrated themselves
to the Sevice of God after the manner of the Regular Canons, and made their
Profession in the Hands of the Patriarch of Jerusalem. Balduinus II. King of
Jerusalem, lent them a House near the Temple of Solomon, from which they had
the name of Templars, or Knights of the Temple. In the mean while, as they
lived only by Alms, the King, the Prelates, and Lords of that Kingdom gave them
Estates, some for a while, and some for ever. The Aim of this Institution was,
to defend the Pilgrims against the ill usages of the Infidels, and to keep the
ways free for those who would make a Journey to Jerusalem. These Nine First
Knights, did admit none into their Society, till in the year 1128, after a
Celebration of a Council held at Troyes in Champagne. Hugo of Paganis came to
it with five of his Brethren, and asked for a Rule. Bernard, Abbot of
Clairvaux, who was there present, was appointed to draw them one; and it was
ordered that they should wear a white Habit; and since, viz. in the year* 1146,
Eugenius the III. added to it a red Cross on their Cloaks. After that, this
Order grew for some while to a great Honor and Reputation, and got so great
Fortunes and Estates by their Valor, that Matthew Paris assures, their Riches
were immense, and that they had nine thousand regular Houses. Such a Hosp. de
Orig. Mon. l. 5. c. 20.
flourishing Condition raised a mortal Envy in the Hearts of all the other
Knights and Monks, who could not bear to see them in that Greatness and Power.
Nay, several Princes and Kings conceived Jealousy against them; and above all
others, Pope Clement the V. This Pope, fearing lest they might Anthonin tit.
21. c. 1. ss. 3.
take from him his Papal Crown, made use dexterously of the Covetous Humor of
Philip le Bell, King of France, to persuade him to extirpate them out of his
Kingdom. This Prince having given his Word for the doing of it, upon Condition
of being invested with all their Estates in his own Dominions, the Pope H^rm.
M^n^r. in Man. Chron. fol. 368.
went about to persuade other Christian Princes to do the same. Which succeeded
so well, that at one and the same time, upon a signal given, all these poor
Knights, not thinking of so Deplorable and Tragical an End, were unmercifully
murdered. This Pope, or rather this Monster of Cruelty, to give some Color to
so Barbarous an Execution, had them charged with several horrid Crimes, and
took care they should be published, but never was able to prove any of them.
James of Morlai, Gentleman of Burgundy, Grand Master of the Templars, was burnt
alive at Paris, with two of his Knights, in the year 1313, and several others
were publicly executed in other Provinces; nor was it possible to make them
confess the Crimes wherewith their Order was accused, though they were offered
Paul. Aeemil Ursper. Paral.
their Lives if they would do it. They persisted always saying, they would not
defile, with so execrable Lies, the Nobility and Glory of their Order. Pope
Clement the V. desirous to have the satisfaction to see burnt alive one of the
Knights of that Order, being then at Bourdeaux with Philip le Bell; they were
looking both of them out of a Window, and the poor wretched Knight who was
carried to Execution, having spied them, spoke thus to them, Fulg. l. 1. c. ^.
Being not permitted to appeal to another Tribunal for my defense, you Clement,
the unmerciful Tyrant, and you King Philip, I cite you both within a year and a
day before the just Tribunal of God; there I shall expose the innocence of my
Cause. Hosp. de Orig. Mon. l. 5. c. 2^.
Accordingly the Pope and the King died, both in the same year. After the
extirpation of the Templars, they enriched themselves with their Spoils, and
the Estates which they possessed in the other Kingdoms, were divided between
the Knights of Rhodes, who are now those of Malta, and the Teutonicks.

Of the Knight-Order of Montjoye.
Moreri.
POPE Alexander the III. established this Order at Jerusalem, and Confirmed it
in the year 1180. under the Rule of St. Basil. They wore a Red Cross, and were
Instituted Tamb. de droit des Abbes.
for to go and fight the Infidels. King Alphonsus, the Wise, called for them
into Spain for to fight the Moors; and having allowed them Revenues, gave them
the name of Knights of Mofrack; but under the Reign of King Ferdinandus, they
were united to the Order of Knights of Calatrava.

Of the Order of Avis of Portugal.
Moreri.
ALphonsus, the I. King of Portugal, having Conquered, in the year 1147, the
Town of Evora, from the Moors, and ascribing this to a singular Favor of the
Virgin Mary, he established, for the defense of that Le Mire Orig. Ord. Equest.
City, Knights, who signalized themselves under the Name of Brethren of St. Mary
of Evora. Some while after, they had a Great Master, who was Ferdinandus of
Montereiro. They received the Rules of Cisteaux; and John Civita, Abbot of that
Order, framed them some particular Constitutions, in the year 1162. Pope
Innocent the IV. approved in the year 1204. this Establishment, which proved
very advantageous to Christianity, by the continual Victories which these
Knights obtained over the Rescentius de Antiq. Urb. Ebor.
Moors. This Order had already the name of Avis, from a Castle of that Name,
which Sanches the I. had given them, in acknowledgment of the great Services
they had done him upon all occasions. They wor^ the white Habit of Cisteaux,
and their Arms were Gold, with a Sinople Floree-Cross, and two Sable Birds on
the top, in allusion to the word Avis, which signifies Bird. In the year 1213,
Rodrigues Garcia de Asa, Grand Master of the Order of Calatrava, with the
consent of his Knights, gave to the Order of Avis, several Places, which they
did possess in Portugal. Which Generosity did engage them so far, that for an
eternal acknowledgment, they desired a greater union with them, and submitted
willingly to the Order of Calatrava; but some differences arising afterward in
the Wars of the Portuguese with the Castillans, they refused obedience to it.
This happened under John the Great, of Portugal. He was Natural Son to Juesticier
Peter, and Ascended the Throne in the year 1385.

Of the Order of St. Lazarus.
Moreri.
THE Western Christians being Masters of the Holy Land, established it; and it
was a distinct Order from the Templars, Teutonicks, and those of St. John of
Jerusalem. Pilgrims were received there, in Houses founded purposely for them,
and were to be conducted on the Highways, and defended by them against the
Mahometans. The Popes granted great Privileges to it, and Princes great
Possessions. Louis the VII. King of France, gave Le Mire Orig. des Ord. Milit.
them in the year 1154, the Territory of Boigny, near Orleans, where these
Knights fixed the Seat of their Order when the Christians were driven from
Palestine. Nevertheless, as they were become unprofitable, they were also
slighted; insomuch that the Knights of Malta obtained very easily from Pope
Innocent the VIII. the suppression of this Order, and its union with theirs.
But those of France having carried their Complaints to the Parliament, i^ was
ordered there, that this Order should subsist independent, and by it self,
throughout all the French Dominions. Pope Pius the IV. willing that his Family
should make an advantage of the Wrack of these Knights, conferred the
Mastership of it in Italy, to Janot of Castillon, his Relation; and after his
Death, Pope Gregory the XIII. gave it entirely to Duke Emmanuel Philebert, of
Savoy, and to all his Successors, uniting it with the Order of St. Mauricius.
But this having no place in France, Aimar of Chartres, Knight of Malta,
undertook to bring i^ again to a flourishing Condition. Philibert of Nerestan,
Captain of the Life-Guards, succeeded him in the same design, and employed so
successfully his Power at the French Court, that King Henry the IV. made him
Grand Master of it, in the year 1608, and obtained from the Pope a very
advantageous Bull for this Order, by which they have power to Marry, and to
hold Pensions, arising from Consistorial Benefices. So that this Order is not
now what it was in its first Institution, and serves only for to have a Wife,
and a golden Cross hanging on their Necks.

Of the Order of Calatrava, in Spain.
IT was Instituted under Sanches the III. Moreri Dict. Hist.
King of Castilla. This Prince having Conquered the strong Castle of Calatrava,
from the Moors of Andalousia, gave it to the Knights Templars, who wanting
Courage to defend it, returned it to him again. Dom Raimond, born of Bureva in
Navarra, Abbot of the Monastery of Hytero, of the Order of Cisteaux,
accompanied with several Gentlemen, offered themselves to defend this place,
which was granted to them, and the Order was established in the year 1158. It
increased so much under the Reign of Alphonsus, the Noble King of Castilla,
that the Knights demanded to have Grand Masters. They went on very Fran. Brav.
de Acun. del Orig. and Prog. del Ord. d^ Call.
successfully till the year 1489, in which time, Ferdinandus and Isabella
annexed the Great Mastership of Calatrava to the Crown of Castilla. Pope
Alexander the III. approved this Order, in the year 1164, and Innocent the III.
confirmed it in 1198. They have yet in Spain eighty Commanderships. At the
beginning, the Knights wore the Habit of Cisteaux, but Pope Benet the XIII.
dispensed with it; and Paul the III. gave them permission once to Marry: So
that they are not neither what they were formerly, the Popes having been
themselves the chief Promoters of their Remissness. Their Arms are Gold, with a
Flowree-Cross of Gules, sided with two Azur Hand*Fetters. The Knights wear also
a red Cross on their Breasts.

Of the Order of Knights of Alcantara.
Moreri.
ALcantara, a Town of Estramadura, on the River Tagus, was taken from the
Moors, in the year 1212, by Alphonsus, the IX. King of Castilla, who committed
it to the care of the Knights of Calatrava, and two years after it was given to
the Knights of the Pear Tree, whose Order was Instituted in the Mariana l. 12.
Hist. c. 3.
year 1170, by Gomez Fernandus and approved by Pope Alexander the III. in the
year 1177, under the Rule of St. ^enet. They took since, the name of that Town,
and the green Cross, or Sinople beset with Flowers de-lis. Some Scandalous
disorders, that happened amongst these Knights, obliged them to ask Permission
to Marry, which was granted them in the year 1540. Nevertheless, the Mastership
of this Order, as well as that of Calatrava, was united to the Crown of
Castilla, under the Reign of Ferdinandus and Isabella.

Of the Order of Knights of St. James'.
Moreri
THIS is also called the Order of the Sword. Some Regular Canons having
observed that the Pilgrims who went to visit the Relics of St. James of
Compostella, were ill used by the Moors, built several Hospitals for their
reception, and 13 Gentlemen offered their Swords to defend them. This was
properly the beginning of that Order, which was approved by Pope Alexander the
III* in the year 1175, and by Innocent the III. in 1198* The Knights observed
the Rules of S. Austin, and Monastical Vows; but since they were permitted to
Marry. The ancient Arms of this Order, were Gold with a Sword of Gules and a
Shell of the same, with this Motto, Rubet ensis sanguine Arabum; but now they
are a Cross made in the form of a Sword, with a Heart for the Pommel, and the
Hilt made in the figure of a Flower-de-lis. This was R^derick of Toledo.
established in Castilla and Portugal. The King of Spain is the Grand Master of
it, since the Reign of Ferdinandus and Sabella, who obtained it from Pope
Alexander the VI.

Of the Order of Teutonick Knights, Marrianes, or Sword-bearers.
Moreri.
THIS Order was established after the Conquest of the Holy Land, by the
Christians of the West. It was founded at Jerusalem by some Germans, who built
there an Hospital for the Pilgrims of their Nation, and a Church in honor of
the Virgin Mary, from whence they were called Marianes. They took the Title of
Teutonicks, the Rule of St. Austin, and a white Cloak with a Cross of Sable,
and in the midst, another little Silver Cross. Pope Celestin the III. approved
this establishment 1195, and several other Popes granted to it great
Privileges. Henry of Valpot, was the first Master of the Order. After Aubert
le Mire de Orig. Ord. Equest. l. 1. c. 3.
the loss of the Holy Land, these Knights retired themselves into Germany. They
Conquered afterward all Prussia, whereof they took the name, and for above Two
hundred years, made themselves formidable to their Neighbors, until Albertus
of Brandenburg, who was their Grand Master, embraced the Protestant Religion,
and became a Secular Prince of Prussia in the year 1525. Then the Knights
returned into Germany, where they had already great Possessions, and elected
for their chief or Grand Master, Albertus of Volfang. Since that time the
Eldest Sons of German Princes and Lords, do possess the Estates of that Order,
in Quality of Teutonick Knights, but observe the ancient Constitutions of the
same.

Of the Order of Christ's Militia, for the extirpation of the Albigenses.
Mr. de Thuy Etats and Emp. Traitte des Ord. Milit.
DOminick, Institutor of the Order of Preachers or Dominican Friars, having
un^ertaken to reduce to the Roman Church the Albigenses, who with much reason
had sepaparated from it, Instituted the Order of these Soldiers, who were to
extirpate with the Material Sword, those of the Albigenses, Heretics (as he
called them) who would not submit to the Spiritual Sword of God, which was
manifested (he said) by his own Sermons. He ordered for these Knights, or
rather for those Bloody Dogs, a Spiritual Rule above the common one of
Seculars, and beneath that of the Religious. They were called at that time, the
Brothers of the Militia of St. Dominick, and when these Murderers had done
cutting the Throats of these poor People, having nothing more to do, they
retired with their Women to their Houses, living there a wicked and idle Life;
observing only some silly Rules which the Dominican Friars gave them, and were
called afterward the Brothers of the Penitence of St. Dominicus.

Of the Knights of the Virgin Mary, in Italy.
M. de Thuy Traitte des Ord. Milit.
IN the year 1233. Bartholomew of Vicence, of the Order of Preachers, was the
Author of these Knights, whom he instituted to maintain Peace in all the Cities
of Italy, and exterminate all sorts of Discord and Divisision. Pope Vrbanus the
IV. in the year 1262 approved of it. Their Habit was a white Robe, with another
gray one, and they wore a Purple Cross in a white Field, with some Stars on the
top of it. They took also under their protection the Widows, and the Signion.
Orphans. They were since called merry Brothers, because they lived without
care, and a very pleasant Life in their Houses.

Of the Order of Knights of Montese, or Brothers of our Lady.
M. de Thuy des Ord. Milt.
THE Knights of Montese, were so called from the Place of their first
residence, having been instituted at the same time, when the Templars were
abolished, and whose Estates they got in the Kingdom of Valence, upon condition
they should Defend its Frontier Places against the Moors. Their Order was
approved by Benet XIII. and Martin V. They wore a white Habit, and a read Cross
over it.

Of the Order of Christ-Knights in Portugal.
Dionysius Perioca, King of Portugal, Nephew to Alfonsus the X. King of
Castiglia, Instituted this Order, commonly called of Portugal, or of Christ. He
ordered them to wear a black Habit, and black Cross. Pope John the XXII. in the
year 1321, commanded M. de Thu^ des Orig. de Cheval.
them to follow St. Benet's Rule. Their Duty is to make War against the Moors,
who inhabit Besica. It is by their means that the Portuguese Empire has
strecht it self very far in the East, in Africa, in Brasil, and other Western
Countries.

Of the Knights of St. Georges of Carinthia.
Moreri.
THIS Order was founded in the year 1470, by Frederick the IV. Emperor, and
first Archduke of Austria. The Knights were under the Rule of St. Austin, and
obliged to defend the Frontier Places of Hungary, and Bohemia against the
Turks. Frederic^ gave to V^lfang l. 3 Hist. Austriacae.
the first Grand Master of that Order, and to his Successors, the Title of
Prince, with the Town of Milestad in Carinthia. He founded there likewise, a
College of Regular Canons of St. Austin, under the direction of the Bishop, who
was to be one of these Knights. This Order was since brought weary low, and the
Emperor Maximilian designed to reestablish it, had not the Civil Wars hindered
him from the performance of it.

A List of the Order of Knights, Instituted by the Popes.
THE Knights of Christ, by Pope John XXII. wear a red Cross.

The Knights of the Holy Ghost, wear a white Cross.

The Knights of S. Peter, by Leo the X. against the Turks.

The Knights of S. Georges, by Alexander the IV.

The Knights Pii, Instituted in the year 1560, by Pope Pius the IV. who gave
them his name. And for this very reason, he would have them to go before the
Knights of all other Crowns, even those of Malta.

The Knights of Lorreto, Instituted in the year 1586, by Sixtus the V.

The Knights of St. Anthony.

The Knights of Julius.

Conclusion of Military Order.
THERE are, as I already have mentioned, two sorts of Knights, one of Regulars,
and the other of Seculars. The Regulars may be divided again, according to the
end of their Institution, into Knights who do profess to sight against the
Turks and other Insidels, and into Knights Instituted to destroy all those, who
do not submit themselves to the Church of Rome. As for the first, one cannot
deny, but they have done great Services to Christendom, by the brave
Expeditions, wherewith they have signalized themselves, and the great Victories
they have got over the Enemies of Christianity; and they would deserve indeed
more praises yet, if Christ had left us any Precept, to propagate his Holy
Religion, with Fire and Sword. There is no reward, as I know of, promised, to
those who shall destroy the Infidels, but for those who shall work their
Conversion. I don't question, but the Knights of Malta are good Soldiers, and
that the persuasion they have, that by spilling Turkish Blood they save their
Souls, and acquire great Merits before God; has a considerable influence upon
their Enterprises, upholds them in the midst of the greatest Dangers, and makes
them to sight like Lions; but who is the Warrant of all those fair Promises in
the other World, but the Pope's Word alone? Nevertheless, I must say in honor
of those of Malta, that they are now the only Knights true to their Profession,
of fighting against the Infidels. The others, as the Teutonicks in Germany, do
indeed enjoy great Estates, but where is their Standards, where are their
Military Expeditions? What is become of that Noble, Acient Valor, which made
them formerly the Bulwark of Christendom in Hungary against the Turks? It seems
now turned entirely against Pots and Drinkingglasses, Hospin.
says a very grave Author. I pass from these Orders to those that are
Instituted, to destroy the Enemies of the Popish, See, whom they call
Heretics, and especially the Protestants. As we are very reasonably persuaded,
that the Church of Rome is not only full of Errors, but also possessed with a
Spirit of Persecution and bestial Fury against those who refuse to embrace
them; we can give no other name, but that of Barbarous Cuthroats, to those
wretched persons, who by a Sacrilegious and abominable Vow, do promise at the
Altars, to promote with their Fortunes and Lives, her Bloody designs and
Vengeances against those who maintain the Purity of the Faith. The Dragoons,
who in our days so cruelly persecuted the Reformed Churches of France, wanted
nothing but to make Vows, for to be Knighted at Rome, or rather to become yet
more worthy of Hell. These Dragoons put me in mind of the Order of the Dragon,
Instituted in Germany by Le Sieur de Thuy de l' Orig. des Ordes Militaries.
the Emperor Sigismond. This Prince (says a Popish Author) showed so great a
Zeal for the advancement of the Christian Religion, that not satisfied with
having so often fought the Turks, and got many Victories over them, at his
instance two General Councils were called, one at Constance, and the other at
Basil, for the extirpation of Heresy and Schism; especially in Bohemia and
Hungary; and for a lasting Monument of his Devotion, he Instituted the Military
Order of the Dragon, so called, because these Knights had for their Coat of
Arms, a Precipitated Dragon, as a sign that Heresy and Schism, (those venomous
and pestiferous Dragons) were by him vanquished and supplanted. This is the
Notion which this Author gives us of that Order, which manifestly shows, to
what Merit and Honor these deluded People think they arrive, by the
Persecution which they raise against the true defenders of the Gospel. Time
will come, says Christ, when those who Persecute you, shall think they do
great Service to God. As for the Secular Orders of Knights, having not Treated
of them in this Book, it would be superfluous to give here the Character of
them. I only say, that most of these Orders being Instituted, to establish a
true Submission of the Subjects to their Princes, or a perfect Friendship
amongst equals; or lastly, to serve for Badges of Nobility, and honor to
distinguish Illustrious and brave Men, they cannot but produce very good
effects in those Kingdoms, where they are established; and Crowned Heads will
always do well to make them Glorious, by becoming themselves the Heads of them.

A CONCLUSION OF THE Whole WORK.
NO Body will deny, but it is very advantageous to retire now and then into
Solitude, far from the noise and dissturbances of the World, there to examine,
more at leisure, and with a composed mind, the State of his own Conscience, and
the Ways of Salvation; to the end that one may dispose himself to discharge
better afterward his great Duties toward God, and to order more charitably
his Employments and Conversation amongst men. A Retirement made for such good
Ends and Purposes, cannot but be very good and commendable; and in this sense
ought to be understood all the Elogies which the Holy Doctors, and First
Fathers of the Church have given to Solitude. Christ himself has commended the
same by his own Example, when he retired into desert places upon the Mountains,
with his Disciples, where he taught them to pray, and instructed them in all
the duties of the Gospel. He gave them in the Solitude, those Precepts which
they were to practice in the Cities; insomuch that all these Retirements were
only ordered for to converse better afterward in the World.

The Romanists, who commonly take things very materially, without well
examining what goes before, and what after, were not wanting to pronounce, that
because Christ did practice Retirement, this same Retirement, considered
absolutely in it self, without reference to the end for which it was chiefly
intended, was to be looked upon as the most perfect State in which a Christian
may live, not observing, that it was only to be considered as an excellent
means for better ordering civil Life. Upon this mistaken Principle, are
grounded all the the Monastical Orders of the Church of Rome; and the Monks are
called, by a very improper Emphasis, Religious Men, which is as much as to say,
perfect Christians. Would to God they were so indeed, or at least that they did
come something near to the simplicity and honesty of Life of the most part of
the first Monks, who inhabited, in the Third and Fourth Ages, in the Deserts of
Palestina and Thebaide; they in this case should be only guilty of a little too
much Superstition, which the uprighness of their Hearts might render excusable
both before God, and before Man. But the Monks of our times have brought things
to such a point of Abomination, by their Hypocrisies, Cheats, perfidious and
infamous Practices, that happy a thousand times those Kingdoms and People are,
who see themselves freed from such a Brood of Vipers, who tear in pieces the
very Bowels of those who cherish them in their Bosoms. Nevertheless, I know
very well, that these wretched persons, well stocked with impudence, are very
eager in taxing the Protestants with being declared Enemies to those very
Christian Virtues, Poverty, Chastity, and Obedience, endeavoring by that means
to render them more odious to those of their own Party. But in this they are
very unjust, because there is never a good Protestant but will acknowledge,
that voluntary Poverty for the love of God, is a great Treasure to a Christian,
who knows how to make a good use of it; that Chastity is a Virtue, beloved both
of God and of Angels; and that Obedience to lawful Superiors, Spiritual and
Temporal, is a necessary Virtue, to maintain that good order of things, which
God has established here on Earth. All the disference between a Papist and a
Protestant in this Point is, that the first believes, that he can make bold
with God's Gifts, dispose of them after his own Will, and make a Vow
beforehand, to observe what is not in his own power to perform, unless it be
given him from above; exposing himself thereby to an evident danger of becoming
perjured and Sacrilegious, in not performing his solemn Oath and Promises. The
other, on the contrary, has a just and respectful sentiment of Gods Grace and
his Holy Gifts, which being merely free, are above our natural reach, and
therefore must be fervently prayed for, and when given, humbly received; but
not disposed of beforehand, as being not sure, if God will be pleased to
bestow them upon us. It is then the Vow that is found fault with, as Bold and
Rash, and not the Virtues, which are Heavenly and Holy This Declaration, I hope
will be enough fore the present, to defeat all these odious Calumnies laid so
unjustly by Popish Monks and Priests at the Protestants doors, viz. that they
hate Retirement, Christian Poverty, Chastity and Obedience. Having done with
this, I come to another Observation, concerning the beginning of Monastical
Orders.

In the first page of this History, where I say, that it is generally agreed
that Monastical Institutions, did begin toward the middle of the third Age; I
dicourse only to those who have truly, unpartially, and with unprejudiced mind
inquired into these matters. I know very well, that some Popish Writers blinded
by a false Zeal for Monkery, have been so hot in pushing it up, as to make
Monks, of almost all the Ancient Fathers, and the Primitive Christians; of the
Holy Apostles and the Blessed Jesus him, St. John the Baptist, Elias, and the
Sons of the Prophets; Noah in the Ark, and a long time before him Enos. Nay,
they go back beyond the World, and say, that God before the Creation of the
Universe was a Monk (...) alone. As for this last, I make no disficulty to call
it a down right Impiety and Profaneness, to raise such ridiculous comparison,
between their filthy Monks and Almighty God. And for Enos the Son of Seth, the
only ground they have to assert that he was a Monk, is, because its said in
Scripture, that he begun to call upon the name of the Lord. If to begin to call
in a special manner upon the name of the Tho. Wald l. 3. Doct. fidei ar^. 1. c.
1. Corn. a lap. in Genesis p. 91. Bellarm. l. 1. de Mon. c. 1. p. 1512. Torniel.
in Annal sac. and prof. ad an. 236. n. 4. p. 69. petrus Come c. 33. in Genes.
Middend. l. 1. Hist. Monast. c. 1. p. 4. 2 Reg. 7.
Lord, is as they would have it, to be a Monk, to be sure our first Reformers,
who, departing from Idolatrous Popery, called in an undefiled manner upon the
name of the Lord, must have also their Lot amongst the Monks. Noah, they say,
and all those who entered the Ark, were Monks and Nuns; because both Men and
Women, by Gods Special command, were all the while of the Flood separated one
from another. Oh the neat interpretation of Scripture! Let them go on with
Elias, and the Sons of the Prophets, Monks they were, because Elias wandered
from one Desert to another, till he came to Mount Oreb; and the Sons of the
Prophets, had removed their Habitations to the River Jordan; but do we not
know, the cause of Elias flying into the Desert? It was by a Special Command of
God, and for a while only, that he should not fall into the Hands of King Ahaz,
and Queen Jezabel, who would have put him to Death; and he was some time after
ordered by God to return into the Cities, to teach and 2 Reg. c. 19.
to discharge there the office of a Prophet. As for the Sons of the Prophets,
some of them indeed left their former Habitations, because 4 Reg. c. 6:
they were too narrow for them, and builded others near Jordan of a bigger
compass; not to live there as the Monks of our days, in Leaziness by
themselves, and to themselves, but to be instructed by the Prophets in all
Piety 1 Samuel c. 10. 2 Reg. c. 2. and 6.
and Learning; and sent afterward to Preach unto the biggest Cities, as Rhama,
Hierico, Ramoth, Galaad, Bethel, etc. where they came to fix their Abode. In
all this, there is nothing of an Heremetical or Monastical Institution. I pass
to St. John the Baptist, of whom it is written, that he lived in the Desert,
until the day Hosp. de Orig. Mon. l. 11. c. 3.
of his manifestation in Israel. By this Desert, says the Learned Hospinian, we
must not understand a Solitary place, far from the Towns and from human
Conversation; but his Father Zacharia's House, where John the Baptist lived
with his Relations, which House was built in that Country, which is called in
Scripture Desert, because it was ^illy and pretty full of Woods, and not so
much Habited as the others; yet there were in that Country six Josue. c. 15.
Towns, one of which was Juda, where Zacharias had his House, and John the
Baptist lived there with him, till the appointed time that he was called by
God, to perform his Office both of Preaching and Baptizing. I have already
spoken here above of our Blessed Saviors Retirement into Solitude, and of what
instruction it does afford to us. Now it will not be a hard matter to vindicate
the Holy Apostles, from their having been Monks. They whose Mission was to all
over the World, to Preach the Gospel to all Nations, and who did converse both
with the Jews and the Gentiles, were very far from being Solitaries. Nor can
the Romanists say, that the Apostles were Monks by their condemning Marriage,
as the Monks do, since all of them (according to St. Ambrosius) St. John the
Evangelist only excepted, were Married and had Wives. But says the Popish
Monk, they lived some while together, and did possess every thing in common, as
we do, therefore they were Monks as we are. If this be to be a Monk, then
Pythagoras and his Disciples, who possessed likewise every thing in common,
were Monks; then all the Primitive Christians who did the same, were so. Nay,
all Married People who maintain big Families of one and the same Stock, and
live together, are Monks. We see then what poor and silly Arguments these
well-wishers to Monastic Antiquity do bring, to make their Ridiculous
Imaginations, go down with the Ignorant People* and to make it appear that the
Apostles were Monks, and Founders of the Prosper Stellar. de Reg. M. p. 30.
Monastic Order of Lateran, called Regular Canons. So does Pope Pius the IV.
speak of them. Canonici Regulares fuerunt and sunt de illis Clericis a St.
Augustino, quinimo a sanctis Bulla data Romae Ann* 1564. 18. Jan.
Apostolis institutis. The Regular Canons have been, and are of those Clarks
instituted by St. Austin, nay, by the Apostles themselves. With the same
facility one may answer, what the Papists say of some particular Religious
Orders, pretended to have been Founded by St. Barnabas in Italy, by St. Mark
Evangelist at Alexandria, by St. John the Evangelist at Ephesus, by St. Paul at
Iconium, by Lazarus, Martha and Maria Magdalen at Marseilles in France, by
Ignatius at Anticch, by Clemens, Thelesph^rus, Dionisius, Cletus, Narcissius,
Frontonius, Beatus, and many others in several places in the two first Ages.
The mistake of the Romanists in this Point, proceeds from three heads. First,
from their living in common, which for several good reasons, was established
amongst the Christians of the Primitive Churches, to which they give the name
of Monastical Life. Secondly, From the retreat of the first Christians, to
Solitary places during the Storms of Persecution: And thirdly, From the
voluntary Retirement of some eminent men into Solitude, who betook themselves
thither for a while, the better to apply themselves to their Studies. As to the
first, I say, that their Life in common, established amongst the Christians of
the former times was so far from having been a Monastical Life, or the pattern
of it, that it was quite contrary to it. For what is more opposite to a
Solitary state, than to live many together, in order to be continually applied
to Charitable Offices in the World, as to take care of the Orphans and Widows,
to visit the Sick, to comfort the Afflicted, and to relieve the Poor; which to
do more effectually, these first and truly Charitable Christians sold their
Estates, and brought the Money, laying it at the feet of the Apostles; not
indeed as the bony Friars of the Romish Church do, who pretending to despise
the World, retire with what they have, or what they can scrape from their
Families, into rich and well endowed Houses; there to enjoy their Prey, in
company of Cheats and lazy Fellows, bidding farewell to all the good Works
practiced in the World. For the second head mistake, it has not better
Foundation than the former. God be praised for these Blessed times, in which we
enjoy here in England, the liberty of our Religion; but if he was pleased to
let a time of Persecution come, and we were obliged to hide our selves in
Deserts, Grottos and Caves, in the days of Wrath and Indignation, should we be
called Monks and Friars for doing so? As for the third head of mistake, it is
methinks, of so weak and so slight constitution, that unless one has a great
mind to be mistaken, it cannot stand by it self. Every one knows, that
Retirement and Solitude are a great help to Studies, and extraordinary
Application of Mind, and therefore the ancient Fathers of the Primitive
Churches, when not only the Jews and the Gentiles endeavored with human Wisdom
and Philosophy, to overthrow the Principles of Christianity, but many Heretics
and false Christians made it their business also to corrupt, deprave, and
undermine the soundness of Christian Doctrine and Piety; then I say, the Holy
Fathers and Doctors of those Times, did not think fit amiss to retire now and
then into Solitude, there the better to apply their Minds to untie and dissolve
the Sophistical and deceitful Arguments of their Adversaries, and to explain in
their learned Writings, the eminent Truths contained in the Gospel. Their
Solitude became then, by the good use they made of it, a Blessing to themselves
and to the World, but was not looked upon as an holy State by it self, and most
pleasing to God, till in the third Age; when this Error together with
Monastical Discipline, begun first to creep into the Church, as it is generally
agreed upon by all good and impartial Writers. Neverthel^ss, some Popish
Authors have not only taken the boldness, to pretend these to be the times for
the Institution of Monks; but even the confidence to assert that it is so true,
that Monkery was Prosper Stellartius Ord. Heremit. S. Aug. Tract. de Reg. Mon.
hatched as soon as Christianity it self; that Christ could not well dispense
with it, nor frame a perfect Church here on Earth without Monks. The two
reasons which they bring, to prove the two parts of their Assertion are these,
viz. that Christ being come into the World not to break, but to fulfill the Law
of Moses, his Office was to substitute the Reality to every Shadow or Figure
represented in it; but there was, they say, a Shadow of Monastical Life in the
Pharisees, Saducees, Esseans, etc. Therefore Christ could not dispense with the
Institution, of true and perfect Monks, (such as they pretend to have in the
Popish Church.) The second Argument runs thus, Christ would not have been able
to Frame a perfect Church, if he had left out the most Holy and perfect State
of human Life; but such a State is that of the Monks, therefore without them,
he could not have Framed a perfect Church. Amongst several silly proofs, which
they make use of to back this last Minor Proposition, I find this, viz. That
the most part of the World has been so fully persuaded, that Monastical Life
is the most pefect State here on Earth, that even the Pagans themselves, the
Indians, the Turks, and the most barbarous Nations have their Monks, and the
ancient Romans had some likewise, and consecrated Virgins, whom they called
Vestals; and they conclude upon the whole, that Christ could not exclude that
State from his Church, and that it would be a great shame for Christians, if
they were alone deprived of Holy Friars and Monks. I do not think it worth my
while, ^o make here a long Discourse, to discover the foulness of these rotten
Arguments. I say only as to the first, that though Christ was to substitute
Reality to every Figure of the Old Testament, yet every Institution, or
Observance of the Old Testament was not a Figure, but might come to an end with
the Law. As for Example, the exacting Eye for Eye, Tooth for Tooth, was an
Observance of the Law, which we see has been quite and clean abolished by
Christ; so we know likewise, that amongst the Jews were some kinds of Monks,
viz. the Nazareens, the Recabites, Saducees, Pharisees, and Esseans. But
besides that, they were most of them dangerous Heretics, we do not see, that
Christ has ever commended their Institutions, or Persons in the Gospel; on the
contrary we read how often he forwarned his Disciples, and first Believers, to
beware of them in the presence of the Pharisees, who were at that time, the
chiefest and most esteemed Monks amongst the Jews; and how many Woes he
pronounced against their Singular and Hypocritical Practices, as contrary to
Communion or common Union and Charity. Now to Answer the Second Point.

It Is true indeed, that the Pagans and Infidels had, and have still amongst them
several sorts of Monks, perhaps not very unlike those of Polydor. Vergil. l. 7.
c. 7. de Invent. rerum.
the Church of Rome. There were of old the Brothers of the Goddess of Siria,
who, like the Popish Mendicant Friars, went from one place to another, with the
Statue of their Goddess, offering their Clothes to Kiss, selling their
Prayers, and cheating the poor Country People, of their Goods and Moneys. The
Druides among the Gauls, were famous heathenish Monks, who lived in the Woods,
making their continual Sacrifices to their Gods; they were in great repute and
veneration, enjoyed great Privileges and Immunities, and served not their Gods
for nothing. There were likewise other Monks of the Grandmother of the Gods,
called the Brothers of Cibele, Curetes, Corybantes, or Dactyli Idaei, who lived
upon the Mountains of Phrygia. The Romans had a College, or Monastery for the
Brothers called Arvalos, whose office was to Sacrifice to Ceres and Bacchus.
They had besides their Nuns or Virgins called Vestals, who were entrusted with
the care and preservation of the sacred Fire, and were to pray for the
Prosperity of the Roman Empire. But what need we to remount so far in the
ancient Times to look for Monks, do we not see nowadays, several sorts of
them amongst the Turks? Some go Stripped naked Winter and Summer, and make many
Cuts and Incisions on their Bodies. Some others do profess so strict an
Abstinence and Fasting, that they pass many days without Eating and Drinking.
Others affect to be so great Lovers of Poverty, that they do possess nothing in
the World, and will not provide Victuals, even for the next day. Others again
are so silent, that it is not possible to draw one word from their Mouths,
either by fair means or ill usage. These are called Czamutlar or Dumbs. Others
pretend to Revelations, Ecstasies, Prophecies and Miracles, and go under the
name of Dermshler, who are most esteemed amongst the Turks. Some of them live
in their Monasteries in Towns, and others in the Country, and Solitary places,
or in Tombs amongst the Dead. The Czofilar are another sort of Monks amongst
the Turks, who are much given to Contemplation and Prayer, are strict holders
of the Traditions of their Forefathers, rely entirely upon their own Merits,
without the Grace of God; rise in the Night to sing praise to God, and are in
great honor with the Nobility and Gentry, who are of the same Opinions as
they. But generally, all these Turkish Monks do profess Chastity, and condemn
Marriage. There was formerly another Order in Turkey called Dervis; but for
their Impieties and bad Marinus Barl^t de rel^us gestis S^anderbeg.
Lives, they were by the Emperor Bajazette quite Extinguished. In the Province
of Ciandu belonging to the Tartars, there is a Monastery wherein above Two
thousand Monks live together, who are continually employed in the Service of
the Idols. They profess Chastity, exercise great austerities on their Bodies,
and are distinguished in their Clothes from the Seculars, very like in their
Superstitious Practices and Ceromonies to Popish Comment. Jesuit. de r^bus
Indi^is and Japoni^^s Coloniae ^d^t. f. 42^. Av^rius Jesuitae in Epist. 49.
Monks. In some Relations of Japan, we are cold of the Japonian Monks, whom they
call B^ntii. They have there a great many Monasteries, and are both very
Superstitious and very wicked Men. The Indians likewise have their Talapoi, who
make as great pretense of Holiness, as the Romish Friars do. But what then?
must we conclude, that because the Heathens and Idolaters have Monks, there
must be some also in the Church of the living God? Ought we not rather to
conclude the contrary, that because they have some, we must have none,
especially when we know that those Heathenish Monks have been in all times the
greatest contrivers and upholders of Idolatrous Worship and Superstition, and
when it is manifest likewise, that the Romish Monks in imitation of those
Infidels, have at last brought downright Idolatry into their Popish Church.
Monks where those who invented the Adoration of Saints, of Crosses, of Wooden
or Stone Statues and Images, who contrived Transubstantiation, Purgatory,
Processions, Pilgrimages, Vows, in a word, almost all the new Doctrins and
Practices, wherewith the Church of Rome is miserably infected. Upon which we
may reasonably conclude, that though it could be proved, (which I do not grant)
that Monastical Life was at the first beginning very Holy, yet seeing the great
evils which have been caused at all times, by the Professors of it, it cannot
be but very safe to cut them off from the Churches Body. Because when any State
whatsoever occasioneth Evils, far greater than the good for which it was
intended, it is always much better to be without it, than to bear with the
continuance of it. A State, such as Monkery is, cannot but bring forth
singularity, and singularity in one Body is a kind of a Schism. In reading the
Declarations of the Benedictine Monks upon their Rules, I observed, that they
strictly forbid to them, any sort of singular practice from the common
observances of their Cloisters; as being, they Declar. Cong. S^. Mauri* Or^l.
S^. Bened. in R^g.
say, the destruction of a Religious Order. But the singularity which themselves
make in the Church is far greater than any singularity which one particular
Monk may cause in his Cloister; therefore Monkery cannot be looked upon but a
Plague, and a Destruction at last of the Church. This I find expressed in an
Old Epigram, related by Hospinian, which gives likewise a hint to their Greedy
Guts.

Hosp. de Orig. Mon. l. 1. c. 1.
Vos Monachi vestri stomachi sunt amphora Bacchi.
Vos estis, Deus est testis, deterrima Pestis.
God of his Infinite Goodness and Mercy keep all the Protestant Churches from
it.

Advertisement.
Compendium Graecum Novi Testamenti, Continens ex 7959 Versiculis totius N.
Testamenti tantum Versiculos 1900 (non tamen integros) in quibus Omnes universi
novi Test. voces una cum versione latina inveniuntur, Auctore Johanne Leusden,
Philos. Doctore and Linguae sanctae in Academia Ultrojectina Professore
Ordinario, Editio quinta.

Forms of private Devotions for every Day in the Week, by a Method agreeable to
the Clergy, and occasional Prayers, and an Office for the Holy Communion, and
for the time of Sickness, in Oct.

The State of the Protestants in Ireland, under the late King James's
Government, in which their Carriage toward him is Justified, and the absolute
necessity of their endeavoring to be freed from his Government, and of
submitting to their present Majesty's Demonstrated, the fourth Edition with
Additions.

An Answer to great Britains just Complaint, in Quatto, stitcht.

A Sermon Preached before the Lord Lieutenant, and the two Houses of Parliament
in Ireland, by John Lord Archbishop of Tuam.

FINIS.

