OBSERVATIONS ON A JOURNEY TO NAPLES.

WHEREIN The FRAUDS of Romish Monks and Priests are farther Discovered.

By the Author of a late Book, Entitled, The Frauds of Romish Monks and
Priests.

LONDON, Printed by Samuel Roycroft, for Robert Clavell, at the Peacock at the
West End of S. Paul's. 1691.

TO THE Most Reverend Father in God, JOHN, Lord Archbishop of CANTERBURY;
Primate and Metropolitan of ALL ENGLAND; And One of Their Majesty's most
Honorable Privy Council.
My Lord,
IT has been none of the least Artifices of those of the Church of Rome, to
recommend their Religion to the World, by denying a great part of those Abuses
which the Protestants have charged upon it; and ascribing that to the mere
Invention of their Adversaries, which at the same time all, who have ever lived
in those Countries in which Popery prevails, cannot but know, is every Day
practiced among them.

I am sufficiently sensible how little need there is for Me to say any thing in
Answer to this Pretense, which has been so fully and solidly Confuted in so
many Learned Discourses as the late Times produced upon this very Argument: And
which ought to make them for ever ashamed of such Expositions and
Representations of their Doctrine, as show rather what the Authors of them would
have their Religion thought to be, than what indeed it is. But yet having had
some Opportunities by my long Conversation among them, to Observe more, and
penetrate farther into their Mysteries, than Those who have been always
Strangers to their Communion can well be supposed to have done; I thought it
might not be altogether Useless to Communicate my Reflections to the World; and
show what Popery is not in the smooth Descriptions of Designing Men, but in the
Open Practice and Profession of it, in those Countries where they Act without
Disguise, and look upon themselves to be the truest and most Zealous Observers
of it.

This, My Lord, was my Design in Publishing the following Discourses: And it is
this that emboldens me with all Humility to present them to Your Grace, who is
so great a Judge, and so proper a Patron of such an Undertaking.

It is, My Lord, Your Honor to Govern a Church, than which none has ever
approved it self more firm to the Protestant Interest; or better deserved to be
esteemed, what by all Understanding Men it is allowed to be, the strongest
Bulwark against Popery. But it is much more, so to have been thought worthy of
such a Station, by Princes so Wise and Discerning, and so affectionately
concerned for the Churches Good. And it ought not to be wondered, if all Men
desire his Patronage, whose Virtues are no less Illustrious than His Character.

But, My Lord, this was not all the Reason I had, for desiring to prefix so
Great a Name to my Present Undertaking. I am well aware, that in the following
Relations many things will occur which may perhaps appear a little Strange to
the Vulgar Reader, and will hardly gain Credit with those who do not know how
great the Extravagances of Those of the Other Communion are, when they act
freely, and according to the true Principles and Genius of their Religion. And
Travelers, as well as Poets, are commonly looked upon to be priviledg'd
Persons; whose business it is to set off their Stories to the best advantage,
and especially when they write to such as they think are not able to confute
their Pretenses. But I hope when it shall be considered to whom I have
adventured to present these Discourses, no man will after that presume to
Question the fidelity of them; Or think I should have durst to intitule your
Grace to any thing that I was not sure would bear the strictest Examination.

May it therefore please your Grace who have so often and Gloriously triumphed
over the Errors of the Church of Rome in your own Writings, now to give a new
force, by the Authority of your Name, to what is here produced against them. A
Name as Venerable to all true lovers of their Country and Religion, as Terrible
to Those who bear a secret Enmity to Either; and know both how well Able your
Grace is, and how Vigorous they have reason to fear you will be, to discover
and defeat their designs against both. And may that God, who has been pleased
to raise up so great a support to his Church, at a time when it never more
stood in need of the Wisest Conduct, long continue to render you a Public
Blessing to it: And when you shall late have finished your Course with Honor
here on Earth, translate you to a more Exceeding and Eternal weight of Glory in
Heaven, Which is the most sincere and ardent Vow of Him who with all possible
Duty will always remain,

My Lord, Your Graces Most Humble and most Obedient Servant G. Do You.

TO THE READER.
WHen I Published my LETTERS the last Year, concerning The Frauds of Romish
Monks and Priests; I was in some measure resolved not to have troubled the
World with any more of these kind of Writings: And could have been very well
contented to have given thereby a fair Occasion to those of that Religion to
commend my Moderation. But my former Discourses having met with a reception
beyond what I durst have promised my self; and several of my Friends, for whom
I have a very just Esteem, flattering me, That it would not be altogether
useless for me to suffer the rest of my Observations to see the light: I
thought I could not do better than in following their Advice; and that I ought
rather by this means to testify my Zeal for the Reformed Religion, than to
gratify the Humors of the Contrary Party, by refusing their Desires. I do not
think, that in any thing of this I can justly be charged to have exceeded the
Bounds of Charity; seeing I am sure I have kept my self with great exactness,
within those of Truth: And upon all Occasions chosen rather to say too little,
than too much.

Having said thus much concerning the Occasion of my Publishing the following
Treatise, I must in the next place desire the Reader to stop so long as while I
take notice of an Objection, which I am told has been made against my former
Book. In my VIIIth LETTER, page 398. of the first and second Editions, I
related a singular Instance of the liberties which the Monks in Italy allow
themselves in their Intriegues with Ladies. There is it seems a certain
Gentleman in the World, who having an extraordinary Zeal for the Truth, and it
may be to render some service to those of the Other Religion, has been willing
to take upon himself the scandalous Adventure which is there recounted. He
pretends that it happened whilst he was at Venice, and that himself was the very
Person concerned in it. And from thence would have it thought, that I take up
the stories of the Vices and Extravagances of Laymen, and put them upon the
Priests and Monks of the Romish Church, only to render them thereby the more
Odious.

It is not my design to rob this Gentleman of the Honor of such a Rencounter.
But I must needs entreat the Reader to remember what I have before Remarked in
several places of those Letters, that the Stories I tell, are no extraordinary
Events, but things that happen frequently and ordinarily in those Countries,
where Popery reigns in its full liberty. And therefore that it ought not to be
inferred, that because such an Adventure happened to this Gentleman, therefore it
did not also happen to the Monk of whom I there speak. This I am sure, that the
Monk boasted of it to me, as he was going to say Mass; and if occasion were, I
could tell above VII or VIII Stories more of the like nature; but that I fear I
should tire out my Reader with so many Relations to the same purpose.

THE CONTENTS OF THE OBSERVATIONS ON THE First Days Journey.
IT is Discoursed of Italian Learning; and first, Of the Ignorance of the
Popes, Cardinals, Bishops, Abbots, Priests and Monks of the Church of Rome, in
Matters of Religion. Page 2 Vain Distinction of Faith of Understanding, and of
Faith of the Will; and to what Trick it serves in the Church of Rome. 6 How
Studies are conducted in Italy. 13 Studies, how ordered and spoiled by the
Jesuits. 14 With what Impudence the Jesuits boast themselves, to Teach Youth
gratis. 18 Studies, how managed in the Italian Universities. 20 Four Reasons,
why a man cannot become truly Learned there. 21 Their pitiful Method of
Argumenting and Defending Theses. 25 Story of an Ass, that took his Doctors
Degree at Padua. 26 Encomiums given by some Travelers to Learned Men of Italy,
are to be understood with restriction, and that for two Reasons. 29 Art of
being esteemed Learned at a cheap Rate, practiced by most of the Italians, and
in what it does consist. 30 Hebrew and Greek not encouraged in Italy. 32 Method
for Studies in Convents and Religious Houses. 34 First, of the Jesuits. 35 They
make, in their Colleges, a Trial of Spirits; and what Qualities are required
for to be received a Jesuist. 36, 37 How ridiculous in their Latin. 38 They
change their Philosophy and Divinity, according to the Times. 41 They follow
Molina's Doctrine no better, than that of the Pelagians and Semi-Pelagians. 43
Mental Restrictions introduced by the Jesuits, to cover Lies. 49 Their pitiful
Arguments against Protestants. 51 Manner of Studies of some Religious Orders
amongst the Papists. 53 Of Thomists and Scotists. 54 What sort of a Man was
Thomas Aquinas, Head of that Party called Thomists: How much abstracted and
hypocondriacal he was. 58 He is obliged to pretend Crucifix-Speeches, to
confirm his Doctrine concerning Transubstantiation 57 What sort of a Man was
John Duns Scotus, Head of the Scotists: He affects to contradict Thomas Aquinas
in every thing. 61 The Popes dare not declare more for one of these two
Parties, Thomists and Scotists, than for the other. 62 A Dominican Friar
disappointed in a Public. Dispute, gives his Answers all wrong. 64 Monks in
Italy learn to Dance, to Fence, and to Ride the Great Horse; and why. 66
Studies of Secular Priests in Italy. 68 Why Learning is generally so much
discouraged in those Countries. 70
Second Day.
BAptism of Bells; Description of that Superstitious Ceremony. 72 The Belief of
Papists concerning them. 78 Pleasant Story of the Bell of S. Proculo, at
Bononia. 77 Infamous Covetousness of Priests in Ringing their Bells, and the
use they make of the false Doctrine they spread about them. 80 Wonderful virtue
of a Little Bell of the Capucins at Venice. 81 The Devil takes possession of a
Bell, and Rings it himself. ib. Blessing of Beasts in the Church of Rome, with
Holy Water. 85 Exorcism of Rats, Caterpillars, and Flies, etc. 86 How vain and
ineffectual they are, by several Examples. 88 The Chapel of S. Thomas Aquinas
at Fossa Nova: The Abuse which is made of several Bones there. 91 Of the
Catacombes, and of the Bones found there. 92 Ill use made of those Bones, by
the Popes. 94 Jaw Bone of a Beast made use of for a Relick at Vandosme in
France. 96 Worship of Latria given to the Holy-Tear at Vandosme, and the
Falsehood of this Relick. 97 Frightful History of two Famous Highway-Men adored
as Saints in S. Martin's time. 98 What kind of a Saint S. Vicar was. 100
Mendicant Friars chief Distributers of false Relics. 101 They pay their Hosts
with them. 102 Of the Agnus Dei. 105 Of S. Margarets Girdle for Big-bellied
Women. ibid. A Priest burns a Crucifix, for fear it should be Profaned. 110
Sad Accidents which do happen to the Holy Host; with some Examples of my own
Experience. 111 Frightful sight at Maladurne, in Germany, happened in the
Sacrament. 115 Description of a ridiculous and merry Pilgrimage thither. 117 No
Heretics admitted there. 124 Some Protestants were ill Treated by the Pilgrims
of Maladurne. 125 Continuation of the Holy Exercises of these Pilgrims. 127
Third Day.
SAd Spectacle of a Nun, who had made her Escape from a Convent. 135 Of the
Nuns of Italy. 137 Of the young Gentlewomen-Boarders in Religious Houses. 138
How enticed to become Nuns. 139 Some are very cruelly and unnaturally forced to
become Nuns. 140 Ceremonies which do precede the taking the Religious Habit.
141 Ceremonies of their taking the Habit. 142 Nuns have great Pensions from
their Parents. 144 To what use they employ these Moneys. ibid. Convents of Nuns
are Discharges of Families. 145 How Nuns do employ their time. 146 They are the
best Confectioners and Pastry-Cooks in Italy. ibid. A Spirit of Impudence,
Effrontery, and Impiety reigns in the Cloisters of Nuns. 147 The Bishops do
prohibit to go and speak with Nuns. 148 Copy of a License for celebrating Mass
in Convents of Nuns. 150 Nuns great Contrivers and Carriers on of Intriegues.
154 Subtle Intriegue of a Nun at Milan. ibid. Story of a Gentleman poysond by a
Nun. 156 Reasons why Nuns are of so Devilish a Spirit. 158 A Dominican Nun very
barbarously Treated at Milan, for having endeavored to prove her Profession
void. 159 Wantonness of Nuns in their Dresses. 165 They are very partial in
their Humors. ibid. Their Impiety and Lasciviousness in their Songs, even at
Church. 167 Nuns Court the Men, and run mad for them. 168 How Devilish in their
Amorous Contrivances. ibid. Infamous Instance of it amongst the Nuns of Bresse
in Italy. 169 Nuns are under two sorts of Government. 173 Of the Nuns of
Fontevrault in France. 175 Institution of this Order: The Nuns command the Men.
176 Description of the Abbey of Fontevrault. 177 The Jesuits were once in great
Authority at Fontevrault; but afterward were very ignominiously droven out, as
they deserved. 181 Shameful Trials which these Nuns make of the Monks, that
live under their Obedience. 185 They have all public Exercises of Learning of
their Monks, performed in their presence. 186 What were the Religious
Communities of the Primitive Church. 189 Monks in France ashamed of their
Names. ibid. Excesses of Bigotry in some Nuns. 190 The Church of Englands
Wisdom in suppressing Monasteries. 193
Fourth Day.
GReat Superstition of the People in the Kingdom of Naples, toward their
Priests. 195 Priests in that Kingdom are called by every one, Christ's Knights.
196 Distinction which the Venetians make of the Priests. ibid Priests at Venice
used by the Nobility with great Indignity and Contempt. 197 Spanish Soldiers
go a Begging for Priests in the Kingdom of Naples, and how. 199 Pride of a
Spanish Priest in saying his Office. 200 Description of the Splitted Rock, and
of the Miraculous Chapel there. 202 Of the Hermits which live there. 205
Capucins are irreconcilable Enemies to the Hermits, and for what reason. ibid.
Eremitick State formerly so great in Italy, is now at a very low Ebb, and why.
210, 225 Most of the Hermits are Murderers and Highway Men. 211 Deceit of two
French Hermits on the Mountain called S. Sylvester. 211 Description of the
Mount Soracte, otherwise called S. Sylvester. 212, 220 Hermits no lovers of
Brown Bread. 215 Debauched Life of an Hermit Italian there. ibid. Description
of an Abbey of Bernardins, on the Top of the Mount S. Sylvester. 218 Miraculous
Carots in S. Sylvester's Garden, do continue ever since. 220 Curious Meeting
with the Italian Hermit, and his downright Hypocrysie. 221 Description of the
Hermetical Habit. 222 History of an Hermit at Venice, who was an infamous
High-way-man, and publicly Executed for his Crimes. 223 Hermits are a very
ignorant sort of People, and great up and down Runners of Countries. 226
Hermits very Dextrous at Pilfering; one instance of it. 227 Papists valuing
themselves much upon the Hermetick State against Protestants, who have Cut it
off from the Bosom of the Church. 228 Description of the Wilderness of Sublac,
and of the Grotto of S. Bennet. 230 A Stone not falling down, because it is
well fastened to the Rock, is a perpetual Miracle there. 232 Rose-Trees bearing
Roses, are a perpetual Miracle there. 233 Description of the Abbey of
Montcassin, in the Kingdom of Naples. 235 The Popes Infallibility contradicted
about S. Bennet his Body. 236 Miraculous Ravens, like to the Blackfriars, or
Monachi Neri of S. Bennet. 237 The Monks of that Abbey Eat Fish that fly in the
Air, and what kind of Fish it is. 239 Description of the Hermitage Encylas, in
Swisserland. 241 Cbrist is seen to Consecrate a Chapel there, and to say Mass
in it. 242 Reflections upon Christ's saying Mass there, of the Wafers and
Communion in one kind. 245 The Ancient Custom of Celebrating the Lords Supper,
is still Practiced once a year in the Archbishopric of Mentz in Germany,
though in a Corrupt manner. 247 Abuses which are committed in Performing this
Ceremony. 250 Reflection upon this Ceremony. 251 Papists have no true Communion
amongst themselves. 252 Country People in the Kingdom of Naples, are very
ignorant of some Duties of Christianity, and Articles of Faith. 255 Very
Superstitious, and very kind to their Priests and Monks ibid
Fifth Day.
LIttle Chapels or Vaults in Italy full of Bones Hairs, bits of Wood, etc. What
they are. 258 Women creep on their knees to these little Chapels. 260 The
Closestool or Seeds Stercoraria, made use of in the Popes Exaltation, to the
Throne of S. Peter. ibid Knavery of a Carmelitan Friar, and his gallant Guest.
262 His Letter to a Lady, and the Ladies answer to him. 264 Monks Habits are a
Cloak to all sort of Wickedness. 268 Seculars are Buried in Italy with some
Monasterical Habit. 270 A remarkable saying of a Turk concerning Monks. 269
Priests and Monks in the Church of Rome, impose heavy Fasts upon Seculars, and
do not keep them themselves. 272 Fasts of the Papists. 273 Lent amongst them is
only for the Poor. 276 How impudently the Priests and Monks in the Church of
Rome, have perverted the Hours of their Fasts. ibid Pleasant way of Fasting in
Germany. ibid Ridiculous Scruples about Fasts, and Sermons made purposely to
resolve such Cases. 278 The Spaniards are very strict observers of Fasts. 281 A
Curious instance of their Extravagant Zeal on this Subject. ibid Some great
Canons of Mentz, are very ill dealt with in the Country of Burgundy, for
transgressing the Fasts. 282 Fasts to be commended, if done with Charity, but
People are not to be forced by Fire and Sword to it. 284 Description of the
great Hospital for the Sick at Naples, how well and Nobly administered by the
Gentry. 285 How pitifully and uncharitably on the contrary are administered
those Hospitals for the Sick, which are committed to the Care of Friars and
Monks. 286 Reflection upon the Magnificency and Beauty of th Churches of
Naples. 288 Jesuits are very Powerful at Naples. 290 They perform there the
Office of Intelligence for Men and Maidservants, and for what end. ibid
Jesuits generally hated of all the World. 291 They are unsatiable Usurpers of
other Religious Orders and Estates. 292 Very Ingenious Distick made upon the
Jesuits. 295 They do Profane the Holy Name of Jesus, by appropriating it to
themselves. ibid Of the famous Relick of S. Januarius, his Blood at Naples. 297
A Protestant Minister who was turned Papist, turns Protestant again at the
sight of this Relick. 298 False Story spread abroad by the Jesuits, to inspire
People with horror against Protestants. 299 Papists cannot reproach Protestants
of any Superstition. 300 Those which leave the Monastical Habit, are at Rome
Condemned to the Galleys. 302 The Secret promised for Confession of Sins, is
not kept. 303 Auricular Confession both very Divertizing and Profitable to the
Priests. 305 Questions made in Confession. 306 Confessors very eager for to
hear Women's Confessions. 307 Stratagem of some Young Scholars, for to be
dispatched in Confession by their Confessor who was a Jesuit. 307 Amorous
Letter found in a confessional. 309 History of an other Jesuit upon the same
account. 310 Women become Impudent by auricular Confession. 311 It is a great
advantage to be Confessor of Ladies. 312 Confession is a great help to fill the
Priests Purses. 313 A Neapolitan Knight Robbed of his Money by the Jesuits, for
not being willing to part with one part of it. 314 Confessionals worse than bad
Company. 317 The Doctrine of Attrition, saving Sinners if joined with
Confession, is a great encouragement to Sin. 318 Priests are seen very seldom
to Confess their Sins. 319 Penances which the Priests do inflict upon their
Penitents. 321 Confessors of the White-Rod or Penitentiaries. 323 A Protestant
of Geneva severely banged by a Jesuit, for Laughing at a very silly Ceremony
practiced in the Church of S. Peter at Rome. 324 Another Protestant banged by a
Jesuit at Strasbourg, for not kneeling at the Elevation of the Host. ibid
OBSERVATIONS ON A JOURNEY TO NAPLES.
The First Days Journey.
I Departed from Rome the 6th of May, in the Year of our Lord 1686, and by
chance joined Company with an Aged Neapolitan Abbot, who was going to Veletre.
He was a Man thoroughly versed in the Politics of Rome, and had been Secretary
to several Cardinals. And forasmuch as I had already conceived a sufficient
aversion for the Romish Religion, the Corruption whereof I had a fair occasion
to discover during my long abode in Italy, I was very desirous to understand
the Sentiments of a Person of so great Age and Experience. Wherefore after
having discoursed him about indifferent Matters, I insensibly put him upon the
Point of the Capacity and Learning of the Clergy of Rome. He sufficiently
satisfied me on that Subject; and in the Account he gave me, he observed
something of a Method: For in the first place, he spoke to me of the Head of
that Church, viz. the POPE; and from him passed to the Principal Members
thereof, which are the CARDINALS, the ARCHBISHOPS, and ABBOTS, and concluded
his Discourse with the Common PRIESTS and MONKS.

As for the first of these, I mean the Pope, he told me, That it was a
lamentable thing to see in what gross Ignorance many Popes lived, of the most
important Truths of the Christian Religion; and that he himself had been fain
to inform Pope Innocent the Xth, of the true sense of this Passage of the
Creed, Qui conceptus est de Spiritu Sancto, who was conceived by the Holy
Ghost; for he instead of understanding them of the Temporal Conception, in the
Mystery of the Incarnation, did attribute them to the Eternal Generation of the
Word; and according to his Apprehension these Words, [Who was conceived by the
Holy Ghost, born of the Virgin Mary,] afforded this meaning: Jesus Christ, who
was Conceived from all Eternity by the Holy Spirit, was Born in time of the
Virgin Mary. So that if this Pope should have undertaken to have determined the
Sense of them according to his Notion, he would have given us a fine Instance
of his Infallibility. His Successor wished the same Abbot to Explain to him the
Nature of Original Sin, and how the Blessed Virgin came to be exempt from it.

Now it is worth our Observation, that they were just these very Popes, the
most Ignorant that of a long time had appeared in the Church of Rome, who
undertook to decide the most important Controversy which ever was determined
in the Church since the Council of Trent; the Propugnators of the Efficacious
Grace of S. Austin being of one side, and the Defenders of Sufficient Grace on
the other; I mean, the Dispute was maintained between the Augustinians or
Jansenists, and the Jesuits, otherwise called Molinists. The former of these
two Popes had at the first no great mind to determine any thing concerning
those Points: For he declared one day to Luke of Holstein, his Library Keeper,
That the Solicitations he had from France, to pronounce his decision concerning
the Propositions of Jansenius, drawn from S. Austin, gave him a great deal of
Trouble, because the Question was concerning Points that he did not understand,
neither had he ever studied them. Luke of Holstein answered him, That his
Holiness would do well not to begin at the Age he was of, to trouble himself
about the understanding, and much less about the deciding of them; because they
were very perplex and intricate of themselves; and that they had not only been
the occasion of great Disputes amongst the Christians, but also amongst the
greatest Philosophers of Ancient Times; by reason of the difficulty they found,
to reconcile the Liberty of Man's Will with the Decrees and Foreknowledge of
God, whereupon some of them embraced one Opinion, Others, another; as was done
still to this day, and would so continue as long as there should be Men in the
World. Whence he inferred, That forasmuch as it was impossible for him to
pronounce a decision that might satisfy both Parties, it would be better for
him not to meddle with it at all, but to leave things in the state he found
them till they should drop of themselves, as they would without doubt, whenever
the one or other Party (or both of them together) should be weary of the
Disputing, and forcing their Opinions upon their Antagonists.

It Is said, The Pope was extremely pleased with this Advice. In the mean time
it was observed, that by his frequent Assisting at many Congregations which
were held on this Subject, he at last took a great deal of pleasure to hear
these different Doctrins discust, notwithstanding the great Repugnance he had
for them at the first; and he attributed this change in himself, to an
extraordinary assistance of the Holy Spirit. On a time the Lady Olympia, his
Sister, asked him, What Matters were treated of in those Congregations, that
were so very pleasing to his Holiness? The Pope Answered, That they were
certain Subtilties which she did not understand; but that probably she might
come to comprehend them, in case she were present there whilst one of the
Consulters Discoursed, who explained those Points with the greatest clearness
and perspicuity. In a word, All these Consultations were held on purpose, to
give his Holiness a true Notion of these Points in question. But it seems to
me, that persons who pretend to Infallibility, ought to be in possession of the
Key of Knowledge, or at least do their utmost endeavor to obtain it: For can
any thing be imagined more ridiculous, than that a Pope, to whom Application is
made by the whole Church, for the ratification of the Doctrins of Faith, should
be fain to treat with others, and to demand time and opportunity to inform
himself, by consulting his Doctors; and afterward hear him tell you, That the
very same Point of Doctrine, which a while ago he was ignorant of, is an
infallible Truth, and which he alone has the Authority to determine?

I entreated the Abbot to tell me in good earnest, Whether he himself, who had
been witness of so much Weakness and Ignorance in those who are seated in S.
Peter's Chair, could receive all their Decisions for Infallible? To which he
Answered, That he rather believed them such by a Faith of his Will, than by a
Faith of Understanding. I requested him to explain this distinction, which
seemed to me to be somewhat obsure, and in which I saw that he placed something
of Mystery. He told me, That the Faith of Understanding carried along with it
some kind of Evidence, that its Motives were so agreeable with the Principles
of Reason, or had so close a dependence upon Matters revealed, that they could
not be resisted without acting contrary to good sense; and that by this
Intellectual Faith, we believe there is a God, and that this God must be feared
and worshipped; That he will reward those that are Good, and punish the Wicked;
That Jesus Christ is the Savior of the World, foretold by the Prophets, etc.
But as for the Faith of the Will (continued he) that is altogether obscure, we
find nothing in it to satisfy our Reason, and we believe it only, because we
will believe it. It Is by this Faith (said he) that I believe the Infallibility
of the Pope, and a vast number of other things. I indeed can find nothing that
in a human way can persuade me of the Truth of them; but at the same time do
perceive in my Soul a secret Bias swaying my Will to believe them; and this
Bias or secret Inclination is nothing else, but that Baptismal Grace which is
infused into all Christians at their Baptism. I perceived that this good Abbot
took that for a Baptismal Grace, which indeed is no other than an Inclination
proceeding from Education, and which disposes him as much to Error as to
Truth, according to the anticipations this Inclination, be it good or evil,
has formed in us. Moreover, at this rate of Arguing he was obliged to believe,
(after the Italian manner) That the Protestants are no Christians; for granting
their Baptism to be good and effectual, they must be supposed to have the same
Grace infused, disposing them to believe the Popes to be Infallible.

Behold here the wonderful Engine that is made use of at Rome, to tie the
Papists to their Good Behavior; and this was the sum of all the goodly
Satisfaction the Grand Penitentiaries of Rome could give me during the abode I
made amongst them. I went often to Confession to them about some Doubts that
racked my Conscience, with respect to the Point of Transubstantiation, in hopes
to rid my self of them. When I told them, That my Reason rose in perfect
opposition to it: They answered, That I ought not to hearken to it: And when I
replied, That it was every whit as impossible for me to go contrary to my
Reason, as to believe it Midnight at High-Noon: They had recourse to their last
Shift, which was, to demand of me, Whether I was not really sensible of a
secret Motion which inclined me to a willingness of believing that, which
according to Reason seemed incredible to me: To which I answered, That indeed I
should find my self somewhat moved, if any one should go about, to force me
immediately to abjure Transubstantiation; but withal told them, That this might
as well proceed from a Habit I had acquired, and from those Opinions which the
Romish Religion had instilled into me: But they always obstinately persisted in
assuring me, That the cause of this difficulty in the practice of what my Sense
and Reason seemed to lead me to, did not at all proceed from what I imagined,
but indeed from that Habit of Faith, which had been infused into me in my
Baptisin, and which then did operate in me, as it always does in time of
danger, and when there is any likelihood of falling under some grand
Temptation. And when this sort of People have once declared their Judgment,
upon a Case of Conscience, you must believe them, or at least assure them, that
you submit to their Reasonings; for otherwise, notwithstanding all the Noise is
made about the Secret of Confession, they would soon find means to oblige you
to a very uncomfortable Pastime, by lodging you in the Inquisition before you
ever could be aware of it.

I shall have occasion hereafter to inform my Reader further concerning their
Confessions, and therefore for the present shall continue to relate what this
Abbot declared to me about the Ignorance of the Clergy of Rome. For after
having discoursed of the Popes at the rate I have told you, he passed over to
the Cardinals, whom he distinguished into three Classes. The first was of
those, who are raised to that Dignity at the solicitation of Princes, and to
favor the Interest of Crowns: These are either Princes themselves, or great
Statesmen, whose entire study consists in advancing their own glory, or that
of their Masters, and who have other Fish to fry, than to break their Heads
with the study of Philosophy, or Divinity. The second sort of Cardinals, are
those who are beholding for their promotion to the good luck they have had of
being the Nephew, near Relation, or Friend of some Pope. It Is of small concern
to these, whether they be Learned, or not; for though the Nephew or Friend of a
Pope should chance to be the most Ignorant person in the World, he needs not
fear that this will prove the least obstacle to him in arriving at the Sacred
Purple; (for the Odescalci's, that is to say, the Popes that abhor Nepotism,
are very scarce nowadays) and indeed Experience teaches us, that these sort of
People are commonly at a very low ebb of any extraordinary Seize. Lastly,
The third Classis of Cardinals consists of those, who have distinguished
themselves amongst the Crowd by some Talent, that has made them to be taken
notice of above others. Thus we meet with some Preachers, who having got the
knack of that Ability, after the Italian manner, do arrive to this high Degree
of Honor, as likewise some Generals of Orders, and some Bishops of the most
refined Parts and Accomplishments. Now in this very last rank (continued the
Abbot) we meet with some persons that pretend to be Learned, though to speak
truth, there is very little of any excess of it to be found in them; for if you
come once to press them home upon some Points, you soon find the dimensions of
their Knowledge, and that it bears small proportion with the Conceit they have
of themselves.

All the World knows, that the Cardinals are the Pope's Grand Council, and the
very persons who are his Assistants in constituting those Decrees, which
afterward become the Dogma's of the Papists. When it happens therefore that an
Ignorant Pope fills the Chair, and that his Cardinals partake of the same
Qualification, what can be hoped for, as the result of all their Consultations,
but Ignorance? It was observed, that at the Congregation which was granted to
some Doctors of the Sorbonne, who were come to Rome to solicit the Condemnation
of Jansenius his Propositions, all the Cardinals who were Commissioned to hear
them, very fairly took a Nap upon it; whereupon one of the Consultors finding
them all in that posture, could not refrain himself from reflecting upon it, by
saying to one of his Colleagues, Al meno se fosse qualcheduno che facesse la
Sentinella; At least there should have been one to stand Sentinel the while.
One of the Jansenist Deputies makes this Reflection upon it; But whether they
Nodded (says he) or were awake, the manner of their managing of things upon
the Information of One Party only, was very insufficient to inform them of the
Points they were to determine. This is that which made us often to lock upon
the Condition of these Cardinals with the Eyes of Pity and Compassion, who
having (for the most part,) spent their Lives in Employments rather Secular,
than Ecclesiastical; and being besides overstock'd with Business, do
notwithstanding find themselves engaged to declare their own Sentiments, and to
form that of the Popes about the most knotty and intricate Questions that can
be met with in all Theology; and of which no Judgment can be given without
rashness, if a Man have not taken care aforehand, to inform himself concerning
them by an exact, assiduous, calm, and composed Reading of the Scriptures and
Fathers. Here it is indeed that the Abbot (my Fellow-Traveller) had still more
reason to exercise his Faith of the Will, or to speak more plainly, his blind
Faith, to induce to believe, That these Men (in spite of all their Ignorance
and Negligence) could pronounce nothing but Words of Life and Eternal Truth.
Nay, what is more, he believed, that the more ignorant they were, the more the
Holy Ghost was pleased to speak by their Mouths: For the Sy(...) he had formed,
in describing to me the great Ignorance of the Conductors of the Church of
Rome, was not so much to undervalue them, as to exalt the profound Secrets of
the Wisdom of God, who formerly having made use of poor Fishermen, that had no
acquired Parts or Learning wherewith to confound the Wisemen of the World in
the Preaching of the Gospel, did still continue to make use of these poor
Ignorant Souls, the Pope and his Cardinals, to maintain the Truth of the same
Gospel, against the false Wisdom, and seeming Doctrine of Heretics. The Zeal
wherewith he urged this System of his, seemed to me to be somewhat extravagant,
for he proportionably extended the same to all Bishops, Curats, and Monks; in a
word, to all the Clergy of Rome, whom (in a manner) he dipped in the same Sauce,
treating them as so many Asses and Ignoramus's. I told him, That I had
conversed with several Persons of Wit and Parts, who according to the
Principles of the Doctrine of the Church of Rome, did Reason tolerably well, and
that some Indulgence ought to be allowed them in this Point, because the
Doctrine of Rome was exposed to abundance of Contrarieties, which it was not an
easy Task to reconcile: As for Example, That Accidents are separable from the
Substance, and exist without a Subject; That one Body can at the same time be
in several places; and a vast number of such like Absurdities, which they are
fain to maintain in defense of their Mystery of Transubstantiation. However,
notwithstanding all that I could say to him, he persisted always in his
Opinion; and though he appeared to me somewhat too rigorous, yet I cannot say,
that he was altogether unjust in his Censure. For if the manner and method of
ordering ones Studies be the measure of the Knowledge one acquires, I don't
believe there is a Country in the World where their Studies are worse
conducted, than in Italy, and where consequently there must needs be less
Learning than there.

I suppose it will not be unpleasing to my Readers, if I present them with a
view of the Particulars thereof.

In the first place, The Italians have too much Indulgence for their Children,
and the fear they have of putting them upon any thing that might be too
laborious for them in their Tender years, makes them have no thoughts of
putting them to School, till very late. They ordinarily keep them two or three
Years in the Inferior Schools, where they only learn to Read and Write Italian;
and a Boy, who at the Age of Twelve Years begins to Read and Write, is already
looked upon as forward enough in his Studies. Afterward they change their
Masters, and are sent to a Latin School, where they spend two or three years
more only in learning the first Rudiments of Grammar, and some Latin words to
dispose them for the prosecuting of their Studies with the Jesuits. These
Fathers have almost engrost all the public Colleges in all the Cities of
Italy, as making a most particular Profession of instructing Youth. But in the
mean time experience teaches, that God seldom accompanies their undertakings
with his Blessing, and that indeed they are the very Men, notwithstanding all
the Noise they make to the contrary, who make Youth to lose their time. For in
the first place they choose young Jesuits to be their Masters or Regents of
their Scholars, whose wit is not yet settled, and who are not sufficiently
grounded themselves in the Latin Tongue, so that it is in a manner impossible
they should be capable of instructing others. But the design of the Society
herein is, that these young Jesuits may perfect themselves in their Latin by
teaching others, according to that Maxim, Optimus modus Discendi, est Docendi;
the best of Learning, is that of Teaching. This method is indeed for the profit
of the Masters, but is as disadvantageous to the Scholars; whereas when those
that teach others are already perfect in their Art, and skilled in all the ways
and turnings of it; this is a great advantage to the Scholars, and a kind of
loss of time for the Masters, who learn nothing by teaching others, but what
they are already perfectly acquainted with: That it is a very ill boding for
the Scholars, to see these young Jesuits take possession of the Masters Chairs,
who are not able to explain an Author themselves.

Another reason why the Scholars advance so little under the Conduct of the
Jesuits, is, because these Fathers being too great Lovers of their pleasures,
give too much leave for Pastime to their Scholars. They have two whole days
leave to play in every Week, viz. Tuesday and Thursday, without reckoning the
extraordinary days of Vacation; for whenever the Weather is fair and inviting
to walk abroad, it is a very hard Task to keep a Jesuit within Doors. The young
Regents address themselves to the Rector or Provincial, and are so importunate
with them for leave to take their Recreation, that it is not possible to deny
them. And besides all this, the Holy Days are so frequent in Italy, that
sometimes you meet with three or four in one Week. Moreover, every year in
Autumn they have two Months of vacancy; so that all this being well considered
and laid together, we shall find but a small proportion of time left for Study.
The Youth, as every where else, are very well pleased with it, though sooner or
later they are made sensible of the bad effects of it; for ignorant they come
to the Jesuits, and ignorant they leave them; and having lost the most precious
part of their time, they for the most part continue Ignorants all the rest of
their Lives. Neither is this all, that there are only a few days allotted for
Study, but also very few hours in those few days; for the Morning School only
lasts two hours, and the Afternoon an hour and an half. Some Jesuits have
endeavored to maintain to me, that it was not possible in Italy to study for a
longer time together: But as to that I answered them, that I had continued my
Lectures four hours together in the Morning, and three in the Afternoon, when I
taught at Milan, in the Abbey of Great St. Victor; and that my Scholars, who
were all of them Italians, became at length accustomed to it. Thus I made it
appear, that they had no lawful excuse for their carelessness and neglect, and
that it was only their love of pleasure and idleness, that had reduced Study to
the condition in which it was. Again, of these few hours that are destinated
for Instruction, there are but few moments employed as they ought. These young
Jesuits are never unfurnisht of some ridiculous conceit, or story to tell their
Scholars to shorten the time; and it is obvious for them to start occasions of
Mirth and Pastime, when ever they please, amidst that great number of Scholars
that surround them. But of all the time they squander away, there is none lost
with a more specious pretext, than that which they bestow upon Declamations,
whereby they endeavor to dispose and fit their Scholars to appear with
applause upon their Theaters.

The Jesuits take much pains themselves in making of Comedies and Tragedies,
and every Regent is bound to compose two at least every year. To this end as
soon as they have finished some piece of Elaborate Folly or Boufonery, they
distribute the Personages thereof, to those of their Scholars they judge most
proper to represent them, and they spend a great part of the time of their
Classes or Morning and Afternoon Lectures in exercising them two or three
months before the Drama is to be acted publicly. This loss of time would not
be altogether so great, in case these Comedies or Tragedies were in the Latin
Tongue; but excepting only some few sprinklings of Latin words here and there,
they are all Italian. Their end herein is to make them the more Intelligible to
the Ladies that are invited to them. Amongst the rest they take care not to
forget the Mothers of their Scholars, who are ravished to see their Children
declaming upon the Theater of the Reverend Fathers the Jesuits; and conceit
their Children have profited greatly, in being so dextrous at playing the
Jack-Pudding. Neither is all this ado without some profit to the Reverend
Fathers, for this gives them an occasion of putting their Scholars upon a
liberal Contribution toward the Decoration of their Theaters and Machines.

There are many Italians who are very sensible of the loss of their Childrens
time, caused by these methods of the Jesuits; but they are fain to smothet it,
not daring to mention the least word of it to them; for if they should, they
would presently call them ungrateful, as not acknowledging the favor that is
done them in teaching their Children gratis, and after these reproaches would
not fail shamefully to expel them their College.

I cannot but take notice here, with what a stock of Impudence the Jesuits
pretend and boast themselves to teach Youth for nothing; for indeed every City,
where they have their Schools, provides a Fund that is more than sufficient to
maintain them, and this Money is raised by new Impositions laid upon private
Persons. The only good effect their teaching produces, is this, that there are
no Persons how poor soever they are, but may send their Children to the
College; but on the other hand it gives occasion to a great Evil, which is,
that this vast number of Students, whereof the greater part are of very mean
Extraction, and ill Educated, do greatly corrupt and spoil one another. Yea, it
is in a manner impossible that the Regents should ever be able to teach them
well, because of their excessive Numbers, there being sometimes no less than
three hundred in one and the same Classis or Form (as we call it,) and who have
but one Master to teach them all. These Classes are not distinguished by the
number of Scholars, but by the degrees and progress of their Studies; and there
are Seven of these in every College where the Latin Tongue is taught. They
commonly count them backward; for that which receives the Petits at first, is
called the seventh Classis, and those who are the most forward in Latin, such
as the Rhetoricians, are in the first. They continue a year in each Classis, so
that the Jesuits do not undertake to teach Latin in less than seven years;
whereas I have known Masters, who in two years time have advanced their
Scholars further than the Jesuits do in all that time. Whence we may take an
estimate of the extraordinary Talent and Capacity they have to teach, and the
great Blessing of God that accompanies their Institution.

But at this time of day that which they affect most, is not at all the
Information of Youth; they much more please and pride themselves in Politics
and the Intrigues of State, than in their Schools, and in giving Law to
Princes, than in setting Children their Lesson. But this Subject would draw me
too far from what I am upon, and my design is not at present to stray from the
matter of Studies. After they have finished their course of seven years to
obtain the Latin Tongue, the Jesuits have besides these, some other Classes
where they teach Philosophy and Theology, but after a very poor manner, and
such as is not admired by any but themselves. It Is commonly about this time,
that Scholars begin to determine their thoughts for some particular Profession;
some go to the Universities, others retire themselves into Convents, others
dedicate themselves to the Church, and become secular Priests; and Lastly,
others embrace other Callings and Employments.

To represent to my Reader in what manner they continue their Studies in Italy,
and to what degree of Perfection they arrive, I shall endeavor to give him the
most exact description thereof that possibly I can in all these different
Stations. And in the first place to begin with the Universities; every one
knows, that of all those that are found in Italy, those of Bononia, of Padua
and of Pavia are the most famous.

If a man has but set his Foot in one of these Universities, it is sufficient
to raise him to the Esteem of a Learned man, in the minds of the Italians, though
it may be he knows no more than he did the first day of his Entrance (such is
the prevalency of a vulgar Error) and, to speak the truth, it is not very
common for a man to become truly Learned there, and that for these four
reasons. In the first place, the Climate of Italy is so sultry hot, that it is
not very pleasing to apply ones self a long time to one thing: A too obstinate
and continued application, does so agitate the Spirits, and puts them into such
an Effervescency, say they, that many of them would fear the over-heating of
their Brains, should they apply themselves to any serious Meditations for two
or three hours together. But it must be owned, as I have observed before, that
the Italians are somewhat too nice and delicate in this point. Which is the
reason why the Italians, not having the patience to examine a question to the
bottom, choose rather to suppose it such as it is given them, than to take the
pains to penetrate it themselves.

The second reason is, because they are not made to Write, that is, to take
Dictates. The Readers of Philosophy or Theology content themselves to take some
printed Author, which they explain to them. Now it is sure, that those things
that are Written, make a double Impression upon the minds of Scholars, and that
the new Air that is given them, does more rowse and excite their Spirits, than
the Reading of an Old Book. Besides, Writings or Dictates keep them more in
Subjection, than a Book, which they are sure of having always, and which the
most part let alone very undisturbed upon their Table, yet looking upon it
notwithstanding as their course of Philosophy, though it may be they never had
the patience to read it all over. The Italians cannot be charged with being too
much in love with Books, except it be with those as may assist them in their
Amors, such as are the Romances and Poets.

The Third Reason, why Scholars gain so little good in the Universities, is
this, because having had their first Education under the Jesuits, they
ordinarily bring along with them thither a Spirit of Libertinism and
Debauchery, which recovering new strength by this change of place, as commonly
it is, and remoteness from their Parents, whose presence alone is a sufficient
check upon Children, they immediately give the Rains to their Passions, and
seem to be more busied about the Study of Vice, than that of Virtue. I assert
nothing here but what is Notorious to all Strangers that ever frequented these
Universities; and every body knows, that it is not possible to go abroad to
walk the Streets at Night in the Cities of these Universities, without being in
great danger of feeling the Insolences of these dissolute emancipated Youths.
Now what can be imagined more incapable of serious Study or true Science than a
disordered and debauched mind? That which favors and greatly heightens this
Disorder is, that under the pretext of not discomposing the repose of the
Muses, these Universities enjoy great Privileges, and this above all the rest,
that they cannot be troubled by any Justice or Tribunal, whether Ecclesiastical
or Civil, except only in case of Murder, or matters that belong to the
Inquisition; which is the right way to foment Crimes by assuring them of
Impunity.

Lastly, the Fourth Cause of this prevailing Ignorance, is the pitiful method
they take to try the skill and seize of their Students. All men of
Learning do agree, that the surest proof of the Learning and Capacity of a
Student is to expose him in public to all the shot of those that are his
Opposits in their Opinions and Sentiments, from time to time; I mean to oblige
him publicly to defend some Thesis or other, to exercise him, and show him the
strength or weakness of the contrary Arguments. The Italians indeed as well as
others, do serve themselves of this method, but in such a manner as makes it in
a manner altogether useless. The Defendent having Printed his Theses or
Conclusions, goes and presents them about a Fortnight or three Weeks before the
day appointed for Disputation, to all those, with whose presence he desires
particularly to be honored. But there are three amongst the rest, whom he
makes choice of for his Opponents, and who are obliged in civility, or rather
by the prevailing Tyranny of a bad Custom, which at present has the force of a
Law in Italy, to acquaint him eight days after, the Points on which they intend
to Argue: Yea, and to send him in Writing the Arguments all at length, with
which they design to attack him. The Student therefore you see, has a fair
time to digest them; and to get them by heart, as well to facilitate the
repeating of them, as to provide himself with Answers against them. Neither is
it permitted to any other besides these three, to enter the Lists against him;
so that the Defendent is clearly out of harms way, without the least danger of
having any slur put upon him, and therefore cannot fail of doing Wonders. The
first time that I was present at a Disputation in Italy, I confess I was
astonished to see with what readiness the Students repeated the Arguments, the
pat Answers they gave, and how all the Conclusions of their Opponents turned
gloriously to the Increase of their Honor: But after that I had discovered the
Intrigue of it, they lost the great Esteem I had conceived of their Abilities,
and it was no difficult matter for me thereupon to estimate the great
disadvantage accrued to them by this precarious Conduct. For it follows from
hence, that the most Ignorant Scholar of a whole College; yea, even such an one
as has never read a Question of Philosophy, may maintain his Theses, with as
much applause, as the greatest Scholar possibly can: For when he has got the
Arguments of his Opponents, he needs only to procure them answered by some of
his Friends, to get the Answers by heart, in order as they stand, in half an
hours time, and then boldly appear on the Bench, by which means the greatest
Dance, may pass for a great Doctor. I have often presented my self at Bononia
to oppose some The^s, when I saw that the arguments of those who had been
Invited, had been very short, and that there was time enough left for it; but
it was never possible for me to obtain audience with them. They are very
distrustful of Strangers, especially since that some of them have showed them a
Trick, by exercising them in good earnest.

The Italians are very magnificent upon all public Occasions; they spare
nothing that may adorn and set forth the place where they Dispute: All their
Theses are commonly Printed either upon Satin or on fair sheets of Silk, of
all sorts of Colors, with curious Brass-Cuts, at the Top of them. There are
some also that present those they have Invited, with curious Nosegays; and
generally after the Disputation is ended, the Defendent entertains the
Professors, and their Opponents, with a splendid and plentiful Collation. Here
now it is that amongst their Cups, and good Bits, they bestow Magnificent
Encomiums upon the Defendent, and upon his Master that has Instructed him;
they Congratulate him, with a Glass in hand, upon his readiness in repeating
the Arguments, the Propriety of his Expressions, and the profoundness of his
Learning. But yet these Sumptuous Entertainments would not be sufficient to
advance one to the Degree of Doctor, if they were not backed with a pregnant
Purse; and this fair Bud of Immortality, I mean the Doctorate, would never
spring or open, if it were not watered with a Golden Shower. It is very
expensive to obtain the Licenses and the Degree of Doctor; and it is very
frequent on these occasions, to see Learning, the Merits whereof ought chiefly
to be looked upon, Postpon'd, and Ignorance preferred, which if I mistake not,
may well be esteemed a fifth Reason, why Students do so little concern
themselves to make any great progress in their Studies.

I had always believed that a certain Story very current in Italy, of an Ass
that took his Doctors Degree at Padua, was no more than a Tale or Fable made at
pleasure: But one of the chief Doctors of Physic, whom I had a particular
acquaintance with, and whom I will not name, for fear of exposing him to the
hatred of his Colleagues, assured me, that it was very true. He related the
matter of Fact to me in this manner. A young Gentleman of the Country of the
Grisons, of a very good Family, but somewhat stinted in his Estate, had applied
himself with extraordinary diligence to the Study of the Canon Law, and had
very regularly performed all his Exercises in the University; and his time
being out, he presented himself in order to be admitted Doctor: But
notwithstanding that his Capacity was without exception, yet there still
remained an insuperable Difficulty, for want of Money. This troubled him so
much, that he Writ to his Father about it, and they resolved together to put a
Trick upon the Rector of the University, a man of a most sordid Covetousness.
The Students Father comes to Padua, having borrowed a considerable Sum of Money
of one of his Friends, and having brought his Ass with him, took up his Lodging
in the most famous Inn that was in the whole Town: This done, he goes to the
Rector about Eleven a Clock at Night, telling him, that a young Lord a
Stranger, whom he named to him, was come in Post to Town to take his Degree,
but that he found himself so extremely tired and discomposed with his Journey,
that it was Impossible for him to come and present himself in Person, and that
besides he was obliged to be on Horseback again by Three or Four in the
Morning, to get a Benefice at Rome, which he could not be qualified for without
having taken his Doctors Degree; and to give more Life and Energy to his words,
he presents him with a Purse stuffed with Ducats, and told him, that as soon as
his Letters should be ready, his Master in acknowledgment of so great a favor
would be very ready to gratify him further. The Rector dazzled with this
charming Present, and in the hopes of a second part to the same Tune, required
nothing of him but the Name of the young Lord; he got his Letters ready, and
with the same Expedition sent them to the Chancellor of the University, to have
the Seal put to them. Thus all passed admirably well, without Rub or Let in
favor of good Doctor Martin, for that was the Name they had given him, and
which still to this Day, is the common Name of all the Asses of the Country.
This was that the Doctor related to me of this Story; but he proceeded not to
tell me what others add to it, which is, that the next Morning, at the opening
of the College-Gates, the Grison Gentleman drove Doctor Martin into the great
Hall, being the place of public Disputation, with his Letters Patent hung
about his Neck, and a Doctors Bonnet fastened to his Ears, to the great
Astonishment of all the Doctors, who could not sufficiently admire the Port and
Majesty of their New-Collegue. I don't love to relate Matters that turn so much
to the Confusion of these great Bodies of the Universities, for whom I have
always had respect and Veneration; and I had rather incline my Reader to
believe, that all this is no more than the pure Invention of some witty Droll,
whereby he had a mind to express to the World, that these Rectors are commonly
more sensible of the Money, than of the Merits of those they promote. However,
thus much I think my self obliged to declare to the Honor of these Illustrious
Bodies, that they have at all times made themselves Renowned, by some great Men
that have signalized themselves amongst them, by their extraordinary Parts and
Learning: And when I say that Ignorance Reigns amongst them, I speak only of
the generality or greater part of them. For I know that there are always found
amongst them Spirits naturally elevated above the common Pitch, and who by the
Noble Efforts they make to raise themselves out of the Dust, do justly deserve
to be distinguished. Neither am I Ignorant that many of them have given
sufficient Proof of their Learning by the gallant Works they have left us; and
many Persons who have Traveled in Italy, have received much Pleasure and
Satisfaction in their Conversation. Some of these Travelers have proceeded so
far in honoring of them, as to give them particular Elogies in the Relations
they have given us of their own Travels: Yet for my part, I am Inclined
sometimes to understand these kind of Encomiums with restriction, and that for
two Reasons. The first is this, that Travelers are very often prepossest with
the Learning of some Persons, before they are well acquainted with it, and are
sometimes strongly carried to Proclaim them vast Scholars, because they have
done them some Service, or have expressed a great deal of Civility to them on
their Voyage. I know at Bononia a Person of mean Learning and Parts, who
compelled a Stranger to go and spend Eight days at his Country House, where he
Treated him most Sumptuously every day, and sent for all the Rarities that were
to be got about Bononia, only because he had heard this Stranger say, that he
intended to Publish his Voyage of Italy. His Son having demanded of him, why,
contrary to the Genius of the Country, he would put himself to so great Charges
in Treating of a Person, who was a perfect Stranger to him? The Father
Answered, that what he did was not without Reason, forasmuch as that honest Man
had declared that he intended to Rank his Name amongst the Learned Men of
Italy, in the Book of his Travels he intended to Publish. It is not of to day
only that the Italians are accused for being Liberal in nothing but Ceremonies
and Compliments, and extremely cautelous and reserved about any thing that may
engage them in any particular Expenses: But yet if a man would take the pains
to comport with them in their humor, and more especially flatter them in the
vain Ambition they have, though very Ignorant, to pass for Learned Men, a Man
might draw from them what he pleased himself.

A second Reason, why I would not always take the Praises that Travelers
bestow, according to the rigor of the Letter, is this, because there be many
Italians who practice that, which may be called the Art of being esteemed
Learned at a cheap rate. This Art consists in choosing out some particular and
select Points, and bestowing all their Application and Study upon them for some
time together, until that they are become perfectly Masters of them, and till
they find themselves in a Condition to resolve all the doubts that can be
objected against them. If it be a matter that may be confirmed by Authorities,
care is taken to get the most considerable by heart; and if it depend more upon
Experience, they endeavor to exercise themselves therein, until the managing
of it be made easy to them, and they have got the perfect Command of it. And
after all (say the Italians,) that Man is a great Blockhead, who cannot
insensibly make the Conversation he is engaged in, to fall upon the point he is
most versed in; and the more dexterously he can do this, the more he makes
himself to be admired. But yet these sort of Men, let them carry it as
cunningly as they can, they are still discovered sooner or later, by those that
frequent their Company for any time; but Travelers indeed, who only pass by
and are gone, may easily be imposed upon by this method, and be apt to believe
them equally able in all other Parts. I know many Learned Men of this Stamp:
There was one at Venice whom we called Physical Predetermination; another,
Copernicus his Systeme; another, the World in the Moon, and many others, upon
whom we bestowed the name of the things they had got by Rote, and wherewith
they continually alarmed Men's Ears. As soon as they were entered into Discourse
with any one, it was not necessary to draw near to understand what they said,
for that might be seen from far by their Actions and Gesture of their Arms and
Hands, as the Italians use to do, who are pleased to signalize themselves this
way. This is that I call the Art of gaining the repute of Learning at an easy
rate.

I do not say that all make use of this method, there are some to be found that
are Learned indeed and in good earnest; and it cannot be denied, but we meet
with Men there, that are very able in all kind of Professions; and what I have
before alleged is only to show, that Travelers may sometimes be deceived in
them. I shall add one Remark more, I have made concerning these Learned Men,
which is, that we do indeed find some of them that excel in the Civil and Canon
Law; others in Physic, in Chemistry, in History; some few in the Mathematics,
etc. but withal, that it is a kind of Prodigy to meet with one that
understands Hebrew or Greek, or that is well versed in Holy Scripture, or that
is a good Divine, in the Popish way; and yet all these are such
accomplishments, as one would think should be very becoming, if not absolutely
necessary, in a Country that is so full of Priests as Italy is. The reason
whereof, as far as I could ever penetrate, is, that all these kind of Studies,
are neither favored by the great ones, nor encouraged by rewards, nor
supported by any Temporal Interest. The Languages of the Dead (if we except in
some kind the Latin,) are of small Credit in the Courts of Italian Princes,
because of the difficulty there is in becoming Master of them, and for the
small use, according to their Conceit, they are of in the World, after one with
great praise has attained some competent skill in them. As for Divinity, that
seems yet more useless to them, than any of the rest; because the Jesuits, who
are the Popes Emissaries, and the Confessors of all the Princes and great Men,
make them believe that it is a pitiful kind of Science, and only fit for Monks
and other Religious to amuse themselves about it, and that the best Divinity
for a secular Person is to understand none of it, but only to believe
confusedly and in general as the Church believes, as being the true and sure
way to avoid all those Temptations which may carry Men's minds toward Novelties
and Heresies. So that if any Man should undertake, at present, to talk of
Divinity in the presence of the Princes or Lords of Italy, he would make his
Company not only uneasy, but ridiculous. The Case is not the same with other
Sciences; those that possess them, may by their means advance themselves in the
World. A Person is always in good esteem that has attained to considerable
skill in the Civil Law, in the Mathematics, in Physic, or even in the Canon
Law, especially in Beneficiary cases. All these Sciences are of as good stead
to a Man as a plentiful Patrimony, and are the making of those who are well
versed in them: But poor Divinity is hated, and abandoned by almost all the
World. I was acquainted at Bononia with a young Gentleman, who had applied
himself to this Forlorn Study, for some years; and having one day asked him,
whether he continued in the vigorous prosecution of his Studies, he told me,
that he was just about to quit it for good and all; to learn to play on the
Violin, because he believed that Art would be much more profitable to him. See
here a true account of the Languishing Condition of Theology in those
Universities, and which is the reason that scarcely any professors can be found
in them, that are capable of Teaching it. This is no Exaggeration at all, but
is a thing visible and notorious; for it is this extreme scarcity of Divines,
that has obliged them to Incorporate some Monks into their Body, under the
Name of Doctors or Professors of Divinity, to the end they might teach that
Faculty amongst them.

Forasmuch as I am insensibly got amongst the Monks, and that I have
sufficiently, as I suppose, described the manner of Studying in their
Universities; I persuade my self you will not be displeased to understand the
method these observe in the Colleges of their Convents or Religious Houses in
Italy. We will begin with the Jesuits; we have already taken a View of their
way of Teaching Latin, and it remains now for us to take notice in what manner
they regulate their own Studies, with regard to their young Jesuits; for if
they be able to perform any thing in this kind, which is the Foundation of
their Institution, we may expect to see the fairest Fruits of it in the young
Plants of their Society. Thus much we may safely aver of them, that they have
in some sort the very choice of Spirits, it being easy for them, amongst that
vast Number of Scholars that are under their Inspection, to pick out those they
think most fit for their Turn, having had the opportunity of observing them of
a long time. See here the course they take: They industriously apply themselves
to examine the Temperament of their Scholars, especially when they are in their
last or highest Latin Classis, where they are taught Rhetoric. If they have
observed any of them that are of a well tempered, modest and composed Humor,
they say such a one will be good to make a Benedictin, for they call the Monks
of the Order of St. Bennet, not without an Air of slighting and contempt, good
Men: If they perceive another that is of a Silent, Sour, Sullen and Melancholy
Temper, this Youth, say they, will make a good Chartreux, Camaldule, or unshod
Carmelite: If they find another of a sweet and pleasant humor, and of a tender
and effeminate Complexion, such a one they look upon as proper to associate
with the Canon Regulars, or Olivetans, or to be a Confessor to Nuns: If any of
them be inclined to Boufonry, and to play tricks of Legerdemain; See there a
Youth, say they, that will fit the Cordeliers and Minimes: Others that are of
dastardly, mean and cowardly Spirits, they turn over to the Capucins, for they
are very well acquainted what Spirit Reigns in each Order.

Lastly, If they chance to meet with any poor, ignorant, and simple Youth, and
whose mind has no Elevation at all, they hope that such a one may by their
means come to be a good Country Curate. They make no difficulty in the Class of
Rhetoric, to take every one of their Scholars apart, and declare to them, the
Calling to which God seems to have called them. But as for themselves, if they
find one that is of a keen and subtle Spirit, brisk and active, full of Fire,
daring and undertaking, these are the Youths forsooth, that are for their
Society; these are the Persons fit for their Tooth, and such they endeavor to
gain to their Number.

After some years past in their Novitiat and Travels, they set them to Teach
Latin, and make them Regents over the seven Classes, in Order, one after
another, which is their Employment for seven years; and during all this time,
they do not suffer them to mind any other thing, but what concerns their
Classes; no nor so much as to read any Book, but those that are designed for
that use. When they enter into the Society, they commonly are about 21 or 22
years of Age, so that before they have finished their Regency, over all the
seven Latin Classes, they are above Thirty years of Age. Then it is they are
put upon the Studying of Philosophy, and afterward of Theology; in the first
of which they spend two years, and in the latter three.

It Is about this time, that the Fathers make another Scrutiny or Trial of the
Spirits of their younger Jesuits. Those who have kept all their Fire, and make
themselves remarkable for their Boldness and Resolution, are designed to be
Missionaries, and the rest are left to their liberty, to apply themselves to
some particular Study, for which they have most Inclination; or else they make
Preachers of them, whilst the Old Jesuits are the Doctors of Fraternites, or
hear Confessions. But all of them generally are Educated in a Spirit of refined
Policy, which does not shake hands with them till Death. And those in whom this
Spirit is most rife and pregnant, are advanced to the Charges and Employs of
the Society, or else means are found out to please them in the Courts of
Princes; and if any one be found that is not Baptized into this Spirit, though
otherwise he be endowed with the most promising Talents that may be, he is sure
to be expelled the Society of Jesus.

Now the Conclusion we may draw from what I have here represented, concerning
the Conduct of the Jesuits, is this, viz. that it is in a manner impossible
they should ever attain to any great degree of Learning; for the very prime of
their Youth, and the Age that is most proper to apply themselves to Sciences,
is wholly employed in Learning and Teaching Latin; so that we have reason to
believe that to be the only thing they are good at; and yet the truth is, that
even herein they make themselves ridiculous. The Proverb tells us, that the
Corruption of the best things, is the worst: Corruption optimi, pessima; and it
may be said also, that the Jesuits, who probably read none but the best Authors
of the Latin Tongue, do make a kind of mixture of them in their Spirits, to
which they superadd an intolerable kind of Affectation, that utterly spoils all
the good that could be in it. All their Latin is commonly thick, larded with
Enimveros, Quidems and Ergo's: I can no better parallel this their Folly, than
by comparing it with the Vanity of some Women, who from an excess of desire
they have to appear Beautiful, dawb their Faces so thick with Paint and
Patches, that quite contrary to their design, they make themselves ugly and
abominable. All the honor that is rendered to their Latin, is this, that in all
the Societies where they speak good Latin, as with the Gentlemen of Port Royal,
and in all the Schools of Physicians, it is termed pitiful Jesuits Latin.

As for what concerns their Philosophy and Divinity, which they are made to
Study, after that they have Taught Latin, that we may discover the nature
thereof, we are first to know, that the Society of Jesuits, having been
instituted at Rome by Ignatius Loyola, had at first no other Schools, besides
the public Schools, nor any other Opinions, but such as are commonly Taught
there.

In their general Assembly held in the year 1550, they made some Constitutions,
by which their Founder obliged them to follow the Doctrine of St. Thomas
Aquinas, as to their Divinity, and consequently in all Questions of Philosophy,
that necessarily depend upon it. There are to this day some of their Theses to
be seen, publicly defended by them in their College at Rome, in the years
1560, and 1562; a short time after the Death of their Founder, and at the
sitting of the Council of Trent, where they defend the Opinions of St. Thomas,
concerning Grace, directly opposite to those they maintain at present. In the
mean time, James Lainez being chosen General in 1558, two years after the Death
of Ignatius Loyola, he caused a Statute to pass, at the same Assembly where he
had been Elected, by the which it was resolved, that they should Teach also the
Master of Sentences; but in case afterward, it should be judged, that some
other Author, would be more profitable to the Students, as if they should think
fit to compose a new Sum of Theology, or any other Work that might better
comport with the Times, (Temporibus accommodatior,) that then the same might be
made use of, after a mature Deliberation. Lainez having thus left the Jesuits
at liberty, to find out a method of Teaching Philosophy, more accommodate to
the latter Times, than that which had been followed ever since the Schoolmen
were known in the World, (for it was about this time, that they resolved to set
up for great Politicians, and to be the Depravers of Science and Morality, the
better to please the corrupt age in which their Lot was fallen;) and the very
same year several Instances were given of this Corruption.

In the University of Salamanca, Prudentius of Monte Major a Jesuit, publicly
maintained a Thesis, wherein he rejected all the absolute Decrees of God, with
respect to acts of human Liberty, and particularly all Predestination
gratuitous and independent on any foresight of good actions, with some other
like Doctrins. The Divinity Faculty of that University condemned them, but they
pleased the Society well enough, who gave permission to their Divines to teach
them, according as occasion and Time should seem favorable for it.

Now in order to their finding out a way entirely to shake off the Yoke of St.
Thomas's Doctrine, Claudius Aqua Viva, General of the Jesuits, in the year 1584,
called to Rome six of the most able Divines of the Society, with ^^der to
consult beforehand, the most Learned of each Province, to make a choice of
those select Opinions, which were to be taught in their Society. These Divines
being come to Rome, they there composed a Book with this Title; Ratio atque
Institutio Studiorum Societatis Jesu. The way and Institution of the Studies of
the Society of Jesus, which was Printed in 1586. Here it was that they
absolutely cast off S. Austin and S. Thomas, upon the Points of Predestination
and Physical Predetermination, which they were allowed the Liberty to maintain
till then. They established their mediate knowledge, the Foresight of future
Contingents, and they explained the Efficacy of Grace, after the manner of the
Pelagians, and Semipelagians, as if the same were entirely dependent on the
Free Will of Man, which they do not suppose to be so corrupt, as the most
Venerable Doctors of Antiquity, and particularly S. Austin took it to be.

It will not be besides our purpose, to represent to you here a brief Reflection
upon a short Sentence I met with in the same Directory of the Studies of the
Society, where it is said, that it is for the honor of the Society of Jesus
that a new Theology be introduced, with Liberty of Spirit: That is to say,
without being too strictly tied up to the Opinions of the ancient Fathers, or
to the Decisions of the Modern Doctors. Besides it implies, that they had a
terrible Itch of Pride to join to their Novel Institution, a novelty of Doctrine
and Morals, that might distinguish them from all others. For it seemed somewhat
hard and grating upon them, that being Jesuits, they were fain to be Thomists
in their Opinions.

Molina a Spanish Jesuit, was one of the most bold and venturous in Publishing
the new Doctrine of the Society, and publicly boasted, that the greater part of
it, was of his own Invention. He Published in the year 1588, his Work entitled
The Concord of Grace and Free Will: The Opinions he there vented, were the same
with those of other Jesuits, but proved by Metaphysical Reasons, after the
manner of the Schools. He made no bones to say, that S. Austin had been
involved in a kind of Darkness, as to what concerns the Doctrine of Grace; and
that he had believed that Gratuitous Predestination was necessarily joined with
it. The design of the Jesuits herein was this, that conformably to the
Resolution they had taken, to distinguish themselves by abandoning S. Thomas,
and finding as yet no means, they had a mind cunningly and under other Terms,
to restore Pelagianism, which seemed to them more plausible to be maintained,
than the efficacious Grace of S. Austin, which too openly favored the
necessitating Grace of Luther and Calvin, (as they are pleased to call it,)
which had been condemned at the Council of Trent, or rather, which seemed to be
one and the same with it. To the end therefore, they might more dexterously
obtain this their end, and the more sweetly engage the minds of Men to receive
it; they were not wanting from time to time, to make their Disciples publicly
to maintain the Doctrine of S. Austin and S. Thomas, that by this means they
might appear to be disinterested Men, and that searched after nothing but the
Truth. But all this their address and cunning, did not hinder the Dominicans,
being incensed by Molina's Book, openly to oppose themselves against their
Innovations, and succeeded so well in their Pursuit, that Clement VIII.
established a Congregation at Rome, to hear the Reasons of both Parties. They
began with the Examination of Molina's Book, and they reduced his Doctrine to
four Principles, which they explained in diverse Propositions. And forasmuch as
they make a part of the Theology of the Jesuits, I do not think it a wandering
from my Subject, to give you here a short account of them.

The first Principle of Molina is, That the general Concourse of God, does not
consist in acting upon second Causes, as if they stood in need of being moved
by God, in order to produce their effect; but that God acts immediately in the
Action, together with the Cause; and that if God should push on the Will to
act, he would thereby ruin the Liberty thereof. From which Principle Molina
drew these Consequences.

1. That Man by the strength of Nature, can believe Supernatural Mysteries.

2. That having performed what lies in him, according to his natural Strength
and Ability, God comes in and bestows his Grace; and that God foreseeing who
those are, that will make use of these Abilities, when the Gospel shall be
Preached unto them, he is ready to bestow upon them the Grace that is necessary
for their total Conversion.

3. That a man by his natural Strength, can form a resolution of never
offending God, for time to come.

4. That natural Light may be sufficient to keep the Law of Nature, whatsoever
trouble or difficulty there may be in the doing of it.

The Second Principle of Molina is, that God does not refuse to any grown
Person, the assistance that is necessary for him to persevere in that which it
good; so that it is the fault of him who does not persevere in Godliness, and
not the want of Grace, that makes him to fall away.

The Third Principle is, that we are to distinguish in God, three sorts of
Knowledge, the one purely Natural, the other altogether free, and the third
Mediate, or partaking of both; according to which latter, God by the intimate
knowledge he has of the Free Will of every man, knows what he would do,
supposing such or such a thing, though it be in his power to do the contrary.
Under this Principle are comprehended these Propositions.

1. That there is but one exciting Grace, and none that is Efficacious in it
self.

2. That it is not Grace that determines the Free Will, but that the Free Will
determines it self.

The Fourth Principle is, That God Predestinates those, who he foresees by his
mediate knowledge, will make good use of the strength of Nature and of Grace.

The Consulters of the Congregation, de Auxiliis, (for so they called them,
because they therein treated concerning the assistances which God affords Men,
in order to apply themselves to that which is good;) had couched the Sentiments
of Molina in Twenty Propositions, whereof the most are the very same, or to the
same Sense of those we have here set down. They censured every one of them, as
may be seen in the abridgment of the Acts, which is still in being, and
declared that Molina and his Adherents, which are the Jesuits, had espoused the
Opinions of the Pelagians, and the Semipelagians, as well in the Principles of
their Doctrine, as in their Proofs and Objections. They tell us that hereupon,
the Jesuits joined Threats with their Prayers, to hinder the Publication of
this Censure, and that out of very Rage they publicly maintained in Rome, that
it was no part of the Faith, that Clement VIII. was Pope, and that he was not
Infallible. Their Adversaries have used the same liberty toward the Popes,
when ever they proved contrary to them, and there is great probability, that
they do not think themselves obliged to maintain the Infallibility of the Pope,
except then only when it is of use to them to overthrow their Adversaries.
However the Pope was resolved to decide this difference by a Bull, in case the
Jesuits should refuse to submit themselves: But his Death which happened the
Eighth of March 1605, delivered them from the fear they were in of being forced
to retract their Doctrine, or of being Condemned. Paul V. who succeeded to Leo
XI. took the same matter in hand, with design to decide it.

At this time it was, that the Jesuits, being in a greater apprehension than
ever, of seeing their Doctrine Condemned for Heretical, and all their fine
Projects for establishing of their Novel Opinions, overthrown; their General
Aqua Viva thought fit to make a Show of changing them in some respect. He made
a Decree, dated the Fourteenth of December, whereby he ordered those of the
Society, for time to come, to teach this Doctrine with some Modification, by
approaching in some Degree to the Grace of the Thomists: But this having been
cast in the Teeth of the Jesuits, as a reproach tending to their shame and
confusion, Mutio Vitellexti, the Successor of Aqua Viva in the Generalship,
declared, that it had not been the intention of his Predecessor, to retract
their Dogmas, and accordingly he restored the Opinions of the Society to their
former State. Thus we see that the Doctrine of the Jesuits changed three times
in less than Thirty years: For they departed from the Sentiments of S. Austin
and S. Thomas, to those of the Pelagians, and from thence they returned again
anew to those of S. Thomas, from whence soon after they fell again to their
discharged Vomit, I mean to Molinism or Pelagianism. They gave a remarkable
instance in these their shiftings, that they did indeed accommodate their
Doctrine to the times, Temporibus accommodatior, according to their own
expression. And that at last the great Itch they had of signalizing their
Society by novel and particular Opinions, prevailed against all manner of
Reasons whatsoever. They knew so well to manage the Spirit of Paul V. which
they had sweetened toward them, by dedicating to him a second Edition of
Cassianius, that notwithstanding the Doctrine of Molina, the Jesuit, had been
pronounced Heretical, by the Congregation de Auxilus, as well as by himself and
his Predecessors, he forbore Publishing the Bull, which he had prepared to
thunder-strike it with, and contented himself with the Publishing of a Decree,
by which he imposed silence on both Parties, until it should please him to make
the Decision. The Jesuits in the mean time, persisted in their new Dogmas, and
in process of Time, had the good success to keep them standing, in spite of
their Adversaries.

I cannot deny, but that the Church of Rome has a great Interest on one hand,
to Found new Religious Orders, as being a sort of People, that promise total
Subjection, and inviolabe Faithfulness to her; but on the other hand, Time may
make it appear, that they will prove a great means of rending and dismembring
her, by their restless Ambition of distinguishing themselves by their Doctrins.

This is that which wanted little of being accomplished in our days, wherein we
have seen a vast number of Augustinians and Thomists, under the name of
Jansenists, in a fair way of rending themselves from the Church of Rome, when
by the instigation of the Jesuits, they were going about to condemn the Dogmas
of their Masters. Yet was it not the Solidity and prevalency of the Jesuitical
Arguments, that made them triumph at last; but indeed the only thing that
procured them this advantage, was the Temporal Power, which at present they
have acquired in all Places, that follow the Communion of Rome.

It was observed, that whilst the poor Jansenists, good Souls, were wholly
employed in poring upon S. Austin, to search out those Passages they stood in
need of, to maintain their Efficacious Grace, these made it their chief
business to manage the Spirit of the Pope, and of the Court of Rome, to secure
themselves a Party in the Sorbonne, and to engage the Bishops in France on
their side, by making use of the Royal Authority.

To make an end of giving you a just and full Idea of all their Divinity, it
shall suffice to acquaint you, that the Faculty of Lovain, in the Year 1677,
did by their Deputies, present to the Pope, several Propositions relating to
Morals, drawn out of the Books of Jesuits, Sixty five whereof were Condemned by
a Decree of the Second of March 1678. This only consideration of the
multiplicity of Errors that are found in their Books, ought to be a sufficient
Ground to the Papists, for suspecting all the Divinity of these Reverend
Fathers. It is not without cause, that the Modern Papists are accused of being
the greatest Liars in the World, of having no human Faith, of Violating all
manner of Oaths, of breaking their Words, and of making less difficulty of
forswearing themselves, than the very Turks and Infidels. They are beholding
for the Progress they have made in these goodly Virtues, to the Novel Doctrine
of the Jesuits, who have introduced their mental restrictions, to save them
from the odious charge of a Lie.

According to these Casuists, if a Christian be asked Whether he believe in
Jesus Christ; he may answer no; supposing that he means in his heart, that he
does not believe in him as the Turks do, who believe in him, only as a Prophet.
If he be asked Whether he be a Protestant; he may say upon occasion, that he is
one, if his inward meaning be, that he protests against the Errors of the
Protestants. I heard a Penegyrick pronounced at Milan, by a Jesuit, in honor
of St. Charles Borromeo, Cardinal and Archbishop of that City: One of the
Principal Points insisted on, was the great Charity this Saint expressed toward
two Famous Robbers on the Highway, who were Pursued by some Officers of
Justice; they asked the Saint, Whether he had seen these two Criminals passing
that way? No, quoth he, they did not pass this way: You must know, he had at
that time his Finger in his Sleeve, through which, his meaning was, that the
Robbers had not passed; and the Officers giving credit to his words, ceased
from pursuing them, by which means they had the opportunity to make their
escape. O action truly holy and worthy of all praise! Precious Fruit of the
mental reservation of the Jesuits!

The World must also be informed, that after three years Study spent upon this
Excellent Divinity, the Jesuits make choice of their Preachers, and
Missionaries, without ever having had the time, nay it may be, so much as a
thought, to read the Scriptures or the Fathers; and accordingly we may guess,
what these men are capable to perform. The former, viz. their Preachers abound
in words, without much Sense or Solidity, Multa verba, nullus fere sensus: And
as for the latter, that is, their Missionaries, we may take the height of their
Standard, by those of them we meet with in England; whose whole Stock commonly
amounts to no more than two or three poor Arguments, which after all conclude
nothing.

They demand in the first place, Where the Protestant Church was before Luther
and Calvin? and then set themselves to exaggerate the Vices and Defects of
those two Persons. From thence they pass over to give a Representation of Henry
VIII. in the most malicious Colors they can; and conclude from all this, that
it is very unlikely, that God should ever have made use of such Persons, to
make a Reformation. Others of them ask a Protestant, Whether it be absolutely
impossible for a Man to be saved in the Romish Religion? And because he is more
Charitable than they are, and unwilling to condemn any one, they would infer
from thence, that theirs is the surest side.

I am acquainted here in London with a Lady, who turned Papist in King James
his time; the Argument that overswayed her was this: The Jesuits told her, that
that must be the true Church, which can give full assurance of Salvation to all
her Members; that the Protestant Church gives no assurance at all; but that the
Romish Church does: From whence it followed, that she must be the true Church.
Whereupon, this Gentlewoman went, as she said, and consulted the most able
Doctors of London, the Deans and Bishops, asking them, Whether by persevering a
good Protestant, and living well, she should Infallibly be saved? To which she
says, they gave her only this Answer, That they hoped, that by the goodness of
God, and the merits of Jesus Christ, she should be so. This so modest and
rational an Answer, was not sufficient to confirm the Gentlewoman. The Jesuits
were not wanting to observe to her, that the Bishops had said to her, we hope,
which did express nothing of Certainty or Assurance; but that as for them, they
assured her, that she should Infallibly be Saved in the Roman Catholic
Religion.

Indeed it is not easy for me to believe, that so pitiful an Argument should
have been capable to persuade a Gentlewoman, who otherwise seems to have Wit
enough; and that in all probability, there must have been some other motive of
Interest lurking, more strong than all this, and that some Promise had been
given her, of the advancement of her Husband in King James his Court. In the
mean time, he is at present in Ireland, where notwithstanding all the fair
Promises the Jesuits may have given him, he is fain to live on hopes.

That I may not run out into a long Digression, having now represented to you
the order and method of the Studies of the Jesuits, I shall pass over to the
Studies of the other Religious Orders, which I shall comprize in few words,
that I may not be tedious to you by an overlong Relation. Those of these
Orders, who profess a strict and austere Rule, complain that the Rigor of their
observance exhausts and flats their Spirits, and makes them in a manner wholly
incapable of applying themselves to Study, and that their time is too much
shortened by that, which they call the Divine Office, to be able to do any good
at it. How is it possible for me to Study? said a Reformed Religious to me, I
must rise at midnight to go to Mattins, which continue two hours and an half.
After which I return to my Cell, to see if I can take some rest, my Head being
much disordered, with the unseasonable breaking of it: About an hour or two
after, I am fain to rise again, to go and meditate, and sing that which they
call Prime. This done, we are sent to Work in a Garden, there to Dig and Delve
for near two hours more; after which we must go to sing the Terce, and High
Mass. This done, we go to Dinner, which is followed with an hour of Recreation;
the rest of the Day, is taken up in going three times more to the Church, there
to sing the Nones, Vespers and Complies, so that we can never have three
quarters of an hour together to our selves. For my part, said he, I render
thanks to God, that I understood a little Latin, before I ever entered into this
Religious Order, which makes me at present to understand a little of my
Breviary; but the most of my Brethren scarcely understand one word of it, and
sing like so many Asses, without knowing what they say; and much less do they
know what Philosophy or Theology means. They say that these kind of Studies
are very dangerous to Salvation, and fill Men with Pride and Vanity. For our
parts, we are sure that by obeying our Superiors, we shall go to Paradise,
without troubing our Heads beforehand, to know what kind of place it is. This
was the Reasoning of this poor Monk; and he was so far from lamenting, as he
ought, the Misery of his Condition, which deprived him of so great a Treasure,
as is that which is the product of Study, that he insulted over, and despised
Learning; it being but too natural to the most part of Men, to endeavor to
abase and undervalue that, out of a kind of maliciousness of heart, which their
folly or weakness will not suffer them to obtain.

But forasmuch as there are but few Religious Orders in Italy, where this exact
Observance is practiced; so we find other Religious, who have much more time to
themselves, and that are altogether of a different humor. And forasmuch as the
most part of these, are either of the Order of S. Dominick, or S. Francis, we
may with respect to their Doctrine, divide them into Thomists and Scotists. The
former of these, follow the Doctrine of S. Thomas Aquinas, who was a Dominican.
This Thomas stuck close to Aristotle in matters of Philosophy, and studied his
Divinity at Collen, under Albertus Magnus of the same Order. He undertook
afterward, by the subtilty of his Spirit, to reconcile Aristotle with S. Paul,
forcing that Pagan Philosopher in a manner, to become a Christian, and what is
yet more wonderful, a Papist, in spite of all the aversion he had to these
novel Doctrins.

Aristotle was fallen into great Decadence, and Neglect in S. Thomas his time,
and it is to him therefore, they attribute the Glory of having as it were,
raised him from the Dead, according to that saying, Sine Thoma mutus
Aristoteles, Without Thomas, Aristotle is Dumb. Having addicted himself very
much to the reading of S. Paul, he could not avoid gratuitous Predestination,
nor efficacious Grace, which he strongly maintained, showing himself very
inventive and dexterous at splitting a Hair in his way of handling Scholastic
matters, and particularly the Points that respect Transubstantiation.

Pope Urban IV. who instituted the Feast of the Holy Sacrament, ordered him to
apply himself to the composing of an Office for it. The Papists greatly admire
the Hymn, he made on that Subject, and more particularly the Prose, which to
this day is Sung at the Mass. It is full of the Rapsodies and contradictions,
which the Papists at present do believe on that Subject. And he himself owns,
about the midst of the said Prose, that what he says of it is
incomprehensible, does not fall under the Senses, and is contrary to, or beyond
the order of natural things.

Quod non capis, quod non vides,
Animosa firmat Fides, praeter rerum ordinem.
What thou do not understand, and what thou do not see,
Courageous Faith confirms, beyond the course of things that be.
I am astonished how he durst assert that it is Faith alone, that assures us of
it; for as subtle as he was, it is evident that in his Searching, he himself was
very doubtful, whether what he had writ on this Subject, was true or no. This
Passage of his seems too remarkable to be past by, without giving you an
occasion of making some Reflection upon it. To this purpose I shall relate to
you, what Ribadeneira tells us of it, in his Legends, in the Life of S. Thomas
Aquinas.

Notwithstanding, says he, S. Thomas in his Explication of other matters, goes
beyond all other Doctors; yet in the point of this ineffable Sacrament and
Divine Sacrifice, he surmounts and outvies himself, as may be seen in his
Works, and in the Office he composed at the command of Pope Urban IV. for the
Celebration of the Feast of the Holy Sacrament. This thorny and difficult
Question, having been once canvas'd in the University of Paris, concerning the
Accidents of Bread and Wine, which continue there visible after the Conversion
of the Substance to which they belong, into that of the Body and Blood of Jesus
Christ, and which are called the Sacramental Species or Kinds: S Thomas, (to
whom they had all referred themselves,) writ to them his thoughts of this
Question, upon a Paper, which he laid upon the Altar; and having his Eyes and
Heart fixed upon a Crucifix which was there, he beseeched him most earnestly,
that if he had writ the Truth, he would be pleased to do him the Favor to tell
it him; and if not, that he would please to stop and hinder it. And as he was
in the greatest Fervor of his Prayer, Jesus Christ showed himself visibly unto
him upon the Altar, and said to him, You have writ this well, Thomas. The Saint
continuing his Prayer, being Prostrate on the Ground, his Body was lifted up
into the Air, and continued so, hovering there for a good while, in the
Presence of many Religious of the Convent.

At another time, when he composed the Office of the Romish Church, which they
sing on the day of the most Holy Sacrament, being then in the City of Orvieto,
a Crucifix spoke to him, the same words, which Crucifix is to this day called
S. Thomas his Crucifix. The same happened to him also at Naples; as he was
writing the Third part of his Sum, the Crucifix which was upon the Altar, spoke
to him with a loud and intelligible Voice, saying, Thomas, thou have well writ
concerning me; What will thou that I give thee for thy Reward?

Thus far are the Words of Ribadeneira the Jesuit, in his Legend, which is so
highly approved by the Church of Rome. Upon all which, I desire you to make
this Reflection, That if S. Thomas had not been doubtful of what he wrote, he
would not have had recourse to so many Crucifixes, to be confirmed and assured
in his own mind; for otherwise it would have been an open tempting of God, as
it would surely be, if at present we should desire Miracles of him, to prove to
us the Resurrection of his Son Jesus Christ. And if S. Thomas doubted of this
matter, it follows, that he was convinced, that these things were not solidly
ratified in the Gospel, or in the Doctrine of S. Paul, or at least could not be
deduced thence, as natural and necessary Consequences. Wherefore then does he
say in his Prose, Animosa firmat Fides, that Faith confirms these matters? Men
have begun in these latter Ages, to recover a little from these Apparitions of
Jesus Christ, and from these speaking Crucifixes: But Thomas Aquinas had Wit
enough, at that time, to discern that his novel Doctrine did stand in need of
such Proofs. True it is also, that probably he might have imagined it; for his
assiduous Application and Meditation of matters purely Metaphysical, had made
him extremely abstracted and Hypocondriacal; and to make use of the Expressions
of him, who has composed his Encomium, He was so extatical and so insensible,
that he seemed rather a Statue than a Man. Insomuch that whilst he was a
writing his Books of the Trinity, a Candle burnt his hand, without his feeling
of it: And that which is yet more wonderful is, that he fell into these
Ecstasies and Ravishments, how and when he would himself.

The same Author in most pious Terms relates a very pleasant thing of him, and
which shows the great abstraction of Spirit, in which he was at times. He
says, that S. Thomas at a time, sitting at Table with S. Lewis, King of
France, who made him to Dine with him, out of the great respect he bore to him
and his Order; without minding what he did, or in whose Company he was, he
thump'd with his Hand upon the Table, saying, I am sure, the Manichees will
never be able to answer this Argument. The Prior who was there with him, pulled
him by his Gown, and put him in mind that he was at the King's Table; whereupon
he came to himself again, as one that was returned from the other World, and
asked Pardon of the King for his Indiscretion. This puts me in mind of a like
Action of his in Presence of the Duke of Mantua; He had swallowed a Fly, and
having almost immediately let it escape again, he made a most fearful outcry,
and a thousand frustraneous efforts to catch it again, without considering that
he was in his Masters Presence. I don't pretend by all this, to imply that
Thomas Aquinas was a Fool; but on the contrary do affirm, that he had a great
stock of Wit; yea, and it may be was over-stock'd with it; but withal, that he
had (as many topping Wits have) many bad Intervals. The only thing I am
astonished at, is, that they would needs make a Saint of him, and extol that
for an act of Heroical and transcendent Virtue, which indeed was a formal
Disobedience to the declared Will of his Mother, and of those that had the
Authority over him, and this when he was yet a young Child. Moreover, I was
willing by the way to make this short Digression, to give you some kind of Idea
of the Man, whom the Papists dignifie with the Name of The Angel of the
Schools; The Hammer of Heretics, etc. This is he that is the Head of that
great Party called Thomists, whereof the chiefest are the Dominicans.

Another Party, no whit less considerable, is that of the Scotists. John Duns a
Scotch-man, and who upon that account was Surnamed Scotus, was the Head of
them. He was of the Order of S. Francis, and lived about the latter end of the
Fourteenth Century. He at first followed the Opinions of S. Thomas, and taught
them publicly: But his Scholars having one day Reproached him, That he said
nothing, but what Thomas had said before him, Nihil dicis quod non dixerit
Thomas; he was touched to the quick with this Reproof, and having a good
opinion of his own Ability, he told them, That for time to come they should
hear such things from him, as Thomas never said. From that time forwards he
affected to contradict him in every thing: Because Thomas (for Example) was for
Efficacious Grace, he invented another sort of Grace, which came nearer to that
of the Semi-Pelagians, than to the Grace of S. Austin, whom Thomas followed in
this Point. And in the Sacrament, because Thomas would not have the Body of
Christ to be there with its natural Quantity, but only after a definitive
manner; Scotus asserted the contrary, and said, That his Body was there with
its whole Quantity. But because he durst not save himself by maintaining, That
the Body of Christ in the Sacrament had an extension of Place, as being
repugnant to Sense and Reason; his Subtilty put him upon inventing another sort
of Quantity, which he determines to be an Extension of Parts in themselves,
Extensio partium in ordine ad se: By which means he made the Generical Quantity
of the Thomists, to be only a Species of his. This Distinction indeed was very
subtle; yea, so subtle, that probably Scotus did not understand it himself. For
how can it be conceived, that a Body should be extended in it self, without
being so with respect to Place? I have conversed with many Scotist Doctors, who
professed to hold this Opinion from their subtle Doctor, yet had not Subtilty
enough to explain it. This same Scotus died, being only 35 years of Age.

I do not pretend here to run through all the Oppositions of his Doctrine to
that of S. Thomas. The only Reflection I could wish might be made upon it, is
this, That the Popes dare not declare themselves more in favor of the one than
of the other, for fear of incensing one of both these Parties, who are become
so powerful in the Church of Rome. However it is evident, that these Doctrins
being diametrically opposite and contradictory one to the other in most of the
Points, it is impossible they should be both true, and consequently one of those
great Parties must needs be in an Error. The Romish High Priests, who boast
themselves to be Infallible, ought (as it seems to me) for the Love alone which
they owe to Truth, to pronounce their Decisive Rules concerning this kind of
Controversies; but by Ill-hap these two Parties are too strong for them, and
they would be in danger by pulling down one of them, to be themselves buried
under the Ruins. They rather choose, seeing both Parties do own the Papal
Authority, to let them both alone. Luther and Calvin said nothing concerning
Efficacious Grace and Free Will, but what the Disciples of S. Austin and the
Thomists held, and still hold to this day, though under Terms that are somewhat
differing, but signify the same thing: Yet the Council of Trent condemned the
former, thereby endeavoring to aggravate and to render odious (by the Citation
of a great number of Errors) persons that had lifted up themselves against the
Holy See. Thomas and Scotus are not only different in Opinions; but we find
also, that their Followers are at great Variance amongst themselves. There are
no less than three or four sorts of Thomists, who every one of them pretend to
have Reason on their side, in the Explications they put upon S. Thomas; and the
Scotists do as much by their Scotus.

What I have here related concerning those two Authors, and their Adherents,
and what before I mentioned concerning the Molinists, or Jesuits, and the
Augustinians, agrees generally to all those who profess to follow them, in
whatsoever Country they may be. But to apply this more particularly to the
Italians, I shall tell you, that they differ in nothing from others on those
Points, save only in this, That they do not trouble themselves to search to the
bottom of them, except some particular occasion, and where their own Glory, or
that of their Order is concerned, engage them to it. They are too great lovers
of their Repose and Pleasures, to concern themselves with Theological Notions:
And they are the Monks that have invented that way of Disputing which I have
mentioned, where I speak of their Universities. They must show them the Arms
they intend to fight them with, and point them to the Parts they design to make
their Thrust at, that they may be spared for their own defense.

There happened once upon this account a great Disorder at Bononia, whilst I was
there: A Dominican Father, who was a French Man, had been desired to oppose in
the Grand Convent of the Dominicans at Bononia, where he was arrived some days
before from Foreign Countries. He being not over-well acquainted with their
Customs, after that he had chosen the Theses he would dispute against, and
communicated his Arguments, a desire took him to change his Medium, which did
so extremely confound the poor Defendant, who was not prepared for it, and
whose Stock was not sufficient to remedy such an unlooked for Accident, that he
Answered quite wrong, and set all the Company a Laughing; resembling herein a
certain person I have heard of, Who being sent to take his Orders, without
understanding a word of Latin, and had only got by Heart so many Answers in
order, as the Bishop (who was no Conjurer) was commonly used to ask Questions;
but being confounded in Marshalling his Answers, was at last reduced to say,
That he had the Devil in his Sleeve, instead of his Letters Patents; which he
supposed the Bishop had by his Question demanded of him. The same thing happened
to this poor Dominican, who defended the Theses; but soon after all, the Storm
fell upon the Frenchmen. The Scholars, who were all of them young Religious,
were so extremely enraged at this Affront, which they pretended to have been
offered to their Colleague, that they had no patience to stay till the Dispute
was ended, but run away from the place like so many Madmen, to the Chamber of
this poor Stranger, and having broke down the Door, they tore to pieces several
Turbans of Silk, and other Curiosities he had brought with him from
Constantinople. After this, having watched him at the Door of the Hall, where
the Disputation had been held, One of them, as he came forth, gave him a great
Box on the Ear; telling him, He had best learn another time, to put his
Arguments in Form and Figure. See here in the mean time, the Inconveniences to
which the Italians expose themselves. They are the Monks also who have
introduced Feasts at the end of their Disputes, and the sumptuous Adorning of
the Hall where they are celebrated; and in these Particulars indeed it is they
surpass all others.

It may generally be said of the Italians, That they are never excellent in
those Studies that require a constant and serious Application; as on the
contrary, there be very few can equal them in all others, which of themselves
do afford Diversion and Pleasure. The greatest part of Monks in the Convents
apply themselves to learn to Sing, or Play upon Instruments: Some addict
themselves to Poetry, in order to make Compositions and Sonnets in Praise of
their Saints, which they expose on Festivals in their Churches; and they are
wonderful good at it. In the Abbey of S. Michael in the Wood, where I Taught at
Bononia, the Abbot sent for a Dancing and a Fencing-Master, to teach his
Religious. I thought this very strange for Monks; and one day I took the
freedom to declare my Thoughts of it to the Abbot. The Prelat Answered me, That
there was no hurt in all this, and that they did it for a good End. For (said
he) in the first place, we sometimes act some little Tragedies and Comedies in
the Vestry, or in the Church, to which we Invite our Kindred of both Sexes, and
our Friends, to be merry together. Now, you know very well, that in the
Interludes there is always expected something of Boufonry; and sometimes a
little Ball, or a French-Dance, are very agreeable to the Ladies; and indeed,
if a man cannot Dance well, he exposes himself to Laughter, and our Colleagues
become the less esteemed, who being all of them Children of Persons of Quality,
ought not upon that very account to be ignorant of this kind of genteel
Exercises. The Abbot in giving me this account, took notice of some sort of
Indignation on my Brow when he told me, that they made use of the Church to act
their Farces and Comedies in; and therefore would needs excuse himself on that
Point, by telling me, That they were in a manner forced to serve themselves of
that place, because the Ladies were not suffered to enter the Convent, so that
they had no other place where to bestow them; as if forsooth it were a case of
absolute and insuperable necessity for the Ladies to be present, or for them to
act such kind of Follies. Sometimes also they are guilty of most horrible
Profanations, by building their Theater upon the High-Altar where their Holy
Sacrament is lodged.

The Abbot further endeavoring to satisfy me, past over to another Reason,
which appeared somewhat more witty. My Religious, said he, have all of them (as
you know) great Pensions, and we cannot hinder them from spending their Money,
as they please themselves. Now, I should be very loath, that they should employ
it (as so many others do) in keeping their Whores: This is that which makes me
cast about continually, by what means I may most dexterously get it out of
their hands without offending them, by making them expend it upon other uses.
It Is in this view that I exhort them, to learn all manner of Exercises; as to
Dance, to Ride the Great Horse, and to handle their Arms. They pay their
Masters themselves, and by this means their Purses are drained. The Abbot
supposed he had found a very plausible pretext, for allowing his Monks this
liberty; though in the mean time others in the City openly flouted at it, as
finding good reason to be against the Religious, spending their time in
Exercises so little becoming Monastic Gravity. It is to be observed, that all
these young Religious were then engaged in a course of Studies, but it was not
possible to keep them intent upon them; and scarcely with all the pains taking
in the World was it possible to bring them to any thing, so strangly were they
taken up with their vain Exercises. See here in what manner the Italian Youth
spend their time in the Cloisters; and without doubt at this rate, they cannot
but stand in need of having the Arguments of their Opponents communicated to
them, before they come to Dispute against them on public Occasions. I should
scarce ever make an end, should I go about to relate all the ridiculous
Occupations that divert them from their Studies.

I shall shut up this Treatise of Studies with those of some Secular Priests,
who never having had the means or inclination to go and study at the
Universities, are forced, or willing to content themselves with that which they
have learnt with the Jesuits. The shortest way they have to arrive at their
end, which is to be Ordained Priests, is to get by Heart a little Book called,
Examen Ordinandorum, the Examen of those who are to be Ordained; which contains
the ordinary Questions that are put to those that desire to enter into Orders.
The most part of them learn this like Parots, without understanding the sense
of it; being assured, that no other things shall be asked them. For Ignorance
has so far prevailed in the Church of Rome, that none at these Examinations
are put to it, to show their Scholarship. And these Men being once Ordained,
would rather be Hanged (so to say) than ever after look in a Latin Book, except
the Missal and their Breviary; and yet it is a rare thing to find any that are
able to explain them. They abandon the Trade of Preaching to the Monks, as I
have already declared in my LETTERS; and for their part, they content
themselves to say their Masses, to gad to Baptisms, and Burials.

It is remarkable, and a thing known to all Italy, that Bishoprics and good
Benefices, Ecclesiastical Employments and Offices are not bestowed upon Men of
Learning; but upon those who have most Friends, who can best please and
flatter, or who being Rich, are in a condition to make the best advances. The
case is very different in England, where the Bishops, and other Dignitaries,
are only chosen from amongst the Doctors, and where their Merit is chiefly
considered. This is the true Reason why the Ecclesiastics of Rome do so little
care or endeavor to get Learning, as being well assured that it will stand
them in no stead at all; yea, that their Enemies or Competitors might take
occasion from thence, to render them suspected. The Abbot with whom I Traveled
the First Days Journey to Veletre, informed me of nothing, but what I knew
before, by the description he gave me of the way of conferring Bishoprics and
Benefices, which commonly fell to the share of the most Ignorant. I only asked
him, what might be the Reason of this great Disorder? To which he Answered,
That he did not know, or rather durst not tell it me: And for my part, neither
durst I tell him my Thoughts about it in that Country. But now, that by the
Grace of God I may freely speak my Mind, I shall declare, that the greatest
Secret of all this is, the Resolution which the Heads of the Romish Church have
taken, to keep the People committed to their Charge, as much as they can in a
profound Ignorance. The Doctrine of that Church is so extremely corrupt; the
Contradictions it contains are so great and many; the Decrees of the New
Councils and Popes, and the Doctrins of their different Religious Orders are so
inconsistent and irreconcilable one with the other; the use, or rather the
commerce and Trade that is made there of Holy things, or such as are pretended
to be so, is so base and infamous; the Morals they profess are so low, wicked
and unworthy, that there is no other way left to keep that Church standing, but
by abasing the Spirits of Men by Ignorance, or rather by wholly blinding of
them, to make them fall into the Abyss of Error. Now the best Expedient in
order to this is, to make clear work with whatsoever might encourage the
Studies of Learning, and to set over the People Ignorant Bishops and Pastors;
from which God preserve all Protestant Churches, and more especially that of
England.

OBSERVATIONS ON A JOURNEY TO NAPLES.
The Second Days Journey.
BEing Come to Veletre, the Abbot took up his Lodging with one of his Friends,
and I betook my self to an Inn, near the Piazza. My Host asked me if I had not
a mind to see the Ceremony, which was to be Celebrated the next day at the
Dome, (so they call the Cathedral Churches in Italy;) he told me, there was a
great Bell to be Baptized, whereof a great Lord was to be the Godfather, and a
Lady of Quality, the God-Mother, and that there would be a great apperance of
the Nobility, who had been Invited to the Solemnity from all Parts. I had
before this seen Bells Baptized in France, but because I knew that the Italians
surpass all other Nations in the Magnificence of their Ceremonies, and that
they commonly season them with a double proportion of Superstition; I resolved
with my self to see it Baptized, and with that design I staid all the next day
at Veletre. I went to the Church in the Morning, to take a view of the
Preparatives, that had taken up a whole Weeks time, which I found to be great
and Sumptuous indeed. The Bell was placed at the Lower end of the Body of the
Church, hanging upon two Gudgeons, covered with rich Hangings of Velvet, of a
Violet Color, and the Bell it self, was accoutred with a kind of Robe of the
same Stuff. There were two Theaters Built on each side of it, for the
Musicians, and an Amphitheater for the Ladies, who were to be present at the
Ceremony. The Pillars and Walls of the Church were richly adorned, with curious
sheets of Silk, and Pictures. Near to the Bell, was Erected an Altar, very
neatly set forth, and upon it lay a white Satin Robe, which was to be put upon
the Bell, as soon as it should be Baptized, with a great and fair Garland of
choice Flowers: There was also upon the Altar a Roman Ritual, a Censer, and a
Vessel with Holy Water, and round about the Altar, rich Velvet Elbow-Chairs,
for the Priests, who were to perform the Ceremony. Just over against it, a
Throne was seen most Magnificently Hung, for the Godfather and God-Mother of
the Bell. About Ten of the Clock the Company came, and having taken their
several Places, the Priests began their Function. He who officiated was a
Bishop in partibus, whom the Bishop of Veletre, being at that time very Sick,
had deputed for this purpose, and his Chair was placed upon the Steps of the
high Altar. He struck up the first Psalm, which was continued by the Music.
These Psalms, by the way, which may be seen in the Roman Ritual, have as much
reference to the Baptizing of a Bell, as to the Baptizing of the Moon; the
Prophet David, very probably having never had the least notion of the Baptism
of Bells. After that the Psalms were ended, the Bishop began the Blessing of
Holy Water, to Sanctify it in the first place, to the end that afterward it
might Sanctify the Bell also. This Benediction is very long, and no less
Ridiculous; which being Finished, the Bishop and Priests dipped Spunges in it,
with which they rubbed over the Bell, from the top to the bottom, within and
without, being in this regard, certainly much better Baptized, than Children
are, upon whose Heads only they pour or sprinkle a little of it. They repeated
in the mean time abundance of Prayers, which speak of nothing else but Heavenly
Blessings, that are to Purify, Sanctify, and Consecrate the Bell; Ut hoc
Tintinnabulum, say they, coelesti Benedictione perfundere, purificare,
sanctificare and consecrare digneris. That thou would be pleased to Rinse,
Purify, Sanctify, and Consecrate this Bell, with thy Heavenly Benediction.
The Bell being thus well washed, they dried it with clean Napkins; and the
Bishop having taken the Viol of Holy Oils, which are those they bless on Holy
Thursday, for the whole year following, he therewith anointed the Cross of
Metal, which is on the top of the Bell, in order to make the Devils flee at the
Sound or Ringing of it: Ut hoc audientes Tintinnabulum tremiscant and fugiant,
ante Crucis in eo depictum vexillun: That hearing this Bell they may tremble
and flee, before the Banner of the Cross designed upon it. He afterward made
seven other Crosses with the said Oil, upon the outside of the Bell, and four
on the inside. This done, he made the Godfather and God-Mother draw near, and
demanded of them in Italian, Whether they were the Persons that Presented this
Bell to be Consecrated? Who having answered that they did; he then asked them,
Whether the Metal of the Bell, and the Workmanship of it, had been paid for to
the Artificers? To which they answered, Yea. They make this demand, because it
has sometime happened, that for want of Payment, the Workmen have seized and
fetched away their Bells, the very same day, or the day after it has been
Baptized, and have melted them down, to be employed to Profane uses. The third
Question he asked of them, was, Whether they believed all that the Catholic,
Apostolic, Roman Church believes, concerning the Holiness and Virtue of Bells?
The answer to which was affirmative also. In the Last place, he demanded of
them, what Name they desired should be put upon the Bell? To which the Lady
answered, Mary. Then the Bishop took two great silk Ribbands, which had been
fastened to the Gudgeons of the Bell, and gave each of them one in their Hands,
and pronounced with a Loud Intelligible Voice, the words of Consecration, which
are these: Consecretur and Sanctificetur Signum istud, in nomine Patris and
Filii and Spiritus Sancti, Amen. Let this Sign be Consecrated and Sanctified in
the name of the Father, Son, amd Holy Ghost, Amen. Then turning himself to the
People, he said, The Name of this Bell is Mary. Afterward he takes the Censer,
and Censeth it on the outside round about, and afterward put the Censer under
the Bell, filling it with Sacred Fumes, and repeating all this while Prayers
and Invocations, that it might be filled with the Dew of the Holy Spirit. Tu
hoc Tintinnabulum Spiritus Sancti rore perfunde, ut ante sonitum illius semper
fugiat Bonorum Inimicus. Do thou all besprinkle this Bell with the Dew of thy
Holy Spirit, that at the sound of it, the Enemy of all good may always take his
Flight. The Office was carried on with a great number of Psalms, which they
repeated; the Music all the while performing wonders; and then the Bishop, for
to shut up the whole Ceremony, arrayed the Bell with the white Robe of a
Proselyte or Convert, and with a loud Voice read the Gospel of Mary and Martha:
I supposed at that time, that the reason of their reading this Gospel, was,
because the Bell was called Mary; but I have seen since in the Roman Ritual,
that the same Gospel is read at the Consecration of all Bells, whatsoever their
Names be. This is that I am astonished at, because that Gospel has no reference
at all to the Ceremony. The whole Solemnity being thus ended, the Bishop gave
his Benediction, and the Priests received great Presents from the Godfather
and God-Mother.

The Doctrine of the Church of Rome concerning Bells, may be reduced to the
following Points. The First is, that they have Merit, and pray God for the
Living and the Dead. Secondly, That they do produce, by a Divine Virtue
conferred upon them, Devotion in the Hearts of Believers. Thirdly, That they
drive away Storms and Tempests; and in the Fourth place, drive away Devils.

Before that I run over these four Points, I Will tell you a Story that happened at
Bononia, and is of sufficient Antiquity, though the memory thereof be still
preserved fresh and entire. They had been Baptizing a Bell in the Church of S.
Proculo, which is an Abbey of Benedictines, and after all the Ceremonies,
Benedictions and Prayers, that the Bell might do good to all, and hurt to no
body; the first time of the Ringing of it, it fell upon the poor Sacristan or
Sexton, that Rung it, and who had taken more care and pains for the Solemn
Baptizing of it, than to get it well hung and fastened, and broke his Neck,
together with it self into a thousand pieces. The Name of the Sacristan was
Proculus, and this ingenious Distick was made to Celebrate the Memory of this
Accident, which at this day is found Engraved upon a Stone, of a Foot Square,
near to the Church Door, where the thing happened.

Si procul a Proculo Proculi Campana fuisset:
I am procul a Proculo, Proculus ipse foret.
The agreeableness of this Verse cannot be rendered in English, because of the
Adverb Procul, which in our Language is not the same, and therefore will not
comport with the allusion; but the Sense of it, as well as it can be rendered is
this: If the Bell of S. Proculus had been far from Proculus, Proculus would at
present be far from Proculus, that is, he would not as yet have been Buried in
that place.

I proceed now to the four Prerogatives, that are attributed to Bells, by those
of the Church of Rome. The first seems to me to smell too rank of Interest, to
be so easily swallowed. I shall not take up my time to prove to you, that an
insensible and material thing is incapable of either Merit or Prayer; my design
having never been to prove what I set down, by Theological Arguments, but only
to allege matters of Fact. If indeed they Rung their Bells for naught, the
Doctrine of Rome might insinuate it self with more appearance of Truth: But a
Man must pay so dear, to be partaker of their Merit and Prayers, that it mars
the Plot; and I know not why the Priests and Monks should not scruple this
Simonio. There are little, midling and great Bells, and the Money to be paid for
the Ringing of them, increases proportionably to the bigness of the Bells.
There is all the reason in the World indeed, that the Persons that Ring them
should be paid; but why the Priests should over and above this, receive a
considerable Sum of Money, I see not. Is it not evident that this is some of the
Fruit and Revenue of their novel Doctrine? It seems they would fain introduce
amongst us a new Gospel, according to which scarcely any but the Rich should be
saved, forasmuch as none but they, are in a Condition to pay well for the
Graces of God, which these Men tell us they have at their disposal.

When a Poor Man dies in Italy, they bury him without ever Ringing a Bell, or
saying any Mass for him, except any one out of Charity will be at the Charges
of it for him. They say the Spanish Priests do (as to this particular) outvy
the Italians in Covetousness; and Persons who have been in Spain have assured
me, That when a Poor Man dies, they expose his Body in the most frequented
Street and Thorough-fare of the City, to the end that the People who go and
come, may cast in some Pieces of Money for their Interment. The Priests come
ever and anon to see, whether the whole Sum be gathered; and, if they should
find so much as one Penny wanting, they would leave the Body there, to stink
and infect the place, without ever offering to touch it. See here to what a
strange height of Shame and Infamy Popery has reduced things! I mean by
Popery, all that new Mess of Doctrins, which only tends to fill the Purse.

The second Point of Doctrine, which is this, That the Sound of Bells increases
the Devotion of the Faithful, is built on the same Foundation as the former,
viz. Covetousness and base Avarice, or rather downright Rapin and Robbery. The
more Bells that are Rung at a Christning, and the longer time they are Rung,
the greater portion of Grace does the Infant receive: The more Bells, and the
longer they are rung at a Marriage, the greater share do the Married Couple
obtain of the Grace of Conjugal Love: The more Bells are rung at a Burial, and
the longer they are rung, the greater Refreshment and Ventilation does the Soul
of the Departed receive in the Flames of Purgatory, and the sooner is delivered
from them: The more Bells are rung on a Holyday, and the longer time the
Ringing is continued, the more the Persons that come to Church are made
partakers of Heavenly Graces and Blessings. But withal it is to be noted, that
all these mores cannot be obtained without more Money.

Proceed we to the Third Point, which is this, That Bells (by the Grace which
is infused into them at their Baptismal-Consecration) have the virtue of
dissipating Thunder, of laying High Winds, driving away Tempests, and calming
of Storms. There is never a thing in Nature which produces any effect, never
so little beyond what is common, but the Papists will needs make a Miracle of
it. The Sound of Bells, by striking the Air, does sometimes dissipate the
Clouds; but sometimes also it splits or breaks them, and makes the Thunder to
fall upon the very Churches or Steeples where they are rung, as when a Cloud
chances to be directly hovering over them. The former of these effects is a
Miracle with the Church of Rome, and the Priests serve themselves of it, to
give credit to the Benedictions they bestow upon their Bells; notwithstanding
that it is very evident at the same time, that the Thunder lights oftener upon
Steeples, than upon any other places, and sometimes melts all the Bells, which,
one would think, might be sufficient to stop their Mouths for ever on this
Point. There is a Little Bell at Venice, in the Convent of Capucins in the
Judeca, which has the Vogue of being so miraculous against Tempests; and the
People are so Superstitiously possessed with it, that when there is the least
Storm, if the Capucins should chance to neglect to ring it, the People would
not fail to besiege them in their Convent, and cut them in pieces. And to the
end that all may be attributed to the Merit of this Bell, they do not ring it
all out, but only Toll it, so that between each Toll a Man may repeat the
Lord's Prayer three or four times.

It remains, that I speak one word of the Fourth Virtue, which is that of
Chasing away Devils. A Religious Benedictin of the Congregation of S. Maurus in
France, once related to me a Story, which evidently proves the contrary. It was
then not above Three years ago since it happened in a Monastery, where he was at
that time. These Monks rise at Two of the Clock in the Morning, to go and sing
their Mattins and Morning Song. The Devil, or some Hobgoblin it seems, had
taken possession of the Bell, and used to Ring the First Peal, and never failed
of doing it very exactly at the Hour, without missing one Minute. He continued
this good Office to the Monastery for Six years together, so that the Monks
found themselves rid of the trouble of Ringing it. A vast number of People from
the Towns and Villages thereabouts, believing it to be a Fable that was told
them, had the Curiosity to come and see this Bell, which Rung of it self at Two
of the Clock in the Morning, without any one touching it; and they themselves
were irreproachable Witnesses of it. Now it happened one Night in Winter, that
this officious Devil rang his Bell three Hours sooner than ordinary. The Prior
of the Monastery, who was not yet gone to Bed, and was Writing of Letters, took
notice of the Irregularity; and spelling nothing of good from it, he went
immediately to the Door of the Church, where he staid for the Religious; who
being waked at the sound of the Bell, and believing that the time for their
Devotions was come, went to Mattins; but the Prior sent them all back to their
Cells, without suffering any one of them to enter into the Church, telling
them, That he feared the Devil had a mind to play them some unlucky Trick.
Neither was he mistaken in his surmise; for about half an Hour after the Roof
of the Quire fell down, and would have buried them all in its Ruins, had they
been there at that time to sing their Mattins. The Devil had so well guessed at
the time when that old Roof would fall, that he knew the Hour and Moment
thereof; so that he had not put himself upon performing this good Office for
them, but only with the design of doing them a great mischief, if the Prior had
not outwitted him.

To apply this to our Subject: We find here that the Devil was so far from
being frighted at the Ringing of the Bell, that he Rung it himself, and made
use of it for the bringing about of his Malicious intent. Leave we then this
Superstition of Bells to the Papists, nor let this hinder us from making use of
them, as commodious Instruments to call Believers together, to show Respect to
our Dead, and to be made use upon occasion of Public Rejoycings; yet without
believing they can make us better, and without attributing to insensible
things, the precious Aids and Helps of our Salvation, which are the Graces
which we receive from God alone, by the Merits of our Lord Jesus Christ. I feel
an unexpressible Joy to see, that the Protestants of England have so far forgot
the Superstitious Practices of the Church of Rome, that it is at present a
Novelty and strange thing to them, when they are told of them: But on the other
hand; I cannot bear to see the Papists take occasion from this forgetfulness,
to calumniate those who have a mind to write or speak of those, as some of them
have done who have said, That I had imposed upon them, by relating several
Superstitions of the Church of Rome, the Practice whereof they deny. Amongst
other things they have Instanced in the Blessing of Eggs at Easter: To which I
Answer, That they might as well have given the Lie to their Roman Ritual, where
the said Formular of Blessing them is found at length in these terms:

Subveniat, quaesumus, Domine, tuae Benedictionis Gratia, huic Ovorum
Creaturae, ut Cibus salubris fiat Fidelibus tuis, in tuarum gratiarum action
sumentibus, ob Resurrectionem Domini nostri Jesu Christi, qui tecum vivit and
regnat, etc. Et aspergat Aqua Benedicta.

In English thus:

Let, we beseech thee, O Lord, the Grace of thy Blessing succor this Creature
Eggs, that it may become wholesome Food to thy Faithful, receiving them with
giving Thanks to thee, for the Resurrection of our Lord Jesus Christ, who lives
and reigns with thee, etc. And let him besprinkle them with Holy Water.

In the said Ritual we meet with many other Blessings, which I have not
mentioned, that are never a whit less ridiculous. We find there Blessings for
Houses, for Ships, for Swords, for the New Fruits of the Earth, for the Nuptial
Bed, for Asses and for Horses, and in a word, for all sorts of Beasts that are
sick. And because it is likely the Papists might endeavor to persuade People,
that I had imposed upon them, as to this last instance. See here the very words
of it, as they are see down in the Appendix of the Roman Ritual.

Primo, Animalia aspergantur Aqua Benedicta; postea Sacerdos dicat,

Misericordiam tuam, Domine, supplices exoramus, ut haec animalia, quae gravi
infirmitate vexantur, tua Benedictione sanantur, etc.

Aspergantur iterum Aqua Benedicta.

First, The Beasts must be sprinkled with Holy Water; and then let the Priest
say,

We humbly implore thy Mercy, O Lord, that these Living Creatures, which are
troubled with great Infirmity, may by thy Blessing be healed, etc.

Let them again be sprinkled with Holy Water.

I have observed, that in their other Blessings they use but one Aspersion of
Holy Water; but that in this they use Two Sprinklings, the one at the
beginning, and the other at the end of the Benediction. I cannot give you any
Reason for it, except it be, that the Beasts being greater in bulk, seem to
them therefore to stand in need of a greater Sanctification. It will not now be
looked upon as a strange thing, what Dr. Burnet has writ in his Letters
concerning the Blessing of Asses and Horses, which he saw in Italy, having here
given you the Authentic Form of it, which the Papists cannot deny.

There is another Observance in the Church of Rome, which is still more
ridiculous than this, which is their Exorcising of Rats, Caterpillars, Flies,
and all other Insects between the Feasts of Easter and Ascension. I my self
have assisted very often, both in France and Italy, to the performing of this
Ceremony; and herein I can say, that I have been among the number of Fools:
True it is, that it was for our Advantage; for we were well paid for our pains.
We go from one Farm to another, from one Country House to another, and almost
upon every piece of Ground we repeat our Exorcisms. We bespeak all these little
Insects, no otherwise than if they were Reasonable Creatures, and make use of
the Name of God to Adjure them.

Adjuro vos per Deum Sanctum, per Deum vivum, per Deum Omnipotentem, etc.

I Adjure you by the Holy God, by the Living God, by the Almighty God, to
depart these Grounds, and to get you gone to Desert and Waste places, where you
may not be in a condition of hurting any one, nor the Fruits of the Earth.

(If this be not to take the Name of God in vain, I don't know what is.)
Besides, all this was nothing, but mere Labor in Vain; because there was not
so much as one poor Worm or Caterpillar, that offered to budge from its place
for all this puther. When we were quite tired with Exorcising, we went to
refresh our selves in the first Farm that was next to us, where the good
Country People did not fail to set before us the best that they had. We found
some amongst them though, that were no Fools; They told us, Sirs, If we did not
take the pains to rid our Trees of the Caterpillars, your Exorcisms would stand
us in poor stead. We reproved them for their want of Faith, which rendered the
pains we took unprofitable to them. The most part of the Peasants, by way of
acknowledgment for these Exorcisms, send all their First Fruits to the Priests
that have Officiated them, so that we had always the First-Fruit of every
Season.

I was once Invited by a Noble Venetian, to pass the time of Vintage with him
in the Country at his House of Pleasure, Two Miles from Rovigo, in the
Polesine. When we arrived there, there were a kind of Flies, which (as they
said) were fallen from the Sky, and did much mischief; they sucked and devoured
all the Grapes that were not yet ripe. The Noble Venetian desired me to
accompany the Curate of the Parish, in order to Exorcise them; Accordingly we
went thither with five or six Clergymen more. The Heat was so excessive that
we were forced to go for shelter into every House we met with in the Fields.
Now it happened by Mischance, that he who carried the Holy Water, (whether by his
having drunk much, or otherways) fell asleep in a Cellar, where he was entered
to cool himself. We did not take notice of his not following us, and we walked
almost a Mile to a certain Field, where we were to Exorcise. Here we began to
call for our Holy Water, without which nothing was to be done; but the Man was
not to be found, and we were obliged to send some Body to seek for him with all
speed. We staid there near an Hour expecting him, and during that time the
Flies stung us so terribly, that our Faces and Hands were all of a Gore-blood;
they plainly showed by this their rudeness, that they did not care a Rush for
our Exorcisms, and accordingly in our own defense, we dispatched them as quick,
as possible, and with all expedition returned to our first House. These Insects
we found discharged their fury during the Heat of the Day; for toward Evening
one might safely walk abroad, without being molested by them. And then it was
that we went and recommenced our Exorcisms, though without the least success; for
the Flies persisted to make the same havoc as before, until that a continual
Rain of four or five days killed and swept them all away, better than all the
Holy Water might have done.

I went at another time, during my stay at Bononia, to Exorcise the Insects in
the Country, in Company of a Country Curate, who had a very Comical Wit. He had
always a word ready to make the Company laugh, and all his Exorcisms were mere
Fancies, or perfect Drolling. He did not tie himself to the Ritual, or Form
prescribed by the Romish Church, but made his Paraphrase upon every thing;
sometimes he spoke to the Pismires; sometimes to the Grasshoppers; sometimes he
made his Apostroph's to the Rats, Lizards, and Worms. He banished them all one
after another, to the Countries which he assigned them for the place of their
Exile, and relegated the Moles to the Antartick Pole, without once knowing what
it was. He had scarcely pronounced the dreadful Sentence, but a Mole came forth
out of his Hole; whereupon the Curate cried out, Courage, my Friends, look!
there is one of them which is ready to begin his march. But the Mole; it seems,
had no mind to take so tedious a Journey, and no sooner had smelt the Oar, but
crept into another Hole near to it, in the same Field. Then one of the Peasants
that was present, ran to look into the Hole, to which the Mole had betaken
himself, and said very innocently, What, Sir, is this the Antartick Pole? We
could not forbear Laughing; and because we saw that this was diametrically
opposite to that great Gravity, that must more particularly be affected upon
these sorts of occasions, we desired him to leave off his Drollery; but he was
so habituated to it, that he had much ado to command himself. His way of
Preaching also was much to the same purpose, which made, that though he was very
ignorant, they stocked from all the Villages thereabouts, to have the
divertisement of hearing him Preach. I have been present at many other
Exorcisms, and Benedictions of the Fruits of the Earth. The Priests are very
willing and ready to officiate or assist at them; forasmuch as it is an
employment both pleasant and profitable for those that discharge it. For by
this means they take the freedom to enter into all the Country-Houses of Lords
and Gentlemen, and into their Gardens, where they never fail of being well
Entertained. At the time of Vintage they go and Bless the Wine in the Fats; and
at S. Martin, the Wine in the Cellars.

I might proceed to relate to you, a great number of other Benedictions and
Exorcisms, to show you the Abuse is made thereof by the Priests of the Church
of Rome; but because I fear keeping you too long upon one and the same Subject,
I shall choose rather, to diversifie it by some other Relation.

I shall take my Subject from a Remark I made at the Abbey of Fossa Nova,
whither I Journyed from Veletre, after having seen the Baptizing of the Bell,
which I have already described. This Abbey is not far from Terracine; and it was
here that S. Thomas Aquinas died, on his Way to the Council of Lions. The
Curiosity I had to see the Place where he was Buried, made me alight; and the
Monks of that Abbey, who are Bernardines, showed me a great deal of Civility.
They led me to a Little Chapel underground, where they told me that S. Thomas
was laid after his Death. I desired them to show me his Relics; but they told
me, They could not answer my Request, because his Body had never been taken up
out of the Ground; and that the Altar of the Chapel was built upon his Tomb.
But for all this fair Story, I knew very well, that Pope Urban the Fifth had
bestowed his Body upon the Religious of S. Dominicus, who had translated it to
their Convent at Toulouse; and what I inquired concerning it of these Monks,
was only to discover their Honesty in the case. I told them also, That I had
seen a Capucin at Rome, who had showed me a considerable piece of S. Thomas his
Arm, which he said, the Fathers of Fossa Nova had bestowed upon him. I gave
them a description of this Capucin from Head to Foot, which made them at last
call to mind one that was a German, who after he had Fudled himself in their
Monastery, had with so much Importunity requested of them some Relick of S.
Thomas; telling them, He was resolved not to leave their Monastery, till they
had given him one; that at length they were fain to show him a great heap of
Dead-mens Bones, which was in a Corner of the Chapel, amongst which he had
chosen the Relick which he had showed me. They told me, That they themselves
questioned, whether there might not be some Relics of that Saint amongst all
their Bones, because the Earth of the Chapel had been stirred several times;
and though it was precisely believed, that the Body of S. Thomas did rest under
the Altar, yet they were not absolutely sure of it. This is the Reason (said
they) why many Persons have made no difficulty to take some of these Bones, in
the Conceit, that they might probably be some of his; or at least in hopes,
that the Presence of the Body of the Saint, near whom they had the Honor to
Rest, might have communicated to them some Heavenly Virtue.

To speak the truth, these are the very Reasonings, which the Gentlemen of
Rome; I mean the Pope and Cardinals, make use of every day, with reference to
the Holy Bodies, which they fetch out of the Catacombes, and which they send so
boldly, and so frequently to places of their Communion, to be Worshipped there.
These Catacombes, in the Sense they take them in, are Subterranean Places,
where Believers assembled themselves in the times of Persecution; and where
they Buried the Corpse of their Martyrs; but they also indifferently Buried
there the Bodies of all Christians, so that as these places served them for
Temples, or places to meet in, so they served them also for Churchyards to
bury their Dead. The Popes having in these last Ages, taken into mature
Consideration, the great gain they reaped from the Bones of their Saints, had
recourse to these places, as to inexhaustible Mines, and indifferently seized
all the Bones they met with there: Yea, their Avarice lasht out to that degree,
that either not knowing, or not being able to distinguish the true Catacombes,
they have gone to search for dead Bodies in the Common Sewers, or Subterranean
Vaults, which were the Sinks to carry off the filth of the City, and where in
ancient times they were used to fling the Bodies of Malefactors, after their
Execution. True it is, that amongst them, were sometimes found the Bodies of
Martyrs, which escaped the knowledge of Christians. The Popes not having the
power to distinguish the one from the other, and to spare themselves a trouble,
which besides would have been pure labor lost, by the Power of God himself,
which they profess themselves to have, metamorphos'd them all, dictum factum,
into Saints. The Heathens had also Caves and Vaults, where they caused
themselves to be Interred with their whole Families; and the greatest part of
all these Bones, are now upon the Altars of the Papists, under the name of
Saints, taken up out of the Catacombes. And forasmuch as the Popes are ignorant
of their Names, they baptize them anew, and give them a Name as best pleases
them, which is the cause, why there be found so many Saints of the same Name.
This is also the true cause of so many Contests and Trials between the Priests
and the Monks, who all pretend in good time, to be the sole Possessors of the
Primitive Saint, of this or the other Name. These Trials are to be determined
at Rome, by means of Money, which still inflames the Popes with a greater Zeal,
to send as many as they can of these Saints into all parts, which one day or
other will not fail to furnish them with matter for Trials so gainful to them;
yea, we may affirm that there be almost as many Trials at Rome, about Relics,
as about Beneficial matters. Now the Doctrine which serves to quiet the
Consciences of the Romanists, from the checks that might torment them, for
having exposed, and still daily exposing such abominable Filthinesses upon
their Altars, is this, that they believe, that what S. Paul says, that the
unbelieving Wife, is sanctified by the believing Husband, ought also to be
understood of their Relics; forasmuch as all the Bones, which are found in one
Vault, are sanctified by their Neighborhood with those of one Saint. Or at
least, if this will not do, they betake themselves to their last shift, which is
this, That a good intention is an abundant excuse for all these petty
irregularities in those, who continue in the bosom of the Church of Rome; so
that it is enough according to them, to have a right intention of honoring
such a Saint, or she Saint, and to receive with Reverence and Obedience the
Instruments proposed to them, for to honor them. They have propounded such
like Arguments to the Protestants of France, to persuade them to go to Mass.
Why do you fear, say they, to adore the Host, as long as you direct your
intention to Jesus Christ, who in it is worshipped? For by this means it will be
Jesus Christ whom you shall adore, and not the Bread, supposing it to be so:
Only be obedient to the Church of Rome, and your good intention shall save you.
And they have discoursed them at the same rate about Relics.

Now the use, that the Priests and Monks of the Church of Rome, do make of
these Principles, is this, that there are no Bones whatsoever, no not the Bones
of an Ass or Horse, but they may make Relics of them; they need only break a
piece of them and tell you, that it is a Relick of one of the Eleven thousand
Virgins that suffered Martyrdom at Collen, or else one of the Soldiers of the
Theban Legion, who were all cut in pieces at the passage of the Alps, for
refusing to Sacrifice to Mars the Traveller. They may show you the Rib of a
sucking Pig, and tell you it is a Relick of one of the little Innocents, who
were Massacred at our Saviors Birth; or Lastly, tell you that it is the bone
of a Saint taken out of the Catacombes. Besides all these, they can give you
many other Categories, under which their Relics are commonly ranked and
Marshaled; and pray how can you contradict them, as to what they allege? And
as for them, Good-men, they salve their Consciences, by the intention they
have, of procuring Honor to such a he or she Saint, for whom they have the
greatest Devotion, or who suits best with their interest.

I was once in the Abbey of the Trinity at Vandome in France, when they exposed
their Treasury of Relics: They showed us amongst other things a Jaw Bone,
which the Monks told us was that of S. Magdalen; and a very able Physician, who
was present at the same time, was ready to maintain to their Faces, and would
forfeit his Head, if he did not prove to them, by the Texture, scaling and
largeness of the Bone, that it never belonged to a human Body, but it was the
piece of the Jaw Bone of some Beast or other. But the Fathers were so far from
desiring him to disabuse them in the case, that they presently pop'd up another
Relick, to put him by his displeasing Discourse. This Relick was that they call
the Holy Tear, which is so famous in that Country. The Tradition they pretend
to have concerning it runs thus, that when our Savior wept over Lazarus, an
Angel gathered up his Tears, in a small Crystal Vial, and that having preserved
them a long time, he gave them to S. Mary Magdalen, who was then doing Penance,
at a place which is called la Saint Baume, near to Marseilles; that in process
of time, this Relick was carried to Constantinople, where it continued during
the Reign of the Greek Emperor; and being afterward fallen, together with all
the Riches of that great City, into the hands of the Turks, a Turkish Emperor
presented it to Godfrey Earl of Vandome, who deposed it in this Abbey. It seems
by this Tradition that it took many turns, before it came thither, and above
all, that which I consider is, that it has past through the hands of Infidels
and Enemies to the Name of Christ. But for all this, the Roman Catholics, and
above all, the Monks of that Abbey, have not the least doubt or scruple
concerning it; but bestow upon it the Worship of Latria, even the same they
give to Jesus Christ himself. Upon any extraordinary occasion of great Drought,
or raging Sickness, they carry it solemnly through the City, and that with
greater Pomp than they do their Holy Sacrament. These Fathers, who are Reformed
Benedictins, told us, That now for so many Hundred years, that is to say, since
the time of our Savior, the said Tear had been preserved so fresh, as a Tear
that actually drops from the Eye. We viewed this Crystal very attentively
holding it up against the Light, and afterward took a review of it at the
Light of a Wax-Taper, but we could discover nothing of what they were pleased
to tell us. They have recourse to this Relick in all Maladies of the Eyes, and
upon this account, it brings a vast Income to these Fathers. Surely People had
need to be Endowed with a great Stock of Simplicity and good Intention to adore
things, which even according to humane Tradition are so uncertain and doubtful.

We meet with a Story in the Life of S. Martin, which makes it appear, that
this good Intention, was not so generally in vogue in his time, or at least
that the Bishops did not favor it, at the rate as those of the Romish
Communion do at present. There was a Devotion got up at some Leagues from
Tours, toward certain Relics, which made a great Noise. The People ran from
all parts thither out of Dovotion, and they pretended that great Miracles were
wrought upon the Place, and all manner of Maladies healed. S. Martin (as says
the History of his Life, writ by Ribadeneira the Jesuit,) went himself thither
by way of Devotion; and being at the Place, he was seized as it were with a
secret Instinct, or Divine Inspiration, that the Bones which they Worshipped in
that Place, were not the Bones of Saints. S. Martin to be cleared in the
Matter, adjur'd the Bones to tell him, whose they were; whereupon (adds the
Story) was heard a terrible Voice proceeding from the Shrine or Case wherein
the Bones lay; which said, We are so far from being the Bones of Saints, that
we are the Bones of two miserable Criminals, Murderers and Robbers on the
Highway, who were executed at such a time publicly for our Crimes; and yet of
a long time have we been here worshipped as if we had been Gods. S. Martin
having received this Information, immediately commanded the Bones to be cast
out upon the Lay-stall.

Good, GOD! If all the false Relics, which at present are adored in the Church
of Rome, had Voices, and could but speak, as these did, what strange Stories
should we hear! Some would say, We are the Bones of Heathens, or of
Malefactors; others, of Horses, Asses, Dogs, etc. And yet I question very much,
whether after all this, they would resolve to quit them. They would say, It Is
like that these Voices were only the Illusions and Artifices of the Devil, who
is envious at the Glory that is bestowed on the Saints; and that their Church
being Infallible, having proposed these Relics to Believers to be worshipped,
She can neither err in matter of Right, or in Matter of Fact. See here a true
Portraicture of the Spirit of that Church, as it is at present; being so far
changed, I will not say from that of the Primitive times, but even from that of
the middle Ages, as nothing more.

But we are to take notice of a distinction here, which is this, That if any
Relick should chance to be introduced by any other way, but that of the Church
of Rome, and come to the knowledge of the Popes, they would never suffer it.
Father Mabillon gives us an Instance of it in his Voyage of Italy; for he tells
us, That some Spaniards having Addressed themselves to Pope Urban the Eighth, to
obtain Indulgences upon the account of a Saint called S. Viar; the Pope being
surpised at the Novelty and singularity of the Name, would be informed upon
what good ground the Holiness of this Saint was founded, to whom such
extraordinary Qualities were attributed in some places: For confirmation of
all, they brought him an Inscription containing these Letters S. VIAR. But the
Skilful and Learned found, that the Inscription was made for a Praefectus
Viarum; that is, a Person who had the care and inspection of the Highways
amongst the Romans. Wherefore the Pope forbad them any more to expose this
their Saint; whereas indeed could they have made out, that this Relick had been
bestowed upon them by one of the Popes, his Predecessors, the case would have
been altered; and we have all the reason in the World to believe, that to
maintain the Honor of the Holy See, he would never have suppressed it as he did.

The Capucin whom I had seen at Rome, that had got a Bone of S. Thomas Aquinas
at Fossa Nova, had already broken it into a thousand little bits, which he had
wrapped up in pieces of Paper, with a design of distributing them in his Journey,
when he should return to his own Country. The Capucins, and others who are
called Mendicants, never carry any Money about them, and consequently pay
nothing wheresoever they come; but being looked upon as men full fraught with
Relics and Agnus Dei's, the Persons who entertain them, ask some of these to
be bestowed upon them; or rather, they themselves prevent them, by giving them
some of these Presents before they set any thing before them, as being assured,
that by this means they shall procure better Treatment from their Hosts.

I have on a thousand Occasions, in the Company of Capucins, seen them
distribute a thousand Relics; but amongst the rest, I was once in the Alps,
in a Village called S. Gothard, at the foot of a very high and famous Mountain,
which bears the Name of it. I arrived there at Dinner time, and being got into
an Inn, I perceived two Fathers Capucins, who were warming themselves at a
great Fire, in the best Chamber of the House, whilst their Dinner was making
ready. The desire I had to meet with Company, made me entreat my Hostess to
endeavor to persuade them, to let me Dine with them: They very obligingly
consented to my Request; and I saw that one of the Fathers took the Hostess
aside to a Corner of the Room, and gave her a Paper very neatly folded up. I
could not at that time imagine what it might be; and soon after Dinner was
brought up. After we had Dined, the Capucins called up their Hostess, and asked
her what they had to pay? Truly (said the Woman) as for your part good Fathers,
your Reckoning is easily made; but for this Gentleman here, there is a Crown to
pay for his part. I found my share to be overreckon'd, and that the Hostess had
a mind to make up the Expense of her Charity toward these good Fathers out of
my Purse. In the mean time one of the Capucins told her very pleasantly, that
they did not intend to quit her at so Cheap a Rate, seeing they had bestowed
upon her the most precious Piece in all their Treasury; but that such a Day,
the next Week, they were to pass by that way again, and that they hoped she
would well weigh and consider the great worth of the Present they had bestowed
upon her: Which was as much as to say, That they expected to be once more
plentifully Treated by her, and that accordingly she would think of providing
some good thing for them against that Day. They began afterward, as if they
had a mind to insult over me, for that it had cost me so much, though I fared no
better than they, and that as for them a small Devotional Present had doubly
satisfied their Hostess, without paying any thing. I demanded of them, what
kind of Present it was? They told me it was a Relick, but would not specify it
particularly. This put me upon making a pretext to go down, to know of the
Hostess what it might be. As soon as I came down, I sound her very devoutly
presenting the Relick to her Domestics in the Kitchen, for them to kiss it. It
was a Tooth forsooth of an old Box-Comb; she showed it me, with the Paper in
which it was wrapped, whereon was writ with great Letters, A Holy Tooth of the
Comb, wherewith S. Martha Combed her Head at Marseilles. I viewed it very
attentively, and as I was going to wipe off with the end of my Handkerchief,
some filth that was upon it, that I might with the less aversion kiss it; not
that I believed the Relick, but to the end I might not give any offense to
others (for at that time I was a good Roman Catholic) the Hostess would not
let me, and in a kind of Passion told me, That I was going about to take away
the best part of the Relick, which was the Sweat of the Saint. I restored the
gay Relick to my Hostess, and returned to my Capucins. I told them, I came from
having taken a view of the Holy Tooth of the Comb of S. Martha, wherewith they
had presented the Woman of the House, as a Recompense for her Treating of them.
I easily perceived, that this Complement did not please them at all; for having
entreated them to tell me, how they came to light upon so precious a Treasure;
they Answered very fiercly, That it was not their business to give me an
account of it. Whereupon I also left them, without using much Ceremony, in
order to prosecute my Journey.

Many English Roman Catholics, cannot endure to hear, that they bestow their
Adorations upon things that are so very vile and contemptible; but it is only
by reason of their Ignorance of what passes in those Countries where Popery is
rampant; for there may be seen things yet far more ridiculous, such as the
Lanthorn of Judas; the Dice wherewith the Soldiers Cast Lots, which of them
should have Christ's Garment; a Shoe of St. Joseph; Hair, Paring of Nails, and
all manner of Excrements of their Saints and Saintesses. The Treasuries of
their Churches are top filled with these kind of precious Pelicks, and the
Protestant Travelers, may make themselves very merry in Italy, if they will
give themselves the leisure to go and see the Treasures which are kept in their
Churches, and more especially in the Country, where the Cupucins, and other
Mendicants, take care to leave great store of them. At least they may be sure
to find there, those Implements the Papists call Agnus Dei, and almost in every
Parish, one of S. Margarets Girdles. Their Agnus Dei's are pieces of white Wax,
upon which is imprinted the Figure of a little Lamb, carrying a Cross upon his
Shoulder. The Popes bless them in the Holy-Week at Rome with abundance of
Ceremony, in memory of the words which S. John Baptist said of our Savior,
Behold the Lamb of God which takes away the Sins of the World. They believe
therefore, conformably to this, that these Agnus Dei's do forgive Sins; at
least, those that are not very heinous ones indeed; and they almost pay as
great respect to them, as they do to the Host it self: They carry them in
Procession, they kneel before them, they pray to them; Secular persons may not
touch them with their Fingers, they must be Priests, or Monks, or Nuns, to whom
the Bishops give this permission and privilege. The Nuns make it a great part
of their employment to make Enclosures of Silk for them, very neatly wrought
with a Needle into all manner of Figures, and then they bestow them upon such
Seculars as Present them highest, for the Sanctification of their Souls. And
besides the Remission of Sins, they are over and above very good to preserve a
Roman Catholic from all the evil Accidents of this Life.

As to what concerns the Girdle of S. Margaret, we are to know, that according
to the Tradition of the Papists, a great Dragon having offered to devour this
Saint, she whipped off her Girdle, and having put it about his Body, he
immediately became as gentle as a Lamb, and did her no hurt at all. The Priests
of the Church of Rome hereupon believed, That this Girdle which had tamed the
Dragon, which they pretend was the Devil himself, might as well be of efficacy
to tame Women, or rather the Pains they endure in Childbed. Wherefore almost
all of them have pieces of it in their Churches, and some of them pretend to
have the whole Girdle. Insomuch, that if all the parts of it were joined
together, they would without doubt make a Girdle that would reach the length of
the Strand, or of Cheapside in the City of London. They are the Priests and
Monks themselves that carry it to Women Great with Child: It Is they themselves
put it about their Bodies, repeating certain Supplications and Prayers; and
whilst they are performing this Function, all the Company must withdraw out of
the Room. If the Woman chance to be Delivered before the Girdle comes, there is
no hurt done, for her Deliverance in this case is attributed to the Vow she has
made to the Girdle; but if she happens to die, then it is, because she was too
backward and negligent in sending for it; and if it happens as sometimes it
does, that she dies between the Hands of the Priests, having the Girdle
actually about her; in this case the Priests very devoutly sneak away with
their Girdle, and lay it up again in their Chapel, without saying any thing but
this, that there is no obviating the orders and course of Providence.

The Priests have brought things to that pass in the Church of Rome, that
nothing can be done without them; they must be present every where with their
Relics, their Holy Oils, and their Holy Water. Their Benediction of the
Marriage Bed, is a Ceremony that deserves our speaking a word or two of it. The
Priests go in the Evening to Bless the Bed of the Married Couple, before they
Bed together, in the same manner as God blessed all Living Creatures, after
their Creation, giving them the virtue of Increasing and Multiplying. After
that they have bestowed their Holy Water, they have good Wine presented them to
drink, and they help to put the Bridegroom and Bride to Bed. What think you,
Sir; Are not these very modest and becoming Occupations for Men that profess
Chastity?

I have made mention of all these Benedictions, upon occasion of that of the
Eggs at Easter, which some Ignorant Papists, and little versed in their
Ceremonies had denied; and if any should be found to deny any of these here
mentioned, we are ready to show 'em them in the Roman Ritual. I have also made
mention of some Relics upon occasion of that of S. Thomas Aquinas, which the
Monks of Fossa Nova pretend to have in their Abbey. I shall now continue my
Journey toward Terracinne, where I arrived very late; and parting thence again
betimes in the Morning, I had no leisure to examine any thing there about
Religious Matters. Only they gave me a sad Relation in my Inn, of a terrible
Desolation caused by a furious Tempest about five Days before, all along the
Seacoast from Terracinne to Naples, in which 14 Ships had been dashed against
the Rocks, or Shipwrecked on the Sands in several places. I had heard them
speak of it at Rome Three days before I came away from thence, but was not then
informed of all the Particulars of it. The only thing I took notice of in the
Account they gave me, suiting to my present Subject, was, that amongst the rest
there was one Vessel lost, which had been but lately Blessed, in order to make
it Tempest-proof. They told me also, That there was a Priest in that same
Vessel, who was put into the Inquisition for having burnt his Crucifix, after
that it had happily been the Instrument of saving his life. This Priest had a
design of Traveling into Foreign Countries, and had lighted upon a very good
Invention for to save his Life, in case of Danger. He had caused to be made for
him a great Cross of Wood, which was hollow within, but joined very light and
close on all side, like unto those the Penitents carry upon their Shoulders in
the Holy Week; and differed only in this, that it had the Image of our Savior
fastened to it. This Cross was thus contrived by him, that it might be a proper
means for him, in case he should be Castaway at Sea, to escape upon it; and
indeed, both the Shipwreck and his Escape, by means of the Cross, happened
according to the foresight he seemed to have had of it. There arose a violent
Tempest, the first Night the Vessel put to Sea; so that after having been
extremely tossed and beaten by the Waves, it sprung a Leak, and let in Water on
every side. All those that were in her, perished, except only some Seamen, and
our Priest, who after that he had made use of his great Crucifix, to exhort
those who were ready to be drowned, to die well, committed himself to the Sea
with it, and by this means was driven by the Waves to the Shore; being thus
escaped, he had courage enough to take his Cross out of the Water along with
him; and soon after met with the Seamen, that had saved themselves also, who
had made a great Fire on the Shore to dry themselves, and pass the rest of the
Night, into which the Priest cast his great Crucifix, and would not suffer the
Company to save it from burning; but the poor Seamen, who were not accustomed
with such Sights, were struck with Horror; they seized the Priest, they
manacled him, and dragged him the next Morning to the Inquisition; and from so
black a Crime, as this Action of his seemed to be, inferred, That he was a
Sorcerer, and had raised the Tempest. Nevertheless, I was told, That he
defended himself very well; and that in all likelihood the Inquisition would
release him, because he pleaded, That what he had done, was in conformity to
the Practice of the Church of Rome, with respect to Holy things, that are in
danger of being profaned, which is to burn them: In like manner he alleged,
That not knowing how to dispose of his great Crucifix, and being afraid lest it
might be profaned, he had imitated the Custom of the Church in this Point.

This puts me in mind of many sad Accidents, which daily happen to the Holy
things of Papists, and especially to that which is the chiefest Object of their
Devotions, viz. the Holy Host, or their Sacrament. I take it for a thing that
is sure and certain, that there are very few days in a year, when in some part
of the World or other, they are not fain to burn it, or to put it into a filthy
stinking Hole, to which notwithstanding they give the fair Title of a
Sacrarium, or Sanctuary, which is (as it were) the Dunghill, where they cast
forth that which they believe to be the true Body of Jesus Christ, that the
same may there return to Corruption. I my self have found, upon two several
Occasions, the Hosts which are kept in the Ciboire, in very bad order: The
first was near Orvieto, in a Country Parish, where the Ciboire being not close
shut, and the Tabernacle or Cupboard of the Sacrarium not being close joined,
the Pismires had made bold to visit the Holy Sacrament, and finding the Hosts
to their Tooth, had eaten some part of them, and were dragging the rest in
little pieces to their Ant-hills. I acquainted the Curate (after I had said
Mass) with this disorder, who was much troubled at it; for it was occasioned by
his Negligence, who had forgot to shut the Ciborium. He entreated me more
earnestly, than he would have done God, not to speak a word of it to any Body;
because, if it should come to the Ears of the Grand Vicar of Orvietto, who was
already his Enemy, he would have been undone. We therefore both of us
endeavored to remedy it as well as possibly we could; and indeed the Bishop
himself, had he been there, could have done no more than we did. To prevent all
manner of Scandal, we staid till all the People were gone out of Church, and
traced the Pismires to their Hole, which went underground; and pursuing it, we
found it to lead to a Cossin, wherein there was a Body that was half Rotten,
which cast forth a most dreadful stink and infection. Forasmuch therefore, as
it was impossible for us to search any further, we filled the Hole of the Ants
with Straw and Wood, and set fire to it, in order to consume the Host, the
Ants, and all that was in it; and there is no doubt but this succeeded
according to our desire. We met with many of these little Animals, who being
laden with their Sacrilegious Prey, ran up and down the Church, which we picked
up, and burnt them in a Chasing-Dish, as many as we could meet with, and after
that we had well Swept the Church, we cast all the Sweepings into the Fire, and
consumed them. This was indeed as much as could be done. But alas! there were
several other things, which it was impossible for us to remedy; for seeing that
in all probability the Ants had been long a laboring at the transporting of
these Hosts, the Country People, who all this while came to Mass, had without
doubt crushed many of them with their Feet, and had carried away with them
pieces of the Host, sticking to the dirt of their Shoes: Yea, we our selves,
who had taken so great pains to remedy this Mischance, when we viewed the Soles
of our Shoes, found several Particles sticking to them. Now, according to the
Doctrine of the Papists, the Body of Jesus Christ is whole and entire in the
least Particle, as well as in the greatest, and consequently we may imagine, how
great this Profanation was.

I have read something of a Book Printed in Flanders, and made by a Jesuit,
where treating of the Eucharist, he takes upon him to confound the Protestants,
by the Examples he alleges of Beasts, who have paid their Adorations to the
Sacrament. Amongst other things we read there, That Ants and Bees, having by
chance met with Consecrated Hosts, which some Heretics had thrown away in the
Fields, they had with a great deal of Reverence gathered them up, and carried
them to their Hills and Hives, and having divided themselves into Quires, they
by turns chanted musically, and sang forth the Praises of God, until the
Priests being drawn that way by their melodious harmony, came and fetched away
their Hosts. What Experiences of this kind the good Father Jesuit may have had,
I know not; but for the good Curate and my self, I am sure we met with no
Music.

The second place where I found the Consecrated Hosts much abused, was in a
Little Church near to Ancona, in a very moist place. I found the Ciborium full
of Wafers; those that lay uppermost stuck to one another, and those at the
bottom were turned into a kind of Glue or Jelly: And forasmuch as it was
evident, that some of them were wholly spoiled, and the rest in a fair way to
be so too, after that Mass was ended I cast them all into the Sacrarium, which
is a Hole made in the Wall express for this purpose, and poured upon them great
quantity of Holy Water, to make them sink to the bottom, and to cleanse the
Orifice of the Sacrarium. This was at that time all the Ceremony I used to bury
that, which I then believed to be the Body of our Lord. Others have found the
Hosts full of Worms; and in other places, the Rats have eat them up whole.

The Divines at Rome admit, for the most part, as many Miracles in these kind
of Corruptions, as they do in Transubstantiation: For after the same manner
(say they) as at the Consecration, the Substance of the Bread is
transubstantiated into that of the Body, and that the Accidents of Bread and
Wine are supported by the Divine Power without a Subject; so in the next moment
to Corruption (say they) the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ cease to be in the
Host, and in the Chalice; and that God, by his Omnipotence, creates in it
another Substance, which becomes the Subject of Corruption.

I have been an Eyewitness of many other considerable Accidents that have
happened to their Holy Sacrament. It frequently comes to pass, that Priests
(whilst they are saying Mass) let some of the Consecrated Wafers fall down to
the ground, and tread upon them without thinking of it. Others spill the
Consecrated Cup upon the Altar; so that the Precious Blood of our Lord runs
down on all sides, and is spilt upon the Ground, amongst the Filth and
Spittings of the People. Sometimes Priests have been taken with a Vomiting,
immediately after Communion. A Priest at Venice, as he was lifting up the
Calice, for the People to worship it, spilt it all upon his Head and Sacerdotal
Habit, which was all stained with it. These are some of those great Accidents
that happen to the Papists, with respect to their Sacrament, and which put them
to extreme trouble and concern for the remedying of them. The best way they
have, ^is to wipe it up with Tow and Linen Cloths, which are afterward cast
into the Fire and burnt, to wash the Vestments into which it is soaked in seven
several Waters, and to scrape the Stones and the Wood upon which any of it is
fallen; there be some Priests, who out of Devotion lick them first of all,
clean with their Tongues. True it is, that, according to the Faith of the
Papists, if it is the true Body and Blood of our Lord Jesus Christ, they cannot
be too careful in endeavoring to gather up so great a Treasure; but in good
earnest, can any Man believe, that it is consistent with the Wisdom of God, to
have placed the Body and Blood of his Son, under those accidents that are
subject to a thousand Casualties and Profanations, and this after his having
glorified it in Heaven, and seated it at his right Hand? They show us a
frightful thing in Germany, at a place called Maladurne, which is a Corporal,
or a kind of Tablecloth of Arras, whereupon the Host and Calice are placed,
when Mass is said, upon which there is Imprinted the Figure as it were of the
body of a Tree, divided into Seven or Nine Branches; at the end of each Bow, is
a Head like to those, they make of our Savior Crowned with Thorns, upon the
Napkin or Handkerchif of Veronica: The whole is very ill Drawn, and all the
strokes and Lineaments of the Heads are very bungling, neither are all the
Heads equally great, or proportionable to one another. But for all that, the
Tradition is, that the Curate of that place, as he was one day Celebrating
Mass, spilt the Consecrated Calice, and that the Blessed Blood of our Savior
falling upon the Corporal, did Form all these Heads, which therefore they
pretend to be Miraculous. This is one of the great Pilgrimages of the Germans,
and you shall scarce meet with any Inhabitants of the Country toward the
Upper- Rhine, who have not the Representation of this Miracle hanging in their
Chambers, at the bottom of which are these words, Christi Sanguis Maladurni in
Corporale est. But we are not to believe that God works Miracles without any
Reason, or without some Order, which may discover that such Operations proceed
from his Hands: But what do we meet with in this Figure, that bears this
Character? Would God, think we, demonstrate to us, that the Blood of his Son
Jesus Christ is really present in the Sacrament after the Consecration, by
representing an hideous Picture to us of several Heads, that are extremely ill
made, and are not like one another? Or would he by this means intimate to us,
that Jesus Christ is a Monster, with many Heads? This cannot be affirmed
without the greatest Impiety. For my part, I am well assured, that no reason
can be excogitated, that can either far or near give us to understand, the
design of this Figure. The Devil also is too cunning and subtle, to have had
any hand in it; for had it been his doing, he would rather have made the Figure
of some little pretty Child, such as was that, which they say appeared in an
Host, in the time of S. Lewis, King of France. It remains therefore, that we
attribute this Artifice, to the good Curate, who Celebrated Mass, and who was
willing at once, to draw the Devotion and the Money of People to his Church. A
Jew being come to vend some Commodities at Mentz, in the House where I was
Boarded, having seen one of these Images hanging in the Stove, demanded what it
was? Whereupon I immediately opened the Garden Door, and left him, leaving the
Woman of the House to answer him; for as for my part, I knew not what to say to
him.

The Germans have not many Devotions in their Country, but those which they
have are very gross ones; they dress their Saints of both Sexes, in such Antic
Habits, that one cannot forbear Laughing in seeing them. In most of their
Churches, they have Crosses of a Prodigious bigness, and they put upon the Head
of the Figure, that represents our Savior, great ugly Periwigs made of the
grosser part of Hair, and great Beards of Hemp.

Forasmuch as I have made mention of the Figure of Maladurne, I have a desire
to give you here a description of some parts of a Pilgrimage, undertaken to
this Image, where I was present my self upon occasion, four years ago. I was
Traveling from Mentz to Francfort about some business; the most commodious way
to go thither is by Boat, which sets out from Mentz every Morning at seven a
Clock. By ill luck, or rather good luck, (because this stop procured me very
diverting Company,) I came too late by half an hour, and the ordinary Boat was
already got out of sight; but I found another there in the Haven, which was
ready to set Sail, to go up the Main to Francfort. This was a great long Boat
or Vessel, which could contain two hundred Persons, and it was well nigh filled
with Persons of both Sexes, who went a Pilgrimaging to Maladurne. As soon as I
was entered the Boat, they gave me a very good Place, perceiving me to be a
Clergyman; only I was obliged to be silent for the space of near two hours,
because I came just at the time of their Meditation, which lasted an hour, and
which was followed by many Prayers, and Ora pro nobis, which lasted another
hour. Afterward the Father Director of the Pilgrimage, who was a Father
Capucin, having rung a little Bell, gave them leave to go to break their Fast,
and silence together. Here it was that all our Germans, Men and Women, began to
rummage their Bags for Provision; some produced Legs and Shoulders of Mutton
ready Roasted, others Gammons of Mentz, and Pies, and a hundred other cold
Meats, such as were commodious upon such an occasion, not forgetting their
great Pitchers and Bottels of Wine, and they strenuously applied themselves to
Eating and Drinking, after such a manner, as was able to procure an Appetite to
the most difficult and distasted Spectators. Indeed there were some amongst
them, upon whom it was not good to cast ones Eyes, because their Viands were so
sluttishly wrapped up, and they thumb'd and devoured it in so slovenly and
beastly a manner, that it was enough to turn ones Stomach to see them. All the
Meat that was in the Boat, was not common to all the Company, but they Eat in
Troops or Knots, according as aforehand they had associated themselves
together, of what they had brought along with them, so that some of them fared
much better than others. However they expressed a great deal of respect to the
Father Director of the Pilgrimage, and his Companion, by sending them of the
best they had upon their Tables. The Father had the Civility to invite me to
come and Eat with him; but having very well breakfasted at my Lodging, before I
came away, I returned him my Thanks, without accepting of his kindness.
Nevertheless, they were so importunate with me on every side, that I was forced
to drink with them; for in Germany, they account it a great Crime for a Man to
refuse a Health; and on such occasions as these, Men are forced to incommodate
themselves, how unwilling soever they may be. Their Breakfast lasted much
longer than their Meditation; however at last they were fain to make an end of
it, at the Fathers Ringing of his Bell: After which having imposed Silence, as
well as he could, he began a kind of Sermon, wherein he discoursed of the great
and many Spiritual advantages we receive by going on Pilgrimage, and more
especially by that of Maladurne. Above all, he insisted upon the Relation of a
long track of Miracles that had been wrought in that place, and which were very
Divertizing. Sermon being ended, the Father Capucin put all that were in the
Boat upon making a Confession of their Faith, and he began with his Companion,
asking him aloud, Do you hold in Heart and Mouth, the Catholic, Apostolic and
Roman Faith? The Brother answered, I do so by the Grace of God: The Brother put
the same question to his Neighbor, Do you hold with Heart and Mouth the Faith?
etc. And he again made the same Answer, and so the same Question and Answer run
through the whole Boat from one to the other, not excepting the Boat-men
themselves. They told me that the reason of their taking this Precaution was,
to find whether there were any Heretics in the Boat, and if they had found
any, they would have forced them to leave the Boat, because they were apt to
mock at their Sacred Mysteries and Holy Practices of Pilgrimaging. This
Confession being ended, and all the Company having been found good Catholics,
the Father received the Vows of a Troop of Pilgrims, which were come from
Hockum that Morning, and joined themselves to the rest of the Company in the
Boat. He made them all to kneel before him, and made them say after him with a
loud and audible Voice these words, I N. do vow to go to the holy Relick of
Maladurne, and during the whole Journey, as well going as coming, to be Obedient
to the Reverend Father Blasius, Director of the Pilgrimage. This done, the
Father Blasius, (for that was the Capucin's Name,) gave them his Benediction,
and embraced them one after another, and afterward sent them to embrace the
rest of their Companions. I took notice that the Father expressed a great deal of
Civility to these last come Pilgrims, and placed them near to himself, on his
Right Hand. Now it is t^ be noted, that Hockum, whence these Men came, is the
place where the very best Rhenish Wine grows, and whereof they had brought
along with them, a very plentiful Provision. These therefore with a great deal
of reason were placed at the Right, and the Pilgrims of Bacrack, who had
possessed that Place till then, were fain to pass over to the Left. The Father
having Commanded the whole Company to kneel down, pulled out of his Sleeve a
little Image or Figure of the Miracle of Maladurne, and having himself first
Kissed all the Heads represented on it, he delivered it over from Hand to Hand,
that every one might do the same; which done, he enjoined the saying of seven
Paternosters, in Honor to every one of the Heads. Whilst all these Ceremonies,
Prayers and Adorations were performing, the Boat Arrived at Hochst, which is a
small City, belonging to the Elector of Mentz, and where they make an Hours
halt to Eat their Dinners. There be very good Inns in this Place, and many
stepped out of the Boat, either to Dine there, or to buy more Provisions; but the
greatest part, remained in the Boat and Dined there. The Father Capucin was so
very importunate with me, that he obliged me to stay with him. These kind of
Boats are so large and long, that always at one end of them, they have a very
large Kitchen, where they Boil and Roste whatsoever the Company desires. The
Kitchen happened to be very well furnished that day, and after that the Capucin
had craved a Blessing, we sat down to Dinner. The heat and fumes of the Meat
and Pottage, had so extremely heated the Boat, that one could scarcely fetch
ones Breath in it, and caused a very unpleasant scent, for these Boats are all
covered with Boards, like Houses, and they can let in no Air to them, but only
by the sides, and by a Board on the top of the Boat, which they can lift up,
upon occasion. I repented that I had been persuaded to stay and Dine there, and
that I had not stepped out to take a little fresh Air, as others did. But yet to
countervail this Displeasure, I took delight to see the Germans Eat at the rate
they did; for notwithstanding the good Breakfast they had made, they Eat with
that Greediness, as if they had seen no Meat in three days. God be praised,
said the Capucin, I see that Devotion procures a good Stomach. He was a Man of
a very good humor, and who had always a Jest at command to divert the Company
with; but nevertheless he did one thing which did much displease me, and was
very unbecoming the Gravity, which ought always to be inseparable from a long
Beard, and especially from one that is a Conductor and Director of Pilgrims.
Dinner being ended, and the Capucin having given Thanks, he granted one hour of
Recreation to the Company. This Recreation consists in speaking and acting all
sort of Fooleries, and above all in drinking Healths, and eating relishing
Bits, and Incentives to Drink, as Gammons of Bacon, dried Tongues, and other
Salt-Meats. The Father had for his part, a good Gammon of Mentz before him; and
having placed on his right hand a great Bottle of Wine, which the Pilgrims of
Hockum had bestowed upon him, and another great Bottle of Bacrack Wine on his
left hand, he placed them both on each side of his Gammon of Bacon, and
Laughing said, with a loud Voice, so that all the Company might hear him, these
Latin words taken out of the XXth Chapter of S. Matthew, most filthily
profaning them: Grant, that these two Bottles may sit the one on the Right
hand, and the other on the Left.

After this he got into the best Humor of the World, and drunk to admiration. I
desired him to tell me, why they were so cautelous to prevent, that no
Heretics might lurk in the Boats amongst them: The Reason is, (said he)
because they mock us; yea, some of them are not afraid to abuse us very
insolently. Once upon a time (proceeded he) five or six of these wicked Men
played us a very ill Trick; they had mixed themselves amongst the Pilgrims, to
observe what we did. We discovered them at last, when after having worshipped
the Holy Image, I sent it about for them to kiss. One of them took it in his
hand, and instead of kissing it, he with horrible Blasphemies threw it into the
Water, saying, That that Image was more like the Hydra of Hercules, or the
Beast in the Revelations, than like Jesus Christ. Our Pilgrims seeing this
horrible Impiety, ran to him with design to have pulled him to pieces; but four
or five other wicked Wretches, his Companions, drew their Swords in his
defense, and to make way for him to escape; and the only way was left him, was
to leap overboard, which he did, and by Swimming got to the other side of the
River. The Rage our Pilgrims were in, to see this Wretch was got out of their
hands, made them fall upon the rest, and one of them had his Arm run through. I
had much ado to appease the Tumult; but at last I made them call to mind the
Obedience they had vowed to me; and they let the Heretics go ashore, after
that they had soundly beaten them. By ill-luck for our Pilgrims, all this had
happened in the Jurisdiction of Francfort, whither we were going, and where they
are all Heretics; and these wicked Rogues had made haste and got there before
us, and had made their Complaints to the Magistrates; who sent immediately to
stop or arrest our Boat, and they carried us all Prisoners to a great Tower,
where we were kept till the next day. We expected all of us no less than to be
made Martyrs; but instead thereon the Magistrates having taken more particular
Information of the Matter, the next Morning sent to us in a manner to excuse
themselves, and to tell us, That they wholly disapproved the Action of those
rash and giddy Youths; and if we had made our Complaints of them, without
abusing them, they would have done us Justice: But however, forasmuch as there
had been some Blood spilt, we were condemned to pay the Charges of the Justice,
and an hundred Gilders, to be distributed amongst those Protestants that had
been abused by them. The Money was soon found amongst our Pilgrims, for all did
not amount to Half a Crown apiece. The Receiver to whom we paid our Money told
us, in a very girding manner, that the only cause of all these Quarrels was,
because in our Pilgrimages we swallowed down more Rhenish Wine, than
Holy Water. When we were returned to our Boat, we found almost all the
Provisions of Victuals that we had left; only they had taken care to visit our
Bottles and empty them, and filled them with Water. After that again we had
Embarked our selves, I called to mind the Holy Image of Malaturne, which the
Heretic had cast into the Water, and which we had quite forgot, by reason of
this Hurly-burly we were engaged in. I was inspired of God, to send some of our
Company in a little Boat to seek for it; and they found it miraculously on the
Shore, amongst the Sedge. It is the very same I have still at this day, and
which all of you have worshipped this Morning. It was an Image of Paper, fastened
with Starch to a Piece of Wood; neither was it any great Miracle, that being
such it did not sink, or that it was stopped amongst the Sedge. But however, the
good Father took it as a great honor to him. He told us this Story with a
great deal of Pleasantness, and Laughing said, We shall in the Evening see
those Devils, that emptied our Bottles; he said not, Who have profaned our
Image.

Whilst the Father was telling this Story, they drunk Healths to him from all
Quarters; and he very frankly Pledged them all out of his two Bottles. When the
Hourglass, which was turned up for the Hour of Recreation was run out, they
informed the Father of it; and he having rang his Bell, all the Company shut up
their Glasses and Bottles, and he took a Book in his hand, to read a Spiritual
Lecture, which was to last one Hour; which was to be followed with a Meditation
of the same continuance, as in the Morning: After which, he was to Preach an
Hour, and then they were to betake themselves to their Afternoons Treat, or
Collation. The Father accordingly began his Reading with a great deal of Vigor;
but he was not gone far, before that the Fumes of the Wine having got into his
Head, he knew no more what he read, so that his Companion was fain to take the
Book from him; neither did he proceed much further in his Reading: For finding
that the Father Director, and most of the Pilgrims, were Nodding and Snoring on
every side of him, he very fairly laid down his Book on the Table, and leaning
his Head upon it, fell asleep for Company. Never in my life did I see such an
Image of Devotion, as was then to be seen in this Boat. Those who could neither
Sleep, nor take Tobacco, set themselves to Chat together, and to tell Jests and
Merry Tales, to make Laughter. They could not Play at Cards, because all manner
of Gaming had been forbid them. I for my part, being no Pilgrim, got upon the
Deck of the Boat, to take a little Air; where I found a Gentleman of Mentz,
whom I was acquainted with, and with whom I discoursed a good while concerning
this Pilgrimage. I told him, that I was extremely scandalized to see so much
Brutality acted amongst Christians, and that even in the midst of those
Exercises, in which they pretend most to Devotion. He told me, that I had seen
nothing as yet; that they had yet a Day and an half to be on the Water, and to
lead the same manner of life as I had seen; and that afterward they were to
Land at a certain place, from whence they had almost two days Journey through
Woods to Maladurne, which all of them went on Foot; That this was the most
pleasant and merry part of all the Journey, for that they were used to go and
sing amongst the Rocks, where there were most Ravishing Eccho's; afterward,
they would go further, to find some pleasant place or other, where all the
Company might sit down upon the Grass, whilst the Father was Preaching to them.

After Sermon they continued their Journey a little further, till they came to
some delightful place, amongst shady Trees, where they refreshed themselves
with Eating and Drinking. The Father Director made those that were the most
able and strong amongst them, to carry the Provisions, besides what every one
carried of their own. Here they did eat all of them in Common, and an equal and
abundant distribution was made to every one, both of Meat and Drink. The
greatest trouble and inconvenience they have, (said he) is to carry those, who
after their Meals are found Drunk; for these the Men were obliged to carry by
Turns on their Shoulders, or to lead them under the Arms, until they had a
little digested their Wine. If at any time it happened, that the number of those
that were Drunk, was too great for the rest to lead or carry them, then all the
Company was obliged to make a Halt, till they were come to themselves again;
for they are all bound by Oath, not to leave any one of their Company behind
them, for fear of any Accident that might happen to them. The Father Capucin
showed himself always very favorable to this sort of People, because
frequently he had been one of the number, and had been in his Turn carried upon
their Shoulders. When the Pilgrims were arrived at Maladurne, the Father
Confessed them, and Absolved them of all the Faults and Excesses they had
committed during their Journey, and gave them the Communion with his own hands;
afterward they went to Visit the Holy Relick; and having staid there the
remainder of the Day, he led them back again by the same way that they came, to
the Boat, making them repeat the same Exercises they used in going.

I desired this Gentleman to tell me, after what manner these Pilgrims passed
the Nights. I knew already, that as long as they went by Water, they laid down
in the Boat, and slept in their Clothes, every one in his place, in leaning
their Heads one upon another. And this indeed was in a manner the only thing
that I found to be very troublesome in all their Pilgrimage. But I was very
desirous to know, how they Lodged when they Traveled by Land, and whether they
could meet with Beds enough for all their Company, considering their great
Numbers? The Gentleman, at this Question of mine, fell a Laughing, and told me,
That he found that I was not over well acquainted with the Custom of Germany;
and that there were no Beds to be found, except only in great Cities, and along
the Upper Rhine, where I had Traveled: But, that in all other Parts, there
were none to be found; and that Travelers thought themselves very happy, when
they could meet with fresh Straw to lie upon. The way therefore of our Pilgrims
Lodging was after this manner: They got into Barns, or the Peasants Houses,
where they procured for their Money some Bundles of Straw, which they spread
upon the Floor, and stretched themselves along upon it, like Herrings, Men and
Women pel-mel together, of what condition soever they may be, without having
any thing wherewith to cover themselves.

True it is, that I had already had some experience hereof; for having once
passed up the Rhine from Collen to Mentz, with a Count of the Empire, who had
with him the Countess his Wife, and two Sons; we were fain to lie two Nights
upon Straw, in two pitiful Villages, without being able so much as to procure a
Bed for the Countess. The Rats and Mice skipt over our Faces all Night, and we
had nothing to cover our selves with, save only our Cloaks. However, I did not
conceive this to be so common in Germany, as this Gentleman informed me. We
were yet engaged in our Discourse about our Pilgrims, when we heard the noise
of our Capucins Bell; this made me go down into the Boat, to see what they were
going about next. I found the Capucin a rubbing of his Eyes, and demanding what
of the Clock it was, and how far we were got. They told him, that he had Slept
three Hours, and that they were come near to Francfort. He testified his
Trouble, that he had not been in a condition to put them upon their Holy
Exercises; but the Spirit is ready, (said he) and the Flesh weak. Well, there
was now no remedy; and forasmuch as he perceived that the Collation Hour was
come, he enjoined all the Company to fetch out their Bottles. The Pilgrims
therefore fell again as heartily to their Eating and Drinking, as if they had
neither Eaten nor Drunk all the Journey. Indeed the thing I admired most, was to
see, how they could Eat and Drink at the rate as they did; and yet this was not
all, for two Hours after they were to go to Supper.

They had scarcely begun their Collation, when the Boat arrived at Francfort. I
stepped out of the Boat in the Haven, after having taken my leave of the Father,
and all his Holy Company, who were to stay there an Hour, to take in some fresh
Provisions. If I had not had some business at Francfort, which I could not put
off, I believe I should have been induced to Accompany these Pilgrims to
Maladurne, and by this means should have been in a condition, to have given you
an entire description of this Pilgrimage, and of the pleasant Adventures, which
seldom fail of being coincident with them; but for want of a favorable
opportunity, I can give you no more but this small shred of it. I shall only
tell you, That this was the good Fathers Trade all the Summer long. When the
Pilgrims had performed their Vows, he brought them back again to the place
where he had taken them up, after having first given them a great Benediction,
and some Indulgences, which he said he had received of the Pope; and thus
having dispatched them, he provided himself again with others.

See here the good Fruit which the Miracle of the spilling of the Blood of
Jesus Christ has produced, which was wrought to confound the Protestants, and
to replenish the Children of the Church with Heavenly Graces. I shall not need
trouble my self in Moralizing this Subject any further, as being that which
carries its Moral along with it. I only beg Pardon of the Protestants, for the
Shame I have caused them in relating such a Story; and the Fault I have
committed herein was the greater, because it had no great reference to my
Neapolitan Journey; neither indeed had I inserted it, but because this Second
Days Journey from Veletre to Terracine proved very dry and barren, and did not
furnish me with sufficient Matter to entertain my Reader. However, I cannot but
think, that such like Matters of Fact may in some sort deserve to be made
Public, and I don't believe I shall have occasion, to write of them any more.
And so I return to my Journey.

OBSERVATIONS ON A JOURNEY TO NAPLES.
The Third Days Journey.
UPon the Way from Terracinne to Fondi, a most sad Spectacle presented it self
to our Eyes: We saw about a Score of Sbirries, who surrounding the House of a
Peasant, had blocked up all the Avenues thereof, and whose Countenances showed,
that they had met with a Prize. Having enquired what the matter was, they told
us, That they had seized a Nun, who had made her Escape from a Convent, with
the help of a young Man, who had stolen her away. The desire we had of seeing
her, made us stay there above an Hour. At last, they brought her forth out of
the House, with Irons on her Hands and Feet. They set her upon a Horse, to
which they bound her fast with a great Chain, which they had put round her
Waste. She did not seem to be above Eighteen years of Age, and was tolerably
handsome. She made dreadful Outcries and Lamentations, and the Despair that had
seized her was so great, that she begged of all the Passengers, they would be so
kind as to kill her. She made several Attempts, to throw her self down from her
Horse, but all in vain; for they had bound her so fast, that it was impossible
for her. We were not above Five Miles from Fondi, whither they were carrying
her, and we followed her all the Way, at less than half a quarter of a Miles
distance. The Throng of People, that came running in from all Parts to see her,
was so great, that we had much ado to enter the Town, for fearing lest some
Insurrection might be caused by so Tumultuous an Assembly. As soon as she was
entered, they shut the Gates, and we were forced to stay without near five
Hours; after which, with a great deal ado, we at last made a shift to get in.
Every one spoke so differently of the Matter, that it was very difficult for us
to learn the precise Truth; but the greatest certainty we could gather from
their Relations were, That it was only a simple Escape of a Nun, who did not
like her being coup'd up in a Convent. She was of the Order of S. Francis; but
they told us, That about a Month ago, three Nuns of the Order of S. Bernard,
had made their Escape with better success; for having taken their Way toward
the Seacoast, they met with a Turkish Vessel, that took them in. The Relation
of so strange an Adventure touched me to the Heart, and filled me with a just
Indignation against the Church of Rome, for having erected such States of
endless Restraints, and so contrary to Natural Liberty, that those who have
been so unhappy as to be engaged in them, are afterward desirous to quit
themselves thereof, at the cost of embracing a perpetual Slavery amongst a most
Barbarous People, and the greatest Enemies of Christendom.

I had conceived a design in the LETTERS I have Published, to Treat of the Nuns
of Italy; but some Reasons having obliged me, to Publish them sooner than I
intended, I had not the leisure to reduce that Matter in order, which yet is of
importance enough, not to be passed over in Silence. Wherefore I shall speak of
them here, by occasion of this Nun of Fondi, and shall make it the
Entertainment of this Third Days Journey.

I do not pretend here to discourse of the Institution of Nuns in the Church of
Rome. It is known, that notwithstanding the same may be thought ancient enough,
yet is indeed but novel, and took its rise at a time, when many other Weeds of
Superstition began to over-grow the Church. I shall only make it my business,
to represent the State of the Nuns as it is at present. The Motives which
engage them to this kind of Life, their Occupations or Employments in the
Convents, and their Intriegues abroad, together with the Scandals, which this
forced kind of Life does from time to time produce.

We may assert in General, That all the Monasteries of the Females in Italy,
are very well Founded, that is, Endowed, except some few, where the Nuns
profess the Poverty of S. Francis; as those are, who are called the Poor
Clarisses, and some others. Besides these great Foundations, they have also a
Casual Revenue, which amounts to no less than their yearly Incoms: For all of
them take in Pensioners, and there is never a Religious House, that has not at
the least Threescore or Fourscore of them, who all pay great Pensions. The
Italians put out their Daughters to Board in Convents, in like manner as we put
them here to Boarding-Schools, to learn all sorts of Work becoming Gentlewomen.
There are in every Convent some Nuns deputed to take the care of these
Boarders, and Teach them. All their Works belong to the Nuns, who Sell them,
driving a considerable Trade by this means to their great Profit. The Italians
send their Young Daughters at the Age of five or six Years into the
Monasteries, and of this great Number, some are to return again to their
Parents, after a certain time, and the rest make themselves, or are forced to
become Nuns; so that these Schools are the fruitful Nurseries, whence the
Monasteries are Peopleed and receive their Complement, and without which they
would soon become Deserts, there being few Italian Families, who have seen a
little of the World, and are come to the Age of Discretion and Knowledge, that
are willing freely to Imprison themselves there, notwithstanding they be kept
in a kind of continual Slavery in their own Houses.

The Parents of these little Boarders, know so well how to command the Spirits
of the Nuns that Govern them, that by this means they do what they please; and
to discover the Secret in one word, it is by Presents. If they have a desire
that their Daughter should be a Nun, these Governants and Mistresses forget
nothing of what they think may incline them to it. They will talk to them a
thousand times a day, of the advantages of a Religious Life, which may be
reduced according to them, to the following Heads:

In the First place, they will tell them, that a Nuns Habit, becomes them
extremely well, and that the Vail makes them look as handsome again, as the
common secular Dress.

Secondly, That they shall be always sure to Eat and Drink of the best, and
that they shall never want any thing conducive to a pleasant recreative Life.

Thirdly, That they shall live in great Honor, and that after two or three
years, they shall have the respect of being called Mothers.

Fourthly, That they shall always have the freedom to see and speak with their
Kinsfolks and Friends at the Grate; yea, to Treat them with good Dinners, and
splendid Collations in the Parlour, with the Money that shall be allowed them
for their Boarding.

Fifthly, That afterward they shall be dignified and raised to Religious
Charges and Employments, one of them shall be Mistress of the Novices, a^^ther
the Governess of the Boarders, others again Sacristans, Overseers of the
Provisions, Prioresses; yea, that all of them in their Turns, may become Lady
Abbesses.

And in the Sixth and Last place, They do not fail to add to all the rest, that
they shall be sure of Eternal Life. To this purpose a Nun of Vicenza told me
very pleasantly, that they Preached only six Beatitudes to them, and that they
always wanted two to make them perfectly happy, viz. Liberty and a Husband.

Besides these, there be many other lesser Reasons, which may engage Young
Girls to make themselves Nuns. Some enter upon this kind of Life, because they
have some of their Kindred that are Nuns; they have an Aunt or a Cousin in the
Monastery, or some She Friend of theirs. Others engage themselves in this
Profession, because they know that they cannot make so fair a Figure in the
World, as they fain would; others again, because they find the Monastery, the
Gardens, and Chamber allotted them, to their liking; and some also, because
they are at liberty to Jest and play the Fool, as much as they please. In a
word, a hundred other Motives of this Nature, do not fail to give the first
start to the Vocation of these Girls. But the most unhappy of them all, and
those whom I truly pity, are those, who not suffering themselves to be cajoll'd
by these petty Amusements, have their Thoughts fixed upon the loss of their
Liberty, upon the great Temptations they expose themselves to, and who, besides
all this, have a natural Antipathy against all these kind of Maxims, and who
openly protest, they can never resolve to embrace a Monastic Life; and yet for
all this, will they nill they, must do it; their Parents, from a
Family-Interest, will have it so; these Cruel and Unnatural Monsters press them
to it; and if this proves Ineffectual, they proceed to Outrageousness and
Blows; yea, even to threats of killing them with their own Hands, if they do
not pronounce the impious and Sacrilegious Vows; for so I call those Vows which
are made against ones Will, and where the Will does neither accord with the
outward act, nor with the Tongue that utters them.

I had almost forgot to relate to you the Ceremony that is performed some days
before these Young Virgins take upon them the Religious Habit. They allow them
a Week to go and take their leaves of their Kindred and Friends, and they
Attire them in the Richest Clothes that can be had, and which are commonly
Embroidered with Pearls and Precious Stones, that have been borrowed up and
down: They put a rich Crown upon their Heads, and a Scepter in their Hands, as
it were to signify thereby, that they are entering upon a State of Life
preferable to that of Queens, and in this Pomp they are led in a Coach through
the City, and carried to all their Kindred, where they never fail of being
Sumptuously Entertained. There are no Young Women, who seeing them pass by,
with all this Pomp and Magnificence, do not wish themselves to be in the same
Condition. But the Mischief of it is, the Festival does not last always, and
the day of their putting on the Habit comes, in which these Young Ladies are
carried in Triumph to the Convent; as so many Victims they are going to offer
up to the Avarice of their Parents, to the Interests of their Family, or to
some other Predominant Passion; for as for the Glory of God, that is not a
thing that comes in competition in Italy, on these sort of Occasions. The most
part of Nuns will tell you, two or three years after their Profession, that
they have been imposed upon, or that they have deceived themselves, and that
the Motives which have inclined them to embrace this kind of Life, were some
little foolish Conceits or Trifles, the desire whereof has quite left them. But
poor unhappy they, there is no Remedy left for them.

The Ceremonies of their taking the Habit are very Magnificent, and no less
Ridiculous. The Abbess of the Convent will needs appear at this Solemnity, in
her Pontifical Habit, and Acts the Farce of Pope-Joan, with her Crosier-Staff
in her Hand, and her Miter upon her Head: The signings with the Cross, and the
aspersions of Holy Water are never wanting in abundance. But after a great many
Preliminaries, they come to the point in Hand, which is to uncase these Maidens
of their Secular Habits, and to put upon them those of the Religion. And all
this while they have gayety enough in their Looks; but when they come to cut
off their Hair, then it is that the most of them can hold no longer, but burst
forth into Tears; which probably proceeds from some remainder of Love, they
still have for that, which they have taken so much pains to Cultivate and
Adorn, and that which makes the fairest Ornament of the Italian Ladies, who
cannot endure any thing upon their Heads, but their own Hair, which they
frizle, curle and bind up in different manners, enterlacing them with Flowers
either Artificial or Natural. It may be also, because at that time, they have a
more Lively Sense of the loss of their Liberty, they are then entering upon. For
though they are allowed one or two years of Novitiate, before they make
Profession, or engage themselves by a Solemn Vow, yet they never afterward
refuse to do it. The Italians have reduced a Nuns leaving her Monastery, to
that pitch of Dishonor and Infamy, that a Maid who had been Whipped by the
public Executioner, in the most public places of the City, or who had been
Stigmatized and stood under the Gallows, might appear with less shame in
Company, than a Religious, who should leave the Monastery after she has taken
the Habit. So that after once they have made the first step, they are in a fair
way, or rather in absolute necessity of making the other also.

And forasmuch as the business here lies rather in quitting the World, than the
Spirit of it; the Nuns are very cautelous, not to receive any Nun amongst them,
without being assured of a Pension for them from their Parents, of at least 100
Crowns a year, which serves purely and simply to buy her things she has a mind
to, and which may give her some satisfaction and palliate her Restraint. I knew
a Nun of the Monastery of S. John the Baptist in Bononia, whom her Parents
allowed a Pistol every day; with this Money they buy the Materials they stand in
need of for their Works, which afterward they present to some of their
Friends, or else Sell them for Money. They are also obliged with the said Money
to perform the Offices of their Religious Order, by turns, at their own
Charges. She who is the Sacristan, must during her year of Officiating, provide
the Wine that is used at Masses, and the Wax that is Burnt upon the Altar. The
Overseer of the Mouth Provisions must Treat the Nuns at her own Charges, at the
Principal Festivals of the year, with all manner of Curiosities and Dainties.
They are obliged also every one in their turn, to furnish a Mass for their
Preacher, and their Confessor; and herein it is, they endeavor to outvie one
another, which is the reason why these Fathers lead such Delicious Lives, and
are so indulgent in Pardoning of their Sins, to whom they are beholding for so
many good Bits. Besides all this, they have the liberty of Treating their
Relations and Friends, who come to Visit them at the Grates, and of giving them
Collations in the outward Parlour. In a word, I am sure, that if their Pensions
were Ten times more than they are, they would not be to seek for Means to spend
them. This necessity of having so much Money, at one dash, excludes all poor
Maidens, and those of midling Condition from all Religious Houses, and their
Parents find it more for their Interest to Marry them, except they have a mind
to make Convert Sisters of them, (that is, Servants to the other Nuns,) or poor
Clarisses.

The Convents of Nuns are no otherwise looked upon at present, than as a
convenient means of discharging Families of supernumerary Encumbrances. The
Italians commonly Marry no more than one or two of their Children, and so all
the rest are forced to become Priests or Monks, if they be Boys, or Nuns, if
they be Girls. However it must cost them a Pension, for without it, they will
never be received. The Call of God to any of these States, is no longer owned,
except they bring along with them a good Purse to attest it. Is it not a thing
to be Lamented, to see the Papists have the impudence to reproach the
Protestants, that they have Sacrilegiously abolished these Sacred Retreats,
where the Virgins have their Liberty, to follow the Lamb whithersoever he goes?
Is it not evident as the Sun at Noonday, that before they will open their
Gates to them, the Enquiry is not whether they have Oil in their Lamps, but
whether they have Money in their Purses?

Let us now take a view, how those who have the happiness to be Admitted, do
employ their time there. I confess, I speak somewhat improperly, for no Body is
permitted to go and take a view of them; but however, we may make a guess of it
by the Works that come from them; the most Curious Laces and Points, the most
rich and sumptuous Embroideries, and the most exquisit Handy-works, Artificial
Flowers, Pretty Knacks and Curiosities, with a thousand other Toys, are the
most serious Occupations of these Holy Recluses; so that indeed, though they be
retired from the World themselves, they are wholly busied to glut and satisfy
the Vanity of it in others. But the Masterpiece wherein they excel, is their
Skill in preparing all Dainties and Enticements of the Palate, to preserve
Fruits, to make Sweetmeats, dry and liquid, all sorts of Pastry-Works, and
White-Meats; all which shows them to have very dainty and licorish Palats. All
this is comprised in Italian under the Words of Roba Dolce, or Roba di Monache:
If any would have them to make a Piece of Pastry, or to Dress any other dainty
Dish, they must send them as much more of the Ingredients, as can enter the
Composition; for it is known, they will be sure to take the one half for
themselves; and besides, they must pay Dearer for the Fashion, than it would
cost them at the Cooks: But withal it must be confessed, that they get for their
Money something that is far more neatly done, and delicious, than if the Cooks
had had the handling of it.

If they seem Covetous on one hand, on other Occasions again you will find them as
Liberal and Profuse; yea, one may say of them, That they do not addict
themselves to Avarice, but that they may be in a better condition to exercise
their Liberality. When any Festivals are celebrated in their Churches, all the
Priests and Monks that Officiate in Saying Mass, are sure to be dismissed with
their Handkerchiefs filled with Biskets and dried Sweetmeats; and they who
perform the Evening-Service, are afterward conducted to the Parlour, where
they have a Collation presented them, of all manner of exquisit Dainties and
excellent Wines. I once happened at Milan to be present at one of these
Collations of the Nuns of the Monastery Magiore. All the Crust of their
Pastry-Work were made of Almonds, Pine-kernels, and Pistaches, which had been
beaten or ground into Flower. An Old Priest seeing this Excess, could not
hinder himself from saying, O, Dio, Come potiamo mangiar questo senza Peccato!
Good, GOD, Is It possible to eat this without Sin! But a young Nun answered him,
Si, si Signor, e cosa buena per i vecchi: Ay, ay Sir, It is a good thing for
Old Men. They are more ready at their Jests and Drollery, than those who are
most Conversant in the World. Yea, what is more, there reigns in their
Cloisters a Spirit of Impudence, Effrontery, and Impiety, beyond what is found
elsewhere; which proceeds, as I believe, from the secret Rage they have
conceived, for having lost their Liberty. They abandon themselves, as far as
they are able, to all manner of Luxury; and were it not that Modesty well
becomes a Writer in this kind of Matters, I could relate Facts to you that
would make your Hairs stand on end. In order to remove all occasions of such
Enormities, the Italian Bishops have taken care to double their Grates, which
were only single before, as they are still to this day in France and Germany.
The first Grate is about a Foot distant from the second Grate; and the Bars are
so close set together, that one cannot thrust in his Fist. Moreover, they have
most expressly forbid all manner of Persons, as well Ecclesiastical, as Civil,
(except it be Kindred to the Second Degree) to go to see them, or speak with
them, without an express Permission set down in Writing, and Signed with their
own Hands, or of the Vicar General, deputed over the Monasteries, upon pain of
being Prosecuted in the Ecclesiastical Court, and condemned either to Prison,
or to pay great Fines.

In a word, it may be truly said, That they have taken more Precautions, to
hinder all Men from Visiting them, than if they were struck with the Plague.
But yet all these rigorous Prohibitions, do not hinder their Parlours from
being always well filled with Company; and the Sbirries, who have Orders to
make a search in the Parlours, and at the Grates of Convents, dare not so much
as come near them; for all these Nuns commonly have very powerful Relations and
Friends, who would take care to get their Legs and Arms broke for them, should
they ever offer to attempt the least thing that might displease them. To speak
the Truth, these Prohibitions serve only to inflame the Italians the more, to
go and Visit them, if it were for no other thing, but because it is a thing
forbid. Omnis Praevaricatio dulcis: Every Sin is sweet. Yea, what is yet more
astonishing, is, That the Bishops forbid all Priests upon pain of Suspension
and Imprisonment, to celebrate Mass in the Convents of Nuns, without having an
express Permission for so doing; by which they sufficiently give to understand,
the ill Opinion they have conceived of their Nuns.

I have found amongst my Papers one of those Licenses, which I got at Venice,
in order to say Mass in two Churches of Nuns, which are therein specified. The
Contents of this License seems to me curious enough to deserve a Publication;
it is Printed, and begins in these Terms.

Licentia Celebrandi Missam in Ecclesia Monialium.
Aloysius Sagredo, Miseratione Divina Patriarcha Venetiarum, Dalmatiaeque
Primas.
DIlecto nobis in Christo Reverendo Domino.... Salutem in Domino. Haevendo not
veduto le fedi and attestationi fat in scritto, della tua buona vita, costumi
e fama; in virtu della present nostra si concediamo Licenza di poter peril
corso di mesi tree, celebrare la Santa Messa, nella Chiesa esteriore delle
Monache del Monasterio di Santa Maria del Pianto, e di Santa Maria de'
Miracoli. Mentre pero tu vadi tutto vestito modestamente. Non mostri nel tuo
habito, e persona vanita, o lascivia alcuna. Porti continuamente la Chierica
apparente and proportiorata a Sacerdoti. Non parli con Monaca alcuna; ma
ricerando il bisogno, solamente con la Conversa o Converse destinate al
servitio della Chiesa esteriore, e dicose necessary appertenenti all'
officiatura della Sante Mess con brevissime parole. Non tratti con alcuna
Monaca, o con altre per via di lettere, o di presenti, o in altra maniera. E
anco in tutto il rimanente tu prenamente osservi tutti gli Ordini and
Constitutioni Patriarcali e' Sinodali. Altrimenti la present Licenza resti
nulla; onde per tal nullita su incorri nella pena di sospensione a Divinis ipso
facto; and in oltre resti soggetto a poter esser con altre pene arbitrarie
castigato.

Dat. Venetiis in Patriarchali Palatio, diE 20. 7bris 1689. Aloysius Patriarcha.


I was willing to set this down here in Italian word for word, as it is in the
Printed Copy, that the Emphasis thereof might remain whole and entire. In
English it runs thus:

Aloysius Sagredo, by the Grace of God, Patriarch of Venice, and Primate of
Dalmatia.
TO Our Beloved in Christ, the Reverend.... Greeting in our Lord. Having seen
the Testimonies and Attestations in Writing of thy good Life, of thy good
Manners and good Reputation; We by these Present grant unto thee the
Permission, that thou may (during the time of Three Months) celebrate Mass,
in the Outward Church of the Nuns of the Monastery of our Lady of Pity, and in
that of our Lady of Miracles. Provided notwithstanding, that you repair
thither, being modestly dressed; That thou make no show* either in thy Clothing
or Person, of any Vanity or Lasciviousness; That thou wear thy Clerical Crown
or Tonsure, as does become a Priest; That thou do not speak to any Nun; and
when need requires, be it only with the Converse, or Sisters Conversers,
appointed for the Service of the Outward Church; and this neither, save only it
be about things necessary, and that respect the Celebration of the Holy Mass,
and this in few words. That thou have nothing to do with any Nun; or others
(that is to say, the Boarders or Pensioners) by Letters, by Presents, or any
other way. And that moreover, in all other things, thou do observe all the
Patriarchal and Synodal Orders and Constitutions. Otherwise we declare these
Presents to be void, and that by this Nullity thou shall incur the Penalty of
Suspension a Divinis ipso facto, and shall moreover be punished by other
arbitrary Punishments.

Given at Venice, in our Patriarchal Palace, the 20th of 7ber, 1689. Aloysius
Sagredo, Patriarch.


We may easily perceive from all this, the high Opinion the Pastors of the
Church of Rome have of the Virtue of their Holy Recluses; and without question
they have reason for their taking all these measures about them. The Priests
are forbid to speak with them, because Experience has taught, that in their
Discourse they did only Cajole and Court them. They are forbid to make them any
Presents, because they are well assured, that the Priests never give any thing
for naught. And in the third place, they forbid them having any Commerce with
them in any other manner; I leave it to you to conjecture what the meaning of
that may be.

The Priests, for their parts, do not much concern themselves with all these
Threats. They say, That Suspension Ipso facto signifies nothing, except it be
publicly declared by a Sentence; and they know well enough, that their
Colleagues will never proceed to such an Extremity against them; forasmuch as
in their time, they have been as guilty of the same Transgression, as
themselves. Some will have it, That the Punishment of Suspension with the rest
expressed in the License, cannot light upon any, but such who are guilty of all
the Particulars there prohibited, that is, who Discourse with, send Presents,
write to them, and have commerce with them; but that they who discourse, or
have commerce with them, without Writing, are not of that number. In a word,
The most Clear-sighted perceive, that these Prohibitions are only made to
secure the Honor of the Superiors, who otherwise might be accused by the
Seculars, for conniving at all these Disorders, which daily happen in these
Matters, and which, according to a Jesuitical Interpretation, are sufficient to
quiet their Consciences. They say, That the Bishops after all, never had the
intention of Suspending them. Thus notwithstanding they Court the Nuns, yet
they continue to say Mass, and to perform all the Sacerdotal Functions, without
feeliny the least scruple in so doing.

The Italians do not always pay their Visits to the Nuns for the Love they bear
them, but more frequently to consult with them, and concert the means of
accomplishing some great design, or to manage some Intriegue abroad. The Nuns
commonly have the qualification of a Devilish Spirit, and it is matter of
astonishment to see, how young Women shut up in Cloisters, as in a Prison, are
notwithstanding able to act at a great distance with so much power and
efficacy. Is a Man engaged in an unjust Trial, or does he stand in need of the
Favor of some Great Person; the best means for him to succeed, next to the
Jesuits, is to address himself to the Nuns. Has a Man a mind to ^^mpass some
Amorous project; if you can but once get them to embark in it, you may be in a
manner sure of succeeding. I shall to this purpose relate to you, the subtle
Intriegue of a Nun of Milan.

A certain Count courted a young Lady, whom he was extremely pleased with; but
he had no means of seeing her, save only at Church, when she went on Sundays to
Mass, or sometimes in passing by her Window, after the Italian manner. He had
taken notice of the young Ladies Smiling on him, and from thence concluded,
that without doubt she would prove favorable to his Wishes: So that nothing
remained now, but the finding out a way for a free and secret Interview,
wherein the Count found an insuperable difficulty; for her Mother, who was a
Woman of Honor, was so true a Sentinel to her Daughter, that she was
inseparable from her, and never stirred out of Doors without taking her along
with her. This was a business indeed, that required the Intriegue of a Nun to
compass it. He addresseth himself to an Ancient Mother of the Monastery
Magiore, to whom he promised 20 Crowns, in case she could make him obtain his
desire: The Old Nun undertakes it. To this effect she writes a Letter to the
Lady, wherein she desires her to come and speak with her, for that she had some
secret and charitable Advice to give her concerning the Carriage of her
Daughter, and signifies the Hour, which would be most proper for her to come.
The Mother being very impatient to know what the matter might be, did not fail
of going to her, leaving her Daughter at Home. When she was come, the Nun told
her, That she had sent for her, to put her in mind to double her Care in
observing her Daughter; that it was taken notice of, that a Count was
passionately enamored of her; and that her Daughter answered him with Casts of
her Eye. She made a shift, with her long Discourse, to stay this good Woman
near two Hours in the Parlour; and all this while the Count, who had received
all necessary Instructions, was with the young Gentlewoman. The Mother returned
to her House, with a Resolution to make good use of the Advice the Nun had
given her; but the more assiduous her Precautions were, the more reason she
found to be astonished, after some Months at her Daughters, being big with
Child. She urged her to that degree, that she obliged her to declare how the
thing had happened. But what could the Mother do? It would have been in vain for
her to have undertaken to trouble the Nun upon this account, because in so
doing, besides the loss of her Daughters Honor, she might very well have lost
her own Life into the bargain; for the Nuns are no less able and expert in
bringing about their Revenge, than in managing a Love intriegue. The most part
of the violent Deaths that hapen in Italy, are carried on by their means, and
therefore it is that I have said, that they have a devilish Spirit. Those that
have any Enemies in Italy, are very cautious of drinking any Liquors of their
Preparing, or of their Sweetmeats, or Pastry-Work. There are too many funest
Examples to this purpose.

There is to be seen in the Mad-house at Milan a poor Gentleman, whom they make
to pass for a Fool or Madman, though indeed he be not so. The thing was brought
about by the Stratagem of a Nun, the account was given me of it, is as follows.
This Gentleman had a younger Brother, who was desirous to make himself Master
of his Estate; in order whereunto he took occasion to get his Brother go along
with him to Visit the Nuns, who bestowed a Collation upon them, and the Elder
Brother having drunk a Dose, fell down to the Ground, as if he had been quite
Dead. However the Poison it seems had not been so well prepared, but that he
came to himself again. The Nuns in the mean time being extremely concerned that
their design had not succeeded, Published that he was a Fool, and that they had
seen him carry himself like a Changeling in the Parlour: Whereupon his Brother
caused him to be Seized, and to be carried to the Mad-house. It is a place from
whence no Body is ever suffered to come forth, and where all the actions and
words of those, whom they have once thrust in there, be they never so rational
and composed, are interpreted and wrested to Folly. It was to special purpose
for him to say there that the Nuns had Poisoned him, when they made that a
strong argument to prove him a Fool, for entertaining such thoughts of them.
And by this means his younger Brother is at present still in full Possession of
his Estate. This was the account they gave me of this Story.

That which makes the Nuns so bold and daring in these sort of Enterprises, is,
because the Civil Magistrate cannot take cognizance of any thing they do, and
their Superiors that Govern them, receive too many good Treats from them, ever
to use them roughly. Besides, the most Rigorous Sentence that can be Pronounced
against them, is to Condemn them to be shut up in the inmost part of their
Monastery, and to Fast so many days a Week, with Bread and Water. They
themselves do execute the Sentence, for no Body has the power to enter into
their Convents to force them to it; so that we must not imagine them to be such
Fools, as to be overcruel to one another. And if an Abbess or Superior, should
attempt to have the Sentence executed according to the Rigor of it, they would
get the whole Body of Nuns about their Ears. So that by this means, they are
secured from the fear of ever dying an infamous Death; yea, or so much as to
suffer any thing considerable, whereas a poor Secular Female, being convinced
of the like Crimes, would be dragged to the Gallows, or Burnt alive. Nay, there
are some who excuse them of all these Enormities, upon the account of their
being Recluses; for why do the Seculars, say they, go to them? We must not come
near the Beast, if we have no mind to be bit by it. And they, on the other
hand, conceive they may justly deceive the World, because they have once for
good and all deceived them, and made them lose their Liberties, by forcing them
to become Nuns.

The Roman Catholics may well expect that these Monstrous Vocations, will one
day produce nothing but Monsters. It Is too great a Violence done to the natural
Right, which every one has to his Liberty, to pretend to force people to a
Condition, which they can never after change: But it is still a greater Tyranny
to handle those as the most infamous Criminals, who make the least attempt for
to recover it. The following History which is a very true one, and happened at
Milan about four years ago whilst I was there, is a most sensible proof
thereof. A Dominican Nun of the Number of those; whom their Parents force to
shut themselves up in a Cloister, having made serious Reflections upon her
engagement, found that her Parents in order to deceive her the better, had
falsified the Date of the Extract, which they had taken out of the Register of
her Baptism, and had made her a year older than indeed she was, to engage her
the sooner in a Monastic Life. For it is to be noted, that the Canons declare
all those Professions to be Null and Void, which are made before a certain Age,
there prescribed, though there be but one day wanting; and our Religious was not
ignorant of it. She therefore resolved to quit her self of her Profession, as
being null and invalid. The Abbess of the Convent gave advice thereof to her
Parents, who immediately repaired to the Monastery, and having given a
considerable Sum of Money to the Abbess, they desired her to join with them, to
hinder her coming out from thence. The shortest and surest way was to make her
pass for a Fool. Accordingly the Abbess and some of her Confidents Published
that her Brains were cracked; but because she was not so Crazed, but that she
could upon occasion, give good Reasons of what she said, she was forbid the
Parlour, and never suffered to come to the Grates. Thus this poor Creature was
forced to live in this desolate manner for some years, without being able to
come to the Speech of any Body. In the mean time, having dexterously managed
the Spirit of a Converse Sister, she took upon her to deliver a Letter from
her, to the Cardinal Archbishop, to whom only it belongs to take Cognizance of
the Affairs of Nuns in extraordinary Cases. She most humbly represented to him,
in her Letter, the reasons she had to reclaim or retract her Profession, and
the great Cruelties which the Abbess, at the Instigation of her Parents, had
exercised against her, since they had discovered her Intent. The Cardinal far
from being touched by the Justice of these Remonstrances, supposed, that by
granting her Request, he would give an occasion to the rest of the Nuns, to
follow her steps, and make them desirous to examine the day and hour of their
Professions: Wherefore he immediately sent his Orders to the Abbess, to shut
her up more closely than before; conformable to which Order, she was shut up in
the inward Prison of the Monastery, where she continued five years, with the
allowance only of a little Bread and Water for her Nourishment, and being
cruelly Whipped thrice a Week. The Nuns, as I have said before, exercise a very
sweet and mild Justice one toward another; but if there be any found amongst
them, who have a mind to quit the Convent, to these they are inexorably
Pitiless and Cruel. They fear, lest being got out from amongst them, they might
Divulge the infamous Wickedness they commit, and as an honest Man told me, they
are of the humor of the Devils, who wish Men would Damn themselves, to have
the more Company in Hell. Solatium miserorum est habere Pares: It Is a comfort
to miserable Persons that they are not alone. Our poor Prisoner in this her
extreme Misery found none, but this same Converse Sister, who had delivered her
Letter to the Cardinal, that had any pity for her, who took upon her, to
deliver another Letter for her, which she had addressed to an Honest Gentleman,
in whom she had a great deal of Confidence; who accordingly resolved with one
of his Friends, to do his utmost endeavor to set her at Liberty. He, by means
of this Converse Sister, furnished her with Instruments to break her Prison; and
on a certain Night, according to the Measures they had before taken, they drew
her with Cords over the Wall, and being entered into the Coach, that stood ready
for her, she desired the Gentlemen to carry her to Genoa. The Nuns in the mean
time, took so charitable a care of this poor Creature, that a day and almost
two Nights past, before ever they perceived that she had made her escape; and
she was already arrived at Genoa, before the Report of it came to Milan. The
Nun being got to Genoa, about Eleven a Clock at Night, made the Gates to be
opened to her, and having taken up her Lodging in the best Inn, she presently
sent to acquaint one of the Principal Magistrates of the City, that she desired
some Body might immediately be sent to take the care of her, and to discharge
the two Gentlemen, that had brought her thither, that all might be satisfied of
their Honesty and good intent in this Undertaking; and that they had not
endeavored to Steal her away upon any motive of Licentiousness. This Sage and
prudent behavior of hers, which did not at all bespeak her a Fool, as her
Enemies misrepresented her, was well approved of by the Magistrates of Genoa.
They received her with extraordinary kindness, and promised to afford her their
utmost Assistance. They appointed Commissaries to receive the Reasons of her
leaving the Monastery, and having found them good and just, they writ to the
Court of Rome, to inform his Holiness what had past, and to receive his Orders
about it. It was in the Papacy of Innocent XI. who was a great Enemy to all
those, who deserted their Convents; for they say of him, that he sent to the
Galleys every one of the Monks, who after having quit their Monasteries, humbly
addressed themselves to him for Relief, without hearing any of their Reasons.
Conformable to this Humor of his, he ordered the Magistrates of Genoua, not to
meddle any more in that matter; and immediately to send back the Nun to her
lawful Superior, the Cardinal Archbishop of Milan, who would take care to do
her Justice.

This Order was very cruel; for this Cardinal being accused by the Nun, for
having been so far from hearing her Remonstrance, when she had recourse to him,
that he caused her to be Imprisoned and Abused, was become her most dangerous
Adversary. This made these Gentlemen, to write a second time to the Pope, to
represent to him these Inconveniences, and to discharge their Consciences. But
Innocent the XIth was too firm in whatsoever he had once resolved on, (and it
may be this was the only Fault he had) and redoubled his former Orders, with
greater expresness than before, threatening them (in case of delay) with
Excommunication. Thus these Gentlemen, who were unwilling to involve themselves
in Trouble for the sake of a Nun, sent her back three Months after, with a good
Guard, to Milan: Every one pitied her condition, and believed the Archbishop
would receive Orders from Rome, for to hear her Case. But in the mean time, she
was sent back to her Convent, and the Nuns shut her up in her Dungeon, and
three or four Months after she was never heard of more. English Women have
great reason to bless GOD, that such a Barbarous Tyranny is at last abolished
in England; for they may be sure, that if ever Popery should set her Foot in
England again, they would not fail to build Prisons for them every where (I
mean Monasteries,) where, in spite of their Teeth, they would be made to
renounce the World. It being therefore a thing in a manner impossible, for a
Nun ever to get out of a Monastery, it is much better for them never to think
of it.

Now forasmuch as the Profession of renouncing the World, does not make one
really dye to it; so they seem, on the contrary, to have taken the resolution
of cleaving to it more than ever, and to follow the Maxims of it, as far as is
possible for them to do, and more than it may be they ever would have done, had
they staid in it. Their Habit ought to be very plain, without Pride or
Affectation; but we find that they have been very ingenious in reducing them to
another pass. Only setting Silk aside, which they may not wear, they use the
finest and most curious Woollen Stuffs they can meet with; and every thing
about them is so neatly made, and to that degree of Curiosity and Exactness,
that there is no uneven Fold or Stich to be found in them; and certainly, there
be a great many to whom a Religious Habit is much more advantageous, than a
Secular, a making them to appear more comely and hands some. Some of them let
their Hair grow on the forepart of their Heads, and take great care in
frizling of it. They wear also Laced Head-dresses under their Veils, as
likewise Neck-Laces, Bracelets, and Pendants in their Ears; and in a word, the
most of them Paint themselves to excess.

I went once to ask leave to speak with a Nun of the Monastery of S. Thomas at
Vicenza. She made me stay for her an Hour and an half in the Parlour, and came
at last so Curled and Painted, that she even frighted me. She excused her self,
for having made me stay so long, because forsooth, she durst not present her
self before me disorderly. This Nun gave me a plain and downright description
of all that past in her Monastery; the Antipathies, the Jealousies, the Amorous
Intriegues, and the Parties that reigned amongst them. They were at that time
in a great Division amongst themselves; some being of the Emperor's Faction,
others of the French Kings. They who were of the Emperor's Side, could not
endure to hear the others speak well of his Enemy. There happened one day (as she
told me) a very furious Battle between them, upon this account.

A Nun at Dinnertime drunk a Health to the French King: The Imperialists not
being able to brook it, they came to Words, and from Words to Blows. They flung
the Dishes and Plates, and whatsoever else came next to hand, at one another
Heads; she showed me her Veil, which was yet all stained with a Sauce out of a
Dish they had flung at her. This vexed her more than all the rest; for the
Italian Women, but more especially the Nuns, are exceeding neat and cleanly:
She endeavored her Revenge in flinging a Chasing-dish full of hot Coals in the
Face of the Party that had thus Affronted her. And she continued to demand of
me, Whether there might not be means found to signify her Bravery to the
French King, and that she doubted not, but that if he were informed of the Zeal
she had for his Glory, he would send for her to Paris, and make her an Abbess
there. These poor Maidens are very apt to intoxicate themselves with a thousand
such like Fancies. When they are weary of Quarrelling and beating one another,
then they betake themselves to Jesting and Fooling, and compose Comedies and
Farces to make one another Laugh.

The Reverend Dr. Burnet, now Lord Bishop of Salisbury, did not exaggerate the
matter, when he says, That He had seen some of them that were not over modest.
They make no difficulty of representing in their Plays, Venus's and Lucretia's
wholly to the Life; they Sing profane Songs, and altogether unworthy and
unbecoming Persons consecrated to God; they act Dances and Postures that are
extreme Lascivious, and all that they speak in them, is commonly conceived in
Terms admitting a double signification, whereof one sense is always either
impious or wanton. They commonly have very excellent Voices, and understand
Music perfectly well; but if there be any impure or lascivious Air, that is
that which pleases them best, and which they make choice of, to entertain the
Company with. That which is the most enormous thing of all, is, that not only
in these their Comedies, but also (O unheard of Profanation!) in their Divine
Offices for Sundays and Festivals, they intermix these filthy Songs, which they
blasphemously pretend to be made in imitation of the Song of Solomon. All the
Debauched Youth of the City, about this time, flocked to the Church of the
Coelestines at Milan, where these Nuns equally tickled their Ears and Fancies
by the sweetness and lasciviousness of their Songs. The Scandal grew at last to
that Excess, that the Cardinal sent his Orders to have their Church shut up,
and absolutely forbad them to sing Music any more.

It Is the Custom in the World, for Men to Court Women; but in these Religious
Orders, on the contrary, the Nuns Court the Men; they write Amorous Notes to
them; they send, to entreat them to come and see them; and there are few Nuns,
that have not two or three, to whom they are more particularly linked in
Affection; and they are so well skilled in disposing their Timos, that they
never meet together in the Parlour. They are very Jealous of them, and should
they once understand, that any one of their Lovers had discoursed with any
other Nun, besides themselves, they would immediately quit them, and would find
a time to be revenged on them. I take them to be very unhappy in this, That
they desire so strongly, what is so difficult for them to enjoy. Some amongst
them do so far inflame their Imaginations about their Amors, that they run
Distracted; and others are so immoveably determind to what they long for, that
they actually apply themselves to the inventing of Means, that may bring them
to the possession of what they desire: Of these, some give themselves to the
Devil; and to this purpose they tell a Story, That upon a time, a Nun being
resolved to give her self to the Devil; He plainly told her, He would not have
her, because she was more Devil than himself. It Is for this Reason that we are
told so many Stories of Nuns, that are Possessed. Others endeavor for Money to
corrupt the Turn Keys and Maidservants, that have the Care of the
Outward-Gates, to admit their Gallants at Night by the Tower. Some have plucked
away whole Grates from the Parlours; others have broke through the Walls, or
have made Passages undergro^^d; and it happens frequently enough, th(...) their
Cunning, they get the Keys of the Great Gate of the Monastery from under the
Lady Abbesses Pillow; or that they are so happy to meet with one Key or other,
that can unlock it. There is also another Little Gate in the Vestries, by which
the Priests enter, to go and carry the Holy Sacrament and Extreme Unction to
those that are Sick, and by which they convey the Ornaments of the Altar: Now,
to get the possession of this Door, they need only to gain her who is over the
Vestry. But the most sure way to obtain their desires, is, when a whole
Community of Females agree together, to take their Pleasures. Of this there
happened a most infamous Instance, about seven or eight Years since, amongst the
Nuns of Bresse, which made a great deal of Noise in Italy.

These Religious finding themselves quite weary of keeping their Vow of
Chastity, agreed amongst themselves to admit their Lovers into the Monastery,
and having all bound themselves in an Oath of Secrecy, they wrought hard, to
make a Passage Underground, under the Walls of their Enclosure, and which was
to end in the House of a young Gentleman, who was one of the Plot. Their
Undertaking had so good success, that the Nuns enjoyed the Galants as often as
they pleased. In the mean time there was observed a great change in these
Recluses; they became more modest in the Parlour, and more assiduous in the
Quire, than ever the(...) had been before. Their Confessor, who was a very Aged
Man, being incapable of taking part in their Amors, was not thought fit to be
admitted to the Secret. They informed him in their Confessions and secret
Conferences, that they felt from time to time such Ravishments and Internal
Joys, as they could no way express; without telling him, whether they belonged
to the Soul or Body. And this good Man, who took all in the best sense, and who
also attributed in part this their Conversion, to his own good Prayers for
them, went to the Bishop of Bresse, and made his Report to him; telling him,
That his Nuns were all of them become Saints to that degree, as to suffer
Exstasies and Ravishments. The great Opinion the World had conceived of their
Sanctity still increased more and more, when the greatest part of these Nuns
undertook to observe a Six Months Retirement in the Inner part of their
Monastery; making a Vow, That during all that time they would never come to the
Grate: This was to hide their Big-bellies, and Childbearing.

In a word, they had many Children, and this infamous Commerce lasted many
years. The World has been since astonished to consider, how it was possible to
be concealed for so long a time, without making a Noise in the World; for there
were above a Score of Youths that were of the Gang. However, as Wickedness
always drags its own Chain, this also was discovered at last by the Cook-Maid.
This Sister finding her self abandoned and neglected, because she was very
Ugly; and moreover, finding her self overcharged with Work, by reason of the
Cawdles and Broths, and a thousand other extraordinary things, which she was
obliged to make for those that were in Childbed. Besides, whenever the young
Galants came at Night, they always brought some dainty Bit or other along with
them, which she must Dress for the rest. One of the Nuns, on a time, having
very indiscreetly jeared her for the bigness of her Nose, she was so extremely
nettled at it, that in Revenge, she by way of Raillery reproached her with her
Big-Belly: From these stinging Jests, they proceeded to high Words, and in
fine, the Cook-Maid was basely abused by them. The next Morning she sends a
Letter to the Vicar General of Bresse, wherein she informed him, That she had a
Matter of great consequence to disclose to him, provided care were taken to
secure her Life from the Revenge of the other Nuns. The Grand-Vicar was so
possessed with the high Esteem he had conceived for these Recluses, who of late
had undertaken the Reforming of themselves, with so much Edification, that
having heard what the Cook-Maid had to say, he immediately called her a
Visionary. But she persisting to maintain what she had discovered to him; and
offering to make it appear, that three of the Nuns were actually with Child,
and that two of them had been lately brought to Bed; the Grand-Vicar at last
resolved to perform a Visitation of the Convent. Many of the Nuns perceiving,
that there was something extraordinary in this Proceeding, endeavored to make
escape out of the Monastery; but they were all stopped in their flight, and
brought back to their Convent, where they found very pretty Children, Males and
Females, in the Cells of these Nuns, who called them their Mothers.

The Bishop having been informed of it, drew up an Indictment, and sent it in
all diligence to the Tribunal of Venice, which is established to take
cognizance of Matters relating to Nuns; (for Bresse is a Venetian City,
depending upon the Republic both in Temporals and Spirituals.) This Tribunal
is very severe, and never fails of punishing things with the extremest vigor.
In the mean time all the Young Men, who knew themselves guilty, had time to
save themselves, some in Swisserland; others in the Country of the Grissons;
and others in Germany, as having by good-luck nothing but the Alps to pass.
Some days after, a Sentence was pronounced and published against them, as
severe as ever had been seen. Their Goods were confiscated, their Houses razed
to the ground, and their Heads set at a price. I was troubled to find amongst
this number one of my Scholars, the Son of a Procurator of S. Mark; but some
time after, I had the satisfaction to understand, That he was come freely of
his own accord, to put himself in Prison, in order to his Justification; which
he did to so good purpose, that he was acquitted.

There were many Persons in Italy, especially amongst the Priests and Nuns, who
condemned this so severe and so public Proceeding of the Republic, which had
made the matter to be much more Noised abroad, than otherwise it would have
been. They said, it would have been much better to have suppressed it wholly, as
they do at Rome, and in all the other Governments of Italy; because the
Heretics on the other side of the Hills, and more especially Geneva, are never
wanting, when such Matters as these happen, to make the best Advantage of it,
or, to make use of their Phrase, to Butter their Cabbage with it. As for the
Nuns, they contented themselves with setting a strict Guard upon them for some
time, and with stopping up the Conveyance they had made under their Walls. For
above a year together, the Gentlemen of Bresse durst not pass along the
Streets, near to their Monastery, for fear of incurring a sinister Suspicion.
See here the common End of the Amorous Intriegues of Nuns, and though indeed they
do not always make so much Noise, it is because those who ought to take
cognizance of them, pretend to have more Prudence than the Tribunal of Venice
made use of on this occasion.

There be two sorts of Superiors of Nuns in Italy; for some of them are
immediately subject to Bishops, and others to some Generals of Orders, of the
same Rule that they profess. Those that are under the Conduct of Bishops, are
somewhat better Governed; but they who are under the inspection of Monks, do
for the most, wholly give the Reins to their Passions, and lead a most infamous
Life, though with less Noise. The Monks will scarcely ever suffer any Seculars to
frequent the Grates of those whom they Govern, that they may keep the
Affections of these Maidens entirely to themselves. If any disorder chance to
happen, all is kept very secret, because this would turn as much to their
Dishonor, as to the disgrace of the Nuns. There are a Thousand Stories abroad
in the World, of the Loves of Monks and Nuns, and I find no difficulty to give
credit to them, since the Information I my self have had thereof, during my
abode in Italy, from Persons, whom I can belive; but am resolved to pass them
by in silence, for fear of offending Chaste Ears.

It Is a Prodigious thing to see how Nuns have multiplied themselves in Italy,
and the vast quantity of Convents they have, as well in every City, as in the
Country. There are almost as many different Orders of them, as there are of
Monks. Amongst the rest there are also She Jesuits, which commonly are called
Ursulines, who more particularly undertake to Instruct Young Girls. In Italy
they are obliged to be Cloistered, though in Switzerland and in France, they are
not under that engagement. I was surpised to see that the Italians, who are
accused of being become so effeminate some Ages since, have not yet introduced
amongst them a pleasant Order of Nuns, which is extremely multiplied in France;
I mean that of Fontevrault, which contains something so odd in its Institution,
and in its Observances, that forasmuch as I do not believe I shall have any
opportunity of entertaining you further about Nuns, I suppose you will not find
it disagreeable, if I give you here a short Relation of them, if it were for
nothing else but to represent to you, to what a height Folly and Delusion are
mounted in the Church of Rome.

A Person whose Name was Robert d' Arbrissel, having been followed by a great
number of Men and Women, in the Woods of Fontevrault, who had been persuaded by
his Preachments to embrace a Monastic Life, he gave them the Habit, and placed
them in several Cells in the Year 1100. And being of a very complaisant Humor
for the Sex, he undertook to overthrow the Order of God, and of Nature, to
oblige Women, by giving them the Superiority over Men. Some say he did this,
because of the great Devotion he had to the Blessed Virgin, and more
particularly to honor the Recommendation Jesus Christ made of S. John the
Evangelist to his Mother, when he was upon the Cross, as may be seen in the XIX
Chap. of the Gospel of S. John, Verse. 26, and 27. When Jesus therefore saw his
Mother, and the Disciple standing by, whom he loved; he says unto his Mother,
Woman, behold thy Son. Then says he to the Disciple, behold thy Mother. And
from that Hour that Disciple took her to his own Home. He pretended it might be
gathered from hence, that Women were to Command Men; at least he conceived,
that Men acquired a greater degree of Perfection, by submitting themselves to
be obedient to them. Accordingly, he would have the Monks should oblige
themselves by a Solemn Vow of Obedience to the Nuns, and make Profession
between the hands of the Lady Abbess. Pope Paschal confirmed his Order, which
since that time multiplied exceedingly, especially in France, where it had its
first Rise. It has been the wonder of these last Ages, why the Popes have
suffered so long an Order, which may with good reason be looked upon as the
greatest Shame and Reproach of the Religious Orders of the Church of Rome.
Endeavors have been made, to persuade some of the late Popes to suppress it,
but the great Ladies that have been Abbesses thereof, Fifteen of them having
been Princesses, and amongst them Five of the House of Bourbon, have had so
much Power, that by the interposition of the Authority Royal, they have always
hindered it. It is the Sister of Madam de Montespan, who at present is their
Lady Abbess; she met with abundance of opposition at first, for these Nuns who
were already accustomed, of a long time, to have none but Princesses for their
Abbesses, would not accept of her; and that which made them the more to
distaste her was, the motive for which this place was bestowed on her; however
the absolute Will of the King, has in fine proved instead of a Principality to
her. I am in a Condition to acquaint you with some Specialities, concerning the
present Condition and Spirit of this Linsey Woolsey Order; for having had two
Uncles that were Monks, and an Aunt that was a Nun of that Community, whom I
often went to Visit; I came by this means to be very particularly informed
about them.

In the first place to give you some Description of the Abbey of Fontevrault. It
is Situated three Leagues from Saumur in France, upon the Confines of Touraine.
It was formerly a dismal Place, full of Woods and Thickets; but at present it
is very pleasant, as being extremely well cultivated and improved, and enjoys a
very good Air. There are Five Monasteries, whereof Three are of Nuns, and Two
of Monks, without counting the Palace of the Lady Abbess, which is a Stately
Building. The first of these Monasteries of Nuns, is called the Great Montier,
or the greater Monastery; and in this all the Nuns of the Quire, that have a
good Voice, and are in Health, are Lodged. The Offices are very regularly Sung
here at all Hours, and the Church is a curious fair Building, to Perfection,
Spacious and Sumptuous. There are about a hundred and fifty Nuns professed in it,
who continue there till they grow Old or Weak and Infirm, for then they are
discharged of their Observance, and from the Service of the Quire, and are
removed to the Monastery of S. Magdalen, which is destinated only for those
Nuns, that are Old or Distempered. They have no other Obligation upon them, but
to hear one low Mass every day. Their Church also is a very fair one, and they
have very curious Gardens. The Third Monastery of these Religious Maids, is
called the Novitiat, where they have their Boarders and Novices. Here they are
taught whatsoever they have a desire to, viz. to Work, to Sing by Notes, to
Dance, to Play upon Instruments, etc. The Fourth Monastery, which is for the
Men, is that of S. John the Evangelist, which contains about Fourscore or an
Hundred Monks, taking in the Novices. Their Buildings and Cloisters are very
Fair, but more especially their Library, and their Refectory. The Fifth
Monastery is that which is called the Secretenerie, and contains the Brothers
Converses, which are about Sixty in Number. They are appointed for the Service
of the Fathers, when they are sent to be Directors to other Religious Houses of
the same Order. All these Five Monasteries are extremely well Built, have large
Gardens, and their particular Enclosures; but besides these, there is one great
Enclosure, which contains them all, and makes a kind of City, Peopled with
Monks and Nuns. Without the grand Enclosure is the Town of Fontevrault,
Inhabited by all sorts of Trades and Handicrafts-men, who gain their
Livelihood by Working for the Abbey, and for the Strangers that come thither
from all Parts, either out of Curiosity, or to Visit some of their Kindred.
This Order contains about Threescore Abbeys of Nuns, who all own that of
Fontevrault for their Mother, and depend on it. The Abbess is General of the
Order; it is she that performs the Visitation of the Monasteries, sends them
Directors and Confessors, and recals them at her Pleasure.

The first time that ever I came to Fontevrault, I was between Fifteen and
Sixteen years of Age, and it was at the Solicitation of my Aunt, who was a Nun
there, and Mistress of the Novices, that I went thither. Her design was to
persuade me to become a* Monk of that Order, where she had already gained
abundance of Credit. I found also my two Uncles there, who were of very
different Sentiments and Inclinations; for the one of them, who was very well
pleased with his State of Obedience, endeavored, all he could, to draw me into
it; but the other, who had a more noble Soul, talked to me of nothing else, but
of the baseness and degeneracy of Spirit there was, in making ones self a Slave
to Women. It is sometimes permitted in the Church of Rome, to remove from one
Order to another, provided it be from one of greater Liberty to a stricter.
Accordingly my Uncle had done his utmost endeavor, to quit the Order of
Fontevrault, and to betake himself to that of the Reformed Benedictins of the
Congregation of S. Maur. But Madam de Bourbon, the last Princess of the
Blood Royal they have had for their Lady Abbess, perceiving that the best
Subjects of her Order abandoned it at last, by the natural shame and regret
they had to obey Women, by this means took a course to shut this Backdoor. She
had so much Power, and so many Friends in the Court of Rome, and she knew so
well to represent, that this Change would not be allowed of in Conscience;
forasmuch as her Order, though otherwise very mild and slack, ought indeed, (by
reason of the blind Obedience which it renders to the Inferior Sex) to be
accounted the most mortifying and abasing of all others, that are approved by
the Church of Rome, and that consequently, according to the Canons it could not
be left, to go to another; That at last she obtained a Bull from Rome, which
declared, That after Profession, none ever after should be able to quit the
Order, to enter into another. But whether it were her Rank, and her Friends, or
the strength of her Arguments that prevailed in this case, I will not
determine. But by this means all my Uncles designs were overthrown, and he was
forced by the Tenor of this Bull, to continue in his first Calling, though sore
against his Will. He therefore did his utmost endeavor to deter me, from
Entering my self a Religious there: And though I was but a Boy then, I remember
very well, that nothing was more intolerable, than the Pride of these Nuns, who
(to exercise the Power they had of Commanding) made them do all manner of
Indignities, Follies, and infamous Services, even to that degree, as to make
them undress themselves Stark-naked before them in their Parlours, to receive
Discipline.

The Jesuits, who are the subtle Foxes, that creep in every where, where they
have the prospect of Profit and Advantage, had so far insinuated themselves
into the Spirit of Madam de Bourbon, that she chose them for her Confesaors,
and sent for two of them to be always about her, as her Directors. This was the
greatest Affront that possibly she could have put upon her own Monks, as if
none amongst them all had been able, or worthy to be her Spiritual Father. In
imitation of their Lady Abbess, the other Nuns would needs have Jesuits for
their Confessors too; so that by this means, these Fathers became very powerful
at Fontevrault; and to the end they might be the more respected, they had the
Address to persuade the Abbess, to command her Monks to obey them, and that the
Obedience rendered to them, should be looked upon as paid to her self. If there
were a Petition to be presented, an Office to be bestowed, and in a word, any
Favor to be demanded, all was to pass through the Jesuits Hands. The Lady
Abbess Signed nothing, but what her Father Director had first approved of. It
was they that had all the good and dainty Bits, and who devoured all their
Sweetmeats and Confects. This you must think was a very sensible Displeasure
to these Monks, who thereupon began to grow very lean. But by good hap for
them, though most unhappily for the Jesuits, the Lady Abbess died; and they had
no sooner closed her Eyes, but the Monks, in revenge of their Sufferings and
Disgraces, as one Man, fell upon the Jesuits, and after having Lasht them very
bountifully, turned them shamefully out of the Monastery. The Nuns might Cry
their Hearts out from their Parlours, commanding them to Treat the Gentlemen
civilly, and not to hurt them; the Monks were resolved not to hear them, since
the Authority of the Abbess was no longer there to restrain them.

My Uncle gave me a full Account of all the Particulars of it: But my other
Uncle, on the contrary, did his utmost endeavor to persuade me, to make one of
them. He told me, That their Obedience was not at all difficult to be observed;
that the Abbess and the Nuns commanded them nothing, but such things as were
sweet and easy, and that there was nothing of Rigor in all their Observance;
that they were not obliged to Rise at Night; and kept no other Fasts, save
those of the Church; and that after they had finished their Studies, they were
all advanced to be the Directors and Confesssors of the Nuns of their Order,
and that then they were perfectly happy.

My Aunt, after this, sent for me into the Parlour; where, after that she had
made me take part of a Collation, she told me a thousand pretty things, to
engage me to be one of them. I took occasion to object to her, what her Elder
Brother had told me, about their giving Discipline to Men: She desired me, by
no means to give ear to him, as being a discontented Person, and enraged,
because he could not effect his Designs: Yet she could not deny that such
things past amongst them, but that it was only upon young Novices, and those
that were newly professed, until they had accomplished their Studies; that is to
say, till the Age of 25 Years. And forasmuch as these were the very Stages,
that I was to pass through, in case I resolved to stay with them, she told me,
to soften the matter, and the better to prepare me for it, That it was not so
harsh a thing, as probably I might imagine; that all the Nuns of Fontevrault
were Ladies of Quality, and that it was a far greater Disgrace, to receive
Discipline from the hands of a Monk, who often is no better than the Son of a
Porter, or Cobbler, than from them; and besides, that this never happened, but
upon very extraordinary Occasions, to try their Obedience. In a word, she told
me, That all this was accounted as nothing amongst them, as being accustomed to
such matters. However, all these Reasons were not capable of satisfying me, and
I was obliged to cut short, and tell her, That I felt no Call to the Religious
State, of what Order soever it might be; and if it should please God to give me
one hereafter, he was to be Master, and that then I would apply my self, with
all my power to follow it: And so desired her, to talk to me no more about it.

I staid about Three Weeks with my Uncles in the Monastery of S. John's, and I
ate always at the Prior's Table in the Hall, where they entertain their
Strangers. A young Gentleman, who came thither the same Day as I did, only Supt
there the Evening after our Arrival; after which time, because he was come with
the design of Entering himself into their Order, they made him Eat in the common
Refectory, together with the other Novices and Monks; and Eight days after,
they gave him the Habit. The Master of the Novices being come one Day to the
Table for Strangers, where I was, the Prior asked him, How the young Novice
behaved himself; who answered him, That he did Wonders, and gave the marks of
an extraordinary Fervor. Amongst other things, I remember he said, That He
alone had almost swept the whole Dormitory that Morning, and that the Nune had
already once called him into the Parlour, from whence he returned more joyful
than he went thither. The Monks that were there Smiled upon one another, and
conceived good hopes, that he would persevere, seeing he had made so good a
beginning, and so well taken his first Trial.

I had a great desire to go and see the Monks Dine in the Common Refectory; but
they told me, I must stay till next Sunday, for that it was not permitted to be
there any other Day of the Week, because of the Trials they made of the
Novices. My Uncle informed me what these Trials were, viz. to make some of them
to carry a piece of Wood, or Gag in their Mouths; others were commanded, to go
and kiss the Monks Shoes; others, to continue upon their Knees, with their Arms
across; others again, to eat their Meals on the Ground, without either
Table-Cloth or Napkin, and an hundred other such like Fooleries. The highest
Trial of all, is the Discipline, and they observe a Nasty manner in the giving
of it; for whereas in all other Religious Orders, they ordinarily give it on
their Shoulders, at Fontevrault they always give it beneath. It was not long
since, that two Novices went to complain to the Abbess, That the Prior handled
them with too great Severity; but the Abbess having made them come into her
Chamber, gave them as much more, to make them forbear their Complaints to
another. It Is in these Fooleries they make Virtue to consist, and they never
teach their Religious, what it is to be Virtuous indeed, viz. to mortify, as
they ought, their Appetites, and to be meek and lowly of Heart. This is that
which makes these Young Men, when they are past their Novitiate, and have run
through the Course of their Studies, to have their Passions as headstrong as
ever, and to lead a scandalous Life with the Nuns, whose Directors they are.

These Nuns have a great deal more Liberty allowed them, than those of other
Orders; their Grates are very spacious, and are not double, as in Italy: They
have the freedom to enter into their Outward Churches, and Outward Parlours,
which is not permitted to other Nuns, and with leave from the Abbess they may
go abroad too. They will have all the Public Exercises of Learning to be
performed in their Presence, as all Latin Declamations and Disputations. They
have to this purpose a very great Hall, which is called the Disputation-Hall,
and is of a great length and breadth, having the Partition of a curious
Iron-Grate in the midst of it, all Gilt, the one half being assigned to the
Nuns, and the other to the Fathers, who maintain the Dispute. There are a great
many Nuns amongst them, who do very well understand Latin, yea, and, Philosophy
too. It seems, that being to Command Men, they thought it fitting to take upon
them this Manly quality.

In a Second Journey, which I took about Twelve years ago to Fontevrault, I
heard some Nuns Disputing very prettily upon some Metaphysical Points. They had
conceived a design of establishing the Study of the Liberal Arts amongst
themselves; and indeed being the sole Mistresses there, they might do in it
whatsoever they pleased. They said, They would give the World a sensible
demonstration, That it is a great piece of Injustice done to the Sex, not to
suffer them to Study, only to keep them the more in Subjection and Error. As
for what concerns Piety and Devotion, these Nuns show they have but little of
it, their whole Conversation being extremely Worldy and Lascivious, as well as
their Dress and Habit. They are clothed in white, and wear a black Veil over
it: When they appear in the Quire, they wear a great black Frock. The Monks
wear a black Cassock, and a Hood, and when they go to Church they also put on a
black Frock.

This is what I had to communicate to you concerning this Religious Order, though
not all that I could say concerning them. It was to great purpose indeed, that
S. Paul affirms Man to be the Head of the Woman, and that therefore she ought
to be subject and obedient to him; seeing the Popes, who boast themselves to be
many degrees above S. Paul, have decisively declared on this occasion, that the
Woman is the Head of the Man, and who upon this account is bound to yield
Obedience to her. I remember to have read in an English Author, that formerly
there were such like Abbeys in England, where the Women usurped Authority over
the Men. He mentions (amongst others) the Abbey of Repandune, and that of
Streneshaleh, where the Abbesses commanded the Monks and Nuns, that were in the
same Monastery. But forasmuch as this Author does affect throughout all his
Discourse, to oppose himself to the Benedictins, who first brought the
Monastic Life along with them into this Island, and that he racks his Brain to
prove, without any ground of Reason, That Joseph of Arimathea (he who Buried
our Lord Jesus) came and Founded several Monasteries here, Thirty years after
the Death of our Savior, only to rob them of the glory, of having been the
first Founders; there is reason also to reject what he says concerning these
Abbeys, which he pretends to be much more Ancient, than the Arrival of S.
Austin in England.

It cannot be denied, but that there were Communities of Religious Persons in
the Primitive Church, seeing the Apostles themselves, for some time lived in
Common, and the Believers of both Sexes at that time, in imitation of them, and
by the necessity there was of their being Instructed in the Faith and Duties of
Christianity; as likewise, that they might be in a better condition to provide
for their Poor, lived Charitably together, and in the constant practice of all
Religious Duties. Wherefore it may be, that in this sense, and after this
manner, there may have been at the first Preaching of the Gospel in England,
some of these kind of Communities, which were no more than the first Converts,
who lived together for the better convenience of being Instructed, to the end
they might be in a condition afterward of Instructing others. I speak now
according to the Opinion of those, who will have it, that the Gospel was
Preached in England, in the Apostles time, and by the Apostles themselves; for
according to the Sentiment of others, who maintain, that S. Austin was the
first that Preached the Gospel in England, it is not improbable, but that he
Founded Monasteries here after the Roman manner, as being a Monk himself. But
these Romish Monasteries, are very different from those Religious Communities
of the Primitive Church, which were only Instituted for the Public Good,
whereas these seem only to eye a Particular Good, and to have abandoned all the
Duties of Christian Charity toward their Neighbor, for to live only to
themselves; and are in fine become to that degree the Scandal of Christianity,
that they are even ashamed of their own Names. Let any Man go in France, and
desire to speak with a Monk or Nun, or let him address a Letter to them with
this Superscription, and they will find them more offended at it, than if one
had called them Rogues and Queans: No, they will be called Religious forsooth.

There remains nothing for me at present, but to answer a certain Question,
which might be put to me; Whether I, who have made it my Business in my Italian
Journies, to discover and examine the Defects of those Females that live in
Monasteries, and who have here given a very plain description of them; whether,
I say, I would by this seem to aver in Truth and Conscience, that generally all
of them are in this state of Corruption, Malice, Sensuality, and
Licentiousness, whereof I have spoken?

To which I Answer, That I have not yet made mention of another excess of
Bigotry, Superstition, Illusion and Folly, which predominates in a great number
of Convents of Nuns, and always in some one Nun or other, even in those
Monasteries that are the most Corrupt and Licentious. Their Devotion consists,
it may be, in Kneeling before some little Saint of Wood they have in some
Corner of their Monastery, and to continue there in that posture two or three
Hours together every day. Another undertakes to mumble over daily a dozen
Rosaries for the Souls in Purgatory; and if any Sister come to speak with her
during that time, she affects to turn a deaf Ear to her, for fear of
interrupting her Prayers. Another will go to the Middle of the Choir, and there
lie prostrate upon the Ground, for a long time together before the Holy
Sacrament, beat her Breast, stretch forth her Arms crosswise, push forth great
Sighs, and stare with her Eyes, as if she were ravished and transported in an
Exstasie. Others undertake to live on nothing but the Host, which they receive
at the Communion, for two or three Days, during which time they abstain from
all manner of Meat, and by this means reduce themselves to a pitiful condition.
If any one demands of them, why they pretend to do so, they will tell you, that
it is in hopes of becoming Saints, and that this is their highest Ambition.
These poor Nuns have their Brains filled with those miserable Legends of the
Lives of Saints, wherewith their Ears ring continually, and where a great
number of such like Actions are related, for their most transcendent Virtues.
And accordingly they believe, that by doing the same they shall become Saints
likewise; and there is more of a Worldly Ambition in the case than is commonly
thought of, to acquire Reputation in a Church, where after Death they place the
Persons, that practice these kind of Follies upon their Altars, in order to
worship them.

It is not unlikely, but that a Nun may possibly fill her Head with such
Imaginations as these; Go to, after that I have been frequent and assiduous in
these Actions, from whence the measures of Holiness and Saintship are commonly
taken, when once I am dead, they will make me a Saintess, they will cause a Head
of Silver to be made, in which they will enchase mine, they will enshrine my
Body, every one will strive to get a little bit of my Skin, to dispose of it
amongst their Relics; the Sisters will carry me on their Shoulders in
Procession, and come and Kneel before my Relics, to Pray to me, as we do to
such and such a Saintess. O, the Glory and Honor there is in being a Saint! My
greatest Ambition is to be one of them. Without doubt, there be many Nuns in
Italy that give way to such Thoughts as these, and those who have not the
Talent of the World, do incline to this Spiritual Ambition. They become
insupportable in their Convents to their Sisters themselves, and one may easily
perceive in all their Actions a most devilish Pride.

These are the other sort of Nuns I have taken notice of, and of whose Temper
and Actions I have had occasion fully and perfectly to be informed. But yet I
will not be so rigid, as to say that amongst so great a number of Nuns, there
should not be sometime found some good Soul, who with a right and sincere Heart
goes purely and simply to God; though indeed never any one came to my knowledge,
for whom I could pass my word, as far as mortal Men, who do not see the bottom
of the Heart, can do, for the Honesty of one another; but yet I am willing to
believe, that there are some found amongst them that are Good indeed, and
exempt from those great Weaknesses that are found in the two Extremes, in like
manner as we find some white Crows here in England. But and if there should be
a greater number of these, yet would not this enervate my Conclusion, which is
this, That when a State or Condition has been erected, in the hopes of
attaining a greater Good; if afterward it be found, that contrary to the good
hope that has been conceived, it produces a great Evil; though it may be true
also, that it is not without good effect upon some, yet those who are in Power
are obliged in Conscience to abrogate it; Which is that the Church of England
has done, in suppressing the Monasteries of Men and Women, wherewith the
Country was so miserably pestered: For which GOD be praised.

OBSERVATIONS ON A JOURNEY TO NAPLES.
The Fourth Days Journey.
WE departed from Fondi early in the Morning, with design to reach Capua that
day. The Night before they had told us many Stories of Banditi, who not
contenting themselves to Rob the Passengers they met with, most frequently took
them Prisoners along with them, and Sold them to the Turks, or the first
Pirates they met with, for Slaves. These Banditi Swarm in the Kingdom of
Naples, into which we were entr'd the day before; for Fondi, is a Town
belonging to that Kingdom. We were extremely affrighted, after that we had Rode
Three or Four Miles, to see Four Men coming strait toward us, cross a Field,
as if they had a mind to intercept us. The only thing encouraged us was, that
we saw no Arms about them: But we soon recovered of our Fears, when instead of
advancing nearer to us, we saw them kneel down, crying aloud to us, that we
would be pleased to give them our Blessing, for they had perceived by our Habit
that we were Priests; we immediately dispatched them a great Sign of the Cross,
whereupon they returned to their Labor. Being gone a little further, we saw
many others come, who desired the same favor. Some of them approached nearer
to us, and endeavored to kiss our Boots, or touch our Habits with their Hands,
and afterward kissed the parts of their Hands wherewith they had touched them.
We were not much in Love with these kind of Ceremonies, as having the Banditi
always in our minds. However, we began at last to be accustomed to it, and
admired the Superstition and simplicity of these poor People, whom their
Priests have well nigh persuaded to adore them.

I have already in several Places made mention of the Superstition of the
Italians; but there is none to be compared with that, which Reigns in the
Parts, that are subject to the Dominion of Spain. And I suppose the reason why
the Priests command more respect there is, because by their frequent Conversing
with the Spaniards, they have accustomed themselves to an air of Gravity, that
makes them very Venerable, and have taken to themselves Proud and Lofty Titles,
affecting to be called Gentlemen and Knights of Jesus Christ, which probably
may contribute much to impress this great respect upon the Spirits of the
common People.

Generally throughout all Italy, the Priests are Masters, and consequently are
Feared, but (setting aside their Character, which they have a respect for,) not
esteemed or respected. Yea, there are some Parts of Italy, where they have
scarcely any respect showed them at all. The Venetians make a distinction
between a Priest at the Altar, Arrayed in his Pontifical Habit, when he says,
or is about to say Mass; and a Priest in Worldly Commerce and Converse. Under
the first Consideration, they bestow the same Adorations upon him, as upon
Jesus Christ, whose Person, they say, he Represents; they approach them to
touch and kiss their Habit, or their Footsteps, as they return from the Altar,
and fall upon their Knees to receive their Benediction. But as soon as they
have undrest themselves, and are come out of the Vestry, they do not so much as
Salute them, or give them the least Preference. The most part of the Nobility
of Venice, have a Priest in their Houses, for their Chaplains, or to be the
Governors of their Children; but they use them with the greatest Indignity,
they make them to Dine with their Servants, and use them as such; for they
Command them as the meanest Servant, and make them run up and down on Errands
like Foot-Boys; with a Come hither Priest, Go thither Priest; indeed it is a
very shame, to see how they talk to their Priests; and they have certainly more
respect for their Gondoliers or Bargemen, than for them. When a Priest
accompanies the Children, whose Governor he is, along the Streets, they will
not suffer him to go besides with them, but will have them follow them, as
their Lackey; and if the Children go to Visit some other Noble Venetian, they
are called to come up, to the Dining Room, and the poor Priest must stay below
at the Gate with the Servants. And in truth, they make use of them purely for
Foot-Boys; for if they had no Priests to accompany their Children, they would
be obliged to keep Foot-Boys, or some Servants or other to do it, and yet they
give them no Salary neither. It Is the Priest that costs them less than any
other of their Domestics, for he has never a Farthing of Wages, and for his
Diet, he is fain to take it with the Servants, and Gondoliers, as was mentioned
before. All the advantage he has, is this, that they give him leave every
Morning, to go and say Mass in some Church or other, and the Money he gains
thereby, is for himself, and serves to maintain him in Clothes. But as much as
the Priests are kept under, and undervalu'd in outward Converse amongst the
Venetians, so much are they Honored and Respected in the Kingdom of Naples;
the Title of Cavalier di Christo, Knight of Christ, gives them entrance to, and
acceptance with the best of Companies, and amongst the greatest Lords. Not only
at the Altar, but wheresoever they meet them, they account it, not only
Honorable, but Meritorious, to touch and kiss their Cassocks, as those poor
Country Men did, who quitted their Plows, and came a great way to kiss our
Boots.

We came to Mola, which is a small Town upon the Sea Shore, and from whence we
may see Gaeta. I will not insist here to give you a Relation of Cicero's
Gardens, of the Via Appia, or of those other Curiosities which we meet with in
these Quarters, and whereof the World is sufficiently informed, by those many
Books of Travels, that have handled them on purpose, and also because it
conduces nothing to my present Design. I shall only here present you with a
pretty odd Spectacle which presented it self to our Eyes at Mola. We saw a
Spanish Soldier, who had a great Purse in his Hand, and a Priest that followed
him, they went from House to House, and from Shop to Shop. The Soldier
accosted us in a manner, very Cavalier like, and which spoke him to be what he
was. Gentlemen, said he, put some pieces of Money into my Purse, that this
Knight of Christ here may say Mass. My Companion gave him somewhat a rude
Answer. How so, said he, do I hinder him from saying Mass? It is not enough,
replied the Soldier, that you do not hinder him, you must help and assist him;
and taking him by his Cloak, he said, assure your self, that I will not let you
go, till you have given me something; so that he was fain to put his Hand into
his Pocket and content him. The Priest who was likewise a Spaniard, kept
himself always behind the Soldier, with his great flat Hat upon his Head, and
with all the Gravity of a Prelate, he neither looked upon, nor Saluted any one,
but Marched along continually muttering in his Breviary: Which made my
Companion, after that he had put some Money into the Purse, to say, methinks he
might at least thank those, that give something. But the Soldier, answered for
him; What? would you have him to take notice of Men, whilst he is speaking to
God? The answer I confess was excellent for a Soldier: Though indeed it was but
too evident, that it was nothing but Pride, which put this Priest upon saying
his Office, after this manner publicly in the Streets, as if he could not have
found any other place or time for the performance of that Duty. But I have
observed, that the most part of the Clergy of Rome, seldom put themselves upon
saying their Office, but when and where they may be seen. There are some of
them, who make themselves insupportable, and who to exempt themselves from the
Duties of Civil Society, betake themselves to their Breviary, when any one
stands in need of them. One might well tell them, what an honest Man, who had
business at Rome, spoke upon occasion of an Ecclesiastical Judge, before whom
his Cause was to be Pleaded. Every time he went to speak with him, this Judge,
who had already been Bribed by his Adverse Party, to avoid the Hearing of his
Reasons, took upon him always to Read his Breviary, when ever he came to speak
with him, and his Servants gave him no other answer, but this, that their
Master was saying his Office: Dice al suo Officio. At last this Honest Man
being weary of hearing continually the same answer, told them: Dice l' Officio?
quanto Sarebbe meglio che lo facesse. Says his Office: (quoth he?) How much
better would it be to do it? In like manner this Spanish Priest would, as it
seems to me have done much better, either to have taken his time early in the
Morning, to have said his Breviary or to have deferred it to some other time
more convenient, that he might have been in a condition to have thanked the
Persons, that bestowed their Charity upon him?

They told us, That the Soldiers in those Parts did render this kind Office to
all poor Stranger Priests, who could not meet with any that would pay them for
their Mass, to excuse them from the trouble of Begging themselves. As for the
other Priests of the Country, they are sure to meet with their Pay in their
Churches. These Soldiers sometimes gather a great deal more, than is necessary
for to say a Mass; but for all that, they very honestly give all to the poor
Priests, for whom they have Collected it, without being willing to receive one
Farthing of it for their pains, notwithstanding that frequently they are a
Company of miserable Wretches, that are ready to starve; in which case I have
often admired their extraordinary Piety, in point blank contradiction to the
common Proverb; Nulla Fides Pietasque viris qui castra sequuntur. They are the
Spanish Soldiers who do this, and not the Italian, nor the Natives of the
Kingdom of Naples.

After having refreshed our selves at Mola, we went to Caieta, which lies on
one side of it, and from thence went on Foot, to take a view of the Rock, which
they say was rent asunder at the Death of our Savior, when the Rocks were
cleft, and the Graves were opened. We ascended, winding round the Mountain,
which is on the backside of Caieta; and indeed a part of the City is built upon
the Side, of that height, where it forms a fair Amphitheater. They have taken
care to make the Way, that leads up to the Cleft of the Rock, very easy; I
cannot well say, whether it was half a mile, or a quarter of a mile that we
mounted; but we had no reason to repent of the Pains we had taken, for
certainly it is one of the most Lovely Places, and greatest Curiosities that
can be seen. This Rock forms a Cape, which runs out a great way into the Sea,
and is split from the Top to the Bottom by the midst, and the two halves of the
Rock are distant from each other the length of about a Perch, or a Perch and an
half. Being on the Top, we see the Waves of the Sea that pass under the Rock,
and beating against the Stones make a dreadful Noise. A great Stone being
loosned from the upper part of the Rock, fell down with that exactness, that it
stuck fast between the Cleft in the lowermost part of it, which is pretty near
the Water, and it was found large enough, and firmly fixed to build a Chapel
upon it. The Papists make a Miracle of this, and tell us, That a Holy Hermit,
who dwelt upon this Mountain, and who almost continually meditated upon the
Passion of our Savior, near to the Cleft of the Rock, prayed on a time very
earnestly to God, That it would please him so to dispose of things, that a
Chapel might be built in this place, which had expressed some kind of Sensibility
at the Sufferings of his Son, our Lord Jesus Christ; and at the same instant,
by the Divine Power, this Stone was loosned from its place, and fell down and
fixed it self in the place, where he had desired to have a Chapel.

The Roman Catholics have been so often convinced of Falseness, in regard of
the Miracles they attribute to themselves, that we have reason to doubt of all
those they have a mind to make us believe. This Stone, and this Chapel, in the
condition they are at present, show nothing that looks Miraculous; both the one
and the other rest upon very good Foundations; and if a Miracle was wrought in
loosning it from the rest of the Rock, and placing it where it is, this is that
which is in question; and as we cannot prove the contrary, so neither can they,
what they assert. The Matter of certain Truth is only this, That there is a
Chapel there, and a very fair descent leading to it. If Men feel Devotion, when
they go down thither meditating on the Passion of our Savior, as a certain
Traveller in the Relation he has given us of his Travels does assure us, it is
the Meditation it self that will afford and excite that at all times, and in
all places, where it is done with a well-prepared Heart and Mind. The Chapel is
spacious enough, and very neat, and there are Windows that look out on both
sides, by which one may take a view of this great Cleft very exactly; and
certainly, it is a Sight that frights Nature, especially when one looks down
into the Sea. Whilst we were here we saw a Sea Monster, which, as it were in a
moment, plunged it self again into the Sea, not giving me leave to view it so
well, as to give you a description of it. The Popes have granted Indulgences to
those who go and visit this Place; and at certain times of the Year, more
especially in Lent, they come in Pilgrimage thither from all Parts.

After that we had satisfied our Curiosity, we remounted again by the same
Steps, and we went to see some Hermits, who abide upon the Mountain, and are
Lodged very neatly. The Gentleman that Traveled with me, having presented them
with a Paper of Bononia Snush-Tobacco, which without doubt is one of the
greatest Presents that can be made to Italians; they Invited us to stay and
Dine with them, and seeing that they were well provided with Flesh and Fish, we
accepted the Invitation. They told us, That though they were poor, and lived only
upon Alms, yet, blessed be God, they wanted nothing. There was one of these
Hermits that was a Priest, and who went every day to say Mass in the Miraculous
Chapel. Those of them that are Priests, they call Fathers, and those that are
not, Brothers. The Father Hermit kept Company with us, to entertain us with
Discourse, whilst the Brothers gave Order about Dinner. He told us, That he had
not been an Hermit above Three years, and that he was a Secular Priest before
he turned Hermit: That the Hermit, his Predecessor died very Aged, and with an
odor of Sanctity; but that about a year after his Death, they had found a
great deal of Silver hid in an Old Pallet-Bed, on which he lay, though it was not
permitted to them to possess one Farthing, and that this had much lessened the
good Opinion they had conceived of him, neither was it known how possibly he
could gather all that Money. This Hermit entertained us with good and witty
Discourse, and had seen the World in his time. He had Traveled in France and
Germany, before that he was an Hermit. He seemed to be of a plain, open, and
free Spirit, and quite different from the ordinary Temper of the Monks and
Frati of Italy; whence the Capucins also had taken occasion to Accuse him
before the Bishop of Caieta, that he was not of an Hermetick Spirit, with
intent of thrusting him out of that Place, and putting in themselves, but
failed of their design. I formerly was not unacquainted of the Capucins, being
irreconcilable Enemies to the Hermits, because of the resemblance of their
Habits, and of their same way of Subsistence, which is Alms; Figulus odit
Figulum; Two of a Trade seldom love one another. But this Hermit, it seems, had
kept his Station in spite of all their Efforts, and had so far gained the
Spirit of the Poor by his Alms, of the Common People by his Familiarity, and
that of the Great Ones by his unaffected Air, and pleasant Comportment, that
they despaired of ever gaining their End upon him. He told me, That they gave
Meat every Day to above Forty poor People. I desired him to tell me, how it was
possible for them to do so, since they lived upon nothing but Charity
themselves? He replied, That they had mnch more bestowed upon them than they
could spend; that every Morning they had two Asses sent to them laden with
Provisions, and that besides this, he went every Evening to demand a Charity at
all the Gentlemen's Houses where he was known; that when he came there, they led
him into their Cellars where their best Wine was, and afterward into their
Butteries, saying to him, Hermit, if there be any thing here you like, pray
take what pleases you best. Here it is (said he) that I and my Companion do
fill our Knapsacks. When we have a mind to have some Fish, we go in the Evening
to the Haven where the Fisher-Boats come, and they give us abundantly, and that
too which is very good, as you will find by what you shall have for your
Dinner. But on the other hand, also these Persons some time or other return the
Visit to us, and we entertain them with the Best that we have. We are not at
all Covetous of that which cost us nothing, and indeed this is the way for us
to have still more; for, by this means, these Persons do not know how to make
us good Cheer enough when we come to them again. The Capucins (said he) do not
take this method, they are insatiable, and have a Temporal Father (as they call
him) to whom they send the Surplus of their Alms, and who turns it into Money,
to Buy for them whatsoever they desire. They touch no Money, nor buy any thing;
but he touches it, and buys it for them. If they give some bits of Bread to
the Poor at their Gate, they are only some Scraps of the Brownest, which they
could not sell. But as for us, we bestow upon them indifferently of all we
have; this is that which has procured us the Affection of the Poor, and to
that degree, that they would certainly sacrifice their Lives for us, rather
than to suffer the Hermitage to be taken out of our hands.

This good Hermit, after having discoursed thus a good while against the
Capucins, ordered Dinner to be brought up, which indeed was Ordered and Dressed
very handsomely, though in Wooden Dishes. My Companion would eat no Pottage,
because they had no other, but Wooden Spoons. This made the Hermits to laugh
heartily. They asked one another, where they might get a Silver Spoon for this
Gentleman? This was a young Priest, who never had Traveled, and who had always
been brought up in his Father's House: But at last, seeing that the Pulse
looked very well, he ventured to taste of them, and finding them extremely well
dressed and seasoned, Well, (said he) I don't matter a Spoon now, I shall make a
shift good enough, to eat them with my Fingers. The Hermits and Capucins have
the gift of Dressing Meat perfectly well, and it seems, as if they made it part
of their Study: Neither would I have any one to take an estimate of their
Mortification by their Wooden Spoons, but by that which is in them. The Father
Hermit drank to us in most excellent Wine, though out of a Wooden Cup: And for
his part, was not slack to encourage us to eat and drink by his good Example. I
am no Hypocrite (said he) as many Hermits are. When one comes to Visit them,
they will tell you, They have not eat of Four days, and that they are yet
Fasting: For my part, to tell you Truth, I eat but Four times a day, and do not
think, that Holiness consists in not Eating, but in Eating well, (that is, with
giving Thanks) except only on Fast-Days, enjoined by the Holy Church.

I seeing that our Father Hermit was in a good humor, desired him to tell me
his Opinion concerning the Miraculous Chapel. Alas, (said he) I was not there
when the Miracle was done; but if God was pleased to work one for the Founding
of it, we have need he should work another now, for the preserving of it; for
ever and anon Stones fall down from the Rock, and much endamage the Roof of it;
so that all the Money of the Pilgrims is scarcely sufficient to Repair it
continually: But as for the Miracles which are wrought in the Chapel, though they
say that a great many happen there every Day, we never saw so much as One only.
Yea, what is more yet, about Thirty or Forty Miles from hence, you shall hear
them talk of Miracles, which they say have been wrought here, that we our
selves never heard of before. I suppose them to be some Beggars, who pass this
way, and who go afterward into the Villages, and report there, that they have
been miraculously healed of their Infirmities, to induce People to give more
liberal Alms to them. This Hermit expressed a great Air of sincerity in all that
he said, which gave me indeed a great esteem for his Person; for many others of
his Coat, are so far from owning any such thing, that they would rather have
been of the Humor to exaggerate all such Reports, and been ready to invent a
thousand Falsities to raise the Credit of the place of their Devotion. After
Dinner the Hermit had no leisure to Discourse us any longer, by reason of the
great Numbers of Poor, that waited at the Gate for his Charity. We therefore
took our leaves of him, after that we had thanked him for his Civility and his
good Dinner, and so returned to Cajeta.

Seeing that an occasion has been here presented me to speak of these Hermits,
and that this has brought to my remembrance many things I have observed in
Italy concerning this kind of Life, as well as those that profess it; I shall
continue to entertain you therewith some longer time. I was astonished to see
that the Eremitick State, which formerly was so Flourishing in Italy, as may be
seen, by so many ancient Foundations, and Places, which are still at this day
called Hermitages, (though no Hermites live in them) are now fallen into so great
Decadence, that scarcely are there some few of them to be found here and there.
In S. Bennet's time, Italy was full of Hermitages, and he himself professed an
Hermetick Life, before the Monastic. At that time there were Men of Learning
and Piety, who retired into Hermitages, to have the better opportunity, by
being separated from the World, of applying themselves, more entirely to Study
and Contemplation; whereas the present Hermites are no other, but a company of
miserable Wretches, of the Sink of the common People, who have neither Learning
nor Parts, and whereof the greater part lead a very disorderly and scandalous
Life. The reason whereof is, because the Monks, being in process of time become
very Powerful, have possessed themselves of all the best Hermitages, that were
endowed with standing Revenues, and made Priories of them, which they
Incorporated with their Abbeys; and the Mendicant Orders gleaning after them,
took Possession of well nigh all those which were near to Cities, or great
Buroughs, and there built their Convents: So that there are none remaining
now, but some in Solitary and far distant Places, and a very few, that are near
to Cities. The Hermites that are the Inhabitants of these latter Hermitages,
have enough to do, to defend themselves against the Capucins and other
Mandicants, who endeavor to supplant, or at least to decry them, and bring
them into Disrepute. Those who live in solitary and far distant Places are much
suspected, because there have been frequently found amongst them some that were
the greatest Villains imaginable, who Murdered all those that came to Visit
their Hermitages, and Robbed upon the Highway. This is the reason why Honest
Men do not care to make their Retreat in any of those Places. Wherefore
commonly they are none but poor Men, that make themselves Hermites, in hopes,
that in favor of that Habit, they may find a Subsistence from the Liberality
of some of the good Country Folks, if they can but once get the knack of
dexterously Playing the Hypocrites.

I shall here relate to you a deceit that I my self discovered, of two French
Hermites, who lived on one of the Hermitages, which are on the Mountain called
S. Sylvester, about a days Journey from Rome, but by another Name, Mount
Soracte. I was gone from Rome with an intent to take a View of the Country,
which they call la Sabine, which is not above three or four days Journey from
thence, being Famous for having once been the abode of the ancient Sabini, who
signalized themselves by so many brave Exploits against the Romans. I took up
my Lodging, the first Night, in a Village, which is near to the Mount S.
Sylvester, and the next Morning the curiosity took me to endeavor to get up to
it. They told me, there was but one only Pathway to get up to it, which was on
the other side of the Mountain, so that I had a great way to go about to get
thither: Wherefore viewing well the Top of the Mountain, it appeared to me,
that I might very well save my self the trouble of going that great way about,
in mounting by a certain passage, which seemed to me as if it had been a trodden
Path, and the Stones that were above it, appeared to me like Steps, by which
one might get up to the Top. Wherefore without any further consideration, I put
my self forward to make an assault upon this high Mountain. I scarcely was got
up the one half of this way, but I found I was extremely mistaken in my
account, and that those Stones which had appeared to me so little, and by which
it seemed I might easily gain the Top of the Mountain, were indeed no other
than great Rocks heaped upon one another, which made the Top of the Mountain in
accessible. However, I continued still to ascend, rather for my Recreation, and
to see how far I could get, than in any hopes of compassing my first design,
the execution whereof did then seem to me impossible. I mounted, I clambred, I
crept, into the Clefts of the Rocks, and by the help of certain Roots of Trees,
I raised my self up to some great Rocks, whence I perceived that I was come
near to the Top. This added new Spirits to me, and so much the more Courage,
because I saw there would be more danger, in attempting to get down again, to
the place from whence I was mounted, than to get up to the very Top.
Accordingly I prosecuted my intent, and being come up higher, I was extremely
astonished, to find amongst the Stones, great Pieces of brown Bread, and in
very great quantity, some of them being Moldy and quite Rotten, and others yet
very fresh.

At last after some new and last Efforts, which I would not now begin again, I
found my self all on a sudden in a very fine Garden, which was Enclosed on all
sides with very high Walls, except only on that side where it was thought in
accessible. This was the Garden belonging to one of the Hermitages; and I
descri'd in it two Hermits, who were taking their Recreation in a Bower, shaded
with pleasant Green-Trees. These Hermits were sorely affrighted at me, and
taking me for some Ghost, betook themselves to their Heels, and being got into
their Hermitage, they Barricado'd it against me. I was quite spent with the
extreme pains I had taken, out of Breath, and in a great Sweat; so I went to
rest my self in the Bower they had left, to see whether I could retrieve my
Spirits again. I found here, the remains of a great Pasty, and of a large
Bottle of Wine; and upon a Bench, on the other side of me a Fan and a Coiff.
The Hermites at last being recovered a little of their Fright, ventured again
into the Garden, and came to accost me. They were astonished to hear, that I
had made a shift to get up by the Rocks. I soon discovered them to be French
Men, and they told me, that it was about two years, since they had begun to
live in that Hermitage: I spoke to them concerning the Pieces of brown Bread
that I had found, and I took notice that this brought a fresh Color into their
Faces; and forasmuch as they perceived that I had taken notice of the Gloves,
Coif, and Fan, that were left in the Bower, one of them took the Word, and told
me, Sir, as you are a French- Man, we hope that you will have the goodness, not
to do us any Prejudice. We will hide nothing from you, but sincerely Confess
that it is we, that have thrown away these bits of Bread, in the place where
you met with them; for we never had the design of being good Hermites; we have
always been Soldiers by Profession, before that we took this Habit upon us. It
was a French Hermit, a great Runner of the Countries, and who made a shift to
live very well in Italy, that persuaded us to do as much, and to follow the
same Course, and procured the Habit of Hermits for us at Rome: and having some
time after found this Hermitage Vacant, we retired thither, and we have lived
here, as other Hermits do, on the Alms we beg in the Neighboring Villages. We
at first refused to change our brown Bread for other Necessaries, amongst the
poor Peasants; but when this came to the knowledge of many Persons, it was a
great prejudice to us, in our Quests, and they began to reproach us for dainty
Persons, that could eat no Brown Bread; wherefore we now rather choose to cast
it to the Crows, than either to sell or give it away. And thus much for the
Pieces of Bread you met with. But seeing you have cast your Eyes upon some
Female Ornaments, that are left here with us, we shall tell you the Mystery of
them also, in order to desire you, to give us your Advice, in a business that
extremely perplexeth me and my Companion.

In the next Hermitage which is joined to ours, there lives an Italian Hermit
of a very bad Life, though he be not known for such. He has debauched a Roman
Gentlewoman, whom he has kept with him, for some Months; and seeing he had no
prospect of keeping her with him long, but that we must discover, because we
have some Windows that look out, toward his Hermitage, and that we go daily to
Visit him, with a great deal of Freedom; he rather chose to Communicate the
Matter to us, than to endeavor to conceal it. He has made a hole in the Wall
of our Garden, by which his Lady, in case of sudden Surprise, or of any one
coming to Visit him, might retire her self into our Hermitage. For the rest, we
have nothing but the sight of her; for he is so extremely Jealous, that he
keeps her all the day shut up in a Hole, that differs nothing from a Prison;
and when at any time he brings her to take a Walk, he continues all the while
with her. And it seems she does not think much of it neither, for she loves him
extremely. It Is she that furnishes all manner of Expenses; for she has
brought abundance of Gold and Silver along with her from Rome. And to speak the
Truth, we have found our selves very well, since the Hermit has Discovered all
to us; for there is not a day passes over our Heads, in which we do not
receive some Present or other from them. He came and gave us a Visit this
Morning, with his Lady, and they brought with them the Pasty and Bottle you
have seen; it is not much above a quarter of an hour since they are gone, and
it seems the Gentlewoman forgot to take her Fan and Gloves with her. It was
great good luck for you Sir, that you did not come whilst he was here, for he
would certainly have killed you, for fear of being Discovered. He carries
always a great Dagger under his Gown, to make use of it upon occasion: Neither
would we advise you, to stay here any considerable time, for should he return
hither, as sometimes he does, and as in all likelihood he will, to fetch the
things his Lady has left behind her, you would be in great Danger. We only
desire you would be pleased to assist us with your Counsel, how we might best
discover this, without doing our selves a Mischief. I told them that the most
safe, and short way was to acquaint the Cardinal Vicar, and that they needed
not to trouble themselves any further: And that as for my part, I knew not,
whether I should return to Rome or no. They told me that this Hermit was so
cunning, that now for some time they had not durst so much as to take one step
toward Rome; so narrowly did he watch them.

I had been told, that there was a very fair Abbey of Bernardines upon the same
Mountain, and therefore I asked the Hermits, why they did not discover the
matter to the Abbot; but they replied, that they knew they would not be welcome
there with such a Story, because all the Monks there led a very dissolute Life,
and had all of them their Mistresses, as well as the Hermit. Moreover they told
me, that they suspected the Hermit to be a Sorcerer, which made them the more
fearful, to make the least step toward the discovering of him. That they were
of opinion also, that he had bewitched this Gentlewoman, because that though he
had no considerable Qualities, and was besides very deformed in Body, with a
great slovenly Beard, a stinking Breath, and rotten Teeth, yet that she had
always loved him Passionately, from the time that she had first received one of
his Letters, wherein was enclosed a Piece of white-Wax, like unto an Agnus Dei.
That they had also frequently had cause to admire his knowledge of many secret
things, that had happened at very far distant Places, all which gave them great
suspicion, that he had to do with the Devil.

They were about to tell me more of him; but the fear into which they had put
me, lest this Venerable Hermit might return to give me a Visit, made me, after
that in a few words I had exhorted them not to follow such wicked Examples, and
to have the Fear of God before their Eyes, to take my leave of them, desiring
them to show me the way to the Abbey of the Fathers, where I intended to go and
say Mass, having made a Vow to do so, at the Altar of S. Sylvester, when in
clambring the Rocks, I found my self in great danger of my Life. This was also
the reason why I refused to Eat or Drink with these Hermits, because no Man may
say Mass except he be Fasting. So I went a little higher up the Mountain, by a
very pleasant way, and I Arrived at the Abbey, just at Dinner time. I had much
ado to get the Church Door opened for me, in order to acquit my self of my Vow.
After I had said Mass, I desired them to let me see the Monastery; but they
made great difficulty also to grant me this Request; because the Monks,
according to the Custom of Italy, were almost all of them gone to take their
rest. However at last one of the Monks, by order of the Prior, led me into a
small Garden, which he told me was the place, whither S. Sylvester retired
himself, during the Persecution, which afflicted the Church in his time, and
that there he wrought that great Miracle, whereof mention is made in his Life
time, viz. that some of the Emperors Men being come to look for him, the Saint
had a desire to entertain them; but having nothing wherewith, he sent a Deacon
that served him, to Sow some Carots in the Garden; and having about an Hour
after ordered some of them to be taken up for Dinner, his Men went in a way of
Mockery and Derision to him, but were extremely surpised, when being come at
the place where the Carot Seed had been Sowed, they found very fair and large
Carots, of an admirable good taste, and which served for a Dinner to his
Guests. The Monk told me, that this Miracle had in some sort been continued
ever since; for that the Carots, that were Sown in that Garden, retain an
extraordinary pleasant taste. Upon his telling of me so, I made bold, to pluck
up one of them out of the Ground, and having scraped it with my Knife, I tasted
of it, by way of Devotion; but found it of a very flat taste: I threw it away;
Hold Sir, said the Religious, they are not to be Eaten so, they must be Boiled,
and dressed with good Oil, or good Butter, and good Spices. We have a Cook that
knows how to dress them admirably well. You put so many good things to them, my
good Father, said I, smiling, that at last you make them, if not miraculously,
at least admirably good. This Religious, after having showed me the Garden
only, had the Civility, according to the Order he had received, to lead me to a
Chamber where I was to Dine: They brought me a Dish with Fish, and another with
some of those Holy Roots, which indeed were extremely well dressed.

After Dinner I applied my self to take a view of the Top of Mount Soraele,
from whence certainly there is the best Prospect that can be, the whole Country
about Rome lying open to it, together with that Proud City, in its whole
extent. This Mountain stands single, and is not joined to any other, having on
all sides of it most rich and fertile Plains, that surround it, and being very
high and steep on all sides with great white Rocks, one would take it, at a
distance, for some very high Steeple, having its Top in the Clouds; and more
especially in the Winter time, when the Snow covers some little Shrubs of
Trees, which have their Roots in the Rocks, whereof Horace makes mention in one
of his Odes; Cernis ut alta stet Nive candidum
Soracte --


I came down the Mountain by a much more pleasant and easy Way, than that by
which I went up to it. In my way I met with the Old Hermit, of whom I made
mention before, who returned from saying Mass in a Village at the Foot of the
Mountain. He inquired of me, Whether I had been to Visit the Hermitages, or the
Abbey? I told him, that I came from the Holy Places, which S. Sylvester had
sanctified by his Retirement. God be praised for it, Sir, (said he) it is very
well done of you. This is the good Pattern which the other Hermits of this
Mountain, and I my self, have propounded to our selves to imitate; and, to
speak truth, he pours forth abundance of Graces upon those who are devoted to
him, and put their Trust in him. It is now One and Twenty years, I have had the
Honor of wearing the Sacred Habit you see upon me; and the further I proceed,
the more pleasure and satisfaction do I find in the Ways of the Lord. To hear
him Talk, one would have taken him for another S. Paul of Thebes, who was the
first Hermit. But for all his fine Talk, I took care to keep my self at a
certain distance from him, that his great Dagger might not reach me, in case he
had gone about to make use of it. But at last, he bid me Farewell, wishing me a
Thousand Blessings. He held a great Bead-row, or Paternoster of Wood in his
Hand, the Beads whereof were as big as a Nut, and he had a Cross fastened to his
Girdle, with many great Medals, which made a great Noise as he went, by
striking one against the other; he leaned upon his Staff, and in all points
acted the Hypocrit to admiration.

The Eremitical Habit is of a brown Tawny Color, consisting of a short
Tunicle, reaching a little lower than the mid-Leg; they have a great Cowl upon
their Head of a Pyramidal Figure, and a little Mantle about their Shoulders,
not much unlike to that of the Capucins. These kind of Antic Habits seem to
have been contrived for no other end, but to make terrible impressions on the
Senses, the better to dispose the Minds of Men to conceive a great esteem and
veneration for those that wear them. He that should go about to vilify or
undervalue this external Garb in the presence of a Papist, had almost as good
profane whatsoever is most Holy in his Religion; as if forsooth there could be
no wicked Men in the garb of Satyrs. I met with my two French Hermits some time
after at Venice; who told me, They had accused the Old Hermit, but he having
very dexterously slipped away his Lady, denied all, and made these Poor Men to
pass for Slanderers; to that degree had he Charmed the People by his
Hypocrisy. Whereupon they had been forced to quit their Hermitages, and were
then going for Hungary, to take upon them the Habit of Soldiers, which (they
said) was every whit as Holy, as that of a Hermit.

I have since this, in my Travels, seen many fair Hermitages, more particularly
on the Apennine, which are those Mountains that divide all Italy in the length
of it. I have had occasion to pass and repass them several times, in various
parts of them, where are to be seen wonderful places in the Woods, and upon the
very points of Rocks, which they told me were Hermitages. But since the time I
knew, that the most of those that dwelt in them were only a Company of base
Fellows, I took care not to Visit them. Many of these wretched Hermits have
been publicly Executed from time to time, for committing the most enormous
Crimes. There was one of them taken at Venice, who confessed at his Death, that
he had killed above Threescore Persons, as well Men as Women. He had his
Hermitage between Venice and Buran, in a little Island of about Two hundred
Paces in Circuit, where is still to be seen the Ruins of his Hermitage, which
they demolished. This wretched Person went by Night to Sea in a Disguise, and
Masked, accompanied with three or four Robbers, to whom his Hermitage served
for a Retreat: They went and stopped the Gondola's or small Boats that past
through the Channels, and murdered those that refused to surrender their
Purses. There had been Reports abroad, for a considerable time, of great
Robberies and Murders, that were committed about this Hermitage; but who could
ever have believed, that a Person wearing so holy a Habit, and so venerable a
Beard, had been the Head and Captain of these Murderers? He was at last
discovered by the Sons of a Rich Merchant of Venice; their Father, who took
pleasure in the Company of such kind of Hypocrites, went one day out of Devotion
to Visit this Hermit, and had acquainted his Wife and Sons with his intent. He
carried along with him some very good Provisions, to Present him with; but this
Impious Wretch being not satisfied with that, after he had got him to enter
into his Cell, took him by the Throat and strangled him. His Children being
astonished at their Fathers staying so long, went with a great many of their
Friends to look for him, and entering into the Hermitage, they found their
Fathers Shoes under the Hermit's Bed; whereupon they immediately seized him,
and having found the rest of his Clothes in an Old Cupboard, the Hermit at last
showed them the place where he had cast his Body; it was a great Hole, which
formerly had served for a Cistern, where they found the Bodies of above
Threescore Persons, that had been sacrificed to the Fury and Avarice of this
Infernal Monster. There is also great Talk in the Country of Ancona in Italy,
of an Hermit, who robbed and murdered the Pilgrims going to Loretto; and of
another between B^nonia and Florence, that was no better than a Highway Robber.
These kind of Stories coming fresh to my mind, whenever in my Travels I met
with any Hermits or Hermitages, hindered me from being overcurious to Visit
them.

I could not sufficiently lament (according to the Principles in which I had
been Educated) that a State, which heretofore had been so flourishing in the
Church of God, and so fruitful of Saints, was at last degenerated to that
degree, that the Hermitages were become little else, but the Dens of Robbers
and Murderers. In former times Learned Men were seen to retire to these
places, to apply themselves more uninterruptedly to their Studies, leading most
virtuous and holy Lives; but at present that Mode is quite out of date, and a
Man of Wit and Learning would be laughed at, should he think of entering into
this kind of Life. But the Monasteries, on the other hand are in more Credit
and Repute than ever, notwithstanding that the Eremitick Life has indeed been
the Mother of the Monastic; the first Monks have been nothing else but
Hermits, who joined themselves together to live in Common, and with this
respect we say, that Filia suffocavit Matrem; the Daughter has devoured the
Mother. The Reason whereof may easily be given: This Change did not happen till
after the Church of Rome was mounted to that pitch of Pomp and Pride, where we
find her at present. The Head and chief Members that govern it, have affected
to make show of the most magnificent and luxurious Court, that it may be is in
the whole World. Now such a Court as this cannot but stand in need of great
Incoms; and for the poor Hermits, they were the least able to contribute any
thing toward it; this is the very Reason for which they have neglected and
almost quite abolished them, to make the more way for the Monks, who have
well-lin'd Purses, and who are obliged from time to time, to Pay in prodigious
Sums of Money to the Apostolical Chamber.

They are the Bishops who confer the Habit upon Hermits within their Diocese;
but at present there are many Bishops that refuse to admit any, and choose
rather to leave the Hermitages vacant. The most part of these Hermits
understand no Latin, and some of them can neither Write nor Read. How would you
have these Men spend their time in this Solitude? They become soon weary of it;
and then turn Vagabond-Hermits, that run up and down the Country. They
undertake every Year to Visit the Holy Places; that is to say, to go to Rome,
to Loretto, to S. Anthony of Padua, to S. Nicholas of Bar, to Mount Gargan,
etc. After that they have finished their Round, either they begin it anew, or
they go and spend the two or three remaining Winter Months in their Hermitages.
At their Return, the good People of the Country receive them very gladly,
because they come ordinarily well laden with Agnus Dei's and Relics, which
they distribute amongst them, and have always in a readiness some pleasant
Story or other to tell them. Besides, the Monks think it beneath themselves, to
speak to poor People; whereas the Hermits make themselves familiar with them.
But a Man must have an Eye to their Fingers, for they are very dextrous at
Pilfering whatsoever they can lay their Hands upon, which afterward they sell
for Money, or make a Change of it in their Inns, for good Lodging and
Entertainment.

I happened to be on a time at an Inn, where some Hermits offered to sell
Children Clouts and Swadling-Bands, and desired only to have a good Dinner in
lieu of them. The Hostess asked them, What way they had come by them? adding,
That she was astonished to see them have such Gear to sell, and that she was
afraid they had stolen them. The Hermits protested before God, they had not,
but that a Country-woman, whose Child was Dead, had given 'em them. Whilst they
were in this Contest, the Woman of whom they had stolen them, came to the Inn,
whom the Hermits no sooner saw, but they betook themselves to their Heels,
leaving the Clouts and Swadling-Bands behind them. The Woman told us, That
whilst one of these Hermits was telling a Story, of an Apparition of the Souls
in Purgatory, the other went forth into the Court, and took away her Child's
Clouts, which she had hung up there to dry.

Notwithstanding the Heremetick State be so extremely corrupted and
degenerated, yet the Papists do not leave valuing themselves much upon this
account, and making a great matter of Honor of it to themselves against the
Protestants, who (say they) have declared themselves professed Enemies to all
these Holy States, which, as they pretend, were the greatest Ornament of the
Churches of the first Ages; and in imitation of the Life which Elias and other
of the Prophets did lead in the Deserts, which S. John the Baptist professed,
and our Savior Jesus Christ himself sanctified, by his so frequent retirings
into Solitude; and of that Life, in a word, which the first Doctors and Fathers
of the Church, as Origin, S. Hierom, etc. have so highly cherished and
commended: To be even with them in this, I would demand of them, what they
themselves make of it? Who they are amongst them, that make profession of this
Excellent Life? What Fruit it produces? and whether it were not much better,
considering all the Disorders that have happened by this means, and do still
daily happen before their Eyes, wholly to cut off from the Bosom of the Church,
a sort of Men who are become the Scandal of it, and who having voluntarily
plunged themselves into Idleness, which is the Mother of all Vices, have, in
fine, renounced all Virtues, whether Civil, Moral, or Christian.

Having thus given you some Account concerning Hermits, I cannot well avoid
giving you a Relation of some very considerable Places, which formerly have
been the Retreats of Solitudinarians, and are now the Abode of Monks. And
forasmuch as I am here Discoursing of the Kingdom of Naples, I shall begin with
that of Sublac, which was the place S. Bennet chose for his Retreat, when he
was as yet but a young Child.

In another Journey I made to Naples, finding my self near this place, some
advantageous Accounts I had received concerning it, inclined me to go and Visit
it. I first Arrived at the Borough of Sublac, where the Monks of S. Bennet
have both Temporal and Spiritual Jurisdiction. There is an Abbey of Nuns of the
same Order; and a League further in the same Valley, but in a part of it that
is Narrower, there is a very Fair Abbey of Monks, who are very Civil to
Strangers, especially to those who come with an intent of Visiting the Grotto
of their Patriarch S. Bennet. I met here with a Father, who was a French Man by
Nation, and to whom my Relations in France were not unknown, who was the cause
of staying me here a whole Day; and he himself led me to the Grotto of S.
Bennet, which is about a quarter of a League further, in the Narrowest part of
the said Valley. The Mountains on both sides are very steep, and the Brook that
runs between them takes up well nigh the whole Space of the Valley. However
these Fathers have made a shift to find place enough to Build here a Monastery
all in length, which can contain Fifty or Threescore Monks, and yet it serves
but for a Lodging to Ten only, whom they call Hermits, though indeed they be only
so by Name, because they live in a Community, and because they only stay there
for the space of Two Months; after which they send Ten others thither, out of
the Neighboring Monastery, to relieve them. Thus they succeed by Turns to one
another. The only difference there is in their Observance is this, That those
of the Monastery where the Grotto of the Saint is, do eat no Flesh-Meat; and in
the other (as throughout all the Order in Italy) they eat Meat Four times a
Week, notwithstanding that the use of it be forbid them by the Rules of their
Institution, which they have Vowed to observe. They say, It is out of the
Respect they have to these Rules, that their Abbots have ordered, That no Flesh
should be eaten in this Little Monastery, no more than in their Great One of
M^nt Cassin, that it might be true at least* That the Rule of S. Bennet was
observed in Two of their Monasteries; which, as they believe, is sufficient to
quiet their Consciences as to this matter. The Fathers pretend, forsooth, That
the Bodies of Men are much changed in their Constitution since the time of
their Legislator; and that they are not so strong, nor consequently so able to
undergo such Rigid Observances; and indeed they Treat all their other Rules
much in the same manner, and content themselves with the observing of them by
Turns, or by Halves.

In this Little Monastery, they showed me the Grotto of S. Bennet, upon which
they have built an Altar; and we see there also a most curious Statue of white
Marble, representing this Saint, very young, and upon his Knees, with a
Countenance very humble and penitent. The Habit wherewith he is represented,
serves to condemn that which the Benedictins of Italy do wear at present; they
have so amplified and pleated it, for to make it show fine and magnificent,
that it is no more to be known to be a Copy from this Original. The Father
Benedictins of the Congregation of S. Maurus in France, have taken the form of
their Habit from this Figure, and retain the same to this Day, as believing it
with Reason, to be the true Pattern. After we had said our Prayers in this
Little Chapel, they led me to a little Garden, and they bade me take notice of
a huge Stone at the Top of the Rock; they wished me to observe it very well, as
being no less than a perpetual Miracle, which demonstrated the visible
Protection God afforded to that Holy Place, and to those that dwelt there. This
Stone, according to their Talk, was quit loosned from the Rock, and suspended
in the Air, by the alone Divine Power, God not suffering it to fall down,
because, if it should, it could not fail of utterly destroying the Grotto, and
the whole Monastery. I told them, after that I had viewed it very narrowly,
that I saw it so well fastened to the Rock, that in my thoughts it would be a
Miracle indeed if it should fall, and that they ought not to pretend the
contrary to those that had good Eyes. I saw well enough, that my Answer did not
please them; but I was so weary to hear them talk of such kind of Miracles,
which they will force upon Men contrary to all Reason, that I could not, by
times, hinder my self from expressing my resentment of it. The French Father,
that was my Guide, wished me to cast my Eye upon certain Rose-Trees, which were
in a Corner of the Garden, and told me, that as soon as we were got out of the
Hermitage, he would tell me the mystery of them. And in the mean time he showed
me the rest of the Buildings. I did not find the place so frightful, as was the
Impression they had given me of it; though it must be owned, That in S. Bennet's
Time it was a very Desert place.

Having therefore taken a View of all, we returned to the Great Monastery, from
whence we came; where being arrived, the Father told me as to those Rose-Trees,
which he had wished me to take notice of, that the Monks had not thought
sitting to tell me of the great Miracle, wherewith they commonly entertain
Strangers, for fear I should reflect upon them for it, as I did upon occasion
of the Stone. It is Related (said he) in the Life of our Blessed Father S.
Bennet, That he had one day a furious Temptation of the Flesh in this place;
and that in order to quell it, he went and rolled himself stark naked upon
Thistles and Thorns, that were near unto his Cell, and made all his Body on a
Gore-blood, until he found that the Temptation was quite dissipated. Now the
History tells us, that these Thistles and Thorns, tinged with the Blood of S.
Bennet, were miraculously changed into Roses. Wherefore special Care has been
taken always to preserve these Rose-Trees, the Roses whereof we dry, and being
pulverized, do exhibit them to those that are Sick; for it is an universal
Remedy against all manner of Diseases, to those who take them in Faith. I told
this French Father, That the Monks his Confraters had done very well not to
mention this Miracle to me, for I should presently have put them in mind of the
Fable of Pyramid and Thisbe, whose Blood changed the color of Mulberries from
white to red. Could they have shown me Thistles, Nettles, or some
Blackberry-Bushes and Brambles that brought forth Roses, this would have been
something rare indeed, I will not say miraculous (for I know not whether they
have found out the Art of grafting Rose-Trees upon these kind of Wild Plants)
but to show a Man Rose-Tree that bears Roses, this is a thing we see every day,
without ever dreaming of a Miracle. And as to what concerns their miraculous
Operation, in Curing all manner of Maladies, that they had very advisedly added
this Clause, If they be made use of in Faith: For if those that take of this
Powder in their Sickness chance to die, it is because there was no Faith in
them; but if they escape, it is a plain Miracle.

These Fathers are extreme Rich, and almost all the Country round about, to a
very great distance, belongs to them. The next Day I went up to a Mountain,
where they showed me a Chapel, which S. Bennet caused to be built; and about
Seven miles further, they showed me another, Dignified with a New Miracle,
which is, the Impression of the Body of S. Bennet upon a Rock. The Story of it
is this, They tell us, That this Saint being on a time Benighted, he was forced
to beg Lodging of a Priest that lived in those Parts, who very uncivilly denied
him. The Saint being so extremely tired, that he could no longer keep himself
standing, leaned against a Rock, which received his Body with the same ease, as
if it had been a soft Bed, where he rested all that Night; which impression of
his Body (say they) remained there ever since. True it is, that such an
Impression is indeed found there, but who has made it I cannot tell you, except
you will believe the Miracle.

From this place I took Directions of the Way to Mont Cassin, which is about
Three small days Journey from thence. Here it is you may take a view of the
Glory of the Monastic State, in all its luster. The stately Buildings which
these Fathers have raised upon this Mountain, make it appear to be the Head of
an Order. The place is exceeding pleasant, surrounded on all sides with Rich
Valleys, and Little Hills, over which Mont Cassin commands by its height, and
by the Temporal and Spiritual Jurisdiction the Monks do exercise over a great
many Towns Villages which lie round about it. Amongst the rest there is a very
pretty City situate at the Foot of Mont Cassin, which is called S. Germain. The
Abbot has Episcopal Jurisdiction there, and keeps his Grand Vicar, who is a
Monk of the same Order. I went to see him, to get permission of him to say
Mass, and afterward I went up to the Mountain. They have made the Access to it
very fair and easy, and one ascends near Four Italian Miles, before one comes
to the Monastery. A man must not expect here any great Antiquities, this Place
having been several times ruined by the Wars, and by Fire, which did not so
much as leave one Stone upon another. The only Remain of Antiquity they show
one is, the Remainder of an Old Steeple, which the Monks have extraordinarily
embelish'd within, as supposing it to be the place where S. Bennet died, and
that God as by Miracle had preserved it, amongst so many Desolations and Fires,
as of Old he did the Ark of Noah, in the midst of the Deluge. They will have
every one that enters it, to put off his Shoes; and they themselves, when they
go in, make very strange Postures and Faces. They maintain, That they have the
whole Body of S. Bennet in their possession, and that what was said of his
Translation to the Monastery of Fleury in France, is no more than a Fable:
According to which Supposition, all the great Miracles which the Benedictins of
France pretend to have wrought, at the Translation of it, must be very grand
Impostures. And we may see by this scantling, how the Monks make no Bones of
Accusing one another of Fraud and Imposture, when their Interest is concerned.

Several Popes who had a Kindness for Mont Cassin, have been pleased to make an
Essay of their Infallibility, by declaring, That the Body, which they never
saw, is there whole and entire: Other Popes, on the contrary, who were more
concerned for the Benedictins of France, have Thundered out their Anathethema's
against those that should say, That the Body of the same S. Bennet was at Mont
Cassin. So that upon the matter, we do not know who to believe, for here is
Infallibility against Infallibility; and a Papist cannot believe what one Pope
has pronounced about it, without falling into the Excommunications of another,
which you will say, is a very hard case. Howsoever it may be, the Fathers of Mont
Cassin tell you plainly, That they have it; and for proof thereof, they
maintain a Race of great Ravens in their Monasteries, which they declare to be
the Offspring of a Raven, who rendered a great piece of Service to S. Bennet,
by carrying away an empoyson'd Leaf, which a wicked Priest had sent him. These
Ravens are very familiar, and the Fathers tell us, That the Charm which keeps
them in that Place, is the Odor of the Body of S. Bennet: Though for my part, I
should rather incline to believe, That it is the Odor of their Fat Kitchen;
for they are continually stuffing of them, and a great many Poor People might
have their Subsistence from what they allow these Birds. These Ravens in Color
do well resemble these Monks, who are Clothed all in Black, and for
distinctions sake are called Black Friars, Monachi Neri. Furthermore, they
showed me all the Regular Places, the Cloisters, Dormitories, the Apartments
for the Officers, the Gardens, and the Backsides: All which carry a greater
show of the Grandeur and Majesty of a Palace Royal, than of an Abode for Monks.
But the Church above all things is extremely well and sumptuously Adorned,
being embelish'd with Marble, Jasper, Porphyry, and other precious Stones; and
in particular, the Gilding and Painting you see there, are of an inestimable
Value.

They observe still in this Abbey, the Laudable Custom of Entertaining all
Strangers, and Pilgrims, according to their Rank and Quality, and indeed
Persons are very well entertained there, though it be only with Eggs, Herbs, and
Fish. For, as I have said, in another place, they profess to observe their
Rule, according to the Rigor of it, in this Monastery, in hopes of excusing, by
this means, the decadence and failure of all the rest. But I have been since
informed after what manner they acquit themselves of their Vow. They send their
Religious by turns into the Country, for a Month or two, to Fatten and Plump
them; which time expired, they recall them again to their Observance, at which
they are kept the same space of time, after which they send them again to be
Fatted anew. After this manner do they mutually solace and relieve one another
amongst themselves with an Holy Brotherly Love, whereby they find themselves
much benefited. One of these Monks, on a time, supposed himself to have found
the Secret, to spare himself and his Brethren, the Pains and Trouble of all
these Flittings and Removes. He had made his reflection upon a Hymn of S.
Ambrose, which they Sing on Friday Morning, where speaking of the Works of the
Fifth days Creation, which were the Fishes and the Birds, he has these words,
Qui fertili natos aqua
Partim relinquis Gurgiti,
Partim levas in Era.
From whence he inferred, that forasmuch as the Fish and Birds proceeded both
from one Matter, to wit, the Water, they might indifferently pass for Fish, as
being in Substance nothing but the same thing. Besides the Resemblance there is
between the Fins of Fishes, and the Wings of Birds, helped to flatter his
Imagination, as a further Confirmation of his Notion; he desired his Brethren
to Meditate a while upon this Mystery, which being once unfolded, might be so
profitable to them. The Notion was found to be very good, and they made no more
ado but with one consent presented a Petition to the Abbot, that they might
have leave from thence forward, to Eat the Fish that flies in the Air. The
Abbot supposed that his Religious had taken up the Holy Resolution of Reforming
themselves to a higher Degree, and that they would for time to come, abstain
wholly from Fish also; for if they Eat nothing, said he in himself, but the
Fish that flies in the Air, they will not need any great store of Oil to Fry
them with. Wherefore he very readily granted their Request; but he was
extremely astonished, when entering the next day into the Refectory, he found
all the Table charged with good Foul, both Boiled and Roasted, as Woodcocks,
Partridges, and all others that were in season. He presently sent for the
Steward of the Monastery to come to him, and those who had made these
Provisions, intending to Jobe them very severely: But they putting him in mind
of the Permission he had granted them, and Quoting the passage out of S.
Ambrose, and the 20, 21, and 22 Verses of the First Chapter of Genesis, the
poor Abbot, was put to a Nonplus, by the subtilty of their Reasonings, and
allowed it should be continued. The matter being divulged some time after, it
came to the Ears of their Cardinal Protector at Rome, who sent a Letter to
them, by which he exhorted them, either absolutely to Eat Flesh, if they had a
desire so to do, or else to Eat nothing but the Fish that lives in the Waters,
for that otherwise it was to be feared, the People would learn by their
Example, to Eat cramb'd Capons in Lent; and leaving the Swimming, betake
themselves to the Flying Fishes* It is not above Twelve years since, that the
Reformed Benedictins of the Congregation of S. Marus in France, practiced much
a like thing: They Eat nothing but Otters and Badgers, as long as they could
get any of them, taking these Animals for Fish, because they live along the
Rivers, and feed upon Fish; and forasmuch as they did also Eat them in Lent,
this extremely scandalized the People in the Provinces of France, where Otters
and Badgers are looked upon as Meat. Wherefore the Bishops were fain to desire
the Fathers, for time to come, to abstain from eating of them, as they do at
present. By this it appears that all this sort of People, who outwardly profess
to live a Life of Penance, do it sore against their Will; and could one see all
that passes in Secret in their Monasteries, the World would be no longer abused
by their Hypocrysie.

I shall only give you an account of one famous Hermitage more, which lies in
Swisserland, and afterward prosecute my Journey to Naples. This Hermitage is
called Encylas, and the Benedictins, who have made themselves Masters of it,
have there at present a very fair Abbey. It is Situate upon a very high
Mountain, between the Canton of Zurich, and that of Solure. The Papists Flock
thither in Pilgrimage, from all parts of France, Germany, Swisserland, and
Italy, for the sake of a Miraculous Chapel, which is to be seen in that place.
The History of it runs thus. An Hermit having caused a Chapel to be Built here,
was at a loss to find a Bishop, who would take the pains to come and Consecrate
it, in a place which was at so great a distance from the Commerce of Men: But
on a certain Night as he was at Prayers, he saw Jesus Christ coming down from
Heaven, accompanied with his Blessed Mother, the Virgin Mary, the Twelve
Apostles, and an infinite multitude of Angels. All this Heavenly Company entered
the Chapel, and Jesus Christ commanded the Sacerdotal Habits to be brought
forth, which the Angels immediately delivered to him, and were all enriched
with Pearls and Diamonds. He took them all from their Hands, and put them on,
repeating the Prayers which the Priests are obliged to say, whilst they put on
the Sacred Habit. Observe here by the by, that in one of these Prayers, the
Priest Prays, that God would be pleased to extinguish in him the Carnal
Concupiscence, that reigns in his Members, and apply this if you can, without
the highest Sacrilege, to Jesus Christ, who is the Eternal Purity. Our Savior
then having put on his Sacerdotal Ornaments, went and Consecrated the Chapel,
and afterward the Altar; in performing which, he observed all the Ceremonies,
made all the signs of the Cross, performed all the Sprinklings of Holy Water,
dispatched all the Anointings with the Holy-Oils, and pronouced all the
Prayers, which are set down in the Roman Ritual, for the Consecration of
Chapels, and Altars; the Apostles all this while assisting him, and answering
Amen to all the Prayers, at the same time that the Angels Sang the Music,
played upon Instruments, and in a word, made such a melodious Consort, that the
poor Hermit, who took a View of all this, from one of the Corners of the
Chapel, was wholly charmed and ravished with it. After that the Ceremony of
Consecration was thus finished, Jesus Christ would needs also Celebrate the
first Mass there, and having put on the rest of the required Ornaments, he went
to the Altar; S. Peter and S. Paul Ministered to him at the Mass. The Hermit
took notice that Jesus Christ did not omit the least Ceremony, Benediction,
Kneeling, or Prayer, that are contained in the Roman Missal. This done, he took
the Communion himself under both kinds, and afterward delivered it to his
Blessed Mother, and all the Apostles, concluding the Mass with an Ite missa
est, to which the Angelical Consort answered Deo Gratias. When all this was
thus performed, Jesus Christ together with all this Heavenly Society returned
to Heaven, leaving the Chapel Consecrated, as it is at present. We are to take
notice that this happened at a time, when Men believed Hermits upon their bair
Words, and when the living in a Wood, or upon a Mountain, with a swinging Cowl
upon ones Head, past for an incontestable proof of Saintship. The Hermit writ
to the Bishop, that now he needed not to incommodate himself to come and
Consecrate the Chapel, seeing that Jesus Christ himself, had been pleased to
save him that trouble. The good People, who at that time were the Inhabitants
of those Mountains, and who would have Swallowed any thing, under the notion of
a Miracle, gulp'd down this also. This Chapel is to be seen there to this day,
whole and entire, and the Benedictins, who have taken Possession of this Place,
have Built a great Church round about it, so that the Great one, encloseth the
Lesser.

These Fathers are very Rich, and have got together a very great Treasury of
Plate, by means of this Devotion. And forasmuch as they are almost on every
side, surrounded with Heretics, (so they call the Protestants;) they make use
of abundance of Precaution, and do not show their Treasure to all the World.
They have enclosed it within a double Wall, to the end that in case of a Civil
War, the Protestants, might not be able to find it. Near to the Abbey, there is
a fair Village, very well Built, and the outside of all the Houses are Painted,
which makes a very fine show. They are almost all Inhabited by Innkeepers, who
are furnished with excellent Wine, which is a strong Magnetism for the Swiss
and German Pilgrims.

The Roman Catholics of this Country, glory so much in having got so
convincing a Proof of the truth of their Mass, that they openly declare, that
Jesus Christ having foreseen the fatal Revolution, which of late has happened in
Swisserland, by the perverse Doctrine of Calvin, denying the real presence of
the Holy Sacrament, was pleased beforehand to Condemn this Doctrine, by his own
offering up to his Eternal Father, the Bloodless Sacrifice of the Holy Mass,
with all the Ceremonies, the Holy Church of Rome makes use of. It is to be
supposed that Jesus Christ was greatly pleased to find in the Roman Missal, all
those finical Additions, the Popes have joined to it; and especially with the
invention of those pretty little Hosts, to the composition of which there
enters more Wax than Flower. I have frequently seen these Wafers made, and I
have some time for Recreation made them them my self. They grease the
Wafer-Iron, in which they make the Hosts, with white-Wax, to make them the more
firm. This Wax being melted, Penetrates the Wafers through and through, and
serves for a Glue to hold them together. This was it, our Adorable Lord and
Savior thought not of, when he instituted his Sacrament; but however approved
very well of this new Invention, in Celebrating the Mass at Encylas. The
Memento for the Dead, that is, the Prayers for the Souls in Purgatory, which
they have inserted into the Mass, pleased him also extraordinary well: And
seeing it cannot be doubted, but that his Prayers were assuredly heard; it will
follow, that there was not so much as one Soul left in Purgatory that day. I
have forgot to ask these good Catholics, whether Jesus Christ when he said
Mass at Encylas, gave the Communion to his Blessed Mother and his Disciples,
under both kinds? Or whether he conformed himself to the Modern Practice of the
Church of Rome? who communicate the People under one kind only; if they affirm
this Latter, I protest I have taken the Resolution never to believe them; and I
will rather believe, that Jesus Christ, who is the Eternal Wisdom, had disposed
all things so wisely, in his Institution of the Sacrament, that as there wanted
nothing that might be added, so neither was there any thing superfluous to be
taken away from it. He would that all should Eat of the Bread, and Drink of the
Cup. Bibite ex eo omnes: Drink ye all of it. This has been the constant
Practice of the Primitive Church, for many Ages; and I am so far from looking
upon this first Church, as being very defective in all her Practices, as the
Papists would fain persuade us, that I shall always consider it, as the True
and Perfect Pattern and Model of the Church, which our Lord and the Apostles
have left us, which we cannot undertake to mend, without spoiling it, and from
which we cannot depart without Sin. Some ancient Churches, even of those that
follow the Communion of Rome, have in some sort preserved the ancient Custom of
Celebrating the Lords Supper, though they look upon it only at present, as one of
the Ceremonies of the Holy-Week, and they practice it only on Monday and
Thursday, but with several Excesses and Indecencies, which ought to be
retrenched and put away.

I will give you a Relation here of what I have seen practiced at Mentz in
Germany, where I happened to be for Two years together on Holy-Thursday. This
Day, after Morning-Service, and the Washing of Feet, the Archbishop, the Great
Canons, and all the other Priests that serve in the Cathedral, go in Procession
to a Great Hall, that is near the Church, which they call the Chapter House,
there to Celebrate the Supper. The Seculars that are of any Rank and Quality,
have leave to enter with the rest. There are great Benches placed round about
the Hall, where all the Company seat themselves, and a great Table in the
midst, covered with a Table-Cloth, upon which are placed large Cups or Goblets,
with other Pitchers and Vessels full of Wine, and a vast quantity of great
Wafers divided into Pounds and half Pounds. The Archbishop being Arrayed in his
Pontifical Habits, reads with a loud Voice that part of the Gospel, which
contains the History of the Supper; and afterward blessing the Bread and the
Wine, he declares, That they are to take this in memory of the Passion of our
Lord Jesus Christ, and to be obedient to the Command he has left us, to do the
same in Remembrance of him. Thus after having taken his part of the Wafers,
which is of two or three Pounds, because of his Dignity, he goes and
distributes the rest, to all those that are present, a Service of one Pound to
every Grand Canon, and of half a Pound to all the rest, the same share being
given to me also. They spread a great Napkin before all those that assist at
the Supper, and every one applies himself to eat these Wafers, which are very
thick, and of another sort than those are, that they use at Mass. Formerly they
gave to all the Company pieces of Unleavened Bread; but these Wafers were in
Aftertimes found more pleasing to the Palate, and more fit to be Presented. The
Archbishop, in the mean time, takes the Cup, or rather, it is held to him,
whilst he drinks; for it is so large and so full of Wine, that two of the
Canons are scarcely able to support it. After he has drunk, he sends it to be
presented to the Great Canons, and then to all those that sit on the Benches.
They don't amuse themselves with letting down a little Gulp only, as is done at
the Sacrament; but they drink in good earnest, and fetch the greatest Draughts
they can: And there be some of these German Gentlemen, that drink above a Quart
at a Draught; so that the Cup, as big as it is, is nevertheless soon emptied,
and must be filled anew. The Wine that is used on this occasion, must be of the
best Rhenish Wine that is to be got in all the Territory of Mentz; and the
Officers of the Cathedral, have power to go and choose it that Day with great
Ceremony in the Electors Cellars. They pierce all the Vessels one after
another, and take the Judgment of some Learned Palats upon them. It is the high
Opinion they have conceived of the goodness of this Wine, that makes these
Gentlemen drink so heartily. The Great Cup takes its Round five times, and so
often every one of the Company drinks. But if any one should chance in these
Intervals, to be tormented with Thirst, he needs only to make a sign to the
Priests, who are near to the Table, where other Vessels stand ready, in which
they are presently served: Whilst the Cup goes round, the Singing-Men and the
Musicians strike up their Notes and Sing, (standing near the Table which holds
the Cups and the good Wine) that which the Papists call Improperia, which are
the Reproaches our Savior made to the Jews for their Ingratitude, in Abusing
him to that degree as they did, notwithstanding all the Benefits they had
received of him.

I observed, that the Company kept themselves in a great degree of Restraint
and Modesty at the first and second Round the Cup made; but at the third Turn,
when the good Wine began to display its virtue, every one began to Talk and
Laugh; and the Singing-men, who were willing to take their shares of the good
Wine, made Stops ever and anon, to refresh themselves with the pleasing Liquor;
so that toward the end of the Ceremony they were quite gone, and knew no longer
what they sung. I was pretty near one of the Grand Canons, and told him; In
truth, My Lord, I am astonished to see them suffer these Singing-Men, to act
all these Fooleries they do in the midst of the Hall, and in your Presence; and
at a Function, which requires a great deal of Modesty and Seriousness. He
Answered me very fiercely; We do not concern our selves with those Men; they
are a Company of pure Rogues, they deserve indeed, to have their Legs and Arms
broke; but all that can be said for them is, that they are drunk, and to speak
truth, I am somewhat engaged that way my self. I found that he spoke Truth, for
the good Wine had seized his Capitol, as well as those of the rest of the
Company. My Host, with whom I lodged, who was one of the Officers of the Grand
Chapter, returned from thence very much out of order, and owned to have drunk
above six Quarts for his own share. He often called for Wine extraordinarily,
under pretense that the bits of the Wafers which he eat, stuck in his Throat.
At last, when the Ceremony was ended, which lasted about two Hours, every one
returned to his own Home, staggering as they went, and running their Heads
against the Walls. The Gentlemen certainly would be highly displeased, if they
should be deprived of the Cup that Day; and I question whether the Pope, with
all his Authority would ever be able to bring it about.

Now if we set aside the Excesses, the Indecencies, and some other Improperties
these Men did commit in this Solemnity; sure it is, that this is the true way
of Administering the Holy Supper, which has been continually preserved in this
Church. It seems probable, that sometime or other they were in the belief, that
they could not satisfy the Command of the Supper, by celebrating the Mass, and
Communicating in the manner as they do; and therefore to remedy this in some
degree, they retained this Ceremony, which they call the Lord's Precept; but
surely they then observed it with more modesty and respect than they do at
present. Indeed, I know no Function the Papists have, throughout the whole
course of the Year, that represents the Holy Supper; for what I have now said
of Mentz, is not practiced in any other of their Churches. I know they commonly
assign Easter Day for this purpose; but I can find nothing in the whole Office
of that Day, that represents any thing of it: For the Mass has no conformity
at all with the Supper; and besides, the People do not Communicate whilst the
Mass is celebrating, but after the Mass is ended, and then the Priest, without
making any Prayer, and without declaring what he is about to do, goes and puts
into the Mouths of all those that present themselves, a small Consecrated
Wafer, and says to every one of them; The Body of Jesus Christ preserve thy
Soul to Life Eternal. Every one that has Received it, retires to a Corner of
the Church, to Pray in private; and then every one goes home, without the least
Prayer made in common. Where therefore is the common Union, or Communion in all
this? They cannot say, that they partake all of one Bread, for all the little
Wafers they give are distinct, some Old, and others New; some of them bought at
one Shop, and some at another, and all of them (as was said) are so penetrated
with Wax, that it is hard to say whether it be Bread or Wax. They do not so
much as once know, for the most part, that this Action is to be performed in
remembrance of the Passion and Death of our Savior Jesus Christ, neither is
there so much as one only word mentioned to put them in mind of it. For my
part, I must acknowledge that I knew nothing of it, before that I began to
study Divinity; and I believed, that to Communicate, was only to Receive the
Body of our Savior, without being obliged to call any thing to Remembrance.
And yet, this is that which is most expressly declared in the Commandment of our
Savior, in the Institution of the Holy Supper; Do this in Remembrance of me.
And those who Administer the Sacrament, have an Engagement lying upon them, to
declare the Death of our Lord, to make us remember it.

Notwithstanding that these various Relations and Observations that I give you
here, seem to have no great Connection with my Journey to Naples; yet they do
very well comport with the General Subject I have proposed to my self, and
which I may well call the main scope and aim of my Work; which is, to discover
to you the rest of the Corrupt and Superstitious Practices of the Church of
Rome, which are come to my knowledge. I produce them one after another,
according as I find occasion; and in this regard, I readily acknowledge this
Treatise not to be very Regular: For, because the most part of these Matters
have no great Connection together, and that they cannot make out a whole
Chapter, or a Days Entertainment, I have been obliged to follow this Method,
though somewhat Irregular, not being able to order things better.

I shall conclude this Days Journey with an Observation I made in my Journey from
Mola to Capua, which is this: Having struck out of the Highway, we entered into
some Little Villages, to refresh our selves. Whilst they were Watering our
Horses, we took a Turn to see the Houses, and after what manner the Poor People
lived there. Their Houses are a Company of Little Holes, I believe the largest
of them was not above twelve Foot in length, but kept very Neat. We were
astonished at the prodigious quantity of Women we found in them; but we saw no
Men there, except only some few that were very Ancient, the rest being gone to
their Labor.

All the Old Women came out of their Houses, carrying in their Hands Sausages,
and little Loaves of a kind of Turkish Corn, which they call Fromenton, and
some dry Figs. They desired us to give them our Blessing, and to accept of
their Presents. We took some of their Figs, and these good People took this for
a great Favor at our Hands. Some of them amongst the rest, prayed us to come
into their Houses, that we might Bless some of their Wine, Water, or
Goats-Milk. We asked what they intended to do with it afterward? They told us,
It was to give their Husbands to drink, when they returned from their Labor
all on a Sweat, that it might do them no prejudice.

I said to my Companion, That I could not but admire the Faith of these People:
Who replied, That he took them all for Saints. One of these good Women that
overheard him, sent forth a deep Sigh, saying, That for her part, she was no
Saint; but as for her deceased Mother, that certainly she had been one: For she
Prayed to God from Morning to Night, for the Souls of Purgatory, and always
kept her House well-stor'd with good Provisions, for the Monks and Priests that
passed by that Way. I questioned them about some other Duties of Christianity,
and some Chief Articles of our Faith, wherein I found them very Ignorant; and
some of them Answered me, That their Curate was a very Learned Man, and that he
would satisfy us concerning these Points. I found by this, that these Poor
People were arrived at that Blessed Ignorance and Simplicity, to which the
Priests of the Church of Rome would so fain reduce the whole World, if it were
in their Power. So we returned to our Horses in the Inn, which we found had
been well looked to; we were served also with very good Wine, and when we
demanded what we had to Pay, they would take none of our Money, our Host telling
us, That we were Knights of Jesus Christ, and that we had too much honored
him, by coming under his Roof.

Just as we were Mounting on Horseback, a Footboy came to desire us to stay
one Moment; for that Count Ludovica his Master desired, if it might be
acceptable to us, to have our Company to Capua. Our Host assured us, That he
was a very virtuous good Lord. So we stayed for him, and Traveled together to
Capua. We told him of the Simplicity and Charity of the Poor People of the
Village where we Baited. He said, That they were used to it, and that in all
the Villages at any distance from the Highway, they were all of the same
Temper; and that the Monks and Priests took care to direct their Course that
Way, when they Traveled, to spare their Money.

Being Arrived at Capua, the Count Invited us to accept of a Lodging with him,
where we were very Nobly Entertained, with a Generosity and Open-heartedness,
which is not very common amongst the Noblemen of Italy.

OBSERVATIONS ON A JOURNEY TO NAPLES.
The Fifth Days Journey.
THis Day, which was the last of our Journey, was the most Troublesome to us of
all the rest, because it was a Fast of the Church. We returned our
Acknowledgments to our Noble Count, who had showed himself so generous and
splendid in his Entertainment of us; and prosecuted our Journey to Averse, which
is a very pleasant and delicious City, situate between Capua and Naples. We met
with nothing considerable on the Way, with relation to my Subject; only we cast
our Eyes upon some Little Chapels, which we found almost at the End of every
Field. These Chapels are no more than so many Little Vaults, four or five Foot
long, and three or four Foot broad; and entering in, we found they contained the
Picture of a Crucifix, or of some Saint or other, who are supposed to be the
Tutelar Saints of those Grounds, on which the Chapels are built. We saw in most
of these Chapels, Little Stones hanging upon the Walls, being fastened with
Thread; as also Little Bones, small Tufts of Hair, bits of Wood, shreds of
Cloth, and an hundred other things of like Nature. We got some of the Peasants,
who quitted their Labor, to come and receive our Benediction, to unfold to us
the meaning of these things. They told us, That they were the Vows of some of
the good Country People, according to the differnt Occasions or Dangers they
had been in. Some of them that had caught Falls, as they were going on their
Way, had gathered up the Pebbles, or Flints, at which they had stumbled, and
carried them to the Chapel: Others had brought thither the Sticks wherewith
their Masters had beaten them: Women that had Quarreled and Fought together,
very devoutly carried thither the Hair they had plucked from one another
Heads. These good People believing, by a Superstition, whereof I had never
before seen an Instance, that by committing the Instruments of their Mishap to
some one of these Chapels, they prevent the happening of the like Accident for
time to come.

It may be some will Object to me here, That I have been very diligent, in my
Travels, to take Notice of some inconsiderable Trifles, which were not once
worth the observing; and now make use of them, to reproach and mortify the
Papists.

To which I Answer, That if it may pass for a kind of Excuse, to produce the
Example of others that have done the like, I can assert, there are some who
have made Remarks of much less Importance, than is this I have last mentioned.
Father Mabillon, that Famous Benedictin, in the History of his Travels, gives
us a Relation of certain Women in Rome, who creep up the Steps of the Portal of
S. Peter's Church on their Knees; and makes this goodly Reflection upon it,
That this is some Remainder of the Piety of the Emperor Theodosius, and of his
Veneration for that August Cathedral. In the mean time we find, that it is not
only in their Approaches to this Magnificent Temple, that these Women put
themselves into these Postures; but that they also use the same in their
Drawing near almost to every Place, where any Superstitious Worship is in
Vogue; for I have seen both Men and Women shuffling on their Knees, to these
little Chapels built in the Fields, whereof I am now speaking, where there is
nothing considerable, that deserves any Veneration. Should a Papist be the
Relator of these Actions, he would not fail to exalt them to the Clouds, and
set them forth as most Signal Instances of an extraordinary Piety and Devotion,
and as Actions very Meritorious in the sight of God; whereas, a Protestant in
giving an Account of them, would rather deplore the Blindness of this Poor
People, who are so ignorant of the true Ways of Salvation, as to believe, that
by employing themselves in this kind of Practices, they go strait to Heaven,
and that by this means their Sins are blotted out, without having recourse to
serious Repentance.

The same Father Mabillon makes mention of the Close-Stool, or Chair, with a
Hole in it, called Seeds Stercoraria, on which formerly the Popes were carried,
after their Exaltation to the Throne of S. Peter. He puts an Explication upon
it, which I suppose was scarcely thought of at that time. He says, This
Ceremony was made use of, to put the Popes in mind, after their Election, that
they ought to keep themselves humble in the midst of that Greatness, to which
God had been pleased to raise them, as from the Dust and Dunghill, alluding to
that of the Psalmist, Psalm. 113. 7. De Stercore erigens Pauperem. Some Writers,
whom this Author terms Heretics, give a very different account of it, and say,
That this kind of Chair was made use of in the Ceremony of the Papal
Exaltation, ever since they had been Imposed upon by Pope Joan, as a necessary
Precaution, to prevent the like Mistake for the time to come: For they made the
Pope to Seat himself in this Chair, which afterward they held Lifted up on
High, till all the Cardinals had performed their Scrutiny concerning the Holy
Father, Whether he was furnished with all the Constitutive Parts of a Perfect
Man. It Is hard to determine, whether of these two Explications be the true one.
However, the Abolition they have since made of this Ceremony, might make one
suspect, that there was indeed something in this Action, that did not comport
with the Glory of the Heads of the Church of Rome; or else, that the Popes have
renounced those humble Thoughts of themselves, which this Close-Stool might
serve to inspire them with. I have Read in the Books of Travelers, many other
Observations, which in dignity do not in the least out-vy those which by times
come to my mind, and which I hear relate to you, rather for the Consequences
which may be drawn thence, or for the Reflections they may occasion, than for
the importance of the Matters of Fact themselves.

After having taken some time to view these Chapels, and observe the
Superstitious Practices of these poor People, we have just now related, we at
last Arrived at Averse, where we were Witnesses of a very pleasant Encounter,
which is well worth the relating in all its Circumstances. For the better
understanding of it, I must put you in mind, that the Italian Dames are kept
up, worse than Slaves, to that degree, that they have not so much as the
liberty of the Rooms of their own Houses. In the Kingdom of Naples, the Custom
is to lock them up in the Garrets, which for that reason, they call the Women's
Apartment. Whenever they have a mind to buy any thing, that is Cried along the
Streets, or to give an Alms to any poor Body, they have Baskets, which they
fasten to a great Rope, and let them down to give or receive what they please.
A Friar Carmelite who was making his Quest (a genteel word to express Begging)
in honor of the little Scapulary, was waiting under the Window of a Dame of
Quality, for the descent of some Alms; the Gentlewoman it seems having too
great a kindness for him, to send him away empty, conveyed down to him in her
Basket a great white-Loaf, which the good Friar was reaching out his Arms to
receive; when two French Men coming by, that were almost Famished, proved more
nimble than he, and disappointed him of his Prey, for the one of them having
rudely thrust the Friar to the over-side of the Street, the other laid hold
upon the Basket, and having taken out what was in it, they both betook
themselves to their Heils. The Carmelite, who was sensible of his Guilt, and
was therefore very desirous of getting the Loaf into his own hands, fell a
running after them with all his might, Crying out, Stop the Thieves, stop the
Thieves. Whereupon the People soon stopped them, as supposing that they had
Robbed something considerable; but these poor Wretches gave good Evidence, that
it was nothing less than Necessity had put them upon this Piece of Thievery,
for without being moved or skar'd at the Uproar made about them, he who had
Stolen the Loaf; broke it in two, and gave the one half of it to his Companion.
As this was doing, some Papers dropped out of it upon the Street, which an
Italian immediately snatched up, and the Carmelite, who till then had expressed
such earnestness to have his Loaf back again, slipped away through the Crowd,
without making any further enquiries concerning it.

Every one of the Spectators, were curious to know the Contents of these
Papers, and the Italian to avoid the Throng of People, retired to one of the
Chambers of the Inn, where we were, for to read it. After that he had read it
by himself, he was willing to Communicate it to all, for a notable Piece of
Gallantry, that desired to hear it. There were two Letters, the one enclosed in
the other, whereof the one was the Friar Carmelite's Letter, and the other
contained the Ladies Answer. We heard both of them read, but I am not able to
repeat the Contents of them to you word for word; therefore shall only mention
those Expressions I more particularly took notice of, for the Amorous Gallantry
they contained. Their Custom in Italy is to demand Alms, for the honor of the
Mother of God, that is, the Holy Virgin, accordingly this Devout Friar began
his Letter with these words: Anima devota della grand Madre Venere, fatemi la
Carita povero Fraticello, deh per pieta datemi un squardo, un riso, un bacio,
qualehe cosetta, par l' amor del Dio Cupido. In English thus: Devout Soul of
the great Mother Venus, give an Alms to a poor Friar; vouchsafe to me I pray
you for Charity, a Look, a Smile, a Kiss, some little thing or other, for the
sake of the God Cupido. At the bottom of his Letter, he desired the Lady, that
she would be pleased to honor him with a word in Answer, and to send him back
his own Letter, as well to set his Heart at rest, in that regard, as that she
might not be exposed to a Surprise of her Husband. The Letter had no Name to
it, and concluded with these words, the poorest of all your Lovers.

The Ladies Answer had an Air of Galantry no whit inferior to that of the
Friars; she told him, That if he had demanded any Favor of her, she would
before have desired him to inform her of his Rank and Quality; but seeing that
he only demanded an Alms, every one might without abasing themselves afford
that to the most poor and miserable. That though she had had no opportunity of
taking a view of him, otherwise than from the Garret Window, where she was
Imprisoned, yet that her sight was good enough to discern he had a very good
Countenance under his Hood, and that she allowed him from that very moment, to
study the best means of getting to her, provided that it were done with all
possible Precaution. That she might indeed have Burnt the Letter he had sent
her, but that she supposed it would have been an ill Presage, to Condemn to the
Fire the first Fruits of his Love toward her; and that she doubted not, since
he had been so circumspect in the securing of his own Letter, but he would be
at least as careful for the Answer she sent him, that it might never fall into
the hand of her Tyrant, (meaning her Husband:) She concluded with the most
tender Expressions, that could be invented by the most ardent Affection, and
desired the Friar not to fail of returning the next day, at the same Hour, to
make his Quest; assuring him, that he might build upon her Charity.

Though these Letters seemed to be Pleasant enough, yet the most Understanding
and Virtuous of those who heard them read, could not but express something of
Horror, to see Wickedness covering it self with the pretext of Godliness, and
Stalking up and down in the Disguise of a Habit so Holy in outward appearance.
They sent out some Persons by several ways, to look for the Friar, but they
could not meet with him; only they Learnt, at a House where he had Lodged,
three or four days before, that he was one of the great Convent of the
Carmelites in Naples, and that he had been sent to make Quest in the Countries
round about. My Companion, who had some Letters to deliver to the Fathers of
the said Convent, took upon him to inform the Prior of the whole matter, as
soon as we should be Arrived there, if they would deliver to him the Letters of
this Friar Questor. The Letters were accordingly delivered to him by the
Italian, after that he had first taken a Copy of them. That which favored the
Lady in this Business, was, that the two French Beggars, who had minded nothing
but the Prey they longed for, and who after they had seized it, had run three
or four Streets to save themselves from the Pursuit of the Carmelite, could by
no means find out the House again of this Charitable Creature, neither was
there any Italian found, that was in the humor to own it for his Wives hand.

This Honest Gentleman my Companion did not fail two or three days after his
Arrival at Naples, to acquit himself of his Commission; but he received nothing
but Frowns and Displeasure for his Pains; for having acquainted the Prior of
the Carmelites with it, they flatly denied that any Friar of their Convent had
been sent upon the Quest to Averse at that time; yea, they abused him with ill
Language, asking him by what Authority he had charged himself with this
Commission, as if it were the Office of Priests to take cognizance of the
doings of Friars? That they were sure, the Priests had no reason for their
parts, to reproach their good Manners, seeing they themselves led such very
Loose and Scandalous Lives.

The good Gentleman, seeing that the Prior began to be in a great Passion, and
fearing lest the Religious might think fitting to give him the Discipline for
his Pains, made his humble Excuses to them, and withdrew himself, saying, that
what he had done in this Matter, was not in the least done with any intention
to Insult them; but only because he thought himself bound in Charity to
advertize them of a thing for which they were so much reproached at Averse, and
which probably they might find out some means to remedy. The Prior accordingly,
notwithstanding the bad Humor he was in, did not fail of sending the very same
day, the Steward of the Convent to Averse, with Orders dexterously to divulge
there, that the Friar Questor, who had played these gallant Tricks, did not
belong to their Monastery, and that in all probabilty, it must have been some
Secular, that had made bold with their Habit, the better to act his Part.

It is true enough, that sometimes Seculars Disguise themselves in the Habits
of Friars, to accomplish their Ends, as knowing that nothing can be invented
more proper to give them a free access to all Houses: For notwithstanding that
the Men of the World are daily Trappand by these wretched Monks, yet for all
that they retain as great a respect for their Habit, as for the most Sacred
thing in the whole World; and the Monks, that on their side, they may not be
wanting to the daily increase of this Veneration, scarcely Preach up any thing
else but the Sacredness of their Habits. Therefore it is that these Habits, by
the great esteem Men have of them, are so very Proper and accommodate to Cloak
all manner of Wickedness and Treason, and consequently are made use of, to
facilitate the escape of Criminals, to Murder People in their Houses, to
maintain secret Correspondencies in Cities, for to Burn and betray them; and in
a word, to commit Adulteries, Incest, all manner of Cheats, and Persidiousness,
Murders, and Sacrilege; yea, what is more, to attempt the Sacred Lives of
Kings, whereof we meet with too many fatal Instances in History. A Turk, to
whom the Prince of Mirandula, gave a Relation of the different Religious
Orders, there were in the Church of Rome, and who (as he said) were the
Ornament of it; Replied, That if there was but one of them, they would be
sufficient to exterminate all the Princes of the Earth. It seems he had Read
something of our Histories. So many dreadful Catastrophes which daily happen by
these pieces of Cloth, shaped after an Antic manner, and ridiculous Figure,
one would think might be sufficient (if there were no other Reason for it, but
the Conservation of their States) wholly to cut them off from the Church; for
Religion and the State ought to be so perfectly united, that the one may not
betray the other, nor give occasion to any Dissension or Misunderstanding
therein. Whereas it is true in the Church of Rome, that they would sooner
trample upon a Royal Robe, than upon the Frock of a Monk; because this Habit in
it self, though it may be he that wears it may be oft-times worse than the Devil
himself, is accounted most superlatively holy.

They call Italy, the Country of Monks, not only upon the account, that Monks
(under which Word I comprehend all the Religious) do live very happily there,
and have made, as it were, their Paradise of it; but also because all the
Italians are in some degree Monks. Those who have not been of their Number
during their Lives, will at least be so after their Deaths. They specify in
their Last Wills, the Religious Habit in which they will be Buried; One will be
dressed up like a Benedictin, another like a Carmelite, and so for the rest. When
the Bodies of any of these are Carried to the Ground, their Biers and Coffins
are uncovered, that every one may see them dressed in their Monastic Habits,
whereas the Biers of other Persons are always covered. The Monks tell us, That
it is an Honor due to their Habits, that nothing can interpose betwixt them
and Heaven; because they have the virtue of immediately uniting to that place
of Bliss.

A Wax-Merchant at Venice, who had Cut his own Throat, because having bought up
a great quantity of Wax, the Price of it chanced to fall some Days after, had
Breath enough left him, after the Wound given, to declare, That he would be
Buried in a Capucin's Habit; and soon after died thus in Despair. His Relations
therefore executed his Last Will, and I saw this Wretch carried through the
Streets in his Capucin Dress, with his Throat Cut: Now I would fain know,
Whether his Accoutrement had the virtue of immediately uniting him to Heaven.
Externals have to that pitch gained the Ascendant in the Church of Rome, that
true Virtue seems wholly banished from it.

We departed from Averse, as soon as we had Dined, and we Arrived (without
putting our selves or our Horses much to it) timely enough in the great Suburbs
of Naples. The Gentleman with whom I was in Company, did not think himself in
an Equipage good enough, to enter the City that Day; and I, because I would not
leave him, took up my Lodging in an Inn of the Suburbs with him. The Host was a
Spaniard, and the first thing he demanded of us was, Whether we were Fasting?
We told him, That we had Dined at Averse; and the Gentleman's Servant had
acquainted him, that we had been very well Treated. However my Companion, who
was not used to Travel, and who found himself weary with his Journey, gave
Orders for a Supper to be made ready, and under the pretext of his not being
very well, he would have them get some fresh Eggs for him. The Host very
obligingly promised to get all things ready; but when Supper-time was come, we
found nothing but two bits of Bread upon the Table, and some Fruit. My
Companion sent word to the Host, to have the rest of the Supper sent up, with
the fresh Eggs; who came himself to return him an Answer, which was to this
purpose, That he wished the Gentleman to call to mind, that it was a Fast Day,
and that being a Clergyman, he was obliged (more than any one else) to give a
good Example; and that in keeping his Fast, he would at the same time perform
two Duties, the first in keeping the Fast; and the other by not offending any
one. This Clergyman, that was not used to be reproved by Seculars, who
ordinarily dare not Reproach Men of their Coat, came to great Words with the
Host, and told him, that he had good Friends enough at Naples, that would make
him repent of his Insolence: The Host, on the other side, threatened him with
the Inquisition, saying, That he knew no reason why he might not be put there,
as well as his Wife, who had lain there already three Years, for having eaten a
little piece of Cheese on a Fast Day, when she was Big with Child; and that she
had been Informed against by two Priests, who had Lodged in his House, and had
committed there all manner of Excesses. We perceived very well, that our Host
was transported with a very violent Passion, and therefore we thought fit to
change our Inn, notwithstanding that it was very Late. Forasmuch as I had had
no manner of Quarrel with him, he did in a manner Excuse himself to me;
protesting to me, That for the space of Twenty two Years that he had kept an
Inn, he never had seen so much as one Priest or Monk that kept the Fasts of the
Church; though they made a great Crime of it, to those poor Seculars that were
Convict of that Transgression.

Because this Adventure has put me upon mentioning the Fasts of the Papists, I
shall take occasion truly to declare to you, after what manner they observe
their Fasts in the Church of Rome; and enquire, Whether their Practice be so
evident a Mark of the Purity and Holiness of their Communion, as they pretend.
The Fasts Commanded by the Church of Rome, under the Penalty of Mortal Sin, and
other Chastisements Corporal and Pecuniary, are, Lent, the Quater Temps, or
Four Times, and the Vigils or Eves. As for the time of Advent, they leave it to
every ones liberty, to Fast or not, according as their Devotion or Inclination
sways them. The Abstinence from Meat is inseparably joined with all their
Fasts; for the Papists do not believe, that any Fast can be truly kept without
abstaining from Flesh-Meat; and they suppose this to be the most Essential part
of a Fast. In those Countries where the Inquisition is established, those who
break their Abstinence, may fall under the Rigor of that Tribunal; but in other
Countries, the Bishops of every Diocese have Power to punish Spiritually and
Corporally those that Transgress this way. Moreover, every Priest in particular
is obliged, at Confession, to impose upon them some Punishment, equivalent to
the Breaking of their Fast.

Now these for the most part are Pecuniary Mulcts, because by this means they
serve two Ends, viz. that of Mortifying their Penitents, and of Greasing their
own Fists. As for Example, They will order a Person, who has failed of Fasting
in any one Day of Lent, to put a Crown into the Parish Trunk or Chest, and so
proportionably if they have Transgrest oftener. The Priests from time to time
take care to empty the Trunk, and divide the Money amongst themselves. Infants
and Old Men, at a certain Age, are exempt from Fasting, but not from the
Abstinence from Meat; and none are excused from Abstinence and from Fasting,
save only such as are Sick; and they also must have an Attestation in Writing,
under the Hand of a Physician, that they are really and truly so; and upon this
Attestation, they grant them a Permission to Eat Meat, and consequently not to
Fast. There be some Butchers particularly Appointed to sell Flesh on those
Days, with strict Orders, Not to sell any Meat, except to those only who have
such a Permission.

Here it is we may take Notice, how hearty the Roman Catholics are in the
Observance of their Fasts, whereof they boast so much; for it may be asserted
of a Truth, that above three Fourth Parts amongst them get these Permissions
from their Physicians and Curates, without any real need, and only for some
pretended Sicknesses, which indeed they are not afflicted with; or else, they
make the most of some little Indispositions they are subject to by times, to
excuse them from the trouble of Fasting. The Physicians are obliged to take
their words for it, and the Curates refer themselves to the Physicians. The
Curates are assured, That the more there be of such Persons, who in this regard
burden their Consciences, the more Money they shall put into their Pockets at
Easter, when their Parishioners come to Confess to them. Thus we may well say,
That though these People have paid their Butchers for the Meat they had of them;
yet it is not all paid, till they have Talked with their Confessor, and
satisfied his After-reckoning. As for what concerns the Priests and Monks, they
take their Permissions from themselves; and there be but few Clergymen to be
found, that keep Lent; or in cast they do, it is with such Profusion and
Dainties of Fish, that makes their Abstinence from Flesh much more grateful,
than the Shro^etide, which ushered it in. True it is, that amongst the
Seculars, there be found many Poor People, who are not in a condition of making
these Expenses, and who, fearing to be too high Taxed by their Curates at
Easter, are fain to Fast the whole Lent out, not without a great deal of
Trouble: Which is the Reason of that Common Saying among the Roman Catholics,
that Lent is only for the Poor. Lastly, to say the most, If amongst the great
Number of Papists, that enjoy Plenty, there be some whose Consciences are
tender enough, to put them upon a Resolution of Fasting, it is still only after
the manner of Rome, which imports, that they must eat no more than Twice aday.
They take their Chief Meal at Noon, and they may then without scruple Eat as
much as they please.

A Doctor of Physic, who had been at Dinner in a Monastery, upon a Fast Day,
told me merrily, That these Monks had made him lay in Provisions enough for
Three days, he had so stuffed his Belly amongst them. At Evening they make a
Collation, at which they eat Fruits, Sweetmeats, and other such like things;
and Fried-Fish, amongst other things, passes for a Dish that may be used at
Collations.

The Ancient Custom of the Church of Rome in their Fasts, was to Eat but once
aday, after Sunset, when Even-song was begun; but forasmuch, as this Practice
did not agree with the Delicateness of the Clergy, the Ecclesiastics lighted
on a pleasant Invention to illude it; They formed an Office, or Set of Prayers,
which they called Vespers, or Even-song: And to the end they may observe the
Rule of not Eating till after Even-song, they celebrate their Evening-Prayer in
the Morning.

Now if this be not very ridiculous, and if this be not impudently to Mock at
all manner of Honesty and Sincerity, I leave you to judge. Just as if the
Ministers of the Church of England should go about to persuade the People, That
for to eat their Suppers betimes in the Morning, they need only to say their
Evening-Prayer very early.

The Fasts, as to the quality of the Viands that are eaten, are very
differently observed amongst the Papists: In some Countries they abstain from
Eggs, Butter, and Cheese; and in others, they make no scruple of Eating them.
In some Countries they express a very great distaste of Lent. I Sojourned two
whole Years at Mentz in Germany, and the Electoral Archbishop, the First Year
dispensed with the Observance of Lent throughout all his Diocese, except only
the Holy-Week, or Week before Easter; and the Second Year he Ordered, they
should only Fast three times a Week. They have a very pleasant way of Fasting
in Germany: After that they have eaten a good Dinner in the Morning, they may
(if they please) Eat and Drink all the rest of the Day, as long as they eat no
hot Meat: They may eat Broth, Fish, Eggs, etc. so they be but Cold before they
fall upon them; which is the Reason, why in Germany they always take care, to
have their Cupboards well provided with Cold Meats in Lent time.

Again, there are other places where they are as strict and scrupulous in the
observance of Lent, especially in the Countries that are under the Dominion of
Spain. The Priests are bound at Milan to Preach a Sermon at the beginning of
Lent, to take away those Scruples that may arise in the minds of the People,
about Fasting and Abstinence. This Sermon is always composed of Questions and
Answers, much like the Athenian Mercury we have here in London, and every one
sends his Doubts to the Preacher, who resolves them the best he can. I once
heard one of these Casuistical Sermons in the Church of S. Anthony, where
abundance of very ridiculous Doubts were proposed. Amongst other things, the
Question was asked, Whether it were lawful to eat Figs? And the difficulty was,
because this Fruit contains a sort of Milk in it, whilst it is green, which is
turned afterward into that sweetness which is found in them, when they are
fully Ripe; now all sorts of white-Meats, that is, things made of Milk are
forbid in Italy: The Question was very Learnedly Resolved in favor of the
Figs, and they were happily incorporated amongst the Lent Viands, because the
Milky Juice in the Figs contained no Cream or Fatness, and because neither
Butter nor Cheese could be made of it: And he added this Corollary, that upon
the same account, Almond-milk was a good and lawful Lent Meat, and that with it
they might prepare their Rice-milk. I lived for some time in a Monastery at
Milan, where three times a Week, we had Rice-milk dressed after this manner,
which was much more delicate, than if it had been prepared with Cows-milk. The
Learned Father at last concluded this Question, with this shameless Expression,
That it was lawful also to eat Mandrakes, notwithstanding these Fruits did very
lively represent the Members of Man and Woman. I beg my Readers excuse for
making use of his own words.

Another Question was, Whether at their Evening Collations, they might dip
their Bread in Wine? The reason of the difficulty was, because according to the
Rules of their Fasts, they are not permitted to eat any Menestre, that is,
Pottage, at Night; and many believe, that by dipping their Bread in Wine or
Water, they change the nature of Bread, and make a kind of Pottage of it. I my
self have seen many Persons, who otherwise were very sensible understanding
People, who made no difficulty of eating Bread and Fruit in abundance in the
Evening at their Collations, and to wash them down with two or three Bottles of
good Wine, who yet in the mean time made a great scruple to dip a bit of Bread
in Wine, and to eat it. But however the Question was decided in favor of these
who did dip their Bread in Wine. He backed his Decision with an Example very
convincing to a Papist, and such as hit the Nail on the head: When you receive,
said he, the Body of Christ in the Communion, the Priest puts a little Wafer
into your Mouth, which immediately is penetrated throughout with your Spittle;
and yet the Faith teaches you, that the Body of Jesus Christ remains there
still, and that none of the Accidents are corrupted by the humectation or
penetration of the Spittle: In the very same manner (said he) when you Sop your
Bread in Wine, this makes no change at all, in that which you take, not a jot
more than if you should eat the Bread, and drink your Wine separately, so that
you may for time to come safely do it without any scruple. In a word, this
Father resolved a vast number of Difficulties, that had been propounded to him,
and which for the most part were of the same Stamp with those I have given you
a taste of.

Because we are speaking of the Observation of Lent at Milan, you may take
notice, that Lent begins there four days later, than in all the other parts of
Italy, by a Privilege they pretend to hold from S. Ambrose. Now for these four
days, a vast quantity of People from all Parts of Italy repair thither, to
enjoy this Privilege; and I have known Persons that came above one hundred
Leagues; which shows that there is a strange Avidity in the Papists, to eat
Flesh at the time it is forbid them. Now these days are no sooner ended, but
all this Crowd makes as much haste to get away from thence, as before they made
haste to get thither; the reason is, because afterward the Quadragesimal
Abstinence is observed with much more rigor and exactness at Milan, than in
any other part of Italy, excepting only those, that have Licenses, which, as I
have mentioned before, are always in great Numbers. If any one be found that
transgresses the Rules of the Lent Fast, they are sent immediately to the
Inquisition, and proceeded against as Heretics. The Spaniards will allow of no
slackning of this Point, in those Countries that are subject to them. In the
time when Burgundy was under Spain, they observed the Fasts of the Church much
more rigorously than they do now, since it is under the Dominion of France.

An Officer of the great Chapter of Mentz, gave me the Relation of a
troublesome Accident, though the passages of it be very pleasant, which happened to
him, and three of the great Canons of Mentz, with relation to Fasting. They had
taken a view of the greatest part of France, and they returned to their own
Country through Burgundy, in time of Lent. As they were Traveling from Dola to
Besancon, this Officer happened to kill a great Hen in the Fields, and the
Gentlemen Canons having Congratulated his good Luck, resolved to eat it at the
first Inn they should come at. Being Arrived about Dinnertime, at the first
Village they met with, they ordered a great Fire to be made in their Chamber,
and the Officer commanded them to bring up a Kettle, without saying what he
intended to do with it: Their Hostess brought them one, but being seized with a
curiosity to know what use they would put it to; she spied them so well, that
she found they were Boiling a Hen. Whereupon she presently ran out of Doors and
told her Neighbors, who came all running away in Throngs, no otherwise than if
the House had been on Fire. The Hostess led them the way to the Chamber of
these Gentlemen, and in a furious Transport, demanded her Kettle again; they
desired her to have Patience a little, telling her that what they had put into
it, was almost Boiled; but the Woman in a great rage, snatched the Kettle from
off the Fire, and the Officer forced it from her again, to have his Hen.

In the mean time the Neighbors all came up at the Noise, and belching forth
the most execrable Oaths, (which were far worse than the breaking of the Fast,)
threatened the Gentlemen to kill them immediately, if they did not render
themselves Prisoners. These Grand Canons, who were all of them Lords of great
Quality, in vain called up for their Foot-Boys, dressed in their rich Liveries,
and put off their Riding Coats, which covered their rich Silk Habits, and
showed them their Golden Crosses and the fair Medals hanging about their Necks.
These Villainous Peasants, in spite of all they could show or allege, made them
get on Horseback, and having bound them with Cords, in a most ignominious
manner, they Conducted them with a strange Hue and Cry, carrying the Par-boil'd
Hen tied to the top of a Staff, before them, till they came to the City of
Besancon, which was about Eight Leagues from the Village, insulting over them
with a thousand Affronts all along the Way, as if they had been Heretics.

As soon as they were come into the City, a vast Throng of People came from all
Parts to see them, flinging Dirt and Stones at them, and crying aloud, Burn
them alive; Burn them alive. They brought them in this Posture straight to the
Archbishop, who being immediately informed who they were, brought them into one
of the Dining-Rooms of his Palace, and had very much ado to appease the Rabble.
After that he had signified to them the Humor of the People of that Country,
and the extreme Danger to which they had exposed themselves, he expressed to them
the sensible Regret he had for the Affront they had received, and showed them a
thousand Civilities, in Token of the Respect he bore to the Canons of the most
Noble Chapter, that was in the whole Empire. And the next day very early in the
Morning, he let them escape by a back Door, for fear of their being Torn to
pieces by the Rabble. See here what an Extravagant Zeal for Superstitious
Observances is capable to produce; neither Civility, nor Virtue, nor Reason,
being able to gave Check to the furious Effects thereof. Jesus Christ certainly
never left us any such Spirit, or any such Religion. It wanted but very little
of our falling into the same Trouble, by the Imprudence of my Companion, the
Evening we Arrived in the Suburbs of Naples; and had they put us into the
Inquisition, it would have been much worse with us.

I do not in the least disapprove of Fasts; but on the contrary think them to
be both commendable and useful for a Christian to Exercise them, especially
when accompanied with Prayers and Almsgiving, for the humbling of our Souls,
and the subduing and subjecting our Bodies to the Spirit; that is, for the
Mortifying our Brutal Passions, which commonly owe their force and vigor to a
healthy pampered State of the Body, and too great Repletion; and to give the
Spirit a greater liberty and agility in the practice of Virtue. Nay, what is
more, I could wish with all my Heart, that Christians would exercise themselves
by times altogether, in this good Practice, to the End of Encouraging one
another by their good Examples, and by their Union in so good a Work, to draw
down upon themselves the Heavenly Blessing. But I cannot by any means approve
the going about to force People to this Duty, by the Confiscation of all their
Goods, by Tortures and Fire, and by a most pitiless and cruel Inquisition. I
don't believe, that God ever gave such Power to Men over one another, as to
proceed to such barbarous and inhuman Constraints; and those who pretend to
such a Power, ought not to be called Pastors, but Robbers and Murderers, who
are got into the Sheepfold only, to rob, destroy and kill.

The next Morning betimes we Entered the City of Naples, where I made a Stay of
Three Weeks. I went to Visit the Great Hospital for the Sick, which without
doubt is very well Administered; neither is the Direction of it in the Hands of
Monks and Priests; but the Nobility of Naples have the whole ordering of it. I
was extremely edified to see a Score of Gentlemen, Knights, Earls and
Marquesses, who served there in their Turns by Weeks, and who themselves
carried Broth and Meat to the Sick, having their great Rapiers by their Sides,
after the Spanish Mode, with a Neatness and Cheerfulness, capable of
alleviating the Maladies of these poor Patients. The Apartment for Women was up
Stairs, who were served in the same manner by Noble Matrons. I have Visited
many other Hospitals in Italy, appointed for Sick-People, which were Governed
by Friars, whom they call Brothers of Charity; but never met with any thing
that might be compared with that of Naples. These Monks are commonly very
peevish and cross, and frequently Abuse the Sick with Words and Strokes, after
having taken to their own share, the best part of the Charities, that are sent
to the poor Sick. I could not keep my self, upon a time, from saying to one of
these Monks, who had Beaten one of the poor Sick, That that Action of his
struck me with Horror. To Excuse himself, he told me, That I did not know that
Sick Person so well as he did, and that he was one of those, who
notwithstanding that they are perfectly Cured, do yet complain continually,
only that they may remain still in the Hospital; and that to make them weary of
it, they were forced to Abuse them in this manner.

They had none of all these base and unworthy Considerations in this Great
Hospital of Naples; on the contrary, they took Methods quite opposite to those
now mentioned, to incline those that were recovered to leave the Hospital.
Whilst they are Sick, they are kept strictly to the Rules the Physicians
Appoint concerning them, who direct the quantity and quality of their Meat and
Drink; which they execute with a punctuality that is to admiration. Afterward,
when the Physicians declare that they are wholly Cured, they continue them
there still for Three Weeks, and they are Treated Morning and Evening with all
sorts of delicate Viands, boiled and roasted; and served with the choicest
Fruits and best Wine, in such a quantity, as may most contribute to the
strengthening and nourishing of them, without doing them any prejudice. At the
end of the Three Weeks, those that want Clothes have them bestowed upon them,
and a piece of Money besides; and so are sent away. By this means there is never
a Poor Patient in the Hospital, but wishes, that this Three Weeks time were
come for him too, to be so Nobly Entertained: And by this means, they are put
to no trouble, to discharge their Hospital of those who are Recovered.

The Great Hospital of Milan, and some others of Italy, are almost Administered
after the same manner. I could wish the Italians would be advised, not to trust
their Charities to Priests and Monks, so much as they do, who, for the most
part, have the most pityless and inhuman Hearts that can be: For indeed this is
a Curse which God pours forth upon them, for being the Authors of so many
Idolatrous Practices and Profanations they are guilty of; to give them a Heart
as herd and unrelenting, as that of Pharaoh. They would do much better, to take
the pains of distributing their Alms themselves; because we find, that in those
Places where they do so, things are managed in so noble and generous a manner.

Having taken a View of the Hospital of Naples, I spent some part of my time to
go and see the Fair Churches of that great and stately City; which indeed are
such, that nothing can be seen more Rich, Magnificent, or Beautiful: There is
scarely the least Parish Church, which is not all Gilt and Painted from the top
to the bottom. All the Altars and Chapels are built of Precious Stones; and
there is never a Church, but has Silver-Candlesticks, Basins, and Lamps in
great numbers, without counting the Shrines and Cases for their Relics and
their Crosses, that for the most part are of pure Gold: Which made a Viceroy
of Naples say, That if all the Churches of that City were made into One, and
that all their Riches made up but One Treasury, it would by far surpass in
Beauty and Riches the very Temple of Solomon; and that by this means, there
might be seen at this Day, to the Honor of the Neapolitans, something more
glorious, than was that which in past Ages had been the Admiration of all the
World. For my part, I do truly believe, that in making this Imaginary Union of
the Churches of Naples, it would by far surpass in sumptuousness the same Union
we might conceive of all the Churches of Rome. Yet must we not conclude from
hence, that therefore the Neapolitans are the better Men; God having made it
appear two or three years ago, that he cares little for these Material Temples,
by permitting the most part of all those fair and sumptuous Churches, to be
overthrown by a dreadful Earthquake.

It would be much better in my Opinion, to take away all the superfluous
Ornaments of Churches, and to turn them into a Stock, for the Entertainment of
the Poor of the Parish, who are the Temples of the Holy Ghost, than to study
Night and Day, to embelish Pillars and Dead-Walls. This without doubt would be
much more pleasing to God, than all the fair and stately Fabrics that could be
built. It is sufficient, that the Places where we Meet to worship God, be
decently Adorned, without any thing of superfluous Costliness, and convenient
for the Faithful that Assemble there; but it is the holding forth of a false
Notion of Religion, to go about to persuade Christians, as the Popish-Priests
endeavor to do, That the more lustrous and dazelling their Churches are with
Gold, Silver, and Precious Stones; the more abundantly the Holy Ghost pours
forth of his Graces and Blessings on them. One of the fairest and most
sumptuous Churches of Naples, was that of the Jesuits, save only that the
Length of it was not answerable to the Breadth of it; and yet all Rich and
Beautiful as it was, we see the late Earthquake took no pity of it, but in a
manner totally overthrew it. This probably will give an occasion to the
Fathers, to build another more proportionable, and probably also more Rich and
more Magnificent.

All manner of Monks and Religious live generally very richly and plentifully
at Naples, and all of them have many Monasteries and Convents there of their
own Order; but none of them all are more Rich and Powerful, than the Jesuits;
they are they that have all the Nobility at command, who do nothing without
them: It Is by their means Men get into Places and Offices: There are no Matches
made, which they have not a hand in; yea, they stoop so low, as to take care of
furnishing them with Men and Maidservants. And indeed there is more Policy in
this last Point, than one would imagine. We must not be so weak to think their
Charity puts them upon these kind of Services, but rather their own Interest;
for by this means they have constant Intelligence of whatsoever passes in all
Families, and are sure of a Party, who will dispose all things in favor of
them, upon occasion. But if the Persons thus placed, should chance in the least
to disoblige them, as they have found the means of getting them in, so they
will soon find a way to turn them out again: Which makes, That these Servants,
for the most part, had rather betray their own Masters, than to hazard the
displeasure of the Jesuits; as being assured, That if their Masters, at the
worst, should come to discover their Falseness, that the Jesuits will either
make their Peace, or do their endeavor to seek out for them another Condition,
that may be more for their Advantage. But if they should chance to offend the
Jesuits, they had as good go out of the World. All the Jesuits of Italy, for
some Years since, have followed the Model the Fathers of Naples have given
them, to place Servants and Maids; and generally all those that have a mind to
enter upon any Service whatsoever. Insomuch, that People go and Address
themselves to the Jesuits there, as here in London they go to the Offices of
Intelligence, with this distinction only, That instead of giving a piece of
Money, they oblige themselves, to be their Slaves for ever.

But notwithstanding all this great Access the Jesuits have every where, and
that they are so Rich and Potent; yet it may be also with Truth affirmed, that
they are at this day generally hated of all the World. The Princes and Grandees
have no further esteem for them, but as they fear to hazard the ruining of
their Affairs, should they once offer to disoblige them; but at the bottom, and
in truth, they love them not. The Common People also are very weary of seeing
themselves reduced to Slavery, under the insolent Domination of the Jesuits,
who Command them in the most Imperious and Servile manner that can be: And
generally all sorts of Priests, Monks, and Religious, hate them mortally, as
being their greatest Enemies; and a sort of People, that carry it toward them
with Loftiness and Disdain, who have already deprived them of a great part of
their Temporal Revenues, and who probably will find themselves strong enough
one day, to invade all the rest. Some very Intelligent Persons have Cast the
Account, that they have already usurped near one half of the Goods belonging to
the Order of S. Bennet. They make Kings and Princes to grant them whatsoever
they please, and they are continually begging some Abbeys or Priories of S.
Bennet, either to make Colleges of them, or to unite them to their Professed
Houses. What is more, they make themselves Masters of, and invade them with the
extremest Insolence.

I had a Letter shown me once, which the Father Rector of the College of the
Jesuits of Clermont of Paris, writ to the Father Prior of the Abbey of S.
Benignus of Dijon, upon account of the Priory of Laris, which did belong to
those Fathers, who are Benedictins, and which the Jesuits had a mind to get for
themselves; which runs thus:

My Reverend Father,
WE have thought good to Unite the Priory of Laris, which depends on your Abbey,
to our College of Clermont, to augment the Revenues thereof: And forasmuch as
the Consent of your Community is necessary for this, we doubt not but you will
show all readiness in giving the same. You know that Father de la Chaisse
concerns himself in this Matter, and the Power he has at Court, ought to
affright you, from incurring his Indignation by your Refusal; so that we hope,
that all things on your side will correspond with our Wishes.

My Reverend Father, Your, etc.


The Benedictins of this Abbey having called a Chapter, consulted what was best
to be done; but were so terrified with this Threatening Letter of the Jesuits,
that they basely and cowardly consented, that that great Priory should be
dismembered from their Abbey, and Incorporated with the College of Clermont, as
it is at present.

The Jesuits are like to Drones, who enter upon the Labors of others, and eat
the Bees Honey: They are the last come into the Church of Rome, and yet they are
the first in Power, in numbers of Houses, and in Riches. The great number of
Colleges they have, surpasses all belief.

And now I am speaking of their Colleges, it brings to my mind a very ingenious
Epigram which one of their Scholars made at Dola in Burgundy, upon occasion of
their taking Possession of a College which they have there, and is called l'
Arc, or the Bow. The Jesuit, who was the Rhetoric Regent, told his Scholars,
That they knew very well that the Famous College of la Flesche, in Flanders,
belonged to the Fathers of the Society; and that now, by a wonderful and Divine
Providence, the Magistrate of Dola had bestowed upon them the Piazza and fair
Buildings of l' Arc; wherefore his Will was, That they should endeavor every
one of them, to make an Epigram upon this so happy an Encounter, proposing a
Reward to him that should best acquit himself of the Task. They accordingly,
all of them, set their Wits upon the Rack to produce something more than
ordinary upon so rare a Subject. Some flattered them, That with this their Bow
and Arrow (for this is the English of l' Arc and la Flesche) they would sooner
or later subjugate the World: Others applying it to their Doctrine, said, That
the Bow by its strength represented the Solidity of it, and the piercing Point
of the Arrow, the Subtilty thereof: Others, that were greater Liars than the
rest, or it may be also to Laugh at them in their Sleeves, said, That the Piety
and Virtue of the Jesuits lifted them up to Heaven, as the Bow does the Arrow.
But the most happy and lucky Wit of all was his, who made this most excellent
pat Distick: Arcum Dola dedit Patribus, dedit Alma Sagittam
Gallia; quis Funem quem meruere dabit?
Fair France the Arrow, Dola gave the Bow;
Who shall the String, so well deserved, bestow?
It Is without Controversy, that the Scholar who made this, had best deserved
the promised Recompense; but instead thereof he was shamefully expelled the
College. For my part, I wish neither Halter nor Death to these Fathers, only I
could wish, from a Spirit of Christian Charity, that they would once seriously
think of changing their Evil Ways, and that they would not drag along with
them, as they do, so many Thousands down the way of Perdition. Or at least, I
could heartily wish, they would give over the Profaning the Holy Name of JESUS,
by appropriating it to themselves. Of all the Popes that the Church of Rome has
had, there is not one to be found, that ever durst take to himself the Name of
S. Peter, out of the respect they had to that Apostle; and yet these Wretches
have had the Effrontery, to take to themselves that of our Adorable Savior,
insomuch that I cannot name the Name of JESUS, but these Wretches immediately
come to my mind. Yea, they are the cause, why many People whom they give
occasion to Curse them, pronounce that Holy Name most Irreverently, mingling it
with the wicked Words and Revilings they bestow upon.

I don't pretend to any thing of a Prophet; yet durst I almost venture to
Prognosticate thus much, That like as this Order of the Jesuits, has in a very
short time raised it self to a prodigious Greatness, so it will not be long,
before it take a Fall equal to its Elevation. Its own weight shall sink it,
Mole ruet sua, and its Ruin shall drag the Dissolution of the Church of Rome
along with it. For then Peoples Eyes will be opened, to see how shamefully they
have been abused and gulled by a Company of Men, who pretending to be the
Pillars of the Church, and professing the outside of Virtue, rejected the
Substance thereof. God grant that Atheism may not thrive by the approaching
Wreck of that Church; but that all at that time may terminate in a holy
Reformation, whereof the Church of England has already given so perfect a
Model.

The Jesuits are they who have the fairest and richest Churches not only at
Naples, but also throughout almost all the other parts of Italy; and they are
also the best Men of the World, according to the Sense I have already
explained. After having taken a view of their Colleges and Churches in this
Noble City, I had a favorable occasion offered me, of seeing the Relics of S.
Januarius, which are kept in the Cathedral, and where the Roman Catholics
boast of having a perpetual Miracle: For they show you a Vial full of Blood,
averring it to be that of S. January, which as soon as it is brought near to
his Body, turns to Liquor. The Reverend Doctor Burnet, now Bishop of Salisbury,
has, in his Letters, given us his Opinion concerning this Relick, which is very
probable. As for my part, though I was a Priest of the Church of Rome, yet they
did not so far Honor me, as to let me handle the Vial, that contains the
Blood, notwithstanding my earnestness to obtain that favor. This indeed made
me somewhat Suspicious of the Relick; for if a Priest has the Power and
Authority of handling the Body of Jesus Christ in the Eucharist after
Consecration, he may very well, I should think, be allowed to touch all other
sorts of Relics, which are so far inferior to that. I imagined therefore, and
not without reason, that there might be some Concavities in the Glass, which
contained a reddish Liquor, which the Priests, who knew the Trick of it, could
when ever they pleased, cause to be diffused over the middle of the Glass. They
declare to all Persons that come to see this Relick, that a Heretic was once
Converted at the sight of this Miracle; so that here is now a Second Miracle
produced, to confirm and prove the first.

I saw since at Milan, a Minister of Geneva, who was turned Papist at Turin,
and after that he had Traveled over all Italy, and amongst the rest had seen
the Relick of S. January; I asked him, What he thought of it? He desired me in
the Name of God, not to speak to him about it, for fear it should raise those
thoughts in him, that might incline him to turn Heretic again: For he told me,
that when the Priests were about to show it him, they fell into the greatest
Confusion imaginable, because the Spring of the Machin, would not Play; but at
last they shak'd the Bottle so long, till they made a shift to show him
something, that was Reddish and Liquid. He added that another Minister, who had
abjured with him at Turin, and who was there at the same time present with him,
protested to him, at their coming out of the Church, that for his part he had
seen enough, and was resolved to return to Geneva. So that we see here a Saint
that is an Ambo-dexter, and Works Miracles both ways, by making Protestants,
turn Papists, and the Papists, Protestants. The same Gentleman protested to me,
that if he had no other Reasons to believe the Roman Catholic Religion, that
Miracle would never have had the Efficacy, to persuade him of the Truth of it,
as they pretended it had done others.

I had also another Question to ask of this New-Papist, which was, How the
Heretics lived at Geneva? Because being a New-Convert, and having been a
Minister there, I hoped he would discover something Extraordinary concerning
their Practices. He told me, that he could not tell me of any Superstititious
Practice that they had, nor of any Fraud or wicked Action, that they Committed,
to Engage the People to their Party; and that almost all their public Acts of
Religion, consisted in these four things; the Reading of the Holy Scripture,
the Singing of Psalms, Preaching, and Celebrating the Lord's Supper. I prayed
him also to tell me sincerely, Whether what I had heard reported of them, from
my first Youth, were true or no? viz. that they have the Figure of a Devil in
their Churches? and that as soon as the Sermon is Ended, all the Hugonots went
and Prostrated themselves before it, and Worshipped it? (This is that Story the
Jesuits so often tell to their Scolars, in their Schools, to inspire them with
Horror against the Heretics;) His Answer was, that it was a very great Lie,
and that the Hugonots had so great an Aversion for all sorts of Images in their
Churches, that they never suffered any to be there; neither of God, nor of the
Angels, nor of the Saints, nor of the Devil. So that it seems he could tell me
nothing, that might give me any Disesteem for the Protestants; but on the
contrary, he very much Diminished the false Idea, they had given me of them. He
only declared, that the sole Reason that had inclined him to leave them was,
because he believed their Doctrine not to be Sound, and that they put a false
Interpretation on the Scriptures. In a word, he did not believe, said he, that
their Divinity was good. But indeed he could not say less, to make Men believe
he was a Papist.

I have since made this Reflection, that it is some kind of Proof of the true
Religion, when those who leave it, have nothing to object against the Manners
or Practices of those who profess it. I defy a Protestant that leaves the
Church of England, to turn Papist, to Ridicule or Disapprove the least Ceremony
that is practiced in the same; for should he do this, he must either Scoff at
the Preaching of the Word, or the Common Prayers, or the singing of Psalms, or
at the Communion, and this is that they cannot do, because these are Acts of
Religion, which are practiced in the said Church, with an Exemplary Devotion,
and without any Superstition at all. But the Case is not the same, with those
who Abandon the Church of Rome; for they can tell you a thousand things that
are in Vogue there, the bare Relation of which, without any the least change or
exaggeration, cannot but excite the Disesteem or Indignation of honest and good
Men.

But to return again to Naples; after having Visited the Churches and Relics,
I had the Curiosity one Evening, to go and take a Walk before the Haven, where
three of the Pope's Galleys were Arrived that day, and I entered into all three
of them, to see how the poor Gally-Slaves were treated there. I must
acknowledge that my Heart was not Stanch enough to resist the Motions of
Compassion at so pitiful a Spectacle. The Inhumane Cruelty of the Masters that
beat them, surpasses a^y thing I can tell you of it. I could not conceive how
Christians, could have the Heart, to handle with so much Rigor, those who were
their Brethren in Christ. 'True it is, I represented to my self, that all these
were miserable Wretches, that had been Condemned for their Crimes, and that
Crimes were to be Punished.

As I was entertaining my self with these sad Thoughts, I cast my Eyes upon
Three of them, who seemed to me to be New-Comers, and who were all fastened to
the same Bench. One of these Three hid his Face with his Hands, and another of
them Beckned me to come to him. As soon as I was come near, he asked me,
Whether I did not know him? I could not of a sudden call him to mind, because
they had cut his Hair; and besides, his Gally-Slaves Habit had much disguised
him: But having Eyed him with more attention, I knew him to be a Person, who
had been the Steward of a Cardinal at Rome. He told me, That the two others,
who were of each side of him, were Monks, who had left their Monasteries, and
had lived sometime at Rome Incognito, under a Secular Garb. The Steward told
me, He had been Accused, of having wished for the Death of his Master; and the
Cardinal sometime after having found himself a little Indisposed, he firmly
believed, That his Steward had Poisoned him. They assured me, all Three of
them, That they had been discovered, or rather betrayed by means of their
Confession.

No Body at Rome knew, that these Two unhappy Wretches were Monks; only the
Humor took one of them, to go to discover himself in Confession, and to make
mention also of his Companion; and the very next Day they were both of them
seized and sent to the Galleys, withou telling them why, or for what. As for
the Steward, he told me, It was but a few Days since, that he had Confessed the
secret Hatred he had against his Master; and his Confessor, who was always very
Welcome at the Cardinal's House, had Informed him thereof; which made him
interpret a small Fit of the Colic, he had soon after, to be an effect of the
Poison his Steward had given him; and that upon this Cruel and
Ill-grounded-Suspicion, he sent him, whom he supposed to be the Author of it,
to the Galleys. They all Three of them wished earnestly, That the Gally in
which they were, might be shattered to pieces against some Rock or other, or
sink-down to rights in the Sea, forasmuch as Death would prove much more
acceptable to them, than the Slavery to which they were reduced: But they
protested, That if by any other more happy Accident they ever came to be set at
Liberty, they would never hear of Confessing any more, nor of a pretended
Secret, which was never kept, and for which they now paid so dearly.

This had led us to a Point which is of a very large extent, and wherein the
Papists make one of the chief Parts of their Religion to consist, viz. the
Confession of Sins. Of all the Practices that in process of time have been
introduced into the Church of Rome, there is none at which I am more
astonished, than at this, and wherein the Artifice of the Monks and Priests
has been more subtly employed. There is nothing more pleasing to the World,
than to know the most secret Thoughts, and the very bottom of Men's Hearts; but
on the other hand, neither is there any thing which Men are more loath to
impart to others, because of the Ill use may be made of it. The Angels take an
unutterable pleasure mutually to communicate their Thoughts, and reciprocally
to receive this knowledge from each other; forasmuch as being confirmed in
Grace, they cannot hurt one another. But the Nature of Man, since the miserable
Fall of Adam, is so extremely corrupted, and his inclination to Evil is so
great, that a man that should speak all he thinks, and all that he does, would
expose himself to a thousand Dangers: Which is the Reason why Secrecy, which in
the state of Innocence would have proved very useless, is at this time, in this
state of Corruption, become a necessary Virtue; as being a main ground of his
security and safety.

But let us suppose, that a Person had the power to penetrate into the Thoughts
and Hearts of others, how great an Advantage might he draw thence, to further
his own Affairs? For if this Person were of an Ambitious Humor, it would be
enough for him, by his knowledge of other Men's Thoughts, to Address himself to
such Men, as he knew might be easily gained to endeavor his Elevation. If he
was Covetous, he would only Converse with those whom he knew to be of a Liberal
Heart, and whom he might easily persuade to gratify him. If he were addicted
to sensual and infamous Pleasures, he might, without ever fearing a Repulse,
confidently apply himself to those who had the most Lustful Inclinations. A
Revengful Person needed only to betake himself to those who were of a Bloody
and Inhuman Temper, to make them the Executors of his Revenge. A General of an
Army would not stand in need of Spies; but knowing all the Designs of his
Enemy, he would be thereby Instructed how to order his own Actions and Conduct;
he might always be sure of his Blow, and could never be taken at a Surprise.
Besides, what a pleasure and diversion it would be to him, to tickle his Fancy
with a thousand Maggots and foolish Thoughts, which continually flutter in the
Heads of most Men, and which would be no less divertizing, than the most merry
Comedies and ridiculous Farces.

In a word, having considered all, we may well assert, That nothing would
either be more pleasant or profitable, than this intimate Knowledge of the
Thoughts of Men's Hearts. And this is the very thing the Priests and Monks of
the Church of Rome, have in some sort procured to themselves by means of their
Auricular Confession, as they are pleased to call it. To bring about this
Advantageous Design, they make use of the 23th Verse of the XXth Chapter of S.
John; Whosoever Sins ye remit, they are remitted unto them; and whosoever Sins
ye retain, they are retained: And of Verse 16th of the Fifth Chapter of the
Epistle of S. James; Confess your Faults one to another: The former of which
Texts they Interpret concerning the Power, they pretend to have been given
them, to pardon Sins; and the other, of that Auricular Confession, which they
pretend must be made to the Priests. At the first, they Confessed their Sins
only in General; or if they specified any, they were such as had been Public,
and had given Scandal to others; but, by little and little, they have obliged
Persons to Confess their most Secret Sins, and that with all the most
particular Circumstances thereto belonging. Nay, besides all this, they will
have Persons Confess to them, all their Evil Inclinations; that is to say, they
will know where the Strength or Weakness of a Person lies, before he shall get
out of their Hands.

The first Question they make to you at Confession is, Who you are? Your
Quality, Condition, and Way of Living? Afterward, they ask, What you have
done; the Place where you committed the Sin; the Means and Instruments you have
made use of, to put it in execution; the End you had in doing it; the Manner of
your Committing it; at what Time, and with whom you have Sinned; and how often
you have Committed the same Sin? In a word, a dextrous Confessor knows so well
how to search and sift his Penitent, that nothing shall escape his Scrutiny.

I should certainly make the Papists Blush, should I begin to relate here the
Confession of their Whores, and what Questions the Priests put to them; but I
bless God, I have not Impudence enough to undertake it; and I should be very
loath, to blot the Paper with what the Priests and Monks of the Church of Rome,
make no Bones to mingle with their Sacrament of Penance. I shall only tell you,
That the avidity and eagerness wherewith the Priests show themselves carried,
to the Confessing of those that are of the Female Sex, make it very apparent,
how much Pleasure they take in putting Questions to them, and Hearing of their
Answers. They will dispatch a Man's Confession in less than Half an Hours time;
but if they have got a Handsom-Woman to Task, they will keep her in a
Confessional-Chat two or three Hours together.

I shall never forget a Stratagem, some Jesuits Scholars made use of, to Tole
their Father Confessor to the Confessing-Chair. The Jesuits oblige their
Scholars, to Confess themselves every Holy Day or Festival in the Year, and
that under the Penalty of being Whipped, in case of Neglect; so that they perform
this Duty rather out of Fear of Punishment, than from any Spirit of Penitence
and Devotion. In the mean time the Confessors, who are appointed to take their
Confessions, are not at all earnest to discharge that Function; but let their
Penitents lie often four or five Hours on their Knees in the Church, before
ever they come at them. The Scholars had agreed to Play a Match at Tennice, as
soon as they should be dismissed from Confession, but did not know by what means
to get themselves dispatched. The Fathers Confessors were all Playing at Bowls
in their Garden, and as often as any of the Scholars came to ask for them, they
were sent away with this Answer, That the Fathers were engaged in Meditation.
At last, as they were pumping for something that might relieve them, they
called to mind, that a pretty young Woman, called Alison, spent almost every
Day three or four Hours in the Confessional with the Father Rector; whereupon
they deputed one of their Company, to go and tell him, That Madam Alison waited
for him at the Confessional. The Father immediately left his Game at Bowls, and
ran all in a Sweat to his Confessional; where he found none but this Troop of
young Scholars, whom he did not much care to Confess. Wherefore to rid himself
of them, he dispatched them a Great Benediction, telling them, That he knew
already what they had to say, and that they had nothing but some Scholars Sins
to Confess to him, which did not once deserve a Formal Absolution; and so sent
them away very well satisfied with his quick Riddance. However, considering
with how much Expedition he had dismissed them, they said to one another; Well,
certainly we have great Reason to Bless God, that we have not so many Sins to
Confess, as Madam Alison has; for otherwise he would not have made an end of
Confessing us all, till to Morrow Morning.

It Is in these Confessionals, that the Priests and Monks do Court their
Mistresses. I once chanced to find in one of the Sides of a Confessional, an
Amorous Letter, which an Italian Monk had writ to his Lady. An Old Woman, who
was come on purpose to Confession, to receive the said Letter, had by Mischance
dropped it, as she came out of the Confessional. The Letter was full of Wit: He
told her, That the greatest Sin she ever had committed in her Lifetime was,
that she had not been so good as her Word in coming to Confession that Week: If
this Neglect did proceed from the difficulty she found to Love him, he had a
Penance ready Cut out for her; which was to Command her to Love him better. I
don't remember the rest of the Letter; only thus much I can tell you, that it
was stuffed with nothing but Flourishes and Love, and there was no Name
subscribed to it.

Those who have a quick Ear, and draw near to these Confessionals, do often
hear pretty Stories. There sometimes happen great Tumults in the Convents, and
amongst the Priests, upon the account of young Women Penitents: For if any of
them do chance to change their Confessor, this Alteration causes great
Jealousies, which many times are not extinguished, but by Poison, or with the
Blood of one of the Competitors; for they presently interpret it, as if the
other Confessor, had by his Artifices allured, and (as it were) debauched his
Penitent.

A Father Jesuit, very Famous for his Sermons at Mentz in Germany, desired me
to make his Peace with a Gentlewoman of Quality, who, for some time, had left
off coming to Confession to him. The Lady told me, That she was astonished, to
hear the Father talk of making his Peace with her; that for her part, she had
never had any the least Quarrel with him; and that the only Reason, why she had
not Confessed to him of late was, because it was more for her Convenience to go
to the Carmelites, as being nearer to her House. When I returned this Answer to
the Jesuit, his Color changed of a sudden, and he appeared to be in a strange
agitation of Spirit. In a word, a Fever seized him the same Night, and the
Charitable Lady, for fear of giving any occasion to his Death, sent him word,
That she would come and Confess to him for time to come.

The greatest Secret they have to allure Ladies to Confession is, to be very
Complaisant to them, to sooth them with a company of sweet Words, to testify
their loving of them Tenderly, and from the Bottom of their Hearts. Sometimes
they find it very troublesome at first, to make them Confess as they ought, that
is, Clearly and Plainly without any mincing of the Matter, and with all the
Circumstances of some shameful Sins, and especially those of the Flesh. They
are fain to take a great Compass, to bring them to the Point, they would have
them at; but by little and little, and a great deal of Pains-taking, they at
last weather the Point, and make them Impudent enough. Then it is they assure
them, that they are Arrived at that Simplicity, Purity, and Faithfulness, which
are of such absolute Necessity, for the well Discharging of the Duty of
Confession. Hence it is that those Women who mostly frequent the Confessionals,
and who are Arrived to that degree of Perfection, I just now mentioned, that
is, to be less shamefaced than the rest, become also the most bold and
shameless in all Companies. They are got past Blushing at any thing, and with a
great deal of Freedom, make use of those Terms their Confessors have taught
them at their Confessions. I upon a time expressed my self not over well
satisfied with the Discourse, which some Devout or Bigoted Young Woman, had in
the Presence of two Young Counts of the Empire, whose Governor I was. I took
the liberty to tell them, that it did not become them; but they with a terrible
Impudence, which yet was accompanied with some little Smartness of Wit,
answered me, that they did not believe that they had spoken so unhandsomly, but
that they were ready to repeat the same Words in Confession. Indeed they have
made it a School of Impudence and Lascivious Discourse, where those that speak
Broadest, and call a Spade, a Spade, receive the greatest Praises. They are not
afraid to tell them; Courage Madam, the more clearly, and in the more proper
Terms you do express your Self, by so much the more will you show your
Sincerity to God, who hears you, and the better I shall like you. To Facilitate
this the more, they have these Words writ on their Confessionals with great
Letters, GOD HEARS THEE. It is a thing that will Surprise a Man to see young
Girls amongst the Papists, that know those things which they ought, by right,
to be ignorant of all their Life time, and all this by means of Confession.

It is a matter of great Advantage to be the Confessor of Ladies, and the more
one can get of them, the more Charitable Nurses one may be assured of, who will
never suffer a Man to want any thing, they can furnish him with. They from time
to time send Presents to their Confessors, which do make them full amends for
all their Pains, they have taken in hearing their Confessions. Moreover the
Confessions are very gainful to the Priests, by reason of the Pecuniary
Penances they impose upon them, for their Sins. There is always a Trunk or Box
at the lower end of their Churches, whereof they are the Turn-Keys, and
according as they know the Person to be Stocked with Riches, they command him
for his Penance to go and put such a Sum into the Trunk. We gathered once five
hundred Crowns on one of the Easter Holy Days, in a Parish at Venice, and the
next day we divided the Money amongst Eight of us, who had been the Confessors.
The Custom amongst them is, when any Covetous Man comes to Confession, to
represent to him his Sin, in the blackest Colors they can Possible; and
afterward to give him good Words, to Sweeten him, and incline him to
Liberality; if thereupon he Testify great Sorrow for his Sin, they never give
him Absolution, till he have given some Sound Marks of his Repentance, by
dropping a very plentiful Alms into the Trunk: And if he show any hardness of
Heart, yet they Absolve him nevertheless, for fear of Distasting him altogether
with Confession; because they are in hopes to find him another time in a better
Humor, and better disposed for Repentance. When Thieves and Robbers, Usurers,
and those that use false Weights and Measures, come to Confession, they oblige
them, as they ought, to make Restitution, as far as it lies in their Power so
to do. They enjoin those who are not able to make a Personal Restitution, that
is, to the Persons they have Defrauded, either because they are Dead, or
because they do not know where they are; these I say they enjoin to make
Restitution to the Church, that is, to put an Equivalent Sum into the Trunk. As
for Personal Restitutions, they are commonly performed by the Hand of the
Confessor, to the End that the Penitent, who must be Concealed, may not come
into any Danger, as he would, should he do it himself, of falling into the
Hands of Justice. And in this case there always comes a considerable part of
the Sum to the Churches share, which he that was Robbed can never recover.

A Neapolitan Knight was Robbed of two Thousand Crowns in Coin, at the time of
a Jubilee, granted by Pope Innocent the XIth. He who had committed the Robbery,
went and Confessed himself to the Jesuits, and put all the Money into the Hands of
the Father Rector, who had heard his Confession, to restore it to the Gentleman
to whom it did belong. The Jesuits put Five hundred Crowns of it into their
Trunk, and carried the rest to the Knight, but he refused to take the One
Thousand Five hundred Crowns, and would have the whole Sum restored to him. The
Jesuits after some Endeavors to persuade him to receive his Money, declared to
him, that in case he would not take it before twice Twenty Four hours came
about, they would cast the rest into the Trunk also, and that he should not
have one Penny of it. And they were as good as their words. But the Knight
repenting himself some days after, came and told them, that since it could be
no otherwise, he would content himself with the One Thousand Five hundred
Crowns of his Money. But the Jesuits flowted at him, telling him, That he was
come too late, and there was no Remedy, because the Church was in actual
Possession of the Money; thus it was impossible for the Gentleman to recover any
part of it. This word of the Church, which they make use of, when they say, the
Money is given to the Church, the Church is in Possession of it, etc. is only a
fine word to deceive the Simple: For the Church in the Sense, they take it, is
a thing in the Air, and indeed they are the Priests and Monks only that possess
the Money, and make use of it for themselves.

Some believe that Confession, as it is practiced in the Church of Rome, is a
very proper means to remedy many Disorders, and to prevent a great many Sins,
which if that were Abrogated, many would make more bold with: For, say they,
many are restrained from committing a bad Action, from the shame they have to
Confess it afterward The Papists will tell you, that the Protesttants reject
this Sacrament, because they love Libertinism, and hate all manner of
restraint, and any thing that may serve to humble them. As for my part, who
have tried both States, without flattering the Party I have chosen, I do
profess, That I have observed more of Honesty, of Conscience, and of Virtue, in
the External part of a Civil Life, amongst the Protestants, than ever I found
amongst the Papists, with all their Confessions. As for that which is Internal,
it is God alone that can judge of it: And I hope, that the Fear of God, and of
his Judgments, does bring forth far more Noble Effects in their Hearts, than a
Human Shamefacedness does produce in those who follow the Communion of Rome.
Besides, I conceive that Auricular Confession may be rather prejudicial, than
any way advantageous to a Christian Life, which I prove thus: Bad Company and
Vain Conversation are prohibited, because they are commonly known to corrupt
good Manners: Corrumpunt bonos mores Colloquia prava. Now we may truly say,
That the Priests and the Monks of the Church of Rome, are every day, whilst
they are in their Confessionals, in very lewd Company, as where they hear
nothing but Blasphemies, lewd Practices, Villainies, Treasons, Robberies,
Murders, Revenge; In a word, whatsoever is superlatively Wicked and Infamous.
They in some sort familiarize themselves with such abominable Filthiness, by
the continual hearing of them, and the reiterated Examples thereof, which they
have almost continually before them, makes the Confessors accustom themselves
by degrees with them, and to have less horror for them, and commit them with
less reluctance. The Clergy being thus corrupted by the Seculars, do as it were
in Revenge influence a double Corruption upon the Seculars, and by the
perpetual circulation of their secret Communications, or Confessions, they
miserably infect and spoil one another. We may conclude then, that the
Confessionals are rather worse than Bad Company; and for the little good which
sometimes by chance they may be the cause of, they give occasion to far greater
Evils, which without there would never happen.

Moreover, we must add to this the dangerous and false Doctrine, that is Taught
and Preached in the Church of Rome, with relation to this Subject; which is
this, That Attrition being joined with Confession, is sufficient to Salvation,
to those who after Baptism are fallen into Mortal Sin. This Attrition,
according to them, is a Sorrow for having offended God, only for fear of the
Eternal Punishments of Hell, which are due to Sinners, without which they would
never have had any Sorrow for having offended him. They suppose therefore,
according to this Doctrine, that a Man who is altogether destitute of Charity,
or the Love of God; and, what is more, who has a formal Hatred against him, as
he considers him abstractedly in the effects of his Justice, may nevertheless
be saved, when he fears God only as an Avenging God; so he do but superadd to
this servile Fear, the Sacrament of Confession. This is that which gives a
wonderful presumption to Sinners, and encourages them to spend the chief part
of their Lives in the ways of Iniquity: For there is no Man, be he never so
profligately Wicked, who will not be ready to promise for himself, when he is
at the Point of Death, he shall doubtless be seized with the fear of falling
into the hands of the Living God, and yet have time enough to send for a
Confessor, to whom he may declare his Sins; Which done, he is as sure of going
to Paradise, as the good Thief was on the Cross.

This Doctrine was invented by the Priests of the Church of Rome, to exalt the
force and virtue of Auricular Confession, which is so pleasing and profitable
to them, though with the loss of so many Souls, who perish by this unhappy
Persuasion. Probably, after having deceived a great many others, they at last
deceive themselves also; for many of these Confessors Dye like Dogs, and make
desperate Ends, endeavoring to persuade themselves, that their Confession, and
their fear of falling into Hell with save them. I never found, that the Priests
and Monks were ever very ready to go and confess themselves: They love nothing
more, than to Confess others; and hate nothing worse, than to Confess
themselves. A Noble Venetian told me, That before the Publishing of a certain
Order by the Patriarch, by which he enjoined all Priests to Confess themselves
at least once a Month, upon Penalty of Interdict from Mass, and Suspension from
all Sacred Functions, there was scarcely a Priest to be seen at Venice that
went to Confession. One might see them often going directly from the Stews to
the Altar, and to Confess others; but as for themselves, they did not think it
worth the pains.

But at present they are obliged every Three Months, to bring their
Attestations to the Patriarch in Writing, that they have Confessed themselves
according to Order. The same Method is observed at Milan, and in several other
parts of Italy. As for the Hearing of Confessions, and especially those of the
Fair Sex, alas, the Case is altered with them, and they run to them very
greedily! You Will see them Walking in their Churches about their
Confession-Chairs from Morning to Night, to watch for a Bird to be snared in
their Net. How happy am I, (said once a Curate to me of a great City in Italy)
I have no Family to put me to Charge, and I have much more Money than I know
what to do with: I have often most Ravishing Concerts of Music in my Church,
in which I take unutterable Pleasure: When I have nothing else to do, I walk
under the sumptuous gilded Roofs of this Magnificent Temple, of which I make
(as it were) my own House: I never want Company at my Confessional, where I
meet with the satisfaction of hearing a Thousand different Stories and
Adventures: God grant me the Grace only, that after having enjoyed my Paradise
in this World, I may afterward go and possess it in the other.

This is what I had to declare to you, concerning the practice of Sacramental
Confession amongst the Papists; I shall only add, that the Secrecy, which is as
it were the Seal of it, is not so faithfully observed as they would fain have
us believe it is: For many things are discovered by these Confessors, and those
poor Gally-Slaves, I but just now mentioned, and who it is likely to the very
Hour do Groan under that Dreadful Task, are a sad, but certain instance of it.
A Confessor that reveals a Confession, according to the Law in that case
Provided, ought to be Burnt alive: But though many Confessions be every day
revealed, yet don't we find so much as one only Confessor, that has this
Sentence Executed upon him; forasmuch as it is in a manner impossible to
Convict them thereof. A Priest is always believed upon his Oath, and if he can
but resolve to Swear that he has not revealed the Confession, there is no
going any further; so that at present Fire and Faggot are only made use of
against Sorcerers and Heretics. I could here have related to you many gallant
Stories, as well as some very Tragical ones, which have been deposited with me
in Confession, but I find no inclination to do it; not because I fear the
Papists Fire, but because I am of the mind, that an honest Man, who has
charged himself with a Secret, is obliged in Honor to keep it, as far as
possibly he may. Indeed this is the very Reason, why I have only entertained
you here with some common things, which are known to all those who will take
the pains to be a little inquisitive, and which I have observed out of
Confession, or which have been told me by Persons of Credit, and who have put
me under no Engagement to conceal them.

Some it may be will be desirous to be informed, what kind of Penances the
Confessors impose upon their Penitents in Confession. According to the Doctrine
of Rome, though God does pardon Sins as to the Guilt, in Confession, and though he
remits to Penitents the External Punishment due to their Sins; yet nevertheless
his Will is, that they suffer here for the same Sins some petty temporal
Punishment; and this he has left to the Judgment and Disposal of the Priests of
the Church of Rome, who may do in it what they please themselves. Conformably
to this they order some to Fast on certain days, to others to say a Set of
Prayers, and to others to pay so much Money, and to some other to receive
Discipline or Penance. There have been found some of the New Saints of the
Popish Church, who out of Humility (so they express themselves,) have made
their Confessors to give them Discipline; S. Rose, S. Theresa, and Sister
Margaret of the Holy Sacrament, were of this Number. The Confessors, to give
them their due, are not wanting to give Credit to, and to extend these holy
Practices of Humility, upon which they bestow continual Elogies; yet in the
mean time, we see that the generality of People are not much affected with
these kind of Examples, and there are but some few of the Confessors whose
Persuasions, as to this Point, prove Effectual.

The Penitentiaries or Confessors of the Churches of S. Peter, of S. John of
Lateran, of Lorette, of S. January of Naples, of S. Petronius of Boulogn, and
of many other Places of Devotion in Italy, have great white-Rods in their
Hands, as they sit in their Confessionals, wherewith they strike not only those
that come to be Confessed, but also all sorts of Persons, be they Men or Women,
that present themselves before them to receive their Blessing, giving them
small Strokes upon their Head, their Shoulders, and their Ears; which done, the
Persons so Struck, make a very low Bow to them by way of Thanks for that
Favor. An Armenian once demanded of me, What was the meaning of this Practice?
I told him that it was a Practice of Humility, by which the Roman Catholics
expressed their readiness to receive all the Chastisements, which the Church
thought good to inflict upon them; to which he Answered, Smiling; Do you
believe (said he) that if these Black Men who Beat them, (he meant by that
Expression the Jesuits, who are the Confessors of S. Peter, and who are dressed
in Black) should make good Sound Strokes upon them, that the People would
express as much Earnestness to be favored with them, as now they do? I was not
able to answer him as to that Point: But this I know, that upon a time a
Protestant of Geneva received such Strokes from them, that instead of
Complimenting them for the Favor, he run away from them as fast as ever he
could. This Protestant, it seems, who was not Inured to the Ceremonies of the
Church of Rome, had the Curiosity to enter the Church of S. Peter, at the time
that Mass was Saying, and was either so Neglectful or Ignorant, as not to fall
down on his Knees when they Sounded the Bell at the Elevation of the Host:
Moreover, his Curiosity led him to draw near to a Statue of S. Peter, which is
on the Right side of the Church, near to the High Altar: This Statue is of
Brass, and Represents S. Peter sitting in a Chair; He has one of his Feet
stretched outward, and the People out of Devotion, and to show their Submission
to the Holy See, come and kiss his Toes, and put heir Heads under his Foot. The
Protestant seeing them in these Postures, could not forbear Laughing; but one
of the Jesuits, who had his Confessional near that place, and who had observed
him, came to him with his great Wand, and struck him as hard as ever he could
upon his Head and Shoulders: The Protestant betook himself to his Heels,
without so much as ever looking behind him; the Jesuit all the while pursuing
and beating him till he was got out of Church. The great Noise this made,
occasioned much Distraction to those that were Hearing Mass, and every one
said, it was a Heretic, whom the Jesuit had had the Zeal to bang out of the
Church. There was no Body that expressed the least Compassion for him; and the
Jesuit returned glorying in the Act he had performed, saying, That though he had
a good strong Arm, yet he found that Heretics Bones were stronger and harder.

At another time I saw a Protestant Abused after the same manner in the
Cathedral Church of Strasbourg, in Germany; which could not but be the more
sensible to these Gentlemen, because it was but a little before, that they had
voluntarily submitted themselves to the Domination of France, and that they
began already to use them like Slaves, having scarcely the free Exercise of
their Religion allowed them, in those few Churches, the Papists were pleased to
leave them.

GOD grant that others may become Wise by their Example: This is one of my most
ardent Desires, wherewith I conclude these Observations, made upon occasion of
my Journey ot Naples.

GOD of his Mercy afford this Grace to us all.
ERRATA.
Page 59. lin. 25. dele of his in presence, and read a like action of the Duke
of Mantua's Jester, etc.

BOOKS Printed for Robert Clavell; Published in Michaelmass Term, 1691.
A Defense of Pluralities, or holding two Benefices with Cure of Souls, as now
practiced in the Church of England.

The State of the Protestants of Ireland under the Late King James's
Government; in which their Carriage toward him is Justified, and the absolute
Necessity of their endeavoring to be freed from his Government, and of
submitting to their present Majesty's, is demonstrated. Licensed by the Right
Honorable the Earl of Notingham.

Observations on a Journey to Naples; where the Frauds, Cheats, and Ill-dealings
of Romish Priests, Jesuits and Monks are farther discovered: By the Author of a
late Book, Entitled, The Frauds of Romish Priests and Monks, etc.

L. Annaei Flori Rerum Romanarum Epitome, cum Interpretatione and Notis in usum
Serenissimi Delphini, una cum Indicibus copiosissimis oppido necessariis.

Compendium Graecum Novi Testamenti, continens ex 7959 versiculis totius Novi
Testamenti tantum versiculos 1900 (non tamen integros) in quibus omnes universi
Novi Test. voces, una cum Versione Latina inveniuntur. Auctore Johanne Leusden:
Editio quinta; in qua, non tantum Themata Graeca and Voces derivatae
exprimuntur, sed etiam Tempora Verborum adduntur. Tandem ne aliquid ubicunque
desideretur, in hac Novissima Editione Londinensi cuilibet Voci aut Compositae
aut Derivatae, Radix adjicitur propria, in Tyronum gratiam.

De Presbyteratu Dissertatio Quadripartita, Presbyteratus sacri Origines,
Naturam, Titulum, Officia and Ordines ab ipsis Mundi primordiis usque ad
Catholicae Ecclesiae consummatam plantationem complectens, in qua Hierarchiae
Episcopalis Jus Divinum and immutabile, ex Auctoritate Scripturarum Canonice
expositarum and Ecclesiasticae Traditionis suffragiis, breviter quidem sed
luculenter asseritur. Authore Samuele Hill, Diaeceseos Bathoniensis and
Wellensis Presbytero.

Sometime since Published by R. Clavell.
FORMS of Private Devotion for Every Day in the Week, in a Method agreeable to
the Liturgy; with Occasional Prayers, and an Office for the Holy Communion, and
for the Time of Sickness.

Roman Forgeries in the Councils, during the first Four Centuries, together
with an Appendix concerning the Forgeries and Errors in the Annals of Baronius.

A Scholastical History of the primitive and general Use of Liturgies in the
Christian Church; Together with an Answer to David Clarkson's late Discourse
concerning Liturgies.

The FRAUDS of Romish Monks and Priests, set forth in Eight LETTERS: Lately
Written by a Gentleman, in his Journey into Italy; and Published for the Benefit
of the Public. The Third Edition.

Political Arithmetic: By Sir William Petty.

FINIS.

