A LETTER TO Father Lewis Sabran JESUIT,

In Answer to his LETTER to a PEER OF THE Church of England.

WHEREIN The Postscript to the Answer to NVBES TESTIVM is vindicated.

And F. SABRAN's Mistakes further discovered.

LONDON, Printed for Henry Motlock at the Phoenix in St. Paul's Churchyard.
1688.

Imprimatur, A Letter to Father Lewis Sabran.

Guil. Needham Rmo in Christo P. D. Wilhelmo Archiepiscopo Cant. a Sacris
Domest.
Nov. 25. 1687.
Reverend Sir;
SInce I am altogether a stranger to that Honorable Person, to whom your
Letter is dedicated, I would not presume to write my Vindication to his
Lordship, but thought it more proper for me to address this to your self.

What I put down in a Postscript in relation to your Sermon at Chester, has, I
perceive, given you no little disturbance. I do not wonder at it, since few men
are content or able to bear the justest censure that can be past upon them.

But though I do not wonder at your displeasure, yet I do very much at your
attempt to vindicate your self in a matter that is not capable of any defense,
as I shall quickly show you.

I intend this Letter for a Vindication of my self to the world, as well as to
you, and therefore will take leave to repeat what you said in that Sermon, and
what it was that I animadverted upon in my Postscript to the Answer to the
Nubes Testium.

In the second page of your Sermon you have these words; If I presume not to
present them, [yours and your Auditors Prayers] without taking along the joint
Intercession of the Mother of God, I follow therein the Advice of St. Augustine,
which I address to you in his words; Let us by the most tender Application of
our whole heart, recommend our selves, to the most Blessed Virgin's
Intercession; let us all, with the greatest eagerness, strive to obtain her
Protection; that whilst with Assiduity we pay her our Devotions on Earth, she
may entreat for us in Heaven by her earnest Prayers; for undoubtedly she who
brought forth the Price of Redemption, has the greatest Right to intercede for
those who are redeemed.

This was the passage that I reflected upon there, since with a very little
pains I found that that Sermon out of which you quoted these expressions, was
not St. Austins, and therefore I said in that Postscript that I could not but
conclude you guilty either of great Ignorance, or of notorious disingenuity,
who would ascribe to the venerable St. Austin this Notorious Forgery.

These Expressions of my Postscript I do still own notwithstanding your
Vindication, and intend this Letter for a Defense of them, and a full
Confutation of what you have so weakly and so unwarily offered toward the
clearing of your self.

You have prefaced your Letter to that Honorable Lord with some hard words
against the Church of England about her Reformation by mere Lay-Authority,
about her want of Succession, Mission, and about her undermining one third part
of the Apostles Creed. I am so very desirous to come to the Controversy
betwixt us, that I will only tell you here, that every word of what you have
said there against the Church of England is very false, and very absurd.

You next make two or three Reflections upon my Answer to the Compiler of the
Nubes Testium; I will pass over these at present also, since I am not at
leisure here to defend that Book, and which is more, I need not against what
you have said there.

You next come to the Dividing of my Accusation against you, and tell the
World, I accuse you first of Ignorance in saying, you followed the Advice of
St. Austin, when you recommended your self to the Most Blessed Virgins
Intercession.

In Answer to which I must tell you, Sir, that you abuse words in dividing
them-into the charge of Ignorance about Using the Intercession of the Blessed
Virgin, and Disingenuity about quoting the Sermon as St. Austins. Your design I
easily foresee, which is to draw me into a Controversy about Invocation of
Saints, that so the heavy charge laid against you may be either dropped, or
buried in a multitude of words about other things.

But to be plain with you, Sir, now you have drawn me into the field, I am
resolved not to be diverted with the throwing in of other matter about
Invocation, which I have sufficiently answered once already in my Answer to the
Compiler of the Nubes Testium: I am resolved to finish this dispute about the
Sermon of St. Austin, before I begin any other with you; When you have either
cleared your self, or owned your obstinate Mistake, then I shall be at your
service either in the DEFENSE of my Book, or of my Mother the Apostolical
Church of England.

You must not be angry therefore if I throw aside as nothing to the purpose of
the present Controversy what you have set down out of the Nubes from your third
to your sixth page, where I was glad to find that you did recollect with your
self that our dispute was about those words as taken out of the thirty fifth
Sermon de Sanctis: Which I said could not be St. Austins, but you are now
resolved to defend that it may.

As for my Arguments; you tell his Lordship that I borrow some Proofs, of this
Confident Assertion [I suppose you mean of the Sermons not being St. Austins]
of Alexandre Natalis, and add one of my own contrivance.

Since I am not acquainted with that Honorable Lord, I am afraid you will not
do me the favor to tell that Lord from me, that what you say here is very
false. I designed and drew up that Postscript, and had it Printed in half a
day; I had not looked into Natalis Alexandre of five weeks before, and which is
more, neither looked for, or ever saw one syllable in him about that, or any
other Sermon attributed to St. Austin that I remember. I must own that I have
been acquainted with Natalis Alexandre, but it was merely to find out the
stealings of your Pious and Learned Author of the Nubes Testium, who as I have
thewn in my Answer, did not only steal his whole Book, (excepting a small
passage or two) out of that French Historian, but stands excommunicated by this
present Pope for his pains,

After your false account whence I had my Proofs, you come next to examine them
singly.

My first was that the Title, a Sermon on [not in as you translate the words]
the Feast of the Assumption does not at all agree to any thing that is near St.
Austins time.

You answer that there is no consequence can be drawn from the Title, since the
Title (as I suppose your meaning is) might have been afterward added. But why,
Sir, can there be no consequence drawn hence; my design was not only from there
being no Feast of Assumption then (which you grant) and therefore no Sermon
could be Preached on that Solemnity, but from there being no belief of such an
Assumption then, and therefore a Sermon on that subject, which this evidently
is, cannot be either St. Austins, or near his time, since there was then and
long after not only no Feast, but no belief of any such thing as the Assumption
of the Blessed Virgin. But you endeavor to illustrate this shadow, or rather
phantome of an Answer by an Instance. You tell his Lordship St. Austins
fourteenth Sermon de Sanctis is allowed by all to be his genuine work, the
Title whereof, is in the Feast of all Saints; yet that the Institution of that
Feast was much later than that Sermon, which was made for, and preached in the
Solemnity of a Virgin and Martyr.

Surely Sir, you thought your putting your name and your society to your Letter
would fright the nameless Author, from daring to give one word of Answer to
that Letter, and therefore that you might take the Liberty to say what you
pleased in it. Without such a supposition, I am not able to rescue you from a
more odious Character, than I am willing to mention: For this is one of the
falsest passages I have met with in so few words. You say St. Austins 14 th
Sermon de Sanstis is allowed by all to be his genuine work: This is (give me
leave to speak out) very false: For the Benedictines of Paris (not to mention
our Authors, whom I will not insist on to prove against your ALL,) have thrown
this Sermon into their Appendix ad Tom. 5. i.) August. p. 316. Edit. Paris 1683.
Appendix as Spurious, and show that it is a mere Cento, made up of pieces of
Sermons, borrowed here and there. You tell his Lordship next, that the Title of
the Sermon, is in the Feast of all Saints. This is as false as the other; for
not only in the Louvain, but in the Benedictine, as well as in Erasmus's
Edition, the Title of this fourteenth Sermon, is in Festo Conversionis Sancti
Pauli, a Sermon on the Feast of the Conversion of St. Paul. I must confess Sir,
that I was wholly astonished at your asserting these things with so much
assurance to a Peer, and to a Peer also of the Church of England, and without
any truth: I looked again and again at it, and lest it might be an error of the
Press, I looked into the fourth, into the twenty fourth, into the thirty fourth,
into the forty first; I looked also into the two next Sermons before and after
this fourteenth Sermon de Sanctis, but no news could I find of your Title in
any one of those Sermons, and therefore must lay this mistake to your own
charge.

You lastly tell his Lordship, that this fourteenth Sermon was made son, and
preached in the solemnity of a Virgin and Martyr; which is as false as either
of the other, since it certainly was made for, and preached upon St. Paul's
Conversion.

You next tell his Lordship of a far greater mistake in this my Objection, much
to be wondered at in so great a pretender to reading, as if (say you) Feast, or
day of Assumption in the Writings of Ancients, did almost ever signify any
thing else but the Day of a Saints Death.

But pray, Sir, what is that to this Sermon, if the day of Assumption do not
ever signify the day of a Saints Death, why may not this be the exception? but
to pass that; you know very well that that cannot be the meaning here, since
this Sermon speaks of Assumption of the Blessed Virgin; and that it was the
Churches Custom to believe that the Virgin Mary was on the day of that
solemnity assumed into Heaven.

But all this is but to raise a dust about nothing, for were the Argument from
the Title as weak as you could desire, yet what follows in my Postscript, is
more than strong enough to convince all reasonable men that that Sermon could
not be St. Austins.

I next urged against this Sermon, that the Benedictines of Paris in their late
Edition of St. Austin had cast it into their Appendix as spurious, and that
they told us that in their MSS. it wanted the name of any Author; but that the
Divines of Louvain told us that in several Manuscripts, which they used in
their Edition of St. Austin, this Sermon de Sanctis was entitled to Fulbertus
Carnotensis.

This Argument you were afraid to take together and therefore without saying a
word to the Benedictine Manuscripts, which name no Author for that Sermon, you
think you answer the Louvain MSS. about its being entitled to Fulbertus, by
saying St. Ambrose and Chrysologus's Sermons have appeared in MSS. under other
Authors names. But pray, Sir, what would you prove from hence, because such a
thing has happened to St. Ambrose, therefore this Sermon must be St.
Augustins, because printed among his works, though it bears not his name either
in the MSS. used by the Louvain Divines, or by the Benedictines. How is it that
we know one man's Sermon's from another's, is it not either from his style, or
from its being attributed to such a person by the most and best Manuscripts?
from one of these ways it is that St. Ambrose's or any other Father's Sermons
are vindicated to their true Authors. But both these Arguments are directly
against this Sermon's being St. Austins; the style is dull and heavy, has not
any thing like or near the briskness, wit, and great sense of St. Austin; and
further the MSS. used by them, give it against you, they either entitle it to
no Author, or to Fulbertus Carnetensis.

Though my Arguments were not very weighty, yet what I next urged I thought would
fully satisfy any ones scruples; I mean the instance of Isidores being quoted
in it, by which I said it was certain that this Sermon must be written after
his time who lived in the beginning of the Seventh Century.

What I say is certain here you tell his Lordship is unprobable. You give this
as one reason, because the Author of that Sermon says no Author among the
Latins could be found, who treating of our blessed Ladies Death had been
positive, and express; whereas Gregory of Tours in the Sixth Age has a most
full account of our blessed Ladies Assumption, and therefore the Author of this
Sermon must have lived before Gregory, and consequently long before Fulbertus,
or Isidore of Sevil. But I do not see this Consequence, it is no error to
suppose the Author of that Sermon had never seen Gregory of Tours Book, and
therefore might have that expression concerning no Latin Author treating of the
Virgin Maryes Assumption: Or we may very well suppose that if he had, he
reckons his story among those Apocryphal ones which were then writ, but
rejected by the Church of God: And I cannot see how it should be a fault in
Fulbertus to reject Gregory of Tours (if he knew of him) as an Apocryphal
Author, and not in St. Bernard, who so very long after either doubted or
disbelieved (as you own in the page before this) the Story of the Assumption,
notwithstanding the most full account of it in Gregory; whom (with the Author
of this Sermon) he either did not know, or did not regard.

Your Answer about St. Isidore is very strange, since though there were never so
many Isidores before St. Austin, yet can you, or dare you offer to show that
any of them were Writers? But to drive you from this weak hold, we are certain
that the Isidore quoted here is he that lived in the seventh Century. If you
did look into the Louvain Edition when you wrote your Letter, you could not
have mist seeing what book of his the passage is taken from.

But I am afraid, Sir, I have to do with one, who is resolved to carry things
by his own wild guesses more than by examining things fairly. The passage in
the Sermon is in Isidor's Book de Vita and Morte Sanctorum. Isidor. de Vita and
Morte SS. n. 68. p. 168. Edit. Paris 158^.
So that all your dreams are vanished; and this one passage enough to have
answered your whole Letter. I shall therefore be shorter with the rest, and
tell you that your sleighting the Judgment of the Louvain Divines, and the
present Learned Benedictines at Paris, especially when invincibly strengthened
by this passage from Isidore, and your believing this Sermon to be St Austins,
because Thomas Aquinas believed it to be his, discovers (pardon the expression)
a very unbecoming obstinacy; You cannot but have heard how little a Critic
Monsieur Launoy has shown Aquinas was, what forged Authorities he used and
urged as from S. Cyril of Alexandria; whereas there was no such things in his
works. This instance, which you make use of for your defense, is an evidence as
well against him as you, however far more excusable in him than in you, since
he lived in such times of Ignorance, and you in times so learned; I am very
confident that had he seen how much is now said against this Sermon, he would
have been far from acting like you, or have been obstinate in the defense of
such a noted forgery.

I have but room left to tell you that the Louvain Divines are of no Authority
with me except where their reasons are apparently good; and therefore should
they have asserted the 18th Sermon de Sanctis to have been St. Austins as you
say they do) I should not upon good reasons assent unto them; but that what you
say here is false, is evident from that note set by them before this Sermon,
that some attribute this Sermon to Fulgentius: and the Benedictines of Paris
are so far from your words, that they say the Louvain Divines leave it as
DUBIOUS: And they for their parts have east it into the Appendix as Spurious,
*Append. a Tom. 5 p. 321.
and give this reason for it among others* that it is the work of some ignorant
botcher, who has patched it up out of stolen Sentences: So that your quotation
for Invocation thence ought to be slighted by that honorable Lord as much as
your other in the Sermon before the Court at Chester,

Thus, Sir, I have given you the trouble of a Letter; if you intend a further
Vindication of your self, pray oblige me so far as to hasten it out, that so!
may stay no longer for it, than you have done for this. One thing you may
oblige me in further, and that is not only to quote, but to look into those
Authors you make use of. This will prevent the multiplying of the Controversy;
though you be resolved to continue this any longer against

Reverend Sir your Friend in all Christian Offices.

FINIS.

