Matrimonial Customs



MATRIMONIAL Customs: OR THE Various Ceremonies, AND Diverse Ways of Celebrating
Weddings, Practiced amongst all the Nations, in the whole World.

Done out of French.

LONDON.

Printed, for A. S. and sold by the Booksellers, 1687.

THE PREFACE.
FEw Authors do agree about the true definition of Marriage. Charron, in his
book of Wisdom, calls it a wise Bargain, and an honorable Contract; others,
more Critical, tell us that it is a name importing nothing but mere Slavery and
Bondage, a Society of evils and troubles. I think it not worth the while to
examine the several Opinions about the right Definition of it, much less to
pass my censure upon the sentiments of any man. I shall content my self with
the Definition commonly approved by all the judicious Civilians, which say that
Marriage is no other thing than an holy union of the man with the woman, which
cannot be dissolved, but by the death of the one or the other. Matrimonium est
viri and mulieris conjunctio, individuam vitae societatem continens.

It is the first and most honorable of all other States and Conditions in the
World, seeing it deriveth its institution from no other than from the the
Supreme Author of Nature. It is also the most extensively profitable, seeing
that it is the foundation of all humane society, the rise of families, and
consequently the offspring of Commonwealths and Kingdoms. Prima societas in
coniugio est, quod principium Urbis, seminarium Reipublicae. And although the
holy and truly Catholic Church never reckoned it in the number of Sacraments,
yet was it ever esteemed as a sacred ordinance, seeing it was instituted by God
himself, in the Paradise of Eden, and that the Second Person of Deity, being
manifested in the flesh, did not only vouchsafe to honor it with his presence,
but also with his first miracle.

But although Marriage be Common to all the Nations in the World, yet it is not
regulated by the same Laws, nor celebrated in the same Forms and Ceremonies,
they varying according to the diversity of Religions and Nations. Amongst
Christians Marriage is very strict and severe, one man being allowed but one
woman: But amongst the greatest part of other Religions, Polygamy and Divorce
are commonly approved of and practiced, to the end (as they say) that Marriage
be less cumbersom, more free and more fruitful. But notwithstanding the great
variety of Laws and Ceremonies used amongst so many different Nations, yet
there is never a Nation under the Cope of Heaven, how barbarous soever it be,
but celebrateth the solemnity of Wedlock, with more than ordinary Ceremonies
and festival Jollities.

This has induced me to make a diligent Inquiry, into the different
Ceremonies, which are practiced amongst the Jews, Christians, Mahumetans and
Idolaters: These four being the only Religions known in the World. As for the
Jews, they being the most Ancient People, I shall begin this small treatise
with them, humbly submitting my endeavors to the censures of the Curious
Reader.

CEREMONIES Observed at the MARRIAGES OF THE JEWS. CHAPTER I.
THe Jews commonly marry their Sons at Eighteen years of Age, according to the
Ordinance of their Talmud, and sometimes sooner, to avoid Fornication; as for
the Daughters, they may marry at Twelve years and a Day.

When the Marriage of the two Parties is agreed upon, many Jews, both young and
old, assemble themselves in some covered place, where the young Jews hold,
every one of them, an Earthen Pot in their hands. One of them reads the
Contract of Marriage, and gives notice of the day prefixed for the Wedding,
above all declaring that the party, who shall not stand to that which is agreed
upon, shall pay to the other party, such a Sum of Money, as the Parents of both
parties have unanimously pitched upon. This being done, they wish one another
all prosperity and happiness, and in the mean while all the young Jews fling
their Earthen Pots on the ground, and break them in pieces, believing this to
be a token of great plenty, and future abundance. As they are going out of the
said place, there is always one who stands at the Door, who gives every one of
them a Glass of Wine, and sometimes also some Sweet Meats. The Rabbi, whose
Office it isto crave a blessing upon the Espousals, takes a a Glass full of
Wine, and after that he has blessed it, and tasted of it, he imparts the
remnant, to the new betrothed Couple, who, going to their Houses, ought not to
go out of Doors, within eight days after. But during this retreat, many young
Bachellors daily resort to the House of the future Bridegroom, to divert him
and make merry with him

The betrothed Woman is bound to bath her self in cold Water, the day before
her Marriage: And she is conducted into that Bath, by some Women, which make a
very great noise, to the end that every body may take notice, that she is a
betrothed Woman, while she is in the Bath, many of those Women dance and sing
round about her.

The future Bridegroom sends to his betrothed Spouse a Wedding Girdle,
garnished with Plates of Gold; the betrothed Spouse does the like to her
betrothed Husband: But the Girdle, which she must send him, ought only to be
Garnished with Plates of Silver.

The Wedding day being come, the betrothed Bride make her self as fine as her
Husband and ability can permit her, according to the fashion of the Jews:
afterward she is conducted by some Women, which sing before her, into a Room
whene they dress her head as neatly as they can, other Women in the while
singing and dancing before her, for to recreate her, thinking by so doing, to
render to God some very acceptable Sacrifice.

When the Bridegroom must receive the Nuptial Blessing, four young Bachellors
carry a Canopy, which, being born up upon four sticks at the four Corners of
it, they carry into some open place or garden, where the solemnity of the
Nuptials must be performed. The Bridegroom with his Relations, and the Bride
with many Women, together with Musicians playing on several Instruments, resort
under the said Canopy, and then every one that is present at the solemnity
cries aloud, Blessed be he that is come. Then the Bridegroom goes three times
round about his Bride, and having taken her by the hand, the people cast some
Corns of Wheat upon them crying, Increase and multiply.

In some places, where People are more wealthy, they use to mingle with their
Wheat some pieces of Silver, which the poorer sort of Jews gather up. The Bride
stands always at the right hand of her Bridegroom, and besides it is requisite
that her face be always turned toward the South; for the Rabbis have left a
Tradition in their Talmud, that if any person place the Bed so as her face be
toward the South, that then she is like to be the Mother of many Children. The
Rabbi, who joines them in Marriage, sets, upon the head of the Bride, the end
of the hair-cloth, which the Bridegroom wears upon his neck; that being done,
he takes a Glass of Wine, and, saying the two prayers which are in the Mahzor,
after that he has tasted of it, he gives it to the young Couple to drink.
Then, if the Bride be a Maid, they give her drink in a strait narrow Glass; but
if she be a Widow, then she must drink in a broad one. Then the Rabbi
receiving from the Bridegroom a Ring of Gold without any stone in it, he calls
in some witnesses, and showing them the said Ring, he enquires of them whether
it be of fine pure Gold; and having received an answer in the affirmative, he
then sets it about the second Finger of the Bride; and having done that, he
begins to read the Contract of Marriage with a loud and intelligible voice.
After that he takes another Glass of Wine, and praising God that the two
Parties have taken one another, he presents them another time with drink; after
that the Bridegroom has drunk up his Glass, he with all his strength casts it
against the Wall, or against the ground, to the end it be all broken in pieces:
And this they do for a remembrance of the Destruction of the Temple of
Jerusalem. In some places they use to strew ashes upon the head of the
Bridegroom for a Memorial of the Temple which was burnt down; and for this same
reason the Bridegroom wears a black Hood upon his head, as those are wont to
do, who are in long Mourning.

The Bride has also her head covered with a black Cap, to the end that they
may show that they retain some marks of sorrow for the destruction of their
Temple; even in their most Festival Solemnities.

Being Married, they are conducted to the place of Feasting, where all being
sat, the Bridegroom begins to sing a very long Prayer; and in the mean while
they set before the Bride a raw Egg, with a roasted Hen. Then the Bridegroom
carves a little piece of that Hen, which he presents to his Bride; and
immediately after the Guests* as well men as women, scuffling together, tear
the remnant in pieces, and whosoever can snatch away the biggest part of it is
reputed the bravest of all the company; they snatch away from one another, that
which they hold in their hands, making fine sport amongst themselves, to make
the new married folks merry. As for the raw Egg they fling it at one another
Faces, and if any Christians be there to look on them, they are like to be
finely dawbed with it: Now they set this Egg before the Bride, to the end that
she may hope to bring forth Children, as easily as the Hen lays her Eggs. After
all this mirth they lay the Cloth, and cover the Table with Dishes of all
gallant meats, and then few of them remember either Jerusalem or the Temple.
The feast being ended, they betake themselves to Dance a certain dance, which
they call the Nuptial dance, ordained as they say by the Commandment of God:
the chief and most considerable person of all the company, takes the Bridegroom
by the hand, this takes another, this other takes the next, this another and so
consecutively, until there be none left who may dance. The most considerable
amongst the Women takes also the Bride, and they do the same amongst themselves
as the Men do: So that they carry on the work with an extraordinary Mirth and
Jollity. The Wedding lasts sometimes eight days: But their Rabbis strictly
forbid them from inviting any Christians, for they think that the good Angels
seeing them there, would forth with fly away, and the evil ones would presently
succeed and come in their place.

CEREMONIES Observed at the MARRIAGES OF CHRISTIANS. CHAP. II.
Customs and Ceremonies used amongst Roman Catholics.
POlygamy, or the use of many Women together, is very usual amongst Infidels:
but it is generally forbidden amongst Christians, who are for bidden, upon pain
of death, marrying more than one Woman together; and further she must be
married in the Church before the Parson of the Parish. All other Marriages
contracted otherwise are declared void and clandestin, the Children born in
such are reputed Bastards, and consequently incapable of Succession, and of
challenging their Parents inheritance.

The Ceremonies of Marriages amongst Roman Catholics are prescribed by the
Councils. The Council of Trent, for to prevent all abuses in Marriages,
declares and pronounces all Marriages invalid and void, which have not been
celebrated before the Parson of the Parish of the one or of the other
contracting parties. Wherefore according to the decrees of the Romish Church,
as soon as the contracting Parties are agreed, the Parsons of their respective
Parishes are bound to proclaim three Banes on three Sundays, or three Holy days
consecutively, to the end that if any of the Parishoners know any lawful cause
why they may not be joined together, they may reveal it to the Parson of the
Parish. And in case no body can allege any lawful impediment, then both the
parties are conducted by their parents into the Parochial Church of the Woman,
where they are betroathed by the Parson of the said Parish, who examines them
whether they be well contented to be betroathed one to the other, and whether
they be not already engaged by promise of Marriage to any other person or
persons. This is the Ceremony, which is called Espousals or betroathing, and
is nothing properly but a Nuptial preparation, or an engagement, to a future
marriage, of which engagement neither of the contracted parties can be released
but by the Court of the ordinary, which condemns him or her that violateth
promise, to all damages, and expensces whatever, together with a Fine.

There be some Bishoprics where they use to betroth people as soon as they are
agreed together, and before the publication of the banes.

The day of marriage being prefixed, the betrothed parties, after they have been
at the auricular Confession of their sins, go to receive the Communion the day
before their marriage. The next day they are conducted by their friends to
Church, where the parson of the Parish, having asked them their names and
sirnames, asks them, one after another, whether they are content to take one
another; He asks them besides if they be not already engaged by any solemn
vow, or any promise of Marriage; and whether they will engage to love and keep
fidelity one to another. When to all these questions they answer affirmatively,
he then blesses a ring, and thirteen pieces of money, which he gives to the
Bridegroom.

The Bridegroom sets the Ring upon the fourth finger of the Brides Right Hand,
in saying to her, with the Parson, with this Ring I thee wed; then giving her
some pieces of money, he goes on saying, and with this money I thee endow: The
Bride answers with a compliment set down in the Romish Ceremonial. Then
presently the Parson takes the right hands of them both, saying; Et ego
conjungo vos in Nomine Patris, Filij and Spiritus Sancti: He sprinckleth them,
and all the Assembly, with Holy Water.

After the Nuptial Blessing, both the new married Folks are bound to hear Mass
with a lighted Taper in their hands, with which they go to kiss the Offertory,
and to present the Parson with Bread and Wine.

Then, if the new married Folks were never married before, two of their nearest
Relations hold a Sheet over their heads, whilst the Priest reads some Prayers
over them.

The Mass being ended, the Parson presents the Church Register to the new
married Couple and to their Relations, to the end that they may sign and seal
the Act of Marriage; after that then every one goes away, in the same order as
they came.

On that Evening before the new married folks betake themselves to their bed,
the Parson, or some other Priest deputed by him, comes to bless the Nuptial
Bed, wherein the Marriage ought to be consummated.

In the most part of Italy, they do not use to betroth people in the Church;
but the contract of Marriage is made in the presence of the Parson, then the
Proclamation of the Banes follows, they proceed to the Solemnization of
Marriage, which is celebrated either at Noon, with all Pomp imaginable, or else
before the Sunrising without any noise at all: The Woman being conducted to
Church by her Father if living, and if he be dead, by the nearest of her
Relations.

At Venice when any Gentleman is to marry, as soon as the contract is made, all
other Gentlemen resort to the house of the future Bride, whom they call
Novizza; the Bridegroom also, with his nearest Relations comes thither: He
stands at the entry of the House, receiving, with all demonstration of Honor,
all his Guests, giving them his right hand as a mark of his entire Affection;
The Bride does do the like to the Women. After the Celebration of Marriage, the
Bride enters into a splendid Barge finely decked, her Hair hanging about her
shoulders, being set in the most eminent place, that is called, in their
Language, Andar in Trafto; This they do to the end that every body may take
notice that she is a new married Bride, and the Wife of such a Gentleman. But
now adays they have left of something of the ancient Custom, for the Noviza's
appear in their Barges many days, with their Hair plaited very high, much like
English Women's high Towers.

The Sicilians did formerly betroth the Man and the Woman at home, and very
often were not married till the Hour of Death, or at the extremity of the one*
or of the other Parties: But this was for bidden by the order of the Council of
Trent. The espoused woman did also use to ride through the City with a great
Company and Pomp, on horseback: But that is now quite left off, since the
Invention of Coaches. But notwithstanding the Prohibition of the foresaid
Council even to this day, as soon as the Articles of the Contract are signed,
the man enjoyes his Spouse with all liberty, and reaps the sweet Fruits of
Marriage many years sometimes before the celebration of it.

At the Weddings of their Country People, there is very much dancing, and there
is always a great number of Guests, as well of the Relations and others, who
bring Presents, after that the Bridegroom has regaled them three times. Their
Feasts usually consist of Meats baked in the Oven, and of Kettles full of Rice
boiled in Milk*

In France when any one is married, the betrothed man, accompanied with his
Relations, Friends and other Guests, which he has invited, and as well Men as
Women, goes to fetch the Bride to conduct her to Church. The Bridegroom goes
first in the middle of his nearest Relations, the young Bachellors, going two
by two, follow after him, then the married men, according to their nearness of
Kin: The Bride follows dressed as neatly as her ability and condition can
permit, wearing on the hinder part of her Head a little Crown of white Flowers,
or Diamonds, and sometimes of Oriental Pearls. Two of her near Kinswomen lead
her by the Hand, then the Bridemaidens, wearing every one of them a Crown like
that of the Bride, march after in the same order as the Bachellors. The married
Women come in, after all the Nuptial pomp is shut up by the Servants of the
Bridegroom, or of the Bride; which come the last, carrying the Bread and Wine,
which ought to be presented to the Priest! They come from Church in the same
order as they went, excepting only that the Bachellors conduct the Bride, and
the Maidens the Bridegroom.

In some places as soon as they are come from Church to the place where the
Feast is prepared, all the Relations, Friends and Guests come thither bringing
their Presents, which they deposite in a great Charger set before the new
married Couple for that purpose; the Violins, and other Instruments, playing
all the while: In some certain places they offer their Presents the next day
after the wedding, and in others they make none at all.

The Bridegroom never sits down with others at Table, but the Bride sitting at
the most honorable place, he stands always behind her, taking care to serve
her, and to order the dishes upon the Table.

After the feast, the Bridegroom leads his Bride to dance, the Bachellors and
Maids continue the Ball: as for the married men and women, they conduct the new
married Couple into their Bed Chamber* which is made ready for them to lay
down. The Bride makes her self somewhat shy and unwilling to be undrest, but
notwithstanding her forced resistance, she is willingly constrained to yield to
the force of them that have undrest her, and resign her self into the arms of
her Bridegroom, for to consummate the Marriage, and (as they say) for to gain
the Dowry, which has been allowed her.

The next Day Morning, the new Married People receive the Complements of all
their Friends and Relations, and even from their Neighbors, and commonly the
Bridegroom makes them some Presents.

At Paris the new married Woman receives her visits in her Chamber, attired
with all her Nuptial Ornaments, sitting on a Bed of State, all the Windows of
her Chamber being shut up, so that there is no Light at all in it, but that
which comes from Wax Tapers, and Flambeau's.

At present the most part of Persons, of any Quality, are married in the Night
time, without any Ceremony or Pomp.

The Spaniards differ very little from the French or Italians, as to the
Ceremonies of their Nuptials, but only in this sottish Custom, which they have,
as I conjecture, retained from the Moor's which were a long while Masters of
their Country. If, in that Amorous Duel between the loving Combatants, there
happens any effusion of Blood upon the Sheets, then they expose them at the
Windows, as a Trophy of the Woman's Virginity, which they call, Virginita de la
moucher. But if by good chance, (as it befalls very often*) the Combat has been
harmless and bloodless, then they fairly supply that defect from elsewhere.

Formerly the Germans never married Women of any other Nation, but their own;
that they might avoid all confusion in their Blood. And they never bestowed
their Daughters in Marriage too Young; Batchelors also did not go a wooing but
very late: So that by that means, the Children which did proceed from two
Persons of mature Age, of full Proportion, and of Vigorous strength, were also
tall, strong and vigorous. They, even to this day, will never marry their Sons
but to them Maids. which are of a strong constitution of body, tall, and most
likely to bear strong and lusty Children. Their Nuptial Ceremonies are m uch
the same as of the other People in Europe; they differ only in this, that the
Bride-Maids wear every one a Crown of Gold, or of Flowers, at the Weddings of
their fellow Maids, which is not lawful for others to do. All the Guests
present the Bride with Jewels or Pieces of Gold and Silver, which th^^ cast
into a Basin* which is placed before the Bride, as she sits at Table in the
middle of Women of her near Relations, and they accompany their Presents with
civil Acclamations, and good wishes, of Prosperity and Happiness, to the new
married Couple.

There are amongst them some free Weddings, in which Men of Honor defray all
the charges; and there be some also, in which every one pays his Scot. Their
Feasts last at least three days, during which the new married Folks are
accompanied with a great number of People, inso-much that a common
Handicrafts-man will have oftentimes above sixty Persons at his Wedding: For
the more People they have about them, the more are they regarded and esteemed.

As for their Gentlemen and Persons of considerable note, they present their
new married Wives with a Chain of Gold, or some Precious Jewel, on the next day
morning, after the consummation of Marriage, and this Present they call, in
their Language, Morgengal, that is to say the Gift of the morning, because they
bestow it upon the Bride, as soon as they are up, as it were to make her some
recompense for h^ Maidenhead, which they have taken ay^^.

If any Maid amongst them has been so liquorish, as to have tasted of the
Horse* Radish before the time; if she, by good fortune, does not go away with
the bag, but is so happy as to marry him, that has already played upon her
Fiddle, then the said couple will go to Church very early in the morning,
without any Instrum^nts of Music: and, in some places, but especially in
Country-Towns, all the Neighbors, crowned with Garlands made of straw,
accompany them to Church.

In many places they compel the Daughters at the Marriages to renounce, and
disclaim, all their Rights, as well Paternal as Maternal, and this they do, in
casting some straw into their Fathers Houses. Moreover if the Bride does not
shed some Tears, when she goes before the Priest to be joined in marriage, then
her Virginity becomes very much suspected, and for that purpose many of them
Brides carry Onions, wrapped up in their Handkerchiefs, that they may force some
tears out of their Eyes.

The Francons observe this order in their Marriages. The Bridegroom, having
some Trumpet^rs and Drummers going before him, marches between two Persons of
Quality, then his Relations, and Friends follow him, two by two, until they
come to the Church Door; then they make a halt till the Bride be come to them:
who being preceded by many, who play on Flutes, and being accompanied with many
Maids, is followed by a great number of married Women, which wear very long
Mantles of black cloth, plated, and fastened to their necks, with Silver Clasps:
and then the Marriage is celebrated in the presence of the Parson of the
Parish, according to the Roman Ceremonial Book.

In Poland, but chiefly in the Country, of Prussia and Lithuania, Maids seldom
marry under four and twenty Years of Age; and not so neither till they have
first wrought, with their own hands, as much stuff, as is sufficient to cloth
every one, who must accompany their Bridegroom to Church. Amongst them when any
Father seeks a Wife for his Son, he neither regards her Beauty nor Wealth, but
only her good Morality, ripeness of Age, and strong constitution of Body. The
Women are never married till two of their future Bridegrooms near Relations
have had a deep finger in their Pies, and then they use to crave their Fathers
good consent: those People do still retain many Dregs of the old Superstition
of the Heathens: For when the Solemnity of Matrimony is celebrated, the Bride
is led three times about a Fire, then they make her sit down, they wash her
feet, and with that same water they besprinckle the Nuptial Bed, and all the
Utensils of the House. This done, they anoint her Mouth with Honey, they bind
her Eyes with a Vail: Then she is conducted toward all the Doors of the House,
which she must kick with her right Foot; they afterward strew every Door with
Wheat, Rye, Oats, Barley, Beans and Poppy, declaring that her Bridegroom shall
ever enjoy a great abundance of all those good things, if she devoutly retain
her Religion, and if she be careful and industrious in ordering her Family. The
evening being come when she must bed with her Bridegroom, they use to cut her
Hair, then the married Wom^n takes a Posie, which they fasten on her Head:
after that they put on her Head a white Hood, which new married Women wear
until they have brought forth a Son, for until that time, they are reputed
Maids. The Bride is at last conducted into her Bedchamber, whereafter they
have shuffed and beaten her, they at length cast her into the Bed, into her
Bridegrooms arms. And then instead of Sweet Meats or Sack Possets, they bring
them a dish of Rams or of Bears stones to eat; For they think that after they
have eaten of that meat, they become very prolifick and fruitful, and for this
reason they never use to kill any gelded creature for their use at their
Nuptial Feasts.

In the Island of Goa the person who intends to marry never sees his Mistress,
but in her Parish Church where she uses to resort; if he likes her he, taking
a Priest along with him, goes to her house and then is betrothed to her: He may
visit her after this Ceremony, but they are never permitted to be alone
together. Many men of that Country are not contented to see their Mistresses as
they are dressed in their best Cloths, but will also view them at Home, in the
Market, and in their ordinary Habits, that they may the better discern whether
they cover not some natural defect, and whether they be not patched or painted.

They generally marry in the afternoon, and they use to go to Church in great
Pomp and Solemnity. The Bridegroom is oftentimes accompanied with 80 or an
hundred Young Men, all on horseback, richly attired and clothed: The Relations
and Friends of both Parties follow them. The Bride sitting in a Sedan, and the
Women, which are her Relations, are every one carried in their Sedans also;
They being come near the Church, they all alight, and the Bridegroom, being
conducted by two Men of his nearest Relations, and the Bride also by two Women
of her near Kinswomen, into the Church, where they are joined in Marriage: They
call the foresaid persons their four Gossips. After the Solemnization of
Marriage, they return home in the same order as they came, the Trumpets and
other Musical Instruments playing all the while before them, the People, as
they pass along, casting sweet Meats, Comfits, sweet Waters, and Flowers in the
street, which the Servants, scuffling one with another, gather up. Being come
to the house where the Feast is prepared, the nearest Relations and their most
intimate Friends go in, but as for the Young Men they remain without, making
sport, before the door, with the running and bouncing of their Horses, and
fighting with Reeds and Canes, which they throw one at another. The new married
Folks, and their Friends, standing in the Balconies, and others at the Windows,
looking upon their Sports and Braveries. This Pastime being over, they all
ali^^t off their Horses: And being conducted into a low Hall, they are
presented with all sorts of Sweet Meats of Fruits, and with a kind of perfumed
Aromatical water, called water of Bagulrim. Then the Bridegroom comes down to
them, and dismisses them with all Civility and Demonstration of Thankfulness:
Then he returns to his Parents and Relations, with whom he feasteth: But they
stay very little at Table, every one retiring into their Habitations. The new
married couple go to bed, commonly before Sun set, without so many Ceremonies,
and Drolleries, as are practiced among the French.

The Sclavonians, of the Commonwealth of Ragusa, are never married but with
Persons of their Rank and Quality, that is to say, the Noble with the Noble, so
that a Noble Person can not marry a Woman of the vulgar sort, or a Stranger,
for fear of introducing any ignoble Blood into his Family, which might blemish
the luster of his Nobility; and for this cause the number of Noble Families is
so much diminished, that there is not above 20 or 25 now left among them, which
have the Government and Administration of all the affairs of their
Commonwealth.

Notwithstanding if any Noble Person was willing, either for some private
convenience or molument, to marry a Wife born out of his own Country, he may
lawfully do it: Provided that she be a Lady, born between Zare and Cattaro, but
not otherwise. And besides whosoever should marry such a Lady, born in the
Country aforesaid, it is requisite that he be worth, at least, two Thousand
Ducats of Gold for a Dowry, and for the security of the said Lady.

As for the Portions at the Marriages of their Sons, they are limited by the
Law, at a Thousand Ducats of Gold: But, at present, they little regard that
limitation; so that a Father will give his Son four, five or six Thousand
Ducats of Gold, and sometimes more, according to the Means and Quality of the
Woman. The Marriage Money is paid before ever the Man see the Woman he must
have; and when every thing is agreed upon, the Money paid, and the Contract
signed and sealed, he may then with all liberty go to visit her: For it is a
constant custom, amongst the Ragusians, never to court and caress their Ladies,
but only after that they are made sure with them, When a Maid is married, it is
lawful for her to wear Silk Cloths a month after her Marriage, that she may be
distinguished from others, who wear Cloth ones. But when a Lady is married, she
is obliged to wear, on Holy Days, a double Hood of red Satin, purfled with Gold
and Silver Flowers, to the end she may be discerned from the common ignoble
sort of Women.

As for the Flemings, and other Inhabitants of the Neighboring Countries, they
have that particular Custom, that they easily, and without any difficulty,
contract Marriage with Strangers; but it is reputed amongst them very unseemly,
and a very filthy thing, for a Young Man to marry an Old Woman, or for an Old
Woman to marry a Young Man. Tradesmen never marry Gentlewomen, nor Gentlemen
Tradesmens Daughters; and it is never seen amongst them, which is commonly
practiced amongst the French, for the Master to marry his Chambermaid, and for
the Mistress to marry her Servant. In that Country, Gentlemen always prefer
their Eldest Daughters before the Youngest, so that many times they will bestow
their Youngest upon them to whom they have refused the Eldest; because they
reserve her for a better Match, and more advantageous Fortune.

CHAP. III. Rites and Ceremonies practiced among Protestant Lutherans.
THe Protestant Lutherans are married in the face of the Church, as
Roman Catholics are, and they are conducted there with great Pomp and
Solemnity, to receive the Nuptial Blessing from the Hand of their Minister.

At Strasburgb, and in the Neighboring Countries, when any Young Man goes a
Wooing, after that he has sufficiently testified his affection to his Mistress
by Letters, or any other way; he then goes about Midnight, with some of his
intimate Friends and with many Flambeau's, to give his Mistress a Serenade, or
a Musical Concert, before the door of the house where she dwells: And if she
appear not looking out of her Window, then the Young Man may assure himself of
a Repulse, and that his Suit is but in vain, but in case she be seen to be
present there, then he may sometimes visit her about the Evening, provided
always that some of her Domestieks be present at their amorous Entertainment
After any common Wedding the Trumpets sound, on Monday and Tuesday Morning,
that the People may take notice, that there has been a Wedding amongst People
of Trade, which are married but on those days: As for the Weddings of Noble
Persons, they last three days and an half. There be also amongst them some free
Weddings, called amongst them Frengaal Hoczeit, where People bring Presents,
but pay nothing, but in others every one pays his share.

In Saxony, when any Gentleman is married, the Gentlemen, and Young Gentlewomen
of the Neighborhood resort, without any Invitation at all, to the Regale which
he is obliged to make according to the Custom. As for the Nobles, they are
strictly forbidden marrying with Tradesmen, or Merchants Daughters, although
they be never so rich: for in Leipsick, and other Capital Cities, some
Merchants give their Daughters oftentimes thirty or forty Thousand Dollars,
that if any Noble Person, for lucre of Money, without regard to his Nobility,
should marry such a one, he is degraded of his Title of Honor, and besides
runs the hazard of being pelted to death by the Nobility and Gentry.

Amongst the Goths, the Swedes, and the Danes, they of the common sort use many
Ceremonies in their Marriages too tedious to rehearse here, I shall therefore
content my self to mention the chief of them. The Maids Parents, being
sufficiently informed and satisfied about the Qualifications of her Suitor, her
Father presents his Daughter to him, speaking these words; I give thee my
Daughter for to honor thee, that she may be thy Wife, for to have the half of
thy Bed, the Key of thy Doors, with the third part of thy Money, and other Goods
moveable and immovable. At the day assigned, she is conducted to Church with
many Torches, done about with Silk stuffs of several Colors. The Solemnity
being over, she is handed Home by her Bridegroom: But before she may bed with
him, she must go to the Stoves or hot Baths, many Maids going before her, and
as many Married Women accompanying her; but before they come thither, they have
made great Provision of Strong Beer, or of Wine in that place, for to refresh
the Women in the Bath, lest being overcome with the Heat they should faint:
wherefore they recruit their strength, with eating tosted Bread dipped in some of
the foresaid Liquors, which are sweetened with Cinnamon and Sugar.

When they come out of their Baths, they wear every one of them a Garland of
Rue upon their Heads, as for the Maids they go to Supper with the Bride.

The Gentlemen usually marry Women of their Rank and Quality. As for Tradesmen
and Mechanics they commonly present the Bride with Swine, Sheep, or Cowes, but
they present the Bridegroom with some Colt, Dog, Cat or Goose.

In Livonia. when a Maid is led to Church to be married, they crown her with a
very high Crown of Silver gilded, and all the Women and Maids march before
her, covered with long plated red Mantles, which reach from their Heads to
their very Heels.

CHAP. IV. Nuptial Rites and Ceremonies, used amongst Evangelical Protestants.
Having treated of the Ceremonies, which those Protestants of Luthers
persuasion do use at their Marriages, it now remains that I should give some
account of the Customs and Solemnities performed at the Weddings of Evangelical
Protestants. And first I say that by Evangelical Protestants I mean the
English, Dutch, Switzers, and many other People, which do not pin their faith
upon the Church's or Popes Sleeve, but rejecting all vain Traditions and
Novelties ground their belief upon the Pillar of Truth and Gospel verity.

As for the English their Ceremonies are so generally practiced throughout this
Kingdom and consequently so well known, that I will pass them over in silence,
least I should seem to light a Candle at Noonday; wherefore I come to the
Dutch.

When the parties are all agreed, then they send for the Minister who
betrotheth them one to the other, and then they give them drink, every one in
their Glass asunder: He that fills the Drink, takes the two Glasses, and
mingles the Wine of one with the other; he presents the Glass of the Bridegroom
to the Bride, and that of the Bride to the Bridegroom: After they have drunk,
the future Bridegroom does present his betrothed Bride a Ring. But before they
may marry it is requisite that the Minister make Publication of their Marriage
three Sundays consecutively, lest there be amongst them any Impediment or other
Engagement: After which publication they may lawfully marry. Then at the day
appointed, the Bridegroom resorts to the Church with his Parents and Relations,
the Bride also, with a Garland of Flowers upon the hinder part of her Head, is
conducted thither by two Men, or two Young Bachelors, of her near Relations,
many Maids, with married Women of Relations and Guests, following her thither.
When she comes out of the Church, she is led to her Bridegrooms House by the
same Persons. The Widows, which marry again, may not wear a Garland upon their
heads, but only a large Nosegay in their Bosoms; and are led to Church by two
Widows of their near Relations.

In Friezland, the men of that Country did not at all regard the Quality or
Portion of their Women, but only their Handsomness and good Morality; so that
many Gentlemen and rich Merchants did marry virtuous comely Women, although
they were never so poor. But now adays the case is altered, for they not only
regard their Quality and Descent, but also expect a competency of Wealth,
answerable to their Estates. The Bride wearing a Crown upon her head, and
accompanied with a long train of Maids, goes to Church where the solemnity of
Marriage being celebrated, they return to her Fathers house, where they are
feasted. The Guests seldom present the Bride with any Money, But the Brides and
Bridegrooms Relations come very liberally to offer her their Presents, whereof
the Bridegroom takes good notice.

The Feast being ended, the Musicians begin to play on several Instruments, and
then every one dances in order. On the next day, all the Guests resort to the
same place, and the new married Woman, presenting every one of them with a
glass of the best Wine or of some other aromatical Liquor, she dismisses them
with honor, thanking them for their Civility and kindness. And this she does,
to the end that she may make it appear that she is now become a Household Wife.

In Hungary Bachellors never marry with Widows, although never so rich,
because they are persuaded that if any Bachellor marries one, who is not a
Virgin, he shall never enjoy any Prosperity in this World: wherefore if any
amongst them did discover that the Women, which they have married, have played
any Legerdemain with others before Marriage, they would put them to a cruel
Death.

As for the Lords of that Country they usually marry their Children very young;
and many times as they ly in their Cradles: And this is done on purpose to
entertain good correspondence and Friendship amongst Honorable Families; and
when the Children have attained to ripeness of Age, they are obliged to
consummate their Marriage, lest by their refusal they should procure their
Parents implacable enmity, the Sequels whereof might prove very dangerous and
tragical.

In Scotland formerly, and in the days of Popish Idolatry, the Brides did lay
down their Propira Feminea before their Lairds of the Manor, who did shake
their Hair-bags on the first night after the Solemnization of the Marriage: But
since the Light of the Gospel did shine bright in that Kingdom, that Barbarous
Custom has been exploded; wherefore the Brides do not now pay their Marks in
specie, but only by way of Exchange, the Bridegroom paying half a Mark to his
Landlord for that Right, and that Right is now called, the Women's Marks.

The Irish in their Marriages, I mean those who are partakers of the English
Civility, use the same decent Nuptial Ceremonies as the English do: But as for
the Popish wild Irish, they are so Barbarous and Brutish that they do not
deserve to be mentioned here.

CHAP. V. The Rites and Nuptial Ceremonies of the Grecians.
BEfore the Grecians Marriages, the future Bride does openly show what she is
able to bring to her future Bridegroom; the Bridegroom also is to declare the
full extent of his Estate, and that is done in a spacious Room upon a Table,
the Men sitting above the Women, as it were an Amphitheater. When the Bride
receives the Presents from her Relations and other Friends, she is sitting in
the middle of the Gyneconitide, or Chamber of Women, wearing a gilded Crown on
her Head. All the Guests having drunk good store of Metheglin, and ballasted
their Bellies with variety of Sweetmeats they betake themselves to walking;
and come back to Supper about the Evening. Immediately after Supper, the new
married Folks, without staying for the three publications of their Banes as we
do, go to bed together: The next day morning the married Women come to visit
them and to search their Sheet, to see whether, by good fortune, they can sind
any marks of a lost Maidenhead; which if they find, they are extremely jocund
and Jovial, but, upon a Non inventus, they depart as mute as Fishes. As for the
Bridegroom he fairly sends away his tried Bride to her Parents; unless the
Turkish Magistrate, being a little greazed in the fist constrain him to keep
her for better and for worse.

The Grecian Women, which bestow themselves upon Turks, Spaniards, French, or
Italians, may be afterward present at Divine Service: But they for some time
are excommunicated, that is to say, they are for some time debarred from the
Lords Table. Which kind of Excommunication Savoureth somewhat like the Spirit
of Christianity, and is nothing of Kin to the Popes brutum fulmen, which dare
at tacque the Sacred Heads of Crowned Sovereigns; neither is it like the
Anathemas of some high flown Ecclesiastics, who wear the Cross-Keys at their
girdle, with one of which they many times, for frivolous causes, deliver the
Souls of their fellow Christians to Satan, and with the other they commit their
Bodies to Jails. Is this the Spirit of God, or the Spirit of Belial? But I must
conclude this short Digression with this shorter Ejaculation: From the Spanish
Don's fiery Inquesto's; from the bloody Anathemas of the Popes; and from the
cruel Mercies of all Reverendos, Domine, libera nos.

The Walachians of Transylvania never marry any Women till they have got a
snack with them beforehand, but they also put them away for very slight and
trivial Causes.

Amongst the Moscovites, when a Father intends to bestow his Daughter in
Marriage, all his care is to look for a Young Man to his own liking: Having
found such a one, he presently proffers her to him as a Wife, with such a Sum
of Money for her Portion as he is able to give. If the Young Man accept of his
proffer, then the said Father goes immediately to the Young Man's Parents, to
whom he makes the same Offers: For in that Country, a Young Man may not see his
future Bride until the very day of the Wedding; but his Mother, and other Women
of her near Relations, go not only to visit her but also diligently to search
her, to know whether or no she does not hide some bodily Infirmity: The
Daughters Mother does the same toward the Young Man. The Wedding Day being
come, before the Celebration of Marriage, the Bridegroom and the Bride,
together with their Relations and the Parson of the Parish, make extraordinary
great Cheer together; and paint their Noses with such lively Colors, that they
scarce go to Church till they be passingly well dipped. As soon as they are come
there the Priest, according to the Custom, demands some Loaves; which having
received he desires the Bridegroom to take his Bride by the hand: then drawing
nigh to the Bridegroom, he asks him whether he be willing to be joined in
Marriage with that Woman? If he answers to the Affirmative, then he again
asks him, whether he will misuse or beat her? the Bridegroom answering
Negatively. He does then turn himself toward the Bride, and likewise asks
her if she be well contented to take that Man as her lawful Husband, to govern
his Family, and to be faithful to him; she answering yea, he then crowns them
both with two Garlands of Rue, and gives them the Nuptial Blessing. That being
done he takes some Wine in a gilded wooden Cup, and, having wished them all
Prosperity and happiness, he drinks to them, they also pledge him in the same
Cup: But after that the Bride has drunk, then the Bridegroom, snatching the
Cup from her hand, presently with all his Force flings it on the ground, and
treads it under his feet till it be all broken in pieces; and then he prays to
God that all those, who should go about to bring any division between them, may
be likewise trodden upon and destroyed by his Infinite Power: He afterward
receives the Presents of all that are there.

So that in that Country no Man may have more than one Wife, but withal he
keeps her no longer than she pleases him, for as soon as he begins to be
displeased with her, he presently puts her away, for the least occasion in the
World. They may also put away their Wives, if they prove barren: And they may,
after that divorce, warry six weeks after.

It is lawful for Widows to marry again the second time: But if they should
marry three times, they are reputed very wanton and light heel'd House-wives.

CHAP. VI. Nuptial Rites and Ceremonies of the Abissin's.
ALthough the Inhabitants of that Kingdom profess the Christian Religion, yet
notwithstanding they may marry as many Women as they please, and that without
the license of their Negus, or High Priest. The men of that Country are so far
from receiving any Portion from their Wives, that on the contrary they must
allow them a Dowry; which consists in a Sum of Money, which is deposited in
some trusty hand of the Women's nearer Relations, who pays him the interest as
long as the Woman lives: But in case she dies without issue he then may
command the Principal, but if she leave any Children, then the Interest goes
toward their Maintenance: And coming to Maturity of Age, they divide the
Principal amongst themselves. These are the Ceremonies which they observe in
their Marriages. The Couple, that is to be married, are both set before the
Church Door, and three Priests, going three times round about them, sing many
Hallelujahs; then, cutting two Tuffs of the new married Folks Hair, they put
them in Wine sweetened with Honey. After that, they take up the Bridegrooms Tuff
of Hair, which they put upon the Brides Head, on the very same place where her
own has been cut off; they also take up the Brides Tuff of Hair, which they
likewise put upon the Head of the Bridegroom: And, having sprinkled them both
with Holy Water, they receive the Communion and the Nuptial Blessing. The
Priest does, last of all, give them notice that they are both but one Flesh.
This Ceremony being ended, they all return home, where there is a great Feast
prepared, and they make very great cheer. But the new married Folks must not
stir out of the Door, till a month after the Solemnization of their Marriage:
After which time, the Bride must, when she goes out of the Doors, wear a black
Vail upon her Face, which she ought not to lift up but at six months end after,
unless she does prove with Child.

CHAP. VII. Nuptial Rites and Ceremonies of the Egyptians.
AMongst the Egyptians, when a Couple is to be married, the Friends of both
Parties resort to the place where the wedding Feast is preparing; the
Bridegroom goes to fetch his Bride to her Dwelling and handeth her to the
foresaid place: Where being come, they refresh themselves with their Relations
and Friends, drinking some Glasses of Wine, and distributing some dry
Sweetmeats. This done the Bridegroom's Relations and Friends accompany him to
Church, then they come again to the Bride and conduct her thither also, many
Torches and Wax-Candles lighting them on the way they go along the Streets,
singing Psalms and Hymns in their Coptick Language, and with little wooden
Hammers knocking upon little Rulers of Ebony, which is instead of very
Harmonious Music amongst them; this Ceremony is performed immediately after
Midnight.

Being come to Church they conduct the Bridegroom into the Chancel, where
usually the Divine service is celebrated: As for the Bride, she is led to the
Women's Apartment. Then the Priests, together with the people, begin some
Prayers with Hymns which last a considerable time. The Divine service being
ended the Priest, who is to celebrate the Solemnity of Marriage, coming out of
the Vestry in his Robes, leads the Bridegroom into the middle of the Chancell,
and, reading upon him three or four Prayers, does sign him with the Sign of the
Cross at the beginning and ending of every Prayer; This done, he causes him to
sit down on the Ground, his face turned toward the Heikel, and holding a
Silver Cross upon his head behind him, he reads many more Prayers.

Whilst that these things are done in the Chancell, the Sexton carrying a Seat
out of the Chancell, places it at the Chancell-door; and speaking to the Bride,
desires her to sit down on it, with a Woman of her nearer Relations. Then the
Priests begin to say the Prayers, which they call the Prayers of the knot;
which being ended, the Parson puts on the Bridegroom a long white Robe, like a
Surplice, and girdeth him with a white Girdle above his Loins, and covers his
Head with a clean Napkin* He then taking him by the hand conducteth him out of
the Chancell to his Bride, and making him sit down near her, he takes the
Napkin from his Head, and bringing both their Heads together, covers them both
with the same. Afterward he anointeth them both with consecrated Oil, on their
Foreheads and above their Wrists: Then, having joined both their Hands
together, he reads to them aloud an Exhortation of the Duties, which they ought
to render one another mutually. So ends the Solemnity of their Marriages
which they call the Coronation of the Bridals. Last of all, they begin Mass and
the Bride and Bridegroom, having very devoutly, upon their Marrow bones,
swallowed up their Breaden God, every one returns to the place of Feasting.

CHAP. VIII. Nuptial Ceremonies amongst the Sabeans.
THe Sabeans, who are otherwise called the Christians of Saint John, are those
People, which inhabit in the Confines of Persia toward the Kingdom of the
Turks, They indeed retain some Principles of the Christian Religion, but as
they border upon Turkey and have great Commerce with the Jews, they also partake
something of Judaism and Mahometanism. They may according to their Law marry
two Wives. As for the Ceremonies of their Marriages they are but very short,
being these. Both Parties being come to Church with their Friends and
Relations, the Priest does presently put the Bride upon her Oath before all the
People, asking her whether she be a pure Virgin or no. And although she answer
in the affirmative upon her Oath, yet notwithstanding, that must not serve the
turn, but the Priests Wife, with other married Women, must search her: And in
case they bring a Verdict conformable to what she has deposed upon Oath, then
the Priest baptizeth them both: Which being done, he brings them back to
back; and having read some Prayers, the Solemnity is ended. Then the new
married Folks are conducted to the Brides or the Bridegrooms house for to
feast, according to the Custom of their Country.

The Priests as well as Laymen, may also marry two Wives, and their Children,
if they be but Sixteen years of age, succeed them in their Priestly Office; but
in case they leave no Children, then their nearest Relation succeds them in
their Places.

CHAP. IX. Nuptial Rites or Ceremonies of Marriage amongst the Christians of
Colchis, Georgia, Circassia, and other adjacent Places
THe Christians of the States of Colchis, Georgia, Circassia, and other Places
adjacent, as they little differ from the Sabeans in the Principles of Religion,
so their Ceremonies are much alike, with this difference only: That if any of
them intends to marry, if the Bishop or Curate of the Parish be absent, then
they choose what Priest they please, and going with him into their own Cellars
(which they repute as holy as their Churches) the Priest, holding two Crowns in
his hand, sets one of them upon the Bridegrooms head, saying, Be thou crowned,
N, our Servant of our great God, for, N, the Handmaid of the Lord. He sets also
the other upon the Brides Head, saying likewise, Be thou crowned, N, the
Handmaid of our great God, for, N, the Servant of the Lord. He stitches
afterward the Bridegrooms Coat and the Brides Gown together: He then takes a
Glass of Wine, which he presents to the young Couple, who having drunk one to
the other, their Gossips cut the Thread wherewith their Cloths were fastened; and
this is all the Ceremony of their Marriages.

As for the Circassians the Promise, which the Man and the Woman make to one
another before some Witnesses, makes up all the formality of their Marriages.
They never marry a second Wife, till their former be dead, or that they are
otherwise constrained by some very great reason either of Barreness or Adultery.

THE Second Treatise.
Nuptial Rites or Ceremonies of Marriage, observed and practiced amongst
Mahometans.
ALL the Turks may, according to their Law, have four lawful Wives, and as many
Slaves as they are able to maintain: But as soon as their Women Slaves have
brought them a Child, they obtain their Liberty: Wherefore they may bestow them
away upon their Friends, but never sell them. Their Churchmen also may marry
many Women, excepting the Dervises, Monks, and other Religious Persons. It is
also lawful amongst the Turks to put away their Wives, and to take them again,
even to the fourth time. They may also marry not only Women of another
Generation, but even of their ow n near Kindred, for they hold that by a double
Tie, the Knot of Friendship and Love is the stronger.

When they intend to contract Marriage, the nearest Relations of the Man and of
the Woman, gather themselves together for to agree amongst themselves about the
Dowry which the Young Man must allow his future Bride: For the Parents never
allow them any Portion at all; which thing is also practiced amongst the
Eastern Christians. This being done, the future Bridegroom sends to the Maids
Father, or to her nearest Relations, the Sum agreed upon, to the end that a
part of the said Sum be bestowed partly in Cloths, and partly upon Household
Goods, according to the Quality of the Persons: As for the Remnant of the Money,
it must remain in the Hands of the future Bride, or else she deposites it into
the Hand of one of her own Kindred, which she can best confide in: But her
future Husband may never call her to any account for it. Now a day's the
Parents of both Parties contribute toward the Expenses of the Wedding, for
they do think it more honorable to do so. As for the future Bridegroom, he
makes choice of one of his best Friends to invite his Guests, and to take care
of all the preparation of his Wedding, and this man is called amongst them,
Sagois.

The future Bride is to remain always within doors, her face covered with a
Vail eight days before the Celebration of the Marriage, and none of her future
Husbands Relations may see her. As for her Bridegroom he, taking his Sagois
along with him, goes about to invite his Guests: The Guests send every one
their Presents to the Bridegroom, the day before the Wedding. The day before
the Celebration of the Marriage, the Bride is conducted by the Women to the
Bath, two or three of them washing and rubbing all her Body, but especially her
Parsley-Garden. They also take a certain Powder, called amongst them Elcana,
whereby they cause her Hair, her Nails, the inward parts of her Hands and Feet,
to become Red. This Bathing is reputed so Holy a Ceremony amongst them, that
when the Bride goes to the Bath, she is accompanied with many Women of her
Relations and Friends, who march two by two before her, every one of them
holding a lighted Wax-Candle in their Hand.

The Wedding day being come, the Bridegroom sends Presents to the Cady,
entreating him to draw an Instrument in writing concerning the Dowry, which by
Agreement he ought to allow his Bride. This being done, his Sagois, accompanied
with all the Guests go to the Brides House, many Drums, Trumpets, Fifes, and
other Instruments, sounding before them. They all stay in the lower Court of
the House, then the Brides Father coming down with her, delivers her into the
custody of the Sagois, who presently mounts her on Horseback, and conducts her
to her Bridegrooms House. All the Relations and Friends of both Parties go
afoot after her, the Carts and Horses, which carry her Goods and
Household Stuff, following in the Rear: The Bride rides upon a Horse richly
trapped, her face being covered with a thin Vail, and an Umbrello carried over
their Head: She is also waited upon by her Servants, Chamber-maids and her
Nurse, who going a foot at her side, shed tears for Joy, bewailing her
Virginity, which is reduced to the last Extremity of being lost In the mean
while, as she rides along, she with a little bowing of her Head salutes them,
whom she meets in the Streets, Which thing no Woman dare do but upon her
wedding Day. Being come to her Bridegrooms Door, the Sagois helps her down and
her Bridegroom, waiting for her at the Door, conducts her to the Women's
Appartment: And, after they have feasted plentifully, they begin to dance
merrily. The ball being ended and the Guests retired to their respective
Habitations the Sagois, taking the Bride by the Hand, leads her to the
Nuptial Chamber and commits her to the custody of her Bridegrooms Eunuchs,
until he himself comes. As soon as he is come, after their mutual Civil
Salutations, he takes away her Veil, and all her Cloths, one after another, but
when he comes to unbutton and take down her Linnen-Drawers, there will be a
little fumbling and scuffling; for she will be sure to show some little willing
Resistance. The next day the Sagois comes to pay his Civilities, and makes them
many drolling and frollick Questions. As soon as the new-married Wife is up
she, taking some Women of her near Relations with her Chamber-maids, goes to
the Bath and having sufficiently duckt her self, she returns to her Husbands
House. These are the Ceremonies which are practiced amongst them of the better
Quality. It is a Common Custom, amongst the Turks, to marry three Sisters one
after another, provided that they have married the Eldest at first, but if they
began at the Youngest, they may never marry her Eldest Sister.

The Arabians did formerly contract Marriage only for a time prefixed and
limited, by mutual consent of both Parties* And to the end that they might make
some show of Matrimonial Convention, the Woman did present her Bridegroom with
a Tent and a Dart for her Portion: But the limited time being expired, she
fairly went her way looking for a fresher Customer. Which Custom proceeded
from the Inconstancy and natural Looseness in both Sexes, which loved change
and variety, in such a a manner, that a Woman was married in one place, brought
forth in another, and bred up her Children in anothet, without remaining long
in any place all her life time. The people of Arabia Felix had the Women common
in every House: The Man that came home at night first, having set a stick
before the Door, went to Bed with the Woman: So that amongst them, they never
reputed any to commit Adultery, but those who had to do with them of another
Nation.

Now adays the Arabians take as many Wives as they please, but they never put
them away as the Turks do. They also buy them with ready Money, but they are
very strict in not coupling themselves with any Women, but them of their own
Family or Alliance. As for their Formalities of Nuptial Ceremonies, they are
the same with them of the Turks.

When the Persians go a wooing, if they intend to signalize themselves for
their Fidelity and passion toward their Mistresses, they use to burn
themselves in many places of their Bodies with some kind of Linen, which they
set on fire, much like our Chyrurgeon's Causticks. And being so burnt, they
come in this manner into their Mistresses Presence, who have a care of sending
them some Linen, or Pieces of Silk, to bind and heal their Wounds: And he that
has most Burnings on his Body, is most esteemed amongst the Ladies, and will
sooner purchase their favorable acceptance. They may marry many Women; the
Mechanics may have seven and no more, but their Nobles may have as many as
they are able to maintain.

When a Person of Quality is to marry, his Parents, Relations, and intimate
Friends, without Invitation, resort to his House, wearing his Liveries: But if
they be neither Relations, nor Familiar Friends, they may not then be permitted
to wear them, they only appear in their best Equipage. The Bride comes out of
her House riding on Horseback, accompanied with the Women of her Relations and
Friends gallantly mounted: Many Instruments of Music playing before them, they
go toward the the Bridegrooms House; who also coming to meet them with his
Friends on Horseback, these two Squadrons joined together go back to the Brides
House, where they begin the Ball. The Ball being well begun, two Gentlemen
conduct the Bridegroom into the Brides Bedchamber, two Gentlewomen lead the
Bride to her Bridegroom and resign her into his Arms. About Midnight some old
Women come down, and bring a Linen which they present to the Bridegroom's
Relations, if it appear blushing with the Beauty-Spots of a lost Maidenhead,
then they hug it as a precious Relick, but in case it be, Facies miris modis
pallida, then those same old Women bring away the Bride, and the Bridegroom
divorceth himself from her before the whole Assembly; and having paid a very
small Sum of Money to her Relations, they presently carry her away,

Amongst the people of Cambaya, Palandura and Maldivia, this particular
Ceremony is observed in their Marriages. Both Parties being agreed, the future
Bride delegates a Man of her Fathers near Relations, who has power to
represent her Person; this Man goes with the future Bridegroom before the
Pandiar, or Priest, and taking the Bridegroom by the Hand, asks him whether he
be willing to take his Kinfwoman, for his lawful Wife, upon such Terms and
Conditions as have been propounded and concluded. The Priest asks the Woman's
Kinsman the same Question, and both answering affirmatively, then the Priest
proceeds to the other Solemnities of Marriage, the Relations of both Parties
being present as witnesses of the Coniugal Knot. This Solemnity being ended
they all resort to the Brides House where she waiting for them, receives them
with all possible Civility and Demonstrations of Respect. Then they are
regaled, many Instruments of Music playing all the while they are feasting;
many Persons come to compliment the new-married Couple, the Bride presenting
them with Boxes of Betel. They also send to the Pandiar two Larrins, a Dish of
the best Meat, with a Box of Betel. The new married Folks are obliged to send
their Presents to their King and Queen, according to their Ability: But when
the King himself is married, all his Subjects are bound to send him their
Presents: Some send them Cloths, some Robes, others send him Turbans, and
others again only Fruits and Flowers.

The Men of the foresaid Countries may have three lawful Wives at one time, if
they be able to maintain them; and if they live in the same Island, he is bound
by the law to divide amongst them the duty of Benevolence equally: But this Law
is not always observed amongst them.

The Women never bring their Husbands any Portion at all, on the contrary the
Husband must not only defray all the charges of the Wedding, and provide them
all things necessary, but also settle upon them a Dowry, which in their own
Language is called Rans. The Bachellours Marry when they please, but as for the
Maids, their Parents bestow them upon the first that offers any reasonable
Terms, when they have attained to ten or twelve Years of Age. But in case their
Fathers be dead, they then are accounted Orphans. and they may not marry till
they be fifteen. When they present themselves before their Pandiar to be joined
in Marriage, he makes a strict scrutiny whether the persons be any way related
to one another in Blood, or in Milk. So that if he find that they used to call
one another Brother or Sister, only for love sake, or else that they have
sucked the same Nurse, it is a lawful Impediment to obstruct their Marriage,
and their Priest dares proceed no further. The Husband puts away his Wife when
he pleases, provided that the Woman give her consent to it, but if she refuses
to agree to it, he notwithstanding may put her away, if he first pay her down
her Dowry promised upon Marriage.

Through all the Island of Ceilan men may marry as many Women as they are able
to maintain, and Maids are commonly married as soon as they come to be ten or
eleven: Even as in the Islands of Cambaya, Palandura, and Maldivia.

The Mahometans of the Island of Javan may not have above four or five lawful
Wives, but they may take as many Concubines as they can maintain. On their
Wedding Day their Friends, Slaves, and other Menial Servants appear richly clad
before the doors of the Bride and Bridegroom, where they have set up many Pikes
adorned with Fringes of white and red Cotton: They also discharge several
Volleys of Shot before the Door. After twelve of the Clock, the Bridegroom goes
out to fetch his Bride with this following Pomp. First there are five or six
men which carry five or six Basins hanging upon poles; these men are
accompanied with as many men which, holding in their hands little Coco-sticks,
beat upon the said Basins. After these follow four or five other men which
carry long Drums, which they beat with Switches, or else with their Hands;
After these follow a great Train of Men, which, having some Basins hung to
their Necks beat upon them continually as they march along. These are followed
with a great Number of Men which carry long Mattocks colored with Red, and
adorned with Peacock's and Horses Tails; Then come thirty or forty other Men
armed with Darts, Swords, and Bucklers, in their Buff-coats; these armed Men
march with great Pomp, and many times making a Halt fight amongst themselves,
and sometimes dance for to divert the Spectators. These last are followed with
other Drummers, immediately after these come a great company of Maids richly
adorned, some of which carry Baskets full of Flowers, and rich Pictures, others
little gilded Boxes, others carry little Coffers for to keep their Betel. The
married Women, which follow the Maids, do not come empty, but march every one
carrying all manner of Household Stuff; all which things are Presents which they
bring to the Bride. The Bridegroom comes out at last, riding on horseback and
richly attired, having his Relations round about him well mounted on Palfreys.
This Nuptial Pomp is shut up with all the Guests which are invited to the
Wedding, all of them gallantly mounted. This Cavalcade being come near the
Brides House, all the Drummers stand before he Door playing merrily; but as for
those which carry their Swords, Bucklers and long Mattocks, they order
themselves on both sides of the Street making a Lane till this pompous Train be
past. The Bridegroom being come to the Brides door, she stands ready to wait
upon him, who lighting off his Horse, she having a Vessel full of Sweet Water,
and casting her self upon her knees does wash his feet, which being done she
presently rising up takes him by the hand, and conducts him into her own
Appartment; where having staid a little while to pay their mutual Civilitys,
the Bridegroom helping his Bride on her Palfrey, they return to the Bridegrooms
Dwelling in the same Order as they came. Being come near the Bridegrooms House,
they all alight, and the Bridegroom taking his Bride by the Hand goes in first,
and all their Guests following them, they remain with them three days feasting,
dancing, and making extraordinary great Cheer. The Inhabitants of the Island of
Moluccos, retain yet some principles of Idolatry, with the Mahometanism which
the Persians and Arabians have brought in amongst them. Those People may have
as many Wives as they are handsomely able to maintain, but withal they are so
exceeding jealous of them, that they can in no wise suffer that any Man should
so much as cast an Eye upon them. They are notwithstanding very Liquorish, and
let their Husbands use never so great Precaution, yet they will be sure to
entertain their Gallants and Paramours, and get a Lick of the Horseradish with
them in a corner. When any Man amongst them desires to marry, he may never go
to visit his Mistress, till the Parents of both Parties are agreed amongst
themselves, but after the said Agreement then he is introduced into her
presence, and she is obliged to accept of him, although she never saw his Face
before.

The people of Barbary, but those especially of the better sort, marry many
Wives also; but they do not buy them. They only allow them Dowries answerable
to their Quality, as the Ancient Romans did use to do. They retain yet some old
Customs and Ceremonies which the Goths and Vandals have left amongst them. They
are also so extremely Jealous of their Wives that they will, by no means, allow
them to appea^ before their own Fathers without their Faces be covered with a
Vail

The Moors of the Kingdom of Moroc^ marry many lawful Wives, besides th
Concubines allowed them by their Alcoran. Some few days before the Marriage the
Bridegroom goes to the Caccis, and having with him the Relations of both
Parties as witnesses, they send for a Notary who, having received his
Instructions concerning the Dowry, which the said Bridegroom is to give to his
future Bride, the Notary draws a public Instrument of it, which is, in their
own Language, called Codaca; So that although they may divorce their Wives
afterward, they may not put them away till they have paid them the full Sum
mentioned in the Contract of Marriage. They are very joviall at their weddings,
and so extraordinarily profuse, that it is a common Proverb amongst them, That
the Christians spend most in Suits at Law, the Jews in their Passovers, and the
Moors at their Weddings.

On the Wedding Day the Bride, being gallantly mounted upon a Mule richly
trapped and adorned, and having a Canopy of Turkey Carpets over her Head, with a
thin Vail over her Face; She is led in Pomp about Town, and immediately after
her follow many Mules carrying her Furniture and other Presents, which her
Friends have bestowed upon her. After the Mules come all the Men and the Women
of her Friends and Relations; but the Women, as they march along, make hideous
Outcries which, together with their Moorish double Drums, make a horrible
Noise. After this Cavalcade, they betake themselves to their Dinner, which
being ended they go to the Market place; and if the Bridegroom be a Military
Person, then all his Friends appear there on Horseback playing and exercising
themselves with their Lances, and Javelins, on purpose for to divert the whole
Assembly; after which Recreation every one withdraws to their respective
Habitations.

But amongst Persons of eminent Quality, the Bride is mounted upon a Camel
sumptuously fett out, and charged with a little Turret (called amongst them
Gaiola) her Head covered with a thin Taffeta, so thin, that although none can
see her Face, yet she easily can see all them that are about her. She is
accompanied with many Gentlewomen and Knights which ride along with her, and
after the Cavalcade she is again conducted to her Fathers House, and from
thence to her Bridegrooms Habitation; where, the Feast being sumptuously
prepared, all the Assembly resort to feast, to sing and to dance. After which
Jollities the Bridegroom begins a new Courant with Bride, but in case he find
that she has been versed in it before, and her case so plain and open, that no
Tokens of Virginity appear, then he presently surrenders her to her Parents,
who have her away with all her Furniture and Household Stuff; But if, on the
contrary, her Clothes appear dyed with the Rose and Lilly, then he hugs her as
a pure Virgin, and her Linen Drawers are carried in Triumph thorough all the
City, as an honorable Testimony of the unquestionable Virginity of his new
tried Bride. The Jews themselves, who live in those Countries, observe the same
Custom.

They of the Kingdom of Fez practice this particular Custom at their Marriages,
that as soon as a Father has promised his Daughter in Marriage, then the
Parents of both Parties gather themselves in some assigned place; going
asterwards to the Mosque with two Notaries, who write down the Conditions of
the Contract. This being done, and the Parties being fully agreed, then the
Bridegroom invi^es to Dinner them, which have accompanied him and have been
witnesses of the Contract: The Brides Father does likewise feast his own
Relations. When the Bridegroom intends to bring his Bride, he then sends a
Litter covered all over with rich Silks; she is carried in it to the public
Place of the city with all her own and her Bridegrooms kindred together with
many Flambeau's, Fifes, Drums and Trumpets; the Bridegrooms Friends go before
the Bride with their Flambeaus, and his Fathers Familiars follow after her. As
soon as they are come to that public place, then the Bridegroom comes to
salute her Father and Relations; which Duty of Civility being performed, he
then, without any more Ceremony, betakes himself to his own Habitation, waiting
there for his Bride, who as soon as she is come thither, her Father and nearest
Relations accompany her even to her Nuptial Chamber Door, and resign her into
the Hands of her Bridegroom: who as she comes into the Chamber sets his Foot
upon one of hers, and having shut the Door upon themselves, every one withdraw,
some few Women only excepted which, remaining at their Doors till the
consummation of Marriage, come down afterward bringing the lower Sheet all
bedewed with the Tokens of her lost Virginity. But in case no such Tokens
appear, then she is fairly dismissed, as a Cracked piece and surrendered to her
Parents: As for the Guests they go their ways with a Peck full of trouble, and
their Bellies full of Vacuum.

Those People use to make three several Feasts at the Solemnity of their
Marriages: The first is made on the day of the Wedding; the Second is made the
next day after, but this is only for the Women: And the Third is prepared on
the Seventh day after the Celebration of Marriage, and this chiefly concerns
the Brides Relations and intimate Friends, who are all feasted that Day. Her
Father sends his Son in Law some Sweetmeats and some whole Muttons on that day
for a Present. But as soon as the Bridegroom goes out of Doors, which happens
ordinarily but at seven days end, he then goes forthwith to buy some Fishes,
and bringing them Home, he delivers them into the hands of his Mother, or of
some other Woman, who immediately fling them all on the young married Woman's
feet, as a fortunate Emblem of her future fruitfulness.

A Month after the Marriage the new married Woman's best Friends send her great
Pots full of Bread fried in Oil, and whole Muttons ready roasted; and the new
married Man, to retaliate their kindness, invites them to a Feast.

If a Widow be married again, the nuptial Pomp is not so magnificent, the
Guests must then be contented with roast Mutton, Beef, and some boiled H^ns:
They also set before them a great wooden Platter charged with Porringers of
Broth. As for the poorer sort of people they set before their Guests a great
wooden Charger of Broth thickened with Bread grated very small, with thick
Gobbets of Beef, but they make use of no Spoons, every one helps himself with
his Hands.

The Inhabitants of the Kingdoms of Tunis and Algier, marry but very few Women,
for they are bound by their Religion not only to divide the duty of Benevolence
equally amongst them, but also to allow every one of them a Chamber private to
themselves. The Husband does also assign his Wife a Dowry, and when the Man and
the future Brides Relations are agreed about it, then the Bridegroom sends her
some Boxes of Sweetmeats. On the Wedding Day the Bridegroom, Bride, their
Relations and Friends, feast together in the Bridegrooms House: They do not sit
down upon Seats as we do, at Table, but lay along upon Turkey Carpets; after
the Feast they begin to danceafter the Moorish Fashion: then the Bride mounts
upon a Theater, erected for that purpose, and there makes a show of her
Bravery, having sometimes her face all shining with Diamonds and other precious
Stones. About the Evening the Bride is conducted to her Nuptial Bed, many Drums
and Trumpets sounding before her; then her Bridegroom follows, who shutting the
Door after him does consummate the Marriage; All the Women waiting at the
Chamber Door for the Brides Linnen-Drawers, which the Bridegroom brings them,
and having fastened them upon a Pole they carry them in great Triumph dancing
and making great cheer. The Woman, after her Marriage, keeps seven days within
Doors, but as for the Man, he must go to bath himself, which thing they ought
always to do after Coition.

The Moors of Egypt have many Wives which they keep in one Seraglio, as so
many Nuns in a Nunnery, every one enjoying her private Room. But as for the
Morisques or Granadins, expelled out of Spain, called Moros Francos, they have
but one. When the Moors of Egypt are passionately affected toward any Woman,
they use to testify their zealous Passion by slitting their Skin in several
parts of their Bodies, and so present themselves before their beloved Object.
Is she, by good fortune, chance to kiss her Hand at the sight of them, they
then presently conclude she has hung out her white Flag, wherefore they
forbear attempting any more Assaults at the Breach, looking upon the place a s
good as surrendered already.

The Negroes of Jaloffa and Senega marry many Women, but they have more respect
for them that are better descended. They are so civil toward their Women, that
they never overcharge their Ship, but ha ving given them their sufficient
Cargo, never load them again till they be safe ly arrived to the Harbor, which
we call, Safe Delivery.

The Inhabitants of Tartaria Deserta, which are Subjects of the great Duke of
Moscovy, may have as many Wives as they can get, and he that has most of that
kind of Cattle, is reputed amongst them the most honorable Man, and the most
eminent Vir gregis.

The Tartars of Chersonesus, otherwise called little Tartars, may marry as many
Women as their Law allows them: They most an end buy them of the Perigorts, or
Circassians. They maintain them splendidly and are very courteous to them, and
especially to them that have brought them any Children. They little regard
Beauty or Riches in their Women, but only their Fidelity and good Manners: If
they perceive their Slaves to be duly moralized, they do not disdain to take
them as their Wives. From thence it comes to pass that their Wives are always
very faithful and dutiful, cautious of giving their Husbands any Offense,
living with them with singular comfort and Concord. If any amongst them, having
promised Marriage to a Woman, chance to fall sick unto Death, he then sends for
his betrothed Bride, who is married with him by his Bedside. He also allows
her a competent Dowry, with all Household stuff fit for Housekeeping, and this
they do upon the prospect of a future Life, thinking they shall enjoy one
another in the World to come.

THE Third Treatise.
Of Nuptial Rites, or Ceremonies, of Marriages practiced amongst Idolaters and
Pagans.
THE Indians are either Pagans, Mahometans, or Christians; but as they observe
the Ceremonies of Marriage prescribed by the Religion which they profess, we
will treat in this following Treatise only of those which remain, even to this
Day, plunged in the woeful Labyrinth of blind Idolatry and Paganism.

All the Indians in general, whether they be Christians or Idolaters, make
exceeding merry at their Weddings, passing many Day's and Nights in feasting,
singing and dancing. As soon as the Instruments of Music begin to play, they
dance round with little painted switches in their hands. But as for the Pagans,
they are so exceedingly Barbarous, that they bind their Women by promise upon
Marriage, that in case they overlive them, they shall cast themselves headlong
into their Funeral Pile, there to be consumed to Ashes.

The Inhabitants of the Kingdom of Kunkam and Ballagatt contract Marriage, when
they are hardly come to the seventh Year of their Age, but they use not to
consummate it, till they be eighteen. They are very cautious of marrying below
their Rank and Quality, but their Women bring them little store of Riches; For,
besides a few Jewels of inconsiderable value, they bring them their dainty
Marigold, but not a Dram of Silver nor Gold.

The People of the Kingdom of Bisnagar marry as many Women as they please, but
in case any of their Women be not pleased with their Husbands, for want of
their sufficient Dose, or any other reason, they then go to their King and
presenting him with a piece of Gold, he laying his Sword upon their Right
Shoulder sets them at Liberty; so that being divorced in that manner, they may
lawfully seek to mend their Quarters.

There be some in that Kingdom, which consecrate their Daughters Virginity to a
certain Idol, so that as soon as they have attained to the tenth Year of their
Age, they are conducted with great Pomp, by their Parents, to the Temple, and
being come there the young Damsells Mother, with some other grave Matrons, go
up with her to a Turret, where is erected a Statue about a Cubit high: They
kneel down before it and perform their Idolatrous Devotions. After which the
young Maid must embrace the said Statue three times; which being done, she must
remain, all her life time, as pure a Vestal Virgin as ever served seven years
Apprenticeship in our Whet-Stone Park.

Those of Canara observe the same Nuptial Ceremonies as those of Kunkan and
Ballagatt.

The Inhabitants of Malabar, are divided into three Ranks viz into Bramins,
Naires and Moucois: The Race of the Bramins is the most eminent and honorable
amongst them; They also differ in their manner of Living, and enjoy
considerable Prerogatives above the rest. They may marry two Wives, but never
any which be inferior to them in Quality: They marry very young when they are
yet but seven or eight years of Age.

As for their Naires which are the Country-peasants they may not match with any
Women superior to their Order and Quality, neither is it lawful for them to
marry more than one Woman at one time; But as for their Women, the case is
altered, for they may, if they please, enjoy three Husbands at once, all which
are bound to contribute equally toward her and her Childrens maintenance. The
first that comes in, leaving his Arms at the Door, enjoys her company, and they
that come in after, are so civil as to withdraw and not to go in to her, until
the Coast be clear: So that there happens no Debate nor Quarrel, but they live
amicably, every one of them Husbands having his Finger in her Pie Successively.

The Maids of Malabar are naturally very wanton and leacherous; wherefore the
Noblemen of that Country are very careful to marry their Daughters betimes,
lest for want of sufficient Toying and Riggling they should unhappily spring a
leak: So that very few remain unmarried after fourteen Years of Age. But if
they prove so unfortunate as to keep their Maidenheads after that time, then
they may bewail their Virginity all the Days of their Life, for young Men look
upon them to as be useless as old Almanacks.

They are very Jovial at their Weddings: as soon as both Parties are agreed,
they go to their Pagodes Temple, where they use to say some Prayers before
their Priests. Fifteen days before the Wedding the Relations of both Parties
conduct the future Bride every Day to the Bridegrooms house for several Days
together; Who every one of those times treating them, conducts her back to her
Parents House. All this is done with great Magnificence (according to the
Abilities of the Parties) great store of that Countrey-Musicians attending,
during this whole Nuptial Festival. When the time of consummating the Marriage
is come, the Virginity of the Bride is offered up to an Idol, or Pagode,
(seated on a brazen Throne, of an horrid frightful Form,) which has a sharp
Bodkin of Gold or Silver fastened to his Privy-parts: On this the Bride is
forcibly set, and it, by reason of its sharpness, forces great store of Blood
to come. And if, though by her Husband, she proves with Child the first Year,
they believe this Idol got it, and more highly esteem it: But, by reason of the
Pain, the Priests, by enjoying them first, quit them from this Ceremony; and
without one of these two none are married. Their Samoryn's, or Kings,
themselves not being exempted: Who, on this account, order heir Sisters
Children to succeed, as being more certainly of the Blood Royal. In these
Countries they change their Wives as often as they please, nor seem the Women
displeased at it, Poligamy is so tolerable or rather acceptable: And as the Men
are allowed many Wives, so one Woman is allowed many Husbands, and the Issue
bequeathed as she nominates, The World affords not more obscene lustful Persons
than the Naire's, using Provocatives to stir up the decaying heat of Nature:
And as our European Gallants, by making the Husbands drunk, sometimes attain
their amorous ends, so these Naire's act their Amors by the help of a certain
herb, or Drug, called Deutroa (which infused, or otherwise taken, infatuates
the Intellect,) the Poor Cuckolds being in such a Pickle as not to be sensible,
though he sees before his Eyes another plowing with his H^ifer.

In Nepapata (a Town upon the River Nega) the manner of their Marriages is
extraordinary. For many times the Priest with a Cow, and the Man and Woman, go
together to the Waterside, where the Bramyn first mutters a short Prayer, and
then, linking their Hands about the Cows Tail, pours upon them all his hallowed
Oil; and lastly forces the Beast into the River, whereinto she goes willingly
so far as till they be up to the middle in Water: Neither returns she, nor do
they disunite, till the Waves advise them. Being come on shore they loose their
hands; and hold that mysterious Tie forcible and sacred ever after.

In Cochin-China Polygamy is forbidden; the Women are modest, and differ not in
Apparel; all of them wearing over them a Veil of White Linen: and indeed they
are the civillest of all the Idolaters of those Countries, which, to say the
truth, have no Wives, all Women being common amongst them.

They of the Kingdom of Bengala marry as many Women as they can maintain, but
they are extremely Jealous of them, wherefore they keep them as close as our
Euclio's do their Precious Jewels.

The Inhabitants of Pegu have extraordinary Manners. These People, neglecting
the natural use of Women, were formerly much addicted to the detestable
Abominations of Sodom; wherefore, to obviate this Mischief, one of their Queens
was constrained to enact a Law that whosoever should be Legally convicted of
that Crime, he should be burned alive. She also ordained that Women should go
with naked Neck and Breasts, to the end that, exposing a Samplar of their
Wares, they might the sooner allure Customers. The Men of that Country are very
shy in their matching, and very fearful lest they should light upon a
Crack-piece; for, to say the Truth, their Maids are generally all Fire and Toe.
They are scarce out of the Shell but their quick Oister will be gaping,
wherefore their Mothers, knowing by Experience the common frailty of their Sex,
(which is never found sure till it be sure bound,) When their Daughters are yet
young, they use to stitch their lower Lips, leaving nothing but a small Orifice
just fit to evacuate their natural Effluvium's. On the day of their Marriage
their Mothers unstitch them in their Bridegrooms Presence, and rubbing them
with some kind of Oil, they are well enough disposed to play at Putt, or else
at Ombre. The Nobles, and other Persons of Gentile Extraction, repute it a
disgrace to beat upon their Brides Anvils the first night of their Wedding:
They hire some of their Friends for that Drudgery. Nay their King is so
magnificent, that he will liberally reward the Valiant Champion, who has
courageously demeaned himself in the first Onset, and planted his Artillery in
his Queens Breach.

The People of the Kingdom of Siam may marry as many Women as they please. They
commonly buy them of their Parents; they may also send them packing at their
pleasure but they must maintain the Children which they have had by them. The
Women's Parents may also recall their Daughters to their own Houses, provided
they pay back again the Money which they have received of their Husbands. They
that are Idolaters have the same Customs as those of the Kingdom of Pegu, but
those amongst them, which profess the Mohammedan principles, are better
civilized and moralized.

The Chinese bestow their Children in Marriage when they are very young, and
their Fathers contract them oftentimes when they are yet in their Mothers Womb.
When any of them is to marry he appoints his future Bride such a Dowry as he is
able to give her; the Day appointed for the Wedding being come, the Brides
Father makes a sumptuous Feast, to which all his Son-in-Law's Parents and
Friends are invited: The Day following, the Bridegrooms Father does do the same
toward his Daughter-in-Law's Relations. This Feast being ended the Husband,
bringing the foresaid Dowry before the whole Assembly, delivers it to his
Bride, who presently surrenders it into the hand of her Father or Mother; which
thing is done for to make them a part of amends for the Charges, they have been
at in her bringing up and Education, and, for this reason, they that have most
Daughters are commonly the wealthiest amongst them. For the Parents make use of
their Daughters Dowry, and improve it not only for their own profit, but also
for the good of their Daughters, because after their decease all the Dowry,
together with the Improvement, returns to their Daughters, for their and their
Childrens Maintenance.

The Chinese may have as many Women as they please, but their first Love is
looked upon as the only lawful Wife, the others being reputed amongst them no
better than Paramours or Concubines. Wherefore they always live with the first,
but as for the others, they maintain them in several other Places, and in case
they be Merchants, they send them as Factors into their several places of
Traffic. They are forbidden by their Law to marry within any degree of
Consanguinity, and they are so strict as not to marry any Woman who bears the
same Surname as themselves, although she were of no Kin at all. They esteem
Beauty in Women far above their Extraction, and an handsome Woman, although
like a Mushrom born upon a Dunghill, is a dainty Dish for their palates. As for
the common sort of People amongst them, they buy their Wives with ready Money,
and sell them again as soon as their Appetite longs for Variety.

Mendoza does write that, in some Provinces next adjacent to Tartary, the
Viceroys do prefix a certain limited time, within which both Men and Maids are
obliged to marry, or else to confine themselves within the Walls of a Cloister.
When the said prefixed time is come, all that desire to marry and to be married,
come to a certain City appointed to them by their Governors for that purpose.
As soon as they are come thither they present themselves before twelve
Commissioners elected by their King: These Commissioners are commonly grave and
the most ancient persons of the said City: They take the Names and Sirnames of
all Bachellors and Maids which come before them; they enquire also into their
Qualities, and the Dowries which the Men are able to bestow upon their Women:
This being done, they examine their Catalogue and finding more Men than Women,
or more Women than Men, they cause them to draw Lots, and by this means the
supernumerary ones are cast back till the following Year. Six of them twelve
Commissioners divide the Men into three Companies: Setting aside the Rich in
the first, the Middle sort of them, in the second, and the Poorest in the
third. Whilst that these six are making this Separation amongst the Men, the
other six are busy in making also a distinction amongst the Women, distributing
them into three Bands: In the First they place them that are eminently
Handsome; In the Second, them that are indifferently Comely; And in the Third,
the Deformed and Hard-favoured by Nature. This Division being made, they bestow
the Fairest upon the Rich men who, in regard of that, pay a certain Sum of
Money limited by the Judges; they then give the less Handsome to them of the
Middle ability, without paying any thing at all. As for the Hard-favoured they
become the portion of the Poorest sort of Men, but withal they receive some
Money with them: for the Money which the Rich men have paid and deposited in
the Judges Hands, is distributed equally amongst them. The Men being thus
coupled with the Women, they resort to some public Houses, appointed by the
King in every City for that purpose, which Houses are furnished with Beds, and
all things necessary for the new married Folks, who remain there fifty days
feasting, dancing and making exceeding merry. After which time all the Men,
instead of Cloak-bags, carrying provision for their Cod-piece, betake
themselves to their respective Habitations.

The Nobles of that Country are not obliged to observe the Laws aforesaid, but
they marry when and whom they please.

The People of Javan marry usually but one Woman, but they send her packing
when they list, and marry another. As for their Women they may not leave their
Husbands and take others, unless they bestow themselves upon some great Lord,
who is willing to accept of them.

The Tartars, which are Idolaters, have many Wives which, notwithstanding their
Number, live amongst themselves peaceably. The First is always accounted the
most honorable, and her Children are preferred before any others. If a Father
chances to dye, his Son may marry all the Women he leaves behind him, his own
Mother and Sisters only excepted. They commonly marry their Sisters-in-Law
after their Brothers Decease, and they are very Jovial at every one of their
Weddings.

The Inhabitants of the large Province of Tanguth, together with those of the
Kingdom of Catay, may have as many Women as they are able to maintain. These
People are great admirers of Beauty, and if they be never so rich they will
purchase a handsome Woman at any rate, although she be of never so mean
Parentage. They have sometimes to the Number of thirty Wives, more or less
according to their Abilities, but the first is always the most regarded. If any
of their Women be morose, or troubled with any other intolerable Qualities,
they presently pack her away to learn better Manners: they marry their
Kinswomen even as the Tartars do, their own Mothers and Sisters only excepted.

The People of Caindu have extraordinary Customs amongst themselves: On their
Wedding Day they will invite all sorts of Strangers which sojourn amongst them,
and leave them, without any disturbance, to solace themselves with their
Brides. And their Women like the Sport so well, that they set a Token at their
Doors, and never take it down till they are all departed, and then their
sottish Cuckolds may have free Access.

They of Cascar are as much given to that silly piece of Hospitality toward
Strangers as those of Caindu, for they are never jealous, if Strangers partake
never so largely of their Pyes; so that they may have a Finger in it in due
season. If a man be absent from his Habitation twenty days the Woman may marry
another Husband: The Men may likewise do so in their Wives Absence.

The Canarins, which inhabit the Island of Goa, worship a certain Idol like a
Woman all naked: When they have a mind to bestow their Daughters in Marriage,
upon any Man, the Parents use to conduct their Daughters toward that Idol,
where they perform their antic Devotions, after which they are bestowed upon
them that promise the most. As for their Nuptial Rites and Ceremonies of
Marriage, we have made mention of them before, when we treated of the
Solemnities of the Marriages used amongst the Christians of the City of Goa.

The Negroes of Africa, Inhabitants of the Kingdom of Serroliana have, in every
Town and City, a large House, like a Nunnery, appointed for young Maids to
dwell in together, and to be instructed in all manner of Civil Deportment, and
good Housewifery. They have there several grave Matrons, with a Venerable old
Man, who is President over all, that have a special care of these Probationers.
At the Years end these young Maids come out together, as fine as their Hands
can make them, and coming to the most public Place of the City they dance
there at the Sound of several Sorts of Instruments. Their Parents are there
present, and the young Bachellors resort thither as to a Fair; every one making
his choice of her he likes best, but he must pay something to her Father
before he can have her away. He must also bestow some Gratuity upon the
President of the said Place, in consideration of his Care for her Entertainment
and Education: Which being done, without any more Complements, every one
carries away his own Bride to his Lodging, where they make very merry.

In the Kingdom of Guinney, as soon as their Sons are come to Maturity of Age,
the Parents go a Wooing for them and bring them Women, which their Children are
obliged to accept of, although they never saw their Faces before. The Maids
Parents give her fourteen ounces of Gold for her Portion; And this Custom is so
strictly observed amongst them, that even their petty Kings allow no larger
Portion to their own Daughters, excepting only that they allow them some Slaves
to wait upon them Every Maid, that is to be married amongst them, must take her
Oath that she shall be dutiful to her future Husband, and that she shall never
violate her Conjugal Fidelity: As for the Men they never use to require any
such Oath from them.

Moreover if, after their Marriage, the Man has been so thrifty a Husband as
to have got Wealth sufficient for the maintenance of another Wife, he may take
another, provided that the former give her Consent to it. He must also allow
her a certain weight of Gold for her Good will: So that he may afterward marry
another, but she is reputed rather as his Concubine, than as his lawful Wife;
and when this second Wife begins to grow in Years, he casts her off, as an
Almanac out of Date, and marries another. He notwithstanding is obliged to
keep always the First, who is the only Mistress, having the Command over all
his Family.

The People of the Empire of Monomotapa in the lower Ethiopia, marry as many
Wives as they can maintain, but the former is always looked upon as the most
Honorable, and her Children only may challenge every one a part of their
Parents Inheritance: As for the other Women they are bound to wait upon her and
observe her Directions and Commands. No man may marry a Maid until she be
capable of Conception: Wherefore as soon as the Parents perceive any such Marks
by their Daughters, they make very merry in their Families. The Maids go naked
till almost that time, but when they are to marry, they then put on thin Cloths
made of fine Cotton; and afterward, when they have bore any Children, they
cover their Breasts with a Piece of Woollen Cloth.

The Inhabitants of the Island of Zocotora in Africa marry as many Women as
they please, and when they have their Belly-full of them, they drive them to
the Market, where they truck them for others, as we do our Cattle.

The People of Canada may, if they please, take many Wives, they
notwithstanding are well contented with one only.

As for them of Samaya they have many, not so much for to satiate their
appetite, as for to increase their Grandeur; for they repute it honorable to
have many Friends, Allies and Children. The Fathers bestow nothing upon their
Daughters: on the contrary he that will have any of them, must make some
Presents to the Maids Parents, according to her Quality and Beauty. They make
great Solemnities at their Weddings: For besides Feasting, Balling and Dancing,
they make Nuptial Harangues and Epithalamiums, if any married Woman be
surprised in Adultery, both she and her Ruffian are in great Jeopardy of their
Lives. But as for their Maids, they are very favorable toward them; for they
repute their Instruments never the more jarring, or the less Musical, although
their jolly Gallants have played never so many Courants upon their Fiddles
before Marriage.

Amongst the People of Florida no man is permitted to marry above one Woman,
their Kings and Nobles only excepted; who may have two or three Wives, but upon
this condition, that the First shall be always esteemed as the Lady-paramount
amongst the other, and that her Children alone shall challenge their Parents
Honors and Inheritances. Their Women are very thrifty Houswives, very careful
to improve every thing to the best advantage of their Families, and never use
to lie with their Husbands after Conception.

As for the Islanders of Cuba, before their Island was depopulated, they
married many Women, but they did use to leave their Wives at pleasure, the
Women also using the same Liberty. Their Caciques marry as many Women as they
list, but they have this Custom altogether extraordinary, which is, that when
any of them is married, all the Men that are invited to this Wedding, are
obliged to try their Manhoods upon the Bride* This Custom is observed not only
amongst the common Sort of People, but also amongst them of the best Quality.

The People of Mexico, before they had embraced the Christian Faith, were
married in this manner. The Bridegroom and Bride went together to their Idol
Temple, and presented themselves before the Priest who, taking them both by the
hand, did desire them to let him know their pleasure; which having known, he
presently took a Corner of the Vail, wherewith the Brides Head was covered, and
fastened it to the Corner of the Bridegrooms Gown; and being so bound together
conducted them to the Brides House, where a great Fire was made ready; and
being come near that Fire, the said Priest led them seven times about it. After
which Ceremony the Marriage was ended, and then they betook themselves to
Feasting.

The Inhabitants of Civola, otherwise called New Granada, never marry but one
Woman at once, but they take the liberty to send her away at pleasure, and
marry another; the Women also enjoy the same Privilege, for in case their
Husbands be not so liberal and kind-hearted, as to spare from their own Bellies
to put it into theirs, then all the Fat is in the Fire, and they will presently
seek better Masters.

The People of Cumana use to send their young Daughters to their Piaces, or
Priests, to be instructed by them, and to learn their Duty toward their future
Husbands. The Nobles of that Country take as many Wives as they please, and are
so extraordinary Courteous toward Strangers that they, standing at their
Doors, will invite Passengers, whom they not only delight to regale at their
Tables, but will bestow their fairest Women upon them also to solace them at
Night.

They of Paria, may also have many Wives, but the First married is always the
Chief among them. They of the meanest Sort have commonly three or four, but
when they begin to be old, they turn them off, and take others more young: The
Priests afterward instruct them, according to the customs of those of Cumana.

The Inhabitants of Caribe marry after the same fashion, only, the day of the
Marriage and some days after, they bring out the new married Bride into the
Woods with a mighty Noise, driving and killing all they meet.

The Topinanboes, Inhabitants of Brasil, in the South parts of America, when
they marry, respect only the first degree of Father, Mother, Brother, Sister,
Son and Daughter; for there the Uncle may freely marry his own Niece. They take
so many Wives as they please, and the more they have, the more valiant and
vigorous are they esteemed. Though they have one they chiefly love, yet the
rest are not at all Jealous, or at least discover it not, for they labor in
their Employments, and live together in Peace. As for Ceremonies, they have
none, save that he who comes to see a Maid, or other Woman, desires her of her
Father, or nearest Relation and (after having discovered their Suit, and got
their Consent) takes her along with him as his Wife. It Is ordinary amongst
them, chiefly those of Quality, to promise their Daughters in Marriage, when
they are very young; and afterward give them to those, to whom they are
promised, who take them according to the Custom of the Country. The Husband may
repudiate, and put away, his Wife at pleasure, when she offends him: And
likewise when the Wife designs to part from her Husband she tells him (in their
Tongue) I Will have no more to do with thee, I Will go search for another. The
Husband (without troubling himself) answers, Escoain, go where thou will. The
Woman may give her self immediately to another Man, having the same Privilege
to put away her second Husband.

The Inhabitants of Peru, before they become Catholic, have many Wives, but of
those there is but one whom they reckon the Lawful Wife. The Bridegroom on the
day of Marriage went to her House and, bringing her to his own Habitation, he
did put on her Feet some kind of open Shoes made with a sort of Rushes, which
be called, in their own Language, Ottoya; which being done, she was honored as
the Mistriss-paramount, all the other Women Concubines obeying and serving her,
and the Issue of her Body was only capable of Inheritance.

The Itatins and Varack's, inhabiting the Country of Sancta Cruz, did likewise
marry as many Women as they could maintain: An Uncle does oftentimes marry his
own Niece. When their Daughters are yet but twelve Months old, their Parents
look for Husbands for them, they also choose him that is next of Kin in the
second degree. The Parents having thus made choice of a Husband for their
Daughter, they go to his Habitation, presenting him with a Bow and Arrows, and
a Mattock* as Pledges of the Matrimonial Contract; If the said Person accepted
of them, he is looket upon as the Son-in-law, and is presently conducted to his
Father-in-Laws house, there to remain and manage the businesses of his Family,
until his future Bride has at attained to Maturity of Age. But in case that a
young Man has any Affection for a Maid which never was offered to him, he then
makes his application to her Parents, and presents them with a bundle of
Sticks: If they receive it, it is an evident token that they are well pleased
with his motion, and presently they admit him into their own House. As soon as
a Woman is married amongst them, her first care is to make two winding Sheets,
one for her Husband and the other for her self: A commendable Example for all
Christians to follow; the remembrance of our Mortality being a prevalent
Antidote against all pestilential Diseases of the Soul.

In Guiana otherwise called Nova Andalusia, the common Sort of People must be
contented with one Dish, but as for their Nobles they may enjoy Variety of
Women; they have the same Marriage-Ceremonies, as those of Peru. But, as
England is esteemed the Paradise of Women, so on the contrary that Country is
their Purgatory; for Women are put to all manner of Drudgery, their condition
being little better than our common Servants, or Chamber-Maids.

There is a kind of People in Syria called Druses, which some Authors have
reckoned amongst Christians, but which are neither Jews nor Christians, but
rather a Crew of Barbarous Mongrels; for they marry their Mothers Daughters and
Sisters without any regard at all: The reason they allege for this Barbarous
brutality is, that they have begotten Children for their own use, and not for
others, and that no body ought to forbid them the enjoyment of that which is
Naturally their own. They have some Holy Days in the year, wherein their Men
and Women assemble themselves in a public place, where they are extremely
Jovial, for after their Feasting and Balling, they begin another kind of Dance,
borrowing one another Wives.

The Eastern Japannois, otherwise called Wild Lopps, contract Marriage in this
manner: The day of the Wedding being come, all the Bridegrooms Friends, and
Relations, resort to his Tent, and being gathered together, the Bridegroom goes
to his Brides Tent, and brings her to his own; where being come, he in the
presence of all the assembly, taking a Steel with a Flint, strikes Fire with
all his force, and the more Fire appears, the more fortunate they judge him,
looking upon that as a happy Presage of his future Prosperity: This Ceremony
ended, the Marriage is concluded. Then they cause the Bride, clothed with
Zibellins and Hermines, to be set upon a tamed Boar; the Bridegroom, being
clothed with Bear Skins, goes a foot by her side, all their Relations following
with joyful Acclamations, wishing them all Prosperity, and a numerous
Offspring. Being come to their Tent they feast and dance, which being done,
they begin to sing the Elogium's of their deceased Hero's, and eminent
Captains, renowned amongst them for their valorous Achievements in Warlike
affairs. As soon as they have made an end of their Songs, the Bridegroom*
Bride, and all their Guests, cast themselves on the ground, in a pitiful
manner, weeping, sobbing and lamenting the frailty of their Nature and
Mortality. About half an hour after, the Instruments begin again to play, and
every one rise up to renew the Dance.

In the South part of the World, commonly called Magellanica, when a Man has
Affection for a Woman, he goes to her Relations, to ask them their good will;
which having obtained he, without any further Ceremony, takes her along with
him, and they Cohabit together like Husband and Wife. Their Relations assemble
themselves the next day for to feast and make merry; after that the Brides
Relations offer her some Presents, which the Bridegroom receives with
thankfulness: The Women amongst them practice the same Trade as their Husbands.
If any of them chance to ring Changes, and play foul with another Man; then her
Husband sends her away to her Parents, who presently shave off all the Hair of
her Head; and in case she, turning a Convert, will return to her Husband, he
notwithstanding never will vouchsase to honor her with his Bed, but she must
rest contented to serve him, and do all manner of Drudgery.

Having performed my task (gentle Reader) and, as I hope, in part contented thy
Curosity about these Nuptial Ceremonies; a part of which Ihave been a Witness
to, and of others have received credible Informations from sundry grave Authors
and Travelers: Nothing remains, but that I Pray the God of all Unity and
Concord, in Mercy to heal all our Breaches, to the end that our Church may
appear like a Bride, all Glorious within, ready to attend upon Christ her
Bridegroom, to whom with the Father, and Holy Spirit, be all Honor and Glory,
World without End.

Amen.
FINIS.

