STRANGE NEWS FROM PLYMOUTH: OR, A Wonderful and Tragical RELATION of a VOYAGE
FROM THE INDIES,

Where by Extraordinary Hardships, and the Extremities of the late great Frost,
several of the Seamen and others Miserably Perished; and for want of Provision,
Cast-Lots for their Lives, and were forced to Eat one another; And how a Dutch
Merchant Eat part of his own Children, and then Murdered himself because he
would not Kill his Wife: with the Miraculous Preservation of George Carpinger
an English Seaman, and the Dutch Merchants Wife, now a Shore at Plymouth.

In a Letter to Mr. D. B. of London, Merchant.

LONDON, Printed for J. Conyers at the Black-Raven in Duck-Lane, 1684.

Strange News from Plymouth: Or, a Wonderful and Tragical Relation of a Voyage
from the Indies, etc.
SIR,
ACcording to promise in my last, I have inquired into the particulars of that
so Tragical Relation therein mentioned, the which (without any Prologue) I
shall lay down in its Naked Truth, as I had the same from the mouth of the
Survivours who are now at my House, which if you please take as follows -- A
Gentleman called the Here van Essell Native of the Low Countries, having had
the Education of a Merchant at home, was resolved to improve his Pacrimony in
some Foreign Parts: To which end, being thereunto the more Encouraged by the
promise of a strict Correspondence with several of his Countrymen, he undertook
a Voyage to the Indies, whither he Arrived about the year 1670. And by the
Industrious Management of his Affairs, increased his Estate so considerably,
that few Men in those parts Lived in greater splendour, being thus settled about
7 years, afterward he came acquainted with the Daughter of a Dutch Merchant of
great Fortune, a Gentlewoman of many worthy Accomplishments, and exceeding
Beautiful, our Merchant being much taken with her Port and Beauty, made his
Addresses to her, and resolving to change his Condition, found her not
altogether averse to his Happiness, which by degrees he raised to Consent, and
obtained Her for his Wife, with whom he lived very happily for several years,
till he had increased his Estate to such a Portion as made him think to return
to his own Country where he first drew Breath, and had left his Relations,
Communicating which Design to his Lady, she readily assented to the Voyage, and
accordingly he made preparation to gather his Estate into a Bottom, and take
leave of the Indies, which in a short time he Effected, and being supplied with
a Vessel that had discharged her self at the said Port; he hired the same for
Rotterdam, and therein Embarked himself, his Wife, two Children, and one
Servant, with all his Estate, which amounted to a very considerable Catgoe, and
in August last took Shipping. The flattering Sea which too often beguiles us to
our undoing, promised him for the two first months a very happy Voyage, and
filled his Heart with hopes of touching the Shore, the long absence of his
Friends rendered very desirable to him, and Boy'd up with the exp^ctation of a
happiness cruel Fat^ had designed to deprive him off, was on a sudden becalmed,
insomuch that for several weeks they could scar^e tell whether they were
forwarded a Leagues space, in which time the sixteen Seamen and Master that was
one Board, by a Disease that increased amongst them, several Dyed, and by
Degrees their Provision growing short, they were forced to deal the same more
sparingly about, hoping by their care they might have enough to serve then through
their Voyage, and made the best way they could to their desired Port; yet such
was their misfortune, that they were failed of their expectation, and came to
see the last of what they had spent, and for four days lived without any
sustenance, and the Wi^d being Cross they could not make Land, where they might
revictual, but were forced to keep on their Voyage. Their extremity was such
that the two Children not so well able to be^^ the hardship as others, both
died, on whose Bodies notwithstanding the Tears and Entreaties of the Merchant
and his Wife they were forced to feed, which being in a short (...) consum^^
(...) came to be considered, having no sight not hope of any (...) that they
must either all of them submit to the Fate that (...) ned them, or contrive
some other method to save themselves* which at present they had not the least
prospect of, unless in the common Calamity, they consented by Lot or otherwise
(...) destroy some one in the number to save the rest, which unwillingly they
were at length enforced to, and Joyn^^y (...) that according to the number then
a Board, they should number so many Lots, and on whom number 1 fell, he should
be slain, and number 2 should be his Executioner. But here a Dispute arose,
whether the Merchants Wife whose two Children had to her great grief been
already Eaten, and in favor to her Sex, should not be Exempted from the Fatal
Lot, some were of the opinion she ought, and particularly one George Carpinger,
a stout English Seaman, used his endeavors to work the Company to Assent
thereunto; but as nothing is so Voracious or Cruel as the Jaws of Hunger on
the one hand, or so Estimable as Life on the other, he could not Effect his
Design, so that the majority having overruled his Arguments, they drew in
common, and such was their misfortune, that the Lot fell on the woman for
Death, and on her Husband for Executioner; miserable was the Lamentation of the
Husband and Wife, that so fatal a Mischance should for ever part them, yet
Tears and Entreaties were ineffectual, so that nothing but submission was left,
tho the Merchants Servant and Carpinger stood resolutely against the rest, and
resolved to spare them, which the Merchant perceiving, and knowing their force
was too little to accomplish their wishes, with a settled Countenance, spoke to
them to the following purpo^t: Honest Friends, for such you have approved your
selves to me, you have seen the hardship of my Fate, and since it is drove to
this point, I am resolved never to be her Executioner, who has been so loving
and just a Wife to me, but in her stead am resolved my self the Sacrifice, and
therefore, what I have to say to you is, that you stand her Friends when I am
Dead, what is in this Vestel, does as you know belong to me, spare nothing of
it to serve Her, and with these Notes, if ever that Arrive at Rotterdam, tho
all in this Cargoe be lost, you shall be plentifully Rewarded: which after he
had said, and they with Tears had heard, being about to Answer him, he drew a
Pistol from his Pocket, which he so unexpectedly discharged, they had not time
to prevent it, and shot himself in the Head, of which Wound he Immediately Dyed.

The Cry they made at his Fall, and the noise of the Pistol was quickly heard
to the rest of the Ships Cr^w, which soon called them thithe^; Nor was his Wife
long absent, who poor Lady had been preparing her self for her end, which by
this less pleasing Disaster she saw prevented. The Tears she shed and
extravagancies she acted at so Dismal a T^^gedy, were but needless to recount,
since none so hard-hearted but might in some Measure Judge; She Swounded and
almost Dyed with Grief, and begged to be her own Executioner, but she was too
narrowly watched by her Servant and Carpinger to effect so cruel a purpose;
their Eyes never left her, and their cares more for her Preservation then their
own, but in vain was all their watchfulness against the Enemy from without,
when she Harbored in her own Breast (...) sufficient to destroy a greater
strength then Grief had left her, for no entreaties could persuade her to Feed
on that dear Corpse she had so often cherrished, but what share thereof the
hardship of her Fate allowed her for her Food, she Embalmed with her Tears, and
by renewed Vows promised to share Fortunes with it, and be Buried in the same
unwonted Grave in which that Flesh was distributed, she once so much admired,
which she had near accomplished, having had no Food in that time but two Rats
which were Fortunately taken, and Presented to her by Carpinger) at such time
as the Fatal Lot was to take its second round, in which she was resolved to
share notwithstanding all the entreaties of Carpinger and her Servant, and in
short, she had her wish, and drew again a Second time her own Sentence, which
she welcomed more then Bridal-days, and being just ready to yield her Throat to
the Executioners Knife, she had certainly Fell, had not Carpinger with two more
whom he hired, stepped in and resolutely withstood the Execution; Upon which
Quartel they drew their Fal^hions, and four Persons were Slain, amongst whom
the Faithful Servant was one. This was a sufficient Morsel for the present, and
staid the Bloody Hunger of the Survivors, who were now reduced to 5 or 6
Persons besides the Lady, with the Bodies of the Slain they were then Fed more
plenteously then for some Months proceeding, but such was the Rigor or their
Fa^e, that by the unusual Dyce most of their Men were Dead, just as they got
sight of the Lands end of England, and having but very few hands to work their
Vessel, they found that from the dangers they had been so long in, a second
threatened them from the Severity of the late Season, for the Ice being there in
very great Flakes, they found themselves drove amidst the same toward the
Shore, from whence they could not disingage the Ship, in which time Carpinger
(bring a Person of a Volluable Tongue, and formerly well bred about Stepney in
London, where his Father Captain Carpinger had long Lived) used all the
Consolation he could, by Words, or Devise, to Comfort the Desp^^^ing Lad^ till
at length she was prevailed to hearken to him, and give her promise to spare
all violence on her self, and wait her (...) Fortane, in this Case they lay
for six days, till all but two Persons besides themselves were Dead, and these
so Miserably weak they could not leave their Cabbins, so that, being Froze in,
that they could not (...), Carpinger with the Lady resolved to venture on the
Ice, and set forward toward the Shore, which she the rather undertook for that
(...) by to find a Grave in those (...) on which the had lost what she (...)
above her (...) Preservation, with this Resolution Carpinger taking charge of
the Lady got a Planck and a long Pole in his Hand, and with these left the
Ship, and with great danger and difficulty in six hours got safe to Shore,
having opportunity only of saving a Casket of Jewels, which he brought off with
him, where at my own House the said Parties do now remain, in reasonable
Health. And considering the care and kindness of Carpinger, the Lady seems much
to Favor him, and when the time of Mournings over, will undoubtedly make him
Happy in her Embraces.

SIR,
YOu may according to the Credit I have with you, Communicate this to the
Public, if you think fit, after Easter I intend to see you at London, and in
the mean time, I am,

Your Servant, J. G.
Plymouth, Feb. 3d. 1683.
POSTSCRIPT.
I Should have given you some Account of the Ship called the Do Ruyter of
Rotterdam, which we see at a distance, but as yet the Frost is so hard we
cannot get to her, but have small hopes of Preserving hot.

I. G.
This Relation is Justified for from.

By Us, John Cross, William Atkins,
Seamen.

FINIS.

