A SEASONABLE SERMON PREACHED JANVARY 26. 1689. And Published for the COMMON
BENEFIT OF ALL True English Men.

By J. G. D. D.

LONDON, Printed by S. Roycroft, for R. Clavell at the Peacock at the West End
of S. Paul's. 1690.

NUMB. XI. Ver. 4, 5, 6. And the mixed multitude that was among them fell a
lusting; and the Children of Israel also wept again, and said, Who shall give
us Flesh to eat?

We remember the Fish which we did eat in Egypt freely; the Cucombers, and the
Melons, and the Leeks, and the Onions, and the Garlic.

But now our Soul is dried away, there is nothing at all but this Manna before
our Eyes.


THis Book of Numbers, besides a Muster-Roll of the several Tribes and Families
of Israel, which it affords us in the former part (and from whence it has its
Name) presents us also with a Journal of the Motions of that mighty Host, or an
History of the most remarkable Passages of their Forty years Travel through the
Wilderness toward Canaan. And in the Course of this History sets before our
Eyes a wonderful Scene of miraculous Providence on the one hand, and as
strange and frequent Instances of human Folly and Frailty on the other. On Gods
part, a display of infinite Power, Wisdom, Goodness and Patience: And on the
part of the People, prodigious Infidelity, Stubborness, Peevishness, and
Ingratitude. God Almighty had seen their Affliction in Egypt, and had heard
their Groanings, and by a powerful Hand had rescued them from an horrible
Slavery under an unrelenting Tyrant; and by the gentle Conduct of Moses, was
leading them into possession of the good Land he had promised them. But they
instead of Thankfulness for so great a Deliverance, are perpetually quarrelling
with his Instruments or his Methods, or tempting and affronting his Divine
Majesty; and which was most Ungrateful of all, are continually upbraiding him
with the remembrance of the good Things they had forgone in Egypt.

In particular, sometimes they want Water, and then all Gods Miracles of Power
and Providence are forgotten; There is no help, but they must all be Famished
in the Wilderness. Another time they want Bread, and then God and Moses are
Nosed with Egypt again, Were there no Graves in Egypt, but we must be brought
hither to be Starved? Well, God gives them Bread to the full, Manna, Bread from
Heaven, Angels-Bread: But this will not serve the turn neither, they must have
Flesh too, and that not so much for necessity, as Capriciously to try Gods
Power: Can God prepare a Table also in the Wilderness? If not, they are
presently for Egypt again: So in the Text, the mixed Multitude fell a Lusting,
and the Children of Israel wept, and said, Who shall give us Flesh to Eat? We
remember the Cucombers, and Melons, and Onions, and Garlic, etc.

In which passage of the Scripture, I observe these Four things:

1. The peculiar circumstances of this Mutiny or Murmuring.

2. The Beginners or Ringleaders of this Disorder.

3. The quick and general Infection of this Mischief.

4. Gods Resentment of their Carriage. Which when I have opened, it will be
easy to make Application of all to our own Case.

(1) I begin with the First, The Circumstances and Aggravations of this
Murmuring; and amongst them these Four are most remarkable, viz.

First, The Time of it. It was now but about a Year and two Months (as Divines
compute) from their deliverance out of Egypt, and yet so quickly could they
forget their own Sufferings and Gods Wonders; And nothing runs in their
Thoughts, but the Fish, the Onions, and Garlic, etc. which they had there: A
strange Levity and Inconstancy of Mind this! Had it been an Age or two after,
one would not have so much wondered, that when Time (which effaces all things)
had worn out the Remembrance of their Hardships, their other Entertainments
there might have been reflected on with some gust and delight; but so quickly
to forget God and themselves too, argued them to be a true Mobile.

And, Secondly, their Wantonness and Curiosity, was no less remarkable, than
their Levity and Inconstancy. They had Bread to the full, which might very well
have satisfied them in a Wilderness; and especially when they were going to
Canaan, a Land flowing with Milk and Honey, they might well have dispensed with
some tolerable Inconveniences in the Way; tolerable Accommodations might serve
the turn in a Wilderness. But they had not only Bread enough, but delicious
Bread, Manna; however that will not do, they must have Flesh too; they made a
pish at Manna; Nothing but this Manna, say they.

Thirdly, There was Insolence, as well as Wantonness and Curiosity in the case;
it was Flesh they desired, not so much for their Hunger, as for their Lust.
They must have their will, or else to Egypt again; and it was more their design
to tempt God, than to be gratified themselves. They must prescribe to God what
Miracles he shall do for them; they must have arbitrary Proofs of his
Omnipotency, Can God prepare a Table in the Wilderness? If he will not work
Miracles, what and when they think good, they will follow him no further, but
to Egypt again.

Lastly, There was a profane Spirit in all this, a plain contempt of God and
Religion. God had asserted them to be his own People; had newly given them
Laws, which it would have been both their Wisdom and Happiness to walk in. He
intended to keep them a while in the Wilderness, to difuse them from the
Superstitions of Egypt, and to train them by degrees into the Habits and
Customs of the True Religion; and then shortly to place them in their own Land,
under their own Laws and Princes, and far from any temptation of Apostasy from
him and them; but they meditated a Relapse, they were indifferent as to this
business of God and Religion; they would run the venture and hazard of
Idolatry, and defiling their Consciences with the Follies of Egypt, rather than
want the Onions and Garlic. So we see a long time after this, in the Prophet
Isaiah's Time, Isa. 30. 1, 2, 3, 4. They talk to go down to Egypt, and have not
inquired at my Mouth; their Princes were at Zoan, and Ambassadors came to
Hanes, etc. q. d. They were negotiating a Peace between Me and the Gods of
Egypt; they were contriving a Concordat between the true Religion and Idolatry;
they would not stick out upon point of Religion, so they might accommodate
their Secular ends.

Thus much for Matter of Fact it self.

(2.) In the second place, I observe in the Text, the Beginners or Ringleaders
of this Sedition, A mixed Multitude: Who they were we may guess by Exodus 12.
38. when the Children of Israel came up out of Egypt, it is said, A mixed
Multitude came along with them; that is, such as were not of the Race of the
Jews, nor of any one Nation, Tribe or Family; but a Colluvies of several
Nations, or perhaps a Bastard brood, part Jew and part Egyptian, but of no
certain Principles; such as had their God and Religion to choose, and had only
the fancy to follow the Fortune of the Israelites in this great and famous
Expedition, in hopes to mend their own.

This Vulgus, this Rabble begins the Mutiny (as they are always wont to do) and
such are dangerous Incendiaries in all Societies; they have not only no Honor,
nor Principles, nor Conscience; but no Prudence, no Modesty, no Restraint;
there is no Handle to take hold of them by, to govern and manage them. Of these
the Historian observes, Inest omni populo malignum quiddam and querulum in
Imperantes; the Populacy, or Rabble, is always a tumultuous ungoverned Beast.
They are of no Value, of no Industry, nor Capacity, but to do Mischief; Ignavus
quisquis seditiosus; these are usually the first in at every thing, and first
out; that first dishonor a good Enterprise by Abetting it, and then betray it
by Revolting from it.

(3.) Thirdly, I observe in the Text, the quick and general spreading and
infection of this seditious Murmuring Humor; the mixed Multitude fell a
Lusting, and presently all Israel put Finger in the Eye, and weep for the
Entertainments of Egypt; like Fire, though it begin in a little contemptible
Spark, it quickly diffuses it self, and bears down all before it; I sets all in
a combustion.

Example, especially of Evil, is too taking amongst the generality of Mankind,
Pecorum ritu sequimur antecedentium gregem, non qua eundem est, sed qua itur;
as Cato observes of Sheep; It is easier to drive a multitude of them, than a
few; get but some to go, and all the rest will follow.

It is very unreasonable in it self, and therefore may seem strange, that evil
Example should be more prevalent than good; but Experience leaves us without
doubt, that so it is for Matter of Fact, and especially in the case of Mutiny
or Sedition. Whilst there are (as there ever will be) a teachy, querulous,
discontented People, so long there will never want some Pretense or other for
Disturbance. Public Affairs can never be conducted with that Even-hand, but
there will be some Grievance or other to such over-tender and captious People;
and the Passionate representing of these will expose the Authority, even of
Moses himself, and weaken the Hearts and Hands of well-meaning People. But,

Fourthly, and Lastly, I observe Gods resentment of this matter, v. 1. of this
chapter; And when the People complained, it displeased the Lord; and the Lord
heard it, and his Anger was kindled; and the Fire of the Lord burnt among them,
and Consumed them that were in the uttermost part of the Camp. And again, v.
33. of this Chapter, though God gratified their Humor; yet, while the Flesh was
between their Teeth, e're it was chawed, the wrath of the Lord was kindled
against the People, and he smote them with a very great Plague: and beyond all
this, in Chap. 14. v. 23. he takes up a resolution, and solemnly Swears, That
not a Man of these, that had thus provoked him by their Murmurings, should
enter into the good Land he had Sworn unto their Fathers, to give them.

And thus, I have, (as much as was sufficient to my purpose) opened the Letter
or History of my Text; Let us now see how far this will concern our selves. And
I doubt, it will be found a very easy matter to draw a Parallel, in the Sin and
Folly of this present Generation; and I pray God, We be not in some measure
parallel in the Judgment.

It cannot be denied, that we have lately had a signal Deliverance from a
Slavery, little inferior to that of Egypt; and though there has not appeared
altogether so much of Miracles in the effecting it, yet there have been most
signal Instances of the Divine Hand in bringing it about, particularly in
infatuating the Councils, cowing the Spirits, baffling the Powers, and
dissolving all the Forces that were ready to obstruct our Deliverance.

And now, that we escaped the House of Bondage, and come into some straits in
our Passage through the Wilderness, toward a state of Rest and Settlement, we
fall a Murmuring, and a thousand little Scruples and Jealousies run in our
Heads, which were never thought of (or thought scorn of) before; yet now are
able to make us wish, we had never set out from Egypt.

Some are affirighted with the Difficulties before us, and dream of Giants and
Anakims, as if the Promised Land was to be obtained without conflict; or, as if
the God that Miraculously delivered us out of Egypt, was not able to carry us
through to Canaan.

Some false Spies misrepresent the good Land, as if it was not worth the
contending for; and that our Religion, Laws and Liberties, would not quit the
cost.

Some suspect Religion and Reformation it self, as if it would be too strict
for them; and therefore their Mouths water after the Onions and Garlic they
left behind them. Others complain of the Intermission of Trade; some of the
Taxes and Burdens.

One sort Murmurs, That they are not preferred to their Mind, and that others
are advanced above their Merits. Another sort repines, That their Party is not
encouraged enough, and that some other Party, has too much of the Public
Countenance; and all these look toward Egypt again.

And to inflame this Reckoning, we want not a mixed Multitude amongst us: From
Abroad, French Agents and Popish Emissaries; at Home, all Discontented persons,
that love to fish in troubled Waters, and those whose Guilt renders them
Jealous of a Settlement; all half Protestants and Papists in Masquerade, as
also Men of no Religion, but whose Interest is all the Conscience they have;
and together with these, some, who though perhaps they cannot digest downright
Popery, yet the Manna of Reformation is too thin a Diet for their gross
Stomachs; but Onions and Garlic, a good hautgust of Superstition will relish
well with them: All these begin the Murmuring, and are ready to set the
Multitude agog for Egypt.

Upon the whole Matter, the Parallel is but too easy and obvious, between our
condition and that of the Israelites hitherto. Now therefore it is time to take
care, that it go on no further, lest we match them in the Mischief and
Punishment, as we seem to have done in the Folly.

In order to the prevention of which deplorable Calamity, I have a few Things
upon this Occasion, to offer to the Consideration of all true English Men,
Lovers of their Country, and of the Protestant Religion: And though I know, I
now shall be heard by few of those that are concerned in the Advice, and
perhaps by none of those that have most need of it; yet I will make use of this
Opportunity, to deliver my self with all sincerity in the case, to the intent,
that you that hear me, may Report it to others of your Acquaintance; and by
that means (and the Blessing of God upon it) some check may be given to that
Murmuring Spirit, that is begun amongst us.

The sum of what I have to say, will be comprised in these three Particulars:

First, That we will be entreated to reflect back a little, and to consider
what our Condition was before we came into this Wilderness, and fell under the
present Temptations to Discontent.

Secondly, That we will also look Impartially about us, and view our present
Condition, to the end that we may make the better Judgment; Whether even now in
the general, and for the main, we have not those Advantages which may
countervail the objected Straits and Inconveniences?

Thirdly, That we will look forward, and consider as discreet Men, what is
likely to be the effect of our Murmuring, and of thinking of returning back to
Egypt.

It will not, I presume, seem strange to you, (who know me well) that I should
(at this time especially) make use of this Freedom, since I am persuaded your
own Thoughts and Experience of me, will acquit me from all suspicion of
Partiality toward any Person or Party of Men whatsoever, in regard you are in
some measure aware, That as I have neither been personally disobliged by the
former Times or Government; so neither have I been (nor am I capable of being)
bribed or biassed by any Obligation from the present.

Therefore with the sincerity and Good Will of an English Man toward his
Native Country, and as a resolved Protestant for the Honor or Interest of that
Excellent Religion, I go on with my Intentions. And,

First, I earnestly beseech all my Brethren and Country men, That before they
suffer themselves to be tempted to murmur and repine at the Present state of
things, they will reflect upon the Condition of our Affairs before this
Revolution, and what it was likely to have come to, had it not pleased the
Divine Providence to interrupt the course of Things.

And the Time is not so long since, but that we may easily remember We were
Miserable enough; nor were the Designs so obscure, or the Methods so intricate,
but we might easily foresee, that we should quickly have been intolerably
Unhappy, at that rate of Proceeding.

Do we not know, That all our Laws (contrived by the Wisdom, and defended by
the Prowess of our Ancestors) were all cut off at one Blow by a Dispensing
Power.

Were not all, or at least most of the Charters in England (the Glory and
Ensign of Honor to all the Cities and Great Societies of the Nation) confirmed
by all former Princes, owned by the Laws, and established by Ancient Custom,
damned and dissolved at once?

Was not the sacred Right of Property invaded, and Freeholds taken away (not
only from Private Persons, but from the Noblest Societies) without form or
color of Law?

Were not all our Lives at Mercy, and had we not several dreadful Instances of
Emin^nt Men violently hurried out of the World, (...)

And whether even our Lives themselves were not held at Mercy, one would be
tempted shrewdly to suspect, who reflected upon the dreadful Instances of
several Eminent Persons hurried out of the World, some one way, and some
another.

In a word, Were not Parliaments (the only conservative of our Constitution,
and redress of our Grievances) either disused, as inconsistent with the Designs
in hand; or endeavored to be corrupted, fore-stalled, or the freedom of
choosing them designed by new and unheard of Methods, to be for ever destroyed?

These things are too fresh in our Memories to need Repetition, too plain to be
denied, and too great in themselves to be aggravated; but, Haec olim meminisse
juvabit --.

And as for that great Affair of Religion (dearer to all true Englishmen than
their very Lives) the prospect thereof was in those Times very melancholy, when
a Design was not only formed, but begun to be put in execution, of laying a
Yoke upon our Necks, which neither we nor our Forefathers were able to bear.
And in pursuance hereof, not only mercenary Pens were employed to expose and
ridicule Protestantism in general; but Care was taken to blow up, inflame and
perpetuate the Divisions amongst Protestants; partly by odious Names of
distinction, and partly by exasperating their Minds one against another, as
that in conclusion all of them might be destroyed with the less pity or scandal.

It is true, the Church of England was all this while complemented, but never
the securer from destruction: Witness the Imprisoning, and severe treatment of
7 excellent Bishops at once, for but daring to understand the Project, and
humbly interposing their Advice; and the suspending another excellent Person of
that Order, only for being too good a Man for so bad times: Witness also the
scorn cast upon the whole Body of the Clergy, in imposing a Declaration, to be
read by them in all their Churches; wherein (according to the mannerly
Expression of that time) They should (not only) have been compelled to eat
their own Dung; but in truth, to be Felo de se, and to have cut their own
Throats.

To say no more therefore, our Condition was not unlike that of Israel in
Egypt; We were vexed, oppressed, undermined, weakened, treated as Slaves; and to
assure and perpetuate our Slavery, foreign Forces were brought in, and more
were intended to be brought in, to Nail our Ears to the Door-Posts for ever.

Or, if all this be not sufficient to make us sensible of the Condition we were
then in, or going into, let us look upon the State of France, and especially of
the Poor Protestants there; for that was designed to be a Pattern and Precedent
for Us.

By All which together (the Particulars whereof I have rather intimated than
represented) we see our Ill state then, and that we had good cause to get out
of Egypt as soon as we could, whatever befell us in the Wilderness. Which leads
me to the Second thing I designed to speak to, viz.

Secondly, That we will be entreated impartially to consider, Whether our
present Condition is not more tolerable, than that we have escaped? and,
Whether we have any just Provocation from the present Inconveniences, to Murmur
and meditate a Revolt? It is true, we are yet but in a Wilderness, and there in
want of many things; and we are beset with many difficulties and dangers, and
perhaps too, have a long Journey (to Canaan) to a complete Settlement; and
especially there is the more likelihood of that, if we be Peevish, and obstruct
the Way to our own Happiness. However, take Things as they are, and at worst we
may have many things to oblige us to be thankful for our present Condition, and
none to make us repent of the Change.

In the first place, we have a KING and a QUEEN, both of our own Religion; a
Felicity we have not for many years had experience of, and for want of which,
the State of Protestantism has been fluctuating and uncertain, and could never
make any good progress: A Prince and Princess we have now, whose Interest
conspires with their Education and Choice; and who abandon themselves, if they
grow cold, or indifferent in the Protestant Religion. Now of what Consequence
this One thing is, if we had not learnt by our former Experience, common
Prudence would instruct us; since it cannot be expected, but that a Prince of
another Religion, if he have any Zeal for it, will be sure secretly to
undermine that which is Rival to his own Persuasion, if he have not the Power
or the Courage openly to assault and suppress it: Whereas now (by the Blessing
of GOD) we have that comfortable Prophecy accomplished of a King and Queen,
Nursing Father and Mother to this Church: We enjoy our Religion with all the
Accommodations of it as fully, and as securely as our Hearts can wish; and not
only so, but Piety and Virtue lifts up its Head; and all Profaneness which grew
Rampant heretofore, is in a great measure put out of Countenance: Nor ought it
to trouble us, that some Men (whose particular Persuasions in Religion we are
not well satisfied with) should enjoy some share of Advantage by this
Revolution, since it is not only what we Vowed to God, and promised to them in
our Adversity; but is that which cannot be denied them consistently with our
own Safety.

Then for our Laws, They have recovered their just Vigor and Authority, great
Care being taken, to provide excellent Judges and Magistrates for the Execution
of them; and so our Lives, and all our Rights and Properties are as secure as
can be expected under any human Constitution: And to all this, We are under a
Government so easy and gentle, that we have nothing to object, unless it be
that it is so very benign, that it encourages some evil-Natur'd Men, to presume
and to contemn it.

It is true, notwithstanding all this, that there are at present great Burdens
and Taxes upon us; but as they are no other than what are absolutely necessary
for our Preservation, nor other than are voluntarily assented to by our selves,
being no otherwise imposed than by our Representatives in Parliament; so it is
greatly to be hoped (by the Blessing of GOD) they will not continue long upon
us. So that upon the whole, our present Condition is very tolerable for a
Wilderness, and we have no cause to murmur, or to talk of returning back to
Egypt. But,

Thirdly and Lastly, Let us (before we indulge our selves in a discontented,
complaining Humor) forecast with our selves, what are likely to be the effects
and consequences of Murmuring, and they can be no better, nor other, than such
as these following; viz.

First, Forasmuch as this Womanish humor of Murmuring and Complaining is both
too weak in it self, and also comes too late to reverse the state of Affairs;
it can effect nothing, but mischief to the Murmurers themselves; We are (GOD be
thanked) so far out of Egypt, that some Men's Fancy and Humor will not be able
to carry us back thither again. The King in Possession is too sensible of his
own Strength, and of the Hearts of his People, to be Murmured out of his
Throne: The Nobility and Great Men are too far engaged to think of returning:
The Body of the People have too quick a Sense of the Liberty and Advantages
they have under this Government, to be induced to forego All for a Notion, or a
Complement, or to save the Longing of some Sickly People.

So that this way will attain, no End, mend no Matter, ease no Burden,
discharge no Tax; but contrary wise, increase and continue the Burdens of the
Nation. Besides, that at this rate we are Constant to nothing; unworthy of
Deliverance; ungrateful to God and Man; false to our selves, and to our real
interest; Et quid frustra turpes esse volumus.

Secondly, But suppose the contagion of this Murmuring Humor should take
through the Nation, (which God forbid) why then, as Relapses are said to be
more fatal than the Diseases themselves; so would our Condition be more
miserable than ever: We shall then return to Egypt with a Vengeance, not only
to the Onions and Garlic, (which perhaps we could fancy) I mean, not only to
the Idolatries, and superstitions, and Follies; but to the Brickkilns and Iron
Furnaces; nay, to the Plague of Lice and Caterpillars; to Darkness that may be
felt; to absolute slavery of Body and Mind: In a word, to all the dismal
Effects of French Insolence, and Popish Revenge.

Nor will it help us, or make any discrimination in our Case, to pretend, That
we were the first that mentioned a Retreat, and that talked of going back
again; that we boggled at the Design, and were not thoroughly satisfied with the
Revolution; but why did you hearken to Moses at all? why did you break off your
Fetters? and wherefore did you once look toward Canaan? Thus we shall perish
with shame and confusion to our selves, without pity from Spectators, and with
scorn from our Enemies.

Thirdly, Nor will the Mischiefs end there neither; but the Effects of it will
reach over all the Protestant World, and destroy all the Measures taken for the
preservation of that excellent Religion: Forasmuch as all of that denomination,
not only in Ireland, and in the Low Countries; but Germany, France, etc. are
Imbarqu'd in the same Bottom with us, and consequently must sink or swim as we
do. All their Eyes are upon us; next under God, they depend upon Us, as the
principal support of that Profession: If we fail them, they are all lost; if we
stand to it, they will take heart, and (by the Blessing of God) recover such
Head, as probably never to be suppressed again.

And now is the Opportunity of making our utmost Effort in Conjunction, since
we can never (without Miracles) hope for such an happy Juncture again, as now
God has presented us with, when all the Popish Princes are so deeply engaged
in a War against France; and seem well contented, that we should assert our own
Interests, whilst in so doing we assist them in humbling the Great Leviathan,
who is otherwise ready to swallow up both.

Wherefore then, when such a Prize is put into our Hands, should we not have
the Hearts to make use of it? Why should we complain of Little things, and take
Pet at Punctilio's; and soften our Spirits, and make feeble our Hands, by
Murmuring and Repining; and so abandon both our Selves, our Brethren and
Friends in such an Opportunity?

To all which add in the Fourth and Last place, Let us consider the Example
before us in the Text, and be really afraid (as there is great Reason for it,)
lest if we indulge this Murmuring Humor) GOD should resolve that none of us
shall enter into his Rest; I mean, That we shall never see those happy and
glorious Times of Religion, which Good Men expect in these latter Days,
according to the Predictions of Holy Scripture.

No question of it, Antichrist must down, and the true Spirit of the Gospel
shall be advanced gloriously before the End of the World. This shall as
certainly come to pass, as it was certain the Posterity of Israel should
possess the Land of Canaan.

But, if we for our parts be Faint-hearted, and Peevish and Unbelieving, God's
Promise shall be accomplished; but we shall have no share, nor comfort in it.

To conclude therefore, Let us stand steadfast in our Minds; Rubiconem
transiistis, you have left Egypt, meditate not a Revolt thither again; we are
Imbarqu'd, and must go on or perish. Put on the Spirits of English Men, and the
Zeal of True Protestants; stick not in the Wilderness, but resolve for Canaan.

Give me leave to press this upon you, as the Apostle does on the Corinthians;
in the first Epistle, Chap. 10. he begins thus; Brethren, I would not have you
ignorant, that all our Fathers were under the Cloud, and passed through the
Sea; and were all baptized unto Moses in the Cloud and in the Sea, and did all
eat the same Spiritual Meat: But with many of them GOD was not well pleased,
for they were overthrown in the Wilderness.

And then Ver. 6. Now these things were our Examples, to the intent that we
should not Lust after Evil things, as they also Lusted; neither be ye
Idolaters, as were some of them; neither let us commit Fornication, as some of
them committed; neither let us tempt Christ, as some of them also tempted.

Again, Ver. 10. Neither let us Murmur, as some of them also Murmured, and were
destroyed of the Destroyer.

Lastly, Ver. 11. Now all these things happened to them for Ensamples, and they
are Written for our Admonition, upon whom the Ends of the World are come.

God give us all Hearts (in this our Day) to mind the Things of our Spiritual
and Temporal Peace. Amen.

ADVERTISEMENT.
ROman Forgeries in the Councils during the first Four Cehturies: Together with
an Appendix concerning the Forgeries and Errors in the Annals of Baronius. By
Tho: Comber D. D. Precentor of York.

Concio ad Synodum ab Episcopis and Clero Provinciae Cantuariensis celebratam;
Habita in Aede Westmonasteriensi XII. Kal. Dec. A. D. 1689. Per G. Beveregium,
Archidiaconum Colcestriensem. Jussu Episcoporum.

Seasonable Reflections on a late Pamphlet, Entitled, An History of Passive
Obedience since the Reformation; wherein the true Notion of Passive Obedience
is settled and secured from the malicious Interpretations of Ill-designing Men.
All Sold by Robert Clavell, at the Peacock at the West End of S. Paul's.

FINIS.

