(...). CHRIST'S PREEMINENCE; In a Question Propounded, Discussed, and
Resolved; That Christ was the first, that with Flesh, and Blood entered into the
Kingdom of Heaven.

By NICOLAS GAVVEN Minister, and Preacher of the Word of God at Bister in the
County of OXFORD.

Who being the brightness of his (Father's) glory, and the express Image of
his person: and upholding all things by the word of his power, when he had by
himself purged our sins, sat down on the right hand of the Majesty on High.

Heb. 1.3. That in all things he might have the preeminence.

Colos: 1.18. OXFORD, Printed by H: Hall Printer to the University. 1668.

To the Right Worshipful Dr LAMPLUGH D. D. Archdeacon of Midlesex, and
Principal of Albane Hall in Oxford, Grace on Earth, and Glory in Heaven.
NOt to make too wide Gates to my little Myndus; lest some railing Zoylus,
carping Momus, barking Diogenes, critical, and censorious Aristarchus, having
eyes more quick, and piercing then Lynceus, the Eagle, Crocodile, or Epidaurian
serpent; should except, and maunder at this my poor innocent, and first borne
infant; that it was of monstrous, and deformed shape: much like to Martial's
monster, having the daring, and outfacing head of Hector, but the spiny, puny
spider legs of Astianax; or just like to a child sick of the rickets, whose
head swells, and grows too big for the body: I esteem, and reckon it my bounden
duty, to give your Worship an account of two things: First concerning the
occasion of my writing this Treatise: Secondly concerning the cause of the
Dedication.

The occasion was this: Being at a certain time in company with one of my
Parishioners; he by chance, pro more, and amore, inter discumbendum, inter
discurrendum, put the question to me; whether or no, Christ was the first that
with flesh and blood, entered into the Kingdone of Heaven. To which question I
answered Affirmatively; yea, and fortified my Answer, for the time present,
with some positive Texts, and Testimonies of Scripture: but so it was, that
upon that mean occasion, I could find no rest in my thoughts, till I had given
way, and scope to my meditations, to dilate, and enlarge themselves, and take a
contemplative ramble, and vagary, thorough the spacious, and pleasant fields of
the sacred Scriptures; there to discover, and gather what flowers I could, for
the making up of this my mean garland, or rather posie; and the enlergement and
improvement of my former Answer.

And that, that proved another spur to me, to undertake this Task, was for
that no man, as ever I heard or read of, purposely, and ex industria traced
this ground, and undertook this Argument before me: why you will say? because no
man yet e're doubted of the truth of the assertion. But this objection is much
to be doubted: because as there wanted not some who endeavored to rob our
Savior of the prerogative of his Divinity: as Carpocrates, Cerinthus, Ebion,
Theodosian, Photinus, Arius, that Arrant Heretic; who pretended, that he had
42. Texts of Scripture to prove that Christ was not true and perfect God. And
as there have not wanted others who have attempted to dispoile, and rob him of
his Humanity, as Marcian of Pontus, Saturninus of Antioch, Basilides,
Valentinus, Apelles with his minion Philumela, Apollinares, and others. And as
there has not been wanting others; who have attempted to rob him of the
integrity, and singularity of his person, as Nestorius, who did Dichotomize,
cut him asunder, and make two Christ's of him; the one Divine, the other Humane:
so questionless there have not wanted some who have attempted to deprive him
of this Preeminence of his humanity; of its first asce^t, and entrance into
heaven; let Marcion stand for instance, who taught that Christ had but (...),
the mere resemblance and apparition of man; and Eutiches too, who affirmed that
Christ's Humanity was quite Absorpt, swallowed up, and annihilated by his
Divinity, and so deprived of all bodily ascent, and consequently of the first
ascent into Heaven.

But no true believer, you will say, ever doubted hereof. Answ: Though it may be
granted, that the better, and most learned sort of believers, whom the Apostle,
Heb: 5.12. terms men of full age, who by reason of use, have their senses
exercised to discern both good, and evil: never doubted hereof, yet it is to
be feared; that the unlettered sort, and those endowed with mean knowledge have
doubted thereof, or not firmly, and sedledly believed it, witness the question
put to me that must needs proceed from doubting or unbelief thereof.

But be it granted, that none yet ever doubted of our Saviors first bodily
ascent into Heaven, yet this discourse, for the proof and confirmation thereof
is not (especially in these times) unseasonable, unnecessary: and that
Physician is not to be blamed, that gives an Antidote as well for the
prevention, as the removal of a disease. and such is the counter-position of
this Thesis; a botch, a bile, a disease in the Church, if it happen to be
entertained, and take place, and quite contrary to sound Doctrine. They that
hold that any man before Christ bodily ascended into Heaven, do in a manner,
and after a sort Un-Christ our Savior, which thus I prove:

They that rob, and deprive Christ of All, or Any of his Offices, do in a
manner un-Christ him, for from his unction, and inauguration into his Offices,
of King, of Priest, of Prophet: he has the title, or denomination of Messiah,
or Christ.

But that man that holds, that any man before Christ, bodily ascended into
Heaven, does as much as in him lies, strip, and rob Christ of his office of
Priesthood, of being our High Priest, it being proper, and peculiar to his
Priesthood, to enter first into the holy place: viz: the Kingdom of heaven,
There to make intercession for us. As the High Priest of the Leviticall Law,
first of all, and instead of all, after he had ended his Sacrifice without,
entered with the blood thereof within the vail, to sprinkle it before the Mercy
seat, and to make intercession for the people, whereas the people stood
without; Luk: 1.10. As the Apostle plainly teaches, Heb: 9. v 7, 11, 12. by a
comparison between Christ, and the High Priest of the Levitical Law; and
therefore I conclude, that they that hold, that any man before Christ, bodily
ascended into Heaven, do in a manner, and after a for Un-Christ our Savior,
and so grate upon the foundation. The Thesis therefore that I have fortified,
in this Discourse may be received without fear; refused it cannot be without
danger. I am persuaded that this my Infant, as it is an Infant, and speaks
like an Infant; so will it behave it self as an Infant in the world; that is
innocently; if it can do no good, I am confident it will do no wrong.

This my poor Tractate such as it is, whether blind, or lame, or maimed, or
withered, or any, or every way defective, do I presume to present, and dedicate
to your worship, but why and wherefore, which is the second thing whereof I am
to render an account. No other cause, scope, end, or fetch have I, but your
innate virtue, goodness, kindness, courtesy polished, and embelished by
grace, celebrated in the months of All in general, and experienced by my self
in particular, drawing me with a kind, of magnetical virtue, inviting, and
citing me.

It is observed by a learned, and grave Divine of our Church, that God has
depictured, and characterized, those refulgent, and eminent virtues, and
graces, wherewith he endued some men in their names. The golden eloquence of
Chrysostom; the milkie vein of Lactantius, the immortal fame of Athanasius,
that grand Arianomastix; the golden wit, and most great, and profound judgment
of Aurelius Augustinus; the peaceable disposition of Irenaeus; the Divine
fruitfulness of Policarpus, are intimated in the names: the same lot has
befaln you, Phoebei Lampadis instar; for what is Lamplough, but as if it should
be said, (...): as having your name derived from a Lamp; thereby to intimate,
that like the Baptist, you are a burning light in your life and conversation.
Sir, I flatter you not; flattery is a bribe, that I am as unable to give, as
you to receive, I give you no more then your due; and all that know you will
most willingly afford you so much.

The bare, and naked consideration of this your goodness, both by nature and
grace, has strongly, and irresistibly importuned me, and prevailed over me;
and kindled, and enflamed my affection, and desire, and made it to burn (like
those ancient Olibian fires, which Antiquity (as I remember) dedicated to the
remembrance of their deceased Hero's, and Benefactors) with zeal to serve you
constantly, and perpetually, (...), as Homer, till death us do part, and in
expression thereof to dedicate to you this poor Pamphlet, which I entreat you
to accept: this is both the profession, and protestation together with the
subscription of him who is

Sir, Your Worships most hamble servant to serve you in what he may in the Lord
NICOLAS GAVVEN.

Christ's Preeminence.
a Correlatis, and ab utriusque contrariis effectibus, and operationibus, that
is to say, from an Analogy, and comparison taken from the first, and second
Adam, and their contrary effects, workings, and operations. Romans 5.12. The
Apostle says, By one man sin entered into the world, and death by by sin: not
only death temporal, but also death eternal; And in this death eternal you must
observe, that there is a twofold formality, and denomination. For it is not
only (as the Schoolmen speak) a punishment positive of sense, and of sensible
Anguish, Smart, and Torment, but likewise a punishment privative, and of the
loss of infinite, and eternal joy, comfort, and content; It is not only
inclusi^^, an incarceration, inclusion, and shutting into Hell, but it is
likewise exclusio, an exclusion, shutting, and bolting out of Heaven. So that
when Adam sinned against his Maker, and by sin fell from his original
integrity, and perfection, he by his fall became not only the heir of Hell,
but also the Bandido, and exile of Heaven, and that not only in his own
behalf, but likewise in the behalf of all his children, and posterity, (who
were to stand, or fall in Him) and that for evermore.

And this very thing was Typified immediately after the fall of the first Adam,
by the Lord's chasing, driving, and excluding of him, for his sin out of
terrestrial Paradise, Genesis 4.24. The Lord drove out the man, and placed at the
East of the garden of Eden, Cherubins, and a flaming sword, which turned every
way, to keep the tree of life. In this narration there is no doubt to be made,
but that the Terrestrial Paradise, did Typifie, and shadow out unto us, the
Celestial; the beauty of the place, the multiplicity, variety, and excellency
of the fruits thereof; the incomparable, and unconceivable refreshments, joys,
delights, and pleasures of the Kingdom of God; In whose presence is the
fullness of joy, and at whose right hand are pleasures for evermore. Psalm.
16.11. God's friendly, and familiar walking, and talking with Adam (during his
continuance in his perfect estate) in earthly Paradise; That immediate, and
Soul-gladding communion, and fellowship, that God vouchsafes his Saints; and
the spirits of just men made perfect, in the Kingdom of Heaven. Heb. 12.23.
The tree of life doubtless signified, our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, as
Saint John intimates, Apoc. 22.2. the driving of Adam out of Paradise, the
exclusion and shutting of himself, and all his posterity out of Heaven; God
placing at the East End of the Garden of Eden, Cherubims, and a flaming sword,
which turned every way, to keep the way of the tree of life; the stepping, and
coming in of God's fiery law, given (as the Apostle says) by the Angels on
mount Sinai, which is sharper then a two-edged sword, piercing, even to the
dividing asunder of soul, and spirit, and of the joints, and marrow, and is a
discerner of the thoughts and intents of the Heart. And so like the flaming
sword at Edens gate, turning every way, this way, and that way, meeting with
every the least perceptible thought and contrivance of the heart, either as a
right rule to measure it, or as a just Judge to condemn it, thereby to stop,
and bar man out, from entering into the Kingdom of Heaven, and eternal life; by
reason of an utter impotencie, and impossibility, that (immediately upon his
fall) befell Adam, and all his posterity for ever to perform, and fulfill it:
The sum of this first Argument may be given in these few words.

The effects, workings, and operations of the first Adam (though directly
contrary, yet) are correspondent, and answerable to the working, operations,
and effects of the second, as the Apostle shows, by diverse branches, and
members of comparison. Romans 5. For which cause he calls the first Adam, the
figure of Christ which was to come, Romans 5.14. I add secondly.

But the first Adam being the first that sinned, was first personally himself;
secondly, representatively, in respect of all his posterity, thrust literally
out of earthly; mystically, and symbolically, out of the Heavenly Paradise:
therefore I conclude, that the Lord Jesus Christ, the second Adam, being the
first man, and only man, that fulfille all righteousness, in the behalf of his
elect, was likewise the first man that opened the gate of Heaven, entered into
that within the vail; Heb. 6.19. And took possession of the Kingdom of Heaven,
in the behalf of all his elect, according to that golden expression of the
Church; in that Hymn, or Song, (whether compiled by Ambrose, or Austin, or
both, it matters not) When thou had overcome the sharpness of death, thou
diast open the Kingdom of Heaven to all believers: And this is the reason,
that the Apostle calls Christ our forerunner, which for us is entered into that
within the vail, Heb. 6.20. And Christ (a little before his passion,
Resurrection, and Ascension) told his disciples, that he went to prepare a
place for them. Joh. 14.20.

Cor. 15.20, where he calls Christ, the first fruits of those that slept: But
now is Christ risen from the dead, and become the first fruits of them that
sleep: In which words the Apostle assures us of three things: First, that
Christ is risen from the dead, of that there is no doubt. Secondly, that he is
first risen from the dead. Thirdly, that the resurrection of Christ the head,
is the sure pledge, and in fallible earnest, of the resurrection of all his
members: for which cause he calls him the first fruits of those that slept,
understand those latter words only of all true believers; for here the Apostle
alludeth to the first fruits of the earth, that the people did offer unto the
Lord in the time of the Leviticall Law, which were blessed, and privileged
with a double property, and qualification: First, Of presentation, Secondly, of
Sanctification: first to be offered of all other, secondly to sacrifice all the
other fruits of the Harvest. Christ, I say, is the first fruits of all
believers in two respects,

First, in respect of his resurrection, for that he is the first, that ever
perfecty, and fully rose from the dead, as the first fruits, (as I conceive,)
were those that were rathest, and soonest ripe; for is est primus, ante quem
nullus; He must needs be the first in order, before whom there is not another,
says Tertullian. li. de carne Christi. So says Paul, 1 Cor. 15.23. Christ is
the first fruits, and after they that are Christ's at his coming: In this
respect the Apostle calls him, the first borne from the dead. Col. 1.18. And
the first borne among many brethren. Romans 8.29.

Object. If it be here objected, that Elias raised the widow of Zarephtha's son
to life; and Elisha the Sunamites son from the dead; And that his dead bones
quickened, and raised a dead man that touched them, to life; 2 King. 13.21.
which caused the wise Syracides to give this encomium and applause of him; that
after his death his body prophesied. Ecclus. 48.13. and therefore Christ was
not the first that rose from the dead.

Answ. As before (by way of occupation, and prevention) that Christ was the
first, that fully, and perfectly rose from death to life; first because he
alone rose by his own power; Having loosed the pains of death, for that it was
impossible that he should be holden of it, as says Saint Peter, Act. 2.24. And
Paul likewise says, Romans 1.4. That Christ was declared to be the Son of God
with power, according to the spirit of holiness, by the resurrection from the
dead: whereas the former instanced examples did not. Secondly, for that he
alone rose victoriously, and triumphantly over the dead, as a man quite freed,
and disengaged from it, never again to return to it, nor to its bondage, and
captivity; so says Paul of Christ's conflict with death; He led Captivity
Captive, Ephesians 4.8. And again, Christ being raised from the dead, dies no more,
death has no more Dominion over him. Rom: 6.9. And Christ himself Apoc: 1.18.
I am he that lives, and was dead, and behold I live for evermore. Whereas the
former parties, though they rose from death to life, yet was it not to an
immortal, but a mortal life; a life subject still to the bondage of corruption,
and consequently liable to the law of death, to return again to the place from
whence they came, viz: the dark chambers and receptacles of death, at the term
and end of life: as a prisoner may be special dispensation, part out of prison
for a while, having his keeper with him, to return, and bring him back thither
again at pleasure, and in due time. And this Doctrine is strengthened with the
opinion, and suffrage of the Author that bears the name of Justine Martyr,
Quaest. and Respons: ad Orthodoxos, quaest: 85. (Justine Martyr's work it is
not, as plainly appears by the very next question, wherein he cites Origin,
that lived 80. years after him:) for thus he speaks very peremptorily (...).
never was there any resurrection of any man to an immortal and incorruptible
life, besides our Savior Jesus Christ, for which cause he is called, the first
begotten of the dead, and the first fruits of those that slept. And this is the
first reason, or respect, why Christ is termed the first fruits; I say in
respect of his Resurrection.

But secondly, (which makes more to my purpose) Christ is called the first
fruits, in respect of is Ascension, and entrance into the Kingdom of Heaven,
wherein he bears proportion, and directly answers to the first fruits of the
Levitical Law; for as the first fruits (as I conceive) were so called, not
only, for that they were some of the rath-ripes of the Crop; Ex. 22.29. and
23.19. (for of all living creatures also, every first borne, That which first
opened the matrix, was holy unto the Lord: Exodus: 13.2. and 22.29.) but also for
that they had the prerogative, and preeminence of presentation, being first of
all others presented, and offered unto the Lord, in the Tabernacle, being both
the representation, and sanctification of the whole crop: Rom: 11.16. So Christ
likewise is the first fruits of all true believers; not only in respect of his
resurrection, being the first borne from the dead, Colos: 1.18. but also in
respect of his Ascension, and entrance into Heaven (Typified by the earthly
Tabernacle,) whither as our Captain, Heb: 2.10. Surety, Heb: 7.22. Forerunner,
Heb: 6.20. He is entered to appear in the presence of God for us, and to make
intercession to God for us, Heb: 9.24. Rom: 8.434. That so being made pertakers
of his holiness here, Heb: 12.10. we may be partakers of his glory herafter.
This is that which Christ made intercession for to his Heavenly Father in our
behalf, whiles he was here on earth; Father I will, that they also whom thou
have given me, be with me where I am, that they may behold my Glory Joh:
17.24. And this is no more then reason; that he who first, and alone rose
victoriously over death; should first of all enter triumphantly into life, as
the Apostle says, Ephesians: 4.9, 10. He that Ascended, what is it, but that he
also descended first, into the lower parts of the earth? He that descended, is
the same also that ascended up far above all Heavens. And v. 8. the Apostle
plainly proves from Ps: 68.18. That the ground, and cause that Christ first of
all men, entered into Heaven, was for that he first of all men, triumphed over
death, And led Captivity Captive; And no doubt to be made, but that the
Psalmist, by the spirit of prophecy, pointed at the glorious resurrection, and
ascension of Christ, when he said, God is ascended up on high, with a shout,
the Lord with a sound of a Trumpet. Psalm 47.5. The sum of this Argument may
be given in these few words.

That which befell the first fruits in relation to the earthly Tabernacle,
befell Christ in relation to the Heavenly (for this cause the Apostle calls
Christ the first fruits,) but the first fruits, of all other, were first
presented, and offered, before the Lord in the Terrestrial Tabernacle,
therefore Christ of all men first entered, and appeared before the Lord in the
Celestial.

Hebrews. Now as touching the properties, and duties of the High Priest, the
Apostle plainly tells us, Heb: 5.1, 2. That every high Priest taken from among
men, is ordained for men, in things pertaining to God, that he may offer both
gifts, and sacrifices for sins, who can have compassion on the ignorant, and on
them that are out of the way, for that he himself also is compassed with
infirmities.

In which Text, the Apostle (as we may ^bserve) sets down five proper
Attributes of every-high Priest; all which i a most excellent measure, and
after a most excellent manner are in our High Priests, the Lord Jesus Christ:
1. The High Priest was a man chosen from among men, so is Christ the most
perfect man that ever was. 2ly, He was to Act, and deal with God as an Agent
in the behalf of men, so does Christ: There is one Mediator betwixt God and
man, the man Jesus Christ: 1 Timothy: 2.5. 3ly He was to offer gifts, and
sacrifices to God for sins, so does Christ; and as the Apostle makes the
comparison, Heb: 9.13, 14. If the blood of bulls and of goats, and the ashes of
an heifer sprinkling the unclean, sanctifies to the purifying of the flesh;
how much more shall the blood of Christ, who thorough the eternal spirit,
offered himself without spot to God, purge your consciences from dead works to
serve the living God? 4ly Every High Priest must be such an one, that could
have compassion on the ignorant, and on them that are out of the way. Such an
one is Christ, Heb: 4.15. We have not an high Priest, which cannot be touched
with the feeling of our infirmities, but was in all points tempted, like as we
are, yet without sin. 5ly, He must be lawfully called, and ordained; for no man
takes this honor to himself, but he that is called of God, as was Aaron: So
Christ (says our Apostle) glorified not himself, to be made an high Priest,
but he that said unto him, Thou art my Son, to day have I begotten thee: as he
says also in another place; Thou art a Priest for ever after the order of
Melchizedecb, Heb: 5.5.6.

Now whereas the duties, and offices of the High Priest were many, and diverse;
as first to pray for the people. Secondly, to offer sacrifice for sins.
Thirdly, to carry the blood of the beasts that were sacrificed into into the
Holy place. And fourthly, and lastly, there to make intercession for the
people. Know and understand, that some of these offices he did fulfill and
discharge, without the Sanctuary, and some within the Sanctuary; The offices
which he did perform without the Sanctuary were two; first to pray for the
people: Secondly, to offer Sacrifice for their sins. The offices which he did
perform within the Sanctuary were likewise two: First, to take and carry the
blood of the slain Sacrifice into the holy place, and sprinkle it with his
finger upon the mercy seat. Levit: 16 14. And secondly to make intercession for
the people. Even the like (for all the world) was done and performed by Jesus
Christ our High Priest, who was Typified, and prefigured by the High Priest of
the Levitical Law; some parts of his Priesthood he did, and performed on earth
without the vail, without the Heavenly Sanctuary. First as our High Priest he
prayed for us, And in the days of his flesh offered up prayers, and
supplications with strong crying, and tears. Heb. 5.7. And Joh: 17. before his
last Passover, and passion; and likewise in the garden of Gethsemene; and upon
the Cross before his death, and departure out of this world. 2ly, After this
prayer for us, he offered up himself a sacrifice for us on the Cross, Christ
our Passover is sacrificed for us, says the Apostle, 1 Cor: 5.7. which
sacrifice being once done, performed, and as Christ said, Finished at his
death, the third day did he rise again, ascend, and enter into the most holy
place, even the Heaven of Heavens, perpetually ^resenting to his Holy, and
Heavenly Father, the merit, and value of his own blood, and bloody passion on
our behalf, and perpetually appearing in the sight of God, and making
intercession for us. The sum of this Argument may be rendered in these few
words:

There is an infallible, and undeniable Analogy, and Correspondence betwixt
the High Priest of the Leviticall Law; and our Lord and dear Savior Jesus
Christ, as the Apostle declares at large in his Epistle to the Hebrews, and
specially in the 5, 7, 8, 9. Chapters. But the High Priest of the Levitical Law
only, and but once a year; first of all, and instead of all, after he had ended
his Sacrifice without, entered with the blood thereof, within the veil, to
sprinkle it before the Mercy-seat, and to make Intercession, and Atonement for
the people, Exodus 30.10. whereas the people stood without, Luk: 1.10. And
therefore I conclude, That our High Priest, our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ,
after he had once finished his bitter, and bloody passion, and death here on
earth, rose again, ascended up on high, and first of all, and instead of all
his elect, in his Humane body, intred into Heaven, to present the merit of his
death and passion to his Heavenly Father in our behalf, and as the Apostle
says, Heb: 1.3. Sat down at the right hand of the Majesty on high, there
perpetually to make intercession for them, Rom: 8.34. and Heb: 7.25. And this
well agrees with that ancient, and excellent saying of St Ambrose in his
Commentary on the 39. Psalm, where he says what is so proper to Christ, as to
stand by God the Father for an Advocate for the people? And that of St Austin
likewise pointing more to the present purpose, on Psame 64. where he says,
Christ is the Priest, who being now entered into the vail alone, there of them
that have been partakers of flesh, does make intercession for us: In figure of
which thing in that first people, and in that first Temple, the Priests only
did enter into the Holy of Holies, and the people stood without. This likewise
is the opinion and assertion of that famous Divine, learned and religious Fulk,
who says that Christ was the first that in his whole Humanity ascended into
Heaven. Annotat: in Apoc: 11. Sect: 4.

Ephesians: 1.11. and 3.11. And promise, and performance in time, Gen: 3.15. Esaias
9.6. Joh: 1.14. Galat: 4.4. did vouchsafe and condescend in free grace, and
mercy to assume, and take unto himself, and so to become married thereunto in
the unity of the same person, unto all eternity. Surely this is the sum and
sense of these promises, Gen: 3.15. The seed of the woman shall break the
serpents head. And Hos: 2.19. says the Lord, I will betroth thee unto me for
ever; yea. I will betroth thee unto me in righteousness, and in judgment, and
in loving kindness, and in mercies: which gracious, and most precious promises,
though made by God to his elect in Christ, and are in an inferior, secondary,
and subordinate degree, and measure ^^lfilled, and discharged, in all, and
each, and every one of them (for not one of them but in due time by Christ's
grace shall tread down Satan under his feet, Rom: 16.20. not one of them but is
betrothed, and espoused to Christ in righteousness for ever:) yet howsoever,
primarily, and in the first place, are they principally, and completely
fulfilled in Christ himself, in whom all the promises of God are yea, and Amen.
For he is that in the primest sense (according to the Apostles exposition, Gal:
3.16.) the seed of the woman, that does bruise, and batter the serpents head,
and thorough death, destroy him that had the power of death, that is to say,
the Devil. His flesh, his blood, his humane nature it is, in the first,
highest, and sublimest sense, that is betrothed, and espoused unto the Lord, in
righteousness for ever; and in him was this promise, chiefly, and principally
fulfilled, when God was manifested in the flesh, when the word was made flesh
and dwelt among us. Joh: 1.14. This is the sense and meaning of that
soul-gladding expression, and promise, Esaias 9 6. Unto us a child is borne, unto
us a Son is given, etc. In which words the holy Spirit joins, and marries God
and man together, in the unity of the same person, to all eternity; for what
is this child that is borne? but the man Christ Jesus. And what is this Son
that is given? but the eternal Son of God, Who so loved the world, that he
gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes in him should not perish,
but have everlasting life. Joh: 6.16. The same is the sense, and meaning of
that expression of wisdom it self: Prove: 9 1. Wisdom has built her a house,
etc: Who, or what is this wisdom? But the eternal Son of God himself, Christ
the power of God, and the wisdom of God. 1 Cor: 1.24. And what is this house
that is built? but his humane body, even the same of which Christ by his
eternal spirit, speaks unto his Heavenly father, Psalm. 40. according to the
translation of the 70. A body have thou prepared me; The same of which he
speaks to the Jews in another place, Destroy this Temple, and in three days
I will build it up, Joh: 2.19. This is that holy house, that divine, and
Heavenly Temple. So Christ and his Disciples call it, Joh: 2.19., 25. In which
dwells all the fullness of the Goahead bodily, Colos: 2.9. The sacred
rendevous, or meeting place, wherein God and man meet together, to hold an
enterparle, and treaty after a long, and mortal enmity, and hostility; and to
conclude (both to the glory of God, and joy of men and Angels) an everlasting
peace. That holy and heavenly Herald St Paul thus trumpeteth out, and
proclaims to the world, that agreement, and reconciliation, 2 Cor: 5.19. God
was in Christ reconciling the world to himself. In this personal union God
shows himself to be reconciled to our Humane nature; takes upon him to renew
it, by deriving his righteousness, and holiness through the humane nature of
Christ, as through a channel, or pipe of conveiance, to as many of the sin-sick
sons of Adam, as he endues with true faith to receive it. The Humane nature of
Christ is that little leaven, that leaveneth the whole mass and lump of all
true believers, by means of that is he made to us of God, wisdom, and
righteousness, and sanctification, and redemption, 1 Cor: 1. ult: To redeem us
from all iniquity, and purify unto himself a p^^uliar people zealous of good
works, Tit: 2.14. For if the r^ot be holy, so are the branches, and he that
sanctifies, and they that are sanctified are one, says the Apostle, Heb:
2.11. And the same Apostle says, Colos. 1.19. That it pleased the Father that
in Christ all fullness should dwell. And another, That of his fullness have we
all received, and grace for grace. Job: 1.16.

Now then if the flesh, and blood of our Dear Lord, and Savior Jesus Christ,
was the first of all other, that the eternal Son of God vouchsafed, and
condescended to betroth, and espouse to himself, in righteousness, and true
holiness; for which cause that holy thing that was borne of the Virgin, was
called the Son of God, Luk: 1.35. Shall we think that the same flesh and blood,
being thus gloriously decked, and trimmed with the robes of most full and
perfect righteousness, and holiness as the bride fitted and prepared for the
bridegroom; after it had finished it is course here on earth, was not first of
all others, led home by the bridegroom, the eternal Son of God to his own
Fathers house, so to enter into the Kings palace, Ps: 45.15. and to be made
partakers of his glory, even his own glory, Luk: 24.26. which he had with the
Father before the world was, Job: 17.5. especially since Christ himself so
plainly avoucheth, and declares; That no man has ascended up into heaven, but
he that came down from heaven, even the Son of man which is in heaven, Joh.
3.13. The sum of this Argument may be recollected, and rendered in this
Enthymeme, Christ's humane body was the first that had the grace and honor of
Assumption and personal union into the Divine nature; and therefore it alone
had the first honor, and dignity of evection, and exalt^tion unto glory.

the Church, Ephesians: 1.22. And has given him to be the head over all things to
the Church, that we may grow up in him in all things which is the head, even
Christ, Ephesians: 4.15. Christ is the head of the body, Coloss: 1.18. Now I suppose
there is no man so headless, so senseless, so sottish, but that he very well
knows, and understands where the site, the place, the position of the head
in the body natural is. Concerning the fabric of man's body, and it is aspect,
the Heathen Poet tells, Ovid: Metamorph: lib: 1. Os homini sublime dedit,
Coelumque videre
Jussit, and erectos ad sidera tollere vultus.


In which Distich the Poet intimates unto us, not only the head's
perspicacitie, but also it is sublimitie; not only that it of all the members,
looks up to Heaven, but that it of all the members likewise is highest, and
nighest unto Heaven. So the Apostle St Paul teaches, and assures us likewise,
that the head is the most honorable of all the members of the body, 1 Cor:
11.4. and 1 Cor: 12.23. And being the most honorable of all the members of the
body, (according to our Saviors own Doctrine.) Therefore it both deserves,
and possesses the highest place, Luke 14.8, 9. And for this cause as it has
the priority of all the other members in the birth, so has it the preeminence,
and prority in progressive motion, without doubt it has in an ascendent motion
wherein the head being the highest member, must of necessity, possess, and
occupy each place ^^rst, and before all other members of the body, and Dato,
sed non concesso, that Elias was coached by Angels up into Heaven, yet can I
never be persuaded, that he was carried up thither, with his heels upward.

Christ therefore being the head of the Church, as the Apostle teaches, must
of necessity (as the head in the body natural) have the preeminence in All
things, Colos: 1.18. And therefore the priority, and precedence of all his
members, in respect of ingress, or entrance into Heaven; otherwise he could
not, he should not have the preeminence in all things, nor could the Apostle
Heb: 6.20. rightly, and properly term him our forerunner into Heaven, if any
other man did outrun him thither, or run before him, for is est primus, ante
quem nullus; He is properly the first of all other, before whom there is no
other, says Tertul: lib: de carne Christi.

Is alone the Lord of Glory, 1 Cor: 2.8. The Prince of the Kings of the earth,
Apoc: 1.5. He is the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, Apoc: 10.16. and chap.
17.14. The Son of the Eternal God; whom the Father has appointed heir of all
things, Heb: 1.2. According to that witness, and testimony of the Prophet
David, cited by Christ himself, Math: 22.44. The Lord said unto my Lord, sit
thou on my right hand, till I make thine enemies thy footstool, Psalm: 110.1.
And all this I say is Christ, not only as he is true God. 1 John: 5.20. but also
as he is man, and Mediator, Math: 28.18. For as he ceased not to be the true,
and eternal God, when he was a dead man hanging on the Cross, Act: 20.28. So
ceased he not to be King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, even at the lowest step
of Humiliation, when he had taken upon him the form of a servant, Philip: 2.7.
For which cause the Apostle Saint John in his Revelation, chap. 19.16.
ascribes, and affixeth this badge, and title of Honor to Christ's Humane
nature, saying, That he had on his vesture, and on his thigh a name written,
King of Kings, and Lord of Lords. And Christ himself in the days of his flesh,
and humiliation, standing before Pilate, to be examined upon intergatories, to
Pilate's demand, Art thou a King? Denies it not, but answered Affirmatively,
and by way of concession, and grant, thou say that I am a King; to this end
was I borne, and for this cause came I into the world, that I should bear
witness unto the truth; every one that is of the truth, hears my voice, Job:
18.37. etc: This was the end of Christ's coming into the world, to preach the
truth; to gather his Saints together, Psalm: 50.5. to raise his Church and
Kingdom, to summon his Subjects; and to gather together in one, the Children
of God that were scattered abroad, Ephesians: 1.10. Joh: 11.52.

Christ having finished the great work of Redemption here on earth, which his
Father sent him to do, Joh: 17.4. returned then again to his Heavenly Father,
from whom he came, Joh: 16.28. In the name of all his elect, to appear in the
sight of God; and to take possession of that Kingdom, which it pleased the
Heavenly Father to confer, and bestow upon them, Luk: 10.32. And which he
prepared for them from the foundation of the world. Math: 25.24. This very
thing Christ himself testifies, and intimates to his Disciples, saying, Joh:
14.2, 3. In my Father's house are many mansions, if it were not so I would have
told you, I go to prepare a place for you and if I go and prepare a place for
you, I will come again; and receive you unto my self, that where I am, there ye
may be also. In which words our Savior comforts the hearts of his Desciples,
at his departure from them, telling them, that he was even going to Heaven,
nevertheless, that it was expedient for them, that he went away, John 16.7.
because he went to heaven, to take possession of that place, and Kingdom, not
only in his own behalf, that he might reign there himself alone, but also as
their Captain, Leader, and Forerunner, that he might take possession of it
likewise in their behalf, that where he is they might be also.

The very self same thing does Christ Symbolize, and shadow unto us under the
Type, and Figure of a certain Noble man, that went into a far country, to
recive for himself a Kingdom, and to return: Luk: 19.12. There is no doubt to
be made, but by this certain Noble man is meant the Lord Jesus Christ, by the
far country Heaven, by the Kingdom the glorious Kingdom of Heaven; by the
receiving of this Kingdom, Christ's bodily Investiture into it, when having by
himself purged our sins, he rose triumphantly over death, ascended up into
Heaven, and as Lord, and Heir of all things, Sat down on the right hand of the
Majesty on High, Heb: 1.3. far above all Principality, and Power, Might, and,
Dominion, and every name that is named, not only in this world, but also in
that which is to come, Ephesians: 1.21. who is gone into Heaven (says St Peter of
Christ) And is on the right hand of God, Angels, and Authorities, and Powers,
being made subject unto him, 1 Pet: 3.22. This is the sixth and last Argument
for the positive part, Christ as man, and Mediator, being heir of all things,
as a son and heir of his own house, took Frst possession of the Kingdom of
Heaven; therefore as man he made the first entrance into it.

Ob: If any here except, and say, Though it be granted that some men in their
body, and in their flesh, entered into Heaven before Christ, yet this is no
disparagement, or derogation from Christ, so it likewise granted, that Christ
entered first in his Humane body as Redeemer.

Sol: Answer, that the grant of this courtesy is scarce worth the acceptance;
there is no doubt to be made, but that Christ as Redeemer, took first
possession of the Kingdom of Heaven; for there is but one Mediator betwixt God
and man, the man Christ Jesus, says Paul, 1 Timothy: 2.5. And him has the Father
appointed Lord, and heir of all things. Heb: 1.3. But thus I Argue, and reason
from the former grant; Christ of all men is the only Savior, and Redeemer,
therefore he alone, and first of all men, in his Humane body, entered into the
Kingdom of Heaven. As the Apostle St Peter expressly says, that Christ's
precious blood was our Redemption, 1 Pet: 1.19, 20. So Ephesians: 1.14. The Apostle
S. Paul intimates plainly enough, that the same precious blood, was the price,
and redemption of the purchased possession of the Kingdom of Heaven in our
behalf: And if Christ alone by his body, and blood, purchased the Kingdom of
Heaven in our behalf, all the reason in the world, that he himself should first
of all bodily enter into it, and take possession of it in our behalf. And thus
much may suffice for the confirmation of the positive, and affirmative part.

The Counter-part of the Question discust.
NOw for the confutation, and eversion of the negative, and counterpart; know
and understand, that the Scriptures afford no Apodeictical, or demonstrative
Arguments at all, and but few, yea very few Topical, or probable Arguments to
strengthen, support, and uphold it.

Arg. 1. The first, and most ancient that I can discover, is the example of
Henoch, the seventh from Adam; of whom Moses witnesses saying, Gen: 5.24. And
Henoch walked with God, and he was not, for God took him, says the Text;
therefore may some conclude, that Christ was not the first that bodily
ascended, and entered there.

Sol: Answ: By granting the Antecedent, and denying the Consequent, Henoch was
not (says the Text) and God took him; yet hence it follows not, that he was
bodily rapt, and transported into Heaven without dissolution (as Habakkuk was
transported thorough the vehemency of the spirit of the Lord, from Judea to
Babylon as the Story says; And Phillip from Gaza, or thereabouts, to Azotus.
Act: 8.26, 40.) For what is there in this. Text spoken of Henoch which cause us
so to think, which is not in other places of Scripture, spoken of other the
Saints, and deer children of God? And yet from them we never did, nor could
conclude, that they were bodily transported into Heaven. Is it said of Henoch
he was not; and is not the same phrase, and form of speech used by Jeremy,
lamenting the destruction, and desolation of the Jews: Chapter 10.20. My
children are gone forth of me, and they are not. By Rachel weeping for her
children, and refusing to be comforted for her children, because they were not,
Jer: 31.15. And likewise by Jacob, concerning his two sons, Joseph and Simeon;
Joseph is not, and Simeon is not. Gen: 42.36. And Joseph's brethren to Joseph
living, and standing before them, concerning himself, supposed to be dead, Gen:
42.15. Thy servants are 12. brethren, the sons of one man in the Land of
Canaan, and behold the youngest is this day with our father, and one is not.
This phrase of Scripture therefore, he is not, or, they are not, signifies
nothing else, but the dissolution, and death of a man departed this life; and
by death separated, and sequestered from the face of the earth; that he may
behold man no more with the inhabitants of the world. Esaias 38.11. And in sense
it answers to that phrase used amongst the Romans, concerning one dead, and
departed out of this life, Abiit ad plures, he is gone to more company; or, he
is gone to the greater number: and that other of the Hebrews, used to the same
purpose, He went to his Fathers; or, He was buried with his Fathers. 1 King:
14, 31. 2 King: 14.20. Thus the Lord himself told Abraham, Thou shall go to thy
Fathers in peace. (And what that phrase means the words following do expound,
and declare,) And be buried in a good old Age. Gen: 15.15.

Secondly, It is said of Henoch, that God took him; and what though? must we
therefore of necessity conclude, that like Christ his Savior, He was taken up
both body and soul into Heaven? Act: 1, 2, 9, 10, 11. Why then may we not by
the same rule conclude the like corporal assumption of those blessed Saints,
and servants of God, of whom the Prophet Esaias proclaims. Chap: 57.1. where the
same phrase is used. The righteous perishes, and no man lays it to heart,
and the merciful are taken away (by whom? By none but God:) none considering
that the righteous is taken away from the evil to come. The same phrase, and
form of speech does the Lord himself use, concerning Ezechiel's wife; Behold I
take from thee the desire of thine eyes: Ezech: 24.16. And Jonah to the Lord
concerning himself: Now O Lord take I beseech thee, my life from me: Jonah
4.3. All these Saints were taken away by God, as well as Henoch; yet are we not
able thence to conclude their evection, and transportation, both in body and
soul into the Kingdom of Heaven. In like manner says Moses of Henoch, God
took him; to wit by death removing him from the company of men. And the wise
man Wisd: 4.11. says of him, that he was speedily taken away, lest that
wickedness should alter his understanding, or deceit beguile his soul. Even by
the self-same form of speech of all the world, and in the very same sense, as
the Prophet Esaias says, That the righteous are taken away from the evil to
come. By the example of Abraham, Gen: 15.15. of good King Ezechiah, 2 King.
20.18, 19. and likewise of King Josiah, 2 King: 22.20. Because from the time,
and age of Henoch, the Church, of God began to be corrupted, and the true
worship of God to be perverted, by means of the conversation, and commixture of
the sons of God, to wit, those of the posterity of Seth, with the daughters of
men, to wit, those of the posterity of Cain, therefore this ereption, and
assumption of Henoch by God out of this world, all this while does not prove
his assumption both in body and soul into Heaven; nay the Author of that book
of Wisdom, (whosoever he was, whether Solomon or Philo Judaeus, I know not,
God knows) is so far from thinking him corporally alive, that indeed he
esteems him among other righteous men corporally dead; as plainly appears by
what he says v. 16. by way of application unto Henoch; Thus the righteous that
is dead, shall condemn the ungodly which are living.

Ob. But though the righteous be taken away, and by God, as Henoch was, yet it
is to be supposed, that they are not taken away, after the same manner, as was
Henoch. I easily grant it, for of him says Calvin, in Heb: 11. In solito modo
Henoch Deus a terra subduxerit. God withdrew Henoch after an unusual manner
from the earth. And of him says the Author of the book of Wisdom, Chap: 4.10.
He pleased God, and was beloved of him; so that living amongst sinners he was
translated. The same says the wise Syracides, Ecclus 44.16. So does Paul, By
faith Henoch was translated, that he should not see death: Heb: 11.5.

Answ: I grant that Henoch was translated; (for so says the Scripture) but
concerning the manner how? and the place whither? Adhuc sub Judice lis est;
there is the question; for in the Scripture we read of a translation to grace,
as well as of a translation to glory, 1 Coloss: 13. The Apostle says; That God
has translated us, into the Kingdom of his deer Son. And yet notwithstanding
all this, he has not as yet transported us both body and soul, into the
glorious Kingdom of Heaven. That Henoch's translation should consist in the
evection, and exaltation of his Humane body into Heaven, I can hardly grant,
for this (as I conceive) would quite evert, and overthrow that assertion of the
Apostle, that Christ is the first fruits of those that slept. 1 Cor: 15. and
that other of the same Apostle, That Christ in all things has the preeminence,
Coloss: 1.18. Yea and that saying of Christ himself also, Joh: 3.13. No man
has ascended up into heaven, but he that came down from heaven, even the Son
of man which is in heaven. And if I must needs err concerning one, I will
rather choose to detract something from the honor and repute of Henoch, then
derogate the least jot, or title from the glory, honor, and preeminence of
Christ. Sure I am that St Chrysostom is so far from avouching the body of
Henoch to be in Heaven, that he condemns it of curiosity to enquire what is
become of him, or to what end he was translated. Hom: Heb: 22. and Jer: 21.6.

Ob: But of Henoch the Apostle says, that he was so translated that he should
not see death. Heb: 11.5.

Sol: The same says Christ of every true believer, Joh: 8.51. Verily, verily I
say unto you, if a man keep my saying he shall never see death: yet every one
that believes in Christ, and keeps his saying, is not forthwith corporally
translated to eternal life. It is plain, and manifest, that these words of
Christ cannot be understood of the exemption from corporal, but of the evasion
of eternal death, as plainly appears by the Jews answer to our Savior v. 52.
Abraham is dead, and the Prophets are dead: yet those holy men of God,
believing in Christ are truly said by Christ not to see, that is, not to feel
the sting of death; because in the midst of death, by true faith, they have a
sight of eternal life. Job 8.5, 6. says Christ to the Jews, Your father
Abraham rejoiced to see my days, and he saw it, and was glad. As in the former
sentence, not to see, is not to feel; so in the latter, to see, is by faith to
enjoy.

Elias, of him the Scripture testifies, That he went up by a whirlwind into
heaven, 2 King: 2.11. The wise Syracides likewise celebrates him with this
Encomium, That he was taken up in a whirlwind of fire, and in a chariot, of
fiery horses, Ecclus 48.9. He was taken up in a whirlewind of fire, says the
Apocriphal book, by a whirlwind into heaven, says the Canonical; and what
though? shall we hence infer, that therefore he was transported body and soul
into the emperial Heaven without dissolution? it does not follow, we well know,
that whatsoever is lifted up from the earth, and that does encircle, and
encompasse the earth, in Scripture phrase, is called by the name of heaven,
(for from hence the name of heaven is derived, for that it is hoven up above,
or from the earth, says Mr Verstegan.) In the Scriptures we read of the fowls
of heaven, Job 35.11. By that can be meant nothing else but the air, as plainly
does appear from Gen: 6.7. and Math: 6.26. compared together. In the Scriptures
likewise we read of the Stars of Heaven, Gen: 22.17. By Heaven there can
nothing else be meant, but the Celestial orbs; for as the Emperial Heaven, that
has no need of Sun, Moon, or Stars, or any of those petty, or inferior
lights, as St John witnesses in his Revelation Chap: 21.23. The City had no
need of the Sun, neither of the Moon to shine in it: for the glory of God did
lighten it: and the Lamb was the light thereof. In the Scripture likewise we
read of a third Heaven whither Saint Paul was rapt, which by Paul 2 Cor: 12.4.
Joh: Apoc: 2.7. And Christ himself, Luk: 23.43. is called Paradise. And again
by Christ himself, Abraham's bosom, Luke 16. And his fathers house wherein are
many mansions. Joh: 14.2. So that Elias, according to this Trimembred
distinction may be carried into Heaven, and yet be elevated no higher, and
pass no further then the air; yet if this Answer seems too poor, hungry, and
starvling; be it granted that Elias was transported into the highest, and
Emperial Heaven, yet as Paul speaks of himself, and of his own rapture, into
the same place; so may I say of Elias, whether it was in the body I cannot
tell; or whether it was out of the body I cannot tell; God knows. Still I
think the safest way will be; (that nothing may be derogated from the
prerogative of Christ.) To conclude that his spirit returned unto God that gave
it; yielding over his body into the hands, and secret wisdom, and council of
God to be disposed of, and resolved as he thought good. And why may we not say,
that the body of Elias upon his spirits return into the hands of the father of
Spirits: was resolved into its mother earth by the power of God, even by the
same omnipotent power, by which Humane bodies were prepared, and accommodated,
for the holy and heavenly Angels, that appeared to Abraham, Lot, and others;
(certainly they had true bodies, as appears by their eating, drinking; the
washing of their feet, and the performance of other Humane Actions; and this is
the opinion of Michael Psellus, the best Doemonist that ever wrote, says Joh:
Luaovicus vives, both concerning Angels, and Devils; as he derives it from the
great St Basil in his book of the operation of Devils;) which immediately after
the execution, dispatch, and finishing of their embassage, and dispensation,
were by the same Almighty power of God, either annihilated, or resolved into
their first principles.

Moses, and Elias, who at Christ's Transfiguration on the holy mount, are said
to have appeared unto Jesus, and to have spoken unto him of his discease, which
he should accomplish at Jerusalem; Math: 17.3. Marc: 9.4. Luke 9.30, 31. The
objection as I conceive may be thus formed, and fashioned; Moses and Elias
appeared in glory to Jesus on the holy mount in their Humane bodies from
Heaven: therefore Christ was not the first that entered into heaven with humane
body, because if the two former brought their bodies along with them from
heaven, it is likely they carried the same bodies along with them to heaven.

Moses, and Elias, appeared unto our Savior with true, real, and substantial
humane bodies? 2ly, whether they were the very self same Humane bodies, and
earthly tabernacles wherewith they were invested, and clothed, during their
peregrination, and pilgrimage here on earth? Thirdly, whether brought these
their bodies from Heaven?

Though I may easily grant, that they appeared to our Savior in true, real,
and substantial, Humane bodies, as may easily be concluded, and confirmed from
those bodily, and corporal actions, that they performed on the mount, speaking
and discoursing with our Savior face to face, concerning his death, and
departure, that he was to accomplish at Jerusalem: And though I easily grant in
a second place, that those true, and real bodies, were the same bodies
wherewith their souls were clothed whiles they were on earth; (for had their
bodies bin others, they could not properly have been said to be Moses and
Elias:) yet cannot I so easily grant in the third place, that they brought
their bodies along with them from Heaven. Full well I know, that it was an
opinion embraced by many, yea very many of the Ancient Fathers, that the bodies
of Henoch, and Elias, are reserved and kept alive in a third mansion house,
distinct and separate both from Heaven, and earth, which they call Paradise;
and that they shall return, and bodily appear on the earth, before the day of
Judgment; yea, and John the Divine, and the Prophet Jeremie too, whose death is
not read of; says Hyppolitus. If this opinion be true, then doubtless Moses,
and Elias brought not their bodies from Heaven along with them to the holy
mount.

But leaving that opinion as we found it, concerning Moses, the Scripture
plainly concludes concerning him that his body went not to Heaven together
with his soul. Deuteronomy: 34.5, 6. there we read: So Moses the servant of the Lord
died in the land of Moab, according to the word of the Lord, and he (that is
either God himself, or an Angel of God.) buried him in a valley in the land of
Moab; over against Beth Peor, but no man knows of his Sepulcre unto this day.
And this, as I conceive, accasioned that grave, and solemn dispute, and
controversy (according to St Judes Ecclesiastical tradition, and relation, v.
9. of his Epistle betwixt Michael the Archangel and the devil, about the body
of Moses: The devil urging, as I conceive, the necessity of the revelation of
the place of sepulture thereof, that by that means he might yield the Jews a
copious, and abundant occasion of committing Idolatry, who he well knew were
apt enough by nature, to honor God's faithful servant too much, and to
neglect his Lord. Contrariwise the ArchAngel pressing home, the expediencie,
and necessity of the concealment of it is place of burial, for the prevention,
and disappointing of the occasion, and introduction of Superstition and
Idolatry.

Wherefore if the body of Moses went not together with his soul to heaven, but
as the Scripture teaches, remained on earth, then surely could he not bring it
along with him from heaven, when he appeared on the holy mount; and why may not
the same be said of Elias, that his body by the hand of God's omnipotency, had
as sudden a restitution at his soul's descent from Heaven (the very case of the
souls of God's elect at the resurrection) as it had dissolution at it is
evection, and transportation thither? Sure I am, whatsoever other men think,
the conceit and opinion of the sons, of the Prophets was, that his body was
not carried up into heaven, but rather that the spirit of the Lord had taken
him up, and cast him upon some mountain, or into some valley, which made them
so earnestly to sue unto Elisha: That fifty strong and able men might go, and
make search, and inquisition after him. 2 King: 2.16. And these sons of the
Prophets, as I conceive, were no plain, or simple men, but even Prophets
themselves (as man, and son of man, are all one in Hebrew phrase) belonging and
appertaining to the Schole, or College of Elias, and Elisha, whom a great
Antiquary, and Chronologer, from profane writers calls by the name of
Elulaeus Armagh: Chron: One objection remains that may be made, that seems
somewhat weighty, and ponderous; it is this,



Answ: Be it granted, that Christ had his messengers, and forerunners, before
he came personally himself, to plant his Church, to gather his Saints together,
and to enter upon his Kingdom of grace, yet hence it follows not, that he had
any that did fore-run him bodily, before himself bodily, and personally entered
into his Kingdom of glory. A necessity there was of the Antecedent, but no
necessity at all of the Consequent. For the better, and clearer Demonstration
of my sense, and meaning in this Answer, we must observe, and mark, that the
whole my stery of man's redemption, is grounded, and established on a threefold
foundation: First on God's eternal purpose before all time. Secondy, on his
free promise at the beginning of time. Thirdly, on his merciful performance in
the fullness of time.

The first is God's eternal purpose before all time: of this we must conceive
thus: that God, to whose eternal knowledge, all things are present, and
nothing past, or to come, foreseeing man's fall before all time purposed to
send his Son Jesus Christ into the world to redeem him, Ephesians: 1.9. Act: 2.23.

The second is, God's free promise at the beginning of time; when immediately
upon the fall of Adam, God promised Christ unto him, saying unto the serpent, I
will put emnity between thee, and the woman; and between thy seed, and her
seed: He (that is to say, Christ the seed of the woman) shall break thy head,
and thou shall bruise is heel. This promise of Christ the woman's seed, was the
Gospel, and the only comfort of Adam, Abel, Henoch, Methuselah, Noah, and the
rest of the godly Fathers till the time of Abraham.

At the time of Abraham, this promise was turned into a covenant with Abraham,
and his seed, and often times repeated: That in his seed all Nations should be
blessed. Gen: 12.3. and 18.18. and 22.18. which promise, and covenant was the
very voice it self of the Gospel; it being a true Testimony of Jesus Christ as
the Apostle bears witness, saying, Gal: 3. The Scripture foreseeing, that God
would Justify the Gentiles through Faith, preached before the Gospel unto
Abraham, saying, In thee, or in thy seed shall all nations be blessed. That
this promised seed was meant of Christ, and of him alone, the Apostle puts us
out of all doubt, Gal: 3.16. Now to Abraham and his seed were the promises
made, he says not, and to seeds, as of many, but as of one, and to thy seed
which is Christ. Now this Covenant thus made, and confirmed with Abraham, was
renewed with Isaak, Gen: 26.4. and made known unto Jacob by Jesus Christ
himself; for that man which wrastled with Jacob, was none other, but the man
Christ Jesus; for himself said, That Jacob should be called Israel, a wrestler,
and prevailer with God: and Jacob called the name of the place Peniel, because
he had seen God face to face. Gen: 32.28, 30.

Anon upon the death of these holy Patriarchs, God raised up his faithful
servant Moses, who by God's command committed that to writing, which was
derived by tradition, and word of mouth, from Adam to Seth, Henoch, and the
other Patriarchs successively to his own time; to wit, the creation of the
world; the fall of man; the promise of a Redeemer; the Genealogy of Christ
from Adam: the propagation, progress, and protection of the Church: the
fearful destruction, and confusion of God's enemies: the which Moses receiving
from God a form of ecclesiastical government, upon the top of mount Sinai,
consisting in diverse and sundry sacrifices of beasts, and other religious
rites, and ceremonies shaddowed out unto the people; the sole expiatorie, and
propitiatory sacrifice of that true Pascal Lamb, the Lord Jesus Christ which
was to come; the same Moses also being himself a Type, and Figure of Christ,
yielded forth, and uttered a most excellent and perspicuous Phophesie of
Christ, Deuteronomy: 18.15. The Lord thy God will raise up unto thee a Prophet from
the midst of thee; of thy brethren like unto me; unto him ye shall hearken,
and it shall come to pass, that ^hosoever will not hearken unto my words,
which he shall speak in my name, I will require it of him. v. 19. The which
glorious prophecy of Moses the Apostle St Peter in that excellent Sermon of
his, which he had to the people, at the beautiful gate of the Temple,
concerning the lame man restored to his feet, applies home to our Lord Jesus
Christ, and to him only, Act: 3.12, 13.

After Moses succeeded Joshua, the Captain, and Leader of the Lord's people
into the Land of Canaan; who likewise was a Type of Christ, the true Michael,
Prince, and Captain of the Hosts of the Lord. Joshua 5.14.

After Joshua followed the Judges, whose rescue, and deliverance of the Lord's
people, from the tyranny of their temporal enemies, was the undoubted type, and
figure of the eternal redemption of the Church, by Christ Jesus, the Judge both
of quick and dead, from the Captivity of their spiritual, and everlasting
enemies, sin, satan, and condemnation: Yea, and all the Prophets from Samuel,
and those that followed after, as many as have spoken, have likewise foretold
of these days. Act: 3.24.

For David, a man chosen of God after his own heart, being both a wise King,
and a great Prophet; foresaw the coming of Christ in the flesh; foretold that
he should be borne of his own loins, 132.11. The Lord has sworn in truth unto
David; he will not turn from it; of the fruit of thy body will I set upon thy
Throne: which words, though literally meant of Solomon, yet typically, and
mystically, are they fulfilled in Christ, as may be gathered, and concluded
easily, by applying, and comparing them with what he says all along, thorough
out the 72. Psalm: moreover he foresaw, and foretold both the natures of
Christ: First his humane nature, Psalm: 45.2. Thou art fairer then the children
of men. Secondly his Divine, v. 8. Thy Throne O God is for ever, and ever; the
Scepter of thy Kingdom is a right Scepter, thou love righteousness, and
hate wickedness, therefore God, (even thy God) has anointed thee with the
oil of gladness above thy fellows. Likewise he foresaw, and foretold both the
states and conditions of Christ; both his state of disgrace, and his state of
glory; his state of humiliation, and his state of exaltation: his state of
humiliation he intimates in those words of his, Psalm: 22.6. I am a worm and no
man: a reproach of men, and despised of the people. His false accusation,
crucifixion, bitter death, and blooddy passion, with the concomitant
circumstances thereof. He intimates in those words of his, Psalm: 22.16, 17, 18.
For dogs have compassed me; the assemblies of the wicked have enclosed me:
they pierced my hands, and my feet: I may tell all my bones: they look, and
stare upon me: they part my garments, and cast lots upon my vesture: Math:
27.34. That bitter potion, that they offered him, either in pity, and
compassion to stupifie him, that he might become senseless, or at leastwise
less sensible of his tortures, as say some, or else in scorn, and derision,
as say others; David intimates in those words of his, Psalm: 69.21. They gave
me also gall for my meat, and in my thirst they gave me vinegar to drink.
His death, burial, and resurrection he intimates in those words, Psalm. 16.8,
9, 10. I have set the Lord always before me, because he is at my right hand,
I shall not be moved, therefore my heart is glad, and my glory rejoices, my
flesh also shall rest in hope, for thou will not leave my soul in hell,
neither will thou suffer thine holy one to see corruption. All which words of
the Prophet David, the Apostle Saint Peter applies to Christ, and to him alone,
Act: 2.25, 26, 27. verses. His ascension he intimates in these words, Psalm:
68.18. Thou have ascended on high, thou have led captivity captive. His
glorious evection, and exaltation to the right hand of his holy, and heavenly
Father. He points at in these words, Psalm: 110.1. The Lord said unto my Lord,
sit thou on my right hand, until I make thine enemies thy footstool. which
words of David, our Savior applies to himself, Math: 22.44. and what should I
more say? but that from the first issuing forth of the promise, from God in the
garden of Eden; that a Messiah should come: God never ceased in all ages, and
generations of his Church, either by visions, or express Revelations, and Types
to the Fathers before the Law: and Types and Figures under the Law; and plain,
and manifest predictions by Moses, David, and other succeeding Prophets, to
point out unto the world the promised Messiah, and to give his people assurance
of his coming: who prophesied the time, place, and manner of his birth: the
affliction of his life, the kind of his death, the glory of his resurrection,
the deliverance of his people, the end for which he came, with all other
circumstances belonging to his manifestation. The last of all, the Prophets
(and that by Christ's own witness, Math: 11.13.) was John the Baptist, who
immediately before his coming, going before the face of the Lord, in the
spirit, and power of Elias, to prepare his way, preached unto the people the
doctrine of repentance, and remission of sins; saying, repent for the Kingdom
of Heaven is at hand. After the voice of this Crier, immediately followed the
eternal word of the Father, in his own person, clothed with flesh and blood,
to preach redemption to his people. And here was the full performance of God's
long promise: now then to sit down and rest, and breath a little after a long
ramble, and chase, peradventure some may say,

Quorsum isthaec tam longo repetita circuitu? What means this long narration
of God's most mercisul dispensation to his Church, in putting it in mind, some
way or other, in all ages, and generations of the promised Messiah?

Answ: That the necessity might the better appear, why the Father sent the
servants in the first place; before his son personally appeared in the last: to
gather his Saints together, and to raise his Kingdom of grace: these he did
for these Reasons.

Beroaldus; had not God some way, or other, as says Paul Heb: 1.1. either by
visions, and revelations, tradition, Types, and Figures, Prophesies, and
Predictions of his servants the Prophets, successively sent in all ages,
continually called his promise to remembrance; and preserved and kept it fresh
in the minds of his people: in all reason his promise in so long a tract, and
duration of time, would have been forgotten, and the whole world have fell into
a general, and universal atheism, and apostacy: faith unfeigned in the Lord
Jesus Christ, and in him alone, being the undoubted, and infallible ground
work, and foundation of true, and sound religion, toward God: so says Christ
to his heavenly Father. And this is life eternal, to know thee the only true
God, and whom thou have sent Jesus Christ. Joh: 17.3.

the Messiah, from God in Paradise, to the performance thereof, there being so
long a tract, and continuation of time, as the space of almost 4000 years: had
not God continually seconded, and backed his first promise, with fresh, and new
promises to his Church in all ages; the faith of God's children had bin apt,
yea very apt to fail: and not without cause might they have cried out, and
complained with David, Psalm: 69.3. Mine eyes fail while I wait for my God and
119.82. Mine eyes fail for thy word: saying, when will thou comfort me? and
119.123. Mine eyes fail for thy salvation, and for the word of thy
righteousness. And as he does Psalm: 77.7, 8. Will the Lord cast off for ever?
and will he be favorable no more? Is his mercy clean gone for ever? does his
promise fail for evermore? And for this cause God made the Saints of all ages,
as Saint Paul says, Heb: 6.12. thorough faith, and patience to inherit the
promise, both of the coming, and incarnation of the Son of God, that so both
they, and we might be made one. ( Christ, as says Paul, having broken down the
middle wall of partition between us, Ephesians: 2.14.) And so as Saint Peter, All
of us be saved, through the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, Act: 15.11. We by
faith in Christ that is come: they by the same faith in Christ that was to come.

Solomon yields us a most excellent saying to this purpose, Prove: 13.12. Hope
deferred makes the heart sick, but when the desire comes, it is a tree of
life. In which golden Text, hope is set for the thing hoped for, as it is
likewise Heb: 6.18. And this hope deferred, and delai'd, says Solomon, makes
the heart sick; that is, to sigh, and groan earnestly, with desire and love,
and longing after the thing hoped for. Thus the Apostle Saint Paul, by a most
elegant prosopopoeia Rom: 8.21, 22. makes the whole creature, the whole
creation, to groan, and travel in pain together, to be delivered from the
bondage of corruption, into the glorious liberty of the Sons of God. Thus the
Church grew sick with desire, and longing she had after Christ, Cantic: 2.5.
and 5.8. Thus Jacob waited for the Lords salvation, Gen: 49.18. And David
longed for it, Psalm: 119.174. And his soul panted, and thirsted after God,
with as much vehemency, and ardencie of desire, as the Heart panted after the
water brooks, Psalm: 42.1, 2. Thus the Prophet Esaias makes the Church to sigh
and groan after the company, and fellowship of Christ, Chap: 26.8, 9. In the
way of thy Judgments, O Lord, have we waited for thee: the desire of our soul
is to thy name, and to the remembrance of thee: with my soul have I desired
thee in the night, yea with my spirit within me will I seek thee early, etc:
Thus Simeon earnestly looked, and longed for him; and all the Saints likewise,
that looked for redemption in Jerusalem. Luk: 2.38. And after the same manner
the Apostles, both Saint Paul, and Saint John, make the whole Church to long
after the comeing of Christ, and the restitution of all things. 2 Con: 5.2.
Apoc: 22.17, 18, 20. This I say is the third Reason, why the great Lord both of
Heaven, and earth, sent so many of his servants, in the first place before he
sent his only Son: that so the world being continually informed by the
servants, and messengers that went before, concerning the comeing of their Lord
and Master that was to follow after: the hearts of all true believers, might be
enflamed with the desire of him, and long to see that day, wherein Christ
Jesus, the desire of all Nations, as Haggai calls him, Chap: 2.7. should come;
(as the sick patient thinks every hour two, till the Physician comes, who he
believes will recover him,) and at his coming receive him, the more joyfully;
and glorify the Lord the more thankfully, for that long looked for was at last
come: and their eyes with Simeon, had seen the Lord's salvation, even the Lord
Jesus Christ, the Lord of life: who is indeed, as St John says, Apoc: 22.2. A
tree of life to every faithful soul: according to the former Aphorism of the
wise Solomon, Hope deferred makes the heart sick; but when the desire comes
it is a tree of life Prove: 13.12.

Adam's sin; that it might appear exceeding sinful; and the manifestation of
the corruption of our Humane nature flowing from thence; which by most certain,
and evident arguments, of so many ages, and generations, was so far from being
bettered, and amended, that aetas parentum pejor avis: it still grew worse and
worse: The venime of Adam's sin was so strong, and mortal: the gulf, and
whirl-pool of his transgression, so unsearchable; as says Musculus: and
thereupon to give us occasion, the more dangerous, and desperate the disease
was, the more to magnify, and admire, the most profound skill of our Heavenly
Physician.

winked at the times of this ignorance. And in this the Lord performed the part
of a patient, and long suffering creditor, who suffers his debtors to run on
long, and far in his debt, before he calls for payment, and satisfaction; and
even then gives them money of his own to pay the debt: so God suffered the world
to run on long in skore with him; almost 4000 years, and then sent Christ to
pay the debt, and make satisfaction, whom God has set forth to be a
propitiation, thorough faith in his blood, to declare his righteousness for
the remisston of sins, that are past thorough the forbearance of God. Rom: 3.25.

Solom: Prove: 14.28. In the multitude of people is the Kings honor. This
doubtless made David in pride, and vain glory to number the people. Secondly,
from Samuel instruction to the children of Israel concerning the order,
custom, and manner of Kings. 1 Samuel: 8.11 He will take your sons, and appoint
them for himself; for his chariots, and to be his horsemen: and some shall run
before his chariots. And thirdly, from Absolom's practice; 2 Samuel: 15.1. who to
declare unto the world his pomp, power, and Majesty, prepared him chariots. and
horses, and 50 men to run before him. Now if Christ had had no messengers
before his face, to prepare his way, before he came bodily, and personally
himself into his Kingdom of grace; the royalty, state, and Majesty of this
great Lord, and King, both of Heaven, and earth, might have well seemed less,
then that of the Centurion, who had soldiers under him; and who could say to
this mangoe, and he goes; and to another come, and he comes; and to his
servant do this, and he does it: Math: 8 9. This Royal State, and Majesty, of
Christ himself, typifies to the life; under the Parable of a certain
householder, that planted a vineyard, and let it it out to husbandmen, and sent
his servants in the first place, but last of all his only son, and heir, that
they might receive the fruits thereof: Math: 21.33, 34. Now there is no doubt
to be made, but by this householder is meant God the Father, whom Christ, Joh:
15.1. calls an husbandman; by this vineyard the people of the Jews
(representing the whole Church of Christ;) whom immediately after their
deliverance out of the land of Egypt, God nourished 40. years in the
wilderness; and then planted as a Vineyard in a very fruitful hill: Esaias 5.1.
even the Land of Canaan, flowing with milk and honey. Of this David sings, and
tryumphs, Psalm: 81.8, 9. Thou have brought a vine out of Egypt, thou have cast
out the Heathen, and planted it: thou prepared'st room for it, and did cause
it to take deep root, and it filled the land. By those husband men are meant
the Scribes, Pharisees, and Ecclesiastical Rulers, and Governors among the
Jews, who by their impiety and ill husbandry, proved perfidious traitors, and
rebels, against this great householder in abusing his servants the Prophets, who
came first; and then in murdering, and slaying his own Son, and Heir, who came
last, to demand fruits of his vineyard: and these are the Reasons why Christ
had so many messengers, and servants to go before him, before he came
personally himself to erect, and raise up his Kingdom of grace. These are the
reasons why (as says Saint Paul) God at sundry times, and in diverse manners,
spoke in times past, unto the Fathers by the Prophets, but in these last days,
has spoken to us by his Son, whom he has appointed heir of all things. Heb:
1.1, 2.

But though Christ had many servants still going before him, before his bodily
introduction into his Kingdom of grace; yet still I say, hence it follows not,
that any of his Saints, and members went before him, and prevented him, before
his own bodily induction, and investure into his Kingdom of glory. A necessity
there was of the former (for the reasons before alleged) but there was no
necessity at all, of the later what necessity could there be, that Christ
should have his forerunners in the flesh, to go before him; before himself
bodily ascended into the Kingdom of Heaven? what? to carry news to God the
Father, his holy Angels, and Saints of Christs's tryumphant, victory over
death, his resurrection; and to inform them; that Christ himself would shortly
bodily appear in his own person in Heaven? As Ahimaaz the son of Zadoch, ran
speedily to carry David good news concerning his victory over his rebellious
son Absalom? 2 Samuel: 18. there was no necessity, I say, of all this; God, his
holy Angels, and the Saints themselves doubtless by revelation from God, knew
sufficiently, that Christ, after he had finished his passion, should himself
bodily enter into his glory, Lu: 24.26. For it became him for whom are all
things, and by who^ are all things, in bringing many sons unto glory, to make
the captain of their salvation. (and therefore their ringleader) perfect
thorough sufferings Heb: 2.10. Nay there was a double necessity, that no flesh,
and blood should enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, before Christ himself.
First in respect of Christ himself. Secondly in respect of his members.

First in respect of Christ himself, for if any Saint had bodily entered into
heaven before Christ himself, then that Saint had bin the first fruits of them
that slept, and not Christ. Secondly, in respect of the members of Christ;
there was a necessity that some should not enter bodily into Heaven without
others, that so (as the Apostle says) Some without others might not be made
perfect, Heb: 11.40. But briefly to recapitulate what has been spoken, a
necessity there was that Christ of all men should first enter bodily into the
Kingdom of Heaven, for those 6. causes, or reasons before alleged. 1. Thereby
to declare the Analogy, and correspondence between the first and the second
Adam.

Secondly, Thereby to confirm that Christ is the first fruits. Thirdly, for
that Christ is our High Priest, and therefore ought first, and before all
other, to enter into the holy place. Fourthly, for that his Humane nature was
the first flesh that God assumed; and therefore in all reason ought it first to
be glorified. Fifthly, for that Christ is the head of the Church; therefore to
him belongs the Preeminence of the first entrance. Sixthly, for that Christ
is the Lord, and heir of all things; therefore to him appertains the first
entrance, and possession of the Kingdom of Heaven. To these may be added vice
coronidis in the seventh and last place, the confirmation, and establishment
of diverse, and sundry express testimonies of the Scriptures, all avouching,
and confirming the same thing, that Christ first of all bodily ascended, and
entered into Heaven. Joh: 3.13. says Christ, No man has ascended up into
heaven, but he that came down from Heaven, even the Son of man which is in
Heaven. This one Text of Scripture, quite strangles, and cuts the very
throat-strings, nerves, and finews of all those counter-Arguments drawn, and
taken from the examples of Henoch, Moses, and Elias, Coloss: 1.18. says the
Apostle, Christ is the head of the body the Church: the beginning, the first
borne from the dead, that in all things he might have the preeminence: which
could not possibly be, if ever flesh and blood entered into Heaven before him:
and for this cause it is that the Apostle Saint Paul calls him our Captain, (or
Leader) Heb: 2.10. And our forerunner. Heb: 6.20. Whither the forerunner is
for us entered, even Jesus that is made an High Priest for ever after the order
of Melchizedech. Deo Gloria.

In all this that I have here written I submit to the sounder, and sincerer
Judgment, and censure of my Mother the Orthodox Church of England.
FINIS.

