XXXI SERMONS Preached to the PARISHIONERS of Stanford-Rivers in Essex, Upon
several Subjects and Occasions. BY CHARLES GIBBES, D. D. Rectour of that
Church, and Prebendary of Saint Peter's at Westminster. Never before made
public.

printer's device of Richard Royston, featuring fruits and a sun QVI SEQVITUR
ME NON AMBULAT IN TENEBRIS


LO^^^^ Printed by E. Flesher, (...) most Sacred MAJES^^ (...)

To the well-beloved, the PARISHIONERS Of Stanford-Rivers in the County of
Essex, Grace and Peace, from God the Father, and our Lord Jesus Christ, be
multiplied.
IN this Age and Nation abounding with Learned Men and Books of all sorts,
especially in Points of Sacred Theology, I should not have thought any thing of
Mine worth the Press, being conscious to my self of mine own Unfitness for that
Employment, by reason of Age and other Imperfections, had not your Importunity
extorted these Papers from me, which I now exhibit to you. But that I might not
be wanting in what I am able for your Edification in the Doctrine of Christ, I
have yielded to adventure an Impression of them: whereunto I have been induced
by a like Consideration with that of Saint Peter, 2 Epist. chapter 1. verse. 12, 13,
14. where his writing is declared to be out of an apprehension of his
approaching Dissolution, that after his Decease there might be that extant
which might keep in their Remembrance that which he had taught them, and
wherein they were established. It is part of my Rejoicing, that I have had so
much Ability as to hold forth the Word of God to you in any measure; and that
it has found so ready Reception with you. It is that which I pray for, and
earnestly exhort you to, that you will never forget the Saving Truths you have
been taught, though I be buried in oblivion; nor backslide to Error or
Profaneness: But that you be still constant in the true Faith of Christ, and
the right Worship of God, in public, and in your private Families, seeking the
Divine Benediction on your selves and Families, and living in mutual Love, and
Helpfulness toward all: as knowing, that the saving Grace of God has appeared
to all men, teaching us, that denying Ungodliness and worldly Lusts, we should
live soberly, righteously and godly in this present World; looking for that
blessed Hope, and the glorious Appearing of the great God, and our Savior
Jesus Christ, who gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all
Iniquity, and purify unto himself a peculiar People, zealous of Good works.
Whereunto if this Writing or any Labor of mine may conduce, I have my Desire;
who, recommending both you and this Work to the Almighty's Blessing, do yet
remain

Your truly loving and faithful Servant in Christ, CHARLES GIBBES.

A TABLE of the several TEXTS discoursed upon.
PSALM. VI. 6. I Am weary of my Groaning: every night wash I my Bed, and water
my Couch with my Tears. Three Sermons. page 1, 19, 37. PSALM. LI. 1, 2. Have
mercy upon me, O God, according to thy Lovingkindness: according to the
multitude of thy tender Mercies, blot out my Transgressions.

Wash me thoroughly from mine Iniquity, and cleanse me from my Sin.

57. PSALM. LI. 3. I acknowledge my Transgression, and my Sin is ever before me.
75. PSALM. LI. 11. Cast me not away from thy Presence; and take not thy Holy
Spirit from me. Two Sermons. 87, 99. PROVE. XVIII. 14. The Spirit of a man will
sustain his Infirmity: but a wounded Spirit who can bear? Two Sermons. 111,
121. PSALM. CXXX. 4. But there is Mercy, or Forgiveness, with thee, that thou
may be feared. 131. PSALM. LXXIX. 8. O remember not against us former
Iniquities: let thy tender Mercies speedily prevent us, for we are brought very
low. 153. HEBR. IV. 7. To Day if you will hear his Voice, harden not your
Hearts 173. ROMANS VI. 1. and part of 2. What shall we say then? shall we
continue in Sin, that Grace may abound?

God forbid.

185. LAMENT. III. 22. It is of the Lord's Mercies that we are not consumed,
because his Compassions fail not. 197. PSALM. LVI. 13. For thou have delivered
my Soul from Death: will thou not deliver my Feet from Falling, that I may walk
before God in the Light of the living? Two Sermons. 217, 235. PSALM. CXIX. 15. I
will meditate in thy Precepts, and have respect unto thy Ways. 251. PSALM.
CXXII. 1. I was glad when they said unto me, Let us go into the House of the
Lord. 263. PSALM. XXXVII. 4. Delight thy self in the Lord, and he shall give
thee thy Heart's desire. 275. 1 PET. III. 13. And who is he that will harm you,
if ye be Followers of that which is Good? 287. PSALM. XVI. 11. Thou will show me
the Path of life. In thy Presence is fullness of Joy, at thy right hand there
are Pleasures for evermore. Two Sermons. 305, 325. PSALM. LXXIII. 24. Thou shall
guide me with thy Counsel, and afterward receive me to Glory. 345. PSALM. XL.
8. I will both lay me down in peace, and sleep: for thou, Lord, only make me
dwell in Safety. 357. 1 JOHN III. 1. Behold what manner of Love the Father has
bestowed upon us, that we should be called the Sons of God. 371. PSALM. CXIX.
34. Give me Understanding, and I shall keep thy Law; yea, I shall observe it
with my whole Heart. 383. PROVE. XIV. 2. He that walks in his Vprightness,
fears the Lord: but he that is perverse in his Ways, despises him. Two
Sermons. 399, 411. REVEL. VII. 15. Therefore are they before the Throne of God,
and serve him day and night in his Temple; and he that sits on the Throne
shall dwell among them. 421. JOHN VIII. 56. Your Father Abraham rejoiced to see
my Day: and he saw it, and was glad. 435. GENESIS XII. 1. Now the Lord had said
unto Abraham, Get thee out of thy Country, and from thy Kindred, and from thy
Father's House, unto a Land that I shall show thee. 449.

Imprimatur.

Febr. 27. 1676/7. Guil. Sill, R. P. D. Henr. Episc. Land. a Sacris Domesticis.

DAVID's GROANS. Part I.
The First SERMON.
PSALM vi. 6. I am weary of my Groaning: every night wash I my Bed, and water
my Couch with my Tears.


THIS Psalm is entitled to David, and is styled by many, One, or the First, of
his Penitential Psalms: And it is true, it expresses his Agony and dolor of
mind, for his Sickness undoubtedly, for his Sins as the Cause of it in
likelihood, and so for both; as in a Psalm parallel to this he complains, Psalm.
38.4. which two make a heavy Burden, too heavy for any man to bear. The
Burden of one only (to wit, of Sin, though not his own,) made the Mighty One,
the Mighty God, to stoop under it, when he bare the Sins of Men in his own body
on the Tree: insomuch that as in the Garden he told his Disciples, Matthew.
26.38. My Soul is exceeding sorrowful unto death; so on the Cross, he cried
out in the Anguish of his spirit, Matthew. 27.46. O God, my God, why have thou
forsaken me?

No marvel then, that holy David, though a man after God's own heart, and one
that was of so bold and magnanimous a spirit, as to encounter with a Lion and a
Bear; that with the most gallant Courage a man shall likely meet with, could
slight the proud Vaunts and Menaces of the great Goliath of Gath, and be no more
affrighted by him, then as if he had been to encounter with a Child, while by
faith he saw God for him; yet when he saw God against him, calling his Sin to
remembrance, laying Affliction on his loins, consuming him with the blow of his
hand, that he (I say) should shrink under the burden, his spirit slag, his
heart faint, and he roar and cry out like a Child, as in the words of my Text,
I am weary of my Groaning, etc.

Which words express the sad plight of David under some heavy Pressure, which
drew from him

1. Groaning; the doleful sound of the Inwards, Lungs, and other of the
Bowels, upon the feeling of some oppressing Burden, Grief, or Pain, or the
apprehension of some expected approaching Evil. And this Groaning of David is
with weariness, so excessive, as that it did even break his Heart.

2. It drew from him Tears, which are the emanations of watery moisture from
the eyes, drawn out sometimes by excessive Joy; but most commonly by sad
afflicting Griefs, which do not stupefy, but affect the Heart. These Tears of
David are described

1. By the abundance of them, They made his Bed to swim: they watered his
Couch. Beds and Couches are Utensills made for Rest and Ease, the one in the
Night, the other in the Day, when either labor, sickness, or other malady,
makes us to betake our selves to them for repose and refreshing. So said Job in
his Calamity, My Bed shall comfort me, my Couch shall ease my complaint, Job
7.13. Now to have the Bed to swim with Tears, to have the Couch watered with
his own Tears, is a sign of no Rest nor Ease by them, and therefore of extreme
remediless Grief.

2. His Weeping is aggravated by the incessantness of it; in the Night, made
for Rest, and that every Night, yea, all the Night. And in the Day too, (for
that is the time of using the Couch.) So that, as elsewhere he expresses
himself, he went mourning all the day long, and day and night God's hand was
heavy upon him, and his moisture was turned into the drought of Summer.

But may it not be said, Ad quid perditio haec? Wherefore was this waste? what
was the cause of this excessive Groaning and Weeping? Scire est per Causam
scire: We never well understand a thing, till we know the Reason of it. Weeping
and Groaning are sometimes voluntary and of choice, when a person sets himself
to weep and groan; as when S. Peter, remembering Christ's words, went out and
wept bitterly, Matthew. 26.75. Sometimes they are involuntary; as when the
Christians, Act. 20.37, 38. parted with S. Paul, they wept sore, sorrowing most
of all for the word which he spoke, that they should see his face no more.
Sometimes because of Calamity, sometimes because of Sin, and sometimes for
both. Sometimes to express Compassion, Tenderness and Love; as when S. Paul by
the space of three years ceased not to warn the Arians night and day with
Tears, Act. 20.31. Sometimes for their own Sins and Calamities; sometimes for
the Sins or Calamities, or both, of others. Christ, when he perceived the
Pharisees infidelity and hardness of heart, sighed deeply in his spirit, Mark
8.12. when he beheld Jerusalem, he wept over it, Luke 19.41. when he saw Mary
weep, Christ groaned in the spirit, and was troubled, and wept upon Lazarus his
burial, Joh. 11.33, 35. Jeremiah the Prophet wishes, Oh that my head were
waters, and mine eyes a fountain of tears, that I might weep day and night for
the slain of the daughter of my people, Jer. 9.1. And Chap. 13.17. he tells
them, If ye will not hear it, my Soul shall weep in secret places for your
Pride; and mine eyes shall weep sore, and run down with tears, because the
Lord's Flock is carried away captive. Which he did abundantly perform, when he
made his Book of Lamentations. David, Psalm. 119.136. says of himself, Rivers
of waters run down mine eyes, because they keep not thy Law. And these indeed
were charitable Tears for others.

But the Groaning and Weeping in my Text was for himself: partly natural and
involuntary, because of his weakness, the vexing of his bones; partly voluntary
and of choice.

1. Because his Affliction, whether Sickness or other Distress, was likely to
bereave him of Life, and thereby deprive him of the opportunity of praising God
among the living; in which he so much delighted, as to count his life a burden
to him, when he could not come to the Tabernacle to praise God, Psalm. 42.1, 2.
and 48.1, 2, 3. Which is gathered from his plea why God should save him from
his present Malady; For (says he, verse. 5. next before my Text) in Death there
is no remembrance of thee, in the Grave who shall give thee thanks? It seems he
had some Sickness or other Danger which he apprehended to be mortal, (which is
not related in the Books of Samuel,) and that put him upon this sad Complaint
in my Text. As in like manner Hezekiah complained in his Sickness, Isa. 38.10,
11. I said in the cutting off of my days, I shall go to the gates of the Grave;
I am deprived of the residue of my years. I said, I shall not see the Lord,
even the Lord in the land of the living: I shall behold man no more with the
inhabitants of the world. verse. 18. For the Grave cannot praise thee, Death
cannot celebrate thee: they that go down into the Pit cannot hope for thy
truth. This then was the Grievance which made their other Malady so disquieting
to them, that it would put an end to their praising God on Earth.

I do not question whether the Patriarchs looked only for Temporal Blessings,
whether they believed the Immortality of the Soul, the Beatificall vision
immediately after Death, the Resurrection of the body; since Heb. 11. it is
resolved, that Abraham looked for a City which has foundations, whose builder
and maker as God, verse. 10. that they confessed they were Strangers and
Pilgrims upon Earth, verse. 13. that they sought and desired a better Country,
to wit, an Heavenly, verse. 14, 16. that they accepted not deliverance, that
they might obtain a better Resurrection, verse. 35. As our Lord Christ, Luke
23.46. and S. Stephen, Act. 7.59. commended their Spirits into God's hands: so
David, Psalm. 31.5. Into thine hand I commit my Spirit; thou have redeemed me, O
Lord God of truth. Yet certain it is, whether by reason of their great
affection to the solemn Worship of God on Earth, their expectations and
apprehensions of God's Promises, or their imperfect umbratile
Twilight-knowledge of the Mysteries of Christ, they seem not to be alike
apprehensive of the Happiness of the Soul after death, as the holy Apostles and
Martyrs were after Christ's Ascension; and therefore bemoan their exclusion out
of the Land of Canaan, and their privation of natural Life, more passionately
then seems to agree with the quietness and rejoicing which the Saints since
Christ's Ascension have expressed in their Death.

2. A Second Cause of David's excessive Grief is intimated here, verse. 7. Mine
eye is consumed because of Grief, it waxes hold because of all mine Enemies:
and verse. 10. Let all mine Enemies be ashamed and sore vexed; let them return
and be ashamed suddenly. It seems he apprehended they would, (or knew they did)
if God took away his Life, insult over him, and reproach him, for his often
profession of trusting in God, if God did not help him. So Psalm. 42.3. My Tears
have been my meat day and night, while they continually say unto me, Where is
thy God? verse. 9, 10. I will say unto God, My Rock, why have thou forgotten me?
why go I mourning because of the oppression of the Enemy? As with a Sword in
my bones mine Enemies reproach me, while they say daily unto me, Where is thy
God? The vilifying of his God, and the deriding of his hope in him, was more
grievous to David, then his Exile, or Sickness, or Death it self.

3. Nor are we to doubt (though it be not expressed in the Text) that those
Groans and Tears of David were also Penitential, occasioned by the Remembrance
of his Sins: for elsewhere is the like Complaint. Sin is that poisonous Herb
which made his Affliction bitter and deadly to him; like the wild Gourd, that
made the Sons of the Prophets cry out, (Mors in Olla) There is death in the
pot, 2 Kings 4.40. Thus Psalm. 38.2, 3, 4. Thy hand presses me sore. There is
no soundness in my flesh, because of thine Anger: neither is there any rest in
my bones, because of my Sin. For mine Iniquities have gone over my head; as an
heavy burden, they are too heavy for me. Psalm. 40.12. Innumerable Evils have
compassed me about; mine Iniquities have taken hold upon me, so that I am not
able to look up: they are more then the hairs of my head, therefore my heart
fails me. Psalm. 41.4. I said, Lord, be merciful unto me; heal my Soul, for I
have sinned against thee. Where he expresses his Misery, he does often declare
his Sin to be the Cause of it: as he prays for the removal of the one, so for
the pardon of the other; and as he complains of the one, so he bewails the
other. And therefore it is to be so conceived here, where he describes the
vehemence of his Groaning, and the redundance of his Tears; which is confirmed
by that which he says here, verse. 8. Depart from me, all ye workers of
Iniquity, for the Lord has heard the voice of my weeping: which implies a
penitential frame of spirit to have been in David, when he made this Prayer; he
abandoned the society of the workers of Iniquity, which is one principal part
of Repentance, showing displicency with our selves for Sins committed, and
resolution to avoid the Occasions of Sin, to which we may be tempted: there
being no sign more evident of loving Sin, then conforting with the workers of
Iniquity; nor any means more necessary to avoid it, (which is the chief part of
Repentance,) then to shun the company of the practisers of Evil.

And that his Tears were penitential, is intimated, in that it is said they
had a Voice, a praying Voice to God: which what other can it be deemed to be,
then Confessing of Sin to God, Complaining to him of his Misery be reason of
it, Deprecating of his Vengeance? as verse. 1. he expressed himself, O Lord,
rebuke me not in thine Angor, neither chasten me in thy hot Displeasure.
Sutably hereto he speaks Psalm. 39.8, 10, 11. Deliver me from all my
Transgressions; make me not a reproach to the foolish. Remove thy stroke away
from me: I am consumed by the blow of thy hand. When thou with rebukes do
correct man for Iniquity, thou make his beauty to consume away like a moth:
Surely every man is vanity. So that hereby we may well conclude, (without much
straining of the Text,) That those Groans and Tears were mixed, partly from the
sense of Affliction, and in that respect involuntary; partly Penitential, from
the sense of his Sin, and in that respect voluntary: and that he mourned (
propter malum Culpae, as well as propter malum Poenae,) for the Evil of Acting
as well as the Evil of Suffering; for both together, as being concatenate, and
the one following the other. And accordingly we may hence infer these useful
Propositions.

1. That when God visits for Sin, the Pain is extreme and intolerable. 2. That
Beds and Couches and other bodily Refections little avail to ease a Conscience
or a Person that is oppressed with the weight of God's Stroke for Sin. 3. That
the want of opportunities of glorifying God is very grievous to a Godly man
when he is under Affliction. 4. That it aggravates his Affliction, when by
reason of his Suffering, Reproach is likely to be cast upon God. 5. The Groans
and Tears and Disquietness of an Holy person are as well or more for his Sins,
then his Sufferings. 6. In such sense of Misery or Sin, the pious Penitent
bemoans himself to God, confesses, bewails his Sins, humbles himself before
him, deprecates his Wrath, and earnestly seeks by Prayer and Supplication for
Forgiveness of Sin, Healing, and Peace from God.
I shall consider each of these as they are placed.

I. PROPOSITION.
That when God visits for Sin, the Pain is extreme and intolerable.

Be it Sickness, Exile, Restraint, or whatever other Affliction the Almighty
brings a man's Sin to remembrance by, it will fetch Groans and Sighs from his
Breast; Tears, Rivers of tears, from his Eye. The Anguish, the Venom of his
Indignation will drink up his Spirits. Though (as Solomon says, Prove. 14.9.)
Fools make a mock of Sin: It is a sport to a fool to do mischief: (Prove.
10.23.) yet the conclusion will be, when God visits for it, Indignation and
Wrath to them that are contentius, and obey not the Truth: Tribulation and
Anguish upon every Soul of man that does evil, Romans 2.8, 9. When Abner and his
men, and Joab and his men, met by the Pool of Gibeon, Abner said to Joab, Let
the young men now arise, and play before us: but when they had a while been at
the sport, Abner calls to Joab, and says, Shall the Sword devour for ever?
know thou not that it will be Bitterness in the latter end? 2 Samuel 2.14, 26.

A man never thrives by Sin: he may for a while be in great Power, flourish
like a green Bay Tree; but in the conclusion Terrors take hold on him as
waters, a Tempest steals him away in the night, says Job, 27.20. The lips of
a strange woman drop as an honeycomb, and her mouth is smoother then oil: But
her end is bitter as wormwood, sharp as a two-edged sword, Prove. 5.3, 4. Stolen
waters are sweet, and bread eaten in secret is pleasant, Prove. 9.17. But after
the mouth is filled with gravel, Prove. 20.17. Though Wickedness be sweet in a
man's mouth, though he hide it under his tongue, as men use to do, who would
keep the taste of Sweetmeats long with them; Yet his meat within him is turned
into the Gall of Asps. He has swallowed down Riches, and he shall vomit them
up again: God shall cast them out of he Belly, says Zophar, Job 20.12, 14, 15.
The whole Books of the Proverbs and Job, yea and the whole Bible, are so full
of such expressions, as that a man scarce reads a Chapter, but something or
other occurrs to this purpose: yea all sorts of Writers, sacred and profane,
have left upon record their Observations concerning the attendance of
Punishment upon Sin; the lying of Sin at the door, when Evil is done within;
the avenging Eye of God; the Terrors that are subsequent, when Conscience is
awakened; the secret and silent Lashes and Tortures of a guilty Conscience,
when Affliction, Trouble, the apprehension of Death or God's Anger seize on the
spirit of a man. We need not instance in Cain, Saul, Judas, Felix, and such
like, which the Scripture mentions; nor such as Nero, Caligula, and others, of
whom the Roman and Greek Historians speak; nor of Spira, and others of later
Times: The Confessions of David, the Complaints of Job, the Lamentations of
Jeremiah, yield us pregnant proofs of this Truth.

Besides the forealleged Texts, David tells us, Psalm. 32.3, 4, 5. that when he
kept silence, his bones waxed old, through his Roaring all the day long. For
day and night the Hand of God was heavy on him; his moisture was turned into
the drought of Summer; till he acknowledged his Sin. Psalm. 31.10. My strength
fails because of mine Iniquity. Psalm. 38.8. that he was feeble and sore
smitten, that he roared by reason of the disquietness of his heart. Job speaks
thus to God, Job 13.26. Thou writest bitter things against me, and make me to
possess the Sins of my youth. And Jeremy, Lament. 1.14. The yoke of my
Transgressions is bound by his hand, they are wreathed and come up upon my
neck: he has made my strength to fall: and verse. 20. Behold, O Lord, for I am
in distress; my bowels are troubled, mine heart is turned within me; for I have
grievously rebelled.

This Anguish from the sense of Sin arises,

1. From the nature of Sin, which is really mischievous, though seemingly
pleasant. Sin is of a Serpentine kind; it has a smooth Skin, but a venomous
Tail. The sting of Death (says S. Paul) is Sin, 1 Cor. 15.56. It is a Sting,
and that deadly, though it be hidden. What Solomon says of the Drunkard's Cup,
Prove. 23.31, 32. though when the wine is red in the Glass, gives its color in
the Cup, and moves it self aright, it is very delightful; yet at last it will
bite like a Serpent, and sting like an Adder; is true of every Sin. There is a
deceitfulness of Sin, which hardens men in the committing of it, Heb. 3.13. Men
are fearless and secure while the pleasure of Sin beguiles them; the consequent
upon it is hidden from them: they discern not God's Eye to be on them: they
delude their Souls with blasphemous imaginations, as if he saw it not, had
forgotten it, were such an one as themselves. But it is otherwise: when he sets
their Sins in order before them, rouzes up their sleepy Consciences, causes
their Iniquities to stare in their faces; then they find that there is a Sting
in Sin; the sweet drink which they swallowed down pleasantly, gnaws and frets
their bowels, torments and corrodes their spirits, so that they sigh and groan,
and are ready to destroy themselves to be rid of that Venom which they so
easily and greedily drank down before.

2. From the Properties of God arises the Dolor that is consequent on Sin.

1. The Omniscience of God, which discerns all the most hidden ways of man:
which caused Job to say, Chap. 31.3, 4. Is not destruction to the wicked, and
strange punishment to the workers of Iniquity? Does not he see my ways, and
count all my steps? We are foolishly apt to imagine, that God sees not through
the thick Clouds, that he has forgotten, that he regards not what we do: and
thus we befool our selves with such devices as in the end ruin us. We are like
that Bird, that puts its head in a hole, as if thereby it were safe from the
Fowler: like Children, we wink our selves, and think none sees us, because we
see none. A deceived Heart thus turns us aside, that we cannot say, Is there
not a Lie in my right hand? Quod nimis miseri volunt, hoc facile credunt. But
what says the Psalmist? Psalm. 44.20, 21. If we have forgotten the name of our
God, or stretched out our hand to a strange God; Shall not God search this out?
for he knows the secrets of the heart. Hence does Moses derive the Affliction
of Israel in the Wilderness, Psalm. 90.7, 8. We are consumed by thine Anger, and
by thy Wrath are we troubled. Thou have set our Iniquities before thee, our
secret Sins in the light of thy Countenance.

2. The Purity of God makes God to hate Sin, and so not to tolerate it. Thou
art of purer eyes, (says the Prophet Habakkuk, 1.13.) then to behold Evil, and
can not look on Iniquity. Though he sees it, yet he will not see it: he knows
it, and looks on it, yet turns away his face from it; as we do, when we see
some noisome unclean thing, which we cause to be removed out of our sight. And
this must needs create Trouble. As when the Sun shines not on the world, Clouds
and Darkness and Tempests quickly overspread the Heavens: so when God hides his
Face, Sorrow and Anguish of spirit take hold on men's Souls. Odium est Appetitus
amovendi; Hatred is a desire of removing of that which we hate from us. I hate
the work of them that turn aside, it shall not cleave to me, (says David,
Psalm. 101.3.) It is much more true of God. Psalm. 5.4, 5, 6. Thou art not a God
that has pleasure in Wickedness, neither shall Evil dwell with thee. The
Foolish shall not stand in thy sight; thou hate all workers of Iniquity. Thou
shall destroy them that speak leasing. God's Holiness moves him to inflict
Anguish on men for Sin.

3. So does also his Truth. He has given us a Law, and has fenced it with
many Threatenings, that it might not be broken. He is true in his Threatenings as
well as in his Promises: as he is engaged to make good the one, so to verify
the other. We are sure (says the Apostle, Romans 2.2.) that the Judgment of God
is according to truth against them which commit such things: and again, Romans
3.4. Let God be true, but every man a Liar; as it is written, That thou
might be justified in thy sayings, and might overcome when thou art
judged, or do judge. God forces the Jews to acknowledge this, when he puts
the question to them, Your Fathers where are they? and the Prophets do they
live for ever? But my words and my Statutes, which I commanded my servants the
Prophets, did they not take hold of your Fathers? They returned and said, Like
as the Lord of Hoasts thought to do unto us, according to our ways and
according to our doings, so has he dealt with us, Zech. 1.5, 6.

4. The Justice of God, as well as the Veracity of God, engages God to inflict
Anguish on men for Sin. His eyes are upon all the ways of the sons of men, to
give to them according to their ways, and according to the fruit of their
doings, Jer. 32.19. He is the Judge of all the World, and therefore must needs
do right; as Abraham pleaded Genesis 18.25. That be far from thee, that the
Righteous should be as the Wicked. So in like manner we may say, That be far
from God, that the Wicked should be as the Righteous. Yea, God complains, Mal.
2.17. thus, You have wearied the Lord with your words: yet ye say, Wherein have
we wearied him? When ye say, Every one that does evil is good in the sight of
the Lord, and he delights in them; or, Where is the God of Judgment? And
again, Mal. 3.13. Your words have been stout against me, says the Lord: yet ye
say, What have we spoken so much against thee? He tells them, verse. 15. Ye call
the proud happy: yea, they that work Wickedness are set up; yea, they that
tempt God are even delivered. See how God counts himself blasphemed, when he is
charged to favor Evil men, by not executing Justice on them. Justitia est
perpetua and constans voluntas suum cuique tribuendi, (says Justinian in the
beginning of his Institutions;) Justice is a perpetual and constant will of
giving to every one his own. And sure, as Praise is due to them that do well;
so Vengeance to him that does evil. As Powers be ordained of God in his
Ministers to reward well-doing with praise; and to be revengers for wrath upon
him that does evil, Romans 13.4. so God (whose Deputies they are, and bear his
name,) will render to every man according to his works.

5. It is from the Power of God that such Anguish befalls men for Sin, as I
have asserted. He is great in power, and will not at all acquit the wicked,
says the Prophet Nahum, 1.3. Moses therefore, having bewailed the great
Devastation of mankind by God's Anger, that carries them away as with a Flood,
breaks out into these words, Psalm. 90.11. Who knows the power of thy Anger?
even according to thy fear, so is thy Wrath. Whereby he plainly intimates, that
the Power of God makes God's rebukes for Sin extreme and intolerable. 1.
Because they reach to all parts of a man. He can punish Soul and Body, yea and
cast both into Hellfire, Matthew. 10.28. 2. He can make all or any of the
Creatures his Instruments of Punishment; he can arm the least Worm for
Vengeance: yea and that which makes it most unsupportable, he can make a man's
own Spirit his Sword to wound him; and this is of all the sorest; it being true
which Solomon says, Prove. 18.14. The spirit of a man will sustain his
Infirmity: but a wounded spirit who can bear? 3. There is no way to escape from
it, or to avoid the Affliction he will bring on a person; there being neither
hiding place where he cannot find a man, nor remote place whither his hand
cannot reach, nor any auxiliary power to match or withstand him, nor any Remedy
but by him. Qui vulnera fecit, Solus Achilleo tollere more potest. Which brings
in the Second Observation.

II. PROPOSITION
That Beds and Couches and other bodily Refections little avail to ease a
Conscience or a Person that is oppressed with the weight of God's Stroke for
Sin.

This Job found, 7.13, 14, 15. When I say, My Bed shall comfort me, my Couch
shall ease my Complaint; Then thou scarest me with Dreams, and terrifiest me
through Visions: So that my Soul chooses strangling, and death rather then
life. And the like we may say of any other Creature-help. All the Artists,
Orators, Divines, Angels, and whatever there is in the Universe to cure or
alleviate an afflicted Spirit, are no more able to redress its Malady, without
God, then the old World was to stay the universal Deluge; or Sodom to prevent
its Burning with fire and brimstone from heaven. It is God's Prerogative to
kill, and to make alive; to bring down to the Grave, and to bring up; to raise
the Fiend of an awakened Conscience, and to lay it again. He that made the
Spirit can by the Spirit and his Son's Blood quiet and purge the Conscience
from dead works, to serve the living God, and he alone.

APPLICATION.
To apply this then to your use.

1. It should deter you from sinning against God. Though Sin may smile upon
you before you commit it, it will bite you when you have acted it. It may sing
you a fair pleasant Song, like a Siren; but it will destroy you, if it entice
you thereby. S. James tells you the true brood of Sin, 1.14, 15. Every man is
tempted, etc. Though the Pleasures of Sin be delightful, yet they are
poisonous. Quisquamne Venenum vult in Auro? Will any man venture to drink
Poison in a golden Cup? You that are given to drink excessively, consider while
the Cup is at your mouth, that there will be a Cup of Wrath given you to drink,
the Venom whereof will set your Bones on fire, and drink up your Spirits. You
that are given to unclean and unlawful Lusts of the body, if you be not afraid
of the Morbus Gallicus, yet fear the Wrath of him who will judge such persons,
and burn you with a more unquenchable Fire then that which consumed Sodom and
Gomorrah. You that so love the Mammon of Iniquity, that you serve it; that
regard not how you get Wealth, per fas, per nefas, by right or wrong, Rem, Rem,
quocunque modo Rem, Money any way, though by Sacrilege, public Robbery,
Grinding the face of the Poor, by Bribery, Extortion, Perjury, Overreaching in
bargaining, Defrauding, Theft, or any other way; think of Zechariah's flying
Roll, the Curse, Zech. 5.4. which God will bring forth, and it shall enter into
the house of the Thief, and into the house of him that Swears falsely by his
Name; and it shall remain in his house, to cut off or torture the Inhabitant,
and to consume the Materials of the house. You that are profane Scoffers, that
deride the Word and Service of God; or close Hypocrites, that counterfeit
Godliness; know that God will not be mocked, and cannot be resisted. Let me say
to you, or any other Sinner who goes on in any sinful way, insensible of the
Sting which is in the Tail; the Terrors of Conscience, and Wrath of God, these
will surely overtake him, without Repentance: yea and if he do repent, will in
some measure bring Anguish and Pain to him. And as the Apostle says to the
Corinthians, 1 Cor. 10.22. Do we provoke the Lord to Jealousy? are we stronger
then he? If we be, sin and spare not: if not, consider the evil that will
follow, all ye that forget God; lest he tear you in pieces, and there be none
to deliver you, Psalm. 50.22.

2. If you have sinned, think not to wear out by time the impression Sin makes
on thy Conscience; nor to extinguish the sense of Sin, by Drinking, merry
Company, carnal Pleasure, vain Mirth, Music; or to lay it asleep by Formality
in Religion, Popes Pardons, Priests Absolutions, without true Repentance and
Faith in Christ. All these are Physicians of no value, Forgers of Lies, as Job
speaks, 13.4. Do rather as Job did, 42.5, 6. say to God, I have heard of thee
by the hearing of the ear; now mine eye sees thee. Wherefore I abhor my self,
and repent in dust and ashes. Humble thy self under his hand: pray to him not
to rebuke thee in Anger, nor chasten thee in his hot Displeasure; but to have
mercy on thee, and heal thy Soul that has sinned against him. Bring with thee
penitential Groans and medicinal Tears of that Sorrow which is according to
God, working Repentance to Salvation, not to be repented of: and with it Faith
in the blood of Christ, which cleanses from all Sin. And if thou come to God
in this manner, doubt not but God will perform to thee what he says, Isa.
57.18. I have seen his ways, and will heal him; I will lead him also, and
restore Comfort unto him and to his mourners. Amen.

LAVS DEO.
DAVID's GROANS. Part II.
The Second SERMON.
PSALM vi. 6. I am weary of my Groaning: every night wash I my Bed, and water
my Couch with my Tears.


THIS Psalm, or Poem de Tristibus, is entitled to David, and contains an holy
Elegy or mournful Complaint to God concerning his present Affliction, whether
Sickness, or Exile, or whatever other Grievance he was under: the effect
whereof was,

1. Groans, and those usque ad lassitudinem, deep continued Groans, which
showed much Anguish of spirit he was under; I am weary with my Groaning.

2. Tears, a sign of Grief; and those not a few, not like a small Mist or Dew,
that a little moistens; but as a great shower of Rain, that makes a Flood, so as
to make his Bed to swim, and to water his Couch. And these too continued night
and day, yea all the night, or every night and every day, (it is likely) for the
time: and that so as to disappoint him of the benefit of his Bed for Rest in
the night, and of his Couch for Ease in the day.

The Causes of which sad estate are intimated: verse. 5. his fear of being
deprived of the opportunity of remembering God, and giving him thanks among the
living; the insulting of his Enemies, verse. 7, 10. and especially their
Reproaching his Affiance in his God; and, by collation with the like Complaints
in other Psalms, the Remembrance of his own Sins, which made, as his present
Affliction very heavy, so his Groans and Tears vocal, that is, supplicatory,
verse. 8. Whence these six Conclusions or Propositions have been deduced, and
the two first already handled.

1. That when God's hand is on any for Sin, it is heavy and intolerable. 2.
Beds and Couches give not Ease, when God brings Sin to remembrance.
Of these I shall say no more.

3. The want of opportunity of glorifying God is very grievous to a person that
is Godly, when he is under Affliction. 4. That it aggravates his Affliction,
when by reason of his Suffering, Reproach is likely to be cast on God. 5. The
Groans, Tears and Disquietness of an Holy person under his Affliction are as
well or more for his Sins, then his Sufferings. 6. In such sense of Misery or
Sin, the pious Penitent bemoans himself to God, confesses, bewaileth his Sin,
humbles himself before him, deprecateth his Wrath, and earnestly seeks by
Prayer and Supplication for Forgiveness of Sin, Healing, and Peace from God.
III. PROPOSITION.
That the want of opportunity of glorifying God, by praising of him, by
commemorating his Goodness, exciting of and joining with others in the
celebrating his Praise, is very grievous to a person that is Godly, and adds
to his Affliction by Sickness, or Exile, or other Restraint which he is under.

This was one Reason of David's Tears and Groans here. And to like purpose he
argues with God, Psalm. 30.9. when He hid his face, and himself was troubled;
What profit is there in my blood, when I go down to the Pit? shall the Dust
praise thee? shall it declare thy Truth? And Hezekiah in his Sickness bemoans
his Condition thus, Isa. 38.10, 11. I am deprived of the residue of my years: I
shall not see the Lord, even the Lord in the land of the living. Verse. 18. he
gives the Reason, why he had great bitterness for peace; For the Grave cannot
praise thee, Death cannot celebrate thee: they that go down into the Pit cannot
hope for thy Truth. verse. 19. The Living, the Living, he shall praise thee. In
his plea before Saul, David makes this his greatest Grievance by reason of
Readiness Persecution, that he was driven from abiding in the Inheritance of the
Lord, 1 Samuel 26.19. Psalm. 84.1, 2. he expresses his Affection thus; How
amiable are thy Tabernacles, O Lord of hoasts? My Soul longs, yea even
faints for the Courts of the Lord; my Heart and my flesh cries out for the
living God. And as preferring the condition of the Birds before his present
condition in his Exile, he thus bespeaks God, verse. 3. Yea, the Sparrow has
found a house, and the Swallow a nest for her self, where she may lay her
young; even thine Altars, O Lord of hoasts, my King and my God: and then adds,
verse. 4. Blessed are they that dwell in thy House: they will still be praising
thee; and verse. 10. For a day in thy Courts is better then a thousand. I had
rather be a Doorkeeper in the House of my God, then to dwell in the Tents of
wickedness. No Society, no Habitation, no Fare, no Pleasure, could content
David, while he was deprived of the Society of them that praised God, was kept
from the Worship of God at his Tabernacle, debarred from access to God, to
enquire of him what he was to do, and to address his Supplications to God in
his House of Prayer. And the Reasons hereof are,

1. From the Property of an Holy person, which is, to delight in Communion with
God, so as to make God his Joy chiefly, yea, in some sort solely: that is,
though he can rejoice in Wife, Children, Food, and other Blessings he has; yet
he cannot, he dares not terminate his Joys in them, but he rejoices in them as
the gift of God, Eccles. 5.18, 19. He eats his bread with joy, and drinks his
wine with a merry heart; for God accepts his works, Eccles. 9.7. He rejoices
in them, because he has them with God's allowance, with his favor; they are
sanctified to him by the word of God and prayer, and thereby they are good to
him, 1 Timothy 4.4, 5. otherwise they would be unclean to him, Tit. 1.15. All
things are good to the Godly with the light of God's Countenance, if they can
have them with his acceptance, and use them for his Glory. God is the principal
thing in which a renewed Nature delights: all other things are pleasant as they
come from him, and tend to him; as they signify to us his good will toward us,
and as they are occasions of showing our love to him. Trahit sua quemque
voluptas. As carnal hearts have carnal delights; so a spiritual person
delights in the things of the Spirit of God, Romans 8.5. A Sow will feed on
filth, a Sheep on tender sweet grass: So profane and ungodly men can be merry
in a Tavern, in Swearing, Cursing, Singing obscene Songs, and Invectives
against Piety, praising of God, hearing his Word; but a Holy heart is weary of
such Company, it is a Hell to him to associate with such. Woe is me, says
David, (Psalm. 120.5.) that I sojourn in Mesech, that I dwell in the tents of
Kedar: but, says he, Psalm. 122.1, 2. I was glad when they said unto me, Let us
go into the House of the Lord. Our feet shall stand within thy Gates, O
Jerusalem: for there God is praised, there is an Assembly of them that love
God, and delight in his Worship. Truly, says S. John, (1 John 1.3.) our
fellowship is with the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ. As it is the
greatest Grievance for an Epicure, a swinish, brutish, voluptuous, luxurious
man, to be restrained from his Cups, wanton and sensual Company and Delights:
so it is the greatest Grievance to good men, to be withheld from the Communion
and Society of Saints, from the enjoyment of holy Ordinances, and employment in
holy Exercises, whereby they may honor and enjoy Communion with God; because
they delight in God, and count all other delight as insipid, without relish,
while they want that Intercourse with God which makes all things savoury and
pleasant to them.

2. The End of a Godly man's life is to honor God, and to promote the Service
and Kingdom of Jesus Christ. None of us (says the Apostle, Romans 14.7, 8.)
lives to himself, and no man dies to himself. For whether we live, we live
unto the Lord; and whether we die, we die unto the Lord: whether we live
therefore or die, we are the Lord's. Without God a Godly man's Life is not Vita
vitalis, a lively Life, but rather a Dream then a Life: He does sensim mori, he
does but linger, and die a lingering death. This, says the Apostle, ( Phil.
1.20, 21.) is my earnest expectation and hope, that in nothing I shall be
ashamed, but that with all boldness, as always, so now also, Christ shall be
magnified in my body, whether it be by life, or death. For to me to live is
Christ, and to die is gain. That is, the whole gain of his life or death was
Christ: and therefore so he might glorify him, and enjoy him, he was
indifferent whether he did live or die. He was affected so to Christ and his
love to him, that in his farewell speech to the Ephesian Elders, Act. 20.22,
23, 24. he says, And now behold, I go bound in the Spirit unto Jerusalem, not
knowing the things that shall befall me there: Save that the Holy Ghost
witnesses in every city, saying that bonds and afflictions abide me. But none
of these things move me; neither count I my life dear unto my self, so that I
might finish my course with joy, and the Ministry which I have received of the
Lord Jesus, to testify the Gospel of the grace of God.

It is the property of Love, not to seek its own things, 1 Cor. 13.5. but the
pleasing and serving him whom he loves, and accordingly to that he loves; he
regards nothing so much as the gratifying of his beloved, is willing to part
with any thing which may be inconsistent therewith, imploys his faculties to
the utmost, acts ad extremum virium, to the uttermost, on his behalf. Love is
Affect us Vnionis, an Affection of Union: the Soul of a Lover is ubi amat, non
ubi animat, not where he breaths, but where he loves; which makes him long
after his beloved, as David did, Psalm. 42.1, 2. As the Heart pants after the
waterbrooks, so pants my Soul after thee, O God. My Soul thirsts for God,
for the living God: when shall I come and appear before God? And for the same
reason he is not content in Exile or Sickness, when he cannot have opportunity
to glorify God. As, on the other side, it is well with him, when he can enjoy
God, and do his work, though it be with shipwreck of all his other
Commodities: he willingly parts with all, and freely relinquisheth them, for
this end; as knowing that of our Savior to be a necessary Lesson to be learned
by him, He that loves Father or Mother more then me, is not worthy of me: and
he that loves Son or Daughter more then me, is not worthy of me, Matthew. 10.37.
and again, Luke 14.26. If any man come unto me, and hate not his Father, and
Mother, and Wife, and Children, and Brothers, and Sisters, yea and his own Life
also, he cannot be my Disciple. Excellent and worthy was the resolution of S.
Paul, Act. 21.13. When he was besought not to go up to Jerusalem, because of
Agabus his Prophecy of his being bound at Jerusalem, and delivered into the
hands of the Gentiles; he thus repells the motion of his most loving Friends,
What mean ye to weep and break my heart? for I am ready not to be bound only,
but also to die at Jerusalem for the Name of the Lord Jesus. But far more
excellent was the Objurgation of Christ to S. Peter, to whom (when he dissuaded
him from going up to Jerusalem, to suffer death there) with indignation he
turns himself with this Thunderclap, Get thee behind me, Satan, thou art an
offense unto me; for thou savourest not the things that be of God, but those
that be of men, Matthew. 16.23.

And indeed, though in a far inferior degree, such is the mind of all that
truly love God and the Lord Jesus Christ; They are magnanimously resolved to
encounter with all Difficulties for Their honor; (as Luther, who would go to
Worms to witness his Doctrine before the Emperor, though he should meet with
as many Devils there as there were Tiles on the houses of that City;) and are
well contented when they part with the greatest outward Advantages for it. As
those Martyrs that went to the Stake joyfully; and that Marquess that left the
Emperor's Court, and Preferment there, his Wife and Children, to enjoy the
Gospel in a Protestant City. And they think their Life not to be regarded but
for the use of it in God's Service. As that learned Doctor, who being
dissuaded from studying so much, whereby his Life was likely to be shortened,
and told, that it was not wisdom perdere Substantiam propter Accidentia, to
lose Substance for Accidents, meaning Life for increase of Learning, and
communicating it by writing, answered, Nec propter Vitam vivendi perdere
Causas, that it was as unfit for him to take care of his Health, and to lose
the Use and End of his Life, which was the doing his work, glorifying of God,
and benefitting of others. (Doctor Reynolds.) Then a Holy man lives with
Comfort, when he can honor God, and do his work: but when he is stopped
therein, then he is weary with Groaning, and waters his Couch with his Tears;
as David did here for his present Affliction, because it hindered him from the
Assemblies, wherein he might remember and thank God: as also because he feared
the insolent Pride of his Enemies, that they would reproach God. Which leads us
to the

IV. PROPOSITION.
That it aggravates a Godly man's Affliction, when by reason of his Sufferings,
Reproach is likely to be cast upon God.

That the sense of this was that which so much disquieted David when he penned
this Psalm, and caused the mournful Groans and Tears here mentioned, may be
gathered from the next verse, where he says, Mine eye is consumed because of
Grief, it waxes old because of all mine Enemies: and verse. 10. Let all mine
Enemies be ashamed and sore vexed; let them return and be ashamed suddenly. Now
the Reason why his Enemies were such a thorn in his side, when he was in
Sickness or Exile, (in one of which it is likely this Psalm was penned,) is
expressed Psalm. 42.9, 10. thus, I will say unto God, My Rock, why have thou
forgotten me? why go I mourning because of the oppression of the Enemy? As
with a sword in my bones, mine Enemies reproach me, while they say daily unto
me, Where is thy God? God had sent Samuel to anoint him King over Israel, he
had promised to establish the Kingdom in his House, and to subdue all his
Enemies on every side: of this he much gloried, even then when he fled to the
Philistines, and changed his behavior before them; and his Enemies in Readiness
Court, or the Philistines, insulted over him, as if his hopes were at an end,
God had cast him off, and would be favorable no more, had forgotten to be
gracious, and did fail in his promise, Psalm. 77.7, 8, 9. yet even then (as the
Title of the Psalm imports, Psalm. 34.1, 2.) he resolved thus, I will bless the
Lord at all times: his praise shall be continually in my mouth. My Soul shall
make her boast in the Lord. With this his Confidence in God they were wont to
upbraid him, when he was low, in some Sickness, or in a flitting Condition, or
driven from Jerusalem by his Son Absalom: as Psalm. 3.1, 2. he complains, Lord,
how are they increased that trouble me? many are they that rise up against me.
Many there be that say of my Soul, There is no help for him in his God. So when
Shimei railed on him and cursed him, 2 Samuel 16.7, 8. The like may be gathered
from passages in many other Psalms; as Psalm. 7. concerning the words of Cush
the Benjamite; Doeg the Edomite, Psalm. 52. and others. By which it may be
perceived, that in his low estate David was more sensible of the Injury which
might be to God's Name, then his own Calamity. Psalm. 22.7, 8. among other
things wherein (whether in respect of his own Condition, or prophetically
describing the Anguish of our Lord Christ's Soul when he suffered for us, of
which that Psalm is a manifest Prediction,) David sets out his deplorable
estate, he urges thus, that all that saw him laughed him to scorn, they shoot
out the lip, they shake the head, saying, He trusted on the Lord, that he would
deliver him: let him deliver him, seeing he delighted in him. Which being the
thing done to Christ, Matthew. 27.43. and Christ using the first words of that
Psalm, Matthew. 27.46. on the Cross, it is evident, that as to David in the Type,
so to Christ in the Antitype, this was one of the greatest Vexations to them in
their Sufferings, that they were twitted with and scoffingly taunted for their
Trust in God, as if it were a vain thing to call upon God, and to trust upon
him. And indeed the Apostle tells us, Romans 15.3. that herein Christ pleased not
himself, but it was an addition to the heavy Sufferings which he underwent,
that the Reproaches of them that reproached God fell on him. When Hezekiah
heard of Sennacherib's message, in which he magnified himself, and vilified the
God of Israel, it is said that he rent his clothes, and covered himself with
Sackcloath, and went to the House of the Lord, and sent to Isaiah this message,
This day is a day of Trouble, and of Rebuke, and of Blasphemy. It may be the
Lord thy God will hear the words of Rabshakeh, whom the King of Assyria his
master has sent to reproach the living God: thereby showing what he laid most
to heart, that the living God should be reproached. When, by reason of the Sin
of Achan, the men of Israel were smitten by the men of Ai, Joshua rent his
clothes, and fell to the earth upon his face, before the Ark of the Lord,
until the even-tide, he and the Elders of Israel, and put dust upon their
heads: and he prayed, O Lord, what shall I say, when Israel turns their backs
before their Enemies? For the Canaanites and all the Inhabitants of the Land
shall hear of it, and shall environ us round, and cut off our name from the
earth: and what will thou do unto thy great Name? Josh. 7.6, 8, 9. Wherein you
may perceive, that the Sore which most of all vexed the spirit of Joshua and
the Elders of Israel, which made them to put on the habit of Mourners, was the
Disparagement likely to befall the great Name of God, if the Canaanites did
prevail. In like manner Moses, when he interceded for the Israelites, who had
provoked God to destroy them by their Idolatry and their Murmuring, uses this
Argument, of the Injury that would accrue to his great Name, if he did not
spare them; preferring God's Honor before his own Advancement or Happiness:
Exodus 32.11, 12. Number. 14.13, etc. Yea, the Dishonor done to God in making the
Golden Calf did so incense Moses, that he broke the Tables of the Decalogue,
and burnt the Calf, made them drink the powder of it, and set the Levites armed
to kill the Idolaters. Memorable also was the carriage of Barnabas and Paul,
Act. 14.14. When the people of Lystra magnified them as Gods for the healing of
an impotent man, and would have sacrificed unto them, as to Jupiter and
Mercurius, they rent their clothes, and ran in among the people, crying out,
Sirs, why do you these things? We are men; turn to the living God: though they
were in jeopardy of being stoned by them. This is indeed the constant
disposition of all uprighthearted men, that they had rather suffer any
Indignities, Injuries, Damages, Calamities, themselves, then have God's Glory
and Honor be eclipsed: they are willing that any Crime, Shame, Falsehood,
should be imputed to them, rather then the least Ignominy or Disgrace cast on
God; that their Names should become odious, then God's have the least blemish.
And the Reasons are,

1. Because they esteem themselves as nothing in comparison of God; and
therefore count it a small matter, what Evil befalls them, so that God be
magnified. When Abraham bespeaks God, he uses this self-debasing preface, Genesis
18.27. Behold now, I have taken upon me to speak unto the Lord, who am but dust
and ashes: And Jacob, Genesis 32.10. I am not worthy of, or, as it is in the
Hebrew, I am less then the least of all the Mercies, and of all the Truth,
which thou have showed unto thy Servant: And Job, 40.4. Behold, I am vile, what
shall I answer thee? I will lay my hand upon my mouth; Chap. 42.5, 6. Now mine
eye sees thee, I abhor my self: And David, 1 Chronicles. 17.16. Who am I, O Lord,
and what is my house, that thou have brought me hitherto? 1 Chronicles. 29.14, 15.
Who am I, and what is my people, that we should be able to offer so willingly
after this sort? For we are strangers before thee, and sojourners, as were all
our Fathers: our days on the earth are as a shadow, and there is none abiding.

On the other side, they ascribe all Greatness unto God. Moses in his Song,
Exodus 15.11. Who is like unto thee, O Lord, among the Gods? who is like thee,
glorious in holiness, fearful in praises, doing wonders? Deuteronomy. 32.3, 4.
Because I will publish the Name of the Lord; ascribe ye Greatness to our God.
He is the Rock, his work is perfect; for all his ways are Judgment: a God of
Truth, and without Iniquity, Just and Right is He. Psalm. 145.1, 2, 3. says
David, I will extol thee, my God and my King, and I will bless thy Name for
ever and ever. Every day will I bless thee, and I will praise thy Name for ever
and ever. Great is the Lord, and greatly to be praised; and his Greatness is
unsearchable. The four living Creatures rest not day and night, saying, Holy,
Holy, Holy, Lord God Almighty, which was, and is, and is to come. They give
glory and honor and thanks to him that sits on the Throne, who lives for
ever. And the four and twenty Elders fall down before him that sat on the
Throne, who lives for ever and ever; and cast their Crowns before the Throne,
saying, Thou art worthy, O Lord, to receive glory, and honor, and power: for
thou have created all things, and for thy pleasure they are and were created,
Rev. 4.8, 9, 10, 11. Many more such expressions there are in the Songs of
Hannah, the blessed Virgin, the 14000 Virgins, and other Hymns of the Saints in
the Old and New Testament, which do fully show, that this is the constant
disposition of all Holy hearts, to nullify all their Excellency, when it is
compared with God; and to extol the Name of God as infinitely exceeding all
created Beings: and therefore they conceive it most equal, that they should
count the Disparagement of God as a more heavy Affliction then their own
Sufferings.

2. They know that God's Name is most tenderly regarded by him. Number. 14.21. the
Lord said, Truly as I live, all the Earth shall be filled with the Glory of the
Lord. Deuteronomy. 32.26, 27. I said, I would scatter them into corners, I would make
the remembrance of them to cease from among men; Were it not that I feared the
wrath of the Enemy, lest their Adversaries should behave themselves strangely,
and say, Our hand is high, and the Lord has not done all this. Isa. 42.8. I am
the Lord, that is my Name, and my Glory will I not give to another, neither my
Praise to graven Images. Isa. 48.11. For mine own sake, even for mine own sake
will I do it; for how should my Name be polluted? and I will not give my Glory
to another. Ezekiel. 20.9. But I wrought for my Name's sake, that it should not be
polluted before the Heathen, among whom they were, in whose sight I made my
self known unto them. In the Third Commandment, Exodus 20.7. God charge, Thou
shall not take the Name of the Lord thy God in vain: for the Lord will not hold
him guiltless that takes his Name in vain. And therefore the Godly are
sensible of his Glory above their own Peace; and more affected with any dirt
cast on God's face, then any wound given to their own persons.

3. They know it is the Duty of all created Beings, to prefer their Maker,
their Father, their King and Lord, before themselves. They know they are
engaged to fear this glorious and fearful Name, The Lord their God, Deuteronomy.
28.58. as the Father that begat them, the Rock that formed them, Deuteronomy. 32.6,
15, 18. When S. John would have worshipped the Angel, he forbade him, See thou
do it not; for I am thy fellow servants, and of thy brethren, the Prophets, and
of them which keep the sayings of this Book: worship God, Rev. 22.9. As David's
people counted their King (as all good Subjects do) worth ten thousand of
themselves, 2 Samuel 18.3. and all honest Servants count their Master's Welfare
and Credit far before their own, yea his Life before their own: so do all Holy
persons God's Glory, as being their Master, their Father, their King. Croesus
his Son, that never spoke before, opened then his mouth, and said, Kill not
King Croesus, when a Soldier was about to slay him. So will every Child of God
be moved, when his heavenly Father is blasphemed, and his Name stricken
through; though he be silent when himself is abused. Christ bids us pray, Our
Father, which art in Heaven, Hallowed be thy Name, before he directs us to
pray, Give us this day our daily bread, And forgive us our debts. The Relation
of Creatures, Children, Subjects and Servants to God, oblige every Holy person
to mind and seek the sanctifying of God's Name, though it be with never so
great diminution and detriment to himself.

4. And lastly, They know that thus doing, they shall best provide for
themselves. When David was little in his own eyes, God chose him to be head of
his people Israel. He knew it to be true which God said to Eli, 1 Samuel 2.30.
Them that honor me, I will honor; and they that despise me shall be lightly
esteemed. As all Princes of worth will reward their loyal Subjects, all good
Parents their dutiful Children, all wise Masters their obedient Servants: so
God will do to all his true-hearted Subjects, Children, and Servants. And this
makes them regardless of themselves in comparison of God, as knowing, that they
best provide for themselves, when they are careless of their own Estates, but
most careful of his Glory.

APPLICATION.
1. We may hereby judge of what spirit they are, who neither in Sickness nor
Health, Adversity nor Prosperity, are affected with the Worship of God, with
the Dishonor or Honor that is done to his Name. Sure they have not the Heart
of David, who groaned unto weariness, all the night made his Bed to swim, and
watered his Couch with his Tears, because he wanted the opportunity of
remembering God, of giving him thanks in his Sanctuary, by reason of his
Sickness or Exile: in which he was most afraid lest his Enemies should be
highly injurious to God, in speaking evil of him; was less sensible of his own
Suffering. They who, well or ill, mind not to repair to the Assemblies to
praise God; that are no whit moved by the taking of God's Name in vain, or the
blaspheming of him, if so be they may be quiet, live at ease, in wealth, in
content. They are undoubtedly of a Devilish spirit, that are enemies to the
praising of God, that inveigh against and oppose the solemn Service and
Worship, in holy Prayer, Praises of God, Preaching and Hearing of his most holy
Word; that deride those things, and deter men from them. Much more damnable
is their practice who glory in the profaning of the glorious Name of the
Almighty God; who make it their sport and their gallantry to abuse the High and
Holy one in vain and false Swearing, in direful Blasphemies and Curses, in
impious Atheistical Jests and Scoffs: which I wish were only outlandish
behavior, that could, as heretofore, be charged only on Italianated,
Hispaniolized Papists; that it were not the fashion of English Protestants, who
seem often to pray, Hallowed be thy Name, and when the Commandments of the
First Table are read, to say, Lord, have mercy upon us, and incline our hearts
to keep these Laws; yet neither have God for their God, nor regard his Worship,
nor hallow his Name, nor sanctify his Day, but pollute all with their impure
Tongues and foul Feet. Oh that you that are guilty of so doing would tremble at
the Damnation due to these Sins; and you who are not guilty would mourn for
these Abominations in others, and be affected as David was, Psalm. 119.136.
Rivers of waters run down mine eyes, because they keep not thy Law.

2. If God bring Sickness or any other Affliction upon you, let this be a
Grievance to you, that you cannot be with them that are employed in God's
Worship: when you are in Health, at Liberty, in Peace, omit not to wait on God
in his solemn Service. Consider how unworthy a thing it is, to mind your own
things, as if you owed nothing to God, from whom you have All: to forget that
He is your Maker, the Father that begat you, your King, your Lord, your God,
who is good, kind, and merciful to you. Let the thoughts of God be dear to
you, his Name precious. Be affected like David, who could not be contented to
dwell in a house of Cedar, when the Ark of God dwelt within Curtains, 2 Samuel
7.2. Be willing to further God's Honor, and the Knowledge of him, more then to
furnish your own Houses, adorn your own Backs, and make provision for your own
Tables. Let them be your best Friends that glorify God most; and those your
Enemies, that take his Name in vain. And let your Sighs and Tears be as much
for neglecting God's Service, as for omitting the pursuance of your own Ends,
your own Preferments, Pleasures, Profits. In a word, where you can, endeavor
to recover such from their Profaneness and Ungodliness, who mind not his
Worship, or pollute his Name by any profane speeches or behavior: pluck them
as Brands out of the fire, with holy zeal for God, and compassion to them. And
if you cannot amend them, yet mourn for them, (as Samuel did for Saul, when God
was departed from him, 1 Samuel 15.35.) And for your selves, take heed of
suffering as Evildoers, but be not ashamed to suffer as Christians, but
glorify God therein. Amen.

LAVS DEO.
DAVID's GROANS. Part III.
The Third SERMON.
PSALM vi. 6. I am weary of my Groaning: every night wash I my Bed, and water
my Couch with my Tears.


THIS Verse has held us twice already. Inquiry being made of the Cause of such
excessive Grief as is here expressed; it has been resolved, That not only
Pain of Body, or Bodily Restraint, drew out such Groans, such a Fountain of
Tears as was let out when this Psalm was made: Privation of God's Worship, fear
of the Dishonor that might accrue to God from his Enemies, Reproaching God by
reason of him, are intimated verse. 5, 7, 10. to have been likewise Causes of
this immoderate Sorrow. And accordingly I have already handled these four
Points.

1. That when God's hand is on any for Sin, it is heavy and intolerable. 2.
Beds and Couches give not Ease, when God brings Sin to remembrance. 3. The want
of opportunity of glorifying God is very grievous to a person that is Godly,
when he is under Affliction. 4. That it aggravates his Affliction, when by
rearon of his Suffering, Reproach is likely to be cast on God.
Thus far we have proceeded. There is plus ultra, somewhat more to be gathered
from this Flower.

Commonly this Psalm is styled One, or the First of the Penitential Psalms.
And that these Groans and Tears were for Sin, has been gathered partly from
other parallel places, Psalm. 38.1, 2, 3, 4. Psalm. 39.11. Psalm. 40.12. Psalm.
41.4. and others: from the Prayer here, verse. 1. wherein he acknowledges his
present Affliction, Rebukes and Chastening, from God, and therefore for Sin;
and verse. 8. ascribes an audible Voice to his weeping, which argues his Tears
were for Sin, and with Supplication for its Pardon. And hence these Conclusions
or Propositions have been deduced.

5. That Affliction brings Sin to Remembrance; and that the Groans and Tears
and Disquietness of an Holy person under his Affliction are as well or more for
his Sins, then for his Sufferings. 6. In such sense of Misery or Sin, the pious
Penitent person bemoaneth himself to God, confesses, bewaileth his Sin,
humbles himself before him, deprecateth his Wrath, and earnestly seeks by
Prayer and Supplication for Forgiveness of Sin, Healing, and Peace from God.
And of these (with Divine assistence) I shall now speak.

V. PROPOSITION.
That Affliction brings Sin to Remembrance; and that the Groans and Tears and
Disquietness of an Holy person under his Affliction are as well or more for his
Sins, then for his Sufferings.

1. That Affliction brings Sin to Remembrance, is manifest by many Instances.
When the Sons of Jacob were in streights by reason of Joseph's seeming rough
dealing with them in Egypt, and his imprisoning one of them; then they
remembered their Sin, which it seems they minded not before: Genesis 42.21. And
they said one to another, We are verily guilty concerning our Brother, in that
we saw the anguish of his Soul, when he besought us, and we would not hear:
therefore is this distress come upon us. When Adonibezek was caught, and his
Thumbs and great Toes cut off, he could then remember, Threescore and ten
Kings, having their Thumbs and great Toes cut off, gathered their meat under my
Table: as I have done, God has requited me, Jos. 1.7. The Widow of Sarepta
that entertained Elijah the Prophet, when her Son was dead, expressed her self
in a fit of passion to Elijah, What have I to do with thee, O thou man of God?
art thou come unto me to call my Sin to remembrance, and to slay my Son? 1
King. 17.18. Even holy Job, though an upright and perfect man, one that feared
God, and eschewed evil, yet in the time of his Affliction complains, that God
did write bitter things against him, and made him to possess the Iniquities of
his youth, Job 13.26. When Manasseh was bound in fetters, and carried to
Babylon, then he humbled himself greatly before the God of his Fathers, 2 Chronicles. 33.11, 12. When Jerusalem, that slighted the many Warnings of the
Prophets that were sent to her, was taken by Nebuchadnezzar, and the people
carried captive to Babylon, then they could remember that they had grievously
sinned, and therefore were removed, Lament. 1.7, 8.

And indeed, this is the very End of God's Afflictions, to bring men's Sins into
Remembrance. In their Prosperity men are secure, they mind their Pleasures,
think not of the Reckoning; they are like men that are filled with Wine, fast
asleep, and heed not what is said of them, or to them, or what is near them, or
intended to be done to them: and so are not moved at all by any Counsels or
Warnings given them by God or man. When Wisdom calls, they refuse to hearken;
when she stretches out her hands, no man regards it: their Prosperity destroys
them, Prove. 1.24, 32. Yea, because sentence against an evil work is not
executed speedily, therefore the heart of the sons of men is fully set in them
to do evil, Eccles. 8.11. And therefore as men use to do when a person is
thus asleep, and the house is on fire, or an Enemy is coming, they jog and
pinch, and, if need be, whip and scourge and beat such a drowzy person to
awaken him, that he may escape the fire or the sword, that he may perceive his
folly and his danger: so does God deal with men that sin, even the best, when
they abuse their Prosperity so as to grow secure in Sin, or to become dull and
sluggish about the work God requires of them; he visits them with some
Affliction or other, which may bring their Sin to mind; he hedgeth up their way
with thorns, and makes a wall, that they may not find their paths, as it is
Hos. 2.6. What the Lord often inculcates to us concerning our Children, he is
not wanting to observe toward his own. He tells us that Foolishness is bound
in the heart of a Child; but the Rod of Correction shall drive it far from him,
Prove. 22.15. The Rod of Reproof gives wisdom; but a Child left to himself
brings his Mother to shame, Prove. 29.15. And therefore he often charge
Parents to correct their Children. Correct thy Son, and he shall give thee
rest; yea he shall give delight unto thy soul, Ibid. verse. 17. Chasten thy Son
while there is hope; and let not thy Soul spare for his Crying, Prove. 19.18.
Yea he says, Prove. 13.24. He that spares his Rod hates his Son: but he that
loves him, chasteneth him betimes. And accordingly the Lord, who is wise, and
knows how to handle his own Children, when he does perceive them careless, and
heedless of their Duty, secure in their Sin, sets their Sin before them, making
it legible by some Correction; that they may discern their Fault by their
Punishment, and being humbled for the one, may remove the other. As many as I
love, (says Christ,) I rebuke and chasten, Revel. 3.19. Which is no other then
what the Author of the Epistle to the Hebrews (12.5, 6.) tells them; My Son,
despise not thou the Chastening of the Lord, nor faint when thou art rebuked of
him. For whom the Lord loves he chasteneth, and scourges every Son whom he
receives. Which is the same that Solomon had said, My Son, despise not the
Chastening of the Lord, neither be weary of his Correction. For whom the Lord
loves he corrects, even as a Father the Son in whom he delights, Prove.
3.11, 12. And before him Eliphaz in Job, (5.17.) Behold, happy is the man whom
God corrects: therefore despise not thou the Chastening of the Almighty.

The nature of all the Afflictions which God inflicts on any is Castigation, or
Vindication. It was not for any special Sin of the Child or Parents, that the
man mentioned Joh. 9.2, 3. was born blind; nor that Job was under so many
Calamities as we read of, was it because of any presumptuous Sin that he was
chargeable with: but that in the one the works of God might be made manifest in
him; in the other, that his Sincerity might be tried, that he did not serve God
for his outward Prosperity. Yet there was Sin in them, and one Use of those
Visitations was to show the Evil of Sin. All God's punitive Acts are Judgments;
even his own Children are judged for Sin: though when they are judged, they are
chastened of the Lord, that they might not be condemned with the world, 1 Cor.
11.32. Though the Avengement or vindictive Satisfaction be laid on Christ, so
as that he bears the Iniquities of his Children; yet their own Sufferings are
from God's Justice, occasioned by their Sins as the impulsive cause, though not
intended in Satisfaction to his Justice as the final cause. Hence it is that
some are so blinded, that when the Hand of God is lifted up, they will not see,
Isa. 26.11. And some, when they have been stricken, have not grieved, when
consumed, have refused to receive Correction; have made their faces harder then
a Rock, have refused to return; have been so foolish, as not to know the way of
the Lord, nor the Judgment of their God, Jerem. 5.3, 4. Yet so much effect has
natural Conscience had even in Infidels, that it has accused or excused them
between themselves, that they have judged others; as knowing the Judgment of
God, that they who do commit great enormous Crimes are worthy of death, Romans
1.32. and 2.1, 15. Even the barbarous people, Act. 28.4. were so acquainted
with God's avenging Justice, that when they saw a Viper on S. Paul's hand, they
said among themselves, No doubt this man is a Murderer, whom, though he has
escaped the Sea, yet Vengeance suffers not to live. And always those who have
acquaintance with God become sensible of his Hand: as David, Psalm. 119.120.
says of himself, My flesh trembles for fear of thee, and I am afraid of thy
Judgments. And it moves them to be affected more with their Sin then their
Sufferings, which is next to be considered.

2. That the pious Penitent person is more afflicted by reason of his Sin, then
his Sufferings; that his Groaning and Tears are from the sense of his own
Displeasing God, more then from the sense of the Pain which God inflicts on
him; is apparent from the Instances we have of such Penitent persons. In
David's penitential Complaints, it is his Sin that he still complains of. Psalm.
31.10. My life is spent with grief, and my years with sighing: my strength
fails because of mine Iniquity, and my bones are consumed. Psalm. 38.3, 4.
There is no soundness in my flesh, because of thine Anger; neither is there any
rest in my bones, because of my Sins. For mine Iniquities are gone over my
head; as an heavy burden, they are too heavy for me. He says not his Pain was
too heavy a Burden for him, but his Iniquity: which is indeed so heavy a
Burden, that the Shoulders of Christ himself, the Lord of Glory, were so
pressed with it, as to make him cry out, My Soul is heavy unto the death; and,
My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? Again, Psalm. 40.12. he bemoans his
case, that innumerable Evils had compassed him about; his Iniquities had taken
hold upon him, so that he was not able to look up: they were more then the
hairs of his head, therefore his heart failed him. It was not by reason of the
multitude of his Evils, but the multitude of his Iniquities, that his heart
failed him.

Outward Evils reach but the outward man: Sins remembered lie heavy on the
Conscience. Now, as Solomon says, ( Prove. 18.14.) The spirit of a man will
sustain his Infirmity; but a wounded spirit who can bear? Those Philosophers
that could endure the greatest Tortures of body, inflicted by cruel Tyrants,
while they had (...), Tranquillity of mind within; yet could not bear the least
Pain, when the Conscience of some foul Evil haunted them. A great Burden will
be born by a whole Shoulder; but the least Burden pains intolerably when the
Bone is broken, or it lies on a Sore place. A broken spirit dries up the
bones, Prove. 17.22. My Sin, says David, is ever before me: and that brake his
Bones. Where Sin (as it is said of Antipheron Oretanus, that his Shadow was
always before him) is still before a man, it haunteth and vexes him as a
Hornet: or, as the Poets feign of the Furies, which the Orator interprets of a
guilty Conscience, it still affrights him. Lament. 1.14. The yoke of my
Transgressions is bound by his hand. The yoke they felt, they term the yoke of
their Transgressions; intimating, that by reason of their Transgressions, their
Afflictions were as a yoke bound by God's hand, and wreathed, and came upon
their neck. And in like manner, Isa. 64.5, 6, 7. the afflicted Penitents pour
out their Souls before God thus: Behold, thou art wroth, for we have sinned. We
all do fade as a leaf, and our Iniquities, as the wind, have taken us away.
Thou have hid thy face from us, and consumed us, because of our Iniquities.

Herein there lies a great difference between the Sufferings of a mere Natural
man, and one Renewed or Regenerated by the Spirit of God. The one complains of
his Pain, of his hard Fortune, his ill Luck; he frets and vexes at his
Disappointment; his Sighs and Groans are, that he is crossed, and cannot have his
will; he imputes his Misery to Chance, Stars, and the like. If he weep, as
Esau, it is not for his Profaneness, but for his missing the Blessing: Heb.
12.16, 17. His Crying and Bitterness of spirit is not to God, but Isaac, Genesis
27.34. with a murtherous mind toward Jacob, verse. 42. Cain tells God, Genesis
4.13, 14. My Punishment is greater then I can bear. Behold, thou have driven me
out this day from the face of the earth, and from thy face shall I be hid, and
I shall be a Fugitive and a Vagabond in the earth; and it shall come to pass,
that every one that sindeth me shall flay me. Not a word that showed his
Repentance for his devilish act in murdering his Brother. It is otherwise
with the Penitent. S. Peter goes out, and weeps bitterly, not for his Danger,
but for his Sin. The Regenerate bemoan their sinful Corruptions, not their
Sufferings. S. Paul, that could take pleasure in Afflictions and Reproaches,
yet groans in his earthly Tabernacle by reason of the Sin that dwelled in him.

This indeed is the nature of true Repentance, it begets a Sorrow after God,
such as produces Carefulness, Self-clearing, Indignation, Fear, vehement
Desire, Zeal, Revenge; as they are said to be in the Corinthians, 2 Cor. 7.11.
When they remember their ways and their doings, wherein they have been defiled,
true Repenting persons will not inveigh against others, cry out of their
Destiny, nor censure others, or impute their Evils to foreign Causes; but take
shame to themselves, and loath themselves in their own sight, for all their
Evils that they have committed, Ezekiel. 20.43. And the reason hereof is, because
it is their Sin which is indeed their Evil. It is that which is simply Evil;
their Affliction is but Malum secundum quid, Evil in some respect, Evil that
has something of Good in it, and which tends to some Good; not only to God's
Glory and other Warning, but also to his own good who is afflicted, by humbling
and bettering him that is truly Penitent. It is good for me that I have been
afflicted, says David, that I might learn thy Statutes. It is Sin that is the
cause of all the Misery he feels, and therefore that must be more evil then his
Misery. If a Potion be bitter by reason of Gall and Wormwood; the Gall and
Wormwood that makes it so must be more bitter.

Thine own Wickedness shall correct thee, and thy Backsliding shall reprove
thee: know therefore and see, that it is an evil thing and bitter, that thou
have forsaken the Lord thy God, and that my fear is not in thee, says the Lord
God of hoasts to the Jews, Jerem. 2.19. And indeed this is the only way for
remedy of Afflictions, to be sensible of the Sin more then the Sufferings; to
groan and shed Tears because we have offended God, not only because we have
brought Trouble on our selves. It is the way to take away the Cause of the
Evil, and so the Bitterness of the Affliction. Death it self, were it not for
the Sting of Sin, could not harm us: take away the Conscience of Sin, and the
weight of our Sufferings will be removed. If Sin be forgiven, if the Conscience
be purged from dead works, either God will take away the Rod, or the Smart of
it. Now the only way to effect that is, to be affected with the Sin, and to
loath it, to be weary of it, more then the pressure of the Cross. If we take
any other course, though we houl on our Beds, though we should be weary with
Groaning every night, and all the night make our Bed swim, and water our Couch
with Tears; though we should wear Sackcloath, cast Ashes on our heads, creep to
a Cross, whip our selves naked, go on Pilgrimage to Jerusalem, to weep at
Christ's Sepulcher; this would make but a palliated Cure, our Wound would not
be healed at the bottom, but it would fester, and break out again, and
gangrene, and become mortal. And therefore

VI. PROPOSITION.
The Penitent pious person, in the sense of his Sin and Misery, bemoaneth
himself to God, confesses and bewaileth his Sin, humbles himself before him,
deprecateth his Wrath, and earnestly seeks by Prayer and Supplication for
Forgiveness of Sin, Healing, and Peace from God: which is the last Conclusion,
deduced from the Vocality of David's Weeping, verse. 8. The Lord has heard the
voice of my weeping.

There was a Prayer in David's Tears, and that God heard. And we may see how
effectual this course is by the example of Manasseh King of Judah, who did evil
in the sight of the Lord, like unto the Abominations of the Heathen, whom the
Lord cast out before the Children of Israel: yea, he made Judah and the
inhabitants of Jerusalem to err, and to do worse then the Heathen. And the
Lord spoke unto Manasseh, and to his people; but they would not hearken. And
the Lord brought upon them the Captains of the host of the King of Assyria,
which took Manasseh amongst the thorns, and bound him with fetters, and carried
him to Babylon. And when he was in Affliction, he besought the Lord his God,
and humbled himself greatly before the God of his Fathers, and prayed unto him:
and he was entreated of him, and heard his supplication, and brought him again
to Jerusalem into his Kingdom. Then Manasseh knew that the Lord he was God, 2 Chronicles. 33.2, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13.

By which Instance we may perceive what is the right course to be taken by any
one whom God afflicts for Sin; he is to seek the Lord, to humble himself
greatly, and to make his Supplication: also how efficacious a way this is to
remove the greatest Evils from the greatest Transgressors. Nor is this Case of
Manasseh a singular Case, but such as other passages of Holy Scripture warrant
us to make a common Rule of, both for Duty, and for Success. For Duty, thus
says Jeremiah, Lament. 3.39, 40, 41, 42. Wherefore does a living man complain,
a man for the punishment of his Sins? Let us search and try our ways, and turn
again unto the Lord. Let us lift up our heart with our hands unto God in the
Heavens. We have transgressed and rebelled, and thou have not pardoned. For
Success, thus speaks Elihu, Job 33.27, 28. He looks upon men, and if any say,
I have sinned, and perverted that which was right, and it profited me not; He
will deliver his Soul from going into the Pit, and his life shall see the
light. For both, the Prophet Joel speaks thus, (2.12, 13.) Therefore also now
says the Lord, Turn you even unto me with all your heart, and with fasting,
and weeping, and with mourning; And rend your heart, and not your garments, and
turn unto the Lord your God: for he is gracious and merciful, slow to anger,
and of great kindness, and repents him of the Evil. Whence may be gathered,

1. That Complaints of our Punishments without Complaint of our Sins are vain
and fruitless. It was to no purpose for living men to complain of the Evils
they felt, while they were insensible of the Evils they did: for in so doing
they justified not God in his Judgments on them, nor showed any hatred of their
own evil ways: but either were insensible of their Afflictions as from God's
hand, and so gave him not the Glory of his Avenging act; or being sensible,
hated God as an Enemy, dealing unrighteously with them, as not deserving it,
and fretting against the Lord in heart, or blaspheming his Name because of
their Plagues, as those mentioned Revel. 16.11.

2. That the wisest and most successful course that any can take in the time
of God's Scourge upon them, is, to search and try their ways, that is, to find
out their Sins; which, till they be discovered, will be like Achan's Theft,
which caused Israel to fall before the Canaanites. For if God set our Sins
before him, and we do not set them before our selves, his Anger will burn us
like fire, and we know not where to cast water to quench it.

I confess, there are some Errors that we cannot find out: Psalm. 19.12. Who
can understand his Errors? And for those, though we understand them not, we
may escape Vengeance, if we know them in general, are sensible that we have a
vicious or imperfect Nature, ignorant, and heedless of what we should know and
do. Yet those we should not be ignorant of, nor slight them as Peccadillo's,
Venial sins in their own nature. S. Paul doubtless cried out of these, even the
first motions of Concupiscence, without Consent, his very Lustings, which he
hated: The Evil he would not do, that he did; the Law in his Members warring
against the Law of his Mind; as a body of Death, which made him wretched, and
of which he enquires, Who shall deliver me from it? When David speaks of his
Sins as exceeding the hairs of his head, doubtless he comprehends his
Omissions, his imperfect Performances of Duties, Praying with distraction,
Praising God with coldness, Hearing without attention of mind, giving Alms with
self-respect, the Mixtures of Evil with what was Good, his Vanity of thoughts,
his Ignorance, Incogitancy, Excess in words, Jests, Merriments, and thousands
of such Failings; which though each of them be little, yet the Multitude of
them made them too heavy a Burden for him. Though Sand be but a small thing,
yet Heaps of it may sink a Ship. So though Sins of Error be but small, yet
being many, they are to be known at least in the general, though we be ignorant
of each particular. And accordingly David, when he had said, Who can understand
his Errors, adds, Cleanse thou me from secret Faults. These the Penitent must
crave Pardon for, and therefore take notice that he is guilty of them, though
he cannot make a particular Confession of them. S. Austin often urges against
the Pelagians, that no man in this life is perfect, without Sin, because Christ
teaches us to pray, as for our daily Bread each day, so for Forgiveness of
Sins each day: thereby intimating, that in the best, who call God Father, there
are Peccata quotidianae incursationis, Sins of daily incursion, (as Tertullian
called them,) which have need of Pardon; and that this must be begged of God.
Pelagian (...) or Sinlesness, Popish Merit and keeping of the Law, Monkish
works of Supererogation, Quakers imagined Perfection, are all proud and
arrogant Dotages, contrary to Christ and his Gospel. We are to charge our
selves with Sin in our daily Actions, yea to count all our Righteousness as an
Unclean thing: yet that which we should especially consider, should be our open
and scandalous Sins, as bringing most Dishonor to God, and being most
pernicious to our selves.

3. In time of God's exercising his punitive Justice, we should Confess our
Sins to God, and complain of our selves to him. He that hides his Sins shall
not prosper: but whosoever confesses and forsakes them shall have mercy, says
Solomon, Prove. 28.13. Auricular Confession to a Priest, as the Papists teach
it, is but an Invention of men for their advantage; but Confession to God is a
Duty necessary for our Salvation: wherein especially the Sin which God seems to
point out by his Judgment is most freely to be acknowledged. As Joshua said to
Achan, Josh. 7.19. My son, give, I pray thee, Glory to the Lord God of Israel,
and make Confession unto him, and tell what thou have done. Thus do all truly
Penitent persons in their Afflictions: and this is the way to recover out of
their Affliction, if they deal plainly with God and Men.

4. To which, fourthly, it is necessary should be added Sorrow of heart, a
contrite, broken and rended heart, Compunction of spirit, Remorse of Conscience
for what we have done: and in some special cases, when the hand of God is sore
upon us, and our Sin has been eminently great, there must be Fasting, Weeping
and Mourning for our Sins; yea the abundance and continuance of his Tears,
David says hyperbolically, watered his Couch, made his Bed to swim, every or
all the Night, with Groans unutterable, even unto weariness. As Manasseh sinned
greatly, so he humbled himself greatly. Great Sins require great Floods of
Tears to wash them away. I know forced Tears, out of the fear of Hell, can but
little avail with God: they may consist with love of Sin. There may be
counterfeit Tears, which may be so far from pacifying God, that they will
incense him the more, as knowing himself mocked by them. There may be so deep a
sense of Sin, as to stupefy: but where there is a kindly melting of the Heart
for Sin, Tears will likely follow; and if they be in secret, they are likely
sincere. And if we weep bitterly for Sin, with S. Peter, we may expect a
gracious Forgiveness, as S. Peter had: but if we grieve not for our Sins, we
may expect God will make our Sins grievous against our will.

5. Tears and Sorrow for Sin must be as David's weeping here, (Vocal,) with
humble Supplication and earnest Prayer for Pardon. When there is a spirit of
Grace and Supplication joined with Mourning, then is God sought aright, and
found by the Repenting person. Confession and Sorrow for Sin is but to make way
for Prayer, which is the chief thing whereby God is glorified, and the Sinner
benefited. For then it is that his Heart turns to God, when it acknowledges
its own Demerit, and God's Justice: and then God's Heart is turned to him; as
it was to Rehoboam, when he and his people humbled themselves, and said, The
Lord is Righteous, 2 Chronicles. 12.6. Which Prescriptions are effectual, if

6. There be a Forsaking of Sin, and Obedience to God; as says the Prophet,
Isa. 55.7. Let the wicked forsake his way, and the unrighteous man his
thoughts: and let him return unto the Lord, and he will have mercy upon him;
and to our God, for he will abundantly pardon. Which David here observes, and
therefore adds, verse. 8. Depart from me, all ye workers of Iniquity; for the
Lord has heard the voice of my weeping: and Psalm. 119.115. Depart from me, ye
Evildoers; for I will keep the Commandments of my God. Surely, says Elihu
excellently, Job 34.31, 32. it is meet to be said unto God, I have born
Chastisement, I will not offend any more. That which I see not, teach thou me:
if I have done Iniquity, I will do no more. Relapses into Sin make men's cases
the worse, so as that their latter end is worse then their beginning, 2 Pet.
2.20. The Devil enters into such with more force; hardens his Heart the more,
who has seemed to repent, but betakes himself again like the Dog to his vomit,
or the Sow that was washed to her wallowing in the mire; procures more
Vengeance from God, who walks contrary to them that walk contrary to him, and
when men are not reformed by Afflictions, punishes them seven times more for
their Sins, Levit. 26.23, 24. And therefore Christ's Warning to the cured
person is necessary for all that are helped in their Affliction, Sin no more,
lest a worse thing happen to thee: and John Baptist's Advice is to be followed
by all Penitents, Matthew. 3.8. Bring forth therefore fruits meet for Repentance.

APPLICATION.
Give me leave now to speak to you that have heard me this day, as the Prophet
Haggai did to Judah, Chap. 1.5, 7. Consider your ways: how is it with you? He
is a rare bird that is without Sickness, or Sorrows. Every day, says our
Savior, has enough of Evil, Matthew. 6.34. And methinks none of you should be
so foolish as to say with Babylon, Revel. 18.7. I sit as a Queen, and shall see
no Sorrow. If any be so secure, as to be insensible of other Afflictions, yet
there should not be such a Stupidity in them, as to be mindless of Death and
Judgment. I presume none of you are so miss-led by any spirit of Error, that
you conceive your selves perfect and without Sin: I fear too many of you are
guilty of great Transgressions; I wish you were none of you such as sin
presumptuously, against the Light of your Consciences, oppose the Truth,
oppress the Poor, delight your Bodies, misspend your Time, misimploy your
Estates and Abilities, and perhaps glory in your Profaneness, Swearing,
Drinking, Cheating, Lying, Backsliding, False accusing, raising Jars and
Contentions. If any of you be guilty of any of these Sins, or have had
experience of God's Hand in his Afflicting of him, or is sensible of his
Mortality; let him bethink himself how his Afflictions work on him, whether
they bring his Sin to Remembrance; whether the Remembrance of his Sin be more
grievous then his Sufferings; whether he complain of it, rather then his
Affliction: let him search his ways, confess his Sins at least to God, weep
and groan, as David, with real Sorrow according to God, which may cause
Repentance not to be repented of; seek the Face of God with Supplication, and
amend his ways. Has not God rather cause to say of you as he did of the Jews,
Jer. 8.6, 7. I hearkened and heard, but they spoke not aright: no man repented
him of his Wickedness, saying, What have I done? every one turned to his
course, as the horse rusheth into the battle. Yea, the Stork in the heaven
knows his appointed time, and the Turtle and the Crane and the Swallow
observe the time of their coming: but my people know not the Judgment of their
God. Will he not, when he observes your doings, find you rather Ranting in a
Tavern, then Praying in the Church? rather Sporting in your Beds, then Watering
them with Tears? Cheating one another in Gaming, rather then Relieving the
Poor? Devising rather Mischief on your Beds, then Weeping for your unmercifull
and unrighteous dealings in your Closets? regarding Pass-times more then holy
Sermons? reading in your Chambers rather wanton Comedies, or light Poems, then
the Bible and Holy Writings?

Yea, let me ask the devoutest of you, whether at any time you do weep for your
Sins of daily incursion. Are you sensible of your too much Formality, too
little Fervency in your Prayers? Do you weep for your vain Thoughts, proud
Imaginations, inordinate Desires, your Ignorance, Forgetfulness of many Duties,
Slothfulness, Passionateness, Omissions of many Duties you should do,
Uncharitableness, Unthankfulness, and many other Sins of Error and secret
Sins, which God knows, though men do not? Sure a sincere Christian is a weeping
Christian: if God keep him from greater Enormities, yet he will find cause
enough to mourn for his daily Aberrations; if he do (as a true Penitent does)
take notice of the Naughtiness of his own deceitful Heart. If you say daily
the Lord's Prayer, and be not sensible of your daily Sins, do you not mock God,
when you say, Forgive us our Sins? Sure Christ, when he directed the use of
that Prayer, appointed you to be examining and judging your selves every day,
to confess your Sins, to bemoan them, to ask Pardon for them, to resolve and
vow against them every day. And, Oh that God would give you a Heart of Flesh,
in stead of a Heart of Stone, you that are guilty of more heinous Crimes, such
as I have named, or any other your own Consciences can inform you of; to
imitate S. Peter, to go out immediately after this Sermon is ended, and weep
bitterly; to break off your Sins by Righteousness, as Daniel advised
Nebuchadnezzar, Dan. 4.27.

And you that (though unblamable toward Men, yet) are conscious of offending
God by any privy Transgressions, yea all of you who have any remainders of
sinful Corruption in you, Oh that you would not defer, but this day, yea every
day, imitate holy David in his holy vocal penitential Weeping, which has been
this day described to you: And let every Affliction you feel or fear, specially
the thought of your Death, bring you to a daily practice of Repentance, and
Supplication unto God, that your Iniquities may not be your Ruin; but that
your Tranquillity may be lengthned here, and you may be blessed for ever in the
world to come. Amen.

LAVS DEO.
THE PENITENT's PRAYER.
The Fourth SERMON.
PSALM li. 1, 2. Have mercy upon me, O God, according to thy Loving Kindness:
according to the multitude of thy tender Mercies, blot out my Transgressions.

Wash me thoroughly from mine Iniquity, and cleanse me from my Sin.


WE find in this Text a Sinner struck with the sense of his Sins, and pleading
at the Mercyseat of God for the Remission and Forgiveness of them. If the
Greatness of his Person, or the Sacredness of his Function, had been Antidote
enough against Temptation, Armor of proof against the fiery darts of Satan, we
had not this day heard of David a Sinner; for he was a King, and he was a
Prophet, and a man after God's own heart. But since neither his Profession nor
his Royalty could protect him from being a Sinner, and that in so foul and
crimson Crimes as Adultery and Murder, (which occasioned the penning of this
Psalm;) it is happy that we yet find him here a Penitent, and a complaining one:
for we have him here a Supplicant at his Prayers on his knees, with a Miserere
mei, Deus, Have mercy on me, O God, etc.

What S. Paul said of himself, that his Fall and Recovery was a Pattern to all
that should believe in Christ, may be as rightly said of David; The Lord
permitted him to sin, that no man might presume, but the strongest Saint might
take heed lest he fall; that none might be high-minded, but fear: and the Lord
also recovered him by Repentance, and has left his Confession and Absolution
upon record, that none might despair; but that his Example might direct them to
return to God after their Wanderings, and erect and keep up their spirits from
sinking, by the assurance of his Mercy, so remarkably vouchsafed to so great a
Transgressour.

And therefore if there be any Soul, that hears me this day, struck with a deep
sense and horror of his Sins, lying groaning and trembling under the heavy
pressure and burden of them, let him not despair of Pardon, either by reason
of the Quality or Quantity of them: for here are Loving-kindnesses, or kind
Mercies, a Multitude of tender Mercies; well expressed by Zachary, Luke 1.78.
the Bowels of Compassion of our God; such as are in a Woman, or rather
exceeding the Compassion of a Woman on the Son of her womb, Isa. 49.15.
Loving Kindness of God, against Unkindness of Man; Bowels of Mercy toward him
who had no Compassion on himself; merciful Remembrance of him who forgot his
God and himself; awakening and saving him, who in his insensible Lethargy of
Impenitence would have destroyed himself. Whoever thou art, know that the Holy
Ghost has recorded this Story for thy Consolation: not only set David's Fall
before thee; but likewise the means of his Recovery, the many and tender
Mercies of his God. As the Prophet Nathan was sent to David, so David himself
is sent to thee. He extends and reaches out to thee the same Physic that he
took himself. And therefore distrust not thy Cure; but come and hear David
bitterly bewailing his Condition, and with him bewail sadly thine own: See him
weeping, and weep thou as fast: Hear his Voice and Cry piercing the Clouds; and
be not thou dumb, but as loud as he, till thou have awakened the Compassion of
thy God. Observe all this, and say with him, Have mercy upon me, O God, etc.

Which words are the main Petition of this Holy Supplicant in behalf of
himself, for pardoning Grace, out of the deep sense of his great Sins, and
apprehension of God's great Mercies. And they exhibit to us,

1. David's Malady, the Disease which pained him to the heart, which made him
groan, cry out, and be instant with the great Physician of Souls for Cure:
which is expressed with Aggravation in three words. 1. Transgression; a word
that notes sometimes Rebellion or Revolt from God. 2. Iniquity or Perverseness;
importing his Unrighteousness to Vriah, his Wife, Himself, his Child by her,
his whole House and People, who all tasted of the bitterness of his eating that
forbidden fruit. 3. Sin or Error; intimating the great Folly which he now
deprehended, in yielding so to his Lust, as to err from God's Command, and for
a little Pleasure, to draw on himself the Wrath of God, and the Horror of
Conscience now upon him. He uses not mincing or diminutive terms, as those
that love their Sins as fond Parents do their Children, and call their
Monstrosities small Blemishes: but paints out his Sins in their most ugly
Deformity, to show his Hatred of them to the utmost, and to justify God fully.
Yea he uses those very terms to express his Sins by, which God himself used in
his most blessed Declaration of himself, when he proclaimed of himself, Exodus
34.6, 7. The Lord, the Lord God, merciful and gracious, longsuffering, and
abundant in Goodness and Truth, keeping Mercy for thousands, forgiving
Iniquity, Transgression, and Sin. To which it is very likely he had an eye, and
that he made that Proclamation the rise of his Hope, That though his Sins were
great, yet they were not any other then God had proclaimed of old, he did
forgive; and after in his New Covenant he more fully assured the Condonation of
them: Jer. 31.34. Heb. 8.12.

2. The thing David requesteth of God: and that is full Remission, expressed in
three terms.

1. Of Blotting out his Transgressions; a phrase used by the Prophet Isa.
43.25. and 44.22. And it intimates, that his Sins were written by God in his
Remembrance, as in a Book of Records: in the sense that Job said, 13.26. and
14.17. God did write bitter things against him, and sealed up his Iniquity. And
the blotting it out, is the putting it out of his Remembrance, so as not to
charge it upon him, nor condemn him for it: as it is explained Isa. 43.25. 2.
Of Washing him thoroughly from his Iniquity; a term noting frequent or abundant
washing: that is, Absolution, meant by Ablution, 1 Cor. 6.11. where it
comprehends Justification as well as Sanctification. And so it is said, Revel.
1.5. Christ has washed us from our Sins in his own blood; alluding, it is
likely, to the cleansing of men from their Leprosy and other Legal Pollutions
in the Mosaicall Law. 3. The third term is, Cleanse me from my Sin; by
Emundation meaning Emendation, purifying his Heart from the love of his Sin,
and his Life from the practice of it any more: as it is expressed Isa. 1.16,
17. Wash ye, make you clean, put away the evil of your doings from before mine
eyes, cease to do evil, learn to do well.
3. The Third thing considerable in David's Petition (which is indeed the
Hindge on which all turns) is, the Loving Kindness or Benignity of God, the
Multitude of his tender Mercies; such as are in the Womb or Bowels of a tender
Mother toward her Child. And this Loving Kindness and Multitude of tender
Mercies is urged by David as the Motive, the impulsive Cause, or sole Reason of
granting his Request; of blotting out his Transgressions, washing him thoroughly
from his Iniquity, and cleansing him from his Sin. In the same manner as Moses
pleaded with God for Israel, Number. 14.17, 18, 19. after whose Copy this Petition
seems to be framed, and is an exact Pattern according to which a Penitent
Supplicant is to address himself to God for Ease from under the pressure of his
Sins; teaching us these Points.

1. That the Remembrance of his Sin is the greatest Grievance to a Penitent
Sinner. David complains not of other Evils incident to him and his, but his own
Sin. 2. That a Penitent Sinner does not mince or lessen his Sin, but sets it
out or confesses it to God in its greatest Aggravations, in variety of odious
Appellations, when he betakes himself to God for Redress. 3. That the Blotting
out of our Transgressions, the Washing thoroughly from our Iniquity, the
cleansing from our Sin, is to be sought from God. 4. That we are to beg
earnestly, not only for Blotting out our Transgressions, but also for through
Washing and Cleansing from Iniquity and Sin, not only by Condonation of them,
but also by Emendation and Amendment of life. 5. That it is Loving Kindness and
multitude of tender Mercies which is the Motive whereupon God blotteth out
Transgressions, washes thoroughly the guilty Sinner from Iniquity, and
cleanses him from his Sin. 6. That the only way to obtain these things is, to
beg them of God upon this consideration, and no other.
You see a large field and copious matter is before us, in which I might
exspatiate far, and prosecute a long time: but I will endeavor to abbreviate,
and end with the time.

I. OBSERVATION.
That the Remembrance of his Sin is the greatest Grievance to a Penitent
Sinner.

This is evident from their penitential Complaints. In the many mournful
Elegies of David, the great Pressure of his spirit lay in the Remembrance of
his Sin. Psalm. 38.3, 4, 5. There is no rest in my bones, because of my Sin. For
mine Iniquities are gone over my head; as an heavy burden, they are too heavy
for me. My Wounds stink and are corrupt, because of my Foolishness. And again,
Psalm. 40.12. Innumerable Evils have compassed me about, mine Iniquities have
taken hold upon me, so that I am not able to look up; they are more then the
hairs of my head, therefore my heart fails me.

It is true, Afflictions are hard to be born: Poverty, and Disgrace, and
Imprisonment, and Pains of body, are very heavy upon many persons; Discontents,
and Fears of trouble, Griefs and Sorrows for loss of Friends, Wife, Children,
do often quench men's spirits, and sink them into the Grave. Nor is it to be
denied, but that many times they cause men to prefer death before life, and to
choose strangling before breathing, Job 7.15. But upon the sense of Sin, when
the Conscience feels the weight of it, when God shoots his Arrows into a man,
and haeret lateri lethalis Arundo, the deadly Arrow sticks in his side; then
the Venom thereof drinks up his spirit, is as the stinging of a Scorpion or
fiery flying Serpent, it tortures like Hell, and is more bitter and terrible
then Death it self. The spirit of a man will sustain his infirmity; (says
Solomon, Prove. 18.14.) but a wounded spirit who can bear? In other Afflictions
there is some Remedy, from Reason or Faith, if not to comfort, yet to quiet the
Soul: but in the sense of Sin committed (till Pardon thereof be apprehended) no
Argument can be fastened, but will be rejected. Men in these Wounds of
Conscience do like persons in extreme Anguish, who tear off their Plasters
that should ease or cure them: so do wounded Consciences reject all Allegations
of Scripture, brought to allay their Anguish, as if they belonged not to them;
as Spira and others have done. And that which is the Sting of Sin, that most of
all makes it deadly poisonous, is the apprehension of God as angry, as an Enemy
unappeasable, (till it be acknowledged to be what it is, an evil and bitter
thing that we have sinned against the Lord, and that his fear is not in us; as
the Prophet speaks, Jer. 2.19.) Which leads me to the

II. OBSERVATION.
That a Penitent Sinner does not mince or lessen his Sin, but sets it out or
confesses it to God in its greatest Aggravations, in variety of odious
Appellations, when he betakes himself to God for Redress.

So David, besides the variety of terms he here paints out the Deformity of his
Sins by, adds also verse. 3, 4. I acknowledge my Transgressions, and my Sin is
ever before me. Against thee, thee only, have I sinned, and done this Evil in
thy sight. And to set out his Sin as the more venomous, he derives it from his
original innate Pravity: Behold, I was shapen in Iniquity, and in Sin did my
mother conceive me, verse. 5. And S. Paul acknowledged himself the chiefest of
Sinners, 1 Timothy 1.15. The Reasons hereof are,

1. Because otherwise the Heart loves and favors the Sin, and the Repentance
and Humiliation will appear to be but feigned. True Hatred of Sin will cause us
to confess and abandon it with all our might. Odium est Appetitus amovendi: it
will stir up a desire to remove it, it will cause Detestation, Clearing,
Revenge, Indignation, Zeal, Fear; as it is said of the Corinthians, 2 Cor.
7.11. The poor Publican durst not lift up his eyes to heaven, but smote on his
breast, saying, God be merciful to me a Sinner, Luke 18.13.

2. By this means he justifies God in his Sentence against his Sin, in his
Punishment; acknowledges his own Desert: which is the Reason here, That thou
might be justified when thou speak, and be clear when thou judge, verse.
4. The more we aggravate our Sins, the more we magnify the Justice of God's
Law, and his dealing with us.

3. It also tends to the magnifying of God's Grace in Pardoning; that where Sin
abounds, there Grace overabounds, Romans 5.20. It is rich Grace that forgives
great and many Sins. They that make their Sins venial, and speak of them as
small matters, do show they take themselves little beholden to God to pardon
them, and that they owe little thanks for it. To whom much is forgiven, he
loves much; to whom little is forgiven, the same loves little, Luke 7.47.

4. This is the way to obtain Pardon. He that hides his Sins shall not
prosper: but he that confesses and forsakes them shall have mercy, Prove.
28.13. Stultorum incurata Pudor malus Vlcera celat. They are foolish persons,
that when they are to make use of a Physician, conceal their Disease, and tell
not the worst of it: for thereby they disable the Physicran from Curing them,
and are Authors of their own death. But a wise Patient will relate all the
Symptoms of his Disease, and declare the worst of it; that so there may be a
through, and not a palliated Cure. So it is with a true Penitent, he declares
his Sin to God with the greatest Shame to himself, in all its evil
Circumstances, that he may dispose God to forgive him: it being God's way, to
justify them that condemn themselves; as the poor Publican, that with a
dejected heart and look craved mercy to him a Sinner. Which brings us to the

III. OBSERVATION.
That the Blotting out of our Transgressions, the Washing thoroughly from our
Iniquity, the Cleansing from our Sin, is to be sought from God.

This was the course which David took, and Manasseh, 2 Chronicles. 33.12, 13. When
he was in Affliction, he besought the Lord his God, and humbled himself greatly
before the God of his Fathers, and prayed unto him: and he was entreated of
him, and heard his Supplication. No such Prayer to be found in Scripture, as is
in the Office of the Romanists, (Mary, Mother of Grace, Mother of Mercy, defend
us from the Enemy, grant Pardon to the guilty.) Christ directs us to say, Our
Father, which art in Heaven, forgive us our Trespasses. And good Reason: for,
1. Our Sins are against him, and therefore are to be pardoned by him. Against
thee have I sinned, says David; therefore do thou blot out my Transgressions.
He must cancel the Bond, who is the Creditor. I will say to my Father, says
the Prodigal son, Father, I have sinned against Heaven, and against thee, and
am no more worthy to be called thy Son. 2. It is he only that has power to
forgive Sins. Who can forgive Sins but God only? Mark 2.7. Who can bring a
clean thing out of an unclean? not one, Job 14.4. It is God's Prerogative,
which he challenges, Isa. 43.25. I, even I am he that blotteth out thy
Transgressions for mine own sake, and will not remember thy Sins. It is true,
the Son of man had power on earth to forgive Sins; but he was also the Son of
God. It is true, the Apostles had power to remit Sins by a peculiar delegation
from Christ, or (as the Apostle S. Paul speaks) in the person of Christ, 2 Cor.
2.10. Nor is it to be denied, that Ministers of the Gospel, ministerially, by
preaching the Gospel, may be said to forgive Sins declaratively, and
instrumentally, by bringing men to Repentance and Faith, on which Forgiveness
and Cleansing from Sin follow: but not as the Pope pretends to forgive Sins, by
his Indulgences, authoritatively; or as the Popish Priests, by their
Absolution, certainly and immediately. Men may forgive Sins, by the assuring of
Pardon to the truly Penitent and Believing. And the Absolution of the Minister
is of great moment to quiet the guilty Conscience, if he do it (Clave non
errante;) when he is skillful in Binding and losing, and the Penitent freely
confesses, and sincerely believes in Christ, and unfeignedly purposes to
amend; without which the Absolution is invalid. And therefore, which was the

IV. OBSERVATION.
The Penitent Sinner is to beg earnestly, not only for Blotting out his
Transgressions, but also for through Washing and Cleansing from Iniquity and
Sin, not only by Condonation of them, but also by Emendation or Amendment of
life.

So David, Psalm. 51.9, 10. Hide thy face from my Sins, and blot out all mine
Iniquities. Create in me a clean Heart, O God, and renew a right Spirit within
me. These are to be conjoined. As the Guilt of Sin is to be pardoned, and the
Stain of Sin to be washed away: so is the Conscience to be purged from dead
works, that we may serve the living God; the Heart is to be sprinkled from an
evil Conscience, and the Body to be washed with pure water; as the expressions
are Heb. 9.14. and 10.22. allusively to the Legal Purifying with blood and
water, to which answers the washing of Regeneration, and renewing of the Holy
Ghost, Tit. 3.5. which is thus expressed by S. Paul, Romans 6.4. Therefore we are
buried with him by Baptism into death, that like as Christ was raised up from
the dead by the glory of the Father, even so we also should walk in newness of
life.

And this is a principal part of true Repentance, to have a renewed Heart, and
to lead a new Life. And therefore S. John Baptist, when the multitude came to
him to be baptized of him for the Remission of Sins, charge them to bring
forth Fruits meet for Repentance, Luke 3.7, 8. letting them to understand, that
every Tree which brings not forth good Fruit, is hewn down, and cast into the
fire. And our Savior, when he found the impotent man, who was healed by him at
the Pool of Bethesda, told him, Joh. 5.14. Behold, thou art made whole: sin no
more, lest a worse thing come unto thee. For, as Christ says, if after the
unclean Spirit is gone out of a man, he return again, and finds the house
empty, swept and garnished; that is, after the Sinner in some sort has
repented, and his Conscience has been quieted, and his former Courses
relinquished for a time, he grow secure and loose in his Conversation; the
unclean Spirit takes with him seven other Spirits more wicked then himself,
and they enter in and dwell there: and the last state of that man is worse then
the first, Matthew. 12.43, 44, 45. Satan does make such a person more sinful
then before, and his Condition is worse then it was before his seeming
Repentance. Most truly does S. Peter tell us, 2 Pet. 2.20, 21, 22. If after
persons have escaped the pollutions of the world, through the knowledge of our
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, they are again entangled therein, and overcome;
the latter end is worse then the beginning. For it had been better for them not
to have known the way of Righteousness, then after they have known it, to turn
from the holy Commandment delivered unto them. But it happens to them according
to the true Proverb, The Dog is returned to his own vomit again, and the Sow
that was washed, to her wallowing in the mire. As it is with men who relapse
into a Fever which was for a time abated, their Disease grows worse and mortal:
so is it with them that after some imperfect Change and Peace acquired, do fall
back into the same or other Sins, become secure and heedless of Temptations;
they commonly become more notorious Sinners, and more hardened therein to their
perdition. None likely make a mock of Sin, and sport themselves in Evil, more
then they who once seemed to be humbled, penitent, and reformed. And therefore
there is as great a necessity of begging for effectual Renovation, as
Condonation, from God; Sanctification throughout, in Body, Soul and Spirit, as
well as Justification from all our Transgressions. To which the only Motive is
God's Loving Kindness, and the multitude of his tender Mercies; according to
the next Observation.

V. OBSERVATION.
That it is Loving Kindness and multitude of tender Mercies which is the Motive
whereupon God blots out Transgressions, washes thoroughly the guilty Sinner
from his Iniquity, and cleanses him from his Sin.

As God said of the people of Israel, that it was not for their Excellency,
Multitude, Righteousness, or Vprightness of heart, that he took them to be his
People, Deuteronomy. 7.7. and 9.5. but out of his own Compassion; Ezekiel. 16.5, 8, 9.
speaks of them under the Similitude of an unpitied outcast infant, till he
pitied, loved, washed and clothed them: so it is true concerning every person
that is saved, that is justified and sanctified, that he is before unclean,
till the Loving Kindness of God toward him appears. Not by Works of
Righteousness which he has done, but according to his Mercy, God our Savior
saves him by the washing of Regeneration, and renewing of the Holy Ghost: That
being justified by his Grace, he may be made Heir according to the hope of
eternal life, Tit. 3.4, 5, 7.

And indeed all that is done by us, before God pardons and cleanses us from
Sin, provokes God against us: nor is there so much as a thought in us of
returning to God, after our departure from his ways; nor any help in our
selves to deliver our own Souls, till he pities us and saves us. O Israel,
(says God, Hosea 13.9.) thou have destroyed thy self; but in me is thine help.
He blotteth out our Transgressions for his own Name's sake, and out of his
abundant Mercy through Christ.

It is through the Blood of Christ, as a Price of answerable value, that he
redeems us: and yet it is mere Mercy that procures this for the payment of our
Debt. So that full Satisfaction to his Justice and free Remission do well
consist together, notwithstanding the exceptions of Socinians. And we must
still acknowledge, that it is not for our sakes, but for his holy Name's sake,
that he cleanses us from our Iniquities: and upon this consideration, he will
be inquired of by repenting Sinners to do it for them; as it is said Ezekiel.
36.22, 33, 37. Which brings us to the last or

VI. OBSERVATION.
That the only way to obtain Deletion of Transgressions, and Cleansing from
Sin, is to beg them of God, upon consideration of the multitude of his Mercies,
and his Love in and through Christ.

So did the poor Publican obtain Justification by his crying Peccavi, and
supplicating thus, God be merciful to me a Sinner: whom Christ propounds as an
Example of a prospering Penitent, excluding the self-justifying Pharisee from
attaining Righteousness. This is the Gospell-way, to address our selves to the
Throne of Grace; to confess our Sins; to trust only to the blood of Christ,
for cleansing us from all Sin; to make use of him as our Advocate with the
Father, and the Propitiation for our Sins. In him we have Redemption through
his blood, the Forgiveness of Sins, according to the riches of his Grace, Ephesians.
1.7. This is the way whereby God will be glorified, and we shall be saved. And
therefore still our Litany must be, (...), Lord, have mercy on us; or, with
David, Lord, be merciful unto me, heal my Soul, for I have sinned against thee.

APPLICATION.
And now it behooves you that have heard David's Petition opened unto you, to
apply his Case to your own Souls. You have sinned, as David did; if not in the
same kind, yet in Sins enough to sink you into the Lake that burns with fire
and brimstone. Can any of you say, My Heart is clean? I am pure from my Sin?
Can any of you deny that you were shapen in Iniquity, and that in Sin your
Mother conceived you? Will not your own Conscience, if you heed it, inform you
of many unholy and unrighteous Thoughts, Words, and Deeds? If there should be
any self-boasting Pharisee, any ignorant Papist, that imagines he can keep the
Law of God, and merit Heaven by his Works; any deluded Quaker or other
Fanatic, that conceives himself perfect, without Sin; If there should be any
Protestant Justitiary, that conceives so well of his Innocence, that he thinks
God should wrong him, if he should damn him; so well of his Good deeds,
Prayers, Alms, Religious performances, at Church or in private, as to expect
Heaven as wages due to them in exact Justice: let him consider, that he prefers
himself before holy David, S. Paul, and such other holy Saints as have gone
before us to Heaven.

Christ has told us, he is the Way, the Truth, and the Life; and that no man
comes to the Father but by him, Joh. 14.6. And S. Peter tells us, Act. 4.12.
Neither is there Salvation in any other but Christ: for there is none other
Name under Heaven given among men whereby we must be saved. And therefore as it
was said once to a Novatian by the Emperor, Thou that think thy self
perfect, set up thy Ladder, and climb up to Heaven by thy self, if thou can:
so may I say to thee, Make the best thou can of thine own Righteousness, thou
shall find the way to Salvation by thine own Works a way unknown to the holy
Saints, untroden by them; none there ever got thither that way. That is not
Scala Caeli, the Ladder of Heaven, by which the Saints climbed thither; but
Scala Gehennae, the Precipice by which proud Pharisees, superstitious Monks and
Friars, ignorant Quakers and formal Protestants, that trust to their own
Devotions and Good deeds, tumble down to Hell.

I beseech you then, as you love the Salvation of your Souls, seriously examine
your selves, whether you that have sinned with David, do repent with David.
Complain of your Sins; be sensible of them as your most heavy Burden; confess
them to God with detestation: be instant for Cleansing from Sin through the
multitude of God's Mercies: hope for Pardon and Righteousness only through
Christ's Atonement by the Sacrifice of himself, and his Intercession in Heaven:
have a settled purpose of Amendment of life: be impatiently importunate with
God for a new Heart and a new Spirit: and expect these things, and whatever
Good your Souls want, only through the Lovingkindness and free Grace of God in
Christ.

If it be so with you, I may assure you of Blessedness, and tell you from the
Spirit of God, that Blessed is he whose Transgression is forgiven, and whose
Sin is covered. Blessed is the man unto whom the Lord imputes not Iniquity,
and in whose spirit there is no guile, Psalm. 32.1, 2. cited by S. Paul, Romans
4.7, 8. to prove the Blessedness of the man unto whom God imputes
Righteousness without Works. I may tell you from him, Romans 8.1. There is no
Condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus, who walk not after the flesh,
but after the Spirit.

But if you be insensible of Sins, unhumbled for them; neither confess them
freely, nor bewail them mournfully; fly not to the multitude of God's Mercies
for Pardon; trust to other things for Salvation then Christ's Merits; find no
change of your Hearts, nor alteration of your Lives, nor work of renewing Grace
in your minds; nor beg it of God as a thing most necessary for you: I may truly
say, you stumble at the Stumbling-stone; and that you will (unless God awaken
you, and change your minds,) die in your Sins, and perish for ever.

Be persuaded then to follow the Example of David, S. Paul, and other holy
Saints: find out by God's Law your Sins; confess them to God; bemoan them with
hatred; beg for Mercy in the Forgiveness of them: trust to the Obedience of
Christ in his dying for you, his appearing with his Blood before God: magnify
God's Grace, and Christ's Love: pray for a new Heart, and study to live a holy
Life, and thou shall be blessed. Amen.

LAVS DEO.
THE TRUE PENITENT.
The Fifth SERMON.
PSALM li. 3. For I acknowledge my Transgression, and my Sin is ever before me.


THIS Psalm is one of the Penitentials, occasioned by the greatest Sins which
David committed, the greatest Rebuke which ever he underwent; and therefore
penned with the greatest Compunction of spirit, and most vehement Deprecation
of his Guilt and Punishment, of any which he composed. After the Inscription of
the Psalm, which shows that it was framed after his Conviction by Nathan the
Prophet, and the Denunciation of Divine Vengeance, for his Adultery and
Murder, he instantly craves Pardon with variety of Expressions, and most
prevalent Motives, doubling and redoubling his Petitions, and adding this
forcible Reason, which the words of my Text yield, For I acknowledge my
Transgression, etc. Wherein,

1. He professes ingenuously his Agnition of his Transgressions, as most
heinous, of deep dye, Crimson, Scarlet Sins, Red Sins, Bloud-guiltiness, and
damnable Uncleanness.

2. That he did not slightly take notice thereof; but that as his Sin stared in
his face to his great Horror, so he set it before him for his deep
Humiliation: and that not only for a fit, while the Prophet's Conviction was
fresh in his memory; but for a continuance, it was ever before him; he mourned,
and intended to mourn for it all or most of his days, to repent and abhor
himself in dust and ashes. God had set it before his face by his Prophet; and
he did set it continually before his face as an humble Penitent. And therefore
he importunes God with strong hope for merciful Forgiveness.

In the Text we have many considerable things to be observed, concerning the
estate of an holy and humble Penitent. As, 1. He owns his Transgressions and
his Sins, as by and from himself. (My Transgression, and My Sin.) 2. He does
not extenuate, but aggravate them, by various terms, denoting their
Criminousness. (Transgressions, and Sin.) 3. He does freely acknowledge and
confess them to God and Men. 4. He makes not this a short transient Action, but
his Sin is ever before him. He continues this Humiliation as just and equal,
by reason of the greatness of his Iniquity. 5. He pleads this as a Reason to
induce God to a compassionate relenting toward him, and a gracious Condonation.


Of these briefly in their Order.

I. OBSERVATION.
A Penitent Sinner owns his Sin as from himself.

He does not as Eve did, father it on the Serpent; or as Adam, on Eve; but
imputes the acting of it to his own innate Pravity, as the fountain and spring
out of which it did issue. And that is indeed a right derivation of it. Every
man, says S. James, (1.14, 15.) is tempted, when he is drawn away by his own
Lusts and enticed. Then when Lust has conceived, it brings forth Sin; and
Sin, when it is finished, brings forth Death. Perditio tua ex te, O Israel,
said God to Israel, Thy destruction is of thy self. And the same may be said of
all Sinners.

The Providence of God orders the Occasions of Sin: but it is Man's own Free
will that chooses to sin upon these Occasions. God ordered Bathsheba's washing
her self, and David's walking on the roof of the house: but he put not Lust
into David's heart, or the wicked contrivance of her Defilement. Vriah's
assaulting Rabbah, and the Soldiers falling upon Vriah, were by Divine
Providence: but the Plot of David, and execution of it by Joab, were of humane
Maliciousness.

Impenitent Sinners charge their Wickedness on their ill Fortune, unhappy
Destiny, unlucky Planet: which is done with the like reason as if the Knife
were to be blamed for a man's Self-murder; or the Bread he eats, as the cause
that he is choked; or the Girdle he wears, that he was strangled by it.
Planets and other natural Agents, though they have Influence on the Body, which
may provoke to Evil, yet they cannot necessitate the Mind to assent to it, or
to act accordingly. Casual Concurrence of things may prompt, but not compel to
Sin. Evil Company, bad Counsel, cruel Tyrants, may have power on the Members,
not the Will. It is true, the Devil is the Father of Lies; He that commits
Sin is of the Devil: but were it not that man's Heart did entertain his
Motions, embrace his Suggestions, Sin could not be engendered by them. So that
in vain does the corrupt spirit of a man accuse things or persons, without
himself, as the Authors or Causes of his sinful Evils: the Judge of Heaven
will lay it at his own door, and endite him as guilty of the Crime. And so do
all wise and holy persons. We all do fade as a leaf, and our Iniquities like
the wind have taken us away. Behold, thou art wroth, for we have sinned, Isa.
64.5, 6. Nor do they lessen the Fault, but aggravate it, as David does here:
which was the Second thing observable in an humble Penitent.

II. OBSERVATION.
The Penitent Sinner makes not a light matter of his Sin, but acknowledges the
Grievousness of it.

This is manifest by all the Examples of humble Penitents in the Scripture. We
have sinned, says holy Daniel, Dan. 9.5. and have committed Iniquity, and have
done wickedly, and have rebelled, even by departing from thy Precepts and from
thy Judgments. And holy Ezra, (9.6.) O my God, I am ashamed and blush to lift
up my face to thee, my God: for our Iniquities are increased over our heads,
and our Trespass is grown up unto the Heavens. Thus when the justified Publican
prays, he dares not lift up his eyes to Heaven, but smites on his breast,
saying, God be merciful to me a Sinner. And S. Paul censures himself as the
chief of Sinners, for those Sins he committed in Ignorance and Unbelief. He
knows that God sees more evil in his Sins then he himself can discern; that
Sins are not to be censured according to men's estimation, but God's most pure
Law and righteous Judgment; that God is of purer eyes then to behold Evil, and
that he cannot look on Iniquity with the least approbation or connivence; that
what is highly prized in men's eyes, or made a venial Sin by men, is counted a
foul Abomination with God; that the least Sin is against an Infinite Majesty,
and cost no less then the Blood of the Son of God to expiate it; that there is
no Venial Sin in its own nature, to say, Raca, Thou fool, to our Brother, makes
a man liable to Hellfire; that every Sin is of the Devil, who sinned from the
beginning; that the wages of Sin, every Sin, is Death, even that Death which is
opposite to everlasting Life.

Hence it is that David makes not a small matter of the Sins of his youth, but
prays God not to remember them: and Job complains, that God wrote bitter
things against him, and made him to possess the Sins of his youth. And Christ
makes idle words such, as that for them men are to be accountable at the day of
Judgment. Popish Doctrine of Venial Sins, Resolutions of Cases of Conscience
after Popish Casuists Dictates, are not found in the expressions of
Scripture-Penitents; much less Pharisaicall Vauntings of Self-righteousness, or
Monkish Ostentation of their own Merits, or Quakers Opinions of Innocence and
Perfection: but Acknowledgment of their Transgressions and Sins, with the
heinous Degree and Circumstances of them. Which was David's profession here,
and is an instance of an humble Penitent's practice.

III. OBSERVATION.
He freely confesses and acknowledges his Sin, at least to God, and sometimes
to men.

Though David often professes his Innocence in respect of the Criminations
which were cast upon him in Readiness Court, as if he had conspired against him;
though he allege his Integrity before God, as being upright in heart, in
promoting God's Worship, not going after any other gods, but in the choice of
his Soul preferring the Observance of God's Laws before any Ends of his own;
yet he still acknowledges his Sins to God, without any arrogant vaunting of
Perfection, or opinion of unspotted Holiness. I acknowledge my Sin unto thee,
and mine Iniquity have I not hid, says he, Psalm 32.5. And holy Job, although
he could not be beaten out of his hold, (the conscience of his Integrity before
God, and his Innocence from any Oppression of men, with which his Antagonists
charged him,) yet disclaims the Covering of his Transgressions, as Adam, by
hiding his Iniquity in his bosom, Job 31.33. And Chap. 7.20. he bespeaks God
thus; I have sinned, what shall I do unto thee, O thou Preserver of men? And
again, Chap. 40.4. Behold, I am vile, what shall I answer thee? I will lay my
hand upon my mouth.

All Holy persons do subscribe to that of Bildad, Job 25.4, 5, 6. that in
comparison of God, in his sight no man living can be justified. How can he be
clean that is born of a woman? They know that God searches the Heart, discerns
the windings and turnings of their deceitful Hearts: that they have secret
Sins, which neither other men nor themselves perceive. S. Paul once conceived
himself, touching the Righteousness of the Law, blameless: while he was
ignorant of its Spirituality, he observed not how the Law forbade Coveting, the
very first Motions of Lust: But when he knew how holy and perfect the Law was,
how imperfect he was; when he found a Law in his Members rebelling against the
Law of his Mind, and leading him into captivity to the Law of Sin, which was in
his Members; he then cries out, O wretched man that I am! who shall deliver me
from the body of this death? Romans 7. Such is the Affection of the most
enlightened Saints, who have been best acquainted with God's Purity, the
Perfection of his Law, their own Impurity, and the Defect in their ways, that
they have always cried out of themselves, (as the Lepers in the Law) We are
unclean, we are unclean. In their Supplications to God, they have bemoaned
their sinful Thoughts, their most hidden Transgressions: yea in their
Transgressions against men, when doing right to them, and giving glory to God
has required it, they have not stuck in full Congregations to confess their
Errors, and to bewail their Transgressions. Which thing has been always
necessary, 1. To justify God in his Sentence and Judgments; that he might be
justified in his sayings, and be clear when he is judged: as it is in the next
verse to my Text. 2. To abase Man, that he may lie prostrate at his feet, and
not proudly lift up his head before God.


Both which Ends are discernible in that humble Confession of Daniel, and his
speech to God, Dan. 9.7. O Lord, Righteousness belongs unto thee, but unto us
Confusion of faces, because of our Trespass committed against thee.

For which Ends, as God sets our Iniquities before us, so the humble Penitent
always sets his Sins before his face; as David did here.

IV. OBSERVATION.
He makes not this a short transient Action, but his Sins are ever before him.

There is indeed a setting our Iniquities before our faces which is pernicious;
when we look upon our Sins as of so horrid a Guilt that they are unpardonable:
as when Cain told God, Genesis 4.13. My Punishment is greater then I can bear; or,
Mine Iniquity is greater then that it may be forgiven. So indeed it falls out
sometimes, that men's Transgressions (when they have sinned presumptuously,
against Conviction of Conscience within, and Warnings without,) do so stare in
their faces, that they affright them with terror and astonishment: their
Spirits are wounded: they apprehend the Devil haling them to the infernal
Prison; expect nothing but Hell and Damnation; cry out of God as Cruel, of
themselves as Damned wretches.

Such a View of Sin, as thus tends to Despair, that eyes only God's Justice
and their own Desert, that begets Hatred of God as a Tyrant, no Address to him
as a Gracious Prince, is indeed very dangerous.

Humble Penitents do not so set their Iniquities before them: This is the
manner only of despairing Readiness, revolting Spira's, such as have sinned
wilfully with an high hand, and continue in their Apostasy from the Truth;
that say, There is no hope: we have loved strangers, and after them will we go,
Jer. 2.25. But returning Sinners remember their Sins, and they are ever before
them, in another manner, and to another purpose. They present their Sins to
themselves, that they may shame themselves, and give Glory to God in
acknowledging his Righteousness; without denial of his Grace. They look not
only on the foulness of their Trespasses, and the greatness of their Debts;
but also on the riches of God's Grace, the fullness of Christ's Obedience, the
inexhaustible fountain of Christ's Blood, the infallible Assurance of the New
Covenant, the ample Promises of the Gospel: and accordingly, with Confession of
Sin they adjoyn Prayer for Pardon, Faith in Christ's Blood; and plead God's
declaration of his own Properties, his former dealing with great
Transgressors; and in the same manner as David did here,

V. OBSERVATION.
The true Penitent tells God of setting his Iniquities before him, to induce
God to relenting Compassion toward him, and gracious Condonation of him.

In the Penitential Psalm De profundis, (130.2, 3, 4.) the Penitent Sinner
thus bespeaks God; Let thine ears be attentive to the voice of my Supplication.
If thou, Lord, should mark Iniquities, O Lord, who shall stand? But there is
Forgiveness with thee, that thou may be feared. Even the wicked Ninevites
had so much apprehension of the possibility of God's merciful Clemency, that
(after Jonas's Proclamation of their approaching Ruin) they resolved to cry
mightily to God upon this apprehension, Who can tell if God will turn and
repent, and turn away from his fierce Anger, that we perish not? Jon. 3.9.

It Is true, they that worship the Devil, and pray to him, do all out of Fear,
as looking for nothing but Cruelty from unclean Spirits: But Jonas in his
froward fit, Chap. 4.2. acknowledges that the Lord is a gracious God, and
merciful, slow to Anger, and of great Kindness, and repents him of the Evil.
Even by the experience of them that know not God, this is found true: which
made even Infidels cry unto the Lord in their Distresses, and confess their
Sins in hope of Help. The believing Penitent knows both by experience, and from
the Nature, Works and Word of God, that when he sets his Sins before him, God
casts them behind his back: that God looks upon men, and if any say, I have
sinned, and perverted that which was right, and it profited me not; He will
deliver his Soul from the Pit, and his Life shall see the Light, Job 33.27, 28.
They have learned, that he that hides his Sins shall not prosper; but he that
confesses and forsakes them shall have Mercy, Prove. 28.13. That, if we
confess our Sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our Sins: and the
Blood of Jesus Christ, his Son, cleanses us from all Sin, 1 John 1.7, 9. They
judge, that what David found they shall find: I said, I will confess my
Transgressions to the Lord; and thou forgavest the Iniquity of my Sin. And
therefore, For this shall every one that is Godly pray unto thee in a time that
thou may be found, Psalm. 32.5, 6. And consequently, it is their course, (as
being best for them) to set their Sins before them, so as to humble them; and
to set them before God, that he may pardon them.

APPLICATION.
And now, I beseech you, lay all that I have said to heart, as of greatest
concernment to each of you. What David did, what all the Saints have done in
all Ages, you should do in this; their Practice should be your Pattern: It is
necessary to be done, though it be much against the spirits of men.

Most men are quick-sighted in viewing the Faults of others, but blear-eyed
when they are to look upon their own Crimes: Censuring and Judging others is
very frequent; Self-judging is very rare. They that would take a Mote out of
their Brother's eye, will not take notice of the Beam in their own. Few are
willing to have their Sins set before them by others; and themselves are far
from setting them before them of their own accord. A free Reprover is accounted
intolerable. Men hate them that rebuke them. Yea, a Minister, who by Office is
bound to do it, though he do it to save their and his own Soul, yet he is not
endured for it, but declined and persecuted. They that cannot deny their Sins,
yet put off the Faultiness of them to some other Cause. They that acknowledge
their Sins to have been from themselves, yet excuse and extenuate them. Scarce
a man confesses his Sins that are hidden from men: if he do confess them to
God, it is but slightly. What a Beast was I? says the Drunkard; God forgive
me, says the Swearer: though the one wallows in his Intemperance day after
day, and the other profanes the Name of God every hour.

Thus Sin is slightly acknowledged by the Sinner, without any sense of the
Iniquity of his Nature, or the Love he has to his Sin, which are the Causes of
it; without any Compunction of heart, without Remorse of Soul, without
Bemoaning it to God, in Supplications, bewailing his Folly, his Naughtiness,
and earnestly, humbly begging Pardon.

Yea, when God sets men's Sins (by his Judgments on them) in order before them,
they will not set them before themselves, to give him the Glory of his Justice:
when his Hand is lifted up, they will not see: when he makes their Hearts ache,
their Eyes weep, by his Strokes for their Sins, they fret with Anger, but weep
not out of Sorrow for Sin.

No marvel that men find not the Comfort of God's pardoning Grace, when they
slubber over this great Business (which the Godly have always found to be the
right and only way to Mercy) in so dull and negligent a manner, as if they
could deal with God as with an Idol, that has neither eyes to see their
Impenitency, nor hands to punish their Sins: and so carry themselves as if they
could mock God with a few words of course, without any serious or hearty Sorrow
for their Disobedience to God's Law, and Provocation of his terrible Majesty.

Oh that you would in time repent thoroughly of this your want of Repentance, or
the perfunctory doing of it. And that you would bethink your selves, that you
may deceive your selves, but cannot deceive God: that your Dallying with God
will end in your Damnation: that you will never have Peace with him, till you
show that you count and use your Sins as his and your Enemies.

Do this then which David says he did, Search out your Sins impartially, know
them to be your own Brats; that the least of them are of a Viperous brood; that
they will bring upon you everlasting Punishment, without much Repentance and
real Amendment.

Set your Sins before you in their ugly shape: Set God before you as a severe
Judge, and yet withal a merciful Prince: Confess them to God with godly
Sorrow: Supplicate for Pardon with humbled Souls: Sprinkle your Consciences
with the Blood of Christ by the hand of Faith: and Resolve to leave your
Wanderings, and to follow Christ. And then, and not till then, you shall have
Peace with God: which he grant for his Son's sake, etc. Amen.

LAVS DEO.
THE COMFORT OF THE Divine Presence. Part I.
The Sixth SERMON.
PSALM li. 11. Cast me not away from thy Presence; and take not thy Holy Spirit
from me.


OF all the Holy Patriarchs, whose ways are recorded in the Old Testament,
there is none, of whose Acts we have more relation remaining to us for our
Imitation, or our Caution, then we have of David's. In the constant course of
his Actions he was so obedient to God, that God gave this Testimony to him, and
said, I have found David the son of Jesse, a man after mine own heart, which
shall fulfill my will, Act. 13.22. And yet he sinned so foully in the matter of
Vriah, that he is stigmatized by the Prophet Nathan, sent by God to reprove him
sharply for it, as one that gave great occasion to the enemies of the Lord to
blaspheme, 2 Samuel 12.14. He that in the time of his Persecution had showed much
Constancy in his Obedience to God, and Adherence to him; in the time of his
Prosperity and greatest Tranquillity showed his Instability, so as to become a
Reproach to the Profession of his God.

Whence it came to pass, that as in his Afflictions he made many Psalms of
Exultation in God, and Exaltation of his Name, so as to gain the Elogy of the
sweet Singer of Israel; so by reason of his great Fall in defiling Bathsheba,
he is fain to mourn as a Dove, to change his tune, to sing Lamentation, to
bewail his Transgressions, and to cry Peccavi in this Penitential Psalm,
composed (as the Title shows) by reason of his Fall into those horrid Evils of
Adultery and Murder. For expiating of which, though the Law yielded no
Sacrifice, yet the Grace of God he knew did: and therefore he prays instantly,
both for Pardon of what he had done, and for preventing Grace against future
Relapses, as the words of my Text import; Cast me not away from thy Presence,
and take not thy Holy Spirit, or Spirit of Holiness, from me.

In which words he deprecates two Evils as most pernicious: 1. The Ejection out
of God's Presence; 2. The Loss of his Holy Spirit.

Concerning these, it may be enquired, how he could pray against that which
elsewhere he seems to reckon as not fecible, when he says, Whither shall I go
from thy Spirit? or whither shall I flee from thy Presence? Psalm. 139.7. which
intimates as if there were no escaping God's Spirit, or avoiding God's
Presence: And therefore it was in vain for him to petition God against that
which could not be effected, though God should go about it.

To which I answer, That it is true, that God's entitative Presence is
everywhere, and therefore there could not be a Casting him out of it, nor
could he go any whither where he might hide himself, or not have the Spirit of
God to find him out, and to reach him: his Omnipresence, Omniscience and
Omnipotency make such an Exclusion or Subtraction unimaginable.

But there is a Presence of Favor, of Assistence, of Protection, an having of
the Spirit for Guidance, Comfort, and Ability for operation, (here meant,)
which a person may be excluded from, and destitute of: such as Cain dreaded,
when he said, My Punishment is greater then I can bear. Behold, thou have
driven me out this day from the face of the earth, and from thy Face shall I be
hid. And Cain went out from the Presence of the Lord, Genesis 4.13, 14, 16. That
is, he was deprived of the light of God's Countenance; filled with Horror in
his spirit, out of the conscience of his unpardoned unnatural Murder of his
Brother: God respected not his Offering, admitted him not to any Communion with
himself, let the infernal Spirits haunt him, delivered him into the hands of
the Devil.

And this most horrible estate the Psalmist does here deprecate; since the
conscience of his Guilt made him sensible that he might justly expect it.

Now to begin with the First Petition: whence these Points are deducible.

1. That God's Presence of Grace is most desirable. 2. That the committing of
great and enormous Sins does endanger the Privation of it. 3. That a Penitent
Sinner begs earnestly against the Loss of it, as his greatest Calamity; and
prays for the Continuance of it, as his chiefest Good. Dominus tecum, and cum
spiritu tuo, The Lord be with thee, and with thy spirit, are the most important
Prayers in our Christian Liturgy.
To begin with the first of these.

That God's Presence of Grace is most desirable.

How desirable the Presence of God's Favor is to men, may appear by that
Dialogue between God and Moses, which we meet with Exodus 33.14, 15. wherein,
after God had made that terrible Commination, of coming up into the midst of
the people of Israel in a moment to consume them, because of their great
Provocation of him in making the Golden Calf, and not to go up with them,
verse. 3, 5. and Moses, verse. 12, 13. had instantly made Supplication for God's
Guidance in that great Expedition which he put him upon, of bringing the people
of Israel into the Land of Canaan; the Lord tells him, that his Presence should
go with him, and he would give him rest. Moses replies to God, If thy Presence
go not with us, carry us not up hence. And gives this reason, verse. 16. For
wherein shall it be known here that I and thy people have found grace in thy
sight? is it not in that thou go with us?

From which passage may be discerned how much Moses valued God's Presence, as
that without which he counted all his Undertakings as vain; that he could not
effect any thing prosperously, not subdue Enemies, nor rule that people, nor
successively accomplish any undertaking: But on the other side, with God's
Presence he doubted not but that he should bring to pass that great Business,
and all other Designs which he should be put upon, if God did vouchsafe it to
him.

The same is true in our Spiritual Voyage toward Heaven, and our Christian
Warfare. The Presence of God is All in all; without God's Presence we can do
nothing: though we should have all the furniture of wit, strength, wealth, and
the assistence of men; yet should we not be able to go one step forward in the
way to Happiness: we of our selves should not be sufficient to think any thing
as of our selves, for all our Sufficiency is of God, 2 Cor. 3.5. Yea our
Adversary the Devil would easily devour us, if the Lord should depart from us.
On the other side, If God be for us, who can be against us? Neither life, nor
death, nor Angels, nor Principalities, nor Powers, nor things present, nor
things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature shall prevail
against us. The auxiliary force of God's Presence makes a Believer, in
Tribulation, distress, persecution, famine, nakedness, peril, sword, to be more
then a Conqueror, even to triumph and to glory in the Lord; as knowing that
his Riches exceed Croesus his wealth, his Glory Solomon's glory; and that he
may truly say, without Thrasonicall vaunting, Whether Paul, or Apollos, or
Cephas, or the world, or life, or death, or things present, or things to come,
All are mine, I being Christ's, and Christ God's, 1 Cor. 3.22, 23.

Thus did the Psalmist express his apprehensions of the benefit of God's
Presence in relation to his Safety, Comfort, and Happiness. That he restored
his Soul, and led him in the paths of Righteousness for his Name's sake. Yea,
though he did walk through the valley of the shadow of death, he would fear no
evil: for God was with him, his Rod and his Staff did comfort him, Psalm. 23.3,
4. That his Goodness and Mercy should follow him all the days of his life,
verse. 6. That he would show him the path of Life: in his Presence was fullness
of Joy, at his right hand Pleasures for evermore, Psalm. 16.11.

As to be near such a King as Solomon, was counted so great a Happiness, that
the blessedness of Solomon's Courtiers was magnified with admiration by the
Queen of Sheba: so much more blessed are they that are acquainted with God, and
are near to him. In his Favor is their life, Psalm. 30.5. The light of his
Countenance is better then life it self.

Man being Animal sociabile, a sociable Living creature, needs Society: it is
most joyous for him to be with them whom he loves, and who love him, and can
help him. But such is none now in comparison of God, and therefore no Company
(to a Holy heart) like to God's. David's Soul thirsted for God, panted after
him, to come and appear before him. But his Tears were his meat day and night
in his absence from God; and it was as a Sword in his bones to be reproached
with this demand, Where is thy God? When God hid his face, he was troubled.
Which comes to pass by our departing from God: and that brings me to the

II. OBSERVATION.
That the committing of great and enormous Sins endangers the Privation of
God's Presence.

It is true, that God sometimes, to try his most upright Servants, does
withdraw from them the light of his Countenance; not out of Indignation against
them, for any great Transgression committed by them. Thus he dealt with Job,
when he exercised his Patience: which made him expostulate the matter with God,
Job 13.24. Wherefore hidest thou thy face, and hold me for thine Enemy?
verse. 26. For thou writest bitter things against me, and make me to possess
the Iniquities of my youth. And Heman the Ezrahite, Psalm. 88.14. Lord, why
castest thou off my Soul? why hidest thou thy Face from me? But this casting
off and hiding God's Face is but for a time, and not in wrath, but like a
Father's dealing with his Child, when he for a little while sequesters himself,
to make experiment of his Child's Affection, and to excite him thereby to seek
him the more earnestly.

Nevertheless even this also tends to bring them to the acknowledgment of their
Sins: therefore the Prophet Hosea (5.15.) brings in God thus saying, I will go
away and return to my place, till they acknowledge their Offense, and seek my
Face: in their Affliction they will seek me early. Even Job wanted God's
Presence, till he confessed himself vile, and repented, abhorring himself in
dust and ashes, Job 42.6.

But there is a more direful Casting out of God's Presence with utter
Forsaking, so as to cast a people or person out of his sight for ever; by
leaving them to be a Prey to those who waste and oppress them: as when he
threatened, Jerem. 7.15. to cast the Jews out of his sight, as he had cast out
all their brethren, the whole seed of Ephraim: which he accomplished in the
Babylonish Captivity, as it is Jerem. 52.3. Through the Anger of the Lord it
came to pass in Jerusalem and Judah, that God cast them out of his Presence;
especially because of all the Provocations that Manasseh had provoked him
withal, 2 King. 23.26. And indeed, though Manasseh, repenting, was not utterly
and for ever cast out of God's Presence; yet by reason of the hainousness of
his Sins, the Lord brought upon him and his people the Captains of the host of
the King of Assyria, which took him among the thorns, and bound him with
fetters, and carried him to Babylon, 2 Chronicles. 33.11.

And David himself, when he had by his great Transgressions provoked the Lord
to Anger in the matter of Vriah the Hittite, found God's favorable Presence so
removed from him, that in his House he suffered by his Children great
Calamities, which were inflicted by God to show his Indignation: so that though
he were not Filius Irae, a Child of Wrath, cast away with utter Dereliction as
a Reprobate; yet he was Filius sub Ira, a Child under Wrath for that present,
which made him dread his Danger, and to be thus importunate with God, not to
cast him out of his Presence.

And indeed in case of great Sins committed presumptuously against Warning, or
Conscience enlightened, and continued in with Impenitency, it is inconsistent
with God's Holiness and Honor to afford his Presence; it being contrary to his
Nature and Glory to countenance Evil, who is not a God that has pleasure in
Wickedness, neither shall Evil dwell with him. The foolish shall not stand in
his sight; he hates all workers of Iniquity, Psalm. 5.4, 5. He is of purer eyes
then to behold Evil, and cannot look on Iniquity, Hab. 1.13.

As it is with a gallant Prince, who cannot brook a base Coward; or a neat and
cleanly Nobleman, who cannot endure in his company a sordid and nasty Sloven,
but will thrust or keep such out of his presence: so it is with God. When a Man
or Nation have defiled themselves with such odious Iniquities as God abhors,
till they be washed with true Repentance, and new clothed by putting on the
Lord Jesus, there is no hope of finding God ready to admit them near to him.
Wherefore

III. OBSERVATION.
Penitent Sinners (such as David was) do beg earnestly against the Loss of
God's Presence, as their greatest Calamity; and pray for its Continuance, as
their chiefest Happiness.

The Holy Writings are full of such Petitions as these. Let my sentence come
forth from thy presence, Psalm. 17.2. Make thy Face to shine upon thy servant,
Psalm. 31.16. Forsake me not, O Lord; O my God, be not far from me, Psalm. 38.21.
Awake, why sleep thou, O Lord? arise, cast us not off for ever. Wherefore
hidest thou thy face? Psalm. 44.23, 24. Return for thy servants sake, Isa.
63.17. Take away all Iniquity, and receive us graciously, Hos. 14.2. As it is
with a Child who misseth his Father, he cries after him, till he appears to
him; or as a Traveller that is out of his way, and knows not what way to
take, nor what may become of him, calls for his Guide to direct, for his
Company to help him: So it is with a Repenting person, who has wandered out of
his way; he is sensible that he has done foolishly in leaving God's way, fears
lest he shall become a prey to Satan, finds the want of God's Guidance, the
need of his Assistence: hereupon he cries aloud to God not to leave him; he
wrastleth with God, as Jacob did when he feared his Brother Esau's hostile
approach, so as not to let him go until he bless him; he weeps and makes
Supplication, till he becomes an Isaac, one that prevails with God; his Eye
trickleth down and cease not, without any intermission, till the Lord look
down, and behold from Heaven; he bewails his turning aside into crooked paths,
begs to be led into the way everlasting; and to that end resolves to hold close
to God for the time to come, and to keep his way, lest he (by Recidivation and
Relapse) drive away God for ever. For which purpose he begs God not to take
away his Holy Spirit from him, as being his best Guide and Guard in his
Pilgrimage on Earth. Which leads me to the consideration of the Second Petition
in my Text: but at present, time will not permit me to handle it. Of what has
been said give me leave to make some Application.

APPLICATION.
You that have fallen into any such gross Transgression as David's was,
remember to imitate him in his Return to God. As his Sin was very great, so
this Penitential Psalm shows his Sorrow after God was very conspicuous,
working Repentance not to be repented of, 2 Cor. 7.10. What the Apostle said of
the Corinthians, (guilty of Indulgence to the Incestuous person,) For behold,
this self-same thing, that ye sorrowed after a godly sort, what Carefulness it
wrought in you, yea what Clearing of your selves, yea what Indignation, yea
what Fear, yea what vehement Desire, yea what Zeal, yea what Revenge: in all
things ye have approved your selves to be clear in this matter; the same was
true of David, and ought to be verified in every one of you, chiefly in these
things.

1. To be sensible of the great danger of the Loss of God's Presence; to know
and see that it is an evil thing and bitter, that you have forsaken the Lord
your God, and that his Fear was not in you; when either by Wantonness, or
Intemperance, or Profaneness, or Unrighteousness, or any other kind of
Leudness, though committed in secret from the eyes of man, ye did Evil in God's
sight, and rebelled, and vexed his Holy Spirit, so that he was turned away from
you, became your Enemy, fought against you, and left you to be ensnared by the
Devil, and to be led captive by him according to his will, 2 Timothy 2.26.

Oh this is a thing you should mourn for as one mourns for his only Son, and
be in bitterness for his absence as one that is in bitterness for his
firstborn.

2. For the time to come, that with the spirit of Grace and Supplication you
instantly press God to vouchsafe you his preserving, guiding, comforting,
aiding Presence, that you may not be overcome by a like Temptation, nor wander
from God by Error, nor by Infirmity of your flesh yield to such Motions in
you, or Solicitations of others, as may overcome you, and prevail upon you to
go astray from God, and leave him, who is your Shepherd, lest the Wolf of Hell
catch you, and tear you in pieces, and there be none to deliver you.

Oh, whatever you do, watch, and pray that God may lead you in the paths of
Righteousness for his Name's sake. And whatever Bait or Suggestion may be set
before you, yet remember that which Joseph thought on when he was enticed to
Leudness by his Mistress, How shall I do this great Wickedness, and sin against
God?

Oh, set God always before you, who being at your right hand, you shall not be
moved. It will be your everlasting Comfort in life and death, that you can say,
I was upright before God, and kept my self from mine Iniquity. While you live
on Earth, walk humbly, obediently, patiently with God. Do as Enoch did, who
had this testimony, that he so walked with God as to please him: and then you
may be assured, notwithstanding your former Falls, yet at last to be translated
(if not as he was, not to see death, yet) so as not to abide in death, but to
be with your Father for ever. Which the Lord grant, etc. Amen.

LAVS DEO.
THE HEAVENLY GIFT. Part II.
The Seventh SERMON.
PSALM li. 11. Take not thy Holy Spirit from me.


IN this Penitential Psalm of David, wherein he applies himself to God for
the recovery of his Favor, after his great Fall in the matter of Vriah, as he
sincerely confesses his Sin, and humbly beggeth Pardon, so he does earnestly
deprecate God's Dereliction of him, as being the most sad presage of his
everlasting Perdition; and the taking away his Holy Spirit from him, as the
inlet to Satan's possession of him, and so the forerunner of his extreme Ruin.

I have heretofore considered his Petition against Ejection out of God's
Presence; the regaining of which is a most desirable thing to a Penitent
Sinner; and though it be forfeited by Sin, yet is it recoverable by humble and
earnest Supplication. It now remains that I consider the other Prayer in my
Text, against the Privation of God's Spirit, in these words, And take not thy
Holy Spirit from me.

For explication whereof, it is requisite that it be showed, 1. What is meant
by the Holy Spirit, or Spirit of God's Holiness, which he feared might be taken
from him: 2. How it is taken away from a person.

1. The term Spirit is meant sometimes of God the Father, as Joh. 4.24. where
it is said that God is a Spirit: sometimes of the Son, as 2 Cor. 3.17. where it
is said, The Lord is that Spirit: and sometimes of the Third Person in the Holy
Trinity, as 1 John 5.6. where it is said, It is the Spirit that bears
witness; who is termed the Holy Ghost, or Spirit, and is all one with the
Spirit of his Holiness in my Text. Now he is so termed in opposition to the
unclean Spirit, Matthew. 12.43. or evil Spirit, and Spirit of Devils, which are
in some men, as the Holy Spirit is in others. For as the Heathens imagined that
every man had his good Genius or his bad, his good or bad Angel: so the Holy
Scripture expresses the Motions of men to be from the Spirit of God's
Holiness, in them who are sanctified; and from Satan, in them who are unholy,
as in Cain and Judas.

Now the Spirit of God is sometimes spoke of as God's Instrument by which he
works in the works of Creation. Psalm. 104.30. Thou sendest forth thy Spirit,
they are created; and thou renewest the face of the Earth. Job 33.4. The Spirit
of God has made me, and the breath of the Almighty has given me life. When
God brings any great thing to pass, he does it by his Spirit. Zech. 4.6. Not
by might, nor by power, but by my Spirit. That which is in Matthew. 12.28. If I
cast out Devils by the Spirit of God, is in Luke 11.20. If I with the finger of
God cast out Devils: whence it appears, that the Spirit of God is Digitus Dei,
God's Hand or Finger, whereby he works. But especially the works God does in
and for the Saints are ascribed to the Spirit of God. All these things works
that one and the self-same Spirit, dividing to every man severally even as he
will, 1 Cor. 12.11. All those precious Qualities and Operations whereby we
please God are termed Fruits of the Spirit, Gal. 5.22, 23.

2. This helps us to understand how the Holy Spirit may be taken from a person;
to wit, by withdrawing from him those Operations of the Holy Spirit which are
amiable to God, or comfortable to us. Now in this Petition it is to be
considered, that notwithstanding David's Sins, he was not utterly bereft of
God's Spirit: for in this Psalm, his humble Confession, his ardent
Supplication, show that there was some fire of God's Spirit remaining in him,
all the sparks were not gone out. Yet he felt so little of the Vigor and
Consolation of the Spirit, that he feared its utter Extinction. And because
this would leave him in utter Darkness, therefore he is importunate with God,
that he would not take his Holy Spirit from him; but, as it is in the next
verse, restore unto him the joy of his Salvation, and uphold him with his free
Spirit.

The Petition thus opened yields us these Observations.

1. That the having of God's Spirit in us, and with us, is the most beneficial
Gift which God gives to a Repenting Sinner. 2. That great Transgressions
endanger the Loss of God's Spirit. 3. That a Repenting Sinner is an earnest
Suitour to God for the Continuance of it to him.
Of these in their order.

I. OBSERVATION.
That God's Spirit is the most beneficial Gift that God bestows on a Repenting
Sinner.

This is manifest from the words of Christ, Luke 11.13. If ye then, being evil,
know how to give good Gifts to your Children; how much more shall your heavenly
Father give the Holy Spirit to them that ask him? Which shows that the Gift of
the Holy Spirit is a greater Gift, and far better, then that which earthly
Parents give to their Children, as bodily Food, and the like: and that God, in
giving his Holy Spirit to those that ask him, shows an Affection far exceeding
that which Parents have for their Children, when they supply them with
Corporal sustenance. Add hereunto, that the Apostle, 2 Cor. 13.14. in his
Benediction of the Corinthians, prays thus for them, The Grace of the Lord
Jesus Christ, and the Love of God, and the Communion of the Holy Spirit, be
with you all, Amen. Whereby it is manifest, that the Communion of the Holy
Spirit is ranked among the best things he could beg for that people, to wit,
the Grace of Christ, and the Love of God.

Nor is this without reason: for the Spirit of God removes all that Evil which
is odious to God, and noisome to our selves; it washes away that Filthiness of
flesh and spirit which is loathsome to God; it cures that Blindness of Mind,
that Hardness of Heart, that Perverseness of Soul, that Impotency of Faculties,
which make us unable to do any thing that may please God, or rectify our own
Actions. It is this clean Water which, being sprinkled on us by God, makes us
clean in his eyes, so as to cleanse us from all our Filthiness and all our
Evils. It is that, by giving of which, we have a new heart, and a new spirit is
put within us: God takes away the stony heart out of our flesh, and gives us an
heart of flesh, which causes us to walk in God's Statutes, and to keep his
Judgments, and do them, Ezekiel. 11.19, 20.

In whom the Spirit of God dwells not, there is a Spirit of Slumber, Eyes that
they should not see, and Ears that they do not hear: even the Gospel is hid to
them; the God of this world blinds their minds, lest the Light of the glorious
Gospel of Christ, who is the Image God, should shine unto them: they are held
in the Snare of the Devil, and are taken captive by him at his will. An evil
Spirit possesses them, so that they want the Consolations of God, the Peace
which passes understanding, which guards the minds of them that believe
through Christ Jesus: they are filled with Horror of Conscience, are under the
spirit of Bondage: they sow to the Flesh, and of the Flesh reap Corruption.

On the other side, where the Spirit of God inhabits, it renews a man in the
spirit of his mind, so that he knows the things that are freely given him of
God; spiritually discerns the hidden wisdom of God in a mystery, which God
has ordained before the world to our glory; even those things which eye has
not seen, nor ear heard, nor have entered into the heart of man, the things
which God has prepared for them that love him. Even to Babes are these things
revealed by God's Spirit, which the Princes of the world knew not, but they
were hid from the wise and prudent, Matthew. 11.25. Whence it is, that they are
made the Epistle of Christ, written not with ink, but with the Spirit of the
living God; not in Tables of Stone, but in fleshly Tables of the Heart: with
open face beholding, as in a glass, the Glory of the Lord, they are changed
into the same image from glory to glory, even as by the Spirit of the Lord, 2
Cor. 3.3, 18. By which means they are made the Temple of God, in that the
Spirit of God dwells in them, verse. 16. and holy unto God, an habitation of
God through the Spirit: they are joined to the Lord, one Spirit with him; new
Creatures in Christ, and conformed to him. Whence it is that Sin bath not
dominion over them, nor the Wicked one touches them. They are delivered from
the Law, that being dead wherein they were held; that they might bring forth
fruit unto God; serve in the newness of the Spirit, and not in the oldness of
the Letter. For though the Letter of the Law kills, being the ministration of
Condemnation; yet the Spirit gives Life, being the ministration of
Righteousness, which exceeds in glory. And consequently, they have liberty by
the Spirit of God; are beautified by it, so as that Christ is formed in them.
They live in the Spirit, and walk in the Spirit. The mind of the Spirit is to
them life and peace. They have access by one Spirit unto the Father. The Spirit
of God is the Spirit of Adoption, whereby they cry, Abba Father. The Spirit it
self bears witness with their spirit, that they are the Children of God: and
if Children, then Heirs, heirs of God, and joynt-heirs with Christ; that
suffering with him, they may be glorified together. They are led by the Spirit;
sow to the Spirit, and of the Spirit reap life everlasting; through the Spirit,
wait for the hope of Righteousness which is by Faith.

In a word, that Life, that Holiness, that Beauty, that Liberty, that Joy, that
Hope, that Fruit which a Christian has from Christ, is communicated by the
Spirit; and that Glory of Soul and Body which is expected hereafter, that
Quietness and Rest in life and death which is desirable, is from the Spirit of
God. If any man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of Christ's: But if
Christ be in us, the Body is dead, because of Sin; but the Spirit is life,
because of Righteousness. And if the Spirit of him that raised up Jesus from
the dead dwell in us, he that raised up Christ from the dead shall also quicken
our mortal bodies by the Spirit that dwells in us, Romans 8.9, 10, 11.

So that I may safely infer from this enumeration of Benefits, even the most
precious Riches that a Spirit is capable of, that the Gift of God's Spirit to a
man is the greatest Commodity, the Jewel of Heaven. What Solomon says of
Wisdom, is true of God's Spirit: It is a Gift more precious then Rubies, and
all the things we can desire are not to be compared to it. And therefore the
Loss of it is the greatest Loss. Which brings me to the Enquiry what endangers
the Privation of it; and that was asserted, in the Second Proposition, to be
great Transgressions.

II. OBSERVATION.
That great Transgressions endanger the Loss of God's Spirit.

This is manifest from David's Petition, in that by reason of his Sins he was
afraid of its Loss, and therefore begs the Continuance of it, notwithstanding
his foul Trespasses.

It is, I confess, a great Dispute, Whether a person once regenerated by the
Spirit, washed, sanctified, and justified in the name of the Lord Jesus, and by
the Spirit of our God, can totally and finally lose its Continuance with him. I
will not meddle with that Point: But this is out of question, That some Gifts
of the Spirit may be lost; else the Apostle, 1 Thessalonians. 5.19. would not have
premonished the Thessalonians that they should not quench the Spirit. Such
Gifts of the Spirit as are for others good, to which the Salvation of a person
is not promised, may undoubtedly be totally lost by great Transgressions. So
Saul lost the Royal Magnanimity and other Princely Endowments which he had
before, by sparing Agag, and by usurping the Priestly Office in offering
Sacrifice. Judas lost the Gift of Healing which he had with the rest of the
Apostles, and other Abilities to preach the Gospel, by his traitourous Selling
of his Master: he fell from the Apostleship and Ministry by his Transgression.
Nor is it denied, but that some who were once enlightened, and had tasted of the
heavenly Gift, and were made partakers of the Holy Ghost, and had tasted of the
good Word of God, and the powers of the world to come, might fall away, and not
be renewed again by Repentance; that they might crucify the Son of God afresh,
and put him to an open shame; that they might tread under foot the Son of God,
and count the Blood of the Covernant, wherewith they were sanctified, an unholy
thing, and do despite to the Spirit of grace, Heb. 6.4, 5, 6. and 10.29.

Yea, those of whom God gave testimony, that they did that which was right in
the eyes of God, as did David; yet even they fell so foully, as that they lost
the Fruits and Comforts of the Spirit, so as not to regain them in that degree
they once had them. Of Asa it is said, that his Heart was perfect with the Lord
all his days, 1 King. 15.14. and yet he put the Seer in prison, being in a rage
with him for reproving his Relying on the King of Syria, 2 Chronicles. 16.7, 10. and
even in his Disease he sought not to the Lord, but to the physicians, verse. 12.
And Hezekiah, though he walked before God in truth and with a perfect Heart,
and did that which was good in his sight; yet when God left him to try him,
that he might know all that was in his Heart, he rendered not again according to
the benefit done unto him: for his Heart was lifted up, 2 Chronicles. 32.25, 31.

Certain it is, by David's and other Holy men's example, that God does sometimes
leave men to themselves for a time, so as to fall into such Sins as deprive
them of the Joy of God's Salvation, and the establishing virtue of God's
Spirit; so as not to be so active and constant in the exercise of Godliness as
formerly; at least for a time: else why does David pray, in the next verse to
my Text, Restore unto me the Joy of thy Salvation, and uphold me with thy free
Spirit? And however the event be, yet there is great danger of an utter Loss of
the Spirit of God, not only in respect of its Comforts and Motions, but also
of its inexistence and quickening virtue, when men are so overcome by Lust as
Solomon and David, or Fear as Peter, or other Temptations, to sin so foully as
they did.

The Reason whereof is, because such Sins do grieve and vex the Holy Spirit.
For though the Spirit of God be not subject to humane Passions; yet the Holy
Scripture, as it ascribes Repentance and some other Affections of men to God,
so does it attribute Grief to the Holy Spirit, Ephesians. 4.30. where it minds us
that we grieve not the Holy Spirit of God, whereby we are sealed unto the day
of redemption, in respect of the effect that Grief has in man, which makes him
withdraw from that which grieves him. And so says the Book entitled the
Wisdom of Solomon, Chap. 1.4, 5. For into a malicious Soul Wisdom shall not
enter, nor dwell in the body that is subject to Sin. For the holy Spirit of
discipline will fly deceit, and remove from thoughts that are without
understanding, and will not abide where Unrighteousness comes in. Contraria se
invicem expellunt: There is a Contrariety between God's Spirit of Holiness, and
man's spirit that loves or yields to Unholiness; and therefore they consist not
together. And God does also justly deprive persons of that great Gift of his
Spirit, when they resist it, when they vex it, so as to make it become their
Enemy: as Princes take away their Favors and Offices and Honors which they
have conferred, when they are contemned, and abused against them. And therefore
a Penitent Sinner, being sensible of his Danger, deprecates the ablation of
God's Spirit, though deserved by his Sin, as David in my Text, which is the

III. OBSERVATION.
That a Repenting Sinner is an earnest Suitour to God for the Continuance of
his Spirit to him.

It is the doleful Expostulation of the people of God, Isa. 63.17. who had
rebelled, and vexed God's Spirit, so as to make him their Enemy, verse. 10. when
they repented, and discerned their Error, and begged his Return, O Lord, why
have thou made us to err from thy ways, and hardened our heart from thy Fear?
return for thy servants sake. They at last find the miss of God's Spirit, as
that which yielded them the greatest Safety and chiefest Happiness. They find
that they, by their not cherishing God's Spirit, but unkind usage, have driven
away their best Friend. They see that, by their Security, they have let in
their greatest Enemy.

In a word, when a Sinner has found his Misery by acting that Sin which
forfeits his interest in the Guidance and Assistence of God's Spirit, he
bewails it, and fears left an evil Spirit should possess him, and bring with it
seven more unclean spirits, worse then it self, when his house is empty, swept,
and garnished, and dwell in him, and so his end be worse then his beginning; as
it is Matthew. 12.44, 45. And therefore he begs for the Continuance of God's
Spirit, lest the unclean Spirit possess him, as it did Saul. David therefore so
earnestly here deprecates the Loss of the Holy Spirit, as remembering what
befell his Predecessor Saul: which all Penitent Sinners should likewise dread.

APPLICATION.
Now then, it concerns us all to prize the Presence and Virtue of God's Spirit
in us, as the great Gift of Heaven; and to take heed how we forfeit it by our
Sins: which if we have done, let us by Repentance bewail our Forfeiture of it,
and beg of God the Continuance of it, notwithstanding our desert to be deprived
of it.

We count the Titles and Ensigns of the Favor of a King, the Robes and
Proclamations by which he honors a Subject, of great worth. Joseph's and
Mordecai's riding and clothing by the Kings of Egypt and Persia were highly
accounted of; and the Loss of such Advancement was terrible to Haman and
others: and Fear of like Disgrace makes men beg that they may not be deprived
of them.

The having of God's Spirit is as the Seal of God, as a Robe or Diadem, as the
Ensign of the Order of the King of Heaven, as that which assures our
instatement in the rank of Nobles, which are as Angels before God.

Oh let us then value it far above all the Ensigns of Favor and Honor by
which the greatest Kings on earth testify their respect to their Favorites.
Let us take heed of rebelling, and vexing the Holy Spirit of God, lest he
become our Enemy, and sight against us. If we have by Sin endangered our Loss
of it, let us beg earnestly its Restitution: and take heed of Security and
Remissness in sowing to the Spirit, of Barrenness and Unfruitfulness in
bringing forth the Fruits of the Spirit; lest we lose its Comforts and
Operations, and our case be like Readiness, that the Spirit of God depart from us,
and an evil Spirit from the Lord possess us for ever.

It is a very sad thing, that any, in mockery and scorn, should deride the work
of God's Spirit, especially in fervent Prayer; that any should counterfeit it;
that any should ascribe that to God's Spirit, which is but their own Fancy.
Such Profaneness and Hypocrisy let us take heed of: such Fanaticism is justly
recompensed by a being possessed with Satan, in stead of God's Spirit.

But however we be free from these Evils, let us not content our selves without
the feeling and experiment of the Guidance of God's Holy Spirit by the Fruits
of it, mentioned Gal. 5.22, 23. by working out our Salvation with fear and
trembling: let us beware that a spirit of Slumber come not upon us; that we do
not by any sinful Lust provoke the Spirit to leave us. And if we have
endangered our Loss of it, Oh let us not give rest to our selves, till by
humbling our selves for our Sins, and by fervent Prayers, we recover its
inhabitation, its supporting and comforting Presence, which will stand us in
greatest stead in life and death. Which the Lord grant, etc. Amen.

LAVS DEO.
THE POWER OF True Integrity. Part I.
The Eighth SERMON.
PROVERBS xviij. 14. The Spirit of a man will sustain his Infirmity: but a
wounded Spirit who can bear?


IT was the immense Munificence of the Divine Goodness to his people the Jews,
that he not only gave them the Treasures of Egypt, but also the Riches of
Heaven, in such holy Precepts as he vouchsafed not to other Nations: so that in
respect of true Wisdom they might have exceeded the Egyptians or Greeks, if
they had applied their minds to observe them.

It was not altogether undeservedly, that Pythagoras his Poem was said to
contain Golden Verses; that others of the Greek Poets and Philosophers were for
their Sentences and Apophthegms magnified as wise above the common sort of men:
But none of them was comparable to Solomon; nor any of their Sayings equal to
his Proverbs; amongst which, this which I have pitched upon is very remarkable,
The Spirit of a man, etc.

The former part of which presupposes Man obnoxious to Infirmities: which
indeed all Experience proves true. He has Infirmities of Body: in the outward
Senses many Defects, in the other Faculties many Imperfections. Not only his
Eyes are dim, his Ears deaf, his Taste, Feeling, Smelling, decay: but also his
Memory fails, his Apprehension is shallow, his Invention dull: the whole Man is
sickly, withering, and inclining to Corruption. He has worse Infirmities of
Soul: Ignorance of God, of his Will; proneness to yield to Seducements and
Temptations of Satan; Unteachableness, and Untractableness; Passionateness,
Inconstancy, Prevalency of Lusts: by reason of which God said of the Jews,
Ezekiel. 16.30. How weak is thine Heart, seeing thou do all these things, the
work of an imperious whorish woman? Both these sorts may be well here meant;
Sickness and Sorrows, Errors and Fears: and both are supposed to be as
Burdens which depress a man. Heaviness in the heart of a man makes it stoop,
Prove. 12.25. Age and Sickness cause the Keepers of the house to tremble, and
the strong men to bow themselves, Fear to be in the way, the Grasshopper to be a
burden, Desire to fail, the silver Chord to be loosed, the golden Bowl to be
broken, the Pitcher to be broken at the Fountain, the Wheel to be broken at the
Cistern; as Solomon poetically describes that State, Eccles. 12.3, 4, 5, 6.
These and innumerable more Weaknesses are incident to Man: whereof some are
natural, common to all; some adventitious, by our own Folly, Men's
Injuriousness, the Creature's Harmfulness, God's just Judgments which happen to
men. Yet all these the Spirit of a man will sustain.

By the Spirit is no doubt meant the Soul of man, with its vital Faculties, his
Reason, Will, and Affections; of which the Apostle speaks 1 Cor. 2.11. For what
man has known the things of a man, save the Spirit of a man which is in him?
But then it must be understood of the Spirit of a man in its Rectitude and
Integrity, opposite to a wounded Spirit, as the Antithesis in the latter part
of the verse shows.

This Rectitude or Integrity of the Spirit consists,

1. In the right use of Reason, which is indeed the Sinews of the Spirit. The
less there is of Reason, the more is the imbecility of the Spirit: and the
weaker the Mind, the less is the Patience. Children can bear nothing: upon
every Lash, every motion of a Rod, presently they cry; an ugly Vizor, any
strange Noise or unexpected Accident affrights them. So it is with
weak-spirited persons; they are ready to faint at every Threat, every Frown of
a Superior: they think every Symptom of a Disease presageth Death, and
presently the Physician must be fetched; every Rumor of War puts them to a
stand what to do, where to be; every Loss is as if they were undone; every
Difficulty apprehended is as a Lion in the way.

When Gideon bids Jether his firstborn, up and slay Zeba and Zalmunna; though
they were in his hands, under his feet, yet the youth drew not his sword: for
he feared, because he was yet a youth, Judge. 8.20. Rise thou, said they then to
Gideon, and fall upon us: for as the man is, so is his strength. As is the
man's Reason and Understanding, so is his Courage and Fortitude of Spirit. Men's
cujusque is est quisque. It is not the height of the Stature, nor the bigness
of the Bone, nor the length of the Arm, nor the vigor of the Members, that
enable a person to bear or act. A little man with a lively Spirit can fight
better then a Giant that is slow in motion, and dull in contrivance: a cunning
Ulysses will overcome Difficulties, and bear Storms, better then a lusty Ajax.

Necessitas fortiter far docet, Consuetudo facile. Men that have much Wit to
find ways of evasion, Skill to apply themselves to persons and times, to
foresee Means and Events, will wind themselves out of Troubles; when a man of a
rude and boisterous Spirit, by his self-vexing, his fretfulness and fuming,
does but hamper himself the more, like the Bird that flutters in the Net.
Custom also makes many a Disease born without Disquietness, many a dangerous
Storm adventured through without Fear. The more Experience men have of
overcoming Afflictions, the more are they armed against them. Any way whereby
Reason is confirmed, Infirmities are abated. The Foresight of Evils approaching
makes them the less formidable. Those Darts pierce least, which are foreseen
best. Reason is indeed a Buckler that bears off many Blows, which would cut a
Fool to the heart. The Argument of the Apostle is rational, 1 Cor. 10.13. There
has no Temptation taken you, but such as is common to men, and therefore
should be born. Far quam sortem patiuntur omnes, Nemo recusat, is Reason in
the Poet.

How admirable were the Resolutions, how constant were the Actings of spirit in
Stoics, in bearing their Sufferings by the help of Philosophy? Pains of the
Stone, Torture of the Rack, were stoutly born without a Groan, upon such
Apprehensions as these: This Evil reaches not Me, but my Sheath; what is
common to me with Beasts, not that which is mine. The Writings of Seneca,
Epictetus, Suetonius, and others, are full to this purpose: so are the
Relations of the Lives of Philosophers. Certain it is, that for the sustaining
of humane Evils, Prudence is much availing. That of Solomon is true of it,
Eccles. 7.19. Wisdom strengthens the wise, more then ten mighty men which
are in the City.

2. But then, 2ly, Reason is much more strong, when there is with it a
Breast Plate of Righteousness, a Conscience of Uprightness. This is indeed
Armor of proof, such as no Infirmities, no sad Accidents can penetrate. Then
is the Spirit of a Man whole and sound, able to bear its Burdens of
Afflictions and Injuries, when he is Integer vitae, Scelerisque purus, of an
innocent Life, and unspotted Conscience. Yea, such has been the height of
Confidence in some moral Heathens, such their Heroic Gallantry, that they have
provoked the most barbarous Tyrants to do their worst; have gloriously
triumphed in the severest Tortures; have vaunted of an undaunted mind, though
Heaven and Earth should be tumbled together. Si fractus illabatur Orbis,
Impavidum ferient Ruinae.

What glorious talk have the Stoics of their Virtues, as of themselves
sufficient to make them happy under any Pressures? What sullen (if not
well-composed) Deportment of Spirit have some of them showed under Racks,
Strappado's, and such like Engines of Cruelty? What Euthymy or Tranquillity of
mind have they had in Sicknesses, yea in Death, when (Conscientia recte
factorum) the consciousness of their well-doing, specially for their Country,
has animated them, like strong Wine which chears the heart?

Holy Believers have (if not with so daring a Spirit, yet with a calmer and
more gentle Submission to the Will of God) held up their heads under the
greatest Rebukes of God's Hand, or Satan's Malice, when they have appealed to
God concerning their Sincerity in their Obedience to God's Will. When Hezekiah
was sick unto death, and Isaiah the Prophet, the Son of Amoz, came unto him,
and said, Thus says the Lord, Set thine house in order, for thou shall die,
and not live; he turned his face toward the Wall, and prayed unto the Lord,
and said, Remember now, O Lord, I beseech thee, how I have walked before thee
in truth, and with a perfect Heart, and have done that which is good in thy
sight, Isa. 38.1, 2, 3. He was under a mortal Disease, with sense of killing
Pain; had a sharp Message by the Prophet, which might cut him to the heart: yet
this did not sink him, but that he held up, so as, in the Conscience of his
Uprightness, to urge God to revoke his Sentence, and lengthen his Life.

But of all the Instances of mere mortal men's enduring Afflictions, no Example
is like that transcendent Mirror of Patience, holy Job; for, notwithstanding
all the Adversities wherewith Satan had laden him, notwithstanding the
Provocation of his froward Wife, notwithstanding the injurious Criminations of
his evilsurmizing Friends, and the cross Arguings wherewith they a long while
baited him, yet he stood firm, fell not into any kind of Dejectedness of mind,
or Despair of a good issue out of his Temptations: though he swam in rough
waters against the stream, yet he kept up his head. The knowledge of his
Purity, the assurance of his Witness in heaven, supported him with strength to
undergo all his Sores, to refute all his Adversaries, to conquer Satan, and to
recover out of his Fluctuations, so as with greater advantage to get safe to
Land, and to improve his Losses to a greater increase of Favor and Acceptance
with God, and temporal Prosperity.

Saint Paul, even when the malignant Jews came about him like Bees, and were
prepared to sting him to death, before their malevolent Council, bore himself
up with this Protestation, that he had lived in all good Conscience before God
to that day, Act. 23.1. And this made him bold before Felix, when he could say
in truth, Herein do I exercise my self, to have always a Conscience void of
offense toward God and toward men, Act. 24.16. When he reasoned of
Righteousness, Temperance, and Judgment to come, before Felix the Governor,
and Drusilla his Wife, which was a Jewess, he was without Fear; whereas Felix
(whose Prisoner he was) trembled, verse. 25.

In a word, though he had Afflictions as much as any, yet in them all he
rejoiced in this, that he had the Testimony of his Conscience, that in
Simplicity and godly Sincerity, not with fleshly Wisdom, but by the Grace of
God, he had his Conversation in the world; even at that time of his Trouble in
which he was pressed out of measure, above strength, insomuch that he despaired
even of life, 2 Cor. 1.8, 12.

3. But there is yet a third Prop of the Spirit of a man, (besides right
Reason, Prudence, and conscience of Innocence,) which does enable it to sustain
its Infirmities more steadily then the rest; and that is Faith in God through
Jesus Christ, the chief part of the Divine Panoply, or whole Armor of God.

And indeed Faith is the best Cordial to sustain the Spirit of a man in his
Infirmities, be they never so great: by reason of which the same Apostle could
say of himself out of experience, 2 Cor. 4.8, 9, 11. We are troubled on every
side, yet not distressed; we are perplexed, but not in despair; persecuted, but
not forsaken; cast down, but not destroyed: always delivered to death for Jesus
sake; yet the spirit of Faith, verse. 13. so upheld him, that, though the Holy
Ghost witnessed in every city, saying that Bonds and Afflictions did abide him,
yet none of those things did move him, Act. 20.23, 24. He was so rooted and
grounded in Faith, that (whatever inward Decays he found, whatever outward
Storms beat upon him, yet) his Spirit stood firm with unmovable Resolution.

So it was with David at Ziklag: when his Fellow Soldiers with himself had
their City burnt, their Wives, Children and Goods carried away captive by the
Amalckites, he was greatly distressed; for the people spoke of stoning him,
because the soul of all the people was grieved, every man for his Sons and for
his Daughters: yet he encouraged himself in the Lord his God, 1 Samuel 30.6.

Faith then showed its virtue; it strengthened his Heart, when the rest of the
people in a womanish Sorrow fell a-weeping; and he betook himself to God, to
inquire what was to be done: which was followed with such Success, that he
recovered all that was lost.

But what speak I of these Infirmities, these Afflictions, which are nothing in
comparison of what the Holy Martyrs bare through Faith? of whom we read, Heb.
11.35, 36, 37. that though they were tortured, yet they accepted not
deliverance, that they might obtain a better Resurrection: that when they had
trial of cruel Mockings and Scourgings, of Bonds and Imprisonments, were
stoned, were sawed asunder, were tempted, were slain with the sword, were
destitute, afflicted, tormented, they could take joyfully the spoiling of their
goods, Heb. 10.34. and so contentedly undergo their Sufferings, as to take
their Persecutours for their best Benefactours, and make the sweetest Melody in
the most scorching Flames.

Innumerable Arguments Faith presents to the Spirit, from God's Presence,
Appointment, Love, Power, Promises, which do invincibly arm a Believer in all
Perils, in all Assaults, in all Oppressions, and make him invulnerable. Reason
enables the Spirit of a man to sustain his Infirmities stoutly, a good
Conscience comfortably, Faith triumphantly.

APPLICATION.
And now give me leave to apply this to your use. You are often told (and if
you were not, your Eyes and Ears and other Senses might inform you,) that Man
that is born of a woman is of few days, and full of trouble. Which of you
(unless besotted with vain Dreams, or drunken with sinful Pleasures) but has
some foresight of imminent Dangers, some foretaste of future Sicknesses, and
consequent Dissolution?

Is there any of you of so unshaken a Spirit, as that none of the things ye
feel or fear do in the least move you? Why do you distill Hot waters, but to
revive you in Faintings? why do you get Friends, but to help you in Troubles?
why do you take Physic, but to help you in your Infirmities? why do you lay
up, some Money, others Counsel, but to provide for times of Affliction? But
do you any thing to enable your Spirit to sustain you in your Infirmities? I
deny not but the Providence you use may be commendable: but if there be no more
then that, it will be insufficient.

Some Infirmities may be remedied by natural Means; some may be prevented by
moral Prudence: but the Decumane waves of Sickness and Death, the thoughts of
Sin's Guilt, and of Judgment to come, require a better Anchour then these to
keep you up from being drowned, when the Conscience of the one, and the Fear of
the other, beat upon the Vessel of your Spirit.

These Storms your Soul will not ride out, without the Conscience of a Reformed
life, without the strong Cable of a fast-holding Faith, the sure Anchour of a
lively Hope in Christ. All the Trimming and Tackling besides, be it Wealth,
Friends, Beauty, Bravery, yea, though it be a Form of Godliness, a strict
Profession, with some measure of Sufferings for the Truth, will not keep you
from Sinking, without an upright Heart, an unfeigned Faith, a stable Hope in
Jesus Christ. Whatever you do then, let these never be wanting in the Closet
of your Breasts: make not Shipwreck of Faith and a good Conscience; whatever
you lose, lose not them: yea, have them always in a readiness, when any thing
happens which may oppress you with Fear, or sink you with Sorrow.

Yea, forget not to exercise your Faith in God, your Hope in Christ,
continually; that when you shall need them, you may not only have them in
habit, but also in use; not only in the Root, but also in the Fruit.

Let your Life be a Life of Faith; your Breath be a Breathing of Hope in God:
and then you may be assured, though your Body fall to the ground, your Spirit
will mount upward to God that gave it. Which He grant, etc. Amen.

LAVS DEO.
THE WEAKNESS OF A Wounded Spirit. Part II.
The Ninth SERMON.
PROVE. xviij. 14. But a wounded Spirit who can bear?


THE Life of man on Earth consists of Action and Passion; of Doing his Work,
and Bearing his Condition: And in both these there are innumerable
Difficulties; so that it becomes a hard Task, either to do what we ought, or
to suffer as it becomes us. In Doing our Work we are commonly unskilful and
slothful: In Bearing our Burdens we are querulous and unquiet. Man is born
like a wild Asse's Coli, (says Zophar, Job 11.12.) If you drive him, he will
not go rightly: if you put Burdens on him, he will throw them off if he can;
if he cannot remove them, he will wince and kick, especially when his Back is
sore, his Mind galled: in which case this of Solomon is by much experience
found true, A wounded Spirit who can bear? So we read; but the Vulgar Latin
has it, Who shall be able to sustain the Spirit that is easy to be angry?

But the word is more general, and signifies not so much the Passions of one to
be born by another; in which case it is a truth, That the Wrath, Envy,
Insolency of some men's Spirits is intolerable, as it is Prove. 27.4. Wrath is
cruel, and Anger is outrageous: but who is able to stand before Envy? But it is
rather to be understood of the person's Spirit who is to bear; Who of all men
can bear his own Spirit when it is wounded or broken? so as in that case his
own Ability and all other men's is insufficient to bear up such a wounded
Spirit. Such a man is (...), as the Greek expresses it, one that has but a
little life in him. It is only God that revives the Spirit of the humble, and
revives the Heart of the contrite ones, Isa. 57.15.

Now the Spirit is wounded or broken either by worldly Sorrows; By Sorrow of
the heart the Spirit is broken, says Solomon, Prove. 15.13. and S. Paul, 2 Cor.
7.10. Worldly Sorrow causes death: or else it is broken by the sense of Guilt,
and the fear of Wrath. In respect of which David complains, that his Bones were
broken, Psalm. 51.8. and more fully Psalm. 38.2, etc. Thine Arrows stick fast in
me, and thy Hand presses me sore. There is no soundness in my flesh, because
of thine Anger; neither is there any rest in my bones, because of my Sin. For
mine Iniquities are gone over my head; as an heavy burden, they are too heavy
for me to bear. My Wounds stink and are corrupt, through my foolishness. I am
troubled, I am bowed down greatly, I go mourning all the day long. For my
Loins are filled with a loathsome disease, and there is no soundness in my
flesh. I am feeble and sore broken: I have roared by reason of the Disquietness
of my heart.

In both these sorts of Wounds, Experience has proved the Imbecility of men's
Spirits to bear them, or of any other man to keep them from falling, until
there appear (Deus e machina) Divine help from Heaven.

So that I am to demonstrate to you, That in the great Pressures of Spirit
(either through worldly Afflictions, or by reason of the Conscience of Sin) no
man is able to hold up himself from sinking, nor can any other support him,
besides God; with the Reason hereof: That God only makes up the breach, and
closes the Wounds in the Spirit; and how he does it.

That worldly Crosses break men's Spirits, so as that they are weary of their
Lives, is evident in the instance of Ahitophel, who was counted so wise a man,
that his Counsel was reputed as if a man had inquired of the Oracle of God; yet
barely because he saw his Counsel was not followed by Absalom, (God so
overruling the heart of Absalom, that he hearkened to Hushai rather then to
himself,) his Spirit could not bear this Disappointment of his Design, (to be
the grand Minister of State under Absalom,) but, in stead of dissembling his
Grievance, he saddled his Ass, got him home to his City, put his house in
order, hanged himself, died, and was buried in the Sepulcher of his Fathers, 2 Samuel 17.23. Many more such Examples of men eminent in respect of Wisdom,
Dignity, Power, Wealth, who upon some unexpected Loss, Fear, perhaps but the
angry Looks of a Prince, the Expulsion from Court, or Deprivation of an Office,
have been impatient of their Lives, and turned Executioners of themselves, may
be found in Histories, or known by our own Experience.

And the Reason hereof is, from the extreme Folly that is in men, who lay so
great a stress of their Happiness upon worldly things, that when they fail
them, their case seems deplorable, they have no Buttress to keep up their
Spirits.

How great a number are there, that trust in uncertain Riches, and not in the
living God? And therefore when the Prop of their Wealth is gone, then all is
gone with them; their Hearts are faint, and they cast away their Life, as if it
were an unsupportable Burden to them.

How many are there that depend on the Prince's Favor, and make such account
of Preferment by it, that all their study is to get and keep it, though with
the loss of God's Favor? But that being changeable, and their Hopes thereupon
frustrated, there is no Acquiescence in God's Will, but violent Impatience,
till they have dispatched themselves.

How many have so set their Affections on some particular person, (as Amnon on
Tamar,) that they wax lean from day to day, because they cannot obtain their
desire? Yea, the Inconstancy of their Mistress, the miss of the hoped Match,
shortens their Lives, brings down their heads with Sorrow to the Grave.

And it is just with God it should be so, that those things should be cursed to
us, be as blasted Trees, from which we seek that Fruit, that Content, and those
Enjoyments, which alone are to be had in God's Favor. When our Hearts wander
after some Creature, and make it as our God, love it, trust in it, in stead of
God himself; he will not brook it, but remove it, or make it our Vexation; make
it become our Perdition, which was the means of our Corruption.

This is much more true, when the Spirit is wounded by the Conscience of Sin
against God. In the former, there is defect of Love to God; in this, express
Enmity against him; and therefore it is more intolerable. Cain's Complaint,
Genesis 4.13. verifies this, whether we read, My Punishment is greater then I can
bear; or, Mine Iniquity is greater then that it may be forgiven. How doleful
was his complaint, when he said, Behold, thou have driven me out this day from
the face of the earth, and from thy Face shall I be hid, and I shall be a
Fugitive and a Vagabond in the earth: and it shall come to pass, that every one
that finds me shall slay me? verse. 14. How terribly did the Sting of
Conscience exagitate him, when he went out from the Presence of the Lord, and
dwelt in the Land of Nod, as a Renegado from God, and one that was pursued by
his own Bloud-guiltiness?

Nor is the Case of Judas less pregnant, to demonstrate how furious and
inevitable is the pursuit of a guilty Conscience. He had sold his Master, the
Lord of Glory, for thirty pieces of Silver: but his Money was as Fire in his
Bosom: the remembrance of his devilish Act did so envenome his Spirit, that
he could find no Rest, till he had disgorged his Money, and rid himself of his
Life too. So that of him was verified what Zophar spoke of others, who sin in
like manner, Job 20.12, 13, 14, 15, 16. Though Wickedness be sweet in the
Mouth, though a man hide it under his Tongue: Though he spare it, and forsake
it not, but keep it still within his Mouth: Yet his Meat in his Bowels is
turned, it is the Gall of Asps within him. He has swallowed down Riches, and
he shall vomit them up again: God shall cast them out of his Belly. He shall
suck the poison of Asps, the Viper's tongue shall slay him. How many Myriads of
men have there been in the Ages of the world, who have ventured upon Sin
without Fear; have blessed themselves in the Success of their unrighteous
Projects; have delightfully for a season satiated themselves with the enjoyment
of their prohibited Lusts? yet in the conclusion, the Remembrance thereof has
been as a Fire in their Bones; as a heavy Burden, that neither their own
strength nor the help of other men could support them under.

And the Reason hereof is, Because to them that obey Unrighteousness, there is
Indignation and Wrath from God; and consequently, Tribulation and Anguish upon
every Soul of man that does evil, Romans 2.8, 9. And this is that which makes
the Heart to be affected as Belshazzar's was: When he saw the finger of a man's
hand writing over against the Candlestick, and upon the plaster of the Wall of
the King's Palace, his Countenance was changed, and his Thoughts troubled him,
so that the Joints of his Loins were loosed, and his Knees smote one against
another.

How shall thy hands be strong (says God to the Jews, Ezekiel. 22.14.) when I
shall deal with thee? The Sinners in Zion are afraid, fearfulness has
surprised the Hypocrites: who among us shall dwell with the devouring fire? who
among us shall dwell with everlasting burnings? Isa. 33.14. Therefore the Lord
says, I will not contend for ever, neither will I be always wroth: for the
Spirit should fail before me, and the Souls which I have made, Isa. 57.16.
Which leads us to that which is intimated,

OBSERVATION.
That though the Spirit of man, when it is wounded with worldly Sorrows, or
with Conscience of Sin, cannot sustain it self from sinking; yet the Lord can
and does support it.

This is verified by experience in holy Job, then whom none was ever more
sorely handled, (except our Lord Christ, when he bare our Sins in his Body on
the Tree,) insomuch that he complained, Job 6.4. For the Arrows of the Almighty
are within me, the poison whereof drinks up my Spirit: the Terrors of God do
set themselves in array against me: yet did the Consolations of God so support
him, that he could allege, Behold, my Witness is in Heaven, and my Record is on
high, Job 16.19. so as that he could never be drawn to disclaim his own
Uprightness, or God's Righteousness.

Holy Paul, though he were abundant in Sufferings, so that he had the sentence
of death in himself, yet he would not relinquish his Trust in God, whom he
found the Father of Mercies, and the God of all Comfort: so as that, with the
abounding of his Sufferings, he had also abounding Consolation.

After the like sort was it with Christ Jesus: who though he was in great Agony
in the Garden, so that his Soul was heavy unto death; in the days of his flesh
he offered up Prayers and Supplications, with strong Crying and Tears, unto him
that was able to save him from death; yet he was heard in that he feared, Heb.
5.7.

David, after he had committed that Sin against Vriah the Hittite, when Nathan
had discovered the Evil thereof, His Bones waxed old, through his Roaring all
the day long; Day and night the Hand of God was heavy upon him; His moisture
was turned into the drought of Summer; His Bones, his Soul were sore vexed;
Innumerable Evils compassed him about; His Iniquities took hold upon him, so
that he was not able to look up, therefore his heart failed him: yet God
restored unto him the Joy of his Salvation, upheld him with his free Spirit,
took away his Sackcloath, and girded him with Gladness.

The ways that God takes to sustain the Spirits of men in their Infirmities
are various. Sometimes by allaying the Sharpness of their Afflictions:
sometimes by a mixture of outward or inward Refreshings: sometimes by
moderating their Temptations, not suffering them to be tempted above that they
are able, but with the Temptation making a way to escape, that they may be able
to bear it; making it short, though it be sharp.

But the chief way whereby the Lord supports the Spirit, when it sinks of it
self, is by giving to some the tongue of the learned, that they may know how to
speak a word in season to him that is weary, Isa. 50.4. whose business it is
first to humble, to search the Wound; and then to pour in Oil: first to
discover the Malady; and then to apply the Medicine.

This method is described at large by Elihu, Job 33. from verse. 15. to v. 29.
When God has spoken to man in sleep, and otherwise, to open his ears, to seal
his Instruction, to withdraw him from his purposes, to hide Pride from man: He
chasteneth him upon his Bed, and the multitude of his Bones with strong pains;
so that his Soul draws near unto the Grave, and his Life to the Destroyers.
Yet if there be a Messenger with him, an Interpreter, one among a thousand, to
show unto man his Vprightness, to make known to him the Atonement which is made
by the Blood of the everlasting Covenant; when he washes himself with
penitential Tears, and sprinkles his Conscience with the Blood of Christ by
Faith: Then he is gracious unto him, and says, Deliver him from going down to
the Pit, I have found a Ransom. He shall pray unto God, and he will be
favorable unto him; and he shall see his face with Joy: for he will render
unto man his Righteousness. If when God looks upon men, they say, We have
sinned, and perverted that which was right, and it profited us not: He will
deliver their Soul from going into the Pit, and their Life shall see the Light.

Thus did Hezekiah find it, as he acknowledges, Isa. 38.16, 17. O Lord, by
these things men live, and in all these things is the life of my Spirit: (that
is, by God's undertaking for him, verse. 14.) so will thou recover me, and make
me to live. Behold, for Peace, I had great Bitterness; but thou have in love to
my Soul delivered it from the Pit of corruption: for thou have cast all my Sins
behind thy back. Thus he creates the fruit of the lips, Peace, Peace to him
that is afar off, and to him that is near, and heals them, Isa. 57.19.

Men sin, and then God scourges; they cry, and God sends his Messenger to
teach them; they are humbled for Sin, and fly to the Blood of Christ for Peace:
Believing in him, they obtain Reconciliation; being reconciled, the Spirit of
Christ, as the Comforter, is given them, to make known the things that are
freely given by God: hence comes Joy in believing, and Hope of the Inheritance
of life, by which they are supported; which I was to demonstrate.

APPLICATION.
And now this belongs to you, that so many of you as have by proof found the
truth of this may be thankful; so many as do or shall need these directions,
may wisely make use of them. You are all of you yet in the Body, and this Body
you bear about you is a Body of Sin and Death: and perhaps you have been
affected as S. Paul was, when he cried out, O wretched man that I am! who shall
deliver men from the Body of this death? Romans 7.24.

If you have not found it already, you may expect such a sense of your
Infirmities, as may perhaps make you tremble and quake, bemoan God's Absence
from you; and from the words of your Roaring, you may find Wounds in your
Spirit, and Breach in your Bones. Conscience of Sin, sense of God's Rod on your
backs, may make you cry out in the bitterness of your Soul for Ease and Help.

If any of you have already found your selves in this Case, you are able to
tell how weak your Spirit has been, either to avoid or bear the Blows of God's
Hand. Only they are happy in such a case who can truly say, I thank God
through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Sure all others are Physicians of no value. It is in vain to imagine any solid
Comfort to your Spirit by a Pope's Pardon, or a Priest's Absolution, or any
other Remedy, which either your own Mind or others Wit can minister to you for
your Ease or Recovery. It is only the Balm of the Gospel, the Physician of
Heaven, that can make a perfect Cure. Without these some Mountebanks may make a
palliated Cure, but the Sore will break out again.

Oh then be sure to take home with you this Receipt, write upon it Probatum
est: No Medicine like God's Favor, obtained by sound Humiliation, true
Repentance, unfeigned Faith in the Blood of Christ, to heal your Plagues,
whether from God's Judgments, or your own Fears.

Keep this as the only Plague-water, make use of it toties quoties, as often as
you find need, in life and death. And when you have found Refreshing in your
Spirits by it, forget not to lift up your eyes to the Father of Spirits, both
by acknowledgment of what Support you have had, and by seeking such farther
Comfort from him as you may need.

I shall dismiss you with S. Paul's prayer, 2 These. 2.16, 17. Now our Lord
Jesus Christ himself, and God even our Father, which has loved us, and has
given us everlasting Consolation, and good Hope through Grace, comfort your
hearts, and stablish you in every good word and work. To whom, with the Blessed
Spirit, be ascribed, etc. Amen.

LAVS DEO.
PIETY THE DESIGN of PARDON.
The Tenth SERMON.
PSALM cxxx. 4. But there is Mercy, or Forgiveness, with thee, that thou may
be feared.


THIS Psalm is one of the Fifteen which are entitled Songs of Degrees. For
what reason they are so called, is variously conjectured, but not certainly
determined. It is also one of the Seven termed Penitential Psalms. The matter
of it is Supplication, with a declaration of the Psalmist's Resolution or
Practice, v. 5, 6. and an Exhortation to wait and hope in God, as he did, with
assurance of God's Graciousness and Merciful intention to Israel, verse. 7, 8.

The Supplication expresses the state he was in. De profundis, Out of the
Depths; that is, deep Mire or Waters: by which are signified great Calamities,
Psalm. 69.2, 14, 15. such as those are in that are put into a Dungeon, as
Jeremiah was, Jer. 38.6. or that are cast into a deep River, Sea or Lake, in
which they are like to be overwhelmed. It notes some great Affliction; whether
inward or outward, private or public, is not certain; though the words in
verse. 3, 4. seem to intimate it to have been inward, out of the sense of Sin,
and terror of Soul by reason of it.

In this condition, he says, he called or cried to God: and his Cry was,

1. In general for Audience; Lord, hear my voice: let thine ears be attentive
to the voice of my Supplications, verse. 2. 2. With Confession of his
Guiltiness; verse. 3. If thou, Lord, should mark Iniquities. 3. With imploring
and confident application of Forgiveness, in my Text; But there is Mercy, or
Forgiveness, with thee, that thou may be feared.
Whether the word be read Mercy, or Forgiveness, it is not much material;
saving that this latter is more agreeable to the words, and to the Coherence
with verse. 3. and better expresses, the particular Mercy meant here. The Greek
has it (...), with thee is Propitiation, or Appeasing: which is either the
same with Forgiveness, or connexed with it. Nor is it of any moment whether we
read For, or But; save that this latter is more apposite to the matter. And it
is all to one purpose, whether we read with thee, or from thee, the Hebrew
particle signifying both; save that this latter is more expressive of the
sense. And the meaning is the same with that in Daniel 9.9. To the Lord our God
belong Mercies and Forgiveness, though we have rebelled against him. The latter
part of the verse is otherwise read by the Greek and Vulgar Latin upon
mistakes, which Learned men in their Annotations take notice of. (Doctor
Hammond on this place.) But the reading according to the Original is, for thy
fear; which is all one with our Translation, that thou may be feared; that
is, reverenced, worshipped, and obeyed, which are usually comprehended under
the Fear of God. The Truths included in this passage are, 1. That there is
Forgiveness with or from God. 2. That this Forgiveness engages or encourages
men to fear him.


Of these in their order.

I. OBSERVATION.
That there is Forgiveness with or from God.

That God is a pardoning God, is the Assertion of God himself, in that
Proclamation in which he told Moses, he would make all his Goodness to pass
before him: which was thus delivered, Exodus 34.6, 7. The Lord, the Lord God,
merciful and gracious, long-suffering, and abundant in Goodness and Truth,
keeping Mercy for thousands, forgiving Iniquity, Transgression and Sin.
Conformable whereunto, in that Prayer of Nehemiah, (9.17.) it is said, Thou art
a God ready to pardon, or, a God of Pardons; gracious and merciful, slow to
anger, and of great Kindness. And the Prophet Isa. (55.7.) exhorts the wicked
to return unto the Lord, and he will have mercy on him; and to our God, for he
will abundantly pardon.

It is then one of God's Jewels, which his Crown is set with, that he is not
as a cruel Tyrant or infernal Fiend, with whom there is nothing but Cruelty
and Mischievousness: but as a gracious King or loving Father, in whom is
Clemency as well as Justice, affectionate Forgiveness as well as severe
Correction. Which that we may the better conceive, (it being that on which our
Life lies,) it will be requisite that we consider, 1. What Sins God forgives.
2. For what Motive. 3. To whom he forgives them. 4. Why he forgives them.


I. For the first, our Savior has resolved it in express terms, Mark 3.28,
29. Verily I say unto you, All Sins shall be forgiven to the sons of men, and
Blasphemies wherewithsoever they shall blaspheme: But he that blasphemeth
against the Holy Ghost has never Forgiveness, but is in danger of eternal
Damnation.

What this Sin is, and whether any be at this day guilty of it, is a Question
that requires some disquisition. The Schoolmen (as Aquinas) make six Species of
the Sin against the Holy Ghost; Despair, Presumption, Impenitency, Obstinacy,
Impugning the acknowledged Truth, and Envying our Brother's Grace.

Protestant Divines, taking in other Texts, out of the Epistles to the Hebrews
and Titus, and out of S. John's 1. Epistle, have formed such a Definition as
this, That it is a Blaspheming against the Gospel of Christ, testified by a
clear Conviction of the Spirit of God in the heart of the Blasphemer, arising
out of a spightfull Hatred and obstinate Rejection of that Truth and Testimony
of and by which he was convinced, causing an oppugning of it and the Avouchers
of it, upon the strong possession Satan has got in his Heart.

But the Text, Mark 3.30. in which it is added, Because they said, He has an
unclean Spirit, does seem to restrain it to that spightfull belying Christ's
Miracles, (done by the Spirit of God most evividently, so as that they could
not gainsay it,) as if they were done by the Prince of Devils, and Christ were
possessed and acted by an Unclean Spirit. Which makes it very probable, that
none at this day can (as things are) commit it, there being no such Miracles
now done, as can evidently show the Operation of the Holy Spirit to be
blasphemed, as it was by the Pharisees. Nor is Julian the Apostate sufficiently
proved (however so judged by some of the Ancients) to have committed this Sin.

Much less have any of those doubting Souls, who, by reason of their Tenderness
of Conscience, (which makes them very jealous and fearful of their own
Condition,) have been apt to charge themselves with this Sin, any reason so to
do; they being guilty of no such Blasphemy in words, Rejecting of Christ,
Speaking evil of his Spirit or its Operations, Oppugning of the Gospel, or the
Believers of it; nor of any Obstinacy in any course of open Persecution, or
Disclaiming Christ and his Gospel.

Perhaps this which I have said may be of great use to some doubting and
troubled Spirits, who put themselves on the Rack, through Mistakes arising from
the Weakness of their Understandings, and the Fearfulness of their Hearts.

As for any other Sins, they are not in their own nature unpardonable: other
Blasphemies are pardonable. Peter's Denying Christ (though with Cursing himself
if he knew him, yet) had Pardon. Manasseh, though notorious for his Cruelties,
as filling Jerusalem with innocent Blood, even of the Prophets of God, though
infamous for his setting up the most abominable Idolatries of the Gentiles,
though proceeding so far as to use Familiar spirits, yet when he was humbled,
and prayed to God in his Affliction, God heard him, and forgave him, 2 Chronicles.
33.12, 13. I instance in these, as seeming to come nighest to the Sin against
the Holy Ghost: the one sinning against Knowledge, after Warning, and solemn
Promise to the contrary; the other offending in the most heinous manner, in
Sins of the greatest Guilt, with extreme Wilfulness and Violence.

Not to mention the Sins of David, or Lot, or Noah, or Solomon: If Cain meant
it as the Vulgar Latin has it, Genesis 4.13. My Sin is greater then can be
forgiven; it might well be replied to him, Mentiris, Cain, Thou lie, Cain:
Thy Sin might have been forgiven, if thou had had a penitent Heart, and had
begged Pardon from God. Though in the Law God would not forgive some Sins, as
Blasphemy, Murder, Adultery, Sins with an high hand, so as to expiate them by
Sacrifice, and free the Sinner from death: though God swear to Eli, that the
Iniquities of his House should not be purged with Sacrifice nor Offerings for
ever, 1 Samuel 3.14. though he never will pardon the Sin of Devils, of Judas the
Son of Perdition, nor the final Impenitent and Unbeliever: Yet Christ tells us
plainly, No kind of Sin or Blasphemy (except one) but is pardonable to the sons
of men.

II. But then, upon what Motive God forgiveth Sins, is to be farther considered.

They that say that any Sins against God are venial ex genere suo, the whole
kind of them of their own Nature; as having an evil or inordinate thing for
their Object, but not against the Love of God or our Neighbor; or by reason of
the Smalness of the matter in which, or the sudden Motion by which they are
done; speak otherwise then the Scripture, which makes the Wages of Sin simply,
and every Sin, death, Romans 6.23. and him cursed who continues not in every
thing written in the Law to do it, Gal. 3.10. They derogate from the efficacy
of Christ's Blood, which alone is it that cleanses from all Sin; make it a
light matter to sin against the Most high and infinite Majesty; would excuse
our First Parents Sin; and harden men in Impenitency.

And when they make voluntary Works of Penance Satisfaction for such Sins,
Priests Absolutions, Popes Pardons, and saying of Divine Offices for the
Sinner, sufficient to take away the Guilt of Sin against God; though they
provide for their accursed Gain, yet they derogate from the Necessity and alone
Sufficiency of Christ's Blood, who is the only Advocate with the Father, and
the Propitiation for our Sins, and the Sins of the whole world, 1 John 2.1, 2.

We learn Heb. 9.22. that without shedding of blood is no Remission: and that
though the Sacrifices of the Law might procure Forgiveness in respect of some
Penalties, and sanctify to the purifying of the Flesh; yet that it is the Blood
of Christ alone (who through the eternal Spirit offered himself without spot to
God) that can purge our Consciences from dead works, to serve the living God,
verse. 14. and that it is for Christ's sake (whom God has set forth to be a
Propitiation, through faith in his Blood, to declare his Righteousness for the
Remission of Sins that are past, through the forbearance of God, Romans 3.25.)
that God does forgive any Sins of any persons, Ephesians. 4.32. Not for any Saint's
or Martyr's Intercession; or any Surplusage of Merits in the Treasury of the
Church, distributed by the Pope's Indulgence; or for the bare Work done, of
saying Mass, singing Dirges, or other Offices, for a person deceased; or merely
for the Priest's Absolution upon Auricular Confession in the Sacrament of
Penance; or for any humane Satisfaction whatsoever: but by the Expiation of
Christ's Blood, and his Intercession for them to whom Sins are forgiven; though
not without their due Qualifications, which are next to be considered.

III. The Persons to whom God forgives Sins are not all whatsoever. There are,
that, after their hardness and impenitent Heart, treasure up unto themselves
Wrath against the day of Wrath, and revelation of the righteous Judgment of
God, Romans 2.5. Nor all that are in the visible Church, that have been baptized
into the Name of Christ. Notwithstanding Simon Magus believed, was baptized,
continued with Philip, and wondered beholding the Miracles and Signs which were
done: yet when, by his offer of Money for the power of bestowing the Holy
Ghost, his Heart appeared not right in the sight of God, S. Peter admonishes
him to repent of that his Wickedness, and pray God, if perhaps the thoughts of
his Heart might be forgiven him, Act. 8.13, 21, 22. But,

1. They to whom God forgives Sins must be real and unfeigned Penitents; such
as are sensible of their Sins, and the Desert of them; such as are humbled in
their own eyes, yea so as to loath themselves for their Iniquities; such as
have that Sorrow which is after God, that works Repentance not to be repented
of. Such a Repentance as is not for some Sins only, but for all; not only for
Sins open and notorious, but also for Sins secret, and known to themselves and
God alone; not only for Sins of outward Action or Words, but also for Sins of
Thought, of evil Concupiscence; not only for Sins of Commission, but also for
Sins of Omission: and according to the degrees of them, with a proportionable
degree of Sorrow; so as to mourn much, where the Sin has been very heinous, as
David's was. And that not only by reason of the Affliction consequent, Danger
of Hell, or Infamy; but also for the Dishonouring of God, and the Offending of
him, not only as a severe Judge, but also an indulgent Father. Against thee,
thee only, have I sinned, and done this Evil in thy sight, says David, Psalm
51.4. And, Father, (says the prodigal Son, Luke 15.21.) I have sinned against
Heaven, and in thy sight, and am no more worthy to be called thy Son. Thus S.
John Baptist preached the Baptism of Repentance for the Remission of Sins, Mark
1.4. S. Peter, Act. 2.38. Repent, and be baptized every one of you in the Name
of Jesus Christ, for the Remission of Sins. And, Repent, and be converted, that
your Sins may be blotted out, Act. 3.19. To them that thus Repent, there is
Forgiveness of Sins, not to the Impenitent and unrelenting.

2. To Repentance must be joined Confession of Sin. If we say that we have no
Sin, we deceive our selves, and the Truth is not in us. If we confess our Sins,
God is faithful and just to forgive us our Sins, and to cleanse us from all
Unrighteousness. If we say that we have not sinned, we make him a Liar, and his
word is not in us, 1 John 1.8, 9, 10. How full is the Scripture against all
Self-justitiaries, Pharisees, Philosophers, Votaries, Pelagians, Quakers, and
other Perfectionists, that boast of their own Good works, and their being free
from Sin? No marvel that they that think they have no need of Pardon, should
find none. God fills the Hungry with good things: the Rich he sends empty
away. The proud Pharisee, that talked of his own Well-doings, the boasting
Papist, that is confident of his own good Merits from God, are not capable of
Justification. It is the poor Publican, that is sensible of his Sin, that
stands afar off, that will not lift up so much as his eyes to Heaven, as being
dejected by the sense of his Sins, but smites on his breast, saying, God be
merciful to me a Sinner, that goes home justified, rather then the other; as
Christ himself has determined, Luke 18.13, 14.

When I kept silence, day and night (says David to God, Psalm. 32.3, 4, 5.) thy
Hand was heavy upon me. I acknowledged my Sin unto thee, and mine Iniquity have
I not hid. I said, I will confess my Transgression unto the Lord; and thou
forgavest the Iniquity of my Sin. There was no necessity of Auricular Popish
Confession to a Priest; his purpose of doing it to God seriously, and with true
Compunction and Contrition of Soul, was sufficient for his Pardon. David said
unto Nathan, I have sinned against the Lord: and Nathan, without injoyning him
Penance for Satisfaction, tells him immediately, The Lord also has put away
thy Sin. A free and unfeigned Confession of Sins to God never goes without
Pardon, if it be with real Sorrow, and giving to God the Glory of his Justice:
if other Qualifications be withal added, which are also to be considered;
whereof the next and third is, That there be a Forsaking of the Sin in Heart
and in Act.

3. That Sin that shall be pardoned must be hated, must be left. He that
covers his Sins shall not prosper: but whosoever confesses and forsakes them
shall have Mercy, Prove. 28.13. While we love and cherish Sin, we bid defiance
to God, and show our selves Enemies to him, and therefore can expect no Favor
from him: for he is not a God that has pleasure in Wickedness, neither shall
Evil dwell with him, says the Psalmist, Psalm. 5.4. For a man to say he is
sorry for his Sin, (as often men do,) and yet to commit it customarily again,
is indeed to belie himself. True Sorrow would make men fearful and wary how
they fall into that, for which they say they are sorry. Piscator ictus sapit:
If they were sensible of the Evil of Sin, they would dread a Relapse into it.
And besides, it is no better then a mocking of God, to confess Sin, and pray
him to forgive it, and yet to continue in the practice of it. It is all one as
if thou should beg of God to give thee a License or Dispensation to sin: as
if thou should tell him, thou have sinned indeed, but thou hopest he will not
be angry, though thou do so again: as if thou should ask of God, that he
would make void his Law for thy sake; let thee live as if thou owedst no
Subjection to him. It is to declare thy self a professed Rebel against him; to
tell him, that he shall not rule over thee; and in effect to say, Depart from
me, for I desire not the knowledge of thy ways. Much more evil is it, when men
harden themselves against Reproof; hate him that deals plainly with them,
because he shows them the Sin which they will not leave; are Enemies to him
that tells them the Truth; hate him that rebukes in the Gate, and abhor him
that speaks uprightly, Amos 5.10. Such men are so far from obtaining Pardon,
that they fall into Judas his Curse, of adding Iniquity to Iniquity, and never
come into God's Righteousness, Psalm. 69.27.

4. That Sin may be forgiven, the chiefest Qualification of all must not be
omitted, Faith in the Lord Jesus; who though he knew no Sin, yet was made Sin
for us, that we might be made the Righteousness of God in him, 2 Cor. 5.21.
This is the tenor of the Gospel, (as Christ himself instructed his Apostles,)
that Repentance and Remission of Sins should be preached in his Name among all
Nations, Luke 24.47. And accordingly S. Peter says to Cornelius, Act. 10.43.
To Christ give all the Prophets witness, that through his Name, whosoever
believes in him shall receive Remission of Sins. And S. Paul, Act. 13.38, 39.
Be it known unto you therefore, men and brethren, that through this Man is
preached unto you the Forgiveness of Sin: And by him all that believe are
justified from all things, from which ye could not be justified by the Law of
Moses. He was delivered for our Offenses, and raised for our Justification,
Romans 4.25. Christ died for our Sins, according to the Scriptures, 1 Cor. 15.3.
He was wounded for our Transgressions, he was bruised for our Iniquities: the
Chastisement of our Peace was upon him, and with his Stripes we are healed. All
we like Sheep have gone astray: we have turned every one to his own way, and
the Lord has laid on him the Iniquity of us all, Isa. 53.5, 6. His own self
bare our Sins in his own body on the Tree, 1 Pet. 2.24. These and many more
places in Holy Scripture do evince, that it is by the Death of Christ that our
Sins are remitted. And the Apostle, Heb. 10.12. tells us, that after he had
offered one Sacrifice for Sins, he sat down for ever at the right hand of God:
and, Heb. 9.24. that he is entered into heaven with his blood, to appear for us
in the presence of God: and, Heb. 10.14. that by one Offering he has for ever
perfected them that are sanctified. And therefore they that reject that
Sacrifice, and stick to the Law and its Priesthood, miss of Forgiveness of
Sins. It is impossible now, without Faith in Christ, his Death, Resurrection,
and Intercession at God's right Hand, to be free from Condemnation, and to
obtain Forgiveness. But Faith is sufficient (without the Figment of the
unbloudy Propitiatory Sacrifice offered by a Priest in the Mass) to expiate
Sin, and to obtain Remission. Whosoever therefore believes not that Christ is
he that was to come, that does not believe and trust to his Blood and
Intercession for Forgiveness with God, that trusts in the Sacrifice of the
Mass, the Milk of the Virgin Mary, the Mediation of Saints, or any other thing
besides Christ's Death and Intercession, that man forfeits his interest in
God's Pardoning Grace.

5. That Sin may be forgiven, there must be a Turning to the Lord. Let the
wicked forsake his ways, and the unrighteous man his thoughts: and let him
return unto the Lord, and he will have mercy on him; and to our God, for he
will abundantly pardon, says the Prophet Isa. (55.7.) Wherefore does a living
man complain, a man for the punishment of his Sins? says Jeremy, Lament. 3.39.
and directs him the best course, Let us search and try our ways, and turn again
to the Lord, verse. 40. And that is to be done,

1. By humble Supplication; Ibid. v. 41. Let us lift up our heart with our
hands unto God in the Heavens; by Praying for it, Matthew. 6.12. by justifying
God, condemning our selves; taking Shame to our selves, and acquitting God from
all blame; deprecating his Severity, imploring his Mercy for his Son's sake,
whom God sending in the likeness of sinful flesh, has condemned Sin in the
flesh: and therefore there is no Condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus,
Romans 8.1, 3.

2. But then must be added the second thing, wherein we turn to God, to wit,
Newness of life: There is no Condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus, who
walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit. Wash ye, make ye clean, put
away the Evil of your doings from before mine eyes, cease to do evil, learn to
do well; seek Judgment, relieve the oppressed, judge the fatherless, plead for
the widows: and then, says God, Come now, and let us reason together: Though
your Sins be as Scarlet, they shall be as white as Snow; though they be red
like Crimson, they shall be as Wool, Isa. 1.16, 17, 18. It is not the plea of
Innocence that prevails with God, but the earnest Supplication for Mercy: not
the Tale of a vainglorious Pharisee, but the feeling Prayer of a
brokenhearted Publican, that obtains Forgiveness. Nor will he that has
escaped the Pollutions of the world through the knowledge of Christ be safe, if
with the Dog he return to his vomit, and the Sow that was washed, to her
wallowing in the mire. He that sins again, sins more dangerously: as he that
falls into a Relapse is more desperately sick. New Obedience is necessary to
assure the Forgiveness of old Sins.

6. There is yet another Qualification necessary to the Forgiveness of our own
Sins, that we forgive other men's Sins against our selves. Our Savior puts it
into the Lord's Prayer, that we should profess to God our Forgiveness of them
that are indebted to us, as a Reason why we expect Forgiveness of him when we
pray him to forgive us. Yea he allows us not to ask Forgiveness of God, but
according as we forgive others. If you forgive men their Trespasses, your
Heavenly Father will also forgive you. But if ye forgive not men their
Trespasses, neither will your Father forgive your Trespasses, Matthew. 6.14, 15.
Yea, in the close of that Parable, Matthew. 18.35. he tells us, that our heavenly
Father will exact our Debts, cast us into Prison, deliver us to the
Tormentours, if we from our hearts forgive not every one his Brother their
Trespasses.

He that bears a Grudge, that reserves a purpose of Revenge in his breast, that
says he will forgive, but not forget, that passes not an Act of Indemnity and
Oblivion of his Brother's Injuries, does but delude God, play the Hypocrite
with him, when he prays the Lord's Prayer; shows himself to be unlike to God;
of a venomous, Toad-like, Viper-like nature, malicious like Satan; and so does
the more provoke and enrage God against him, as being an unthankful, virulent,
Devilish Wretch, that deals so unworthily with him, and abuses him to his
face. And this ushers in the last thing I am to consider, to wit,

IV. Why there is Forgiveness with God.

Of many Reasons I shall name one or two, besides that in my Text.

1. From his Property of Mercifulness. He is very pitiful, and of tender
Mercy, Jam. 5.11. He is not like a cruel Tyrant, that delights to destroy; but
like a gracious King, that is glad to save.

Est piger ad poenam Princeps, ad praemia velox:
Quique dolet quoties cogitur esse ferox.
It is for a Sicilian Tyrant, to invent Torments; or rather for a Fiend of
Hell, to rejoice in doing hurt. I am the Lord which exercise Loving Kindness,
Judgment and Righteousness in the Earth; for in these things I delight, says
the Lord, Jer. 9.24. Who is a God like unto thee, (says the Prophet Micah,
7.18, 19.) that pardons Iniquity, and passes by the Transgression of the
remnant of his Heritage? he retains not his Anger for ever, because he
delights in Mercy. He will turn again, he will have Compassion on us, he will
subdue our Iniquities: and thou will cast all their Sins into the depth of the
Sea. And then the Prophet adds, verse. 20. that which is my Second Reason why
God forgives,

2. Thou will perform the Truth to Jacob, and the Mercy to Abraham, which thou
have sworn unto our Fathers from the days of old. This is the Reason why he
has raised up a Horn of Salvation, and gives the knowledge of Salvation for or
by the Remission of Sins: to perform the Mercy promised to our Fathers, and to
remember his holy Covenant, the Oath which he swear to our Father Abraham, Luke
1.69, 72, 73, 77. And for this Reason the Blood of Christ is termed by himself,
the blood of the New Testament, which is shed for many for the Remission of
Sins, Matthew. 26.28. And the Covenant of God is alleged as witnessing the effect
of Christ's Sacrifice, wherein God said, Their Sins and Iniquities will I
remember no more, Heb. 10.16, 17. For which reason S. John says, that God is
faithful and just to forgive us our Sins, and to cleanse us from all
Unrighteousness, 1 John 1.9. His Merciful nature prompts him to forgive Sins;
his Wisdom has directed him to do it by the Blood of Christ; his Truth, to
keep his Covenant: and the End is, that he may be feared. Which brings me to
the Second Point in my Text.

II. OBSERVATION.
That God's Forgiveness engages and encourages men to fear him.

It is objected against the Jews, Jer. 5.23, 24. that they had a revolting and
a rebellious Heart, because they said not in their hearts, Let us now fear the
Lord our God, that gives Rain, both the former and the latter in his season:
he reserveth unto us the appointed weeks of the Harvest. Which evinceth this to
be an Evil, That men fear not God notwithstanding his Providence to them for
good: and therefore God's Care of us should engage us to fear him. And it is
prophesied, that the Children of Israel shall return, and seek the Lord their
God, and David their King, and shall fear the Lord and his Goodness in the
latter days, Hos. 3.5. Which intimates, that God's Goodness is to be feared;
and that it is both an engagement and encouragement to fear him, that he is
good. O fear the Lord, ye his Saints: for there is no want to them that fear
him, Psalm. 34.9.

Now of all parts of his Goodness, this is the chief, his Forgiving Sins. It is
that which shows the greatest Kindness and Condescension in God. Therefore when
David blesses God, he puts this in the first place; Bless the Lord, O my Soul,
and forget not all his Benefits, Who forgiveth all thine Iniquities, Psalm.
103.2, 3. And it is the greatest Blessing to us. Blessed is he whose
Transgression is forgiven, and whose Sin is covered. Blessed is the man unto
whom the Lord imputes not Iniquity, Psalm. 32.1, 2. This Favor then requires
Fear in the greatest degree. Not a tormenting Fear, which consists not with
Love, and which is expelled by Love, 1 John 4.18. such as is in Devils, that
fear and tremble, Jam. 2.19. but a dutiful Fear, which makes us wary how we
offend God, and studious how to please him: makes us fear him, not as an Enemy
or Tyrant, from whom we expect nothing but hard Usage and sore Tasks; but as a
good Master, or a loving Father, whom we fear as our Superior, that may punish
us, yet love for his Goodness, Bounty, and Indulgence to us. This Fear is
usually termed a filial or reverentiall Fear: which is manifested, 1. in our
Worship of him with reverence and godly fear, Heb. 12.28. where the Fear of God
is put for his Worship, as Isa. 29.13. 2. in our Obedience to him, both active,
in doing his Will, and passive, in submitting to his Correction. Now to this
Fear God's Forgiveness engages us,

1. Because such Forgiveness should and does beget Love. To whom many Sins were
forgiven, she loved much, says Christ, Luke 7.47. What Rebel is so
hardhearted, as not to love his Prince, that has forgiven his manifold
Treasons? We have been more treacherous to God, and yet he forgives us; and
shall we not then love him, and fear to offend him?

2. There is no greater Security can be given to draw our Hearts to God, then
the Forgiveness of Sins. This is that Loving Kindness that draws us to God,
Jer. 31.3. the Chords of a man, the Bands of Love, that tie us fast to God,
Hos. 11.4. And therefore there is no more expedite, more rational, more sure
way to maintain perpetual Amity between us and God, to devote us to his
Service, to bring us into Communion with him, then the Preaching and Believing
the rich Grace of the Gospel in the Remission of Sins by Jesus Christ,
according to the New Covenant in his Blood. But I see the time will not permit
me to enlarge on this precious Subject: I shall now apply that which has been
said in some necessary Uses, and so end.

APPLICATION.
1. First then, If there be Forgiveness with God, and that of the greatest
Sins, let no drooping Soul sink under the sense of his Sins: though they have
been Scarlet or Crimson Sins, yet there is Pardon to be had.

It is true, (as nowadays things go,) the greatest Sinners are most hardened
in Security: there is an Atheistical Spirit, that makes men bold in Sinning.
Whether it be from the subtle Insinuations of some Seducers, who (like Balaam
of old) instill into men's minds those Principles which make them as audacious
as Zimri and Cozbi of old were, so that they declare their Sins as Sodom, and
hide them not; ungodly men crept in among us, turning the Grace of God into
wantonness: or from their doting so much on Nature, as they call it, that they
forget the God of Nature; so magnifying Naturam naturatam, that they heed not
Naturam naturantem, as they barbarously speak in the Schools: or that the
Miscarriages of hypocritical Professors of Religion induce them to think all
Zeal in Religion is but from Fancy, not God's Spirit; and that all zealous
persons are Fanatics, or men not in their right wits, not soberly wise.

So it is, that the greatest part either openly commit the most horrid Sins;
monstrously Swearing, as if they would dare God to his face, Scoffing at the
practice of Piety, making no scruple of Deceiving, spending their time in
Drinking, prodigally wasting their Estates by Luxury and the like, which should
be employed to good Uses, for the Relief of others, and the public benefit: or
they secretly practice some or all these Sins (or worse, if it may be) under
Disguises of Religion and other Vizors without Fear. They that complain most of
Sin, are usually they that are most fearful of Sin.

Yet to both it is needful this Doctrine be taught, of God's Forgiveness. The
most hardened Manasseh may be taken in the Thorns, and humbled: the most
audacious Sinner among you may be awakened, and his Eyes opened, to see how
evil and bitter a thing it is that he has sinned against the Lord, and his
Fear has not been in him: Poverty, Imprisonment, Sickness, or Death
approaching, may open his Ears to Discipline, and make him remember God. If
these things happen, let him remember (though but then) that there is
Forgiveness with God. And for any other perplexed person, let him never forget
to have this Cordial in the Closet of his Heart, which may revive him in his
Agonies and Faintings of spirit, That there is Forgiveness with the Lord. But
then,

2. Let them not forget how and by what means it is obtained, to wit, by
Repentance, Confession, Forsaking of Sin, Faith in Christ's blood, humble
Supplication to God, new Obedience to him, and Forgiveness of our Brother.
There must be another Heart, a heart of Flesh, not a heart of Stone, in him
that shall obtain Forgiveness. He shall have Judgment without Mercy that shows
no Mercy. You must take heed of seeking Forgiveness by Popes or Priests
supposed power to forgive Sins by their Authority, by others officiating for
you; or by your own Satisfactions, Works of Penance, Fasting, Alms, or other
laborious Works imposed, or undertaken by your selves, as meriting or procuring
your Absolution. But you must wholly rely on the Death and Intercession of
Christ in Heaven, and the Covenant in his Blood. Though in the mean time you
are not to omit other Duties, which I have showed to be required of God in
their place.

3. Be sure not to forget to magnify the Grace of God, with whom is
Forgiveness. Stand and admire that infinite Goodness, that after all the Sins
of thy Progenitors, ( Adam's Sin in Revolting from God his Maker and
Benefactour, the Sins of thy Pagan Ancestors in their horrid Idolatries and
other Provocations, the Sins of thy Popish Ancestors in their perverting the
Gospel of Christ, imitating the Vices and Superstitions of Pagans, corrupting
Christianity, and destroying Myriads of holy Souls, who in their Generations
opposed their Abominations, and contended for the Truth of Christ,) besides thy
own Sins of Idleness, Pride, Wantonness, Envy, Covetousness, Ungodliness,
Profaning holy things, living without God in the world, he should yet have
Mercy on thee, pardon thy Sins, and save thy Soul. Oh say with David, Bless the
Lord, O my Soul, and all that is within me bless his holy Name, Psalm. 103.1.

4. Forget not to fear him for the time to come. It is the End of his
Forgiving, that thou should fear him. If God miss his End, thou will lose thy
hopes of Forgiveness. Mark what our Savior says, Joh. 5.14. Behold, thou art
made whole; sin no more, lest a worse thing happen unto thee. Surely, says
Elihu, Job 34.31, 32. it is meet to be said unto God, I will not offend any
more. That which I see not, teach thou me: if I have done Iniquity, I will do
no more. If pardoning Grace do not better thee, it will leave thee more
inexcusable, and thy Damnation more certain and just. If thou become not
obsequious to God, and merciful to others, thy Pardon will be nulled.

Oh do not forfeit thy Pardon by After-disobedience: but as thou have God to
remember thee in Mercy, be sure to remember him by Dutifulness to him all thy
days. That when thou shall meet with thy Father in Heaven, thou may be
ravished with his Grace, and he may welcome thee as his obedient Son into his
everlasting Joy. Amen.

LAVS DEO.
THE EFFECTUAL REMEDY.
The Eleventh SERMON.
PSALM. lxxix. 8. O remember not against us former Iniquities: let thy tender
Mercies speedily prevent us, for we are brought very low.


THE Message which was sent from Hezekiah, that good King of Judah, to the
Prophet Isaiah, This Day is a Day of Trouble and Rebuke: Wherefore lift up thy
Prayer for the Remnant that is left, Isa. 37.3, 4. is by His Majesty's
Proclamation sent to us: We are minded by our Gracious King, That this Day is a
Day of Trouble, such as that we may call it Magor-Missabib, Terror round about
us; a Day of Rebuke, wherein the great Correctour of the World rebukes us in
his Anger, and chastens us in his hot Displeasure. Haeret lateri lethalis
Arundo; The Arrow of the Almighty flies by day and night among us, sticks fast
in us, and drinks up our Spirit: so as that we are consumed by his Anger, and
by his Wrath we are troubled. And therefore it is now a Time for us to lift up
our Prayer for the Remnant that is left; and to betake our selves to our Litany
in good earnest, From Plague and Pestilence, good Lord, deliver us.

Hitherto are we led by this Precedent which I have read to you, O remember not
against us, etc.

The Argument of the Psalm sufficiently intimates the Time and the Occasion of
penning it. The first Verse being a Complaint to God, that the Heathen were
come into God's Inheritance, that is, the Land of Judaea, had defiled or
profaned his holy Temple, by casting it to the ground, and had laid Jerusalem
on heaps. Which was done by none but Chaldaeans, when this Psalm was composed:
and therefore it was composed after, and upon occasion of the Demolition and
Conflagration of Jerusalem and Solomon's Temple by Nebuchadnezzar's
appointment, of which we read Jer. 52. which moved either Ezra, or Daniel, or
some other Holy person of that Time, to address himself to God with Complaint,
Expostulation, and Petition, in the words of my Text, O remember not against
us, etc.

Wherein are,

1. A Deprecation, O remember not, etc. By former Iniquities some understand
their Idolatry in making the Golden Calf in the Wilderness: concerning which
the Jews have a Tradition, That in all the Miseries which came upon that
People, there was some Remembrance of that Sin; according to that which is said
in Exodus 32.34. Nevertheless, in the Day when I shall visit, I will visit their
Sin upon them. But more probably are meant the Sins of Manasseh and other
Kings, whereby they polluted the Temple with Heathenish Abominations, filled
Jerusalem with blood, brake their Oath to Nebuchadnezzar, were obstinate
against all the Warnings of the Prophets, whom they mocked, despising their
words, and misusing their persons; which stirred up the Wrath of God against
his people, so as there was no Remedy, 2 Chronicles. 36.16. These were the Sins that
Daniel meant in his Supplication, which either symbolized or was contemporary
with this, Dan. 9.5, 6. Now God is said to remember Sins, when he does actually
punish persons for them; and this is deprecated here: simple Forgetfulness
being a thing impossible to befall God, who is incapable of any defect, but
has all things, past, present, and to come, in his view throughout all
Eternity.

2. Here is a Petition for Help, Let thy tender Mercies speedily prevent us.
Wherein the thing desired is, the coming of Aid for their Deliverance from
their Captivity, and the restoring of their City and Temple; and that to be
hastened, the time seeming long to them, in which they were oppressed by the
Babylonian Kings, and kept from the Land of their desires. And this is begged
as a product of God's tender Mercies, or Bowels of Mercies: by which Expression
such Mercy as is wont to be in Mothers toward the Children of their womb,
whose Bowels earn toward them, is attributed to God. Though, to speak
exactly, (as the Schoolmen say,) Mercy is not in God secundum Affectum, he has
not any formal Dolor or Sympathy, so as to be grieved with our Evils, as we
are when we pity others; but secundum Effectum, in respect of the Effect,
because God in our Misery does (as we do when we have Compassion on others)
afford Succor and Relief to those whom he is said to be merciful to.

3. The Petition is enforced with the mention of their low Condition; For we
are brought very low, impoverished, or made thin: that is, we are poor in
Purse, thin of People, much diminished every way, spoiled, debarred of our
Liberty, of our Religion, of our Peace, burdened with imperious Commands,
heavy Yokes of the Lordly Tyrants of Babylon, persecuted with a fiery Furnace
for not adoring their Idol, in danger of casting into a Den of Lions for
calling upon the Name of our God, destined to a Panolethry, or a total
Slaughter, by wicked Courtiers, proud Haman and his Accomplices, and have none to
help us but our God; and therefore we pray, Let thy tender Mercies speedily
prevent us, or, as in the Verse next my Text, Help us, O God of our Salvation,
for the Glory of thy Name: and deliver us, and purge away our Sins for thy
Name's sake. From whence (though the occasion of the present business be
somewhat different) we may deduce these Observations, useful for this Day's
work.

1. That it is God's Remembering of Sins which is the reason of the Calamities
that befall a people. 2. That the Removing of them is an effect of his tender
Mercies. 3. That God's Time of Help is the low Condition of Supplicants. 4.
That Bewailing of Sins, and humble Supplication for Mercy, are the proper and
effectual Remedies against the Calamities which are incumbent on God's people.
Of these in their order.

I. OBSERVATION.
That it is God's Remembrance of Sins, which is the reason of the Calamities
that befall a people.

It is the Maxim of the Apostle, Romans 6.23. That the Wages, or Stipend, of Sin
is Death. Death and all the Evils tending to it were at first the adjudged Pay
for Sin against God; and Sin is still the Egg out of which all the venomous
brood of Mischiefs incident to mankind are hatched. By one man Sin entered into
the world, and Death by Sin: and so Death passed upon all men, for that all
have sinned, Romans 5.12. Adam opened the Floud-gate whereby a Deluge of all
sorts of Miseries has drowned the world.

But though his Sin were the Fountain of all Calamities: yet as Rivers swell by
much Rain, and overflowing cause particular Inundations of some places; so it
is with Man by reason of Sin: besides the First man's Transgression, there is
such an increase of Sin in his Posterity, that it provokes God sometimes to
inflict such remarkable Plagues and Vengeance as are different from the common
Death of all men. The Uncleanness and Cruelty of the Old world in Noah's days
brought the universal Flood on the world of the Ungodly. The excessive Pride,
Filthiness, Riot, Bestiality of the Sodomites, brought down on them from Heaven
Fire and Brimstone, to consume them. The Oppressing of Israel, with the
Hardness of Pharaoh's Heart, caused the drowning of him and his Army in the Red
sea. Yea, the remarkable Sins of those who have been owned as God's own People,
have caused particular Judgments. Achan's Sin made Israel fly before the
Canaanites. Readiness Sin caused three years Famine. Hophni and Phineas, by their
profaning the Offering of the Lord, brought on Eli's House the Loss of his
Sons, the Loss of the Ark, and the Deprivation of his Posterity from the
Priesthood. Yea, David's Sin, in numbering of the people, moved God to send a
Plague on Israel, which swept away seventy thousand men. But when Manasseh had
filled Jerusalem with Witchcraft, Idolatry, Cruelty, and added an obdurate
Heart against God's Messengers, the Desolation by Nebuchadnezzar seized on them
in a far greater measure. But worst of all, when the Jews killed the Lord
Jesus, and their own Prophets, and persecuted the Apostles of Christ, not
pleasing God, and being contrary to all men; forbidding the Apostles to speak
to the Gentiles, that they might be saved, to fill up their Sins always: then
Wrath came upon them to the uttermost, as S. Paul speaks, 1 Thessalonians. 2.15, 16.

Yea, were there no words of Holy Scripture to inform us, whence wasting Wars,
Inundations of water, great Famines, consuming Pestilence, and other effects of
Divine Vengeance come on a Nation: yet the Histories of such people as knew not
God, the Observations of considerate men, the extorted or free Confession of
notorious Sinners in all Ages, were abundant evidence to inferrre, that it is
God's Remembrance of Sin that is the Source of Calamities: it being usual for
all sorts of Sinners, to accuse themselves, their own Consciences bearing
witness against them, when Evils are upon them. Adonibezek could remember his
Cruelty, when the Lex talionis took hold on him: Judge. 1.7. And Joseph's
Brethren could then acknowledge that God had found out their Iniquity, when
they were in Distress themselves: Genesis 42.21. and 44.16. Any remarkable
Affliction, that is not ordinary and common, wrings out from guilty Consciences
such expressions as that of the Widow of Sarepta, 1 King. 17.18. O thou man of
God, art thou come to call my Sin to Remembrance, and to slay my Son?

Consonant hereto are God's Declarations of himself. Isa. 59.1, 2. Behold, the
Lord's Hand is not shortened, that it cannot save: neither is his Ear heavy,
that it cannot hear. But your Iniquities have separated between you and your
God: and your Sins have hid his Face from you. Perditio tua ex te, Israel: O
Israel, thou have destroyed thy self, Hos. 13.9. Your Iniquities have turned
away these things, and your Sins have withholden good things from you, Jer.
5.25.

We may then thank our selves for all the Evils that come upon us: we must not
cast them upon Destiny, Stars, or any other Cause, and leave out the principal
Cause, which is the plague of our own hearts. God is neither the Author of
Sin, nor the Punisher of Sin without cause. It is the Devil's property, to
rejoice in Evil: and therefore as he tempts to Sin, so he delights to torment.
It is otherwise with God: Afflictions are Opus alienum, his strange work. He
does not afflict willingly, nor grieve the children of men, To crush under his
feet all the prisoners of the earth, Lament. 3.33, 34. Is God unrighteous, who
takes Vengeance? (I speak as a man:) God forbid; for then how shall God judge
the world? says the Apostle, Romans 3.5, 6.

We deny not, that God might impose Sufferings on him that had no Sin of
himself: He made his Son to be Sin for us, who knew no Sin, 2 Cor. 5.21. Job's
Calamities came on him by God's Permission, though he were an upright man, one
that feared God, and eschewed Evil, Job 1.8. that he might prove his Integrity
by his great Patience. Of the Son who was born blind Christ says, Joh. 9.3.
Neither has this man sinned, nor his Parents: that is, there was no special
Sin committed by either of them, (as his Disciples deemed,) which was the
immediate cause of his Blindness; but it came to pass, that the works of God
should be made manifest in him. The Holy Martyrs suffered for Righteousness
sake, and were therefore to count it all Joy when they fell into manifold
Temptations.

But in such Evils as their Circumstances demonstrate to be from a more then
common Hand of God, specially when they are public and universal, as we are to
acknowledge the Finger of God in them; so we are to discern them to be the
fruit of our doings, and the work of our hands. The Scripture styles them God's
Judgments; and we are sure (says the Apostle, Romans 2.2.) that the Judgment of
God is according to truth against them that commit such things. And therefore,
though we are not allowed to judge of the afflicted as greater Sinners then
others, and point out them as the Causes of common Calamities; yet we are to
judge our selves, and impute the Evil, whatever it be, to our own Sins. Moses,
the man of God, in the 109. Psalm, which was made in a time of great Mortality,
(such as is now with us,) having said to God, verse. 7. We are consumed by thine
Anger, and by thy Wrath we are troubled; adds, verse. 8. Thou have set our
Iniquities before thee, and our secret Sins in the light of thy countenance.

It is true, that all outward things happen alike to all; there is, in public
Calamities especially, one event to the Righteous and to the Wicked: No man
knows love or hatred by all that is before him, Eccles. 9.1, 2. Yet even in
these, and all other, that of the Prophet, Lament. 3.39, 40. is necessary for
every person to mind: Wherefore does a living man complain, a man for the
punishment of his Sins? Let us search and try our ways, and turn again unto the
Lord. Though in this day of God's Visitation we may discern many common and
open Sins, the increase of which may be judged the Cause wherefore God brings
this sore Scourge of the Pestilence, in such a manner, at such a time, in those
places on which it lights, considering that God shoots not at Rovers, but at a
certain Mark; (and so the consideration of the Practices of the Persons and
Places may justly lead us to determine, that such Sins as have been by them and
there committed are the Sins God punishes, for instance, the Uncleanness,
Riot, Profaneness, and other Sins committed among us, have brought down this
Vengeance on our great City:) yet since there are particular Sins also with us,
and there is never a one of us but has his secret Sins, (perhaps our Security,
putting far from us the Evil day, living in Ease and Pleasure, Unmercifulness,
and Insensibleness of the Afflictions of others, secret Atheism, Lukewarmness
in Religion, leaving our first Love, Backsliding from our Profession, secret
Hypocrisy, Formality without the Power of Godliness, which may cause Christ to
spue us out of his mouth;) it is necessary that the best of us make a strict
Enquiry into our own Bosome-sins, and resolve that God, by this his Judgment on
others, calls our Sins to Remembrance, and presses us to justify him, and to
betake our selves to his Mercy, as the Psalmist here, Let thy Mercy speedily
prevent us. Which leads me to the

II. OBSERVATION.
That the Removing of the Calamities which are inflicted by God, when he
remembers men's Sins, is the effect of God's tender Mercies.

So it is expressly said, Lament. 3.22, 23. It is of the Lord's Mercies that we
are not consumed, because his Compassions fail not. They are new every morning:
great is thy Faithfulness. Verse. 32. Though he cause Grief, yet will he have
Compassion according to the multitude of his Mercies. And hereto accord very
many speeches of God concerning himself: That he is the Lord, the Lord God,
merciful and gracious, long-suffering, and abundant in Goodness and Truth,
keeping Mercy for thousands, forgiving Iniquity, Transgression and Sin; as he
says in his solemn Proclamation to Moses, Exodus 34.6, 7. Who is a God like unto
thee, that pardons Iniquity, and passes by the Transgression of the Remnant
of his Heritage? He retains not his Anger for ever, because he delights in
mercy, Mic. 7.18.

Hence it is that the Holy Writers, and all the Saints, do still celebrate his
Mercies, as being tender, abundant, free, rejoicing against Judgment: and, to
instance in no other, there is a whole Psalm, (136.) in which the close of
every verse is this, For his Mercy endures for ever. And this Mercy of his is
the Reason of all those works of Goodness he does, as to the World in general,
in causing his Sun to rise on the Just and Unjust, and being kind to the
Unthankful and to the Evil, Luke 6.35. so as that his tender Mercies are over
all his works, Psalm. 145.9. so chiefly to his own people, all whose
Deliverances and Benefits are made the fruits of his Mercy. Above all, the
great Redemption in Christ, of which the Apostle thus speaks, Ephesians. 2.4, 5. God
who is rich in Mercy, out of the great Love wherewith he has loved us, even
when we were dead in Sins, has quickened us together with Christ, is the effect
of the highest, most transcendent and everlasting Mercy. Hence in all their
Praises, the Godly remember his Mercies: as the Prophet Isa. (63.7.) I will
mention the Loving Kindness of the Lord, and the Praises of the Lord, according
to all that the Lord has bestowed on us; and the great Goodness toward the
house of Israel, which he has bestowed on them, according to his Mercies, and
according to the multitude of his Loving-kindnesses.

In like manner, their Obsecrations are by the Mercies of God, Romans 12.1. as of
all things most dear to them: and their Prayers are still enforced by minding
God of his Mercies. So in the Penitential Psalms: Psalm. 6.2. Have Mercy upon
me, O Lord, for I am weak; verse. 4. Return, O Lord, deliver my Soul, O save me
for thy Mercy's sake; Psalm. 51.1. Have Mercy upon me, O God, according to thy
Loving Kindness: according to the multitude of thy tender Mercies, blot out my
Transgressions; and so in the rest. There is scarce a Psalm of Petition, or
Thanksgiving, or Narration of God's Acts, but there is some, if not frequent,
mention of God's Mercy and tender Compassion, as the Source of all the Help his
people have, and the Ground of their Hope for what they want. And the Reasons
hereof are,

1. Because without God's Mercy there would be no Forgiveness of Sin, and
without Forgiveness of Sin there would be no Deliverance from Evil. Where the
Holy Scripture mentions Redemption from Evil, it ascribes it to the Forgiveness
of Sin. The Redemption in Christ is in the Forgiveness of Sins, Ephesians. 1.7.
Forgiving of Sins and Healing Diseases are conjoined Psalm. 103.3. And Forgiving
of Sins is derived from Mercy: He pardons Iniquity, because he delights in
Mercy, Mich. 7.18. Of his own Mercy he saved us, Tit. 3.5. Therefore a primo ad
ultimum, those follow one another; Redemption from Evil follows Forgiveness of
Sins, and Forgiveness of Sins God's tender Mercies. And therefore it is God's
tender Mercy that Evils are removed, as taking away the Cause, whereupon the
Effect cease.

2. But farther, All Influx of Good is from God's tender Mercy. There is
nothing that does or can make God a Debtor to any, but his tender Mercy. Man is
a poor helpless thing of himself: the best of men, in their estate antecedent
to God's Help, are more destitute of power to help themselves then the very
Brutes; whether in respect of Naturals, or Spiritualls. As we are born into the
world, we are, as God said of the Israelites, Ezekiel. 16.6. as a young Child
exposed, polluted in our own blood; without the Mercy of God teaching,
strengthening, and providing for us, certain to perish. There is none eye that
pities us, to do us any good, without God. It is his Mercy that the Sun
shines on us, that the Air refreshes us, our Food nourishes us, our Clothes
warm us; that we have Strength to act, Wisdom to direct us. It is his Mercy
that our Parents take care of us, that our Friends comfort us, our Enemies pity
us, Devils are curbed from hurting us, Ministers preach to us the way of Life,
the Holy Angels assist us, the Spirit of God guides us, and, which is the Mercy
of Mercies, that the Son of God is given for us and to us, and with him all
things: and so he crowns us with Loving Kindness and tender Mercies. In a word,
all the Safety and Benefits we enjoy, which are innumerable, are Fruits
springing from the tender Mercies of God as the Root. Mercy is the Principle
which sets God on work to do all the good he does. This is evidenced from the

III. OBSERVATION.
He makes the low Condition of Supplicants his Season of ministering Help.

This is acknowledged Psalm. 136.23. Who remembered us in our low estate; for his
Mercy endures for ever. In another Psalm (107.) throughout, this way of God's
Providence is exemplified in his dealing with Pilgrims, Prisoners, Captives,
Diseased persons, Mariners, oppressed Subjects; to all which, and all other
sorts of dejected and disconsolate persons, when their Case is deplorable, when
they are destitute of all other Remedies, when all things are dark and cloudy
about them, when they are reduced to extremities, and are at their wits end,
God steps in, and by some way unthought of, unexpected, ministers seasonable
supply, timely Succor and Relief. The Scripture is full of Instances, in the
case of Jacob, David, Jonah, Paul, and many others. Besides the famous
Instances of old, of Rain sent to Antoninus his Army upon the Prayers of the
Christians; of Help to Constantine against Maxentius, to Theodosius against
Eugenius: and of late, our own great Deliverances, from the Spanish Invasion in
Eighty eight, of the King and Parliament from the Gunpowder-Treason; and, which
is most apposite to the present state of things, the Deliverance of our
Metropolis from the sweeping Pestilence in the memory of many of us. These and
innumerable more Experiences (of which no considerate Christian that has been
at Death's door, or under Agony of Spirit, or in any other low Estate, wants
Instances,) do abundantly prove this Truth, That Man's Extremity is God's
Opportunity.

And the Reason is, Because then Mercy appears to be Mercy; God is then
manifested to be what he is styled to be, the Father of Mercies, and the God of
all Consolation, 2 Cor. 1.3. As the Devil then appears to be a Devil, when he
takes advantage of our Weakness, to hurt us: so God appears to be God, by
making our Infirmity the Reason of his Help. Thereby he encourages us to trust
in him, engages us to Thankfulness, and to Obedience. That is the
Harvest-time, when God reaps most Glory; and we carry home with Joy, after our
Mourning, our Sheaves of Assurance of his Salvation. S. Paul therefore tells
us, that in his Trouble in Asia, he was pressed out of measure, above strength,
insomuch that he despaired even of life, had the sentence of death in himself,
to this end, that he should not trust in himself, but in God which raises the
dead: and then God delivered him from so great a death, and did still deliver
him, and therefore he trusted that he would yet deliver him, 2 Cor. 1.8, 9, 10.
Such seasonable Help in Extremities God would therefore have observed, and kept
upon Record, and always acknowledged.

The Israelites were commanded to present their basket of First Fruits, and to
make this Confession solemnly, Deuteronomy. 26.5, etc. A Syrian ready to perish was my
Father, and he went down into Egypt, and sojourned there with a few, and became
there a Nation, great, mighty, and populous. And the Egyptians evil entreated
us, and afflicted us, and laid upon us hard Burdens. And when we cried unto
the Lord God of our Fathers, the Lord heard our voice, and looked on our
Affliction, and our Labor, and our Oppression, and brought us thence into this
place. Such Providence of God he requires us to observe, that we may
understand his Loving Kindness, Psalm. 107.43. that we may be excited to cry
unto the Lord in our Trouble, who delivers us out of our Distress. Which
brings us to the

IV. OBSERVATION.
That Bewailing of Sins, and humble and instant Supplication, are the proper
and effectual Remedies against the Calamities incumbent on God's people.

Hereunto we are directed Lament. 3.40, 41, 42. Let us search and try our ways,
and turn again unto the Lord. Let us lift up our heart with our hands unto God
in the Heavens. We have transgressed and have rebelled; thou have not pardoned.
Thus did David, when God sent a Plague on Israel, and swept away 700000, 1 Chronicles. 21.16, 17. He and the Elders of Israel, clothed in Sackcloath, fell on
their faces, confessed the Sin which was the Cause of it, prayed God to remove
the Pestilence; and he was entreated of them. When there was a Plague upon
Israel for their Murmuring, Aaron took Incense, and made an Atonement for the
people: and he stood between the living and the dead; and the Plague was
stayed, Number. 16.47, 48. At another time, when the Israelites provoked God to
Anger with their Inventions, and the Plague brake in upon them, Phineas stood
up, and executed Judgment, or prayed; and the Plague was stayed, Psalm. 106.29,
30.

This Antidote has in all Ages been found a Preservative against the Plague,
and the most effectual Medicine to cure it. Physicians prescribe many good
Receipts: and Magistrates do well, to use all the best means they can to
hinder the spreading of Infection: and justly are those destroyed as Pests of
Mankind, who willingly infect the sound, or carelessly permit those things which
may poison others. They that are unmercifull to the Sick, suffering or causing
them to perish by their negligence and ill usage, are justly censured as
Promoters of the Contagion. But the truly Penitent, who confesses and
forsakes his Sins, the importunate believing Petitioner at the Throne of
Grace, the zealous and impartial Magistrate, who executes Judgment against
those venomous Sins that provoke God to shoot his deadly Arrows against us, are
the best and most prevalent Instruments to cure the Plague, and to restore
Health in our dwellings. On the other side, the unchaste, intemperate,
unrighteous, covetous Worldlings; the Atheistical, proud, profane, the
deceitful Hypocrites, that are impenitent, that confess not their Sins, nor
forsake their evil ways; those that hang down their heads for a day, forbear a
Meal or two, and perhaps come to hear, but are not affected with God's Hand,
nor sensible of the Evil of their ways, that reform not their ungodly and
unrighteous Life, that use other means to preserve them, but seek not to God in
good earnest for Pardon of Sins, that appear here for company, but do not
execute Justice, nor show Mercy to others; These are so far from being
isntrumental to removing the Plague, that they rather cause the continuance
and the increase of it: it being God's course, not to turn away his Anger, but
to stretch out his Hand still in punishing, when people turn not to him that
smites them, nor seek the Lord of hoasts, Isa. 9.12, 13.

APPLICATION.
And now to apply what has been said to the present work. What the Preachers
of God's Word have often foretold us, that for the Sins of this Land, and
especially of the people of our great City, we had reason to expect some great
Scourge, the same is now come upon us. The destroying Angel has drawn his
Sword, has killed thousands already; the Plague is not only begun, but has
wasted some part of that City; great Terror is upon us; many fly thence, and
perhaps die by the way, or live to infect other places; Houses are emptied,
Streets untroden, Markets without Sellers and Buiers: a heavy doleful Disease
is come upon us. Who is so hard-hearted, so Atheistical, as not to see the
Hand of God in all this? The Preachers from the Pulpit foretold it. Any who was
acquainted with the Holy Scripture, with the way of God's Judgments in our own
or former times, might see, that our excess of profane Swearing, Contempt of
Religion and the Word of God, our unmeasurable Pride, Vanity, Luxury, in Meat,
Drink, Apparel, sensual Pleasures, our Contentions, our Oppressions, our
Hatred, Divisions, Unmercifulness, and all sorts of Vices, continually showing
themselves openly among us, would be the Seed out of which this or the like
Calamity would at length be produced. And yet where is the person that lays
this to heart, as an effect of Divine Vengeance, and the Fruit of his Sin? Who
is there that searches and tries his ways, that is sensible of the Plague of
his own Heart, that with repenting Ephraim smites upon his thigh, that repents
him of his Wickedness, saying, What have I done? Who is there that either fears
God the more, or prays the more, or amends his ways the more? Are not our
Pride, Fullness of bread, Wantonness, Unmercifulness, yea, which is worse, our
Cursing, Swearing, Lying, Rage, Blasphemy, Lewdness, as much as before? Do we
not (to use the Prophet's phrase) every one turn yet to our course, as the
Horse rusheth into the battle? Have not we yet such an unsanctified, unhumbled
spirit, as to deride Preachers Monitions, to slight God's Judgments, to harden
one another in Sin, and so to disappoint God's Design in this Visitation, which
should awaken us from our Security, humble us under his mighty Hand, bring us
on our knees in earnest Supplications, teach us to fear Sin, learn us to do
well, lest a worse thing happen to us?

If it be so with us, what can be expected, but that our seeming Humiliation,
Fasting and Prayer this day should become Sin to us, and be so far from
averting the present Evil, as that it will provoke the Divine Vengeance to
punish us yet seven times more for our Sins? For sure, when one Judgment does
not cause us to return to God, he will send another. The more Warnings God
gives us, if the fire of God's Wrath be not quenched by our Repentance and
Supplications, it will burn the more fiercely. It is in vain for us to imagine,
that by any other means we can prevent our Danger: this is the only safe
course for our Preservation. And therefore let us be persuaded this day to draw
nigh to God, that he may draw nigh to us.

1. We must begin with a through Search into our own ways; finding out and
confessing to God, with serious Compunction of Heart and Remorse of Conscience,
not only our open, but also our secret Sins. Know that the revenging Eye of
God cannot be deceived with Shows: that he knows the secretest Motions of our
Hearts, the most hidden Practices of our Lives. Know that it is in vain to
strive with him; that it is Madness to provoke him to Jealousy, unless we were
stronger then he is. And therefore it is no better then Folly and Madness, to
be superficial in this business of Searching, Confessing, Repenting of our
Sins. We say, Non est tutum ludere cum Sacris; We must not trifle in things of
God, we must not sport with God.

Neither must we only be sensible of our own personal Sins, but of the Sins
of others; our Governors, our Neighbors, our Forefathers Sins. David's Sin
may bring a Plague on the People. We are to mourn and be humbled for them
especially which go unpunished, which cause the Land to mourn.

2. We must go on to cry mightily to God, as the Ninevites did. The Pardoning
of great Sins, the removing of great Plagues, require great Mercies, and
importunate Suing. Now must the Bridegroom go forth of his chamber, and the
Bride out of her closet. The Ministers of the Lord, all sorts of persons, old
and young, must cry with Tears and Supplications, Spare us, O Lord, and give
not thy Heritage to reproach. We must lift up our hands with our hearts to God
in the Heavens, as sensible that nothing but his Mercy can save us; that he is
ready to hear and help, when we hope in his Mercy; that we have an Advocate
with the Father, Jesus Christ the Righteous, and he is the Propitiation for our
Sins. We must mind God of his former Mercies; trust on him, as one that has
promised to deliver us when we call on him in the day of Trouble; look unto him
with Patience, as being assured that they that wait for him shall not be
ashamed.

3. We must add an unmovable Resolution to amend our ways, to sin no more as
we have done, to abhor Evil, and cleave to that which is good; in Duties of
Religion, Prayer, Hearing God's Word, Praising of God, Thanksgiving, to be more
frequent and serious; to cleanse our hands, and to purify our hearts from
double-mindedness; to be upright in what we do, walking humbly with our God,
and seeking his Glory all our days. And in two things especially we are to
deal rightly with God. 1. In doing Justice to others: if we be public persons,
by punishing Sin, and giving just Sentence for all that are wronged; if
private, by restoring that which is not our own, and righting those we have
injured. Remember that God abhors ex Rapina Holocaustum, Robbery for
Burnt-offerings; and that the Prayers of the unjust are an Abomination to the
Lord. 2. In showing Mercy to others. We are to be merciful, as our heavenly
Father is merciful; chiefly when we beg Mercy at his hands. This is a
necessary Duty for a Fasting-day. Isa. 58.6, 7. Is not this the Fast, etc? Now
especially is a time for this Duty, in which there is so much Want, by reason
of the great Poverty that is come upon Families shut up; now that Trading is
decayed, and Provision so dear, and difficult to be got. As you cry to God for
Help, so do others Necessities cry to you for Relief. Have you then Bowels of
Mercy for them, as you would have Bowels of Mercy in God toward you. Let your
hand be open to them, as you would have God's hand ready for you. So may you
expect Preservation in this time of Danger; at least you may be assured,
however you speed now, of Life eternal hereafter. Which God grant, etc. Amen.

LAVS DEO.
THE HEAVENLY CALL.
The Twelfth SERMON.
HEBREWS iv. 7. To Day if you will hear his Voice, harden not your Hearts.


THIS Passage is a Quotation, with an Application of it beyond what at first
the words seemed to import. They were spoken by David; but intended as a
Monition to hear the Gospel. They are a Summons or Writ of Appearance served
upon Jews and Gentiles, limiting them to a certain Day of accepting the offer
of the Gospel, without delay upon pretense of Business, Profit, or Pleasure,
by themselves, without Attorney or Proxy. The thing to be done is hearing his
Voice: the means thereunto is (Removere prohibens) to remove that which might
hinder, the Hardness of the Heart.

This being applied to the Gospel of Christ, intimates, 1. That the Preaching
of the Gospel is the Voice of God. 2. That it is to be heard. 3. That it is to
be heard to day. 4. That, to the end it may be heard to day, the Heart must not
be hardened.


I. OBSERVATION.
That the Gospel of Christ is the Voice of God.

It is the express Assertion of S. Peter, 1. Epist. 1.25. alluding to Isa.
40.8. But the Word of the Lord endures for ever: and this is the Word which by
the Gospel is preached unto you. Which is demonstratively confirmed,

1. By its own Evidence; in respect of which it is termed the Light of the
glorious Gospel of Jesus Christ, who is the Image of God, 2 Cor. 4.4. It is not
denied that it is the hidden Wisdom of God in a mystery, which none of the
Princes of the world knew; yea it is such as eye has not seen, ear has not
heard, nor has it entered into the heart of man, without Revelation from him,
it being not an humane Invention, but a Divine Contrivance: yet shining forth
in the Preaching of it by Christ and his Ministers, it exhibits such a Light as
can come from none but God. It is not like any Talmudicall Fable, or Popish
Legend, or Poetical Fiction, or witty Romance, the Brats of men's Fancy, or
subtle Composure: But it is for the matter of it suitable to God's Wisdom,
Goodness, and Holiness; agreeable to the undoubted Oracles of God committed to
the Jews; foretold and prefigured by the Prophecies of the Old Testament, and
Shadows of the Law. Whence S. Peter tells us, 2 Pet. 1.16. We have not followed
cunningly-devised Fables, when we made known unto you the Power and Coming of
our Lord Jesus Christ; and verse. 19. that Christians had a more sure word of
Prophecy, to which they were to take heed, as unto a Light that shines in a
dark place; adding, that the Evidence of the Gospel is as the Dawning of the
Day, and the Arising of the Daystar in the Christians hearts.

2. And in truth, the Gospel appears to be such by its Effects. It does to the
Heart what the Stars and the Sun do to the Eyes; it enlightens, it enlivens, it
warms, it spirits the Heart. It does that which Natural Reason could not do,
Philosophy could not attain to, the Law could not accomplish: It discovers our
selves to our selves; the Being, Properties, Counsels of God to us. It turns
the Heart from Sin, begets Men to God, fills the Soul with heavenly Comforts,
strengthens and quickens the Spirit to do the Will of God, and to suffer for
his Name. It makes men to be of composed Spirits, and celestial Conversation,
beyond what either Stoicall Philosophy or Rabbinicall Dictates could raise men
unto: to be more noble and heroical then those renowned Worthies or Patriots,
which either Greeks or Romans have admired and magnified.

3. And (which puts it out of all doubt to be Divine) it has such Attestations
as could be given by none but God. For besides what John the Baptist saw and
heard at Christ's Baptism; besides what S. Peter and his Colleagues testified,
who were Eyewitnesses of his Majesty, when he received from God the Father
Honor and Glory, when there came such a Voice to him from the excellent Glory,
This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased, 2 Pet. 1.17. besides all
this, the Miracles which Christ and his Apostles did so convinced Nicodemus,
that he confessed, We know that thou art a Teacher come from God: for no man
can do these Miracles which thou do, except God be with him, Joh. 3.2. And
that I may not be infinite in this, (though of all Points it be of most
concernment,) the Gift of the Spirit, the fulfilling of Prophecies delivered by
Christ, the wondrous Success of the Gospel in converting the World, the
direful Judgments of God on the Opposers and Persecuters of Christ,
Christians, and the Gospel, both Jews and Romans, do abundantly witness the
Divine Original of the Gospel of Christ, and that it is the Voice of God;
which therefore is to be heard: and that is the

II. OBSERVATION.
That God's Voice is to be heard.

This not only the Holy Scriptures tell us, but even the Light of Nature
dictates. When Ehud told Eglon King of Moab, that he had a Message from God to
him: he arose out of his Seat, Judge. 3.20. All Nations repair to the Oracles of
their Gods, and take Counsel from them. When Cornelius was advertised that S.
Peter was sent to him from God; with all submission and devotion he attends
him, telling him, We are all here present before God, to hear all things that
are commanded thee of God, Act. 10.33.

And great Reason it should be so. He is a God of Truth, that neither can be
deceived, nor deceive; and therefore it is of greatest advantage to us to hear
him. Men's foolish Hearts hearken oftentimes to them that flatter them, that
speak pleasing things; but it is to their Ruin. The Devil's Oracles are so
ambiguous, so false, that they delude, they corrupt men to their Perdition. But
God's Voice, the Gospel of Christ, never misguides, never perverts, but leads
men into all Truth, for their present Benefit, and their everlasting Happiness.
Besides, God is a powerful Lord, the only Lawgiver, who is able to save, and
to destroy, Jam. 4.12. It is not safe to slight him: it is the only way of
Salvation to hearken to his Voice. We have so much wit, as, however we contemn
our Inferiour's or Equall's words, yet not to neglect our Superiour's Commands
or Counsels. Who is there that dares despise the Sayings of a Judge on the
Bench? or of the King on his Throne? How obsequious in Attention, how
regardfull in Observance of what such Potentates say to them, are all their
Subjects? They are aware that they speak with authority; that they have
Punishments and Rewards to accompany their Commands. It is much more so with
God: He has power of Life and Death, Heaven and Hell are at his disposal. And
therefore it is necessary that his Voice should be heard, which is a glorious
Voice, a mighty Voice; heard with the Heart as well as the Ear, with Subjection
of Soul as well as Reverence of Body; and that without any demurr or delay, to
day, as it is in my Text. Which brings us to the next or

III. OBSERVATION.
That the Gospel is to be heard to day.

By saying to day, the Holy Ghost (says the Apostle) limits a certain Day in
which the Voice of God is to be heard: which intimates, that there is a day,
and but a day, fixed for this transaction. To day implies something inclusive,
and something exclusive. That which is included is the Opportunity, and the
Duration: That which is excluded is the Night succeeding the Day, and all
Duration after, even to Eternity. The Opportunity of hearing is, while the
Gospel is preached; while the Spirit moves upon our Hearts; while Christ stands
at the door and knocks, that we may open the door, and he come in, and sup with
us, and we with him. While the Ministers of Reconciliation, as Ambassadors for
Christ, as Workers together with God, beseech us that we receive not the Grace
of God in vain, is the accepted time, and the day of Salvation, 2 Cor. 6.1, 2.

It was Jerusalem's Day, the time of her Visitation, while Christ would have
gathered them to him, as a Hen gathers her Chickens under her wings. It was
the Old World's Day, while the Spirit of God did strive with them, while Noah
prepared the Ark, and was a Preacher of Righteousness to them.

The utmost extent is but during this present Life. Perhaps it may be shortened
by our Obstinacy, by our Grieving the Spirit of God, which moves God to
withdraw the tender of Reconciliation, and the Influx of his Spirit, and to
leave us to the Blinding of the God of this world, and the Obduration of our
own Hearts. The time after this Life is quite excluded in this business. I must
work, says Christ, (Joh. 9.4.) the works of him that sent me, while it is Day;
(that is, while I am in this world, as he expresses it verse. 5.) the Night
comes, when no man can work.

As in Sales by the Candle, he that bids not the price before the Candle goes
out, buies nothing: so it is in this great Merchandise of the rich Pearl of the
Kingdom of Heaven; he that sells not all before his Light is extinguished, can
never purchase the Inheritance. There is no knowledge, no wisdom, no
operation to this end, in the Grave whither we go. Neither Priests Masses, nor
Monks Prayers, nor large Alms, nor continual Obits, can buy Remission of Sins,
or recover a man from the Infernal place, or state of eternal Punishment, when
once the Grave has shut its mouth upon him. In the Grave there is no
Remembrance of God to this effect; there is no Praise of him, or hearing of his
Voice to Salvation: much less at the day of Judgment. When once the Master of
the house is risen up, (says our Savior, Luke 13.25, 27, 28.) and has shut
to the door, and ye begin to stand without, and to knock at the door, saying,
Lord, Lord, open unto us; and he shall answer and say unto you, I know you not
whence you are; depart from me, all ye workers of Iniquity: there remains
nothing but weeping and gnashing of teeth. If men slumber and sleep, and get
not Oil in their Lamps and Vessels, no admission will be for them into the
Wedding-chamber when the Bridegroom comes.

It will not consist with God's Majesty and Honor to be always waiting upon us
to do us good. He is long patient; but (Laesa Patientia fit Furor) his injured
and abused Patience ends in Fury. If while God assigns a Day to hear his Voice,
we make it a day of Provocation, he will swear in his wrath we shall never
enter into his Rest.

Besides, the longer we defer the accepting of God's Grace, the more we make
our selves incapable of hearkening to God's Voice. Custom in Sin hardens us
therein. They that are used to do Evil, hardly ever learn to do well. Often
Sinning makes Sin habitual, and that begets Hardness of Heart: this must be
removed, if we will hear God's Voice; which I propounded for the

IV. OBSERVATION.
That we may hear God's Voice to day, our Hearts must not be hardened.

The Heart, in Scripture acception, comprehends all the inward Intellectual
Faculties, the Understanding, Memory, Conscience, Will, and Affections, which
must concur with the Ear in hearing God's Voice. Romans 10.17. They that had
never any Preaching could never hear God's Voice. And they that have admitted
it into the Ear, without opening of the inner Door of the Heart, want the
enjoyment of it. It was Lydia's happiness, that when she heard S. Paul, the
Lord opened her Heart, that she attended unto the things which were spoken,
Act. 16.14. They are unhappy to whom the Lord vouchsafes not the opening of the
Ear to hear his Voice: but they are most unhappy, and accursed, to whose Ears
the Voice of God comes, but their Hearts are not opened to receive it. No Curse
more direful then that which our Savior says was fulfilled in his Auditors:
By hearing they heard, and did not understand; and seeing they did see, and not
perceive. For this people's Heart is waxed gross, and their Ears are dull of
hearing, and their Eyes have they closed; lest at any time they should see with
their Eyes, and hear with their Ears, and should understand with their Heart,
and should be converted, and I should heal them, Matthew. 13.14, 15.

For this reason, as the absenting from hearing of God's Voice is a damnable
Sin; (they that come not to hear with their Ears, show their Contempt of God's
Grace;) so much more damnable is the hardening of the Heart, whereby the Voice
of God is wilfully kept out of the Understanding, Memory, Conscience, Will,
Affections, so as it cannot be seated in them, nor they guided and ruled by it.
Which thing comes to pass by the Deceitfulness of Sin, as our Apostle tells us,
Heb. 3.13. Love of any Sin, adherence to any Error opposite to God's Voice,
will harden the Heart, so as neither to admit the enlightening Brightness of it
into the Eye of the Mind, nor the softning Virtue of it into the Will, to make
it pliable. Pride and Self-dependence were two of the chief Causes of the Jews
hardening their Hearts against the Voice of God in the Preaching of the Gospel
by Christ and his Apostles. How can ye believe, (says our Savior, Joh. 5.44.)
which receive honor one of another, and seek not the Honor which comes from
God only? Romans 10.3. They being ignorant of God's Righteousness, and going
about to establish their own Righteousness, have not submitted themselves to
the Righteousness of God, Romans 10.3.

Thus at this day do Popish Justitiaries, who place their Righteousness in
their own good Merits. All ignorant people, who are wedded to vain
Superstitions, harden their Hearts against the Voice of the Gospel, so as not
to be humbled for Sin, as the penitent Publican, but to boast themselves, as
the proud Pharisee. They receive not Christ joyfully, with sinful Zacchaeus;
but reject the offers of Grace, like those who judged themselves unworthy of
eternal life, Act. 13.46. In like manner, the Cares of this World, the
Deceitfulness of Riches, the Pleasures of this life, with other Lusts, choke
the word of the Kingdom, so as that it becomes unfruitful, Matthew. 13.22. Luke
8.14. Hence it is that worldly-minded men and voluptuous livers harden their
Hearts against the Warnings of God's Word, slight the Tender of the Gospel,
employ their wits to discredit it, hearken to Seducers, which foment their
Lusts, and pervert their Understanding. As redundance of Choler in the Stomach
makes it cast up the best Meat as unsavory: so where the Heart is filled with
sinful Lusts, or erroneous Principles, they make the most precious Truths of
the Gospel to be loathed and refused. Vicious minds expel holy Doctrines: and
therefore till the Heart be softened, the Motions of God's Spirit will not be
entertained.

APPLICATION.
Let me now entreat you, Brethren, to descend into your selves, and examine
whether it be not so with you. The Voice of God in the Gospel of Christ has
been so evidently demonstrated to the world, that never was there any thing
which was published with more manifest proofs, and Divine infallible assurance
of its Truth. And to take away all doubt of Imposture in the Publishers,
Testimony has been given to their Sincerity therein, by their relinquishing
all outward desirable Advantages, even with the sacrificing of their own Lives.

And to you of this Nation it has been held forth with much Perspicuity,
pressed with much Earnestness. But do you hear it? do you perceive this to be
the time of your Visitation, your Day? Do you not harden your Hearts as in the
Provocation? Do not your proud Spirits think it below you to stoop to it? May
we not say as once the Jews did, Which of the Rulers believe on him? Do we not
find the Poor receive the Gospel, when the Rich are sent empty away? Surgunt
Indocti, and rapiunt Coelum; the Unlearned rise up, and take Heaven by
violence, when the reputed Wise go on in their ways to Perdition? Do we not
love the Praise of Men more then the Praise of God? Do not your love of
Pleasures and the Cares of this world choke the Word, and make it unfruitful?

I come not to accuse you, but would have you judge your selves, as knowing
that you shall be judged by the Lord, and, if you prevent it not by
self-judging, condemned with the World. Take it as a warning, out of a most
ardent desire I have to save your Souls, that I tell you, that there are shrewd
Symptoms of the Hardness of your Heart, and Averseness from hearing God's
Voice; in that places of Pastime and Pleasure, houses of Good-fellowship, are
so much frequented as they are, and the Church of God neglected; in that
Romances, profane Histories, yea Discourses savouring of Atheism, are bought
up, and read with more delight then the Bible, or any other Holy Writings; we
take more pleasure to furnish our Fancy, then to rectify our Conscience.

Are you not sensible that God has limited you a certain time to hear his
Voice? that your days are numbered, and your months, that you cannot pass? that
while the Gospel is preached, is your Day of Salvation? that if the Sun of
your Life be set, the Day of the Gospel darkened over you, there will be no
time left to make your Peace, to save your immortal Spirits? that if you
harden your Hearts, there remains nothing after this Day but Hell and eternal
Judgment? Think seriously then upon your Condition, and while it is called to
day, provide for Eternity. Hear God's Voice readily and constantly. Harden not
your Hearts by Pride, Luxury, Covetousness, Superstition, or any other evil
Lusts. Submit your Understandings to God's Wisdom. Retain his Word in your
Memory and Conscience. Believe him against your own Fancies. Conform your Wills
to his. Receive his Truth in the love of it, and you shall be saved by it.
Which he grant, etc. Amen.

LAVS DEO.
THE DANGER OF Abusing Grace.
The Thirteenth SERMON.
ROMANS vi. 1. and part of 2. What shall we say then? shall we continue in Sin,
that Grace may abound?

God forbid.


TO acquit the Gospel (which he preached) from the Exceptions and Obloquies
which it, and the Preachers of it, were obnoxious to, and to demonstrate the
Wisdom and Power of God in his proceedings concerning it, S. Paul (in this
Epistle, written to the greatest and most intelligent People of the Gentiles,)
declares both the extreme Corruptions of the whole World, and the Wrath of God
impendent on them for that reason; as also the unparalled Longanimity of God,
in bearing with such a provoking Generation, whom Hell had long waited for; and
especially, the incomprehensible Philanthropy or Lovingkindness of God toward
men, whom, though Enemies, though weak to resist him, he not only spares, but
also reconcileth to himself by the Blood of his own Son, and proclaims his
free Pardon to all that receive him, by his Apostles.

But lest Mercy abused should inflame the Wrath of God so much the more; lest
the sweetest Meat, undigested through a Surfeit, should be putrefied in the
Stomach, and turn to the most deadly Poison; he in this and the following
Chapters warns us of the ill Inference which men may make from so great
Goodness: and he begins at the words now read unto you, What shall we say then?
shall we continue in Sin, that Grace may abound? God forbid.

In which words are two Questions: the former whereof is only a form of
Transition, propounding it to the consideration of those to whom he writes,
that they with him should bethink themselves what Determination to make upon
his former Declaration, What shall we say then? If this be the state of affairs
between God and us, it concerns us to heed what thereupon we resolve to do.

The other Question is more particular; Shall we continue in Sin, that Grace
may abound? Shall this be the Inference we make from it? The Answer is
negative; Absit, God forbid. Let no so absurd, so unworthy an Abuse of so rich
Mercy be yielded to; though it be never so plausibly urged by our carnal
Reason, and our corrupt Affections would incline us to embrace the Motion.

In this passage of Scripture these following Conclusions are couched.

1. That God's dealing with Sinners according to the Gospel of Christ is out of
his abundant Grace. 2. That the corrupt Heart of man is apt thereupon to harden
it self by Continuance in Sin. 3. That such a Determination is a most foolish
and pernicious Abuse of God's superabundant Grace.
Of these in their order.

I. OBSERVATION.
That God's dealing with Sinners according to the Gospel of Christ is out of
his abundant Grace.

That abundant Grace which is here supposed is the same with that which he
speaks of Romans 5.20, 21. Moreover, the Law entered, that the Offense might
abound: but where Sin abounded, Grace did much more abound: That as Sin has
reigned unto Death; even so might Grace reign through Righteousness unto
eternal Life, by Jesus Christ our Lord. Which elsewhere, Ephesians. 1.7. he terms
the Riches of his Grace; In whom we have Redemption through his blood, the
forgiveness of Sins, according to the Riches of his Grace. And Ephesians. 2.4, 5, 7.
God who is rich in Mercy, for his great Love wherewith he loved us, even when
we were dead in Sins, has quickened us together with Christ: That in the Ages
to come he might show the exceeding Riches of his Grace, in his Kindness
toward us, through Christ Jesus. And Ephesians. 3.8. it is termed the unsearchable
Riches of Christ.

All which Expressions are true, without an Excess of speech, if we consider
either the State of mankind antecedent to the exhibition of this Grace; or the
Effects thereof, or the Means of exhibiting it.

For what more deplorable Condition (except that of Devils) could the World be
in, then it was in before the exhibiting of the Divine Evangelical Grace of
Christ to the sons of men? They had all sinned, and came short of the Glory of
God: they were concluded, as Malefactors condemned, under Sin, under the Curse
of the Law; dead in Trespasses and Sins: they were alienated from the Life that
is in God; Enemies in their minds by wicked works; foolish, disobedient,
serving diverse Lusts, hateful, and hating one another; children of
Disobedience, of Darkness, who walked after the course of the Prince of the
power of the Air: they were carried away after dumb Idols; were Vassals of
Satan, and children of Wrath by nature.

And yet even to such did the Loving Kindness of God toward Man appear, so as
to reconcile the world unto himself, not imputing their Trespasses to them. He
made him to be Sin for us, who knew no Sin; that we might be made his
Righteousness in him: and committed the Ministry of Reconciliation to chosen
Vessels, which might bear his Name to the Gentiles, and bring Light and
Salvation to such persons.

It was no small Testimony of his Goodness, that (even then when they were
such, when they walked in their own ways) he gave them Rain from Heaven, and
fruitful seasons, filling their hearts with food and gladness; that he caused
his Sun to shine upon such unjust people, as were both Jews and Gentiles. The
former of which were degenerated from the Integrity of Abraham; and though
claiming the privilege of his Children, yet in reality were of their Father the
Devil, whose works they did; except a few names, that waited for the
Consolation of Israel: the rest of them were a Generation of Vipers, full of
Hypocrisy and Cruelty, Unpeaceable, Ambitious, seeking the Praise of men, not
the Honor that comes of God; such as would compass sea and land to make one
Proselyte, and having wone him to them, made him twofold more the child of Hell
then themselves. The other were filled with all Unrighteousness, Fornication,
Wickedness, Covetousness, Maliciousness; full of Envy, Murder, Debate, Deceit,
Malignity; Whisperers, Backbiters, Haters of God, despightfull, proud,
Boasters, Inventers of evil things, disobedient to Parents, without
Understanding, Covenant-breakers, without natural Affection, implacable,
unmercifull, Romans 1.29, 30, 31. Yet even such as these he washed, he
sanctified, he justified in the Name of the Lord Jesus, and by his Spirit.

It might rather have been expected, that he should have repented that he had
made them, and have executed his Wrath on them, as he did on the world of the
ungodly in Noah's time, by a Deluge of water, to wash away from the Earth that
Dunghill and filth of evil Imaginations and wicked Works that had polluted the
whole Earth; or should have rained Fire and brimstone from Heaven, to burn up,
and so to take away, those unclean Sodomites, those brutish Dogs and Swine
which filled the World. He might justly have caused the Earth to open its
mouth, and swallow up the Inhabitants of the world, so as that they should go
down quick into Hell, as it did the Families of Korah, Dathan, and Abiram. He
might have sworn in his Wrath, (as he did concerning the Rebellious
Israelites,) that they should never enter into his Rest. They and we in all
Generations succeeding might have expected to suffer the Vengeance of eternal
fire.

But O Altitudo, O the depth of the riches both of the Wisdom and Knowledge
and Love of God! how unsearchable are his Judgments, and his ways past finding
out? Even in this desperate State, when Iniquity was at the height, when the
Sins of men were ripe, the Harvest come to its full growth, when they lay
weltring in their own blood, he said unto such outcast, helpless sons of Adam,
Live: he has swaddled, washed, nourished, decked, married to his Son such
forlorn Creatures, done the greatest Good to the worst of men: he so loved the
World, that he gave his onely-begotten Son, that whosoever believes on him,
should not perish, but have Life eternal. Jesus Christ came into the world to
save Sinners, (even the chiefest,) though it was foreseen, (which is next to be
considered)

II. OBSERVATION.
That corrupt Hearts will be apt, upon this gracious dealing of God, to harden
themselves by continuance in Sin.

The Apostle Jude in his Epistle, verse. 4. tells us of some ungodly men in his
time, who turned the Grace of God into Lasciviousness. But it is an Abuse not
peculiar to those only; it is a Disease which is hereditary. How many are
there who presume on God's Mercy, though they persist in their Impenitency? Is
it not a frequent thing with many, that profane the Name of God by an hourly
Abuse of it in vain Swearing, that spend a great part of their lives in
Debauchery, so as to become more like Beasts then Men, to live more Pecudum, or
more Ferarum, as Sensualists, rather then Religious persons, as Devils, rather
then Saints; yet to feed themselves with imaginations of God's Grace, as if God
would be merciful to such, Christ died for All, God would damn None? to
bolster up themselves in Sin, deluding themselves with Conceits of Pardon, if
at last Gasp they can but cry Peccavi, when they love their Sin as much as they
did, and grieve only that they cannot still commit it, or that God awards Hell
to the Actours of it; and cry God mercy in a faint Miserere mei, God be
merciful to me, when they have neither acquaintance with his Promise, nor any
lively sense of his Love in Christ?

How great a part of the sons of men expose themselves to Temptations, and give
way to sinful Compliance in Error or unrighteous Practices, out of a fond
hope of future Repentance, and easy Pardon? Not only notorious ungodly
persons, who walk in the Stubbornness of their heart, adding drunkenness to
thirst, say in their heart, they shall have Peace, when God says he will not
spare them, Deuteronomy. 29.19. bless themselves, when God curses them: but also
others, who have a Form of Godliness, without the Power, shelter themselves
from Wrath, upon a mistake of God's abundant Grace. Yea, somewhat of this
Leaven is hidden even in Good men's Hearts, which is apt to sour their Spirits,
to puff them up with high conceits of their Happiness and Interest in God, so
as to make them secure in some goings astray. Which is a foolish and pernicious
Abuse of God's superabundant Grace, to be next considered.

III. OBSERVATION.
That it is a foolish Conceit, that we may securely continue in Sin, and expect
Favor from God, because of his superabundant Grace in Christ.

This is manifest, because it is a groundless and vain Presumption; there being
no Promise or other Declaration of God which assures his Grace to such persons.

Promise of Pardon of Sin is made only to the Penitent: Mercy to him that
confesses and forsakes his Sin. Only a working Faith, that is in Christ
operative by Love, avails with God to the Justification of a Sinner. New
Obedience is requisite to the Continuance of our Peace with God; a holy Life,
to eternal Life.

We read of David's Forgiveness, and we read also of David's Confession: he
acknowledges his Sin, before Nathan tells him, The Lord has put away thy Sin.
We read of God's Mercy to Manasseh: but the same Story tells us of his
humbling himself first. Saint Paul was saved, though the chief of Sinners; but
not till he was converted, and thereby made a real Saint.

Were it so that Grace were bestowed on hardened Sinners, it would be in effect
a cherishing of Rebellion. When a Prince pardons a Traitor, he will first have
him an humble Supplicant, lay down his Weapons, and fall prostrate at his feet.
Else he should maintain Enemies, not secure his Dominion: he should, in the
event, destroy himself, by saving his Foe: such Pity to them would prove
Cruelty to himself.

It is so in God's Royal Government. Should he show himself facil and forward
in bestowing his most beneficial Grace on open Sinners, that persist in their
Provocations, or on secret Hypocrites, that are false-hearted, he should, in
stead of upholding his Kingdom, ruin it; in stead of gaining good Subjects,
nourish Vipers in his bosom.

It is a Maxim with him in his Holy Polity, That when the Righteous turns
away from his Righteousness, and commits Iniquity, his Righteousness that he
has done shall not be mentioned: in his Trespass that he has trespassed and
in his Sin that he has sinned, in them shall he die, Ezekiel. 18.24. This is the
way of God, which he counts, as it is indeed, most equal: it being altogether
incongruous to God's Holiness to abett Evil. For that would foster such
Conceits in men, as those were in him of whom God says, Psalm. 50.21. These
things have thou done, and I kept silence: thou thoughtest that I was
altogether such an one as thy self. Then which there is nothing more opposite
to his pure Nature, nothing being more repugnant to him then Sin. Such
Imputations therefore are the greatest Disparagements of God; the foulest
Reproaches, the most heinous Injuries, the most monstrous Indignities that can
be cast on the Divine Majesty: it being all one as to metamorphose him into a
Devil.

All Sin is from the Devil; and therefore for God to bestow his Grace on him
that continues in Sin, were to countenance the Devil's Actings, to breed up his
Brats: in stead of destroying the works of the Devil, such Indulgence would
promote them. God should be an egregious Dissembler: he should in word forbid
Sin, in deed command it: he should take to himself the name of a Righteous God,
and act as the Author of Sin: he should threaten Sinners as if he were in
jest, not in earnest; give liberty and allowance to a dissembling Hypocrite to
mock him to his face, while he makes a show of honoring God, when he sues for
his Grace, and yet in Heart derides the Word of the living God.

The Intention of God in exhibiting his surpassing Grace, is, to draw the
Hearts of men by the Chords of love to him the more abundantly; that (as it is
said of that woman, Luke 7.47. that her Sins, which were many, were forgiven,
for she loved much,) much Love might be the fruit of much Grace. Whereas the
Continuance in Sin out of the fancy of superabundant Grace, is indeed to abuse
the Love of God to the increase of Hatred against him; Spider-like, to suck
Poison out of that Flower which a Be would convert to the sweetest Honey. In
the end, this course is most pernicious to him that follows it; there being
nothing that more alienates Affection from a person, then his abuse of
Kindness. God's Love abused, turns to Rage: and none have God more incensed
against them, then those that, having tasted of the good Gift of God, fall away
into sinful Courses; that are so unthankful for so great a Favor as the
offer of Reconciliation, the Sacrifice of Christ, the Invitation to his Supper,
to the Marriage of the Son of God, as that they choose rather to be at home with
their Oxen and Wives and Farms, or to come without a Wedding Garment, then to
accept of his Motion, and accommodate themselves to his Kindness; that having
had ten thousand Talents forgiven them, take their Brother by the throat for an
hundred pence.

When men despise the Riches of God's Goodness, and Forbearance, and
Long-suffering, not knowing that the Goodness of God leads them to
Repentance; after their hardness and impenitent Hearts, they treasure up to
themselves Wrath against the day of Wrath, and revelation of the righteous
Judgment of God, Romans 2.4, 5.

APPLICATION.
Oh then let me, in the most tender Bowels of Compassion my Heart can be
touched with, with the most serious Importunity that my words can express, with
the deepest Adjuration by the most affecting things that I can mind you of,
instantly press you to take heed of this most vile, ugly, dishonest,
irrational, and damnable Abuse of the Divine Grace, so as to continue in Sin,
that Grace may abound.

It is most meet, yea natural, that Love should beget Love, Grace should beget
Observance. Is not he a most egregious Villain, that hates his own Father that
begat him, that kills him that gave him Life? Is not the Lord the Rock who
begat thee, the God that formed thee? And will thou then be so unnatural as to
hate God, as thou do, if this be thy Requital for his Grace, to persevere in
Wickedness?

He tells thee, that he is hated, when thou love any thing more then him,
give his Glory to another, make thy Belly thy God, gloriest in thy Shame,
mindest earthly things: And will thou thus recompense so great Goodness with
such extreme Badness? He says, he will not hold him guiltless that takes his
Name in vain: And will thou pollute the Holy Name of thy Holy Father with thy
impure Swearing? The earnal mind is Enmity against God, as being not subject to
his Law, but inconsistent with it: And will thou suffer vain Thoughts to lodge
in thee, fleshly Reason to sway with thee, carnal Lusts to rule over thee?

All Benefits received engage to answerable Duty. What art thou then but a very
Miscreant, that (having so much taste how gracious God is, how amply he has
vouchsafed to be bountiful to thee in giving Christ for thee, how profusely he
has bestowed on thee the Riches of Heaven in the largess of Spiritual
Blessings in heavenly things in Christ,) do yet side with Sin and Satan, his
professed irreconcilable Enemies; that can harbor that Enemy, which thy
Allegiance to God binds thee to pursue zealously unto death?

Oh that rather the Sense of God's Goodness might make us good, the Taste of
his Grace might make us gracious. Surely none are worse Enemies to God, then
such as have been acquainted with the excess of God's Grace in Christ, yet
exceed in their obstinate perseverance in Evil: such as, when God's Grace
should draw Tears from their Eyes, Sighs from their Breasts, cause Dejectedness
in their Spirits by reason of their Sinning against so incomprehensible a Love,
as that which he vouchsafes to the Sons of Adam in Christ, have yet a Forehead
of brass, that cannot blush; glory in their Wickedness, boast of their
Lewdness, and are secure in their Impenitency.

Greater Woe was to Chorazin and Bethsaida then to Tire and Sidon, because they
repented not upon such Proofs of Christ's Excellency, as would have wrought on
the other. As they had been lifted up to Heaven; so Christ foretells their
casting down to Hell. No people in the world are likely to have a greater
degree of Torment in Hell, then profane and unrighteous men among us, who have
the greatest Proof of God's Grace of any people on the Earth.

As then you either stand in fear of so great Damnation, or are desirous of
that abundant Grace which the Gospel of Christ exhibits, abhor the thought of
Continuing in Sin, that Grace may abound. Let the Mercies of God lead you to
present your Bodies a living Sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto God, which is
your reasonable Service: for that will procure his Favor here, and your
Blessedness hereafter. Which he grant, etc. Amen.

LAVS DEO.
THE DIVINE COMPASSIONS.
The Fourteenth SERMON.
LAMENT. iij. 22. It is of the Lord's Mercies that we are not consumed, because
his Compassions fail not.


I Have read to you a passage out of a most doleful Poem, composed by that
Holy Prophet Jeremiah, with much Art in the four first Chapters, the order of
the Hebrew Alphabet being observed in the initiall Letters of the Verses; yet
with a very deep sense of God's Judgments on Judah and Jernsalem, and a tender
Sympathy with them in their Affliction. He had long and often foretold those
Evils would befall them, which he now saw come upon them, and quorum pars magna
fuit, and in which he had a great Share: and he might well say, (Quis talia
fando, temperet a lacrymis?) Who could think or speak of such things with dry
Eyes, or an insensible Spirit?

This set (may I say his Muse? I should say rather) his Prophetic spirit on
work, to endite and leave to the Church this Poem. In which, with much
Compassion toward his Country, he bewails their Desolation: yet, with much
Piety toward God, justifies him, as punishing them according to the Demerit of
their Sins; and magnifies his Goodness, as punishing them less then they
deserved. Both which are expressed in the words of my Text, It is of the Lord's
Mercies that we are not consumed, because his Compassions fail not.

And sure we may say the like, It is of the Lord's Mercies that London and all
England are not consumed by the Pestilence, because his Compassions fail not.
And therefore the handling of this Passage will be apposite to the present Face
of things with us, and the Occasion of this Day? In it, 1. The Prophet takes
notice of the Mitigation of God's Wrath, in that they were not consumed. 2. He
assigns the genuine Cause of it, the Lord's Mercies or Benignities, great
Mercies: which is exclusive of any other procuring Cause that might deserve it;
and intimates, that there was sufficient reason (did not his Mercies interpose)
why he should have consumed them. 3. These Mercies are described, 1. By the
kind of them; they were Compassions, in the Original, Bowelmercies, such as a
tender Mother has to the Child of her womb; in God, Pardoning Mercies,
Relieving Mercies. 2. By the Indesiciency of them: Though men fail in their
Duty, though they fail in their Obedience, though they be wanting in Returning
to God, though their Prayers be consumed; yet his Compassions are not consumed,
and therefore they are not consumed.


And this is here alleged as a Door of Hope, (to the prophet) that God would
restore that People: for to that end are these words brought in this place, as
that which follows in four Verses of this Chapter plainly shows. From hence
then, this Explication of the words being premised, these Observations do arise.

1. That the Lord, in Punishing of his People, does not consume them. 2. That
Holy persons ascribe not the Mitigation of God's extreme Severity in his
Punishments to any promeriting Cause in themselves, but confess their own Sins
deserve utter Consumption. 3. That there are Mercies and Compassions in God
toward his People. 4. That these Mercies fail not. 5. That the Non-consumption
of God's People is to be ascribed to this. 6. That the apprehension of this
encourages them to hope and wait on God for a Consummation of their Health and
Peace.
Of these I shall speak in the order propounded, and then apply them to the
present state of things, and so conclude.

I. OBSERVATION.
That the Lord does not, in Punishing of his People, consume them.

This is equivalent to what God speaks in the Prophet Isaiah, (57.16.) I will
not contend for ever, neither will I be always wroth. And he gives this Reason,
For the Spirit should fail before me, and the Soul which I have made.

It is true, the Devil is a roaring Lion, that goes about, seeking whom he may
devour, 1 Pet. 5.8. He is the Apollyon, the Abaddon, the Thief that comes not
to save, but to steal and to kill and to destroy, Joh. 10.10. because the Sheep
are not his own. He made nothing, nor has any Love to any thing; and therefore
seeks not to help any, but to mar and do mischief to all that God has made.
But the People of God are the work of his hands, and the Sheep of his Pasture,
Psalm. 100.3. and therefore he will have a desire to the work of his hands, Job
14.15. What is our work, we are loath to pull down. So God, doubtless, does not
delight, as Children, to make a house of Sticks, and then kick it down again.
As he made Man after his own Image; so he is not easily induced to break him.
He that accounts it an heinous Injury to himself, to curse Man with the Tongue,
who is made after his Image, Jam. 3.9. and is so severe against whatever shall
destroy him, that it is his strict Determination, for Preservation of Mankind
after the Flood, that he will not let the killing of Man go unrevenged; but
enacteth this Law among his Precepts to Noah, Genesis 9.5, 6. And surely your
blood of your Lives will I require: at the hand of every Beast will I require
it, and at the hand of Man; at the hands of every man's Brother will I require
the Life of man. Whosoever sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed:
for in the Image of God made he man; He doubtless is so chary of Men, as not to
consume them himself utterly, till Iniquity is grown so daring, as that there
is no Remedy.

His own People, it is true, do sin and provoke God, and he often brings them
low; yet he does not make an utter end of them, because they are not only his
Creatures, as others, but also his Redeemed and Chosen people. Thus the Prophet
Samuel told the Israelites, 1 Samuel 12.20, 22. Fear not, (ye have done all this
Wickedness: yet turn not aside from following the Lord, but serve the Lord with
all your heart:) For the Lord will not forsake his people for his great Name's
sake, because it has pleased the Lord to make you his People.

That which a man has purchased for himself, he will hardly let it be taken
from him: with much more reluctance will he cast it away. Though Michal had
been given to another, and was defiled, yet David would have her again, 2 Samuel
3.13. because he had espoused her to him for an hundred Foreskins of the
Philistines. How much less will God let go those whom he has purchased by his
Son's Blood? He will not have him destroyed by our Meat, for whom Christ died,
Romans 14.15. If any, through the Watchman's failing to warn them, perish, their
blood will he require at the Watchman's hands, Ezekiel. 3.18. Which shows, that he
has a Fatherly Care of his own People, that they be not consumed. And though
they provoke him, so as to cause his Anger to wax hot against them; yet in the
midst of Judgment, he remembers Mercy. He chastises as a Father; does not
exterminate or extirpate as an Enemy. If they break his Statutes, and keep not
his Commandments; Then he will visit their Transgression with a Rod, and their
Iniquity with Stripes. Nevertheless his Loving Kindness he will not utterly
take from them, nor suffer his Faithfulness to fail, Psalm. 89.31, 32, 33.
Though he make a full end of all the Nations, yet he will not make a full end
of them, but correct them in measure; yet will he not leave them wholly
unpunished, Jer. 46.28. Wherein he manifests a mixture of Mercy and Justice.
And therefore, in the next place,

II. OBSERVATION.
Holy persons ascribe not the Mitigation of God's extreme Severity in his
Punishments to any promeriting Cause in themselves, but confess their own Sins
deserve utter Consumption.

This was the acknowledgment of Ezra; Thou our God have punished us less then
our Iniquities deserve, Ezra 9.13. Though the Punishment of the Jews were
exceeding great, insomuch that our Prophet, Lament. 4.6. compares it to the
Punishment of the Sin of Sodom, and aggravates it, as secundum quid, in some
respect, greater then it: yet, to speak simply and absolutely, there was an
ingredient of Mercy that did allay it, and therefore they acknowledge their
Sins to have deserved greater Evils then they felt. Whence in all their
Addresses to God, they ascribe Righteousness to their Maker, and take all the
Blame of their Sufferings on themselves. In the same Chapter, verse. 15. O Lord
God of Israel, (says Ezra,) thou art Righteous, for we remain yet escaped, as
at this day. But most fully the Prophet Daniel, Chapter 9.11, 12, 13, 14. We
have sinned against the Lord our God: And he has confirmed the words which he
spoke against us, by bringing upon us a great Evil: for under the whole Heaven
has not been done as has been done upon Jerusalem. Yet made we not our Prayer
before the Lord our God, that we might turn from our Iniquities, and understand
thy Truth. Therefore has the Lord watched upon the Evil, and brought it upon
us: for the Lord our God is Righteous in all his works which he does; for we
obeyed not his voice. See also verse. 5, 6, etc. of the same Chapter.

And indeed such Acknowledgments are necessary, and are always made by those
who are wise-hearted in all Generations: for the very best of Men or People can
never acquit themselves from being guilty of such Iniquities as might justly
expose them to greater Wrath then they feel. There is not a Just man upon earth
that does good, and sins not, says Solomon, Eccles. 7.20. Who can say, I
have made my Heart clean, I am pure from my Sin? Prove. 20.9. Holy Job, of whom
God testifies, that he was his Servant, none like him in the Earth, a perfect
and an upright man, one that feared God, and eschewed Evil, Job 1.8. though he
still avouched his Integrity; yet when he is to speak of his Afflictions as
they come from God, he is crest-fallen, lets down his Plumes, speaks in such
forms as these: How should a man be just with God? If he will contend with him,
he cannot answer him one of a thousand. If I justisie my self, mine own mouth
shall condemn me: if I say, I am perfect, it shall also prove me perverse. If I
wash my self with Snow-water, and make my hands never so clean: Yet shall thou
plunge me in the ditch, and mine own clothes shall abhor me, Job 9.2, 3, 20,
30, 31. He makes no such plea for himself as the proud Pharisee, that trusted
in himself that he was Righteous, and despised others: nor does he out of mere
Modesty speak thus of himself, but out of the sense of the verity thereof, he
confesses concerning all the Sons of Adam, Job 14.4. Who can bring a clean
thing out of an unclean? not one. The Septuagint reads, verse. 5. No, though his
life be but one day upon earth; and after them the Ancients, Though he be but
Infans unius diei, an Infant of one day.

We read of Hezekiah, Isa. 38.3. that he deprecated the Sentence of his Death
in these words; Remember now, O Lord, I beseech thee, how I have walked before
thee in truth, and with a perfect Heart, and have done that which is good in
thy sight: Yet when the Sentence was reversed, he does not ascribe it to his
own desert, but, verse. 17. he thus speaks to God; Thou have in love to my Soul
delivered it from the Pit of corruption: for thou have cast all my Sins behind
thy back. He does not, like a proud Pharisee, impute his Recovery to his own
Righteousness; nor, like some boasting Friar, brag of his own Merits or Works
of Supererogation: Such language of Self-justitiaries, such Conceits of men
puffed up with arrogant Self-esteem, were far from him. He speaks like an
humble Penitent, not like a vain Glorioso. He assigns as the cause of his
Recovery, not his own Merit, but God's pardoning Mercy.

Nor can any People justly reckon their own Innocence as the cause of God's
sparing them; but must (if they will speak truth) acknowledge they have
deserved to be consumed. Though David, when the Pestilence was upon Israel,
said, Lo, I have sinned, and I have done wickedly; but these Sheep what have
they done? 2 Samuel 24.17. yet that there were Iniquities in the People which
occasioned David's Sin, is plain from verse. 1. where it is said, that the Anger
of the Lord was kindled against Israel.

The Churches of Christ in the Primitive times were the purest; yet S. Paul, 2
Cor. 12.20, 21. says, he feared, lest when he came to Corinth he should not
find them such as he would, and that he should be found unto them such as they
would not: lest there be Debates, Envyings, Wraths, Strifes, Backbitings,
Whisperings, Swellings, Tumults: lest when he came again his God would humble
him among them, and that he should bewail many which had sinned already, and
had not repented of the Uncleanness which they had committed.

In Christ's Survey of the Seven Golden Candlesticks, the Seven Churches of
Asia, though golden or pure by his Acceptance, yet he finds much drossy stuff,
their Light but dim, and almost wasted, and ready to go out; such
Imperfections, such Errors, such Decays, such Practices of evil savor, as
were enough to move him to extinguish their Light quite, and to remove the
Candlesticks, except they repented.

It is by reason of man's deceitful Heart, that God finds, even in the best
Men and Churches, sufficient matter against them to consume them: which yet he
permits by his own just Decree and wise Counsel, that he may hide Pride from
man, and none might glory in himself; but that his Mercies might the better be
discerned. Which leads us to the

III. OBSERVATION.
That there are Mercies and Compassions in God toward his People.

It is true, Mercy and Compassion, as they are in Man, are Perturbations, which
do disquiet them: Compassion in them is a dolorous Passion, arising from some
appearing Evil, that is destructive, or otherwise grievous, which happens to a
man undeservedly. And it is occasioned by a sense of the common Condition of
men, and a possibility of the like Accident befalling themselves; as Aristotle
describes it in the Second Book of his Rhetoric.

But in God, who is without Body, Parts, or Passions, (as the First Article of
the Church of England speaks,) there is no such Perturbation, no afflicting
Affection: But Compassion in him is a sweet, calm, and gracious Inclination of
his Will, whereby he has regard to the Defects and Miseries of his Creature.

This Attribute is asserted by himself, in that most majestic Proclamation of
his, when he showed his Glory, and made all his Goodness to pass before Moses,
Exodus 33.18, 19. descended in a Cloud, passed by him, and proclaimed the Name
of the Lord, The Lord, the Lord God, Mereifull and Gracious, Long-suffering,
and abundant in Goodness and Truth, Exodus 34.5, 6. The same has been by many
of the Holy Writers attested: it being the great engaging Property of God,
whereby all his Creatures, chiefly his Elect, are eternally obliged to be his.
Thus he is styled by the Psalmist, Psalm. 116.5. Gracious is the Lord and
Righteous, yea our God is Merciful: by S. James, (5.11.) a God very pitiful,
and of tender Mercies, or of much Bowels of Compassion: by S. Paul, the Father
of mercies, and the God of all Consolation, 2 Cor. 1.3. rich in Mercy, Ephesians.
2.4. And therefore Mercy is most truly ascribed to him: so that as Christ said,
There is none Good but one, that is, God, Mark 10.18. so we may say, There is
none Merciful or compassionate but one, that is, God; understanding it of the
most intensive Degree, (quoad Affectum,) in respect of the disposition of his
Will to help; and of the most extensive Latitude, (quoad Effectum,) in respect
of the Effect and working of it; for so it is universal. Psalm. 145.9. The Lord
is good to All, and his tender Mercies (in some kind) are over all his works.
Thy Mercy, (O Lord) is in the Heavens, and thy Faithfulness reaches to the
Clouds. Thy Righteousness is like the great Mountains; thy Judgments are a
great Deep: O Lord, thou preservest Man and Beast, Psalm. 36.5, 6. And Christ
sets out the Mercifulness of God, in that he makes his Sun to rise on the Evil
and the Good, and sends Rain on the Just and Unjust, Matthew. 5.45.

But his Mercies are most abundant to his own People, chiefly to his Elect; who
are therefore termed Vessels of Mercy, Romans 9.23. on whom he bestows Mercies
most freely. He says to Moses, I will have Mercy on whom I will have Mercy;
and I will have Compassion on whom I will have Compassion, verse. 15. On them he
bestows the sure Mercies of David, Isa. 55.3. Not by works of Righteousness
which they have done, but according to his Mercy he saves them, by the washing
of Regeneration, and renewing of the Holy Ghost, Tit. 3.5. He keeps Mercy for
thousands of them that love him, and keep his Commandments, Exodus 20.6. Yea,
for their sakes he does often show Mercy to and spare those that are
disobedient, in respect of outward Judgments. Thus Moses stood in the Gap, and
turned away his Wrath from the Children of Israel. Phineas stood up, and
executed Judgment, or prayed, and the Plague was stayed. David supplicated for
Jerusalem, and the Angel of the Lord put up his Sword, and the Pestilence was
stayed. Daniel prayed, and obtained the Return of the Jews from Captivity. And
thus still God does to his People, in the midst of Judgment he remembers Mercy.
He does not always chide, nor keep his Anger for ever, Psalm. 103.9. He
retains not his Anger for ever, because he delights in Mercy, Mic. 7.18.
And this brings us to the

IV. OBSERVATION.
That God's Mercies and Compassions fail not.

To this purpose is that the Lord says Isa. 54.7, 8. For a small moment have I
forsaken thee, but with great Mercies will I gather thee: In a little Wrath I
hid my Face from thee for a moment; but with everlasting Kindness will I have
Mercy on thee, says the Lord. And indeed the Mercies of God to his Elect are,
as himself is, eternal. As they arise from himself; so are they of
interminable duration, as himself is. His Electing Mercy was before the World
was; his Redeeming Mercy, before we were; his Calling and quickening Mercy,
when we were dead in Sins and Trespasses; his Pardoning Mercy, when we have
gone astray; his Confirming Mercy, when we are ready to slip; his Comforting
Mercy, when we are ready to despair; his Raising Mercy, when we shall be
returned to the Earth; his Saving and advancing Mercy, when we shall stand in
Judgment, and have no other Plea for our selves but his free Mercy, when Time
shall be no more.

His Mercy therefore is indeficient, because it helps us when we are in the
lowest Condition. We count him a sure Friend, who fails us not when we are at
the lowest ebb, in the greatest Streights, in the extremest Necessity. And
thus does God, who remembered us in our low estate; for his Mercy endures for
ever, Psalm 136.23. When our Pressure is great, so as that the Enemy has
enclosed us, and we know not which way to escape, (as Pharaoh did the
Israelites at the Red sea,) even then he redeemeth us from our Enemies; for his
Mercy endures for ever, verse. 24. Even then when we have none to help, he
helps us. When he sees his People's power gone, when there is none shut up or
left, Deuteronomy. 32.36. when the Enemy is most insolent, the Danger greatest, our
Hearts fail us, we despond and despair; when we say, Our way is hid from the
Lord, and our Judgment passed over from our God; when we conclude that we are
cast out of the sight of his eyes, and say with our Savior, My God, my God,
why have thou forsaken me? when in our own account we are free among the dead,
like the slain that lie in the Grave, whom we think he remembers no more, but
they are cut off from his hand: yet even then his Compassions fail not. They
neither fail in their Duration, nor in their Constancy, nor in their Efficacy,
nor in their Seasonableness: but when there is a Necessity, when it is for his
People's greatest Advantage, they then appear effectually.

Yea sometimes, when we are insensible of our Danger; when we are disappointed
of those Supports we relied on; when we are out of Hope; when perhaps we are
secure, and know not how near our Affliction is; when the Judgment comes in a
way that is not perceivable; as when the Arrow of God flies by day, and the
Pestilence walks in darkness, and the Destruction wastes at noonday: In
these and all other cases, wherein there is no Help nor Deliverance but in and
from God, yea when there is no reason to expect any, no not from God himself,
yet even then his Compassions fail not, he comes in opportunely, and shows
Mercy efficaciously. And therefore justly, in the next place,

V. OBSERVATION.
The Non-consumption of God's People, their Salvation, is ascribed by them to
his indeficient Mercy only, to his Compassions that fail not.

David thus begins one of his Psalms, (89.1, 2.) I will sing of the Mercies of
the Lord for ever: with my mouth will I make known thy Faithfulness to all
generations. For I have said, Mercy shall be built up for ever: thy
Faithfulness shall thou establish in the very Heavens. And Psalm. 117. he says,
O praise the Lord, all ye Nations; praise him, all ye People: for his merciful
Kindness is great toward us, and the Truth of the Lord endures for ever.
Praise ye the Lord. And the 136. Psalm. throughout is one continued Invitation
to give Thanks to God, for his Mercy endures for ever, 26 times repeated.
Consonant whereto is that of the Prophet Isa. (63.7.) I will mention the
Loving-kindnesses of the Lord, and the Praises of the Lord, according to all
that the Lord has bestowed on us, and the great Goodness toward the house of
Israel, which he has bestowed on them, according to his Mercies, and according
to the multitude of his Loving-kindnesses.

In the New Testament, the Blessed Virgin Mary in her Magnificat sings thus; My
Soul does magnify the Lord, for that his Mercy is on them that fear him, from
generation to generation. He has helped his servant Israel, in remembrance of
his Mercy, Luke 1.46, 50, 54. Zacharias, in his Benedictus, Blessed be the Lord
God of Israel, for he has visited and redeemed his people; to perform the
Mercy promised to our Fathers, verse. 68, 72. John Baptist was to give knowledge
of Salvation unto his People, by the Remission of their Sins, through the
tender Mercy of our God, verse. 77, 78.

In a word, this was the main in the holy Songs of the Ministers of the Temple,
to give thanks to the Lord, because his Mercy endures for ever, 1 Chronicles.
16.41. And in like manner Jehosaphat, when he had consulted with the people,
appointed Singers unto the Lord, and that should praise the Beauty of Holiness,
as they went out before the Army, and to say, Praise the Lord, for his mercy
endures for ever, 2 Chronicles. 20.21.

And the same Commemoration of God's Mercy is the practice and delight of them
that have a Spirit of Holiness in all Generations. They write [Ex dono Dei] on
all they have: they ascribe all they do to Mercy: all their Prosperity,
Victory, Success, they account as Mercies from God. When they cast up the
Inventory of their Good things they have enjoyed, all that they possess, the
Sum total is, innumerable Mercies. How precious are thy thoughts unto me, O
God? how great is the sum of them? If I should count them, they are more in
number then the Sand, Psalm 139.17, 18.

The Law of Gratitude (then which none is more equal) ties every one to magnify
God's Mercy. What has any which he has not received? 1 Cor. 4.7. And who can
look upon his Receipts as due Wages, and not rather pure Alms? Who has not
received loads of Benefits from God, and all out of pure Mercy? Our Forming in
the womb is a prime Mercy, our Birth, our Education, our Instruction, our
Preservation, our Salvation. That I be not infinite in this Account, Our Life,
Breath, and all our Ways, all our natural Parts and Abilities, all our Motions
and Proceedings, all our Escapes from Dangers, from Sicknesses, from Death, and
most of all from being a Prey to the Devil, and our Deliverance from Hell, are
Evidences of transcendent Mercy in God, which all God's people are sensible of.
And this leads us to the

VI. OBSERVATION.
That the apprehension of God's great Mercy encourages his People to hope and
wait on God for a Consummation of their Welfare.

The greatness of God's Mercies encouraged David to cast himself into God's
hand, rather then to fall into the hands of men, 2 Samuel 24.14. And Holy Daniel,
in that effectual fervent Prayer, Dan. 9.8, 9. to appeal to God's Mercy; O
Lord, to us belongs Confusion of face, to our Kings, to our Princes, and to
our Fathers, because we have sinned against thee: To the Lord our God belong
Mercies and Forgivenesses, though we have rebelled against him. Verse. 18. We do
not present our Supplications before thee for our Righteousnesses, but for thy
great Mercies. Psalm 138.8. The Lord will perfect that which concerns me. Thy
Mercy, O Lord, endures for ever: forsake not the works of thine own hands.
Isa. 63.15. Look down from Heaven, and behold from the habitation of thy
Holiness, and of thy Glory: where is thy Zeal and thy Strength, the sounding of
thy Bowels and of thy Mercies toward me? are they restrained? Psalm. 130.7.
Let Israel hope in the Lord; for with the Lord there is Mercy, and with him is
plenteous Redemption.

Not one of all the Holy Saints in all the Bible has ever dared to utter such
Expressions to God or men, as if they could challenge the least Relief in
Trouble, the least Abatement of Sufferings, much less eternal Life and Reward
in Heaven, upon account of their own Merit, as Pharisaicall Self-Justitiaries
have presumed to do. Holy Jacob, on the contrary, ( Genesis 32.10.) tells God, I
am not worthy of the least of all thy Mercies, and of all the Truth which thou
have showed unto thy servant. And Nehemiah, when he allegeth his Actings for
God, Neh. 13.22. thus bespeaks him; Remember me, O my God, concerning this
also, and spare me according to the greatness of thy Mercy.

This is the Plea of all upright humble Souls; this is the Anchora sacra, the
sure Anchour upon which their Spirits are stayed in all their Fluctuations;
this is that Gale of wind which carries them on comfortably in all their
Voiages. They have learned from the Psalmist, Psalm. 33.18. Behold, the Eye of
the Lord is upon them that fear him, and that hope in his Mercy: and therefore
they say, verse. 22. Let thy Mercy, O Lord, be upon us, according as we hope in
thee. They have found this Address to God always prosperous; and therefore they
join with the Holy Prophet, in the words of my Text, and the two following
verses, It is of the Lord's Mercies that we are not consumed, because his
Compassions fail not. They are new every morning: great is thy Faithfulness.
The Lord is my Portion, says my Soul; therefore will I hope in him.

APPLICATION.
And now what is more necessary, more just, more meet for us to do, then to
join in consort with the Holy Prophet in this passage? Surely we may each of us
say, that it has been of the Lord's Mercies that we have not been consumed in
this most deadly Pestilence, which has swept away in our great City and the
neighboring places not many short of an Hundred thousand, and yet we have
hitherto been preserved alive, to be Monuments of his Mercy. Have not his
Mercies been new to us every morning, when we have heard either the doleful
Knells, or the hideous voice of Carr-men, (Bring out your Dead,) or the Reports
of the Weekly Bills of Mortality, so many Hundreds in such a Parish so many
Thousands in the whole, dead of the Plague, and yet we alive?)

It was thought by God no small Mercy to Baruch, when the common Calamity added
Grief to his Sorrow, when he fainted in his Sighing, and found no Rest, to give
him his Life. Behold, I will bring Evil upon all flesh, says the Lord; but
thy Life will I give unto thee for a Prey in all places whither thou go,
Jer. 45.5.

And should you not count it a great Mercy to you, that in this common and sore
Judgment, in which perhaps you have lost Wives, Husbands, Children, Friends,
Neighbors, Goods, in which you have been filled with Fears, oppressed with
Griefs, that yet you are not consumed; that yet the whole City, the whole Land
is not consumed; that yet our King, our Nobles, our Teachers, our Government,
our Glory is not buried in perpetual Oblivion?

It is true, it is a heavy Calamity; but we have deserved worse. It is true, we
have lost our Friends; but our Lives are not lost, our Souls are not lost:
unless our Unthankfulness, our future Disobedience, our Murmuring, provoke God
to bring a worse Misery, the casting of Soul and body into Hellfire; which our
Sins have merited.

Oh then, let us still all our impatient Complaints; let us quiet our Spirits
in the present estate we are in; let us be thankful to God that we are not in
Hell; let us confess our Unworthiness; let us be humbled for the great
Depravedness of our former sinful ways; let us justify God in his inflicting
Vengeance on us, and our Land; let us forsake those Sins which we have been
guilty of, that (we have reason to conceive) added fuel to this Fire that
has burnt so fiercely, and wasted so extremely.

Let every one of us bewail the Plague of his own Heart: let us lay to heart
and mourn for the Sins of the City and the whole Nation; their Pride,
Uncleanness, Riot, Oppression, Unrighteousness, Profaneness, and the iterated
Rebellions, first open and hostile, secondly more secret, in Nonconformity to
Laws and Government; and this maintained even against the unparalled Goodness
and Mercy of a most Gracious Prince. All these, and whatever Sins we have
committed, let us, for time to come, fear to commit again, either the same, or
the like Sins.

Let us dread God's Indignation, which we have found so intolerable: let us
hope in his Mercy, which we have found so helpful. Let us love God, who has
done us good so freely: let us be studious to please him, who has remembered us
in our low estate. And as we have our Lives as it were restored: so let us
dedicate our Lives to him, consecrate our Souls to him, present our Bodies a
living Sacrifice to him in our reasonable Service, and devote our selves wholly
to serve him without fear in Holiness and Righteousness before him all the
days of our life. Considering seriously, that though we have now escaped this
Judgment, yet without sound Repentance, and thorough Amendment of life, though
we have avoided this first Death hitherto, yet shall we not escape the second:
though, with the Sodomites, we be delivered from the Sword; yet Fire from
Heaven will consume us, we are reserved to the Vengeance of eternal Fire.

But if the Mercy of God lead us to Repentance, make us more obedient, more
cleaving to God in Dependence on him; this Deliverance will be a Mercy indeed,
a Pledge of more Mercies, yea an eternal Mercy: So that we shall have cause to
join with all the Holy Saints in that Temple-Song, O give thanks unto the God
of Heaven; for his Mercy endures for ever. Amen.

LAVS DEO.
DAVID's Thankful Commemoration. Part I.
The Fifteenth SERMON.
PSALM. lvi. 13. For thou have delivered my Soul from Death: will thou not
deliver my Feet from Falling, that I may walk before God in the Light of the
living?


THE Title of this Psalm tells us the Occasion, to wit, David's Apprehension by
the Philistines in Gath: And that points us to one of the two Times in which he
was fain to make his Escape out of the Land of Israel to the King of Gath's
Court, to avoid Readiness Persecution. Most likely it was the former of the two,
when he was alone: for the second time he was accompanied with 600 men, 1 Samuel
27.2. and not so liable to be taken, as now. And therefore it is more likely it
was upon his Danger 1 Samuel 21. when, being warned by Jonathan of his Father's
evil Intendments toward him, he got Provision from Ahimelech, and Goliah's
Sword, and fled to Achish King of Gath: where hearing what the King's Servants
said of him, he was afraid, and changed his behavior; and now, like a frantic
person in show, but an inspired person in truth, he indites this Psalm,
expressing therein his Supplication for Deliverance, his Confidence in God, his
Enemies Practices, his assurance of their Disappointment, his Vows to God, his
acknowledgment of God's Preservation, with his future Hopes, and the End of
all, in the words read to you, For thou have delivered my Soul from death: will thou not deliver, etc?

In which words we have, 1. A Commemoration of what God had done for him; Thou
have delivered my Soul from death. 2. A Postulation, expressing his Hope of
what God would yet do farther for him; Will thou not deliver my Feet from
falling? 3. The End designed in both; That I may walk before God in the light
of the living.


Of these in their order; and

I. His Commemoration; which is of a Deliverance, and that from Death, and that
of Himself, and that by God.

All Deliverances are memorable things. As the Evil escaped is grievous; so the
Evasion is joyous. Whence it is, that men love to tell of their Preservations
from Dangers, and to keep Memorials of them, and express their Gratitude
toward the Means whereby they avoid them.

Navita securus narrare pericula gaudet. The Mariner, preserved from Shipwreck,
loves to tell of his Dangers: the Soldier, that is safe after Fight, to talk
of his Encounters. And the greater the Danger has been, the more freely do
they discourse of it: especially if the Deliverance be complete. For then there
are likely Festivities, to make others partakers of their Joy; Monuments or
Records, to prevent Oblivion; and (if they have any sense of God's Hand, any
smack of Religion,) Vows and Offerings are made and performed to God. Thus did
the affrighted Mariners; when, upon Jonah's being thrown overboard, the
Seaceased from her raging, they feared the Lord exceedingly, and offered a
Sacrifice unto the Lord, and made Vows, Jonah 1.15, 16.

And this was David's practice here and elsewhere. He had fled from one Enemy,
but was fallen into the hands of more: He was as if a man did fly from a Lion,
and a Bear met him; or went into the house, and leaned his hand on the wall,
and a Serpent bit him. Saul hated him out of fear, lest he should supplant him:
the Philistines, who had found him a terrible Enemy, could not but hate him,
because he had been the instrument of destroying them. In this great Straight,
his only Refuge is in his God: In God have I put my trust, says he, verse. 11.
I will not be afraid what Man can do unto me. And being assured of his
Preservation, he adds, Thy Vows are upon me, O God; I will render Praises unto
thee, verse. 12. The reason of which is in my Text, For thou have delivered my
Soul from death. Whence you may perceive this Conclusion to flow naturally,

OBSERVATION.
That God's Deliverance of our Souls or Lives from death, should engage us to
perform our Vows made to God in our Danger, and to render Praises to him for
our Deliverance.

This was David's practice in all his Dangers, to make Supplication to God in
the time of his Distress; to make Vows to God for the enforcing of his Prayers;
and then to perform his Vows, and praise his Deliverer, when he was escaped.

The 116. Psalm is very full to this purpose. There he tells us of his Danger,
verse. 3. The Sorrows of Death compassed me, and the Pains of Hell gat hold upon
me. In this Extremity he applies himself to his sacred Anchour, Then called I
upon the Name of the Lord; O Lord, I beseech thee, deliver my Soul, verse. 4.
The Event is, he was brought low, and God helped him, verse. 6. he called upon
the Lord, and he heard him. Therefore he bespeaks his Soul, Return unto thy
Rest, O my Soul; for the Lord has dealt bountifully with thee, verse. 7.
Therefore he loves the Lord, consults what he may render to the Lord for all
his Benefits toward him, chiefly for delivering his Soul from death: and he
resolves to take the Cup of Salvation, and to call upon the Name of the Lord;
to pay his Vows in the presence of all his people, verse. 13, 14. to offer the
Sacrifice of Thanksgiving, verse. 17. to tell of all God's works with gladness,
and to make others to be partakers of his Joy. He invites the Godly to hear the
Narrative of God's Mercies toward him, Psalm. 66.16. Come and hear, all ye that
fear God, and I will declare what he has done for my Soul. And in a word, He
uses all the ways he can, to demonstrate his sense of God's Goodness to him, to
keep a Memorial of his Loving-kindnesses, to affect others with his
Experiments; that both he and all others (as much as in him lay) might be moved
to pray unto, to trust in, to praise and obey God, as one that delivers from
death.

The like Instance we have Isa. 38. concerning Hezekiah. A Message was brought
to him, that he should die: He betakes himself to Prayer, turns his face
toward the Wall, and weeps: God hears his Prayer, sees his Tears, adds to his
days fifteen years: Being recovered, he writes an Hymn of Praise, sets out his
Danger and Deliverance, with his Resolution to praise God all his days in the
most solemn manner he was able.

Even the Light of Nature taught the same to the Mariners, Jonah 1.16. All
people whatsoever, that have acknowledged a God, have still ascribed their
Deliverances from Death to their God, and have still performed their (...), or
Thank-offerings, to their Deities upon their Preservation. Nor was this done by
them without great and just Reasons.

1. For first, Death is the chief of all Evils: it deprives of all Good. Omnia
appetunt Bonum, says the Philosopher in the beginning of his Ethics; It Is
natural to all to desire their own Good. Beasts will struggle much with the
Slayer, before they will die. Skin for skin, and all that a man has will he
give for his Life. The most sickly, needy person, would fain preserve his Life.
Death is most resisted, as the most terrible. Nature apprehends it as the
Privation of all Good.

Even our Lord Christ would fain have had this Cup pass from him, and therefore
in the days of his Flesh, he offered up Prayers and Supplications, with strong
Crying and Tears, unto him that was able to save him from Death, Heb. 5.7.
Though he had no Sin of his own to gall his Conscience, yet he had a natural
sense of the Evil of Death, and earnestly desired Deliverance from it. The
Being he had as a Man he so prized, that if his Father's Will had not engaged
him to it, he would never have parted with it.

Life is sweet; it is a pleasant thing to behold the Sun: but there is
Bitterness in Death, as the King of the Amalekites speaks, 1 Samuel 15.32. Many
Circumstances make it indeed more bitter to some then others: yet to all it
has its exceeding Bitterness. O Death, (says the Son of Sirach) how bitter is
the Remembrance of thee to the man that lives at rest in his possessions, unto
the man that has nothing to vex him, and that has Prosperity in all things,
yea unto him that is yet able to receive meat! Ecclus. 41.1.

I deny not but some, to avoid the fury of Tyrants, have killed themselves; yet
not without fretting and indignation. Some to gain an immortal Name, and others
by Satanical Delusions or Philosophical Charms, have of themselves embraced
Death: but I cannot say they have done it without any Reluctance at all; though
to avoid a worse Evil, or obtain a better Good, (as they conceived,) they have
parted with their Lives.

There were some Circumstances which might have made Death more bitter at this
time to David, then it was to him when he fell asleep, and was gathered to his
Fathers. To be killed in the Land of the Philistines, by the hands of the
Uncircumcised, when he fled from Saul out of some distrust of God's
Preservation in his own Country; to have died with the Disappointment of his
hopes of being King of Israel, to which he was anointed by Samuel, and had
God's Promise for it; had been a greater Grievance, then to die in his Bed,
full of days, and in a good old age.

Violent Deaths and dying by pestilential Diseases are the more terrible, in
regard a person is then deprived of all Help, Society, Conference with others;
all shun him (even his nearest Relations) as an instrument of Death, when
dying, he kills others with his Breath; his Plague Sore takes away the Life of
his Child, whose Life he prizeth above his own; the Life of his Friend, yea his
Wife, that is as his own Soul. These and many other such Concomitants of Death
do make it more dreadful to a man.

But there is yet something besides that makes it most terrible. The
Consideration that Death is the Wages of Sin adds greater weight to the
pressure of Death: for then Death becomes not only the Burden of the Body,
but also of the Spirit. While the Back is whole, it will bear much: but when
the Skin is flayed off, or the Shoulder Blade broken, then to have a Load laid
on the Back, is intolerable. So it is in the case of Death: When there is Peace
of Conscience, it is not so heavy news, but that Faith and a good Conscience
can bear the tidings of it: but when Death is presented as the Fruit not only
of the first Sin of Man, but also of our own particular Sins, so as Conscience
tells a man, My Excess in Drinking has shortened my Life, I have hastened my
Death by my Riot and Intemperance, by my Quarrelling, my Disloyalty, my
Eagerness to get Wealth, by my Wilfulness and Rashness in venturing into
infected houses, by a pragmatick humor in meddling with that which did not
concern me, by these and such like practices; Oh then how does Death bite as a
Serpent, and sting as an Adder! The Sting of Death is Sin, when it lies on the
Conscience: it kills as a Scorpion; tortures as well as kills; makes a Fire in
the bones; kindles Hellfire in the Soul.

Especially when the Soul remembers how Sin has been committed presumptuously
with an high hand, against Instructions of Parents, Warnings of Friends,
Admonitions of Preachers, Offers of Grace, Invitations to Repentance: that all
these have been slighted, and even the Gospel of Christ has been neglected:
that the Sin remains unpardoned: that after the first Death the second Death is
expected, after Death Judgment follows, which ushers in Wrath and Vengeance.

When the Conscience of Unmercifulness, Neglect of the poor Members of Christ,
wasting our Estate in Luxury, spending our precious Time in vanities, (which
should have been employed in Prayer, and other holy Exercises and Meditations,
and in Self-examination,) flies in our Faces, frights us like the sight of
Furies; when the thought of Christ's Coming to Judgment, of that dreadful
Sentence, Go, ye cursed, into everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and
his Angels, still runs in our mind; then is Death the King of Terrors.

The man not only sings Adrian's Ditty, Animula, vagula, blandula, Hospes
Comesque Corporis, Quae nunc abibis in loca? but he roars out for the
Disquietness of his Soul; and cries out with Cain, My Punishment, or Iniquity,
is greater then I can bear. Then will he wish the Mountains and Rocks to fall
on him, and hide him from the Face of him that sits upon the Throne, and
from the Wrath of the Lamb: For the great day of his Wrath is come, and who is
able to stand? Rev. 6.16, 17.

Now then Deliverance from Death must needs deserve Praise and Thanksgiving:
Deliverance from the greatest Evil should be received with the greatest
Gratitude. Deliverance from natural Death causes Holy persons to bless God:
but Deliverance from Sin, (the cause of Death,) from the Wrath to come,
(eternal Death,) much more. This makes the Deliverance most complete, and the
Thankfulness should be most ample. To which is to be added,

2. That the Deliverance is by God: it is He that delivers the Soul from Death.
Now what comes from God's hand is most acceptable to them that love God. A
Deliverance from Death by a man does engage our Affections to him: we think our
selves obliged to him while we live, who has preserved our Life; especially if
he be a person of great Quality. To have our Lives saved by the King whom we
had provoked, to be pardoned our Treason, exceedingly heightens our valuation
of the Benefit.

There is much more cause to magnify the Goodness of God, who saves his people
from Death by pardoning of their Sins, by advancing them to Nearness with
himself; who so saves from Death temporal, as to give Life eternal. Behold,
says Hezekiah, (Isa. 38.17.) for Peace, I had great Bitterness: but thou have
in love to my Soul delivered it from the Pit; for thou have cast all my Sins
behind thy back. The Forgiveness of Sins (which occasioned Death) is a greater
Benefit then the prolonging of Life: And then it is Happiness accumulated to
the height, when there is not only length of days on Earth, but eternal Life
in Heaven conferred upon the saved.

Bless the Lord, O my Soul, says David, (Psalm. 103.1, 2, 3, 4.) and all that
is within me, bless his holy Name. Bless the Lord, O my Soul, and forget not
all his Benefits: Who forgiveth all thy Sins, and heals all thy Diseases; Who
redeemeth thy life from destruction, and crowns thee with Loving Kindness and
tender Mercies.

All which Mercies are the more joyful to the believing Soul, because they are
not so much the fruit of our Prayers, as of God's free Grace in Christ. The God
and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ so loved the World, the sinful World, even
when they were Enemies to him, that he gave his onely-begotten Son to death,
even the death of the Cross, that whosoever believes on him should not perish,
but have everlasting Life.

This Deliverance from Death proceeding from God's special Love, that great
Love wherewith he loved us, when we were dead in Trespasses and Sins,
quickening us together with Christ, saving us by Grace, is that which makes it
incomprehensibly welcome, and encourages the Soul to expect farther
Preservation; as David does here: which brings me to the Second Part of my
Text, now to be handled, viz.

II. David's Postulation; Will thou not deliver my Feet from falling?

The Expression seems to be expostulatory, but is to be conceived to include a
Petition. He demands of God, Will thou not, etc? not as one that challenged it
as his due desert, but as assured of the Continuance of God's Goodness. He
deprehends in God a Fountain of Love, which is still running over, flowing down
in farther Streams of saving Mercy.

We have an exact and ample Paraphrase upon the words of my Text in that
passage, Psalm. 36. from verse. 5. to the end, where, having set out the
Wickedness of men, and his own Danger, he breaks forth in extolling God's
Goodness, in an assurance of a constant Current of Mercies; and then is instant
with God for the Continuance of his Preservation.

This part of my Text is a most precious passage, of great Use for your
Meditation in times of Danger by reason of Pestilence or War; and it shows this
to be the customary practice of Holy persons, to gather Arguments of Assurance
of future Help from God, from their experience of his former gracious
Deliverances. So did David: 1 Samuel 17.37. when he was to fight with Goliath, he
argued thus, The Lord that delivered me out of the Paw of the Lion and of the
Bear, he will deliver me out of the hand of this Philistine. And after him S.
Paul, 2 Cor. 1.9, 10. We had the sentence of death in our selves, that we
should not trust in our selves, but in God that raises the dead; Who delivered
us from so great a death, and does deliver: in whom we trust, that he will yet
deliver. In his former Deliverance he perceived the Power of God, that he could
deliver from Death: he deprehends his watchfulness over him, in the Continuance
of his Deliverance, his Love to him and Care of him: which confirms him in the
expectation of farther Help for the future.

As they say all Virtues are concatenate in Prudence: so all Mercies are linked
together in God's Love and Care of his Servants. And indeed so the Apostle
inferrs, Romans 8.32. He that spared not his own Son, but delivered him up for us
all, how shall he not with him also freely give us all things? He that
preserves our Lives, will keep our Feet. Thou have delivered my Soul from
Death: will thou not also deliver my Feet from falling? Surely thou will.

But then this Deliverance must be sought for at his hands; which is also
implied in this Expression. When Christ cured the lame Cripple, he bade him
take up his bed, and walk. God, when he saves our Life from death, expects that
we should walk before him. Our Life is a Pilgrimage; we walk from one Stage of
it to another: as the Sun runs its course, so does Man. The Emanations of our
Minds, the Actions of our Members, are our Steps. If we walk not uprightly, if
we heed not what we think, what we speak, what we act, our Feet will quickly
fall, first into Sin, and then into Mischief. The Psalmist, Psalm. 73.2. tells
us out of his experience of himself, that his Feet were almost gone, his Steps
had well-nigh slipped. He had stumbled at the Stumbling-stone, to wit, the
Prosperity of the Wicked: This begat Envy in him; and that drew him on to a
kind of Affection to their ways, to a condemning of his own Course, and
offending against the generation of God's Children. And had not God mercifully
caught him when he was falling, by directing him to the Sanctuary of God, where
he might see the End of the wicked, (that however they stood on smooth, yet
they were but slippery places; they walked on Ice, which would suddenly break
under them, and then they would sink for ever,) he had certainly perished.
Therefore he recovers himself, and applies himself to God, verse. 23, 24. and
stays himself on the Manutenentia Divina; Thou have holden me by my right hand:
Thou will guide me with thy Counsel, and after receive me to Glory.

As for me, (says he in another Psalm, 41.12.) thou upholdest me in mine
Integrity, and set me before thy face for ever. Faith in God's sustaining
Grace is the only sure Preservative against falling into Sin, and thereby into
Misery. Thou will keep him in perfect Peace whose mind is stayed on thee,
because he trusts in thee, says the Prophet Isa. (26.3.) He that trusts in
his own Heart is a fool: but whosoever walks wisely shall be delivered, says
Solomon, Prove. 28.26. He that leans on his own Free will, his own good
Purposes, his own Reason, his own good Merits, shall be sure to fall. S. Peter,
when he was confident of his own Strength, that he should die rather then deny
his Master, (and was so venturous thereupon as to go into the High Priest's
Palace,) was so affrighted with the words of a Maid, that he not only denied
him, but forswore him.

Israel, which followed after the Law of Righteousness, attained not to the Law
of Righteousness. Wherefore? Because they sought it not by Faith, but as it
were by the Works of the Law: for they stumbled at the Stumbling-stone, says
the Apostle, Romans 9.31, 32.

We are like little Children, we love to be on our Feet, not knowing our own
Weakness: and then we venture without God to guide and stay us, and so we fall
and wound our selves. Our safest way is to distrust our selves, to work out our
Salvation with fear and trembling; as knowing that it is God that works in us
to will and to do, of his good pleasure, Phil. 2.12, 13. And accordingly to
betake our selves to him, as David did here, that he may keep our Feet from
falling; having the same designed End that he had; that we may walk before him
in the light of the living. Which leads me to the Third Part of my Text,
David's Aim in his Commemoration and Postulation: but time will not now permit
the handling of it. Only an Application of what has been already spoken
remains to be added.

APPLICATION.
What you have heard David did, it concerns you to do. You that are here now
alive may say, God has delivered your Souls from Death. I wish I might say
truly, that God has delivered your Souls from the Death of Sin; that God has
given you Repentance unto Life; that you were none of you such as should die in
your Sins, but by believing in Christ should see the light of Life. I wish that
he were to you the Resurrection and the Life: so that though you were dead, yet
you might live; that living and believing in him, you might never die, as our
Savior said to Martha, Joh. 11.25, 26. I hope the best of you. However, while
you are yet alive, (especially you that have been in danger by reason of the
Contagion of late,) endeavor to walk in the steps of David. Remember what your
Prayers were in your Perils; what Vows and Promises you made, when you expected
Death; what Perplexity and Anxiety seized on you, when the Remembrance of your
Sins filled you with Horror; when you looked for Death to attack you, and cast
your Body into the Grave, and perhaps your Soul into Hell; when you expected a
Summons to the Bar of God's Judgment, there to be tried, and to have your Doom
passed on you. Call to mind (I beseech you) what secret Meditations, what
Purposes you had; what passed between God and your Souls in those Streights you
were in. And then resolve, as David did here, to address your selves to God, as
he did, saying, Thy Vows are upon me, O God; I will render Praises unto thee,
for thou have delivered my Soul from Death.

O remember what God has done for you, in giving you your Lives, in bringing
you back from the depth of the Earth again. When thousands have fallen on your
right hand and on your left hand, yet the Evil has not come nigh you. If it
have entered into your Houses, lighted on your Persons; yet it has not taken
away your Breath: so that though the Lord has chastened you sore, yet he has
not given you over unto Death.

Chiefly, if God have awakened you that slept, that you might stand up from the
dead, and Christ might give you light; O then rejoice in God's Goodness to you:
let the Remembrance of it make the Thoughts of God delightful to you; quicken
you to run the ways of his Commandments; mind you to perform the great Duties
of Reformation of your Lives, and new Obedience to God that preserved you,
according to all the Vows, Resolutions and Engagements which were upon you when
you were in Trouble.

Yea, if you were then insensible of your Condition, and thought not on the
accursed estate which would have befallen you if you had died in your Sins; now
at least begin to lay it to heart. Sure, though you have escaped out of the
hands of Death now, yet it will overtake you at last: All the means you can
use, all the Advantages, all the Privileges you have, cannot avoid it, or
exempt you from going the way of all flesh.

Oh then that you would now become in your Lifetime, what you would willingly
be found to be at the hour of Death. If you would not be found of Death
Swearing, Lying, Deceiving, or engaged in any ungodly and unrighteous way; then
be not so now. If you would then be found Praying, Meditating on God's Word,
Praising God; inure your selves to such Exercises now. It will not be easy to
do it then, if you be not accustomed to it now. You will then have the Comfort
of a happy Death, if you be acquainted with the practice of a holy Life now.

If your Remembrance of God's Goodness toward you puts you on such
Resolutions, the Remembrance that you have tasted how gracious the Lord is, how
he has redeemed your Souls from the nethermost Hell, by the Blood of his Son,
(which you are to remember with the greatest Thankfulness, when you come to
receive the Holy Communion,) and preserves you from the second Death; you will
then be animated to expect of God, that he will keep your Feet from falling.

Take heed that you stumble not at the Prosperity of the wicked, so as to
approve and choose their ways. Take heed that Christ be not a Stone of Stumbling
and a Rock of Offense to you; that you stumble not at the Word, disbelieving
the Gospel, being disobedient to the Precepts of the Word: lest ye be appointed
unto Wrath, and not to obtain Salvation through our Lord Jesus Christ. Take
heed of ordering your Steps by your own Reason, by the imagined Light within
you; which is for the most part an Ignis fatuus, a dangerous Meteor, that will
bring you into Pits and Bogs. Take heed of trusting to your own Free will, your
own good Purposes: they will prove but a broken Reed, which, when you lean on
them, will run into your hands, and pierce them.

Get your Feet shod with the Shoes of the Preparation, or (as it may be well
read) the Pavement, of the Gospel of Peace, as firm ground upon which you may
stand; not your own Good works, or your own Merits.

As you have received Christ Jesus the Lord, so walk in him; rooted and built
up in him, and established in the Faith, as ye have been taught, abounding
therein with Thanksgiving: as the Apostle exhorts, Colos. 2.6, 7. Still pray
that God would keep your Feet from falling, and order your Steps in his Word,
that no Iniquity get dominion over you. And then you may with assurance say, I
shall not die, but live, and declare the Works of the Lord: and you shall
obtain David's desire, to walk before God in the light of the living.

But sure we walk contrary to God in the Darkness of this World; else why is it
that God has called to contend against us by Fire? It was not long ago, that
we rejoiced because we had prevailed upon the Waters; and now the Scene is
altered, and we mourn because the Fire has prevailed upon our houses at Land.
Sure we rejoiced not with trembling; we were sensible of God's Hand on others,
but not sensible we deserved his Indignation on our selves.

God warned us by Signs in the Heavens, but we amended not; he sent the
Pestilence, but we reformed not; we were embroiled in War, but nothing
bettered; Preachers cried out against our Sins, but we cried not to God for
Pardon; the Lord's voice cried to the City, but we were not men of wisdom, to
see his Name. Our Sins cried to Heaven for Vengeance, and the Lord's Vengeance
has from Heaven fallen upon us. We observed days of Fasting formally, but did
not really repent in Dust and Ashes; and now God has really reduced our Great
City unto Dust, and turned it into Ashes.

Has not God by his Judgment, resembling that of Sodom, pointed out the Sins
which procured this Judgment, Pride, Fullness of bread, abundance of Idleness;
not strengthening the hands of the poor and needy; Wantonness and
Unrighteousness? Were not the Souls of many (as Lot's in Sodom) vexed from day
to day in hearing and seeing men's unrighteous deeds and wicked conversation;
perhaps having a Form of Godliness, but denying the Power of it?

But are we better then they? Are we not all under Sin, liable to the same
Condemnation? We may, we ought to bemoan the Calamity which is come on others.
The lifting up of God's Hand should affright us, the Blow of his Hand on our
Brethren should afflict us. We, out of Sympathy with them, out of Dread of
God's Anger, should bewail the Burning which the Lord has kindled.

Jeremiah's Lamentations are suitable to this Occasion. We may take up those
Wailings, Alas! Alas! our great Neighbor- City is burnt, in a short time is
her Judgment come.

But that which most befits us, which is most likely to benefit us and them,
is, to be affected with God's Visitation; to look upon this as a Forerunner of
a greater Fire, magnum futuri Judicii Praeindicium, an Example of the Vengeance
of eternal Fire. Let us be awakened by it out of our Security, as considering
that we have the like Sins, and may expect the like Punishment; that God's
Burning there is our Warning here; that however it were in respect of men, yet
in respect of God it is as a Beacon fired to alarm us, that we may prepare to
meet our God by Fasting and Prayer, and Amendment of life, lest, if we repent
not, we likewise perish. It becomes us not to be Censurers of others, but to
judge our selves, that we be not judged: we must not insult over them, but pity
them. If we have our Houses spared, it is that we may receive them that are
destitute: if our Goods be preserved, it is that their Wants may be supplied.

In a word, we should take heed of Edom's Sin, who rejoiced in the day of
Jerusalem's Calamity: take heed of promising to our selves increase of Trade,
or other worldly Advantages: most of all, take heed of Flattering our selves,
as if we were better, more safe, more in God's Favor then they. Let us rather
fear God's Judgments, tremble at his Word, search our own ways, turn unto the
Lord with our whole Souls, pray for them that have suffered, help them what we
can; that their Breach may be repaired, our Tranquillity may be lengthened, and
our Souls delivered from the Wrath to come. Which the Lord vouchsafe for his
Son's sake. Amen.

LAVS DEO.
DAVID's PIOUS RESOLUTION. Part II.
The Sixteenth SERMON.
PSALM. lvi. 13. That I may walk before God in the light of the living.


AS God is the Alpha, the Beginning of all things; so he is the Omega or End of
all things: as he is the Father of Lights, from whom every good and perfect
Gift comes; so should he be the Scope of our Lives, as he was here of David's:
according to the last Particular observed in this Text of Scripture, viz.

III. The Aim and End of David in his Commemoration and Postulation; That I may
walk before thee in the light of the living.

To this End he both commemorates what God had already done for him, in
delivering his Soul from Death; and petitions, with expectation of speeding,
that he would yet do more for him, in keeping his Feet from falling. He does
not desire this Stability of his Feet, that he might sit still, or sluggishly
keep his Bed, or lie on his Couch; but that he might walk.

Walking naturally is a progressive motion of the Body from one place to
another, performed by the Feet, with the help and direction of the Eyes, for
the acquiring or effecting something. And it connotes a Way, in which a person
is to walls; and a Terminus ad quem, to which it tends.

By this Metaphor of Walking the Scripture understands the Motions of the Mind
and Actings of the Members, as they are subject to a Rule; which is the Way in
which a person walks. If it be right, it is God's Law: if it be wrong, it is
the Devices of men's own Minds, the way of a man's own Heart, or the Course of
the World, or the Wiles of Satan; which are mentioned as the crooked ways men
walk in, Ephesians. 2.2, 3. All these are ways of Darkness, wherein men depart from
God, and walk after Satan. But David's Aim is, to walk before God in the light
of the living.

Walking before God here denotes not only a doing or thinking so, as that the
Action or Thought would still be in God's presence; as if David meant no more
then this, that God would see him, or his Walk would be in his sight, whether
he would or no: But it means also such a Walking before God, as to eye his
presence, whatever he should do or think, with an aim to please him. And
therefore walking before God is rendered often, pleasing God: as when it is
said, Genesis 5.24. Enoch walked with God, in the Greek it is, Enoch pleased God;
which the Author to the Hebrews follows, Heb. 11.5. Enoch before his
Translation had this Testimony, that he pleased God. And so it notes not only
his apprehension of God's entitative Presence, or his Tuition or beholding him,
but also his pleasing God in his Conversation, having a regard to his
Approbation, out of desire to obtain his Favor, as well as to his Power, to
avoid his Anger. As S. Paul says of himself, 2 Cor. 2.17. We are not as many,
which corrupt the Word of God; but as of Sincerity, but as of God, in the sight
of God speak we in Christ: and Chap. 4.2. commending our selves to every man's
Conscience in the sight of God.

There is somewhat more also, I think, in this Expression, viz. That his Aim
was to walk before God by worshipping at the Tabernacle; for that place he
means sometimes when he speaks of appearing before God: as Psalm. 42.2. When
shall I come, and appear before God? the meaning of which longing is thus
expressed Psalm. 43.3. O send out thy Light and thy Truth; let them lead me and
bring me unto thy holy Hill, and to thy Tabernacle: and Psalm. 84.2. My Soul
longs, yea even faints for the Courts of the Lord: my Heart and my flesh
cries out for the living God. And so it has the same sense with that of
Hezekiah, Isa. 38.20. The Lord was ready to save me: therefore we will sing my
Songs to the stringed Instruments all the days of our life in the house of the
Lord. And then, in the light of the living, is all one with, all the time of
his Life, or among the living; opposite to that which Hezekiah said verse. 18,
19. The Grave cannot praise thee, Death cannot celebrate thee, they that go
down into the Pit cannot hope for thy truth. The Living, the Living, he shall
praise thee, as I do this day: the Father to the Children shall make known thy
Truth. And to this sense is it which the Psalmist here says, I will walk
before the Lord in the land of the living. So that hence arises this

OBSERVATION.
That a Godly man, when God delivers his Soul from Death, and his Feet from
falling, aims at walking before God in the light of the living; as counting
himself thereto engaged.

Indeed every Holy Christian counts his Life due to God. Romans 14.7, 8. None of
us (says the Apostle) lives to himself, and no man dies to himself: For
whether we live, we live unto the Lord; and whether we die, we die unto the
Lord: whether we live therefore or die, we are the Lord's. Every one that has
found God gracious to him, does as Enoch, Noah, Abraham, and all the Saints of
old did, he walks before God, as counting his Life only Vitam vitalem, a Life
indeed, while he imploys it for God: otherwise, while he lives without God in
the world, he counts himself to live a liveless Life, to be dead while he lives.

Now walking before God may be understood either Materially, and so all men
walk before God: (his Eye is upon them; he knows their down-sitting and their
uprising; he understands their Thoughts afar off; he compasses their path
and their lying down, and is acquainted with all their ways. There is not a
word in their Tongue but he knows it altogether, as it is Psalm. 139.2, 3, 4.)
or Formally and reciprocally, so as that God is eyed by us; his Omnipresence,
Omniscience, Omnipotency, are apprehended and observed by us, as the Psalmist
speaks, Psalm. 16.8. I have set the Lord always before me: because he is at my
right hand, I shall not be moved.

This may be done either Speculatively, so as to contemplate his Being, to
enquire after him, to have some Apprehensions of God: or Affectively, either so
as to hate God, as the Devils and damned Spirits, that acknowledge God to be,
but with trembling and horror of Spirit, and against their wills, James 2.19.
or so as to love God; If any love God, the same is known of him: or
Practically, so as not only to acknowledge him to be God, and to love him, but
also relatively to own him as our God; as the Psalmist, Psalm. 48.14. This God
is our God for ever and ever; he will be our Guide unto death.

This Walking before God comprehends the constant ordering the frame of our
Actions for God. A man is not said to walk, who makes but one Step: Walking
imports a Continuation of Steps; and Walking before God, a Multiplication of
Actions, and those in God's way; as they said, Mic. 4.2. He will teach us his
ways, and we shall walk in his paths. For though all the ways of a man are
before the eyes of the Lord, and he pondereth all his goings: yet he counts no
Walking to be before him, but that which is in Holiness and Righteousness, as
it is Luke 1.75. There must be a removing from the opposite term, to wit,
Satan. Some are already turned aside after Satan, says the Apostle, 1 Timothy
5.15. Those cannot walk before God, that hold Intelligence with Satan. When Eve
held Parley with the old Serpent, she departed from God: and so did Saul, when
he went after the Witch of Endor.

And in like manner do all that are conformed to this World, that are
fashioned after their own Lusts, that adhere to their own Reason. Familiarity
with Satan, Conformity to this World, Reasoning with flesh and blood, are
inconsistent with walking before God. There must be a turning from Darkness to
Light, and from the power of Satan unto God, as the words are Act. 26.18. God
must be the Terminus ad quem, he to whom we come, as it is Heb. 11.6. He that
comes unto God must believe that he is, and that he is a Rewarder of them that
diligently seek him.

And this Walking is not, when we only do some Actions in God's way. A man is
not said to walk before God, that sometimes is in God's way, and then skips out
of it again: such Going in and out is not Walking, but running counter; like
the way of a Serpent upon a Stone, dancing, leaping, and frisking. Then a man
is said to walk to a place or person, not when he does make a Vagarie or two,
but keeps on in an uniform, settled, even pace, has his eye upon the Mark, and
follows after it wittingly, willingly, constantly; when he does, as the Apostle
speaks, Phil. 3.16. go on gradually, orderly, by the same Rule that the
Apostles and other Holy persons have heretofore gone by. A man cannot come to
God per Saltum, by a Leap; but by a constant regular Course of actions,
propounding to himself God as the Object unto whom he directs his Actions, and
his Motive for what he does.

And herein there must be two things especally eyed by us: to wit,

1. God's Sovereignty and Almightiness. I am the Almighty God, says God to
Abraham, Genesis 17.1. walk before me, and be thou perfect. The Fear and Reverence
of God as the Supreme Majesty, as he that is Maximus, the Greatest, should
attract our Eyes and our Hearts toward him with Awfulness: as Subjects compose
and order their Carriage with Awe and Respect to their Sovereign, because he is
their Lord; attiring themselves suitable to his Dignity, so as not to disgrace
him by their slovenly Habits. And thus the Apostle requires, that we should
walk (...), Romans 13.13. that is, in good fashion, decently or honestly, (as we
would say, and our Translation reads it,) after the Court-fashion of Heaven. We
should walk before God in white, like the heavenly Courtiers, clothed with
white Linen, fine and clean, which is the Righteousness of Saints, Rev. 19.8.
that is, with holy Habits and Dispositions of mind. They that walk before God
must have clean Hands, and a pure Heart. He that has not lift up his Soul to
Vanity, nor sworn deceitfully, Psalm. 24.4. enters into God's holy Hill. As
Kings love Purity of heart, and grace in the lips, Prove. 22.11. so does God
much more. He is of purer Eyes then to behold Evil, he cannot look on Iniquity
with any good liking. Such as be foolish shall not stand in his sight; he
hates all workers of Iniquity: he will destroy them that speak leasing, etc.
Psalm. 5.5, 6. No impure-spirited man that has vain Imaginations of God, that
fears him not, neither is God in all his Thoughts, can stand before him. If
Solomon would not permit any such about him, neither surely will God. Rectitude
of Heart is the chief Requisite, when we appear before him. Blessed are the
pure in Heart, says our Savior, ( Matthew. 5.8.) for they shall see God. As
long as a man retains erroneous Opinions in the things of God, as long as vain
Thoughts, fraudulent Designs, unrighteous Projects, evil Counsels, lodge in his
Heart, and bear sway in his Actions, he cannot walk acceptably with God. As to
Walking well bodily, the chief thing is the Locomotive faculty: so in Spiritual
Walking before God, the main thing is, to be moved by a right Principle, a due
Apprehension of God as he is Most high.

2. God must be set before us not only as Maximus, but also as Optimus; not
only as the Greatest, but also as the Best; not only as one that can punish
us, but also as one that can and will reward us; as Best in himself, and good
to all that seek him. He that shall apprehend it in vain to serve God, and that
there is no profit in walking mournfully before the Lord of hoasts, that there
is no profit in keeping his Ordinances, as those mentioned Mal. 3.14. will
never walk pleasantly before God. Such a Servant as looks upon God as a hard
Master, that reaps where he does not sow, and gathers where he did not strew,
will shun God and his Service as much as may be; hide his Talent in a Napkin,
rather then employ it to improvement for his Master. He that walks before God
must walk (...), exactly, as the Apostle speaks Ephesians. 5.15. circumspectly and
diligently. As Courtiers that expect Benefits from their Prince, will be
careful to accommodate themselves to his Humor, diligent to prosecute his
Business to the utmost of their skill and power: so is it with those that walk
before God, they expect Preferment from him, and therefore are studious to
answer his Expectation. And when they find God's Favor toward them, they
prize it as their Life, Psalm. 30.5. yea better then Life it self. As the
Prince's Favor refreshes a Servant that attends on him; is as the Dew upon
the tender Herbs, which makes them spring up fresh, and give a sweet Savor: so
the Favor of God makes his Servants walk diligently before him, with all
readiness and alacrity doing his Will. So says David, Psalm 26.3. Thy
Loving Kindness is before mine eyes; and I have walked in thy Truth.

And indeed this is the chief Encouragement to a man that walks before God,
that he does all for a Prince that is not only Deliciae generis humani, the
Love and Delight of mankind, (as Titus Vespasian the Roman Emperor was
styled;) but that he serves a God who is Love it self, Joh. 4.16. in whom there
is not only a River, but an Ocean of Love; not a Pond, but a Fountain of Love.
All his ways are Love to his Holy ones. He loved them with an everlasting Love,
and with Loving Kindness has drawn them to him.

This was it that made David to aim at walking before God, because he had found
God's Love to him, in delivering his Soul from Death, and his Feet from
falling. Thus God encouraged Abraham to walk before him, because he had assured
him that he was his Shield and exceeding great Reward, Genesis 15.1. It is good
for me to draw nigh unto God, says the Psalmist, Psalm. 73.28.

But above all the Manifestations of God's Love, that which is the grand Motive
to encourage our walking before God, is, that there is now a new and living Way
whereby we may draw nigh to God, even through the Veil of his Son's Flesh. That
now the Enmity betwixt us and God, caused by Adam's Sin, and Satan's project to
alienate Men from God, is taken away. That now there is on Earth Peace, and
Good will toward men. That now the Son of God is made the Way, the Truth, and
the Life, whereby we may come to the Father. That now we are assured, that,
however it be that we travel through a Wilderness, through a dry and barren
Land, where we meet with fiery Serpents and many Wants; yet we have Manna from
Heaven to feed on, and we drink of the Rock, which Rock is Christ; Spiritual
Meat, and Spiritual Drink. That as the Serpent was lifted up upon the Pole, so
the Son of man was lifted up; that whosoever believes on him should not
perish, but have everlasting life. That now we have the Cloud by day to shade
and guide us, and the Pillar of fire by night to direct us: we have not the
Shadows of the Law, but the clear Light of the Gospel, to inlighten us with the
Light of Heaven. That we have the Spirit from on high given us, to be a Spirit
of Inlightning; a Spirit of Regeneration, to beget us again; a Spirit of Life,
to quicken us, and make us new Creatures in Christ; a Spirit to comfort and
refresh us; a Spirit to intercede for us. And that (which is the upshot of all)
there is a Rest which remains for the people of God; not in an earthly Canaan,
but in the Heavenly Jerusalem, where we shall rest in Abraham's Bosom, in the
presence of the Holy Angels and glorified Saints; in the Arms of our Husband,
who has espoused us to himself by the greatest demonstration of Love, having
purified us to himself by his Blood, and joined us to himself by his own
Spirit. That we shall behold the Face of our Father which is in Heaven, in whom
is all Beauty, all Worth, and all Love: everlasting Joy shall be upon our
heads, and Sorrow and Misery shall fly away: we shall be Kings and Priests unto
God our Father, and that for ever. So that it will be abundant Recompense to
us, that we have walked before God in the light of the living, if, although it
be through many Tribulations, yet we at last enter into the Kingdom of Heaven.

Now to the end we may walk before God,

1. It will be necessary, that we inquire into and observe the Ways and Places
wherein God walks, and where he delights to meet with us. The Church in Isa.
64.5. thus speaks to God, Thou meetest him that rejoices and works
Righteousness, those that remember thee in thy Ways.

There are indeed Ways of God that are unsearchable, and Paths past finding
out. The ways of God's Election and Reprobation are secret things, belonging to
the Lord our God, and cannot be found out by us, but only a posteriori, by
observing how he works in our own Hearts; and thus far only we are to observe
them, so as to give all diligence to make our Calling and Election sure; that
by doing such things as may improve the Work of God's Spirit in our Hearts, we
may never fall.

The Works of God's Providence in the World, and his Works of Creation, we are
to inquire into, that we may admire and magnify him that makes all. But his
Ways of Judgment we are to observe, and his Ways of Precept and Promise. We are
to take notice of his Corrections, when we go astray; of his Mercy and Truth,
when we walk uprightly: how he meets us with a Rod in his hand, when we wander
out of his Paths; with Embraces, with refreshing Provision, when we walk
uprightly before him. This was David's practice, (as he tells us Psalm. 18.21,
22, 23.) I have kept, says he, the Ways of the Lord, and have not wickedly
departed from my God. For all his Judgments were before me, and I did not put
away his Statutes from me. I was also upright before him, and kept my self from
mine Iniquity.

2. As we are to observe God's Ways, so we are to prepare our own Ways before
him: (as it is said of Jotham, 2 Chronicles. 27.6.) As he that is to walk with
another, must provide all things in readiness, that he may keep him company: so
must he that would walk with God; he must awake, and stand up from the dead;
(as the Apostle speaks, Ephesians. 5.14.) awake to Righteousness, 1 Cor. 15.34. He is
not fit to walk with another, that is drowzy and loves to slumber: so the
person that will walk before God must be wakefull, listening to God's Call,
ready when he shall send for him and require his attendance; he must be
attentive to all the Motions of his Spirit; be prepared to go with God
whithersoever he will have him. Thus it was with Abraham, Heb. 11.8. By Faith,
when he was called to go out into a place which he should after receive for an
Inheritance, he obeyed, and went out, not knowing whither he went. He that will
walk before God, must not sit down in that place and state in which he is, and
say with the Rich man, Luke 12.19. Soul, thou have much goods laid up for many
years; take thine ease, eat, drink, and be merry; but must count himself, as
Abraham did, a Pilgrim and Sojourner upon Earth: he must not take this Earth to
be his resting place, but go after Christ, bearing his reproach: he must learn
to deny himself, and take up his Cross, and so follow him.

A Heart that thinks of nothing but how he may enjoy the Good things of this
Life, that is so minded as Peter was in the Mount, that thinks it is good to be
here, and cries, Let us build us Tabernacles below, is not fit to walk with
God. He that will walk with God must follow him fully: (as it is said of Caleb,
Number. 14.24. that he had another Spirit then the rest of the Spies, and followed
God fully.) What way God will have us to take, that we must take: where he will
have us to be, there we must be contented to be: what estate his Providence
shall allot to us, that we must embrace: what he will have us to do, we must
be willing to do. We must not imagine that we are to walk before God as our
Equal, our Fellow, but as our Lord and Master; and accordingly must be
attentive to what he says to us, and be ready to submit to his Pleasure.

3. To right Walking before God, it is necessary that we should get the Staff
of Faith in our hand. It was that which enabled Abraham to walk with God, and
Noah, and Enoch, and all the Saints. He that will walk before God, must not
only believe that God is, but also that he is near unto, and a Rewarder of
them that diligently seek him, Heb. 11.6. He must apprehend God with him, while
his Heart is toward God. For indeed, nothing will animate us to walk with God,
but the assurance we have that God will be with us, while we be with him; that
if we seek him, he will be found of us; if we forsake him, he will forsake us:
as the Prophet told Asa, 2 Chronicles. 15.2. As many as mean to walk with God must
hold fast this Staff of Faith, to stay themselves in Precipices and slippery
places, to remove what would cast them down, to support them when they grow
feeble and faint, to clear themselves of all Encumbrances that may clog them in
their going, to beat down all Assaults; in a word, to stay their Minds so, as
that by no Inveiglements or Difficulties they may be put out of their way.

4. He that will walk before the Lord must have low thoughts of himself; as
Abraham, Genesis 18.27. I have begun to speak unto my Lord, who am but Dust and
Ashes. He has showed thee, O man, what is good: and what does the Lord require
of thee, but to do justly, and to love Mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God?
Mic. 6.8. It is an humble Heart only that is fit for God's Company. As he is
not fit to wait on a Prince, that is of a saucy and malapert Disposition, that
thinks as well of himself as of his Master, that will take upon him to control
him, that is proud and stubborn, not flexible and pliable, that will not stand
bare, observe the Ceremonies of his Court, give him his due Titles, nor perform
those Rites and Observances which belong to his Highness: So neither is he
fitted to walk with God, who is not of a lowly submissive spirit; who is not
ready to stoop to God, to perform his Worship, to give him that Honor and
Glory which belongs to him; who will glory in himself, and not magnify his
Lord.

To walk in the Name of the Lord (Mic. 4.6.) is to worship him: and that is
done by low Thoughts of our selves, and high Thoughts of God. He that walks
wisely, will choose low ground to walk on: And he that places himself in Imo
suo, in his low Condition, is fittest to exalt God in ipsius Summitatem, into
his Height. Though the Lord be high, yet he has respect unto the lowly: but he
beholds the proud afar off, Psalm. 138.6. he will not have him in his company.

5. He that walks before God must be of a pleasing Disposition: as the Apostle
speaks elegantly, Col. 1.10. when he prays for the Colossians, that they may
walk worthy of the Lord, unto all pleasing. Indeed I told you before, walking
with God is pleasing God: this is the main thing requisite to our Converse with
God, that we have a care to avoid what is offensive to him; as Joseph had, when
he said, How shall I do this great Wickedness, and sin against God?

He that will please God must imitate God. We must be Followers of God, as dear
Children; and walk in love, as he loved us, Ephesians. 5.1, 2. He that will walk with
God must not be of a quarrelling, wrangling, but a peaceable Disposition. God
will not brook him to be with him that persecutes his Fellow Servants, that
molests his Children, that is not loving and kind to them that honor him. No
man can walk with God, that loves not them that are born of God.

6. He that walks before God must affect the Life of God, that is, an heavenly,
holy Conversation: he must not be estranged from the Life that is in God,
through the ignorance that is in him, and the hardness of his Heart; as those
Gentiles that did walk in the Vanity of their Mind, having their Understanding
darkened, Ephesians. 4.17, 18. He must be as an obedient Child, not fashioning
himself according to the former Lusts, in his Ignorance: but as he which has
called him is holy, so must he be holy in all manner of Conversation; because
it is written, Be ye holy, as I am holy, 1 Pet. 1.14, 15, 16. He must walk with
Wisdom in the sight of the Lord; not as a rude Clown, but as a Courtier of
Heaven. If we say that we have Fellowship with God, and walk in Darkness, we
lie, and do not the Truth: But if we walk in the Light, as he is in the Light,
we have fellowship one with another, 1 John 1.6, 7. Our Conversation must be in
Heaven; we must seek the things that are above, the Kingdom of God and his
Righteousness; we must speak the Language of Heaven, expect all our Good from
Heaven, follow the Employment of Heaven, do the Will of our Father which is in
Heaven. We must sanctify and extol his Name, as the Angels do, if we expect
to be like them hereafter: we must so do here, in the light of the living, as
they do in Heaven, in the Presence of God.

APPLICATION.
I have run over a large Field of matter, but such as is of greatest
concernment to each of us to be minded of, that so we may know how to walk with
God. God has been with you, you have been kept by him, he has delivered your
Soul from death; and now he looks you should walk before him. You expect (I
presume) to rest with him, to stand in his Presence hereafter; that in the
great Day of Christ he should own you, and should say, Come, ye blessed. Oh
forget not then to walk before God, and be perfect. They that are ungodly shall
not stand in the Judgment, nor Sinners in the Congregation of the Righteous;
but shall be as the Chaff, which the wind drives away. For the Lord knows
the way of the Righteous, and the way of the Ungodly shall perish, Psalm. 1.4,
5, 6. Oh then that you would bethink your selves, wherefore you have your Lives
continued, your Feet to walk; I mean, your Understandings, your Wills, your
Affections, your Memories, your Tongues, Hands, Eyes, Ears. Are they not made,
that you may set God before you, and prepare your Ways before him? Dream not
that he will entertain you hereafter in his Heavenly Palace, if you do not here
endeavor to be like him. If you be as brutish Swine, wallowing in your impure
Lust; if like snarling currish Dogs, of an unquiet, mischievous, revengefull,
cruel spirit; you are not fit for God's Company. If you be rude, clownish,
barbarous, Heaven is no place for you. Learn then to be wise, to know God, to
observe him: believe in him, be humble, pleasing of him, and heavenly-minded;
then will he welcome you into his everlasting Joy. Amen.

LAVS DEO.
THE HOLY MAN'S MEDITATION.
The Seventeenth SERMON.
PSALM cxix. 15. I will meditate in thy Precepts, and have respect unto thy
Ways.


NOT out of any vain Ostentation of seeming Holiness in himself, (such as
Pharisees were wont to be guilty of,) but that he might give God the Glory of
his free Grace, and excite others to a blessed Consociation with him in his
Praises of him, the Psalmist does in this Psalm, with variety of Expressions,
and the best of his Skill, most delightfully declare the frame of his Spirit,
and the course of his constant Practice. In the verse before my Text he had
told us the matter of his Joy, that he rejoiced in the way of God's Testimonies
as much as in all Riches: And here he declares his Resolution suitable to his
valuation of God's Testimonies, that he was determined, as he had chosen them
for the object of his Joy, so to make them the employment of his Studies, the
Cynosure or Northstar according to which he would steer his course; I will
meditate in thy Precepts, and have respect unto thy Ways.

Wherein he declares his purpose,

1. Of employing his Thoughts, and his Discourse or Talk, about God's Precepts:
for the word we translate (meditate) does also signify to speak or confer,
and is so translated by some here.

2. Of Eying God's Ways. Which may be understood either of God's Ways which he
commands us to walk in, called the Way of his Precepts: and then the sense is,
I will not only apply my Mind to know what thy Precepts enjoin me; but also I
will in my Practice, whatsoever I do, have mine Eye, that is, my intentive
Consideration, on them, as my Rule by which to act. Or else it means God's Ways
which he takes in ordering and governing things, which are the Ways of his
Providence: and so his Determination is, that he will observe God in what he
does, that he may give him the Glory of his Wisdom, Goodness, Truth, Justice,
in his Promises and Threatenings, and accordingly fear or trust God, and in all
things approve himself to him.

From the Words taken in these senses, these four Conclusions do arise.

1. That God's Precepts are the Godly man's Meditation. 2. That they are also
the matter of his Talk. 3. That in his Practice he heeds God's Direction. 4.
That God's Works are his Observation.
I. OBSERVATION.
That God's Precepts are the Godly man's Meditation.

In the first Psalm (verse. 2.) it is said of David's Blessed man, that his
Delight is in the Law of the Lord, and in his Law does he meditate day and
night: by which the Constancy of his Meditation is expressed. Which is not so
to be understood, as if no other Act were to be done but that; that there was
to be no Intermission of actual Reading or Thinking on the words or matter of
God's Law: for then all minding and intending other Business and other Duties,
whether Sacred or Civil, yea the due use of Recreation by eating and drinking,
sleep, and other Refections of the body, (which God allows, yea commands,)
should be sinful. But as we interpret other like Passages concerning continual
Praying, (against the Dotage of Euchites or Messalians of old, who, as the
Monkish Fraternities since, thought they were to do nothing but pray; Shall
not God avenge his own Elect, which cry day and night unto him? Luke 18.7.
Without ceasing I have remembrance of thee in my Prayers night and day, 2 Timothy
1.3.) of a constant course of doing this Duty when other Duties, Offices and
Necessities permit: So in this Meditating of David in God's Law, we are to
conceive he resolves so to do it, as not to omit it out of Slothfulness, or
sinful Avocation; not out of averseness of Heart to desist from it: but as
often and as much as Opportunity, Divine Providence, and the Use of it, did
permit and require, he would be occupied therein.

Concerning which profitable Exercise of Meditation, many Directions might be
given in respect of the Acts, Degree, Manner, End and Use thereof.

As God appointed the King of Israel, when he sat on the Throne of his
Kingdom, that he should write him a Copy of God's Law in a Book, out of that
which was before the Priests, the Levites, and that it should be with him, and
that he should read therein all the days of his life; that he might learn to
fear the Lord his God, to keep all the words of the Law and the Statutes to do
them, Deuteronomy. 17.18, 19. So he enjoined the rest of the People, that the words
which he commanded should be in the Heart of the whole People of Israel; and
that they should teach them diligently unto their Children, and should talk of
them when they sat in their houses, and when they walked by the way, and when
they lay down, and when they rose up, Deuteronomy. 6.6, 7. Which brings us to the

II. OBSERVATION.
That God's Precepts are to be the matter of a Godly man's Talk.

Yea, God commands that they should bind them for a Sign upon their Hand, and
that they should be as Frontlets between their Eyes, and that they should write
them upon the Posts of their houses, and on their Gates, Deuteronomy. 6.8, 9.

And that this Precept was not confined to the Five Books of Moses, but that it
exended to the rest of the Holy Scriptures, that which is said of Timothy, (2 Timothy 3.15. that from a child he had known the Holy Scriptures, which were able
to make him wise unto Salvation) does evince. It is also manifest, that the
people of the Jews (as they do to this day) did conceive themselves bound by
God, old and young, of all Sexes and Ranks, to exercise themselves in reading
and meditating on the Holy Scriptures, which God vouchsafed to them in all the
Books that were by any of the Prophets delivered to them. To which accords that
of the Apostle, Romans 15.4. Whatsoever things were written aforetime, were
written for our learning, that we through Patience and Comfort of the
Scriptures might have hope.

It is then evident, that it was God's Institution and Design, in vouchsafing
to communicate to the sons of men the great Treasure of his Oracles, that they
should busy their Minds and Members about them.

Nor is this sufficient, that they have them in their Houses: or that the
Grandees of the Earth for Parts and Learning, the Clergy, Priests, and
Religious Votaries, do read or study them; while the Laiety, or simpler sort,
do only by an implicit Faith rely on their Rulers or Rabbis; as heretofore
the Judaicall Pharisees, and at this day their Successors, the Popish Clergy,
craftily and deceitfully insinuate into peoples minds. But as God has promised
to write his Laws in their hearts, and put them in their minds; that they shall
all know him, from the least to the greatest: so it is the Duty and Property of
all that expect Mercy and Favor from God, to employ their own Eyes to read,
and their own Ears to hear, what God has vouchsafed to impart of his Mind, in
them, to the sons of men. And not only so, but also to search into the Sacred
Scriptures, as our Lord requires, Joh. 5.39. to seek after the Wisdom therein
as for Silver, and search for it as for hidden Treasure, Prove. 2.4. and when
any Doctrine is taught as from God, to do as it is said of the Beroeans, Act.
17.11. who searched the Scriptures daily, whether the things S. Paul preached
were so or no; and withal, speaking the truth in love, to edify one another by
communicating what they have found and learned.

And indeed the Law of Gratitude binds us to meditate on God's Precepts, it
being one of the greatest Favors from God to Men, that he is pleased to reveal
his Will to them. Among the many Mercies for which the Psalmist extolls God's
Goodness, after the Commemoration of his Providence in his ordering Peace and
Plenty, he concludes thus, Psalm. 147.19, 20. He shows his Word unto Jacob,
his Statutes and his Judgments unto Israel. He has not dealt so with any
Nation; and as for his Judgments they have not known them. Praise ye the Lord.
Which plainly intimates this to have been the top or chief of his Goodness to
Israel, not that he seated them in a Land flowing with Milk and Honey, which
was the glory of other Lands, Ezekiel. 20.6. but that he revealed his Counsels to
them, whereby he advanced them above all the people of the Earth; as Moses
tells them, Deuteronomy. 4.8. What Nation is there so great, that has Statutes and
Judgments so righteous, as all this Law which I set before you this day?

It would therefore be an high Provocation of God to Anger, so far to neglect
the great Favor he has showed in giving us such Holy Precepts and beneficial
Revelations of his Counsel, as not to make them our Study, not to consider the
Usefulness of them, not to observe our Concernments in them, not to set forth
to his Praise his gracious dealing in his notification of them to us.

But besides, as it is an extreme Neglect of God not to meditate on his
Precepts: so it is a most injurious Neglect of our selves and our own Good, to
take our selves off from the Contemplation of them. For thereby men deprive
themselves of that means, which might make them wiser then those who neglect
them, or employ their minds on any enquiry after Wisdom without them. Which it
were easy to demonstrate, by comparing the Wisdom that may be got by them,
with the Wisdom of the most renowned Philosophers, and the most profound
Rabbis among the Jews, or acutest Schoolmen among the Christians, who have
sought the knowledge of Morality or Religion from Inventions and Traditions of
men, from their own Reasonings or devised Rules, without the excellent
Directions of the Holy Scritures. Holy David professes his own experience,
Psalm. 119.97, 98, 99, 100. O how love I thy Law! it is my Meditation all the
day. Thou through thy Commandments have made me wiser then mine Enemies: for
they are ever with me. I have more understanding then all my Teachers: for thy
Testimonies are my Meditation. I understand more then the Ancients, because I
keep thy Precepts. And S. Paul tells Timothy, 2 Timothy 3.15. that the Holy
Scriptures were able to make him wise unto Salvation.

The greatest Wisdom is that which guides a man to the greatest Happiness; and
that is, when he avoids the greatest Evil, and attains the enjoyment of the
best Good. No Evil is greater then God's Wrath; no Good better then God's
Favor. Now to the escaping the former, and obtaining the latter, the
Meditation on God's Precepts conduces most effectually. For thereby we avoid
Sin against God, which incites him to Anger; and thereby we learn how to please
him, which procures his Favor. And therefore it is most evident to be the
wisest course we can take, and whereby we can show most Love to our selves, to
Read, to Hear, to Study and lay to heart God's Word. And herein likewise we
show the greatest Charity to others, by seriously endeavoring to make them
intelligent therein: it tending most to their Good, if with Meditation there
concur also a Respect to God's Ways. Which leads us to the other part of this
Verse, and the Conclusions thence deduced.

III. and IV. OBSERVATIONS.
That in his Practice a Godly man heeds God's Direction: and,

That God's Works are his Observation.

The word which is rendered, I will have respect, or, I will look, imports the
fixing and intentiveness of the Eye upon God's Ways; such as is in a Traveller
when he walks, or a Sailour when he sails in the Deep, whom it concerns that
they have their eyes waking, and their minds observant, the one of the Path he
treads in, the other of the Chanel he steers his Ship in: lest the first either
miss his way, or stumble and fall; or the second run aground on Quicksands, or
split upon Rocks and Shelves, and so miscarry. The Commandment, says Solomon,
(Prove. 6.23.) is a Lamp, and the Law is Light; and Reproofs of Instruction are
the way of life. And therefore as the Eye makes use of the Lamp and Light, for
its Direction: so does the Soul of a Godly man observe the Way of God's
Precepts, for his Rule; and the Ways of God's Acting, to encourage him in his
Course, and to deter him from wandering therefrom.

Nor are the Ways of God's Providence, either toward our selves or others, to
be let pass without heedfull Observation. For thereby we are accommodated with
useful Arguments to give God the Glory of his Truth, Justice, Goodness, and
Power. We have Experiments fitted either to deter us from Sinning against
him, who is a consuming Fire; or to encourage us to serve him with holy
Reverence and godly Fear; or to strengthen our Faith in a firm Dependence on
him, and a Reliance on the Lord in our greatest Difficulties.

Thus Phineas argues, Josh. 22.17, 20. Is the Iniquity of Peor too little for
us, from which we are not cleansed to this day? Did not Achan the son of Zerah
commit a Trespass in the accursed thing, and Wrath fell on all the Congregation
of Israel? and that man perished not alone in his Iniquity. That he might by
this Argument deter the Trans-Jordan Israelites from a Schismatic
departure from the God of Israel, and a Communion in Worship with the other
Tribes on this side Jordan.

Thus David, in the great Trial of his Faith and undaunted Fortitude which he
showed in his heroic Encounter with the Giant of Gath, recollects his own
Experience of Divine Assistence formerly, and fortifies himself against the
fear of that Monster by assurance of the like now. He alleges God's former
Providence as the reason of his gallant Resolution to encounter Goliath without
any hesitancy now; telling Saul, 1 Samuel 17.36. Thy Servant slew both the Lion
and the Bear: and this uncircumcised Philistine shall be as one of them, seeing
he has defied the Armies of the living God.

As God has given us his Word, that thereby we may understand his Will: so
does he exercise his Judgments, that we may discern his Excellency. As the Word
of God, his Precepts and Promises are to be remembered, that we may believe and
obey; and therefore it is the Character of a Righteous person, that the Law of
his God is in his Heart, and none of his Steps therefore shall slide: ( Psalm.
37.31.) so it is said, Psalm. 111.2, 3, 4. The Works of the Lord are great,
sought out of all them that have pleasure therein. God having made his Work
honorable and glorious, that his wonderful Works might be remembered. And
therefore a Woe is denounced by the Prophet, Isa. 5.11, 12. against those
Epicurean Sensualists that spent their time in voluptuous Drinking, and
pleasant Music; but regarded not the Work of the Lord, neither considered the
Operation of his hands: To which answers that true Censure of the Prophet
Jeremiah, (5.4.) Surely these are poor, they are foolish; for they know not the
Way of the Lord, nor the Judgment of their God. In having respect to both kinds
of his Ways we glorify him: in neglecting either, we vilify him, and live as it
were without God in the World.

APPLICATION.
Hereby we may discern whether we have the same Spirit with David and other
Holy persons in their generation, who have always had their Eyes fixed on God
in their Pilgrimage on earth; and their Minds intent on what God says and
does, as the principal Object whereon to employ their Meditations and
Exercitations.

When we read of Enoch, Noah, Abraham, and other Holy persons, that they
walked with God, we may thereby collect that they moved in a higher Sphere then
this lower World: and though their Bodies were carried up and down on the
Superficies of the Earth; yet their Hearts and Spirits were with God, him they
set before them, and kept close to him. And so David professes of himself,
Psalm. 18.21, 22, 23. I have kept the ways of the Lord, and have not wickedly
departed from my God: For all his Judgments were before me, and I did not put
away his Statutes from me. I was also upright before him, and I kept my self
from mine Iniquity. And S. Paul, Phil. 3.20. Our Conversation is in Heaven,
whence we look for the Savior, the Lord Jesus Christ.

Surely they that seriously mind being with God hereafter, must make it their
business to get acquaintance with him here: they that look for their Portion in
Heaven, must have their Conversation in Heaven while they are upon Earth.

As it is the description of a wicked man, that God is not in all his Thoughts,
that God's Judgments are far above out of his sight, that he casts God's Word
behind his back, that he hides his face from God: So on the other side, nothing
is a more real demonstration of a Holy person then this, that he meditates on
God's Precepts, and has respect unto his Ways.

Oh that it might be verified of each of you, that you have the same Mind that
David had. But, alas! how far are men degenerated from this Patriarch! how few
write after his Copy! Survey the Motions of your Mind, of your Tongues, of your
Eyes; you will, I fear, find too little of David's Employment used by you. Do
not your Inquiries, your Conscience, your Practice, show how little your
Thoughts are upon God, his Being, his Counsels, Commands, or Works?

How sedulously do you eye and observe what Way is most in credit at Court;
what Disposition is in the Grandees of the Times; what is the most taking way
for Preferment in the Land; what the most conducible either to get Wealth, or
else to procure Ease or Pleasure? Are not these things, or such like, all that
is sought after or minded, when we are still asking after News at Court, in
City, or Country? when we listen so greedily after what Intelligence the most
inquisitive men can give us of these things?

But seldom do you apply your selves to know how to rectify your Consciences,
by right Information concerning God's Will; little notice do you take of God's
stirring up your Hearts to pray, his answering your Prayers, or rewarding your
Obedience, or punishing your Transgressions. How few Memorialls are kept either
of public Plagues or common Deliverances? How solicitous are we to please Men?
how careless to please God? how intent and diligent to promote our Earthly, how
negligent and slack to farther Heavenly-Designs?

Deceive not your selves, such a posture of your Spirits shows an Estrangedness
from the Life that is in God; and manifests want of interest either in his
Favor here, or Glory hereafter. Learn rather, with the Psalmist, to meditate
on God's Works, and to talk of his Doings; to hearken what the Lord God will
say; to do as the Prophet, Hab. 2.1. to stand upon your Watch, and set you
upon the Tower, and watch to see what he will say to you, and what you shall
answer, when you are reproved. In a word, That God may have his Eye on you for
good, you must have your Eyes on his Ways, to serve him sincerely, and glorify
him perpetually. Which he grant for Christ's sake; To whom, etc. Amen.

LAVS DEO.
DAVID's JOY.
The Eighteenth SERMON.
PSALM. cxxij. 1. I was glad when they said unto me, Let us go into the House
of the Lord.


THIS Psalm is entitled to David: and it is very probable, that it was then
composed by him, when he brought the Ark of God to Jerusalem, and there fixed
the Seat of his Kingdom over Israel, and ordered the Services of the Temple,
with the Officers of Justice; for which a solemn Gratulation was made 1 Chronicles.
16. And to show that now he was Voti compos, had attained the great Desire of
his Soul, Psalm. 42.1, 2. in somewhat a like Affection to that of Simeon when he
found Christ, he congratulates the joint Alacrity of the people with him, in
the words of my Text, I was glad when they said unto me, etc.

It is true, the Temple was not built by David, but by Solomon his Son: yet
David had prepared a place for the Ark of God in his City, and pitched for it a
Tent, where there were offered Burnt-offerings and Peace Offerings before the
Lord, 1 Chronicles. 15.1. and 16.1. and certain of the Levites were appointed to
minister before the Ark of the Lord, and to record, and to thank and praise the
Lord God of Israel, 1 Chronicles. 16.4. For which reason it became the House of the
Lord then, and thither the Tribes went up, the Tribes of the Lord, unto the
Testimony of Israel, the Ark of the Testimony, to give Thanks unto the Name of
the Lord, verse. 4. of this Psalm. And for this he expresses his exceeding
Gladness in my Text. Whence we may observe,

I. David's pious Disposition: He prefers the Honor of God before his own
Dignity. Though the Settling of the Kingdom on him were matter of much Joy,
specially after so long a Persecution as he had undergone during Readiness life,
and those so frequent and sad Removals and Flittings from place to place, which
made him bewail his Condition, Psalm. 120.5, 6. Woe is me that I sojourn in
Mesech, that I dwell in the Tents of Kedar. My Soul has long dwelt with him
that hates Peace: Yet, (as that which cut him most to the Heart in his Exile
was his Absence from the Tabernacle, and those bitter Sarcasms of his Enemies,
when they said to him insultingly, Where is now thy God? so now) he most
rejoices that he is restored to the House of God; that now God's Worship was
begun to be solemnized, and he with the people of Israel frequented it with
Gladness. This was the constant frame of David's Spirit; as may appear, in that
he laid aside his Robes of Royal Majesty, and (putting on a linen Ephod in
company of the Priests) danced before the Ark: and when he was derided by
Michal his Wife, as if it showed Lightness in him; he justified himself as
being guilty of no Indecency, since it was before the Lord, who had chosen him
before her Father, and before all his House, to appoint him Ruler over the
people of the Lord, over Israel. He knew his Exaltation was from God, his
Favor was better to him then his Kingdom; therefore in it he rejoiced more
then in his Regality, and thought he could not rejoice enough in the Lord, nor
sufficiently debase himself before him: and this made him resolutely tell his
Wife, that he would play before the Lord, and be more vile then thus, and base
in his own sight; being assured that this was the ready way to his Honor. 2 Samuel 6.21, 22. And not content with this demonstration of his glorying in God,
in the next Chapter, verse. 2. he complains of it as a reason of his Discontent,
that he dwelt in a house of Cedar, when the Ark of God dwelt within Curtains.
So true was it of him which he professes Psalm. 69.9. The Zeal of thine House
has eaten me up; and the Reproaches of them that reproached thee are fallen
upon me. Which was more exactly and amply fulfilled in our Lord Christ, to
whose Purging of the Temple from the profane and unrighteous Abuses thereof the
first part is applied Joh. 2.17. and the second to his Sufferings for his
Faithfulness toward the Spiritual House of God, by testifying the Truth of God
notwithstanding the Contradiction of Sinners, Romans 15.3.

That this is a Duty common to all, to prefer the Honor of God, and the
Service of his House, before any Grandeur or Concernment of our own, is
abundantly manifest from the Precedence of the First Table of the Law before
the Second; the Precept of Loving God, before the Command of Loving our
Neighbor: from our petitioning (according to the Lord's Prayer) for the
Hallowing God's Name, the Coming of his Kingdom, the Doing his Will, before
the supplying of our Bread, the Remission of our Sins, or our Deliverance from
the Evil one's Temptations: from the Exceptions God takes against them that
built themselves cieled houses, when God's House lay waste; them that had in
their flock a male, and vowed to the Lord a corrupt thing: from his punishing
such Slighting of him, and asserting his Regal Majesty, to convince men of the
transcendent Regard that is due to him above all Potentates: from the
Protestations and Practice of Saints and Holy persons, preferring the
well-being of God's House and Service before their chief Mirth; peremptorily
refusing Delights, neglecting any other Glory or otherwise desirable Advantage,
when God's House or Honor is impaired; Mourning for it more then for their own
Losses; and reckoning them for their best-deserving Friends that promote the
Service of God, and them for their greatest Enemies that hinder it. The Reasons
of which are,

1. On God's part, His superlative Excellency, in comparison of whom all the
Glory, Beauty, Goodliness, Power, Wisdom, or whatever else is magnified in
Creatures, is but a Shadow, yea Vanity, or a mere Nothing. All the Nations of
the Earth, in respect of him, are as a drop of a Bucket, counted as the small
dust of the balance, as Nothing, Isa. 40.15, 17. And therefore to prefer our
own Honor, the Honor of any of the Grandees of the world, or the glorious
Spirits of Heaven, before the Worship, the Regalia or Royalties of the Great
God, who is King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, is to prefer a Torch-light before
the Sun-light; to esteem a Candle more then the glorious Lights of Heaven. As
there is in God more Glory then in all the Creatures; so his Name, his Service
should be magnisied and adhered unto above and against all the Services and
Names that stand in opposition to or competition with his.

2. Nor is this Prelation less due on our part, because of our Obligation of
Gratitude to him: Justice exacts it from us. It is Debitum morale, and
natural, that we should honor our Father that begat us, our Preachers that
instruct us, our Princes that protect us, our Benefactours that help us. All
these is God to us in a superlative manner. He is the Father that begat us, the
Rock that formed us: we are the Work of his Hands, and the Sheep of his
Pasture. He is our Shepherd, therefore we lack nothing; on him we depend from
our mother's womb. It is he that teaches us Wisdom more then the beasts of
the Earth. He is a Sun and a Shield to us: whatever good we receive from any,
it is first derived from him. He is the Fountain of living waters: all
Creatures are but broken Cisterns, that can hold no water. And therefore
undoubtedly he should be preferred before all, and by all. Which that it may be
done, we should have the like Affection as David had; and that is the next
thing observable in this Text.

II. David's Joy at the People's Forwardness to join in God's Worship.

As David preferred God's Service before his own Dignity, so he rejoiced in the
Conjunction of others with him therein. This was it which gladded his Heart,
that not only himself and his own House were ready to go up to the House of
the Lord, but all the people of Israel likewise were forward to join with him
in God's Service. When the People offered willingly to the Lord for the
building of the Temple, it is said, David the King also rejoiced with great
Joy, 1 Chronicles. 29.9. How often in the Psalms does he invite all people to praise
God? Praise him all ye Nations, Psalm. 117.1. is a Prophecy, containing his
Prayer for the Conversion of the Gentiles, Romans 15.11. Our Savior teaches us
to pray, not only that we our selves who pray, but all others may hallow God's
Name. When the Pharisees would have had the Children and Multitude, that cried
Hosanna with his Disciples, rebuked; our Savior not only justifies them, but
also animates them to it, telling the Pharisees, that if those should hold
their peace, the Stones would cry our, Luke 19.40. Malignant spirits, that seek
the Praise of men, their own Power and Interest, envy the forwardness of people
to join in the true Worship of God, and the Duties of Godliness. But to a holy
and humble Heart it is a joyous thing. As Moses said once to Joshua, Enviest
thou for my sake? I would that all the Lord's people were Prophets, and that
God would put his Holy Spirit upon them, Number. 11.29. Hereto every upright heart
is moved, both by the Love he bears to Men, and the Love he has to God who is
honored.

1. Love to others makes him that loves them not seek his own Good only, but
their Good also jointly with his own. Now there cannot be a greater Good to any
person, then when his Heart and Ways are set to glorify God. The best turn we
can do a man is, to bring him into Acquaintance with God, so as that his
Fellowship be with the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ. And therefore if
we love men indeed, we cannot but rejoice with them when they address
themselves to seek God.

2. Love also to God will cause this Rejoicing at the Associating of others
with us in his Service. The Corinthians Bounty to the Saints is commended from
hence, that it is abundant by many Thanksgivings unto God, whiles by the
experiment of such ministration they glorify God, 2 Cor. 9.12, 13. We pray
that all may sanctify God's Name: what we pray for sincerely, we desire
affectionately: and what we desire affectionately to obtain, we rejoice in it
heartily when it is acquired. No man prays to God rightly, but he who earnestly
desires God's Glory by all: the more therefore glorify him, the more is their
Joy increased who love God truly; especially when (as here) the Service is
voluntary, ready, with alacrity; when they say, (as it is in my Text) Let us
go into the House of the Lord. Which leads me to some farther Observations.

III. The People's Willingness and Forwardness: They invite each other to go
into the House of the Lord. Not to the house of Mirth and Jovialty; not to the
house of Bacchus or Baal; not to the Idol-Temple, or other house of Iniquity.
And therein is discernible the End and Motive of this their Invitation. It was,
no doubt, that they might worship God; as those did who went up into the Temple
to pray, as it is said of the Pharisee and Publican in the Parable; or, as it
is in the fourth verse of this Psalm, to the Testimony of Israel, to give
Thanks unto the Name of the Lord. Thus it is said, Luke 1.10. while the Priest
burnt Incense in the Temple, the whole multitude of the people were praying
without. And of Anna, Luke 2.37. she departed not from the Temple, but served
God with Fasting and Prayers night and day. And in respect of this Practice our
Savior Matthew. 21.13. allegeth out of Isa. 56.7. that the House of God was to
be the house of Prayer, not of Merchandise or other profane uses. Hereto
accords that which is foretold Isa. 2.3. of the New-Testament-times, allusively
to the practice of the Jews, Many people shall go and say, Come ye, and let us
go up to the Mountain of the Lord, to the House of the God of Jacob, and he
will teach us of his ways, and we will walk in his paths. This then is the
genuine End of going to the House of God, or the Church of the living God, the
pillar and ground of Truth, that we may pray together, and praise God with one
Heart; that we may learn the Will of God; that we may attend to the Preaching
of the Word, to the Reading of the Scriptures, to the Sacraments of Christ;
and, in a word, that we may with one mind and one mouth glorify God, even the
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. Which directs us also to consider,

IV. The Motive and Mode of their going up to the House of the Lord.

The Motive is implied in the determination to whose house they would go up,
to wit, to the House of Jehovah, the true and living God: not to the House of
Dagon, Moloch, or any of the Gentile Vanities; but to his House who was their
Defense, the Holy one of Israel, their King, Psalm. 89.18. It is Faith in God as
the true God, and in Jesus Christ whom he has sent, which must excite us to
go to the Church on Earth, to join with it in Holy Services; and to approach
boldly to the Throne of Grace in the Temple of Heaven, where Christ our High
Priest appears for us: it is that must quicken our Hearts, that must carry our
Feet to the House of God and Religious exercises.

Alas! many come to the Church out of Custom, or to avoid the Penalties of the
Law, yea perhaps to sleep there; as if they had no sense of God's Presence, no
spiritual Use of holy Ordinances, no need of holy Instructions, no want of
God's Favor, or Christ's Intercession: and therefore they neither exercise
Faith in Prayer or Praising God, nor have any feeling of the Worth of Spiritual
Services. They are no better after they have been at Church then they were
before; no more humbled for Sin, nor amended in their Conversation, nor
intelligent in the Doctrine of the Gospel, nor zealous for God's Glory, nor
helpful to edify one another, then if they had kept at home, or been in
profane Company. They are not like these in my Text, who here invited each
other to go to the House of the Lord.

Which implies the Mode or Manner of their going.

Three things I conceive implied in this Expression; Reverence, Unanimity,
Alacrity.

1. In that they go to the House of the Lord, it intimates that they did
present themselves there with Dread and Awe of God. They were wont to say, as
it is Psalm. 95.6. O come let us worship and bow down, let us kneel before the
Lord our Maker. Thus it should be with us: And therefore this Psalm is
appointed in our Liturgy to be read in the beginning of Divine Service. Our
Reverence should be not barely in respect of the presence of persons of
Eminency, whether Ministers or People; but more in respect of God's Presence.
We should be like affected as Jacob was, and say as he did, Genesis 28.17. How
dreadful is this Place! this is none other but the House of God, and this is
the Gate of Heaven. All Talking, Gazing, and other irreverent Carriage, (as is
too too often among us,) even while we are here about Holy Duties, shows an
irreligious and ungodly Spirit, and cannot but be odious to God, and bring his
Curse upon us.

2. Their Unanimity is intimated in their Invitation of each other, and joint
Association in going to the House of the Lord. And indeed this is also of very
great moment in the public Worship of God, that, as it was in the Primitive
times, we be of one Heart and one Soul, Act. 4.32. that we continue together
with one accord, breaking bread, and lift up our voice with one accord, by
praising God, Act. 2.46. and 4.24. To think to get Peace with God by our
Supplications, when we have unpeaceable Hearts toward others; to have
Forgiveness from God, while we forgive not our Brethren; to have God's Love,
while we love not one another; is a vain Delusion. To pray together at Church,
and quarrel at home; to sit in one Seat here, and to fight one with another
abroad; to say Amen to the Prayer for Peace, and yet to study Strife; is
monstrous Hypocrisy. To praise God in singing Psalms here, and yet to curse
and revile one another abroad, is horrible Impiety. But to brawl, contend for
places in the Church, before or immediately after Praying together, shows a
much more wicked Heart: For where Envy and Strife is, there is Confusion, and
every evil work, Jam. 3. verse. 16.

3. Therefore the third thing implied here, Alacrity, should attend our going
to the House of the Lord. We should serve the Lord with Gladness, come before
his Presence with Rejoicing, as it is Psalm. 100.2. which is read in our
Liturgy after the Second Lesson. God loves a cheerful Worshiper, as well as a
cheerful Giver. As we would have God delight in us, so we must delight our
selves in the Lord, and readily and freely, out of choice, come to the House of
the Lord, and there serve him.

APPLICATION.
And now give me leave both to complain, and to admonish you. God has done for
us greater things then he did for David: his Gospel, his Church, his Worship is
settled among us in a more Spiritual and Heavenly manner then it was among the
Jews: we are not carried away as the Gentiles, who were led by dumb Idols: we
have not mere Latin Service, not the Worship of a piece of Bread, as the
Papists; nor are we fed with Legendary Tales or men's Traditions: much less are
we, like the barbarous Heathens, awed by Oracles, the terrible Apparitions of
Devils, Wizzards, and such Imps of Hell, as many of them are; or cheated with
the ridiculous Fictions and Delusions of that impure Impostour Mahomet; or
imposed on by the Rabbinical Dotages of Jews: And yet we come to God's Service
with no better Devotion, nay, perhaps less, then these do to their false
Worship.

How few prefer God's Service before their own worldly Business, God's Honor
before their own Profit? How many are so far from inciting others to go to
God's House, that they are readier to draw them away from it? Yea, many choose
to keep at home, or to go to worse places and company. Many have no other End
in coming to Church, but to keep their wont, to do as others. Others come
either out of a vain Affectation to show their Bravery, or a Curiosity to hear
some eloquent Preacher, as those did Ezekiel. 33.30, 31, 32. with affection to one
party, opposition to another, yea with a contradicting Spirit. How many come
hither without Faith, or sense of God's Presence, as if they came to a Court?
yea to sport or play? With what Drowziness, Irreverence, Heedlesness, do many
appear here? How many are weary with the Service, with the Sermon? to whom it
is tedious to sit one hour to hear God's Word, though they can endure to sit
whole Nights and Days at their Pastimes, or to be employed in any mischievous
Design? How many bring their Bodies hither, and their Minds the while are
roving over the world? How many are filled with unclean Lusts, Contentions,
revengefull Imaginations and Devices, even while they are in the Church? How
many come to carp at the Preacher, or justle with their Brethren? How many pray
with their Mouths, and curse with their Hearts?

Alas! how will such bear Crucem Domini, the Lord's Cross, who are so backward
to go in Domum Domini, into the Lord's House? How can such expect to appear in
the Temple of God in Heaven, who defile the House of God on Earth? How weary
would they be of the Service there, to whom his Worship here is so tedious?

Brethren, let me deal plainly with you; It is an ominous Presage, an ill Sign,
that such as now are so averse from the House of God and his Service here, are
never likely to enter into the Temple of God in Heaven; it would be a Burden
to them, and they to it.

Oh then bethink your selves of coming hither, as David and his People did.
Prefer the Honor of God before any Interest of your own. Excite one another to
go to God's House, out of Love to one another, out of Love and Gratitude to
God. Go not to any Idol-service, or ungodly Meetings. Come to God's Service
with Faith, with Concord and Unanimity, with Cheerfulness and Reverence. And
know, that if you meet with God in his Ordinances, he will meet with you in his
Mercies. Which the Lord grant, etc. Amen.

LAVS DEO.
DELIGHT in GOD THE Christian's Gain.
The Nineteenth SERMON.
PSALM. xxxvij. 4. Delight thy self in the Lord, and he shall give thee thy
Heart's desire.


THIS Psalm is wholly doctrinall, somewhat artificially composed after the
order of the Hebrew Alphabet; it is likely, for the more ready learning and
easy remembering of it. The matter of it is, a Receipt to cure that Lipothymie
or Faintness of Spirit which is incident to the best men, when they see the
worst to prosper. Which as it is in appearance rational, so it is highly
dangerous, as tending to undermine our Faith in God's Providence, and to divert
our Course from the Via Regia, the high and right Way of holy Obedience to him,
to a walking in Byways of our own choosing.

To prevent which (after some Directions against Impatience, and Distrust of
God) this Dose is here prescribed, by one that could say Probatum est, even by
Holy David, the sweet Psalmist of Israel, who had by his own Experience found
it true, and the most sovereign Medicine and Cordial in this case. He had
observed, That notwithstanding the wicked man prospered a while, and like a
Comet blazed much; yet it was but as a Meteor, a Blazing-star, that would soon
vanish: But that he who trusts in God, and delights in him, should be as a
Fixed Star, which, though it be clouded or benighted for a time, yet it has a
permanent Light, and shall break out of its Obscurity. That it is therefore
best for such a one, in the greatest Luster of the Wicked, and in the most
dismal estate that befalls himself, yet to delight himself in the Lord, and to
assure himself that he will give him the Desire of his Heart.

Which words you may at first View perceive to contain in them,

1. A Precept; Delight thy self in the Lord. Affect not the Prosperity of Evil
men. Though they mount up to Heaven, in Wealth, Honor and Power, so as that,
in their Luciferian Pride, they say in their heart, We will ascend into Heaven,
exalt our throne above the Stars of God; we will ascend above the heights of
the Clouds, we will be like the Most high: yet do thou humbly, quietly,
patiently, contentedly delight thy self in the Lord.

2. A Promise; He shall give thee, in the conclusion, the Desires, or
Petitions, of thine Heart: either in that Deliverance thou would have; or
that Comfort or Preferment which he thinks best for thee.

So that from hence arise two Conclusions of much importance.

1. That it is best to delight our selves in God in the most elevated estate of
Evil men, and in our own most dejected Condition. 2. That such as do so,
shall have their Hearts Desire, and in fine speed better then if they had been
in a like illustrious estate to that of Wicked men.
I shall address my self to handle both in their order, with what brevity and
perspicuity I can.

I. OBSERVATION.
That it is best to delight our selves in God in the most elevated estate of
Evil men, and in our own most dejected Condition.

Delight is an inclining Affection of the Soul, upon the apprehension of some
pleasing Good that is suitable to the Mind: and it is conceived in the womb of
the Heart; but not resting there, it manifests it self by the motions of the
Members, by the speech of the Tongue, glances of the Eyes, harkening of the
Ears, and by other gestures of the Members, which discover the Complacency of
the Spirit within.

Delighting then in the Lord, is, for a man to have pleasing Thoughts of God,
and thereby strengthening his Heart and Mind against all Objections concerning
God or himself, against all Fears and Occurrences which might cast down his
Spirit. Many sadning Objects do often present themselves even to the most Holy
men on earth. We find David sometimes complaining that God had cast him off; I
am cut off from before thine eyes: Holy Job, that God hid his Face from him,
and held him for his Enemy. Such Complaints are frequent, Thou have cast us
off, and put us to shame. Wherefore hidest thou thy Face? Why say thou,
O Jacob, My way is hid from the Lord, and my Judgment is passed over from my
God? Others cry, Wherefore does the Way of the Wicked prosper?

Most fully we find this Argument urged against God's Providence, even to the
staggering of that Holy Psalmist, in Psalm. 73.2, etc. where he relates his
Temptation, and his Recovery out of it. For notwithstanding what his Eyes saw,
his Ears heard, his fleshly Reason suggested to him, of the Happiness of Evil
men, and the vanity of Godly courses; yet he upholds himself by delighting in
the Lord; and thus expresses himself in that Psalm: Verse. 1. Truly God is good
to Israel, even to such as are of a clean heart; and after, verse. 23, 24, 25,
26, 28. Nevertheless I am continually with thee; thou have holden me by my
right hand. Thou shall guide me with thy Counsel, and afterward receive me to
Glory. Whom have I in Heaven but thee? and there is none upon Earth that I
desire besides thee. My Flesh and my Heart fails; but God is the strength of
my Heart, and my portion for ever. It is good for me to draw near to God: I
have put my Trust in the Lord God.

Such Apprehensions as these do affect the Spirits of a man, as the breaking
out of the Sun does the Eyes, after it has been overcast with thick Clouds in
the day, or concealed by the Darkness of the night. Then the Light is sweet,
and it is a pleasant thing to behold the Sun. So it is with the Soul, after
such Perplexities and Affrightments and Disconsolations of Spirit as are
incident to the most holy Saint, by reason of the seeming Disorders and dismal
Occurrences in the world which are obvious to him. When he recollects himself,
and determines against all Arguings ad oppositum, that the Lord God is a Sun
and a Shield; the Lord will give Grace and Glory; no good thing will he
withhold from them that walk uprightly. O Lord of hoasts, blessed is the man
that trusts in thee, Psalm. 84.11, 12. then he delights himself in the Lord,
as the most pleasant and eligible Good thing, as his Sun and his Shield; and
accordingly fixes his Contemplations on God, quickens, chears, confirms, raises
up his Spirits in the remembrance of him; expresses himself in holy Hymns, in
devout Prayers, in wise Observations of his Doings, in commemorating of his
Works and his Word, in holy Conferences, and such like ways, as show that none
is so amiable to him as God, none to be adhered to in comparison of him, none
to be glorified like unto God.

Conformably hereto, he delights in the Consideration of God's most excellent
Being: that he is not like the Vanities of the Nations: that he is the living
God, and an everlasting King: that in the Lord Jehovah is everlasting Strength:
that there is none holy as the Lord, no Rock like unto our God: that great is
our Lord, and of great Power, his Understanding is infinite: that he is
merciful and gracious, abundant in Goodness and Truth.

He delights also in the beholding and observation of his Works; which however
they are not minded by them who are alienated from the Life that is in God, yet
to the Godly enlightened Soul they appear Great, so that in Admiration of them
he is affected like the Psalmist, Psalm. 8.1. O Lord our God, how excellent is
thy Name in all the Earth, who have set thy Glory above the Heavens! Psalm.
104.24. In wisdom have thou made them all, and rulest all. He is holy in all
his Ways, and righteous in all his Works: and therefore are they sought out of
all them that have pleasure therein. His Work is honorable and glorious; and
his Righteousness endures for ever. And hereupon the Psalmist resolves, Psalm.
104.34. My meditation of him shall be sweet; I will be glad in the Lord.

Nor is his Delight less in God's Word then in his Works. I will praise thy
Name, says David, (Psalm. 138.2.) for thy Loving Kindness and for thy Truth:
for thou have magnified thy Word above all thy Name. And thus he often
professes, that the Word of God, his Judgments were more to be desired then
Gold, yea, then much fine Gold; sweeter then Honey and the Honeycomb: that not
only his Word of Promise was his Comfort in his Affliction, for by it he was
quickened; but that he greatly delighted in God's Commands, they were the Joy
of his heart: And Holy Job, (23.12.) I have esteemed the Word of his mouth more
then my necessary Food.

But Holy men's greatest Delight in God is, when by Faith in Christ they
apprehend God to be their God, and they his People; that he dwells in them,
they are his Temple; that they are made by him Kings and Priests to him by his
Spirit; that he is their Father through Christ, they his Children; that they
have access to him by the Faith of Christ, and are assured of an Inheritance
above with him. When they understand this, that Christ is All to them, they
delight in the Almighty, and lift up their face unto God with Joy, as it is Job
22.26.

Now this indeed is best for the Godly, thus to delight themselves in the Lord,
even in their own lowest Conditions, and their Oppressors highest, because the
greatest Good that Evil men have is but vain. Be it Plenty, Peace, Honor,
Liberty, Power, Pleasure, or whatever else is valued by men that have their
Portion in this life, it is but an imperfect, fading, vexing Good; much of it
is such as Beasts enjoy more fully then they, who have more Delight in their
Food and sensitive Pleasure then Men have. Applause, Honors, Wealth, are but
Toys, such as Childish persons delight in rather then wise Men. Philosophers,
by the Light of Nature, have censured them as empty of real Worth; not good,
because they made not the Possessours of them good. Wisdom and Virtue are by
them preferred before them. Yea, they bring often much Vexation, in stead of
Delight. In acquiring and Using them is much Vanity. In the midst of Laughter,
the Heart is sorrowful; Solomon styles it Madness. But Delight in the Lord is
the most rational, exquisite, durable Delight: far above not only Epicurus
his Pleasure, and Zeno's Virtue, and Seneca's Tranquillity of mind; but also
Solomon's Glory, his Wisdom, his Knowledge of the Properties of Natural
bodies, and whatever Excellency (short of Acquaintance with God) he was endued
with. He confesses as much in the close of his Penitentialls: and before him
his Father David, Psalm. 4.6, 7. There be many that say, Who will show us any
Good? Lord, lift thou up the light of thy Countenance upon us. Thou have put
Gladness in my Heart, more then in the time that their Corn and their Wine
increased. This makes the Saints delight in Prayer and Praise, and other
Worship of God; it being their Privilege as well as their Duty to delight
themselves in the Lord, Isa. 58.14. and according to the Desire of their Heart.
Which brings me to the

II. OBSERVATION.
That they who delight themselves in the Lord shall have their Hearts Desire,
and in fine speed better then they who are in the most illustrious estate of
Wicked men.

The principal Desire of one that delights himself in God is, to glorify God:
that is the main End of such as glory in God, that they may do all to his
Glory. Therefore are they taught to make this their first Petition, Hallowed be
thy Name; and to that end to pray, Thy Kingdom come, Thy Will be done on Earth
as it is in Heaven.

Even in God's most severe Dealings with them, they say with those Isa. 26.8.
Yea, in the way of thy Judgments, O Lord, have we waited for thee: the desire
of our Soul is to thy Name, and to the Remembrance of thee. To which that of
the Apostle, Phil. 1.20. is consonant; According to my earnest expectation and
my hope, that in nothing I shall be ashamed, but that with all boldness, as
always, so now also Christ shall be magnified in my body, whether it be by
life, or by death. That which is said by David, but most truly verified of our
Lord Christ, is true of all that delight in the Lord, Psalm. 40.8. I delight to
do thy Will, O my God; yea, thy Law is within my Heart.

And this their Desire God always grants: so that, however he that delights in
the Lord be assaulted with Temptations, be benighted in his Apprehensions of
God's Favor, though Heaviness may endure for a night, Joy shall come in the
morning; though he miss of his Way, yet he shall find his Error, and return
into it again. The Steps of a good man are ordered by the Lord; and he
delights in his way. Though he fall, he shall not be utterly cast down: for
the Lord upholdeth him with his hand, Psalm. 37.23, 34.

Next unto these ultimate and supreme Ends, the Desire of his Soul who delights
in the Lord is, to see God. How earnestly did Moses beg the sight of God's
Face? How often does David bemoan his Absence from God's Worship at his Temple?
As the Heart (says he) pants after the waterbrooks, so pants my Soul after
thee, O God. My Soul thirsts for God, for the living God: when shall I come
and appear before God? Psalm. 42.1, 2. And in the next Psalm, verse. 3. O send
out thy Light and thy Truth: let them lead me, let them bring me unto thy holy
Hill and to thy Tabernacles. So Saint Paul, Phil. 1.23. I desire to depart, and
to be with Christ, which is best of all. And this Desire God will give them at
last who delight in him. Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God,
Matthew. 5.8. Now are we the Sons of God, and it does not yet appear what we
shall be: but we know, that when he shall appear, we shall be like him; for we
shall see him as he is, 1 John 3.2. Manutenentia Divina, God's supporting Grace
here, and Visio beatifica, the Fruition of God hereafter, are two grand Desires
of Souls that delight in God; these they petition for, and he will grant them
both.

There are other Desires which they have, as the Prosperity of God's Church,
the Downfall of their Enemies; which the Lord will also at last accomplish,
though not without much Contention, and long Waiting. They shall overcome the
Powers of darkness, and the World; they shall see the people of God above their
Enemies, by the blood of the Lamb, and by the word of their Testimony, though
they lay down their Lives for it.

Other Desires of outward Blessings God grants not always in the kind, but
often in some Equivalent. He repairs that which they lose for Christ and his
Gospel, by inward Comfort and Spiritual Strength. Though they be in Want, or
under Persecution, yet they know how to abound, in that they have learned in
whatsoever estate therewith to be content. They can do all things through
Christ that strengthens them. If they have a Thorn in the Flesh, a Messenger
of Satan to buffet them, and it still molest them; yet the Grace of God is not
denied them, and it is sufficient for them; his Strength is perfected in their
Weakness. Many Desires of particular Blessings are granted them; and this one
comprehensive Privilege belongs to them, that all things work together for good
to them who love God, Romans 8.28.

APPLICATION.
It remains then that we learn this way of Thriving, by delighting our selves
in the Lord. Self-love is natural; every man desires his own Good: but all
take not the right way to attain it. God made Man upright, or simple; but he
has sought out many Inventions. Many ways are devised by men for the attaining
their Ends, and many Ends propounded by them. The Desires of men are almost as
various as their Faces; and their Designs and Courses are almost as manifold as
their Heads: So many Men, so many Minds.

Among you who are my present Auditors, though you meet here about the same
Business, the Serving of God, yet how few in truth do desire to know him
aright, or to serve him with a perfect heart and with a willing mind? Even in
this very Action how few mind God's Glory? How many observe only the Custom,
in coming to Church? or perhaps some worser Motives bring them hither, and
sinful Thoughts possess them here. And no marvel then if they grow not in
Knowledge and holy Obedience; are ever learning, and never able to come to the
knowledge of the Truth; yea grow worse and worse: because they delight not
themselves in the Lord, but aim only at the feeding their Eyes, or the
tickling their Ears, or some other sinister Ends of their own.

As these men's Hearts are not toward God, so neither is God's toward them:
they have no Pleasure in God, nor God in them. How many of you are there of
whom those things are verified which we read Isa. 58.2. They seek me daily,
and delight to know my ways, as a Nation that did Righteousness, and forsook
not the Ordinance of their God: they ask for the Ordinances of Justice, they
take Delight in approaching to God? and yet for want of real Delighting in
God, it may be your lot at last to hear Christ say to you, I know you not:
depart from me, you workers of Iniquity. Is it not true of you, which the
Prophet said of his Hearers, that they came and sat before the Prophet, as God
s People, and they heard his words; but they would not do them: for with their
Mouth they showed much Love, but their Hearts went after their Covetousness?
The Prophet was unto them as a very lovely Song of one that has a pleasant
voice, and can play well on an Instrument: for they heard his words, but did
them not, Ezekiel. 33.31, 32.

A Sermon is to most but as an Oration in Schools: the Delivery, the Composure
is observed, and perhaps censured; but the Matter is not learned, their Hearts
not bettered, their Ways not amended, God not glorified. After Dismission, yet
neither the Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, nor the Love of God, nor the
Communion of the Holy Spirit, remains in them; but worldly Projects, earthly
Designs, carnal Practices are still prosecuted. Yea, their Hearts are more
hardened, more estranged from God and the Life that is in him; and their
Wisdom remains earthly, sensual, and devilish. No marvel if such find no
Incomes of Grace, no Consolation in Christ, no spiritual growth in Godliness.

Oh that you would ask your selves, whether this Guilt lie not on you: and that
you would now at last apply your selves thoroughly to delight your selves in
God, especially in these great Duties of Prayer and Hearing his Word; lest when
you would have your great Desire of seeing God's Face in the great Day of
Christ's appearing, ye be shut out of his Presence, and be cast into outer
Darkness, where is nothing but weeping, and wailing, and gnashing of teeth.
Delight in the Lord now, that he may delight in you for ever. Which he grant,
etc. Amen.

LAVS DEO.
THE GOOD MAN'S SECURITY.
The Twentieth SERMON.
1 PET. iij. 13. And who is he that will harm you, if ye be Followers of that
which is Good?


I Know you all desire Security and Protection from Harm; and lo here S. Peter
directs you to it: he tells you, that you may best your selves procure an Act
of Indemnity. No Weapons, no Guard, no Laws, no Magistrates can better defend
you from Injuries, then your own good Carriage: And who is he that will harm
you, if ye be Followers of that which is Good?

The Apostle in the beginning of the foregoing Chapter acquaints the Christian
Jews in the Dispersion with the great Preferments and Emoluments they had by
Christ; and after applies himself to direct them in some special Duties, which
he begins at verse. 11. of that Chapter. Officium sequitur Beneficium; Benefits
by Christ require Duties suitable to Christ's Precepts and Example. Particularly
in this Chapter, verse. 8, 9. you have Unity, Mercy, Love and Courteousness
commended; evil Deeds and evil Speech forbidden; Blessing of God and Men
enjoined. Which are farther urged by a Citation out of the Psalmist, Psalm.
34.12, etc. And then are superadded the words of my Text, And who is he that
will harm you, if, etc?

Where the particle [And] is not to be taken connexive, (says Beza,) but to
denote something more, as if it were read, Furthermore who will harm you, or
vex you, if ye be Followers, Imitatours, of that which is Good? specially in
Christ, who was propounded for their Example, Chap. 2.21. even in that point of
not rendering evil for evil, or railing for railing, but blessing, which was
enjoined verse. 9.

To be Followers of that which is Good then, is, to be Imitatours of those good
things in Christ's carriage, words and deeds, which he had before commended to
them; and which also the words of the Psalmist cited verse. 10, 11. exhort to:
to wit, to refrain the Tongue from Evil, and the Lips that they speak no Guile;
to eschew evil, and do good; to seek Peace, and ensue it.

Some Copies read (...), that is, be Zelots of that which is Good: which is the
term used Gal. 4.18. It is good always to be zealous in a good thing. Now Zeal
notes Ardency of Affections, both in the Desire of a thing, Delight in it, and
Love or Well-willing toward it; as also Fear of missing it, Anger against that
which opposes us, Jealousy or Distrust of that which tends to deprive us of
the thing we are zealous for, Emulation of others who prosecute it: in a word,
an Intension of the Affections, an earnestness of Endeavors in the most
eminent degree, and eager Pursuit of the thing which we affect. And so we may
take in both Readings, Who is he that will harm, or shall vex, you, or afflict
you with evil, if ye be zealous Followers of that which is Good, specially
imitating the Example of Christ, in that wherein I have propounded him to you
for your Pattern?

Now this is proposed by way of Interrogation, which usually implies a
peremptory Negation; Who will harm you? that is, None will harm you, or, None
shall be able to harm you. Which cannot be understood absolutely and
universally, as if in no case any could or would harm them that follow that
which is Good. The contrary is supposed in the next verse, that they might
suffer for Righteousness sake. But it is so to be taken as such proverbial
Speeches usually are understood; For the most part, or usually, men do not harm
them who are Followers of that which is Good: or, Usually they speed better
then others. As when it is said, A good Tree cannot bring forth bad Fruit, that
is, it does not so usually or frequently. So here, Men usually do not harm
Sheep, but let them feed quietly: Men do not ordinarily vex them that are
studious of Good. But as men hunt after Foxes and Wolves, and other ravenous
Beasts; so do they cry after a Thief, Job 30.5. they pursue after Murderers,
Thieves, Malefactors, Busybodies in other men's matters, 1 Pet. 4.15.

These things being premised, that which does hence arise as a Conclusion, is,

OBSERVATION.
That the following zealously that which is Good, is a likely means to prevent
Harms.

This is not unlike that Speech in the Prophet Isa. (33.15, 16.) He that
walks righteously, and speaks uprightly, he that despises the gain of
Oppressions, that shakes his hands from holding of Bribes, that stops his
ears from hearing of Blood, and shuts his eyes from seeing Evil; He shall
dwell on high, his place of defense shall be the munitions of Rocks: Bread
shall be given him, his Waters shall be sure. So Psalm. 37.27. Depart from Evil,
and do Good, and dwell for evermore. Many more such Sayings of Holy Scripture
might be produced; but we shall manage our Business to better purpose, by a
distinct declaring, 1. What the Good is that is to be followed. 2. How it is to
be followed. 3. What is the Harm that those that follow that which is Good are
secured from. 4. From whose Harming the Security is. 5. When it is they are
secured. 6. Why those that follow that which is Good are thus secured.


I. For the first, What the Good is that is to be followed: Good things are of
many sorts. Some things are good (...), in some respects; (...), in the
opinion, esteem, and use of men; which are not so in reality. There be many
that say, Who will show us any good? Psalm. 4.6. that is, procure us Wealth,
Good cheer, Corn and Wine and Oil, mentioned verse. 7. Son, (said Abraham to the
Rich man, Luke 16.25.) remember that thou in thy lifetime receivedst thy Good
things; that is, he was rich, clothed in Purple and fine Linen, and fared
deliciously, or sumptuously, or lived wantonly, every day. Those were his Good
things; not simply so, but in the Conceit of the Possessour. They were not the
true Riches, verse. 11. nor that which was indeed his own, verse. 12. but that
which he had only for a while, by permission. As the Quails were given to the
Israelites in wrath; as good Pasture serves to fatten Beasts which are fed for
the Slaughter: so are these seeming Good things oftentimes bestowed on Wicked
men, but it is to their Ruin at last. Ye have lived in pleasure on the earth,
and been wanton; ye have nourished your hearts as in a day of slaughter, says
S. James, (5.5.)

This Bonum Vtile and Jucundum, Profit and Pleasure, carnal and worldly men
count their Good things: like him that flattered himself in his Folly, Luke
12.19. Soul, thou have much Goods laid up for many years; though they were
indeed his Poison, the Bait whereby his Soul was caught by Satan, and himself
censured for an egregious Fool.

There is another sort of Good that is really such in genere Entis: and so all
God's Creatures are good. God saw every thing that he had made, and behold, it
was very good, Genesis 1.31. Another in genere Moris, a Good which makes the
person truly good. Such is the Goodness of God, who is good, and does good,
Psalm. 119.68. even by communicating Good to all, Act. 14.17. And indeed He is
the chiefest Good: He is most transcendently, perfectly, originally Good; from
whom every good and every perfect Gift comes, James 1.17. And therefore
rightly is it said by our Lord Christ, Matthew. 19.17. There is none good but
one, that is God. And this Good we are to be Followers of: Be ye Followers of
God.

There is also a derivative Goodness from him, which is communicated
primitively to his Son, concerning whom it is the Father's pleasure, that in
him should all Fullness dwell, Col. 1.19. The Spirit is given him without
measure, Joh. 3.34. While he was upon Earth, he went about doing good, Act.
10.38. He might truly say, I am the good Shepherd, Joh. 10.11. And from him
Good is redundant to us. He has plenitudinem Fontis, and not only Vasis: With
him is the fountain of Life, and in his Light we see light, Psalm. 36.9. Now the
Good we are to be Followers of is also this Good which is in and from Christ:
the Good of his Word, to know it; the Good of his Example, to imitate it; the
Good of his Gifts, (the Gifts of his Spirit,) to be zealous after them, 1 Cor.
12.31. the Good of Righteousness and eternal Life which is from God by Jesus
Christ, to enjoy it; the Good of God's Favor in Christ, to obtain it; the Good
of Communion with the Father and the Son, to embrace it.

But though these sorts of Good are to be followed, yet that which we are here
required more specially to be Followers of, is not so much Bonum Beatitudinis,
the Good of Blessedness for our selves, as Bonum Sanctitatis, the Good of
Holiness, whereby we may be like unto God, be holy as he is holy, 1 Pet. 1.15,
16. and Bonum Justitiae, the Good of Righteousness, toward our selves and
others, such as may consist with a good Conscience, and a good Conversation in
Christ; the Good of Innocence, that we may be blameless and harmless, the sons
of God, without rebuke, Phil. 2.15. the Good of Benevolence and Beneficence,
willing and procuring good unto all, Gal. 6.10. as we have opportunity, doing
good to all, especially unto them that are of the household of Faith. We must
endeavor after the good Heart, that may out of its Treasure bring forth good
things, Matthew. 12.35. after the good Tongue, that speaks Wisdom, and talks
of Judgment, Psalm. 37.30. that utters that which is good to the use of
Edifying, that it may minister Grace to the hearers, Ephesians. 4.29. after the good
Hand, that may work the thing that is good, that it may have to give to him
that needs, v. 28. In sum, we must labor to become Vessels unto honor,
sanctified and meet for the Master's use, and prepared to every good work, 2 Timothy 2.21. created in Christ Jesus unto good works, which God has before
ordained that we should walk in them, Ephesians. 2.10.

II. How this Good is to be followed.

1. Universally; all the Kinds of it are to be pursued: not only the Good of
Religion toward God, but also of Love toward Man. The End of our Deliverance
from the hands of our Enemies is, that we might serve God in Holiness and
Righteousness before him all the days of our life; as it is in the Benedictus,
Luke 1.74, 75. The Grace of God has appeared to all men, teaching them, that
denying Ungodliness and worldly Lusts, they should live righteously, soberly
and godly in this present world, Tit. 2.11, 12. We know it is S. James his
determination, (2.10.) Whosoever shall keep the whole Law, and yet offend in
one point, he is guilty of all. Virtues are chained together, the Law is
copulative: Bonum non nist ex integra causa; He that is not entirely good, is
not good at all. He that is all for the practice of Religious Ordinances, but
no whit for Charity; he that is devout at Church, but proud, vain, wanton,
uncharitable, unrighteous, intemperate at home; is no Follower of that which is
Good, but an Hypocrite, a mere Pharisee, or painted Sepulcher. And he that is
much for Alms, and Abstinence from Excess, or prohibited Pleasures, yet
careless of Prayer, Reading, Hearing God's Word, in public and in private, is
a profane person; be he never so much esteemed by men, yet is he abominable
before God.

2. Nor must we be Followers of all Sorts of Good only, but also of all kinds
of Good in the most eminent Degree. What the Apostle prays for in the behalf of
the Colossians, Col. 1.9, 10. should be the aim of every sincere Christian,
that he may be filled with the knowledge of God's Will in all wisdom and
spiritual understanding; that he may walk worthy of the Lord unto all pleasing,
being faithful in every good work, and increasing in the knowledge of God. So
what he prays for in behalf of the Philippians, Phil. 1.11. that he may be
filled with the Fruits of Righteousness, which are by Jesus Christ unto the
glory and praise of God: that he may be abundant in the work of the Lord, 1
Cor. 15.58. As he is unjust that lets not the Buier have his full Measure: so
is he that does not afford God the utmost of his Service, that does not love
him with all his Mind, with all his Soul, and with all his Strength.

In this an Emulation is good, which is implied in the word (...), as some
Copies have it in my Text; and it is so rendered by Beza. We should vie one with
another, as desirous to outstrip each other; like Runners in a Race, that
strive who shall run fastest. Yea, in this it is good to be singular. If ye
salute your Brethren only, says Christ, ( Matthew. 5.47.) what singular thing,
or more then others, do ye? intimating, that a Christian that exceeds not a
Philosopher or a Jew, is not worthy of that name. He must not only do good to
them that love him, but even to them that hate him, verse. 44. Though we own no
Popish Evangelical Counsels, no Monkish Vows, as putting a man into a state of
Perfection, no Merit or Works of Supererogation: yet he that will approve
himself to God must endeavor to do those Good works that are commanded to the
utmost, Extensive, Works of all Kinds, and Intensive, in all their Degrees,
according to his ability.

3. And this we are to do sincerely, as before God; not as pleasing Men, but
God that tries the heart, 1 Thessalonians. 2.4. Not like the Pharisees, who gave Alms,
Fasted, Prayed, that they might be seen of Men, and therefore did all with
Ostentation; but in secret and private as well as in public we should be
Followers of that which is Good, looking only at God's Glory, our Obedience to
him, and the pleasing of him, as our End. Insomuch that, if we can acquit our
selves so as to have his Favor and good Liking of us, we must not care what we
lose, or what Obloquy, Censure, or Disgrace we incurro from men. Our
Righteousness and Holiness should not be in show, but in truth, Ephesians. 4.24.

4. In Following of that which is Good, we should do it zealously, with our
Minds, our Affections, and our Studies. We should give all diligence and study
that we may abound in Faith, Virtue, Knowledge, Temperance, Patience,
Godliness, Brotherly love, Charity, 2 Pet. 1.5, 6, 7. We should follow Peace
with all men, and Holiness, Heb. 12.14. pursue after it, as Hunters after a
Prey, or Enemies after Enemies. This one thing I do; (says the Apostle, Phil.
3.13, 14.) forgetting the things that are behind, and reaching forth unto those
things that are before, I press, or pursue, toward the Mark, for the price of
the high Calling of God in Christ Jesus. A lazy slack Following of Good is
ineffectual: such a Seeking as the old Saints are said to have used is that
which is required of them that will inherit the Promises, Heb. 6.11, 12.

5. Yea, we should not only follow that which is Good our selves, but animate
others to follow it too. He loves not God, nor his Brother, that seeing him in
Want, does not relieve him when it is in his power: so neither does he follow
God, that seeing his Brother err, does not, as he has opportunity, endeavor
to convert him from the Error of his ways; that does not lift up the hands
that hang down, and the feeble knees, Heb. 12.12. that does not avoid giving
such Offense as may cause the Lame to fall in the way, or to turn out of it;
that does not encourage others in that which is Good, comfort and heal the
sorrowful Spirit, and lead others by Example, Instruction, and Prayer. Such as
are of God, do good, even as he does, who benefits all, invites all, is Bonum
universale, an universal communicative Good.

6. Our following of Good must be with Constancy. We must always be zealous in
a good thing, Gal. 4.18. all our days, in youth and age; in all Companies, in
all Estates, on all Occasions: not by sits and starts. We must cleave to that
which is good, Romans 12.9. as a Wife adheres to her Husband, as Ruth did to her
Mother-in-law. We should be steadfast and unmovable, always abounding in the
work of the Lord; as knowing that our labor shall not be in vain in the Lord,
1 Cor. 15.58. Which brings me to the other Particulars propounded to be
considered: in which I shall be very brief.

III. The Harm that they who are zealous Followers of that which is Good are
secured from.

This is indeed all sorts of Evils: the chief whereof are the Wounds of
Conscience, and the Wrath of God. While men follow that which is Good, they are
not obnoxious to those Lashes of a guilty Conscience, which are consequent upon
the remembrance of lewd Pranks in youth, Deceits and Covetous practices in age,
cruel Murders, horrid Perjuries, unjust Bribes, Purloining, Stealing, and such
other Evils as do vastare Conscientiam, violently torture the Mind, and are as
scorching Heat in a man's Bones, Gall and Wormwood in his Belly; as when God
wrote bitter things against Job, and made him possess the Sins of his youth.
These Tortures were resembled in the Poets by the Affrightments of Furies, and
are Forerunners of Hell Torments. Nor shall those who follow what is Good be
liable to the Indignation and Wrath, Tribulation and Anguish, which God
inflicts on them that are contentious, and obey not the Truth, but obey
Unrighteousness, Romans 2.8, 9. These are indeed the grand Harms, that are like
the stinging of a Scorpion: but my Text intends likewise all Afflictions
incident to us from men's Injuriousness and Malignity, such as are Reproaches,
Derision, Slanders, privation of Liberty, Livelihood, Life: which though they
be but Flea-bitings in comparison of the other, yet are they very harmfull, as
being extreme trouble-some and grievous. Yet by Following of that which is
Good, there is Security from them, if not altogether, at least in a great
measure; if not from the Feeling of them, yet from the Oppression of them; if
not from the Buzzing and Disquieting of them, as of Flies, yet from the Sting
of them, as of Scorpions; if not from the Molestation of them, yet from the
Deadliness of them: which will be better discerned, if we consider our next
Particular.

IV. Who they are from whose Harming they are secured.

They are either Men, or Devils; neither of whom can mortally and eternally
wound us. Fear not them (says our Lord) that can kill the Body, and when they
have done that, can do no more: but fear him that can cast both Soul and Body
into Hell-sire, Matthew. 10.28. Luke 12.4. Men and Devils may interrupt our
Peace, but cannot damn our Souls. Neither Tribulation, nor Distress, nor
Persecution, nor Famine, nor Nakedness, nor Peril, nor Sword, neither Death,
nor Life, nor Angels, nor Principalities, nor Powers, nor things present, nor
things to come, nor Height, nor Depth, nor any other Creature, can separate
them that follow that which is Good from the Love of God which is in Christ
Jesus our Lord. But in all these things they are more then Conquerours through
him that has loved them: as S. Paul says of himself, Romans 8.35, 37, 38, 39.
Yet are they sorely assaulted by both these Enemies: insomuch that the Apostle
tells us there, verse. 36. for God's sake they are killed all the day long, and
are counted as Sheep for the slaughter. They are as Sheep among Wolves, who are
ready to worry them. Satan casts some into Prison ten days, that they may be
tried, Rev. 12.10. He goes about, like a roaring Lion, seeking whom he may
devour, 1 Pet. 5.8. There is a spiteful Spirit in all that are of the Wicked
one; yet sometimes God restrains the remainder of their Wrath. He cuts off the
spirit of Princes, he is terrible to the Kings of the earth, Psalm. 76.10, 12.
He rebukes an Abimelech in a Dream, so as that he dares not touch them, Genesis
20.6. He suffers no man to do them wrong; he reproves Kings for their sake,
saying, Touch not mine Anointed, and do my Prophets no harm, Psalm. 105.14, 15.
When a man's ways please the Lord, he makes even his Enemies to be at peace
with him, Prove. 16.7. Sometimes the Luster of a Good life does either attract
the favorable Aspect, or dazzle the Eyes of those with whom they live.
Sometimes the benefit of Laws and Government secures their Peace: they are
Ministers to them for good, Romans 13.4. By these and many more means are they
that follow that which is Good indemnified; whenas his own Iniquities take the
Wicked himself, and he is holden with the Chords of his Sins, Prove. 5.22.

V. When it is that they are secured.

But then this is not perpetually so; it falls out sometimes otherwise. When
the Wicked bears rule, in Times of Anarchy or Tyranny, there is not this
Security to them that follow Good, but the people mourn. There is a Just man
that perishes in his Righteousness, and there is a Wicked man that prolongeth
his life in his Wickedness, Eccles. 7.15. When cedunt Armis Togae, men of the
long Robe are awed by men of the long Sword, the people are hurried up and down
by popular Orators, Demagogues sway with them, and they control their
Governors; when an Usurper gets into the Throne, and, to strengthen his Party,
suppresseth the best and wisest; when thundering Cannons are heard, and just
Laws are silenced; when the Magistrate's Sword submits to the Soldier's, the
Judges yield to the Commanders of forces; when the Preachers lead the People,
not by the Word of God, but by the Ordinances of Men; then it is likely, in
such an Iron Age, (wherein non Hospes ab Hospite tutus,) to follow that which
is Good may be a man's greatest Danger, to speak truth may be his Ruin. When
the wicked rise, men hide themselves, Prove. 28.28. Been qui latuit, been vixit:
He is the wisest that lives most retired.

The like may be said of Times of Persecution, when God will have his people to
be under fiery Trialls, that their Faith and Patience may appear; when God will
be glorified in their Sufferings, as well as honored by their Doings. Yet in
these cases, he keeps them in perfect Peace whose Mind is stayed on God,
because they trust in him, Isa. 26.3. While they hold Faith and a good
Conscience, and make no shipwreck of them, the Peace of God, which passes all
understanding, guards their hearts and minds through Christ Jesus. Hic Murus
aheneus. Yea, even in time of universal Loss, in such Sufferings as Job's, they
find an hundredfold advantage with Persecution, and in the end everlasting
Life: so that they who kill the Body, hasten the Salvation of their Souls; and
by dispatching them hence, they speed them in their flight to Heaven. Of which
yet they are not the proper Cause; but there is an higher Cause, who is able to
bring Good out of Evil. Which was the last thing to be considered.

VI. Why they are thus secured.

It is God's Eye and his Hand that do secure and indemnifie those that are
Followers of that which is Good. This Reason of their Security the Coherence of
my Text with the words next before yields me: for having said, The Eyes of the
Lord are over the Righteous, and his Ears are open unto their Prayers: but the
Face of the Lord is against them that do Evil; he subjoyns my Text, And who is
he that will (I had rather say, shall) harm you, if ye be Followers of that
which is Good?

While you are in his Service, God counts himself engaged to take you into his
Protection. And therefore he will either change the Hearts of your Adversaries,
that they shall not mind the harming of you; as he promised the Israelites,
Exodus 34.24. that no man should desire their Land, when they should go up to
appear before the Lord thrice in the year; though then were (in the eye of
Reason) a fit season for them to make an hostile and successful Invasion: or
else he will divert them, as he did Saul, 1 Samuel 23.28. or disable them, as he
did Pharaoh: or if they be permitted to harm you outwardly, God will comfort
you inwardly; and in fine, all things shall work together for good to those
that love God, and are Followers of that which is Good. And thus they shall be
as the Three Children in the midst of the fiery Furnace, and yet have no Harm.
And in this respect the Conclusion is made good, None does, none will, or none
shall harm them that are Followers of that which is Good.

APPLICATION.
1. This may be a good Encouragement to you all, to follow that which is Good;
to exercise your selves, as S. Paul did, Act. 24.16. to have always a
Conscience void of offense toward God and toward Men. At all times, specially
in troublous Times, every man is busy in projecting and contriving how to find
an Asylum or Sanctuary, where he may be safe from Danger, and find Shelter from
the Enemy and Avenger. One fortifies his House: another strengthens himself by
Alliances: another arms himself, and gets into the field: another relies on the
Favor of the Grandees in Court, or Army, or City: another gets together what
Gold or Silver he can, to procure his Peace at home, or provide for Subsistence
abroad. But, alas! all these are but vain Contrivances. Sometimes, yea very
often, that which men trust upon is but as a broken Reed, which, if a man lean
upon it, will run into his hand. Those very things which he thinks to find
Protection by, become his Ruin; and that which he devised to be his Welfare,
becomes a Trap to him.

Nor is it any marvel if Woe befalls men, when they take Counsel, but not of
God; and cover with a Covering, but not of his Spirit, that they may add Sin
to Sin, (as the Prophet speaks, Isa. 30.1.) The best way is, to sow in
Righteousness, and then we shall reap in Mercy; to follow that which is Good,
and then we shall be kept from that which does harm. If our Innocence defend us
not from men's Attempts against us; yet the Faithfulness and Truth of God shall
be our Shield and Buckler. Men might live better under the Protection of Laws
and Government, were it not for their contentious Spirits and unruly Tongues.
Did every one study to be quiet, and to do his own business; did they not
render Evil to any man, but ever follow that which is Good, both among
themselves, and to all men, as S. Paul admonishes, 1 Thessalonians. 4.11. and 5.15.
they might live more safely, and die more happily.

Were men contented with their own, did they defraud none, but apply themselves
to works of Righteousness and Mercy; they might enjoy themselves and God with
more freedom. Did they not seek to climb ambitiously, or hunt after
Vainglory, did they lay up their Treasure in Heaven; they should have Rixae
multo minus Invidiaeque, fare better here, and speed better hereafter.

Oh that you would seriously bethink your selves, and apply your Endeavors to
do that which may save you from the Condemnation of your own Conscience, the
Sting of Death, and the Damnation of Hell: and learn to commit the keeping of
your Souls in welldoing unto God, as unto a faithful Creator.

2. Nevertheless, I would not have you to neglect lawful Means for your
Safety. Christ would have his Disciples wise as Serpents, though innocent as
Doves, Matthew. 10.16. Faith and Prayer exclude not honest Prudence. Integrity is
not always sufficient to ward off the Blows of malicious Accusers. False
Witnesses stone Naboth, and Envy crucifieth Christ. S. Paul is not blamed for
Appealing to Caesar, or making use of the Difference between the Sadducees and
Pharisees; nor for discovering of the Conspiracy to kill him; nor for escaping,
by being let down in a Basket, from Damascus: though he would not bribe Felix,
nor remit any whit of his Profession.

A person may be over-wise and over-righteous, and so destroy himself; as it is
Eccles. 7.16. Therefore run to the Name of the Lord as thy strong Tower, and
follow that which is Good: but withal take Solomon's Counsel, Prove. 27.12. A
prudent man foreseeth the Evil, and hides himself. If God shut thee up in
Streights, so as there is no escaping; learn what follows my Text, verse. 14,
15. be sure to suffer for Righteousness sake: and then be not afraid of their
Terror, neither be troubled; but sanctify the Lord God in your Hearts.

Brethren, it pleases the Lord still to continue our Fears upon us: the Angel
of God still draws his Sword, and cuts down many; the Sword of the Enemy is
held over our head, and we know not but that an overflowing Stream of Blood may
reach even to us. No marvel, while the Fogs of Sin are in our Consciences, if
an Earthquake of Trembling is in our Hearts. It is a sign that we are not
Followers of that which is Good, because God raises up against us so many
Evils.

It is time then that we should turn unto him that smites us, and that we
should seek the Lord of Hoasts; that, while we go against our Enemies, we
should keep our selves from every Evil thing; lest the Anger of God be not
turned away, but his hand be stretched out still. Could we cease to do evil,
and learn to do well, we need not fear either God's Rod, or Men's Rage. Till
then, we can expect no withdrawing of either. Oh then be so wise as to avoid
Sin, if you would prevent Harm. Arm your selves with all the Armor of God,
above all the Shield of Faith, that God may be your Sun and Shield. Amen.

LAVS DEO.
THE WAY OF LIFE DISCOVERED. Part I.
The Twenty-first SERMON.
PSALM. xvi. 11. Thou will show me the Path of life. In thy Presence is fullness
of Joy, at thy right hand there are Pleasures for evermore.


THESE words are the Close of a Psalm, which is thus entitled, Michtam of
David, that is, A golden Psalm of David, or David's Jewel, or notable Song.
Cethem is fine glittering Gold; from whence this word Michtam may be derived,
for a golden Jewel, and so note the Excellency of this Psalm. The like Title is
before other Psalms, viz. 56.57.58.59.60. Nor is the Title unfit for the
Matter, or unbeseeming the Author. The Matter being most precious, containing
that Gold tried in the fire, which Christ gives, and with it enricheth his
Church to all Eternity; that Aurum potabile that cures and preserves Life for
ever. Congruous to David's Spirit, who was a man of much Acquaintance with God,
and of Heavenly Meditations.

But that may be demanded concerning this Psalm, which the Eunuch asked of
Philip, Act. 8.34. Of whom speaks the Prophet this? of himself, or of some
other man? There are that conceive this Psalm wholly meant of Christ, and not
of David: others, that part is meant of Christ only, and not of David: others,
that all is meant of both: others, that part is meant of David only, and not
of Christ at all. I will not interpose in this matter.

It is sufficient for my present purpose, that S. Paul, Act. 13.35, 36, 37.
makes the tenth verse of this Psalm proper to Christ; and S. Peter, Act. 2.25,
26, 27, 28. makes the four last verses thereof to be a Prediction of Christ's
Resurrection, not applicable to David, who saw Corruption, as his Sepulcher
then remaining witnessed. Now of those my Text is cited as a part; and
therefore it may be safely interpreted as the Speech of Christ in an Address to
God his Father, in which he opened his very Heart, declaring the Reason why he
was not moved by that Tempest and terrible Storm of Evils that he was to feel;
how he was kept from sinking, notwithstanding those Floods and Waves that were
to go over his head; why he despaired not in that great Earthquake, that threw
the Temple of his Body to the ground: to wit, Because he set the Lord, or
foresaw the Lord, always before him, or before his face; that he was at or on
his right hand, that he should not be moved: Therefore did his Heart rejoice,
and his Glory, or Tongue, was glad; his Flesh should rest, or dwell
confidently, in hope: he being by Faith assured, that his Father would not
leave his Soul in Hell, in the place or state of the Dead, though he descended
into it, nor suffer, or give, his Holy one (so dear to him) to see Corruption;
but had made known to him the ways of Life, or would show to him the path of
Life, in raising him up to Life; and that he would make him full of Joy with
his Countenance, as S. Peter reads it, or, as it is in our Version, (according
to the Hebrew,) that in his presence was fullness of Joy, at his right hand
there were Pleasures for evermore. Word for word, it may be rendered, Thou will
make me know the way of Life, Satiety of Joys before thy face, Pleasures at thy
right hand to perpetuity. In which sense the words are to the same effect with
what the Author to the Hebrews speaks, (12.2.) Looking to Jesus, the Author
and Finisher of our Faith, who, for the Joy that was set before him, endured
the Cross, despising the Shame, and is set down at the right hand of the Throne
of God.

And thus secondarily these words might be David's, and every Holy Believer's,
in a qualified sense, as being assured of Restitution from Hell, of freedom
from Corruption of their Flesh, of finding the Path of Life, of Satiety of Joy
with God, and Perpetuity of Pleasures at his right hand, in like manner as
Christ found in his Refurrection; they being quickened together with him,
raised up together, and made to sit together in Heavenly places in Christ
Jesus, Ephesians. 2.5, 6. and thereby animated, under all Persecutions and
Sufferings, to persist in their Adherence to their God unmovably, as being
assured of Christ's Resurrection, and thereby of their own; of his being in
Fullness of Joys in God's presence, and so of their own being; of his being at
the right hand of God with Pleasures which endure for ever, and consequently
that it shall be so with them. Of which we have a most admirable Example in
Holy Job, who, though under extreme Pains of Body and Anguish of Spirit, yet
thus expresses himself, Job 19.23, 24, 25, 26, 27. Oh that my words were now
written, Oh that they were printed in a Book; that they were graven with an
iron Pen and Lead in the Rock for ever. For I know that my Redeemer lives, and
that he shall stand at the latter day upon the Earth. And though after my Skin,
Worms destroy this Body; yet in my Flesh shall I see God: Whom I shall see for
my self, and mine Eyes shall behold, and not another; though my Reins be
consumed within me. And thus jointly of the Head and Members, Christ and every
Believer, is my Text verified, and rightly understood; and accordingly I shall
apply it.

Therein is declared the Assurance which Christ had, and every Believer
(together with him, and by reason of his Union with him) has of three things.

1. That God will show them the Path of Life. 2. That in his Presence there
remains to them the Fullness of Joys. 3. That at his right hand they shall have
Pleasures for evermore.
Of these in their order, with what Utterance the Almighty shall vouchsafe me:
though the Argument be such, as neither the Minds of Men or Angels can
comprehend, nor their Tongues express.

I. OBSERVATION.
That Christ and Believers are assured of having the Path of Life made known to
them.

For the distinct handling hereof, we are to consider, 1. What Life it is, the
Path of which both are assured of having made known to them. 2. What is the
Path of this Life, or what are the Ways of this Life. 3. How God has and will
make them known, or show them. 4. Why he did assure Christ, and why he does
assure Believers thereof.


I. What Life it is, the Path of which they are assured shall be made known to
them.

Life is the manner of Living things existing, and is the Excellency of their
Beings, whereby things animate differ from things inanimate. Of Life there are
sundry degrees or kinds made by Philosophers. 1. Vegetative, in Plants, and
things which being rooted in the Earth suck their Nourishment from it, and so
grow thereby, and yield Fruit, and Seed to propagate their Kind. 2. Sensitive,
in those living things that move and have Sense more or less, though they
perceive only such things as concern their Sustenance and Self-preservation;
but can neither discern Spiritualls or Universalls, nor reflect on their own
Actions, nor discourse as Man: though some of them have admirable Sagacity, as
Experience has showed in Elephants and diverse other Animals. 3. Rational, in
a Man, whereby he is enabled not only to know what concerns his Food and
Necessaries to uphold his Corporal Being; but is also capable of Counsel and
Instruction in things pertaining to his Obedience to his Creator, and Peace
with him, and Comfort in his well-doing. 4. There is yet an higher Life, to
wit, that of Angels, who need no Food to sustain their Being, nor Members to
move them, but are of a subtle, active and intelligent Nature; yet much short
of the Father of Spirits, with whom is the Fountain of Life, (as it is said
Psalm. 36.9.) who has all Fullness of Life in him, not capable either of
diminution or privation; and is the universal Cause of all Life in other
Beings, which he imparts to all living things in that way and measure as he
thinks best to appertain to them.

Now the Life of Men or Angels may note the bare Duration or Existence of their
Being: and so the Devils live, and the Souls of the Damned have Life; and the
uncleanest Sodomites, while they walk up and down on Earth, have Life, though
in a moral sense they are dead while alive: they have also in some things a
been esse, or well-being, to wit, in respect of such things as pertain to
Nature, or outward Condition among men; as Abraham said to the Rich man in
Hell, Son, remember that thou in thy lifetime receivedst thy good things, Luke
16.25.

But this is not the Life, the Path, which Christ and his Members assure
themselves God would make known to them; though it be not excluded: for
doubtless David assured himself, and therein rejoiced, that God would uphold
his Soul in Life, deliver his Soul from Death, his Eyes from Tears, and his
Feet from Falling; that he should walk before the Lord in the Land of the
living: as he speaks Psalm. 116.8, 9. And Christ understood by the Life which he
expected from his Father, that he would bring his Soul and Body together again,
and restore that Life he lost by Death. And the Saints believe and expect the
Resurrection of their Bodies from the Grave: and in the expectation and
assurance hereof, they endure the greatest Tortures that Tyrants can inflict on
them: as it is said Heb. 11.35. Women received their dead raised to life again;
and others were tortured, not accepting Deliverance, that they might obtain a
better Resurrection.

But this Resurrection to Life is not the mere Conjunction of Soul and Body
together; for that may be only the Resurrection of Damnation, (as our Savior
speaks Joh. 5.29.) which befalls them that have done Evil, and is there opposed
to the Resurrection of Life, which they only that have done Good shall be
partakers of. The Resurrection of Damnation, though it be with Restitution of
the Being those Wretches had before they died, so as that they shall come out
of the Graves, hear the voice of the Son of man, and in a sort live, stand
before the Tribunal of Christ, and hear their Sentence, and so continue in
their Being everlastingly; yet it is not termed Life, but Death, or the Second
Death, it being to a Copartnership with the Devil and his Angels, with whom
they are sentenced to be in Torments, as they were guided and ruled by them
while they conversed with men on Earth.

But the Life which the Scripture vouchsafes to term Life indeed, as being the
only Vita vitalis, the lively Life, is that which is with God, and according
to God, termed therefore the Life of God, Ephesians. 4.18. God being their God,
therefore they live to God, who is the God of the living; as our Savior's
expression is, Luke 20.38. they live and reign with Christ, as it is Revel.
20.4. It is an holy and happy Life, and therefore simply termed Life by way of
excellency, in opposition to Hellfire, Mark 9.45. If thy Foot offend thee, cut
it off: it is better for thee to enter into Life halting, then having two feet,
to be cast into Hell, into the sire that never shall be quenched. Verse. 47. it
is termed the Kingdom of God; And if thine Eye offend thee, pluck it out: it is
better for thee to enter into the Kingdom of God with one Eye, then having two
Eyes, to be cast into Hellfire. It is by our Savior often called Eternal
Life, of which the Regenerate Believers have the beginning here, they have it
inchoate, with a Right to it. Verily, verily, I say unto you, (says our
Savior, Joh. 5.24.) He that hears my word, and believes on him that sent
me, has everlasting Life, and shall not come into Condemnation, but is passed
from Death to Life. 1 John 3.14. We know that we have passed from Death to
Life, because we love the Brethren: he that loves not his Brother, abides in
Death. 1 John 5.11, 12. And this is the record, that God has given to us
eternal Life: and this Life is in his Son. He that has the Son, has Life: and
he that has not the Son of God, has not Life. Joh. 3.36. He that believes on
the Son, has everlasting Life: and he that believes not the Son, shall not
see Life, but the wrath of God abides on him. But Jus in re, or the
Consummation and full Possession of this Life, is after the Resurrection, in
the World to come: which therefore Christ by way of Excellency terms eternal
Life, Mark 10.30.

And this is that Life, in the assurance whereof Christ laid down his Life with
so much quietness, when he commended his Spirit into the hands of his Father,
Luke 23.46. And upon the promise of Life which is in Christ Jesus, 2 Timothy 1.1.
not only of the Life that now is, but also of that which is to come, 1 Timothy
4.8. S. Paul did both labor and suffer Reproach, verse. 10. In hope of this
eternal Life, Tit. 1.2. he exposed himself to daily danger of Death, which he
terms dying daily, 1 Cor. 15.31. as being sensible, (as he says verse. 19.) if
in this life only he and other Christians had hope in Christ, they were of all
men most miserable.

Now in hope and assurance of this Life Christ (duram serviit Servitutem)
underwent the hardest Service that ever was undertaken; he emptied himself,
took upon him the form of a Servant, was made in the likeness of Men, and being
found in fashion as a Man, he humbled himself, and became obedient unto Death,
even the death of the Cross, Phil. 2.7, 8. Though the Cup he was to drink of
were a very bitter Cup, a Cup of deadly Wine, such as had in it the Dregs of
God's Anger, and was mingled with the Sins of men, (for whom God made him Sin,
or a Sacrifice for Sin;) yet he drank it off, yielding to his Father's Will, as
knowing it to be true which he himself taught the two Disciples, that Christ
must suffer these things, and rise from the dead the third day, and so enter
into his Glory, Luke 24.26, 46.

And the Promise of this Life animated all the Holy Apostles, Martyrs and
Saints, in their several Generations, to give all diligence, to deny
themselves, to take up their Cross, and so to follow Christ even to Death, not
counting their own Lives dear to them, but being zealous to do and suffer for
Christ, though with the Loss of all; as having learned, that whosoever will
save his Life shall lose it, and whosoever will lose his Life for Christ's sake
shall find it, Matthew. 16.25. What things were gain to me, says S. Paul, (
Phil. 3.7, 8, 9, 10, 11.) those I have counted Loss for Christ. Yea doubtless,
and I do count all things but Loss, for the excellency of the Knowledge of
Christ Jesus our Lord, for whom I have suffered the Loss of all things, and do
count them but dung, that I may win Christ, and be found in him; that I may
know him, and the power of his Resurrection, and the fellowship of his
Sufferings, being made conformable unto his Death; if by any means I might
attain unto the Resurrection of the dead. Which occasions them to seek the Path
of this Life, which is the next thing enquired into, and is now to be
considered.

II. What is the Path, or what the Ways of this Life.

The Ways or Path of Life is a Metaphor taken from Travelers, who have a
certain Track in which they are to tread, and by going in which they are guided
to the place to which their Journey tends, and by its direction are ascertained
of coming thither, if they hold on their Motion. Here in this passage it can be
taken for no other then the Means of assurance of their attaining this Life.
Which in respect of Christ are,

1. On God's part, the Engagement of his Father to him, Isa. 53.10, 11. that
when he should make his Soul an Offering for Sin, he should see his Seed, he
should prolong his days, and the pleasure of the Lord should prosper in his
hand: He should see of the travail of his Soul, and be satisfied. Christ
undertook the great Business of doing his Father's Will, which was written in
the volume of his Book, by offering that Body which his Father had prepared
him, upon a Contract between them when he came into the world; as it is
described Heb. 10.5, 7, 8. And this was, that he should so lay down his Life,
as to take it up again; as Christ himself declares, Joh. 10.18. I have power
to lay down my Life, and to take it up again: this Commandment have I received
of my Father. Which thing made it impossible that he should be holden of the
pains of death, Act. 2.24. And therefore it is said, He foresaw the Lord always
before his face, as being on his right hand, that he should not be moved with
the fear of Death, verse. 25. being firmly assured by his Father's Covenant,
(upon which he put himself on that great Expedition of Coming into the world to
save Sinners, by the offering of himself,) that he should not lose by his
Adventure, but should after his Sufferings enter into his Glory. To which is to
be adjoined the Love that his Father bare to him for this reason, as he
expresses it Joh. 10.15, 17, 18. As the Father knows me, even so I know the
Father; and I lay down my Life for the Sheep. Therefore does my Father love me,
because I lay down my Life, that I might take it up again. No man takes it
from me, but I lay it down of my self. This unparalled Dutifulness of Christ
to his Father, in yielding so freely to his Self-exinanition and Humiliation
unto Death, did obtain a singular Love from his Father to him, and engage his
Truth and Power to revive and superexalt him.

2. On Christ's part, his ready Obedience to his Father's Will was the Path to
Life: which therefore he allegeth in that Prayer of his wherein he opened his
Bosom to his Father, Joh. 17.4, 5. I have glorified thee on Earth, I have
finished the Work thou gave me to do: And now, O Father, glorify thou me
with thine own self, with the Glory which I had with thee before the World was.

In respect of Believers, the Path of Life to them is,

1. On God's part, the free Love of God in choosing them to Life; termed the
writing their Names in the Book of Life from the foundation of the world, Rev.
17.8. which (because they are given to Christ) is said to be the Lamb's Book of
life, Rev. 21.27. and our Savior tells them, their names are written in
Heaven, Luke 10.20. Hereby is Christ engaged to give Life to them, as he
himself testifies, Joh. 6.39. And this is the Father's will which has sent
me, that of all which he has given me, I should lose nothing, but should raise
it up again at the last day. And accordingly he says, Joh. 17.2. As thou have
given him power over all flesh, that he should give eternal Life to as many as
thou have given him. Hereby it is that Christ is become the Path of Life to
them; as at several times he declares. Joh. 14.6. Jesus says unto Thomas, I am
the Way, the Truth, and the Life: no man comes to the Father but by me. Joh.
11.25. Jesus said unto Martha, I am the Resurrection and the Life.

And indeed Christ is the Way of Life,

1. As he is the Exemplary Cause of it. All whom his Father has foreknown,
being predestined to be conformed to the Image of his Son, that he might be
the firstborn among many Brethren, Romans 8.29. Wherefore Christ told his
Disciples, Joh. 14.19. Because I live, ye shall live also. The Life of Christ,
which he recovered by his Resurrection, is the efficacious Pattern or Copy
according to which God has contrived our Life. He is risen from the dead, and
become the first fruits of them that sleep. For since by Man came Death, by Man
came also the Resurrection of the dead. For as in Adam all die, even so in
Christ shall all be made alive, 1 Cor. 15.20, 21, 22.

Hence the Apostle tells us, Col. 3.3. that we are dead, and our Life is hid
with Christ in God; it is deposited as a Treasure in Christ's hand, who is the
Trustee, to whom our Life is conveyed ad opus and usum nostrum, for our use and
behoof, (as the Lawyers use to speak:) he has Livery and Seisin given of Life
on our behalf, and so his Life is the Pledge and Path of our Life.

2. As Christ is the Way of our Life as he is our Pattern, Depositary and
Pledge; so is he the Way of our Life as the procuring Cause thereof: He is the
Prince of Life, Act. 3.15. the Cause or Author of eternal Salvation, Heb.
5.9. and that many ways.

First, by his Preaching: which moved S. Peter to say, Lord, to whom shall we
go? thou have the words of eternal Life, Joh. 6.68. The words, says Christ,
that I speak unto you, they are Spirit, and they are Life, verse. 63. The
Preaching of the Law was but the Ministration of Death, of the Letter, that
killed, 2 Cor. 3.6, 7. but the word of the Gospel is the word of Life, Phil.
2.16.

Secondly, by his Death: for so he tells us Joh. 6.51. I am the living Bread,
which came down from Heaven: if any man eat of this Bread, he shall live for
ever: and the Bread which I will give is my Flesh, which I will give for the
Life of the world. And indeed it was for this very cause, that, as the Children
were partakers of flesh and blood, so he also took part of the same; that by
Death he might destroy him that had the power of Death, to wit, the Devil; and
deliver them that through fear of Death were all their Life subject to bondage,
Heb. 2.14, 15. As by the Offense of one, Judgment came upon all men to
Condemnation: even so by the Righteousness of one, (better rendered, by one
Righteous deed, to wit, his Obedience unto Death,) the free Gift came upon all
men unto Sanctification of life. That as Sin has reigned unto Death; so might
Grace reign through Righteousness unto eternal Life, by Jesus Christ our Lord,
as the Apostle says, Romans 5.18, 21. His Death procures our Life, both
removendo Prohibens, by taking away the Sting of Death, Sin, disarming Satan of
his Power; and by meritoriously purchasing our Life, by paying a Price for us.

Thirdly, by his Resurrection, whereby he becomes as the First Fruits, that
sanctifies the rest of the Lump, and so obtains Resurrection and Life for those
that are Christ's. As also he is empowered to give Life upon his Resurrection;
as himself says, All Power is given to me in Heaven and in Earth, Matthew.
28.18. As the Father raises up the dead, and quickens them; even so the Son
quickens whom he will, Joh. 5.21. Hereupon the Apostle argues thus, Romans
5.10. For if when we were Enemies, we were reconciled to God by the Death of
his Son; much more being reconciled, we shall be saved by his Life.

Fourthly, by his Ascension, whereby he is become an High Priest, not on Earth,
but such as is set down on the right hand of the Throne of the Majesty in the
Heavens, Heb. 8.1. He is not as the Priests of the Law, who were not suffered
to continue by reason of death; but continues for ever, and has an
unchangeable Priesthood, or a Priesthood that passes not from one to another,
being made, not after the Law of a carnal Commandment, but after the power of
an endless or indissoluble Life: and therefore he is able to save them to the
uttermost, or evermore, that come unto God by him; seeing he ever lives to
make Intercession for them, Heb. 7.16, 23, 24, 25.

Fifthly, He is the Prince of Life, or Cause of our Life, by shedding forth his
Spirit after his being glorified, which was as Rivers of living water, as his
own words import, Joh. 7.38, 39. This Gift of the Spirit of Christ is that
whereby we are born again to a Spiritual Life. That which is born of the Spirit
is Spirit, says Christ, Joh. 3.6. It is the Spirit that quickens, the Flesh
profits nothing, Joh. 6.63. Neither indeed had Christ's Preaching or his
Dying availed to bring us to Life, had he not given us of his Spirit. And
therefore herein was the Prerogative of the Gospel above the Law, that whereas
that gave the Command, but could not give the Spirit, being a dead Letter; by
the Ministration of the Spirit (or the Law of the Spirit of life, Romans 8.2.)
Christians are made alive, 2 Cor. 3.6. The Gospel is become the Ministration of
Righteousness, verse. 9. If Christ be in you, the body is dead, because of Sin;
but the Spirit is Life, because of Righteousness. But if the Spirit of him that
raised up Christ from the dead dwell in you, he that raised up Christ from the
dead shall also quicken your mortal bodies by his Spirit that dwells in you,
Romans 8.10, 11.

Sixthly, Christ's Appearing shall consummate the Life of a Believer. Though he
now be dead in Appearance to the World, to their Rites, Practices, Hopes,
Enjoyments, and his Life is now only hid with Christ in God; yet when Christ,
who is his Life, shall appear, then shall he also appear with him in Glory: as
the Apostle speaks most comfortably, Col. 3.3, 4.

2. On our part, the Path of Life is,

1. In our Union to Christ, which is by Faith, whereby he is our Head, and we
are his Members, and therefore partakers of his Life. I live, (says the
Apostle, Gal. 2.20.) yet not I, but Christ lives in me: and the Life that I
now live in the flesh, I live by the Faith of the Son of God, who loved me, and
gave himself for me. Joh. 11.25, 26. He that believes on me, although he were
dead, yet shall he live: and whosoever lives, and believes in me, shall never
die. The Life of a Christian is conjoined with Christ's, as that of a Child
with the Mother's.

2. In our Conformity to Christ: 1. In Dying with him, and that, First, to the
World. If ye be dead with Christ from the Rudiments of the World, why, as
though living in the world, are ye subject to Ordinances? Col. 2.20. God forbid
that I should glory save in the Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, whereby the
World is crucified to me, and I unto the World, Gal. 6.14. Secondly, to Sin.
Romans 6.6, 7, 8. Knowing this, that our Old man is crucified with him, that the
body of Sin might be destroyed, that henceforth we should not serve Sin. For he
that is dead is freed from Sin. Now if we be dead with Christ, we believe that
we shall live with him. Thirdly, by Suffering with him. It is a faithful
saying, If we be dead with him, we shall also live with him; if we suffer, we
shall also reign with him, 2 Timothy 2.11, 12. If so be we suffer with him, that
we may be also glorified together, Romans 8.17. 2. In his Resurrection: and that,
First, by walking in Newness of Life. Like as Christ was raised from the dead
by the Glory of his Father; even so we also should walk in Newness of Life; and
thereby be planted together in the likeness of his Resurrection, Romans 6.4, 5.
Secondly, by living to God. As Christ, in that he lives, lives unto God: so
those that have put on Christ, reckon themselves to be dead indeed unto Sin,
but alive unto God through Jesus Christ our Lord: they yield themselves to God,
as those that are alive from the dead; and their Members as instruments of
Righteousness unto God, Romans 6.10, 11, 13. Thirdly, in seeking the things above
as their Treasure: as the Apostle inferrs, Col. 3.1, 2. If ye be risen with
Christ, seek those things which are above, where Christ sits at the right
hand of God. Set your Affections on things above, not on things on the Earth. I
have insisted the longer on this Point, (of the Path of Life,) because it is
the main thing that concerns us to know.

III. How God makes known or shows this Path of Life to them.

This Question is not hard to be resolved from that which has been already
said. God showed Christ the Path of Life, 1. By his Promise to him, mentioned
before, at his coming into the world: 2. By his Providence; he make it known
experimentally to him, when he was raised from the dead by the Glory of the
Father.

To us he makes known the Ways of Life, 1. By his Son's Appearing, and his
Gospel, who has abolished Death, and has brought Life and Immortality to
life, through the Gospel, 2 Timothy 1.10. 2. By his Spirit which he gives,
whereby we are assured, that through it, mortifying the deeds of the Body, we
shall live, Romans 8.13. We have received the Spirit which is of God, that we
might know the things that are freely given us of God, 1 Cor. 2.12.

IV. Why God does show them this Path of Life.

The Reason of God's making known the Way of Life to Christ and to us is one
and the same; That as thereby Christ was to be strengthened in all his
Temptations, in all his Sufferings, animated in all his Obedience to his
Father's Will, by having an eye to the Life which was propounded to him: so
should all the Disciples of Christ be confirmed in all their Sufferings,
encouraged in all their Actings for Christ, by their Assurance of Life with
Christ; that they may live by Faith, and not be of them who draw back unto
Perdition, but of them that believe to the saving of the Soul, Heb. 10.38, 39.
That, with Moses, they may choose rather to suffer Afflictions with the people
of God, then to enjoy the pleasures of Sin for a season: esteeming the Reproach
of Christ greater Riches then the Treasures in Egypt, as having respect unto
the recompense of the Reward, Heb. 11.25, 26. Wherefore Christ assures
Believers, in his Epistle to the Church of Ephesus, Rev. 2.7. To him that
overcomes will I give to eat of the Tree of Life, which is in the midst of the
Paradise of God. To the Church of Smyrna, verse. 10, 11. Be thou faithful unto
death, and I will give thee a Crown of Life: He that overcomes shall not be
hurt of the second Death. To the Church of Sardis, Rev. 3.5. He that
overcomes, I will not blot his name out of the Book of Life.

APPLICATION.
I may say now with Moses, Deuteronomy. 30.15, 19. See, I have set before you this day
Life and Good, Death and Evil. Choose therefore Life, and take hold of the
Paths of it. Life is a thing naturally desired. It is true, in extreme Anguish,
men choose Strangling rather then Life. In his Fits of sore Pain, Job was in
such a mood, as to desire Death most earnestly, and to abhor Life. Yet simply,
every living thing would fain live, it struggles and strives what it can to
keep Life: men spare no cost to continue it, though it be but for a while, and
that not without a mixture of Sorrow and Trouble, to which the best Life on
Earth is obnoxious. Life, we say, is sweet: nor is the Devil taken for a Liar
in this, when he says, Skin for Skin, and all that a man has will he give for
his Life, Job 2.4. But, alas! this Life is too much prized; and that is the
reason why a greater Death is consequent upon the immoderate affecting of it:
because they would still live here, many die for ever in Hell.

That Life, the Way of which was showed to Christ, and now to you, is indeed
worthy your knowing, worthy your embracing and pursuing. It is a holy Life, a
happy Life, a safe Life, an eternal Life. If you live in Christ, you shall
live with Christ: if you live in the Spirit, you shall be quickened by the
Spirit: if you live the Life of God, you shall live in his Presence. In a word,
if you walk in the Paths of Life, which I have this day showed you, you shall
live, not the Life of Men only, but of holy Angels; you shall live a Life as
far beyond the Life of Kings, as Heaven is above the Earth. The Life of the
best and happiest Kings has been attended with much Care and many Dangers: nor
is any Prince's Lifetime so splendid, but that the Day is sometimes darkened
over him, and Storms beat on him, and perhaps his Sun sets in a Cloud. It Is
otherwise to be conceived of this Life; when once attained, it is never
darkened, never eclipsed, never ended.

Oh that you would then learn to die with Christ, to Sin, to the World; to live
by the Faith of the Son of God; to be conformed to him, by putting on the same
mind that was in Christ; to live to God; to do, not your own will, but the
will of your Father which is in Heaven; to commit your Souls in well-doing,
when you suffer for him, as to a faithful Creator. Is the Loss of Credit,
Goods, Peace, Liberty, Life, terrible to you? Why, the Life propounded to you
will sweeten all. Death it self (though the King of Terrors) is to them that
are in Christ as a Serpent without a Sting, which you may handle without
Danger, without Fear: it will but (as the Poets feign of Medea's Medicaments)
let out your old Blood, and beget new Life.

When I consider the voluptuous and worldly Life of most, it pities me to
think, that Men, made to live like Angels, should choose to live more Pecudum, a
Life not higher then the Life of Beasts: that those who are made for God, for
Christ, for Heaven, to live there, should terminate their Thoughts, Affections,
Endeavors, on things on Earth, on Money, gay Clothing, Mirth, Riot, Pomp,
State, Favor of men, Vainglory, and such like momentany things, which must
pass away, and likely lead men to Hell, and end in a Life with Devils.

Oh follow Christ, I beseech you. If you value your Souls, cast them not away
on Trifles. Learn the Path that Christ chose to Life: follow him, and you shall
live with him. Let, I beseech you, the serious Warning of Christ, Matthew. 7.13,
14. take impression on you: Enter ye in at the straight Gate; for wide is the
Gate, and broad is the Way that leads to Destruction, and many there be which
go in thereat. But straight is the Gate, and narrow is the Way which leads
unto Life, and few there be that find it. Let your drowzy spirits heed S.
Paul's monitory Alarm, Ephesians. 5.14. Awake, thou that sleep, and arise from the
dead, and Christ shall give thee Life. Amen.

LAVS DEO.
GOD's PRESENCE, Fullness of Joy. Part II.
The Twenty-second SERMON.
PSALM. xvi. 11. In thy Presence is fullness of Joy, and at thy right hand there
are Pleasures for evermore.


THIS Psalm is a Golden Psalm of David, and the words which I have read to you
make the Close of it: which whether they are meant of Christ, or of David, or
both, and so are applicable to Christ and his Members, has been formerly
considered. In reference to both the First Proposition in them has been
already handled; and therein the Encouragement which Christ had, and all
Believers have, in their Sufferings, by God's showing them the way of Life,
has (though much short of what so precious an Argument deserved) been somewhat
unfolded to you.

That which is yet farther to be insisted on, is the latter part of the Verse:
in which, I told you, are contained two more Observations.

2. That in God's Presence there is Fullness of Joy, or, Satiety of Joys before
his Face, to Christ and all Believers.

3. That at his right hand they shall have Pleasures for evermore, or,
Pleasures at his right hand to perpetuity.

This latter S. Peter omits in his Citation of this Scripture, Act. 2.25, etc.
Yet it is not improbable but he alludes to it verse. 33. where he uses these
words, Therefore being by the right hand of God exalted: and that the Holy
Ghost intended it for a Prediction of Christ's Ascension and Sitting at the
right hand of God; and so it is applicable both to Christ's Exaltation, and our
sitting together with Christ in heavenly places; of which S. Paul speaks Ephesians.
2.6.

But the former is expressly mentioned, with some little difference in the
Reading, Thou shall fill, replenish or make me full of Joy, or Gladness, with
thy Countenance, Face, or Presence. And it is alleged, as being the Cordial
that strengthened and restored the Spirits of Christ in his Agony at his Death;
which is intimated in that speech of the Author to the Hebrews, (12.2.)
Looking unto Jesus, the Author and Finisher of our Faith, who for the joy that
was set before him endured the Cross, despising the Shame, and is set down at
the right hand of the Throne of God: which shows, that both in the Garden and
on the Cross our Savior had his Eye on the Joy that was set before him, as the
Prop and Basis that did support him in those extreme Passions and heavy
Burdens, which no other Shoulders but his could bear, so as not to sink under
their pressure. And S. Peter tells us, (1 Epist. 1.11.) That the Prophets
searched what or what manner of time the Spirit of Christ which was in them did
signify, when it testified beforehand the Sufferings of Christ, and the Glory
that should follow, or the Glories after them. Which shows that the Prophets
did testify beforehand, together with the Sufferings of Christ, the Glories
after them: which no doubt was done in Isa. 53. Psalm. 22. and in many other
places: of which number I question not but these words of my Text are, by S.
Peter's alleging them Act. 2.28.

My II. OBSERVATION I shall consider in these Four Propositions.
1. That there are Joys in God's Presence, or, with his Face, or Countenance.
2. That there is a Fullness in these Joys. 3. That these Joys in their
Plenitude, or Fullness, belong to Christ, and those who believe on him to
eternal Life. 4. That the Assurance and Expectation of these Joys was the grand
Encouragement and Support of Christ in his Obedience active and passive, and is
so still to all the Holy Saints, who do and suffer according to the Will of
God.
I. PROPOSITION.
That there are Joys in God's Presence, or, with his Face, or Countenance.

The same is in other words taught us Psalm. 36.9. For with thee is the Fountain
of Life: in thy Light (that is, in the Light of thy Countenance) we shall see
Light, that is, Joy and Gladness; according as it is explicated Psalm. 97.11.
Light is sown for the Righteous, and Gladness for the Upright in heart. To like
purpose is that passage Psalm. 30.5. In his Favor is Life: Weeping may endure
for a night, or in the evening; but Joy comes in the morning. Though in the
Nightime or Evening, when the black Veil of Death covers their Faces, there
is Sadness and Weeping even to the Righteous; yet Joy comes in the Morning of
the Resurrection, when the Sun of Righteousness shall appear with Healing in
his wings, Mal. 4.2. and they shall see the Face of God.

The better to conceive this, we must consider, 1. What Joy is: 2. What Joys
are in the Presence of God: 3. And from what Cause or Motive they come.

I. What Joy is.

Joy is that Affection of the Soul, whereby it embraces some present or future
Good. For there is a Rejoicing in Hope, (as the Apostle speaks Romans 12.12.)
Abraham rejoiced to see Christ's day; and he saw it, and was glad, Joh. 8.56.
Now of all Affections this is the sweetest to a man's self, as Love is the
sweetest to others. Joy is that which chears the Spirits, enlarges the Heart,
which is shrivelled up and contracted, like a Purse, by Grief and Fear. It
makes the Countenance lightsome, the Feet and other Members lively and nimble;
furthers the Concoction of our Meat, makes our Sleep, which refreshes the
body, sweet to us. And therefore Joy is most suitable to the Will of man, and,
if the Mind be in its right wits, is always desired.

Now Joys are of several sorts, according to the variety of the Objects,
Motives and Means of Rejoicing. There are Objects of Joy within us, and without
us; matters carnal or spiritual, temporal or eternal, present or future; from
faith or sight, hoping or feeling; natural, and acquired; longer or shorter in
duration: which make our Joys either more pure or mixed, greater or lesser,
with great difference in degrees upon variation of Circumstances, different
apprehensions of the Object, and the Good that accrues by it; either
comparatively with the precedent Evil felt or feared, or absolutely, as the
thing is good in it self and its own nature, or in respect of our Interest in
it good to us.

Should I here make a Philosophical discourse of this Affection, and exhibit to
you a Scheme of the several kinds, degrees, properties and effects of this one
Affection, I might spend more then an hour upon this Subject. But I pass to the
next Head.

II. What Joys are in the Presence of God.

Those Joys are the best which spring from the embracing of the best and most
lasting Good, with least Defectiveness, and greatest Latitude. And such are the
Joys that are in the Presence of God, or, with his Face and Countenance. For
therein there is, 1. a perfect Freedom from all Evil; 2. an entire Enjoyment of
all Good in its Purity and Resplendency.

1. The Evils a man is delivered from do much enhaunse his Joys. He that is
delivered from Dangers and Fears does rejoice: and the Joy is the more, if the
Dangers were great and apparent, the Fears of Evil imminent and oppressing;
still more, when the Evils have been felt, and that with much Anguish and long
Continuance. How do men rejoice, when they have overthrown their Adversary in a
Lawsuit, in which if they had been cast, they had been undone in their
Estates? How do men rejoice, when they have overcome their Enemies in Battle,
to whom if they had been Captives, they had been led into Exile from their own
Country? How do Slaves rejoice, when they are redeemed from Turkish Bondage,
and, in stead of rowing in their Galleys, are returned to live with their own
Masters in their own Families? How do Prisoners condemned to the Gallows
rejoice, when the King sends them a Pardon, and they escape the hands of the
Executioner?

These Deliverances do cause much Joy and Exultation in men, and sometimes much
Glorying; though perhaps they be not long free from the Fear and Danger of
their Evils, but, in the Change of Fortune, fall into the same or greater
Mischiess: or if they escape them, yet their Victory, Pardon, or Redemption,
though it bring them Liberty, perhaps reduces them to Poverty and a low estate.
And, which is worst, although they overcome their Adversary on Earth, yet the
Devil their Adversary prevails against them; though they get the Victory
against their other Enemies, yet they are led captive by their own Lusts which
sight against their Souls; though they be without Wounds by a Sword in their
Bodies, yet they have sore Wounds in their Consciences by their Sins; though
they be pardoned by the King, yet they are condemned by the King of Kings;
though they are redeemed from Turks, yet not from Hell. And sure a Holy heart
that prospers in the one, and not in the other, finds his Joys damped so, as
that he can scarce think those Deliverances worth the rejoicing in.

A Holy heart rejoices indeed with hearty Joy, when he prevails against his
Adversary the Devil and his Temptations; when he is cured of the Wounds of his
Spirit; when he has gotten power over that Body of death that makes him cry
out, O wretched man that I am! who shall deliver me from it? They are the
Desertions of God, the Domineering of his Corruption, the Absence of God's
Spirit, his Decay in Prayer, his Doubts of his Interest in God's Grace, his
Backslidings, Inconstancy in good, and such like Spiritual Evils, that do most
annoy him, eclipse his Joys, beget in him Lipothymies, Fainting fits, cold
Sweats, Trembling of Heart, Fearfulness and Dejection of Spirit. These break
his Bones, envenome his Spirits, make him loathsome to himself, as a man whose
Wounds stink and are corrupt. And therefore there is no Joy to such an one,
till he have the Joy of Salvation from God; till in the multitude of the
thoughts of his Heart, the Comforts of God refresh his Soul; till he finds the
Presence of God accepting him; till he sfinds that God prepares his Heart to
Prayer, and then inclines his Ear to hear; till God speaks Peace to him,
sprinkles the Blood of Christ on his Conscience, and frees him from his Fear of
God's Wrath and Condemnation; till there be a Messenger, an Interpreter, one
among a thousand, to show unto him his Righteousness; till God be gracious unto
him, and says, Deliver him from going down to the Pit, I have found a ransom;
till he pray unto God, and he be favorable unto him, and he see his Face with
Joy: as Elihu speaks, Job 33.23, 24, 26. He is not till then free from Anguish
of Spirit and Anxiety of Soul.

In the day of my Trouble, says Asaph, ( Psalm. 77.2, 3, 7, 8, 9.) I sought the
Lord: my Sore ran in the night, and ceased not; my Soul refused to be
comforted. I remembered God, and was troubled: I complained, and my Spirit was
overwhelmed. Will the Lord cast off for ever? and will he be favorable no
more? Is his Mercy clean gone for ever? does his Promise fail for evermore?
Has God forgotten to be gracious? has he in anger shut up his tender Mercies?
Thus mournfully also speaks Heman the Ezrahite, Psalm. 88.3, 6, 7. My Soul is
full of Troubles, and my life draws nigh unto the Grave. Thou have laid me in
the lowest Pit, in darkness, in the deeps. Thy Wrath lies hard upon me, and
thou have afflicted me with all thy waves. And then expostulates, verse. 14,
etc. Lord, why castest thou off my Soul? why hidest thou thy face from me? I am
afflicted, and ready to die: while I suffer thy Terrors, I am distracted. Thy
fierce Wrath goes over me, thy Terrors have cut me off. They come round about
me daily like water, they compassed me about together.

Such Complaints are frequent in the Psalms, Job, and Hezekiah's Song. In the
Penitentials of Holy men, (in the Relation of the Lives of Godly persons of
tender Consciences, Men and Women, of former and later days,) we meet with such
Apprehensions of their Sins, dangers of Temptations, want of God's Spirit,
hiding of his Face, as benight their Souls, take away their Joys, fill them
with Pensiveness, Horror, and Fear of Divine Vengeance, of Hell-sire, of
Apparitions of Devils, that they can neither feed pleasantly in the day, nor
rest quietly in the night, but look ghastly with dejected Countenances, and go
mourning, in the bitterness of their Spirit, all their days.

But when these Clouds are seattered, this Darkness taken away, so as that they
can say with that Martyr, He is come, He is come; [ Glover, in Queen Mary's
days, burnt at Coventry;] when they can discern the Light of God's Countenance
shining upon them, can see him reconciled in Christ, can hear the voice of
Christ speaking to them, Son, be of good cheer, thy Sins are forgiven thee;
when they find the Spirit enabling them to pour out their Souls before the
Lord; when their Souls can send this Challenge to the Gates of Hell, Who shall
lay any thing to the charge of God's Elect? it is God that justifies. Who
shall condemn? it is Christ that died, or rather is risen again, who also
sits at the right hand of God, making Intercession for us. Who shall
separate us from the Love of God? Then there is rejoicing indeed, then they
rejoice with Joy unspeakable and full of glory, 1 Pet. 1.8. Though they be in
much Affliction, they can sing in the Fire, and clap their hands at the Stake;
in a poor Cottage, in a Prison, they can be as merry as if they were in a
stately Palace: for then they are delivered from their greatest Enemies, and
their greatest Fears.

Now the Joys that are in the Presence of God are for Deliverance from these
Evils, from all of them, bodily and spiritual; from unrighteous Sentences of
men, violent Captivity, forcible restraint of Liberty, Sickness, Losses,
Sorrows, Death; and, which is more, from all Corruptions within, Temptations to
Sin from without, from the Malice of men, the Power of Satan, the Hiding of
God's Countenance, the Absence of his Spirit, the Fear of Hell. They that are
with God, in his Presence, do as the Children of Israel did, when they saw the
Egyptians dead on the Seashore, they triumphantly glory in their Deliverance:
they sing as it were a new Song before the Throne: they sing the Song of Moses
and of the Lamb, with the Harps of God, saying, Great and mavelous are thy
works, Lord God Almighty; just and true are thy Ways, thou King of Saints, Rev.
15. v. 3. There they, with the greatest glorying and magnanimity of Spirit,
take up the speech of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 15.55, 56, 57. O Death, where is thy
Sting? O Grave, where is thy Victory? The Sting of Death is Sin, and the
Strength of Sin is the Law. But thanks be to God, that gives us the Victory,
through our Lord Jesus Christ.

2. The Joys that Believers have in God's Presence are not only because of
Freedom from all the Evils which in their lifetime did annoy them, but also by
reason of the entire enjoyment of all Good in its Purity and Resplendency. Many
things there are which men rejoice in on Earth: and if but in one single
Excellency they find themselves go beyond others, how do they glory in it, as
if others were not to be named the same day with them? Some rejoice in their
Descent and Parentage; as Pharaoh, I am the son of the wise, the son of ancient
Kings, Isa. 19.11. Some in their Beauty; as Absalom, that gloried in his
unblemished Body and goodly Head of hair. Some in their Wisdom and Skill,
their Riches and Prosperity; as the King of Tyrus, that had his Heart lifted
up, and said, I am a God, I sit in the Seat of God, in the midst of the Seas.
Behold, thou art wiser then Daniel; there is no Secret that they can hide from
thee. With thy Wisdom and with thy Understanding thou have gotten thee Riches,
and have gotten Gold and Silver into thy Treasures; and thine Heart is lifted
up because of thy Riches, Ezekiel. 28.2, 3, 4, 5. Some in their Honors; as Haman
did in King Ahasuerus his promoting him, Esther 5.11. Some in their
Righteousness; as the Pharisee that boasted he was not as other men are, nor as
the Publican, Luke 18.11. Yea, some can rejoice in their unsociable, Cynical,
sour, austere Deportment, though it be but a Delusion, if they conceive
Holiness in it; as Monks, Anchorets, Quakers, and such like, have done, and do
at this day.

All these, and many more things, the Hearts of men can rejoice in, though they
be some of them but vain things, some but petty good things; yea, if they were
enjoyed in their Confluence, as Solomon enjoyed them, (who had Wealth, and
Wisdom, and Beauty, and Dominion, and whatever the carnal Heart of man
affects; and yet, after his ample experience of the Sweetness of them, gives
this account of them, Eccles. 1.2. Vanity of Vanities, all is Vanity, yea
Vexation of Spirit) they produce but a forced Mirth, Sardonium Risum,
notwithstanding which, in the midst of Laughter the Heart is sorrowful, and
the end of their Mirth is Heaviness. As it was with Belshazzar, Dan. 5.6. He
was in his Royal Palace at Babylon, carousing in gold and silver, with his
Wives and Concubines, praising his Gods; when on a sudden, upon a Hand's
writing on the Wall, the King's Countenance was changed, and his Thoughts
troubled him so, that the Joints of his Loins were loosed, and his Knees smote
one against another.

That which is worth rejoicing at indeed, as begetting a permanent and genuine
Joy, suitable to the Spirit of a man, is his Acquaintance with God, his
Knowledge of him, God's Adopting him to an Inheritance with him, his Relation
to the Son of God, the Habitation of his Blessed Spirit in him, the Holiness of
his Heart, the Beauty that is in the hidden man of the Heart, which is in the
sight of God of great Price; the hearing of his Prayers, the accepting of his
Works, the glorifying of his God, the Love of his Savior. In these things are
the Joys of the Saints. So says S. Paul, We are they that rejoice in Christ
Jesus, and have no confidence in the flesh, Phil. 3.3. God forbid that I should
rejoice in any thing save in the Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, whereby the
World is crucified unto me, and I unto the World, says the same S. Paul, Gal.
6.14. Many there be that say, Who will show us any Good? Lord, lift thou up the
light of thy Countenance upon us. Thou have put Gladness in my heart, more then
in the time that their Corn and their Wine increased, says David, Psalm. 4.6,
7. And again, I have rejoiced in the way of thy Testimonies, as much as in all
Riches, Psalm. 119.14. These things do indeed beget the most solid Joys, which
enlighten the Eyes, and cheer the Heart under many Wants, many Dangers, many
Persecutions, many Expectations of future Evils.

And yet these Joys are eclipsed to the most Holy man. Sometimes by his own
Sins, and the Withdrawing of God's Spirit from him; as the case was with David.
Sometimes by reason of Calamities, and the sinful Practices of his Children;
as it was also with him. Sometimes from his Doubting of his own spiritual
Estate, from the want of such Feeling as once he had of the Efficacy of God's
Grace in his Heart, by the Motions of it to holy Exercises, to Prayer, Praising
God, and heavenly Meditations; in the quieting of his Spirit, by remembrance of
God's Covenant of Grace in Christ, the Love of Christ in giving himself for
him; in the assurance of his Perseverance to the end, and the knowledge of his
Integrity. Yea, Holy persons do often go mourning all their days, charging
themselves with Hypocrisy, with Blasphemy against the Holy Ghost, with
Apostasy, condemning themselves as Reprobates, incapable of Pardon, destitute
of all Grace, and so no better then Firebrarnds of Hell; and this even while
they pray for Pardon, repent of Sin, are of so tender Consciences, that they
fear to sin against God, and would rather die a thousand Deaths then once speak
the least evil of Christ or God.

If none of these Clouds do darken the Joys of Holy men here; yet there are
other things which do, and will certainly, while they are on Earth, much
diminish them. The Sins which they see committed by others are no small
Vexation to Holy men. Just Lot was vexed with the filthy Conversation of the
Wicked: for, dwelling among the Sodomites, in hearing and seeing, he tormented
his righteous Soul from day to day with their unlawful deeds, 2 Pet. 2.7, 8.
The Sufferings of the Saints are no small Affliction to their Fellow Members.
If one Member suffer, all the Members suffer with it; as if one Member be
honored, all the Members rejoice with it, 1 Cor. 12.26. Much more are their
Sins. The incestuous Corinthian's sinful taking his Father's Wife, was matter
of Mourning to the whole Church. So the Schisms in that Church, the Disorders
in their Assemblies, their Yielding to communicate with Idolaters in their
Idolatries, their going to Law one with another before Infidels, and not
composing their Differences between themselves, were matter of Affliction to S.
Paul. I fear, says he, (2 Cor. 12.20, 21.) lest when I come, I shall not find
you such as I would; lest my God will humble me among you, and that I shall
bewail many which have sinned already, and have not repented of the Uncleanness
and Fornication and Lasciviousness which they have committed.

The Ignorance, Unteachableness, Unfruitfulness of his Hearers, much more their
falling away into Errors and scandalous Practices, is no small Grief to a
Godly Pastor; which makes him walk heavily, and complain to God, serving him
with many Tears and Temptations.

Yea, the deferring of a Christian's Hope makes his Heart sick; he is weary
with waiting, so that he cries, Come, Lord Jesus, come quickly. Our selves,
which have the First Fruits of the Spirit, even we our selves groan within our
selves, waiting for the Adoption, to wit, the Redemption of our bodies, Romans
8.23. In this we groan earnestly, desiring to be clothed upon with our house
which is from Heaven. For we that are in this Tabernacle do groan, being
burdened; not for that we would be uncloathed, but clothed upon, that
Mortality might be swallowed up of Life. Being confident, and willing rather to
be absent from the Body, and to be present with the Lord, 2 Cor. 5.2, 4, 8.

But they that are in the Presence of God have all Good. They have the most
high Descent, as being born of God: the most perfect Beauty in Soul, having the
Image of God perfectly restored; and at the Resurrection their Bodies fashioned
like unto the glorious Body of Christ. They become fully Rich, being made Heirs
of God, Joynt-heirs with Christ, Romans 8.17. When they have overcome, they shall
inherit all things: God will be their God, and they shall be his Sons, Rev.
21.7. They have advancement to Honor and Greatness. To him that overcomes,
says our Savior, (Rev. 3.21.) will I grant to sit with me in my Throne; even
as I also overcame, and am set down with my Father in his Throne.

I will not say that the Blessed Saints and Angels that stand in God's Presence
are omniscient: They know not the Secrets of Men's hearts, much less the secret
Counsels of God, whose Ways are unsearchable, and whose Paths past finding out.
That Conceit of some of the Papists, about the (Speculum Trinitatis,) the Glass
of the Trinity, as if by seeing God, they could see all things in him,
(according to that saying of Gregory, Videt omnia qui videt Videntem omnia,) is
most false: though some of them make use of it, to excuse their abominable
Invocation of Saints deceased, whom they absurdly and foolishly pray to for all
sorts of Good things, though they know neither them nor their Necessities, much
less their Hearts. But I may safely say with the Apostle, 1 Cor. 13.9, 10, 12.
Now we know in part, and we prophecy in part. But when that which is perfect
is come, then that which is in part shall be done away. Now we see through a
Glass darkly, or in a Riddle; but then face to face: now I know in part; then
shall I know even as also I am known. The Beatifical Vision of God will perfect
our Holiness and Wisdom so far, as to free us from all Error and Folly, which
now do miserably mislead us; from all Ignorance, which now does sadly perplex
us: it will enlighten us with that Knowledge, which will be sufficient to
glorify our God, and satisfy our selves. As the Light of Heaven exceeds the
Light of the Sun: so the Light of the Soul in those that are with God exceeds
all the Light that was in Adam by Creation; in Moses, S. John, S. Paul, or any
other of the most enlightened Saints on Earth, by Revelation.

In a word, there is no kind of Good, which is meet for a created Being and an
adopted Child of God to have, but it is conferred on those Holy persons that
are in the Presence of God; which makes their Joys unspeakable and full of
Glory. But they are still more sweetened from the consideration of the Fountain
whence they flow: which is next to be considered.

III. What is the Cause and Motive from whence these Good things, these Joys,
do proceed.

And that is the Love and Purpose of God, which is immutable. Ointment and
Perfumes rejoice the Heart: so does the sweetness of a man's Friend by hearty
Counsel, says Solomon, Prove. 27.9. The Love and hearty Welcome that a man
meets with, makes the Feast the more pleasant. Eat not thou the Bread of him
that has an evil Eye, neither desire thou his dainty Meats. For as he thinks
in his heart, so is he: Eat and drink, says he to thee; but his heart is not
with thee. The Morsel which thou have eaten thou shall vomit up, and lose thy
sweet words, Prove. 23.6, 7, 8. Oftentimes men are invited to a great Feast, but
it is not out of Love, but for some sordid Ends, to engage them in something
which they will find cause after to repent of; it is not with True-heartedness:
which makes many sad at Feasts, as fearing an After-reckoning. Joseph's
Brethren, when they sat at meat with him, marvelled one at another, Genesis
43.33. not well knowing whereto that Invitation tended. When men believe they
are welcome indeed, and that they are feasted in Love, they feed heartily, and
are merry, without any Check in themselves, or fear of After-repentance. It is
so with them that feast in Heaven; that are called to the Supper of the Lamb;
that eat and drink in his Kingdom; that partake of that Feast full of fat
things, a Feast of wine on the lees, of fat things full of marrow, of wine on
the lees well refined, Isa. 25.6. that partake of the Delicacies of Heaven, of
the Riches and costly Entertainment there: they know they are heartily welcome
to Heaven; that they are not invited as Esther invited Haman to her Banquet, to
betray him, but that they are in God's Presence out of the purest Love, out of
the most sincere Motive, their Faithfulness to him, their Sufferings for him;
and to the most desirable End, the mutual Solace and Content of each in other:
God has not any intent to make a farther Trial of them, as of Adam in
Paradise; but to put an end to their Sufferings and hard Service, that they may
keep an everlasting Sabbath with him in Glory.

I have showed you in some Adumbration those things which Eye has not seen,
nor Ear heard, neither has it entered into the Heart of man to conceive, even
the things God has prepared for them that love him, 1 Cor. 2.9. Whereby I have
given you a little Taste of those Joys, the Fullness of which in God's Presence
I should now insist on, which was my

II. PROPOSITION.
That there is a Fullness in these Joys.

This might be demonstrated by the Kinds of them, they being not only bodily,
but Spiritual; not mixed, but pure; not in a less, but a most intense degree;
not for a short time, but for ever. But this may perhaps be declared more fully
in the handling of the III. OBSERVATION, That at God's right hand there are
Pleasures for evermore.

III. PROPOSITION.
That these Joys in God's Presence, in their Plenitude or Fullness, as they
belong to Christ, so also to all true Believers.

This is deducible from our Lord Christ 's words, Joh. 16.20, 21, 22. Verily,
verily, I say unto you, that ye shall weep and lament, but the World shall
rejoice; and ye shall be sorrowful, but your Sorrow shall be turned into Joy.
A woman when she is in travail has Sorrow, because her hour is come: but as
soon as she is delivered of the Child, she remembers no more the Anguish, for
joy that a man is born into the world. And ye now therefore have Sorrow: but I
will see you again, and your Heart shall rejoice, and your Joy no man takes
from you. Whereupon the Apostle says, 1 John 3.2. Beloved, now are we the Sons
of God, and it does not yet appear what we shall be: but we know, that when he
shall appear, we shall be like him, for we shall see him as he is. The same
condition of Joy and Glory, though in an inferior degree, shall be to the
adopted Sons of God, as is to the onely-begotten Son of God: and it is God's
righteous Judgment, that they which sow in Tears should reap in Joy, Psalm.
126.5.

IV. PROPOSITION.
That the Assurance of these Joys set before Christ was the grand Support and
Encouragement of him in his Obedience active and passive, and is so still to
all the Holy Saints, who do and suffer according to the Will of God.

As concerning Christ, it is expressly delivered, Heb. 12.2. that for the Joy
set before him he endured the Cross, despising the Shame. And that it is so to
all the Servants of Christ, is frequently told us. Romans 5.1, 2, 3. Being
justified by Faith, we have Peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ: By
whom we have access by Faith into this Grace wherein we stand, and rejoice in
the hope of the Glory of God. And not only so, but we glory in Tribulation
also. 2 Cor. 4.16, 17, 18. For which cause we faint not; but though our Outward
man perish, yet the Inward man is renewed day by day. For our light Affliction,
which is but for a moment, works for us a far more exceeding and eternal
weight of Glory; While we look not at the things that are seen, but the things
which are not seen: for the things which are seen are Temporal; but the things
which are not seen are Eternal.

APPLICATION.
I do but cursorily pass over these Points, that I may make some Application to
your use: and that shall be,

1. To refute the Censures of Carnal men, who count the Course of the Righteous
to be Madness, and his End without Honor; and therefore have him in Derision,
and as a Proverb of Reproach: as it was observed long ago in the Book of
Wisdom, Chap. 5.3, 4. They can discern no Joys in the humble penitent
Believers, either at present or for the future. They are no whit acquainted
with the Joy of the Holy Ghost, nor the Comforts of Christ, nor the Fullness of
Joy that is in the Presence of God: and for this cause imagine the mortified
Christian to be but a melancholic man, that foolishly pines away himself, not
enjoying that Mirth and that Benefit of such things as are allowed to the sons
of men. And therefore if they find a person to be of a wounded Spirit, of a
troubled Conscience; if through Weakness a person of a tender Conscience be
pensive, afflicted with the sense of Sin, and perplexed in Spirit; they impute
it to Religion, to hearing of Sermons, and performing other holy Duties: while
they themselves think there is nothing better then to be merry while they may;
to eat and drink, for to morrow they shall die. Come on, say they, let us enjoy
the good things that are present; and let us speedily use the Creatures like as
in youth. Let us fill our selves with costly Wine and Ointments: and let no
Flower of the Spring pass by us. Let us crown our selves with Rose-buds before
they be withered. Let none of us go without his part of our Jollity; let us
leave tokens of our Joyfulness in every place: for this is our Portion, and our
Lot is this, Wised. 2.6, 7, 8, 9. Come ye, say they, I will fetch Wine, and we
will fill our selves with strong Drink; and to morrow shall be as this day, and
much more abundant, Isa. 56.12.

But sure, sober Infidels have taken such Speeches to be rather the Speeches of
Brutes then of Men. Who can conceive that Man, that has an immortal Spirit
breathed into him from the Father of Spirits, should have no higher Joys then
sensual Delights? that he should be satisfied with such Contents as are only
from Sublunary things? If the Philosophers knew that Virtue of it self could
give such Tranquillity of mind, such ample Content, as that they could discern
the Joys of Sensualists to be but the Foolery of besotted men; Christians may
discern that the Joys of Philosophers, in their dim Light of Reason and Moral
honesty, together with their glorying in their Idols, could be but as
Moonlight, compared to the Sun, and their Joys in Christ. In God's Favor and
Presence are the real Joys; though obscured from the World by the mean
Condition upon Earth of those that possess them.

2. Oh then, you who have heard what Joys there are in God, be persuaded to
quicken and comfort your selves by them. Let not the Scoffs or Censures of the
profane Carnalist affright you from your Choice. Place your Hope in the
pursuance of those Joys that are Spiritual, that are Heavenly. David, Moses, S.
Paul, and He who was the wisest of men, (our Lord Christ,) slighted all the
Contents on Earth, and patiently underwent all Afflictions, all the Reproaches
and Persecutions of men, that they might attain the Fullness of Joys in God's
Presence. Surely, should all your days on Earth be spent with never so much
Mirth, yet you would be great Losers, should you lose the Joys of Heaven. Yea,
the want of the Peace of Conscience, and Joy in the Spirit, on Earth, will so
damp the Joys of the most Atheistical Voluptuaries on Earth, that they will
find them to be far short of that Sweetness they imagine in them, and in the
end to be as Gall and Wormwood in their Bowels. On the other side, the Joys of
Christ and Christians in present fruition, and future hope, will countervail
all those bitter Potions they drink here, and fill them with endless and
unmeasurable Satisfaction hereafter. Let then the Joy of the Lord be your
strength, Nehem. 8.10. your Encouragement to follow all the Holy ones of God,
chiefly our Lord Christ, running with patience the Race set before you, and
looking unto Jesus the Author and Finisher of your Faith. Amen.

LAVS DEO.
MAN'S Guide to Glory.
The Twenty-third SERMON.
PSALM. lxxiij. 24. Thou shall guide me with thy Counsel, and afterward
receive me to Glory.


WE have in this Psalm (whether composed by, or for Asaph to sing) a Skirmish
between the Flesh and the Spirit, with the Victory of the Spirit, thereby
strengthened to stand for God, and to adhere to his Party. The Combat arose
from the Quarrel that humane Reason had against Divine Providence, as either
unequal, or impotent, in that the Wicked prospered in the world, when the
Godly as poor Abjects were depressed and trampled upon by the Nimrods of the
Earth: As if this did argue, either that God was ignorant of humane Affairs,
that he saw not through the thick Clouds; that (according to the Epicurean
Fancy) he followed his Pleasure in Heaven, and let things below run at random,
leaving them to Chance: or that he would not or could not remedy such
Irregularities, as fell out in the Government of this lower World.

To which the Spirit opposes (after some Staggering) this Defense: That the
Prosperity of the Wicked was but for a moment, an empty Bitter-sweet, a fansied
Dream, a mere Vanity, ending in Terrors which suddenly and irresistibly cast
them down, like a Hurricane, and so carry them away to Destruction and
Consumption. That, on the other side, the Godly are preserved and guided to
Glory. And thence is the Spirit's Io Paean, its triumphant Song, ascribing
Happiness to men of pure Hearts, and expressing a Resolution to hold fast to
God, as being well assured of Divine Guidance and Advancement, (in the words
read to you) Thou shall guide me with thy Counsel, and afterward receive me
to Glory.

In which words the Psalmist expresses the Foundation of his future Happiness:
as in the Verse before he declares the Cause of his present Standing,
notwithstanding the Storm of Temptation that was upon him; upon what Bottom he
secures his Soul, notwithstanding such Onsets and Perils of wandering out of
his way to Blessedness. For attaining of which Felicity, he ascribes nothing to
a fansied Light within him, or power of Free will; but to that special
efficacious Grace, which is preventing and sustaining, that works in God's
people both to will and to do of his good pleasure, Phil. 2.13. His Tuition
and his Guidance is the entire and only Cause of a Saint's assured Beatitude.
And this the Author of the Psalm does acknowledge, whilst he expresses the
sense he had of his own nearness to Ruin, (when, as it is verse. 2. he found
that, as for him, his Feet were almost gone, his Steps had well-nigh slipped) had
not God been with him continually, and held him by the right hand, guided him
with his Counsel, and led him to Glory. From whence these Observations offer
themselves.

1. That when God leaves a person to his own Counsel, it is a Forerunner of
his Perdition. 2. That it is the Safety of God's Servants, that they are guided
by his Counsel. 3. That those whom God guides by his Counsel, he does bring
to Glory.
I. OBSERVATION.
That when God leaves a person to his own Counsel, it is a Forerunner of his
Perdition.

That which is said Psalm. 81.12. that God gave the people of Israel up unto
their own hearts Lust, and they walked in their own Counsels; and therefore he
did not subdue their Enemies, nor turn his hand against their Adversaries,
verse. 14. does sufficiently intimate, that the Cause of their wasting and
spoiling by their Enemies was God's leaving them to their own Hearts Lusts, and
their walking in their own Counsels.

The like Speech we have in the New Testament, in that Sermon which was made by
S. Paul and Barnabas at Lystra, when, to take them off from their intention of
sacrificing to themselves, they told them of the Evil of their doings, and of
the pernicious Consequence of their practices in sacrificing to them that were
but Vanities; and how that God in times past suffered all Nations to walk in
their own Ways.

Which Passages do evince, that the reason why both Jews and Gentiles were
under Sin, all the World were become guilty before God, all had sinned, and
came short of the Glory of God, Romans 3.9, 19, 23. were under Wrath and
Condemnation, was because they were left to their own Counsels. For in that
case, as it is Romans 1.18. they held the Truth in Unrighteousness: verse. 22.
professing themselves wise, they became fools. Wherefore God also gave them up
to Uncleanness, through the Lusts of their own Hearts, to dishonor their own
bodies between themselves: Who changed the Truth of God into a Lie, and
worshipped and served the Creature more then the Creator, who is blessed for
ever, Amen, verse. 24, 25. For this cause God gave them up unto vile Affections.
And even as they did not like to retain God in their Knowledge, God gave them
over to a reprobate mind, to do those things which are not convenient, verse.
26, 28. which brought upon them the Judgment of God. And to like purpose is
that Prediction, (which is upon cogent reason conceived to be verified in the
Roman Apostasy) 2 Thessalonians. 2.10, 11, 12. Because they received not the love of
the Truth, that they might be saved; for this cause God shall send them strong
Delusions, that they should believe a Lie: That they all might be damned, who
believed not the Truth, but had pleasure in Unrighteousness.

And it is indeed just with God, that they who forsake him should be forsaken
by him; which must of necessity be their Downfall: for men's own Counsels are
but as rotten Posts, which if they be shaken, the House will fall of it self.
All the Thoughts and Devices of man are but vain; even the Wisdom of the world
is Foolishness with God: for it is written, He takes the wise in their own
Craftiness: and again, The Lord knows the Thoughts of the wise, that they are
vain, 1 Cor. 3.19, 20. It is with Men as with Sheep that wander from their
Pasture and Shepherd, they are caught and made a Prey to Wolves and Foxes: so
those who leave God's Counsel, and choose their own Ways, are easily beguiled
and enslaved by Satan to their Destruction. But, which is the

II. OBSERVATION.
It is the Safety of God's Servants, that they are guided by his Counsel.

There is a twofold Counsel of God. The first is that Counsel by which he
guides himself: of which the Apostle speaks Ephesians. 1.11. that God works all
things after the Counsel of his own Will; and of which the Psalmist says,
Psalm. 33.10, 11. that The Lord brings the Counsel of the Heathen to naught;
he makes the Devices of the people of none effect: The Counsel of the Lord
stands for ever; the Thoughts of his Heart to all generations. And this
Counsel of God is often times contrary to Man's, and clean different from Man's
Imaginations. For though there are many Devices in man's heart; nevertheless
the Counsel of the Lord that shall stand, Prove. 19.21.

Hereby he asserts his own Singularity, Independency, and Sovereign Dominion:
as Isa. 46.9, 10. Remember the former things of old, for I am God, and there is
none else; I am God, and there is none like me, declaring the end from the
beginning, and from ancient times the things that are not yet done, saying, My
Counsel shall stand, and I will do all my Pleasure.

This is not that Counsel of God by which he guides his Servants to Glory;
this being the Secret which belongs only to the Lord. But it is the Thing
revealed which belongs to us, that we may hear it and do it; it is this
Counsel of God whereby he guides his people, and brings them to Glory. And
though it be true, that even this is a Secret in respect of the World, the
Great things of God's Law are strange things to them, the Mystery of Godliness
is so profound, so confessedly great, as that none of the Princes of the world
knew it; yea, when it was in Christ opened, it was the hidden Wisdom of God in
a mystery, containing such things as Eye had not seen, nor Ear heard, nor had
entered into the Heart of man to conceive, even the things which God has
prepared for them that love him: Yet it was ordained by God before the world,
to our Glory, and revealed to his people by his Spirit, who have received, not
the spirit of the world, but the Spirit which is of God, that they might know
the things which are freely given them of God: as it is 1 Cor. 2.12. This
Secret of the Lord is with them that fear him, and he will show them his
Covenant.

This is not either an imaginary Light in every man, conceived by deluded
Quakers as sufficient to guide them to God: nor is it any peculiar Enthusiasm,
such as Fanatic spirits have been deceived by: nor any such Dreams and
Apparitions as Friars and Monks have themselves been abused by, and miss-led
other persons, in times of Ignorance: nor any such vain Raptures or Conceits,
as those whereby men have been so lifted up, as to despise others as Pygmies in
Knowledge in respect of themselves, or to fancy as if they were of God's Privy
Council. But the Counsel of God by which he guides his Servants is his Word,
containing his Precepts, his Promises, and whatever Revelations in Holy
Scripture he has delivered for our learning, that we through Patience and
Comfort of the Scripture might have hope: especially the word of the Truth of
the Gospel; such as S. Paul meant, Act. 20.20, 21, 24, 26, 27. when he said to
the Ephesians, that he kept nothing back that was profitable to them, but
testified to Jews and Greeks Repentance toward God, and Faith toward our Lord
Jesus Christ, the Gospel of the Grace of God; so that he was pure from the
blood of all men, in that he had not shunned to declare unto them the whole
Counsel of God. This is that Counsel of God which makes men wise unto
Salvation, or brings to Glory. And with this Counsel of his he guides his
Servants, 1. By the Preaching of it in the Ministry of the Gospel of Christ,
which is the Power of God unto Salvation, Romans 1.16. 2. By the Operation of his
Spirit; by which they with open face behold as in a Glass the Glory of the
Lord, and are changed into the same Image from glory to glory, even as by the
Spirit of the Lord, 2 Cor. 3.18. Hereby they have the mind of Christ, 1 Cor.
2.16.


To which may be added such special Guidance as either by joint or solitary
Prayer, Christian Conference, Self-examinations, particular Experiments, secret
Motions, Illuminations and Warnings, remarkable Providence, God vouchsafes
some of his Children in Temptations, against fears of Persecution, attempts of
Corrupters, apprehension of Divine Desertion; against all such Scandalls, and
other Evils, as become Precipices into which Souls are cast, or Snares and
Stumbling Blocks by which they are apt to be overthrown. And by this Counsel
of God their Feet are guided into the way of Peace and Safety, and they after
brought to Glory. Which is my

III. OBSERVATION.
That those whom God guides by his Counsel, he does at last bring to Glory.

The Glory which the Psalmist may here mean (especially if David were the
Penner of this Psalm) is not unlikely to be the Glory which he expected in
being made King of Israel; it being probable that this Psalm was composed in
the time of his Persecution under Saul, during which he complained that his
Enemies did live and were mighty, and they that hated him wrongfully were many
in number, Psalm. 38.19. Yet no doubt he also had an eye to the Glory which he
expected after this Life. So Psalm 17. having prayed to the Lord, (verse. 14,
15.) to deliver his Soul from the Wicked, which were his Sword; from the men of
this world, which had their portion in this Life, whose bellies God filled with
his hid treasures, so as that they were full of Children, and left the rest of
their Substance to their Babes: he declares his expectation to be of a higher
kind, (verse. 18.) As for me, I will behold thy face in Righteousness; I shall
be satisfied when I awake with thy likeness. And this the phrase of receiving
him to Glory, after his guiding him by his Counsel, does most clearly intimate.

And indeed this is the thing which is the grand Expectation of the Saints,
That God will not fail to lead them in his Paths for his Name's sake; and so to
order their Steps in his Word, that no Iniquity get dominion over them: that
the Spirit of God will so quicken them, as they may run the way of his
Commandments: that he will enable them to live by Faith in Christ, and thereby
preserve them to his heavenly Kingdom.

It is that exceeding and enduring weight of Glory which is wrought by
Afflictions, and the Guidance of Divine Teachings and Providence, that causes
them to look, not at the things which may be seen, which are but temporal, but
the things which are unseen and eternal, 2 Cor. 4.17, 18. For which reason the
same Apostle tells the Thessalonians, 2 Thessalonians. 2.13, 14. We are bound to give
thanks always to God for you, because God has from the beginning chosen you to
Salvation, through Sanctification of the Spirit, and belief of the Truth;
Whereunto he called you by our Gospel, to the obtaining of the Glory of our
Lord Jesus Christ.

APPLICATION.
For Application hereof; If the Apostle had cause to be thankful for the
Thessalonians, because of God's calling them to the obtaining of the Glory of
our Lord Christ: much more has each believing Christian cause to be thankful
to God, to rejoice and take Comfort in this so blessed a Condition, of God's
Guidance by his Counsel, so as to bring him to Glory. And since the leaving a
man to his own Counsel is the Forerunner of Perdition; how ought he to dread
(as a direful Omen of the most execrable Condition) the being given over to
follow his own Counsel, to be carried away by his own Lusts, as being a
certain sign of God's Desertion, and exposing of him as a Prey to the Devil?

Wherefore it highly concerns every one who desires his own Salvation, to
follow that Admonition Psalm. 2.11. to serve the Lord with fear, and rejoice
with trembling; or, as it is Phil. 2.12. to work out his Salvation with fear
and trembling. When we consider our own Ignorance in the Way which leads to
eternal Life, our Folly and Unskilfulness in finding it out, our Negligence in
inquiring after it, our Inadvertency to that Teaching and direction which might
guide us in it; when we ponder the vanity of humane Reason, our Frailty and
Easiness in hearkening to Deceivers, the incessant Diligence and Vigilance of
the old Serpent in perverting us, the impossibility of our attaining to
Salvation by our own Wisdom and Strength, and the extreme peril of Erring so
as to perish eternally, if we have not God's Guidance: we shall see great cause
to fear our selves, find great reason to seek the Guidance of God's Counsel,
and to walk always by it, to follow that Light which he has held forth before
us in his Word of Truth, especially by his Son, the Light of the world, the
Way, the Truth, and the Life, by whom alone we can go to the Father, without
whom we walk in darkness, and know not whither we go. Without this Guidance we
can do nothing as we ought, but, as men driven by our Lusts, or seduced by
Satan, we are hurried violently, or tamely drawn into those Bypath which lead
down to the Chambers of eternal Death.

Alas! our Temptations, which are many, and with so much Wiliness laid to
ensnare us; our Insufficiency to think any thing of our selves as of our
selves; the sad Experience we have of the Falls of many most precious Saints;
the frequent Complaints of the most mortified Christians, who bemoan their
Wretchedness by reason of that Body of Death which still depresseth them; our
Childishness in affecting what is most pleasing to Sense, and our little
apprehension of our own Necessities; our undervaluing of spiritual Blessings
in heavenly things in Christ; the Prevalency of the Carnal mind in us, which
is too often as the Biass that turns us, that inclines our Free will to Earthly
things, but is Enmity against God, being not subject to God's Law, neither
indeed can it be; All these things, I say, should make us suspect our selves,
and examine our Thoughts and Ways, whether they be according to God's Counsel
or not: they should make us consider what Spirit we are of, even in our
Religious Duties; how we are acted, not only in Secular affairs, but also in
our exercise of Godliness, even in our Prayers and most zealous Service of God.
Solomon's Counsel is very necessary to be followed, Prove. 3.5, 6. Trust in the
Lord with all thine heart, and lean not to thine own Understanding: In all thy
ways acknowledge him, and he shall direct thy paths.

This is the great Stay and Comfort of a self-knowing Christian, that observes
himself, his own Weakness, but yet is possessed with the taste of God's Grace,
That though he be weak and foolish, yet he is guided by God's Spirit; that he
orders the Motions of his life by the Rule of Christ, and still seeks to
Heaven, for Light from thence to lead him; that God will guide him with his
Counsel, and then bring him to his Glory. Amen.

LAVS DEO.
A BELIEVER'S SAFETY, PEACE and REST.
The Twenty-fourth SERMON.
PSALM. xl. 8. I will both lay me down in peace, and sleep: for thou, Lord,
only make me dwell in Safety.


WHAT was the Occasion of composing this Psalm, is uncertain. Whether it were
after or before his Entrance into his Kingdom, before or after his Victory over
Absalom; sure it is, it was made by David when he was in an holy frame of
Spirit. And in it he first bespeaks God as a Supplicant, v. 1. then
expostulates with his insolent Adversaries for their Malignity toward him,
verse. 2. declares his Assurance of Divine Election and Tuition, verse. 3.
admonishes them how to rectify themselves, verse. 4, 5. mentions the Study of
the generality of men, with his Request for himself, verse. 6. acknowledges the
meliority of his Choice, verse. 7. and thereupon infers this Resolution which I
have read, I will both lay me down in peace, and sleep, etc.

There is no difficulty about the Reading or Meaning of the words: whether we
read, [together, in id ipsum,] as the Vulgar Latin; or [both,] as our
Translation: whether we read, [Thou, Lord, only,] (referring to his single
Help;) or, [Thou, Lord, make me alone] (though I have no other with me) dwell
in Safety, Hope, Confidence, or Security.

This Passage shows his settled Acquiescence in the Tuition of the Almighty,
grounded upon his experience and knowledge of his Love and Favor, without any
such anxious Thoughtfulness, enfeebling Fears, distracting Perplexities, as
others in the like Distresses and Destitutions (to those he was in) were wont
to be oppressed with.

It is likely David, when he speaks of his laying himself down in peace, and
sleeping, meant it only of his natural Sleep, and his addressing himself
thereto. To which sense those words lead us, Psalm. 3.5. where he says, I laid
me down and slept; I awaked, for the Lord sustained me. And probably the
Occasion of this Psalm was the same with that of the Third Psalm, which he made
when he fled from Absalom his Son. And likely enough it might be a magnanimous
Reply to the Motion of some of his timorous Servants, (who perhaps would have
had him to have cowardly become a Fugitive, when the Revolt from him was so
great, and every one was ready to shift for himself,) That his Heart was not so
dejected by that Insurrection, but that he (though he were alone, compassed
with ten thousands of people, that set themselves against him round about)
could in Affiance upon Divine Providence, as quietly lie down, and take his
Rest on the Ground, as if he were on his Bed in his Palace at Jerusalem; as
knowing, that though there were none with him in that condition, yet the
Vigilance of God would be as sufficient for his Safety, as if he had been
lodged in his strong Castle at Sion.

Yet may the words be extended farther, (with some Commentatours,) to denote
the Disposition of believing Souls, in addressing themselves with courage to
their Death and Grave, (which is termed a putting off this Tabernacle, 2 Pet.
1.14. and a Resting in their Beds, Isa. 57.2.) through the Assurance which they
have, that when their House of this Tabernacle is dissolved, they have a
Building of God, an House not made with hands, eternal in the Heavens, as the
Apostle speaks, 2 Cor. 5.1. And what David says here of himself, whether
concerning his Resolution, or Assurance, each pious Soul, that has learned to
trust in God, may with a like Composedness of spirit and Confidence, Fortitude
and Magnanimity, take up, and say, I will both lay me down in peace, and sleep:
(either in my Bed or Grave:) for thou, Lord, only (without any other Garrison)
make me alone (without any other Company) to dwell in my house (either on
Earth or in the Heavens) in Safety, Hope and Security; notwithstanding the
Power and Plots of my Earthly or Infernal Enemies. And accordingly these
Observations are hence deducible.

1. That the safe and secure Dwelling of Believers is only from God. 2. That
God makes their Habitation safe to them, though they be alone. 3. That in
Assurance hereof, a holy Believer can quietly take his Repose, without
oppressing Fears, even in the greatest Dangers.
I. OBSERVATION.
That the safe and secure Dwelling of Believers is only from God.

In the Prayer of Moses, the Man of God, Psalm. 90.1. he thus acknowledges;
Lord, thou have been our Dewlling Place in all generations: intimating, that
both in that Age in which he was a Stranger in the Land of Madian forty years,
when he fled from Pharaoh, as it is in S. Stephen's Oration, Act. 7.29. when he
and the rest of the Children of Israel wandered in the Wilderness forty years
more; and also when Abraham, Isaac and Jacob went from one Nation to another,
from one Kingdom to another people; God was still a Shelter to them: they dwelt
in the Secret place of the Most high, lodged under the Shadow of the Almighty:
he covered them with his Feathers, they trusted under his Wings; his Truth was
their Shield and Buckler: he was a Sun and a Shield to them: he suffered no man
to do them wrong; yea, he reproved Kings for their sake, Psalm. 105.14. When he
found Jacob in a Desert land, and in the vast howling Wilderness; he led him
about, he instructed him, he kept him as the Apple of his eye. As an Eagle
stirs up her Nest, sluttereth over her young, spreads abroad her wings,
takes them, and bears them on her wings: So the Lord alone did lead him, and
there was no strange God with him. As most excellently the Providence of God
over Israel is described by Moses in his Divine Poem, Deuteronomy. 32.10, 11, 12.

The like did our Psalmist find in his Persecutions by Saul. When he was fain
to fly from Readiness Court to Nob, thence to Keilah, Ziph, the Wilderness of
Maon, to Achish King of Gath, to Ziklag; in all these his Removes God told his
Flittings, noted his Wanderings in his Book, and put his Tears in his Bottle. He
was a Shelter to him, a strong Tower from the Enemy. He abode in his
Tabernacle; made his Refuge under the covert of his Wings. His Faithfulness and
Truth was his Defense. And therefore in his gratulatory Song, wherein he
commemorates his Deliverances from the hand of all his Enemies, and from the
hand of Saul, he thus makes his Vow, Psalm. 18.1, 2. I will love thee, O Lord,
my Strength. The Lord is my Rock, and my Fortress, and my Deliverer; my God, my
Strength, in whom I will trust; my Buckler, and the Horn of my Salvation, and
my high Tower.

The same Tuition he vouchsafed to Daniel and the rest of the Godly Captives,
when they were carried away from their own Country into Babylon. There God was
(as he promised) a Sanctuary to them: in the Peace of the places where they
were Exiles, they had Peace. God's Presence with them was better to them then
David's Puissance, then Solomon's Wisdom or Riches. He showed that he had the
Hearts of Kings in his hands, and could turn them as the Rivers of waters: that
he could make them that carried them away Captives to pity them: that he could
cause their Enemies Plots to prove their own Snare; their Contrivance against
the Three Children, Daniel, Mordecai, and other Jews, to turn to their own
Destruction; the Fire to kill them, that would have burned others; the Lions to
tear them, which were to have devoured Daniel; Haman's Gallows, which was
prepared for Mordecai, to be his own and his Sons Gibbet; the Decree which was
procured to have the Jews destroyed, to be executed on their Adversaries.

Nor did the Apostles and Holy Martyrs find less Shelter and Security in God's
Presence with them, in those great Persecutions which the futious and
bloodthirsty Emperors (instigated by the great Red Dragon) raised against
them: but that God was a Strength to the Poor, a Refuge to the Needy in his
distress, a Refuge from the Storm, a Shadow from the Heat, when the Blast of
the terrible ones was as a Storm against the wall; as the Prophet speaks, Isa.
25.4.

Which made S. Paul, in behalf of himself and his Fellow Laborers in the work
of the Lord, acknowledge, That though they were troubled on every side, yet
were they not distressed; though perplexed, yet not in despair; though
persecuted, yet not forsaken; though cast down, yet not destroyed, 2 Cor. 4.8,
9. Even then when no man stood with him, but all men forsook him,
notwithstanding the Lord stood with him, and strengthened him; and he was
delivered out of the mouth of the Lion: as he tells us, 2 Timothy 4.16. Which
brings in my

II. OBSERVATION.
That God makes the Habitation of Believers safe to them, though they be alone.

It is true not only, that from God alone they have a safe and secure
Dwelling; but also when they are alone, when they have none to help them
besides him: yea, when there are very many, very potent, very malicious Enemies
against them, yet even then God makes them dwell in Safety and Confidence.

The Lord, says David, ( Psalm. 27.1, 2, 3, 5.) is my Light and my Salvation;
whom shall I fear? the Lord is the Strength of my life; of whom shall I be
afraid? When the Wicked, even mine Enemies and my Foes, came upon me to eat up
my flesh, they stumbled and fell. Though an Host should encamp against me, my
Heart should not fear: though War should rise against me, in this will I be
confident. For in the time of Trouble he shall hide me in his Pavilion: in the
secret of his Tabernacle shall he hide me; he shall set me upon a Rock.

The many Experiences he had of remarkable Evasions and Deliverances, when he
was (as it were) in the Lion's mouth; how he killed Goliath alone, with a Sling
and a Stone, and cut off his Head with his own Sword; how he slew the Lion and
the Bear; how he avoided Readiness Javelin cast at him; escaped Apprehension in
his Bed by his Wife Michal's Cunning, Readiness Fury by his Rapture and
Prophesying at Ramah, the Treachery of the men of Keilah, the Malevolence of
the Ziphims, the Design of the Philistines in the Court of Achish King of Gath;
these made him full of Confidence of God's Assistence in the greatest imminent
Perils, though he were Single, and had none that he could trust to.

It was no news to David, that God's Power is no whit abated by the Multitude
of Enemies, and the want of Helpers. Abraham's Victory over the Kings that took
Sodom, Pharaoh's Overthrow at the Red Sea, Sampson's Slaughter of the
Philistines with the Jawbone of an Ass, his carrying away the Gates of Azzah,
Shamgar's slaying of 600 Philistines with an Ox-goad, Jonathan and his
Armour-bearer's Victory over the same People, were such Examples as made his
Heart to be fixed, and not to shrink at evil Tidings.

The like Assurance of God's Might made Asa, when he was invaded by Zerah the
Ethiopian with an Army of a Thousand thousand, and 300 Chariots, to cry unto
the Lord his God, Lord, it is nothing with thee to help, whether with many or
with them that have no power, 2 Chronicles. 14.11. And of this Deliverance then,
Hanani the Seer minds him, when he let go his Faith in God, and relied on the
King of Syria: Were not the Ethiopians and the Lubims a huge Host, with very
many Chariots and Horsemen? yet because thou did rely on the Lord, he
delivered them into thine hand. For the Eyes of the Lord run to and fro
throughout the whole Earth, to show himself strong in the behalf of them whose
Heart is perfect toward him, 2 Chronicles. 16.8, 9.

Elisha was not dismayed at the Army of the Syrians which besieged him in
Dothan: he knew there were more with him then against him, though his Servant's
eyes could discern none to be present but Enemies.

Hezekiah was not terrified by the proud Vaunts of Rabshakeh, or the reviling
menacing Letter of Sennacherib. He knew that the God of Israel was the Lord,
even he only: that the everlasting God, the Lord, the Creator of the ends of
the Earth, neither faints, nor is weary; there is no searching of his
Understanding: that he gives Power to the faint, and to them that have no
Might he increases Strength. Even the youths shall faint and be weary, and the
young men shall utterly fall: But they that wait upon the Lord shall renew
their Strength; they shall mount up with wings as Eagles, they shall run and
not be weary, they shall walk and not faint; as it is Isa. 40.28, 29, 30, 31.

The same Spirit in a more ample measure was in the Holy Apostles when they
were brought before the Jewish Sanhedrim. S. Paul, when it was foretold by
Agabus that he should be bound at Jerusalem, when he was brought before the
Council of the Jews, the Roman Governors, Felix, Festus, and King Agrippa,
knew in whom he believed; that he was able to keep the Depositum, that which he
had committed to him. When he received the Sentence of death in himself, he
trusted in him that raises from the dead. Thus S. Stephen, when stoned,
commended his Spirit into the hands of his Savior, and fell asleep. And this
brings me to the

III. OBSERVATION.
That in Assurance that God only makes them, though alone, and destitute of
Help from any else, to dwell in Safety, Confidence, or Hope, Holy Believers can
quietly take their Repose, lie down and sleep, though environed with Enemies,
even the chiefest, Hell, and Death, and him that has the power of Death, to
wit, the Devil.

This frame of Spirit Holy David did discover in many of the Psalms, especially
in the 31. where having avouched God to be his strong Rock, and his House of
defense to save him, verse. 2. he thereupon, without any Commotion of mind,
deposits himself with God. Into thine hand (says he) I commit my Spirit: Thou
have redeemed me, O Lord God of Truth, verse. 5. He was assured that he was his
God; that his Times were in his hands; that great was his Goodness which was
laid up for them that fear him; that he would hide them in his Presence from
the Pride of man; that he would keep them secretly in a Pavilion from the
strife of Tongues; that he preserves the Faithful: and therefore exhorts them
to be of good Courage; and God should strengthen the Heart of all them that
hope in the Lord, verse. 14, 15, 19, 20, 23, 24.

But in none was this Composedness of Soul so eminent as it was in our Lord
Christ: who, though it pleased the Lord to bruise him, to put him to Grief;
though he were injured more then any man, he was enclosed with the assembly of
the Wicked, they pierced his Hands and his Feet; though his Heart like wax was
melted in the midst of his Bowels, and he cried out, O God, my God, why have
thou forsaken me? why art thou so far from helping me, and from the words of my
Roaring? though his Soul was made an Offering for Sin; yet did he then pray for
his Enemies, Father, forgive them, for they know not what they do: and when he
had cried with a loud voice, he said, Father, into thy hands I commend my
Spirit, and so gave up the Ghost, Luke 23.46. He did no Sin, neither was Guile
found in his mouth: when he was reviled, he reviled not again; when he
suffered, he threatened not, but committed himself to him that judges
righteously, 1 Pet. 2.22, 23.

The same Tranquillity of mind did S. Stephen show at his death. And after the
Example of the chief Shepherd of their Souls, and the Protomartyr of the
Christian Profession, have the Holy Martyrs and Confessors in all Ages (with
the greatest Fortitude and Undauntedness of spirit, conjoined with Serenity and
Calmness of mind, unconquerable Patience, and Submission to God's Will, (far
beyond the Philosophers Insensibleness, or Roman Stoutness, which was
accompanied with much inward Regret at their Sufferings, Indignation against
the Tyranny of them that oppressed them, Vexation at their hard Destiny,) yea
with Alacrity and Joyfulness of heart,) laid themselves down to sleep, even in
the midst of the Fire, as if it had been in a Bed of Roses, triumphing over the
most extreme Cruelties of their violent Persecutours, that were mad with Rage
against the Sheep of Christ; who herein followed their Shepherd, who was led as
a Sheep to the slaughter, and like a Lamb dumb before the Shearers, so opened
he not his mouth, Act. 8.32.

This excellent Temper of spirit in Holy Believers arises from the Conscience
of their Integrity, and the vigor of their Faith. A good Cause and an upright
Heart are very prevalent to allay all inward Fluctuations of mind, and to arm
the Heart against outward, though stormy, Occurrences. The Righteous, says
Solomon, (Prove. 28.1.) are bold as a Lion. They that fear God need not fear Men
or Devils. Such as know the Uprightness of their Heart, the Justice of their
Cause, (especially when their Danger is for Righteousness sake, for God,) can
appeal to God with Confidence, can mind God as Hezekiah did, Lord, remember
that I have walked before thee with an upright Heart, and have done that which
is good in thy sight, Isa. 38.3.

It was our Lord's Argument, in that his Soliloquy with his Father, that
Bosome-prayer, wherein he did expectorate himself, open his Heart to his
Father, Joh. 17.4, 5. I have glorified thee on Earth, I have finished the Work
thou gave me to do: And now, O Father, glorify thou me with thine own self,
with the Glory which I had with thee before the World was. This was his Plea
when he was to be betrayed and crucified.

It is so in like manner with all that do the Will of God. They know the work
of Righteousness is Peace; and the effect of Righteousness, Quietness and
Assurance for ever, Isa. 32.17. They know that God will keep him in perfect
Peace whose mind is stayed on him; because he trusts in him, Isa. 26.3. Faith
does assure them, that he that keeps Israel does neither slumber nor sleep:
that as it is true, Diabolus non dormit, the Devil sleeps not, but goes about
like a roaring Lion, seeking whom he may devour; so Dominus non dormit, the
Lord sleeps not, but his Eyes are open upon the Righteous. He is that most
vigilant Shepherd, that keeps his Sheep night and day. They know that if God be
with them, none, either Tyrant or Devil, can be against them. That the Prince
of Life has by Death destroyed him that had the power of Death, to wit, the
Devil; and delivered them that, through fear of Death, were all their lifetime
subject to Bondage. That they may take up their (...), their Triumph-song,
their Io Paean, O Death, where is thy Sting? O Grave, where is thy Victory?
That he that gave his own Son for them, will with him freely give them all
things. That he is not ashamed to be called their God; for he has prepared for
them a City, which has Foundations made and built by himself in a heavenly
Country; where no Nero's or Domitians or Diocletians, no bloody Bonner's or
Spanish Inquisitours shall come; where no Infernal Spirits nor Sons of Belial
shall approach to hurt. None shall be able to lay any thing to their charge:
they have God to justify them; Christ to intercede for them. And therefore
neither Height, nor Depth, nor Angels, nor Principalities, nor Powers, nor
things present, nor things to come, nor any Creature, shall be able to separate
them from the Love of God in Christ Jesus our Lord.

Hereby they have that Peace of God which passes all understanding, which
keeps, as a Garrison, their Hearts and Minds through Christ Jesus. And
therefore they can rest in their Beds, without fear of humane Tortures, or
haunting Ghosts. They can sleep in the dust of the Earth, with expectation of a
better Resurrection: and, after David's Example here, they can resolve to lie
down, and sleep, for that the Lord makes them dwell in Safety; and this with
hope of Rising again to Life, and of having Dominion over their Enemies in that
Morning in which the Sun of Righteousness shall appear again from Heaven with
Healing in his Wings.

APPLICATION.
And now, I beseech you, learn to discern between the Righteous and the Wicked.
How fearful are the Minds of them that are troubled with an evil Conscience,
that are not armed with Faith in God! Every Report of an invading Enemy, of a
walking Ghost, any ghastly Apparition, any unusual Noise, terrifies them, and
takes away their Sleep. Solitariness is a Terror to them, specially in the
Night. Cain gets him from the Presence of the Lord into the Land of Nod:
Caligula runs under a Bed at a Clap of thunder: Adrian whines in his mournful
Ditty, when he is to part with his Soul from his Body. Sickness appalls others.
The message of Death makes a Saul fall all along on the Earth; a churlish
Nabal's Heart die within him as a Stone.

On the contrary, Holy David sleeps quietly in a Cave, though Readiness Army be
near him; he dies quietly, though Adonijah go about to take his Crown from off
his Head. Job can trust God, though he kill him. S. Paul can trust in him that
raises from the dead, when he receives the Sentence of death in himself.

Oh then that you would consider these things to purpose. Time may come,
wherein you may have the Name of Magor-missabib, Terror round about: armed
Soldiers may break into your Houses; the Arrow of God may be shot into your
Bodies; Pestilence may enter in at your Windows: sooner or later, Sickness and
Death will surprise you, and seize on you.

If at that hour thy Spirit be wounded also, and God call thy Sins to
Remembrance; if when the Decree goes forth, (This night shall they fetch away
thy Soul from thee,) thou have nothing but thy full Barns, thy high Honors and
Dignities, the Favor of Princes, to secure thee: Oh how will thou be like
Belshazzar, when he saw the Handwriting on the Wall? Thy Knees will dash one
against another, thy Sleep will be gone; thy Terrors will rush in upon thee
like an armed man; thou will feel Hell Torments while thou art yet on Earth.

On the other side, if thou have Hezekiah's Uprightness, and David's Faith,
thou will sleep in Peace, and die with Comfort: God's Grace will support thee
here, and advance thee hereafter: He will guide thee with his Counsel, and
after receive thee to Glory.

Oh be wise then, I beseech you: Take heed of Sin, which will defile you: it
will make your Bed as uneasy as if you lay on Flints or Thorns; breed a Worm
in your Conscience, which will gnaw on you to Eternity; kindle a Fire in your
Bowels, which will never be quenched, but burn for ever; produce the Sting of
a fiery Scorpion, which will never be cured. Get out

It is Goodness, and not Greatness, we are desirous to see, and do freely
remember, and pleasingly celebrate. We sometimes are willing to hear of the
Exaltation of another, and are ready to magnify it: but not without Regret of
mind, unless there be a Complication of Goodness with Greatness. The
Magnificence of a great Prince is a pleasing Object to us, when we know him to
be gracious, kind, merciful, and bountiful: otherwise, whatever we do with
our Eyes and Knees and Tongues, yet our Hearts are averse from him. But when
these concur, when Power is tempered with Love, and that Love is a cordial
Benevolence, as it is in my Text; then it deserves a Videte, as here, Behold
what manner of love, etc. Which leads me to the next thing.

II. The Author: it is the Love of the Father.

The Love of a Friend is highly valued by us. How does David celebrate the Love
of Jonathan to himself? My Brother Jonathan, very pleasant have thou been unto
me; thy Love to me was wonderful, 2 Samuel 1.26. And indeed his Love was
admirable, who preferred a Friend before a Father, who endeavored to preserve
him whom his Father sought to destroy; yea, then stuck fast to him, when he
might, and perhaps did, understand, that David's Advancement to the Throne of
Israel would be his and his Posteritie's Ruin.

Yet this Love is not comparable to the Love of a Father. A Father loves his
Child, though his Child loves not him. A Father loves his Child, and will do
him good before himself: will, like Zalencus, pluck out his Eye, to preserve
his Child's; venture and cast away his Life, to save his Child's. Fathers care
little what they eat, wear, undergo, how they labor, so as their Children be
well, and well provided for. And such is the Love that S. John calls to us to
behold, Behold what manner of Love the Father has bestowed on us.

God is the Father by way of excellency, the Father of Fathers; the Universal
Father, who has formed all things; the Father of all Men, for we are all his
Offspring, Act. 17.28. But in a peculiar manner he is the God and Father of our
Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of his Love, Col. 1.3. He proclaimed from Heaven, (
Matthew. 3.17.) This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased. His orient
brightest Love shines most directly in its Zenith on Christ; he is under the
Line: but it shines also on us from him; He has made us accepted, or
Favorites, in the beloved, Ephesians. 1.6. And so he is become the Father of all the
Saints adopted in Christ Jesus, and made the Children of God by Faith in Christ
Jesus, Gal. 3.26. It Is this Father's Love that is here presented to be seen;
His, who is styled the Father of Mercies, the God of all Consolation, 2 Cor.
1.3. the Father of Lights, from whom every good and every perfect Gift comes,
with whom is no Variableness or shadow of turning, Jam. 1.17. the Father who is
Love it self in the abstract, 1 John 4.16. God is love. It is not an Accident
in him, but his very Essence; so that if he cease to love, he cease to be.
Dulce nomen Patris, The Name of a Father is a sweet Name; especially of such a
Father.

I will go to my Father, said the Prodigal Son, when he knew not what to do,
being brought into great Extremities. Though he had wasted his Estate by
playing the Unthrift, yet he says, I will arise, and go to my Father, and say
unto him, I have sinned against Heaven, and in thy sight, and am no more worthy
to be called thy Son: and his Father meets him, has Compassion on him, runs to
him, falls on his Neck and kisses him, puts on him the best Robe, a Ring on his
hand, Shoes on his feet, kills the fatted Calf, eats and drinks and is merry
with him, after all his Miscarriages. Luke 15. So forcible, so free, so
indulgent, so active, so constant and so unalterable is the Love of a Father.

If there be so much Water in a River, there is more in the Ocean: if so much
Love in an Earthly Father, there is infinitely more in the Heavenly Father. Be
you perfect, says our Lord, ( Matthew. 5.48.) as your Father which is in Heaven
is perfect. As he is perfect in all his Attributes, his Wisdom, Power, Truth,
Justice; so also in his Love. Whence it is that his Love is an everlasting
Love: I have loved thee with an everlasting Love; therefore with
Loving Kindness have I drawn thee, says God in the Prophet, Jerem. 31.3. His
Love is an unchangeable Love; his Gifts and Calling are without Repentance,
Romans 11.29. His Love is a preventing Love, bears date before ours: 1 John 4.19.
We love him, because he first loved us. His Love is a most pure Love, it has
no sordid End, no mercenary Motive. I do not this, says God, for your sakes,
O House of Israel, but for my Holy Name's sake, Ezekiel. 36.22. It is pure
Goodness, mere Love, that sets God on work to do good to us: it is the Love of
a Father, which has no reason from without him, but from his own nature: it is
a most active Love, not in show only, but in deed and in truth: it is an
immense Love, that has a Height and a Depth, a Length and a Breadth, without
bounds: a rich Love; God who is rich in Mercies, for his great Love wherewith
he has loved us, even when we were dead in Sins, has quickened us together
with Christ, Ephesians. 2.4, 5. a Love so ample and full, that he gave his own Son
for us, and with him has freely given us all things, Romans 8.32. And all is
done gratis, without Fee or Compensation, which is next to be observed.

III. The Freeness of it: it is given or bestowed.

Donatur, (say the Civil Lawyers) quod nullo Jure cogente conceditur: That is
said to be given, which cannot by any Law be enforced. Sure that Love which the
Father vouchsafes to us is such, as there was no Reason to demand it, no Title
whereupon to claim it. It was Love to us before we thought of it. I was found,
says God, ( Romans 10.20.) of them that sought me not; I was made manifest to
them that asked not after me. Yea, God commends his Love toward us, in that
while we were yet Sinners Christ died for us: When we were Enemies, we were
reconciled to God by the Death of his Son, Romans 5.8, 10. There was nothing in
us but Hatred of God, when he loved us: and we were so far from any Merit de
Condigno, of Condignity, or de Congruo, of Congruity, that indeed there was the
greatest Demerit in us. So far were we from deserving God's Love, that we
rather merited to be rejected by him, (by reason of our many Provocations of
him to Anger,) as the proper Fruit of our Demeanor. The Wages of Sin is Death:
but the Gift of God is eternal Life through Jesus Christ our Lord, Romans 6.23.

Nor could there be any After-dutifulness which might be accounted a fit and
just Compensation on our part for such Love. Who is there that gives any thing
to God first? Romans 11.35. Surely when we bring forth any Fruit to God, it is
but what is of his own Culture. Christ is the Vine, his Father is the
Husbandman, (and we are God's Husbandry, 1 Cor. 3.9.) he it is that purges the
Branches in Christ, that they may bring forth more Fruit, Joh. 15.1, 2. Neither
is he that planteth any thing, nor he that waters, but God that gives the
increase, 1 Cor. 3.7. Who makes thee to differ from another? and what have
thou that thou did not receive? says the same Apostle, 1 Cor. 4.7. Yea, were
it imagined, (to suppose an Impossibility,) that we could of our selves, by our
own Free will, by the Light of Nature, so ingratiate ourselves with God, as to
procure his Favor; that we could obtain Art propria, by our own Skill, or
Mart proprio, by our own Ability, our Filiation, our Regeneration, our
Adoption to be God's Sons: yet were not God engaged by any Worth of our Actions
to yield it us; this were no Purchase, no Exchange of quid pro quo, no
advantaging God, that he might benefit us. Rightly says Elihu, Job 35.7, 8. If
thou be Righteous, when give thou to him? or what receives he of thy hand?
Thy Wickedness may hurt a man, as thou art; and thy Righteousness may profit
the son of man. But, alas! all that in such a case we could do, all that Adam
himself in his Innocence and Integrity could have done, could not have given us
such a Claim, as that we could have challenged our Adoption as due to us
according to distributive Justice, in an Arithmetical or Geometrical proportion
between our Actings and God's Adoption; but that still it must be taken as the
free Gift liberrimi Agentis, of the most free Agent, as the effect of the
purest and most immense Love. And therefore well said the Apostle, Behold what
manner of Love the Father has bestowed on us, of free Gift, that we should be
called the Sons of God. Which is the next thing to be considered.

IV. The effect of this Love of God: that we should be called, etc.

The Sons of God are of many sorts. The Magistrates are so by Office, Psalm.
82.6. the Angels by Dignity, Job 1.6. Adam by Creation, Luke 3.38. and so all
other men, Act. 17.29. the Posterity of Seth, (as it is conceived) Genesis 6.2. by
Profession; our Lord Christ is his own Son by peculiar and eternal Generation,
Romans 8.32. All Believers are his Sons by Regeneration: As many as received him,
to them he gave power to be the Sons of God, even to as many as believe in his
name; which were born not of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the
will of man, but of God, Joh. 1.12, 13. By Adoption: God having predestined
us unto the Adoption of Children by Jesus Christ to himself, according to the
good pleasure of his Will, to the praise of the glory of his Grace, Ephesians. 1.5,
6. Regeneration is by a Change of us inwardly, whereby we are renewed in the
Spirit of our minds, and put on the New man, which after God is created in
Righteousness and Holiness of truth, Ephesians. 4.23, 24. Adoption is an Act which
alters the outward Estate, whereby a person becomes as a Son to another, as
Moses was to Pharaoh's Daughter, Heb. 11.24. It is Naturae similitudo, ut
Filium quis habere possit quem non generaverit; ( Gaius Inst. l. tit. 5.) an
Imitation of Nature, whereby a person may have another man's Child, as if he
were his own Son: so that he is his Child by a Legal Right, though not by
natural Birth; and is to own his Adopter as his Father, and he the adopted as
his Child. And it is this that S. John here means, Behold what manner of Love
the Father has given us, that we should be called, by reason of our
Regeneration and Adoption, the Sons of God.

And not only that we should be so called, as if it imported a mere Title,
Appellation, or (nudum and inane Nomen) a bare and empty Name. Sure this
Adoption, as it is by the best, highest, richest Father, so it is to the best,
greatest, and most ample Benefits. He that is thus the Son of God by Faith in
Christ Jesus, has the Name, the Dignity, the Honor of a Son of God; has the
Spirit of his Son, crying Abba, Father, Gal. 4.6. has the Apparel of a Son of
God, the white Linen, which is the Righteousness of Saints; has the Provision,
Protection, Attendance of a Child of God, the Angels are ministering Spirits to
him, Heb. 1.14. The Spirit of God is his; he is a Member of Christ's Body; the
Promises are his. He has the Society of Saints on Earth, and is come to the
Church of the firstborn that are written in Heaven. All things are his, Paul,
Apollos, Cephas, Life, Death, things present, things to come; and he is
Christ's, and Christ God's, 1 Cor. 3.22, 23. If he be a Son, then an Heir, an
Heir of God, a Joynt-heir with Christ, Romans 8.17. And can more Favor be
desired or imagined to be done by the most Holy and High God to such Beggars,
Malefactors, Rebels, condemned Prisoners, such base contemptible Wretches as
we are? We may here cry out with the Apostle, O the depth of the Riches both of
the Wisdom and Knowledge (I may add, and Love) of God! how unsearchable are
his Judgments, and his Ways past finding out! Romans 11.33. With the greatest
reason then does S. John call upon us to behold this: which is the last thing
to be considered.

V. The Adverb of demonstration, inviting us to consider this Love: Behold what
manner, etc.

And this may also serve for the

APPLICATION.
This is then the Use to be made of what has been said (and, did time permit,
might be more amply declared) of the Love of God in our Adoption; that we are
to behold it, not so much with the Eye of our Body, as with the Eye of our
Mind. Sure the Apostle S. Paul thought this to be of so great consequence, that
he ceased not to make mention of the Ephesian Believers in his Prayers, that
the God of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of Glory, might give them the
Spirit of wisdom and revelation in the knowledge of Christ; that the eyes of
their Understanding being enlightened, they might know what is the hope of his
Calling, and what the riches of the glory of his Inheritance in the Saints, and
what is the exceeding greatness of his Power to usward, who believe, Ephesians.
1.16, 17, 18, 19. This of all things is most worthy our Contemplation; our most
full, constant, accurate Meditation. We should behold it in all the Effects of
it in us, and toward us. Every Motion of his Spirit, every Providence in
escaping Temptations, every Gospel-Sermon, every Prayer we make, invite us to
this Contemplation.

You that are to receive the Holy Sacrament, what other Business have you but
to taste how gracious the Lord is? The Lord's Supper is visibile Verbum, a
visible Word, that minds you of this Love of God, in giving his Son for you, to
make you his Sons. Look not then so much on what Christ did, as why; that it
was for you. See your own Unworthiness; be humbled for your Sins: but behold
the Riches of God's Love. See it so as to admire it, so as to praise it. Let
this be an Eucharist, a Thanksgiving. Do that on Earth that the Saints in
Heaven now do; Receive it with Hallelujahs in your Hearts, if not with your
Tongues.

Remember this with rejoicing in God, Hope in him, Prayer to him, as your
Father; Love to him, who so loved you; Love to each other, as being one Body
and one Bread, being partakers of this one Bread, 1 Cor. 10.17.

But chiefly behold it with Reverence and Dutifulness to your Father; that you
may be blameless, and sincere, and harmless, the Sons of God, without rebuke in
the midst of a crooked and perverse generation, among whom ye are to shine as
Lights in the world, Phil. 2.15. Amen.

LAVS DEO.
KNOWLEDGE and PRACTICE UNITED.
The Twenty-sixth SERMON.
PSALM. cxix. 34. Give me Understanding, and I shall keep thy Law; yea I shall
observe it with my whole Heart.


OF all the Psalms, there is none which has so much of Curiosity, and yet so
much Plainness, as this. In the Form of it, is much Poetical Art: in the
Matter of it, much Integrity and Holiness of Heart. The Art is seen in
observing the order of the Hebrew Letters, in assigning to each Letter eight
Verses, and beginning every Verse in every Octonary with the same Letter. The
Integrity and Holiness of Heart is observable in the Expressions, which for the
most part contain Protestations of Integrity, or holy Petitions; both which are
in the words I have read to you: in which are contained, 1. A Petition; Give me
Understanding. 2. A Protestation or Promise; expressed, first purely, And I
shall keep thy Law: secondly modally, declaring the manner of his keeping it,
And I shall keep it, or, Yea I shall observe it, with my whole Heart.


From the words these Points offer themselves to us.

1. That the Understanding of God's Laws is a very desirable thing. 2. That
this Understanding is God's Gift, and to be sought of him. 3. That when we
understand God's Laws, we should observe them. 4. That we should keep them with
our whole Heart.
Of these in their order.

I. OBSERVATION.
That the Understanding of God's Laws is a most desirable thing.

If we will believe the wisest of men, this will be out of doubt. It is the
main Argument of many Chapters in the Book of Solomon's Proverbs, (the
Quintessence of his Wisdom,) to commend to us, as the most precious thing that
can be chosen, the Understanding of God's Laws; which he calls the Fear of the
Lord, and the Knowledge of God, Prove. 2.5. And Chap. 3.14, 15. he says, The
merchandise thereof is better then the merchandise of Silver, and the gain
thereof then fine Gold. She is more precious then Rubies; and all the things
thou can desire are not to be compared unto her. Again, Prove. 4.7. Wisdom is
the principal thing; therefore get Wisdom, and with all thy getting get
Understanding.

I should recite to you a great part of Solomon's Books, and of the Psalms of
David his Father, besides other parcells of Holy Scripture, should I heap up
all those Passages which set out the Worth of the Understanding God's Laws. But
I shall make this Point more apposite to your use, by considering the (...),
why it is so; which will also prove the (...), that it is so.

Any right Knowledge is desirable, since every man is ambitious to know; says
Aristotle, in the first words of his Metaphysics. It is true, there is Science
falsely so called, as the Apostle's phrase is, 1 Timothy 6.20. which learned
Interpreters conceive to be meant of the Gnostics pretended Knowledge, (from
whence they usurped the Title of Gnostics, that is Knowing men,) of the thirty
Aeones, and such like Fables, devised by Valentius and other like Heretics, to
draw Disciples from the Christian Doctrine after them: of which much may be
seen in Irenaeus his Five Books against Heresies. These also, or some other
Fanatic Heretics of that Time, are conceived to be meant by them that know
the Depths of Satan, as they speak, Rev. 2.24. Such kind of Knowledge the
Apostle bids Timothy not to give heed to, as the Fables, and endless
Genealogies, whether of Gnostics or Jews, and as ministering Questions, rather
then godly Edifying which is in Faith, 1 Timothy 1.4. which he calls profane and
old wives Fables, to be refused, Chap. 4.7. perverse Disputings of men of
corrupt minds, and destitute of the Truth, to be avoided, 1 Timothy 6.5. foolish
and unlearned Questions, which engender Strife, 2 Timothy 2.23. profane and vain
Babblings, which increase unto more Ungodliness, 2 Timothy 2.16. Jewish Fables,
and Commandments of men that turn from the Truth, Tit. 1.14. Foolish Questions
and Genealogies, and Contentions and Strivings about the Law, which are
unprofitable and vain, such as the Cabalistical Conceits and Talmudical Dotages
of Jewish Rabbis have been of old, and of later days many of the Popes
Decretall Epistles, many of the Monks Legendary Tales in their Book which they
termed Aurea Legenda, the Golden Legend, (though Ludovicus Vives says true, He
that devised it had a Brazen Face, he that believes it a Leaden Heart;) all
these, and whatever is of like stamp, are to be abhorred, as coming from Satan
to corrupt men's minds from the Simplicity that is in Christ.

But all true Knowledge, of what kind soever, is justly desirable, as being
both an Ornament, and some way or other useful to Man, whose Excellency,
whereby he exceeds Beasts, is his Knowledge: and his Inferiority to Angels, is
his Defect in it. And though some of late have endeavored to prejudice the
minds of men against the Study of Arts, Sciences, Languages, and other Learning
taught in Universities: yet it is for no other Reason, but because of their own
Illiterateness. Scientia neminem habet Inimicum, nisi Ignorantem: No man
undervalues Learning, but the Ignorant.

Nevertheless some Knowledge is more desirable then other; and above all the
rest, the Knowledge of God, his Laws, Will, Counsel, Works: which indeed make
men more truly wise then the Knowledge of all the Secrets of Nature, Policies
of State, humane Arts and Sciences. Princely Wisdom to Govern, is a very
excellent Gift. To have the Understanding which Solomon had, to judge and rule
so great a People as that of Israel, was a very glorious Gift of God, and such
as made him renowned above all the men of the earth in his days, and many Ages
after: yet he found a Vanity in this. I gave my heart, says he, ( Eccles.
1.17, 18.) to know Wisdom, and to know Madness and Folly: I perceived that
this also is Vexation of spirit. For in much Wisdom is much Grief: and he that
increases Knowledge increases Sorrow. Be he the wisest Statesman, or
profoundest Scholar, be he Doctor profundus, Angelicus, Seraphicus, though he
have gotten those glorious Titles wherewith some have set out them whom they
have esteemed; yet if he review his Projects, his Writings, he will find cause
to repent of them, to say, Non putaram, This I considered not, to make
Retractations with S. Austin, to charge himself with Folly and Error. That
which we read Prove. 9.10. is a Maxim aeternae veritatis, of eternal truth,
The Knowledge of the Holy is Understanding. That Knowledge which is of God and
his Will, that is practical as well as speculative, is the true Understanding.

1. Because it is the Knowledge of the most excellent Object. We much prize the
Knowledge of the most abstruse things, the things most abstract from sense. The
Knowledge of Transcendents, Stars, Motions, Influences of the Heavens, Angels
and Spirits, is with much Curiosity inquired into: and they are rare Doctors
who can discover such sublime things. But the Knowledge of God, his Properties,
Ways, Precepts and Counsels, is far more excellent, as being of more glorious
things. We think the Knowledge of Reasons of State, Arcana Imperii, the Art of
Governing Men and Kingdoms, more excellent then the Knowledge of Husbandry, how
to order Beasts, to plough and sow and plant; to be a wise Statesman, more
excellent then to be a skillful Rustic. But Theology is much to be preferred
before any of these; yea a Doctor in Divinity before a Physician or a Lawyer,
as teaching the things of God, which are most abstruse, and of highest
Speculation. To be wise in these things, is to be wise as Daniel, who is made
the Pattern of a wise man, Ezekiel. 28.3. because the Spirit of God was in him,
Light and Understanding to reveal the Secrets of God. Yea, it is to be wise as
an Angel of God, Angels being proverbially made the Exemplar of Wisdom, 2 Samuel
14.17. whose excellency of Knowledge stands in their beholding God's Face: by
which (though not as in a natural Glass, according to the Conceit of them that
talk of Speculum Trinitatis, a Glass of the Trinity, as if he that sees God,
must know all things, by seeing him that sees all things; that is an Error, for
then the Angels should be Omniscient: but in a free, clear Glass,) they see
more of his Glory and Works, receive more immediate Orders from him, understand
more of the affairs of Heaven and Divine Mysteries, then men that dwell in
houses of Clay; and the more is revealed unto them of God's Actings,
Intendments or Appointments, the more do they increase in Wisdom.

2. Because this Knowledge of God is the most true, clear, certain, satisfying
Knowledge. There is Imperfection in all other Knowledge, as there is in the
things that are known. He that knows most and best of other matters, yet finds
no Rest or Satisfaction in them. There is Uncertainty even in some things in
the Mathematics; and in those things that are known best, there is no great
Content to the mind by their Knowledge, because it is but of things that shall
end. Knowledge of humane things shall vanish away, 1 Cor. 13.8. How many
thousands of Learned men have at last, after all their Studying, Arguing,
Writing, Reading, come to Socrates his Determination, Hoc unum scio, quod Nihil
scio; I know this one thing, that I know Nothing? How many, the more they plod
on the things of Nature and Art, are the more puzzled? One that was counted a
great Wit of the world, when he had studied the Cause of the Sea's Motions, but
could not comprehend it, threw himself into it, with this Saying, Quoniam ego
non capio te, tu capies me; Because I cannot perceive thee, thou shall receive
me.

But in the Knowledge of God, his Will, his Laws and Counsels, is Perfection.
Quietat Intellectum: The Clearness, Truth, Beauty, Stability of the Knowledge
and things known, satisfy the Mind. I have seen an end of all Perfection: but
thy Commandment is exceeding broad, says David, Psalm. 119.96. There are
wondrous things in God's Law, verse. 18. There is no Sophistry or Fallacy in
any of God's Words; there is none of the Poison of the old Serpent, which
deceives the whole world: But, (as it is Psalm. 19.7, 8, 9.) The Law of the
Lord is perfect, converting, or restoring, the Soul: the Testimony of the Lord
is sure, making wise the Simple. The Statutes of the Lord are right, rejoicing
the Heart: the Commandment of the Lord is pure, enlightening the Eyes. The Fear
of the Lord is clean, enduring for ever: the Judgments of the Lord are true and
righteous altogether.

3. The Knowledge of God and his Law is most desirable, because it is that
Knowledge which pleases God most. It Is true, all the Works of God are worth
the knowing: The Works of the Lord are great, sought out of all them that have
pleasure therein, Psalm. 111.2. God allows us to search out the Secrets of
Nature; and it is a great Excellency in men, to find out the hidden Qualities
and Virtues of Natural Bodies: but to terminate our Knowledge on them, and not
to have respect to the Maker of them, not to look unto him that fashioned the
World long ago, as the Prophet speaks Isa. 22.11. much more to deny his Work,
to ascribe it to a casual Concourse of Atoms, to the Nature of the things
themselves, without acknowledging the First Cause, Primum Motorem, the First
Mover and Universal Efficient, is monstrous Madness, and a thing extremely
odious to the Divine Majesty.

Yea, they that are the greatest Philosophers, if they know not God's Will,
have not Understanding how to worship God, and to do his Pleasure, are usually
more brutish then others: they are given up to vile Affections, to a reprobate
Mind, to do those things which are not convenient, but against Nature, such as
Beasts do not, and none but besotted or bewitched men would do.

Some kind of Knowledge is utterly forbidden us. Well did those Converts
(mentioned Act. 19.19.) who used curious Arts, when they brought their Books
together, and burned them before all men; though counting the Price of them,
they found it fifty thousand pieces of Silver. All Knowledge of infernal
Magic is abominable to God. Then our Knowledge pleases God, when we follow on
to know the Lord, Hos. 6.3. when we understand what he reveals to us for our
Duty and his Honor. The secret things belong unto the Lord our God: but those
things which are revealed belong unto us and our Children for ever, that we may
do all the words of his Law, Deuteronomy. 29.29.

4. Because the Understanding of God and his Law, or Will, is that which is of
greatest Advantage to us, and therefore most to be desired by us. It is true
which Solomon says, Eccles. 2.13, 14. that Wisdom excels Folly, as far as
Light excels Darkness. The Wise man's eyes are in his head; he avoideth many
Dangers, takes prosperous Courses, by reason of his Prudence in discerning
between things hurtful and things helpful to him: for want of which the Fool
walks in Darkness, stumbles often, and falls into Pits and Precipices. Yet,
as he says verse. 15, 16. as it happens to the Fool, so to the Wise; as the
Fool dies, so dies the Wise. Neither does Wisdom in Sciences, Arts, Policy,
Cunning in Trading, or any such Skill as men are most applauded for, (Civil or
Military,) secure a man from Dangers without, or Fears within; common
Calamities, or particular Miseries; Death, or Damnation. But the Wisdom that
is from above, whereby we know God's Will, know the things of the Spirit of
God, which are freely given us of God, arms us against Temptations, Fear of
Death and Judgment to come, and comforts us in Tribulation. It is that which is
able to make us wise unto Salvation, as the Holy Scriptures did Timothy. It
brings us to God, as it comes from God. Which leads us to the

II. OBSERVATION.
That the Understanding of God's Law and Will is the Gift of God, and to be
sought from him.

Every good and every perfect Gift is from above, and comes down from the
Father of Lights, with whom is no Variableness, neither shadow of turning. And
therefore if any lack Wisdom, he is to ask it of God, that gives to all men
liberally, and upbraideth not, James 1.5, 17. Job, after his inquiry, Where
shall Wisdom be found? and where is the place of Understanding? resolves, The
Depth says, It is not in me; and the Sea says, It is not in me: Destruction
and Death say, We have heard the fame thereof with our ears. God understands
the way thereof, and he knows the place thereof. He declares it, prepares
it, and searches it out, Job 28.12, 14, 22, 23, 27. And indeed it is he only
that gives it, and in such a measure as pleases him.

All Understanding is God's Gift: he makes the wise, and the foolish. He can
give Solomon Wisdom, turn Achitophel's Counsel into Folly, make foolish the
Wisdom of the wise. As they that trust to their own Wisdom, lean to their own
Understanding, do follow an Ignis fatuus, that will lead them into Bogs and
Precipices: so they that seek Counsel of God, Wisdom from him in all their
Undertakings, that fear themselves, and work out their Salvation with fear and
trembling, are most prosperous. It was Solomon 's Happiness, that he asked
Wisdom of God; and it was his Unhappiness, that he gave his Heart to enjoy
Pleasure and Mirth, and so doted on his Wives, that they turned away his Heart
from God to set up Idol-service. And therefore, by Solomon 's Example, we
should beware of abusing our Knowledge, by turning God's Grace into Wantonness,
and perverting our Understanding to the Service of our Lusts. But, which is the

III. OBSERVATION.
When we understand God's Laws, we should observe them.

The Observation of God's Law consists in two things.

1. In Considering what it requires, or makes known. The word we translate
[keep] signifies the Observance of a Watchman, who is intent on what he sees,
and attentive to what he hears. And this should be the disposition and exercise
of every one to whom God speaks. I will hear what God the Lord will speak,
says the Psalmist, Psalm. 85.8. There is nothing more concerns a man, then to
have his Ear for God, and his Eye on God. All our Happiness is from him: and
therefore all our Thoughts should be toward him. As a Servant that depends on
his Master will have his eye on him, and his ear open to him; so should it be
with us: our Ear should hear, and our Heart should consider what God speaks or
acts. The Blessed man's Delight is in the Law of the Lord, and in his Law does
he meditate day and night, Psalm. 1.2. And whatever God does in the world,
especially toward us, whereby he either answers our Prayers, or rebukes us for
our Sins, either warns us of our evil Doings, or encourages us in doing well,
should be observed by us; for by so doing we show we have an Heart to please
God, and cause him to take pleasure in us.

2. In Doing of God's Law, according to what we understand, whether it be by
departing from Evil, or doing Good. Unto Man he said, Behold, the Fear of the
Lord, that is Wisdom; and to depart from Evil, that is Understanding, Job
28.28. As God's Precepts cannot be observed without learning them; so are they
not well learned, unless they be observed. Theology is a practical Science, for
Action as well as Speculation. If ye know these things, (says Christ) happy
are ye if ye do them, Joh. 13.17. Practice is the end of Knowledge: and
increase of Knowledge is the fruit of Practice. If any man will do the will of
God, he shall know of the Doctrine of Christ, whether it be of God, Joh. 7.17.
A good Understanding have all they that do his Commandments, Psalm. 111.10. Not
every one that says unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven; but he that does the Will of my Father which is in Heaven. He that
hears these Sayings of mine, and does them, I will liken him to a wise man,
that built his house on a Rock: And the Rain descended, and the Floods came,
and the Winds blew, and beat upon that house; and it fell not, for it was
founded upon a Rock. And every one that hears these Sayings of mine, and
does them not, shall be likened to a foolish man, which built his house upon
the Sand: And the Rain descended, and the Floods came, and the Winds blew, and
beat upon that house; and it fell, and great was the fall of it, Matthew. 7.21,
24, 25, 26, 27. That Servant which knew his Lord's will, and prepared not
himself, neither did according to his will, shall be beaten with many stripes,
Luke 12.47. To him that knows to do good, and does it not, to him it is
Sin, James 4.17. Sin in a higher degree. Majoris est Criminis Legem spernere,
quam nescire, said Salvian. In Ignorance there is Sin; in Contempt of God's
Law, in Stubbornness, much more; in Hypocrisy, most of all. Which brings us to
our

IV. OBSERVATION.
That God's Laws are to be kept by us with our whole Heart.

And indeed God's Law is not kept, unless the Heart keep it as well as the
Tongue: His Service requires the Inward parts as well as the Outward. Apply
thine Heart to Instruction, and thine Ears to the word of Knowledge. My Son,
give me thy Heart, and let thine Eyes observe my ways, Prove. 23.12, 26. The
Mouth of the Righteous speaks Wisdom, and his Tongue talks of Judgment.
The Law of his God is in his Heart; none of his steps shall slide, Psalm. 37.30,
31.

It is the Heart that is the Principle or Fountain of good or bad. A good man,
out of the good treasure of his Heart, brings forth good things: and an evil
man, out of the evil treasure, brings forth evil, Matthew. 12.35. The most
glorious Works of Piety or Charity, that come not from a right Principle
within, please God no more then the offering of Swines blood: yea, God counts
himself mocked, when our Prayers, Praises, or any Duties we do, come not from
the Heart. Heartless Service is no Service of God, but a Derision of him. He
that is a Spirit, must be served with the Spirit, or else the Service is
abhorred.

Nor must God's Law be kept with a part, but with the whole Heart. Blessed are
they that keep his Testimonies, and that seek him with the whole Heart, Psalm.
119.2. He that keeps some of God's Commands, and neglects others, yea he that
shall keep the whole Law, and yet offend in one point, (since the Authority is
the same in all,) is guilty of all, Jam. 2.10. He must keep them in all his
Faculties: in his Mind, by considering them; in his Memory, by retaining them;
in his Purposes, by choosing them; and in his Affections, by adhering to them.
He must keep them with all his Might, with the utmost degree of Observance that
he can: and wherein he is defective, he must bewail himself. He must not keep
any man's Precepts that consist not with God's; not the Statutes of Omri, or
the Ordinances of the house of Ahab, Mic. 6.16. A divided Heart, a double
Heart, an Heart and an Heart, are monstrous, Psalm. 12.2. We cannot serve God,
and Mammon. No man can serve two opposite Masters: no nor two coordinate. As we
cannot serve God, while we observe the Traditions of men, that evacuate God's
Commands: so neither while we observe the Traditions of men, which are imposed
as God's Commands. In vain do they worship me, teaching for Doctrines the
Commandments of men, says our Savior, Matthew. 15.9. Yea, all the just Commands
of Men must be observed with subordination to God's; they must give place to
them, and must be observed because of his Commands. Whatever Servants do in
Obedience to their Masters, they must do it heartily, as to the Lord, and not
to men, Col. 3.23. Our Obedience must be de omni, per se, and quatenus ipsum.
In a word, all that we do in Obedience to God, we must do for God. There must
be Integrity without Partiality, and Sincerity without Hypocrisy. Whatsoever
we do, we must do all, not for our own Praise or sinister Ends, but to his
Glory, 1 Cor. 10.31. without magnifying our selves, or aiming at our own carnal
Advantage. And this is to keep his Law with our whole Heart.

APPLICATION.
You have heard how valuable a thing the Understanding of God's Law is; whence
it is derived; to what End it should tend; with what Sincerity that End should
be prosecuted. I hope hereby you discern the genuine and true Reason why there
is so little Wisdom in the world: And I wish you would apply your minds to get
that Understanding which will make you truly wise. It is the common Complaint,
That the World is full of Fools: and no marvel it should be so, since each man
loves to be his own Guide; and even generally all sorts of men affect to follow
that Darkness which they miss-name the Light within them, and are unwilling to
be undeceived from their Errors. Quis intelligit Delicta? is in this sense
true. Though all are Children in Knowledge; yet are they loath to abide under
the tuition and conduct of their Overseers. Some miss-lead themselves by their
Lusts, some by their Opinions; few move in the direct Line of God's Law: and no
marvel then they suffer eclipses of their innate Light. Earthly-mindedness,
like the Earth, interposing, keeps the Light of God's Word from them: Love of
transitory Pleasures hinders the Light of the Spirit from shining on them. Nor
do they lift up their Eyes and Hearts unto the Sun of Righteousness, that he
may arise with brightness in his Rays upon them.

It would be infinite to reckon up the Fooleries of Philosophers, Jewish
Rabbis, Heretics, Papists, and all sorts of Fanatics, who have declined from
God's Precepts. Let their Errors, their Follies, their Miscarriages, make you
inquisitive into God's Law; wary how you turn aside from it; diligent to
observe it; constant in adhering to it; instant with the Father of Lights to
direct your Steps in it. They that sail at Sea, count it safest to be in a Ship
that has a good Pilot: They that live in a State, think it happy to live where
there are good Laws and good Governors. Sure no Pilot is better then he that
steers the Course of the Heavens; no Laws better then the Laws of the Most
high; no Government equal to the Government of God. If you leave his Guidance,
if you forsake his Laws, you will suffer Shipwreck, and be cast on those
barbarous Coasts where Tyrants and Devils domineer.

Oh then, whatever ye do, prefer the Understanding of God's Will before all
Knowledge: beg earnestly of God, that he would teach you: forget not what ye
learn of him: let your whole Heart be sound in his Precepts. Do as Christ did,
whose meat and drink it was to do the will of his Father; and you shall eat
and drink with him in his Kingdom. Which he grant, who loved us, and gave
himself for us. To whom, etc. Amen.

LAVS DEO.
UPRIGHT WALKING. Part I.
The Twenty-seventh SERMON.
PROVERBS xiv. 2. He that walks in his Vprightness, fears the Lord: but he
that is perverse in his Ways, despises him.


AMong the Variety of Holy Writings, whereby the Wisdom and Goodness of God
has made provision for the Instruction and Guidance of Man, who is born as a
wild Asse's Colt, Job 11.12. this Book of Proverbs is a Star not of the least
magnitude, having the Quintessence of Solomon's Wisdom in it; who is said to
have a Heart as large as the Sand upon the Seashore, in respect of his
Understanding in things both Divine and Humane, in which he exceeded all the
Wise men of his own and other Generations. And among all the Sayings of this
Book, this is one of the most considerable, as directing what way we may
demonstrate our Fear of God, which is the beginning of Wisdom; and shun the
chiefest of Follies, in despising him: the one, by walking in our Vprightness;
the other, by avoiding Perverseness in our ways: as it is expressed in my Text,
He that walks in his Vprightness, fears the Lord: but he that is perverse
in his Ways, despises him.

The Words consist of two Propositions, characterizing the Wisest of men, and
the veriest Fools. The first have two Marks whereby they are discernible: They
fear the Lord; and that appears by their walking in their Vprightness. The
other appear to be Fools by their despising of the Lord; and that is manifested
by their Perverseness in their Ways.

I shall begin with the

I. PROPOSITION:
He that walks in his Vprightness, fears the Lord.

And herein I shall enquire, 1. What is this Walking in a man's Vprightness: 2.
How this demonstrates the Fear of the Lord: 3. What Advantage accrues to a man
that walks in his Uprightness, and fears the Lord.

Of these in their order.

I. What it is for a man to walk in his Vprightness.

Walking (in the primitive acception thereof) imports a natural progressive
Motion of the Body: and Vprightness is that Position of the Body, according to
which it is so placed as not to incline to one hand more then the other, but to
be even set between both. But in the Metaphorical sense, in which hundreds of
times this Expression is used in Holy Scripture, it signifies the moral Motion
of the Mind and Members of a Man, as he is a rational Being, to be regulated by
the Law of his Maker. And so it supposes the Actings of the Understanding,
Will, Affections, and Members of a man, in an orderly and constant Course, out
of a vital spiritual Principle in him, by a certain Rule, from one term of his
Motion to another, for the attaining of his End.

Whence it is evident, that as to Bodily Walking there are many things
requisite or presupposed; so to the Spiritual Walking of the Soul or Man in his
Uprightness, there belong sundry things, either as presupposed or required,
without which he cannot be said to walk in his Uprightness. As it is with our
Body, while we live on Earth, there will still be some Motion; Man is born to
Labor, as the Sparks fly upward; God has given to the sons of men sore
Travail, to be exercised therewith: so it is also with the Soul, there are
stirrings of Thoughts, Desires, which cause elicit Acts of the Will in its
Purposes; and imperate Acts, in setting the Members of the Body on work, for
avoiding Evil, or obtaining some supposed Good.

And as corporal Motion is not in an instant, but requires Time, more or less:
so for the contriving and prosecuting such Designs as the Will pitches upon,
the whole Life of man is employed.

Likewise as there is in Walking, some Place or Person from which or from whom
the Motion begins, and to which or whom it tends, which are called in
Philosophy the Terminus a quo, the Bound from whence, and the Terminus ad quem,
the Bound to which it is directed: so are there in the moral Actions of the
Soul and Members some like Bounds; persons are either turned from God, after
Satan, or they are turned from the power of Satan unto God: they either move
from or to Heaven or Hell, Life or Death.

And as there is a Way in all Walking of the Body, in which the Motion is
performed; Motus est super immobile, there must be some fixed and settled thing
which men ordinarily walk upon; they do not move as Fishes in the Sea, or Birds
in the Air, whose Way has no fixed Path: so it is in men's Walking spiritually;
there is a broad Way which leads to Destruction, or a narrow Way which
leads to Life; a Way of Satan's, or a Way of God's, in which every man walks.

And as there is in man's Walking a vital locomotive Principle, which is well
or ill ordered according to the Sight and the state of the Members, and such
Guidance as is from others Direction; so that sometimes for want of Sight or
Light a person stumbles and falls, or by reason of Mistakes from himself, or
Mis-direction of other persons, he errs, and never attains to that which he
moves toward; sometimes he prospers in his Motion, seeing his Way aright,
heeding it, not fainting, but holding on to the end of his Journey: So it is in
men's Spiritual Walking: there is a wrong and a right Principle which moves
their Mind and Will; they walk after the Flesh, or after the Spirit; their Way
is either Satan's, or God's, his Dictates, or God's Precepts; they walk in
Darkness, or in the Light: either they are weary of well-doing, and go back to
Perdition, and turn aside to crooked Ways; or else they discern the Error of
their ways, choose the Way of Life, go on with Alacrity and liveliness therein,
and persevere to the end.

Also as in Bodily Walking, the Motion is not per Saltum, one Step or Leap does
not begin and end it; but it is progressive, there is Step after Step, one
slower, another quicker, one part of the Way is sooner and with less trouble
and danger passed over then the other: So it is in the Spiritual Walking: the
Actings of the Mind and Will are not performed all together, neither the
immanent nor transient Acts of a man, whether right or wrong, are done at once;
but some one hour, some another, with various Success, with diversity of
Ability, and Speed, and Event, by reason of the Assistence or Hindrance of
concurrent Accidents or Causes, which do frequently alter both the Motion and
the Consequence of it: such as are the Temptations of Satan, or the Influence
of God's Spirit; the Society of evil Company, or the Converse with Godly
persons; corrupt Teachers, or holy Pastors; outward estate of Prosperity, or
Adversity; with many other things, which occasion men's Progress to be more or
less expedite, either to the better or the worse.

Thus I have somewhat opened to you what this Walking is in general: It is now
farther necessary, that I show you more specially what is this Walking of a man
in his Uprightness, which shows he fears the Lord.

1. For a man who fears the Lord to walk in his Uprightness, it is necessary
that he set his face toward God, that is, that he propound God's Glory, and
the obtaining of his Favor, as his End. In all such Actions as are rational,
it is the End propounded by the Doer which has a chief sway in the
denominating of them good. Finis dat Mediis Amabilitatem. Many brave Exploits
done by heroical men only to immortalize their Names, to spread their Fame,
though they were advantageous to the people of their Generation, yet being not
acted out of Dutifulness to God as the impulsive, to exalt God as the final
Cause, they were but splendida Peccata, glistering Sins, like Gloe-worms, or
Wood that seems to shine in the dark, but is nothing else but rotten matter or
mere Dirt. He that walks uprightly stoops not down to the Earth, nor pores on
his own Clothes, but looks upwards to something higher then himself, toward
Heaven. Pharisees Alms, Fasting, Prayers, though much esteemed by themselves
and other men, were not regarded by God, as being done for themselves, not for
God. But such Actions as are done without Ostentation, with an eye to God's
Approbation, though in secret, and of no account with men, yet are they in the
sight of God of great price; as S. Peter says (1 Pet. 3.4.) of the hidden man
of the Heart, in that which is not corruptible, even the ornament of a meek and
quiet Spirit. The Rectitude of the Heart is most conducible to a man's upright
walking: which emboldned Hezekiah thus to mind God in his Prayer, Isa. 38.3.
Remember now, O Lord, I beseech thee, how I have walked before thee in truth,
and with a perfect Heart, and have done that which is good in thy sight. Which
acquaints us with the next Condition of this Walking;

2. It must be a Walking in God's Ways. It is not enough for him that walks in
his Uprightness, that his Intentions be good, but he must also choose the Paths
of Uprightness; he must do what God requires to be done, and to be done by
him. He that ran well, but extra Viam, out of the Way appointed him, beyond his
Line, had not the Crown assigned him by the Judges in the Greek Games. Neither
has he the Approbation or Reward of upright Walking, who walks by another Rule
then God commands. They that choose either their own Conceits, or the Tradition
of the Elders, or any other humane Authority, for the Square of their Actions,
are judged to worship God in vain; to draw near him with their Mouth, and to
honor him with their Lips, but to remove their Heart far from him, whose Fear
toward him is taught by the Precepts of men, Isa. 29.13. They are such as eye
the Dictates of Rabbis, the Decrees of Popes, the Canons of Councils, above or
equally with the Precepts of Christ: they make Conscience of the Vow of Corban,
not of honoring Father and Mother: they will by no means break the Rules of
the Founder of their Order, but scruple not the violating of Christ's Commands.
Neither can those be said to walk in their Uprightness, that make Conscience of
keeping one Command, but not of another; that will not swear, yet will lie;
that will pray to God, and yet defraud men; that will give Alms, yet adore a
Crucifix; that will pay Tith of Mint, Anise and Cumin, and leave the weightier
matters of the Law, Righteousness, Judgment, Faith, and the Love of God; that
abhor Idols, yet commit Sacrilege. All upright Walking is copulative, takes in
its Walk all God's Commands; it excludes none, but observes all in their due
order and place. Then shall I not be ashamed, says David, (Psalm. 119.6.) when
I have respect to all thy Commands. Yet herein there must be heed taken, that
we regard each in its proper time. To keep the Sabbath by Rest, to attend the
Sacrifice, was a Duty; but not when Mercy was to be showed. Vice is to be
reproved, but in fit season: Sin is to be punished, but by him that is thereto
authourized: Sacrifice is to be offered, but by the Priest. He that walks in
his Uprightness must not only look that the thing he does be commanded, but
that it be commanded to him. Each must walk in his own Path, in his own Rank,
if he will walk in his Uprightness.

3. He that walks in his Uprightness must walk warily, steadily, evenly,
constantly; according to that of Solomon, Prove. 4.25, 26, 27. Let thine eyes
look right on, and let thine ey-lids look straight before thee. Ponder the Path
of thy feet, and let all thy ways be established. Turn not to the right hand
nor to the left; remove thy foot from Evil. So says the Apostle, Ephesians. 5.15,
16. See that ye walk circumspectly, not as fools, but as wise, redeeming the
time. He that walks in his Uprightness has his Eyes in his head, to keep his
Way; gazeth not about to satisfy his Curiosity, but minds his Journey, the Way
he is to walk in, the Work he is to do; listens not to seducing Company, that
seeks to divert him out of his Path; takes heed of such Offers, such
Temptations as may be Stumbling Blocks to him, to cause him to fall; sets his
Foot, his Purposes firmly, that he may not slip; looks not back, like Lot's
Wife to Sodom, to his former Pleasures. He goes not on weeping, like Phalti,
when he restored Michal to David; but like David, with enlarged heart he lifts
up his feet to run the way of God's Commands. He is not slothful, but a
diligent follower of them that through Faith and Patience have inherited the
Promises. He looks to the Cloud of Witnesses that have gone before him, and
keeps company with them who confess themselves Pilgrims and Strangers on Earth,
and thereby declare plainly that they seek another City, to wit, an heavenly.
He casts away every weight, and the Sin that does so easily beset him, that he
may with patience run the Race that is set before him. Such do arm themselves
against Encounters of Spiritual Wickedness, that may rob or spoil them of
their Provision for their Journey. They go on (as David said of himself, Psalm.
71.16.) in the strength of the Lord God. Their Strength is in him, in whose
Heart are the ways of them: they go from Strength to Strength, Psalm. 84.5, 7.
The Joy of the Lord is their Strength; his Love heartens them: the Hope of
Glory keeps them from fainting; it is as an Anchor of the Soul, firm and
stable, and which enters into that within the Veil. They look unto Jesus, the
Author and finisher of their Faith, who for the Joy that was set before him,
endured the Cross, and despised the Shame, and is set down at the right hand of
God. They endure Contradiction of Sinners, and resist unto blood, striving
against Sin. In a word, Faith in God through Jesus Christ, Joy in the Holy
Ghost, Love to Christ, Hope of the Inheritance above, animate them to holy
Resolutions of Obedience to God, confirm them against Difficulties, keep them
from fainting under any Pressures, till they get to the end of their Journey,
and that Rest which is prepared for them that walk uprightly.

II. How this Walking of a man in his Vprightness does demonstrate the Fear of
the Lord.

Such Walking does evidently demonstrate the Fear of the Lord (that is, that
reverential Regard of God as their Lord and Master, the Supreme Lawgiver and
Judge, to whom they are subject) to be the Principle that acts them, and
carries them on with vigor to walk in their Uprightness. For, 1. In that they
set their faces toward God, they show that their Walking tends to please God,
to gain his Approbation; which is the greatest sign of Fear in a Servant to his
Master, a Child to his Father, a Subject to his Prince: for in all these
Relations it is the Reverence of Superiors which moves the Inferior to put
forth his ability for the Superior. So it is the Fear of God that moves the
upright Walker to glorify God in his Body and Spirit, which are God's; to
present his Body to him as a living Sacrifice in his reasonable Service; to
devote himself to God, and to gratify him with what Offering he has, with
what Performance he is able to do. 2. A man's Choice of God's Commands, as his
Path, shows his Subjection to him; and that is the greatest proof of an holy
Fear of the Divine Majesty. He is a man after God's own heart, who will do all
his Will; as it is said of David, Act. 13.22. Which is the great Scope of him
that walks in his Uprightness; and consequently a proof of his owning God's
Sovereignty, and uniting of his Heart to fear his Name. 3. A man's Walking in
his Uprightness proceeds from that Faith whereby the Believer presents God to
himself, sets him before his face, sees him that is invisible, as Moses did,
Heb. 11.27. which begets Fear of God, takes away servile Fear of others, keeps
him in even and constant Obedience; as Enoch, Noah, Abraham, and all the Holy
Patriarchs, who walked with and before God without Fear of their Enemies, in
the Fear of God, depending on his Protection, and subjecting themselves to his
Direction; which engaged the Lord to be their God.

III. What Advantage accrues to him that walks in his Vprightness, and
fears the Lord. Of which very briefly.

The Psalmist tells us in few words, Psalm. 84.11. that the Lord God is a Sun
and a Shield: the Lord will give Grace and Glory: no good thing will he
withhold from them that walk uprightly. Psalm. 97.11. Light is sown for the
Righteous, and Gladness for the Upright in heart. And after him the Apostle,
Gal. 6.16. As many as walk according to the Rule of the new Creature in Christ
Jesus, Peace be on them and Mercy, and on the Israel of God. Whence it is
rightly inferred, that all such as walk in their Uprightness, out of a Fear of
the Lord, are assured of Light to guide them, Protection to preserve them,
Peace to quiet them, Supply of good things to cheer them, Assistence to help
them, Favor to comfort them, and Glory to advance them.

APPLICATION.
And now what remains, but that each of us (as the Prophet minds the Jews, Hag.
1.5.) consider our Ways, whether we have chosen the Way that leads to Life, or
that which is the Path to Destruction; whether we walk uprightly in the Fear of
God, or perversely in Compliance with Satan. All of us have a Journey to go,
here we have no continuing City. We may say as David, 1 Chronicles. 29.15. We are
Strangers before God, as were all our Fathers: our days on the Earth are as a
Shadow, and there is none abiding, no expectation of a settled Mansion here. We
must arise and depart, for this is not our Rest, because it is polluted, Mic.
2.10.

Oh then how much does it concern us to heed which Way we take? whether the
tendence of our Course of life be to walk in our Vprightness, as those that
fear the Lord; or our Conversation be in the Lusts of our Flesh, fulfilling the
desires of the Flesh and of the Mind: whether we devote our selves to the Fear
of God, spend our lives, employ our time and estate to please him, to do his
Will; or our Walking be according to the course of this World, according to the
Prince of the power of the Air, the Spirit that works in the children of
Disobedience.

If you say you fear God, and expect Heaven; you must manifest it by departing
from your sinful Ways, by serving him in Holiness and Righteousness before him
all the days of your life. They must walk before God in their Uprightness here,
who would stand before God in Happiness hereafter. Not Words, but Works, not a
Form of Godliness, but the Power of it, prevails with God. Be not deceived,
says the Apostle, ( Gal. 6.7, 8.) God is not mocked: for whatsoever a man
sows, that shall he reap. For he that sows to his Flesh, shall of the Flesh
reap Corruption: but he that sows to the Spirit, shall of the Spirit reap
Life everlasting. Follow therefore Holiness, without which no man shall see the
Lord. Walk with that Company here, with which you would have your Lot
hereafter. Walk not in the way with them, with whom you dread to be associated
at last. Take heed of Complying with the World in your Life, with whom you
would not be condemned at your Death. Consider the End of your Life; and follow
their Faith, whose End you would purchase at the greatest rate. Remember the
Advice of the Prophet, Jerem. 6.16. Thus says the Lord, Stand in the ways and
see, and ask for the old Paths, where is the good Way, and walk therein, and ye
shall find Rest for your Souls.

I direct you not to follow any New Lights, neither to seek any new Ways; but I
advise you to go to Christ, that you may find Rest for your Souls; to take his
Yoke upon you, and to learn of him; to receive him, and to walk in him, rooted
and built up in him, and established in the Faith, as he has taught you,
abounding therein with thanksgiving. Believe in the Light, that ye may be the
Children of Light. Walk as Children of Light: and walk as such while you have
the Light. Casting off the works of Darkness, and putting on the Armor of
Light, walk honestly as in the day; not in Rioting and Drunkenness, not in
Chambering and Wantonness, not in Strife and Envying: But put ye on the Lord
Jesus Christ, and make no provision for the Flesh, to fulfill the Lusts
thereof. To all which let me add that of the Apostle, Ephesians. 5.1, 2. Be
followers of God as dear Children: and walk in Love, as Christ also has loved
us, and has given himself for us, an Offering and a Sacrifice to God for a
sweet smelling savor. Amen.

LAVS DEO.
THE IMPIOUS CONTEMPT. Part II.
The Twenty-eighth SERMON.
PROVERBS xiv. 2. But he that is perverse in his Ways, despises him.


OF all Points of Wisdom, this is the Inlet, and as it were the Door, to fear
the Lord: and of all Ways of Folly, this is the greatest, to despise him. The
one is demonstrated by a man's walking in his Vprightness, of which I have
already spoken: the other, by Perverseness in a man's Ways, which is now to be
considered.

II. PROPOSITION.
He that is perverse in his Ways, despises the Lord.

Concerning this three Quaere's are to be answered; like as there were in
handling the former Proposition.

1. Who is meant by him that is perverse in his Ways, and when a man is said to
be so. 2. How such an one despises the Lord. 3. What is the Evil of such
Despising the Lord. Of which in their order.

I. Who is meant by him that is perverse in his Ways.

By Ways (as has been already said) are meant the Actions of a Man as he is a
Rational Being, whose Motions should be ordered by such a Rule as his Creator
has made known, and should tend to his Maker's Honor. For God at first made
Man upright, or simple, so as that he had no other Way but that which was
God's: but they have sought out many Inventions, says Solomon, Eccles. 7.29.
Whence it comes to pass, that there are many and various Ways in which men now
walk, contrary to God's Way, that is, his prescribed Will; which is the Way
that every man should walk in, and then he walks in his Vprightness. But when
he chooses any Invention of his own to direct the Course of his Actions by, and
chiefly when he opposes God's Will, his Truth, his Precepts, then is he
perverse in his Ways. Now this may happen two ways; either out of Ignorance, or
wittingly: and this either willingly, or unwillingly; with a pure, or a mixed
Will; out of Infirmity, through Fear, Forgetfulness, Heedlesness, or such like
Cause as abates much of the Voluntariness of the Action; or obstinately,
resolutely, presumptuously, after Conviction, Warning, Reproof, Correction, not
only actually, but also habitually, and incorrigibly, with a high hand and
contumacious mind. He that fears the Lord, and walks in his Vprightness, may
sometimes actually be perverse in his Ways out of Ignorance, Infirmity, through
prevalency of Temptation; and yet not be accounted so perverse in his Ways as
to be said to despise the Lord so as Solomon here means. S. Paul at Antioch
charge S. Peter and S. Barnabas, that they did not walk uprightly, according
to the Truth of the Gospel, Gal. 2.14. because that S. Peter, before certain
came from James, did eat with the Gentiles: but when they were come, he
withdrew, and separated himself, fearing them of the Circumcision. And the
other Jews dissembled likewise with him; insomuch that Barnabas also was
carried away with their dissimulation. Herein was a kind of Perverseness, out
of some Timorousness incident to a holy Saint, and a Pillar among the Apostles,
and that in a Point which so much concerned the Truth of the Gospel: and yet
there was no such despising of the Lord as Solomon does here stigmatize. Nor
dare I say but that David did that which was not right in the eyes of the Lord,
in the matter of Vriah the Hittite, in the business of Ziba, and of Numbering
the people; but that he despised the Commandment of the Lord, to do evil in
his sight: yet was he not so perverse in his Ways as to despise the Lord so as
here is meant, because it was not done obstinately, impenitently, habitually.
But Eli's Sons, Hophni and Phinehas, who caused men to abhor the Offerings of
the Lord, and persisted in their Sin, after their Father Eli's Admonition, were
obstinately, habitually perverse in their Ways, and despised the Lord: 1 Samuel
2.17, 25, 29. In like manner all such are perverse in their Ways, and despise
the Lord so as Solomon here means, who do stubbornly and impenitently persist
in any sinful Error, or wicked Practice against the Law of God, or the Gospel
of Christ, either not relinquishing the one after Discovery, or not amending
the other after Reproof; but upholding the one, and continuing in the other,
against the Warnings of God and Man.

Of such Perverseness of men in their Ways there are many Degrees, according to
the several kinds of Warnings given them, the Frequency of their Actings, the
Stifness and Stubbornness of their Wills, the Proceedings of their Practices,
the Excellency of God's Will which they bend themselves against, and the
Engagements they have to conform to it.

Sometimes the Lord warns men of the Evil of their ways by the Reproof of an
Enemy: and it is Wisdom to make use of it for our Amendment. Even Plutarch
has a Treatise directing a man How to get good by an Enemie's ill will: this
is to make Mithridate out of Poison. Sometimes a Friend shows us our Evil: and
then it is great Perverseness to persist in it. Sometimes an authourized
Pastor, a Parent, a Yoke Fellow, admonishes with due Correction; and yet
persons continue obstinate. Sometimes God sends Warnings by his Prophets: as he
did to the Israelites, 2 Chronicles. 36.15, 16. He sent to them by his Messengers,
rising up betimes, and sending them, because he had Compassion on his people:
But they mocked the Messengers of God, and despised his words, and misused his
Prophets, until the Wrath of the Lord arose against his people, till there was
no Remedy. Sometimes he warns men by his Judgments, either on themselves, or on
others; expecting that when his Judgments are in the Earth, the Inhabitants of
the world should learn Righteousness, Isa. 26.9. Yet though they be iterated,
varied, be very conspicuous and terrible, men return not to the Lord; as the
Prophet complains, Amos 4.11. Yea, they are so far from being bettered by God's
Judgments, that, as it is said Rev. 16.11. some blaspheme the God of Heaven
because of their Pains and their Sores, and repent not of their deeds. Yea, so
far are God's Judgments or Mercies from turning men from their Sins, that
oftentimes they multiply Abominations the more: which shows extreme
Perverseness. The same may be said of them that abuse God's Patience and
Long-suffering, not knowing that the Goodness of God should lead them to
Repentance; as the Apostle speaks Romans 2.4. And of those that, because Sentence
against an evil work is not executed speedily, therefore their Heart is fully
set in them to do evil, Eccles. 8.11.

And according to this Stifness of their Wills, there are Degrees of
Perverseness in their Practices. For some (as the Prophet charge the Jews,
Zach. 7.11.) refuse to hearken, pull away the Shoulder, stop their Ears that
they should not hear. Yea, (says he, verse. 12.) they made their Heart as an
Adamant-stone, lest they should hear the Lord, and the words which the Lord of
hoasts sent in his Spirit by the Prophets: therefore a great Wrath came from
the Lord of hoasts. Some shut their Eyes against the Light in them by their
vicious Affections; darken the Light of their natural Conscience, and are given
over to a reprobate Sense. Many hold the Truth in Unrighteousness, after it is
made known to them, Romans 1.18. and not only yield not to it, but also wrangle
and cavil against it. Yea, there are not a few, who, in stead of being altered
by any Denunciations of Judgments from God, or Convictions of his Law, turn the
very Speeches of the Prophets and Preachers that are sent to them into
proverbial Scoffs: as those that scornfully said, Let him make speed, and
hasten his Work, that we may see it: and let the Counsel of the Holy one of
Israel draw nigh and come, that we may know it, Isa. 5.19. And those that
tauntingly took up the Prophet's term of the Burden of the Lord, Jer. 23.38.
To what height of profane Impudence, and Perverseness in their Ways, are they
come, who (as if they counted it their Bravery) abuse the very words of Holy
Scripture, even of Christ himself, in their Discourses and foolish Jests,
(though by themselves and those like them counted witty,) to make themselves
sport, and render them ridiculous? who, as if it were a part of Gallantry to
provoke the God of Heaven, glory in their outrageous Swearing, and direful
Imprecations against themselves? Others there are like Elymas the Sorcerer,
whom S. Paul (Act. 13.10.) terms a man full of all Subtlety and all Mischief, a
Child of the Devil, Enemy of all Righteousness, who ceased not to pervert the
right ways of the Lord, in seeking to turn away the Deputy, Sergius Paulus,
from the Faith of Christ. To whom those are near of kin of whom S. Paul speaks,
in his Farewell-Sermon to the Ephesians, Act. 20.29, 30. I know this, that
after my departing, shall grievous Wolves enter in amongst you, not sparing the
Flock. Also of your own selves shall men arise, speaking perverse things, to
draw away Disciples after them.

All which perverse Proceedings are much aggravated by the Opposition in them
not only to the Law, but also to the Gospel. For, as the carnal Mind is Enmity
against God, in that it is not subject to the Law of God, Romans 8.7. so it is
much greater Perverseness in a man's Ways, to neglect so great Salvation, which
at the first began to be spoken by the Lord, and was confirmed unto us by them
that heard him; God also bearing them witness, both with Signs and Wonders, and
with diverse Miracles, and Gifts of the Holy Ghost, according to his own will,
Heb. 2.3, 4. And therefore our Savior says, Joh. 3.19. This is the
Condemnation, ( per Eminentiam, the great Condemnation,) that Light is come
into the World, and men loved Darkness rather then Light, because their deeds
were evil. It is also so much the greater Perverseness, and renders it
incurable, unpardonable, for men, after their profession of the Truth, after
Vows to God of adhering to Christ, after they have been once enlightened, have
tasted of the heavenly Gift, and been made partakers of the Holy Ghost, have
tasted of the good Word of God, and the powers of the World to come, then to
fall away, so that they crucify the Son of God afresh, and put him to an open
shame, Heb. 6.5, 6. This is the most contumelious way of Despising the Lord,
among all the sorts and degrees of Perverseness in our Ways; as may be
discerned in answering the Second Quaere,

II. How he that is perverse in his Ways despises the Lord.

Despising, says Aristotle, (in the Second of his Rhetoricks, in the Chapter
of Anger,) is the Act of Opinion in not showing any regard of a thing or
person. And it has its Effects in diverse degrees. Sometimes there is only
Slighting, making none or little Esteem of either. Sometimes Damnifying, daring
to harm; because there is so mean a Thought thereof, as not to fear any
Revenge. Sometimes there is insolent Scorning thereof, as of no value. And in
all these degrees a person is despised, when the Contempt is offered either
immediately or directly, as when a King is reviled to his face, his Person
kicked, spurned, derided openly: or mediately, when any such Usage is showed to
that which does more peculiarly pertain to his Dignity; as when his Image,
Coin, Laws, Son, Friends, Servants, Officers, Ambassadors, are vilified or
abused. The Contempt of whom though it be first terminated on them; yet when it
is offered for the King's sake, out of Enmity to or Disesteem of him, or
Affront to his Government, the Relation to him being known, it is either
actually, or by interpretation, a Despising of the King himself. Now, (as the
Prophet Malachi has it, 1.14.) I am a great King, says the Lord of hoasts,
and my Name is dreadful among the Heathens. He is the true God, the living
God, and an everlasting King, Jer. 10.10. There is none like unto him; he is
Great, and his Name is great in might, verse. 6. According as his Name is
glorious and fearful, Deuteronomy. 28.58. so are all the things pertaining to his
Essence and to his Greatness: there is some Reverence due to them. And God is
despised, not only when he is disclaimed, as he was by Pharaoh, Exodus 5.2. or
not minded, as by those wicked ones, who through the Pride of their countenance
will not seek after God, God is not in all their thoughts, Psalm. 10.4. or when
he is reproached and blasphemed, as he was by Rabshakeh, Isa. 36.20. or when
his Worship is neglected, as it was Mal. 1.6, 7. or his Providence denied, as
when it was asked, Where is the God of Judgment? Malach. 2.17. But also when
his Works are undervalued. He that mocketh the Poor, reproacheth his Maker,
says Solomon, Prove. 17.5. Specially when his Children are despised. He that
despises, despises not Man, but God, who has also given unto us his Holy
Spirit, 1 Thessalonians. 4.8. In like manner, to slight God's Laws, his Threatenings,
his Judgments, is an high Contempt of God. But God is most of all despised,
when the Gospel, the Grace of God in Christ, the Ambassadors that bring it,
the Son of God himself, the Image of the invisible God, are contemned, and the
Spirit of God despighted. He that despises you, despises me, says Christ;
and he that despises me, despises him that sent me, Luke 10.16. And in this
respect he that is perverse in his Ways despises the Lord, because he
despises God's Commands, his Gospel, his Messengers; but most of all, his Son,
in whom he is well pleased, and his Spirit of Grace, the chiefest of all the
Gifts that he communicates unto men. Whence may be discerned

III. What is the Evil of such Despising of the Lord. Of which in a word.

All Indignities offered to a King are high Misdemeanors: to rebel against
his Crown, to speak evil of his Person, are Crimina laesae Majestatis, amount
to High Treason, and are usually avenged by the most shameful and tormenting
Death. Doubtless the Perverseness of his Spirit who is obstinate in his Ways,
and despises God's Statutes and his Judgments, is no less High Treason against
the Heavenly Majesty, his Crown and Dignity; chiefly when his Grace is
rejected, his Son is not kissed, his Spirit is despighted: there being no
greater Affront to him, who is the blessed and only Potentate, King of Kings,
and Lord of Lords, then when his Grace in Christ is rejected, when men will not
have Christ to rule over them, but prefer the Prince of this World before the
Lord of Glory, the Prince of Life; and in stead of welcoming the Spirit of
Life, embrace the accursed Fiend, the Author of Death. This makes the Wrath of
God hot, so that they perish from the way, when his Wrath is kindled but a
little, Psalm. 2.12. Such men make God a Liar, 1 John 5.10. And that does in
effect un-God him, and dethrone him. By despising the Riches of his Goodness,
after their impenitent hard Heart, they treasure up to themselves Wrath against
the day of Wrath, and revelation of the righteous Judgment of God, Romans 2.4, 5.
Which can be no less then fiery Indignation, which shall devour the
Adversaries, who tread under foot the Blood of the Son of God, count the Blood
of the Covenant, wherewith persons are sanctified, an unholy thing, and do
despite to the Spirit of Grace, Heb. 10.27, 29.

APPLICATION.
Oh that these things were seriously pondered and laid to heart by you. How
many thousands of holy Monitions, to turn from your evil Ways, have some of you
had? How often has God spoken to you by his Judgments from Heaven on your
selves, or others? How often has Christ stood at the door of your Souls, and
knocked, that he might be let in, that he might sup with you, and you with him?
How frequently have the Preachers of the Gospel, the Servants of Christ,
invited you to his Supper, to be partakers of that Grace of God which exceeds
in worth all the Treasures of the Earth, all the Pleasures under the Sun; which
is of greater Necessity and Advantage then all the Traffic by Land or Sea? and
yet his Word is not believed; Oxen and Farms and Wives, yea (that which is
worse) Dalilah's, Idols are minded, more esteemed then Christ, then his Love,
his Spirit, his Kingdom, his Righteousness.

Where is the man that is willing to deny himself, his own Contents, unjust
Gains, unclean Affections, injurious Projects, yea his vain Opinions, and to
take up Christ's Cross after him? Where is he that will suffer, I will not say
Loss of Life, or Goods, or Credit with men, for Christ, but, even a Divorce
from his Lusts? that will forbear a profane ungodly Oath, a devilish Revenge,
or undergo so much as a Scoff or Reproach, that he may follow Christ, and be
his Disciple? If this be not Perverseness in our Ways, the Despising of the
Lord in the most vilifying way, I know not what is.

I beseech you, bethink your selves in good earnest what will be the End of
these things. Think of that Wisdom Solomon speaks of Prove. 1. v. 22. and so
forwards. The very reading of it, methinks, should awaken and affright as many
of you as yet persist in your Perverseness, and will none of Wisedom's Counsel,
but despise all its Reproof. As therefore you would not be rejected by Christ,
despised by him in that Day when he shall bid some depart from him into
everlasting Fire prepared for the Devil and his Angels; deny, I beseech you,
your Ungodliness and worldly Lusts, obey the voice of Christ, trust in him: and
he will then receive you, and ye shall be where he is. Which the Lord grant,
etc. Amen.

LAVS DEO.
THE SAINTS Future Glory.
The Twenty-ninth SERMON.
REVEL. vij. 15. Therefore are they before the Throne of God, and serve him day
and night in his Temple; and he that sits on the Throne shall dwell among
them.


YOU have here exhibited to your view the most happy and glorious Spectacle
which humane spirits are capable of. Brave Shows (as at Princes Coronations and
Marriages) do greatly attract the Eyes of men. One of the ancient Fathers
wished much to see a Roman Triumph in its greatest Glory. The Queen of Sheba
was so affected with the Glory of Solomon and his Court, that she took a great
and costly Journey to behold them; and was so transported with what she saw and
heard, that there was no more Spirit in her.

But I may well say, A Greater then Solomon, a braver Sight then Solomon's
Court, or a Roman Triumph, is here. Here is the God of Glory on his Throne.
Here the Court of glorious Spirits which are made perfect, have their most
splendid Robes on, and the Ensign of their Victory in their hands: that Palma
nobilis which carries to God the Offscouring of the Earth; and makes them, that
hid themselves in Dens and Caves of the Earth, to be advanced to the Habitation
of God in the highest Heavens.

And therefore this Show is worth your beholding: which I shall endeavor to
present to you, though not in its Splendor, yet so as I hope it may raise you
up, as to an Admiration and Extolling of the Divine Excellency, so also to an
Imitation of and a Following after those glorious Saints, of whom it is said in
the Verse before my Text, that they came out of great Tribulation, and washed
their Robes and made them white in the Blood of the Lamb: and in this Verse,
Therefore are they before the Throne of God, and serve him day and night in his
Temple; and he that sits on the Throne shall dwell among them.

In which two Verses you have described,

1. The Exploits and Estate of these noble Warriors or Combatants on Earth.
They had a great Fight of Afflictions: They wrastled not only against Flesh
and Blood; but against Principalities and Powers, against the Rulers of the
Darkness of this world, against Spiritual Wickedness in high, or heavenly,
places: And though they had sore Falls, yet they washed their Robes and made
them white in the Blood of the Lamb; and by the word of their Testimony at last
they overcame Satan, and the World, not loving their Lives unto the death. This
was their gallant Fight of Faith; this their glorious Victory over their proud
and most treacherous Enemies.

2. Their Triumph, their Ascent into the Capitol, their Reception into Heaven:
They are before the Throne of God, and serve him day and night in his Temple;
and he that sits on the Throne shall dwell among them.

Their present State there may be seen in these Particulars.

1. In the place where they are, they do not, as they did on Earth, wander
about in Deserts and Mountains, and in Dens and Caves of the earth; but are
about the Throne of God. Nor are they clothed with Sheepskins and Goat Skins;
but have Royal or Priestly Robes, like the Servants of Solomon about his
Throne, or the Priests in their Garments at the Altar or in the Temple.

2. Their Employment is not to grind in Mills, or make Brick under a cruel
Pharaoh: but, like the Priests and Levites at the Temple, they day and night
serve the Great, the Glorious and Blessed Potentate, who is King of Kings, and
Lord of Lords, who only has Immortality, and dwells in Light
incomprehensible. And their Service is the most pleasant, and without any
Tediousness, to wit, to praise and magnify him everlastingly.

3. Their Company is not base, sordid and vexing Men; or malicious and cruel
Devils: but he that sits on the Throne, the King of Glory, who has all
Beauty and Loveliness; who will dwell among them, so as to protect them, and
satisfy them with his Presence.

I shall not have time to insist upon the description of the Conflict and
Achievement of these Blessed Saints when upon Earth: though the particle
[Therefore,] referring thither, might induce me to consider thereof. Nor is it
necessary to inquire into the Time of that great Affliction which these are
said to come out of. I will (without limitation of it to one sort of Saints, as
Martyrs, at one time, whether in the Ten first great Persecutions under the
Pagan Roman Emperors, or those under the bloody Roman Popes by Burnings and
most cruel Massacres) apply this to all Saints; and thence observe, 1. That
Afflictions, Persecutions, yea Death, do not extinguish the Being of Saints,
who wash their Robes and make them clean in the Blood of the Lamb. 2. That when
they are removed from Men below, they are placed before the Throne of God. 3.
That there they serve God in his Temple in Heaven perpetually. 4. That they
have God everlastingly cohabiting with them.


Of which in their order.

I. OBSERVATION.
That Afflictions, Persecutions, yea Death, do not extinguish the Being of
Saints, who wash their Robes and make them clean in the Blood of the Lamb.

It is the saying of our Lord to Martha, Joh. 11.26. Whosoever lives, and
believes in me, shall never die. It is true, that believing Lazarus, her
Brother, was then in the Grave, and had been dead (to her apprehension) four
days, insomuch that she made no other account of him but as of a putrefied
stinking Carkase: yet even then Christ avoucheth him to have been alive. And in
like manner he judged Abraham and Isaac and Jacob, though buried many Ages
before, yet even then when he conversed on Earth to be alive, and so to
continue for ever. God being their God, and he not being a God of the dead, but
of the living, they must by consequence live unto him: Luke 20.38.

Be the Dissolution of the Bodies from the Souls of the Saints never so
violent, their Flesh and Bones never so much consumed by the most vehement
Flames, torn and devoured by the most greedy and ravenous Beasts, be they never
so much putrefied and wasted with Sickness; yet in their Dust and Ashes there
is a Seed of Life. It is with their Relics as it is with Seed that is sown,
which though it be buried under the clods of the Earth, and in appearance to
men annihilated; yet has it a seminal Life, which shall spring up again and
flourish. This Job was assured of, when he said, Job 19.26, 27. Though after my
Skin, Worms destroy this Body, yet in my Flesh shall I see God: Whom I shall
see for my self, and mine Eyes shall behold, and not another; though my Reins
be consumed within me.

But this is not all: The Spirits of men, even when their Bodies have only a
seminal Life, have an actual Life; they have a Life of Sense and Understanding:
they neither have their Life extinguished, nor laid asleep without Feeling or
Cogitation. Though the Dust return to the Earth as it was, yet the Spirit
returns to God that gave it.

The Spirits that were sometimes disobedient, when once the Long-suffering of
God waited in the days of Noah, while the Ark was preparing, were in prison
when S. Peter wrote: 1 Epist. 3.19, 20. And it is the saying of the Author to
the Hebrews, Chap. 12.23. Ye are come to the Spirits of Just men made perfect.

When Lazarus was raised from the Grave, he had not a new Soul created which
was not existent before, but the same Soul brought back into his Body. Neither
at the Resurrection are other Souls joined to the Bodies, then those that
before had lived in them. For otherwise, not the same Soul which had done good
or evil should be rewarded, but another. When ( Act. 7.59.) S. Stephen called
upon God, and said, Lord Jesus, receive my Spirit, he, being full of the Holy
Ghost, was assured, that though his Body were buried, yet his Spirit should be
with Christ. And when the Apostle Paul expressed his willingness to be absent
from the Body; yet his expectation was, to be present with the Lord, 2 Cor.
5.8. It was his choice and option, to depart, and to be with Christ, as being
far better, Phil. 1.23. He had learned, that Christ was in Death Life, that he
that believes on him has everlasting Life, that his Life was hid with Christ
in God, that the Spirit of God that dwelt in him was Life, because of
Righteousness; and therefore he counted not himself to live, but Christ in him.

And as Christ did commend his Spirit into the hands of his Father, when he
gave up the ghost, being assured he should be in Paradise: so do all the
Saints that have the Spirit of Christ; even when they lie down in their beds of
Earth, they yield up their Spirits into the hands of their Father, as assured
to be with Christ, who is the Way to the Father. And this brings in the

II. OBSERVATION.
That when Saints are removed from Men below, they are placed before the Throne
of God.

Though God be a Spirit, dwelling in that Light unto which no man can approach,
whom no man has seen, nor can see: yet the Holy Scriptures express him to us
under the Similitude of a glorious King, suppose a Solomon in all his Glory,
sitting on a Throne or Seat of Royal Majesty, and that in the Heaven of
Heavens; where his Son, termed the Lamb in this Chap. verse. 9, 10. has his
Throne also at the right hand of God; for being ascended into the Most holy
place, as an high Priest, he is set on the right hand of the Throne of the
Majesty in the Heavens, Heb. 8.1. There the Angels, who are ministering Spirits
unto him, and the Elders, all the Apostles, Prophets, Martyrs, Confessors, as
Kings and Priests unto God, stand round about the Throne, attending upon and
beholding the King of Glory; the number of whom is said, Revel. 5.11. to be ten
thousand times ten thousand, and thousands of thousands. Now this place is by
Christ termed Paradise, Luke 23.43. and by S. Paul, 2 Cor. 12.2, 4. said to be
the third Heaven, where is a place of Rest, an Abraham's Bosom, into which
Lazarus is said to be carried by the Angels, Luke 16.22.

Now though that were a great Happiness, for a Beggar, that lately lay at the
Rich man's gate full of Sores, and empty of Bread, glad to have been fed with
the crumbs which fell from the rich man's Table, as the Dogs were, who had more
Compassion then the rich man; for they licked his Sores, when the rich man
disdained to look on him, or to pay for his Cure: And though it be to all that
undergo sore Travail, great Wants and Persecutions, a very great part of their
Blessedness, that there remains a Rest for the people of God, Heb. 4.9; and to
the Saints which keep the Commandments of God, and the Faith of Jesus, after
their patient Sufferings, that a Voice from Heaven is heard, saying, Write,
Blessed are the dead which die in, or for, the Lord from henceforth, Yea, says
the Spirit, that they may rest from their Labors: Yet that is not the total
Sum which completes their Felicity; there is more in that which follows, that
their Works follow them, so as to be approved in Heaven. Their Persons are
welcomed, and entertained with Triumph over their Enemies: they have the Crown
of Righteousness conferred on them by the Righteous Judge of all the World:
their good Fight of Faith is applauded with an Io-Triumph, as an Heroical act
of the most gallant Fortitude, by the Acclamation of the Celestial Quire of
Angels and blessed Spirits: they are clothed with white Linen, the
Righteousness of Saints; they are arrayed with the most sumptuous Apparel;
feasted with the Light of God's Countenance; reign with Christ on his Throne;
are designed to be solemnly married to Christ, and to be Judges of the World,
as Co-assessours with Christ, at his Coming: in the expectation of which they
most delightfully see God, as being before his Throne, and there serving him
for ever. Which brings us to the

III. OBSERVATION.
That the Saints serve God in his Temple in Heaven perpetually.

The Service of a great and gracious Prince, though but in the meanest Office
about him, is an Employment much sought after, for the Advantages it brings of
Safety, free Access, Esteem, and other Privileges concomitant: but to attend
him in a higher quality is still more desirable, for the Dignity and Nearness
of it to such a Majesty. David chose rather to be a Doorkeeper in the House of
God, then to be as Haman, the great Favorite in the Palace of Shushan with
Ahasuerus King of Persia.

Yet these are but petty and low Advantages in comparison of what accrue by the
Service of the Great God, who fills Heaven and Earth. Surely it was a
Happiness to be a Servant to God, though but a Hewer of wood, or a Drawer of
water, for the House of God, as the Gibeonites were: they were yet far more
blessed that dwelt in his House, as Priests and Levites, to minister before
him, and to serve at his Altar: but it is superlative Happiness to serve God in
his Temple in Heaven, and to do this for ever without any intermission;
especially when the Service is no other then Service of Gratitude, and Praising
of the Great Creator and Benefactour of the world, even him who is Optimus as
well as Maximus, the Best of Beings as well as the Greatest; even him who is
the Father of Lights, from whom every good and perfect Gift comes, in whom is
no Variableness, nor shadow of turning.

They that are still praising God on Earth are blessed, Psalm. 84.4. As all
God's Works do praise the Lord; so his Saints do bless him: they show forth the
Glory of his Kingdom, and talk of his Power, Psalm 145.10, 11. Much more joyous
and blessed a thing is it when the great Consort of Heaven do there perpetually
sound forth the high Praises of their God; where they have nothing else to do
but to sing, Blessing, and Honor, and Glory, and Power be unto him that
sits upon the Throne, and unto the Lamb, for ever and ever; where this New
Song is sung with the best Music of Heaven, concerning the Lord Jesus, Thou
art worthy of all Benediction, for thou wast slain, and have redeemed us to God
by thy Blood, out of every kindred, and tongue, and people, and nation; and
have made us unto our God Kings and Priests; and where with a loud voice, with
the greatest Shout of Angels and glorified Saints, this Acknowledgment is
echoed forth, Worthy is the Lamb that was slain, to receive Power, and Riches,
and Wisdom, and Strength, and Honor, and Glory, and Blessing.

Oh how glad are men to tell of the Good they have received by such and such
Benefactours? If a gracious Prince has but admitted them to kiss his Hands,
has deigned to speak kindly to them, to promise them Preferment at Court; how
do men, like Haman, tell their Wives and Friends of it with rejoicing? how
highly do they esteem themselves? what Regard do they expect from others? how
do they please themselves in the expectation of his Performance? how thankfully
do they receive any Intelligence of him, any Message from him? And yet it often
falls out, that Princes Favorites be, as a wise Heathen said, like Counters;
which one day stand for pounds, another day are of no value. So that, perhaps,
whom they magnified to day, him they will curse to morrow: whom they gloried in
one day, him they are displeased at the next.

It is otherwise with the Saints in Heaven then with Courtiers on Earth. Once
in God's Favor, and they never lose it. They have no fear of Frowns, when once
before him in his Temple; they have no occasion of Dislike at any of his Looks
or Speeches. There is all Serenity of Aspect, Entertainment with perfect
Friendship, matter of eternal Love, everlasting Preferment.

And therefore with the greatest Freeness and Cheerfulness, without
Intermission or Weariness, the Saints do serve God in their Hymns in Heaven,
and that in his Presence; for he that sits on the Throne does dwell among
them. Which was my last Observation, and is now to be considered, as the Top of
all their Happiness, securing it from all Loss, Disturbance, or Diminution.

IV. OBSERVATION.
That the Saints have God everlastingly cohabiting with them.

Among the Promises and Preferments which are by God bestowed on his Servants,
this is the chiefest, That as they are his Jewels, a peculiar people to him;
are as lively Stones built up a spiritual House, an holy Priesthood, to offer
up spiritual Sacrifices acceptable to him by Jesus Christ: so they become the
Temple of the living God; as God has said, I will dwell in them, and walk in
them; and I will be their God, and they shall be my People, 2 Cor. 6.16.

The Presence of God is counted so necessary to his People, that Moses had
rather stay in the vast howling Wilderness, among fiery stinging Serpents, then
go onward toward Canaan without it, Exodus 33.15. On the other side, the
Psalmist professes, that though he walked through the valley of the shadow of
death, he would fear no evil; because God was with him, his Rod and his Staff
did comfort him, Psalm. 23.4.

And indeed the chiefest Joy of Christians, as well as Safety, is in God's
Company. When God hides his Face, the holiest Souls are troubled: Satan
affrights them, the men of the World vex them; their own Consciences bring
their Sins to remembrance, and cause Gripings and Pain in their very Bowels.
But when God returns, when all the Clouds and Storms are dispersed; Blessed,
says the Psalmist, is the people that know the joyful sound: they shall walk,
O Lord, in the light of thy Countenance, Psalm. 89.15.

How much do Holy Saints here disquiet themselves by reason of their
Cohabitation with profane and unrighteous persons? When they are forced to
dwell with them that are Enemies, they are as a Sword in their bones, when
reproachfully they say daily to them, Where is thy God? How do they long for
the Christian Society of sincere Believers and heavenly-minded Christians? But
their chief Prayer is, Lord, lift up the Light of thy Countenance upon us.
Their Soul thirsts for God, for the living God: When shall we come and appear
before God? A wise and single-hearted Companion is justly valued as a most
precious Jewel: As Ointment and Perfume rejoice the Heart, so does such
Acquaintance a man's Spirit.

But the best of men are imperfect, the purest Churches have their Spots,
Christ's own Disciples had a Judas with them. They are not quite free from
Satan's Haunts, till they be where Christ is. But when they behold his Glory,
are in the Company of the Lamb, where he is, are in the House where their
Father in Heaven dwells, have him dwelling with them, so as that they behold
his Face, and are in his Hand; then they are filled with everlasting Joy,
abundantly satisfied with the Bread of Life, drink of the River of his
Pleasures, with whom is the Fountain of Life, and in his Light they see Light:
they find in God's Presence there is Fullness of Joy, and at his right hand
Pleasures for evermore.

APPLICATION.
And thus have I presented unto you a Shadow of that most desirable Light which
is the Inheritance of all the Saints. A comprehensive View of which is not
attainable, (except there be afforded such a Sight as was to the Three
Disciples at Christ's Transfiguration in the Mount, or to S. Paul at his
Rapture into Paradise,) till we be absent from the Body, and present with the
Lord: and then we shall behold his Face in Righteousness; and when we awake,
shall be satisfied with his Likeness.

In the mean time, while we walk by Faith, and not by Sight, let us be such in
our Choice, in our Affections, in our Endeavors, as the Saints have been, with
Patience waiting for what we see not, and running so as that we may attain it.
This will be our Comfort, our Support when we come to the end of our Race, that
we have not run for a corruptible Crown, but an incorruptible: that we have not
contended for an Earthly Portion with the men of this World, but for an
Inheritance laid up in Heaven for us: that we have, as the Saints have done,
parted with all to buy this Pearl; laid up our Treasure, not in Earth, but in
Heaven; negotiated to be rich toward God, and not to have Treasure here only
for our selves.

You that would be before the Throne of God, must wash your Robes in the Blood
of the Lamb, keep your Garments clean, have your Conversation such as becomes
the Gospel: you must cast off the Works of Darkness, and put on the Armor of
Light: walk honestly, or decently, as in the day, as Children of Light; not in
Rioting and Drunkenness, not in Chambering and Wantonness, not in Strife and
Envying; but put on the Lord Jesus Christ, and make no provision for the Flesh,
to fulfill the Lusts thereof.

Dream not that you can serve Sin here, and yet serve God before his Throne in
his Temple: that God will walk with you, and dwell with you, if you yield your
Members as Weapons of Unrighteousness unto Sin: that, if you affect the Ways of
Sinners, walk in the Counsel of the Ungodly, sit in the Seat of the Scornful,
and join with the Congregation of Evildoers, you shall at last have your
Portion with the Saints.

Apply then your time and studies and abilities to purify your selves as God
is pure, if you hope to see him as he is. And notwithstanding all the
Sufferings and Opposition you may meet with, with Patience possess your Souls.
Let this animate and strengthen your Hearts against Fainting and Backsliding,
that if you suffer with Christ, you shall also reign with him. Which the Lord
grant, etc. Amen.

LAVS DEO.
THE PATRIARCH'S JOY.
The Thirtieth SERMON.
JOHN viij. 56. Your Father Abraham rejoiced to see my Day: and he saw it, and
was glad.


AMong other Sufferings which Christ underwent, the Antilogy, that is, the
Contradiction of Sinners, (the Controversy which he had with cavilling and
perverse Opponents or Disputers against his Sayings,) was not the least: which
therefore Heb. 12.3. is propounded to us to analogize, that is, consider and
ponder upon; that we may not faint or be tired in our spirits, when we meet
with such wrangling Gainsayers.

In this Chapter we have a Specimen of such Sophistry in the Jews, who
exercised Christ with their perverse Arguings, to the intent they might hinder
the Reception of his Testimony of himself, and the Doctrine which he was sent
to teach them, which he terms the Truth, verse. 32. that would make them free.
This they disdainfully except against, as glorying that they were Abraham's
Seed, never in Bondage; and therefore scorned his offer of Freedom.

To both which our Savior replies, refuting their vain Brags of their being
Abraham's Seed, and free in reference to men; since they were the Servants of
Sin, and utterly unlike to Abraham in their Spirits, who was far otherwise
affected toward him then they were: For, says he, Your Father Abraham
rejoiced to see my Day: and he saw it, and was glad; whereas my Day is that
which you spurn against, as galling and vexing your Spirits.

To understand which, it is requisite that I unfold, 1. What is meant by
Christ's Day. 2. How Abraham is said to be their Father; whereas verse. 39.
Christ had said, If ye were Abraham's Children, ye would do the works of
Abraham: which imports they were not. 3. How Abraham is said to have rejoiced
to see Christ's Day. 4. How it was true that he saw it. 5. What matter of
Rejoicing this was to him; and how he was glad in such seeing.


1. Concerning the First; It is agreed on by most, that the Day of Christ here
is meant of his Advent, or Coming in the Flesh, which we at present celebrate.
Though some refer it more specially to his Passion or Suffering. But the Jews
understood it of his Birth, and the Space of his Life on Earth, which usually
is termed a Man's Day in the Hebrew expression; and in respect of Christ, the
Days of his flesh, Heb. 5.7.

2. As for the Second; He terms Abraham their Father, as they gloried, by way
of Concession, acknowledging them, verse. 37. to be Abraham's Seed by natural
Generation: But yet he denies them to be Abraham's Seed in respect of their
Minds and Spirits; there being so great a Dissimilitude and Contrariety betwixt
them and him therein, that they were more truly begotten of the Devil, whom in
Lying and Cruelty they so much resembled.

3. As for the Third; The word rendered [Rejoycing] signifies such a Joy as is
accompanied with Leaping or other Gesticulation, as when a man is superlatively
affected with a thing which he hopes for, has some tidings and assurance of
its futurity, and apprehends it as a Beatitude.

And it is conceived Abraham thus rejoiced, when, upon God's Promise of Sarah's
Conception, and the Blessing consequent thereupon, (wherein Christ's Coming was
included,) he fell upon his face, and laughed, and said in his heart, Shall a
Child be born unto him that is an hundred years old? and shall Sarah, that is
ninety years old, bear? Which was spoken by him, not dubitative, by way of
Doubting, (for the contrary is asserted Romans 4.16, 17, 18, 19, 20.) but out of
Admiration, as over-joyed at the news.

So it is said of John Baptist in the Womb, that at the presence of Christ's
Mother, and her Salutation, the Babe leaped, or skipped in exultation, for Joy,
in the Womb of his Mother.

4. As for the Fourth Quaere; It is true, there be that understand the Seeing
of Abraham, of his beholding of Christ, when with two Angels he appeared to
Abraham in a Humane shape; and Abraham saw him eat, and talked with him, as
with the Judge of all the Earth: which was consequent upon the desire he had to
see him, after the Revelation made to him Genesis 12.2, 3. and Genesis 15.5. and his
Exultation thereupon, Genesis 17.16, 17. Which is far more likely to be meant,
then his seeing him in the Type of Isaac to be offered, or a Manifestation of
the time of his Coming to Abraham being dead.

But if the sense be of Intellectual Seeing, it may be understood of a Seeing
by Revelation or Vision; by such an Apparition as might be peculiar to Abraham,
and not common to those many Prophets, Kings, and Righteous men, to whom it was
denied to see those things which the Apostles saw, and to hear those things
which they heard, Matthew. 13.17. Luke 10.24.

Sure, as Abraham's Faith was singular, (whereupon he had the denomination of
the Father of Believers;) so the Manifestation of Christ to him, whatever it
was, had a Peculiarity in respect of Prophets, Kings, and Righteous men. And
therefore both in Mary's Magnificat, and in Zachary's Benedictus, the
Performance of God's Promise is said to be, as he spoke to Abraham, and,
according to the Oath which he swear to our Father Abraham.

5. As for the Last; This Seeing of Christ's Day, (whether it were Ocular or
Intellectual,) proper to Abraham, was matter of great Joy to Abraham in a more
eminent manner then to others: both in that he saw that Seed which was in
special manner his, not only because it descended from him, (for so it was
also David's Seed,) but because it was to come of Sarah in a supernatural way;
and also that in this Seed, and so in him, all the Nations of the Earth should
be blessed, and he himself should be a Blessing, Genesis 12.2. Which therefore
produced (if not for the kind, yet for the degree,) a singular Rejoicing in
Abraham: such as showed it self, not only in so ready a following God
whithersoever he called him; (a free choice of such an Estate of being as God
allotted him;) but also in that unparalled Offering up Isaac, when he was
tried, the great effect of his Faith, as it is determined to have been, Heb.
11.17, 18, 19.

Having thus opened the Meaning of this Speech of Christ, that I may
accommodate it to this present Time and Occasion, of celebrating the Memorial
of Christ's Advent, we may hence observe, 1. That the Day of Christ, or his
Coming in the Flesh, was foreknown to Abraham, and other Holy Believers which
preceded his Incarnation. 2. That it was that which they desired and waited
for. 3. That the Certainty of its Accomplishment was the Spring of their Joy,
the Basis of their Comfort, the Stay and Support of their Spirits in the days
of their Pilgrimage on Earth.


Of which I shall speak in order.

I. OBSERVATION.
That the Day of Christ, or his Coming in the Flesh, was foreknown to Abraham,
and other Holy Believers which preceded his Incarnation.

This is told us in Mary's Song, that God remembered his Mercy, as he spoke to
the Fathers; and in Zachary's Hymn, as he spoke by the mouth of his holy
Prophets which have been since the world began. Both to Holy Prophets and to
Angels, some, though obscure, Predictions and Foreshewings of Christ's Day were
vouchsafed: as those words of Jacob, about the Coming of Shilo, and the
Gathering of the people to him, show, Genesis 49.10. those also of Moses, Exodus
4.13. when, to decline the Expedition God employed him in to Egypt, he said, O
my Lord, send, I pray thee, by the hand of Him whom thou will send; likewise
the many Passages in the Psalms and Prophets which were opened and explained by
our Lord Christ. All these, I say, show that there were some, though obscure,
Foretellings of Christ's Day.

And indeed, that there should be a Day of Christ, was made known to Simeon, to
whom it was revealed by the Holy Ghost, that he should not see Death, before he
had seen the Lord's Christ, Luke 2.26. To Anna a Prophetess, who, upon Christ's
Presenting at the Temple, gave Thanks likewise, as Simeon did, unto the Lord,
and spoke of Jesus Christ to all them that looked for Redemption in Jerusalem,
verse. 38. Even the chief Priests and Scribes of the people knew that Christ
should be born in Bethlehem of Judaea, Matthew. 2.4, 5. The Woman of Samaria said
to the Lord Jesus, Joh. 4.25. I know that Messiah comes, which is called
Christ: when he is come, he will tell us all things. Yea the Magi or Wise men
of the East had intimation of his Birth, and were led to him by a Star, Matthew.
2.1, 2. Even Suetonius, in his History of Vespasian's Life, tells us, that toto
Orient percrebuit sermo, throughout all the East there was frequent speech of
a Ruler that should come out from Judaea: which was misapplied to Vespasian;
yet thereby the Foreknowledge of Christ's Day is manifest to have been far
spread, which caused the Desire and Expectation thereof in those Holy Believers
who preceded Christ's Incarnation. Which is the next thing to be considered.

II. OBSERVATION.
That this Day of Christ was by Believers of old desired and waited for.

If the words of Jacob, Genesis 49.18. I have waited for thy Salvation, O Lord, do
not intimate his Desire and Expectation of Christ's Day: yet that Speech in the
last words of David, 2 Samuel 23.5. (God has made with me an everlasting
Covenant, ordered in all things and sure: for this is all my Salvation, and all
my Desire,) does express it to have been his; since there is no other thing but
the Day of Christ, promised to come from him, that could be truly said to be
all his Salvation, and all his Desire.

As the Prophet Isaiah foretold, that there should come forth a Rod out of the
Stem of Jesse, and a Branch should grow out of his Roots, Isa. 11.1. and the
Prophet Micah, Mic. 5.2. that the Messiah, who was to be Ruler in Israel,
should come forth of Bethlehem, whose Goings forth had been from of old, from
everlasting: So it was confessedly expected even by the chief Priests and
Scribes of the people. And of him it is said, ( Mal. 3.1.) The Lord whom ye
seek shall suddenly come to his Temple; even the Messenger of the Covenant,
whom ye delight in, behold, he shall come: and this soon after his Messenger
that he sent was come to prepare his Way before him; which to be meant of John
the Baptist is expressly declared Mark 1.2.

And that I may not be too copious in alleging Texts for proof of this; even
the Jews, professed Enemies to Christ, deny it not to have been true, That the
Messiah was to come of the Seed of David, and out of the Town of Bethlehem,
where David was, Joh. 7.42.

Yea, the words of the Prophet Haggai, (2.6, 7.) applied to Christ's Kingdom
Heb. 12.26. that God would shake all Nations, and the Desire of all Nations
should come; and that he would fill that House they were then to build (to wit
the Second Temple) with Glory; these words, I say, show, that Christ's Day was
the Desire of all Nations, and that he was the Person whom the Godly did
delight in and expect: for what Reason, appears by the

III. OBSERVATION.
That the Certainty of the coming of Christ's Day was the Spring of Joy, the
Basis of Comfort, the Stay and Support of their Spirits to Believers of old, in
the days of their Pilgrimage on Earth.

For this we have the words of S. Peter, Act. 2.25, 26, 30. That David (being a
Prophet, and knowing that God had sworn with an Oath to him, that of the fruit
of his Loins, according to the flesh, he would raise up Christ, to sit on his
Throne,) spoke concerning Christ, that therefore did his Heart rejoice, and his
Tongue was glad, and his Flesh did rest in hope. And Heb. 11.26. it is said,
that by Faith Moses esteemed the Reproach of Christ greater Riches then the
Treasures in Egypt. And of Simeon it is said, that he waited for his coming in
the Flesh, as the Consolation of Israel: and accordingly, when he had seen him,
he took him up in his Arms, and blessed God, and said his Nunc dimittis, Lord,
now let thou thy Servant depart in peace, according to thy word; for mine
eyes have seen thy Salvation, Luke 2.25, 28, 29, 30.

And conformable to these was also the frame of Spirit in all the Holy
Believers when he appeared in the Flesh. As persons over-joyed, they were in a
Rapture of Comfort; so as that they could not contain themselves, but must
break out into holy Hymns of Praise. My Soul does magnify the Lord, (said his
Mother,) and my Spirit has rejoiced in God my Savior: For he has regarded
the low estate of his Handmaiden. And, Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, (said
Zacharias,) for he has visited and redeemed his People; and has raised up an
Horn of Salvation for us in the House of his Servant David.

When the Wise men of the East saw his Star, they rejoiced with exceeding great
Joy, Matthew. 2.10. And when the Angel had told the Shepherds, that he brought
them good Tidings of great Joy which should be to all People, of the Birth of
Christ, in the City of David; (upon which there were with the Angel suddenly a
multitude of the Heavenly Host praising God, and saying, Glory be to God in
the highest, and on Earth Peace, Good will toward men;) the Shepherds in have
went to view Christ in the Manger, and upon their Return glorified and praised
God. Hallelujahs were then the Exercise of all that knew of his Birth: and so
they were of all the Holy Patriarchs and Prophets, when they did by Divine
Revelation foresee, and by Faith wait for his Coming.

And the same spirit of Joy showed it self after in all those that saw his Day,
either with their bodily Eyes, or by the Eye of Faith.

When Andrew finds Peter, as over-joyed, he tells him, We have found the
Messiah, which is, being interpreted, the Christ. When Philip finds Nathanael,
he is in the same tune, We have found him of whom Moses in the Law, and the
Prophets did write, Jesus of Nazareth, the Son of Joseph, Joh. 1.41, 45.

And of succeeding Believers S. Peter says, 1 Pet. 1.8. Whom having not seen,
ye love; in whom, though now ye see him not, yet believing, ye rejoice with Joy
unspeakable and full of Glory.

So that I may, by an Induction of Particulars, raising the Observation from
the Hypothesis to the Thesis, conclude universally, That the Day of Christ is
to all Believers the Spring of their Joy, the Basis of their Comfort, the Stay
and Support of their Spirits, in the days of their Pilgrimage upon Earth.

The Reasons whereof are common to all Believers. Jesus Christ is the same
yesterday, and to day, and for ever. Though the Mystery of the Gospel was not
so clearly nor so fully revealed before, as it was by the Apostles Preaching,
but from the beginning of the world was in a sort hid in God: yet in no Age was
there Salvation in any other, none other Name under Heaven given among men
whereby they must be saved. He only has been the Way, the Truth, and the
Life: so that none come to the Father but by him. Abel, Enoch, Noah, Abraham,
Moses, David, and all the rest of the Holy Saints in foregoing Generations, had
Salvation by Faith in Christ, as really as S. Peter and S. Paul, or any of the
Holy Martyrs and Confessors in the Catholic Church.

It is true, the Knowledge of Christ was not so clearly revealed to the sons of
men before his Coming in the Flesh, as it was after, when the Dayspring from
on high visited us, to give Light to them that sit in Darkness and in the
Shadow of Death, to guide our feet into the way of Peace. And therefore John
Baptist exceeded all the Prophets foregoing, he being the man that could say,
Behold the Lamb of God that takes away the Sins of the World. Yet the
Apostles, yea the least in the Kingdom of Heaven, that can preach Christ Born,
Baptized, Preaching, Dying, Rising, Ascended into Heaven, is greater then John
the Baptist, as having seen and heard that which many Prophets and Kings
desired to hear and see, but did not.

The Knowledge the Patriarchs had was Vespertine: the Apostles and ours,
comparatively, Meridian.

Besides, before Christ's Ascension, the Knowledge of him was not so amply
revealed: for though a few of the Gentiles found Christ; yet the Way of
Salvation was not prepared before the face of all People, so as that Christ
became a Light to lighten the Gentiles, as well as to be the Glory of his
people Israel. But when S. Paul was made the Apostle of the Gentiles, Christ
was set to be a Light to the Gentiles, that he might be for Salvation unto the
ends of the Earth, Act. 13.47.

S. Peter was taught to call none common or unclean, but to preach to the
Gentiles, as being those to whom also God had granted Repentance unto Lefe,
Act. 11.18. Whence the same way of Salvation was vouchsafed to Cornelius that
was to Abraham: Cornelius had his Faith imputed to him for Righteousness, as
well as Abraham. God put no difference between them and us, having purified
their Hearts by Faith, says S. Peter, Act. 15.9. He was the God not only of
the Jews, but also of the Gentiles: seeing it was one God which should justify
the Circumcision by Faith, and Uncircumcision through Faith, Romans 3.29, 30.

And hence, as Abraham rejoiced to see Christ's Day, so did the Wise men of the
East: and in all that were made Holy Converts by the preaching of the Gospel,
there was the same Joy, for the kind, which was in Abraham; all with the same
Spirit of Faith glorified Christ, though some with more enlarged Hearts then
others. In the Effects of this Joy, Praising God, Loving Christ, and Adhering
to him, there is the same Mind in all, the same Hope, the same Expressions;
though not to the same degree in all. In some Ages the Joy was more extensive
then in others; in some Persons more intensive then in others: yet in all that
believe in Christ it was and is bottomed upon the same Ground; a Fruit of the
same Faith, showing it self by the same Expressions of Thanksgiving and Love,
Praising God, Following Christ, and Loving all his Members. So that we may say,
All Abraham's Children by Faith rejoice to see Christ's Day; they see it, and
are glad. And thus my Text comes home to you all.

APPLICATION.
You profess your selves Believers in Christ, and Abraham to be your Father: if
you be in truth such, then it will concern you to walk in the Steps of the
Faith of Abraham, who rejoiced to see the Day of Christ, and he saw it, and was
glad.

I deny not, that in this time of Advent there uses to be much Rejoicing,
pretended to be in Remembrance of Christ's Nativity; yea, that many long for
this Time, as the Time in which they are wont to rejoice: nor do I except
against Rejoicing at this Time. But is our Rejoicing such as was in Abraham, a
Rejoicing at Christ's Day out of Faith; a Rejoicing at the Performance of the
Divine Promise, for the bringing of Light and Salvation into the world, whereby
all the Nations of the Earth should be blessed? Is the sense of the Spiritual
Blessings in Heavenly things (I mean, the Knowledge of God's Counsel, the
Mystery of his Will in Reconciling the World to himself by Jesus Christ, not
imputing their Trespasses unto them, the Adoption of us Gentiles into his
Family, with other Riches of his Grace,) the grand Motive of our Joy? Are the
Expressions of our Joy like those of the Shepherds, who glorified and praised
God? of the Blessed Virgin, who brake out into her Magnificat Anima mea, My
Soul does magnify the Lord, and my Spirit has rejoiced in God my Savior?
like those of Zacharias in his Benedictus, Blessed be the Lord God of Israel,
for he has visited and redeemed his people? like those of the Heavenly Host,
who sang, Glory be to God in the highest?

These Hymns I acknowledge are sung in our public Meetings: and it is the
Wisdom of the Church, that you are prompted to remember them. But what is done
in your Houses? Is any such Spiritual Rejoicing there? any such Praising of God
for sending his Son into the world, that you might live by him? Are not rather
your Rejoycings carnal, more like the Heathen Saturnals, full of Looseness,
vain Sports, and Debauchery? Are not your Feasts like the Riotous Bacchanals,
rather then Christian Festivals? Yea, is not impious profaning of God's Name
more frequent there, then holy Conference of such as are filled with the Spirit
of God, singing and making Melody in your Hearts to the Lord?

If it be so, I may say to you as Christ did to the Jews, If ye were the
Children of Abraham, ye would do the Works of Abraham. If Abraham were your
Father indeed, if you did believe in Christ, as Abraham did, you would rejoice
in the Remembrance of Christ's Day, as Abraham did: you would rejoice in
Christ, as born a Savior from Sin, a Teacher sent from God, to direct you in
your way to eternal Life; that so you may live as Abraham did, as Pilgrims on
Earth, as those that seek a City to come, even an heavenly, Heb. 11.10, 13, 16.

Oh that your Faith, your Joy in Christ, might be such a Fruit of the Spirit of
God, as may make your Conversation such as becomes the Gospel of Christ: not
such as is more like theirs whose Belly is their God, whose Glory their Shame,
who mind Earthly things. Let our Conversation be in Heaven, from whence we look
for Christ, to change our vile Bodies, into Bodies of Glory like his; and to
give us an Inheritance above. Which God of his infinite Mercy grant unto us
all, for the Merits of his Son; To whom, with the Blessed Spirit, be ascribed,
etc. Amen.

LAVS DEO
ABRAHAM's PILGRIMAGE.
The Thirty-first SERMON.
GENESIS xij. 1. Now the Lord had said unto Abraham, Get thee out of thy
Country, and from thy Kindred, and from thy Father's House, unto a Land that I
shall show thee.


THAT (after so great a Defection of the World from God, as was upon the
Dispersion of Mankind, occasioned by the Giant-like Attempt of building the
Tower of Babel,) God might have a Race of men who should own and adhere to him,
he singled out Abraham from his Fathers, who dwelt on the other side of the
Flood, and served other Gods, as it is Josh. 24.2, 3. And having removed him
with his Father from Vr of the Chaldees, (where it is likely the Sun was
worshipped in stead of God,) unto Charran; his Father being dead, he translated
him into the Land of Canaan, which he promised to give him for a Possession, as
it is in S. Stephen's Oration, Act. 7.4, 5. consonant to the words I have now
read to you, Now the Lord had said unto Abraham, Get thee out of thy Country,
etc.

Sundry ways God used to speak to the Ancients; by Prophets, Dreams, and
Visions. So Genesis 15.1. The word of the Lord came unto Abram in a Vision: and
Genesis 17.1. The Lord appeared unto Abram: and, speaking of this very Precept
here given him, S. Stephen says, Act. 7.2. The God of Glory appeared unto our
Father Abraham.

Some kind of glorious Apparition there was then, when God gave Abraham this
Mandate. The Business, no doubt, being (as in After-ages, so in Abraham's days)
most famous, God would have it begun by an illustrious Manifestation of
himself, that he might be known to be the God of Glory; and all the Gods that
Abraham's Fathers served, to be but Vanities and Lies; not Numina, but Nomina,
not Gods, though so called. And that there might be the firmer Impression on
Abraham thereby, God thus shows himself, and speaks.

However God speaks to us, we are to hearken: be it in a Dream, or by a
Prophet, if it be God's Voice, it must be obeyed. But then most heed is to be
taken, when God makes known his Pleasure in an illustrious Apparition.

This Command to Abraham was, doubtless, of very great Concernment, both to
God's own Glory, and Abraham's and all Believers Advantage. And therefore it is
of no small importance for us to consider the Charge which God here gives to
Abraham, Get thee out of thy Country, and from thy Kindred, and from thy
Father's House, unto a Land that I shall show thee. Wherein we have, 1. A
Journey or Motion commanded him, Get thee, or, Go thou. 2. The Terminus a quo
of this Motion, or the Place whence he was to go, Out of thy Country, etc. 3.
The Terminus ad quem, or the Place whither he was to go, Unto a Land that I
shall show thee.


1. The Journey or Motion which is here enjoined Abraham is a Transmigration,
expressed thus in the Hebrew, Lec Leca, as if it were, Vade tibi, Go thou, or,
Go to thy self: which is by some conceived a Pleonasm or Redundance of speech;
by others Emphatical, as if it were said, Go for thy self, or thine own
Benefit, intimating, that himself was the Finis cui, he for whom or whose sake
that Pilgrimage was enjoined.

2. The Terminus a quo of this Motion is threefold.

First, From his Country. Every man's own Country, where he was born, is likely
very desirable to him. That Ulysses, whom the Poet sets out as a great
Traveller, (Multorum Mores hominum cognovit and Vrbes,) preferred his own
Ithaca before all the places he had been in, and longed much to see the Smoke
ascending from that little Island.

And therefore it might seem to Abraham (if he had not been guided by a
Principle above Nature) an intolerable Injunction, and such as he might have
complained of with those who bemoaned their Condition thus,

Nos Patriae fines, nos dulcia linquimus Arva. Which was yet farther
aggravated, in that Vr of the Chaldees, or Mesopotamia, was no doubt a pleasant
Country, situated (as it is conceived by the Description Genesis 2.14.) in or near
the Garden of Eden: yet thence he must be gone, as an Exile or Fugitive, never
to return again.

Secondly, He must not only leave his pleasant Country, but also his pleasant
Company, his Kindred, those with whom he had been acquainted, and enjoyed their
Society, from his Childhood even until old Age. Even these (though by Nature
and long Custom endeared to him) he must relinquish at God's Command.

Thirdly, which is yet a farther Grievance to Nature, he must be packing from
his Father's House; from him to whom natural Affection had knit him, and from
those who were as his Flesh: he must quit even them, so as to put off all
respects of Humanity and natural Affection, (which otherwise had been great
Impiety,) in Compliance with the Divine Ordination. Which is yet farther
aggravated by

3. The Terminus ad quem, the Place to which he must remove. It was an
uncertain Place: he was not acquainted whither he was to go, he knew not where
he should rest the Soles of his Feet; whether he were to be seated in the
Deserts of Arabia, or in the Land of Palestine; whether among savage people, or
such as feared God: only he was to rest satisfied, that he was to go to that
Place which God would show him. And that was enough to him, who followed God,
and was acted by an implicit Faith (not such as the Jesuits vow to their
Superiors, who often command them villainous Attempts, but) in God, who is
always Righteous in his Commands, and Good unto all that walk with him and are
perfect.

If any ask, why God did thus impose this Journey on Abraham: I answer,
Doubtless it was not for any such superstitious Ends as the Papists enjoin some
men Pilgrimages, to the intent they should satisfy for their Sins; or as other
persons by Vow undertake them, for the obtaining a greater Holiness, or to
merit thereby. For these, as they are undertaken without God's Command, so are
they performed without his Blessing. But we may conceive the Reasons of the
Precept were,

1. To separate him from that Idolatrous Country, where Nimrod (that mighty
Hunter before the Lord) had erected his Kingdom: (as it is Genesis 10.8, 9, 10.)
and which, it is very probable, was a Country in which Bell and Baal were
worshipped, and the Worship of the true God persecuted. Which may be gathered
or conjectured from what we find, both in the places before cited, and Genesis 14.
as also from such Records of Antiquity as we have in Scripture, or other
Authors, who make mention of the First Monarchy of the Assyrians.

Nor is it improbable, that Abraham had been a Prophet to them to warn them of
the Judgments hanging over their heads, though without Success; as Lot was to
Sodom, though without prevailing for its Conversion.

2. But the chief End of God therein was, to prove Abraham, whether he would
obey God: as he did after by a more difficult Task, when he enjoined him to
take his only Son Isaac, and to offer him as a burnt-offering on one of the
Mountains which he should tell him of, Genesis 22.2.

3. That he might of him and of his Seed raise up to himself a peculiar People,
who might (as Abraham did) follow God, and depend on him entirely; and so be
Witnesses against all the Abominations which the Old Serpent had infected the
World with.

4. That, in Abraham's Example, all Believers might see what their Condition
that will adhere to God must be in this World, to wit, they must be in a
movable estate, be ready to relinquish all at God's Command, and to be disposed
of as he pleases.

For we are to conceive, that which was here enjoined was exemplary, as being
so propounded by the Author of the Epistle to the Hebrews, (11.8.) And as in
obeying of this Command Abraham showed his Faith, not settling either in Vr, or
Charran, or Sichem, or Bethel, or Egypt, or any other place, as his fixed
Dwelling, but moving hither and thither; and that not as necessitated
thereunto, but of Choice, in Submission to the Divine Will, and with
expectation of a settled Habitation above, as the Apostle says, Heb. 11.15,
16. So it is God's Intent, that Abraham should be in this our Pattern to follow.

We read of Cain, when his Conscience pursued him, that he fled from the
Presence of the Lord, and dwelt in the Land of Nod, on the East of Eden, and
there built a City. He thought to relieve himself against his accursed
Condition (which the Terrors and the Furies of his evil Conscience haunting
him brought him into) by his stately Building, and such a voluptuous Life as
carnal and worldly Enjoyments could afford, when he was destitute of God's
Presence with him, and the Light of God's Countenance upon him. And his Example
was followed by his own Progeny, and his Brother Seth's Race also for a great
part.

But Enoch walked with God, and he took him. Noah also, when the Earth was
corrupt before God, was perfect in his Generation, and walked with God; and
therefore at God's Appointment he prepared an Ark, to save himself and his
Household. And Abraham leaves his Country, sine animo revertendi, so as to yield
to a total Privation of all his Contents there, without any expectation of
Regress into that Place, or to that Society which he had there with those of
his nearest Relations.

The like we read of Moses, that he forsook Egypt, notwithstanding his
enjoyment of Dignity there, being called the Son of Pharaoh's Daughter, and
thereby in a possibility or likelihood, if not assurance, of Advancement unto
the Throne of that most rich and fertile Kingdom: and chose rather to keep
Sheep in Madian, then to endure to see the Afflictions of God's People, without
avenging them. After which he returned into Egypt, being commissionated by God,
and endured the Wrath of Pharaoh, with the Frowardness of the Israelites. The
remainder of his life he spent in the barren and desolate Wilderness, with
innumerable Vexations from those unruly People which he had led out of Egypt.
And all this only because it was thus appointed him by God, and having respect
unto the Recompense of Reward which he should give him.

And indeed, God would have all his Saints to be thus minded. It is that which
all the Seed of Abraham by Faith in God must and do expect, an uncertain and
ambulatory Estate in this World; no immutable or fixed Habitation, no Paradise
upon Earth. David says of himself and his Ancestors, Psalm. 39.12. I am a
Stranger with thee, and a Sojourner, as all my Fathers were.

And to show that the matter is not mended in this respect since Christ's
Coming in the Flesh: As Christ had no place certain, not so much as a place
whereon to rest his head, but went up and down, and at last suffered without
the Gate of Jerusalem: so says the Apostle, Heb. 13.13, 14. it is God's
determination, that we go forth unto him without the Camp, bearing his
Reproach; for here we have no continuing City, but we seek that one to come,
even the New Jerusalem that comes down from God out of Heaven, Rev. 21.2, 10.

And indeed there are very urgent Reasons wherefore God so orders the Estate
of his People, that it should be thus changeable and unsettled, both in respect
of his own Glory, and their Good. On both which accounts they comply with God
in his Design, as being regulated in their Resolutions and Motions by Faith in
God, whom they apprehend as their best Friend, and most faithful Guide.

1. For first, hereby God refutes that malicious Slander which the Devil
suggested to God against Job, as if he feared and served God only, because God
had made an Hedge about him, and about his house, and about all that he had on
every side; had blessed the work of his hands, and his Substance was increased
in the Land, Job 1.10. But God (though he permitted Satan to bereave Job of his
Goods and Children and Ease, yet) proved the Devil a Liar, and Job
true-hearted, whom no Sufferings could make to curse God. And in the like
manner he suffers the Patience and Obedience of his Servants to be tried; whom
though he keeps low, yet they own God, stick to him, and show themselves to be
sincere-hearted, and find him in the conclusion to be a God to be trusted. And
by this their Adherence to God, and Experience of his Fidelity, they become
Witnesses for the Lord, that he is God, as it is said Isa. 43.12.

2. By this way of God's Providence in disposing thus of his People, their
Spiritual and Eternal Good is greatly promoted: for they learn hereby, not to
love the World, and the things that are in the World, so as to choose their
Portion in them; not to conform themselves to the men of this World.

As standing Pools gather Mud, when running Springs yield clear Waters: so it
is with men who are at Ease, that have no Changes, who live at Rest and in
Pleasure. They surfeit of these earthly Dainties, are infected with worldly
Thoughts, have no taste of the Rivers of God's Pleasures, are settled on their
Lees, as not emptied from Vessel to Vessel, their Taste remains in them,
and their Sent is not changed.

A Dives, a man that has his Goods increased, minds nothing but building his
Barns, and taking his Ease; thinks not on his Death, on Judgment to come, or
being rich toward God.

But the Lord, to prevent this Danger, (whereas the men of this World become as
Beasts fed to the full, as kept only for the day of Slaughter,) orders his
Sheep to be removed from Mountain to Mountain, to be in bare Pastures; yet to
have sufficient, and, which is the chiefest of all, Acquaintance and Communion
with the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ, and his Holy Spirit.

And indeed the Enjoyment of these Spiritual Blessings does make abundant
Compensation for the Want of that Ease and Pleasure which the Grandees of the
Earth have. For should God let them enjoy brave Palaces, with much Abundance,
and all those Delights that others are Masters of; yet these would be found (as
Solomon proves them to be) Vanity of Vanities, not without their mixture with
Cares and Fears concerning the future, if not with Vexation of Spirit for the
present: Diseases and Discontents being incident to such a state of Life. And
that which would most annoy God's Children in such a Condition is, that a full
Estate breeds much Sin, as Ulcers of Pride, and a Spirit of Slumber in
forgetting God; besides the Evil to which worldly Society exposes them.

Abraham lived at more Ease, with much more Content and Delight, in his Tents,
on the Hills of Canaan, then Lot did in Sodom, which he chose to dwell in:
where he was made a Prisoner first; and when rescued by Abraham, he vexed his
righteous Soul from day to day with the unclean Conversation of the Sodomites,
in hearing and seeing their unlawful deeds: though at last he were freed out
of that cursed Place.

And therefore every one of us is to conceive God speaks so to him, as he
spoke Mic. 2.10. Anise and depart, for this is not your Rest, because it is
polluted. Nor can we be partakers of the Divine Nature, without escaping the
Corruption that is in the World through Lust, 2 Pet. 1.4.

Readiness Court was not so good to David as the Wilderness, in which he was
hunted as a Partridge on the mountains. Then he made the sweetest Psalms, and
sang them with the most pleasant Melody, when, forced to leave Readiness Court, he
fled to God as to his Sanctuary. Yea, it was better with him when he was in the
Field against the Philistines, then when, being at home at Rest and Ease, he
walked on the Roof of his house, and saw Bathsheba.

Sure this present Estate, with all its Advantages, is but a transitory
Condition; The World passes away, and the Lust thereof: and therefore it is
not so eligible as the Favor of God here; much less as the beholding of his
Face in Righteousness hereafter.

And the worst Condition a Saint can be in, who depends on God, and follows
him, (as Abraham did,) is but a Storm: Nubecula est, cito transibit; it will
quickly blow over; as that Holy man said of the Arian Persecution. This light
Affliction, which is but for a moment, will work for us (if we walk humbly with
our God) a far more exceeding and eternal weight of Glory: While we look not
at the things which are seen, but at the things which are not seen: for the
things which are seen are Temporal; but the things which are not seen are
Eternal, 2 Cor. 4.17, 18.

APPLICATION.
And now, I beseech you, take this matter into your serious Consideration. If
you be indeed Children of Abraham, and expect to be in Abraham's Bosom, the
Course that God took with Abraham must not be unpleasant to you. If you will
have your Good things in this Life; you must expect to have the Rich man's
Portion in the next.

You that give your minds to rise at Court, or to be Rich in the City; to build
fair Houses, to fill them with costly Furniture, to store them with the most
dainty Provision; to go in the bravest Attire, and to mind your Ease and
Delight; bethink your selves how suitable this is with the Divine Contrivance,
and the Affections of Saints.

I deny not but an Abraham may be rich, and yet blessed; a David may be great,
and yet happy. God may (and, I doubt not, does) choose some (though not many)
Rich and Great in this world, to be Heirs of the Kingdom which he has prepared
for them that love him. But then it must be so, that they love not their
Riches, nor their Greatness, but God; that they be as Abraham was, ready to
leave all for God, to obey God in the harshest Commands, to wait upon God with
Patience for his Help. They must have, as Moses had, a Will resolved to suffer
Affliction with God's People, rather then to enjoy the Pleasures of Sin for a
season; to esteem the Reproach of Christ greater Riches then the Treasures of
Egypt. They must be as Christ was, not of the World, though in the World; not
from beneath, but from above; having God's Glory in their Eye, Christ's Example
as their Loadstone; seeking the things above, where Christ sits at the right
hand of God, and directing all their Motions and Affections toward Heaven and
Heavenly things.

I press you not to sell all that you have, and give to the Poor, as Christ did
the young man whom he loved: nor to sell your Lands, as the Primitive
Christians did, and lay them down at the Apostles feet. Yet I must tell you,
that if you will follow Christ, you must, (in praeparatione Animi) in the
purpose of your Heart, do these things, and more too, even hate your own
Lives, if the Command of God, the Glory of God, the Kingdom of Christ, the Good
of God's Church, shall require it, or stand in competition therewith.

I do account of the Friars Vows of voluntary Poverty, perpetual Continency,
and regular Obedience, so far from true Sanctity, that they are rather mere
Snares, and like those Services of which God said by the Prophet, Quis
quaesivit haec de manibus vestris? Who has required these things at your
hands? they being neither undertaken by God's Command, nor having any Promise
of his Blessing or Acceptance.

Those Princes therefore that have laid down their Scepters, and thrust
themselves into Cloisters, have been befooled by superstitious Priests, and
have found cause of Repentance for that their ill-grounded Devotion.

But yet this you must do if you will love God: you must not love the World,
nor the things thereof; you must devote all to God, relinquish all at his
Appointment; you must use the World, as not abusing it, knowing that the
Fashion of this World passes away. You must be as Pilgrims on Earth; lay up
your Treasures in Heaven, and have your Heart there; seek your Rest with God in
Christ: and in the mean time walk with God, use all for him, and be content to
be at his Disposing in Life and Death, as Abraham was; and then you shall sit
down with Abraham in the Kingdom of Heaven. Which the Lord grant, etc. Amen.

LAVS DEO IN AETERNVM.
THE END.
A MEDITATION on GOD'S MERCY, being the Subject of most of the SERMONS herein
contained.
WHEN we seek after God, we consult with his Works: but when we study to know
what he is, we have recourse unto those Notions which are above his Works. The
Creature helps us to find him out: but his Power, Infinity, and Mercy, instruct
us to understand him. Neither do these Attributes equally acquaint us with him.
His Power informs us that he is God; but his Mercy much more. For by his Power
he only conquered that Difficulty which Nature presented him with in her first
Principle, (Nothing:) but by his Mercy he overcomes Himself. It sometimes
reverseth the Sentence past against a Nation; and so it makes him incur the
imputation of Mutability: Sometimes it pulls back the stretched-out Arm, and,
like the Angel that laid hold on Abraham, violently detains the execution of
his Fury; and so it upbraideth him with Impotency. It is not then enough to say
that it exceeds all his Works, unless we add, it is that also whereby he is
subdued unto Himself.

As God, who is our utmost Aim, having placed himself at the Journey's end, is
All Mercy; so are the Ways that lead unto him: His Ways are Mercy and Truth.
And as he is only found by those that seek him: so is he only sought for
truly by those that travel in this Way. The Merciful, and they only, shall
find Mercy. The Light communicates its Glory unto that Eye alone which has a
native Light and Splendor to entertain it: even so does God reach out his
Mercy unto that Soul which is before made capable by an innate Tenderness and
Compassion.

To forgive and to have Compassion are the peculiar Affects of Mercy. If I
forgive mine Enemy, I have Mercy on my self; for to him that forgiveth, much
also shall be forgiven: But if I have Compassion on the Distressed, I have pity
on my Savior; for it is him I feed, I cloth, in the persons of the Hungry and
of the Naked.

God has given unto men a Nature which inclines them unto Pity; and therefore
Cruelty is a Vice of the Will's begetting. Since then Nature has no
Inclination bad enough, out of which it may spawn so vile a Brood: I will not
be at so much pains as to force the Soil, that a Weed may grow; nor love that
Sin, which will not be entertained unless I disclaim my Nature.

God once commanded Sacrifices, that he might have Mercy upon Men; and yet he
was willing to have spared them that, if they would have spared one another. I
will have Mercy, and not Sacrifice, was his demand of old; but now much more:
for since he has taken away the Law of Sacrifices, it remains that we employ
all our Obedience in the observance of that Law which is left behind, which is
the Law of Charity. God has abated something of his own Worship, that we might
have more leisure to perform those Duties which respect one another.

If we would have God commune with us, as once he did with the Jews from his
Mercy-seat, it will be first required of us, that, like the Cherubins there
placed, we carry our Faces one toward another, not turning aside from the
Distressed, nor obliquely glancing upon any as averse from Peace. God seems to
instruct us by that Fabric in the Ark, that he then makes his Approach to us
from his Mercy-seat, when we turn face to face, that is, when we are alike
minded one toward another.

God, that he might reconcile his Justice to his Mercy, and so save the
delinquent Creature, became severe to himself: so much he loved us, that he
seemed to love himself less. If we cannot reach the height of this Document,
which is, to die for an Enemy; yet we may go so far, as not to incur our
Destruction by an affected Hatred.

As God's Mercy is transcendent, and runs through all his other Attributes; so
ought ours to be: our very Acts of Justice and severest Rigor must be Acts of
Mercy. As it is our Compassion to the Body that makes us cut off a gangraened
Member: so must our Tenderness of the whole, season that Severity which is
directed against a private person.

The whole Frame and Course of things seem to lesson us to this Duty. If we
look toward that Heaven which must be the Seat and Mansion of the Saints, it is
boundless and uncomprehended: so much delights his Mercy to exspatiate it self,
that it will not be confined: whereas his Wrath and Vengeance are content with
a narrow Room for the execution of his Justice. He has made Heaven of a vast
Capacity, which betokens an Infinite Goodness: but the Place of Torments has
he bounded with straight Dimensions, lest his avenging Justice should be
exalted above his Mercy in the largeness of its Dominion. If God have scarce
afforded his just Vengeance a Point or Angle in this great Universe; then ought
not Man, in so small a Room as his Heart, give any entertainment to unjust
Cruelty or Hardness; but study rather to enlarge it, that he may take in a
greater measure of that Mercy, whose Property is to be boundless and
transcendent.

Page 53. line 13. for delight your Bodies, read defile your Bodies.

A Catalogue of some Books Printed for Richard Royston, viz.
THE Works of the Learned Mr. Joseph Mede, in Folio. The Fourth Edition. Books
Written by Jer. Tailor, D. D. and late Lord-Bishop of Down and Connor. Ductor
Dubitantium, or, The Rule of Conscience, in Five Books, in Folio. The Great
Exemplar, or the Life and Death of the Holy Jesus, in Fol. with Figures suitable
to every Story, ingrav'd in Copper: Whereunto is added, The Lives and
Martyrdoms of the Apostles, By William Cave, D. D. (...), Or, A Collection of
Polemical Discourses addressed against the Enemies of the Church of England,
both Papists and Fanatics, in large Folio. The Third Edition. The Rules and
Exercises of Holy Living and Holy Dying. The Eleventh Edition, newly printed,
in Octavo.
Books Written by the Reverend Dr. Patrick. The Christian Sacrifice: A Treatise
showing the Necessity, End and Manner of receiving the Holy Communion: together
with suitable Prayers and Meditations for every Month in the Year; and the
Principal Festivals in Memory of our Blessed Savior. In Four Parts. The Third
Edition corrected. The Devout Christian instructed how to Pray and give Thanks
to God: Or, a Book of Devotion for Families, and particular Persons, in most of
the concerns of Humane life. The Second Edition, in Twelves. An Advice to a
Friend: the Third Edition, in Twelves. A Friendly Debate between a Conformist
and a Nonconformist: in Octavo, Two Parts. Jesus and the Resurrection justified
by Witnesses in Heaven and in Earth: in Two Parts, in Octavo New.
The History of the Church of Scotland; by Bishop Spotswood: the Fourth
Edition, enlarged, Folio. The Lives of the Apostles in Folio alone: by William
Cave, D. D. Chirurgical Treatises; by R. Wiseman, Serjeant-Chirurgeon to his
Majesty. Fol. New. The Principles and Practices of several Moderate Divines of
the Church of England; also The Design of Christianity: both which are written
by Edward Fowler, Minister of God's Word at Northill in Bedfordshire. In
Octavo. The Second Edition. Reflections upon the Devotions of the Roman Church;
with the Prayers, Hymns and Lessons themselves, taken out of their Authentic
Authors. In Three Parts, in Octavo, New. Go in Peace; Containing some brief
Directions for Young Ministers, in their Visitation of the Sick. Useful for
the People, in their state both of Health and Sickness. In 12. New. The
Countess of Morton's daily Exercises: or, A Book of Prayers and Rules how to
spend the time in the Service and Pleasure of Almighty God. The Practical
Christian, in Four Parts; or, a Book of Devotions and Meditations: with Psalms
and Meditations upon the Four last things; 1. Death, 2. Judgment, 3. Hell, 4.
Heaven. By R. Sherlock, D. D. Rectour of Winwick. In Twelves. The Spiritual
Sacrifice, or Devotions fitted for the hours of the day; by a late Reverend
Divine. In Twelves. Animadversions upon a Book Entitled Fanaticism Fanatically
imputed to the Catholic Church by Dr. Stillingfleet, and the Imputation
Refuted and Retorted: by S. C. The Second Edition. By a Person of Honor. In
Octavo. The Estate of the EMPIRE: or an Abridgment of the Laws and Government
of Germany. Farther showing what Condition the Empire was in, when the Peace
was concluded at Munster.: Also the several Fights, Battles, and Desolation of
Cities during the War in that EMPIRE: And also of the GOLDEN BVLL. In Octavo.
The Sicilian Tyrant: Or, The Life and Death of Agathocles: With some
Reflections on our Modern Usurpers. Octavo. The Royal Martyr, and the Dutiful
Subject; In Two Sermons: By Gilbert Burnet. In Quarto. The Life and Death of
King Charles the First: By R. Perenchief, D. D. Octavo.

