General CONSIDERATIONS relating to a Bill for Regulating the Abuses of Prisons
and pretended Priviledg'd Places; as far as relates to the Prisons.
UNTIL all Men are enabled to pay their Debts, Creditor and Debtor will be at
Variance; (for generally both think themselves injured and as the present
Circumstances of the Nation are, (there being five times more Debts than there
is Ready Money to pay, as is very presumptive from the many attempts to set up
Paper-Credit) It Is humbly submitted, whether a Law of more Mercy then is now in
being, or a Law of greater Severity may be thought more proper.

It is not unfit to be remembered, that by the Common Law Men's Bodies were not
liable to be Confined for Debt; and the Statutes which have since made 'em
subject, are not only more severe than the ancient Common-Laws, but than the
Laws in other Countries, which provide in some cases, that the Creditor shall
Maintain his Debtor in Consinement.

The Prisons of the Kings Bench and Fleet being the immediate Prisons of the
Great Courts of Westminster Hall, Persons Arrested in all parts of the Kingdom
have therefore frequently removed their Bodies to those Courts and Prisons,
where their Causes in Law and Equity are finally determinable: And the Statute
of 23 Hen. 6. Cap.10. reserving Liberty to the Warden of the Fleet the Marshal
of the Kings Bench being likewise adjudged to be within the Equity of the same)
to take Security for true Imprisonment; The Courts have thought it an equal
Advantage both to Debtor and Creditor, that the Prisoners, by Day-Rules, etc,
should have a Qualified LIBERTY (in Term-time at least) to solicit their Law
Affairs, and dispose of their Estates and Effects to the best advantage.

The Mischiefs intended to be regulated are Escapes; Which seldom or never
happen at the worst to be any more then the Suspension of the payment of the
Debt, the Remedy being already sufficient against the Marshal and Warden and
their Superiors: For

If either Marshal of Warden gives greater Liberty then the Law allows, or the
Prisoners abuse that Liberty, they and their Superiors are liable, as the Law
now stands; And Debts have been often paid by these means, and by the benefit
of Securities they have taken, when the Prisoners were wholly Insolvent: of
which many and frequent Instances might be given. But it is highly probable, if
this Bill pass; those Prisoners that are trusted no farther then by Law they
might, will take advantage, and perhaps their Securities too, to withdraw for
ever out of the reach of the Law; which, by the way, may be of very ill
Consequence to the Creditors, as well as to the Marshal and Warden.

If all Security-Bonds are taken away, the Marshal and Warden will be obliged
to Consine all their Prisoners within the Walls: And there being so many
Thousand Prisoners already belonging to both Prisons; and in the adjacent
Streets, as yet part of the Prisons by Rules of Court, for the more wholesome
keeping of Prisoners; and not above 160 Chambers in both Prisons to receive
them, it will be impossible to dispose of them in so small a compass.

The Prisons being now too Narrow to contain the Prisoners already Committed,
what large Buildings, and vast Guards must be requisite to keep those numerous
Shoals of Men, who in all likelihood will become Prisoners, when the Mint,
Savoy, and Friars are divested of their pretended Privilege?

Admitting such a Collection, one need only hint the Noisomness, the Diseases,
the Misery of so many unfortunate People, so closely huddled together, wanting
the conveniences perhaps even the Necessaries of Life: And what attempts
against any Government they would stick at, rather then endure their perpetual
Doom to Poverty, Confinement, Stench and Vermin.


