THE GHOST OF THE EMPEROR Charles the Fifth, Appearing to VOLCART the PORTER:
OR, A Dialogue touching the Times.

April 1st. 1690.
This may be Printed,

ROB. MIDGLEY.



LONDON, Printed for John Newton, at the Three Pigeons over against the Inner
Temple-gate in Fleet Street. 1690.

THE GHOST of the EMPEROR Charles the Fifth, Appearing to VOLCART the Porter,
etc.
The Ghost. GOOD cheer Friend: prithee where abouts am I, and how far is it to
the Low Countries?


Volcart. You seem not well awake Sir, in asking for the Low Countries, when
you are no wat Brussels.


Ghost. Ah do not insult over a poor unhappy Shadow, that has had no rest for
this hundred and thirty Years. Did you know who I were, be you Friend or Foe,
you would show me some respect.


Volcart. Pray let us hear then who you are, that we may know what respect is
due to you; for my being a Porter does not hinder me from being able to give as
good account of things as another; and though I have not lived an hundred and
thirty Years, yet have I lived the best part of that time; which makes a Man
old enough not to be afraid of Ghosts and Shadows. Pray then ask what you
please, for I have past no small time of my life at Court.


Ghost. Good Friend do not trifle with me; you tell me you know Brussels, and
what has past in the World. Pray what is your name, you that speak? for if you
be of Quality, I shall presently know you; are you the Duke of Arschot, Count
Egmont, Count* Horn, the Marquess de Bergues: These are Persons well known in
Flanders.


Volcart. God forbid I should pretend to be so great as any of these; no, no, I
am only a poor Doorkeeper, my name Volcart. But pray let us know what is yours.


Ghost. Why I am the Ghost of Charles V. he that ruled not only the Provinces
we speak of; but carried his name much farther: so that I need say no more to
thee.


Volcart. You Charles V. you are an Imposter, were you that great Prince, you
would know the place where you are, seeing you built it.


Ghost. Ah! I begin to know whereabouts, I am; it is true it was I that built
this Palace, but why do thou make me remember a thing which was the beginning
of my misery? Do thou know why I built it, and for what end it served me?


Volcart. No; unless it were to hang Pictures in; at least this is the common
report. But is it possible, that you are that great Prince, whom I have heard
so much of, and whose Memory is in so great veneration in these Provinces?


Ghost. The very same.


Volcart. And what brings you into these Countries?


Ghost. The desire of knowing what passes. Thou know I was born here, and
that the love of ones Native Country never dies. Another reason brings me here
besides, I am willing to instruct my Descendants, how they may be more happy
than I. Here Is the wretched place where I began to lose my Innocence; I had
ranged Pictures here, as thou now say, of all the Princes of Europe; but to
my misfortune, none of 'em appeared so beautiful to me, as that of my Sister
the Queen of Hungary. I was always gazing on it; Cursed be the Painter that made
her so handsome, which gave me a desire to behold the Original, which appeared
to me far more beautiful than its Picture. I could take no pleasure after this,
but in her company. What shall I say, I loved her, she loved me. And this is
the cursed effect of these abominable Pictures.


Volcart. How! methinks this does not well agree with your Character, for I
comprehend by this, that the Love you had for her, was of another nature, than
that which is usual between Brother and Sister.


Ghost. Very true; and would to God it had not proceeded so far, I should not
have sighed as I have done, and been driven to this despair. But to make an end
of this discourse, do know who Don John of Austria was?


Volcart. Know who he was? yes, sure; he was Governor of these Provinces, and
I have admitted thousands and thousands of Persons into the Palace to speak
with him.


Ghost. That is impossible; for though thou art otherwise old enough, yet not so
old as to have seen him. It Is about an hundred and thirty Years ago since I am
dead, and he was then at Man's state; so that consequently he could not live
long enough for thee to know him.


Volcart. What then you don't mean Don John of Austria, the Son of Philip IV.
begot on an Actress, the Brother of our King now Reigning.


Ghost. No.


Volcart. You speak then of the other Don John, he that won the famous Battle
of Lepanto, in a word, your Son.


Ghost. Yes; but do know who was his Mother?


Volcart. No; I have read Strada out, without being the wiser in this matter.
He says, indeed, that he was your Son; that he was brought up by Don Lewis
Quiscida the Steward of your Household, no body knowing who he was, he himself
being ignorant of his Original, till Philip the Second informed him one day a
Hunting: but of his Mother, he made no mention.


Ghost. Who is this Strada?


Volcart. Why he was a Jesuit that gives an account how you left the Empire,
and forsook the World; and who likewise has given us the famous History of the
Troubles in the Low Countries, under the Reign of Philip II. your Son.


Ghost. A Man of his Order could not write any thing to disgrace my Memory; for
the Jesuits have been ever Pensionaries to the House of Austria; besides, the
first thing they learn, is to offer Incense to the great ones of the World.
However, if he has concealed my shame, I will not; know then, that the Queen of
Hungary was Don John's Mother.


Volcart. The Queen of Hungary, Don John's Mother? What your own Sister?


Ghost. The very same. Do not I tell you so?


Volcart. However prepared one may be against the hearing of extraordinary
things, yet show me the Man whom this Relation will not surprise. A Child of
ones own Sister. Whoring is frequent enough, and passes for Gallantry, but
thank God Incest is not so rife. Our Town it is true is full of Cuckolds, as
well as others; and my own Son was of the number, having married a Woman a
little above his Quality. But seeing the Wife of a King, and the Sister of a
great Emperor have drove on the Trade, it belongs to him to comfort himself.
And it appears to me, that it is not the Cuckolds that suffer in the other
World, but those that make them so; otherwise it would be the King of Hungary
who would appear to me, and not the Great Charles.


Ghost. Thou say right, and it would not be just, that after having suffered
in this World, they should suffer moreover in the other. However being now
sufficiently instructed about me, prithee learn me, what has happened in this
Country since my death.


Volcart. What, then, have the dead such Curiosity? The Heretics affirm they
are no farther concerned in the Affairs of this World.


Ghost. Ah.


Volcart. You sigh.


Ghost. I have reason to sigh. I know what you mean by this Word Heretics, and
this brings still to my remembrance more Evils which I have committed. But do
not enlarge my Grief, but rather divert it by an Answer to my Question.


Volcart. Withal my Heart; provided you will let me know the Reason why you left
the Empire, and retired from the World; for all those that have wrote on that
Subject, have given such different Accounts, that the World is at a loss whom
to believe.


Ghost. Spare me a Recital, which will be to me very troublesome.


Volcart. Spare me then likewise a Relation, which will spend my Lungs.
Besides, do you think I can satisfy your Question without deep Sighs? A Man
must be very insensible to relate without the greatest regret, the former
Condition of these Provinces, and that wherein they now are. I have seen them
flourishing, and at this day do behold them so decayed, that its impossible to
think them the same.


Ghost. Well I see thou art a Man of thy Trade, that will not so much as tell a
Man what is a Clock for nothing; Thou have been always a griping covetous
humored Fellow, I Will warrant thee.


Volcart. I am of that humor God has been pleased to endue me with, either I
do love Money, or I do not love it: However I know not why you should not
satisfy my Questions, as well as I yours.


Ghost. I cannot tell thee any great news from the other World; and as to this,
when I was on the Throne I could not conceal every thing from the Eyes of the
Public. There are some Quick-eyed Argus's every where. All that I can say to
thee is, that if I have been reserved in any thing, it has been chiefly in the
matter of Opinion or Religion; Policy had learned me, that through the
Profession of a great Zeal to the Catholic Religion, I must arrive to the
universal Empire. So that I would be thought to be the most bigoted Roman
Catholic in the World; I undertook Wars under this pretense, and if thou
would know more of this matter, thou needst only read the History of my Life,
which I got written in my Life time.


Volcart. I have read it; and there seems to me several Passages, wherein you
contradict these Polities; for Example, how do you explain the Sacking of Rome
by your Troops, and the Imprisonment of the Holy Father, whom you kept along
time in Custody in the Castle of St. Angelo.


Ghost. Poo a Fart of this, your Spiritual Persons are as great Politicians as
the Secular Princes; we have all our Finesses from the Clergy, and you will find
them to be the greatest Trickers. Read only the History of the Popes, and you will
see, that you must not go to Rome for Religion; and had thou been at the
Place, as well as I, thou would not need two words to be said to thee, on
that Subject.


Volcart. I have heard indeed several times what you say, but I ever thought
'twas the Heretics that spread these Reports. However I am almost convinced by
what you say, for I cannot believe Ghosts will lie, especially such an
Illustrious Phantome as you.


Ghost. I do not lie, but speak the Truth; do thou not see what juggling and
tricking there is to be Pope, whence thou may judge, what they are capable of,
when they have got into the Chair.


Volcart. However we have had one of late, that was not of this Number, but
really an honest Man; for had it not been for him, the Heirs of your Brother
Maximilian might have begged their Bread, the Turks had driven them from the
Throne; whereas by his means, they themselves are driven out of Hungary. Lewis
the Great caused an Archbishop of Cologn to be elected, a Prince of Liege, and
Bishop of Munster, according to his humor, but by a lucky stroke, the good
Father has turned Lewis beside his Politics, without which these Provinces had
in a short time unavoidably fallen into his Hands.


Ghost. And who is this Lewis the Great.


Volcart. It Is the King of France, a Prince such another almost as you have
been, a great Pol, full of Dissimulation, a mighty undertaker, and generally
successful; its true he has not laid hold on the Pope yet, as you have done,
but 'twas not for want of good Will but Power. He has had diverse Quarrels with
him grounded on frivolous Pretenses, byt however the whole has turned much to
the advantage of Christendom.


Ghost. Which is to say, that this Pope whom thou have made so honest a Man, is
no more than a Man; for this stroke thou speakst of, arises from a Principle of
Revenge and human Affections, as well as those of other Men. But before we go
any farther, prithee tell me some of those Remarkable Passages since my death;
and which I could never hear any thing of in the other World.


Volcart. That Is my design, and I had come there, had you not interrupted me:
in comparing Lewis the Great with you, I was about telling you, that he has not
been behind hand with you in loving the fair Sex; and though he has not had
Privacies with his own Sister, which is an abominable Incest, yet he has been
guilty of an Adultery, which must needs sound very Criminal. He has taken away
one of his Subjects Wives, and enjoyed her several years. And in a word, as
your Sin made you retire into a Monastery, where you dyed; his made him
undertake the destruction of the Heretics of his Kingdom. He has deprived them
of the Exercise of their Religion, and this is the Penance imposed on him by
Father la Chaise his Confessor; without which, its probable he has informed
him, that the way to Paradise would be shut up; whether he has deceived him or
no, let others judge; my Hair stands an end at the remembrance of the Violences
and Cruelties used to effect this. However he has had greater success than your
Son; who desirous of doing the like in these Provinces, has thrown them into
such a Revolt, as has cost him the loss of the best part of them. Hence has ar
ose Republic, which flourishes above Envy, and has stood out in War I know not
how many times against all the Forces of your Posterity: But in fine, after
'twas found they could not bring her under; they have made a Treaty with her,
by which they acknowledge her a Sovereign State.


Ghost. In what Canton was this Republic formed; probably in the Provinces
bordering on France?


Volcart. No, Sir, a mistake: on the contrary in Holland, and the six other
Neighboring Provinces, which have made a League together, which has held for
this hundred and twenty years and upwards.


Ghost. What Head have they had to compass such an Enterprise


Volcart. William Prince of Orange.


Ghost. What he that was so dear to me, that I was continually leaning on his
Shoulders as I walked; notwithstanding the Jealousy I caused hereby to my other
Courtiers?


Volcart. The very same.


Ghost. What Reason could he pretend for this?


Volcart. Reason sufficient as you shall hear. Luther and Calvin had brought
over several People to their Sentiments; and several here amongst us believed,
that the first of these was sent from God to reform the Abuses of the Catholic
Religion: In a word, they suffered themselves to be persuaded by the Ministry
of those who taught his Doctrine. What shall I say; The Exemplary Life they
led, compared with the dissolution of Manners amongst the Catholics; the
Inquisition which Philip your Son would have brought in, with some other
Novelties, altogether as dangerous; the rigor of those which Governed, and a
thousand other things, which I do not mention, gave Birth to these troubles,
the Sequel of which has been, as I now mentioned.


Ghost. But why if they would have changed their Religion, did they not rather
take the Lutheran than the Calvinist? Luther was so Honest a Man and so knowing.


Volcart. If he were such a honest Man, I much womder you should Persecute him
so; and not only him, but all those that Professed his Doctrine, and it seems to
me, they have not had a more mortal Enemy than you.


Ghost. Prithee now, these are Mysteries of State, which every body must not
see into, I have already told thee, that Princes are good Comedians, I have
experienced what I tell thee in my self, how many things have I been forced to
do against my Inclinations; for so far was I from hating Luther and his
Doctrine, that I have always had a secret Veneration for both. Thou inquire
of me just now, how I came to leave my Sovereignty to retire into solitude, I
had no other reason than this, that I had persecuted the Truth against the
Light of my own Conscience, and my Sin continually stared me in the Face: So
that imagining that nothing could appease the Anger of God but a Bloody
Sacrifice; I hence determine to leave all to do Penance. I imparted this design
to three Men who had the same Sentiments as I, thouching Luther and his
Doctrine; I had already taken one of them for my Director, though in appearance
he was a zealous Roman Catholic; and having all three of them approved of my
Resolution, they likewise promised to follow me. And here is in one word the
Secret of this great retreat, which has made such a noise in the World. But
after so much Blood so unjustly spilt, could I do less than to Cloister up my
self (as it were alive) for the expiation of my Sins.


Volcart. But you did not dye in those Opinions, but undoubtedly came to your
self again.


Ghost. I did, and the three Men I mentioned. Philip II. knew it well, and I
learnt in the other World a Circumstance which I Will tell thee. My Son, having
been informed, I know not how, that these three Persons had always entertained
me in the same Religion, he would needs make their Process after their death.
But a certain able Counselor, more subtle than he, advised him to have a care
what he did, seeing he could not condemn them, without condemning my Memory as
an Heretic, and that as Rome had given out a Decree, by which the Children of
those Persons could not inherit; so this would be to declare himself fallen
from the fairest Succession as ever befell Prince: So that they were let alone,
and my Bones likewise untoucht.


Volcart. So then as far a I can perceive you are an Heretic Mr. Charles the
Fifth; but will you do me no hurt, or shall I go and setch some Holy Water.


Ghost. Fie, sie; at thy age to talk so. This were well enough for a Child;
prothee be quiet, and stay here, I intend thee no harm; the Dead do neither
good nor hurt.


Volcart. Ah good Mr. Charles the Fifth may I trust you, good now swear as you
are a dead Man; for I believe dead Folks do not use to forswear themselves.


Ghost. I Will do more, I Will swear on the Faith of an Emperor, and this Oath is
stronger than that thou requirest.


Volcart. What then the Word of a dead Man is nothing with you; and that of an
Emperor or Prince is less with me. How many are there in our days, who laugh at
their own Promises, their is neither Treaty nor Oath that holds them, and
provided they can say it is a matter whereon the good of the State depends, they
think they deserve more praise than blame. Its true your Gentlemen Courtiers
are the Causes of these abuses, for instead of blaming what is blame worthy,
they are prodigal of their Incense in all occasions; a great Deceiver is a
great Politician in their speech, and they have always in their Mouths this
Maxim, that he that cannot Dissemble knows not how to Reign. And therefore pray
let me hear no more of your Emperor, and your word of a Prince, I had rather
you would swear to me by the Faith of a dead Man. Death makes all equal, and as
I shall be whether I will or no, dead as well as you, so I may require you to
do me Justice; if you put any of your Tricks on me, your distinguishing Maxims
being not able then to shelter you from my just Reproaches.


Ghost. Well then, on the Faith of a dead Man, I promise thee all thou desire.


Volcart. What Is the meaning of this, to promise me all that I desire? Does not
this resemble the Treaty of Nimiguen, where for want of an exact explication
there arose a thousand Abuses? I Will have something more real and positive; you
Princes have such fetches which others cannot understand. Did not Mr. Ravaux
entertain you below with his subtilties; and after having stretch in this World
the Comte of Chiny as far as he pleased, will not he make a good Counselor for
you? (he that now wants a Master) to trouble all those you may have to do with.


Ghost. Who is this Mr. Ravaux?


Volcart. He is a Man that has gained more Countries to France than any Captain
it ever had; a Man that has introduced such a right of dependancy, as was never
heard of before him, and who if a Truce had not happened between his Master and
the neighboring States, which has interrupted the Course of his Chicaneries,
would have made to depend at the end of a little County the Empire of
Trebison'd, which yet is distant from it some Hundreds of Leagues.


Ghost. But why did the King of France encourage such great Injustice, was he
not informed better than thus of the Truth?


Volcart. But why as long as you have lived, have you upheld those who told
you, to make their Court to you, that you had a right to the Kingdom of Naples,
and the other States which you invaded in Italy? Was not you likewise informed
of the Truth, as well as he could be? or was it more lawful in those times to
seize on others Rights than it is now.


Ghost. Thou art, I was going to say, a saucy old Fellow, to press thus on a
Prince. Are all sorts of Truths fit to be spoken? and were it not better to
dissemble many things.


Volcart. Very well, we are now come to the Point, had I not then reason to
say, that Princes never want Courtiers to ruin them by their Flatteries, and
partial Representations of things? Had you been dealt so freely with in your
time, as I now talk to you, how much Blood had been saved, which was shed by
your wretched Ambition? What are you now the better for all your Violencies,
Rapins, and Murders? What is now left you but the sad remembrance of so many
Crimes? But I Will hold my self in. By the way then, pray inform me of one thing,
which I am curious of knowing. Were you amorous in that time we speak of, or
were you not, and which of the two Historians shall I believe? him who sets
forth one of your Actions as Great and Heroical, whilst the other gives it
quite different Colors. Here Is what the first says; That there was a Governor
of a small Place who had a very handsome Woman to his Wife, one of whom the
Viceroy of the Province became greatly enamored, insomuch that he used all
means to induce her to content his Passions, but that her Virtue being above
the Temptation, he knew not what course to take to have his desire; when he had
news brought him that her Husband was concerned in a Conspiracy: he being
transported with this good Fortune, resolves to make his Wife redeem his Life
at the cost of her Honor; but that this Lady, on the hearing of the Proposal,
went to her Husband and endeavored to strengthen him in the resolution of
dying, rather than purchase his Life on such shameful terms; but that her
Husband, weaker than she, threw himself several times at her Feet, conjuring
her to save him, though at that price, seeing no other would be accepted: That
she had wept, sighed, and bewailed most pitiously her Misfortune, before she
could be brought to yield to her Husbands request; however being at length
prevailed with, she went to the Vice Roy, who beyond Example, had commanded her
Husband to be strangled in the Prison, whilst he enjoyed her Embraces; that
this Woman at the leaving his Bed, thinking to find her Husband, and to bewail
with him the extremity she had been reduced to, was extremely supris'd and
discomforted at the same time to find him dead; that she had a thousand times
cursed the Perfidiousness of the Viceroy, and that after several Imprecations,
easy to imagine, she had resolved to go in the search of you, though to the end
of the World, to demand Justice, had she not been informed that you were coming
into that Country; at which time of your arrival, she addressed her self to you,
and that you having heard the Matter, it had raised such Indignation in you,
that you caused the Vice Roy to come before you, and at the same time sent for
a Priest and an Executioner: that as soon as ever he came into your Presence,
you reproached him with his Crime, with command to make present Reparation, in
espousing the Woman: that he was greatly surpised to see you in such Passion,
and having fruitlesly endeavored to pacify you; he had at length taken the
Party of marrying her, seeing he must do that or dye. But that having Espoused
her, he was still more supriz'd, seeing you told him he had now made reparation
to the Honor of this Woman, but that he had not satisfied your Justice;
whereupon ordering him to confess himself immediately to the Priest, who had
married him, you had caused the Executioner to strike off his Head.


Ghost. All this is very true; and this Historian has related nothing but what
I have done.


Volcart. Very well great Emperor! hold you a little, and hear what the other
Author says I now mentioned. Having related the matter like the former he adds;
that this Woman having seized on your Affections as well as the Viceroys, you
became so in love with her, and so jealous at the same time, that this was the
reason, why you made such quick dispatch of her Husband; and that this was a
thing concerted between you, before this sentence, which made you appear such a
great lover of Justice; but that at bottom, this was only the remains of that
fire, which made you burn for the Queen of Hungary. I always believed this was
mere slander, especially when he tells us you loved your own Sister; but seeing
you have already acknowledged one, why should you not be as ingenious in
confessing the other? seeing the latter is not, I think, so criminal.


Ghost. Yet this has cost me a great remorse of mind.


Volcart. This is true then, and the last Author is not mistaken.


Ghost. No.


Volcart. Very well; here is another stroke which makes you very much resemble
Lewis the Great. You have been gnawed all your life time with such an excessive
ambition, as has made you disturb the Peace of all the World. And this was
reproached you by that little Monk, whose sleep you interrupted, when confined
in your solitude. Did he not tell you that having turned all Europe topsie
turvy, you could not be quiet your self, neither would you let others be so in
their solitude? But as far as I can see, here is another subject of comparison
between you two. You have both of you taken your Neighbors Wives, but Lewis
was so far from putting to death Monsieur de Montespan, that he sent him into
his own Country, and ordered him a considerable sum of Money for the gilding of
his Horns; whereas you cause a Man's Head to be taken off his Shoulders, because
he has a handsome Wife. Bless us! how dangerous was it in those times to Espouse
one of Merit and Beauty; the Husbands were not hornified as they are now adays,
but ran a risk to ride Post into the other World. Well, I see there is no such
great reason to praise the times past; for now as soon as a Spark has Money, he
has quickly an handsome Mistress, and a good Friend. The Husband is the most
complaisant Man in the World, he takes his Cloak, Sword and Gloves, as soon as
ever he sees him coming, and under pretense of business, he lets him do his
peaceably with his Wife. This brings to my remembrance what has happened to my
self; There frequented a certain Spark, heretofore, my House; and as soon as
ever my Wife saw him, she took great care to remember me of a visit I promised,
or of a pleasant walk, I cannot tell whether she meant any harm by it, but
methinks my Forehead itches at this very time I am speaking of it; well, peace
be with her Soul, I forgive her, seeing she is gone.


Ghost. Prithee hold thy Tongue, cease complaining and be quiet, why should
thou be more squeamish than other Folks? if thou were the only Cuckold in the
World, it were another matter.


Volcart. Very fine truly! I thought the People of the other World would not
have expressed themselves at so light a rate on so grave a subject; I thought
rather, that having left behind them these amorous Vanities, they would have
showed the greatest abhorrence of these Abuses. But I have a strong persuasion
you have not wholly lost your old relish; and that having had your time with
the Queen of Hungary, and the handsome Widow we lately mentioned, as well as
with many others, you still have a hankering after the same game; for an old
sinner never dies to himself, and though his strength fails him, yet his will is
still the same. But pray tell me to what end were all those grimaces, when you
were in your solitude, seeing you were ever such a good companion. If I
understand what you now said, you would have one believe you to be a sincere
Lutheran; but if this were true, how could you assist at the Prayers of the
Monks in the Quire as you did; did you find nothing herein that went against
your Conscience? But above all, how do you excuse that whimsie which made you
shut your self up alive in a Tomb as another Harlequin? Is it not for this
reason that this Comedian has a name so near yours, that it is the very same
with the first Letter. Methinks I see you in that posture full of amorous
fancies, whilst the Funeral Offices were chanting for you. But pray what could
be your design in doing this, and what was the use you intended to make of this.


Ghost. To blind the World, and make it believe the contrary to what was true.
Several that saw clearer than I desired, for a long time, suspected that I was
not firmly fixed to the Catholic Religion, which necessitated me to throw Dust
in their Eyes by some famous action. Moreover, how could I do better than in
testifying outwardly to approve of Prayers which I inwardly disliked; yet thou
may know, that I was scrupulous enough to do nothing herein; and I did not
cease to tell my three Directors that this was a great sin, as in effect I do
believe it to be still: but what would thou have a Man do? they seeing me
melancholy and doubtful, were afraid they should be called in question about
the change of my Religion, and therefore they gave me no rest, till I had
finished the Mummery, of which they had been the inventors: Yet there were none
but the Vulgar that were abused hereby, for clear-sighted People saw through
the cheat.


Volcart. Well! As far as I can see, Father Strada is a great liar, who would
have this action pass, as a matter of great edification; if he has had no
better Memoirs for the rest of his History, I see there is not much stress to be
laid on what he says: And to speak the truth, although he brags much of the
certain knowledge of what he writes, yet I have for some time began to suspect
his veracity; for I could never relish his attributing all along the advantage
to the Spaniards, and at the same time I see a Republic spring up, and he is
so far from saying how this comes to pass, that he does not so much as mention
one tittle of it.


Ghost. A Jesuit Historian; you must expect indeed much truth from such a one.
But do not thou disguise it from me, but instruct me in the state of these
Provinces, and that of my Descendants.


Volcart. Your Descendants are terminated in an infirm Prince that remains to
us, and who according to the common report cannot give us an Heir, which is
attributed to his Marriage with a French Princess, of whom care has been taken
to put her out of a condition of having Children before show was suffered, to
go out of the Kingdom. I have ever heard, that when a Woman is brought to Bed,
it is an easy matter to hinder her from having any more Children; but I cannot
tell whether this secret may be extended as far as a Maid. However, for my
part, I am not learned in these matters.


Ghost. So that according to what thou say, here is the Spanish Monarchy at an
end; but is there not a Son of some Daughter of Spain who may keep up the glory
which I acquired when I was in the World?


Volcart. Ay, ay, do not put your self in pain about that matter, the eldest
Sister of our Prince was married about thirty Years since to Lewis the Great,
she has left a Dauphin, and the King his Father, who is not asleep when there is
any thing to be gotten, has already seized of one part of Flanders under
pretense of this Succession.


Ghost. But the time is not yet come, and therefore he must wait with patience
whether he will or no.


Volcart. You do not know him, he is a very Devil at Processes and Law Suits;
the desire of having is so great in him, that without murdering People, he
finds ways to seize on their Estates, he has a thousand Monsieur Ravaux at
Wages, they are turning over Books Night and Day to find what he desires, and
when the Laws are against 'em, they will make new ones, rather than fail of
their Business. I know not where he picks up these Petty Foggers, but they
guild over their matters so well, that they seem to have the reason on their
side. It was under such a sort of pretense, that he entered into Flanders about
twenty Years since, and had our Neighbors suffered him, he had made fine work
of it in three Months time, for he took I know not how many places. The
following Winter he conquered the Comte in eight Days, having with his Louis
d'Or's corrupted the Governor, who was an old Bigot, who pretended to carry
Candles to the Saints, whilst he set up his before the Altar of some Wench. The
most Christian King caused him to come into France after this, as into a proper
place to content his fancy; but having not every Day such Provinces to sell as
la Comte, he was forced to content himself with one Mistress, when he had not
Means to purchase more. God reward our good Neighbors the Dutch, who began
from that time to assist us, without them we had suffered far more; for these
French Devils came to our very Walls insulting over us; I would have killed one
great he Rogue, who came insolently and turned up his Breech at us, having
pursued our Guard to the Counterscarp what a fine mark this would have been,
his name was la Serre, a Lieutenant of the Guard de Corpse, a Fellow insolent, if
ever there was any, witness what he did since to Madameiselle de Guise; I
believe had this been, and this Princess had known it, she would have settled a
Pension on me for life. But of misfortune my Piece went not off, not but that
it was a good one, but I had forgot to charge it; so greatly was I disordered
in my mind.


Ghost. What you were very angry then?


Volcart. I did not know whereabouts I was! What, a Rogue come and let down his
Breeches! and show his Arse to civil People: For an Officer to do this, this
was such an unseemly sight! the Villain makes my Blood rise. But he is, it
seems, a Fellow that has not only two Faces, but two Wives; who are both yet
alive, or at least were so a little while since. The King knows this, and
Mademoiselle de Guise did not forget to acquaint him with it; but being, as he
is, Lewis the Great, and not Lewis the Just, the Villain may Marry two others,
if he will, without any danger from the Law.


Ghost. However, this is a matter of consequence in a State, and a Prince ought
not to suffer it.


Volcart. Why, don't you say, This is not Christian like without enclosing the
Crime within the bounds of Policy; should a Man of the other World express
himself at this rate; I that am still in this, would not speak thus; but you
make good that old threadbare saying, Quo semel est imbuta, etc. But pray how
long have you been below? and how long is it since you came forth? I believe
you have been better here than where you are at present, seeing that after so
long an Apprenticeship your talk is still of one place, and not a word of the
other; this is not a Note that the Lutheran Religion is so good, but rather a
mark that we must remain here as long as we can.


Ghost. Thou may be mistaken in thy conjectures. However, believe what thou will, its not permitted me, to undeceive thee; the dead speak not so freely as
the living; they are enjoined silence.


Volcart. If it be so, I would advise all our Brussels Ladies, to have always
to do with the dead; and as little commerce as may be with the living: by which
means their Adventures would not become so public. I saw a List the other Day
of near two hundred of very high Dames, who were all in by Name and Surname;
and how many Gallants they had apiece; and it must be granted they are not ill
provided, if the List be true. Those that pass among us for the most modest,
have only one Gallant at a time, but they change when they think fitting; you,
for your part, grave and great Sir, needed only one of these to heat you, when
you lay freezing before Metz.


Ghost. But now thou talk of Metz, have not my Descendants or Nephews found
out a way to revenge the affront I received there, by the perfidiousness of
Henry II. who so basely seized on it; could they find in their Hearts to leave
so considerable a place in my Enemies Hands, with the two others, which they
surpised at the same time? This concerned Maximilian my Brother, and his
Children; prithee let me know what they have done in this matter, that I may
comfort my self by the knowledge of the good condition the House of Austria
lies in on that side, and how it is with her in Spain, and these Provinces.


Volcart. I can tell you nothing on this Head, that will much content you; not
but that Maximilian and his Son have followed your Maxims; they have
endeavored, as much as they could, under pretense of Religion, to make
themselves formidable in the Empire; though, if one may believe several good
Historians, they were no less affected than you to the Lutheran Doctrines. But,
in sine, their designs being too well known to succeed by this means, there
arose so many Factions against them, that they left the King of France at rest,
to apply themselves to that which was most urgent.

Since that, we have seen one of their Successors nearer the happy terminating
his Enterprises, if France, who with good reason mistrusted his Ambition, had
not excited the King of Swedeland to oppose him. He was a Prodigy for Valor,
Conduct, and good Fortune; and did as much in two Years as another would have
thought himself happy to have performed in a long Life; and had he not ended
his Days in so fair a beginning, by a mortal stroke at the Battle of Lutzen, he
had placed himself on the Imperial Throne, and driven out the Descendants of
Maximilian. There are who have attributed this to the French, supposing they
had conceived a jealousy at his Power, but withal this, those that really
knew how matters passed, are agreed, That his misfortune came, in that there
arose a thick Mist in the beginning of the Battle, which hindered him from
seeing a Squadron that advanced; and which gave him the mortal Blow we
mentioned. Some of his Party perceived his Death before the end of the Combat,
having seen his Horse, whose Saddle was all covered with Blood, go from
Squadron to Squadron, as if he had been to seek his Master; but having had the
discretion to keep within themselves the grief they felt, they lost not their
Courage, so that they carried away the Victory, which this great Prince had
given a beginning to.

This Death brought some comfort to your Descendants, thinking that after the
loss of this Prince, none of his followers could fill his place; but the Duke
of Weimar, having had the boldness to present himself to Command the Army,
fortune assisted him to such a degree, that he appeared not unworthy this
Employ. He conquered the strong place of Brisac; and dying some time after,
France, who had gotten her Foot into the Patrimony of your House, could not be
obliged to retire; but on the contrary, maintained her Ground by a Treaty, to
which ours were obliged to condescend, having other Affairs to attend. Since
this, so far have they been from finding an opportunity of recovering their
own, that they have added loss to loss. France is now in possession of all the
Banks of the Rhine from Basil to Cologne, excepting Philipsbourg, yet does she
bridle this place, by means of a Fortress, which she has raised between Landaw
and Germesseim.


Ghost. And does all the Country on this side belong to he?


Volcart. No; but she has possessed her self of it by one means or other: Ravaux
has told her, that this belongs to France; she has believed him on his bare
word, and has not put her self on the trouble of discussing the matter; all
that was comprehended in so vast a Country, has been cited to promise Fealty,
and do Homage. All have been cited to appear, of what Quality soever, Princes
as well as others, before the Royal Chamber established at Metz: Ravaux was both
Judge and Party, so that they have been forced to submit; those that would not,
have been driven from their Estates, preferring a miserable life, but glorious
to a repose; which could not be very calm, seeing it must have overwhelmed them
with confusion.


Ghost. It is to be supposed my Descendants have given them a place of Retreat,
and commended a Constancy, which must raise Emulation in those who have not had
the Courage to follow their Example.


Volcart. Not at all, I have seen Princes among them obliged to come seeking
from Court to Court their subsistence; I have seen also some of 'em forced to
take a Captains place in the Troops, to receive a pay, which may hinder them
from holding out the Hand.


Ghost. But I suppose this fury has extended it self only on the Villages, and
that the strong Towns have not been awed by Monsieur Ravaux and his Decrees.
Luxemburg, for instance, must defy this Petty-fogger, any one of its Cannons
being capable of stopping the Mouth of his pretenses.


Volcart. Mistake not your self, Sir, Ravaux has extended his Jurisdiction to
the Gates of this City, and having reduced this Duchy, which is indeed a very
good morsel, the Town it self became so straightned, that it has been forced to
open its Gates.


Ghost. This is in incredible, Luxemburg the terror of Champagne! the Bulwark
of Germany! the Defense of all the Neighboring parts.


Volcart. With all these qualities she has trod in the same steps as the rest.


Ghost. And our good Friends the Hollanders have suffered it; those to whom
thou gave that name, and to whom I give it after thee?


Volcart. They have suffered it; a certain good Gentleman has lulled them
asleep. He became inspired with the holy Spirit of France, which came over in
Hogsheads. The Ambassador shed it abroad with full Hands on him; and for
recompense, this Ambassador bears it to this Day on his Cloak: cursed be such
interest People! This Villain has sold his Country as the Butchers sell Meat in
the Market: and cursed moreover be the -- Well, I dare not say more, it is not
always seasonable to say whatever a Man knows, especially when one is to speak
of great Personages.


Ghost. However, speak on, I Will warrant no harm shall come on it.


Volcart. Ay, Monsieur Charles the Fifth, are you in a Dream, or do you think I
am in one? Those warrants must needs be very good which those of the other
World make; and where shall I go to seek my Surety?


Ghost. I say speak on, my name alone is sufficient to protect thee from all
Insults.


Volcart. This is very pleasant truly, but I would willingly know one thing
first; what reception did you give the Marquess of Grana below? Is he one of
your Friends?


Ghost. I never saw him, nor so much as heard of him; is he one of the
Marquesses de Grana of Italy? I know that Family.


Volcart. Yes.


Ghost. Very well.


Volcart. But are you not a Friend of his Friends, or of some of his Relations,
for the Duke of Arschot married his Daughter?


Ghost. The House of Arschot has been ever suspected by me, so that this ought
to be no obstacle in thy Mind; moreover, I swear to thee, that I know no body
that is in his Interests.


Volcart. How you please me now! I had like to burst, like an old crack
Musket, never secret weighed so heavy with me: know then that he was a great
Villain; in a word, the Man that betrayed the place.


Ghost. Was he Governor of it?


Volcart. No, hang him; a far honester Man than he: but for our sins, and those
of your Family, he was Governor of all the Low Countries.


Ghost. Go on pray.


Volcart. Why, I tell you, he sold the place, and would have moreover sold all
the rest, had not the Devil come behind him and broke his Neck; he had a Belly
like a Drum; he would* Heaven be praised, needs drink the Spaw Waters, but they
made him burst, to the great satisfaction of all honest People. His Widow did
not much bemoan him: she had married him I know not how; it is true, 'twas her
Mother that made the Match: however it be, married she is again to Count Egmont.


Ghost. Thou speak very clear, and one needs only Ears to understand thee.
But let us come to our subject, the Marquess of Grana.


Volcart. To have a full account of that Noble Captain, you must know he did
not stay till the Hour of his Death to betray his Master. He was the greatest
boaster, perhaps, as ever was; according to him, there was never an honest Man
in the World but himself; and to appear such, there were no Tricks which he
made not use of. I have heard Persons of good Worth and Credit say, That the
Emperor after the Battle of St. Godard, having put his Army into Winter
Quarters, he gave him notice underhand, That all the Officers, from the
highest to the lowest, were extreme vexatious to the People: he did more, he
caused the People to complain of this themselves; and, seeing the business
would come to an Inquest, he abstained from Pillaging, though he had as good
Fingers for it as another. This happened just as he foresaw it, the Emperor
caused Memorandums to be given him of all that was done; and there was only he,
exempt from accusation.

He hereby insinuated himself into the Emperors Affections, acted the part of a
distinterest Man, and to make this Prince believe he gained nothing by his
service, he sold a considerable Estate in Bohemia: But how great (soever an
Hypocrite a Man may be, it being hard to dissemble long) he lent him four
hundred thousand Livers a while after; for which the Emperor still pays Use to
his Executors.

In the mean time, believing he only saw clear, he continued to act the part of
a Man zealous for the Emperors Interests; and this Prince having named him to
go to Spain, he requested a private Hearing. The Emperor having granted it him,
he threw himself at his Feet, and continuing in his Hypocrisy, besought him to
observe two Persons he had at his Court; one of which, said he was too heavy a
Man to be trusted with Affairs of Importance; and the other too mercurial and
unfaithful to rely on: he designed by the first, Prince Herman of Baden; and by
the second, the Prince of Saxony. However the Emperor gave him good words, as
believing he spoke from the simplicity of his Heart, and he parted out of the
Emperor's presence with great satisfaction. He did what he had to do in Spain,
but in his return through France, Monsieur de St. Luc, the Kings Lieutenant in
Guienne regaled him, giving him to understand, that if he would impart to the
King his Master, what Secrets past in the Emperor's Council, he should always
be presented with one Thing or other which should countervail his pains. The
Marquess made not himself more scrupulous than was necessary for raising his
Market, and being both agreed of their business, the matter was faithfully
transacted on both sides: There was nothing done in the Emperor's Council, of
which France was not advertised.

In the mean time War being declared between these two States it was still the
same thing, she had Intelligence of whatever past in the Council of War, so
that it was no difficult matter for her to shield her self from the strokes
intended her. In fine, the matter became so public at Vienna and other places,
although he thought it lay concealed, that a great Merchant of this City told one
of his servants, not knowing however he belonged to him, but who came to him to
change Lewis d'Or's, that there was hardly any other Money to be seen now, that
the Marquess de Grana received so many of 'em for his Treasons. France morever
made him a present of a Sword garnisht with Diamonds, when the Imperial Army
lay encampt at Mouzon in the Year 1676. and though it was brought him, as from
the present Prince of Conde as an acknowledgment (according to what he said)
that he had sent Horses to this Prince, it being known he had been well paid
for them, so there were none but Fools that believed it: and in effect the
Liberality of this Family never extended it self to the making of a Present of
this nature, seeing she has enough to do to pay her Debts.

In the mean time the Emperor having been the only Person, who did not perceive
his infidelity, sent him a second time into Spain, in Quality of Ambassador
extraordinary. Here it was, that continuing admirably well to play his Game, he
decried in such a manner the Prince of Parma, who was sent Governour-General of
the Low Countries, that he put into all the Ministers Heads that these
Provinces were lost, without redemption, if he were not recalled. There were
several Councils held hereupon; and this Hypocrite, having had the time whilst
all this past, to have Letters of Recommendation sent out of Germany for him,
he had orders to go and drive away this Prince, and to take his place.

Scarce was this order dispatched, when fearing it would be revoked, he took
leave incognito of his Catholic Majesty, and parted the same Night. If we may
believe the common report, he did wisely in being in such haste, seeing the
Council of Spain had no sooner done the thing, but repented of it. But he being
now in the Road, the business stuck at home, his Ministry being to be judged of
by its Success.

France was soon advertised of his Catholic Majesty's choice, and being on the
point of attacking Luxembourg, she was very willing to make trial whether his
Preferment had not changed his Heart. She sent to meet him on the way, but he
would not stay to explain himself there, but told the Currier, who presented
him a Packet, that he should make some stay in England, under pretense of
refreshing himself (for he was taking the Sea to finish his Voyage) and that
there some Person should be appointed, in whom he might put confidence. There
was no failer of Money, that being already again sent him. So that France being
sure of him, persisted in her Enterprise.


Ghost. Thou know a great deal for a Man of thy Quality.


Volcart. Hear the rest: The first thing he did, when he was arrived, was to
draw out Troops from Luxembourg, under pretense of Garrisoning better Mons and
Namur; although these two Places were in no danger; by reason these were the
Bar the King had granted to the Hollanders by the Peace of Nimiguen, and he
knew as well as any other, that the King of France could not Attack them,
without making them take up their Arms. But pretending to be ignorant,
Luxembourg was immediately invested, whilst the most Christian King set himself
at the head of an Army, to hinder its being succored; but no Body stirred. The
Emperor was not in a condition to do it, having the Turks on his Shoulders; the
Hollanders on their side were divided amongst themselves by the French
Ambassadors Intrigues, and the great Man I now mentioned. And now you have an
account how the Place was lost.


Ghost. What a Traitor was this! And did neither the Emperor or King of Spain
show any resentment at this?


Volcart. I know nothing of that, all that I know is, that the Governor took
Post some days after for Spain, being furnished with good Certificates against
him, wherein all the Officers of his Garrison testified, that if the Marquess
de Grana had pleased, the Place would not have been lost. But there were
Robbers Posted in the Road, who took away both his Papers and Money. This
Robbery was committed near Orleans, through which he past, having obtained a
Passport from the Most Christian King, on which it is good to make Reflection,
that nothing can better convince us of the Intelligence above mentioned, than
this pretended Theft, which was committed in a Kingdom, wherein that care is
taken, that for this Twenty five or Thirty years, the like has never been
known. But for a farther Mark, that these were not Robbers, the Money was
restored to him at Lions, his Papers being the only things retained.


Ghost. These are very strange things thou tellest me of. However I must needs
say to thee, that Europe must be buried in a more than Cimmerian darkness, not
to awake at the noise of so many horrid Enterprises. But go on I pray thee.


Volcart. Had you been here in the time when this happened, you would have
quickly got you back again to the other World, for you would have thought you
had been in a Hell, such a general devastation and burning was here in all
these Provinces.


Ghost. And who was the Cause of all this?


Volcart. The Most Christian King.


Ghost. Why, what was the matter?


Volcart. Because such was his good Will and Pleasure, and he had a mind to
confound all Flanders.


Ghost. If this be so, why do call him the Most Christian King? how can this
Name agree with him after such Outrages, which are only for Barbarians, and the
common Enemy of Christendom? But perhaps thou concealest from me, that 'twas
through default of Payment of Contributions, in which Case its a common use
introduced in War, to proceed to this extremity.


Volcart. No, I conceal nothing from you, but shall tell you on the contrary,
that the Contributions were not only paid, but that the Country having been
threatened with burnings, after this, it taxed it self in a vast Sum to redeem
it self from this violence. But the Payment was no sooner made, but that with
the Sword in one hand, and the Faggot in another, the French showed us such a
French Trick, as consumed all before them.


Ghost. But what kind of People are these French then now a days? It seems to
me they were heretofore human Creatures.


Volcart. They would be so still, had they less success, but this renders these
People intollerably insolent to all Nations, for they pretend now to be Masters
every where; yet the King of France has reduced them to such misery, that it is
a great thing if the Commonalty have Bread to eat. The Man of Quality is his
Slave, through the necessity he is in of making his Court to him, he must spend
all he is worth in attending him sometimes to the* Wars, other whiles in
Journys, where he must be always at some new expense. Versailles moreover is a
Place which is no less chargeable to him, he must keep House there, and also at
Paris, which so wastes him, that he has not for the most part a Sous in his
Pocket, he must now and then dine at other Folks Tables, otherwise he could not
live. Here past by some days since, one of these honest Gentlemen, who swore to
me that Monsieur the Dauphin had given him Money several times, when he played
and won, for himself and several other Persons of Quality, whom he named to me,
a Piece of four Pistols, to bear their charges to Paris; he likewise told me,
that each of them were so far from concealing their Misery, that it became a
matter of sport. Yet all these poor wretches are full of Rhodomontadoes, No
Prince was ever so great and brave as their King, and no Empire comparable to
their Monarchy. If we descend from the Man of Quality to him of the Gown, it is
near the matter the same under another Figure; they are overwhelmed with Debts,
and though he be not obliged to such expense, and consequently can better
subsist, yet nothing is equal to his Economy, because scarcity has a long time
reigned in his House. He has undergone a Thousand Taxes under the name of
Loans, and he fears every day more, without knowing where to have a Farthing to
pay them. This makes him chagrin and uneasy, and he sees no remedy any where,
because he is hindered from selling Justice, which was heretofore a great help
to People of his Profession. Hereby is stopped the Complaints of the ordinary
People, who seeing themselves sheltred from the violence of those who are above
them, comfort themselves in being squeezed by the Master and not by the
Servants. Yet if we make reflection on their Condition, it is as bad as that of
others, if not worse. In the general misery of the Kingdom, they find not any
one of whom they may get a livelihood; if the great ones buy any thing it is on
trust, or if there be any one amongst them who has ready Money, they haggle
like the meanest Tradseman, being no longer edged with Generosity. In fine, if
we examine Paris, where there should be more plenty, we shall find that all is
in desolation from the highest to the lowest, every body discontented, from the
Marshall of France to the Common Soldier, from the Duke and Peer to the
meanest Courtier, from the first President to the last Clark of the Palace,
and in fine, from the Chief Citizen to the poor Cobbler.

If we cast our Eyes on the Country, we shall find it the same or rather worse,
they cannot afford themselves Bread, they Plow its true, but they have not
wherewithal to Sow; their Taxes are so excessive, that they have not Beds to
lie on, or scarcely any sort of Clothes to put on their Backs; and to whom does
the Profit of all this come, but to the King? What slavery is this? What
wretches are these? and yet as wretched as they are, you shall hear 'em
continually extolling the Glory of their Monarch and the greatness of France.


Ghost. Thou surprifest me greatly I profess by these Relations, for the French
are in their own Natures a volatile, uneasy sort of People; prithee what is
become of all the great Lords to whom they were wont to have recourse in their
discontents?


Volcart. There are no such now; for from the Dauphin to the meanest Gentleman,
the King keeps them all so low, that they cannot move; besides he has his Spies
every where, who give him an account of what passes; and there being so many
who have not whereon to subsist, there are several who would have heretofore
blushed, had they been only suspected to have been of this employ, who now with
the greatest earnestness sue for it in the sight of their Friends.

Monsieur Le Dauphin is a good Prince, who provided he has but opportunity to
hunt, concerns himself no farther. The Duke of Orleans loves play, and to be
hung with Ribbands from head to foot, to hear pleasant Tales, and to be nice
and squeamish; as for any thing else he minds it not.

The Chevalier de Lorrain, who is his Favorite of many years, and who has
sometimes spoke to him of the Court, with a great deal of liberty, although he
himself be but an indifferent Man, is now wholly changed by a secret Pension he
receives thence; being the first and chief Spy whom the King keeps near him,
and though his Majesty has others, its only to be certain that he is faithful
to him.

The Prince of Conde does not degenerate from his Fathers Generosity, and the
virtue of his Ancestors; but in Inheriting their good Qualities, he also
inherits their bad, he is covetous to excess, and in this unhappy Passion he
sees nothing worthy of him, but the desire of treasuring up; provided he can
lock himself close in with Gourville, to cast up how much his Revenue is
encreast since the last year, and what course may be taken still to augment it,
this is all he thinks of. The King who knew dextriously to let the time pass
wherein he was greedy of Laurels, without giving him any employ, does not fear
now that he is past Forty five, that he Plots how to disturb the State; he is
well pleased in seeing him mind his own Affairs, and the Process which the
Succession of Mademoiselle de Guise has entangled him in. He knows very well
that when a Man is possessed by these two Passions, they sufficiently fill the
Head, and scarce leave room for other Thoughts.

The Prince de Conti has hitherto minded only his Pleasures, although the
deceased Prince of Conde endeavored to make him understand several times, that
a Prince of the Blood should steer another Course, if he intended to be in any
sort considerable. It Is not yet seen that he has prevailed on his Mind to make
his profit of so judicious a Lesson, perhaps in time he may think better of it,
but till that happens, it will be to penetrate into the future, to say that he
can be ever the Head of a Party, unless this Rank be given him for his being a
Prince of the Blood.

And these are the Princes of the Royal Family of France; for I take no notice
of Monsieur the Dauphin's Children, of the Duke de Chartres only Son of the
Duke of Orleans, nor of the Duke of Bourbon, who are all so young, that it
would be but mere mockery, to have recourse to them in an Affair as this we
speak of. I have willingly given you their Characters, to show you that they
are not like those which were in your time, there are none among these like the
Constable of Bourbon, who was such a great help to you in the Wars which you
had with Francis I. and without whom, perhaps you had not met with such
success. Don't desire me to proceed any farther in the Anatomising of this
Kingdom; should I come to speak to you of Princes that they call Strangers, I
should have such wretchedness to describe to you, as would raise blushing in
you, and confusion in me, in the relating them. Instead of those Dukes of
Guise, so famous in the History of the past Age, I can show you none but
Persons enervated with softness and debauches, Persons that have nothing of
Princes in them but the Name, and who between you and I, cannot remember
themselves without a self-condemnation: Such a Portrait as this is must needs
be unpleasant, and we had better draw the Curtain before it. I must do the same
in respect of the other Grandees of the Kingdom. And what will you think, when
instead of the Montmorancys, Chatillons, and so many other great Personages in
your time, I can show you only Men that are mere Slaves, not only of the
Monarchy, but of the Ministry? It being a Custom established among them, to make
Alliances now in Rich Families, which is the cause that that greatness of mind,
by which their Ancestors were heretofore so recommendable, is not to be found
amongst them; they see every thing, they suffer every thing without saying a
word, and are so far from opposing it, as that they be the first who approve
it, through a base complacency. It is no longer the time wherein they may speak
their minds to the King, they only busy themselves now with Trifles, and among
so many Dukes, of which the Court of France consists, scarcely is there to be
found one, on whom one may reckon, if it concerned only the King of his
Salvation, to the prejudice of a Minister: I can find on the other hand, enough
who will procure him Mistresses if he has occasion for them, and even without
seeking them in another Family, would take them out of their own Bed. I don't
say this by rote, I know what I say as well as another.

This Prince being become in love with a Princess not far hence, and intending
to testify his Love in a manner a little familiar, as this did not please her,
so she repelled him a little scurvily, without remembering he was not wont to be
treated with such Caresses. In leaving her, he told it her Father, desiring him
not to send her to Court; but he instead of being like her, was one of those
Princes I lately described; told him she was a foolish Girl, and that she had
lost her Fortune, and not content with this Answer, he went again to His
Majesty, excusing what had past, telling him in formal Terms, that if he
pleased to command it, he would himself bring her into his Arms.

And these are the Dukes and Princes to be met with in this Court, one of them
knows perfectly well to Cog a Dye, and has his Trade from Father to Son;
another carries on a debauch to excess; and having told his Wife several times
there is no true Pleasure but in Disorder, he has so well insinuated this
Lesson into her, that she puts it every day in practice, every one is welcome
to her, whether he comes to see her, or one of her Friends, she takes a
particular satisfaction in doing her Neighbor a Pleasure, affirming this ought
to be the humor of all Civil People. Another lives without Faith, without Law,
and without Religion, and though he draws near Sixty, he is as young, as
impious, as if he had never time to know himself. Another runs from one Wench
to another, from Morning till Night; another to the Churches, believing it good
to appear Devout to get Credit.

I could make you a Picture of all the rest, but it being sufficient to judge
of the whole Piece by a Pattern, it would be to tire you to relate to you still
the same thing; one is formed from the Mould of another, and excepting two, one
of which has high Thoughts, and worthy of a better Fortune than he has; and the
other which is a very worthy Person, although the Son of a Father who was a
Fool to his Grave, I shall not pass for a Calumniator, when I shall say, that
the rest is mixed Ware. Not but that there are some among them who act the Parts
of honest Men, but I am afraid that he who shall look well into the matter,
will find more Hypocrisy in their Actions than real Piety; Not that I am for
those affected Devotions, which are performed to dazzle the Eyes of the People,
for I love rather to say a Pater heartily in my Closet, than a thousand in the
sight of others. When one is so devout, commonly he is not so busied in
carrying on Intrigues. Yet those I speak of are in them over head and ears, and
are mad if any of them chance to be discovered. In speaking of this, methinks I
see one of our late Governors, whom I supris'd one day, having a great String
of Beads, wound, as it were, about his Wrist, and yet with the same Hand carest
very nearly an exceeding handsome Lady. It Is true, these Beads of his were as
familiar to him as the Monks Breviary is to him.


Ghost. Perhaps these Beads had a certain Virtue which thou know not of;
there is a certain Indian Wood which it is said does wonders, and perhaps his
Beads were made of it, and he was minded to try the Experiment.


Volcart. All this is useless, and without vigor love cannot last long;
whatever Chaplet a Man has, were it of this Wood you speak of, it would have no
effect on me if I was a Woman, unless I was persuaded it had this Virtue to
make a Man vigorous, all Ladys having great esteem for that; and I remember
that a certain Monsieur being arrived in these Parts some Months ago, all the
fine Dames of Brussels were for being of his Friends, not that he was an
handsomer Man than another, but because there were reported mavelous things
of him. The deceased Prince of Conde who had heard of him as well others,
desirous to know whether this was true, asked his Father one day the Question,
who is still alive, or I am much mistaken; but this good Man, who was no
Courtier, answered him seriously he could not tell, seeing his Son had never
made him his Confident in that matter; but this I know, says he, that if it be
so, he has it from his Mother, not from me.


Ghost. Thou relatest matters very pleasantly, but do not mind how much thou
forgettest thy self in thy large Discourse of the Court of France, having quite
lost the Subject we were upon, neither do I know how thou can return to it.


Volcart. This will be no such hard matter, and to speak freely, as old as I
am, I do not so greatly dote as you think for. Does a Man talk idly, when he
recites the Condition of an Enemies Country? and how can you deal with it,
unless you know its strength and weakness? I must tell you farther, though you
still persist in your Opinion, that France has moreover other Malcontents,
than those I now mentioned; and though I have told you, that the King of France
has compast his end, in laying low the Hugonots, yet this is an Hydras Head
which still produces something that is new, they are only extirpated in
appearance; and should they meet with a favorable opportunity, it is not to be
doubted but that they would act the same Part, as under the Reign of Charles
IX. They have only forsook their Religion in appearance, and though I reckon it
among impossible things for a French Man ever to make a good Spaniard, yet I
believe this is more feasible than for them ever to become good Catholics.


Ghost. Well! prithee what consequence do pretend to draw hence?


Volcart. One that to me appears infallible, to wit, that it is not at all the
French Interest to make War at this time; he cannot but be afraid, that whilst
he shall be busied without, there may arise within his Kingdom such a Faction,
as shall not be in his power to allay.


Ghost. Still methinks thou wandrest from our Subject, and have no Logical Head.


Volcart. Ah Master Charles the Fifth, is it for you to pretend to so much
Reason, who have no Brains? Death has dried up all your Bones, and a Dogs head
and yours make one as good a Figure as the other; don't you perceive that being
to discourse with you on a great affair now in hand, and of which I already
have given you some hints by the by, I pretended to prepare you to relish my
Reasons? I have told you that the King of France would have made an Elector of
Cologn, and a Prince of Liege; you know of what consequence it is to your
Family to have these two Persons in her Interests. The pains you were at to
bring over the Cardinal de la Mark, who possessed this last Dignity, is a proof
sufficiently convincing. So now he that is at present on the Imperial Throne,
according to your politic's, has left no Stone unturned to put by a blow so
prejudicial to the Empire: He has succeeded, seeing the Cardinal de
Furstemburg, who is the King of France's Creature, has been rejected by the
Chapter of Liege, which has chosen the Baron d' Elderen one of its Members; and
Prince Joseph Clement of Bavaria is chosen Elector of Cologn. I have told you
that Luxembourg is taken, the Moselle and the Saar are also subjected by the
Forts which the King of France has raised and does still raise; Treves is
dismantled, and the poor Elector is made a Frenchman against his will. This was
cause sufficient for the Empire, and all others in Christendom, to betake
themseves to Arms. Had the Cardinal of Furstemburg gained his Point, what
security could the Empire expect from so troublesome a Neighbor? How many
Creatures must France have gained, when it should be considered, that one may
by her means not only be raised to the highest Dignities, but be maintained in
them against all Right and Reason? Is there any ordinary Gentleman, but must
turn all his desires toward her, hoping she will do for him whatever she
intended to do for his Eminency, who some twenty years past had not wherewithal
to maintain a Servant? What an encouraging Prospect is this for all clear
headed and ambitious Men? In fine, O Monarch without a Crown, recall a little
that vivacity of Spirit for which you have been heretofore so famed, and you will
excuse all my tedious Transports on this Subject.


Ghost. What would have me say? The Emperor must perish rather than not
maintain the Legitimacy of the Prince of Bavaria's Election.


Volcart. But pray how shall he maintain it? He has enough to do in Hungary,
our King has few Troops, and less Money to raise others: the Princes of the
Empire are slow in their Resolutions. There are only the Hollanders, who are in
a condition of resistance; but do you think they will go and throw themselves
into the Lions Mouth? Their single Forces are not sufficient to withstand those
of France, and they can do nothing without help.


Ghost. The Emperor should temporise, and in the mean time make Peace in
Hungary, to the end that all these Forces being reunited may bring the Enemy
to reason.


Volcart. But all this time the Cardinal of Furstemberg, who never wants French
Money, fails not to fortify his places: you know, moreover, that Possession is
a Title according to Law. The thunderings of the Vatican signify nothing now
adays, unless they be backed by an Army.


Ghost. It Is true, and therefore a Pope who knows how to manage his Authority,
knows what time they are efficacious in; for in France People are the least
bigoted in any of the Roman Countries. This Nation acknowledges, indeed, the
Pope to be the visible Head of the Church, yet only as a matter of Policy, she
is too subtle to make this a matter of Faith; she knows only that this has been
judged most expedient to preserve Unity amongst the Members, but as soon as
ever a Pope requires too great a belief, she presently refers him to her
Parliament, where these four-corner'd Cap People maintain it according to their
fancy; and how many Bulls have been burnt by the Hands of the common Hangman?


Volcart. As far as I can see, it is not only in these times that this Assembly
is Heretical; I thought only Monsieur Talon, Advocate General, had been the
scabby Sheep that infected the rest, for he made such a Pleading some Months
since as smelt dangerously of the Faggot, he treated our Holy Father, as if he
had been but a mere Don Quixot; so that having said of him all that is proper
to say of one fallen into madness, he made him moreover pass for a favourer of
Heretics: In fine, I believe it was not long of him that he was not deposed;
but knowing this could not be done in one day, I have heard say, he is greatly
troubled that Voisin and her Disciples were put to Death, as knowing that one
touch with their Hands, would have been capable of obtaining Remission of their
Sins; at least, as to the Temporal pains of them.


Ghost. Who is then this Voisin thou speak of? It seems by thy talk as if I
should know her.


Volcart. A very worthy virtuous and generous Person, if ever there was one in
the World, bequeathing Successions to those who needed them, and procuring an
entrance into Paradise for others who were not in have to go thither; but as
Virtue is not always recompensed, she was charged with doing all this by means
of a certain Powder; so that having been thrown into Prison, she had the same
chance as the Bulls I now spoke of met with.


Ghost. Which is to say in one word, that she very fairly poisoned People.


Volcart. You are in the right.


Ghost. And thou would hereby insinuate, that they would have poisoned the
Pope.

Volcart. I do not wholly affirm that; but that which I would say is, That the
Court would not be much troubled at his taking a Voyage into the other World;
is this such a criminal desire, and can one wish him any thing more
advantageous? You say not a word; is it that you who have been Emperor make
such a great reckoning of this quality, that you prefer it to a place in
Paradise? If this be so, it must be acknowledged, that here are a great many
People deceived, for I cannot believe there have been dispatched from time to
time, on any other design, so many Princes and Princesses who died, some
suddenly, others with a little more knowledge of the cause. In effect, all this
has happened to 'em from the part of their good Friends, whose only design is to
make them more happy in the other World than they could ever arrive to in this.

The deceased Madam the Duchess of Orleans began the Dance; but she had not
time given her to recollect her self, for loving the World as she did, it was
feared, that through weakness, she might obstruct her own happiness; it has
been probably the same in respect of the deceased Charles King of England, who
was known to be too great a lover of his Pleasures to so easily quit them, if
he could help it. But there was not such quick work made with the last Elector
Palatine. It being Catholics that undertook this business, and the desire of
making Converts reigning very much with them, they have therefore given him
time to think on his Conscience, so that it is not their fault, if they could
not vanquish his hard Heart. They comfort themselves the more easily, that he
could not carry his States, whence they had a design to drive out the
Heretics; and as they could not attain hereunto, but by his Death, so we must
not think it strange, if they advanced it, and glory in it as a meritorious
action. In effect, whatever is done in regard to Religion cannot be ill, which
is the Morals of the good Fathers the Jesuits, God preserve us from 'em, and
keep 'em from coming near us; for had I either House or Land joining to theirs,
they would quickly strip me of them for the use of the Altar.


Ghost. It must be granted thou runnest over a great many matters in a short
time.


Volcart. I acknowledge it; but I deal with you otherwise than I would with
another, whom I was sure to see another time; how know I, how soon you will
vanish? I therefore deal out my Merchandise to you by wholesale, lest you
should escape me. And therefore I must tell you again, though you blame me afresh
for it, that it is not a Year since, that by a storke of Charity like to those
I now mentioned, the second Son of the deceased Duke of Brandenburg was sent to
Paradise. It was feared lest he should become one day Elector, and inebriate
himself with the vanities of the World, which were seen to prevail on him. It Is
said his eldest Brother was to have taken the same Voyage, who is now on the
Throne; and in fine, he must thither sooner or latter, but by small Journeys.
However this will not hinder him from leaving behind him a Prince of his Blood,
to Inherit his Countries, seeing the Princess his Wife has lately given him a
Son, to the great content of all honest People.


Ghost. Thou surprisest me, and as far as I can see, it is not only in France
where there are Voisins.


Volcart. This is not a fit name for these Monsters; there was another Woman of
a greater Reputation than she, which was the Marquess of Brinvilliers, Daughter
of the Lieutenant Civil of Paris. She poisoned her own Father, her two
Brothers, her Sister, and her Husband; and for so many famous Facts, her name
remains consecrated, to express whatever is most rare in this Diabolical
Science. A small quantity of Madam Brinvilliers Medicinal Preparations will
make way for any Succession; so that it is wondered how the Duke of Brandenburg
has escaped. God preserve this present Pope, for should he prove otherwise than
favorable to the Court of France, he is in danger of Apoplectick Fits. Yet, as
Pious People resign themselves, not only to the Will of God, but make advantage
of all conditions, this old Gentleman can cough when he pleases, especially
when he is importuned by Demands, to which he is not minded to answer. It was
told me some days since, That the Cardinal d' Estree, who lies at Rome
soliciting the Affairs of France, has given this Cough a thousand times to the
Devil, and would have given the Cougher too, had he believed he would have gone
to him.


Ghost. Well, to thy subject again, this is sufficiently known.


Volcart. What is my subject? for I confess at present I comprehend so much,
that I know not whereabouts I am. However, let us march on softly, and perhaps I
shall recollect my self. Well, pray tell me Master Charles the Fifth, then you
think the King of France does not much matter the Thunders of the Vatican?


Ghost. I do believe so.


Volcart. Yet he acts so greatly the Bigot at present, that it is mavelous
what they say of him.


Ghost. No matter.


Volcart. We are then very happy that the matter does not wholly depend on him,
it is, thanks be to God, in the Hands of People brought up in other Maxims than
you Earthly Monarchs; you are commonly rockt with a Machiavel in one Hand, so
that you suck in with your Milk this Wretches Policy. You have not, for the
most part of you, either God, or Faith, or Law, although you have nothing else in
your Mouths. We have to do with Charions, People brought up in the fear of God
and of Rome, Persons of an upright Heart, a lively Faith, an irreproachable
Conversation; in a word, on whom we may rely, when the question is to decide
between Rome and France.


Ghost. Perhaps so.


Volcart. What do you mean by this perhaps so, as well as this snearing giggle
which accompanies it?


Ghost. Prithee be not out of humor at my smiling, I mean thee, nor no body
else any harm; only let me tell thee, thou expectest Miracle to be wrought out
of season.


Volcart. Why the Devil are you so given to detraction? how can you have so ill
an opinion of so venerable a body as that of the Chanons? Ay, Venerable! is not
that the name given 'em? And the Bishops themselves, do they call them
otherwise, they that know 'em better than any?


Ghost. Whatever pompous Title is given, does not hinder a Man from being
otherwise at bottom. Those that commit the greatest Injustices, yet are
baptized by the name of Just. Another that shall violate whatever is most
Divine and Sacred, shall be called Pious. Another that --


Volcart. Ah, say no more, I know you have reason; I remember that in the
Pleading of Monsieur Talon, whom I not long since mentioned, he said (in
speaking of the King his Master) a King so Pious! Yet wherein confists this
Piety? is it in that he has taken away another Man's Wife, and openly kept her
in the Face of all the World? or, is it that he keeps her at Court to serve as
a scandal to all those who behold her? Is it in his other Adulteries which he
has committed, as well before, as since his pretended Conversion? Who is it
that knows not the History of Mademoiselle de M...? And the Exile of the eldest
Son to the Marquess de Louvois? Did it happen for any thing else than for
speaking too freely his Mind? Who likewise knows not why the Marquess de S.....
has had the Office of keeping the Crown Jewels, which is worth twenty thousand
Crowns a Year? And that Monsieur Pelletier, Controller-General, who had laid it
down in the King's Hands, thought to make it fall into those of the Marquess de
Louvois his good Friend and Benefactor. It was because that his Wife past
through a certain degree, and gave an hour or two of her time to this Monarch;
what an happiness to have thus an handsome Wife! All Versailles might be
swallowed up in ruin for the Iniquity of a Father, as well as that apartment
which had like to have overwhelmed Monsicur Bontemps in its fall. This makes
all forgotten. Present as many Memorials as you will after this, not one of 'em
is read; or if they be, it is only to make a sacrifice of 'em to the Person
beloved. Let one of the Commissaries be found tardy, and to justify himself,
he shows he has done nothing but by his Masters Order; he is not believed, though
all the Court are ready to testify for his Honesty, and though he be generally
bewaised by all People, this will not hinder his disgrace. He must undergo the
Punishment, he is a Rogue, a Rascal, a great Villain; in a word, deserves
Hanging, were they not more favorable to him than his Crime deserves. Yet to
speak freely, as matters are carried, he is more imprudent than criminal.
Having had so long to do with a Minister, ought he not to know that the present
Reign requires a Man to be furnished with an handsome Wise? With this Furniture a
Man cannot fail, for if she be not for the Masters turn, she will serve some
one else, who will have favor enough to make his assistance necessary.


Ghost. Truly, Master Porter, you prate roundly for a Man of your Mediocrity:
have you heard all these Passages at your Gate? do not you know how cautious a
Man must be of talking matters of this Nature?


Volcart. Ay, ay, so I am, of what passes here. I know how to shut mine Eyes on
occasion, and not open 'em but when my Interest requires it. And therefore,
having been already so free with you, I shall further tell you, that when a
Woman comes here disguised in Man's Clothes, I leave always one corner of mine
Eyes open, to see whether she be handsome or homely; yet I always put by evil
thoughts which may arise: which makes me often tell my self, Thou art a damned
censorious Fellow, thou art one of those who cannot see a Man and a Woman go to
Bed together, but presently they must be naught; though I often know Persons, yet
I tell my self I am mistaken, yet I could call 'em by their Names and Surnames,
which makes me sometimes persuade my self they come here for some State
business. I also sometimes lend my Ear, not through curiosity, but to confirm
my self in my Opinion, and hearing now and then some Sighs, and knowing that
our State Affairs go not well, I take matters by the best handle, so that
instead of turning things on the side of Love, as another perhaps would do, I
turn them on the side of Affection, which such may have for the public
Welfare; and attribute hereunto this Affliction.


Ghost. This is very honest, and herein thou do thy Duty.


Volcart. Ah, if I were at the Court of France, I should make a rare
Minister... To what purpose are all those Intrigues? and would it not be better
the public knew less of 'em? It disgusts a Man when he has satisfied his
fancy, for a Woman to talk to him of Marriage, for he will fear thereby to make
himself the laughing stock of the World; but when he can imagine no body knows
any thing of his Affairs, he goes with his Head listed up, and often Marries an
old Whore, as creditibly as if she was an honest Woman. I have heard of a Duke
and Peer of France, who died not long since, who understood so well this Maxim,
that he would not let his own Domestics know what Trade he drove, although it be
a hard matter to conceal it. He had hired an House in Grenelle-street, whose
backside joined to another, where there was a very handsome Woman, and very
modest to look on; so that having caused a passage to be made from one
Apartment to the other, they frequented without any bodies perceiving them.
This Duke's Wife dying, to his great content, they were Married together, and
lived very happily, for all that I know.


Ghost. To hear-thee talk, one would think thou have lain all thy lifetime
buried in Matter; whereas thou should raise thy Thoughts, and consider that
the Mind has infinitely more charms than the Body.


Volcart. So that when you made Love to the Queen of Hangary, and that other
Woman whose Husband you murdered; this was all for the sake of their Minds.
Ah, Master Charles, how you would Hoodwink the World! what necessity was there
of killing this poor Man, who would not have hindered you from enjoying a Thing
to which he had no more right than another? You were for concealing your
Intrigues in all times, not like Lewis the Great, who was so far from hiding
his Vices, that he carried along with him, openly where ever he went, his La
Valicre, Montespan, Maintenon, and Fontanges. It Is true, he now practices
according to your example, having a private back-stairs for such occasions. But
do not you know, how the Devil became an Hermit when he grew old? And this is
perhaps the occasion too why you read me these Lessons; but I would willingly
know at what Age you your self put them in practice.


Ghost. And at what Age will thou become wise, thou that speak?


Volcart. I will not become so, for I pretend to be so already. But is it not
very fair, that you who have learnt so many things from me, should make me a
requital by intrusting me with your Secret to communicate to your Descendants,
seeing you told me in the beginning, that this was the reason why you set out
from the other World? for I Will go as far as Madrid to reveal it to our Monarch.


Ghost. My time is out, and I have leave to stay no longer, I must bid thee
farewell.


Volcart. O he is vanished indeed; how suddenly is he gone? Ah, good Sir, let me
have but one word more with you, let me have but some token that may make the
World believe that I have discoursed with you. But you are dumb as well as
invisible. I must blaze abroad this Conversation, though all the World* will
count me a Fool.


ADVERTISEMENT.

LAtely Published, The History of the Most Renowned Don Quixote of Mancha, and
his Trusty Squire Sancha Pancha, now made English according to the Humor of
our Modern Language, Adorned with several Copper Plates, and sold by John
Newton.

FINIS.

