FROM THE ARCHBISHOP OF THE Isle of Samos in Greece.
An Account of his building the Grecian Church in So-hoe Feilds, and the
disposal thereof by the Masters of the Parish of St. Martins in the Feilds.
IN the Year 1676 I came into England with intentions to publish a Book in
print called Anthologion, for the use of the Eastern Greek Church, but finding
they had no place allotted for the Exercise of our Religion, but that some
Persons of our Country, Daniel Bulgaris a Priest, and others, who had earnestly
endeavored to get one builded, and in order thereunto had obtained his
Majesty's gracious Grant for the same, two years before my arrival; but wanting
means, methods, and interest to proceed to the accomplishing this their
purpose, they desired me to take the business upon me; in which, though some
difficulties appeared unsuitable to my Function; yet in Piety to the Church, and
to promote the exercise of the Divine Service thereof, I undertook the charge,
and proceeded therein, as follows Viz. I first applied my self to the Right
Reverend the Lord Bishop of London, to acquaint him therewith, and his Lordship
did so far approve thereof, that he promised to speak to the other Bishops, and
other Gentlemen to bestow their benevolent Contributions toward the building
the said Church: Next I applied my self to Doctor Barbone, who was then
concerned in building in So-hoe Feilds. He as soon as he was acquainted with my
design, promised to give me a piece of ground, and to build the Foundation at
his own charge; thereupon I went again to his said Lordship, and telling him
thereof, he promised to give me a piece of ground himself, and sent one Mr.
Thrift with me, and marked out the ground.

Hereupon I went to his Majesty, the Duke of York, and most of the Nobility and
Clergy, who were pleased to contribute freely to the Building, there being
gathered both in City and Country fifteen hundred pounds. I began the
foundation at my own charge, and as I received the Contributions I went on; and
expended therein, as may appear by the Workmens Receipts, eight hundred pounds;
and the remainder of the money was expended in Charges, Servants wages, and
Horse hire in going about the Country, and in my maintenance for these six
years last past.

After some time the Church being found inconveniently situated, being too
remote from the abodes of most of the Grecians, (dwelling chiefly in the
furthermost parts of the City,) it was upon mature consideration thought fit to
be sold, another to be builded in a more convenient place; whereupon I applied
my self again to his Lordship the Bishop of London, who was pleased to tell me,
that when the said Church was sold, his Lordship would give his Grant and Title
for the building of another.

Hereupon I endeavored to sell it, and finding two persons that would buy the
same, the Lord Bishop of London would not consent thereto, lest the Party
should make a Meeting House thereof. Hereupon I went to the Doctor of St.
Martins, who proposing it to the Parish, they consented before the said Lord
Bishop, to let it be apprais'd by two able Workmen: The Church was accordingly
veiwed, and rated to be worth 626 l. The Parish proffered 168 l. alleging that
the ground was theirs, and not the Bishops: This agreement falling off, I found
out others, who proffered 62 l. more than the Parish had done, which they of
the Parish coming to understand, they proffered 200 l. which I refusing to
take, the Lord Bishop required me to give them the Key, which I denying to do,
they told me they would take the Church without it, as they did accordingly,
breaking open the door, and taking possession: Hereupon I endeavored to carry
the person who broke open the door before a Justice, that I might justify my
self, but the Parish no^ permitting him to go, I went my self, but not finding
the Justice I desisted from any further proceeding.

This Relation I have thought fit to make, that thereby all Persons may see, I
never sold the said Church (...)

London, Printed for A. F. 1682.


