DIGITUS DEI, OR, A miraculous Victory gained by the English, upon the Rebels
in Munster: Expressed in two Letters, Written to Lieutenant Colonel St. Ledger,
Son and Heir to the Right Honorable Sir William St. Ledger, Knight, late
Lord President of Munster, by his Lordships late Secretary, RICHARD GETHING.

September 20. 1642.



London, Printed for Thomas Bates. 164^

A miraculous victory gained by the English upon the Rebels in MUNSTER.
Most honored Sir,
SUch an action as I shall now recount unto you, would (in justice) require a
far more skillful cheerful pen, then mine is, or can be to relate it: For
indeed, it is in all the parts of it so full of reflection^ (...) the
super-excellency of honor and valor (...) noble Lord of Inchiquin, that I can
only grieve, I (...)her power or parts to set forth the one or the other with
right, (...) less with advantage to his Lordships high merit or worth.

The enemy was now grown full of pride and expectation of a general Conquest,
by the surrender of all the Castles and strong holds in the County of Lymericke
into their hands; (upon the (...) and reputation, merely of one of the fairest
and choicest pieces of battery which they had drawn forth of the Fort of
Lymericke by the succession of foreign supplies of Arms, Munition, and
Commanders, and had advanced as far as Liscarroll into this County, with an
undoubted resolution to carry all before them: When my Lord of Inchiquin
concluded wisely and resolutely (I will not (...) against, but besides the
opinion of some gentle Senators) that some impediment must be given to this
impetuous torrent, which otherwise in all probability would drown this whole
Province in a general inundation. For in case we set up our rest (...) them
take in the other smaller Towns and Garrisons (which undoubtedly they would
do having (...)) then were we most certain of being therein besieged* The
provisions to hold out such a siege we found were not sufficient for a Months,
and the probability they were in to (...) of the River (when they were masters
of the field) (...), made us doubtful of (...) the field therefore must we
expect to receive a footing and (...) in this Province for his Majesty's
forces. To which purpo(...) L. of Inchiquin designed the deserving forth all
such forces as (...) be conveniently spared out of Cork, Kin-sale, Bandon,
Yoghall, (...) and appointed Buttevant and Ballis-beg the Rendezvous(...)
Friday night last were assembled together a body of (...) of horse 360, with
which and s(...) field pieces we mar(...) day (by break of day) to the Camp
which lay before (...) and had that very night ^allen in the Castle; where we
(...) in a post^re which spo(...) the respect at ^on of us, and (...) encounter
us. About eight of the clock my Lord drew down (...) horse, within somewhat
(...)-shot, and made a (...) view their Army; span^ would not permit (...)
safety there, so as we were forced (...) toward our foot (...) was not come
up, and is that (...) the Lord of (...) unhappily shot.

So soon as our foot were advanced, we forced our passage (...) their
Ambuscadoes from off the (...) down into the (...) before Liscarroll, and
brought down our whole Army. The (...) stood ready in three great bodies (the
least equalling if not (...) surpassing ours in b(...) to receive us, and while
our men were (...)ting into order they plied (...)ly and with their A(...) they
had planted lik(...) ready against our coming) having (...) new batteries
(...) us wi^h the better advant(...) indeed great odds they could not de(...)
of us* for the gro(...) had made their own (...) and had, (...) works and
fortifications, (...) men. The Castle which (...) them was their (...) and
every thing as apt to th(...) as their (...) contrive them; Yet it seems they
wanted the conduct of (...) great General the Lord of Hosts, for not(...) all
the (...) ad(...) we (...) small Ordnance (...) (...) to them, and they (...)
my Lord gave the command of the (...) and resolution then is expedi(...)
necessary (my I (...) General, charged with his own Troop upon the Enemies
Horse whom Oliver Steph(...) Troops had the V(...) with his own hands, and
took his (...)out withal by a mistake in the wheeling off, of the (...) they
were commandedy the rest of my Lords Troop (...) had le^^ his Lordship engaged
(...) and B(...) had (...) home ^^d through, insomuch as they beg(...) their
horses were of.

The foot on both sides were (...) a very great (...) of (...) and performed
singularly well, the (...) horse (...) to leave(...) and (...) exercise, in an
instant they (...) the (...) which we continued (...) of two (...) an Ala(...)
as brought (...) the (...)my stood still (...)ved (and very pro(...) be) when
immediately a Retreat was so(...) given over, least the enemy might take our
foot in (...) one body of the three was a very eq(...) and (...) for o(...)
whole Army, Which we (...) a (...)esh po(...)i^^, but by (...) time they had
recovered (...)bogge near (...), and were (...) of our (...)h. The (...) of
(...) stain I (...) believe was above (...) very (...) led inwoods, (...) and
co(...), where (...) at them.

Stephenson and one (...) son to Mac. Carty (...) were the only men of
quality that we can have an account of, though it is probable many others of
good rank(...). D(...) and amongst the ^^st (as a prisoner of ours which
escaped from amongst them averred) Purcell their Lieutenant General. At this
battle were the major part of the forces, of this (...) (...) and (...), (...)
that (...)tween five and six thousand (...)ing (...), bes^des horse and (...)
tell that follow an Army. We took prisoners, Colon(...) (the Lord of Ika(...)
son) T(...) Burg^^ one who supplies (...) (...) li^ Percivals, place amongst
(...). Captain (...) (who was (...) garvan-Castle when my Lord your father
took it) and (...) signs and other Rogues, only wo^th the hanging. Some (...)
Colors were taken, all their Artillery; but especially, their (...) piece,
which is a very brave on(...) reputation(...) I am confident (as it d^d in the
C(...)ty of Ly(...)cke) (...) in all the strong holds in this C(...)y But
Almighty God (...) vented them, few of their Arms could be taken, yet s(...)
found thrown away and ^id i^ bushes* Much of their (...) we, o^ exto(...),
a(...)on, Victual, and spare A(...) which you may percei(...) they (...) that
way) (...) mirable that such a multitude of m^n having the choice (...) quality
from all parts, being so well appointed, provided (...) f^^d, and having so
many several advantage^ should (...) s(...) such a Castle, such Artillery, to
a poor handful of men (...) ison of them: But Digit(...) hic, and therefore,
(...) nobis, sed (...), etc.

Thus Sir you have the full draught of a c(...) action full(...), and valor.
The extr(...) of, thy(...) me to descant further on it, or to (...)ge my self
either (...) or in any other particular: Only I beseech you (...) one (...)
excuse to my Uncle, and impart this relation to him (...) Sir, I beseech you,
a faithful profession of (...) b(...)

Your most respective obliged serv^^^ RICHARD GETHING
Cork. September. 1642.
A second Letter from the same hand to the same party, dated at Corkexv^.
September* 1642.
Most honored Sir,
BY the Packet entrusted to the conveyance of Captain Price, I made bold to
give you a rough and rude account of the happy and glorious victory
(...)chsased us at the ba(...)le of Li(...), where in Lonely fell short
(for(...) sub(...)ce) in the number of the slain. For that the (...) confess
(upon le(...) given them^d bury their dead) that they miss eleven hundred of
the i^men, and that they have found about seven or eight hundred (...) Gorpe^
upon th(...) of the b(...) and chase.

They were so confident of subduing us that all the Newtrals, as (...), and
many of the Rebels themselves, were w(...) great number of horse, upon several
(...), not far distant from the fight, where they attended the success of
that days action, with desig^^s to have fallen upon us in our flight, if it
had pleased God we had been put to it, which way soever we had taken; but the
Almighty determined so of us, that albeit we were but a handful in respect of
them, and their numerous multitude of men, yet they fled before half our Army
came to fight; for only two divisions of our Muskett(...) (which were led on
bravely by your Cozen Pigg^t, and Sir John Brown) charged them, when they
thought fit to make us run after them. Their men whom we took prisoners
(being no mean unknown people) say confidently, that if we had not given them
this days meeting, they had marched the next day to Moyallo, their design
being to cut betwixt us and our retreat to Cork; But man purposes, and God
only determines. ^ justly expect, especially in that of your (...). But (...)
Inchequin (who is full of tender regards of all your co(...) has taken the
care of your horses upon himself, and does (...) as in him lies, serve y(...)
of G(...) are lost in service, Leigh, Wa^^ey, and Keys, the two last (...) my
Lord your fathers death, the other at Liscarroll.

I had almost forgot to tell you, that we had (...) on (...) fifteen men, and
so many (...) as made the (...) or thirty at the most. My Lord of In(...) in
(...) head (but God be thanked not dangerous) as also (...) his hand, Captain,
I(...) the like, and Captain in his thigh. Take likewise the weight of
t(...)ing 768^ (...)*

I should enlarge your trouble, if I were not assaulted with (...) toward
disposition my self, and a (...) in my poor Sarah, who presents you here
(...) hearty prayers for your happiness and safety, as likewise does(...)

Your most (...) faithful servant RICHARD GETHIN^
Cork* 16. September. 1642.
FINIS.

