A Funeral SERMON Preached at Newport-Pagnell, April 11. 1697.

On the Occasion of the Sudden Death of William Maxwell, A Pious and Hopeful
Young Scholar, belonging to Harvard-Colledge, in Cambridge, New England:

And Aaron held his peace,

Lev. 10. 3. I was dumb, I opened not my mouth, because thou did it,

Psalm. 39. 9. Mihi vivere, est Christus, and mori Lucrum. London: Printed for
H. Nelme, at the Leg and Star, over against the Royal Exchange, 1697.

To the Parents of the Deceased.
THE Design of this plain Discourse, was to minister a word of Counsel (and if
the Lord would bless it) of Comfort to you, under that awful and afflicting
Providence, that has of late befallen you, which though very surprising, yet is
it common to good and bad: And as it was principally delivered on your account,
so at your request I have Transcribed the Copy, and put it into your hand to be
disposed of at your pleasure. The Publishing of it was far from my Thoughts,
when I preached it, and is altogether averse to my Inclination, though to
gratify you (whose desire I could not well with-stand) I gave my self the
trouble of writing it over. You have, my Friends, no cause to give too much
vent unto your Sorrow, for upon very good grounds you have reason to hope, that
he whom you love, is with Him that loves him better than you, and is safely
arrived at the Haven of Rest, that you are desirous at last to come unto. What
though his Race was short, his Rest is the longer: and if he be gone a little
before you, you follow after; and if you are prepared, as I doubt not he was,
you will meet together in an unspeakable, unconceivable, far better State and
Place, then was to be enjoyed, or can, in this Vail of Tears. He is wholly set
free from all those Evils that you are still exposed unto, and is warm in that
bosom wherein you hope to be lodged for ever. My love to him (for the Relation
I stood in) was very great from his Childhood, for I do not remember that I did
ever see any thing in him, but what did deserve it: his Nature was very lively,
and his Deportment very obliging, that drew Respect unto him from Neighbors as
well as Relations, that had knowledge of him. And since his departure out of
his Native Country, you have had such a full Account, from good hands, of his
pious and gracious Behavior, that should command your silence under this sharp
Providence. And, methinks should not make it difficult for you to determine,
whether you have greater cause of mourning, in parting from such a Child, than
of rejoicing that you had so good and hopeful a one, How many, alas! poor
Parents, that beget, and bring forth Children for the Destroyer; when you had
one for the Savior, whom he sought, and now does, and will for ever enjoy. It
becomes you not therefore to mourn, as those that have no hope: That the Lord,
who has done it, would sanctify this Stroke, and by the manifestations of his
love to your Souls, sweeten this bitter Cup, and fully satisfy you with his
Will, is and shall be the Prayer of

Your Sympathizing Friend and Relation, J. G.

POSTSCRIPT.
Christian Reader,
THIS Sermon not being intended to come into public view, I shall only
advertise thee, That the Objection about unlawful Ways of getting the good
Things of this World, with the Answers thereunto, not being suited unto a
Funeral Discourse, were a Digression designed to Cure, or Prevent a great
Transgression, which some worldly Auditors fall into, or may be in danger so to
do, unto the dishonor of God, and the hazarding of the Eternal Destruction of
their Immortal Souls.

A Funeral Sermon, etc.
Job II. 10. What, shall we receive good at the hand of God, and shall we not
receive evil?
THIS Book is Entitled the Book of Job, for the principal Matter contained
therein does concern him* Who was the Penman of it is ^^certain, neither is it
much material for us to ^^^w. The first Verse gives us his Picture draw^ (...)
the Finger of God, which he twice Attested unto the Teeth of Satan, Ver. 8.
Chap. 2, 3. which did draw the Malice and Envy of Satan against him. We have
also an Inventory of his Wealth, Ver. 2, 3. The loving and friendly practice of
his Children, 4. This good Man's Fear, and godly Course, 5. Satan's desire to
try him; a Commission given him, with a Limitation, 12. He goes to the utmost
length of his Chain. Upon the sad Messages brought to him, we find he had a
Sense of his Afflictions, and by outward Gestures did demonstrate it, 20. yet
did manifest a gracious Frame of Heart under all, 21. Satan's Commission, with
a Limitation, renewed, it is executed to the full, Chap. 2. 6, 7. Job's Wife, in
discontent, gives him very ill Counsel, Ver. 9. Job Replies, Ver. 10. wherein
he gently Reproves her, 2. gives a valid Reason for this Reproof, in the Words
of my Text, in a double Interrogation: What? As if he should say, what bad
Advice do you give me? What would you have me to sin against God? Then shall we
receive good at the hand of God, and not evil? Interrogations are a kind of
quick and smart Speaking; and in this place it imports the anger of Job at this
evil Counsel; Shall we receive, etc. The Good here spoken of, I presume, does
only intend the good things of this Life, such as Abraham speaks of, Luke 16*
25. unto the rich Man; though some extend it to the good things of the other
(...) also, at the hand, or from the hand, or ^^^^^^ence of God; and shall we
not receive (...) Not the evil of Sin; for God gives (...) nor does Man, though
full of this Ev^^ ^^ceive it from Him; but the Evil of Troubl^ (...)
Affliction, those in Scripture are frequently called Evil, Isa. 45. 7. I create
evil. Amos 3. 6. Is there evil in a city (i. e.) any trouble or affliction,
that the Lord has not done. Called Evil, not that there is any Evil, either
Natural or Moral in it; but because it is so in our Sense and Esteem, or
because the common effect of the Evil of Sin.

From these Words do arise Three Observations.

1. That the Life of Man, in this World, is made up of Good and Evil; not all
Good, nor all Evil: Not all good, lest we be full, and deny God, as Agur said,
Prove. 30. 8, 9. Not all Evil, lest we faint under it, and our Lives be too
bitter: Our Life is as Checquer-work, that has white and black Lines; or as
the Cloud in the Wilderness, that had a bright side, as well as a dark one.
Herein it differs from the future Life, or Life in the other World, that is
either all Good, and that in the superlative Degree, without any allay of Evil,
as with the Spirits of just Men made perfect: Or, all Evil, without the least
mixture of Good; that is, of Comfort and Refreshment, no not so much as a drop
of water; which is the miserable case of the damned in Hell.

2. Obs. That the good and evil Things we receive, are from the Hand of God,
either immediately, or mediately.

3dly. Which I shall principally insist upon in the Doctrinal Part, That as we
receive Good, so must we receive Evil, though from his Hand; and make use of
the Second Doctrine in the Application.

Reasons why, and the manner how, we are to receive these evil things from the
Hand of God.

1. Because they come from the same Hand that all our good Things come: This is
the force of the Reason given by Job.

2. Is from the Sovereignty of God, Psalm. 46. 10. Job 9. 12. who has an
Absolute, Unlimited, and Indubitable Right, to dispose of Us, and Ours,
according to his Pleasure, and none may dare to question it.

3. From the Wisdom of God, who best knows what to do with us. In Wisdom he
does all things, whose Understanding is Infinite, Ps. 147. 5. and therefore is
beyond our search, Isa. 40. 28.

4. His Justice, that does not, nor can do us any wrong.

5. His Goodness is such, that He will do us no harm, nor intends it.

1. All the Good we receive from Him is more than we deserve, for we are not
worthy of the least of his Mercies, Genesis 32. 10. nay, contrary to our deserts;
for whenever He does us Good, or whatsoever Good He bestows on us, He comes
over the heads of innumerable sins and offenses.

2. The Good we receive from Him, if weighed in the Balance, will outweigh
all the Evils we receive, had we only a naked Life. This Truth came out of the
Mouth of the Father of Lies, That skin for skin, and all that a man has, will
he give for his life, Job 2. 4. Importing, that Life is of so great a value,
that it will weigh down all the Good we enjoy, and therefore will outweigh all
the Evils that we suffer. Hence, Lam. 3. 39. Wherefore does a living man
complain? Have Life, and yet complain: which plainly speaks, That where there
is Life, it is so great a Good, that no troubles should so distress us, as to
procure sinful Complaints: but there are none that live, but have some other
Good with it; if nothing else, yet they have Time, which is a great Good.

3. Whatever Evil we receive from the Hand of God, if we are his People, it is
because there is need of it, 1 Pet. 1. 6, 7. The All-Wise GOD, that understands
our Conditions, sees that we have need of such evil Things. It is no pleasurous
thing with Him to Afflict his People, Lam. 3. 33. If a wise and faithful
Physician, that knows our Distemper, sees that it is needful to breath a Vein,
and take away some of our Blood, or finds it necessary to Prescribe an
unpleasing Potion to us, we abiding by his Judgment, and relying on his
Fidelity, are willing to receive it; therefore,

5. We should receive those evil Things, because they are designed for our
good, Heb. 12. 10. and if we receive them as we ought, they will, no doubt,
produce that effect, Isa. 27. 9. Romans 8. 28.

6. To suffer, or receive those evil things, does become those that profess
themselves to be Christians, and to be a Christian indeed, and not in Name
only, is one that takes Christ for his All, and Resigns up himself, and his
All, unto His Dispose; with a conscientious endeavor to be Conformable to Him
who has left us an Example, How to bear the evils that we suffer, 1 Pet. 2.

The manner how we should receive evil things from the hand of God.

1. With a holy submission unto his Will and Providence; it is a Cup put into
our hand by a Merciful and Compassionate Father, which, though it has some Gall
in it, as no affliction for the present is joyous, Heb. 12. yet there is no
Poison. John 18. 11. The Cup which my Father has given me, shall I not drink
it? Christ had a bitter Cup in the Garden, yet if his Father saw it not good it
should pass from Him, He was willing to take it, Mat. 26, 39.

2. Receive evil things from God's hand humbly, either to make us humble, or to
keep us humble, to prevent Pride, and hide it from our eyes, Job 33. 16. or to
pull down Pride, is one principal end of God in the evil thing He brings upon
us; as it was to Israel, in all the hardships they met with in their Passage
through the howling Wilderness, that Land of Pits, Drought, and the shadow of
Death, Deuteronomy. 8. 2. Pride is so contrary to God, that he cannot bear it in his
Children, and therefore his Day of Affliction comes upon them to prevent it, or
rebuke for it, as with Paul, 2 Cor. 12. 7. Hence that Counsel, 1 Pet. 5. 6.
Humble your selves under the mighty hand of God. He loves to see his Children
clothed, or rather adorned with the Garment of Humility, 1 Pet. 5. 5.

3. Receive them silently, or patiently, Romans 5. 2. Tribulation is said to work
Patience, or work it out, that Patience might be kept in exercise; he that is
without it, had need to pack up, and be gone out of the World, there being so
much need of this Grace; Patience is exercised either in bearing evils, Romans
12. 12. or in waiting for good things. Hence the Apostle concludes, we have
need of it, Heb. 10. 36. as the Husbandman, Ja. 5. 7, 8. As we are to do all
things without murmuring at the difficulties, or disputing the Equity of the
Command; so are we to bear and suffer all things from the hand of God, without
fretting or discontent, but more of this in the Application.

4. Receive evil things from God's hand, with reflection upon our own evils, or
the evil of our ways, Lam. 3. 40. Consideration of our ways is necessary, when
under the Rod, Hag. 1. 3. 5. Ecl. 7. 14

5. Diligently attending, or hearkening to the Voice of the Rod, Mic. 6. 9.
that we may know something of the holy ends of God therein: for, there is a
Reason for every Stroke that comes upon us, which we are concerned to inquire
into.

6. With Prayer and Supplication. Times of Affliction, are proper Seasons for
Prayer, Jam. 5. 13. This has been the constant course of the People of God
under the Rod, and herein they have often found relief; Pray for Strength to
bear it; Pray for a Blessing upon the Rod, that you may be taught as well as
chastened, Psalm. 94. 12. And that the Rod may produce the peaceable Fruits of
Righteousness.

7. Thankfully, with our Holy Man, bless God for your Afflictions, Chap. 1. 21.
Grace, in a lively exercise, does not only bring Quietness unto the Mind in
Affliction, but raises up the Heart to admire at God's condescension, Chap. 7.
17, 18. that He will bestow a Rod upon us: and thank Him for his Paternal Care
of us, and his gentle and favorable Dealing with us, who might have Scourged
us with Scorpions.

8. Believingly: that according to God's word, our Afflictions shall work for
our Good, as they are designed and appointed.

For Application, I shall look back to the Second Doctrine, viz. That our Good
and Evil Things, in this Life, come from the hand of God.

1. Then, our good Things come not to us, by that which ignorant People
commonly call Luck, or Fortune, which ought to be cut off from the Mouths of
Christians: That which they call Fortune, is the Providence of God, without
which not a Penny comes into your Purses, nor a Customer into your Shops.

2. Then our worldly good Things comes not to us simply, by our own diligence,
care, and industry, I say not only, or simply, but it is God that gives power to
get Wealth, Deuteronomy. 8. 18. None have reason to Sacrifice to their own Net, or
Ascribe the good Things they have got unto the labor of their hand: For Men
may, and many do, rise up early, and set up late, and eat the bread of sorrow,
Psalm. 127. 2. and yet add not one cubit to their stature, Mat. 6 27. It Is true,
the diligent hand, it is said, makes rich, Prove. 10. 4. yet not without the
blessing of the Lord, ver. 22. These make rich both in Spirituals and
Temporals, not the one without the other; not the diligent hand without the
blessing of the Lord, nor will the blessing of the Lord make rich without a
diligent hand; for God is no Patron for Slothfulness, in the Affairs of Soul or
Body.

3. Then should we trust in the Lord, Ps. 37. 3. and rely upon his Care and
Providence, touching the good things of this World, who will give Grace, and
Glory, and withold no good thing from them that trust in Him, and walk
uprightly before Him, Psalm. 84. 11. He that feeds the Ravens, will not suffer
the young Cranes to starve, as that good Man said on his Deathbed. He that
clothes the grass of the field, will provide garments to cover the nakedness of
them that rely upon Him. He does not indeed engage to provide for them, as He
did for the rich Man, Luk 16. But mean Fair may preserve Life, as well as
costly Dishes; and course Cloth will keep warm, as well as fine.

4. If all the good things thou have come from the hand of God, then be
thankful to God for all. Render all back to Him in Praises, that thou receivest
from his bountiful Hand; that as of Him, and from Him are all things; so all
may with thankfulness be returned to Him. Phil. 4. 6.

5. Use and lay out all for Him; the Mercies we receive should be improved for
his Glory: Whether we eat, or whether we drink, do all to the glory of God, 1
Cor. 10. 31. To honor Him with our substance, Prove. 3. 9. By doing good, and
communicating, especially unto God's poor, Gal. 6. 10. And for Holy and Pious
Uses, in promoting the Gospel and Interest of Christ.

6. Though all good things of this Life are received from his Hand, yet let us
not be contented to have our Portion in them, that it may not be with us, as
with the rich Man, Luke 16. who had all his good things in this Life; the Lord
has better things than those to give, Ps. 84. 11. and we want them: for as our
Bodies need the one, so do our Souls need the other; and he that chiefly seeks
the best, shall not want the worst, so far as God sees them good for us.

Obj. Suppose these good things are wickedly and unjustly gotten, by lying,
stealing, defrauding, overreaching, oppression, and grinding the face of the
poor; do such good things so gotten come from the hand of God?

Res. It is too evident, that many by such wicked and ungodly ways do gain
these things; and that there are too few that in their Commerce and Dealings
with Men, do with Conscience observe that excellent Rule given by Christ, Mat.
7. 12. Whatsoever ye would that Men should do unto you, do ye even so unto them.

2. Yet the things themselves being good, as they are good, do proceed from
God; but the unjust and unlawful means by which they are gained, are from the
wickedness of the heart of Man, as Judas his thirty Pieces.

3. These things thus gained come from God, but not in a way of Mercy, but in
his Wrath and Displeasure, to fatten them against the day of slaughter. The
Lord smites his hand at their dishonest gain, Ezekiel. 22. 13. Alluding to a Man,
when angry, that smites his hands at the Party that offends him, and the Lord
will avenge such, 1 These. 4. 6. I have read of a great Lady, that being in a
City that was Besieged, Contracted with the Besiegers to deliver up the City,
on condition they would give her all the Gold, Jewels, and precious Stones,
that were found therein. Agreement was made, the City delivered up, and the
Gold, etc. were cast upon her, and crushed her to death. Thus Riches gotten,
and not by right, will perish; and those that so get them shall die like fools,
Jer. 17. 11.

4. Those that by unjust and unlawful ways do gain the good things of this
World, together with them do gain a Curse, Prove. 3. 33. So that those things,
though in themselves are Blessings, are accursed unto them, Mal. 2. 2. There is a
worm at the root, and a third Heir seldom enjoys it.

5. Account at last must be given of what Men gain, and how they use it, and in
what way they gain it.

1. Does the evil of Affliction and Trouble that we suffer, come from the hand
of God, then ought we to look beyond, and through Second Causes, unto the
Providence of God, that disposes of us, and ours: For trouble springs not
out of the ground; nor does affliction arise out of the dust, Job 5. 6.

2. Then under the sharpest and severest strokes that fall upon us, we should
be still as David, not to open our mouths, because God has done it, Ps. 39. 9.

Obj. But my affliction is more than ordinary, and falls out but now and then;
this makes it the heavier, and in this the Lord has, as it were, pricked me in
the Life-Vein, taking away the desire of my eye, and the delight of my heart;
had it been in some other way, I hope I could have borne it better.

Res. 1. Shall any teach God knowledge? Job 21. 22. Or shall we direct our
Sovereign Lord, nay, our Father, what Rod He shall scourge us with? He is at
liberty to Correct how He pleases, and if He takes away, as none can hinder
Him, neither may we question Him, or say, What do Thou, or why do Thou
so? Job 9. 12.

2. Thy Child was the delight of thine Heart, therefore thou would have had
him been continued with thee; he was also God's delight, who had most right to
him, therefore he is not, because the Lord has taken him to Himself: you did
love him, therefore was so unwilling to part from him; but your love had too
much Self-love in it, seeing you would have kept him from his Father, and the
Glory prepared for him: So that your Child might say, If you loved me with a
cordial sincere love, free from a mixture of self-love, you would rejoice, and
not overmuch afflict your self with sorrow, because I am gone to the Father,
Joh. 14. 28.

3. This you say is a very heavy burden that the Lord has laid upon you, but
not so heavy as your Sins were, that was laid upon Christ, the which He bore,
Isa. 53. 6. 12. 1 Pet. 2. 24. He bore them on his own Body on the Tree, to
bear, or carry them away from us. Ferebat and auferebat. Did Christ silently
and patiently bear, and bear away our sins? Was He as a Lamb before the
Shearers, and this burden laid upon Him by the Father, and shall not we be
silent under the burden of Affliction that the hand of the Lord lays upon us?

4. You complain that the Trial and Affliction is great, but, alas! it might
have been far greater. He might have been taken from you by the hand of
Justice, inflicting death for horrid wickedness. He might have died, and you
had no well-grounded hopes of his Eternal Salvation; but he gave early Proofs
of his preparedness to meet with the Enemy though he came suddenly upon him.

5. It may be he had taken up too much room in your Heart, and was lodged in
the bed which the Lord had chosen to lie in* and therefore takes him out of the
way, that He might have your Hearts more fixed upon Him. It was, as I have
read, the Saying of a good Woman, whose only Son was taken away by Water, That
now the Lord had left her none to love but Himself. Your Son, though not your
only Son, was thus removed from you, that your heart might be more at liberty
to love the Lord.

6. If the Affliction be great, and the Burden be heavy, do the best you can
to lessen your Affliction, and make your Burden lighter, this is done by a
quiet, silent submission unto the Will of God, in this awful Providence;
whereas impatience, or discontent under it, will add more weight unto it.

7. Such a carriage and deportment, will bespeak our Reverence of God, in
resigning up our choicest Creature Comforts to Him patiently: to part with that
which we have no great affection unto, or kindness for, is no proof of our
Reverence and Obedience, but if our Isaac be called for, and we quietly give
him up. By this we manifest our Fear of God, Genesis 22. 12. 8. Patience under
sharp Afflictions, gives us possessions of our Souls, as says Luke, 21. 19.
The Mind being Composed, will render us capable of making use of those means
whereby we may gain Support and Relief under it. Hence the Apostle James, 1. 4.
Let Patience have her perfect work, that ye may be entire, and want nothing
that is needful for your support, under the present Circumstances. 9. The
exercise of Patience in our Trials, will bring in Experience, Romans 5. 4. of the
Power, Mercy, and Goodness of God: then shall we be capable of taking notice of
his merciful dealings with us. Hence that of Moses unto the Children of Israel,
Exodus 14. 13. Stand still, and see the salvation of the Lord. This included,
Psalm. 46. 10. Be still, and know that I am God. 10. The Lord takes it well when
we are graciously silent, not sullenly silent under our troubles, and quarrel
not with his Rod: He glories in his Servant Job, in the face of the Devil, on
this account, Chap. 2. 3. 11. By such a carriage in afflictions, we imitate our
Lord Jesus, who by his patient bearing all that He underwent, from the hand of
God and man, did give us an example* and certainly it becomes a Christian, and
is no small part of his glory to be conformable to his Lord and Master

FINIS.

