THE NATURE OF JUSTIFICATION OPENED, IN A SERMON On ROMANS V. 1.

BY Mr. GIBBONS, sometime Preacher at Blackfriars, LONDON.

LONDON, Printed for Tho. Parkhurst, at the Bible and Three Crowns in
Cheapside, near Mercer's- Chapel, 1695.

The NATURE of Justification opened.
ROMANS V. 1. -- Therefore being justified by faith, we have peace with God,
etc.


THE Words present us, for the Argument of this Morning-Exercise, with the
great Doctrine of Justification, first to be Opened, and then Improved.

1. To be Opened. And that we may not with Aquinas and the Papists, In ipso
limine impingere, Stumble the very first Step we take, and so quite ever after
lose our way, by confounding Justification with Sanctification, I shall only
premise, That as in Sanctification the change is Absolute and Inherent, so in
Justification the change is Relative and Juridical; the former is wrought in
the Sinner's Person, he becomes a new Creature; but this latter is wrought in
his State, he becomes Absolved at the Bar of Divine Justice; for Justification
is a Law-state, ((...) from (...)) it abolisheth the convincing Power of Sin,
or its Guilt. Our Business therefore, is to discover the Process at God's Bar,
in the justification of a Sinner, which will be best done by comparing it with
that at Man's, which we are familiarly acquanted with.

To be Justified, therefore implies in general three things. 1. The Person is
charged with Guilt. 2. Pleads to the Charge. 3. Upon that Plea is discharged by
the Judge.

1. A justified Person must be charged with Guilt. Now Guilt is the Relation
which Sin has to Punishment; for Sin is the breach of the Law, and Punishment
is the Vengeance which the Law threatens for that breach. And as the threatening
it self is in the nature of it, a Guard to the Law, to prevent the breach of
it, bidding, as it were, the Transgressor come at his Peril, break the Law if
he dare, be wi^e before hand, lest he rue it too late; so the Punishment in the
very nature of it, is a vindication of the Equity of the injured Law, the
Reparation and Amends it makes it self for the wrong done it, by damnifying the
Person injuring her, proportionally to the Injury: Now, that a justified Person
must be charged with Guilt, i. e. with the breach of Law; and by consequence
with desert of Punishment, appears, because otherwise, if a Man be pronounced
Righteous, whom no body ever accused, or questioned, he is only praised, not
justified.

2. The Person to be justified, must plead for himself; either in Person, or by
his Advocate who sustains his Person; for to refuse to Plead, is to despair
quite of being justified; and to abandon ones self over unto Punishment,
Silence gives con^^^t, it argues, the accused Person has nothing to say for
himself, why he should not be Condemned. Our Law, you know, shows no Mercy to
one that will not Plead, he is to be Pressed to Death.

An Indicted person must plead therefore something in his own behalf, why he
should be Justified, if he would be. Now, either the Man is Guilty of the
Charge, or not Guilty. I must speak to both Cases, and show what Pleas are
requisite in each, and which of them is the Plea upon which a Sinner is
justified at the Bar of God.

Case 1. If the Indicted person be not Guilty of the Charge, Justice it self
must justify him upon that Plea. Si accusasse sufficiat, quis erit innocens?
An innocent Person may be accused, he can never be convinced; for that that is
not, can never be demonstrated; the Judge or Jury were themselves Guilty, if
they found Innocence Guilty. Now to be Justified thus, is to be purely and
merely Justified, not at all to be Pardoned; for such a one stands upon his
Terms, bears himself upon his own Righteousness, begs no Mercy. It Is no favor
to justify him, it is his due; he is not beholding to the Judge a jot, the
exact rigor of the Law acquits him.

To bring this to the present Business, I shall demonstrate, that we can never
be justified at the Bar of God, by pleading not Guilty; For,

First, The Plea is false. Although in a very restrained Sense, there is none so
wicked, but he may plead not Guilty, and be justified as to this or that
particular Fact charged upon him. Nimrod was not Guilty of Abel's Murder. Nay,
a Saint may be guilty of some Sins which the Devil may plead not Guilty to, as
grieving the comforting, the sealing Spirit, abusing the Redeemer's Grace, etc.
yet nothing short of Universal Innocence, nothing but a perfect Righteousness,
a total exemption from all manner of Guilt will entitle us before God's
Tribunal to this Plea; For whosoever shall keep the whole Law, and yet offend
in one point, is guilty of all, Jam. 2.10.

1. Because the Punishment due to the breach of the whole Law, viz, the Curse
of God is due to every breach of every part. Cursed is he that continues not
in all things which are written in the book of the Law to do them, Gal. 3.10.
Deuteronomy. 27.26. The wages of sin ((...) of every single sin) is death, Romans 6.23.

2. Because, He that offends in one point, affronteth the Authority of all, as
is excellently observed in the next Verse; For he that said, Do not commit
adultery, said also, Do not steal, Jam. 2.11. Every Sin has Atheism in it, it
denies the God that is above; to trample upon the Majesty of God shining in one
Commandment, is at once to trample upon that Majesty which enacted all.

3. Because thereby he becomes infected with a contagious Disposition to be
guilty of all; the same Principle which emboldned him now, will another time
(if but excited with equal Strengths of Temptation) to commit any other Sin, or
to repeat the same Sins again and again (though excited with still weaker and
weaker Temptations) for as frequent Acts strengthen the habit of Sin, so the
habit facilitates the Acts.

From hence it appears, That the holy Angels, that Adam in Innocence, that the
Man Christ Jesus, might indeed plead not Guilty before God, and be justified
upon that Plea; but now impossible forms, Romans 3.20, 23. Psalm. 1^.^. 1 John 1.8.

Secondly, The Plea being false, there is no h^^e upon this Issue to be
justified, unless there were some defect in the Judge, or in the Evidence. In
the Judge either of Prudence, in not Understanding; or of Integrity or Power,
in not executing the Law might: But in our Case these are a like, that is,
infinitely impossible; for we have to do with the All wise Legislator himself,
who is also the Holy, Holy, Holy Lord God Almighty, and shall not this judge of
all the earth do right? Genesis 18.2^. Nor can there be any defect in the
Evidence, for the b^^^ks shall be opened at the last day, and the dead shall be
judged out ^f these things which are written in the books, according to their
works, Rev. 20.12. Nay, even now there are two Day books a ^^lling, down goes
(every Hour, every Moment) all we do and think, and speak, in the Book of God's
Remembrance fairly written; not an Iota, not a tittle either mist or blurred;
of this God has given us a counterpart to ^eep in our own Bosoms, the Register
of Conscience (though a very imperfect Copy, full of Blo^, Mistakes, Omissions,
yet) enough ^l^^e to ^onvince us instead of a thousand Witnesses; for every
Sinner will be his own Accuser and Condemner, rising up as an Advocate in the
behalf of the great Judge, against himself at the day of Judgment.

-- Prima est haec ultio, quod se
Judic^, ^e^o nocen^ absolvitur --
Case 2. And this was the first Plea, not Guilty; but the Case is not ours, and
therefore this Plea will never justify us. I come therefore to the other
(which in our Case) is Guilty; and here are two ways of pleading. First, Mere
Mercy, for Mercies ^^ke; but indeed, this is not to Plead at all, but to Beg.
And as in the last Case, when an innocent Person upon his pleading not Guilty
is discharged, that is pure Justification, but no Pardon: so here quite
contrary; when a guilty Person is discharged out of Mercy, this is pure Pardon,
but no Justification; for there shines not one Beam of Justice in such a
Discharge, mere Mercy is all in all. Whence it follows, that the Socinians,
who, to avoid the necessity of acknowledging Christ's Satisfaction to Divine
Justice, affirm, That Justification is nothing but mere Remission of Sins, do
abuse the Word, and contradict themselves; for, who sees not, that to be
pardoned gratis, out of pure Mercy (without the least Reparation made, either
for the Injury and Indignity done to the Law, or Satisfaction to the Honor,
Justice, and Authority of the Lawgiver, by the Sin affronted) is not to be
justified at all, (...), but only to be gratified, (...), i. e. disoharged upon
the sole account of Mercy, without any consideration had of Justice. This is
the first way of pleading when Guilty, mere Mercy for Mercies sake; but to be
justified upon this Plea, is an evident Contradiction. Therefore (...), The
only Plea for a guilty Person to be justified upon, is to plead Mercy for the
sake of some Satifaction made to the Justice and Honor of the Law. And by how
much the fuller this Satisfaction is, by so much the fullen is the
Justification of such a person as is upon this Plea discharged.

N^^ as full Satisfaction may be made two ways.

1. By suffering the whole Penalty due. 2. When a valuable Consideration is
accepted by the offended Party or Judge, wherein the Honor of the Law is as
much saved, as if it had never been broken; or as if being broken, the full
Penalty had been inflicted on the Breaker.
And here I have these two things to prove. 1. That Man could never make such
Satisfaction to the Justice of God, nor any Creature for him. 2. That the Lord
Christ has made such full Satisfaction, that it stands now with the Honor of
the Holy God, to justify Sinners upon the terms of the Gospel.

1. Assertion. First, That neither Man, nor any Creature, could satisfy
offended Justice.

1. Not by suffering the Penalty; for that being Infinite, requires an infinite
Continuance under it (there being no other way for a Finite Creature to suffer
Infinitely) and so the whole Penalty will ever be suffering, but can never be
suffered; for in Eternity, stop where you will, and there is yet as much to
come, as is already past; nay, infinitely more, for that which is past, is but
a Finite time of suffering, though Millions of Ages are past, but an Eternity
of suffering is yet to come; and after as many more Millions of Ages, still,
still an infinite Eternity is future, that never can be so exhausted, but an
Eternity will still be left.

Secondly, Not by any act of Service, which amounts to a valuable Consideration
worthy to be accepted of the Judge as Satisfactory to his affronted Justice,
for two Reasons.

1. Because God is more dishonored by one Sin, than honored by an Eternity of
Obedience; for God is not at all obliged to Cherubims and Seraphims for obeying
him; all the Creation naturally owes its utmost possibility of Service, as an
Eternal Debt to its great Creator. Now the least act of Disobedience, or Sin,
being Injury and Treason, thereby a new Obligation is contracted, viz. to
suffer condign Punishment, the former Obligation unto Duty remaining eternally
in as full Force as ever; which, if we could discharge, yet were we but
imprositable servants, Luke 17.10. Can a man be profitable to God? Job 22.2. If
thou be righteous, what give thou to him? or what receives be of thine hand?
Job 35.7. An Eternity of Service in the highest perfection, is every Creature's
Debt as a Creature; and beside this, an Eternity of suffering too, is every
delinquent Creature's Debt, as delinquent. But one Debt cannot pay another;
since therefore, all that the whole Creation can do for ever, would but just
satisfy the first natural Obligation unto pure Justice, viz. the Debt of
Obedience; it is quite impossible that ever any Creature should supererogate,
or spare any thing from hence, toward satisfying the Secondary super-added
Obligation unto offended Justice, viz. the Debt of Punishment, either in its
own behalf, or another.

Secondly, The other Reason, why neither Man, nor any Creature for him, can
ever satisfy the offended Creator by the highest Services, because they all
have it from him, when they do Obey him; of his own do they give him; for in
him we live, and move, and have our Being: What have thou, O Man; nay, O Angel,
O Archangel, that thou have not received? All our, nay, all their Springs are
in him; without him we can do nothing. The more we do for God, the more he does
for us; and consequently, still the more we owe him. So that acts of Obedience
are so far from satisfying our Obligations to God, as that they contract new
ones, for, even for them are we obliged.

2. Assertion. Having cleared the first, we come to the second Point, That
Christ has so fully satisfied his Father's offended Justice, as it stands now
with the Honor of the Holy God, to justify every Sinner, that can upon Gospel
terms, plead his Interest in this Satisfaction. Here we must enquire into these
three things: 1. The Matter of this Satisfaction. 2. The Form, or that which
makes it infinitely Satifactory and Meritorious. 3. What are those Gospel terms?


First, For the matter of Christ's Satisfaction, I humbly conceive, that the
whole State of his Humiliation, from his Conception to his Resurrection (for,
at his Resurrection began the second State of Christ as Mediator, viz. his
Exaltation to be continued to the general Resurrection, and then he shall
resign up the Kingdom to the Father, and God shall be thenceforward all in all,
1 Cor. 15.24, 28.) that this State (I say) of our Redeemer's Humiliation, is
entirely looked upon by God as the valuable Consideration, wherein his Justice
with Honor acquiesceth, and rests satisfied. It has two Parts. First, His
taking the form of a Servant at his Incarnation. Secondly, His management of,
and deportment in that State.

First, His Incarnation, and this presents God with a double Satisfaction,
whereby he may with Honor entertain Thoughts of Love to Mankind.

1. In that, Humane Nature is in Christ unstained with either Original, or
Actual Sin; for, by his Divine Conception by the Holy Ghost, he received of his
Virgin Mother, a pure, undeflowred Virgin Humane Nature; the second Adam
revives the Innocence of the first; those Eyes could without Disparagement
behold his Manhood, which are purer than to behold Iniquity; and even in their
sight, though no other Flesh living could, yet this Flesh must be justified.

2. In that Humane Nature is in him dignified with Union to the Divine, and is
become the Seat and Mansion of the Godhead; so that how loathsome soever Sin
has rendered it in us, yet in him it is highly exalted; even as highly, as the
Divine Nature in him was abased; for the Humane Nature ascends just in the same
proportion, as the Divine descended, that is, to the utmost possibility; for
God could stoop no lower than to become a Man, nor Man rise higher than to be
personally one with God.

Thus you see Christ's entering into his State of Humiliation, has rendered the
Nature of Man very considerable again in the fight of God; so that he can now
with Honor, exercise good Will toward it.

Secondly, His management of this State, consists in his active, and passive
Righteousness.

By his active Righteousness, I mean his Obedience to the whole Law; to the
Ceremonial, in being Circumcised, Baptized, keeping the three yearly Feasts,
etc. To the Moral, in not committing one Sin, or neglecting one commanded Duty,
even to Subjection to his Parents, and paying Tribute to Caesar.

By his passive Righteousness, I mean all that he suffered in his Life time, as
the meanness of his Birth and Education; his Persecution by Herod in his
Infancy, after by the Scribes and Pharisees, his Hunger and Temptation in the
Wilderness, his Poverty and Straits, he had not where to lay his Head; in a
word, He was all his life long in all things tempted as we are (yet without
sin) Heb. 4.15. but especially what he suffered at his Death.

First, In his Body, he was scourged, spit upon, crowned with Thorns, and at
length Crucified, which was, 1. A cruel Death, the Latin Cruciari, to be
tormented, is derived, a cruce, from being crucified, 2. A reproachful one,
Gal. 3.13. Heb. 13.13. it was the Roman Death for Slaves and Malefactors.

But, Secondly, Most of all he suffered in his Soul, witness those Expressions,
(...), Matthew. 26.37. Mark 14.33. add his bemoaning himself to his Disciples in
the following words, and his passionate Prayer thrice repeated, Abba Father, if
it be possible let this cup pass. Add further yet, his sweating drops of Blood,
in that bitter Agony which so spent him in the Garden, that an Angel was sent
to comfort him; but above all, his desertion upon the Cross, witnesses that he
suffered unutterably in his Soul, when he cried, My God, my God, why have thou
forsaken me? The Socinians are here puzzled to give any tolerable Account, how
the infinitely good God could find in his Heart to exercise his only begotten
Son, that never sinned, with all these Horrors in his Soul; for certainly, it
stood not with his Goodness, had not Christ, as the second Adam, been a public
Person, a Representative, on whom the Lord has laid the iniquities of us all,
Isa. 53.6. But if we consider (which they deny) that Christ was then satisfying
his Father's Justice, we need not wonder at those Horrors and Consternations
of the Manhood; for he knew the vastness of his Undertaking, the numberless
Numbers, and aggravations of Sins, the dreadful weight of his Father's Wrath,
the sharpness of that Sword, Zech. 13.7. which he was going now to feel (not
that God was angry with Christ upon the Cross, quoad affectum; no, he never
more dearly loved him, but quoad effectum) and Christ's infinite Abhorrence of
the Sins he bore, and that infinite Zeal wherewith he was inflamed to vindicate
the Honor of Divine Justice. Now, his infinite love to his Church struggling
with all these, produced those Agonies, and overcame them all, when he said, It
is finished, Joh. 19.30. we meet him next triumphing in his Resurrection.

But here to resolve that great Question, whether Christ's passive
Righteousness alone, or Active and Passive jointly, are the matter of Christ's
Satisfaction, which Believers plead at God's Bar for their Justification, and,
which being accepted by God as a Plea good in Law, is said to be imputed ( viz.
in a Law-sense) for Righteousness. Let these Reasons be weighed by such as do
disjoyn them.

First, Each of them has its proper Interest in, and its respective
Contribution toward the satisfying the injured Honor of God's Law. For the
Honor of God's Law, is the Equity of both its Parts, its Command, and its
Threatening; Christ's active Righteousness honors the Equity of the first,
which Man had dishonored by his Disobedience; but the great God-man has
repaired the Honor of God's Commandments, by yielding a most perfect Obedience
to every one of them, and therein proclaimed the Law to be holy, just, and
good. Then Christ's passive Righteousness in like manner honors the Equity of
the Threatening; for, as by Obeying, he acknowledged God's Authority to make a
Law, and his unexceptionable Righteousness in every single Branch of the Law
made; so, by Suffering, he proclaims, that Man is bound to keep it; or, if he
do not, to bear the Penalty. He himself dies to justify, that the Sinner is
worthy of Death, and offers himself upon the Cross as a Sacrifice to the Divine
Justice; and hereby he has proclaimed Sin to be exceeding sinful, and God to
be so jealous a God, as, rather than Sin should go unpunished, and his Justice
wants its Glory, the Righteous Eternal Son of God must be made an Example, what
guilty Man had deserved. Thus God by two equal Miracles (of everlasting
Astonishment to be adored) has satisfied both his contending Attributes, and
rendered each of them Triumphant, in making his Righteous Son an Example of his
Sin-avenging Justice, that guilty Sinners (repenting, and believing) might be
made Examples of his Sin-pardoning goodness.

In the second place, as each has its respective Interest in satisfying the
injured Law, so neither of them can be any where severed from the other; and
those which God has so indissolubly joined, let none part asunder; for
Christ's active Righteousness was every where passive, because, all of it done
in the form of a Servant; for in our Nature he obeyed the Law, but in his very
Incarnation he was Passive, for therein he suffered an Eclipse of the Glory of
his Godhead. And his passive Righteousness was every where active; because,
what he suffered was not by constraint, or against his Will; no, it was his own
voluntary Act and Deed all along; let me instance in the greatest of his
Sufferings, his very dying was the Product both of the freeness of his Love,
and the Majesty of his Power, John 10.17, 18. Rev. 1.5.

In the third place, Both Christ's active and passive Righteousness, what he
did, and what he suffered, partake in common of the form of satisfaction;
therefore, they are both integral parts, or joint Ingredients thereof; for
forma dat esse: but this brings me to the second Enquiry.

2. Query, What is the form of Christ's Satisfaction, or that which renders it
Satisfactory? I answer, the infinite Merit of what he did and suffered; which
infinite Merit stands, 1. In the dignity of his Person; the fullness of the
Godhead dwelt in him bodily, Col. 2.9. John 1.14. Now for the work of a
Servant to be done by the Lord of all, renders his Active; and for him to
suffer as a Malefactor between Malefactors, who was God blessed for evermore,
renders also his passive Righteousness infinitely Meritorious; no wonder the
Blood of Christ cleanses from all Sin, for it is the Blood of God, Acts 20.28.
1 John 1.7. And this is the Reason why the Righteousness of one, redounds unto
all for the justification of life, Romans 5.18, 19. because his active and
passive Righteousness is infinitely of more value, than all, that the Creatures
in Heaven and Earth could have done, or suffered to Eternity; the very Man
Christ Jesus is above all the Angels, Heb. 1.6. for he is the Man that is God's
fellow, Zech. 13.7. And this infinite Worthiness of the Redeemer's Person, you
have excellently described, as irradiating, and infinitely exalting all he did
and suffered, Phil. 2.6, 7, 8, 9. Heb. 7.24, 25, 28.

2. The active and passive Righteousness of Christ are of infinite Merit,
because not at all due, but both mere supererrogations of an infinitely
glorious Person.

And First, For his active Righteousness, it stood in his Obedience to the
Ceremonial and Moral Laws.

1. His Obedience to the Ceremonial Law was a mere supererrogation, for the
Substance to comply with the Shadows, the Antitype to do homage to its own
Types; besides, he submitted to those very Ordinances, whose End and
Institution supposes Guilt, and whose Nature argues them designed only for the
use of Sinners; what foreskin of Impurity had he to be cut off in Circumcision?
what Filth to be washed away in Baptism? Did the holy Child Jesus defile his
Mother's Womb. as common Mortals do, that are conceived in Sin, and brought
forth in Iniquity? And yet he was Circumcised and Baptized, and his Mother
offered for her Purification, Luke 1.21, 22. chap. 3.21. No imaginable
Obligation lay on him to these Submissions, being to him mere Ciphers wholly
insignificant.

2. His Obedience to the Moral Law: Although it must be granted, that as Man,
it was his Duty, Gal. 4.4. yet was it not his Duty to become Man. True, a
Creature's homage was due from him, when a Creature; a Servant's Work, when in
the form of a Servant: but the whole was free and Arbitrary, because his
entering into that State was so: for, what but his own infinite Love could ever
move the Eternal Word, to pitch his Tent in our Nature? What Obligation lay on
the Heir of all things, to take the form of a Servant? Who bound the Eternal
Son of God, to become in the fullness of time the Son of Man?

And as his active Righteousness, so Secondly, His Passive too was a mere
Supererrogation; for his Almighty Father's Holy, All-seeing Eye, could never
espy the least Iniquity in him to punish: What had the Divine Justice to do
with him? for he was a sinless Person, he suffered not for himself, Dan. 9.26.
No, for us, 2 Cor. 5.21. And therefore, since no Obligation lay on him to do
what he did, or to suffer what he suffered, he may impute the Merit both of the
one, and the other, to whomsoever, and upon what terms soever he and his Father
please.

But before I come to consider the terms upon which Christ's Satisfaction is
applied, I must answer some Questions, and clear the Scruples in the way.

1. Object. 1. What is become of the Law of that first Covenant made with Adam
in Paradise? Genesis 2.17. repeated again to the Jews, Deuteronomy. 27.26. The sum of
which you have fully expressed, Ezekiel. 18.4. The soul that sins, it shall dye.

I answer, It is not fully executed, nor abrogated, but released, or dispensed
with.

First, It is not fully executed; for there is no Condemnation to them that are
in Christ Jesus, etc. Romans 8.1.

Secondly, It is not abrogated; for it is in part executed upon Believers; they
are liable to the first, or natural Death, which is the wages of sin, although
the second death has no power over them; besides all manner of Chastisements
and Afflictions, Psalm. 89.30, 31, 32. And also that Law is totally executed
upon finally Impenitent Unbelievers, over whom not the first only, but the
second Death also has Power, 2 Thessalonians. 1.8. For he that believes not, is
condemned already, John 3.18. That is, the Gospel finds him, and every one in a
state of Condemnation; but those who believe, it proclaims Deliverance to;
those, who through Unbelief reject it (judging themselves unworthy of
everlasting Life, see Acts 13.46.) it leaves such as it found them; viz, under
the Condemnation of the old Covenant, since they refuse the pardoning Mercy of
the New.

Thirdly, I answer therefore positively, That the first Covenant is released,
and dispensed with, by super-inducing a New Covenant of Grace over it, That
whosoever closes with, and comes into the terms of the New, should be exempted
from the Rigor and Extremity, i. e. from the Eternal Condemnation of the old,
John 3.16. It is not said, He that believes shall not be Sick, shall not be
Afflicted, shall not Die; No, but he shall not perish. Thus you see the
Covenant of Works, as to its Execution upon such as are in the Covenant of
Grace, is in the chief part restrained; but yet in some part inflicted: They
never shall complain under the Eternal and Destructive; yet they do complain
under the Temporal and Corrective Punishment of their Sins, Lam. 3.39.

Yet more particularly for the clearer understanding of this, we must consider
that the first Covenant lays a double Obligation on sinful Man.

First, In reference to what is past; and here it requires Satisfaction and
Reparation from us, for our Sin in breaking it.

And Secondly, In reference to the future: after such Satisfaction and amends
made, it requires perfect Conformity still as at first, absolute Obedience to
all God's Commands, being the Eternal Debt of the reasonable Creature to that
God that made it in his own Image: if therefore we could (which has already
been proved to be impossible) ever have satisfied God's injured Law for our
past breach, the Law would still have come upon us for future, exact Conformity
to pay the residue of that Eternal Debt: and its Language would be, Sin no
more, lest a worse thing befall thee: as a Fellon, though burnt in the Hand, is
yet bound to live honestly for the future at his Peril. Now the New Covenant of
Grace relieves us as to both these Cases, and dispenses with the Rigor of the
Law.

As to the first, It comforts us with the good News, That the Son of God has
satisfied his Father's Justice; and if we believe but in him, God will accept
of us, as if we had satisfied in our own Persons. The case the Law leaves us
in, is well-expressed, Isa. 33.14. and Heb. 10.51. But the relief the Gospel
brings us in St. Paul's Language, Romans 8.33, 34. You have both together
excellently, Ezekiel. 33.10, 11.

As to the second Obligation, the New Covenant dispenses with the Rigor of
that too: for, woe to a justified and pardoned Person, if he must lose all
again, upon the least defailance: therefore the Gospel proclaims pardon of Sin
upon Repentance, and acceptance of sincere Endeavors to obey him. God's
Language now is, Sinners be but in good earnest, do but love me heartily, and
my Ways: let me but see a Child-like Ingenuity in you, and I will put down your
upright, though imperfect Performances, in the Book of my Remembrance, Mal.
3.16. and blot out your Transgressions, when repented of, out of the Book of my
Remembrance. Mandata Dei tanquam facta reputantur, quando quicquid non fit
ignoscitur. Thus does the Candor of the Gospel dispense with the Rigor of the
Law: God deals not with us as an Aegpptian Task-master, but as a Father with
his Children whom he loves: Christ's yoke is easy, his burden light.

Object. 2. If any doubt how it stands with God's Veracity, and Immutability,
having once declared, that the Soul that sins shall die, to contradict it by
declaring that, He that believes shall never die, but have Eternal Life, John
11.26.

I answer, We must look upon Threatenings as a part of the Law, declaring the
dueness of the Punishment, what the Offender has deserved to suffer; not as
Predictions of the Event, any more than Thou shall, and Thou shall not, in the
Command, are Predictions: but only are expressive of the dueness of Obedience.
Nor will it hence follow, that we have the least cause once to suspect that God
may (if he please) to revoke his Promises, as well as his Threatenings; and
then, what would become of us? for there is a wide difference in their
essential Natures and Properties. In a Promise, the Obligation lies upon the
Party promising; he has past away his own Liberty, and the thing is now no
longer his, but the others, who may, if he please, release, and quit-claim to
his Pretensions; he may dispense with, and surrender his own Right; but if he
claim his Right to, and Interest in the Benefit, by virtue of the Promise, it
cannot be detained without notorious Wrong and Injury, which, God forbid we
should charge him with; for he were not God, if he were not infinitely true and
faithful. How should he else judge the world? But now the Obligation unto
Punishment lies contraily upon the Sinner threatened; he has past away his own
Indemnity, and given God the right of punishing him: I say the Right, not the
Necessity; if God will claim this Right, he may; but if he please, he may
dispense with it. It is no Injury if he punishes; yet no Obligation lies upon
him but his own Honor, And that, indeed, obliges him not, never to dispense
with his Law; but never to dispense with it upon a light Cause, or upon Terms
misbecoming his Glorious Attributes. And the Dispensation we now speak of is an
honorable one; for

1. There are weighty Inducements moving God hereunto. If he had not dispensed
with the rigor of it.

First, He had lost the opportunity of the highest possible way of glorifying
his own Goodness, which now so infinitely endears him to the World, and lays
such Obligations on us to admire and adore him.

Secondly, As all Israel lamented over Benjamin, Judge. 21.6. that a Tribe was
lost; so the Creation would have mist a Tribe; which is the reason some Divines
have given why Christ took not on him the nature of Angels, but the seed of
Abraham; because, only some of the Angelical Tribe lost their Birthright; only
some kept not their first estate; but, man being in honor continued not, but
became like the Beast that perishes.

Thirdly, All Religion had been extinguished, and frozen by Despair
unavoidably; if there had been no Hope, the Fear of God, his Worship and
Service had for ever utterly perished from off the Earth. But now his Name is
excellent in all the earth; even that Name proclaimed to Moses, Exodus 34.6. The
Lord is known in Judah, and his Name is great in Israel, Psalm. 79.1.

2. As the Causes inducing are weighty, so the Terms on which he dispenses
with his Law are as honorable; which was our third Query propounded in the
opening the Point. For, since Christ Redeemed us, not by way of Solution
(strictly) as a Surety, paying the Debtor's proper Debt to the Creditor; but by
way of Satisfaction, as a Mediator and Intercessor, offering a valuable
Consideration to the offended Judge of the World, in lieu of the Laws executing
the Penalty threatened upon the Sinner: It necessarily follows, that no Right at
all in the Benefits of this Satisfaction can accrue to the Delinquent, but upon
such Terms precisely as the offended Party, and the Mediator that satisfies
him, shall agree unto; and upon mutual Treaty and Com-promise, jointly ratify;
so that Justification by way of Satisfaction provides, not only the Sinner's
Indemnity, but in such a manner, as also to consult the Interests and Honor
both of the Party satisfying, and satisfied; and this latter is the rule and
measure of exhibiting the former, and of making over the Satisfaction for
discharge of the Offender.

Query 3. What are the Terms therefore upon which both God and Christ have
agreed to justify Sinners?

I answer: First, Faith, which is a hearty receiving Christ as he is tendered by
the Gospel; and here the Soul quits all Pretensions of being justified by any
Righteousness of its own, and rolls it self upon the Lord its Righteousness;
and therefore has Faith the honor to be the justifying Grace, because it so
highly honors Christ; it is the Nuptial Knot whereby the Soul joins it self
to its Lord-Redeemer in an everlasting Marriage-Covenant, it denies it self,
and forsakes all its other Lovers, and clasps about its Lord and Husband, as
it is all in all. Look what a Wife does in a Marriage-Covenant to her Husband,
that does a Soul in believing unto Christ, it says unto him, (...) thou art my
Husband, Hos. 2.16. And he says unto his Spouse, (...) you are my People.

But then this justifying Faith has two Daughters that inseparably attend her.

1. Repentance: Here sinful Man retracts and undoes his Faults, cries peccavi,
weeps, wrings his Hands, smites upon his Breast, and cries, What have I done?
Laments after the Lord, and abhors himself in Dust and Ashes: He calls himself
Fool, mad Man, Beast, Traitor to his God, and to his Soul: In a word, executes
the Law upon himself; and since God excuses him from the Punishment, he
accuses himself of the Guilt, and condemns himself to the shame of his Sin;
and hereby the Sinner honors the Equity of the threatening by his Tears,
acknowledging that his Blood was due.

2. Newness of Life; Here the Sinner acknowledges perfect Obedience to be
still his Duty; this honors the Equity of God's Commandments. And the
Redeemer, by making this one of the Conditions of the Gospel Covenant, has
given his Father his Law back again; he does not repeal it; no, it is still the
rule of Life, and every Commandment still obliges a Believer. Christ has only
released us from the condemning Power of it, not the commanding Power of it. We
must still press after Perfection; but, though we fall short of it, we shall
not die for it: Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the Law, being made a
curse for us; but has left us under the Government and Command of the Law. The
whole matter is excellently expressed, 1 John 2.1. My little Children, these
things I write unto you; that you sin not; and if any man fen, we have an
Advocate with the Father Jesus Christ the righteous.

3. Having thus discoursed to the three general Points first propounded, and
showed, that the Person justified is charged with Guilt: And, Secondly, that he
pleads to the Charge, (where I have largely opened the nature of that Plea) I
come now to the third general Point, to show how upon his Plea he is
discharged, or justified.

A Sinner is then actually justified, when he is constituted, or made Righteous
in Law. Righteousness is a Conformity to the Law; he that fulfills the Law, is
Righteous in the Eye of that Law; he is (...), within the Protection of it; as
he that transgresses the Law, is (...), Guilty in the Eye of the Law, and
without the Protection of it. Now the Law of the New Covenant runs thus, He
that believes shall not perish, so, that a Believer keeps and fulfills this
Law; and therefore Faith is imputed to him for Righteousness, Romans 4.22, 23,
24. because Faith is the keeping of the New Covenant, which therefore is called
the Law of Faith, Romans 3.27. in opposition to the Old Covenant, called there by
the Apostle, the Law of Works. As therefore Innocence, or perfect Obedience,
would have justified Adam, had he stood by virtue of the Law of Works, or Old
Covenant, whose Tenor is, Obey, and Live, for then he had fulfilled that Law;
and as his Disobedience actually condemned him by virtue of the same Law, --
Disobey, and die for it, Genesis 2.17. So now, believing in Christ justifies, by
virtue of the Law of Faith; for it is the keeping and fulfilling of the
Gospel Covenant, whose Tenor is, Believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou
shall be saved: And again, Unbelief actually condemns by virtue of the same
Law, -- He that believes not is condemned already, because he has not
believed in the Name of the only begotten Son of God, John 3.18. That is,
because the Unbeliever is (...), without the Protection of the Gospel, or Law
of Faith, he comes not up to its Righteousness; he is condemned already, as a
Sinner, by the Law of Works; and yet once more with a Witness, condemned as an
Unbeliever, as a Monster that has twice been accessory to his own Murder:
First, in wounding himself, and Secondly, in refusing to be healed: The Law of
Works includes us all under Sin, we are all dead, our Case was desperate; but
God who is rich in mercy, through his great love wherewith he has loved us,
Ephesians. 2.4. (his immense (...)) when we were dead in Sins and Trespasses, has
sent his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes in him, should not perish,
but have everlasting life, John 3.16. And this is that Law according to which
he will judge the World; according to my Gospel, faith Paul, Romans 2.27. Every
Believer therefore, though he wants the Righteousness of the Law of Works (
viz. Innocence) yet he shall not be condemned, because he has the
Righteousness of the Gospel ( viz. Faith) which is the New Law in force,
according to which, God now deals with us, and shall judge the World at the
last day.

And here it will be richly worth our very heedful Observation, that although a
Believer has not the Righteousness of the Law of Works, inherent in himself:
(for if he had, he were not a Sinner, but should be justified by that Law) yet
by Faith he lays hold upon Christ's Satisfaction, which in the very Eye of the
Law of Works is an unexceptionably Perfect, and infinitely glorious
Righteousness: So that Faith justifies us even at the Bar of the Law of Works,
Ratione objecti, as it lays hold on Christ's Satisfaction, which, is our legal
Righteousness; it justifies us at the Bar of the Gospel, or Law of Faith,
formaliter, and ratione sui, as it is Covenanting-keeping, or a fulfilling of
the Gospel-Law: For, he that keeps a Law is Righteous, where that Law is Judge,
the Lawmakers by his very making of the Law, makes him Righteous, and the Judge
that pronounces according to the Law (for a Judge is (...)) will infallibly
pronounce him so.

But that with all requisite Distinctness we may apprehend this great Affair,
let us take a view of some of the most considerable and important Causes which
concur to the producing this excellent Effect, the discharge and justification
of a Sinner, and state their several Interests and Concernments in their
respective Influences upon, and Contributions toward it.

And First, 1. How free grace justifies.
The free Grace of God is the first Wheel that sets all the rest in motion. Its
Contribution is that of a Proegumenal Cause, or Internal Motive, disposing God
to send his Son, Joh. 3.16. That sinners (believing) might be justified freely
by his grace, through the Redemption that is in Christ Jesus, Romans 3.24. For
Christ died not to render God good (he was so Eternally) but that with the
Honor of his Justice he might exert and display his Goodness, which contrived
and made its self this way to break forth into the World.

Secondly, 2. How Christ's Satisfaction.
Christ's Satisfaction is doubly concerned in our Justification.

1. In respect of God, as a Procatartick Cause of infinite Merit, and
Impetrative Power; for the sake of which God is reconciling himself unto the
World in Christ, not imputing their Trespasses unto them, 2 Cor. 5.19.

2. In respect of the Law of Works, Christ's Satisfaction justieth us formally,
as our proper legal Righteousness; I call it our Righteousness, because it
becomes imputed to us upon our Believing; Faith being our Gospel Title, by
pleading which, we lay claim to all the Benefits accruing from the Merit of
Christ's Performance, to all Effects, Uses and Purposes, as if it had been
personally our own; I call it our legal Righteousness, because, thereby the Law
of God owns it self fully apaid, and acquiesceth in it, as in full Reparations
and Amends made unto it, for the injury and dishonor received by the Sin of
Man. We must plead this against all the Challenges and Accusations of the Law:
who shall lay any thing to the charge of God's Elect? it is Christ that died,
etc. Romans 8.33. And thus our legal Righteousness required in the first
Covenant, that of Works, is wholly without us in our Redeemer, yet imputed upon
our Account.

Thirdly, The Gospel justifies qua Lex lata, 3. How the Gospel.
as it is the Law of Faith; for the very Tenor of the Gospel Covenant, is,
Believe, and thou shall be saved.

Fourthly, Faith justifies vi Legis latae, 4. How Faith.
as it is our Evangelical Righteousness, or our keeping the Gospel-Law? for
that Law suspends Justification upon Believing. Faith pretends to no Merit or
Virtue of its own, but professedly avows its dependence upon the Merit of
Christ's Satisfaction, as our legal Righteousness, on which it lays hold, nor
can it show any other Title to be it self our Evangelical Righteousness, but
only God's Sanction, who chose this Act of believing to the honor of being the
Justifying Act, because it so highly honors Christ; so that as a most
judicious Pen expresses it, the Act of Believing is as the Silver; but God's
Authority in the Gospel-Sanction, is the King's Coin, or Image Stamped upon it,
which gives it all its value as to Justification. Without this Stamp it could
never have been current; and if God had set this Stamp on any other Grace as
Love, that then would have been current, and have justified us as Faith does
now.

Fifthly, God justifies in a proper sense two ways: 5. How God.
First, As a Legislator: Secondly, As a Judge.

1. As a Legislator, enacting by his Sovereign Authority, that fweet and
gracious Law of the New Covenant, by virtue of whose Tenor, every Sinner that
believes is justified from the Guilt of Sin; from which he could not be
justified by the Law of Moses, Acts 13.38, 39. This Law of Justification by
Faith, is God's own Act and Deed, the great Instrumentum pacis, between God and
Man: he has proclaimed his Letters Patents; the King of Heaven and Earth has
in the Gospel (our Magna Charta) given his Warrant under his own Broad Seal,
That he that believes shall not be condemned.

2. As a Judge, the God of Heaven may in three respects be said to justify a
Believer.

First, Forthwith upon his Believing, God owneth him secretly within himself,
as a Person justified; God esteems and approves of him as in that state, unto
which he has, by believing a Title good in Law, an indefeasible Right; a
justified Estate emergeth actually, as soon as Faith; the Law-Title thereunto
emergeth as a necessary Resultance by virtue of the Tenor of the Gospel-Law,
which only justified Virtually, Potentially, and Conditionally before every
Believer in general; but now Actually, Absolutely, and in particular, it
justifies him as a Believer when he is so.

Secondly, At the moment of Dissolution God justifies as the Judge of all the
Earth, passing a private Sentence and Award unto everlasting Life upon every
believing Soul.

Thirdly, But Eminently at the last Day, when the Ancient of Days shall take
the Throne, and in open Court, before the whole Creation, by public Sentence
for ever acquit and discharge Believers at that great and last Assizes.

Sixthly, 6. How Works.
Shall I need to add, that Works are said to justify us? Jam. 2.4. because
they justify our Faith, or demonstrate before God and Man, and to our own
Consciences, that our Faith is not a dead and barren, but a true and living one
by its fruitfulness in well-doing.

Seventhly, 7. How the Spirit.
But I must not forget, Lastly, That the Spirit of God is said to justify us,
1 Cor. 6.11. and that two ways. First, Directly, by working Faith in the Heart,
which is one of the Fruits of the Spirit, Gal. 5.22. Now, Causa causae est
etiam causa causati; the Spirit justifies as it is the Author of the
justifying Grace. Secondly, Reflexibly: The Divine Spirit clears up
Justification to a Believer's Conscience, by discovering the truth of Faith, by
working Assurance, and by sealing a Believer to the day of Redemption. The
Spirit it self bears witness with our spirits, that we are the Children of
God; and if Children, then heirs, etc. Romans 8.16, 17.

Thus I have at length done with my first Task, the opening of the Point, which
finds its self summed up in this Definition; Justification is a judicial act of
God, as Lawgiver and Judge of the world, graciously discharging a Believer for
the sake of Christ's satisfaction, from the condemnation of the Law of Works,
by the tenor of the Gospel-Law, or New Covenant, which requires of, accepts
from, imputes unto sinners faith in Christ Jesus as their righteousness; see
Romans 3.25, 6, 7, 8. Romans 4.5. Phil. 3.9.

Use. Refut. To improve it now (which was my other Task) by way of Refutation,
I infer against the Antinomians, First, That Justification is not from Eternity.

1. Because a person must be charged with Guilt before he is justified or
discharged; but nothing can be before Eternity; if discharged from Eternity,
when was he charged? what, from Eternity too? then he will be at once eternally
charged with, and discharged from Guilt, which, if any excuse from a
Contradiction, they are much wiser than I am.

2. My Text convinces them, actual Faith is not from Eternity, therefore not
Justification before God; for if Faith justify us not before God, but only at
the Bar of Conscience; then there will be no Justification at God's Bar at all
once mentioned in Scripture; for Works do it at Man's Bar. What is it I wonder
that justifies from Eternity? Not God's Decree to justify; for then his
Decree to glorify, would make Glorification from Eternity too; -- but Decreta
Dei nihil ponunt actu in subjecto. God's Decrees are immanent Acts, and pass
nothing actually upon the Creature.

3. A justified person was actually under Condemnation whilst he was an
Unbeliever, Romans 3.18. He that believes not, is condemned already; but he
could not be at all Condemned, if justified from Eternity.

4. Saint Paul expressly affirms, that the believing Corinthians were not once,
but now were justified, 1 Cor. 6.11. Such were some of you, but ye are washed,
but ye are sanctified, but ye are justified in the Name of the Lord Jesus, etc.

Secondly, I infer against them, that are dangerously mistaken, in thinking
that a Believer is Righteous in the sight of God, with the self-same active and
passive Righteousness wherewith Christ was Righteous, as though Believers
suffered in Christ, and obeyed in Christ, and were as Righteous in God's Esteem
as Christ himself, having his personal Righteousness made personally theirs by
Imputation. This is their fundamental mistake, and from hence (tanquam ex equo
Trojano) issue out a throng of such false and corrupt Deductions and
Consequences as these.

That God sees no Sin in his Children; that Affliction and Death are not proper
Punishments of Sin to Believers: that all future Sins are already actually
forgiven, as well as past and present; that a Believer must not pray for the
Pardon of Sin, but only for the manifestation of it; that God loved Noah when
drunk; Lot, when so, and beside incestuous; David, when acting Adultery and
Murder; Peter, when he was cursing and swearing, and denying Christ, with as
high a love of Complacency and Delight, as when conversant in the most
spiritual Exercises of Grace; that all which God requires as a Sinner's Duty in
the Gospel, is to believe that Christ died absolutely for him in particular;
that this is all true Gospel-Faith; and the doubting or questioning this, the
unbelief which the Gospel so much condemns; that, to argue our Justification
from our Sanctification, and gather assurance of God's Love from our Love and
Fear of him, is a legal Principle; that Obedience to God's Commandments is not
properly a Believer's Debt, but, that all the Obligation which lies upon him to
Holiness, is only the voluntary expression of his love and gratitude to God,
not as what is due, but what is comely: And lastly, (for I should be tired to
name all) that Christ has kept the Gospel Covenant for us, as well as
satisfied the Law; so that not only our Legal Righteousness is without us in
Christ our Surety, but our Evangelical Righteousness it self also.

Now to pluck up all these desperate Consequences by the Root, there needs no
more than a right understanding of the true and proper Notion, and manner of
Christ's redeeming us; it is not by way of Solution, but of Satisfaction.
Clearly thus, our Case to God is not properly that of Debtors, but that of
criminal Subjects. God's Aspect to usward, not properly that of a Creditor,
but that of a Rector and Judge: The person Christ sustained, and the part he
acted, not in a strict sense that of a Surety, paying the very Debt in kind,
and so discharging a Bond; but that of a Mediator expiating our Guilt, and
making Reparations to Divine Justice another way than by the execution of the
Law. And indeed, the very nature of a Law is such, as it is quite impossible
that the Obligation either of its Threatening or Command, should in a proper
sense be fulfilled, by any other than the very person threatened and commanded;
alias here makes aliud. If another suffer the Penalty, the threatening is not
fulfilled: Nor if another performs the Duty, the Command: for the Obligation as
to Punishment lies on the person threatened (noxa caput sequitur) and that to
Duty on the person Commanded, it cannot be fulfilled in kind by another, but it
ceases to be the same thing, and becomes another thing from that in the
Obligation; yet it may be such another thing (and Christ's Righteousness (both
active and passive) really is such) as the Rector or Judge may accept of with
Honor, and be satisfied with, as if the very same thing had been suffered and
done just in the same manner, as the Law threatened and commanded it.

That Christ has paid not the Idem, but Tantundem, i. e. not fulfilled the Law
(as for us) in kind, but satisfied it for us, is most evident. For, 1. The Law
obliged the Sinner's person to suffer; Christ was no Sinner. 2. All Men to
suffer, forasmuch as all had Sinned; Christ was but one Man. 3. The Punishment
due by Law was Eternal; Christ suffered but for a season, and is entered into
his Glory; thus Christ paid not the same thing that was in the Obligation, but
something equivalent thereunto.


This being obtained, that the Lord Christ has Redeemed us, not by way of
Solution, or discharging a Bond, by payment in kind, but by way of Satifaction,
or making Amends to the injured Justice of the Law: It follows from the Reason
and Nature of the thing:

1. That God pardons freely; we are not only beholding to Christ for
satisfying, but to God too infinitely, for accepting of any Satisfaction at
all; he might have refused it; he had done Sinners no wrong if he had executed
the Rigor of the Law, without hearkening to terms of Reconciliation. Quite
contrary, a Creditor does not pardon the Debtor, when the Surety has
discharged the Bond by full payment in kind; the Debtor is beholding indeed to
his Friend the Surety, but not all to the Creditor, who cannot refuse to cancel
the Bond; nay, it were wrong and injustice in him if he did.

2. That none has, or can have actual Interest in, or Benefit by this
Redemption, but upon such terms as God and Christ have mutually compromised in,
and agreed to, viz. the conditions of the Gospel Covenant abovementioned. See
the answer to the third Query.

1. The Reason hereof is partly from God, the injured Lawgiver of the World;
who seeing it was at his liberty to accept of Satisfaction or no, has of
necessity the right to make his own terms, when, and how far forth, and in what
manner and method he will condescend to admit the Sinner to the actual benefit
of Christ's Satisfaction.

2. And partly too from Christ; for as he is the (...), or Mediator between God
and Man, a friend to both Parties; nay, a person consisting of both Natures;
the offended and offending; he is engaged necessarily by virtue both of Office
and Person, to espouse with equal tenderness of regard the Interests of both
Parties; for he is really concerned in them both; they are his Concernments as
well as theirs. True indeed, a Surety that discharges a Bond by full payment
in kind, he sustains and bears only the person of the Debtor, minds only his
Indemnity, does what he does upon his Account, and for his sake. But our great
Mediator must consult not only our Impunity, but his Father's, yea, and his own
Honor; and therefore (...), get you hence all you that either yet never did,
or that do not now repent, believe, and conscientiously endeavor to obey;
here is not the least jot of Benefit for you in the case you are in, from this
Redemption: for, how infinite soever the Merit of Christ's Satisfaction is, it
conferreth nothing actually upon any person that has not actually a
Gospel-claim and Title to plead it before God. The immediate effect actually
resulting from Christ's performance, is the procuring the Gospel Covenant to be
ratified by his Father, as a Law, whereby Sinners upon the terms propounded,
become reconcilable unto God; actually it is of force to all that have, but to
none that want the Conditions of it. Now the keeping this Gospel Covenant, God
expects from us in person (though by the Assistance of his Spirit, which he has
promised to give to them that humbly and earnestly ask it of him, Luke 11.1.)
To affirm that Christ has kept the Gospel for us too, is to utter the most
self-contradicting Blasphemy and Absurdity imaginable; as if he could repent,
or believe in himself, free, except, or cancel our Obligation to obey the Moral
Law, by his own obeying it; as if Christ had so done all, that nothing remains
to be done on our part. Such strange extremes do some Men run into, that to
avoid Justification by Works (by an (...)) are as yet extravagant on the other
hand, thinking the Grace of God cannot be free, except the Sinner become either
a senseless Statue, merely passive, or (which is yet worse) have a writ of ease
to be quite idle, or (which is worst of all) a License to Sin by Prerogative.
Let the Apostles (...) chastise this Insolence, Romans 6.15 shall we sin because
we are not under the Law, but under grace? God forbid. If Christ had obeyed the
Law for us in the sense of paying a Debt, or discharging a Bond, the Apostles
answer could not stand, Romans 3.31. Do^^e them make void the Law through Faith?
yea, we establish the Law. When a Believer breaks the Law, he Sins (for sin is
the transgression of the Law) nay, he cannot break it wilfully, but he breaks
the very Gospel Covenant (one Condition whereof is sincere Obedience) and the
guilt of that sin lies upon him unpardoned, until by hearty Repentance, and
fresh Applications by Faith to the Blood of sprinkling (which are the only
Titles good in Law, the only Gospel-claims to Pardon) he has sued out a new
Pardon (for actual Remission is only of past Sins, Romans 3.25.) according to the
Tenor of the New Covenant, which is a perpetual Law of pardoning, repenting
and believing Sinners, whomsoever, whenever, but as such.

Neither was Christ's suffering like the cancelling of a Bond, a total
discharge of us, from suffering the Penalty threatened in the Law; we die still,
and Afflictions are Punishments still. True indeed upon Christ's Satisfaction
made, God and he are agreed, that a believing Sinner should not be punished
with the everlasting destructive Penalty threatened (for whosoever believes
shall not perish) Joh. 3.16. but they are not, that he shall not be, for he is
punished with the temporal corrective Punishments of the threatening, as
Sickness, and natural Death; yet, even these (through infinite Goodness so
ordering and disposing it) prove much more a Benefit, than a Penalty to a
Believer.

Use 2. What cause have we then with the lowest and profoundest Humility, to
adore the Majesty of the living God?

First, To adore his Holiness. Reverence those eyes of his, that are purer than
that they can endure to behold iniquity, Hab. 1.13. Let this God be thy dread
and awe. Dare not to make a mock of Sin; tremble at the horrid Guilt and
sinfulness of the least Sin; look upon it as an Affront and Treason against an
Eternal Majesty, as worthy the Curse of the Law, and the Wrath of an Almighty
God, as that which could not be expiated at a lesser rate than the Blood of
God, Acts 20.28.

Secondly, To adore his Wisdom in finding out such a person to satisfy his
Justice as our Redeemer; consider here, that God could not suffer, could not
die; nay, could not (properly) satisfy himself; (for it had not been a
Satisfaction to his Justice at all, but mere Mercy; and so no Justification of
a Sinner, but mere Pardon, if the person satisfying had been only God.) Again,
consider, that a mere Creature could never satisfy, as I before demonstrated a
mere Creature had perished in the Attempt, would have been overwhelmed, and
crushed to pieces with that insupportable Load, the guilt of Sin, and the wrath
of God. The person therefore that must fatisfie, must neither be Finite, nor
Infinite, neither the Creature, nor the Creator; neither God nor Man; yet must
be both. Here now, the Understandings of Men and Angels must have been tried to
all Eternity, and lost for ever in a bottomless Gulf ^^ Horror and Amazement
to find out such a Person. O the depth of the riches of the wisdom and
knowledge of God! Romans 11.33. see also Ephesians. 1.7, 8. fully hereunto.

Thirdly, To adore the Infinite Riches of his Grace, Romans 3.24. in
Justification; and here consider,

1. God might have let man alone, seized the forfeiture; as the Tree fell, it
might have lain for ever; what obliged God to accept of Satisfaction?

2. The Redeemer has trodden the Wine press alone; what ever was done in this
Satisfaction, he did it; Of the People there was none with him. The Sinner has
not the least hand in it, could not pay one, Christ paid every one to the
utmost farthing.

Thirdly, It was the Judge himself who contrived this way to Justify us, and
it was at his cost, he gave his Son; herein God commended his Love to us, as
Abraham once did his faith to God, in that he spared not his Son, his only
begotten Son whom he Loved. So that if we rightly weigh it, it will appear,
that by how much the Satisfaction is the fuller, by so much the pardon is the
freer; by how much his Justice is the more, by so much too is his mercy the
more glorified, and still, still infinitely the more are we obliged.

Use 3. Consol. Here Is unspeakable comfort for every humble, though doubting
Soul, every contrite Spirit that Hungers and Thirsts after Righteousness.

First, Consider how full Satisfaction Christ has made, he is able to save to
the utmost all that come to God through him; he is the beloved Son in whom the
Father is well-pleased; all power is committed into his hands; God has exalted
him to be a Prince, and a Savior to give Repentance, and Remission of sins.

Secondly, Consider he inviteth thee as a Sinner to come in unto this
Gospel-righteousness, in the general tenor of his Proclamation, Whosoever
believes, etc. If any man Sin, we have an Advocate with the Father, etc. 1 John
2.1, 2. An whosoever, excludes none that excludes not himself.

Thirdly, Consider Christ assures thee (that art the Person I now speak to) he
who is the Truth assures thee thou shall be welcome: Mat. 11.28. Come unto me
all ye that labor, and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest, etc. This is
your very case: Hark, the Master calls you, will you not be of good courage,
and Go, when he says Come! he that never yet cast out any that came unto him,
that never will, he says so himself; Thou may believe him, he never broke
his Word yet, he will not begin with thee, he cannot deny himself.

Fourthly, Consider those standing Monuments of Gods free Justifying grace that
are on record in the Scripture. What has been done, may be done again: Nay,
will be done again (in the case we speak of) by the God that changes not; God
has pardoned as great Sinners; see Ephraims case Jer. 31.18. see the
Corinthians example, 1 Cor. 6.10, 11. see Paul's, 1 Timothy 1.13. Whoever goes and
does likewise, shall receive likewise; for Christ is yesterday and to day, and
the same for ever.

Fifthly, Consider it is the very design of God in giving his Son, and of
Christ in giving himself to die for us, to Justify such as thou art, Isa.
16.1. Luke 4.19, 20. Jer. 3.12. 1. John 5.9.

Use 4. Exhort. First, To the Unconverted.

Use 4. Exhort. Let me then beseech Sinners not to love Death; Why should
iniquity be your ruin? There is Balm in Gilead, there is a Physician there? Why
are ye unwilling to be healed? Turn ye, Turn ye, why will ye die? Would it be a
hard matter to persuade a Condemned Person to be willing not to be Executed,
were he not distracted? If having a pardon offered upon the easy Terms of
confessing his fault, and serious promising Amendment, he should bid the Prince
keep his Pardon to himself; for his part, he was in love with his Chains, he
would not be Released, he would die. Thou art the man whoever thou art that
neglectest Gospel Grace; what Fury and Raging madness is it that thou art
Guilty of? Thy Soul with all its Eternal interests lies at Stake, and as if it
were neither here nor there, what became of thee for ever, thou despisest the
riches of Gods forbearance, after thy hardness and impenitent heart, treasuring
up wrath against the day of wrath; Romans 2.4, 5. Is it well done of thee Sinner?
is this thy kindness to thy own Soul? is this thy thanks to thy Redeemer? How
inexcusable art thou? thy self being Judge, thou can not answer it to thy
Conscience, to thy God, with the least Color or Shadow of a reason. God sends
his Gospel Proclaiming, -- Repent ye, and be converted, that your sins may be
blottted out: Acts 3.19. His Ministers Proclaiming, -- We then are Ambassadors
of Christ, as though God did beseech you by us; we pray you in Christ's stead be
ye reconciled unto God, 2 Cor. 5. Why do thou hate thy Soul, and say I will
not? why will thou not? Is it because it does not concern thee? or because
Eternal Life and Death are trifles, small, little things, not worth thy
considering? or does any body hinder thee? No, no; our Savior gives the true
account, Ye will not come unto me that ye might have life. Let me entreat this
small request of thee for Gods sake, for thine own, take the next opportunity,
and spend half an hour alone; let thy Spirit accomplish a diligent search,
pursue this inquiry to some Issue; am I Justified or no? if not, what will
become of me, if it should happen (sometimes such things fall out) that I
should die now presently? I cannot promise my self that I shall see to morrow
morning. Thus go on and bring it to something before thou leavest; give not
over till thou art not only clearly convinced of, but heartily affected with
thy Guilt; not only to see, but seel thy self to be the Man who art undone
without an Interest in this Justification. Be in good earnest; thou can not
mock thy God; and is there any Wisdom in mocking and cheating thy own Soul?
What thou do, do it heartily as unto the Lord, as for thy life, as one that
would not rue thy self-deceiving folly, when it cannot be recalled; and if thou
art hearty and serious in these Reflections,

1. Thou will deeply humble thy self before the Majesty of the Judge of all the
Earth, with that self-abhorrence and Confusion, that becomes one who feels
himself (even himself being Judge) most righteously condemned.

2. Thou will Solicit and Assail the Throne of Grace with all redoubled
favors, and Holy Passionate Importunities of Prayer and Supplication, giving
God no rest till he has given thee his Spirit, according to his own promise,
Luke 11.13. Ezekiel. 36.26, 27. To help thee to perform the conditions of the
Gospel Covenant, plead his own promise with him. Wrestle with him for a broken
and clean Heart; for Faith, for Repentance unto Life; for these are not of thy
self, they are the Gift of God, let him not go till he has Blessed thee with
these Blessings in Christ Jesus. This will confound every Sinner at the day of
Judgment, that when he might have had grace; yea, the Spirit of Grace for
asking; he either asked not, or if he did, it was so coldly, as if he were
contented enough to go without. Now if thou art in good earnest, God is I
assure thee in full as good earnest as thou; he is ready to meet thee; try but
once whether it be in vain to seek him; all that ever tried, found it good to
draw near to God, and found him easy to be entreated; he uses not to send the
Hungry empty away. He that commands us to work out our Salvation with fear and
trembling, he it is that works in us both to will and to do of his own good
pleasure, Phil. 2.12, 13.

Secondly, To them that are the Children of God by faith in Christ Jesus, Let
me beseech them,

1. To walk Worthy of God who has called them to his Kingdom and Glory, to
adorn their Holy Profession; take the Exhortation in Paul's words, Col. 2.6. As
ye have received Christ Jesus the Lord, so walk ye in him, Receive not this
Grace of God in vain; the interest of your comfort obliges you hereunto;
hereby you will know that you know him, that you are in Christ Jesus that there
is no condemnation to you, if you walk not after the flesh, but after the
Spirit, Romans 8.1. and herein will your Father be glorified, if ye bring forth
much fruit; Joh. 15.6.

2. To live up to the Comforts of their State, 1 John 3.1. you are already the
Sons of God, it does not yet appear what you shall be, who shall lay any thing
to your charge, it is God that Justifies: who is he that condemns? it is Christ
that died, etc. Romans 8.33. Go eat thy Bread with joy, and put on thy white
raiment, God now has accepted thy works, Eccles. 9.7, 8. I conclude this
particular (and the whole Discourse) with the happy effects and proofs of
Jufication which every believer has as good a Right and Title to, as the
Gospel it self, the Word of the God of Truth can give him, as I find by those
sweet Effects and Consequences set down in my Text, and the words next
following it. 1. Therefore being Justified by faith, we have peace with God
through our Lord Jesus Christ: 2. By whom also we have access by faith, into
this grace wherein we stand, and rejoice in hope of the Glory of God. 3. And
not only so, but we glory in tribulations also, knowing that tribulation
works patience: 4. And patience experience: and experience hope: 5. And hope
makes not ashamed, because the love of God is shed abroad in our hearts, by
the Holy Ghost, which is given unto us. wherefore the righteous shall be glad
in the Lord, and all the upright in heart shall glory; Psalm. 64.10.

FINIS.

