A more full and impartial ACCOUNT Of the FIGHT between the Dutch and the
French, AT FLERANS. Sent in a Letter by His Highness Prince Waldeck, which is
as follows.
Dated at Brussels 3 d. of July. High and mighty Lords,
SINCE I gave my self this Honor to acquaint your Highnesses Army and that of
France; This is to let you know, that the Enemy having passed the Sambre, it
was necessary for me to go and meet them to prevent their Designs; so I gave
the Vanguard to Lieuetenant General Wembenum, with a great Party of the Horse,
and I my self followed with the Body of the Army to Melle, where I Encampt: The
General Flodorffs having been afterward Commanded toward Namur, with Orders
to do his Duty with that Garrison; he brought word in his March, he perceived
nigh Flerans our Enemies Troops, and we had advice afterward, that a great
Body of their Army was in march, which obliged me to draw my Army up in
Batallia. As for what passed that day, between to Monsieur the Pensionaire
Heynsius; so that your Highnesses may be informed of him. When I perceived the
Enemy was returned to their Camp the same Night, the 30th. of June, we rested
all night, and ranged in Batallia; and it was thought fit the Army should be
more advantageously posted then it was now, but having understood the next
Morning, that the French had not changed their ground, we thought it not
necessary to remove without knowing where the Enemies marched, who presently
appeared, followed by the whole Army, which presently drawed up before that of
your Highnessess, and endeavored to surround by marching along the Flanck of
our left Wing. We endeavored wite all the care imaginable to shun it, and
draw'd some Troops from the Point of the Right Wing to reinforce the Flanck and
the Rear: The Prince of Larbruge, Monsieur D'hubuy the Spanish General, and the
Prince of Birckenfolt with the Brigadeers, Commanded, that Wing whilst the
Prince of Nassaw, Governor of Fri^^^nd, the Lieutenant General Aylva.
Lieutenant General Webbynum, with their Brigadeers, Commanded the Right Wing,
with the Body of the Battle; we entrusted Lieutenant General Delwich with the
(...) first Lines, which was seconded by his Brigadeers. The Count Flodorff was
ready at call; we disposed of the Cannon and Baggage, the best way we thought
fit. After which the Enemy both Foot and Horse poured upon our Left Wing, and
upon the Flank with so much fury, that several Squadrons of the 2 first Lines
were put into disorder, and had no sooner reinforced them, but the French
attacked a fresh our Horse, which was supported by the Foot, who acted very
Courageously; the Lieutenant General Hubuy, was detached from the Right Wing,
to attack the Enemy in the Flank, which they did with so much success, that
they brought off some of their Canon; but they being much more in Number then
we, they poured upon us instantly with fresh Forces, which was vigorously
suported 6 or 7 hours. After which having no more Horse to assist us, we were
obliged to attack both their Horse and Foot, with our Foot only, who had so
good Success, that the French daring no more to attack us. I retreated with 9
whole Regiments, amongst which were the Lieutenant General Ailva and Webbedum,
and came to Niville, afterward I brought them hither with four other
Regiments, who joined us in the March.

The two Princes of Nassaw, with several Regiments retired to Charle Roy, so
that I cannot tell what Regiments remain; but according to the Report that is
here, there be 20 yet in good condition, and several other indifferent, but not
so bad, but that they may be quickly recruited: And your Highnessess Forces
have taken from the Enemy several Standards and Colors, of which I will give
your Highnesses an Account, as well as of the Officers and Soldiers that are
killed, so soon as I shall have an Account my self. We might have brought away
some Canon from the Enemy with our Foot, had not our Horse failed us. I have
done my Duty as much as my advanced Age would permit: I could not prevent this
ill Fortune. I hope that God will for the future bless your Highnesses Arms
with Success, and that by a soon re-establishment of your Army and other
Necessaries, may grant you a happy Campaign. We are making here a Body, with a
design to fight them again, so soon as the Electoral Highness of Brandenburgh's
Army shall arrive.

Brussels, 3d. of July. G. F. P. V. WALDECK

ADVERTISEMENT.
A Moral Essay on the Soul of Man, in Octavo. Sold by Tho. Jo^ at the White
Horse without Temple-Barr.

London, Printed for Abel Roper at the Miter, next door to the Old Devil
Tavern, Fleet Street, (...) Tho. Jones at the White Horse without Temple-barr.


