Prince WALDECK's LETTER TO THE States General: Giving an Account of a great
VICTORY obtained over the French the 25th of this Instant August, 1689.
Licensed August 24. 1689.

High and Mighty Lords,
THIS Morning, while a good part of your High and Mightinesses Army were
Foraging, came tidings, that the Marshall d'Humiers with his Army, which he
had some days since strengthened by an Addition of six Thousand Men, were
marching; immediately your Foragers were advertised of it by some Cannon Shot,
as had been agreed: In the mean while the Enemies Avaunt Guard attacked the
Village Forge, in which I had placed eight hundred Men to Cover the Foragers;
which were Commanded by the English Colonel Hodges, Coll. Goes, and the Major
of the Hess Regiment. This Attack continued above two hours, but they defended
themselves so stoutly, until the Major d'Roe. who was sent to give notice to
the Lieutenant Generals Webenham, Marlborough, and Houlby, who were with the
Foragers, to bring them back again, succored them with some Horse: whereupon,
while the whole French Army were coming down upon them, they retired Fighting
till they came to a rising by the small City Wallour, in which I had placed
Colonel Linctau's Battalion of Lunenbergers; and afterward strengthened them
with Colonel Hollis's Battalion, while this said City was furiously Attacked by
many French Battalions and Cannon for above two hours. Lieutenant General Aylua
advanced with three Battalions toward the City, from which he detatched the
Brigadier Jalmush; Lieutenant General Marlborough followed with the Lifeguard,
and two English Regiments, and in the mean time Major General Strangenburgh
advanced on the other side of the City with some detached Foot, which made the
French retire confusedly, leaving behind them their Cannon, Bullets, and
Gunpowder, with a great many dead and wounded, whereof we cannot yet know the
exact number, among which are three Captains of the Guards, Monsieur
d'Artignan, Commander of the Guards, and many other taken Prisoners: in their
retiring came two Drums desiring a Cessation, to fetch ^ff their wounded, and
bury their dead, saying that six Battalions ^f the Guards, who had been in the
Attack, were most of them de^^royed. On our side is no considerable Loss,
besides Lieutenant Colonel Grymes, of the English: and the Major of the Hesses
Dragoons, with one Captain Lieutenant, and one Captain, and some Foragers taken
Prisoners, and in the City there are very few killed, or wounde^. The Frenc^
did thereon withdraw into their Camp; and our Troops kept them Standing till it
was Night; the Earl of Nassaw, Field-Marshal, and all other Officers, have
behaved themselves as well as one could wish, and all the Soldiers showed great
Courage and Joy, on the hopes of coming to a Battle, and there might have been
great Success expected, if the Situation of the Country had permitted pursuing
the Enemy. In particular, those o^ the English, who were employed in this
Rencounter, have behaved themselves well. I congratulate your High and
Mightinesses Arms in this Rencounter, and the good Issue in making the Enemies
retreat; wishing, it may please God to continue to give further Blessing to
your High and Mightynesses Arms, and Government, I commit you to his Protection,

In the Camp by Thil Castle, August 25, 1689, late in the Evening. G. Frederick
Prince van Waldeck.
SIR,
YOU will by the annexed see what passed here Yesterday; There are many of the
French slain more than is known; and our men were so courageous, that if the
Ground had not been so hilly it would have come to a pitched Battle; but as it
is, the French have had a lusty Blow: We have been all night upon the Guard,
and I am but just now come to my Quarters from my Regiment of Foot. The Prince
slept all night in his Coach. Just now we hear Shooting again: I believe it is
from Parties meeting each other; but it is likely the French will seek their
Revenge to day. I am dispatching the Courier, and hope our blessed Lord will
give us farther Blessing and Happiness.

In the Camp by Thil Castle, the 26th of August 89. early in the Morning. Fr.
Sluyler.
I believe there are above Two thousand of the French killed and wounded.





POSTSCRIPT.
FLanders Letters confirm these Contents, saying seventeen or eighteen hundred
French are killed, among which many of Note; that seven or eight hundred were
brought Prisoners to Charleroy: that six French Cannon were taken. Much of this
Victory is attributed on all hands to the English Valor. Prince Waldeck's
sending his Army to forage, was a design to draw the French out of their Camp;
which had its effect.

LONDON, Printed for R. Baldwin, in the Old-Bailey.


