The German Princess Revived: OR The London Iilt: Being a True ACCOUNT of the
LIFE and DEATH OF Jenney Voss, WHO After she had been Transported for being
concerned with Sadler about Eight Years past in Stealing my Lord Chancellors
Mace, and several times since Convicted of repeated Fellonies was Executed On
Friday the 19 th of December, 1684 at TYBURN

Published from her own Confession.

AMongst the many Instances of Persons Infamously Remarkable for their
Predatory and ill Lives. none certainly ever Surrendered their Breath at the
Fatal Tree, leaving behind them a Name more generally known for all sorts of
Crimes, than the Subject we are now Treating of: Insomuch, that but to mention
Jenny Vo^s, is a sufficient proof thereof; she having even from her Youth
followed the Thieving Trade, and grown so Famous therein, that few who live in
London, are Strangers to her Name and Reputation. She was as she faith her
self, Born in the Parish of St. Giles's in the Fields, of Parents Reasonably
well to Pass, and Honesty sufficient to have given them more Hopes and Comfort
than they found in their Daughter: Who tho they Lived not to see her Fatal End,
yet in the Buddings of her Youth percieving so much by her to their great
Discomfort; and almost Heart breaking, easily imagined what Fruit she was
afterward too likely to yield. For having ar^ived to the Age of Eleven Years,
her Father and Mother being one Day Invited a-broad to Dinner, she took the
Opportunity, and finding where her Mother had laid up some Money to the value
of 30 or 40 s. upon a Shelf in the Kitchen, she took the same, together with
the Handkerchief wherein it was tied, and puts them into her Pocket; but being
to exercise her Wits to prevent the Discovery of this her first Crime, they
stood by her in the stress, and Dictated to her the following Exploit: Her
Mother had a Monkey which she Loved, which was usually kept in the Kitchen
before mentioned, and observing that sometimes, as it is general with those
Creatures, they are apt if they get Liberty, to carry away and hide what next
comes before them: She accordingly lets him Loose, and drives him up into the
Leads, where following him, she flings the Handkerchief in which the Money was
wrapped after him, and scattering 3 or 4 pieces thereof about the Gutter,
leaves him there till her Mother came in, who missing the Monkey, Inquires of
her Daughter how it got Loose and where it was, to which she readily answered
that it had knawed the Cord that tied it whilst she was Absent and had got
into the Leads; the Mother suspecting nothing further went up Stairs to seek
it, where looking out of Window, she espied the Handkerchief and the scattered
pieces aforesaid, which made her severely angry with poor Pugg, and lay the
Crime at his Door that was not Guilty thereof. This Exploit having thus happily
succeeded, young Jane began to think her self Mistress of great Cunning* and
several times afterward repeating her Domestic Thievery's, was at last found
out by the means of another young Wench that was a Neighbors Daughter, and a
great Comrade of Jenny's, with whom she used to spend her Moneys, and to whose
Breast she communicated all her Secrets: These two having one Day fell out upon
the account of a little Jealousy between them, which was occasioned by the
address of a young Apprentice Boy, (that used to call Jenny his Sweet Heart) to
this her Comrade, with whom the Night before she had found him too Familiarly a
Trifling; upon which Jenny was, so Enraged that she flew upon the Young Wench,
and having torn her Head geer and grievously Beat her, called her whatsoever
her Angry Rhetoric in the first heates of Passion dictated to her: Which her
Comrade laying to Heart, not being able to revenge her self otherwise she went
and immediately discovered the Secrets of all Jenny's Pranks to her Mother who
was strangly Surprised thereat, and began to Examine her Daughter about it: who
tho she absolutely denied the Fact' yet it being so plainly proved against her,
diverse other Circumstances corroborating the same; a severe Punishment was
threatened against her, which from her Fathers Passionate humor she knew would
be aggravated when he came to know her crime to whom her Mother reserved the
Consideration till his coming home that Evening.

In the mean while Jenny being apprehensive of his Anger, was resolved whatever
came of it, if she could get the opportunity, to get out and be gone, not much
careing whether, so she could avoid the Storm that now Threatened her, and
accordingly being Locked up in her Room, it being late before her Father
Returned, her Mother going out to seek him, she packs up her Clothes, and tying
the two Sheets together slipped out of the Window, and betook herself to her
Escape, which by the favor of the Night and the have she made, carried her the
next Morning about 13 or 14 Miles out of Town as far as Sunbury a little
Village by the Thames-side in Middlessex, where she staid the next day at a
Public House, pretending that her own Mother being Dead, and her Father
Married a second Wife, she in favor of several Children which she brought him,
dealt very Severely with her, which had forced her to seek her Fortune, and
that she was willing to get into an Honest Service, if any such presented it
self: Which a substantial Farmer in the Town hearing of took her in and
Entertained her.

In this place she had not lived above a Month, when observing that several
Gypsies used often to come and Lodge in a Barn belonging to her Master: She
would often out of Curiosity only at first repair to the said Gypsies to know
her future Fortunes, which they flattered her would be much to her Advantage
provided she would Join with them, and take such course of Livelihood as they
did; which she was not much averse to, having noted that they lived Merrily,
and wanted nothing in their Straw that might make such a Life Grateful to them,
which they finding, told her if she would get what Plate or money she could
from her Master that was very Rich, she should be admitted into their Number,
and be made much of amongst them, appointing her the next Night to get off with
the Booty, and to come to them at Midnight; and she should have a Guide to
convey her to another Road far enough out of the way of her Masters Reach: To
this Proposition she soon Hearkened, and the next Night Robbed the Farmer of
Plate and Money to the value of 40 l. with which under the Conduct of a Brother
Gipsy, who was for some time afterward her Doxy, they Traveled through
Kingston, in the way toward Guilford, where the general Meeting was concluded
upon.

Being thus admitted into this Gang, the idle Life very well suited with her
humor, and she was soon perfect in their manner of Conversation and Gibberidg,
insomuch, that one of them was a greater Crafts Mistress in the Art of Deceit
than her self, before she had been with them a Year, and had gained the Age of
Sixteen, being soon after one of their chief-Ringleaders: but percieving with
her self that the petty Cheats and Thievery of these her Companions, which
seldom extended beyond the Roost or the Hedge, in Robbing the first of their
Pullen or the last of it is Linen, or at most now and then picking a Pocket,
was much below the greatness of her Designs, which she now began to Thirst
after: she resolved to take the first opportunity to desert them, and live on
her own Politics.

To which end having chosen out one of the Wittyest of these Blades that had
Associated with her all along as Bedfellow: these two Plotted together, and
forsook the other part of the Gang, changing their Habits and designed for the
West of England: In which Road having Traveled for about two Days, they at
last came to a Bye House upon the way, where they desired a Lodging, and of
which they had been Informed as they came along that the Master was very Rich,
and had a great deal of Money by him: where being Entertained, the honest Host
little thinking what Guests he had; afforded the best they called for, they
being very Liberal in their Expense, Drinking and Eating Heartily: After Supper
was over, wherein they had their Landlords Company, they complained they were a
Weary and prepared for Bed: Where they had not lain an Hour but hearing all
things quiet in the House, they slipped out of their Beds, and geting into their
Landlords Chamber, they set a Pistol to his Breast, Swearing they would
certainly Murder him if he did not immediately discover where his Treasure lay:
Which the old Man very unwillingly did, tho under promise of his Life, he at
last condescended thereunto: Hereupon binding him Hand and Foot, they searched
his Chests, and taking out to the value of 40 l. having secured the rest of the
House in like manner, they made off, having the N^ght before them to Travel
Forward.

But being apprehensive that as soon as the Morning came the Robbery would be
Discovered and a Hue and Cry pursue them; They therefore thought sit before they
entered any House to change their Garb, and began to think how to accompl^sh the
same, which they were not long contriving of, for at the some Instant came by
two Gentlemen just in the Twilight of the morning well mounted* which when they
Espied they were resolved to attack To which ^^d the Fellow having a good.
Quarter staff and Jenny her Pistolls at the passage of a bridge they got up
with the two Travelers, who not at all suspecting their Danger, one of them
received a Blow of the Quarterstaffe, which Dismounted him, and the second
imagining a greater Strength near them, surrendered himself upon Presenting
Jenny's Pistol. They being thus secured they drew them aside into an adjacent
Wood, where they made them Strip and and change Clothes with them; Taking
likewise all their ready Money; and tying the said Parties with their Hands
behind them to two Trees; they Mounted their fresh Horses and Rid away: Whilst
in the mean time the two Travelers Condoled their Condition, and could not
stir till about six a Clock in the Morning it being Summer time the Wood-Men
came to Work and Loosed them, of whom they enquired the next way to the nearest
Town, which being directed in, tho the same was about four Miles distant, they
were resolved to make thitherwards: in the Traveling whereof, the Hue and Cry
being out against Jenny and her Husband, overtakes the two Gentlemen, who
having the same Garb as the Parties to them Described, they were forthwith
Apprehended, and being carried before a Magistrate, notwithstanding their
denial, and the Relation of the Robbery aforesaid, they were forced to put in
Bail and answer the same at the next A^s^zes.

During all which time Jenny our now Knight Errant and her said Comrade Rid
onward, Rejoyceing in their Good Success, every Day committing some new Robbery
or other, to the great increase of their Confidence and Store. Jane Voss still
continuing her Manlike Garb, and Traveling the Country as a Gentleman of
Fortune: But as the old Proverb has it, the Pitcher goes not so often to the
Well, but it comes Broken Home at Last: So in the midst of this Sunshine of
Prosperity, the Clouds of Adversity fell at length in showers upon her Head:
For one Day going into a Fair to fell a Horse which they had worn out, in a
Market Town in Wiltshire, the Party from whence they Stole the same came by
chance thither, and owning the Horse, they were both Apprehended and clapped
into Goal.

This cross Adventure was not a little Baulk to our two Gallants, who were
miserably Loaded with Irons, and the Ass^zes drawing on, they began to be
Apprehensive of that Fate that Threatened them, which set Jenny's Brains a
Working how to deliver her self, she being all this while in Man's Clothes and
her Sex undiscovered, which made much for her Advantage, for being of a Comely
Personage, and having the Beauty of a Woman to add to the appearance of
Manhood, the same was taken notice of by the Goalers Wife, who had more than a
Months mind to be dealing with her, which Jenny soon observed, and improved,
insomuch that she grew every day more in Favor than other, and at last by her
means got rid not only of her own, but her Comerades Irons, and soon after of
her Imprisonment: For the Gaolers Wife being very eager to bring her supposed
Gallant to her Embraces, (and withal having no good Opinion of her H^sband, who
was Old and Peevish) appointed her one Evening to come to her Chamber, her
Husband being out of the way; and fearing least the same should come to a
Discovery, ordered the meeting to be in the Dark, and enjoined each to the
other the strictest Silence Imaginable.

The hour appointed came, and Jenny's Husband was ordered to carry on the first
scene of this Comedy, hopeing thereby to accomplish both their Liberties; nor
indeed was he wanting in his Part: tho it answered not his Expectations* but
released Jenny only, for he gave the Goalers Wife the greatest Satisfaction she
could hope for, apprehending it all the while to be Jenny's own Person, for
whom she had an extraordinary Affection. And the next Morning returning her
Thanks accordingly, at which time the Goalers Wife: agreed to give way to her
Escape, and run Fortunes with her. To Facilitate which, a Suit of Women's
Apparel was provided to array Jenny, and the next Night appointed for her
Esc^pe, which tho she would fain have had accompanied by that of her Comerade,
yet could she obtain no more than her own, the Goalers Wife being jealous, that
if they went out together they would decieve and desert her: Hereupon Jenny was
forced to leave her first pretended Husband, who the next Assizes suffered for
the Robbery, whilst in the mean time Jane Voss had got far enough from the
reach of her Adversary, for by the favor of the Promise aforesaid, at the Hour
appointed she found the Door Opened, and the Goalers Wife ready to discharge
her, telling her that there was at such a place without the East part of the
Town a little House at the Sign of the Red-Cross, where if she tarried half an
Hour she would come and bring her a Horse and Pill^on, on which she might Ride
to a Place of Safety: But Jenny not intending to be so Encumbered took the quite
contrary Road, and Traveled with all the speed her Feet could carry her* that
Night, till the next Morning coming to a Town where the Wagon stood for
London: She takes place therein as a maid that went to seek a Service in Town,
and accordingly Esc^ped, whilst the Disappointed Gaolers Wife Lamenting the
Infidelity of her supposed Lover, was overtaken by her enraged Husband, who
ever after made her lead a worse Life than before this Fault she had done.

But Jenny Voss being thus escaped got safe to London, where she heard of the
Death of her Father and Mother, and soon after of her Nominal Husband whom she
left in Goal as abovesaid, which began a little to affect her, considering how
narrowly she had Escaped what afterward she too Fatally tasted; yet such
Thoughts soon Vanished, and the sweetness she had Experienced in the former
Course of Life she had now for some Years led; Induced her to follow the same
for the Future; therefore soon afterward hearing of a Service in a Family of
Reputation, she works her self thereinto by a false Name, and by the first
opportunity runs away, carrying with her a considerable quantity of Plate and
Goods to a great Value: Of which being possessed she began to consider how she
should dispose thereof, being a Stranger in Town and not knowing the Methods of
this Trade so well as that she formerly Practiced in the Country; yet being
drove to some Straits, and wanting Money, she at last ventures into a Brokers
Shop about Westminster, where she offers some of the Goods to Pawn, where, as
it happened she lit on a Rog^e for her Turn, who apprehending the Goods to be
Stole, signified as much to her, bidding her not to be Discouraged, for that
when she had any thing of the like Nature he would vend the same for her to
Advantage: Which tho Jane at first denied. yet resorting afterward to his shop
and seeing others come upon the like Etrand, she grew better acquainted with
him, and commenced a Friendship, which was not a little helpful to her in the
ensuing course of her Thievery, for by his means she came acquainted with all
the Cheats and Pickpockets in Town: Of whom she not only learned the Mystery
but was soon after matriculated into their Society, and became one of their
most applauded Artisans. Amongst many of whose Exploits of this kind, I shall
only recound the following.

A Gentleman being with his Friend at a Tavern, and coming to pay his Reckoning
found that his Pocket was Picked, upon which his Company seeing him Concerned,
he having lost 10 Guineys besides Silver, began to Laugh at him, saying he had
been with some Wench or other who had Robbed him, or otherwise it was
impossible he should have lost his Money. Hereupon being in a great Fret, he
began to swear that it might as well have happened on any of them as himself,
had they been in such a Crowd as he lit upon, comeing out of a Church in
London: Upon which one of the Company replied, that he would lay any Man a
Wager of 5 l. that no one in England should ever p^ck his Pocket, without his
finding them in the Action. Say you so answers the Gentleman, I Will take you up
that Wager, and lay you 5 l. if you carry your Watch in your Pocket for a
Fortnight together, it shall be taken thence: It Is done answers the other and
accordingly bound the Wager agreeing that if in the same time the Watch was
called for, and he had not the same to produce, the Money should be Lost. The
Wager being thus laid, the Gentleman goes immediately to Newgate and inquires
for an Ingenious Pickpocket, to whom he was Directed, and by him to Jenny Voss,
who was at large as a Person for his Turn, to whom the Gentleman goes, and who
in short undertoom the same; and having had sight of the Party whose Watch she
was to take; she dresses her self in very good Habit, and follows the Gentleman
to the Custom-House, where coming up Water-Lane she crosses his way pretends to
be in a Swoon, and fal's down, hereupon the Gentleman in Civility lent her his
Assistance to take her up, in which Opportun^ty she got her Booty, and soon
conveyed it to the party that hired her, who hereby checked the others
Confidence, and won his Wager.

By this and other Exploits Jenny having got in great reputation amongst her
Comerades, grew immediately acquainted with the greatest of the Gang, and
particularly with Sadler and other of his Company who stole my Lord
Chancellours Mace, and committed diverse other Robberies; She being always
called to Consult when any thing of moment was to be done: Nor was less owing
to her contrivance, than the success of most of their Robberies, at many of
which she was her self present, Particularly that which was committed upon the
Old Coverous Victualler who had hoarded up 3. or 400 l. and hid the same so
covertly, that tho they had broke into his house several nights, they could
never find the same. Hereupon Jenny contrives one Evening to go and Drink at
the House, and set Fire on some part of the Hangings or Wainscott, when the Old
Man was within, thinking that the first thing he would than strive to save
would be his money; and so dogging him, they might find where the same was
hoarded: Which accordingly fell out: For no sooner was Fire cried, but away
runs the Old Fellow to the House of Office which was above stairs, under the
Seat whereof he had made a Cupboard, and secured his money; Which they
Perceiving, quickly quenched the fire and the next Night got his money, to the
Heartbreaking of the old Miser.

Another of her Famed Contrivances was that of the Doctor of Hogsdon, which was
performed by Sadler: The Fact was, that Sadler coming to a Goldsmith in London
chose a Cupboard of Plate of a considerable Value, which he said was for his
Friend the Doctor aforesaid; to whom he went the Night before and agreed to
send in a Kinsman of his whom he pretended Distracted, giveing him two or three
Guineys Earnest, and Promising him 20 l. for his Cure, and 10 s. a Week during
the time he was at his House, alleging withal that he believed the cause of
his Kinsmans Distraction was the too great love of the World, for that in his
Fitts he would talk of nothing but Plate and Money: Upon which the Doctor
promised his Cure, and Sadler took his Leave, but returning presently told him
he had another Favor to beg, which was that when he came with his Kinsman he
might be put out of the House so as no notice might be taken of him by his
Kinsman, who if he see he was about to leave him, would very unwillingly part
with him, which the Doctor likewise promised. Having thus laid the matter, the
next Morning he goes to the Goldsmith, and desires him to let his Servant go
with him and carry the Plate, and he should have his Money, which the Goldsmith
consented to, and accordingly the Servant went with him to the Doctors, where
taking the Plate of him' he left him walking below whilst he goes up to the
Doctor, whom he acquainted that he had brought his Kinsman desiring his Care,
and that he might be set out at the Back Door, which he was directed to and so
got off with the Plate, leaving the Apprentice to be Blouded and Drenched by
the Doctor, who apprehended him all the while in a great Distraction, the Young
man talking of nothing but Money and Plate, which the Doctor took to be his
Ravings, and accordingly Bound him in his Bed and used the means he thought
proper for his Recovery, till the Goldsmith coming to Inquire after him,
discovered the Cheat.

Thus far Jenny, had pretty well prospered in her Affairs, now and then only
clapped up into Newgate, and discharged the next Sessions: Till at length
having contrived with Sadler the Stealing my Lord Chancellors Mace, some part
of the same in the Search was found under her Bed: For which Fact being
together with Sadler Arraigned, she was found Guilty, but by the Favor of the
Court obtained to be Transported, as soon after she was, and accordingly served
her time Beyond Sea; during which time she could not forget, her old Pranks,
but used not only to Steal her self, but incited all others that were her
fellow Servants to Pilfer and Cheat what they could from their Master, so that
he was glad to be rid of her; and the rather for that she had wheadled in a Son
of the Planters, who used to Lie with her and supply her with Moneys, which she
was always averse to the want of.

After her time was out she came again for England, and quickly found many of
her Old Comerades with whom she continually associated, resolving not to leave
those Courses she had been all her Life bred in: And here I might recound a
multitude more of her Robberies, which this little sheet cannot crowd in; and
for which reason I must omit a journey she made to Ireland, and a Voyage to
Holland: in both which Places she played her part so cunningly that she came off
with grear Booties. Particularly in Holland, where amongst other things she
cheated a Dutch Merchant of 3 Great Diamonds, and a Pearl Neck-lace to a
considerable Vallue. But to hasten to her End which drew near: Comeing to
London she gets in with one Robinson who was hanged some 4 or 5 Sessions past
for S^ealing of a Horse; and either taking one another word, or making a
Westminster Wedding of it, they lay and companied together, till Newgate and
the Gallows sued out their Divorce. For Jenny having stolen a Silver Tankard
from one John Warren of St. Olive Silver-street in the Parish of Cripplegate on
the 19 th. day of March last, was found guilty of the said Fact on the 10 th.
day of April 1684. And should then have recieved Sentence of Death, but that
she pleaded her Belly: The better to color which, and make the Jury of Women
believe she was quick with Child, tho indeed she was not, she Drank about a
Gallon of New-A^e and Honey, and so deceived them, hopeing in this time to gain
her Pardon, tho she could not accomplish the same, there being no place found
for Mercy where so great and Notorious a Criminal was concerned: Wherefore at
the last Sessions in December she was Sentenced upon the former Indictment, and
on the 19 th. of the said Month Executed at Tyburn: At her Death she seemed to
Bewail her former Life, and grieved that she had been the Cause of many Persons
falling into Bad Courses, which had lead them to untimely Ends: For according
to Report no less than 18 who had been her Reputed Husbands or Friends had
suffered for their Robberies

Entered according to Order.

LONDON, Printed by George Croom, at the Blue-Ba^l in Thames Street, over
against Baynard's Castle. 1684.


