A General Epistle Given forth in OBEDIENCE TO THE God of Peace.

For the Preservation and Increase of CHARITY and UNITY amongst the Professors
of Christ Jesus, and the Teachings of his Divine Light within.

By a Servant of Christ, a True Lover of Christian-Charity Peace and Unity
WILLIAM GIBSON.

Blessed are the Peacemakers, for they shall be called the Children of God,
Mat. 5. 9. Put on Charity, which is the bo^d of perfectness, Col. 3. 14. He
that says he abides in Christ, ought himself even to walk so as he walked, 1
John 2. 6. Let your Conversation be as it becomes the Gospel of Christ, --
Phil. 1. 27. LONDON Printed, and sold by John Bringhurst, at the Sign of the
Book in Grac^-Church street near Cornhil, 1682.

REader, notwithstanding the Authors great care to prevent. Errors in the
following matter, yet several Errors have escaped the Press, which thou art
desired to take notice of; as the mistake of the Printers. Those which are most
material to hurt the Sense, I have collected in this Errata, some other small
literal Faults and Errors in pointing and transposing or misplacing of words
there are, all which may be discerned in reading, by such who are skilful and
diligent therein, and by such corrected so far as may be, for the help of those
who are less skilful in reading and correcting; the two greatest Errors take
particular notice of, the first is in the Introduction page the 5. line the 16.
where speaking of the Spirit of the Creature Man or Woman, it is there rendered
the Spirit of the Creator; the second great error is in p. 107. l. 15. where
the word sensually is put instead of the word sensibly.

ERRATA.
INtroduction page 3. line 10. for Light read Spirit; p. 5. l. 16. f. Creator
r. Creature; p. 6. l. 17. f. were read was; p. 12. l. 14. f. word r. words; p.
10. l. 3. blot out some of.

First PART.
IN Margin, p. 52. r. God commanded the Light to be and appear, and separated
it from the Darkness in the First days work; p. 59. l. the 8. add the word
(one) p. 76. l. 18. add the word (same) p. 78. l. 12. f. nember r. member; p.
95. l. 21. add the word (the) p. 102. l. 23. f. Chrisi r. Christ; p. 105. l. 7.
f. Justifying r. Justify; p. 107. l. 15 f. sensually r. sensibly; p. 109. l.
10. next after the word you make a full stop; p. 126. l. 22 and 23. read, O all
ye ends of the Earth; p. 160. l, 19. dele and fear; l. 14. dele or.

Second PART.
PAge the 2. l. 5. blot out and; p. the 6. l. 13, 14. r. thinks he stands,
take heed lest he fall; p. 19. l. 5. r. the verse 9 and 10, etc. l. 23. blot
out (him;) l. 29 f. careful r. careful; p. 20. l. 11. f. fevere r. severe; p.
24. l. 7. add (spoken of) p. 28. l. 20. f. understanding r. understand; p. 29.
l. 12. r. 1 Cor. 13. p. 45. l. 24. next after and, add (have) p. 56. l. 12. f.
soberly r. sober; p. 65. l. 31. f. ^o^ r. to; p. 80. l. 25. blot out (to;) p.
93. l. 22. f. sowed r. sows; p. 96. l. 6. f. sealed r. seal, p. 99. l. 8. f.
commended r. commended.

Several Scriptures which should have been in the Italick Letter are omitted,
particularly the First Chapter of Genesis, etc. in p. 52, 53, 54, 55.

Note, this Book being printed by several Men, occasioneth it to be in two
Parts, only beca^^ of the beginning anew of the Figures upon the top of the
pages, and that which is called the Second Part begins with the figure 1 at the
top of the page or leaf.

There is also some part of the Book put in Black Letter, which had been most
properly in the Roman: these improprieties of the different form of Letters,
does no way hurt the matter as to the sense thereof.

THE CONTENTS.
AN Exhortation to the Professors of the Light within, to live and walk in the
same; and the Walker in the Light dist^nguished from the Talker of it, who walk
in Darkness, Page. 1 Concerning good Conscience, 21. Concerning evil
Conscience, 23. Concerning them that are weak in the Faith, 28. Concerning
days, 30. Something concerning Christian Order, or Order in the Church of
Christ, 42. Something more concerning the Order of the Works of God in Heaven
and Earth, and particularly in his People, 52. Something more particularly
concerning the Order of Christ in his Church, 72. Concerning the Form of the
true Apostles Doctrine, 95. Concerning the Commands of the Apostles of Christ,
which they gave, not of themselves, or by their own power, but by and in his
Power, Wisdom, Strength and Authority; for they were his Ambassadors, over
them he reigned, in them he spoke and gave commands, who is the Head of his
Church, and one in the Male and Female, 97 Concerning the Honor that God gives
unto his People, 130. Concerning Rule and Government in the Church of Christ,
133. Concerning the Living Faith with its Fruits and Works, 142. Something
concerning Self-Separation, 155.
The Second PART.
COncerning falling from God, 1. Concerning just Judgment amongst Gods People,
given or committed to them, or spoken by or through them (in whom God dwells
according to his promise) against the Devil and his works, sin and wickedness,
9. Concerning the Just and Righteous Judgment of God in and by his People under
the Dispensation of the Gospel, 13. Concerning the Mercy of God, and of his
People, 17. Something concerning true Love, or Charity, 28. Something
concerning the Unity and Fellows^ip of true Christians, 53. Something
concerning the Seven ^hurches in Asia, who were gathered into the Profession of
Christ Jesus, 57. Something concerning Mar^i^g^, 78. Concerning pure Religion,
83.
(...)

A General Epistle TO FRIENDS, etc.
An Exhortation to the Professors of the Light Within, to LIVE and WALK in the
same; and the WALKER in the Light distinguished from the TALKER of it who walks
in Darkness.

ALL you who profess Christ Jesus, the Prince of Life and Peace, to be your
Prince, Captain of your Salvation, and Bishop of your Souls, who profess to be
Taught, Led, and Governed by his Spiritual Light within you:

See that you all Live and Walk in the same, that you may all possess that
which you do profess; and it is most certain, if we walk in the light,
(wherewith God in Christ has enlightened us) then have we fellowship one with
another, and the Blood of Jesus Christ his Son, cleanses us from all Sin: But
if there be not a Walking in this precious Divine Light (which shines from God
the Fountain of it) then there can be no Fellowship with God the Father, nor
with his beloved Son, nor true Fellowship one with another: No cleansing from
Sin then, but the sin of all such who only Talk of the Light (Walking contrary
to it) remains and increases: Therefore all be very careful in this great
weighty Concern, wherein the Glory of the great God, and the Salvation of your
Souls are so very greatly concerned. O Friends! Be all as willing to follow and
obey this Spiritual Divine Light, as you are to profess it, and talk of it; for
if there be not a Walking in it, the Profession of it will be in vain: For
after the Light of Christ Within be known, and Good and Evil made known by it,
if the Creature do not yield Obedience to it, in forsaking the Evil, and
embracing, following, and doing that which is Good, then his sin becomes more
grievous to Almighty God than before; for as it is written, In the time of
Ignorance God winked; but after the Gospel, the Power of God is preached to,
and in, the Creature (which has been subjected by Satan under sin, in the
Bondage of Corruption) and by which the Creatures Heart and Soul is, in some
degree, quickened and opened to know what God requires of it: If then it do
not deny Self, take up its Cross against the Devil and Self, then its
Opposition and Disobedience to the Divine Gospel Light, God accounts the Sin of
stebellion, which is as Witchcraft, from which the Lord God of all our Mercies
and Blessings deliver and preserve you. Into this State of Misery were the
foolish Galatians fallen, to whom the Apostle Paul wrote, and after he had
sharply reprehended them for their Backsliding and Unfaithfulness, he traveled
again on their behalf, that Christ might be formed in them. And as their
Backsliding became matter of great Sorrow and deep Exercise to him, the like
has befaln the ancient and faithful Laborers in the peaceable Gospel of our
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ in our age for some; for as he was sent to turn
the People from Darkness to the Divine Spiritual Light of God and Christ, from
the Power of Satan (who had imbondaged them in sin) to God, whose Power is
Almighty, breaking the Power of Satan down, and delivering the Creature, by its
powerful working, out of the bondage of Corruption, into the glorious Liberty
of the Sons of God: Even so has the Lord God Almighty and Merciful, sent his
faithful Servants, in this Age, to turn People from Darkness unto Light, from
the Power o^ Satan unto God, that through the working of the glorious Power of
God in their In ward Man, they might receive true Faith and Repentance, and so
might receive the Forgiveness of their Sins past, in the name of Jesus Christ,
through the forbearance of God; and not only so, but also by the same power, to
know Redemption out of Sin, from the Power of Satan, who led them into it, and
so come into the glorious Liberty of the Sons of God. This glorious work of
Restoration has the Lord in his tender Mercy begun, and effectually carried
on in Thousands, Glory be given unto him for the same, and for all his tender
Mercies; for he is worthy. But as it was in the Apostles days, so is it in
ours; there were some then, who, after they had tasted of the Heavenly Gift and
power of the World to come, and thereby had known the beginning of the work of
true Faith and Repentance, and the Exercise of a good Conscience, yet through
their Slothtulness, Negligence, and multiplied Disobedience and Rebellion, they
came to make Shipwreck of the Faith which God had given them, and to put away a
good Conscience which God by his powerful Spirit had wrought in them: Of this
sort the Apostle Peter writ, saying, It had been better they had never known
the way of Truth, than after they have known it to depart from the holy
Commandment delivered to them: But (says he) it is come to pass according to
the true Proverb, The Dog is returned to his own Domit, and the Sow that was
washed to her wallowing in the Mire. Jude and Peter writ of these and such like
salse Apostles and deceitful Workers, saying, They are Wells without Water,
Clouds without Rain, carried about of Tempests, wandering Stars, to whom is
reserved the Mist of darkness for ever; Trees whose. Fruit is wither^d, without
Fruit, twice dead, plucked up by the s^o^ts. Such were they whom the Apostle
Paul writ of, saying, ( Acts 20. 30. and 2 Pet. 2. 2.) Men shall arise among
your selves, speaking perverse things, and shall draw Disciples after them,
through whom the way of Truth shall be evil spoken of. I say, as it is was
then, so is it come to pass in our days; diverse Persons, who have come among
us in a Profession of the Pure, Unchangeable, Divine Light of our Lord Jesus
Christ, who, for some time, did in some Measure know it, and obeyed it, they
have turned into Rebellion against it; and such have, and do now make War
against the Children of it, who walk in it, in whom the pure, peaceable Fruits
of it do appear. And this some Men have done, and do, under the Profession of
it, and a specieus pretense of Love to it; this is abominable Deceit, yea, the
deceivableness of Unrighteousness, which works in them, which has been
wrought in them by Satan, because they have not kept in true Love and Obedience
unto the Spiritual Light of Christ the Son of God, to which they were turned.
They have not kept in the Godly Fear, not in true Humility, therefore has
Satan (the Prince of Darkness, and King over all the Children of Pride) darkened
their Understandings, adulterated their Affections, and corrupted their Wills:
Thus by him they are prepared and used as Instruments for him, against the Lord
and his Divine Light, Grace, and Spirit, under the Profession of the same. Such
by professing and using the words of Truth, have, and do deceive the Hearts of
the Simple. God Almighty has Confounded the work of such, in our Age we have
seen it, and do give Glory to him for the same. We do believe that he will
confound such Evil works, and that the Instruments thereof will be eternally
miserable, if they do not find a place of Repentance, which to see them find
would be matter of great Comfort to us. Several Persons have gone out of the
Truth under specious Pretenses of Greater Manifestations of God, and
Seize, and Growth in the way of Righteousness, than they were come to,
whom they turned against. And through those false Pretenses they have drawn
some tenderhearted, well meaning Persons from the Divine Light and Fellowship
in it, into evil Imaginations and unrighteous Jealousies, concerning the
faithful Ministers of Christ, and their Labor of Love for the Glory of God,
and the Peace, Unity, Preservation, and Eternal Good of his People.

But the Lord God in Mercy has given several who were thus hurt, to see how
the hurt came upon them, and has recovered them out of the Snare wherein they
were subtly taken, blessed be his holy Name for the same; and we hope that he
will visit and restore such well-meaning Persons, who are taken, and yet held
in such like Snares, though some who are turned aside after Satan, may grow
worse and worse, as others have done before them, until God cut them off in his
Anger, as he has done such like already.

My dear Friends, you who have anciently been turned to the Divine Light of
Christ, who have and do walk in it, you know what I have here briefly touched
at is true, and you in this divine Light, may see the Old Enemy of our Peace
and pure Christian Fellowship and Unity at work against the same, under a
Profession of the Light, to darken and draw persons from it, into the works of
Darkness. And thus, as in the Apostles days, he has, and does transform
himself as like an Angel of Light, as he can: how should he appear like an
Angel of Light, if he should in words deny the Light of Christ Within Man and
Woman? The Apostle writing of false Apostles, says thus, viz. For such False
Apostles are deceitful Workers, and fashion themselves like unto the Apostles
of Christ; and no marvel, for Satan himself is changed into the fashion of an
Angel of Light: Therefore is it no great thing, though his Ministers fashion
themselves as though they were the Ministers of Righteousness, whose end shall
be according to their Deeds. Thus it is rendered in 2 Cor. 10. Old Translation,
Printed in 1566. O consider of it all such whom it concerns! And how should the
False Apostles in the True Apostles days, have transformed themselves like unto
them, if they should have in Words denied the Light of Christ Within (though in
Works they did?) Seeing Christ's Command was, and is, to believe in the Light
and walk in at, that Men and Women might then, and may now, and hereafter be
Children of the Light, as the faithful Followers of the Light then were, and
now are. The great Message and Work of John Baptist, and the Apostles Paul,
John, Peter, and the rest, was to bear witness of the Light, and to turn People
to it, that they might all believe in it, and obey and walk therein, that they
might be saved. Now for Satan to send his Apostles, or Preachers [ amongst us]
to seek, to deceive us, if they should come blaspheming against the Light of
Christ Within, mocking and scoffing at it, as many dark Preachers and
Professors of this Age do, (who have been bred up in Darkness and Ignorance
from their Youth, who yet never understood what the Light of Christ Within is)
he were not like to prevail upon those who have been turned to it, and have had
their Hearts tendered, and in some measure opened by it: But if he come under a
Profession of it, and his Ministers confessing it, and in words owning of it,
professing to be taught and led by it in their talking of it, and in the rest
of their Conversation, especially if they do keep out of the common, gross
Debaucheries that are in the World, then they are like to prevail upon such,
who do not faithfully watch in the Light which makes all things manifest as
they are. Christ has commanded us to Watch and pray, lest we fall into the
Temptation (of the Devil). He said to his Disciples, What I say unto one, I say
unto all, watch. The holy Prophet said, I will hear what God the Lord will
speak, for he will speak Peace to his People, and to his Saints; but let them
not turn again to folly. O blessed are all they who so do, they are the
Children of the Wisdom that comes down from above; their Eye being kept single
to God, they are kept by his mighty Power through Faith, so that they shall not
stumble, nor walk in the crooked ways of Satan, which leads to the Chambers of
Death, even to take hold on Hell.

My Friends, you, who are anciently convinced of the blessed Truth, as it is in
Christ Jesus our Lord, and have kept your Habitations therein, some of you may
remember what great Evils some run into, when they made a Profession of the
Light of Christ Within, and when they had so done and were reproved for it, and
admonished to repent and reform, they would tell us, We must leave them to
their own Measures of the Light of Christ, and what they did they were
justified therein by it: And such would say, The Light Within is sufficient to
teach us, (will not you leave us to it?) And when some had acted things which
were evil and scandalous, they would say, That they were justified by the Light
in them. They would have persuaded us that the Light of Christ Within did lead
them into those evil and confused, disorderly Practices which they run into:
But the Lord Jesus Christ by his Light showed us plainly, that those things
which they said the Light Within taught them, led them into, and justified them
in, were the Works and Fruits of Darkness, proceeding (through them) from
Satan, who had betrayed and deceived them, as he did Eve. And as we then
withstood those who blasphemed against the Divine Light of Christ Within, by
seeking to father their Works of Darkness upon it, by rendering it the Author
thereof; so in the Light of Christ we do withstand those vain Talkers of the
Light at this time, whose Walking and Works are in Darkness; and in the Light
of Christ we testify to the sufficiency of it, against all Priests and
Professors whatsoever who blaspheme against it, calling it a Natural
Insufficient Light, etc.

Take notice, Oh my Friends! That Satan the Prince of Darkness, and his dark,
wicked, profane, Generation or Offspring, long have, and at this day do
profess the great, true, and living God, and Christ Jesus, whom he has sent,
in Words but in Works they do deny both the Father and the Son.

And although Satan, the Prince of Darkness, may, in some of his confused, dark
Instruments, confess to, and profess the Light of Christ Within, yet he is
still Satan, the Adversary, the Prince of Darkness, and his Professing and
Talking of the Light is only with design the more readily to prevail upon, and
destroy those who through Love to the Light, delight to hear it spoken of and
commended. And Satan and his dark Instruments have done more harm to some such
in their false feigned Profession and Commendation of the Light than ever they
did, or could do, by their direct opposition to it, and blasphemous words
against it.

My dear Friends, Consider what our Lord Jesus Christ and his Apostles have
testified, concerning the only true God, and left the same upon Record in the
Scriptures of Truth; Christ's Testimony is, That God is a Spirit, and they that
worship him must worship him in the Spirit, and in the Truth. The Apostle
John's Testimony is, That God is Light, and in him there is no darkness at all:
If we say we have fellowship with him, and walk in darkness, we lie, and do not
the Truth; but if we walk in the Light as he is in the Light, then have we
Fellowship one with another, etc. Observe that this living true God, who is a
Spirit, and Light, is one God; his Light and Spirit in his People is one in its
kind or Nature with himself, he being the Fountain of it, and it of himself, it
cannot contradict him, or itself, in the several Measures, Manifestations and
Dispensations of it, in those who receive it, believe, and obey it: For if it
should, or could do so, then God by it would be rendered the Author of
Confusion [and not of Peace,] in all the Churches of the Saints; which to
believe or suppose, is very highly blasphemous against him, and directly
contrary to the holy Apostles Doctrine, who says, God is not the Author of
Confusion, but of Peace, in all the Churches of the Saints.

The same Apostle says, The Fruit of the Spirit is in all goodness,
Righteousness, und Truth, proving what is acceptable unto the Lord: And he
exhorted the Saints, saying, Have no Fellowship with the unfruitful works of
Darkness, but rather reprove them. To those who walked in the Spirit and Light
of God, he said, Walk in Love as Christ also has loved us: To these also he
said, Ye were sometimes Darkness, but now are ye Lighi in the Lord, walk as
Children of the Light. See Ephesians. 5. Again he says, The Fruits of the Spirit is
Love, Joy, and Peace, Long suffering, Gentleness, Goodness, Faith, Meekness,
Temperance; against such there is no Law; and they that are Christ's have
crucified the Flesh, with its Affections and Lusts: If we live in the Spirit,
let us also walk in the Spirit; let us not be desirous of vain Glory, provoking
one another, envying one another. Again he says, The Works of the Flesh are
manifest, which are Adultery, Fornication, Uncleanness, Lasciviousness,
Idolatry, Witchcraft, Dar^ance, Emulations, Wrath, Strife, Seditions, Heresies;
Envyings, Murders, Drunkenness, Revellings, and such like, of the which I tell
you before, as I have also told you in times past, that they that do such
things shall not inherit the Kingdom of God. Gal. 5. Again the holy Apostle
John in the Holy Ghost says, He that says he is in the Light, and hates his
Brother, is in Darkness even until now; he that loves his Brother abides in
the Light, and there is none occasion of Stumbling in him: But he that hates
his Brother is in Darkness, and walks in Darkness, and knows not whither he
goes, because that Darkness has blinded his Eyes. If a man say I love God,
and hates his Brother, he is a Liar; this Commandment have we from him, that
he who loves God loves his Brother also. See 1 John 4.

My dear Friends, Observe, That where the Fruits of the Spirit and Light of God
and Christ are wanting, in those who profess the same to be their Teacher,
Ruler, and Orderer, and contrariwise, the Fruits or Works of the Flesh do
appear, this is a plain proof, that their saying they are taught, l^d, and
governed by the Spirit and Light of God and Christ, is very notoriously false,
yea blasphemous against God, Christ, and his Divine Light and Spirit: For when
Christ told his Disciples, that false Prophets, Antichrists, Deceivers, etc.
should come, saying, Beware of false Prophets which come to you in Sheeps
Clothing, but inwardly they are ravening Wolves, he said, Ye shall know them
by their Fruits. Do men gather Grapes of Thorns, or Figs of Thistles? Even so
every good Tree brings forth good Fruit, but a corrupt Tree brings forth
evil Fruit. A good Tree cannot bring forth evil Fruit, neither can a corrupt
Tree bring forth good Fruit: Every Tree that brings not forth good Fruit is
hewn down and cast into the Fire: Wherefore by their Fruits ye shall know them.
Not every one that says unto me Lord, Lord, shall enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven, but he that does the Will of my Father which is in Heaven. See Math. 7.
15. and 24. Again he says, Many false Prophets shall arise, and shall deceive
many: And because Iniquity shall abound, the Love of many shall wax cold; But
he that shall endure unto the end, the same shall be saved. There shall arise
false Christ's, and false Prophets, and shall show great signs and Wonders,
insomuch that if it were possible, they shall deceive the very Elect. See
Matthew. 24. 11, 12, 13, 24. and see Mark 13. 22. he repeating the same words of
Christ, and there he says, Take heed, I have told you before.

Observe Christ's Promise to the faithful chosen Elect, notwithstanding all the
deceiveableness of unrighteousness, which then did, now does, or hereafter may
work in the Instruments of Satan, (by feigned Words, or fair, or flattering
Speeches, false signs, or lying wonders, whereby he lies in wait to betray and
deceive, by which he has prevailed upon some unstable, unwatchful, unfaithful,
and therefore unskilful Souls, who are not acquainted with the depths of Satan,
speaking in his Agents) yet can he not in his Agents, deceive the Elect, the
chosen of God.

Observe, all that are convinced of the truth, and come to some degree of
Obedience to it, are not come to the settled State of Election, (although they
are come to a sight and feeling of the Spirit of Christ, in whom the Election
stands) in which State it is impossible to be deceived. Let not the weakest
amongst the Believers in, and Obeyers of the Light of Christ Within, be
discouraged at these sayings; for as they keep to the Light, God the Fountain
of it will keep them from falling. God set Adam in a State of Innocence, in
which it was possible for him to stand, yet it was not impossible for him to
fall; for we both read, and believe, he did fall; he could not stand in his own
strength, but in the strength of the Lord his Maker, through want of his
diligent attendance, and waiting upon God his Maker for preservation, he fell
under the power of the Deceiver. But Christ who never fell spoke of a State,
and brings those who continue diligent and watchful into it, which is beyond
that, as his forecited words do plainly imply. The Apostles writ unto the
Believers in the Light of Christ thus: viz. Wherefore Brethren give all
diligence to make your Calling and Election sure; for if ye do these things ye
shall never fall. 2 Pet. 1. 10. Read the Chapter through, etc. Again he says,
Beware, lest ye being led away with the Error of the wicked, fall from your
own Stedfastness: But grow in Grace, and in the Knowledge of our Lord and
Savior Christ, to him be Glory, now and for ever, Amen. Chap. 3. 17, 18. Again
Ju^e writes thus: Now to him that is able to keep you from falling, and to
present you faultless before the presence of his Glory, with exceeding joy, to
the only wise God our Savior, be Glory and Majesty, Dominion and Power, now
and ever, Amen. Jude 24, 25. read the Epistle throughout.

Observe further, that the Settled State of Election, where deceit cannot
enter, is not a State above, or beyond Watchfulness, and the holy Fear of God
(the Son of God himself in the days of his Flesh, watched and prayed, and was
heard in that he feared, as the Author to the Hebrews writes, Heb. 5. 7.) but
in this State, of Watchfulness, and the holy Fear of God, they continually
abiding steadfast in, to such it is become Natural to dwell and abide there,
being rooted and settled in the Godly, or Divine Nature, of which they are made
partakers; as the Apostle writ; see 1 Pet. 1. 4. See how Fulks renders this
place in his Confutation of the Popish Translation at Rh^mes; he renders the
words Divine Nature, Godly Nature.

Eternal Glory to him for the preservation of his People, who daily wait upon
him; he gives them Wisdom, Strength and Preservation; he who keeps them never
^lu^b^rs nor sleeps; holy and migh^y is his Wisdom and Strength, by which he
redeems, preserves, and up^^^^ his People, in doing that which is well pleasing
in his sight. Blessed are all those who diligently wait to be made partakers of
the same, they shall be upheld thereby through all Temptations, Trials, and the
Buffetings, and Winnowings of Satan, out of his snares, and over him, (in
Christ the Elect Seed, which bruiseth his Head) and over all his several sorts
of Agents; for as the Apostle says, Greater is he that is in us than he that
is in the World, by whom we overcome the World.

O my dear Friends! All diligently wait on God in the Divine Light and Spirit
of his Son, that you may grow in the Grace and knowledge of our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ more and more, that you may be all firmly rooted and
grounded in him; as Trees or Branches of Righteousness, the planting of the
Lord God, that you may bring forth much Fruit to the Praise and Glory of his
name. Christ the living true Vine said unto his Disciples of old, I am the true
Vine, and my Father is the Husbandman; every Branch that bears not fruit in
me, he takes away; and every Branch that bears fruit, he purges it, that it
may bring forth more fruit -- Abide in me, and I in you: As the branch cannot
bring forth of itself, except it abide in the Vine, no more can ye, except ye
abide in me. I am the Vine, ye are the branches; he that abides in me, and I
in him, the same brings forth much fruit; for without me ye can do nothing.
If a man abide not in me, he is cast forth as a branch, and is withered. Joh.
15. 1, 2, 4, 5. Herein is my Father glorified, that ye bear much fruit, so
shall ye be my Disciples. As the Father has loved me, so have I loved you,
continue ye in my love. If ye keep my Commandments ye shall abide in my love,
even as I have kept my Fathers Commandments, and abide in his love. This is my
Commandment, that ye love one another as I have loved you. See John 15. 5, etc.

O my Friends! These are the sweet and comfortable Sayings of our Lord Jesus
Christ, our Prince of Life, Love, and Peace. Let them be duly weighed,
faithfully regarded and followed by you all who profess to be his Disciples,
(that is) Learners of him; for as he says, Without him we can do nothing,
except we be joined to his gracious Spirit of Light, Life, and Peace, we cannot
please God, but being joined to it, it works in us to will and to do that
which is well pleasing in the sight of the Lord God. So we become his
workmanship in Christ, created in him unto those good Works which God has
ordained we should walk in, that our Light may shine before men, that they may
behold our good Conversation in Christ, constantly coupled with that godly
fear, wherein there is not only a hating of, but also a coming out of, and
preservation from, Pride, Arrogance, and every evil way -- O my Friends! This
is that which is to be desired, sought of God, and diligently waited for; this
is the durable Riches that far excels all that can be mentioned besides it;
this is the Treasure that is to be laid up in Heaven, according to Christ's
Command, where neither Moth can corrupt, nor Thief break through and steal.
Blessed are all they who diligently wait for the Increase and Security of this
Treasure, they shall never be forsaken of the Lord; he whose the Earth is, and
the fullness of it, who feeds the Ravens, clothes the Grass, and takes care for
Sparrows, will take care and provide for them. So all wait, that your Faith and
Confidence may be preserved, confirmed and increased to his eternal honor, and
your enduring Peace and Comfort; even so be it, Amen.

Concerning good Conscience.
MY dear Friends, something lies upon me to write to you in the tender Bowels
of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Prince of our Christian Peace, Fellowship, and
Unity. The matter before me is this: I find that there are some persons
professing Truth amongst us, (who not being faithful to the gracious Spirit and
Light of our Lord Jesus Christ, which they make profession of) that are
offended with the Method, Manner and Form in which Friends Care of Gods Glory,
and the good one of another, is manifest; these persons talk much of Liberty of
Conscience: To which I say, Liberty of Conscience (rightly understood) has
ever since we were a People, been, and still is owned amongst us; but for any
who profess to be followers of the Light, Members of the Church which is in
God, to plead Liberty of Conscience for themselves, without putting a
difference betwixt good Conscience and evil, this is an Unsound and Unchristian
Plea (for the Apostles of Christ distinguishes betwixt good and evil
Conscience) yea, shows that they are separated and divided the one from the
other, for they proceed from contrary Causes. The Apostle said, My Conscience
bears me witness in the Holy Ghost, Romans 9. 1. And again, I have lived in all
good Conscience unto this day: For our rejoicing is this, the Testimony of our
Conscience, that in simplicity and godly sincerity, not with fleshly Wisdom,
but by the Grace of God, we have had our Conversation in the World, and more
abundantly to you-wards. See 2 Cor. 1. 12. He who had believed and received the
Holy Ghost, was made of a good Understanding by it, his Will and Affections
also being purified from Corruption thereby, so that he did not only understand
what was right and wrong, but he also willed and took pleasure to act and do
that which was and is well pleasing in the sight of the Lord: And this he was
enabled to do by the Power of the Holy Ghost, or Spirit of Truth, which
(according to the Promise of Christ) leads his faithful Subjects by Degrees
from Glory to Glory, from one degree of Grace to another) into all Truth: And
so are the faithful followers of Christ Jesus led in this our day.

Paul writing to Timothy says, Now the end of the Commandment is charity out
of a pure heart and of a good Conscience, and of Faith unfeigned, from which
some having swerved, have turned aside unto vain jangling. 1 Timothy 1. 5, 6.
Again ver. 18, 19. he charge. Timothy to hold Faith and a good Conscience,
which some having put away, concerning Faith have made shipwreck. Again, Chap.
3. ver. 9. The Mystery of Faith is held in a pure Conscience. The Apostle Peter
writes to the Believers thus, (viz.) Having a good Conscience, that whereas
they speak evil of you as of Evildoers, they may be ashamed that falsely accuse
your good Conversation in Christ. 1 Pet. 3. 16.

Concerning evil Conscience.
THE Apostle writes thus: Now the Spirit speaks expressly, that in the latter
times some shall depart from the Faith, giving heed to the seducing Spirits and
Doctrines of Devils, speaking Lies in Hypocrisy, having their Consciences
seared with an hot Iron. 1 Timothy 4. 1, 2. Now the Prince that begets and upholds
this evil Conscience, hardened and seared, is the Devil, who abode not in the
truth, in whom there is no truth, he is that Prince of the power of the Air,
who works in the hearts of the Children of Disobedience, as the Apostle says.
This is he who leads into the fleshly Liberty from the Cross of Christ, into
the fleshly Lusts, which war against the Soul, and drowns such men in
predition, who become Enemies to the Cross of Christ. This Liberty is not to be
given way unto, nor to be pleaded for by any true Christian; this is not the
Liberty of the Sons of God, which he has promised to restore them into, who
believe in Jesus Christ, and take up their daily Cross and follow him, giving
and taking Liberty to this evil Conscience brings into corruptible Bondage,
yea, it vassalizeth the Creature, Soul and Body to Satan; and if this Liberty
be continued in, it brings everlasting destruction both upon Man and Woman.

Paul writ to Titus, saying, Unto them that are defiled and unbelieving is
nothing pure, but even their Mind and Consciences defiled; they profess that
they know God, but in Works they deny him. See Tit. 1. 15, 16. Again, the
Apostle writing to the Hebrews, says, Let us draw near with a true heart, in
full assurance of Faith, having our hearts sprinkled from an evil Conscience,
etc. Let us hold fast the Profession of our Faith without wavering; for he is
faithful that promised; and let us consider one another to provoke unto Love
and to good Works, not forsaking the Assembling our selves together as the
manner of some is; but exhorting one another, etc. See Heb. 10. 22, 23, 24, 25.

Oh my dear Friends! All tenderly consider, that the great work of God in, and
through Christ, is to put away this evil Conscience, and to work in man a good
one, yea, to redeem out of all corrupt, sinful, fleshly Liberty, which Liberty
embondageth the Creature under Satan's power, as I said before. Now Christ the
patient and innocent Lamb of God, was sent by the Father to take away the Sins
of the World, which John Baptist in his Eternal Light saw, and testified of,
and in the same Divine Spirit and Light of Christ Daniel the Prophet saw, and
testified of, saying, He shall finish Sin and Transgression, and shall bring in
everlasting Righteousness: Blessed are all they who in Faith and Patience wait
to see this great Work carried on, and finished in the appointed season of the
Father.

O my Friends! Seriously consider how enclinab^e, apt, and prone. Men and Women
are (after they are come to some degree of the knowledge of God, and of Christ,
and of the daily Cross) to hearken to the Serpents voice, (who deceived Eve)
who leads into this ungodly Liberty, who by his Transformations has deceived
some in our Age after they knew God and Christ, as aforesaid; and he has
promised them Liberty and great things, as he did Eve, and has brought them
into misery as he did her; and through this his accursed work, a Root of
Bitterness is sprung up in some, which is in danger to defile many, which God
through his tender Mercy put a stop unto, confound, and drive backward: This is
the earnest desire of my Soul.

The Apostle Peter writes against the fleshly Libertines, with which the Church
was exercised in his day, which became matter of much Travel and Grief to the
faithful Apostles; of them he thus writes, viz. These are Wells without Water,
Clouds that are carried with a Tempest, to whom the mist of Darkness is
reserved for ever; for when they speak great swelling words of vanity, they
allure through the Lusts of the Flesh, through much Wantonness, those that were
clean escaped from them who live in error: While they promise them Liberty,
they themselves are the servants of Corruption; for of whom a man is overcome,
of the same he is brought into Bondage, etc. See 2 Pet. 2. 16. to the end.

Dear Friends, Something more is upon me to write concerning Conscience. The
Apostle writing to the Church at Corinth, speaks of the Idolatry of the
Gentiles, (viz.) As concerning therefore the eating of those things that are
offered in sacrifice unto Idols, we know that an Idol is nothing in the World;
for though there be that are called Gods, whether in Heaven or in Earth, (as
there be gods many, and lords many) But to us there is but one God the Father,
of whom are all things, and we in him, and one Lord Jesus Christ, by whom are
all things, and we by him; howbeit there is not in every man that knowledge;
for some with Conscience of the Idol unto this hour, eat it as a thing offered
unto an Idol, and their Consciences being weak are defiled. But meat commends
us not to God; for neither if we eat are we the better, neither if we eat not
are we the worse. But take heed, lest by any means this Liberty of yours become
a stumbling block to them that are weak; for if any man see thee which have
knowledge sit at meat in the Idols Temple, shall not the Conscience of him
which is weak be emboldened to eat those things which are sacrificed to Idols?
etc. Read 1 Cor. 8. 4. to the end of the chap.

Observe here, that some with Conscience of the Idol did eat things sacrificed
unto it, and their Consciences therein and thereby were defiled. The
Christians, who knew there was no other God but one, were warned by the
Apostle, that they should not sit in the Idols Temple at Meat, with those who
eat their meat unto the Idol, lest their so doing should embolden those
ignorant Idolaters to persist in their Ignorance and Idolatry; for though some
might say, they did not eat it to the Idol as the Idolaters did, but for
strength and sustenance to the outward man; yet this would not answer the
Counsel of the Lord in the Apostle, nor the Light of Christ in their own Souls;
but they were to abstain from eating with them at such Sacrifices, thereby to
prevent emboldening them therein. And in chap. 10. ver. 20. take his Testimony
against this sort of Idolatry in these words, viz But I say that the things
which the Gentiles sacrifice, they sacrifice to Devils, and not to God. (See
Acts 15. 28.) And I would not that ye should have fellowship with Devils.

My Friends, these Testimonies I bring, not only to show good Conscience from
evil Conscience, and weak from strong, but also to show how careful the Apostle
was, that those believing Gentiles (who had received the knowledge of the one
true God) should walk in faithfulness to him, according to the knowledge which
he had given them, that by their good conversation, in Christ as well as by
their, preaching of the word and Doctrine of the Gospel, those Idolaters might
be turned from their dumb Idols to serve the living God.

Concerning them that are weak in the Faith.
YET something further concerning them that are weak in the Faith. The Apostle
writing to the believing Romans, writes thus, viz. Him that is weak in the
Faith receive you; But not to doubtful disputations; for one believes that he
may eat all things, another who is weak eats herbs: Let not him that eats
despise him that eats not, and let not him which eats not judge him that
eats; for God has received him. -- One man esteems one day above another;
another esteems every day alike; Let every man be fully persuaded in his own
Mind, etc. See Romans 8. 1, 5, etc.

My Friends, some unruly, and some unskilful persons of our time, who would be
accounted strong, faithful, and wise, under the Profession of the Light of
Christ Within, have endeavored to strain and wrest this last cited Scripture,
thereby to justify and cover themselves, in the practicing of some things
which are contrary to the Truth, as it is in Christ Jesus; as also in the
omitting and neglecting of some things, which the Light of Jesus has led the
faithful into, not only the Elders or aged in Christ, but the younger also. In
bearing with weakness we are of the Apostles mind and concerning eating of
Herbs, or any sort of Food or Meat; we would have all who profess the Light of
Christ Jesus, to wait diligently in it, that by it their Understandings may be
cleared, that they may see as the Apostle did, and be persuaded as he and many
more were, and are, that there is nothing unclean of it self; that so out of
weakness they may grow strong in the Lord. The same Apostle who took this care,
that they might not judge one another about Meats, Drinks, and Days. Hear what
he further says concerning these things, when some among the Christians would,
or did command to abstain from Meats, and would have it received as a Principle
or Doctrine of Christ in his Church, then the Apostle judged it, and ranks it
as one of the Doctrines of Devils. See Tim. 4. 1, 2, 3.

Observe whilst the abstaining from Meats, in the before mentioned sense, was
practiced as a Weakness (which it really was) through shortness of
Understanding, he bore with it and exhorted others so to do, saying, We who are
strong ought to bear the Infirmities of the weak: Romans 15. 1. But when some did
account themselves strong and wise in Christianity, (but were not so) would
have enjoined it as a Command, that he judged, as aforesaid.

Concerning Days.
AGain concerning Days hear what he says, (viz.) Howbeit then, when ye knew
not God, ye did service to them which by nature are no Gods. But now after that
ye have known God, or rather are known of God, how turn ye again to the weak
and beggarly Elements, whereunto ye desire again to be in Bondage. Ye observe
Days and Months, and Times, and Years; I am afraid of you, lest I have bestowed
on you Labor in vain: Brethren, I beseech you to be as I am. Gal. 4. 8, 9, 10,
11. Again hear what he says, viz. Now the God of Patience and Consolation
grant that you be like minded one toward another, according to Christ Jesus,
that you may with one Mind, and one Mouth glorify God, even the Father of our
Lord Jesus Christ. Romans 15. 5, 6.

Again, hear what the Apostle says concerning these things, writing to the
believing Colossians, viz. Let no man therefore judge you in Meat or in Drink,
or in respect of an holy day, or of the New Moon, or of the Sabbath days, which
are a shadow of things to come; But the body is of Christ, etc. Col. 2. 16, 17.

Observe, That the Apostles and Primitive faithful Christians, who bore with
the weaknesses of some, in their observation of Days, and limiting themselves
to eating of Herbs, they were not to be judged in their eating or drinking,
who eat and drank in the Faith and Counsel of God; neither were they to be
judged, because they did not observe the Jews Holy Days (so called,) neither
because they did not observe the Jews New Moons, or Sabbath days, which are a
shadow; for they were come to Christ, who is the end of the Law for
Righteousness sake, to every one that believes, as its written.

Again, hear what Christ says, And he called the Multitude together and said,
Hear and understand, Not that which goes into the Mouth defiles the Man, but
that which comes out of the Mouth defiles the Man. Do not you understand;
that whatsoever enters in at the Mouth goes into the Belly and is cast out
into the Draught? but those things that proceed out of the Mouth, comes forth
from the Heart, and they define the Man; For out of the heart proceed evil
Thoughts, Murders, Adulteries, Fornications, Thefts, False Witness,
Blasphemies, these are the things which defile a man. Matthew. 15. 10, 11, 17,
18, 19, 20. And concerning the Jews Sabbath hear what Christ says, And he said
unto them, The Sabbath was made for Man, and not man for the Sabbath; therefore
the Son of Man is Lord also of the Sabbath, Mark 2. 27, 28.

Observe, this he said unto the Pharisees, who judged his Disciples for
plucking the Ears of Corn on the Sabbath day, who said unto him, Behold, why do
they on the Sabbath day that which is not lawful? Upon which he brought them an
Instance what David did, in eating the Shewbread, etc. But Christ by offering
up himself through the Eternal Spirit, has since that put an end to these
shadows; so that the Apostles and Primitive Christians were not to be judged
for their refusing to practice them when Christ had ended them. And though the
Apostles and Christians did bear with the Practice of these things in some,
after they came to make some profession of Christ, yet they bore with it as
weakness which it was, which the strong in Christ knew they would outgrow, as
they diligently did follow on to know the Lord, through obeying him in what
they did already know; for that is the way for every one to know what is
needful for them to know, which they yet know not, even to be obedient to God
in what they do already know: For he is faithful who has promised, saying, He
that is faithful in a little, I will make him Ruler over much. The Path of the
Just is as the shining light, which shines more and more unto the perfect day,
as it is written. And again, The light of the Moon shall be as the light of the
Sun, and the light of the Sun shall be sevenfold, as the light of seven days,
etc.

Now if those weak ones, with whom the Primitive Christians bore in these
things, should have called them A^^states and Innova^ors, and have called their
Epistles, rotten Orders, M^ns Prescriptions and Edicts, and have judged them in
their Christian freedom, because they did not continue with them in Bondage, in
Eating Herbs, Observation of Days, Years, and Times, and should have cried up
their Jewish bondage to have been Christian Liberty, and themselves to be
strong Christians, and the others to be weak, or darkened and Apostatized; Would
the Apostles and Primitive Christians have owned them as Brethren in Unity, and
have had Fellowship with them in their so doing? Yea or Nay? Let Gods faithful
Witness in all that know it, answer this Question.

Oh! my Friends, I am grieved in Spirit, because of the hardness, wilfulness,
and selfconceitedness of some, whose work, at this day, is to unsettle the
minds of Gods people, by drawing them from their diligent attendance unto the
Spirit, Light, and Voice of God in their own hearts and souls, and in the
mouths of his faithful Servants, (which Spirit, Light, and Voice in their
hearts, and in the mouths of his Servants, is not contradictory to it self in
the one or the other) after them, into ungodly jealousies, evil surmises,
thoughts and imaginations, words and actions, by which evil work several
persons, whom the Lord in mercy had gathered near to himself, have been drawn
out from the simplicity, which is in Christ, into prejudice, evil jealousies,
and also into some practices, which are inconsistent with the Truth as it is in
Christ Jesus, diverse of whom the Lord has in mercy given the sense thereof,
and through his righteous Judgments upon the evil, has restored them into
Unity with himself and with his tender people, who in his tender bowels have
traveled for their restoration, who now greatly rejoice in their return.
Glory, yea, Glory to his Eternal Name for the same, and that for evermore.

It Is my Faith, that God will disintangle some who are yet held by the
aforesaid Snares, for whose return my Soul travels in Prayers and Supplications
to God: Faithful is that saying of the Apostle, Romans 14. 22. Happy is he that
condemns not himself in the thing which he allows. Again he says, Now I
beseech you, Brethren, by our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye all speak the same
thing, and that there be no division among you; but that you be perfectly
joined together in the same mind, and in the same judgment: For it has been
declared unto me of you, my Brethren, by them which are of the House of Cloe,
that there are Contentions among you. Now this I say, that every one of you
says, that I am of Paul, and I of Apollo, and I of Cephas, and I of Christ: Is
Christ divided? Was Paul Crucified for you? Or were you Baptized in the name of
Paul? Christ sent me not to Baptize, but to Preach the Gospel; not with wisdom
of Words, lest the Cross of Christ should be made of none effect: For the
Preaching of the Cross is to them that perish, foolishness; but unto us which
are saved, it is the power of God: For it is written, I w^^^ (...) ^he wisdom
of the wise, etc. We preach Christ crucified, unto the Jews a Stumbling Block,
and unto the Greeks foolishness; but unto them which are called, both Jews and
Greeks, Christ the power of God, and the wisdom of God, etc. 1 Cor. 1. 10, to
19.

Oh! my dear Friends, and all you who profess the Divine Light of Christ to be
your Teacher; seriously consider of these things: My earnest desire for you all
is, that you may all diligently wait in the Light of Christ, therein to receive
a right understanding thereof; for if you therein diligently wait, you will see
that it was not the Apostles desire or pleasure, that they should contend, or
be in strife for Apollo, or Cephas, or Him, or for them one against another;
but that they should all exalt and magnify Christ, who died for them, and rose
again to govern and lead them in righteousness, and to uphold and justify them
in the same: And also consider, that he Preached not the Gospel with the wisdom
of words, or the words which man's wisdom teaches, lest the Cross of Christ
should be made of none effect; but he Preached the Gospel with the Holy Ghost
sent down from Heaven, in the words which it taught him; that their Faith, who
heard him might not stand in the wisdom of those words, which man's wisdom
teaches; but in the power of God; for, as he says in 1 Cor. 4. 19, 20. I will
come to you shortly, if the Lord will; and will know, not the ^pee^h (or words)
of them which are puffed up, but the Power; for the Kingdom of God is not in
(...), but in po^^r; neither does it stand in meats or drinks, but in
righteousness and peace, and ^^y in the Holy Ghost, into which Kingdom God has
gathered and is gathering them that have or yet do, or hereafter may, in
sincerity Hunger and Thurst after it.

Again, consider the Apostle took great Care in his Preaching, that the Cross
of Christ might Not be made of none Effect, that those who were come to bear
it, might Not be weary of it, and Cast it off, because of the offense taken by
the wicked at them, for their Obedience thereunto (nor for any other cause);
for it is true as he writ, the Preaching of the Cross is to them that perish
foolishness, but unto us it is the power of God; and as it was then, so it is
now, he that was born after the flesh, persecuted him that was born after the
spirit; and they that live godlike (on in the likeness of God in Christ Jesus)
shall suffer persecution; but evil men and seducers shall wax worse and worse,
deceiving and being deceived.

Again Consider, oh my friends, and all you who profess the Light of Christ
within to be your Teacher, Ruler, and Guide, what is the cause that some
professing the Light within make such a Noise against that wholesome Method or
Order which the God of Order has brought forth amongst us, in taking Care of
his Glory, and the good one of another; that the professors of the Gospel and
its Light may walk Orderly in the Light as becomes the same, that their Light
might so shine before men, that they might see their good works, and glorify
their Father which is in Heaven, according to Christ's Command. Is it not
obvious and plain that their Noise and Clamor is, because they seek a Liberty
which Christ and the bearing of the Cross Admits not, nor allows of? Oh
Consider the sayings of Christ, Strait is the Gate, and Narrow is the Way that
Leads to life, etc. and broad is the Gate, and wide is the Way that Leads
unto destruction, and many there be that go in thereat, but Labor ye, To Enter
in at the strait gate. Many Ancient Faithful friends, who have kept their
habitations in the Light, and their first Love therein to God (the fountain of
it) and one to another, have not forgotten what Exercis^ was gone through
Twenty Years ago and upward, through the unsound Notions, Doctrine and
Practices of some, who not only professed the Light within, but Largly talked
and Preached in Commendation of it when they were out of it, and in their works
Enemies to it: Oh how were some at unawars beguiled through their fair words
and fine speeches in their feigned Commendation of, and in words Magnifying the
Light within! they told us in those days, They were come to a greater
Dispensation and Glory, then we were in, and they told us, that we were in the
form without the power; and told us, God would break our form and scatter us;
but they proved false Prophets* for God has broken them, and scattered them,
but ^reserved and kept his People, who have been kept by his Mighty power
through Faith in the true form of Godliness, while diverse of them, with their
high and vain pretentions, have not only been estranged from the Life and Power
of Godlyness, but also from the very form thereof, turning into the Liberty and
Lusts of the flesh, and so became Enemies to the Cross of Christ, whose minds
went downward, into the Earth and Earthly things, from the Heavenly; the
Latterend of such we have seen to be worse than their beginning, though many
that were so subt^ly prevailed upon and hurt in those days, came (through the
tender Mercy of God) to see the snare in which they were taken, and came out of
it; and as it was then, so will it be with respect to diverse who through
^u^t^lty and at unawars (for want of watchfulness in the Holy fear of God) have
been of late years, and yet are ensnared and entangled, as others were before
them; tho some whom Satan has made use of to ensnare them, may not return to
the Lord by Repentance, but be cut off in his displeasure.

And oh my friends, and all you that profess the Light within to be your
Teacher, Consider; does not some at this time who profess the same Light within
to be their Teacher, pay Tithes to a Priest or ^riests, go to a P^^^^^ to be
married, or be married by him, use the unchristian Customs and fashons of the
People of the Nation, in their unsound speech and vain Complyments, and some in
their superfluous and need^^s ^appar^^, and some in swearing, and some in
seeking to, and complying with, and trusting in the Arm of flesh for their
security; and do not these Cry, we must be left to ^ur Liberty in these things,
We must have Liberty of Concience? and have Not some of them presumptuously
said, that the spirit or Light of God might allow them to do so? and to cover
and justify themselves in this unchristian Liberty, have not some of them
sought, to strain and wrest the before cited sayings of the Apostles Concerning
eating of Herbs, Meats, and the Observation of days, and other parts of the
Scripture of Truth? Would not some stra^^ and ^orest these Scriptures in our
time to cover themselves in the aforesaid unchristian practices? let Gods
faithful witness in their own hearts speak in this Matter, and let the words
that have falen from the Mouths of some of the professors of the Light within
(made public) of late, Witness against them in this matter.

The Lord God said by the mouth of his Prophet, Woe to the Rebellious Children,
that take Council, but not of me; and that Cover with a Covering, but not of
my spirit, that they may add sin unto sin, Isa. 30. 1. My tender desires are
for all that profess the Light and Spirit of God withtin, that they may walk in
it, and be covered by it, that the woes of God they may Escape; but the unruly,
loose and disorderly professors of it, will not Ecape the woes and wrath of
God, if they do not unfeignedly Repent, and amend their doings; and Cease from
their unchristian deeds, which they have done, and words, which they have
spoken against the Lord God, Christ, and his tender faithful servants, who have
Anciently and to this day do labor in the Word and Doctrine of the Gospel, in
turning many from darkness to Light, from the power of Satan unto God, and for
their Preservation, Confirmation and Establishment therein.

Something concerning Christian Order, or, Order in the Church of Christ.
THe Apostle writes thus, God is not the Author of Confusion but of Peace, in
all the Churches of the Saints. Again, he exhorts or commands, saying: Let all
things be done decently and in order, 1 Cor. 14. 33, 40. The Apostle James
writes thus, Who is a wise man, and endued with knowledge amongst you, let him
show, out of a good conversation, his works with meekness of wisdom: But if ye
have bitter Endyings and Strife in your Hearts, glory not, and lie not against
the Truth: This wisdom descends not from above, but is Earthly, Sensual,
Devilish; for where Envy and Strife is, there is Confusion and every evil work;
but the wisdom that is from above, is first pure, then peaceable, gentle, and
easy to be entreated; full of Mercy and of good Fruits, without partiality,
and without hypocrisy; and the fruit of Righteousness is sown in peace of them
that make peace, James 3. 13. to the end.

Again, Paul says, Be ye followers of me, even as I am of Christ: Now I praise
you, Brethren, that ye remember me in all things, and keep the Ordinances as I
delivered them unto you, etc. and the rest will I set in order when I come, 1
Cor. 11. 1, 2, 3, 4. And again, writing to Titus, he says: For this cause left
I thee in Crete, that thou should set in order the things that are wanting,
and ordain Elders in every City, as I had appointed thee, Titus 1. 5. read it
through. Again, the Apostle writing to the Church at Corinth, says: Now
concerning the Collection for the Saints, as I have given order to the Churches
of Galatia, even so do ye, 1 Cor. 16. 1.

Observe here, that all things were not set in order at once by the Apostles,
amongst the Believers and Professors of Christ, but as the work of Faith,
Repentance, and Regeneration was wrought in order by degrees, even so good
outward Order and Government they grew into gradually, or by degrees; so has
it been and is in our day, with those who to the light of Christ are turned,
who therein wait, and more and more follow on to know the Lord; such do not
build again the things which the Truth in them has destroyed: They do not pay
Tithes, ma^ry by a ^^^est, or turn back into the sinful customs and vain glory
of the world; but they stand in the liberty wherewith Christ has made them
free, and hold fast the Truth, which is their Crown, that no man take it from
them, or them from it.

Now all you that are young in Truth, and all others whom it concerns, take
notice, that those whom God first turned from darkness to light in this our
Age, who became lovers and followers of it, they thereby were led in the very
morning or Infancy of their knowledge of the Light, and the teachings of it, to
deny being Married by a Hriest, and to deny paying of Tithes, and to deny
Sw^aring, to deny Envyings and Strife, Wars and Fighting, which are the fruits
of the Flesh, proceeding from the Lusts thereof, and to deny the vain customs,
sinful Lu^^s, and glory of the world; to continue in the denial of these, is
well pleasing to God: And as it was with the faithful in the beginning, or
breaking out of the Gospel day amongst us; so it is with the faithful now, as
with respect to their testimony in the denial of these things; and God has
given great Increa^^ of his spiritual Treasures, Riches, and Blessings, to
those that have continued faithful since that time; so that they are now nearer
to the Lord, than they were in the morning of the day, and Infancy of their
knowledge of him, Glory to his Name for the same. And thus it was with the
Primitive Believers and Walkers in the Light, as the Scriptures of Truth
declare.

Now to such as say, Things amongst us (who profess the Light of Christ to be
our Teacher) are not as they were in the beginning; I say, ^ay, as with respect
to a^^ Persons professing the Light, as aforesaid; they are not, nor yet with
respect to diverse things practiced by the professors of the Light; for the
Faithful have grown from one degree of Grace to another, and so from the
practice of some good things, to the practice of more good things, having
walked in the Light, they have held what they had, and gained more, according
to Christ's promise, who said, He that is faithful in a little, I will make him
Ruler over much: And there is to be a growing from strength to strength, and
from Glory to Glory, from one degree of Grace to another, till there be an
appearing in Sion in perfect beauty, till there be a coming to the measure of
the Stature of the fullness of Christ, to a perfect man in Christ Jesus. This is
accordiog to the Apostles Doctrine: Who thus goes on gradually toward
perfection, are no A^^s^ates, Backsliders, or Drawers back to perdition; but
pressers forward for the complete Redemption of their Souls: So these are in a
better condition than they were in the beginning of their profession of the
Spirit, Truth, and Light of Christ within; As he says, ^very Scribe that is
taught or instructed unto the Kingdom of God, is like unto a Man that is an
Householder, which brings out of his Treasure things new and old.

All that come to this State, walking in the light, as aforesaid, they increase
in good Order in the Power of God.

And again, Christ says: Take heed what you hear, etc. And he said, Whereunto
shall we liken the Kingdom of God? Or with what comparison shall we compare it?
It is like a Grain of Mustard Seed, which when it is sown in the Earth, is less
than all the seeds that be in the Earth: but when it is sown, it grows up,
and becomes greater than all Herbs, and shoots out great Branches, see Mark
4. v. 24. to 32.

Oserve here the Parables that Christ spoke concerning the Kingdom of God, and
the Increase of it: Now as the Grain of Mustardseed is small, but being sown in
the Earth grows gradually, and in due season brings forth great increase of
its own Nature and Kind, even so the Heavenly spark or seed of life, being
believed in by man, it takes root in his heart, and grows gradually, and in the
Appointed season of the Father brings forth fruit, first a little, and
afterward more; for Christ the living Vine said, In this is my Father
gloryfied, that you bring forth much fruit: I am the true vine, my father is
the husbandman. Every branch that brings not forth fruit ( in me) he takes
away; and every branch that bears fruit, he purges, that it may bring forth
more fruit, Joh. 15. And again, he said, So is the Kingdom of God, as if a man
should cast seed into the ground, and the seed should spring and grow up, etc.
for the earth brings forth fruit of her self, first the blade, then the ear,
then the full corn in the ear, Mark. 4. v. 26. to 32.

Again, the Prophet Isaiah Prophesying of Christ's Government and Kingdom,
writes thus, For unto us a Child is born, unto us a Son is given, the
Government shall be on his shoulder, and his name shall be called wonderful
Counselor, the mighty God, the everlasting Father, the Prince of Peace; of the
increase of his Government and Peace, there shall be no end; upon the Throne of
David, and upon his Kingdom to Order it, and to Establish it with Judgment, and
with Justice, from henceforth even for ever: The zeal of the Lord of Hosts will
perform this, see Isa. 9. 6, 7.

Observe here the Parable of the Grain of Wheat cast into the Earth, it first
springs to the Blade; secondly to the Ear; thirdly to the full or ripe Corn in
the Ear. Now it may be truly said, that when the Grain of Wheat is sprung up to
the Ear, it is not as it was in the beginning of its growth into the Blade, as
with respect to the stature and growth of it; for the second is greater than
the first.

Again, it may be said, when it is grown to full ripe Corn in the Ear, it is
not as it was in the beginning of its growth into the Blade, nor as it was when
it was grown to the Ear, but not ripe, full, or perfect Corn; for the third
degree of its growth was greater than the first or second, though they
proceeded of one seed and were of one kind, and all good and beautiful in the
order of their growth. Now this Grain of Wheat, and the fruit and product of
it, in the several degrees of the growth thereof to its perfection, being made
by Christ a Parable of the Heavenly Seed of God in the Hearts of his People,
and of the several degrees of its work and appearance in them, and of their
several degrees of growth in it from their Infancy therein, to their
compleatness or ripe Age in Christ. All you that profess to be the Generation
or Offspring of this Heavenly Seed, Try and prove your selves in this matter,
be retired in the Spirit of your minds, and with the Light (you make profession
of) take a view of your States and Conditions, and see whether your growth and
prosperity in the Truth does answer this parable, Yea or Nay.

And observe what Isaiah Prophesied concerning Christ's Kingdom and Government,
He says, Of the Increase of His Government and Peace there shall be no End. Now
they, who under the profession of the Light within, are against this pure
Government of Christ, and the increase of it, in the particular, and in his
Church in general, who are for bringing in and Practicing a corrupt fleshly
Liberty, Contrary to Christ, these are the Apostates and Innova^ors, with such
the Faithful Christian Apostles and Elders, etc. were Exercised and gre^ved in
the Primitive times, as the Epistles of Paul, Peter, John, Jude, etc. do show.

Hear what Peter says Concerning this matter, viz. The Lord knows how to
deliver the Godly out of Temptations, and to reserve the unjust unto the day of
Judgment, to be punished; but Chiefly them that walk after the flesh in the Last
of Uncleanness, and despise Government; presumtuous are they, self-willed, --
having Eyes full of Adultery, and that cannot cease from Sin, beguiling
unstable Souls -- These are wells without Water, Clouds that are Carried with a
Tempest, to whom the mist of Darkness is reserved for ever; for when they
speak great swelling words of vanity, they alure through the Lust of the
flesh, through much wantonness, those that were Clean Escaped from them who
live in Error: while they promise them Liberty, they themselves are the
Servants of Corruption; for of whom a man is overcome, of the same he is
brought into bondage, 2 Peter 2. 9, 10, 14, 17, 18. 19. read the Chapter
through.

And as it was in their days, so is it in ours; some fell away then from the
faith and Obedience to the Cross of Christ, who had been Enlightened, and
tasted of the Heavenly Gift, and of the power of the World to Come; who while
they therein abode, were as Stars in the Firmament of the power of God, and as
the Clouds that are filled with rain, and as the Trees of the Lords Planting,
which brought forth some fruit to him; but when they fell away from Christ, the
root, seed, Light and fountain of life, then their fruit withered, and so they
came to be without fruit, as Jude writes; Trees twice dead, plucked up by the
Roots, etc. and could not grow any more.

Now observe, it is not with these as it was in the beginning, when they were
first turned to the Light of Christ, by which they come to see their Sins, and
to be led to Repent of them, and to forsake them; the latter End of these is,
and will be, worse than their beginning, as the Apostle Peter writes concerning
such; for says he, It had been better for them not to have known the way of
Righteousness, than after they have known it, to turn from the Holy Commandment
delivered to them; but it is come to pass according to the true Proverb, the
dog is returned to his own vomit again, and the sow that was washed, to her
wallowing in the Mire, 2 Peter 21. 22. such, in former time, became the Agents
of Satan to seduce and draw others from the Faith and Obedience of the Cross
of Christ; some such have been and are in our day. All you that Love the Light
of our Lord Jesus Christ, which makes Manifest all things as they are, and
reproves that which is Evil, wait dilligently in the Light, that therein you
may see all the Mysterious workings of Satan and his Agents, that therein
waiting and a biding steadfast, you may Escape all their Snares.

Something more Concerning the order of the works of God in Heaven and Earth,
and particularly in his People.
THE great God, who made Heaven and Earth; and the fountains of Water, who made
all things good in the beginning, he is the great God of Order, he works his
works in Order. In the beginning God Created the Heaven and the Earth, and the
Earth was without form and void, and Darkness was upon the face of the Deep,
and the spirit of God Moved upon the Face of the Waters, and God said, let
there be Note, God Commanded the Light to be and appear the first day.
Light, and there was Light, and God saw the Light that it was Good, and God
divided the Light from the Darkness, and God called the Light Day, and the
Darkness he called Night, and the Evening and the morning were the first day:
and God said let there be a Firmament in the midst of the Waters, and let it
divide the Waters from the Waters, and God made the Firmament, and divided the
Waters which were under the Firmament, from the Waters which were above the
Firmament, and it was so, and God called the Firmament Heaven, and the Evening
and the Morning were the second day; and God said let the waters under the
Heaven be gathered together unto one place, and let the dry Land appear, and it
was so; and God called the dry Land earth, and the gathering together of the
waters called he seas, and God saw that it was good; and God said, Let the
Earth bring forth grass, the Herb yiedling seed, and the fruittree yiedling
fruit after his kind, whose seed is in it self upon the Earth, and it was so,
and the Earth brought forth grass, and Herb yiedling seed, after his kind, and
the tree yiedling fruit, whose seed was in it self after his kind, and God saw
that it was good, and the Evening and the morning were the Third day: and God
said, let there be Lights in the Firmament of the Heaven to divide the Day from
the Night, and let them be for Signs and for Sea^ous, and for Days and Years,
and let them be for Lights in the Firmament of Heaven, to give Light upon the
Earth, and it was so, and God made two great Lights, the greater Light to Rule
the day, and the lesser Light to Rule the Night, he made the Stars also, and
God set them in the Firmament of the Heaven, to give Light upon the Earth, and
to Rule over the Day, and over the Night, and to divide the Light from the
Darkness, and God saw that it was good, and the Evening and the Morning were
the Fourth day: and God said, let the waters bring forth abundantly the moving
Creature that has life, and Foul that may fly above the Earth in the open
Firmament of Heaven, and God Created great Whales, and every living Creature
that moves, which the waters brought forth abundantly after their kind, and
every winged Foul after his kind, and God saw that it was good, and God blessed
them, saying, be fruitful and Multiply, and fill the waters in the Seas, and
let Foul Multiply, in the Earth, and the Evening and the Morning were the Fifth
day: and God said, let the Earth bring forth the Living Creature after his
kind, Cattle and Creeping thing, and Beast of the Earth, after his kind, and it
was so, and God made the Beast of the Earth after his kind, and Cattle after
their kind, and every thing that Creeps upon the Earth after his kind, and
God saw that it was good; and God said, let us make Man in our own Image, after
our Likeness, and let them have Dominion over the Fish of the Sea, and over the
Foul of the Air, and over the Cattle, and over all the Earth, and over every
Creeping thing that Creeps upon the Earth; so God Created Man in his own
Image, in the Image of God Created he him, Male and Female Created he them; and
God blessed them; and God said unto them, be fruitful, and multiply, and
replenish the Earth, and subdue it, and have Dominion over the Fish of the Sea,
and over the Foul of the Air, and over every Living thing that moves upon the
Earth; and God said, behold I have Given you every Herb, bearing seed, which is
upon the face of all the Earth, and every Tree in the which is the fruit of a
tree yiedling seed, to you it shall be for ever, and to every beast of the
Earth, and to every Foul of the Air, and to every thing that Creeps upon the
Earth wherein there is life, I have given every green herb for meat, and it was
so, and God saw every thing that he had made, and behold it was very good, and
the Evening and the Morning were the Sixth day. Thus the Heaven and the Earth
were finished, and all the host of them, and on the Seventh day God ended his
work which he had made, and he rested on the Seventh day from all his work
which he had made, etc. These are the generations of the Heavens and of the
Earth when they were Created. Read the whole first Chapter of Genesis, and the
beginning of the second, etc.

Observe here the Beautiful and Lowly order of the work of the great God of
Order, in bringing forth his Beauti^ul Creation of Heaven and Earth, and all
things in them; behold he did not make Heaven and Earth and all things that are
in them at once, or in one day; you may here Read what he made the First day,
and what he made the Second day, and what he made the Third day, and what he
made the Fourth day, and what he made the Fifth day, and what he made the Sixth
day, and that he finished and ended his work on the Seventh day.

Reader, here thou may see how the works of God were Carried on by degrees,
to their Compleatness; Likewise thou may observe the Ignorance of some in
our day, who say, Things among us (who profess to be Taught and led by the
Light of Christ within) are not as they were in the beginning, when we were
first turned to the Light, but here is new Order or Orders set up amongst us,
several Meetings and Practices, which we are afraid, will bring in Apostasy.
Such Ignorant, Dark talk as this have I heard from some who account themselves
Children of Light, Ancient in Truth, Grown, Wise, etc.

Observe from what God has spoken by the Mouth of Moses, as aforesaid, that
from the First day to the Seventh day, in which God ended his work, he brought
forth New things every day, This glorious work he Carried on by degrees, till
he had Completed it according to the Counsel of his own will.

Again, observe, Man, who was at the first made in the likeness of his Maker,
holy, Just, and good, being seduced, deceived by the Serpent, who abode not in
the Truth, in whom there is no Truth, he is become a degenerate plant of a
strange Vine unto God, by taking, eating, and doing, that which the great God
from the first has forbidden, he died the Death according to the word of the
Lord, and in this degenerate fallen State is dead in trespasses and sins, his
Spirit, mind, will, and affections, dead from God, from Purity, from Holiness,
Righteousness and Innocence, in this State of Death he does not Rightly seek
after the Living God, in this State he is not rightly affected toward him, he
does not behold his goodness, his glory and Mighty power, he does not Reverence
and fear him as he ought, neither does he hunger and thirst after him and his
Righteousness, Purity, Justice, Love, etc. but on the Contrary, his dead mind,
will, and affections, all dead from God, are Employed and E^erc^sed by Satan in
that which is Evil, and that continually, as the Lord has spoken by the mouth
of Moses, viz. And God saw that the wickedness of man was great in the Earth,
and that every Imagination of the thoughts of his heart was only Evil
continually; and it repented the Lord that he had made man on the Earth, and it
grieved him, etc. Genesis 6. 5, 6.

Observe the great and merciful Creator, and God of the whole Earth, has
promised the Redemption of his Creature Man, yea, both the Male and Female out
of the Bondage of Corruption, into the glorious Liberty of the Sons and
Daughters of God; this he has spoken by the mouths of his Servants, as it is
written in the Scriptures of Truth, when God gave his just and righteous
Sentence of Judgment upon the Serpent, for his Cursed work of deceiving the Man
and the Woman, he said unto the Serpent, Because thou have done this, thou art
Cursed above all Cattle, and above every Beast of the Field, upon thy Belly
shall thou go, and Dust shall thou eat all the days of thy Life; and I will put
Enmity between thee and the Woman, and between thy Seed and her Seed, and it
shall bruise thy Head, etc. Genesis 3. 14, 15. The Apostle writing concerning
this Seed, says, Now to Abraham and his Seed were the promises made; he says
not, and to Seeds, as of many, but as of one, and to thy Seed, which is Christ,
Gala. 3. 16. This Seed Christ was Glorified with the Father before the World
began; as he said, Glorify thou me with thine own self, with the Glory that I
had with thee before the World began, Joh. 17. he is that Eternal Divine Word,
by whom all things were made, who lights every that comes into the World,
who, in the days of his Flesh, commanded man, saying, Believe in the Light,
walk in the Light, etc. The Apostle writing of him to the Saints, said, He was
Ordained from of old, but manifest for you in the last time, etc. made of the
Seed of David and Abraham, according to the Flesh, ^ut declared to be the Son
of God with Power, by the Resurrection from the Dead; he was made in due time
of a Woman under the Law, to Redeem them that were under the Law; he went up
and down doing good, healing all manner of Diseases, Maladies and Sicknesses;
yea, he raised the Dead unto life; after which he offered up himself through
the Eternal Spirit, as a Lamb without spot and blemish, an acceptable Sacrifice
to God for the remission of the sins of the Transgressors, (who believe in him,
and come to the obedience of the Faith,) he rose from the Dead the Third Day,
and appeared to his Disciples, and gave them many things in Charge,
particularly to feed his Lambs and Sheep, (and to love one another, and love
Enemies, etc.) after which he ascended according to the Scriptures, and is on
the right hand of the Majesty on High, from whence be shall proceed to Judge the
World in righteousness, the man Christ Jesus; this is he who was with the
Church in the Wilderness, the spiritual Rock; for says the Apostle, He was
with the Church in the Wilderness; for says he, They all eat the same
spiritual meat; they all drink the same spiritual drink; they eat and drank of
the Rock that followed them, and that Rock was Christ; this is h^ of whom John
in the Revelations testifies, saying, He rides upon a White Horse, his Vesture
is dipped in blood, his Name is called the Word of God, and the Armies which are
in Heaven follow him. This is he that was dead and is alive, and lives for
evermore, who has the Keys of Hell and of Death, who slays the Dragon that
plays in the Sea, who destroys Death, and him that has the Power of Death,
which is the Devil; this is he who is the Resurrection of the Dead, and the
Life of the Living; this is he who said, He that believes on me, though he
were dead, yet shall he live; and said, he that lives and believes, shall
never dye; Martha, believe thou this? this is he of whom the Apostle writ to
the Saints, saying, Ye, that some time were dead in trespasses and sins, has
he quickened; by Grace ye are saved through Faith, and that not of your selves;
for it is the gift of God. Again, this is he of whom the Apostle writ, saying,
We have all been gone astray, as Sheep without a Shepherd; but now we are
returned to the Captain of our Salvation, and Bishop of our Souls: this is he
of whom it is written, That there is no Name given under Heaven, by which man can
be saved, but by the name of Jesus Christ; it is also written of him, That
there is not Salvation in any other; he himself has said, I am the way to the
Father; no man can come to the Father but by me; I am the Way, the Truth, and
the Life; I am the Door, he that enters in by me the Door, shall go in and find
Pasture; I am the good Shepherd; I lay down my Life for my Sheep; all that came
before me, they are Thieves and Robbers. The Apostle says, If any man have not
the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his, Romans 8. 9. they who Preach the Words
of God, spoken by his Spirit, in, and by his Son, or in and by his Prophets or
Apostles, without the Spirit of God and Christ, they steal, the Lord is against
them, see Jer. 23. Ezekel 13, 1. to the end. 1 Cor. 2. 10, 11. 1 Pet. 1. 11. 1
Cor. 12. 3.

Observe, This is he by whom God brings forth his New Creation in man, who was
fallen dead in Trespasses and Sins; the Apostle says, If any man be in Christ,
he is a New Creature; old things are passed away, behold all things are become
New; and all things are of God; and he writ to the Saints, saying, We are Gods
workmanship, Created in Christ Jesus unto good Works, which God before Ordained
that we should walk in them.

Observe, This is he that burns up the old Heavens, and the old Earth, which
Satan has filled with Sin and Wickedness; this is he that Baptizeth with the
Holy Ghost, and with Fire, who burns up all the false Joy, false Pleasure,
which is as a false Heaven; for as the Kingdom of God the true Heaven, consists
in true Joy and Peace, so Satan transforms himself in his dark Kingdom, in
fallen man, which he has filled with sin, and gives him, for a short time, a
false Joy and Peace in Evil doing; this is that Joy that must be turned into
Sorrow; this is that Peace which is not the Peace of God, therefore God will
destroy it. Heaven and Earth, and all things, were good in the beginning, and
man was good, yea very good, his Spirit, Soul and Body; but being fallen from
God, degenerated into a Plant of a strange Vine, his Heart, Mind, Spirit, Will
and Affections, all Corrupted, Poisoned, Slain, Dead, from God, he is now
become as the corrupt Earth, which brings forth Briars and Thorns, whose end is
to be burned. Mankind in the fall is accounted by the Prophet as a Forest or
Wilderness, overgrown with Briars and Thorns, and he Prophesies of the day of
the Lord that shall come upon this Wilderness, Briars and Thorns, Sin and
Wickedness, and shall burn them up. And again, the Prophet of the Lord says,
The day of the Lord shall come, which shall burn as an Oven, and the Proud, and
all that do wickedly shall be as stubble, and it shall burn them up, and leave
them neither Root nor Branch.

All have sinned and come short of the glory of God; Sin brought Death and
Separation from God; God says by the Prophet, Your Sins separate betwixt you
and your God, your sins withold good things from you; wash you, make you
clean, put away the evil of your doings from before mine Eyes, and then draw
near, and let us reason together; though your sins were as Crimson, I will make
them as Snow, though they were as blood, I will make them as Wool; I will carry
them into a Land of forgetfulness, and Will remove them as far from you, as the
East is from the West. Again, God commands by the Apostle, saying, Cleanse your
hands you sinners, purify your hearts ye double minded, be afflicted and
mourn, let your laughter be turned into heaviness, and your joy into mourning;
humble your selves under the mighty hand of God, and he shall exalt you in due
time. And the Apostle says, Awake thou that sleep, and arise from the Dead,
and Christ shall give thee Light, Ephesians. 5. 14.

Observe, That all the fallen dead sons and daughters of Adam, who come to be
made alive to God, to become a generation to him, to bring forth fruit to his
Glory, they must come to be Awakened by the Spirit and Voice of God, sounding
an alarm in their own Hearts and Souls, to have their ears opened to his
voice, the eyes of their unberstandings opened to see him a God nigh at hand,
they must know the Revelation of the Righteous Judgments of God upon the head
of the Serpent in their own Hearts, Minds, Wills, and Affections, and through
his Righteous Judgments to know the old man with his deeds which are Corrupt,
according to the deceitful Lusts of the flesh put off, and so to know the
fulfilling of the Apostles words, who said, They that are Christ's have
Crucified the flesh, with the Affections and Lusts; He that is in Christ is a
New Creature.

Again, observe, this work of Redemption of the Creature out of the bondage of
Corruption, into the glorious Liberty of the sons and daughters of God, is a
work that is carried on by Degrees, as Christ has showed and set it forth in
many Parables, showing the smalness of its beginning, as to the sense and
apprehension of the Creature in whom it is begun; The Kingdom of God in the
unregenerate is Compared to a grain of Wheat cast into the Earth, which first
suffers, or dies* but in its suffering or dying brings forth the fruit of its
own kind, first the blade, then the ear, then the full, or ^ipe Corn, in the
Ear, It is also Compared to a grain of Mus^ard Seed cast into the Earth, which
being small, yet in the Appointed season of him that gives the increase, brings
forth fruit plentifully: Again, it is Compared to Leaven put in three measures
of Meal, till the whole was Levened: Again, it is Compared to a Net cast into
the Sea, which gather good and bad to the shore, and gathers the good into
Vessels, but casts the bad away.

Observe still, here is a glorious Order in the work of man's Regeneration and
Restoration to God; Man, who is turned from Darkness to Light, from Satan's
power to God, with the Light he is come to see his sin: Now he is to wait to
know God, (who is a Consuming fire to sin and wickedness,) to appear in him, to
burn up and Consume his Sins, to Slay that Dragon or Serpent in him, who has
led him into Sin, and has kept him in it, and caused him to take pleasure in
the same. Now he is to wait to know the Mighty, Liveing, Dreadful God, to
appear in him as a refiners fire, and as Fullers soap; Now he is patiently to
bear the Indignation of the Lord, because he has sinned, until he has Mercy
on him; for he will not Contend forever with the Repenting, believing Penitent
ones, because he delights in Mercy. Now he that thus believes, waits, and
submits to the Chastising hand of the Lord, does not always Continue under his
rebukes, Chastisement or Judgment; in the midest of Judgment he remembers Mercy
to such; under Judgment he supports the Spirits of these Contrite ones; he
strengthens them in this Winter season, and he Leads them through it, as a man
of God has written, Behold the Winter is over and gone, the time of Rejoicing
is come, and the voice of the Turtle is heard in our Land. Thus they that have
set their faces Sion-wards; and are traveling with their faces thither-wards,
go on and grow from glory to glory, from strength to strength, from one degree
in the grace of Christ Jesus unto another, until they appear in Sion in
perfect beauty; so these are not like a Dwarff, that does not grow; for a
Dwarff was by the Law of God forbiden to be a Priest, and so was a Lepor; but
such who believe, wait, and grow, as aforesaid, are not as the Dwarff or Lepor,
and Diseased, who are all Corrupt, from the Crown of the Head to the Sole of
the Foot, and who has no Health in them as they say; but these are come to
Christ the Physician of Value, yea the saving Health of all Nations, as its
written of him; though these can do nothing of themselves, yet they can do all
things through Christ that strengthens them, which the Apostle knew and writ
of; These have put on the Lord Jesus Christ; These make no provision for the
flesh, to fulfill the Lust thereof; these are strengthened by Christ (who is
Gods glorious power and wisdom) in their Inward man, as its written; these grow
strong in the Lord; by degrees, these put on the whole Armor of God, by which
they are defended from all the fiery Darts of the Devil, these are made
Conquerors in Christ, who Destroys the Devil, and his works in them; To these
is given the Spirit of Praise instead of that of heaviness; these are returned
to Sion with songs of diliverance, and Everlasting joy; amongst these God
reigns, in and through them he shines, to enlighten the dark World, which lies
in wickedness; Thus its written, Out of Sion, the perfection of beauty, God
has shined.

Again, the Apostle writing of the Beautiful Order of the work of God in Heaven
and Earth, says, There is one Glory of the Sun, and another Glory of the Moon,
and another Glory of the Stars, for one Star differs from another Star in
Glory, so also is the Resurrection of the dead, 1 Cor. 15. 41, 42.

Observe here, what the Apostle has written concerning the Different Order of
the Sun, Moon, and Stars in Heaven, and says, so is the Resurrection of the
dead; showing that the several States and Conditions of those whom Christ has
Quickened or raised in some degree from death to life, do also differ in their
several degrees of growth in Life, Stature, and Strength, and accordingly do
differ in their gifts and places, and glory and beauty, in the Resurrection
from Death to Life.

Christ said to them whom he had Quickened, I am come that you might have life,
and that you may have it more abundantly.

Again, The Psalmist, who was Anointed by God and his appointment, both
Prophet and King, writ thus, Praise ye the Lord; Praise the Lord from the
Heavens; Praise him in the heights; Praise ye him all ye his Angels; Praise ye
him, all ye his hosts; Praise ye him, Sun and Moon; Praise ye him all ye Stars
of Light; Praise him, ye Heavens of Heavens, and ye Waters, that be above the
Heavens, Let them praise the Name of Lord; for he commanded, and they were
Created; he has also Established them forever and ever, he has made a decree
which shall not pass; Praise the Lord from the Earth ye Dragons and all deeps,
Fire, and Hail, Snow and Vapor, Stormy Wind, fulfilling his word, Mountains
and all Hills, fruitful trees and all Cedars, Beasts and all Cattle, Creeping
things and flying Fouls, Kings of the Earth and all People, Princes and all
Judges of the Earth, both young Men and Maidens, old Men and Children, let them
Praise the Name of the Lord; for his name alone is Excellent, his Glory is
above the Earth and Heaven, etc. P^al. 148. read it through.

Here again Observe, the great God of Order, who in the beginning Created all
things in Order, and placed them in their Order in Heaven and Earth, all which
was very good; he calls of them in Order, by the mouth of his Prophet, to
praise, Magnify and Glorify him, for whose glory and honor they all were
Created good in the beginning; Oh vain Man! who under the Dark power of Satan,
has been bred up in thy Transgression as a Wild Asses Colt, or as a Wild
Bullock unaccustomed to the yoke, (or thou that have known the yoke of Christ
and cast it off) would thou in thy folly limit the Holy one of Israel in the
beginning, Carrying on and Completing of his Creating anew in Christ Jesus,
the fallen degenerated and dead Sons and Daughters of Adam who have believed in
his divine Spirit and Light, and therein waits upon him in it, he will not be
Limited by thee, but will rebuke and Judge thee for thy presumptuous attempt:
behold the beautiful Creation, the works of God in Heaven and Earth, and the
Order thereof, and these will Teach thee better; it is true what the Apostle
has writ, The wrath of God is revealed from Heaven against all unrighteousness
and ungodliness of men, because that which may be known of God, is manifest in
them; for God has showed it unto them, for the Invisible things of the
Creation are clearly soon, by the things that are made, even his Eternal power
and Godhead, so that they are with out excuse Romans 1. 18, 19, 20, see the 21,
22, 23, 24, 25, 26, to the end of the Chapter.

Observe here, Gods Creation, Heaven and Earth, and the things therein are as a
book, wherein man and woman may read the wonderful works of God, and the
Glorious Order and Beauty of them, all People being enlightened by Christ the
divine word, by whom God the Father made them all, they believing in the Light
of him, in it they may see his wonderful power and wisdom in the bringing
forth, upholding and beautiful Order thereof, God having enlightened all by his
Word and Spirit, which are one, Calls all the Ends of the Earth to Look unto
him; he says, Look unto me O all ye ends of the Earth and be ye saved; for I
am God, and there is None Else, ^ Mighty God and a Savior: they who believe in
his Light, and therein wait, they come therein to see and have Unity with his
glorious works in Heaven and in Earth, and in their own Hearts and Souls, and
therein come to be made sensible of his bounty and kindness unto mankind in the
Creating of them, and setting them in their Beautiful Order, and upholding them
in the same, and in the deep sense of these things, Man's Heart becomes tender,
broken, and humble within him, and in this tender subjected humble frame of
heart and mind, he returns the Praise, Honor, Glory, Dominion, and Thanks unto
him, the great God and Creator, of all things, who is worthy of Glory, Honor,
Obedience and Praise over all Heaven and Earth, now and forever more, Amen.

Something more particularly concerning the Order of Christ in his Church.
THE Apostle writing to the Church at Corinth writes thus, viz. ye are the body
of Christ, and Members in particular: and God has set some in the Church;
first, Apostles; secondly, Prophets; thirdly, Teachers, etc. Are all Apostles?
are all Prophets? are all Teachers? etc. see 1 Cor. 12. 27, 28, 29. Again, he
writes to the Church at Ephesus thus, viz. And he gave some Apostles, and some
Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some Pastors and Teachers, for the
perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the Ministry, for the Edifying of the
body of Christ, till we all come in the Unity of the Faith, and of the
knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect man, unto the Measure of the
stature of the fullness of Christ, Ephess. 4. 10, 11, 12.

Observe here, the Apostle shows the order particularly of the several gifts of
God to the several Members of his Church, which he gave them by the one Spirit,
in which gifts the several Members were appointed to serve him, and e^ch other,
and as they all kept in their proper Gifts, they did therein serve him and each
other, and the weakest Members of the Church also, for whose service they
received their Gifts, (The weak had and have the most need of the help and
service of these gifts) and as they all kept in the Exercise of their several
gifts in the motion, leading and guidance of Gods holy Spirit, the root and
fountain of them all, they had all Unity therein one with another, although
their gifts did differ, both in the manner of their working, and in the measure
or greatness of them, so that there was an Harmony and Unity amongst them,
though they were many Members, yet were but one body, all in Subjection unto
Christ the one head.

Secondly, Observe the Apostles question, are all Apostles? are all Prophets?
are all Teachers? etc. He does not say, they are; the contrary is manifest;
neither are all the Members in the Church of Christ in this Age called,
appointed, or ordained ( In their presant State) to be Prophets, Apostles, or
Teachers; for these are peculiar or proper gifts, given by the Lord God, as,
and when, he pleases, according to the Counsel of his own will.

Thirdly, Observe, that by what I have said in this matter, I only intend all
the Members of the Church of Christ in their present State, are not sent forth
publicly with a message of Salvation to Preach to the Nations, nor to
Prophecy or Preach publicly in words the Doctrine of the Truth or Gospel of
Christ, nor are they all appointed of God to Prophecy and foretell things to
come, nor are they all made Teachers in a public Ministry in Doctrine, or
Exhortation; for these are peculiar or proper gifts, given according to the
Heavenly will and Counsel of God (in his own time and season) as I said before.

Fourthly, Observe that though all the Members of the Body of Christ, have not
all or some of the aforesaid places in the body, yet ev^ry Member has a place
in the body, and it is a precious and blessed thing, for every Member to know
its place, and keep in it, in its proper service, whereto its called of God;
but when any Member goes out of the Counsel of God, and looks at another gift,
and goes out of his own proper place from his gift and service in the body,
striving in a wrong mind or zeal after others gifts; Immitating them in words,
voice, or sound, or other visible or ^udab^e Motion or Action of the Creature,
or through a zeal without knowledge, or by any other means whatsoever, then
such a Member hurts it self, and grieves or offends the other more discerning
Members of the body, who sees and feels the out-going of the said Member.

Fifthly, Observe, it is the place and duty of the discerning Members of the
body, who see such outgoings, tenderly in the Love and wisdom of God, to speak
to such, in order to bring them to a sense of their outgoing, and to restore
them into their place again (if possible) and to watch over them in Love, for
their preservation in it.

Sixthly, Observe, it is the duty of such who have been mistaken, and gone out
of their place, as aforesaid, to hear and receive Counsel of those who freely
tender it to them, in the Love of God, several such in our day, have had
Counsel so given to them, who have received it in the same Love, which have
tended greatly to their profit, even to their settlement and Establishment with
God, and Unity with his People, praised be the Lord God for the same.

Seventhly, Observe, that some who have had a place in the Church of Christ,
through want of watchfulness in the holy fear of God, have been drawn out of
it, by the subtle Adversary of their Souls; and when some of the Members of
the body, (who kept their habitation in the Light, in which they have a right
sense, sight, savor and discerning of Spirits, words and Actions) have spoken
to them, in the Wisdom and Love of God, in Order to have Restored them, into
their places, that they might therein have been preserved in Unity with God and
his People, they have not received in Love, that which in Love was spoken to
them, for the good End aforesaid; but on the Contrary have rejected the same,
and have let up prejudice, hard thoughts and evil will against their friends,
who sought their good, and so these evils given way to by them, have eaten out
the Love, gantiness tenderness, Meakness, and patience, that once in some
Measure appeared in them, and a raging scornful, bitter, reviling Spirit, has
entered some, as also from the same root, feigned Humiliy, feigned words and
flattery has appeared in some, these latter mentioned fruits proceeding from
the Evil root, is more Dangerous to deceive than the former, therefore all you
who Love your own Souls, be warned to fly from the Spirit of dissimulation and
flattery, as also from the rude, railing, boisterous, quarelsome, perverse,
Crooked, self-revengful and scornful, Stubborn, selfwillful, and self-Exalting
Spirit.

Eighthly, Observe, that the same God, who by his Spirit, and in his own Order
set some in the Church; First, Apostles. Secondly, Prophets. Thirdly, Teachers,
etc. by the same Spirit, he gives proper or peculiar gifts to some, that are
not Apostles, Prophets, or public Teachers, according to the aforesaid
difinition of them, viz. he sets some in the Church, helpers in Government,
which last mentioned Members are of great service in their places, in the body
of Christ, they being kept by him in true Humility.

[ O friends, all keep low in your Minds, let nothing be done amongst you in
highmindedness or vain glory, for that God Accepts not; but the Meek he Guides
in Judgment, but the Proud are an abomination to him.

This is the Testamony of the Lord Jesus Christ to you, viz. The more Persons
grow in Christ, the Root, Foundation, and Head of his Church, the more Meek,
Humble, and Patient they grow.]

Ninthly, Observe, that though all the Members of the body have not all or any
of the before mentioned services in the body, yet have they all a place in the
Body, as I said before, and they are blessed who know their place and keep in
it, though it be the place of one of the least of the Members of the Body; for
that is to be desired, which the good man made choice of in his days, who said,
I had rather be a doorkeeper in the house of the Lord, than to dwell in the
Tents of wickedness, for the Lord God is a Sun and a Shield, the Lord will give
grace, no good thing will he withhold, from them that walk uprightly, Psalm 84.
10, 11.

Tenthly, Observe, that as every Member has a place in the Body, so it has a
service therein, though not the place of an Apostle, or Propher, or helper in
Government; yet all they who are properly and truly of the body, do Preach,
witness and testitie of God and Christ, his Kingdom and Glory, (and against the
Kingdom of Satan, Sin, Wickedness, and the vain Glory and Lusts that are in the
World,) In their Christian Lives and Conversations; and every Nember that
abides in its place and service, in the fear of the Lord, and true Humility,
has Peace and Comfort with the Lord, and Unity with all their Fellow Members,
who keep in their places and services; and all who keep their places and
services, as aforesaid, therein, are in a preparedness for whatsoever the Lord
God pleases to call them further unto, and when any is called to further or
other service, than what God has already called them unto, their Peace with
God and Unity with his People, will be continued in their obedience to God that
calls them.

Again, the Apostle writes thus of Christ, viz. he that descended is the same
also that ascended up far above all Heavens, that he might fill all things, and
he gave some Apostles, and some Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some
Pastors and Teachers, for the perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the
Ministry, for the Edifying of the body of Christ, till we all come in the Unity
of the faith and of the knowledge of the Son of God unto a perfect man, unto
the measure of the Stature of the fullness of Christ, that we henceforth be no
more Children, tossed to and fro, and Carried about with every wind of Doctrine
by the slight of men and cunning Craftyness, whereby they lie in wait to
deceive, but speaking the Truth in Love, may grow up into him in all things,
which is the head, even Christ, from whom the whole body fi^^ly Joined together
and compacted, by that which every Joint supplieth according to the Effectual
working in the measure of every part, makes Increase of the body unto the
Edifying of it self in Love, Ephess. 4. 10, 11. to the 17.

First Observe, that the gifts of the Apostles, Prophets, Teachers,
Evangelists, etc. were not given only to convince People of the Truth and way
of Righteousness, but also to build them up in it gradually from strength to
strength, to a R^pe Age in Christ.

Secondly Observe, that those who were turned to the Light and Spirit of Truth
by those whom God sent to turn them to it, could not in the Light and Spirit
gainsay or oppose them who therein Labored in their writing and speaking to
them to build them up in it; from strength to strength, for the Light is not
Contradictory to it self in the Preacher or the Nearer, or in any of the
Children of it, for that which the Light or Spirit of Truth speaks or dictates
to write in one of its Children it does nor reject, oppose or gainsay in any
other of its Children; for if it could do so, then should it be the Author of
Confusion amongst ^'s Children, which is most false and blasphemous to say; for
God by this Spirit and Light is not the Author of Confusion, but of good,
profitable, and Comfortable order and peace in all the Churches of the Saints.
The Apostle in this divine Light saw, and by Experience knew that which he writ
concerning it, viz. God is Light, in him is no Darkness at all, if we say we
have fellowship with him, and walk in Darkness we lie, and do not the Truth;
but if we walk in the Light, as he is in the Light, then have we fellowship one
with another, and the blood of Jesus Christ his son Cleanses us from all sin,
1 John 1. 5, 6, 7.

Thirdly, Observe, that they who profess the Light of Christ within, whether
they be old or young professors of it, that gainsay, oppose, reject, slight and
contemn that which the Light or Spirit of Truth has spoken and dictated to
write in its servants and Children for the Profit, Edification, Confirmation,
Establishment, and comfort of the Body, (which Thousands being Children of the
Light, have gladly received, and finds the great comfort and profit of) These
are not the Lights Children, these do not walk in it, though they talk of it,
and though some of them may be full of self-confidence, that they walk in it,
and that they are discerning Persons, Wise, Strong, etc. yet this is their
great mistake, herein they show their spiritual darkness, blindness, nakedness,
miserableness, Laodician like.

Fourthly, Again Observe, That the Apostles who had turned the people to the
Light and Spirit of Truth within, who were thereby gathered into Congregations
or Churches, did afterward write the several Epistles to the several Churches,
and therein gave to them Commands, Doctrines, Instructions, Exhortations,
Admonitions, and sometimes sharp Reproofs, and Rebukes, as the Lord by his
Light and Spirit moved in them, according to the several States and Conditions
of those they writ to; the Apostle Exhorts Timothy, viz. them that sin, rebuke
before all, that others also may fear, 1 Timothy 5. 20. Again, Reprove, Rebuke,
Exhort with all long suffering and Doctrine, 2 Timothy 4. 2. Again, he writ to
Titus, viz. These things speak, and exhort, and rebuke, with all Authority, let
no man despise thee, Titus 2. 15. And again, Wherefore rebuke them sharply,
that they may be sound in the Faith, it is rendered out of the Greek, in the
Margent, Cutingly, touching to the quick, Titus 1. 13. Here take notice, that
Reproofs and Rebukes are commanded of the Lord, and profitable in their season,
though it sometimes comes to pass, that those who are seasonably reprooved and
rebuked, do not seasonably and rightly receive the same, but turns against it,
in Self-justification, and into Enmity against those, who in the Council of
God, give it unto them for their good, in some such is that Proverb verified,
Reprove a fool, and he will hate thee; but a wise man, and he will love thee.

Fifthly, Observe, Timothy and Titus were Overseers, made so by the Holy Ghost,
Spirit and Light, therein to watch over the Saints for their good, to Minister
to them from time to time, whether by Word or Epistle, what was needful and
profitable for them; we do not read in the Scripture of Truth, nor believe that
these two Overseers did reject Paul's Epistles, written to them, or call them
Man's Edicts, Man's Decrees, Prescriptions, or put any such contemptable names
upon them; but on the contrary, we believe they received them in Love, and
obeyed the good Counsel, Charge and Exhortations therein given them; we do not
read, nor believe, that these two Ministers of Christ did plead their Place and
Office in the Body and Church of Christ, to Exclude and Reject Paul's Epistles
to them, which he gave forth in the Light and motion of the Holy Ghost; we do
not read, nor believe, that they said to Paul, we deny thy Forms, D^de^s
Prescriptions, etc. we are Ministers of the Gospel as well as thee; thy
Epistles are of no use or service to us, why do thou seek to impose them upon
us? the Holy Ghost, and Light within, by which we are made Overseers, is
sufficient for us, away with thy Orders. The Apostle Paul writ thus to Timothy,
viz. These things write I unto thee, being to come to thee shortly, but if I
carry long, that thou may know how thou ought to behave thy self in the
House of God, which is the Church of the Living God, the Pillar and Ground of
Truth, 1 Timothy 3. 14, 15.

Behold here Paul in this Epistle Instructs Timothy, (who was an Overseer in
the Church) how to behave himself in it; we do not read, nor believe, that this
Overseer in the Church did Reject Paul's Instruction herein; or that he pleaded
the Sufficiency of the Light within, in opposition to Paul's Advice and
Instruction, but we do believe that he saw in the Light, the Instruction given
to be good and profitable for him, and therefore gladly received the same.

Now if these Overseers in the Holy Ghost could see a Service to them in Paul's
Epistles, which certainly they did, then there certainly was a Service in his
other Epistles to the Novices, Paul, who in the Light and Holy Ghost, taught
the Elders by his Epistles to them; he also taught the Younger by his other
Epistles, though both of them knew and obeyed the Light within; in it they saw
the good use, profit and comfort of them, and therefore did not contend against
them, but cheerfully received them, and obeyed the Council of the Lord therein
given.
or young Scholars, weak in the Faith, feeble minded, etc. Upon all which,
Observe, That neither these strong men, Overseers in the Churches, nor the
younger, who walked in the Light of Christ, did plead their being taught by the
Light of Christ, or Holy Ghost within, in opposition to their being Taught,
Exhorted, and Instructed, by the Instrumental helps of those Epistles which
Paul and other of the Apostles writ to them as they were moved by the Holy
Ghost. I do Advise and Exhort those professors of the Light within, who are
offended at some profitable and wholesome Epistles, given forth by some of the
most ancient and faithful of the Children of Light in this Age, (concerning
good Order and Government in the Church of Christ,) to read the two Epistles to
Timothy, and that to Titus, and Peter's Exhortations to the Elders (or
Overseers) to f^ed the Flock of God, over which the Holy Ghost had made them
Overseers, which take as follows, viz. The Elders which are among you I
Exhort, who am also an Elder and a Witness of the sufferings of Christ, and
also partaker of the Glory that shall be revealed; feed the flock of God which
is among you, taking the oversight thereof, not by constraint, but willingly,
not for filthy Lucre, but of a ready mind, neither as being Lords over God's
Heritage, but being Examples to the Flock, and when the chief Shepherd shall
appear, ye shall receive a Crown of Glory that fades not away; likewise ye
Younger subm't your selves unto the Elder, yea all of you be subject one to
another, and be clothed with Humility; for God resists the Proud, and gives
grace to the Humble; humble your selves therefore under the mighty hand of God,
that he may Exalt you in due time, casting all your care upon him, for he
cares for you. Be sober, be (...); (or watchful,) because your Adversary the
Devil, walks about, seeking whom he may devour. Whom resist steadfast in the
Faith, knowing that the same afflictions are accomplished in your Brethren that
are in the World. But the God of all Grace, who has called us into his Eternal
Glory by Christ Jesus, after that ye have suffered a while, make you perfect,
stabtish, strengthen settle you. To him be Glory, for ever and ever. Amen. 1
Pet. 5. 1, to the 12. Again, hear his sweet Exhortation, Finally, be all of one
mind, having compassion one of another; love as Brethren, be pitiful, be
courteous: not rendering evil for evil, or railing for railing, -- For he that
will love life, and see good oa^s, let him refrain his tongue from evil, and
his lips that they speak no Guile. Let him eschew, or fly from Evil, and do
good, let him seek peace, and ensue it, ( that is follow it) for the Eyes of
the Lord are over the Righteous, and his Ears are open unto their prayers, but
the face of the Lord is against them that do evil. 1 Pet. 3. 8, to the 13.

Sixthly, Observe here Peter that faithful Apostle of Christ, in his general
Epistle, Exhorts the Elders who were among the Churches, to feed the Flock; we
do not read nor believe, that those Elders took it (...) of Peter that he so
Exhorted them; we neither read, nor believe, that they pleaded their Gifts and
Places in the Church, or their being led by the Light, or Holy Ghost, within,
in opposition to his Christian Council and Exhortation in the same Holy Ghost,
Light and Spirit, given them by his Epistle; but on the contrary, we believe
that in the Light they saw the same to be good and profitable for them, and
therein gladly received and obeyed the same, and also we believe, that the
younger who walked in the Light, did submit themselves unto the Elder therein,
and that they who obeyed the Light were thereby led into Humility and
Lowliness, and therein to submit themselves one to another, in the Fear and
Council of God.

Again, Paul writing to the Colossians, writ thus, viz. And when this Epistle
is read amongst you, cause that it be read in the Church of the Laodicians --
And say to Archippus, take heed to the Ministry, which thou have received in
the Lord, that thou fulfill it.

Observe two things in the foregoing words, first, that he did not only charge
or enjoin them to read his Epistle amongst them, but also to take care, that it
was read to the Laodicearis. Secondly, He writ to them, to say to Archippus,
take heed to thy Ministry, etc. We do not read, or believe, that the believing
Colossians did reject this Epistle of Paul's, or neglect their duty in reading
it, and causing it to be read according to his Exhortation, or that they
pleaded the sufficiency of the Light within, in opposition to his E^istles, and
council therein given unthem, but that in the light, they had Unity with it,
and therefore gladly received it, and had benefit by it, neither do we read or
believe, that Archippus was offended with what Paul writ concerning him, nor
that he pleaded his Gift and Ministry, and the Light within, against Paul's
council, in the matter relating to him, but that he had Unity therewith in the
Light.

Again, Paul writ to Timothy thus, viz. I charge thee before God, and our Lord
Jesus Christ, who shall Judge the quick and dead, at his appearing, and his
Kingdom, Preach the word, be instant in season, and out of season, reprove,
rebuke; exhort, with all long suffering and doctrine, for the time will come,
when they will not endure sound Doctrine, but after their own Lusts, shall they
heap to themselves Teachers, having itching Ears, and they shall turn away
their Ears from the Truth, and shall be turned unto Favles; but watch thou in
all things, endure afflistions, do the work of an Evangalist, make full proof
of thy Ministry, 2 Timothy 4. 1, to the 6th.

Observe, Have not some professors of the Light within now, itching Ears which
cannot endure sound Doctrine, and are not some such for setting up Teachers,
which with unsound Doctrine, for a wrong Liberty, against the Cross of Christ,
can, or do please their itching Ears.

The Apostle said, we speak not as pleasing men, but God, who tries our
hearts, 1 Thessalonians. 2. 4. Again, to the Galatians he writ, saying, For do I now
persuade men, or God? or do I seek to please men? for if I yet pleased men, I
should not be the Servant of Christ, Gal. 1. 9, 10.

Paul charges Timothy before God, and the Lord Jesus Christ, to Preach the
Word, to Reprove, Rebuke, Exhort, etc. and to make full proof of his Ministry;
we do not read, nor believe, that Timothy was offended with this Fatherly
Charge, or Exhortation in this matter; or that he excepted against, or opposed
this Charge, or pleaded his Gift or Place in the Church, or the Holy Ghost, or
Light of Christ, in opsition to it, or that he said, he had no need of it, or
that it was of no use or service to him, but on the contrary, we believe that
this faithful young man, whom Paul had begotten to God, (through the power of
the Gospel) did gladly receive; and profitably ^^prove, the Charge, Exhortation
and Council of Paul the Aged, his Elder in the Truth.

Again, Christ after he was risen from the dead, said unto Simon Peter, Love
thou me, more then these? he says unto him, Yea Lord, thou know that I love
thee. He says unto him, Feed my Lambs. He says to him again the Second time,
Simon Son of Jonas, Love thou me? he says unto him, Yea Lord, thou know
that I love thee. He says unto him, Feed my Sheep. He said unto him the Third
time, Simon Son of Jonas? Love thou me? -- And he said unto him, Lord, thou
know all things, thou know that I love thee. He says unto him, Feed my
sheep, John 21. 15, 16, 17.

First, Observe, How Christ put the Question before Recited, upon Peter Three
times, designing thereby to settle, and revet or fasten, the sense and care of
this great Duty, of feeding his Lambs and Sheep, upon him, which command of his
Masters he faithfully performed, and Exhorted the other Elders to perform their
duty in this matter, of so great weight, as is showed before. The like did
Paul, James and John, and the rest of the faithful Apostles and Elders.

Secondly, Observe, How these Holy men of God did f^ed the Lambs and Sheep of
Christ, in Preaching the Gospel of the Kingdom of God unto them, which they
Preached in the Power of the Holy Ghost, sent down from Heaven.

Thirdly, Observe, We do not read in the Scriptures of Truth, nor believe, that
these Lambs or Sheep of Christ, did profess the Teachings of the Light within,
in opposition to its teaching of them through these Apostles and Elders, who
were commanded Note, The Light of Christ within, is not contradictory to it
self, in any of the Children of it, nor in any others.
and empowered from Heaven to feed them, they did not plead the sufficiency of
the Light of Christ within themselves, against its Teaching them in these
Apostles, for as I said before, the Light in him, that is Taught, cannot oppose
the Light in him that Teaches, neither is the Light contradictory to it self
in any of its Children but walking in it therein is their fellowship one with
another.

Fourthly, Observe, Christ calls those that were to be fed, Lambs and Sheep,
which signifies, they were not of a Woolfish or Dogish Nature or Spirit, that
is, Bitter, Cruel and Ravenous, but as Lambs and Sheep, they were meek and
^u^et; Oh that all the professors of the Light of Christ within, were such,
then would not some of them cause such dishonor to the Lord as they do,
neither would they cause such grief and travel to the faithful Laborers in the
Gospel of Peace, as they do.

Again, Paul writ to Timothy thus, viz. take heed unto thy self and unto thy
Doctrine, continue in them, for in doing this thou shall both save thy self
and them that hear thee, 1 Timothy 16. read the Chapter throughout.

The same Apostle to the Church of the Thessalonians writ thus, viz. Now we
Command you Brethren in the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye withdraw
your selves from every Brother that walks disorderly, and not after the
Tradition which ye received of us, etc. 2 Thessalonians. 3. 6.

Again, he writ thus, viz. We Exhort you Brethren, warn them that are unruly
(or disorderly) Comfort the feeble minded, support the weak, be patient toward
all men, I Charge you by the Lord that this Epistle be read unto all the holy
Brethren, the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you all Amen; 1 Thessalonians. 5.
14, to the end, And to the Thessalonians again, he says in his second Epistle,
viz. for we hear that there are some among you which walk Disorderly, working
not at all, but are busi-bodies, Now them that are such we Command and Exhort
by our Lord Jesus Christ, that with Quietness they Work and Eat their own
Bread, but ye Brethren be not Weary in well Doing; and if any man obey not our
word by this Epistle, Note that man and have no Company with him that he may be
ashamed; yet count him not as an Enemy, but Admonish him as a Brother; Now the
Lord of Peace, himself give you peace always, by all means, the Lord be with
you all, 2 Thessalonians. 3. 11, to the End.

Observe here if any of these to whom Paul wrote, and to whom he Charges his
Epistle to be Read, should have called his Epistle his rotten Orders, his
Edicts, man's Prescriptions, Imposition upon Conscience, Innovations or
Apostasy, and such like; could he or any other of the faithful in Christ Jesus
have owned such therein to be Brethren in the Unity and fellowship of the
Gospel, or could he or they have owned such words and sayings a^ these to be
the fruit of the Divine Light and Spirit of Christ within, as applied t^ the
faithful in Christ Jesus) Oh Certainly Nay.

Concerning the form of the Apostles Doctrine, etc.
The Apostle writ thus to the beleiving Obedient Romans, viz. But God be
thanked ye have obeyed from the heart that form of Doctrine, which was
delivered unto you; Note here, that it was the Apostles Joy that they obeyed
that form of sound Doctrine which was delivered to them, for this he thanked
God, he was not of the mind of some who, formerly as also some of late were and
have been, who under the profession of the Light within, and its teaching, have
spoken, preached, or written, that the way of Gods People must, or ought, or
may be as the way of a Serpent upon a rock, or as the way of a ship on the Sea,
which leaves noe form^ or Impression behind them, this neither was nor is the
way of Gods People either under his Law or Gospel, but the way of an Adulterous
woman as it is written, Prove. 30. 19, 20. And further observe, Stedfastness of
the true Christians in the Apostles Doctrine, viz. And they Continued
Steadfastly in the Apostles Doctrine and fellowship, Acts 2. 42. Moses the man
of God, and the holy Prophets, Christ and his holy Apostles left good forms of
Doctrine in sound words behind them, under the several Dispensations of God, in
which they Lived, which is contained in the holy Scriptures of Truth, which
form of sound Words and Doctrines are both Comfortable and Profitable to the
man of God in this day, and will be to the People of God in Ages to come, and
it is gross Darkness and Spiritual Blindness, that is come upon them who have
spoken, Preach or believe that the way of Gods People must be as the way of a
Serpent on a Rock, or as the way of a Ship in the Sea, which leaves now
Impresion or form behind it, It were to be desired ineed that the Devil and
Wicked men might leave ^^ form or Impression of their wickedness behind them,
seeing their wicked forms others are Apt to follow them in to their own hurt
and danger of Eternal Ruin, God Almighty in his own Appointed time will root
out and destroy all the wicked forms of Imaging, speaking, and Acting
wickedly, which the Devil, in whom there is no Truth, has led men and women
into, by which he has led them to destroy themselves and each other.

Concerning the Commands of the Apostles of Christ, which they gave not of
Themselves, or by their own Power; but by and in His Power, Wisdom, Strength,
and Authority; for they were His Ambassadors, over them He Reigned, in them He
spoke, and gave Commands; who is Head of His Church, and One in the Male and
Female.
THe Apostle Paul, writing to the Church at Corinth, concerning the Things that
were Not in good Order amongst them, writing of many things in his First
Epistle to them, in the 14 Chapter, concludes thus: If any Man thinks himself
to be a Prophet, or Spiritual, let him know, that the things That I write unto
you, are the Commandments of the Lord. Let all Things be done Honestly,
Desently, and in Order; verse. ^7. and 40.

Again, the Apostle writing to the Church of the Thessalonians, writ thus, viz.
We beseech you, Brethren, and exhort you by the Lord Jesus, that as you have
Received of us, how you ought to walk, and please God; so you would abound more
and more; for you know what Commandments we gave you by the Lord Jesus: for
this is the Will of God, even your Sanctification -- That every one of you
should know how to possess his Vessel in Sanctification and Honor, Not in the
Lusts of Concupiscence, as other Gentiles, that know not God; that No Man go
beyond, and defraud his Brother in any matter; because the Lord is the Avenger
of such, as we have forewarned and testified: for God has not called us unto
Uncleanness, but unto Holiness; He therefore who despises, despises not Man,
but God, who has also given unto us his holy Spirit; 1 Thessalonians. 4. 1. to the 9th.

Again, the Apostle Paul writes thus to the Thessalonians, viz. We have
Confidence in the Lord, touching you, that you both do, and will do the things
which we Command you. Now we Command you Brethren, that you withdraw your
selves from every Brother, that walks Disorderly; and not after the
Traditions, or Ordinances, which ye received of us.

Again, the Apostle says, Therefore Brethren, stand fast, and hold the
Traditions which ye have been taught, whether By Word, or our Epistles, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 15. See 2 Thessalonians. 3. 4, 5.

Again, he writes to Timothy thus; These things Command, and teach; let no Man
despise thy Youth, but be thou an Example of the Believers in Word, in
Conversation, in Charity, in Spirit, in Faith, in Purity: See 1 Timothy 4. 11, 12.
read the Chapter through.

Again, hear what the Apostle Peter says unto the Saints in Light, viz. This
Second Epistle, Beloved, I now write unto you; in both which, I stir up your
pure minds, by way of Remembrance, that ye may be mindful of the Words, which
were spoken before by the holy Prophets, and of the Commandment of us, the
Apostles of our Lord and Savior; knowing this first, that there shall come in
the Last days Scoffers, walking after their own Lusts, etc.

Again, -- Ye therefore, Beloved, seeing ye know these things before, beware
lest ye also being led away with the Error of the Wicked, fall from your own
Stedfastness; but grow in Grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior,
Jesus Christ: To Him be Glory, both now and forever, Amen. 2 Peter 3. 1, 2, 3,
and 17, 18.

Reader, who ever thou art, this I say to thee, in the Presence of Almighty
God, the Searcher of all Hearts, before whom all things are naked and bare, who
judges righteously, That I do Not bring the Commands, Ordinances, or Doctrines
given and spoken by the Apostles of Christ, with Any Design to wrong, strein,
or wrest them, or any of them; to ex^lt any Friend, Brother or Brethren, Sister
or Sisters, above or out of their Place, in which Christ, the one Head, has
set them in his Body, his Church, or in anywise to exalt them, or any o^e of
them, as Lords, over Gods Peoples Faith, which our Lord Jesus Christ is the
Author and Finisher of; by which Faith they live to God, and please Him. But my
design therein, is to Exalt Christ the Head, ^n them All, and over them All,
who is One in the Male and Female: He has given us a Command, to Learn of Him,
saying, L^^^n of me, I am meek, and Low in heart, and ye s^^ll find rest to
your Souls: ^f him we have learned Humility, true (...) of Mind; in this we
have found abundance o^ Peace, Joy, Comfort, and Rest to our S^^ls. This to us
is of much more value, th^n all the Riches and Glory of this World: ^ere is the
Pleasant and comfortable Dwelling Place, here we desire to dwell forever. The
Humble God does teach; he guides the Meek in Judgment, and clothes them with
Salvation: Eternal ^lory be given to Him for the same. My Design in bringing
these things to thy View, is, to show that the Apostles, who preached the
Gospel with the Holy Ghost sent down from Heaven (as it is written), did in the
Movings and Authority of the same, give forth those Commands, Ordinances, and
Doctrines unto the Believers, in the same Holy Ghost, Spirit, or Light; by
which Light they saw and understood the Truth, Soundness, and Serviceableness
of them: and by the same were they led; Not to Oppose them, and speak Evil of
them, but to Obey, and practice them. Now, those that profess to be governed by
the same Holy Ghost, Spirit, or Light within, if they possess what they profess
therein, they will see, that the same Holy Ghost is, In some measure, given to
some in our Day; and that by it, Some are made Able Ministers, and thereby have
been Moved to give out So^^ Commands, Not in their own Name, but in the Name of
the Lord Jesus Christ, the chief Shepherd, and Bishop of our Souls: and such
Professors of the Light, who Po^^ess what they Profess, and dilligently attend
upon God in the same, they will herein See, and thereby be Led to Obey, and
practice those things, Not as the Precepts, Traditions, or Doctrines of Men;
But as the Commands, Precepts, and Doctrines of our Lord Jesus Christ, which he
gives, and speaks by the Mouths of his Servants; which answers that Light of
Christ, in the Consciences of his People. And such who reject them, they
therein reject God, and Christ. These things so Commanded, are Not contrary to
the Commands of Christ and his Apostles, recorded in the Scriptures of Truth;
but Agreeable to them, in the fulfilling the precious Promises of God, spoken
by the Mouths of his Holy Prophets; who said, I will pour forth my Spirit upon
all Flesh, etc. For Christ said to his Disciples, When they shall lead you, and
deliver you up, take no thought before hand what you shall speak, neither do
you premeditate; but whatsoever shall be given you in that hour, that speak ye:
For it is Not you that speak, but the Holy Ghost; Mark 31. 11.

In the Apostles and Primitive Christians, observe the Holy Ghost that spoke to
the Magistrates and Rulers, that persecuted them; the same spoke in them to the
Church of Christ, and gave forth Commands, Precepts, Ordinances, etc. And the
Believers, unto whom they wrote, having a measure of the same Holy Ghost, were
thereby given to understand the same, and thereby led to the Obedience thereof.

Again, the Apostle Paul said unto the Saints, You know how we Exhorted, and
Comforted, and Charged every one of you (as a Father does his Children) that
you would walk worthy Of God, who has called you unto his Kingdom and Glory;
for this Cause, also, thank we God, without ceasing; because, when ye received
the Word of God, which ye heard of us, ye received it Not as the Word of Men,
but as it is in Truth the Word of God, which effectually works also in you
that believe; 1 Thessalonians. 2. 11, 12, 13.

Observe here, the Apostle commends the Saints for receiving the Word, or
Testimony of God by him and others, not as the Word of Man, or Men; but as it
was indeed the Word and Testimony of the Lord, which wrought Effectually in
them, as he says: And as ^t was then, so is it now; God having given (by his
Servants) his Word, his Commands, and Doctrines; he has by his powerful,
enlightening Spirit of Life, opened many to receive the same, Not as the Word,
Doctrines, Precepts, Decrees, Edicts, or Orders of One Man, Many Men, or Any
Men; but as the Word, Commands, and Precepts, and Doctrines of the Great God,
and our Lord Jesus Christ. Glory, yea glory to the Lord God, and the Lamb, for
the same.

The Objection that some make concerning the practice of some things in the
Church of Christ, at this day, is, because they were not practiced when we were
first turned to the Light, and came into the belief and profession of it.

This Objection is fully answered before in this Epistle, where the diverse
growths and statures of Gods people are written of.

But the great Objection that is used by some at this day, is, That they An
Objection answered.
do not see those things required of them, or believe them to be their duty;
and because they do not see the practice of those things to be their duty, or
required of them, therefore they oppose (Friends) in the practice of them. What
these things are, these Opposers know; and the Faithful who are opposed by them
therein, know them also. They are not things which are evil or scandalous, or
of evil same or report amongst serious sober persons; we are not afraid to
bring them to the Light; they are practiced by many thousands in Unity, to
their comfort, and tends to preserve both young and old, sweet and orderly in
their Marriages, and in the rest of their Conversations, and is for the Relief
of the Poor, Widows, and Fatherless Children. Some have done hurt in their
selfish and wilful striving against these things; and when they have done the
hurt, they would lay the blame upon the things which they strive against: and
the Instruments who have and do encourage those things. And thus they judge
unrighteously the Innocent, and justifying themselves who are guilty.

Again, the Apostle exhorted, saying, Brethren, whatsoever things are true,
whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are
pure, whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoever things are of good report; If
there be any Virtue, and if there be any Praise, think on these things. These
things which you have both learned, and received, and heard, and seen in me,
do, and the God of peace shall be with you, Philip. 4. 8, 9.

Observe, that Meeting together in the Love and Fear of Almighty God, to take
care of his glory, in providing for the Poor, Widows, and Fatherless Children,
and others who have need of help and assistance among us in their bodily
Weakness, Temptations, Trials, and Exercises; is good, is honest, is Just, is
lovely, is of good report, and is worthy of praise.

These things are done in our Meetings, both by Male and Female. Such Meetings
have the virtuous Presence of the Lord God, them: Such Meetings God does
gather, own, uphold, and justify by his powerful presence in the midst of
them. Again, In those Meetings care is taken, that such who profess the truth,
as it is in Christ Jesus, (and walk amongst us) do proceed in their Marriages
sweetly, in good order, according to the example of holy men and women of God,
in former time (and in our days) those proceedings are briefly, though plainly
touched at in the Scriptures of Truth. Again, In those Meetings care is taken,
that those whose proceedings in relation to Marriage, are not as they ought to
be, that such be admonished, that they may come into a right sense of the
dishonor they bring to God thereby, that they may repent and condemn the same,
and give glory to God therein, that they may obtain forgiveness at his hand;
and that his People whom they have grieved by their unfaithfulness therein, may
be comforted in seeing this good Work of God wrought in them. Again, In these
Meetings care is taken, that those who profess the Truth as it is in Christ
Jesus, (and walk amongst us) do in their Conversations walk orderly, as becomes
the Gospel, that no Professor thereof wrong another, or any other person
whomsoever, in any matter or thing whatsoever. This is endeavored by the
faithful Children of God, Children of Light, both Male and Female, in their
particular and distinct, and also in their more general Meeting, as much as in
them lies. And where any professing the Truth amongst us, do or have done the
contrary, care has been and is to labor with them in the love of God, and
Meekness, and Patience, which Christ Jesus, the meek and lowly Lamb of God,
has taught us, to bring them into a right sense of the dishonor, they have
brought to God by their evil doings; and that they might repent of, and
sensually judge themselves for the same; that so through unfeigned Repentance,
and forsaking the same, they might obtain Forgiveness of their sins at the hand
of God: for the Lord God who is merciful, delights not in the destruction of
the sinner, but rather that he should repent, and turn from the evil of his
ways, and live, and so come into unity with his tender People. Again, In these
Meetings the faithful in Christ Jesus do watch one over another in Love, to be
helpful one to another in their Temptations, Trials, and Afflictions, laboring
to build up each other in the holy Faith, (which works by Love, as the Apostle
says) herein they manifest their love one to another, according to Christ's
command: Their love is without dissimulation; by which they are known to be the
Disciples of Christ, in fulfilling the Royal Law of Love in his Divine Light,
according the Scriptures of Truth.

Again, in those Meetings care is taken, that the Professors of our Lord Jesus
Christ, and the Teachings of his Divine Light within, do walk in the Light
which they make profession of that according to Christ's command, their Light
may so shine before men, that they may see their good works in Christ Jesus,
and glorify our Father which is in Heaven; that as the Salt of the Earth, we
may always keep that heavenly ^avour which God in Christ has given us, and
that we may grow in it more and more, that therein we may be a good savor both
in them that are saved, and in them that perish, even as the Apostle exhorted.

All the before mentioned things are true, honest, just, good, virtuous,
lovely, and of good report, worthy of praise. Hereby God is honored, and his
children profited, benefited, comforted, edified, and built up in unfeigned
Love, Peace, and sweet Unity, to his praise and glory, who is over all Heaven
and Earth, worthy of Honor, Glory, Dominion, and Praise, now and for ever
more. Amen.

Observe, that which opposes, condemns, and ^^orneth the faithful in Christ
Jesus, in these their services and labor of love, is neither true, just,
honest, lovely, virtuous, ^or o^ good report; neither is it worthy of praise,
but the contrary: Therefore all you who profess to be led and guided by the
Light of Christ within; you in the Light of Christ Jesus, I tell you, that his
Light in you, will not lead any of you to oppose any of the good things before
mentioned. And where any person professing to be led by the Light of Christ
within, do oppose any of the beforementioned Meetings, or the aforesaid good
services in them, it is Darkness, and not the Light of Christ, which so leads
and persuades them: He that was a Liar from the beginning, has deceived such.
Oh that they might see his Snare, and come out of it! this is our tender desire
for them for their eternal good. The Lord God, who is Light, in whom there is
no Darkness at all, said by the mouth of his holy Prophet, Woe unto them that
call evil good, and good evil; that put darkness for light, and light for
darkness! Woe unto them that are wise in their own eyes! Isai. 5. 20, 21. Christ
said, If the light that is in thee be darkness, how great is that darkness? See
Mat. 6. 22, 23. See Luke 11. 34, 35, 36. See Joh. 12. 35.

Observe, it is No Proof, that these good things are not their duty, because
they do not see them to be so: for it is undeniable, that it is the duty of all
Men and Women to believe in the one Eternal God; but some were of old, and now
are so blinded by the God of this world, their minds so darkened, and they so
hardened in the practice and love of sin, that they did not, nor do see or
believe that there is a God; as it is written, The Fool has said in his heart,
there is no God: And again, Christ said to the great professing Jews, High
Priests, Scribes, Pharisees, Hypocrites, who were as the whited Walls, Graves,
and painted Sepulchers, (but within were full of rottenness, hypocrisy and
deceit) Ye neither know Me, nor my Father; ye neither know the Scriptures, nor
the Power of God.

Again, it is the duty of every man and woman to believe in the true Light of
Christ, that lighteneth every man that comes into the World; but it is known by
lamentable Experience, that even many of the Professors of Christianity, are
far from believing in it; who on the contrary are Blaspheming against it,
Mocking and Scoffing at it, persecuting and oppressing the Children of it, and
opposing the Testimony of it. Now, if these do say, We do Not see or believe it
to be our Duty to believe in and obey the Light; it does Not therefore follow,
that it is not their Duty: and if they say, We see and believe it is our Duty
to speak and write against the Light, and to punish you who profess and obey
it; Their so saying will Not prove that these their. Evil Works are their Duty
to God and Christ, no not at all, but the Contrary. But to come closer to the
Professors of the Light within, hear what Christ and the Prophet says, viz.
This Peoples Heart is waxed gross, and their Ears are dull of hearing, and
their Eyes they have closed, lest at any Time they should see with their Eyes,
and hear with their Ears, and should understand with their Heart, and should be
converted, and I should heal them. See Math. 13. 14, 15. Acts 28. 26, 27. The
Author to the Hebrews writ thus concerning Christ, viz. And he became the
Author of Eternal Salvation to all them that obey him, called of God an high
Priest, after the Order of Melchisedeck, of whom we have many things to say,
and hard to be uttered; seeing Ye are Dull of hearing, or as it is rendered in
the Margin out of the Greek, Has no Experience; for when for the Time ye ought
to be Teachers, Ye have Need that one teach you again, which be the first
Principles of the Word or Oracles of God. See Heb. 5. 9, 10, 11, 12.

Again, Christ speaking a Parable concerning the Kingdom of God, says, For
unto every one that has shall be given, and he shall have abundance; but from
him that has not, shall be taken away even that which he has; and cast ye the
unprofitable Servant into utter darkness, etc. See Math. 25. 29, 30.

Observe, the sloathful Servant who had not improved his Lords Talent, was and
is to be cast into utter darkness, his Talent being taken from him: Such an one
in Darkness may talk of Light, as Job says, Death and Destruction says, We
have heard of the fame of Wisdom; such an one may talk of the Light, who in his
dark Works Denies it, and opposes it, and contends against the Children of it,
in their pure Obedience to it, and Such an one may say to the Children of the
Light, I do not see that to be my Duty which you practice: I say, how should he
see who is shut up in utter darkness, whose wilful disobedience has brought him
to be like the deaf Adder, which stops his Ears, which will not hear, as
it is written.

Again, Jesus said unto them, Yet a little while is the Light with you, walk
while ye have the Light, lest Darkness come upon you; for he that walks in
darkness knows not whither he goes; while ye have the Light believe in the
Light, that you may be the Children of Light, John 12. 35, 36.

Observe, They who believe in the Light, as Christ commands, and obey it in its
first and smallest Manifestations, they in that Light Cannot oppose what the
Light brings forth In others; for though Some who are turned to the Light, and
have believed in it, and in some measure obeyed it, Do not see so Much or so
Far into the things of God, as some others who are more grown and Established,
and have received a greater Measure of Divine Wisdom; yet Cannot these Weak or
Young ones, by the motion or teaching of the Light, contradict, oppose, or
contend against what the same Light brings forth in others of the Children of
it; for if this Could be, then God (whose gift to Man and Woman, the Light is)
would thereby be the Author of Confusion, and not of Peace, in the Churches of
the Saints, as is observed before in this Epistle; but God Is not the Author of
Confusion, but of Peace in all the Churches of the Saints, as the Apostle has
writ, which is observed before. It is true as the Prophet writ, O Lord in thy
Light we shall see more Light, etc. The Path of the Just is as the shining
Light, which shines more and more unto the perfect day. It is certainly true,
that we find it harder in this Age to persuade some people, to keep and walk in
the Light, than it was to turn them to it; and some like Balaam having been
opened by it, to see the blessed end of the Righteous, do still retain a
Profession of it (though they rebel against it) and desire to die the death of
the Righteous, as Balaam did; but refuses to live that Self-denying Christian
life, which leads to that good End. Christ says, Lo I come, and my reward is
with me, to give unto every one according as his works shall be. And the
Apostle says, Such as every one sows, such shall he reap: he that sows to the
flesh, shall of the flesh reap Corruption; but he that sows to the Spirit,
shall of the Spirit reap Life everlasting. If ye live after the flesh, ye shall
die; but if ye through the spirit mortify the deeds of the body (or flesh)
then shall ye live. The Apostle Paul writ thus to the Children of the Light,
Let us therefore as many as be perfect, be thus minded: and if in any thing ye
be otherwise minded, God shall reveal even this unto you. Nevertheless, whereto
we have already attained, let us walk by the same rule, let us mind the same
thing. Brethren, be followers together of me, and mark them which walk so, as
ye have us for an ensample. See Philip. 3. 15, 16, 17.

Observe here, It was the Apostles belief, that if any among the Believers in
the Light, were of another mind than he was, in any thing that he in the Light
practiced, God would reveal the same unto them also, they abiding steadfast with
the Light to which they were turned; and as he believed, so do we believe in
this matter. It Is possible, that some persons, who are turned to the Light of
Christ within, who have believed, and in some measure obeyed the same, who in
many things have Unity with the most ancient grown and established of the
Children of the Light, yet in some things, may not be so opened and clear in
their Understandings, as to see them, and join in Faith in the practice of
them. We believe, and therefore say, That if such abide in the Light, faithful
to what they know, God will reveal these things unto them. And we believe, and
therefore say, They keeping in the Light, it will keep them from contending
against or opposing others, in the practice of that which God has revealed to
them, and required of them. What is not of Faith is sin, as says the Apostle;
Such therefore that are weak in the Faith, we ought not to reject, but to
receive, though not to doubtful Disputations, but to hear their infirmities or
weaknesses, to be good Examples to them, and to make intercession to God for
them, and to hold forth Truth to them in sound Doctrine, that they may be
strengthened with his glorious power in their Inward man; and that he may
increase their Faith, and more and more fill them with that Wisdom and
Knowledge, which is pure and peaceable from above.

But observe, where persons have been long convinced, and are become Teachers
of others, and by their so doing would be looked upon to be Elders, wise and
strong, shall under the profession of the Light oppose, and teach others to
oppose the faithful Followers of Christ, in things which they practice in the
Faith of Christ, accompanied with his Power and a good Understanding, This Case
is greatly differing from the beforementioned: For these will not grant, that
their refusing the practice of some things, and the opposing the Practisers
thereof, proceeds from weakness, or short-sightedness through their Infancy in
the knowledge of the Truth; Much less that it proceeds from Apostasy and
Rebellion, the latter of which is true upon some in our Age; but these give out
reviling Speeches against the Faithful, calling them Apostates, and many other
evil names, which I here omit to mention, having no pleasure to repeat them.

Observe, we are of the Apostles Faith and Judgment, who writ thus to the
Church at Galatia; Brethren, if a man be overtaken in a fault, ye which are
spiritual restore such a one in the spirit of meekness, considering thy self,
lest thou also be tempted: Bear ye one another burdens, and so fulfill the Law
of Christ. See Gal. 6. 1, 2. read the Chapter through. Christ, our Souls
Bishop, has taught us how to seek to restore those that commit Offenses
against him and his People; and several has been so sought, and recovered out
of the Snare, in which they were taken; and others so sought, have not been
gained, but have persisted in their evil doing, until God has ceased any longer
to strive with them through his Servants, and then his Servants have witnessed
against them, and declared their disunion with them, according to Christ's
command; and some such being declared against, as aforesaid, have appeared in
great wrath against us, like the raging Waves of the Sea, foming out their own
shame; but we pity them, and should greatly rejoice on their behalf, if they
could yet find a place of repentance and return: for it is true which Christ
says, Joy shall be in heaven over one sinner that repents, etc.

Again, it is true which the Apostle James writ, Brethren, if any of you do
err from the truth, and one convert him, let him know, that he which
converteth the sinner from the error of his way, shall save a soul from death,
and cover a multitude of sins, Jam. 5. 19, 20.

Again, to them that say, they do not see, as aforesaid, hear what Christ says
by his Angel to the Church in Laodicea, viz. Because thou say, I am rich and
increased in goods, and have need of nothing, and know not that thou art
wretched and miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked: I counsel thee to buy
of me gold tried in the fire, that thou may be rich, and white raiment that
thou may be clothed, and that the shame of thy nakedness do not appear; and
anoint thine eyes with eye salve, that thou may see: as many as I love, I
rebuke and chasten. Be zealous therefore and repent: behold I stand at the door
and knock, If any man hear my voice, and open the door, I will come in to him,
and will sup with him, and he with me, etc. He that has an ear to hear, let
him hear what the spirit says unto the Churches, Rev. 3. 14. to the end.

1. Observe, this Church or Congregation was gathered into the Profession of
Christ and his Light within.

2. Observe how greatly they were mistaken concerning their own state and
condition; a most gross and lamentable Error were they in, as the before-cited
words of Christ do plainly show, They were puffed up with Self-conceit, that
they wanted nothing, when in reality and truth, they Wanted all things, that
should have rendered them to be that which they professed to be; Namely, such
who were Complete in Christ Jesus, the Head of His Church; who is the fullness;
who Clothes his Members with the Robes of his own Righteousness, and fills them
with the bright Beams of his Divine Light, so that they see clearly; and he
fills their Hearts with the Riches of his Grace, in the abundance of which,
their Hearts and Souls pour forth Praises and Thanksgiving to the Lord God, and
the Lamb who is Worthy for evermore.

3. Observe, Though their State was so miserable; yet in his tender Mercy, he
calls them to Repentance. Oh, consider this, thou Back-slider, whoever thou
art, and let the sense thereof seize upon thee, and break thy Heart. Repent,
and Turn to the Lord, with whom is forgiveness!

4. Observe, How Christ charges this Congregation to be blind, and being blind
they could not see their State as it was; but in their blind Self-conceit,
said, It was What it was not.

5. Observe, That these blind Self-conceited ones, while they remained such,
could not see that to be their Duty, which the Children of Light saw to be
theirs.

6. Observe, That we do not here read, that these blind self-conceited
Laodiceans, did so oppose the Children of Light, in their Faithful Obedience to
it; as some do oppose in our day we do not read they called them Apostates.

7. Observe, That some blind Self-conceited ones in our Age, have appeared
worse than they, who are not contented with that ungodly fleshly Liberty, and
unchristian Looseness in which they are; but therein do oppose, and War against
the children of the Light, because they will not join and walk, and have Unity
with them, in their dark Words and Works: But in the Council of God, Witness
against the same.

8. Observe, If these blind Self-conceited ones do not take Christ's Council,
viz. Anoint their Eyes with Eye Salve, that they may see and repent; then their
Latter End will be Miserable, much worse than their Beginning was. Oh, that
such might yet seek, and find a Place of Repentance! This would be matter of
great rejoicing to the Children of Light, who are calluminated, reviled,
opposed, and greatly abused by them.

Again, the Apostle Peter writ to the Saints in Light, viz. Giving all
Diligence, Add to your Faith Virtue, and to Virtue Knowledge, and to Knowledge
Temperance, and to Temperance Patience, and to Patience Godliness, and to
Godliness brotherly Kindness, Charity; for if these things be in you, and
abound, they make you that you shall neither be barrennor unfruitful in the
Knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ; but he that lacks these Things is blind,
and cannot see far off; and has forgotten, that he was purged from his old
Sins. Wherefore the rather, Brethren, give All diligence to make your Calling
and Election sure; for if you do these things, ye shall never fall, etc. 2.
Pet. 1. 5. to the 11. Read the Chapter through.

1. Observe, All you that profess the Light of Christ within, what things you
are to be found in, Which will render you, that you are not barren, nor
unfruitful in the Knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.

2. Observe, That he that professes to be plentiful in the Knowledge of our
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, And is not found in the Possession and Practice
of those beforementioned Christian fruits, he is blind, as the Apostle says,
and too like the self-conceited blind Laodiceans.

3. Observe, That there are some at this day, who do profess themselves to be
followers of the Light of Christ within, Who do lack these beforementioned
good Things; and so, according to the Apostles saying, These are blind, and the
blind cannot see till their Eyes be opened; So they cannot see their Duty, nor
the Duty of the Children of Light, till their Eyes be opened. Such of them, who
Have not yet sinned out the Day of Gods Uisitation, to them I Exhort and warn
to retire, out of the Selfconceit, and vain Imaginations, to the pure Divine
Light of Christ within, and thereunto diligently attend, that thereby the Eyes
of their Understandings may be anointed and opened, that therein they may see
their Duty, and by virtue of the same, be led into it, and kept in it; and also
may see the Duty of the Children of Light, and have Unity with them therein.

Again, Hear what the Apostle Paul says concerning Blindness, viz. But if our
Gospel be hid, It is hid in them that are lost, in whom the God of this World
has blinded the minds of them which believe not, lest the Light of the
Glorious Gospel of Christ, who is the Image of God, should shine unto them; for
we Preach not our selves, but Christ Jesus the Lord, and our selves your
Servants for Jesus sake; for God, who commanded the Light to shine out of
Darkness, has shined in our hearts, to give the Light of the Knowledge of the
Glory of God, in the face of Jesus Christ; but we have this Treasure in the
Earthen Vessels, that the Excellency of the Power, may be of God, and not of
us, 2 Cor. 4. 3. to 8.

1. Observe, That it is the God of the World, who blinds the Minds of People,
designing thereby to hinder them of the Benefit of the Light; that so they
might be kept blind, and in Blindness, Conceit themselves to be wise and
knowing in the Things of God, and Gospel of his Kingdom, and in their Blindness
to oppose and contend against those, whom God has made Wise unto Salvation, in
opposing their Christian Counsel, Advice, and Conversation.

2. Observe, That the Apostles of Christ did not Preach Themselves, but Christ
Jesus the Lord, and Themselves their Servants for Jesus sake; and so does the
faithful Ministers of Christ, in this day, praisEd be the Lord for the same;
and the Excellency of the Power by which they are enabled to serve God, and
each other, is of God, and not of Themselves. Therefore the Glory belongs to
him forever.

Again, Hear what the Apostle Paul says concerning the darkened and blinded,
viz. For the Wrath of God is revealed from Heaven Against all Ungodlyness and
Unrighteousness of Men, who hold the Truth in Unrighteousness; because that
which may be known of God, Is Manifest in them; for God has showed it unto
them, -- Because that when they knew God, they glorified him not as God,
neither were they thankful; but became vain in their Imaginations, and their
foolish Heart was darkened; professing themselves to be Wise, they became Fools,
Romans 1. 18, 19, to 23.

1. Observe, That the Wrath of God is revealed from Heaven, against all
Ungodlyness and Unrighteousness of Men, for holding the Truth in
Unrighteousness; That is, holding a Profession of it Without Subjection and
Obedience to it, because they do not obey the Truth, in forsaking that which it
shows them to be evil, and choosing and doing that which it shows them to be
good.

2. Observe, That when they through their Negligence and Slothfulness,
continued and multiplied Disobedience and Rebellion, are come to be darkened,
and made Spiritually blind; so that they neither see, know, or desire to Know
their Duty, or to do it; yet this their Darkness and Blindness does not render
them Excusable, or uncondemnable either in the sight of God, or his Faithful
People; but on the contrary, Inexcusable and condemnable in the sight of God,
and also in the sight of his Faithful People..

3. Observe, The cause why they became so darkened and blinded was, that when
they knew God, they glorified Him not as God, neither were thankful; therefore
they became Vain in their Imaginations, and their foolish Hearts were darkened;
professing themselvee to be Wise, they became Fools.

4. Observe, What it is to Glorify God as God, when Man knows Him; for there
are several Degrees of the Knowledge of God, all proceeding from one Cause, and
are of one kind, though Not all of One Quantity or Largeness. Certain it is,
that to Glorify God as God, is not only to believe that He is a Mighty,
Powerful, Just, and Holy God; but also to Reverence, fear, and stand in awe of
Him, and to obey Him, according to that Knowledge received of him. His Blessing
is upon, and will continue and increase upon all those, who do so Glorify Him;
for He has promised, who cannot lie, That he that is Faithful in a little,
shall be made Ruler over much, and shall enter into the Joy of his Lord.

Again, The same Apostle writ to the believing Gentiles at Ephesus, viz. This I
say therefore, and testify in the Lord, That ye henceforth walk not as other
Gentiles walk, in the Vanity of their Minds, having the Understanding darkened,
being alienated from the Life of God, through the Ignorance that is in them,
because of the Blindness of their Heart, who being past feeling, have given
themselves over to Lasciviousness, to work all Uncleanness with greediness,
Ephesians. 4. 17, 18, 19.

Observe here, the woeful and miserable Effects of Disobedience to God; what
Darkness, Spiritual Blindness, Benummedness, and Insensibility it brings them
into, who are given up thereto, alienating them from the Life, Power, and
Spirit of God; yet this Blindness and Insensibility, Does not render them
excusable, in the Sight of the Lord God, who has sent his Son, a true Light,
who lights every Man that comes into the World; who therefore says, Look unto
Me all, O ye Ends of the Earth, and be ye saved; for I am God, and there is
none else; a mighty God, and a Savior, Isa. 45. 22.

And again, The Apostle in his Light, Spirit, and Power saw, and therefore
said, God's Will is, that all Men should know the Truth, and he Saved, 1 Timothy
2. 4. They therefore who believe in the Divine Light of Christ, and walk in and
obey the same, are therein saved, preserved, and justified; but they that know
this Light, profess, and talk of it, but do not obey, and walk in it, they are
justly by the Lord God condemned, and their Disobedience justly Witnessed
against by his Faithful People, who walk in his Light, and bring forth the pure
peaceable Fruits of it; and if such disobedient, unfaithful Professors of the
Light do not unfeignedly repent of their Evil Sayings and Doings against God,
and his People, and walk in Obedience to the Light they make Profession of;
then will the Wrath of God fall heavy upon them in the End.

Again, Hear what the Apostle Peter says to the Faithful Children of Light,
viz. But ye are a chosen Generation, an holy Nation, a peculiar People, that ye
should show forth the Praise of him, that has called you Out of Darkness into
his Mavelous Light. Dearly Beloved, I beseech you, as Strangers and Pilgrims,
Abstain from Fleshly Lust, which War against the Soul, having your
Conversations Honest amongst the Gentiles; that whereas they speak against you
as Evil Doers, they may By your Good Works, which they shall behold, glorify
God in the day of Visitation. 1 Pet. 2. 9, to the 13.

Observe, This Doctrine of the Apostle, is according to the Command of Christ
to his Disciples. He said, Let your Light so shine before Men, that they may
see your good Works, and Glorify your Father which is in Heaven, Math. 5. 16.

Again, Christ says, The Light of the Body is the Eye, If therefore thine Eye
be single, thy whole Body shall be full of Light; but if thine Eye be Evil, thy
whole Body shall be full of Darkness; If therefore the Light that is in thee be
Darkness, how great is that Darkness? See Math. 6. 22, 23.

Again, Christ says, Out of the Heart proceeds an Evil Eye, Mark. 7. 22.
Luke 11. 34.

1. Observe, That the Children of Light are a Royal Priesthood, a Holy Nation,
a Peculiar People, called out of Darkness into Gods mavelous Light; They
walking therein are as Lights in the World, their Light so shines before Men in
the good Works, or good Conversation in Christ, this brings Glory to God the
Father, which is in Heaven; they neither Need nor Do plead Ignorance, of their
duty to God, or Man; or of the Commands of Christ; For they do both know, obey
and do their Duty to God and Man, praised be the Lord God for the same.

2. Observe, That Christ says, The Light of the Body, is the Eye; wherefore if
thine Eye be single, thy whole Body is full of Light; but when thine Eye is
Evil, thy whole body also is full of darkness. Here are 'two Eyes spoken of;
the good one and the evil one, he that has the good Eye open in him, with it
Christ says, If the blind lead the blind, both shall fall into the Ditch, Mat.
15. 14.
sees right, sees good things, and is affected therewith, embraces and holds
fast the same; he sees his duty to God and Man, and by Gods help does the same,
and therein is blessed; but he that has the Evil Eye open in him (which Eye
proceeds out of the Heart, as Christ says, with this his Evil Eye he seeks
and watches for Evil, and therewith sees Evil things, and has pleasure in
them, and therefore embraces them, practices them, pleads for them, and holds
them fast. This is the Man, whose Good Eye is blinded, and his evil one open;
therefore he calls Good Evil, and Evil Good. Here Darkness and its fruits, are
put for Light and its fruits, and Light and its fruits, are put for Darkness
and its fruits. The Person that does this, has changed the Truth of God for a
Lie. Oh, this is a miserable State, which some fell into in Ages past, and some
are fallen into in our Age! Out of which, God Almighty preserve all, who to his
Light are turned, who believe in, and love the same! And the Lord be merciful
unto all, who, though they be Darkened and Entangled in the Snares of their
Souls Enemy, through want of Watchfulness in the pure Light of Christ, and holy
fear of God; yet have not sinned out the day of his tender Visitation to them.
Oh that they may seek and find a place of unfeigned Repentance, and so return
unto the Lord God, before the Harvest, or Gathering, or Restoring time, to them
be ended.

Concerning the Honor which God gives unto his People, etc.
THe fear of the Lord is the Instruction of Wisdom, and before Honor is
Humility, Proverbs 15. 33. And Christ says, If any man honor me, him will my
Father honor, John 12. 26. And the Apostle Peter Exhorted the Saints, saying,
Honor all men, love the Brotherhood, fear God, etc. 1. Pet. 2. 17. The Apostle
Paul Exhorted the believing Romans to be kindly Affectionated one toward
another with brotherly Love in Honor preferring one another, Romans 12. 10.
Again he writ to them, viz. But Glory, Honor, and Peace, to every man that
works good, etc. Romans 2. 10. Again, hear what the Lord says by the mouth of
Samuel the Prophet, viz. Them that honor me, I will honor, and they that
despise me, shall be lightly esteemed, 1 Samuel 2. 30. And again, Paul writing to
Timothy says, Let the Elders that Rule well be counted worthy of double
honor, especially they who labor in the Word and Doctrine, 1 Timothy 5. 17.

Observe, All the Children of God who are taught by his gracious Spirit of
Life, Light, Love and Peace, who walk therein, they Glorify and Honor him,
with their Spirits and Bodies, which are his, and with his good Creatures,
which he has made them Stewards over, which is their reasonable Service, and
all such he honors, with the honor that is from above, which comes from
himself, and all these do honor each other, and prefer each other, according
to the Order of the Work of God amongst them in their several Gifts and
Services in the Body of Christ, his Church; All keeping to, and walking in the
Divine Light of Christ, all will be kept in Humility (and in Unity) yea
clothed with it according to the Apostles Exhortation, and according to the
Command and Example of Christ the Chief Shepherd and Bishop of our Souls, who
said, Learn of me, I am meek and lowly in Heart, and ye shall find rest to your
Souls. A Remnant has learned Humility of him in this Age, and he has given us
rest to our Souls, which to us far excels all the Riches and Glory of this
World, Praises to the Lord God and the Lamb for the same.

Blessed are all they that walk in his Light, they find the fruit of it in
them, to be unfeigned Love to Friends, and also to Enemies, and Meekness,
Patience, Gentleness, Justice, Equity, and Righteousness toward all Men, and a
good Understanding, and holy right Zeal for the honor of the Lord, and the
good of his People; who walks here will not be puffed up with self conceit, or
self wilfulness, or be filled with Wrath, Malice, Strife, nor strive to Honor
or Exalt themselves, as Lords over Gods People; such are not Lords over that
Faith which God has wrought in his People, but in the Love of God, Meekness
and Humility of Christ Jesus, these build up one another in their most Holy
Faith, and are Fellow helpers of one another Joy in the Lord, as the Apostle
has writ and Exhorted. And as the Primitive true Christians practiced.

Concerning Rule and Government in the Church of Christ.
CHrist Jesus after he arose from the Dead spoke unto his Disciples, saying,
All power is given unto me in Heaven and in Earth, go ye therefore and teach
all Nations, Baptizing them into the Name (for so the Greek renders it) of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost; Teaching them to observe all
things whatsoever I have commanded you, and lo I am with you always, etc. Matt.
28. 18, 19, 20.

First Observe, Christ who was always spiritually present with those whom he
sent to preach the Gospel, gave them many things in Charge to teach the People
to observe; those who believed, received and obeyed the Gospel preached by the
Apostles, did obey the Commands and Doctrines of Christ given by, or through
the Apostles, who were his Ambassadors, those who did continue steadfast unto
the end, were ( by degrees) Taught and enabled by the powerful Spirit and Light
of Christ in the Apostles and in their own hearts, to observe and do all things
that Christ commanded them.

2. Observe, Christ in and by the Apostles did command and teach those who
believed and received the Gospel, and walked in the Light of it, and those who
did believe and obey those Commands and Doctrines, were not (therein) subject
or obedient to the Traditions, Doctrines, or Commandments of men (who were
without the Spiritual Presence and Authority of Christ.) But they were obedient
unto the Commandments and Doctrines of Christ, delivered in and by the
Faithful Apostles, those holy Men of God.

3. Observe, Here is Order and Rule in the Work of God, they that are Novices
or young Scholars in the Faith and Doctrine of Christianity, are Learners,
others Elders or Teachers; these are to be Taught and watched over, by those to
whom God has given an oversight of them in his power and wisdom for the
Salvation, Preservation, and everlasting good of their Souls; these Stewards of
God, who labor for, and watch over Souls for the good end aforesaid God,
requires them to be faithful in this great Charge which he has laid upon them;
for they must give an account to him of their stewardship, and blessed are all
those who have believed the Gospel, who obey and walk in the Light of the same,
receiving and obeying the Commands, Doctrines, and Precepts of the Lord Jesus
Christ, given unto them by his Light and Spirit in his Stewards and
Ambassadors, which they see and receive in the same Light and Spirit of Christ
in their own Hearts and Souls. An account will be given of them with joy, unto
Christ the chief Shepherd and great Overseer of Souls.

4. Observe, They who after they have believed in the Spirit and Light of God,
and Christ within, and have partaken of the virtue and power thereof, fall away
when Temptations and Trials come upon them for Christ and the Gospel's sake;
these become like the stony ground, which Christ speaks of in the Parables of
the Kingdom, that young and tender Blade, which appeared, in them being
withered; an account cannot be given of these with joy, but with sorrow, though
they who have labored faithfully with them for their good are clear of their
Fall and Misery.

5. Observe, Those who have come to a farther growth and knowledge of the Truth
than those last mentioned, who have come not only to know the Truth, but also
further to obey it and suffer for it, yet they after they have thus done and
suffered, have fallen away from their first love and obedience to the Cross of
Christ, by rejecting and slighting the Counsel of God by his Light and Spirit
in their own hearts, and in the hearts and mouths of his Servants; and these
having cast off the Yoke of Christ, are become as Sons of Belial without Yoke;
gone into the World, into the Cumbersom Cares of it, and the Deceitfulness of
the Riches, Lusts, and Glory of it, such has made ill use of the grace or
favor of God given unto them, such in their works (whatever their Words be)
deny the only true God and our Lord Jesus Christ; such are the despisers of the
Government of Christ in his Church, who though they retain yet something of the
Christian form of Godliness, yet are out of the life and power thereof, and
Enemies to it, as by their Evil Works and Words do and will appear. The
Stewards and Ambassadors of Christ cannot give a joyous account of these,
though having faithfully labored with them for their preservation and well
being, are therefore clear of their blood, or of being in any wise guilty of
their Fall and Ruin.

Observe further what the Apostle says concerning Rule and Government in the
Church of Christ, he writing to the believing Hebrews, writes thus, Remember
them which have the Rule over you, who has spoken unto you the Word of God,
whose Faith follow, considering the end of their Conversation, obey them that
has the Rule over you, and submit your selves, for they watch for your souls,
as they that must give an account, that they may do it with joy, and not with
grief, for that is unprofitable for you: -- Salute all them that have the Rule
over you, and all the Saints; they of Italy salute you, Grace be with you all
Amen. Heb. 13. 7, 17, 24, 25.

Observe, Though the many sorts of false Teachers have and do falsely pretend to
watch for the Soul; who watch only for their own corrupt earthly Ends, as by
their Fruits have and does appear; yet God did of old and now does send
faithful Laborers into his Vineyard, who have and do labor and watch for the
Salvation of the Souls of the Sons and Daughters of Men, glory be given to him
for the same: These faithful Watchers are known by their Fruits, they covet no
Man's Gold, Silver, or Apparel; they do not watch for Earthly gain; they do not
take the oversight of the Flock for filthy Lucre, but of a ready mind; they are
not Lords over Gods Heritage, but good Examples to the Flock; they are not
Lords over the Faith of the People of God. But they are Fellow-helpers of their
Joy, Peace, Comfort, and Establishment in the way of Righteousness. They Preach
and give freely, according to Christ's Command, they walk in Love to Friends and
Enemies, witnessing against that which is Evil, in all, without Partiality and
without Hypocrisy, and the Fruits of Righteousness is sown by them in peace;
they have peace with God, and live in Love and Peace one with another. They
have learned of Christ Jesus, true Humility, true Lowliness of Mind and Heart,
in which they Preach in their good Example as well as Doctrine, to the honor
of God and the good of his People; they labor in the Word and Doctrine of the
Gospel, and in a good Conversation (in Christ) that he may be Exalted in all,
both Male and Female, to Rule in all, whose Right it is. These do not seek
their own glory, or exalt themselves; but in humility they glorify God with
their Souls and Bodies, which are his, and faithfully and unweariedly serve God
and his People in patience, possessing their Souls in all their Trials and
Afflictions. Again Paul writ to Timothy, saying, An Overseer or Bishop in the
Church of God, must not be an Novice (that is a young Scholar, one lately
begotten to the Faith of Christ, or one that is Raw and unskilful in the word
of Righteousness) lest being lifted up with pride, he falls into the
Condemnation of the Devil; see 1 Timothy 3. 6. Again he writ to him, viz. Let the
Elders that Rule well, be counted worthy of double honor, especially they who
labor in the Word and Doctrine, Chap. 5. v. 17. Again, he writ to the
believing Romans, thus: viz. For I say through the Grace given unto me, to
every man that is among you, not to think of himself more highly than he ought
to think, but to think soberly, according as God has de^^t to every man the
measure of Faith; for as we have many Members in one Body, and all Members have
not the same Office, so we being many are one Body in Christ, and every one
Members one of another; having then Gifts differing, according to the Grace
that is given to us, whether Prophecy, let us Prophecy according to the
proportion of Faith, or Ministry let us wait on our Ministrying, or he that
Teaches on Teaching, or he that Exhorts on Exhortation; he that gives let
him do it with Simplicity, he that Rules with diligence, he that shows Mercy
with cheerfulness; let Love be without Dissimulation, abhor that which is evil,
cleave to that which is good, be kindly affectionated one to another, with
Brotherly love in Honor, preferring one another, etc. Romans 12. 3. to 11.

My Friends, all you that Profess to be Members of the Church of Christ, and
taught by his Spirit and Light within you; by what is here written (given forth
by the Apostle as he was moved by the Holy Ghost) you may understand that there
is a Rule and Government in the Church of God, in his Power, Wisdom and
Strength, for his Glory, who is the Head of it: And you may also understand
hereby, that Christ the Head, has given Gifts differing by the same Spirit,
for the Preservation, Edification, and well Ordering and Governing his Church,
and every one is to attend on his Gift in the Church, and to improve the same,
which being done, is to the Increase of the Body, for the Edification of it in
Love: Moreover by what is before written, you may understand that the Apostle
through the Grace of God given to him, did warn every Man amongst the believing
Romans, not to think of himself more highly than he ought to think, but to
think soberly according as God had dealt to every man the measure of Faith.

Observe, If every one which profess the Light and Spirit of Christ within to
be their Guide and Teacher, did obey and walk in it, it would teach them all
not to think too highly of themselves, or of their States and Conditions in the
Truth (which some do) and if such of the aforesaid Professors were so Taught,
then would they not think nor speak so highly of themselves or of their Sights,
Knowledge, and Growth in the Truth as they do (far beyond what they really are)
then would they not be so puffed up, self-conceited and unruly as they are;
then would they live quietly, peaceably, and harmlesly among the People of God
to his Glory, and the Comfort of his People, and their own peace and rest,
which some do not, but are contentious, unruly and disorderly, self conceited,
fretful, and clamorous with Tongues and Pens. Oh that they could seek and find
a place of unfeigned Repentance, it would much rejoice my Soul to see it.

Concerning the Living Faith, with its fruits and works.
COncerning Faith, the Apostle thus writ (viz.) Now the just shall live by
Faith; but if any Man draw back, my Soul shall have no pleasure in him (says
the Lord God) but we are not of them who draw back unto perdition, but of them
that believe to the saving of the Soul. -- By Faith the Elders obtained a good
report. -- Through Faith we understand the World was framed by the Word of God
-- By Faith Abel offered unto God a more excellent Sacrifice than Cain. -- By
Faith Enoch was Translated, that he should not see death; -- but without Faith
it is impossible to please God, for he that comes to God, must believe that he
is, and that he is a Rewarder of all them that diligently seek him. By Faith
Noah was warned of God of things not seen as yet, moved with fear prepared an
Ark. -- By Faith Abraham when he was tried offered up Isaac. -- By Faith Moses
when he was come to years, refused to be called the Son of Pharaohs Daughter,
choosing rather to suffer Affliction with the People of God, than to enjoy the
pleasure of sin for a season, esteeming the Reproaches of Christ greater Riches
than the Treasures in Egypt; for he had respect unto the Recompense of Reward;
by Faith he kept the Passover, etc.

I may say with this faithful Author, What shall I more say? for the time would
fail me to tell of Gideon, and of Baruck, and of Sampson, of Jephtha, and of
David also, and of Samuel, and of the Prophets, etc. see Heb. 10. 38, 39. Read
the 11 Chapter through: Habbakkuk 2. 4. Romans 1. 17.

Again, the Apostle Peter writ to the Saints concerning Faith, v^z. Who are
kept by the power of God through Faith unto Salvation, see 1 Pet. 1. 5. Again,
the Author to the Hebrews says, Let us hold fast the Profession of our Faith,
without wavering, Heb. 10. 23. Now the Apostle James who writ of this Faith,
writ also of the works and fruits of it (which the rest also did) hear what he
says in this matter, viz. What does it pr^fit, my Brethren, though a Man say
he has Faith? can Faith save him? If a Brother or Sister be naked and
destitute of daily Food, and one of you say unto them, Depart in peace, be you
warmed and filled; notwithstanding ye give them not th^se things which are
needful to the Body; what does it profit? Even so Faith, if it has not works
is dead being alone, yea a man may say, Thou have Faith, and I have works, show
me thy Faith without thy works, and I will show thee my Fath by my works. Thou
believe there is one God, etc. -- But will thou know, oh vain man, that Faith
without works is dead. Was not Abraham our Father justified by Works. -- see
thou how Faith wrought with his Works and by works was Faith made perfect, and
the Scripture was fulfilled which says Abraham believed God, and was imputed
to him for Righteousness, and he was called the friend of God; ye see then how
that by works a Man is justified and not by Faith only -- for as the Body
without the Spirit is dead, so Faith without Works is dead also, James 2. 14 to
the end.

Again the Apostle John writ to the Children of Light concerning this Faith
viz. For whatsoever is born of God, overcomes the World, and this is the
Victory that overcomes the World, even our Faith, 1 John 5. 4. Again Peter
Exhorts those who were come to some degree of this Faith, saying, Give all
diligence; add to your Faith Virtue, and to Virtue Knowledge, and to Knowledge
Temperance, and to Temperance Patience, and to Patience Godliness, and to
Godliness Brotherly Kindness, and to Brotherly Kindness, Charity; for if these
things be in you and abound, they make you that you shall neither be barren nor
unfruitful in the Knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ; but he that la^keth these
things, is blind, etc. Wherefore the rather, Brethren, give diligence to make
your Calling and Election sure; for if you do these things, you shall never
fall, 2 Pet. 1. 4, 11.

Again, the Apostle Paul writing to the believing Thessalonians, said unto
them, We are bound to thank God always for you, Brethren, as it is meet,
because that your Faith grows exceedingly, and the Charity of every one of
you all toward each other abounds, 2 Thessalonians. 1. 3.

Again, Paul writ to the Galatians, viz. Knowing that a Man is not justified by
the works of the Law, but by the Faith of Jesus Christ; even we have believed
in Jesus Christ, that we might be justified by the Faith of Christ, and not by
the works of the Law; for by the works of the Law shall no flesh be justified;
but if while we seek to be justified by Christ, we our selves are found
sinners; is Christ therefore the Minister of sin? God forbid; for if I build
again the things which I destroyed, I make my self a Transgressor; for I
through the Law am dead to the Law, that I might live unto God; I am Crucified
with Christ, nevertheless I live, yet not I, but Christ lives in me; and the
life which I now live in the flesh; I live by the Faith of the ^on of God, etc.
Gal. 2. 16, 17, 18, 19, 20.

Again, he writ thus to the believing Ephesians, viz. We are Gods ^^^kmanship,
Created in Christ Jesus unto good Works, which God has before ordained we
should walk in them, Ephesians 2. 10.

The same Apostle writing to the believing Philipians, writ thus, viz. For it
is God which works in you ^^th to will and to do, of his own good pleasure;
do all things without murmuring and disputing, that you may be blameless and
harmless the Sons of God; without rebuke, in the midst of a crooked and
perverse Nation, among whom ye shine as Lights in the World, Philip. 2. 13, 14,
15.

Again, he writ to the Ephesians, thus (viz.) Unto him that is able to do
exceeding abundantly above all that we ask or think, according to the power
that works in us, unto him be Glory, in the Church throughout all Ages, world
without end, Amen. Ephesians. 3. 20, 21.

Again, the Author to the Hebrews writing to them, says, viz. Now the God of
Peace, that brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus that great Shepherd of
the Sheep, through the Blood of the Everlasting Covenant, make you perfect in
every good work to do his will; working in you that which is well-pleasing in
his sight, through Jesus Christ, to whom be Glory for; ever and ever; Amen.
Heb. 13. 20, 21.

O all you who profess your selves to be Christians, and to be led and guided
by the Spirit and Light of Christ within; seriously consider of the faithful
sayings of these faithful Apostles and Servants of Christ, concerning Faith in
God, and Christ, and the Gospel, and Christian works, which God in Christ works
in all those who comes to the Baptized by Christ with the Holy Ghost and Fire,
which burns up the works of Satan, to with, Sin, who destroys the old man with
his deeds, which are corrupt, and which renews and restores man again into the
likness or image of God who created him. All who come to drink into the one
Spirit, and be Baptized by it into the one Body, come thereby to be made of one
Heart and Soul, and to Worship and Serve God with one consent; these have not
Faith without Works, which is dead; but they have the living Faith which God
has wrought in them, which by the Apostle is called the Faith of the Operation
or Work of God, and with this living Faith they have the living Works and
Fruits, which Faith and Works, prove them to be the generation and living
offspring of God.

Further observe, How sweetly all the beforementioned Apostles in their
sayings, are in Harmony and Unity, concerning this living Faith and its living
Works or Fruits.

Again observe, Where many Professors of Faith and Christianity have been
grossly mistaken concerning Faith and Works. The Apostle Paul in some of his
Epistles, writing much against the upholding of the shadowy works of the Law,
after Christ had ended them by his one offering, many Professors of
Christianity of latter times have been willing to exclude all works, as with
respect to Salvation or Acceptance with God, under the Gospel dispensation;
though the holy Apostle Exhorted the Believers in Christ, to work out their
Salvation with fear and trembling, saying, It is God that works in you to
will and to do of his own good pleasure. Now the Words which I have here
brought out of Paul's Epistles, with much more of the like nature that may be
found in them (which for brevity I here omit) does and will plainly show that
he did never intend in his writing against the shadowy works of the Law, to
exclude, deny, or make void the substantial, good and living Works of God in
Christ, in his People, under the Gospel dispensation; so that he was of the
same mind concerning Faith and Works with James, Peter and John; so here are
four faithful and honorable Witnesses linked together, in Testimony to the
living Faith which God works in his People, and the living Works and Fruits
which accompany it, Glory to the Lord God for the same: and those Four faithful
Witnesses to the living Faith, its Fruits and Works as aforesaid, are also
faithful Witnesses against the dead Faith and dead Works of the Professors of
Christianity in our Age, who notwithstanding their high Notions and talk of
Faith, Election, Redemption, Salvation, etc. are yet dead in their Trespasses
and in their Sins. The Apostle John writ to the Saints, saying, This is the
Victory over the World, even your Faith. And Christ says, If you have Faith as
a grain of Mustard Seed, if you shall say unto this Mountain be thou removed,
and to this Hill be thou cast into the Sea, they shall obey you. -- But they
that are yet (dead) in their Trespasses and Sins, pleading they must continue
therein all their days upon Earth. Their dead Faith has not given them Victory
over the World, neither can it; for as they are taught by the Serpent to
believe, that they must live in sin all their days, according to this ungodly
belief, they submit themselves to him, and he leads them into sin, and they
multiply their sin daily, as they say; and such are not in the strait and
narrow way they talk of, but in the broad way, that leads to destruction. Oh!
that they would turn in their minds to the Light of Christ Jesus, and believe
in it, and diligently seek a place of Repentance; that they might find it, and
so return to God from Satan and their Sins, which while they abide in
subjection to, holds them in a Separation from God, from peace and rest with
him, and from Unity with his chosen; whatsoever they do or may imagine or say
to the contrary, they will find this true at last.

Again, these in their dead Faith and works of Sin have not known Gods wondrous
and miraculous works yet wrought in them, to throw down the Hills and Mountains
of Sin and Wickedness, which the Devil, who abode not in the Truth, in whom
there is no Truth, has raised up in them, to wit, Pride, self-Exaltation,
vain, freshly, earthly Glory, etc. for as the Apostle says, All that is in the
World, the lust of the flesh, and the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life,
is not of the Father, but is of this World, and this World passes away, and
the Lusts thereof; but he that does the Will of God abides for ever; except a
man be regenerate and born again, he cannot see the Kingdom of God, and the
blind who does never see it, is never like to inherit it.

Now all you who do not only profess Christ as the beforementioned Professors
do, but also profess his Spirit and Light within to be your Teacher ( which
they do not) who profess according to John Baptists Testimony, and the
Testimony of Daniel the Prophet, that Christ the Lamb of God, is the sent One
of the Father, and is come to take away the sins of the World, to put an end to
sin, to finish transgression, to bring in everlasting Righteousness; all be
retired in the spirit of your Minds, to the Divine Light of Christ Jesus,
wherewith you are lighted, and therein wait to receive and keep a right sense
of your Conditions; see how you have taken up your Cross, and how you bear it,
and what the fruits and effects of your bearing of it are; see that the hills
and mountains of sin be overturned in you, and the rough places made smooth in
you, and the Valley exalted in you; for who have not known these wonderful
works of God, wrought in them, they are yet short of the possession or sitting
down in the Inheritance of the Kingdom of God and of his Christ, which consists
or stands in Righteousness, Peace and Joy in the Holy Ghost; for through the
Righteous and Fiery Judgments of God inwardly must sinful Man come, before he
can draw near to God, see his Kingdom, or have a place in it; this fiery
Baptism they must come through wherewith Christ Jesus the power and wisdom of
God Baptizeth all who believe in him, and in his Divine Light patiently and
constantly wait to be made new Creatures by him. It is true what the Apostle
has writ, If any Man be in Christ, he is a new Creature, old things are done
away, and all things are become new, and all things are of God; for as he also
says, They that are Christ's, have Crucified the flesh with the Affections and
Lusts.

Again observe, That if any person professing to be led and guided by the
Divine Light of Christ within, and that he or she believes the beforementioned
Testimonies concerning Christ, viz. That he is come to put an end to sin, and
bring in everlasting Righteousness, to enable his People to perfect Holiness in
his Fear, according to what God has promised, and his Servants have writ and
spoken, if such person or persons so professing, continue in a loose and sinful
Conversation, whether they be called Quakers, or by what other name soever,
their Sin is not less but much more grievous to Almighty God, than the sins of
the beforementioned, who have not yet come to be opened so far as to
understand what the Light of Christ within is: Therefore do not make profession
to be taught and guided by it: but those loose and sinful Professors of the
Light of Christ within, if they did ever really come to the Light they make
profession of, and in any measure obey it, then were their hearts opened
thereby to understand and know sin, and the displeasure of God against it more
than the beforementioned; and so the Judgment of God will fall more heavy on
them (if they repent not, and come not to walk orderly, as becomes the Gospel)
than upon others who have not known so much as they have known, and therefore
are not guilty of the sin of Rebellion, so much as they are; for Rebellion is
as the sin of Witcheraft, as it is written: And he that knows his Masters will,
and does it not, he shall be beaten with many stripes, as it is also written.

Again observe, such loose Professors of the Light of Christ within, may boast
and talk of their Faith in God, and Christ, and the Divine Light within, of
living without Sin, of Perfection, or of perfecting Holiness in Gods Fear, yet
being out of the Light and Life of Christ in Death and Darkness, and the Works
and Fruits thereof, It is but Death and Darkness in them, which talks of Light,
and Life, and Faith, Holiness, Perfection, etc. Their talk of these good things
with their Mouths, is an Abomination to God Almighty, while their hearts are
far away from him, while they are not in the Love and Obedience to God and
Christ, and his Divine Light they make profession of; such profession without
Subjection and Obedience, God does reject, it is loathsome to him, neither can
his tender people whom he has sanctified by his Spirit of Judgment and
Burning, have unity with these dead talkers, nor their dead words and works for
Light has no communion with Darkness, though Darkness talk of Light.

Something concerning Self Separation.
JVDE the Servant of Christ writ concerning the Self-Separated ones, thus, viz.
they are the RAging Waves of the Sea, foaming out their own shame, to whom is
reserved the mist of Darkness for ever, and Enoch also the seventh from Adam,
prophesied of those, saying, Behold the Lord c^meth in Ten thousands of his
Saints (mark so it is rendered from the Greek, and is so in some English
Translations) to execute Judgment upon all, and to convince all that are
ungodly amongst them, of all their ungodly deeds which they have ungodlily
committed, and of all their hard speeches, which ungodlily they have spoken
against him, etc. these be they who separate themselves, sensual, having not
the Spirit. -- But ye, Beloved, building up your selves in your most holy
Faith, praying in the Holy Ghost, keep your selves in the Love of God, looking
for the Mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ unto Eternal Life, and of some have
compassion, making a difference, and others save with fear, hating even the
Garment spotted by the Flesh. Now unto him that is able to keep you from
falling, before the presence of his Glory, with exceeding Joy, to the only wise
God our Savior, be Glory and Majesty, Dominion and Power, now and ever, Amen.
Jude 13 and 19 to the end, see also 1 Timothy 4. 1. 2 Timothy 3. 1. 2 Pet 3. 3.

Oh my dear Friends, seriously consider that as in the Primitive Gospel days,
there were such Self-separated ones, makers of Sects or Parties, which caused
great grief and deep Exercise to the Faithful in Christ Jesus; some such like
have been in our Age, and some such like yet are, who having been convinced of
the Truth, have come amongst us under the Christian Profession of the Spirit
and Light of Christ within, who for some time did in some measure follow and
obey the Teachings of it, but have since turned from it, yet keep in a
Profession of it; these are they who separate themselves without it, in
opposition to it, and the Children of it, blessed be God that their number is
but small; but alas! they are too many, for we have received the mind of God,
and Christ (and his Apostles) whose will was, and is, that all Men might know
the Truth, and not only know it, but obey it, that so they might be saved; but
alas! a few restless spirited Instruments of Satan, who under the pretense of
the Spirit and Light of Christ, make War against the God of Peace, against
Christ the Prince of Peace, and against the Subjects of his Peaceable Kingdom;
these are in danger to deceive others, and bring them to be restless like
themselves; the Lord in Mercy stop these evil Works and Workers. Oh that there
might be a place of Repentance yet found by them! Oh that they could yet see
from whence they are fallen, and Repent, and come into that simplicity and
loving and peaceable frame of mind, into which the Truth had once in some
measure drawn them Oh! this would be matter of great joy to those whom they in
their darkness account their Enemies; as some ^loting dark Notionists did the
faithful Apostle Paul, for his faithful and steadfast Testimony against their
Looseness, Confusion and Disorder. It is my steadfast belief in God, that he
will not long suffer this Evil Work to go on to the grief of his People, and
the indangering the loss of Souls, but he will plead with these Evil Workers,
these Serpentine wise and self-conceited, he will stop and drive them backward,
and woe will be to them if they cannot find a place of Repentance, which will
be hard for some of them to find; they have so highly magnified themselves
against God, his Tabernacle, and them that dwell in Heaven; but as Jude the
Servant of Christ, well observed in his Epistle, that there was a difference to
be put betwixt them who were so gone out into disorder, looseness, or confusion
in his time; some no doubt of those, were unwarily, through the subtilty of
Satan's Agents, drawn from the simplicity, honest mindedness, and good
intention, which the Spirit of Truth had wrought in them, into ungodly
Jealousies and a wrong liberty from their obedience to the Cross of Christ.
Jude saw there was a Compassion to such, and therefore wisely in the Wisdom of
God put the Churches in mind of it, and we are sensible such there has been in
our day, who has been betrayed and prevailed upon by Satan and his Agents, as
aforesaid; these have been sought in the Love of God and Bowels of Jesus
Christ, their Advocate with the Father, traveling for them in his Faithful
ones, who has kept their Habitation in God, and we have seen the travels and
desires of our Souls answered, in their returning into Unity with God and his
People, through their unfeigned Repentance and Condemnation upon the Spirit of
Darkness (which led them from God) and upon the evil Words and Works it led
them into, and we believe that there are diverse that yet remain in the same
Snare, for whose return to God we travelin Spir it, and Hope that we shall see
the Fruit of the Travel of our Souls in the Love and Power of God, for their
good, and shall have cause to rejoice and praise God for the same.

Wherefore, oh my dear and well beloved Friends, who are exercised by these
sorts of Evil Agents, and their Evil Works, under a spacious profession of the
Light, Grace, and Spirit of Christ, and the Teachings of it, All keep in the
love of God, and in the patience of Jesus Christ: let Patience have its perfect
work in those your deep Tribulations and sorrowful Exercises: fret not because
of evil Men, nor their evil Works, for behold the Judge of Heaven and Earth, he
sees them and you; he will not suffer you to be tried by them above what he
will give you Ability to travel through without hurt, and fear, without loss or
disadvantage to your Eternal Estates, if you diligently wait upon him, and
move, speak, and act in his Council. It is true which was anciently written by
an Experienced Man of God, Tribulation works Patience, and Patience
Experience, and Experience Hope, and the living Hope is as an Anchor which is
sure and steadfast; so keep this living Hope, that none of you may faint in'this
or any other Exercise which you undergo for Christ's and the Gospels sake, but
all wait diligently upon the living God, who daily renew^ the strength of his
People, so that they can truly say, Sufficient is the day to the Evil thereof;
and can truly say, The Lord is our Rock and our Salvation, and we cannot fear
what man can do unto us, he is an Everlasting Sun unto us, who gives us his
Light to walk in, in which there is no occasion of stumbling; which Light
shines in the Diligent, Watchful, and Obedient ones more and more, unto the
perfect day, our God is a Shield unto his People, to defend them against the
Arrows of the Destro^er; he Arms his Lambs and Children with his ^ight and
Power, whereby the Fiery Darts of Satan are quenched. Eternal Glory to his
honorable and powerful Name, for evermore, Amen, Amen.

Oh my dear Friends, keep close to the powerful Spirit of Truth in all your
Exercises, and particularly when you are Exercised with this sort of Evil
Agents; keep close to the power of God, that in that you may feel that you have
the command of your own Spirits, that no wrong or unnatural heats, sharpness or
false fire may be kindled by you or any of you, but that your Minds and Spirits
may be kept steady and cool in the Lambs patience; for that will lead to run
the race to the end, and will give the Victory: take heed and keep out of too
many words, with restless discontented persons, under the Profession of the
Truth, whose evil life and strength stands in multiplying words, wilfully
striving for Victory or Mastery in a fretful, lofty, and impatient frame of
mind; and also beware of such who are smooth and subtle in their contending
against Truth and its Children, lest any of you be drawn out thereby to the
disadvantage of Truth, hurting of your own Souls, and strengthening the
Unrighteous in their way; but all be steady in your Testimony, against deceit
in all things: and all Friends Male and Female, keep your Meetings in the Light
and Power of God, and in them serve God and each other faithfully; be tender
and wise in your carriage one toward another, at all times, particularly in
your Meetings; hear one another tenderly, in a right frame of mind and in good
order; and if weakness appear in those who intend well in their speaking about
Truths concerns in your Meetings, or that weakly manage any thing of Truths
concerns, either in your Meetings or at other times, let them be tenderly
spoken to in the Order of Truth, at seasonable times, that such may be helped,
and Peace and Unity preserved, and all that avoided that tends to bring forth
contrary Effects; and cherish and encourage one another in your several
Service, that ye may be mutually refreshed together therein, and that your
precious unity and fellowship may be preserved without breach, and grow and
flourish more and more, that the fruits of Righteousness may be more and more
plentifully sown and reaped amongst you, to the Glory and Praise of the great
God, whose building and husbandry you are; and living Branches in Christ the
Heavenly Vine, bringing for^h more and more Fruit in him, to the Glory of God
the Father, who is worthy of Glory over all Heaven and Earth for evermore. Amen.

And my dear Friends, be very careful that none of you go into too many words
in Dispute or Argument for, or in the Defense, or Commendation of those good
things which God has led you into (in which you are opposed by some who
profess the Light of Christ within to be their Guide and Teacher, and by them
reproached and derided for your obedience to God therein:) but let those good
things speak forth their own worth and praise, in their good Fruits and Effects
in and by you, to the Glory of God, and to your Profit, Comfort and
Justification; and to the cutting off occasion from those who watch for, and
seek occasion against you. And to the Convincement of such Gainsayers, who have
not sinned out the day of Gods tender Visitation to them; and for the staying,
preserving, and effectually convincing such who are not clear in their
understandings concerning those things, but are in some degree hurt and darkened
by the Evil Example, Words, and Actions, of some Evil Agents, whom Satan has
made Instruments of Evil to them; yet do they not wilfully, scornfully, or
maliciously oppose, or strive against Friends in those good things God has led
them into; but being short in their understandings and wrong, jealousies and
doubts having entered them, they do not freely join with Friends in some things
which God has led them into, wherein he is honored and his People profitted.

Oh my dear Friends, he who wins Souls to God, is wise in the Wisdom of God,
which is Pure and Peaceable. God Almighty enrich his People every where more
and more with his precious Heavenly Wisdom, that in it they may serve him and
each other in unfeigned Love, that therein their Peace and Unity may remain and
increase daily more and more to his Eternal honor and our everlasting profit
and comfort; even so Amen, says my Soul.


