The Gentlemen Wool Merchants and Serge-buyers CASE.
Showing,
THE Engrossing the Wool of Ireland into private Hands, projected by some
particular Factors upon Commission for Foreigners, is highly prejudicial to the
public Trade of the Nation, will keep down the price of English Wool, and
lessen the value of our Lands in England, by causing the Rents to fall.

These Sergebuyers Factors to Foreigners upon the Credit of their great and
large Commissions, draw all the Sergemakers about the Country to court them for
a Market and Sale of their Serges, which they take in from the Country at their
own Rates and Prices, commonly without any certain Price, or fixed time of
payment. And thereby these Factors have generally in their Hands very great
Sums of the Country's Money (that is, value in Serges) for which they neither
give Bill nor Bond. The Sergemaker having no other so certain and ready Market
to depend upon, are miserably awed and subjected to these great Factors, that
they dare not dispute or ask for Money in four, five, six; or eight Months time;
and can rarely get enough to support the poor Labourer, the Comber and Spinner
with daily Bread; but now some few of these Factors are not content and
satisfied with this great and profitable Commission Trade, and the Credit of
forty or fifty thousand Pounds of the Country's Money in their Hands at a time,
without giving Bill or Bond for the same, as is above set forth. But they
proceed further, to employ and settle Factors of their own in the Kingdom of
Ireland, particularly in the chief Cities and Towns of Trade, as in Dublin,
Cork, Waterford, etc. to ingross and buy up all the Wool in that Kingdom they
can lay their Hands upon, which they import into England, and impose upon the
Sergemakers they owe Money to for their Serges, 6d. 8d. 12d. per Stone, and more
above the Market Price; So that by this Method and Practice, in Fact they buy
up Serges here in England upon Credit without Money, and Wool in Ireland with
the Country's Money: The Irish Bills of Exchange being answered and paid in
London by the Foreign Bills remitted them for Serges. Thus the poor Sergemaker
is shamefully abused, being forced to take Wool after a strange manner, bought
with his own Money, which they privately pack up, and send about the Country, to
the poor sort of Sergemakers Houses, who must take it, and dare not refuse it
in what condition soever, wet or damnisied, as oftentimes it happens to be: By
this evil Practice they break and forestall the Staple Markets. And to further
and force this unfair Trade, they seldom will buy Serges from any, but those
that will take Wool from them; their common Answer being, your Serges do not
smell of my Wool: So that the Sergemaker dares not buy a lock of Wool from any
Body but them. And the poorer sort at least (whose whole Stocks lie in their
Hands) has command of neither Money, nor Bill, to buy as formerly from the
Gentleman and Farmer, or to come to the Staple Ports and open fair Markets,
where great quantities of Wool are always to be bought at current Price: And it
must be observed, the breaking the ancient Staple Ports and Markets for Wool,
and letting it thus fall into private Hands, more especially into Men's Hands
that are in the Interest of Foreigners, whose business is to buy up Serges as
cheap as they can, his Commission being greatest that can serve their Interest
best and buy cheapest. This, with humble Submission, if rightly considered,
must appear a Mischief of the highest Consequence to the Trade of this Kingdom,
and perfectly destructive to every Gentleman and Farmer's Sale of his Wool And
if the Causes of the present low and dead Price of Wool be nicely inquired
into, There does not appear a greater than these Sergebuyers engrossing,
private Selling, Forestalling, forcing and breaking the open fair Markets; and
allowing but other Markets for Cattle, etc. to be so broke, forced, and
forestalled; every Gentleman would soon feel the Consequence; and surely no
particular Commodity ought more to be preserved than the noble Staple of Wool
this Kingdom so justly values herself upon.

This Evil being grown to that pitch and height in three Years time, that no
Merchant that is not a Serge-buyer and Wool-Trucker as themselves can deal in
Wool but to loss, being perfectly beat out of the ancient Trade and Way of
living both in England and Ireland, and to become Agents to these Men to their
Mortification.

So that it is evident these sort of Men must have the whole Market for Irish
Wool to themselves, which is a great Quantity, and of a vast Value: And of
consequence the prices both of Wool and Serges will be in a very little time
entirely in their Power, if not prevented.

The Engrossing the Wool of Ireland (upon a quite different purpose, viz. to
advance and keep up the Price of English Wool) has been attempted by several
Bodies of Men, but was always found too big to be mastered whilst the Markets
were kept open. But now by this Foreign Assistance and Method it is to be done,
and is already in a great measure effected.

2. These Serge-buyers and Wool-Truckers getting so very considerably by the
Wool they dispose off after that manner, they can serve the Foreigner much
cheaper than any other Factor and Serge-buyer that is not concerned in Wool,
which makes them all very uneasy, and to declare publicly, that they must
likewise come into the Wool-trucking Trade too, or lay down their Commissions.
And yet notwithstanding it may not be amiss to observe, that these Men in
Prudence (although they wish heartily a stop may be put to this Practice) are
afraid to appear to prosecute this matter in Parliament, least they should by
these Wool Trucking Merchants be represented Enemies to the Interest and Profit
of those Foreigners they have Imploys from, and so lose their Commissions. And
the poorer sort of Serge-makers, whose whole Stocks are in their Hands, lie
under a greater fear of being more oppressed if they should appear and the
Design not succeed and take effect.

The Continuance of this Trucking Trade will force the Serge-maker to make
deceitful trucking Goods, to the Discredit of the Manufactory, or leave off the
Trade. And the Gentleman and Farmer in a short time must come to the
Serge-buyer for a Market for their Wool at his Price.

The Grievance of this trucking Trade in other Cases having already been
censured, condemned, and provided against by a Law, it is conceived that matter
needs not again in this Paper to be enlarged upon. But only to observe, That
notwithstanding there is still a sort of Men amongst us, that for their own
private Interest would unmercifully oppress and inslave Mankind were it in
their Power.

To conclude therefore, hoping what has been offered (though a great deal remains
to be said) may be sufficient to convince the World this Project wholly tends
to the Ruin of our Trade, the Inslaving and Impoverishing our People, and the
Interest and Benefit of Foreign Nations.

All which is humbly Submitted to the Wisdom of the Nation.


