SINIOPPAGIA, THE Sifters Sieve broken. OR, A REPLY To Doctor Boughen's sifting
my Case of Conscience touching the Kings Coronation Oath.

WHEREIN IS cleared,
That Bishops are not Jure Divino. That their sole Government, without the help
of Presbyters, is an usurpation, and an innovation. That the Kings Oath at
Coronation, is not to be extended to preserve Bishops, with the ruin of
Himself and Kingdom.


Secundum honorum vocabula, quae jam Ecclesiae usus obtinuit, Episcopatus
Presbyterio major. Aug. Ep. 19.

Communi Presbyterorum consilio regebantur Ecclesiae: Hieron. in Tit. 1.

Let the Peace of God rule, and sway in your hearts; to the which also, ye are
called in one body, Col. 3.15.

By John Geree, M. A. and Pastor of St. Faiths under Paul's, in London.

LONDON, Printed for Christopher Meredith, at the sign of the Crane in Paul's
Churchyard, 1648.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFUL Sir Francis Nethersole, of Nethersole, Knight: Grace
and Peace.
Much Honored Sir,
THough the great respect, which you have been pleased to vouchsafeme, might be
engagement sufficient to this Scholastical gratitude; Yet the suitableness of
the subject, added much to my inclination, in this way, to let the world know,
that I am in the number of those, who are grateful honourers of your Learning,
and Godliness. The Book I present to you, is Polemical; But the intention of my
contention is Irenical. As it is Polemical, your learning renders you able to
judge of it. As it is Irenical, your piety (which bears the old stamp) will
incline you to embrace it; for all that know you thoroughly, will give you
testimony, to be a lover of peace, as it is a thing commanded of God, not as it
is popular, and pleasing to men; And that you have been a perswader of it; not
for private, but public interest; not because it is easy, but holy; having
had as deep a sense, as any, of the sad sufferings of your dear Country, in
her honor, strength, wealth, and Religion, by the present unnatural War.

Sr, In this Paper-Combat, I have met with such an Adversary, as makes me need,
not only candor, but succor; yet not against his subtilties, but calumnies;
Neither this, to those that know me, but to strangers: for his personal
criminations, are such gross mistakes, that they will render him ridiculous, to
all that understand my judgment and carriage in these present distractions. But
yet they may make me odious, where I am unknown; as I am to most of those of
quality, whom this Reply should satisfy. Sir, If your name and testimony, free
my person from prejudice with such, that they may ponder the Argument in an
equal balance, I have enough; for I never desire more from any Reader, then
what the weight of unprejudiced Reason inclines him to give. Controversies are
of themselves troublesome; especially when they come to Replies, and
Rejoynders. Therefore, that I may not add to your trouble, with a long Epistle,
praying for an increase of your graces, and blessing on your self, yours, and
all your good endeavors, especially those, for an happy Peace; I take leave,
and remain

Sir, From my Study in Ivy-Lane, Sept. 18. 1648. Yours to serve you in the Lord
Jesus, John Geree.

The Preface to the Reader.
PARAG. I. Detecting the false unjust, and uncharitable dealing of Doctor
Boughen, in his Sifting my Case of Conscience Resolved. Whereby it may appear,
whose Sieve he used civiov Graece cribrum est apud Hesychium and (...) cribrare
apud eundem. Came. Myroth. Evang. in luc. 22.31.
(...) Cribrari to Sift this Resolution.
Christian Reader,
I HERE Present unto thee a Reply to an Answer made to a Book of mine, by a man
I know not; and it seems I am not known to him. For in it, he charge me not
only with error in judgment, which is incident to man, Humanum est errare: But
also imputes to me pravity of intention, both to King and Kingdom, which is
Diabolicum, the Character of those, whom Satan possesses, filling their hearts
with such corrupt affections. Now to manifest my innocence, and (at the best)
the Doctors great mistake in these accusations, I know no better way, then that
which Paul took, in a case of malicious accusation before Festus, and King
Agrippa, Acts 26. verse 4. To lay open what my manner of carriage has been, in
this present National difference; all the irregularities whereof, on one side
my Opponent lays throughout his Book to my charge. Thou may therefore
understand; That in these late unnatural distempers of our Church and Nation, I
have been a zealous Studier of Peace, and an hearty mourner, not only for the
sins, but the hard and irregular sufferings of either party. And have been
conscientiously tender of that duty, wherein, either by the Word of God, or the
legal oaths of this Nation, I stood engaged to my Sovereign. Hence have I, both
suffered for him, and with him. And in my sympathy, I was pierced the deeper,
because I could not but look upon his sufferings, as reflecting scandal on our
Religion, and Nation. Neither knew I how to excuse those, whom I was bound in
conscience, in so great a degree, to love, and honor in their places (as well
as his Majesty;) that not to be able to clear them, was (I truly profess) as
David's sword in my bones. Psalm. 42.10.
This made me restless in my spirit, while there was any thing (within my
sphere) for me to do, whereby any, the least, probability appeared to further
accommodation. For I stood in dread of a prolonged Civil War, not only because
it would hazard the Honor, and Weal of King and Parliament, in whose Union
and mutual safety, was involved the Glory, Strength, and Liberty of this
Nation; But also, because I foresaw what sluices it would set wide open to all
excess of riot. And the further the War proceeded, the more was I confirmed in
my sad prognostics of it; For it seemed evident, that though the pretenses for
War were specious, viz. Truth, and Purity: Either of which, is more precious
then Peace; yet unless, by some happy accommodation, War were shortened, we
were in great danger to be no small losers, both in Truth and Holiness. Hereupon
I drew up a Treatise of accommodation, pressing it with Arguments, by mutual
condescension. Which so far had the approbation of some peaceable men of
quality, that had not some cross accidents prevented, it may be, it might have
seen the light.

While my thoughts were still busied about peace, we had intelligence, where I
lived, that the King, sending from Oxford to the Parliament, for a Treaty for
Accommodation; had by the Earl of Essex, the Lord General, a short answer
returned, with a Copy of the National Covenant enclosed in it. The English
whereof was interpreted to be, that unless the Covenant were taken, no
accommodation could be expected; thereupon I took a serious view of the
Covenant, to see what was in it, that might cause unanswerable scruple. The
result of my thoughts was, that except the second Article about Episcopacy,
(mutatis mutandis, those things being altered, that upon Accommodation must
have admitted alteration) there was nothing, that might greatly scruple, a
mind moderate and peaceable. And for that second Article, considering the
government of the Church by Bishops, was never determined by our Church to be
Jure Divino; And that we acknowledge, as Sisters, those Churches that have
admitted Presbytery; And since what is Humane, is, upon good and weighty
motives, alterable; And what more weighty motive can be to induce a Prince, to
consent to alter what is alterable, then to preserve three flourishing Churches
and Kingdoms, from blood and ashes? The only difficulty, I apprehended, in
reference to his Majesty, in that Article (supposing him to be of the same
judgment, with this most learned Father, touching Episcopacy, in his Basilicon
Doron) rested in his oath at Coronation; which I had read urged strongly, but
modestly, in an Anonymus Book, written on the Royal side about this War; and
afterward pressed with more violence, in a Treatise against the Covenant.

On these Books, therefore I resolved to make an assay, whether what was
objected in that particular, were solveable. And on this occasion was the Case
Resolved first compiled. Which having finished, I communicated to one of the
Kings Chaplains (as learned, rational, and sincerely affected to his Majesty,
as Doctor Boughen, though not so froward) who agreed with me in desiring, and
endeavoring accommodation. He presented it to a Counselor of State, (a lover
of peace, and in good esteem with his Majesty;) What use he made of it, I know
not. But mine own Copy lay dead in my hands, till the King went from Oxford
into the Scots Army; By whom being brought to New Castle, his Majesty had
diverse disputes with Master Hinderson about this very subject; which occasioned
me to re-view my notes, and show them to a learned friend, who judging them not
contemptible, told the Scots Ministers of the Assembly, of such a Tract that he
had seen; whereupon they earnestly desired it, either in Print, or in Writing.
On this occasion, after some months, if not years, it saw the light. And some
Copies being given to the Scots Commissioners, they presented one to the King,
who read it, and (if my Intelligencer fail me not) though he received not
satisfaction by it, yet his censure of it, did neither discover passion, nor
contempt, but the contrary.

But Quorsum haec? That the Reader may know, with what an innocent, and upright
heart, my Case of Conscience Resolved was composed. The main intention of it
being nothing, but a good accommodation, for the honor and safety of
Sovereign, and Country. That thereby, not only the uncharitableness, but the
impertinency; falseness, and injustice, may appear, of those bitter calumnies,
that are every where scattered in the Answerers Treatise, like Ulcers in an
unsound Body, of which his two Epistles are not free, which come first to
receive Animadversions.

PARAG. II. ANIMADVERSIONS on Doctor Boughen's two Epistles, clearing the
Author of the Case Resolved, from imputations of sleighting Authority, and
retorting them on the Accuser.
DOctor Boughen dedicates his Book to the King, and gives his reason, because,
It is a Justification of his Coronation Oath, of his Crown and Dignity; And the
fairest Flower of it,Spreamacy.

Touching the Oath, we shall consider in the body of the Book it self. But what
speaks he of defending the Kings Crown and dignity? As though that were
endangered, by the Case Resolved. Whereas the occasion and intention of that
Treatise, was, (as the Introduction expresses, and the matter evidenceth) to
prevent that great hazard of both, which since they have undergone. And was
written by one, as well affected to his Majesty's Crown and dignity, and, I
doubt, more sincerely then D. B. is. Nor has he more need to defend the Kings
Supreamacy, from any danger that it was in by my Book; For I doubt not, but
(when I come to the last Chapter of his Book, wherein the point of Supreamacy
is handled) to make it evident, that I have detracted nothing of that
Supreamacie, which the King does challenge; Nor, what I had not warrant for,
from his Majesty's own Pen; No, nor, but what this Answerer himself is forced
to relinquish, while, and where he makes a Mimick show of opposition.

There is one passage more in this Epistle, which I cannot pass by. Where he
has spoken of one, That during the Eclipse of Heaven, durst acknowledge our
Saviors Kingdom, etc. He interrogates (with reference to the King) and shall I
be ashamed to do the like? Give me leave Sir, to answer your question. No wise
men will think you need be ashamed of Dedicating a book to his Majesty, though
under an Eclipse. But they may doubt, whether you may not be ashamed of making
a question of it. 2. And more, whether you may not be ashamed of representing
the Author, you answer, as an enemy to the Kings Crown and Dignity; when the
Treatise it self bespeaks him quite the contrary. 3. But most of all, whether
you may not be ashamed of dedicating a Book, better stored with railing then
reason, to so rational a Prince.

In his Epistle to the Reader, he tells him, How being moved by a Friend, to
consider of my Case of Conscience, etc. he was willing to undeceive his seduced
Countrymen; and so yielded to his request, and found the Treatise small, but
dangerous. It aims at the ruin, both of Church and Kingdom. It persuades the
King, that his oath at Coronation, is a wicked oath, and that he ought to break
it; yea, he affirms it to be vinculum iniquitatis, the bond of iniquity. No
sooner read I this, (says the Doctor) but my heart was hot within me; and
while I was musing on this, Psalm. 39.4.
and the like Blasphemies, the fire kindled within me, and at the last, I spoke
with my tongue; Why should this Shimei blaspheme my Lord the King? etc.

Bloody words; but the Prudent Reader will remember, Si satis sit accusari,
quis erit^innocens? If accusation be sufficient proof of a crime, who shall be
innocent? And I doubt not, but, by a fair Apology, to stop the mouth of this
Slanderer; 2 Samuel 16.4.6, 7, 8.
and prove him to play Ziba's, while I clear my self from acting Shimei's part.
For first, whereas he says, that 'this Treatise aims at the ruin, both of the
Church and Kingdom. This is most notoriously false; the scope of it being
expressed in the very entrance of it, to be the preservation of both, by Union
and Accommodation. For want of which, how both have been hazzarded, is evident
to every prudent observer of things. Again, for that he says, That I tell the
"King, that his Coronation Oath is a wicked oath, yea, affirm it to be,
vinculum iniquitatis, the bond of iniquity: This is, in part, false, in part
uncharitable, and crafty wresting words, to draw blood out of them; For there
is no such expression in all my Book, as that the Kings oath at Coronation, is
a wicked oath. And though I use the term, vinculum iniquitatis, yet by the
expressions annexed, if he had set them down, there would have appeard no such
vileness in it, as he interprets it; the words are thus; [The bond of the Kings
oath, may be taken off two ways, either by clearing the unlawfulness of it,
that it was vinculum iniquitatis, and so void the first day, etc.] Now here the
Reader may observe, that vinculum iniquitatis, was used by me, only to note
the unlawfulness of the oath in that particular; and its an usual phrase, to
note the unlawfulness of the matter in any oath; yet I did not English it,
because it might seem harsher in our Language. Besides, I did not assert, that
the Kings oath was unlawful in that point, unless it did engage him to maintain
Episcopacy, as then it stood, which the King has declared it did not, in that
he has offered their regulation by Presbyters. How false then is the Doctor in
this also, in positively affirming, that I make the kings oath, vinculum
iniquitatis? When I do it, only upon a supposition, which the king denies;
yea, and which I did imagine the king might deny; and so declined that way of
invalidating the bond of the kings oath, as appears plainly in my Treatise. But
whether that argument that I brought, did prove it unlawful, to swear to
maintain the Bishops in the power they then executed, will appear, when I come
to discover the sillyness of the Doctors Answer. And if the oath be proved in
that sense unlawful, then I hope tits no offense, but necessary in dispute, so
to call it; unless we be to flatter Superiors in what ever they do; and so not
honor, but Idolize them, and lay snares for their feet.

But with musing on these, and other blasphemies, fire was kindled in the
Doctor. What were these other blasphemies? Those he names not, nor are we ever
like to know. But that the fire was kindled, is evident by the fruits of it;
but such a fire, that I doubt not, but that the Reader will judge, that he
might for it, more pertinently have cited James 3.6. then Psalm. 39.4.

After, to present me more odious, he cites a place out of Doctor Burgess's
fire of the Sanctuary, touching imprecations, and Seditious raylings against
the Rulers of the people, and rude, bitter, unseemly speeches uttered against
them. Also out of Master Wards Sermon before the Commons, about suffering vile
men to blaspheme, and spit in the face of authority. And affirms, all this
Master Geree has done undeservedly. Has he used imprecations, or bitter
railings against the Prince? Has he used rude, bitter, unseemly speeches
against him? Has he blasphemed, or spit in the face of Authority? Convince all
these, or any of these; and you shall find him ready to repent, and ask God,
and his Prince forgiveness. But if he has not done all, no, nor any of these,
then is Doctor Boughen a malicious Slanderer; and whose agent he is, in these
accusations, he may easily see, if he be pleased to view, Joh. 8.44. and Revel.
12.10. But has not Doctor Boughen in truth done that to the Parliament, which
he falsely accuses me to have done against the Prince? And is not the
Parliament an Assembly of Gods, Psalm 82.1? And nearest in honor and Authority
to the king? Nay, has not he done worse to the king, then any thing that he
lays to my charge? For is not perjurie worse, then through incogitancie to
swear to some thing that seems good, but is not lawful? (which is all that can
be objected to me to have said in reference to the King.) And does not Doctor
Boughen (while he says, to abolish Episcopacie is no more against the kings
oath, then to take away their Votes in the House of Peers, page 87. and that he
cannot consent to abolish Episcopacy without perjurie, page 123. charge the
king with perjurie, in consenting to a Bill, for taking away the Bishops
privilege, of Sitting and Voting in the House of Peers? Then let him consider,
who is nearer Simon Magus, and who has more need to pray forgiveness in this
particular. As touching Simon Magus; I am sure I never profer'd money for any
Ecclesiastical Gifts, nor Livings, and so am free from Simony. And to clear me
from being a Magician, I Printed a Book against judicial Astrology at the same
time with the Treatise, which the Doctor would Answer; which has nettl'd Lily,
and Booker, (no great friends to the king) near as much, as my Case Resolved,
did Doctor Boughen.

He closes with two things. First, He that answers a "Book, is bound to
confute all, but what he approves. This I deny, unless he mean all that is
pertinent and weighty: For impertinent triflings and railings (of which the
Doctors Book has too much) deserve no answer, nor the waste of Paper. The
other is, The guides he wishes the Reader to "be led by in judging, viz.
Reason, Scriptures and Authority. And therein, I fully close with him, so far
as Authority, the third, is guided by the two former, Scriptures and Reason: And
so far only it deserves respect. And thus far for his Epistles.

Reader observe, that in this Treatise, D. B. stands for Doctor Boughen, And D.
D. for Doctor in Divinity.

The Contents of the several Chapters.
CHAP. I. ANimadversions on Doctor Boughen's first chapter, wherein he plays
with the Introduction to the dispute; and herein is discovered his subtilty in
the whole, and ridiculous trifling in this part of his book. Page 1. Chap. 2.
Wherein is cleared, that the National Covenant is not to abolish Episcopacie,
root, and branch: Nor is Episcopvcie of Christ's institution: in answer to
Doctor Boughen's second chapter. page 6. Chap. 3. Wherein it is cleared, That
Prelacy, as it stood in England, was an usurpation on the office of Presbyters:
In answer to Doctor Boughen's third Chapter. p. 15. Chap. 4. Parag. 1. Wherein
it is cleared, That Episcopacie is not to be upheld by our Protestation, and
that there may be ordination without it, in answer to Doctor Boughen's fourth
Chapter. p. 20. Chap. 4. Parag. 2. Wherein is showed, That the National
Covenant does not engage to uphold Episcopacie: In answer to Doctor Boughen's
fifth Chapter. p. 31. Chap. 4. Par. 3. Wherein for a full answer, to what Doctor
Boughen has said to prove Episcopacy Christ's institution: This Question is
resolved, Whether a Bishop (now usually so called) be by the Ordinance of
Christ, a distinct officer from him that is usually called a Presbyter The one
a successor of the Apostles, endued with power of Ordination, and other
jurisdiction: The other, the successor of the Presbyters, ordained by Timothy,
and Titus: Endued with power of administering Word and Sacraments. p. 36. Chap.
4. Parag. 4. Wherein is showed, the impertinency of Doctor Boughen's sixth
Chapter against perjury. p. 50. CHAP. V. PARAG. I. Showing, That the Clergies
rights are as alterable by King and Parliament, as the Layties; In answer to
Doctor Boughen 's tenth Chapter. p. 53. CHAP. V. PARAG. II. Wherein is showed,
That the distinction, that is between Clergy, and Laytie, and their
privileges in this Kingdom, hinders not, but the privileges of the one are
alterable by King and Parliament, as well as of the other, in answer to Doctor
Boughen's eleventh Chapter. p. 57. CHAP. VI. Answering Doctor Boughen's
Exclamation, for the removeal of Bishops out of the House of Peers. p. 61.
CHAP. VII. Showing, that the Monarchical jurisdiction, and great revenues of
the Bishops may be divided to the advantage of the Church: in answer to Doctor
Boughens thirteenth Chapter. p. 67. CHAP. VIII. Showing, that abuses are a
forfeiture of some privileges: in answer to Doctor Boughens fourteenth
Chapter. p. 73. CHAP. IX. Wherein is showed, that the converting of Bishops
Lands, to maintain preaching Ministers, would not be Sacriledg, but a good
work: in answer to Doctor Boughens fifteenth Chapter. p. 82. CHAP. X. PARAG. I.
Wherein is showed, what is the true intention of the Kings oath, for the
maintenance of Episcopacy: in answer to Doctor Boughens 7. Chapter. p. 24.
CHAP. X. PARAAG. II. Showing, the right sense of the Kings Coronation oath;
that what he undertakes for the Bishops, must not be conceived, to cross what
he has promised to the people: in Answer to Dr. Boughens eighth Chapter. p.
98. CHAP. X. PARAG. III. Showing, that the Clergy are equally under the
Parliament, as well as the Layty: in Answer to Dr Boughens ninth chapter. p.
103. CHAP. XI. Showing, that the King is not bound to protect the Bishops
Honors with the lives of his good subjects: in Answer to Doctor Boughens 16.
chapter. p. 108. CHAP. XII. Wherein it is cleared, that though the King be the
Supreme Magistrate, yet that supreamacy which is over all Laws, is in this
Kingdom, not in the King alone, but in the King and Parliament: in answer to
Doctor Boughens seventeenth Chapter. p. 118.
Imprimatur,

JA. CRANFORD.
August. 21. 1648.
CHAP. I. Containing ANIMADVERSIONS on Doctor BOUGHENS first Chapter, wherein
he plays with the Introductions to the dispute; and herein is discovered his
subtilty in the whole, and ridiculous trifling in this part of the Book.
WE have heard your malicious charges against the Author of the little
Treatise, which you undertake to answer. Now I must mind the Reader, of a
Serpentine subtilty, that you use, to deceive him into a belief of your foul
slanders, if he be not cautelous; which is, not to set down the treatise
entire, nor to take it in order as it lies, lest the view of it, if it had been
entirely set down, should clearly have cried false on your slanders; but here
and there pack some of it in your margent, in what method you please. I shall
therefore take this course, to set down the first Treatise by parts entire, A
case Resolved.
that the Reader may the better judge, whether is true, my Apology, or your
Calumny; and when I have set down any entire part of the case resolved, I shall
endeavor to clear what you have objected against it, in any part of your
prolix Sieve.

First therefore, the Introduction into the dispute, runs thus in my printed
Treatise.

Case Resolved.
Whether the King, (considering his oath at Coronation to protect the clergy,
and their privileges) can salva conscientia consent to the abrogation of
Episcopacy? Aff.

When I consider, first, that there is no hope of the Kings or kingdoms
safety, without an union between our King and Parliament. Secondly, that such
an union is tantum non impossible, unless the King condescend in point of
episcopacy: Thirdly; for the King to condescend renitente conscientia, though
it might gratify us, it would be sinful in him; and so he should forfeit
inward, to procure outward peace; and be represented to himself, in the glass
of conscience: to adventure the heavenly, to retain an earthly crown. Fourthly,
the oath taken at the Kings Coronation has been pressed by some learned pens,
with that probability, that may stumble a right intelligent Reader; neither
have they, that I know, received any satisfactory answer in print. Now I
conceive, it may be a work worth some pains, to resolve this case, and clear
those objections, that, while they stand unanswered, cast an ill reflection,
both upon the King, in condescending to abrogate Episcopacy, and the
Parliament, in pressing him to it.

This is the introduction; wherein the Reader may see the scope of the Book, to
be safety, and union of the King and Parliament; and not the ruin of the King,
and Kingdom, as Dr. Boughen unjustly suggested in his Epistle to the Reader.
Again, the grounds of undertaking the resolution, are so weighty, and the
candor toward Antagonists, in giving them due testimony, so clear, that one
would think it a fitter object for envy, then carping; but Dr. Boughen can
find a knot in a bulrush; and therefore, because in the title it is said, that
in the Book it is cleared, that the King may without impeachment;to his
Coronation oath abrogate Episcopacy, the Dr. says, Doctor Boughen page 1.
chap. 1. par. 1.
I full magisterially determine before the case be so much as proposed. Is this
the fashion, first to resolve, and then to propose the case? This may be the
course of Heretics, not of Catholics. But you are resolved to maintain, that
a Christian may swear, and forswear, without the least prejudice to his soul.
Thus the Dr. wherein he has given a specimen in the porch, what stuff we are
like to meet with in the building; and gives me just cause to bewail my
unhappiness, that having at first to deal with learned, and rational men, am
now fallen into the hands of a passionate trifler: for does not every
intelligent man know, that though titles of Books be first set, yet they are
last made, and usually last printed, and contain in them the Sum of the Book?
wherein, I doubt not, he will find, not a magisterial, but so rational a
decision, that he will, in answering it, haerere in luto, before I have done
with him: For the accusation wherewith he closes his paragraph, being
groundless railing, I know where it will reflect shame, with the impartial
Reader, and therefore it needs no other answer, but a peremptory denial;
nothing being more abhorrent from my soul, or the scope of this Treatise, then
either to maintain swearing, or forswearing. "But parag. 2. He affirms my
practice is accordingly, because those of my persuasion have taken up arms
against their Sovereign, and hold the Parliament subordinate to no power under
heaven. But here, his assertions are not only impertinent to the case, but
known to be false, by those that know me; but then he comes in with a second
scornful expression, that I have taken the oath of a canonical obedience; and
yet endeavor the abrogation of Episcopacy. But how knows he, that I have taken
the oath of canonical obedience? sure I am, having never had institution, nor
induction, it was never profer'd me: but because he (it seems) has been so
ready to swear, all must be in that bond: but what if I had taken the oath? I
know no engagement to inhibit me to seek the abrogation of Episcopacy, from the
oath, since I was never forbidden by the Diocesan, to seek it; nay I can assure
him, that Dr. Bishop of Gloucester.
Smith, who imposed hands on me, and in whose dioces, while he lived, I
exercised my Ministry, was of Ieromes mind, that a Bishop was an humane
creature, as he expressed himself in conference to a friend of mine, and so not
unalterable. For his 3 Parag. Touching Smectimnuus making a Bishop and an Elder
all one, a and thence his wonder, how they endure my proposition, being he
knows that Author speaks of Bishop and Presbyter in a Scripture-sense (which
anon will cut his comb;) and I speak of a Diocesan Bishop, as now he stands;
as he confesses Parag. 4. That his quirk about Smectimnuus, and the Masters of
the Assembly, is ridiculous trifling, fitter for a boy disputing in Parvis, to
lengthen out an argument, then for a D.D. writing a book, in a case of moment.

But now to the motives, which he says I produce for the abrogation of
Episcopacy, he should have said for writing this case about it. For the first,
no hope of the Kings and kingdoms safety, without union between the King and
our Parliament, he does not deny it, but yet he divides them seditiously: Our
King, and your Parliament. I acknowledge him as my King, pray and act for him in
my sphere, as my Sovereign: the King has written to them as his Parliament,
yet the Dr. divides them, though he cannot deny, no safety without union: For
his petitions made in Scriptures phrase, they are from him, as his heart is
which I leave to God; and in a good sense say, Amen. For the Second ground,
there is no probable means of union, without the Kings condescension in point
of Episcopacy. This, parag. 6. and 7. he denies not, but adds some things out
of his own distempered mind, viz. unless he lay down his lands etc. Which he
cannot prove, though I am truly sorry, that he has any color to set them off
as credible to any. For the third, If the King should do it renitente
conscientia, it would be sinful, etc. To this Parag. 8. he says, that I
perceive, and in a manner confess, that this he must do; for you say, it would
be sinful to himself. Thus you persuade our Sovereign into sin, etc. Was there
ever a more false, or irrational passage dropped from a D.D. pen? do I say it
absolutely, when I only say, if he should condescend, renitente conscientia? or
do I persuade to sin, when I show such inconveniences of sin, as cannot be
balanced? But by way of amplification, we have another piece of Divinity,
worthy such a D. D. Every reluctance of conscience makes not a grant sinful,
but when my conscience checks me on just grounds. Is this catholic doctrine? I
am sure, it is not orthodox; for it is point blank to Saint Paul, speaking of
those that act against conscience, for want of light in indifferent things; and
so not on just grounds. Romans 14.17. compared with verse. 25. The kingdom of
God is not in meat, and drink; But he that doubts, is damned if he eats,
because he eats it not of faith; for whatsoever is not of faith, is sin. For
the last, that the Coronation oath is pressed by learned pens, etc. "he first
takes notice of my confession, Parag. 9. Wherein he might observe my candor to
my Antagonists, and therein read my intentions, that, not out of distaste to
persons, but out of love to peace, and with a quiet and well affected heart, to
those I oppose, I wrote the resolution of this case; but the Doctors blood-shot
eye, can see none of this. He has not so much ingenuity as the Heathen, virtus
in host. No, he was resolved to carry on his Book with railings and scoffs;
and I am resolved, neither to envy, nor to imitate him; being well assured that
such dealing will prejudice both the work and Author, with any pious and
prudent Reader. Next he trifles about an expression touching the Kings
condescension, (I beseech you, do you dream? who told you, that his Majesty had
condescended to this impious and antichristian demand? says he.) Whereas he
knows, the context of my words evidence them to be spoken hypothetically, not
catogorically. But we must give him leave to catch at shows, that wants real
exceptions. For his other expressions, "That desire of abrogation of
Episcopacy, is impious and antichristian; This will appear but froth, unless
he can make his Diocesan Lord Bishop an Ordinance of God, which will now come
to trial.

CHAP. II. Wherein it is cleared, that the Covenant is not to abolish
Episcopacy, root and branch, nor is Episcopacy of Christ's institution, in
answer to Dr. B. Second Chapter.
Case of Conscience Resolved
NOw the bond of the Kings oath, may be taken off two ways; either by clearing
the unlawfulness of it, that it was vinculum iniquitatis, and so void the first
day; For qu^ jurat in iniquum obligatur in contrarium. And if Prelacy in the
Church be an usurpation contrary to Christ's institution, then, to maintain it,
is sin; and all bonds to sin, are frustrate. And truly, as Prelacy stood with
us in England, engrossing all ruledom in the Church, into the hands of a few L.
Bishops, I think, it may be cleared to be an usurpation, by this one argument.

That power that dispoyls any of Christ's Officers of any privilege or duty
indulged or enjoined them by the word of God; that power is an usurpation
against the word of God. But this did Prelacy, as it stood in England:
therefore English Prelacy, was an usurpation against the word of God.

The Major is clear of it self. The Minor is thus proved: Presbyters are by
Christ's warrant, in Scripture, endued with power to rule in their own
congregations, as well as preach; See 1 Timothy 3.5. and 5,17, Heb. 13.17. 1 Thessalonians. 5.12. Now as Prelacy stood in England, the Presbyters were not only
excluded from all society of rule; but, which was more prejudicial to the
dignity and liberty of the ministry, were subjected to a lay-Chancellor; and
was not here usurpation against Gods direction?

Now what says Dr. Boughen? you say true (says he) that the oath which is
Vinculum iniquitatis is void the first day, etc. And hitherto your argument is
good; and in it, he will joynissue, etc. Cap. 2. Parag. 1. See what a work this
passage has on the Doctor, taken together, and considered when the blood was
down; now all goes current; yet this is the place, for which he spit so much
poison of aspes in his Epistle to the Reader. I hope, the Reader will observe;
and by appealing from the Doctor in passion, to the Doctor out of passion, see
how injuriously he has traduced me, for one that blasphemes and spits in the
face of authority. Well now, upon this the Doctor will join issue, and will
readily acknowledge, that if Prelacy in the Church be an usurpation against
Christ's institution, then to maintain it, is to sin, and all bonds to sin are
frustrate; but yet Parag 2. He adds, he hopes I use no tricks, but by Prelacy
mean Episcopacy properly so called. Doctor, I do use no tricks, a good cause
needs them not; but I doubt, you will be found to use tricks presently, and
that poor ones; that is, to change the state of the question: For when I
implead Prelacy as unlawful, I implead it not absolutely; but as it then stood
in England. But the Doctor proceeds, and thinks that my medium is an arrow for
his bow; and makes a triple assay to hit me with it, but is unlucky in all, as
will presently appear; first thus, If Supremacy in Parliament be an usurpation
contrary to Christ's institution, then to maintain it, is to sin; But supremacy,
etc. ergo it is sin.

The major you prove, by 1 Pet. 2.13, 14. Submit your selves to every ordinance
of man, whether it be unto the King as supreme, or unto governors, as those
that are sent by him. I answer, the Apostle gives no other supremacy to the
King here, then I give him Page 9 of my case; that is, to be the Supreme
Magistrate, from whom all power of execution is legally derived; and this is
competible with that supremacy which I give the Parliament. Oh, but says the
Doctor, every rational man cannot but understand, that there cannot be two
supreams in one Kingdom. But Master Doctor, Rational men will see a difference
between a Supremacy, and the Supremacy; that is, Supremacy absolute, and in a
kind. There be more Supremacies secundum quid, in some respect, though not more
in one kingdom absolutely; and this I shall make you confess to be my meaning,
in asserting more then one supremacy in a kingdom, and to be a truth, or I
shall make you deny, not Reason only, but your own words, when I come to
answer your last Chapter.

His second Argument is against Ordination by Presbytery, but in that he begs
the question, and therefore he refers us for the proof, (that Ordination by
Presbyters is against Christ's institution) to another place, where we shall
meet with it.

Thirdly, He argues, If Episcopacy in the Church be no usurpation, but Christ's
institution; then to endeavor the extirpation of it, is sin. But Episcopacy is
Christ's institution,ergo. This he does but propose here, and endeavors to
prove hereafter, where his proofs shall be examined.

He proceeds, parag. 3. "That you, your Assembly and Parliament, have made and
taken an Oath to extirpate Episcopacy, is too notorious to be denied.

Sir, your are the confidentest man, not only in uncertainties, but falsities,
that I have heard. It Is neither true, that I made the Covenant; nor notorious,
that I have taken it: neither is it true, that the Covenant is to extirpate
Episcopacy; but only, (according to my argument,) Prelacy, as it then stood,
that is, by Archbishops, Archdeacons, and the rest, in your etc. Oath, as is
plain by the expression of the second Article. And therefore you must prove,
not only (as you say) Episcopacy, but Episcopacy as it then stood, not to be
contrary to the institution of Christ, before you can prove the Covenant in
that clause to be a bond of iniquity; or exempt the Kings oath from
unlawfulness in that clause, if it bind to maintain Episcopacy as it then
stood.

But say you, The Order of Bishops is Christ's institution. And yet ye have
sworn to up with it, root and branch.

The former you endeavor to prove; and the latter you take for granted, which
is very false, for there is no such expression, nor hint, in the Covenant, as
root and branch.

But Christ you say, was the root of Episcopacy, who is called the Bishop of
our souls, from him it takes its rise. You are good at affirming, but where is
your proof? Why, its evident in the Apostles, strictly so called, who had their
orders immediately from Christ, parag. 4.

A goodly argument, as though an Apostle, and one of your Lord Bishops were
birds of a feather: Whereas toto caelo differunt; An Apostle was an Officer
extraordinary, immediately called and inspired of God, and his office to endure
for a time, and your Bishop is an ordinary officer, called by man, who you
would have to endure for ever. But to them, say you, he gave power to ordain
Apostles. False and Atheological. An Apostle cannot be created but by God, and
had his knowledge by inspiration from God; this is confessed by Divines on all
sides. See Bilson perp. Govern. chap. ^. page 106.

But you will prove they had power to ordain Apostles, Mat. 10.8. (...), which
the Greeks understand thus; a gift ye have received, a gift give.

But what Greeks? Will they understand things against the letter of their
natural language? The English of the words to every smatterer in greek, is,
freely you have received, freely give; and the meaning is plainly, that they
should not make merchandise of their gift of miracles; For the whole verse runs
thus, Heal the sick, cleanse the lepers, raise the dead, cast out devils;
Freely you have received, freely give. But what is this to power to create
Apostles? which speaks only of their dispensing their gift gratis. And so the
Authors in your margent, such as I can meet with, for the most part, take it;
ut sit ministratio gratuita muneris gratuiti, that there might be a free
administering of a free gift, Hill. in Matthew. Can. 10.

Ergo ne quid in ministerio nostro venale sit, admonemur; Therefore we are
admonisht, that nothing in our ministry be set to sale. Ego minister and
Dominus absque pretio hoc vobis tribui, and vos sine pretio date, ne Evangelij
gratia corrumpatur, Hieron. in Mat. 10.8.

Now what are these to your purpose? Only Gennadius from this proves ordination
should be without price; but this must be but by way of allusion. For do you,
Mr Doctor, think that the Apostles had power to create Apostles, given them
here, whilst Christ was alive? I hope your second thoughts will be wiser. That
Christ renewed the Commission of the Apostles, Joh. 20.21. As my father sent
me, so send I you, is granted: but that they (as you affirm) upon the strength
of this commission ordained some other to be Apostles, conferring on them the
same honor and power which they had received from Christ. Is an assertion, I
know not whether fuller of boldness, or ignorance; yea, in part a very Bull.
For first one part, and one of the principlest parts of their honor, was, to
be called immediately by Christ; which they could not confer on others, unless
you can make Christ and the Apostles individually one, which is impossible.
Besides, that there were many other honors peculiar to the Apostles
themselves, not communicable to their successors: You may read in Bilsons perp.
Govern. chap. 9. page 106.

But you say, this is evident in S. James Bishop of Jerusalem, Epaphroditus
Bishop of Philippi, and in Apollos Bishop of Corinth. But for S. James, that he
was an Apostle Scriptures witness indeed, Gal. 1.19. but that he was ordained
of the Apostles, in that Scriptures are silent; nor has Jerome any such words,
but that he was called an Apostle; illud in causa est, omnes qui dominum
viderunt, and eum postea praedicassent, suisse Apostolos nominatos. He was
therefore called an Apostle, because all that had seen the Lord, and afterward
preached him, were called Apostles, Jerome. in Gal. 1.19. But to make a man
truly and properly and Apostle, was required somewhat more, scilicet, immediate
inspiration and mission by Christ, as may be gathered from S. Paul's proving his
Apostleship from these, Gal. 1.11, 12, 15, 16, 17. And James was an Apostle
truly, and properly, yea, a chief Apostle, Gal. 2.2.9. And so he is mentioned
in the Scripture, as an Apostle in Jerusalem, not a Bishop of Jerusalem. See
Act. 15.2, 13, 23. Here James is contained under the name Apostle, with the
rest, without any hint of precedence there, as Bishop. And therefore, whereas
he is called Bishop of Jerusalem, sometimes by the ancients; that is to be
taken but in an allusive, not a proper sense, because he exercised his
Apostolical function there, while others exercised theirs else where; and some
of the Apostolical power was emulated in the Fathers times by Bishops. But a
Bishop there properly he was not, for that were to degrade him: an Apostle
being an office extraordinary, and so higher then the ordinary office of
Bishop. And such degradation is not only injurious. But if the resolution of
the Chalcedon Counsel be true, cited by Bilson, page 280. To bring back a
Bishop to the degree of a Presbyter, is sacriledg; Then certain, to bring down
an Apostle to the degree of any ordinary Officer (as a Bishop is) cannot want
guilt. "And for Apollos, if he were Bishop of Corinth: I pray you, why did not
Saint Paul write to him, when he blames them for not excommunicating the
incestuous person? and blame him for that neglect of discipline, and enjoin him
to see it done, and not the Church? Or why does he say, that the censure was
inflicted by many, 2 Cor. 2.6.? if Apollos were their Bishop, who alone had
power of excommunication; If he be contained under the title of Apostle, 1 Cor.
4.9. (which Calvin approves not;) yet is he called Apostle, in a large, not
strict sense, as contradistinct to other Church Officers, Ephesians. 4.12. For
Epaphroditus, indeed he is called, in the Epistle to the Phlliippians, Your
Apostle; but that is most generally taken, as Walo Messalinus confesses, by
Greek and modern Interpreters; to hint, not the name of a Churchofficer, but a
messenger from the Church to Saint Paul, as our last translation takes it; and
the words following, imply part of his message; he that ministered to my wants.
And though Walo Messalinus dissents, yet he confesses his exposition not to
agree so well with propriety of speech. But these (you say) are confessed to be
Apostoli ab ipsis Apostolis ordinati. First, this is false; for neither Calvin,
nor Messalinus, speak of their Ordination. And the very phrase, an Apostle
ordained of Apostles, shows, that the title, Apostle, is taken improperly.

But Parag. 5. you say, Apostles they were at that time called, but afterward
the name Bishop was settled on them. For this you cite Theodoret. The same
persons were sometimes called, both Presbyters and Bishops; but those who are
now named Bishops, were then called Apostles; but in process of time, the title
of an Apostle was reserved to those that were (...), Apostles properly and
truly so called. And the name of Bishop came appropriated to those who were
lately called Apostles.

For answer to this, First, I observe you have given us a clear confession out
of Theodoret, that Bishops and Presbyters were all one, diverse names of the
same office.

Secondly, those that Theodoret affirms, that being in his time called Bishops,
were formerly called Apostles, were not (...), Apostles truly, but only called
so, because they had pre-eminence over others in his times, as the Apostles had
over others in the first time of the Gospel.

Thirdly, he gives us no proof, that those that are now called Bishops, were
formerly called Apostles: and his conjecture is not infallible; Nay, is it not
apparently false, that the name of Bishop came appropriated to those that were
lately called Apostles, (but were not so (...)?) for was not the name of Bishop
continued common to James, Peter, and others that were (...), Apostles truly so
called? Continued. I say, by the Fathers, calling them Bishops, allusively. But
though the name of Bishop was given to Apostles, by the Fathers: It cannot be
shown, where those that are now called Bishops, were called Apostles, (as
Apostle signifies a Gospel officer) by the Scripture. If they were, let the
Doctor produce the place, where in Scripture any ordinary officer was styled an
Apostle; which if he cannot do, Theodorets assertion, in one part, contrary to
the plain expressions of the Fathers: and in the other, without ground of
Scripture, cannot have much force on any unprejudiced Reader.

The Doctors inference is observable, Hence is it, says he, that Timothy and
Titus, are called Bishops and Apostles. Bishops in the post-scripts of the
Epistles which were written to them by S. Paul, but Apostles by Ignatius,
Theodoret, and many others. Whence plainly it appears, that the post scripts of
the Epistles, were not Saint Paul's, but some other, later then Ignatius and
Theodoret: And so have no force to prove Timothy and Titus Bishops.

Parag. 6. You add, Bishops then they were called, etc. That is, They were so
called by men, that spoke of officers in the Scriptures, according to the style
of their own times, but in Scripture-sence, they were a degree above Bishops,
Apostles, or Evangelists; and in that sense speaks Walo Messalinus, whose name
you abuse.

Parag. 7. You argue, They that have the same name and office with the true
Apostles, are of the same order with the true Apostles. But Bishop Timothy, and
Bishop Titus, and Bishop Epaphroditus, have the same name and office with the
true Apostles.

This argument you seem to glory in, but with how little reason, the Reader
shall see. For whereas you say, Bishop Timothy, and Bishop Titus, and Bishop
Epaphroditus, had the same name and office with the Apostles: This is
manifestly false. First, for the name, neither have Timothy, nor Titus, the
name of Bishop, or Apostle, given them by Scripture; and for other authors, as
Ignatius and Theodoret, that call them Apostles; you must remember Theodorets
distinction, of some that were (...), and others that were called so only
allusively. The true and proper Apostles, were the twelve, and Saint Paul, and
such like, that had extraordinary mission and inspiration.

Now in this proper sense, Timothy and Titus were not called Apostles, but by
way of allusion: and to have the same name, and not in the same sense, argues
nothing. For your proof from Salmatius, for Epaphroditus being called Apostle,
(besides, that in giving such a sense of Phil. 2.25. he differs from many
others, whose opinion is more probable) he only calls him an Apostle,
allusively, not properly: and as you fail in the proof of the same name, so
fail you more, in proving they had the same office; for this you prove, only
from one part of Apostolical power, Ordination, and Jurisdiction: Which they
had from the Apostle Paul, in particular places; whereas the Apostolical office
had power immediately from Christ, for such jurisdiction, all the world over,
Matthew. 28.19. And whereas, the Apostle, makes Apostles and Evangelists distinct
offices, Ephesians. 4.11. and bids Timothy do the work of an Evangelist, 2 Timothy
4.5. The Apostle shows plainly, that Timothy was in that rank. And thence it is
clear, that Timothy and Titus, had not the same office with Apostles, but were
in an inferior order of Evangelists. So your argument falls to the ground.

For your close, " that Bishops, and only Bishops, succeed the Apostles in
ordination and jurisdiction: It Is true of Scripture-Bishops; but for your
Bishops, we shall not believe it, till you better prove it.

Parag. 8. You proceed, Since then Apostleship and Episcopacy, are one and the
same office; He that is the root and Author of the one, is the root and Author
of the other.

But I have, in part, showed already, (and shall more fully hereafter) that
Apostleship and Episcopacy are diverse offices. Episcopacy, if it has any place
in Saint Paul's Catalogue, Ephesians. 4.11. being under Pastors, which is two
degrees below an Apostle: but you further infer, in covenanting to take away
Episcopacy root and branch, you have done no less then covenanted to take away
Jesus Christ.

Answ. Were Christ the ordainer of Episcopacy, as he is not, your inference is
but a childish mistake; for neither does the Covenant speak of root or branch,
nor, if it did, would it follow, that Christ should be rooted up; for there is
a root, properly of Propagation, and a root metaphorical of Institution, which
is by appointment the original of a thing. Christ, if all were true that you
say, is but a metaphorical root, a root by Institution, whose eradication
cannot be inferred, if Bishops, root and branch, be plucked up. If a man
undertake to take away all the trees in an Orchard, root and branch, will it
follow, he must root up the Master that planted it too? Nothing less; so, nor
in this case.

After this you fall a raving, shooting arrows, not caring where you hit,
telling of Parsons and Vicars, sequestered by my instigation. Which is a rash,
if not a wilful slander. And now I hope its clear you have done little to
discharge the Kings oath of sin, or to prove the Covenant a bond of iniquity.

But Parag. 9. You think you put a shrewd quaery, if root and branch must up,
how comes it, that some branches may be preserved, as Presbyters ordained by
Bishops, etc.

Still you run on in your mistake, whereas the Covenant has no such terms as
root and branch. What? a Doctor present such plain mistakes to a Prince? Nor,
if there were such an expression, were there any force in your objection; for
do you not know, that many of our Divines distinguish between the Church of
Rome and the Papacy, which they compare to a wen on a body. So may we, between
the Ministry of the Church of England, and your Prelacie, which is but a
high-swoln wen. Now I hope that a wen may be cut out, core and all, and yet the
body be left sound, yea, more sound: so for this.

CHAP. III. Wherein it is cleared, that Prelacy, as it stood in England, was an
usurpation on the office of Presbyters, in answer to Doctor Boughens third
Chapter.
IN your third Chapter, parag. 1. You represent me saying that the Kings oath
to maintain Episcopacy, is sin.

Where do I say so? I say, if the Kings oath be to maintain Episcopacy, as it
stood in England, then it is sin, and if you leave out this limitation, (as it
stood,) you trifle and change the state of the question; and I must mind you
of a true rule in dispute, Qui verba supprimit quaestionis aut imperitus est,
aut tergiversatur, qui calumniae magis studeat quam doctrinae: He that
suppresses words of the question, is either unskilful, or wrangles, and
endeavors, rather to calumniate, then teach. Which latter you plainly do; for
hence you infer, that I condemn all the Kings and Queens of this Land, that
have taken this oath. But first, you must prove, that they have taken the oath
in this sense, to maintain Episcopacy, as it then stood: which sure our present
Sovereign, has declared he did not, (and so we may judge of the rest;) for he
has offered, to reduce Episcopacie to that power which it had in ancient
times, In his message from the I Will of Wight, Nov. 17. 1647.
to exercise no jurisdiction without its Presbytery. Whereby the King does
manifest, either he is not by his oath, bound to maintain Episcopacie, as it
then stood; or else, that notwithstanding his oath, he may alter some of
Episcopal jurisdiction, at the motion of his Houses. Either of which will cut
your comb, especially the latter.

Secondly, you say, I condemn all those Fathers and Counsels, that justify the
necessity of Bishops. Thirdly, and last of all, you say I condemn the whole
Church of Christ, which from her infancy has been governed by Bishops.

Where you still leave out my limitation, as it then stood, which added, your
inferences will appear most false. Since it is apparent, that both Counsels and
Fathers, and ancient Churches asserted, and were governed, not by Episcopacie
without, but with the joint help of Presbyters.

Hear what Bilson says, in his Epistle to the Reader, before his perp. Govern.
God forbid, I should urge any other, but such as were Pastors over their
Churches, and governors of the Presbyteries under them. And again, That Elders
at first did govern the Church by common advice, is no doubt at all with us;
this is it which is doubted, etc. that those Elders were Laymen, page 158,
159. But had our Bishops, as they then stood, any Presbyteries joined with
them? Presbyters they had; but had they any Presbyteries, wherein the
Presbyters met for acts of government, that the Bishop did govern? And
therefore " your interrogations about blasphemy, etc. are but the mere
calumnies of a tergiversator, altering the state of the question.

And, as ignorant and impertinent trifling is your second parag. Wherein you
talk of the abuses of particular persons, as some Princes or Parliaments.
Whereas my argument runs not on the men, but the office it self, as it then
stood, excluding Presbyters from part in government, which was not the act of
any extravagant Bishop, but the ordinary custom of them all: so, not the men,
but the office it self, was in an abusive posture, in excluding Presbytery
from participation in government; which is the thing to be proved.

Which thing, you confess, I endeavor to prove by Syllogism, which you set
down, parag. 3.

That power which despoyls any of Christ's officers, of any privilege or duty
indulged, or enjoined them by the word of God, that power is an usurpation
against the word; But this Prelacy did, as it stood in England. ergo, English
Prelacy was an usurpation against the word of God.

Parag. 4. You think, to retort this argument on the Parliament, to prove them,
as well to be an usurpation, because they have sequestered and dispoyled many of
you Presbyters, of preaching and ruling in their Congregations.

But herein I must tell you, you bewray your own, not the weakness of my
argument; for my argument runs not upon any particular officers, whether justly
or unjustly despoiled. But of all the officers, as they are officers; of which
Episcopacie was guilty, excluding all Presbyters from partnership in
government. And had you had your wits about you, that can put the [dul man]
upon others, this you might easily have seen, and that any in the Syllogism,
notes not particulars in any office, but the kinds of officers prescribed by
Christ.

But Parag. 5. You would teach me to speak, had you said (say you) that power,
that wrongfully dispoyls any of Christ's officers, and then you tell me, I have
not learnt, it seems, to distinguish, between justly and unjustly.

But it seems, you, though a D. D. have not learnt to understand plain sense:
For in that sense that my words should be taken; can, I pray you, any kind of
officers be wholly dispoiled of a privileledg, or abridged in a duty lest on
record by Christ, justly? Sure then there must be some power, that can control
Christ's institution, without injustice or usurpation.

You add as wise an amplification, that Gods word and mine, are two; Gods word
says, Non est potestas, nisi a Deo, there is no power, but of God, Romans 13.1.
But you say, (say you of me) that there is a power which is an usurpation
against the word of God.

It seems then, you think, that there is no usurped power in the world, or
Church, no not the Popes claim to both the swords. Sure, you are a learned
interpreter of Scriptures, whereas its plain, the Apostle speaks only of all
kinds of lawful civil powers, not denying, but some may usurp a power that
belongs not to them, as the Pope does; and its in question, between you and me,
whether Prelacie did, or no.

You add, " I cannot distinguish between the office and the abuse. Will you
then acknowledge, it was an abuse in Episcopacie, to ingross all government? If
you do, you grant the question, if not, you trifle. Do you not know, Master
Doctor, that these be two things, an usurped power, and an usurpation in power.
If Episcopacie have no inflitution from Christ, its an usurped power: an office
without institution, that question I wave. If there be institution for
Episcopacie, yet if Presbytery should govern with it, and be excluded, this is
not an abuse of persons, but an incroachment of one office upon another. This I
accuse prelacie of, as it stood; one would think, this were plain enough to a
vulgar capacity; yet you run on in your mistake.

And Parag. 6. Mention diverse examples of particular officers, and abusing
their power in unjust censures, or using it in a just way. Which is mere
trifling, as I shall make it appear, by your last instance about Bishops,
depriving Ministers. For I question not now, the Bishops, or you, for calling
Truth Heresy: nor for the abuse of power, in suspending, or depriving for
unjust causes; but for doing it solely, without the counsel and consent of a
Presbytery, wherein, I shall hereafter, clear to you, they usurp more, then
the practice, and counsels, of former Bishops allowed them. This is the plain
state of the business: and its ridiculous, to undertake the answer of a
Treatise, and mistake the plain state of the question.

But Parag. 7. You come to the Minor, and that's trifling still, on the same
mistake; but to seem to say something, at last you say; It is as false aspeech,
to say, Prelacy dispoiles any, as to say, Judicatory wrongs any; Where still
you bewray your ignorance, in comparing an act to an office; but may not one
Court dispoil another? Did not you, or some Prelates think, these Courts did
dispoyl them of their rights heretofore, that granted Prohibitions in point of
tithes, etc. and so the Civil power incroach on the Ecclesiastique? Why else,
were some Judges so frowned on by some Prelates, for such prohibitions?

Parag. 8. You come to my proof, which I set down. Presbyters are, by Christ's
warrant in Scripture, endued with power to rule in their Congregations, as well
as preach; you add in your own character, to as well, as much: why, you know
best, others may guess. For proof I bring four Scriptures; the first from 1 Timothy 3.5. If any cannot rule his own house, how shall he take care for the
Church of God? Here is care (says the Doctor) to be taken for the Church, but
no rule given to the Presbyter in the Church, unless you will allow as much
power to rule in his Parish, as he has in his own house: Is it so Doctor? is
there none given, because none is expressed? Is there not rule in the Church
employed? Hear Theophilact, (...): Theoph. in 1 Timothy 3.4. Again in ver. 8. (...).
for the house is but as a little Church. If therefore he know not how to rule
a little and easily circumscribed and known Church, how shall he govern so many
souls, whose minds he cannot know?

To the same purpose, Chrysostom, (...), etc.
for the Church is a certain house; but if the Rector of the Church have
assistants in government, so has the husband the wife in his house. (Now what
the Rectors fellows in government are, whether Lay Elders, or no, let the
Doctor inquire:) He concludes, it is far more easy to govern an house, then
the Church; therefore he that cannot govern an house, etc. So you see, that
place gives, by implication, government to a Presbyter: If you object what
Chrysostom after hinteth, as though the things here spoken, were meant of one
of your Bishops; first, you your self judge the contrary: next, it will do you
no good; for he says, the Apostle passes from Bishops to Deacons, not
mentioning the order of Presbyters, because between a Bishop and a Presbyter,
there is almost no difference; for the care of the Church is committed to them,
to wit, Presbyters; and what he said of Bishops, belongs also to Presbyters,
Bishops being only in ordination above them: Thus Chrysostom, Presbyters then
were not excluded from governing. So Theophylact gives the same reason, why
Presbyters are not mentioned: Quia quae de, etc. Because what he spoke of
Bishops, belongs to Presbyters, for to them the office of teaching and
government of the Church is committed, being only inferior in regard of
election: And for what you object about Deacons, " that we allow them no rule
in the Church; It Is false, they have rule in their sphere, that is, in
disposing the treasury, though not persons of the Church, they being not over
persons, (which the Presbyter is) but the Treasury.

The next proof is for the Doctor, happily misprinted, 1 Timothy 5.21. instead of
verse 17. which I believe the Doctor could not but suspect; but he was loath to
meddle with it: yet if he mean to reply, I must now mind him of it, 1 Timothy
5.17. It is thus written, Doctor; Let the Elders that rule well be counted
worthy of double honor, especially they that labor in the word and doctrine.
These, you will grant, were Presbyter-Bishops; for to allow any other at
Ephesus, would mar the market; and see, here is ruling distinct from teaching,
ascribed to Presbytery.

Parag. 10. You come to the third Scripture, Heb. 13.17. Obey them that have
the rule over you, and submit your selves, for they watch for your souls, etc.
Here rule is given to Presbyters: Now here the Doctor is pitifully puzzled, and
comes off poorly. He asks, who are these rulers here mentioned; are they
Presbyters only? Again, that he speaks of Presbyters, I deny not, but that he
speaks of Presbyters only, that I deny. Good Doctor, am I to prove that
Presbyters only are rulers, or that Bishops are not the only rulers, as they
were with us? If then, Presbyters be here meant, and they be rulers, the Holy
Ghost ascribes power of ruling to them, which is the question; so now I have
confitentem reum. And your simile, Parag. 11. " of commanders in an Army, helps
me, not you; for though Captains and Lievtenants be not sole rulers, they are
co-rulers in an Army, (you know) both over their Companies, and other Officers
in a Counsel of war; So if there be Bishops in the Church, which you here beg,
yet they are not to be sole Governors, as they stood with us. What you have
concerning Timothy, Parag. 11.12. though I deny not the things, it will not
serve your turn, since Timothy was not a Bishop in your sense, but an
extraordinary Officer, an Evangelist, a distinct office, Ephesians. 4.11. and
ascribed to Timothy, 2 Timothy 4.5. he had therefore an office, and power above a
Bishop of your fancle, though afterward from the custom in the Church, and
some acts that Bishops did like his, (but not solely) he was allusively, only,
if not abusively, as Walo Messalinus has it, (...), called a Bishop. But this
digression about Timothy, was but to bafflle the Reader, and to take him off
the plain evidence of the former Scriptures; for the close, that such power was
not in Presbyter-Bishops, par enim in parem non habet potestatem; Your rule
holds, while they are single; but a company of one kind is above one single
one of the same rank; a Presbytery is above any one Presbyter, as well as a
Synod of Bishops above one Bishop; and so a Presbytery may exercise power over
one of their Presbyters, as well as a Synod of Bishops over one of their fellow
Bishops.

You come to the fourth place, 1 Thessalonians. 5.12. Parag. 13. We beseech you
brethren, that ye know them which labor among you, and are over you in the
Lord, and admonish you.

In answer to this, if the Doctor go not against his own conscience, he has
but little science. First, he says, that a great friend of Presbytery, says,
this place is parallel to that, 1 Timothy 5.17. And so say I too: And then if it be
not cited (as you know who cited Scripture) with mutilation, there will be
ruledom for Elders.

The Elders that rule well, But you leave out these words, and only take the
latter; That these Presbyters are worthy of double honor, who labor in the
word and doctrine. Whence you gather, ruling is nothing, but laboring in the
word and doctrine. A collection, just like that, Matt. 4.6: of Christ casting
himself off the pinnacle, from Psalm. 91.11. lamely quoted. You add, Theodoret
Those that are over you in the Lord, that is, they that offer up prayers and
supplications for you. These words of Theodoret, you bring cunningly, as though
they only expounded the words, that are over you. Whereas, it is all he says,
to the expression of admonishing; whereby its plain, Theodoret by his
exposition, rather denotes the person intended there, to be the Minister, then
describes his whole work. I appeal to your own conscience, whether you think,
the genuine meaning of (...), be, to pray for people; but in Calvin, whom you
cite afterward, how egregious is your fraud? for though the words you cite are
in him, yet they are in opening that other part of the text, for their works
sake; but when he comes to that wherein government is, how plain is he to my
purpose? Qui praesunt in domino. Hoc additum videtur ad notandum spirituale
regimen. Which are over you in the Lord. This seems to be added, to note the
spiritual government, praeesse in Domino dicuntur qui Christi nomine and
mandato Ecclesiam gubernant. They are said to be over them in the Lord, who
govern the Church in the name, and in the command of Christ. You abuse Calvin
as much, in misciting his institutions, lib. 4.2, 3, 5, 15. where he speaks not
of 1 Thessalonians. 4.12. but of Timothy and Titus, to whom in the government of the
Church, he ascribed a Presidency, not a Monarchy, as his words show. Falluntur
si putant, etc. They are deceived, if they think that Timothy, or Titus did
usurp a kingdom in the Church, to dispose of all things at their own
arbitriment. Praefuerunt enim tantum, ut bonis and salutaribus consilijs populo
praeirent, non ut soli exclusis alijs omnibus agerent quod placeret. They were
over others, only that they might go before others, with good and wholesome
counsels; Not, that all other being excluded, they alone might do what they
pleased. So that this is spoken of those that you call Apostles, not
Presbyter-Bishops.

Thus it is apparent, how ungroundedly you confine the rule of Presbyters to
prayer, instruction, admonition, advise.

But you say, "this is all the rule that you can find belonging to Presbyters.
All that you will find, you should have said; for you might have found it in
the name, Bishop, which is a name of authority, and rule, used by Heathens;
sometimes for the Rulers of Countries, and Provinces, who are called Episcopi.
And why else did that Presbyter, that had the chief honor in rule, and after,
by manifest usurpation ingrost all, appropriate the name of (...) to himself,
but that the word notes rule? And this title is given to all Presbyters, Act.
20.28. Feed the flock, over whom the Holy Ghost has made you Bishops,
Overseers. This is said of all the Presbyters, without any hint of
distinction: and does not this note government? Let me ask you a question: have
you not read Bilsons perp. government of the Church of Christ? Can you find no
rule belonging there to Presbyters? Its then, because you cannot see wood for
trees. page 140. He notes, government, to be comprehended under the titles of
Shepherd, Watchmen, Overseers, Rulers, Guides; and these titles belong to all
Presbyters: And page 141. The government, spoken of, 1 Cor. 12.28. He makes
common to Pastors, Prophets, and Teachers: and producing that of Jerome: Communi
Presbytorum consilio regebantur Ecclesiae; He adds of his own; That Elders at
first did govern by common advice, is no doubt at all to us. This is it which
is doubted and denied by us, that those Elders were laymen. page 158.159. And
after, to prove that the Presbyters were not Lay, but Ecclesiastical; he
produces Jeroms words, with approbation, Bishops and Presbyters, were at first
all one; and what does a Bishop, save Ordination, which a Presbyter does not?
Bishops must know, that they are greater then Presbyters, rather by custom,
then truth of the Lords disposition, and ought to govern the Church in common,
page 150.

And all this, he cites out of Jerome, for his own defense: That what Jerome
spoke, he spoke of teaching, not ruling Presbyters. But what need I add
particulars? the sum of his 11 Chapter, is, not to deny, but taking it for
granted, that in Primitive times there was a Presbytery that was joined in
government with the Bishops, without which, he neither could, nor ought to do
any thing, in point of censure; taking, I say, this for granted, he endeavors
to prove, those Presbyters, consisted only of teaching, not Lay Elders.
Chapter 14. Setting out the use of Presbyters, in the fourth use, he has these
words, The government of the Church, was as first so constituted, that neither
the Presbyteries should do any thing without the Bishop, nor the Bishop without
a Presbytery, page 307. Thus far Bilson.

How clear is that of Tertullian, for the rule of Presbyters? Nam and judicatur
magno cum pondere ut apud certos de Dei conspectu, summumque futuri judicij
praejudicium est, siquis ita deliquerit ^ut a commucicatione orationis and
conventus, and omnis Sancti commercij relegetur, Praesident probati quique
seniores, honorem istum non praetio, sed testimonio adepti. Thus it is as clear
as the Sun, that ruling is enjoined as a duty, and given as a privilege to the
Presbyter; of which it was dispoiled in England by Episcopacie; and therefore,
to maintain Episcopacie in that posture, was to maintain it in usurpation,
against Christ's disposition, and so unlawful.

But you require, Parag. 14. one place of Scripture, that allows Presbyters to
excommunicate, or absolve, of their own authority.

I answer, in all the places where they are made Church Governors, they are
enabled in a regular way to pass all Church Censures; and of those places I
have produced and asserted many; as also where the keys of the Kingdom of
heaven are given to the Ministry in general, in the Apostles: and the place
above cited in Tertullian, does it not extend to excommunication, and that
censure to be passed by Elders? But do you show me, on the contrary, in
Scripture a Bishop, that is, an ordinary Pastor, distinct from a Presbyter,
endued with sole power of rule in the Church, I will be of your mind. Your
instances, of Timothy and Titus, will not serve your turn, for that they were
Evangelists. Bilson confesses, more then once, the Scripture never calls them
Bishops; They are called so by the ancients, because they did those acts, that
by humane custom were afterward appropriated to Bishops, in regard of
presidencie; but they did them not as Bishops, which they are not called; but
as Evangelists, which they were, and were called in Scripture. For your speech
in this clause, of particular men's silencing, it is impertiment; and for the
cause, it is delivered in your railing Dialect, which I pass by, and of the same
railing strain is all your 15. Parag. only you tell us "by Scriptures we are
made subject to Bishops; and I have told you, and you confess, in Scripture
Bishops and Presbyters are all one, only you have a vain conceit of an
Apostle-Bishop; of which more anon.

Parag. 16.17. You endeavor an answer to that, that the Presbyters were
subjected to lay-Chancellors, but it is only by way of retorsion; direct
answers you are not furnished with, but refer us to the Doctors Commons; and
yet I doubt not, but you have taken the oath with an etc. that swears to
perpetuity, more then Chancellors; but how do you retort? first, we have set
many lay-Chancellors for one as the Parliament and Committees; ridiculous! when
we speak of Ecclesiastical Officers, to retort touching those that are civil.
But secondly, you retort, that though we complain of one lay-Chancellor, we
subject Gentry and Commonalty to many Lay Elders, and say not (say you) that
there be preaching Elders with them, lest it be returned upon you, that the
lay-Chancellor is but the Bishops Officer in such cases of Judicature, etc. But
I will say, that they have preaching Presbyters amongst them, and more then you
can say for Chancellors; yet they are to be chosen by the people in general,
over whom they are to be; and though you say, the Chancellor is but the Bishops
Officer; Yet it is apparent in the woeful experience of many Ministers, that he
is such an Officer, that without, and against the Bishops mind, has convented
and suspended Ministers, which is more power then the Bishop ought to have;
Episcopus sacerdotibus ac Ministris solus honorem dare potest, auferre non
potest; confessed by Bilson, perpet. govern. page 107. where the Counsel of
Hispalis 2 ca. 2. and Counsel of Afric. ca. 26. are cited; what you add about
institutions by Chancellors, is nothing to me, who never yet had institution;
nor has it any sense in it, that it should be against Gods direction, to
receive institution from a lay-Chancellor, as our land makes a Rectorie an
inheritance, wherein the Civil Magistrate does protect us.

You conclude, Parag. 18. That my first argument, you hope, is sufficiently
confuted; You have done your best, it is like, yet it stands in full force and
virtue; That if the Kings oath binds him to maintain Episcopacie, as it stood
in practice, and as it is in your famous etc. oath; It is an engagement in that
point to what is against Scriptures rale, and primitive practice; therefore an
obligation to what is unlawful, and in that point invalid. In the close, you
cannot give off without calumniating, though never so irrationally. I say in
answer, who ever they be, that hinder the Ministers of God from any part or
duty of their calling required of God, usurp upon them; and they that maintain
them in that, maintain them in usurpation; this is a truth, without derogation
from any authority; and so I close this second chapter.

CHAP. IV. PARAG. I. Wherein it is cleared, that Episcopacy is not to be upheld
by our Protestation, and that there may be ordination without it, in answer to
Doctor Boughen 's fourth chapter.
Case of Conscience Resolved
BUt though this way of invalidating the Kings oath be most satisfactory to
some; yet to those that are not convinced of the unlawfulness of Episcopacie,
it will not hold; and so it would cast the resolution of this doubt, about the
oath, upon another question, touching the unlawfulness of Episcopacie, which is
a larger field. I shall therefore endeavor to show, that though for argument
sake, it be granted that Episcopacie be lawful, yet notwithstanding that his
oath, the King without impeachment may, in this circumstance, consent to
abrogate Episcopacie.

To answer this passage, you descend cap. 4. but there begin with such
notorious trifling, as I never saw in a man pretending to learning.

For Parag. 1. You infer, if Episcopacy be lawful, then the Kings oath is not
vinculum iniquitatis; egregiam laudem, etc. who knows not, that on that
supposition the oath is lawful? You add, but mine own conscience began to
check me for this, because I say it is only satisfactory to some. You are
mistaken sir; The reason why I disputed the oath on a second bottom, was,
because though I thought you, and men of your affection, might interpret the
Kings oath to maintain Episcopacie, in that usurping height wherein it stood,
that by his oath you might keep up your own absurd etc. oath; yet I perceived
that his Majesty, and other impartial Judges, might interpret Episcopacie in a
more moderate way, as it is now come to pass (his Majesty, offering to bring
Episcopacie to that tenor, that they shall do nothing without their
Presbyters;) and with such moderation many count it lawful, nay few count it
unlawful; therefore I disputed the case under the second notion; though
Episcopacie were lawful (understanding, as you may perceive by the scope,
lawful only, not necessary) yet the King might consent by Bill to abrogate it.

After having spent parag. 2. in impertinent slander, according to your
custom, parag. 3. You ridiculously descant upon two phrases satisfactory, and
not hold; though being applied to diverse persons, your own conscience tells
you, there is no incongruitie in them. And then you tell what pity it is that I
have to deal with learned, and rational men, and not with Ignoramus, and his
Dulman: Sir, to ease your passion, I have to deal with both. In my first
attempt with the first, which I ingeniously acknowledge; in this second with the
latter, which I have in part, and shall more clearly evince, and that in the
next Paragraph; For I having said, that the King, without impeachment of his
oath, might in this circumstance consent to abrogation of Episcopacie: You ask,
what I mean by circumstance, whether the Kings oath, or Episcopacie; and run on
in a childish descant, unworthy of paper; when any but a Dul-man may see
plainly enough, what I mean by (in this circumstance) that is, according to the
grounds of the question in the former page. In this state of the nation, that
no hope of safety without union between King and Parliament; no hope of union
without abrogation of Episcopacie; for the Houses had abrogated it, and the
sword was in their hands.

Next, Parag. 5. You confess! the King may abrogate what is lawful. I thank you
Doctor; you have given me the question; for if the King may abrogate what is
lawful, then the reason why the King cannot consent to abrogate Episcopacie,
is not his oath (in your judgment,) but because it is an ordinance of God, and
more then lawful. Well; now let us try it there; prove Episcopacie to be the
ordinance of Christ, I will yield you the cause.

This you say, Parag. 6. "You have proved already, cap. 2.6.7.8. And I there
have showed the weakness and sophistry of your proofs, and shall do it more
hereafter.

But you proceed, Parag. 7. That Episcopacy is the only order to which Christ
has given power to ordain Presbyters, and Deacons, etc. What you deliver here,
is apparently false; for first, Christ gave power immediately to Apostles to do
it, and the Apostles to the Evangelists; this power they exercised in Ecclesiis
constituendis, in constituting Churches. And these extraordinary officers
dying, and their extraordinary offices ceasing, as almost all confess, what
parts of their office were of perpetual use; as praying, preaching,
administering Sacraments, and the use of the keys, were left to those ordinary
Officers, Pastors and Teachers, Ephesians. 4.11. And under them are comprised all
ordinary teaching Ministers, without any distinction from God: the distinction
that followed after, was but humane for order, and to avoid accidental
inconveniences; as Ambrose and Jerome witness most plainly, and unanswerably,
unless men set themselves nodum in foirpo quaerere; let the reader view the
places in Bilson, where he brings them (to prove the Presbyteries were of
preaching, not of Lay Elders) against lay-^lders, and let his view be
impartial, and I doubt not, but he will approve what I assert.

You proceed, no Bishop, no Priest; no Priest, no Lords Supper. Now indeed, you
reason like a Catholic, but a Roman Catholic; for just so, Bellarmine, and
others of that leaven, argue against Protestant Churches, to un-Church them;
with whom, though you may join; yet all those, that according to their
profession, are true Protestants, and embrace other reformed Churches as dear
sisters, will not thank you, but disdain you, and your assertions, that do
obliquely un-Church the most of them. And that which our Divines answer to
them, shall stand good, maugre your teen, and skill. For they holding and
proving, that a Bishop and Presbyter, differ not by Gods law, but humane; And
knowing, that Presbyters are the Pastors meant, Ephesians. 4.11. And that those
Pastors are the successors of the Apostles, to exercise all perpetual acts of
ministry, whereof ordination being one, they must needs, by divine law, be
invested with it. The Bishop, you plead for, was but primus Presbyter, a chief
Presbyter, elected to guide and govern the Presbytery, in acts of government.
For all antiquity acknowledges the Presbytery did govern with him, and
ordain with him.

Now if the Presbyters elect one to be President, though not for life; why
shall not their act be as valid, as if the Presidencie were for longer
continuance? Sure, while learned Bilson gathers from the Presbyterians grant,
of a President in the Prebyterie, by Divine law, or light of nature, though not
the same man perpetually, that their Presidens differ not materially from those
Bishops that the Fathers speak of, to make good his cause against them: We may
also infer, if the difference be so little, as he acknowledges, (as indeed it
is not much) then may we sure infer, that if the Ordination of the one be
complete, the Ordination of the other, cannot be effentially defective.

Augustine is impertinently cited by you, Sine nostro officio est plebi certa
pernities. Without our, (without the Episcopal office) there is certain ruin to
the people.

For though Augustine were a Bishop, and wrote to a Bishop, (as you say) yet by
that, without our office, he plainly means the office of the Ministry in
general, not of Episcopacie: For he makes it lawful to flee, in that Epistle,
as Paul did, when there be others to look to the Church; Fugiant (says he) ubi
ab alijs, (qui non ita requiruntur,) non deseratur Ecclesia, sed praebeant
cibaria consenvis suis, qui aliter vivere non possunt. Let them flee, where the
Church is not forsaken of others, that have not such an eye upon them, but they
will minister spiripual food to their fellow servants, which otherwise cannot
live. Now what were those others? not Bishops, for there were not many of them
in one City, or Country; but Presbyters.

But now you will prove it, by the Protestation and Covenant. First, by the
Protestation, You have vowed in the presence of Almighty God, to maintain the
true reformed Protestant Religion, expressed in Doctrine of the Church of
England.

Add, I pray you, against all Popery, and Popish innovations. And you must
remember again presently, upon the framing of the protestation, there was an
Explanation put forth, before it was taken, in the Country, or City; that
under the Doctrine of the Church of England, the Discipline then in the Church
of Egland, was not included. So, your Argument from the Protestation, is of no
value.

But yet let us see what you can say for this, out of the Doctrine of the
Church of England. First, the ordinary way to heaven, is by the Word and
Sacraments* No man may preach and administer the Sacrament, but he that is
lawfully called and sent; none are lawfully called and sent, but they only,
who are called and sent by those who have authority. Bishops, and only
Bishops, have authority to send in this kind, Article 39.

Here you play leger-demain, for the Article holds forth the way of ordination,
by the Book of Consecration, to be a lawful way, but not the only lawful way.
For the Composers of those Articles knew very well, that there was another way
of ordination in other Churches, whom they always held as sisters; which they
did not, with the Papists, condemn, though the Article approve the English; way
and that being held forth as a lawful, not the only lawful way; it hinders
not, but others may be authorized to ordain, as in other Reformed Churches; and
therefore, if the Protestation for the maintenance of the Doctrine of the
Church of England, were without exception against the Discipline, it will not
prove your no Bishop, no Priest. The Book, you say, was composed in the days
of King Edward the sixth, by those holy men, who after were blessed Martyrs.
But these men, I must tell you, were not of your mind, that the distinction of
Bishops, from Presbyters, was any other, then what Jerome had taught them by
humane custom, Dr Downam in answer to his reply is driven to this. If the
Bishops better informed, concernning their functions, had now reformed their
judgments, that is, to hold their offices not by humane, but Divine
disposition; In his answer to the Replyers Preface, who had pressed him with the
judgment of Whitguift and Jewel.
nor held, the power of the keys belonged only to them; for in this Book of
ordination, they charge the Presbyter, not only with care in Word and
Sacraments, but the Discipline of Christ too.

And whereas, you add, That the Articles were confirmed, 13. Elizabeth, and
subscription enjoined; You should remember, it was with limitation, so far as
they contained the Doctrine of the Church, not the discipline. You conclude,
"thus far with the Protestation. But yet a little further, I pray you; For the
Protestation adds, that the Doctrine of the Church of England is to be
maintained against all Popery: Now you may find in Bellarmins lib. de
Clericis, your argument of no Bishop, no Priest, so no Sacrament, so no Church;
wherein all Protestant-writers oppose him, English and others: and therefore,
surely, the Doctrine of the Church of England, rightly understood, condemns
your position, which is a position in Popery, to overthrow Protestant Churches.

CHAP. IV. PARAG. 2. Where in is showed, that the National Covenant, does not
engage to uphold Episcopacy: In Answer to Doctor Boughens fifth Chapter.
IN your fifth Chapter, you attempt to prove, that the solemn league and
covenant engages to maintain Episcopacy. I might tell you, this is nothing to
me, nor to the matter; for whatever you fancy of the Covenant, they that
framed it, will follow it in their own sense; and if any Covenanters be of that
mind, as you are, that not your, but moderated Episcopacie, that is, a
Super-intendencie over a Presbytery, be nearest the word of God, yet they were
not so considerable, as to be able to make peace, without abrogation of
Episcopacie; nor without peace, to preserve King and Kingdom. If they could,
then my Treatise were answered, by change of circumstances; that argues the
lawfulness of the Kings condescension, chiefly in that circumstance. But to the
matter it self, you have not, nor do you here bring any thing to satisfy.

First, Parag. 1, 2, 3. You come with your Crambe his cocta, That no salvation,
but by hearing and Sacraments, nor these without mission. The Apostles were
sent of Christ, and they sent others, Titus and Timothy, to ordain Ministers.

To all which I have answered before, and in part cleared it, That the
Apostles, and Timothy and Titus their assistansts, as Evangelists, were
extraordinary officers, and ceased; and that, the only ordinary officers now
are Pastors, and Teachers, Ephesians. 4.11.

Touching whom, the Apostle gives direction, 1 Timothy 5. Titus 1. under the name
of Bishops and Elders;) and these are Successors of the Apostles,) to all that
power that is ordinary and neceslarie in the Church; and among these, there is
by Gods law, no prioritie, but of gifts, and order delegated by election. But
for any Bishops, that are of the same order with the Apostles, its a strange
and groundless notion. Almost all Divines tell you, that Apostleship was an
extraordinary office, that ceased; and though an Apostle may be said,
allusively, to be a Bishop, yet a Bishop may not be said to be an Apostle; yet
these things you over with again in this Chapter, and tell us of two sorts of
Apostles, the Apostles of Christ, and the Apostles of the Churches, Philip.
2.25. 2 Cor. 8.23. Whereas, I have showed you, that for Epaphroditus, he is
said there, either to be a messenger only, from Philippi, to Saint Paul,
(which is more evident, in the same phrase used of those, 2 Cor. 8.23.
expounded by Bilson himself, of messengers from the Churches, page 75.) or else
that notes them to be, secundarii Apostoli, that is, as Salmasius takes it,
Evangelists, and so extraordinary Officers: but more of this in the next
Section.

Next, you proceed to the example of best reformed Churches, wherein we agree
with you, to reform, is in primaevam formam reducere, but that form is in
Scripture, that is our first Christian story, and there we find no Bishop, but
what is a Presbyter; others that are abusively called so, were not properly
such, but Officers of an higher kind, whose Office being extraordinary, dyed
with them: For your particular quotations; first, that of Zanchi, Exempla
veteris Ecclesiae nobis debent esse instar praecepti, the Examples of the
ancient Church ought to be to us as a precept, is to be understood, of the
Church under the Apostles, registered in the Scriptures; and so the Ministers of
London, (whom you cite also) speak expressly, that Scripture-examples are
obligatorie, and that will not serve your turn: But for the quotations out of
Zanchy, that, in his conscience they were no better then Schismatiques, that
counted it a part of reformation to have no Bishop in degree of authority above
their true fellow Presbyters: I have sought it earnestly in the place cited,
but cannot find any such thing, de vera reformandae Ecclesiae ratione; but in
other places I find the contrary. In a short confession of his faith, when he
was seventie years of age, cap. 25. de Eccles. Gubernatione, he speaks to this
effect; He acknowledges only Pastors and Teachers to be left by the
institution of Christ, as ordinary Ministers. The superintendency of one, taken
up by men, as a remedy of Schism, he dislikes not; but from the tyranny, into
which that presidencie degenerated; he concludes, Quo proprius acceditur in
ordinibus Ministrorum ad simplicitatem Apostolicam, eo magis etiam nobis
probetur; at que ut ubique accedatur, dandam esse operam, judicemus: In the
Orders of Ministers, the nearer we come to Apostolical simplicity, the more is
it to be approved, and diligence should be used, that every where such
propinquity to the word should be attained: Here you have Zanchy directly
against what you would have him say; as also, on the fourth Commandment, de
diversis Ministror^^^ generibus, he clearly agrees with me, that Pastors
mentioned Ephesians. 4.11. are the highest Officers now left in the Church; and those
the same, mentioned 1 Timothy 3. and Titus 1. Bishops, or Presbyters, which he
proves to be all one; and that superiority, that in process of time, one had
above another, was but by humane grant; For what you cite out of Melancthons
Epistles, touching Bishops; It is but one man's private opinion, and that, when
they were in that case, that we a long time were, and still in the greatest
part are, without any government settled; and undoubtedly, the Church had better
be under a government that has some rigor or tyranny in it, then under no
government; so to shake off Bishops, as to be under no government, is, as
Melancthon truly says, inexpedient, if it were lawful; and such a liberty (as
Luther said) is Libertas minime utilis ad posteritatem, a liberty no ways
profitable to posterity. But what is this to the Covenant, which resates not to
persons, but to Churches' Now it is apparent, that the Churches of Germany have
reformed Episcopacie so, that they have no such Apostle-Bishop, as you dream
of, but Presbytery at the most, with the superintendency of one in their
Presbyteries: neither has that any weight, that you speak, of the Convention
at Auspurg; for they were then but in a way of reformation, it was but the
dawning of the day with them, and they could not see all things at the first;
but we see, when they come to settle the order of their Churches, they settled
Presbytery, not Episcopacie: And yet I deny not, that if the Bishops would
then have been reasonable, they would have admitted their jurisdiction for
peace-sake, as Melancthon says, redimere pacem. And truly Sir, though I
maintain, that the King, for peace, may abolish Episcopacie: Yet I am of that
mind, and wish others were so too, redimere pacem duriori condition, as
Melancthon said, to redeem peace with an harder condition; with Episcopacie so
regulated, as at first, to preside and rule in his Presbytery.

But onething I may not pass; for, whereas Melancthon says, that they did
grant to Bishops, and potestatem ordinis and jurisdictionis, the power of
order, and jurisdiction; you enquire What is this power of Order: certainly a
power that Presbyters had not, that is, a power, at least, to ordain Ministers:
But here, Master Doctor, you bewray too much ignorance for a D. D. for in power
of order, not only Protestants, but most Papists make Bishops and Presbyters
one, for that is to perform, as officers, prayers, consecrate sacraments, etc.
and power of jurisdiction, only they make a Bishops peculiar.

For what you prosecute, touching power of Ordination to be only in their
Bishops, not Presbyters; I will speak more fully to that in the following
Section; In the mean time I must tell you, that in quoting Salmatius, Parag.
15* Of this Chapter, you show egregious negligence in reading, or, which is
worse, deceit; for the words you cite out of him, touching Timothy and Titus,
that they were Bishops indeed, of the same right, and of the same Order,
whereof at this day they are accounted, who govern the Churches, and are over
Presbyters: This he brings only by way of explication of Theodorets opinion;
but when he comes to deliver his own, He says, page 63. That Timothy was
rather super-Episcopus, above a Bishop, an Apostle. And again, page 69. He
says of them, per abusum igitur and improprie Episcopi appellabantur, they
were improperly, and abusively called Bishops. Thus also you use the London 1.
D. who (you say) confess, that their government is not above 80. years
standing: whereas they assert the institution of it by Christ, and the
restitution only for 80 years; when they did likewise reform the corrupt
doctrines in Popery: And do not you speak against your conscience, when you
say, Calvin would have crushed that government in the bud, that sometimes you
make a Geneva invention? Who would think a D. D. should be such a citer of
authors?

But to conclude this Section; if Bishops have no place in Scripture, the best
reformation must be, to abolish Episcopacie; though well limited, they may be
tolerated; and that they have no place in Scripture, is the work of the next
Section.

CHAP. IV. PARAG. 3. Wherein, for a fuller answer to what the Doctor has said
to prove Episcopacy Christ's institution; this Quession is resolved: whether a
Bishop (now usually so called) be by the ordinance of Christ, a distinct
Officer from him that is usually called a Presbyter? The one a successor of the
Apostles, endued with power of ordination and other jurisdiction; the other,
the Successor of the Presbyters, ordained by Timothy and Titus, endued with
power of administering word and Sacraments: Neg.
FOr the sounder and clearer resolving of this question, I shall proceed by way
of Thesis, fetching things from the first original; barely proposing only what
is confessed by all, but proving those things, wherein there is any controversy,
or whereon the controversy has dependence.

Thesis, 1. first its agreed amongst all, that all the teaching Officers that
can challenge Livine institution, are set down in an entire Catalogue, Ephesians.
4.11, And gave some Apostles, and some Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some
Pastors, and Teachers; and therefore all that cannot derive their pedigree from
one of these, must be in the case of those, Neh. 7.64.

Thesis, 2. That of these Officers, some were extraordinary, some ordinary.

Thesis, 3. That Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, were extraordinary officers,
for the first planting of Churches; and Pastors and Teachers, ordinary.

Thesis, 4. That the extraordinary officers were temporary, and the ordinary to
be perpetual in the Church, Bilson perp. govern. p. 300. The office of
Evangelists was extraordinary and temporary: Field of the Church, lib. 5. c.
22. And indeed, whatsoever is extraordinary, is temporary.

Thesis, 5. That Apostles were the highest of extraordinary officers: and
Pastors, the highest of those that were ordinary. Apostles are named first, and
all that are named before Pastors, are acknowledged extraordinary, Ephesians. 4.11.

Thesis, 6. That in the extraordinary Officers, there were some gifts and acts
peculiar to them, as such; as to the Apostles immediate calling, divine
inspiration, infallibility in doctrine, universal charge; and in the
Evangelist, to be an assistant to an Apostle, not to be perpetually fixed to any
place, but for the finishing some special work, as Timothy at Ephesus, 1 Timothy
1.3. Titus at Creet, cap. 1.5. and 3.12.

Secondly, There were some qualities and actions, which though required in, and
done by them, as extraordinary officers, in an extraordinary way, yet are of
necessity; and are, in an ordinary way, perpetually to be continued in the
Church of God; as abilities to teach and rule the Church; and the acts of
teaching, praying, ordination of Ministers, Church Censures, etc. See Bilson
perp. govern. chap. 7. page 106, 107.

Thesis, 7. That these Pastors, Ephesians. 4.11. that are the highest ordinary
Officers, are Successors to the Apostles in all that power, and authority, and
all those acts flowing from it, which are necessary, perpetual, and ordinary in
the Church of God. This also is clear; power and authority require a subject;
divine power and authority, a subject of divine institution: Now no other
remains of those of Gods institution, but Pastors and Teachers, which if they
be not the same, Pastor is the chief. The other, as temporary, are ceased;
therefore Pastors must be their successors, in all this power: and in them must
the commands for execution be kept, without spot, or unrebukable, until the
appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ, 1 Timothy 6.14. And to them must that
Apostolical promise be performed, Matthew. 28.20. Behold, I am with you to the
end of the world.

Thesis, 8. The Pastors and Teachers, 1 Cor. 12.28. Ephesians. 4.11. are no other but
Synonymaes with those Elders ordained in every Church, Acts 14.23. and in every
City, Tit. 1.5. This is clear; for those Elders that were here ordained, were
officers of Christ's giving. The Apostles would ordain no other: it had been
sacrilegious presumption; but they were neither Apostles, Prophets, nor
Evangelists; Ergo, if Christ's, they must be under either Pastors or Teachers

Thesis, 9. These Elders, were, by the Holy Ghost, also styled Bishops, and
were indeed Bishops, aliud aetatis, aliud officii nomen; and of them it is,
that direction is given under the name of Bishops, 1 Timothy 3. Herein Jerome is
most plain, seconded by Ambrose, or Hilary, an approved Author, under his name;
who though they differ from other fathers, who understand by Bishop, Hieron. in
Ep. ad Titum.
1 Timothy 3.2 Bishop distinct from a Presbyter, such as was in their times: Yet
Jeromes reason preponderates all, because drawn out of the bowels of the Text,
1 Titus 1.5, 6, 7. Attend (says he) the words of the Apostle, who having
discoursed of the qualities of a Presbyter, after infers; for a Bishop must be
blameless, etc. Therefore a Bishop and a Presbyter are the same. Again, if any
yet doubt, (says he) whether a Bishop, and a Presbyter, be not all one, let
him read the Apostle, Phil. 1.1. Paul, and Timotheus, the servants of Jesus
Christ, to all the Saints which are in Philippi, with the Bishops and Deacons.
Philippi (says he) was a City of Macedonia: and certainly, in one City (as now
they are called) more Bishops could not be. But St. Paul thus wrote, because at
that time, Presbyters and Bishops were all one. If yet this seem ambiguous
(says he,) that Presbyters and Bishops were all one, it may be proved by
another testimony: It Is written in the Acts of the Apostles, when St. Paul came
to Miletum, he sent to Ephesus, and called to him, thence, the Elders of that
Church, to whom amongst other things he spoke thus; Take heed to your selves,
and to your flock over which the Holy Ghost has placed you Bishops, to feed
the Church of God, etc. Observe this diligently, (says he) how calling the
Presbyters of one City, Ephesus, he afterward calls them Bishops: he adds Heb.
13.17. and 1 Pet. 5.1, 2. and concludes these things, that we might show, that
amongst the Ancients, Presbyters and Bishops were the same.

Thesis, 10. After the decease of the extraordinary Officers, Apostles,
Prophets, Evangelists, and their Office, with cause of it with them: the Church
acknowledgd no other Church Officers, as instituted of Christ, but only the
two, mentioned 1 Timothy 3. and Titus 1. 1 Bishops or Presbyters. 2 Deacons.
Clemens, mentioned Phil. 4.3. who is witnessed, by Tertullian, to be ordained
of St. Peter himself, de prescrip. in an Epistle to the Corinthians, writes
thus: The Apostles preaching through the Countries and Regions: their first
fruits, whom they had tried by the spirit, they appointed for Bishops and
Deacons to believers. Here you see, by the Apostles were constituted but these
two Offices, Bishops and Deacons, of whom he afterward says, that those that
have humbly, and unblameably ministered to the sheepfold of Christ, those we
may not think may be justly thrown out of their Ministry: whence he infers,
(...), etc. It Is a filthy thing beloved, yea, very filthy, and unworthy that
conversation which is in Christ Jesus, to hear, that the most strong, and
ancient Church of Corinth, for one or two persons, should make a faction
against their Presbyters: He concludes, (...). You therefore, who have laid the
foundation of sedition, be instructed to repent, and be subject to your
Presbyters; so, whom he called Bishops, he now calls Presbyters; and gives not,
so much as any hint of any singular Bishops, but the company of Presbyters, or
Bishops, over the Church of God, vid. Blond. Apol. pro sanct. Hieron. p. 11, 12.

Polycarpe, in an Epistle to the Philippians: Be ye subject to the Presbyters
and Deacons, as to God, and Christ; and here you see but two offices: and
therefore yet the Presbyters ruled the Church in Common. Blond. ubi supra, p.
14, 1^. where many more witnesses may be seen. And in this, the Master of the
Sentences consents too, lib. 4. Did. 24. de Presbyteris; unde and Apud
veteres, iidem Episcopi and Presbyteri fuere: quia illud est nomen dignitatis,
non aetatis: and a little after, excellenter tamen canones duos tantum sacros
ordines appellari censent; Diaconatus, scilicet, and Presbyteratus, quia hos
solos primitiva ecclesia legitur habuisse, and de his solis praeceptum Apostoli
habemus.

Thesis 11. Amongst these Bishops or Presbyters, there was one, who by the
consent of the rest, either by their free election, or for his priority in
conversion and ordination, had a pre-eminence of honor above the rest, for
order-sake; who had no new ordination, or none for a great while, but what he
had from his fellow-Presbyters, who chose him, and exalted him, without any
further ado, So Hierom, ep. 85. ad Evagrium, which he confirms from Alexandria;
For (says he) Alexandriae, etc. At Alexandria, even to Heraclas, and
Dionysius, Bishops; The Elders did always name one Bishop, chosen out of
themselves, and by them placed in excelsiori gradu, in an higher degree of
honor, (not office.) Now whether in their choice, they did only look at merit,
or whether they did a good while, (till, as Ambrose or Hilary on the Ephesians.
Quia prim^m Presbyteri Episcopi appellabantur, etc. For he calls Timothy (who
was created a Presbyter by him) a Bishop, because at first, Presbyters were
called Bishops, that one withdrawing, another did succeed; but because the
following Presbyters were found unworthy to hold that primacy, the way was
changed, a Counsel providing, that not order, of time but merit should make the
Bishop, constituted by the judgment of many Presbyters, lest an unworthy man
should rashly usurp it, and be a scandal to many.
Ambrose says, it proved inconvenient) advance him that was the next senior;
it is argued both ways, though in my opinion, Blundel has made it most
probable, that according to Ambrose his expression, it went by senioritie for
certain years; in his preface to the forecited Book. Some think, it went by
senioritie in some places, and by election in others.

Thesis. 11. This preheminency that one had above the rest, was by
Ecclesiastical custom, not by Divine institution: and advanced him only to an
higher degree, or dignity; not to another order, distinct from his
fellow-Presbyters; so that, still he must derive his succession from the
Presbyters, or Bishops, that were to be ordained in every Church, and is to
find his place in the divine Catalogue of officers, Ephesians. 4.11. under astors,
and not Evangelists, or Prophets. That this pre-eminence was not from any
divine institution, but Ecclesiastical ordination, Jerome is express: The
Bishops must know, that they are greater then Presbyters, rather by custom,
then Divine disposition, Hieron. in Tit. So Augustine, ep. 19. Although,
according to the words of honor, which the Churches use has obtained,
Episcopacy is greater then Presbytery, etc. Yet: See bear, the precedencie of
Bishops, is an honor of words, and a fruit of use. And this may be further
cleared, from what was first done in conferring this pre-eminence. It was but a
bare act of the rest of the Presbyters, as appears by the example brought by
Hierom, in the Church of Alexandria. They chose out of themselves, and set him
in an higher degree: This they did of themselves, and by themselves, without
any Divine command, (Let it be produced, if there be any;) yea, without any
example, in any of the Churches in the Scripture, and they did it by
themselves, without the concurrence of other, and they could not set him in an
higher order; Presbyters cannot make an Apostle.

Thirdly, this may appear, from that little difference that was between such a
Bishop and a Presbyter, in the fathers times. Chrysostom. Theophylact, Hilary, on
1 Timothy 3. Inquiring the reason, why the Apostle passes from directions about
Bishops, to directions about Deacons, no mention being made of a Presbyter;
Give answer; First, Hilary, or, Ambrose, Quia Episcopi and Presbyteri una
ordinatio est, uterque enim Sacerdos est, sed Episcopus primus. Because, of an
Elder and a Bishop there is but one ordination, both are Presbyters, but a
Bishop is first. And Chysostom, Because, a Presbyter does so little differ from
a Bishop to wit, in nothing but ordination, says he, In nothing but election,
says Theophylact. Now, where the difference is so little, that one direction
for qualification will serve for both; there is plainly acknowledged a
difference in dignity, or degree of excellency only, not in order or office.

That conceit then of Theodorets, that they that are now called Bishops, were
heretofore called Apostles, and those that are now called Presbyters, were
then, i. e. in the Apostles times, called Bishops, is it self too groundless a
fancy for you (Doctor Boughen) to ground your distinction of Apostle-Bishops,
and Presbyter-Bishops; as though our now Bishops were Apostle-Bishops, and so
of an higher Order, and endued by that order from Jesus Christ to many peculiar
acts, which a Presbyter could not do: And that they are not only an higher
degree of Presbyter-Bishops, endued with power by humane wisdom to proceed and
order those actions, which by divine right, belong to all their
fellow-Presbyters, who are to join with them in these acts of jurisdictions:
This distinction, I say of yours, it has no bottom to bear it up. Vide Morton.
Appl. Cathol. l. 1. c. 33. Crim. tertia.


For first, you see its directly contrary to Hierome, and Ambrose, or Hilary,
and many others; who make Bishops in their times, to be the same with
Presbyters, or PresbyterBishops, as you call them: Nay, it differs from other
Fathers, who though they acknowledge not an Identity of a Bishop and Presbyter;
yet they take that, which you say is spoken of a Presbyter-Bishop, 1 Timothy 3.
and Tit. 1. of such Bishops as were in their time, which you would have to be
Apostle-Bishops.

3. It has no ground in Scripture. The Scriptures sets no other orders, but
Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors, Teachers, which are those
Presbyter-Bishops, spoken of Acts 14.23. Acts 20.28. 1 Timothy 3. Tit. 1.

Now the three first are extraordinary, and ceased; the latter only remain.
And therefore the Bishop, for what of him is divine, must be a Pastor, and
that is the same with a Presbyter-Bishop; else, show us some institution for
him: To talk of Timothy and Titus, is vain, being it is witnessed by Scripture,
confes'd by all, that they were Evangelists, which is extraordinary: Successors
they may, and must, have in the work of ordination, but in their office they
have not; but the same work is done by Pastors, succeeding them in those acts
of Discipline, as well, as in those of teaching and administering the
Sacraments: Neither need we be moved with the appellation which the Fathers
bestow on them, calling them Bishops of Ephesus, and Crete; and saying, that
St. Paul, in them, taught all Bishops. For when Scripture calls them
Evangelists, and reckons Evangelists among extraordinary offices, that Christ
has given; what authority is of force against this testimony? Therefore we
favorably interpret the saying of those Fathers: that they call them Bishops,
with relation to the custom of their times, who called them Bishops, that did
those acts that Timothy and Titus did, not that they were properly so: For they
were of an higher order, and did these acts as Evangelists: which their
successors are to do, as ordinary Pastors: Neither will their being
Evangelists hinder the use of their examples, or the precepts given to them:
For the same acts done by whatsoever officer, are to be done by the same rule;
and therefore, as directions given to them for preaching, so for acting in
government, are to be followed by other ordinary Officers; upon whom (by their
decease) the power and care of their acts, are devolved, though of an inferior
order: Timothy was to imitate Paul; an Evangelist, an Apostle: and every Pastor
is to imitate these Evangelists, in such acts, as are common to Evangelists
with them.

Thesis, 13. All Presbyters being of the same Order, and that the highest of
those that are now in the Church, have by divine law, equal power in places
where the Holy Ghost has set them Pastors and Bishops, as to preach the word,
and administer Sacraments, so to do all other acts of government, when called,
requisite for the edification and perservation of the Church; and the Bishop,
who is but primus Presbyter, made by man for Orders sake, can rightly challenge
no Monopoly, or sole interest, but only a presidencie, to guide, rule, and
order that Presbytery, wherein acts of jurisdiction are exercised, whether
acts of ordination, or deposition; binding, or loosing; excommunicating, or
absolving. This I prove by these reasons:

Argument, 1. Those who are truly and equally the successors of the Apostles,
in ordinary, and necessary acts of the Ministry; to those by their office,
belong all the acts of jurisdiction, that are necessary, and ordinary acts of
jurisdiction: But Presbyter-Bishops are such successors of the Apostles; ergo.
The Major is clear of it self; the Minor I prove thus: Pastors are truly, and
equally successors of the Apostles, in necessary and ordinary duties of the
Ministry, as appears Ephesians. 4.11. Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors.

The three former were extraordinary, temporary, and ceased; so the Pastor
must be the successor, if they have any: But Presbyter-Bishops set over the
flock by the Holy Chost, to feed it, are equally and truly Pastors: ergo. The
minor is clear, from the definition of a Pastor, which is an officer set over
the flock of God, to feed it, and definitio competit omni, and essentia non
variatur gradibus. See Acts 20.28.

Argument, 2. Those that by divine law are equal in the power of order, those
are equal in the power of government, or jurisdiction. All Presbyters, first
and second, are equal in power of order; ergo. For the Minor, that all
Presbyters are equal in the power of order; it may appear by the definition of
the power of order: Lib. 5. of the Church, cap. 27
the power of order (says Field) is that; whereby persons are sanctified, and
enabled to the performance of such sacred acts, as other men, neither may, nor
can do; as is the preaching of the Word, and administration of the Sacraments.

Now all Presbyters, See Field of the Church, lib. 3. c. 39.
as Field confesses, are equal in the power of Order; yea, not only he with
other Protestants, but many Schoolmen, and other Papists also, as he there
shows: For every Priest (says Durand) in regard of his Priestly power, may
minister all Sacraments; ea quae sunt ordinum, (says Aureolus) omnes recipient
immediate a Christo: ita quod in potestate nullius, imo nec Papae est, illa
auferre: in 4. sent. Did. 24. Art. 2. Sect. tertia ratio etc. And this also
appears because they must all sit under the same title of Pastors, Ephesians. 4.11.

For the Major. I prove it thus. Power of jurisdiction is, indeed, but a branch
of the power of Order. A man by the power of order, is made a Minister of
Christ, and so consecrated to serve Christ, in all ministerial services
required of such a Minister of Christ.

Now these services are to edify the Church, either by food, or physic; to
further their salvation by word, or rod of Discipline: Now both these being
ministerial acts and orders, making a man a Minister: hence it follows, that
they that are equal in orders, in actu primo, in regard of power, when they
have a call, are equally enabled to the exercise of discipline, or
jurisdiction, as well as preaching, and consecrating Sacraments, both being
acts of that office, to which he is advanced by orders. And thus much Field
does, ina manner confess: Three things (says he) are employed in the calling of
Ecclesiastical Ministers. First, An election, choice, or designment of
persons, fit for so high and excellent employment. Secondly, the consecration
of them, and giving them power and authority, to intermeddle with things that
pertain to the service of God; to perform eminent acts of gracious efficacy,
and admirable force, tending to the procuring of the eternal good of the sons
of men, and yield unto them whom Christ has redeemed with his most precious
blood, all the comfortable means, assurances, helps, that may set forward their
eternal salvation. Thirdly, the assigning, and dividing out to each man, thus
sanctified to so excellent a work, that portion of Gods people, that he is to
take care of, etc.

Now here plainly, under assurances, means, and helps to set forward salvation,
acts of Discipline must needs be contained, 1 Cor. 5.5, 6. and this flows from
power of order, as its habit is, actus primus, induing a man with power.

There is indeed, this difference between acts of jurisdiction, and other acts
of order; the one every Presbyter may do alone; the other only in a Presbytery.
So imposition of hands, 1 Timothy 4.14. was in, and by the Presbytery; so
censures, 2 Cor. 2.7. by many. But a Minister may preach, baptize, administer
the Lords Supper alone; and this was the use of the ancient Churches, who had
their Presbyters, mentroned both in Scriptures, and Fathers.
Now to streighten the Presbyter in this act of his orders, he has recourse to
that feeble shift; That the Bishop only is Pastor, and the other Presbyters are
but, as it were, curates under him; which if true, it is enough to make a
Bishop despair, as well as a Presbyter to be despised: for how can he discharge
the cure of souls in an hundred miles circuit? But the contrary is evident, in
the Presbyters of Ephesus, Acts ^0.28. the Holy Ghost had placed them Bishops,
to feed the stock of God: Neither is his objection, from the Angel of the
Churches Rev. 2.3. weighty; for if there be not a Sy^echdoche in the word
Angel, which Rev. 2.10. Some of you, etc. seems plainly to manifest: yet its
clear he had only a priority of order, not of charge: And the prioritie of
order, was ground enough for directing to him, what belonged to, and was
communicated to all; as now it is to any temporary president of a Classis; or
as the things that concern the whole Houses, are directed to the Speaker of
either.

The same is plain of the Elders of Alexandria, whose superintendent had no
other charge from God, but only a precedencie of honor, and order, from
themselves: Besides, all Presbyter-Bishops set over charges by the Holy Ghost,
are of those Pastors, Ephesians. 4.11. And I hope, no modest learned man, will think
that any President or Bishop, then, was the sole Pastor; or that these
Presbyter-Bishops, set over the flock, by the Holy Ghost, could not act in
their Ministr^, without leave of him: and therefore those rules of restraint,
mentioned in Fathers and Counsels, were but invasions on the liberties of
Presbyters, who had their cures, not from the Bishop, but from the Holy Ghost.

Argument, 3. To whom the keys of the Kingdom of heaven are equally given; they
have equal power of jurisdiction: but to all Presbyter-Bishops, the keys of
the Kingdom of heaven are given, and equally given: ergo. The Major is clear;
for the keys of the Kingdom of heaven contain all jurisdiction; that is without
all question. and the Apostles are hereby usually proved to be equal in
jurisdiction, because the keys were equally given to them.

For the Minor; the keys are appendants to the office of the Minister. The
Apostles with mission had the keys, John 20. and so the confession of the
Church of England, agrees harmoniously with the rest in this, that the power of
the keys is equally in all Ministers, Harmon. of conf. chap 18. p. 362. So at
the ordination of a Presbyter; the key of Discipline was given to the
Presbyter, as well as that of Doctrine, in the Church of England. And if there
be an equality in that order, whereof the keys are an appendix, they must have
the appendix following in equality likewise, that are equal in that order.

Argument, 4. That to which a man has right, and, in acting, is restrained
only by custom, novell constitutions or Ecclesiastical Canons, that, by Gods
law, he has equal right to with others. But Presbyter-Bishops are restrained
from, or limited in acts of government, (to which they have right) only by
custom, novell constitutions of Emperors, or Ecclesiastical Canons: ergo,
Jure Divino, power of government is in them equally with others.

For the Minor, that they have power of government, I have formerly proved,
because it is an act of their office: for the exercise of it, sometimes in
ordination, Paul witnesses, 1 Timothy 4.14. and for government, Jerome gives
clear testimony: Ecclesiae olim communi Pres by ^erorum regebantur consilio;
and they did consecrate their Bishop in Alexandria from St. Mark, to Heraclas,
as he witnesses. So did they ordain with the Bishop; and without the Bishop,
the Chorepiscopi, and the City Presbyters, till inhibited by the Counsel of
Ancyra, held in the beginning of the fourth Centurie. Panormitanus is express:
olim (inquit) Presbyteri in communi regebant Ecclesiam, and ordinabant
sacerdotes, and pariter conferebant omnia Sacramenta, in lib. 1. decret. de
consuet. cap. quarto. Here is the right and practice asserted. Now for
prohibitions, if any, out of the word show them; for the Fathers, they declare
what the custom was in their times. Counsels and Emperors made laws only,
limiting power to prevent inconveniences; and as Jerome says, contra
Luciferianos, many reservations were made, potius ad honorem sacerdotii quam ad
legis necessitatem. Decreto Hisp. Synodi 2. Presbyteris quibus cum Episcopis
plurima ministeriorum, communis est Disp^nsatio (edicitur) ut quaedam novell is
and Ecclesiasti^is constitutionibus, sibi prohibita noverint, sicut
Presbyterorum, ac diaconorum, and virginum consecratio, etc.
And therefore I conclude, the power of government, of binding and loosing, and
of ordination, is by divine right, an appendant to the office of a
Presbyter-Bishop: and as there is no proof for, so no ^eed of your
Apostle-Bishop: And so the chief cornerstone of your whole Book, which you
relate to, from chapter to chapter, is found but untempered mortar, that is
crumbled away when it comes to hard canvassing, and your building must down
with it.

We are indeed, much pressed in this question, with the authority of Fathers.

But I say, first, the most ancient, (as is to be seen in Blundell) Apol. pro
sententia Hieron.
speak but of two orders of Gospel-Officers in their time, which they sometimes
call Bishops and Deacons; sometimes Presbyters and Deacons: Only Ignatius is
urged, as a great friend of Bishops; but indeed he is too great a friend, for
he does so far exceed in his expressions, and so differ in that, from other
writers of his time; that for that, and many other things, all, or the greatest
part of his Epi^^les, lie under great suspicion of subornation, or corruption,
vid. Blond. Apol. pro sanct. Hieron, and Cooks censura patrum.

Secondly, the most rational of the Fathers, as Hierome, and Augustine, have
witnessed, (not speaking obiter, or popularly, but purposely, giving their
judgment in the thing,) that the difference between Bishop and Presbyter, is
the issue of custom and use, not divine institution.

Thirdly, the Fathers generally, give the Bishop but a Presidency, not a
Monarchy, in jurisdiction: They ascribe to him a Presbytery, in which, and
with which, he was to ordain, and censure; and without which, he was not to act
in these things. And this plainly enough shows, that the Bishops Presidencie
was but for order sake, not that power rested only in him; for that power that
is restrained by Divine ordinance to one order, may not be interposed in by
another; See Forbesii. Iren. p. 180. where he dispures against the Papists
thus: (...) ministerium solis Episcopis, a Christo tributum est, id non potest
Papa etc. committere Presbyteris. At ministerium conferendi ordines potest
Papa, etc. committere Presbyteris, Ergo, etc.
the Levites might not join with the Priests, in offering sacrifice, because it
was a particular above their sphere, appropriated to the Priests; which neither
in the absence of the Priest, nor by his leave, or commission, a Levite might
do: But we know, at first, ordination was in the City and Country Presbyters,
and forbidden them only with a Proviso, unless they had the consent, or
commission of the Bishops; which prohibition, does plainly show, that before
they were used to ordain without him, and after might with his leave.

Fourthly, the Fathers differ more from the high Prelatists, then from the
Presbyterian: For the Presbyterian always have a President to guide their
actions, which they acknowledge may be perpetual, durante vita modo se been
gesserit; or temporary, to avoid inconvenience, which Bilson in his preface,
(and again, and again, in his book of perp. gover.) takes hold of, as
advantageous, because so little discrepant, (as he says) from what he
maintains: but now the high Prelatists exclude a Presbytery, as having nothing
to do with jurisdiction, which they put as far above the sphere of a Presbyter,
as sacrificing above a Levites; to wit, an act restrained to an higher order:
whereas the Fathers acknowledge a Presbytery; and in diverse cases, Counsels tie
the Bishop to do nothing without them; and so its clear, the high Prelatists
are at a further distance from the Fathers, then the Presbyterians.

Fifthly, for that, wherein we differ from the Fathers, we have the Plea of one
of the most judicious of the Fathers, Augustine, who being pressed with the
authority of Cyprian, answers lib. contra Cresscon. 2. cap. 32. His writings I
hold not as Canonical, but examine them by the Canonical writings: And in
them, what agrees with the authority of Divine Scriptures, I accept with his
praise; what agrees not, I refuse with his leave. This is our apology, in
dissenting in this thing from some of the Fathers; wherein you see we follow a
Father, and in that wherein Bilson makes use of him, to put off the authorities
of some learned men of his age; and adds, God suffers the best of men to have
some blemishes, lest their writings should be received as authentic, p. 15.2.

Lastly, if we differ from the Fathers in point of Prelacie, (wherein our
opponents are in no better terms with them, then we;) yet I would have them to
consider, in how many things we jump with the Fathers, wherein many of them
have been dissenting, both in opinion, and practice; as touching promiscuous
dancing, especially on the Lords day. 2. Touching residency of Pastors in their
Churches, which excludes also pluralities. 3. Frequencie and diligence in
preaching. 4. Touching the abuse of health drinking or drinking ad aequales
calices. 5. Touching Bishops not intangling themselves with secular affairs, or
businesses of State, in Princes Courts. 6. Touching gaming at Cards, or Dice,
and such like, so that they can with no great confidence triumph in the
Fathers, against us, in this one point, (wherein themselves also are at a
distance from them) while we keep closer to the Fathers, then they do in many
others.

And thus; (Doctor) I shall leave it to the judgment of the indifferent reader,
whether Apostle-Bishops be not a mere fancy of your own framing; and indeed,
now, there be no other but Presbyter-Bishops; one of which for Ecclesiastical
custom, for pious ends had some power added to his Presidency, for order,
which afterward degenerated into tyranny.

CHAP. IV. PARAG. 4. Wherein is showed the impertinency of the Doctors sixth
chapter, against perjury, which the Author of the Case detests as much as be.
TO come now to your 6. Chapter, where you propose the question, whether the
King, without the impeachment of his Oath at his Coronation, may consent to the
abrogation of Episcopacie? And then tell us, Parag. 1. This question has two
branches: 1. Whether a Christian King be bound to keep his oath? 2. Whether he
may not, etc. But did not your eyes dazzle, when you made this division? Did I
ever question, whether the Kings oath was obligatory, so far as it was lawful,
and in that sense that it was intended? and so dispute, whether the sense of it
were not the same of that with the people, that ingageth only till alteration
by consent in Parliament? Did not I express in the preface, that unless it did
appear, that abrogation of Episcopacy might stand with the sense of the oath,
the King ought not to consent? how falsely do you then affirm, that I persuade
the King to break his oath? and how useless is this whole chapter? either
taking for granted, what is not proved, that Episcopacy is a truth, and
ordinance of Christ; or proving what is not in question, that oaths are to be
kept, perjury to be avoided; wherein you are so vehement, that you fa^l into
rank anabaptistry: page 34. asserting, that oaths therefore must be avoided,
lest we fall into condemnation; as though all oaths were unlawful, for fear of
perjury. You do also admixe so many foul and bold slanders, uttered with such
bitterness, and such evident falseness, that any but a partial reader, will
detest them; and therefore I think them unworthy any answer.

If I had said as that Court-Preacher, Herles answer to Doctor Fern. p. 3.
that the King is not bound to keep any oath he took to the people, to be ruled
therein by law. His oath was but a piece of Coronation-show, he might take it
to day, and break it to morrow, etc. On such a man, you might have spent some
of your zeal against perjury; but to me it is impertinent, as the judicious
reader shall plainly see, by that which follows now to be set down, out of the
Case resolved, which supposes the oath ought to be kept, and only enquires
after the true sense, and intention of it; and this may satisfy this
impertinent chapter.

The Case Resolved.
THe usual way of clearing this assertion, is thus: The King is sworn to
maintain the laws of the Land in force, at his Coronation; yet no man
questions, and the constant practice shows, that it is not unlawful after, to
abrogate any, upon the motion, or with the consent of his Parliament: The
meaning of the oath, being known to be, to maintain the laws, while they are
laws: but when they are abrogated by a just power, in a regular way, they are
then wiped out of his charge and oath. So the King by his oath, is bound to
maintain the rights of his Clergy, while they continue such. But if any of
their rights be abrogated, by just power, he stands no longer engaged to that
particular.

And this I conceive, to be a sound resolution: For the Kings oath is against
acting, or suffering a tyrannous invasion on laws and rights, not against a
Parliamentarie alteration of either. But here steps in my first opponent, and
though he disputes modestly, only proposing, what he holds forth, A nameless
Author in a Book, impleading all War against the King
to serious consideration; yet he objects subtly, and his Discourse runs
thus. The oath for maintenance of laws, is made Populo Anglicano, to the people
of England, and so may be taken off by a future act, because it is by their own
consent, represented in Parliament. But the oath to maintain the privileges of
the Clergy, is made to such a part of his people, Clero Anglicano, and
particularly taken by him, after his oath to the whole Realm, which were
needless, unless it meant some other obligation. This seems (says the learned
Author) to make it a distinct obligation, and not releaseable, without the
Clergies consent.

I answer, taking it for granted, that the oath is thus taken by the King; That
oath was so framed, when Clerus Anglicanus, was a distinct Society or
Corporation, (as I may so say) a populo Anglicano, from the people of England.

This distinction between the Clergy and Laytie, we may observe in our
Historians. Daniel, in the life of William the first, gives this for a reason,
wh^ the Clergy did so willingly condescend to him, because they had their
^rovince a part, whence they supposed a security to their privileges, how ever
the Laytie were inslaved. The same distinction of the Clergy and Laytie, is
observed by him in the life of Henry the second, page 83. And this was not
only in England, but other Nations. Secularium petentes fastigia, in legum
lationes seorsum ab alijs quae civium universitatis proruperant, Omnem Clerum
ab hinc decernentes exemptum. Civil schisma and principatum supremorum
pluralitatem inducentes ex ipsis quam velut impossisilem humanae quieti certa^^
hujus inducentes experientiam demonstravimus, 170 1 Marsil Patav. defens.
pacis, part. 2. cap. 23. Now being the Clergy and Laytie were distinct bodies,
the Clergy holding their rights, by privilege distinct from the laws of the
land; an oath to maintain the laws of the land, secured not them: But as
another body, they had another oath for their security. But now this
distinction of the Clergy, from the Laytie, that they should be a distinct
Province of themselves, being a branch of Popery, is with it quite
extinguished. And La^tie and Clergy are now one body politic, and under the
same rule; for all privileges of the Clergy, that are contrariant to the laws
of the land, were abolisht in the reign of H. 8. As undoubtedly that was, that
any Society should be exempt from secular power; for that was to set up two
Supremacies. And therefore, though the oath be continued in that order that it
was, when the Laytie and Clergy were distinct bodies; yet now, that this
distinction is abrogated, and they are made one, the oath to the Clergy cannot
be stronger, or more inviolabse then that to the Laytie, for the preservation
of the laws of the land, both subject to regular alteration. Thus far the case.

CHAP. V. PARAG. 1. Showing, that the Clergies rights are as alterable, by King
and Parliament, as the Layities; in answer to Doctor Boughen's 10. Chapter.
HEre you invert the method I went in, but without just ground; for I followed
the Authors I answered, in that order, in which they came out in public and to
that I shall hold you; and therefore, now I must come to the 10. Chapter,
reserving the seventh, eighth and nineth, to their due place. In your tenth
Chapter, you are hard put to it, and make a great noise to little purpose, First,

Parag. 1. You make an inference, and quarrel with it. Its lawful for the King
to abrogate the rights of the Clergy. ergo, He may abolish Episcopacy. Its for
all the world, as if one should say, Its lawful for the King to take away the
rights of Lawyers, ergo, He may also take away Judicature.

But you are bad at Paralels, for there may be Ecclesiastical Judicatures,
without your Bishops; which are but the issue of humane custom, as Jerome tells
you.

Then Parag. 2. You raise a fort against a fort. Its lawful for the King to
abrogate the rights of the Clergy, it is therefore lawful for him to abrogate
Presbytery.

I answer, we speak not here of lawfulness in general, but with relation to the
Kings oath; and sure, you do not think, that I conceive, the Kings oath makes
it unlawful for him to abrogate Presbytery, that is, Presbyterial government.
But for what you say, touching the order of Presbyters, parag. 3. and the order
of Bishops; there, I must tell you, that the King cannot take away the one,
because, all confess it to be an Ordinance of Christ: But for that of Bishops,
its an ordinance of man, as I have proved, and so alterable. Your fourth and
fifth Paragraphes, arae digression from this Question.

Parag. 6. You say Well, bound he is by his oath to maintain the laws of the
land, while they are laws, etc. But how long are these laws in force? till
abrogated by just power in a regular way. To this you subscribe, adding, but
the just power is in his Majesty, by your own confession, to maintain and
abrogate laws.

I Answer, If, by power to abrogate laws, you mean, that they cannot be
abrogated without him; I confess it: but if you mean it, as sometime you seem
to import it, that it is in his power, without concurrence of others, I may
well deny it; because he does not assume to himself such power. Your 7, 8, 9.
parag. I shall let pass, as having nothing of consequence to the case in hand,
though they contain some extravagant expressions.

Parag. 10. You examine my words, that if any of the Clergies rights be
abrogated, by just power, he stands no longer engaged to that particular. Here
you quarrel for want of adding, just power in a regular way, which was not
excluded, but included in my expression; and you your self confess, parag. 12.
when you say, " just power goes always in a regular way. But you think I left
out that expression, in a regular way, because I am not able to set down a
regular way, wherein the Clergies right may be abrogated.

Sure you are deceived; for that is the regular way, wherein all their
canonical privileges, that are contrariant to the laws of the Land, are
abrogated, that is, by the King, and Houses of Parliament. See then how
childishly you trifle, Parag. 10, 22. And with as little reason, do you break
out, parag. 13. What? a Clergy man, and a Preacher of the Word of God, and
altogether for ruin and destruction? Surely this is your corrupt gloss; I am
for paring off that which is humane addition, that the Ministry which is of
Gods institution, may be more free, and shine more bright; and this too, to
deliver the King and Kingdom, from a destroying war. Is this to destroy or
preserve? Let the Reader judge. And therefore for your impertinent reviling
from Corah and Judas, they will but reflect shame on your self; neither do I
detract from my office, when I bring Ministers into the same rank with other
Subjects, in regard of their humane, and alterable honors or privileges; for
I speak of none other.

Next, Parag. 14. You ask, what rights of the Clergy I would have abrogated.
An idle question, to raise an odium; the question being in general, whether, as
the laws that concern the rights of the Laytie, may be altered by King and
Parliament, without breach of his oath; so also the laws that concern the
rights of the Clergy, be alterable by the same power.

As impertinent, false, and absurd is your reply, Parag. 15. that I argue from
any rights of the Kingdom, to all the rights of the Clergy; when the same
sign, any, is used in both places, as your self set it down but three lines
before. The Star Chamber, and high Commission Courts stood by law, yet these
were abolisht; so may Bishops and their Courts, and yet ample liberties, and
immunities may belong to the Clergy, and as useful to the Church of God, and
more suitable to his Word, as has been shown; and therefore your question,
whether it be lawful to take away all that the Clergy has? is merely to make
show of saying something, when indeed you are destitute of a rational answer:
for do I infer, that the King may take away all that the Clergy has? or only
such particulars, as upon consideration, to him, and his Houses of Parliament,
seem inconvenient? let the reader judge.

Parag. 16. But you say, it cannot be done by a just power, because justice
gives every one his own, according to Gods command, Render to every one his
due. Good Doctor, does this prove any more, the injustice of altering laws,
concerning Clergy, then concerning Laity? are not their laws, their rights and
inheritances? but with this proviso, that they may be judged on by Parliament,
whether convenient or inconvenient; and accordingly, either continue, or
receive repeal, with the consent of the King, and no wrong done? for the laws
are but their due, with that restriction; so the case is with the Clergy, till
you disprove it, which though you would fain do, yet for ought I see, you are
at your wits end, by your fillings up, parag. 17.18. with such things as
contain nothing toward an answer, but somewhat to confirm my assertion out of
Augustine, charity prefers public good before her own private interest: So
some privileges of the Clergy are to be submitted by them to public interest,
promoted by peace and union.

At last, you come to say something to the purpose that the only regular way to
abrogate any of the rights of the Clergy, or Laity, is at their own motion, or
consent made, and delivered by their representatives in Parliament, or
convocation. Is this true, in the general? was it true of the abrogation of the
Popes Supremacies, and such live immunities of the Clergy? as their Sanctuaries
for criminal offenders, etc. could not there be an alteration of these,
regularly attempted, without it had proceeded from the representative of the
Clergy? Sure then, I doubt, they had stood much longer then they did, to the
prejudice of the Church and kingdom.

Reason it is, I confess, that if any of their Privileges be in question, that
they should be heard, and their reasons weighed; but if, after all they can
say, it appears to the King and Parliament, that some privilege of theirs is
inconvenient to weal-publique, it may be altered without them, if they be
froward; and yet we allow them the privilege of subjects; for all other
subjects have their privileges thus subjected to the wisdom of king and
Parliament; and yet this no tyranny, but good and needful policy: and so also
20. and 21. parag. which are the last of this chapter, are answered.

CHAP. V. PARAG. 2. Wherein is showed, that the distinction that is between
Clergy and Laity, and their privileges in this Kingdom, hinders not, but the
privileges of the one are alterable by King and Parliament, as well as of the
other, in answer to Doctor Boughens 11. Chapter.
IN your 11. Chap. Parag. 1. You say, to grate the very bones of the Clergy; (I
tell you) that this oath was so framed, when the Clergy of England was a
distinct society, or corporation from the people of England. I do say indeed,
that the Clergy, and Laity, were distinct Corporations, but not for that end,
that you mention, to grate the very bones of the Clergy, but to deliver the
laborious Clergy rather from that tyranny, that they were not so long since
under, by a few usurpers, or abusers of power; and I do not only say, but
prove, that the Clergy and Laity, were such distinct corporations, as that
they were under two Supremacies; and that I say, was popery; deny it, if you
have the face: but first you ask, " when this oath was framed; which is but a
cavil; since you know it was framed before Henry 8. in whose days the Pope
lost his Supremacy here. We read of the oath before the Altar, according to
the custom in William 1. Dan. histor. page 36.

But you say, his Majesty's oath is grounded on the word of God, according to
the promise, Kings shall be nursing fathers.

I answer, the question is not, whether the king does well to maintain the
rights and privileges of the Church; he is bound to maintain the just rights
and privileges of Church and Laytie both: but the question is, whether, as
notwithstanding his engagement to the Laytie; he may at the motion or (if it
like you better) at the Petition of the Houses, alter any law that concerns the
people; he may not also, on the like petition, alter what concerns the Clergy?
therefore you must speak to this, or you speak not ad idem, and proceed by the
fallacy, ex ignoratione elenchi. I would have you also know, the Bishops are
not the Church; that is a Popish fancy. Church is otherways taken, in the
note you touch parag. 3. even for the whole body of the Jews.

Parag. 4. You seem to oppose my assertion, that now the Clergy and Laytie are
one body politic, but by a weak reason, Why then are the Bishops thrust out
of the House of Peers? as though every society of the body politic, were to
have a party in the House of Peers; neither were they thrust out, as you
uncivilly express it, but excluded by a legal Bill.

After, Parag. 5. You confess, what before you made semblance to deny, that the
Clergy are not a several and distinct body, but a several state, or
Corporation, under the same body, which I willingly grant; but thence infer, if
they be but a distinct member of the same body, then the heads of the body
politic, under which they are, have the same power over them and their
privileges, as over the other part of the body, the Laytie. It is therefore
needless, and useless pains to prove, that a Clergie-man, and others, may have
distinct relations, Parag. 5. 6. 7. Who denies it? but its a false calumny,
that the Ministers and Stewards of God are cut out of all; for the thing aimed
at in this treatise, is but to restore to some of them, what others, without
warrant from God, had usurped from them.

Whereas you inquire parag. 8. If this distinction between Clergy and Laytie,
be a branch of Popery? You must add so distinct, as to be under two
Supremacies, for so it was before Henry 8. and so its expressed in my Case; and
where I pray you, is such a distinction expressed to be continued, since Henry
the 8th? You cannot show it; nor does any thing that you bring, Parag 8. or 9.
conclude it: distinct they were, but not so distinct, but still they and their
privileges, were under the power of the same Supremacy, as your self confess,
Parag. 10, 11. where your insinuation against me, of seting up two Supremacies,
is but a flash; for I shall show in the last Chapter, that the Supremacy I
give to the Parliament, is not absolute, but (...), and two such are not
inconsistent, neither does such respective Supremacy, make the Parliament
lawless, or subject to no power: and for your closing question, Where then are
the two Supremacies that you erect?

I answer, I affirm it was so, but now it is abolisht, and so I charge not you
with it; but infer, that being equally under one Supremacy, that one
Supremacy has equal power over the privileges of both, which was the thing
to be proved. Neither do I deny what you affirm, parag. 12, 13. That there are
two distinct jurisdictions in our Land, under the same head; Neither do I
deny, de facto but a Bishop by the standing laws, is regularly the Kings
immediate Officer to the Kings Court of Justice in causes Ecclesiastical: But
the querie is, whether this be so unalterable, that the King and Parliament may
not put it to a company of Presbyters? Which you have not yet disproved.
Whether covetousnes, and ambition be more amongst Prelates; then Presbyters,
whom you accuse, God must judge. But whether they be not like to rest more
among those, that would ingross all, then among those that would have
jurisdiction, and maintenance divided, men may easily judge.

For what you say, parag. 14. of Timothy and Titus; I formerly proved them to
be Evangelists, and what they had extraordinary, to be ceased; what they have
ordinary, to rest in Pastors, who are Presbyter-Bishops, the highest ordinary
Officers. For that saying of Cyprian, Ecclesia super Episcopos constituitur: I
would have you reconcile it with that, 1 Cor. 3.11. Other foundation can no man
lay, then that which is laid, Jesus Christ. We acknowledge de facto, in Cyprians
time, that the acts of the Church were ruled by the Bishops, but that, as
Jeroms tells you, was by humane custom, not Divine disposition; nor was it
without Presbyters, as you would have it: who therefore are as far from the
government of his times, as we; what you quote after, may be but the heat of a
Bishop, to whom we oppose Saint Ierem, on Titus 1. and Phil. 1. What you cite
out of Ignatius, is spoken, as upon search I find, only of that Bishop, as he
then stood Orthodox, in opposition to some cursed weeds, or Heretics of the
devils planting; but when the Bishop was an Heretic, as you know in many
places it often fell out, would they have been blessed or cursed, that held
with the Bishop, think you?

For what you add, " touching the privileges of Clergy; For the most part, you
falsely calumniate me, that I seek to ruin them; you know, I call the
alieanation of their means Sacriledg; neither do I envy any of their just
privileges; but this is that which I have in hand; whereas there be two sorts
of privileges, some Divine, some humane, I question only whether those humane
privileges, separable from the offices appointed by Christ in his word, such
as the Monarchy of one above all other, may not upon advisement, for the good
of the Republique, admit of alteration, as well as Laypriviledges? Therefore
you slander me grossly in objecting, that I would take away all honor from the
Ministry, that the Scriptures by prophecy or precept have given to them. But
you, on the contrary, egregiously abuse the Scripture, in applying what the
Scripture says, by way of honor, or privilege of the Ministry, that is, of
Apostles, Prophets, Evanglists and Presbyter-Bishops, (which only are the
Scriptures Bishops) to a few Diocesans; Creatures whom the holy page never
knew: And so you-sleight the generality of Pastors, to exalt a few
Lord-Bishops.

Constantines affection was pious to the Ministers of Christ. But the Bishops
he honored so, were men of another condition then those you plead for; they
lorded it not in the Church, without the joint help of their Presbyters in
government. And further, if there were not some error of the times, in some of
the honors which he gave; how came they so quickly to fall together by the
ears for Primacie? And to give occasion to that observation, That when their
Chalices were wooden, the Bishops were golden, but the Bishops became wooden,
when their Chalices became golden. Sure the general abuse gives occasion to
suspect some error in expression of those affections. But I hope I have said
enough, to let the intelligent Reader see, how far that assertion that I
maintain (to prooure peace and safety to Church and Kingdom, ready to perish
by an unnatural war) is from detracting from any just or useful respect,
commanded, from the people to the Ministers, if faithful; though the meanest
Pastors; which I know, and people will find, God will reward as done to
himself.

But one thing is not unworthy notice, in parag. 8. Where you say, Paul wills
the Philippians to receive Epaphroditus their Apostle, or Bishop, and also
charge them to hold such in reputation.

Consider, I pray you, had not the Philippians, then, other such as
Epaphroditus? else why does he give them charge of others of like quality? And
may you not thence see, that Epaphroditus was no singular Bishop, but such an
one as might have other Presbyters his fellows in like honors.

Case of Conscience Resolved.
Who knows not, that one of the privileges of the Clergy, was, for the
Bishops to sit and vote in the House of Peers? yet that is abolisht, as
incongruous to their calling. And then why may not the removal of their
Ecclesiastical jurisdiction be consented to, as well, if it prove inconvenient
and prejudicial to the Church? The abolition of the one, is no more against the
oath, then of the other.

CHAP. VI. Answering Doctor Boughens explanations for the removal of Bishops
out of the House of Lords, in his 12. chapter.
I Proceed now to examine your 12. Chapter, spent most upon the Theme, whether
it be incongruous to the calling of Bishops, to sit and vote in Parliament? And
here you are very passionate; but I must first tell you, your passionate folly
falls more foul on King and Parliament, then me; for I do but render the reason
given by them, in effect, in the very statute. Anno 17. Car. R. An act for
disabling all persons in holy Orders, to exercise any temporal jurisdiction or
authority.
The words are these; whereas Bishops and other persons in holy orders, ought
not to be entangled with secular jurisdiction (the office of the Ministry
being of such great importance, that it will take up the whole man;) and that
it is found by long experience, that their intermedling with secular
jurisdictions, has occasioned great mischief and scandal; both to Church and
State. His Majesty, out of his religious care of the Church, and souls of his
people, is graciously pleased, that it be enacted; And by authority of this
Parliament, be it enacted, that no Archbishop, etc. shall have any seat or
place, suffrage, or voice, or use, or execute any power or authority, in the
Parliament of this Realm. Now, has my phrase done any more, then express the
reason given for abolition in this Statute by King and Parliament? while
therefore you rave so at me, does not all more properly light on them? I may
therefore say, as sometimes Moses, who am I? Your murmurings are not against
me, but against king and Parliament.

But you question, whether they were not thrust out to make way for these
civil broils? The Incendiaries knew well enough, that those messengers and
makers of peace, would never have passed a vote for war.

I answer, they should be makers of peace, but have they been so indeed of
late? I pray, who occasioned the war by Liturgy, illegally put upon the Scots,
but Prelates? who put on the king, to raise an Army against them, more then
Prelates? You know Bishop Bath and Wells, to excite his Clergy to contribute.
who called it, Bellum Episcopale, Who put on the king to break his first
pacification with the Scots, but Prelates? Then oaths were no engagements with
them, when against Prelates: But now the kings oath must be cried up, to keep
them up: but you should remember, Quicquid fit propter deum, fit aequaliter;
which hints the hypocrisy of your pretenses, of renderness of an oath in this
case, if you had not the same tenderness in the other case.

Then Parag. 2. You tell an Apocrypha tale, of the outcries of some Clothiers,
that occasioned the making of that statute, as though men would believe your
traditional tale before the express words of king and Parliament, contained in
the act.

Parag. 3.4. You inquire, why it is incongruous to the calling of Bishop, to
sit and vote in the House of Peers: and raise imaginary reasons, and confute
them, looking over that in the statute: That Bishops and other persons, in holy
orders ought not to be entangled in secular jurisdiction; and this is grounded
on Scripture, 2 Timothy 2. comparing v. 4. and 7. and more expressly speak the
Apostles; (and you make Bishops Apostles) It is not reason we should leave the
Word of God, Act. 6.2.
and serve tables, (...). Beza, and the vulgar, non est aequum. See how the
grounds mentioned by king and Parliament in the statute, are grounded on
Scripture.

But Parag. 5. You would prove, that there could be no incongruity between
their calling, and voting in the House of Peers, by Scripture: For then
Melchizedeck, that was both King and Priest, had never been a type of our
Savior. It does not follow; for he was therefore a type, to show, that Christ
should be both king and Priest, but his kingdom was not of this world; he would
not entangle himself with the affairs of this life, and divide inheritances.

Again, you bring the example of Moses and Eli, who were extraordinary persons,
as though God does not things extraordinarily, that are incongruous ordinarily,
as to make Deborah, and Huldah, Prophetesses. But Joash thrived so long, as he
followed Jehojada the high Priest: as though a good Bishop cannot give good
counsel to a king, unless he sit and vote among Peers. You tell us also, how
some of our Kings prospered by their Counsels. Is it not as easy to tell you,
of a Bishop that preached, my head aketh, to usher, in the dethroning of a
king? to tell, you how R. 2. was undone, by the unpolitique counsel of the
pious Bishop of Carlisle? which shows, that usually the best Bishops, are the
worst States men.

Parag. 6. You add, a wonder it is, that my faction spies this incongruity,
which was never discerned by the wisest of our forefathers. See you not, how
you call king and Parliament a faction, whose sense I expressed? If I had been so
rude, what outcries should we have had of blaspheming, and spitting in the
face of authority? Of the same nature are other your foolish arguings. parag.
7.8. about the writ of summons to Parliament; as though the Supremacy being in
king and Parliament, they cannot change the state of the Parliament, and so of
the writ. And therefore all your strange language, does not only question the
integrity of king and Parliament, in their expression, and their wisdom in
making; but their power in performing; which insolency, whether it deserve
words to answer, let the reader judge and this same answer will also take off
your 13. parag.

What you say, parag. 9. touching the sufficiency of Bishops for this work, is
not of validity to infer the conclusion, which you would have, are they more
able to vote in Parliament, then the Apostles to serve tables? have they not a
sphere, as Ministers, that will swallow up all their abilities? why should they
then, any more then the Apostles, leave their spiritual work for secular
employments?

What you add touching David, parag. 10. that he erred for want of the presence
and advice of the Priests, and suffered; but after he calls for the Priests,
and acknowledges his error, etc. This is true, and yet withal, his fault was
not in not having the Priests, at first; but not using them as he should: they
drove the cart whereon it was, instead of carrying it on their shoulders;
neither is it mentioned, that they discovered the error to him, but he to them,
having it, as it seems, by divine revelations on his humiliation and prayer, 1 Chronicles. 15.2.

But may there not be the Counsel and advice of Divines, to a Parliament, in
matters of God, unless they sit and vote with Peers, in matters secular? May
they not in a Convocation, or Assembly, advise in matter of religion, where
they shall keep the sphere of Divinity, and meddle with nothing Heretogeneal
to their calling? So your reasonings, parag. 11, 12. are too weak to infer
votes with Peers.

For your statute, Parag. 14. I know not what to say to it, because I know not
where to find it. But do you bring this to involve this king and Parliament
under a curse? and blame me for a moderate and necessary expression of vinculum
iniquitatis? Turp^ est Doctori, etc.

What you say, Parag. 15. Of the benefit of good Bishops, as Ministers of the
Gospel: I assent to it, but neither of the places speak, as having them
Ministers of State. A King and Parliament may have the blessing of faithful
Bishops, by their preaching and prayers; without their votes and presence among
Peers: yea, more then with it, for that usually makes them too great, to preach
in season and out of season, as Timothy was to do, 2 Timothy 4.1, 2. But you are
mistaken, when you say, that the Priests are, in Scripture, called the
horsemen of Israel, and the chariots thereof: For that was spoken of Prophets,
not Priests, viz. of Elijah and Elisha.

Parag. 16. You argue Alogically, the King can have no Subsidies granted
without them, because none has yet been granted; a non esse ad non posse non
valet argumentatio. As ill do you abuse the Scripture against the King and
Parliament, as Removers of bounds, who have rectified it, confining Clergy men
to their own sphere, Divinity; leaving seculars to secular-men: therefore your
curse causeles shall not come.

To parag. 17. I say, I delivered not ex tripode, but out of the marrow of the
act it self, that the votes of Bishops in the house of Peers was taken away, as
incongruous to their calling; and I infer nothing else to be taken away, unless
it seems good to King and Parliament; whose wisdom and conscience, I dare far
better trust then yours; and you abuse your Reader, to say, I argued from the
bare fact, when I argue from the fact, with its ground, to the like, on the
like warrantable ground. And that the abolition of the one, is no more against
the Kings oath, then the other, which you confess; yet you say flatly, 123. If
the King yield to let down Episcopacy, he breaks his oath; what then do you lay
to his charge, implicitly, in consenting to the abolition of their votes, but
perjurie? Is this you that can calumniate others without cause, as spitting in
the face of authority, and yet do this, and present it to the King himself, to
read his own doom?

But you distinguish between privileges, that are the grants of God, and such
as are of the favor of Princes, such as sitting and voting with Peers.

The distinction is good, and helps to clear what I intend; that the King may
alter the Prelacie in question, which is but the gift of Princes, not God. See
the erudition of a Christian man, on the Sacrament of orders. And Princes may
revoke their own grants: but for that jurisdiction, which you say, is a grant
of God; I confess it is: but by him settled on Pastors, the highest degree of
Church officers now; and those are Presbyter-Bishops; and therefore the settling
of it on them in general, is but restitution, no donation of any thing new to
the Presbyters, nor unjust detraction from the Bishops, who had without the
grant of God, ingrost all power into their own hands.

Case of Conscience resolved.
AGain when this oath was framed, the Church was endued, by the ignorance of
the times, with diverse unlawful immunities; in all which respects the oath was
invalid, being vinculum iniquitatis; and some were pared off, as light shined
forth. And why may not the great revenues of the Bishops, with their sole
jurisdiction, in so large a circuit, be indicted and convict to be against the
edification of the Church, and it be found more for the glory of God, that both
the revenue be divided to maintain a preaching Ministry; and their
jurisdiction also, for the better oversight and censure of manners? And then
is there as good a plea, notwithstanding the oath, to alter this useless
anti-Evangelical pomp, and domination of a few; as to antiquate, other
immunities, arising from the error of the times, not the tenure of Scripture.
Were indeed the priviledgs in question, such as were for the advantage of the
Church, to further her edificacation; or had the Prelates been good Stewards,
and innocent in the use of them; then had the plea carried a fairer show. But
these having been so many forfeitures by abuse; and these great promotions, and
jurisdictions, being as unwieldy to a spiritual soldier, as Saul's armor to
David; and so do not further, but hinder the work of the Gospel, whose strong
holds are to be vanquished, not by carnal pomp, but spiritual furniture, mighty
through God 2 Cor. 10.4. I see no just engagement to maintain such cumbersom
greatness, adding only glory to the person, not vigor to the main work of the
Ecclesiastic.

Again, thus I argue: If the king may consent to alter the laws of the Nation,
notwithstanding his oath, then so he may also the Clergies immunities: for
those rights and immunities, they either hold them by law, or otherways: If by
law, then the Parliament, which has power to alter all laws, has power to
alter such laws as give them their immunities; and those laws altered, the
immunitie cease, and so the kings engagement in that particular. If their
immunity be not by law, it is either an usurpation without just title, which
upon discovery, is null: Or, it was given by Papal power in times of darkness,
which being an Antichristian usurpation, is long since abolisht in this
kingdom.

CHAP. VII. Showing, that the Monarchical jurisdiction and great revenues of
the Bishops, may be divided to the advantage of the Church, in answer to Doctor
Boughens 13. Chapter.
THis passage of my Case, you attempt to answer chap. 13. and tell us, that
there is a great cry against the jurisdiction of Bishops, as inconvenient, and
prejudicial to the the Church, against unlawful immunities, Anti-evangelicall
pom, pcumbersome greatness, and forfeitures by abuse, and these, you say, are
cried out of, but none of them proved.

I answer, the very expression were so clear, of things obvious to every
impartial eye, that proof seemed needless: and sure I am, you would disprove
it, if you could, it stands you upon, which not doing, it may pass for current:
yet one quirk you have in this 1. parag. on the word, unlawful immunities.

You argue, if they were held by law, then not un lawful, but legal.

I answer, legal they were, because allowed by man's law, yet unlawful, because
against Gods law.

Your next quarrel, is at the expression, when the oath was framed, the Church
was endued by the ignorance of the times.

But you complain parag. 2. I tell you not when this time was; but what then?
do you not know, it was in times of Popery? and do you think there was as much
true light at Westminster then, as now, as you intimate in this parag.? Sure if
you do, you have not only a Bishop, but (as they say) a Pope in your belly.

Parag. 3. You take notice, that I conclude, the Kings oath is invalid in these
respects, and vinculum iniquitatis; then you mention 5. particulars, 4. of
which you say, you have quitted already; but I have therein disproved you: and
do not you think, that to exempt malefactors from trial, that fled to Churches
for sanctuary; and the Clergies exemptions from secular punishments (which
multiplied many slaughters by them, as Daniel witnesses, in his story of Henry
2. page 83. (and yet Becket Archbishop of Canterbury, asserted this, as one of
the liberties of the Church, which the king had sworn to maintain, page 84.) I
say, did not these, and such like, think you, flow from ignorance? but it
grieves you more, that I should say, the oath in this respect, is vinculum
iniquitatis, and say Parag. 4. I wilfully scandalize diverse Princes of blessed
memory, and charge them almost as deeply as St. Peter did Simon Magus, with the
bond of iniquity, Acts. 8.23. Al-most (we say in the north) saves many a l^e;
for is affirming that Princes (for want of light, which they wanted means for)
do engage themselves with a pious zeal, but not according to knowledge, charging
them with a crime, answerable to Magus his base self-seeking hypocrisy? or so
inconsistent with a state of grace? If it should, what case do you put king and
Parliament in, which more then once, charge them with perjurie.

But tell me sincerely, do you not think, in times of Popery, many unlawful
things were given to the Clergy? and that many Canonical privileges were
unlawful? Sure either their immunities, or the reformation of them was
unlawful; had you rather condemn the reformation, then the corruption, for fear
of obliquely blaming the ancient Princes? Do you not hereby cast an imputation
on those latter Princes, whom you are more bound to respect?

Your parag. 5. is a scornful Ironie, hinting somethings false, somethings
irrational; false it is, That what immunities were unlawful in Bishops, We
would challenge; or inherit their anti-Evangelical pomp: and as irrational is
it, not to apprehend, that diverse scores of Presbyters marshalled into
Presbyteries, in the several parts of a Diocese, may not more easily see, and
more speedily take course to redress errors, and apply general remedies for
the reclaiming of the scandalous, then one Bishop over diverse hundred
Congregations, some of them the better part of a hundred miles from him. The
Diocesses of Bishops, heretofore were called Parishes; and indeed at first, few
of them equal to some Parishes in England, and yet then they had Presbyters.
Now their Diocesses are as large as Shiers, nay, it may be contain more Shiers,
and Presbyteries discarded. Is not this prejudicial to the edification of the
Church? Besides, have you not heard what Queen Elizabeth used to say? That when
she bad made a Bishop, she had spoiled a good Preacher? And how few of that
rank imitate the Apostles diligence, or charge, for preaching, 2 Timothy 4.1, 2.
Is not this a sign that the greatness is cumbersom? Yet we deny not, that
there was preaching under the Bishops, but I am sure there was the less for
many of them; they silenced Preachers, prohibited preaching on Lords days,
Afternoon, etc. And there was censure of manners, but yet Visitations were but
once a year, and Presentations to be but twice; and might not many a man fall
into, and perish in sin for all this? Besides that, their censures were more
nimble against me for strictness, then looseness or profaneness. I believe
therefore, the intelligent Reader will not be scoffed out of his belief of what
I have hinted.

Your Parag. 6. Begins, as you call it, with distempered foame, ends with
appeal to last judgment, which is one main thing which has made quiet me
under Prelatical oppression, having referred my self to him that judges
righteously.

More of your foame you cast, in your fume, Parag. 7. First, you ask " Why we
are fallen from abolition, to alteration? I answer, this alteration, will prove
an abolition to them, qua Bishops, do not you fear. Next this alteration, you
jeer, not sparing to abuse Scripture to adorn your sarcasms; and yet I
confess, htis alteration of the jurisdiction into more hands; and of the means
of Bishops, to maintain more mouths to preach the Gospel, is the best plea I
have against Bishops.

I confess it is, and you shall never prove it anti-Evangelical, or
Antichristian: But I by it, shall blow off all your aspersions, that you lay
upon me, as an enemy of the Church, and Ministry, in my plea against Bishops,
whereas this one thing shows, I seek the good of both, and that rationally.

Parag. 8. You trifle again about the word altar, the vanity of which
exception, was before showed. After you cast about your foame, which deserves
no answer, but indignation; but whereas you would abuse Saint Augustine, to
prove me an Heretic, citing out of him, that he is an Heretic, that for any
temporary commodity, and chiefly for his own glory, and preferment, does either
raise, or follow false and new opinions.

Mine answer is, that I have proved my opinions grounded on Scripture, and so
neither false nor new. And for any end of mine in it, besides the peace of the
land, and the edification of the Church; I leave my self to him, that tries the
heart and reins.

Parag. 9. You come to examine what I said, touching the legalitie of your
privileges, that if they be held by law, the Parliament that has power to
alter all laws, may alter those laws, and so the immunity cease. You here
first grant, you claim no privileges, but what is legal: but you cavil at that
which is said, that the Parliament has power to alter all laws; nay, you
affirm, it is Atheistical to affirm that the Parliament can alter the laws of
God; but all this is but trifling; for you know, by laws, I mean only humane
laws of their own making, and all laws are understood by me, divisim, not
conjunctim, that is, they have power to advise upon any particular law
whatsoever, or whomsoever it concerns; and if on advisement, it seem conducible
to wealpublike, to alter it, they have power to proceed to alteration; and so
the Londoners themselves (whom here you would jeer, or provoke against me)
would not (I am sure they should not) deny the Parliaments power to alter any
of their immunities, that are convinced prejudicial to the wealpublique.

Parag. 12. To that which I say, upon the alteration of the law, the immunitie
cease; you in effect deny the conclusion; for you answer not the argument
convincing, but hold the Thesis: You add indeed, that an ordinance was never
conceived sufficient to alter a law; but what is this to the purpose? who speaks
of ordinances? my argument runs of laws.

If any think themselves absolved from the oath of alliegance, by an ordinance,
let them bear their burden; neither do I go about to absolve the King from his
oath of protection, (as you here calumniate me) but interpret the bond
rationally, which you cannot answer; and so vent your self in impertinent
accusations.

But you conclude, Parag. 13. that suppose there be such a law, could it be
just? etc. You are pleased to acknowledge our privileges to be our rights, how
then can they be taken from us without injury?

1. You alter the state of the question; for every injury is not perjurie: the
quaerie was, whether they could be taken away without perjurie.

2. I acknowledge them your rights, that is, such as you have a legal claim to,
while the laws thus stand; but these your rights were of three sorts: 1. Some
of your Canonical privileges (at least formerly) were corrupt. Such were
abolished by Henry the 8. These were your rights, that is, you had claim to
them by man's, not Gods law. 2. Some were essential to the callings, grounded
on the Word of God. 3. Some were indulged by the Prince and State. The first
sort were void to a Christian, by their anomie. The second unviolable, by the
unquestionable authority of God, the Author of them. The third are under the
Consult of Parliaments, as other laws, which are the peoples birthright, and
they may alter both, if they see occasion: So the laws that concern the
Clergy, make them neither worse nor better, then those laws that concern the
Laytie, render them.

Case of Conscience Resolved.
THe Author illustrateth the force of his argument, by an example, holding
forth an inconvenience: Where public faith is given for money, it is not
releaseable by Parliament, without consent of the party; for if it be, it is
in effect, no engagement, etc.

Answ. There Is a great deal of difference between an engagement made to persons
on valuable considerations; and that which is made gratis to an office, or
society, subservient to public good: Of the former kind, is the engagement
to pay sums of money, of whom they were borrowed for public good, which is
indispensible without the consent of the lender. Of the latter sort is this
engagement to the English Clergy. Now engagements to a Society, to maintain
their rights, indulged for the personal worth of present incumbents; or to
promote the usefulness of that office: If in their matter they prove
prejudicial to the office; or the succeeding officers, by their ill demeanor,
forfeit them, their engagement becomes alterable: There is no injustice done to
make a law to overruled, or alter this engagement. There Is no question of power
in the Parliament, to overruled it; for in the former case of money, if the
King and Parliament should ordain release of the engagement, the engagement was
gone in law, not in equity the order would be valid in law though injurious:
So, if there be no injury, the King and Parliament may cancel any obligation.
And where there is forfeiture by miscarriage, or the privilege to a Ministry
(which ought to hold nothing but for public good) proves prejudicial, the
abrogation will be just, as well as legal, there will be no injury done.

But take it at the worst, it is but for the King to get the Clergies consent;
and I hope in this case, they will not be so tenacious of their wealth and
honor, as to let the Crown run an hazard, rather then they lay down their
Mitres, and endanger the whole land to be brought to nothing, rather then
themselves to moderation. I cannot but have a better conceit of the Major part
of them, at this time, which will amount to a consent, and that, in this
Authors judgment, takes off the scruple about the oath.

CHAP. VIII. Showing, that abuses are a forfeiture of some privileges, in
answer to Doctor Boughen's 14. Chapter.
I Come now to answer your 14. Chapter, which you entitle, whether the lands of
the Church may be forfeited by the misdemeanor of the Clergy?

But here I must mind you, and the Christian reader, that whereas there are
two parts of the Clergy in England;

1. Parochial Pastors, which stand by the ordinance of God, who appointed the
ordaining of Elders in every Church;

2. Diocesan Bishops, which I have proved to be but humane creatures, invented
and set up, as Jerome says, to prevent Schisms;

That which I have spoken of forfeitures, belongs to the latter, which are not
Gods ordinance; though it may be, so they would keep within ancient bounds, and
express ancient worth, they might not be only tolerable, but useful; yet if
these abuse their power, and become an inconvenience, instead of curing an
inconvenience; and any thing indulged to them for the honor of God, be abused,
to his dishonor, in the hurt of the Churches, then they make forfeiture.

Now the Case thus stated; Your instance, Parag. 1. of Abiathars being
succeeded by another, not the office abolisht, is not a pari, for that was in
an office expressly Gods ordinance; so Episcopacie is not.

What you say, Parag. 2. about justice, out of Lactantius, who in that place
distinguishes between Jus civil, quod pro moribus ubique variatur, and vera
justitia quam uniformem, ac simplicem proposuit omnibus Deus. I acknowledge the
truth of his speech, nor would I, nor do I maintain any thing against true
justice.

But what you infer from thence, that where true justice is wanting, there is no
law, nor no Commonwealth, etc. It is evidently contrary to his mind; for
though this true and perfect justice, was wanting in all heathen societies,
(for they had some constitutions, that swerved from it:) yet no man will say,
there were no Commonwealths, but tyrannies, among the heathen, though they
were not such complete Commonwealths as they might have been, had they known
the rule of Gods perfect justice.

Parag. 3. To that, that there is great difference between an engagement made to
persons on valuable considerations, and which is made gratis to an office or
society subservient to public good; You answer, that the settling of land
upon a Corporation, is more firm, and that gift gives as good propriety as
purchase; wherein you wilfully mistake the scope of my speech, or ignorantly;
for the difference I speak of, is, in regard of the injury in alteration; and
that too, where and when there is miscarriage.

Now I hope, though I must return to a corrupt man what is his own; yet it is
no injury to deny courtesies, which are given gratis to men for their worth.
Artaxerxes bestowed a great largess on the Ministers of the Sanctuary, and he
did excellently well in it, and in the confirmation of it, (yet you simply make
that expression, the Law of God and of the King, to relate to that one Decree
of Darius, which you will plainly see, if you read Ezra 7.24, 25, 26.
together:) But the question is, if the following Priests had set up themselves
with that the Kings benevolence, and neglected the work of God, and had grown
insolent against the Monarch; Whether it had been injurious in the succeeding
Monarchs, to have recalled that gift given to good men, to make them more
serviceable to God, and devout in their prayers for the King.

But Par. 4. You say, these lands and immunities were made to the office, and
Episcopacy is a living office. But I answer, its an office that may dye, for
the Diocesan-Bishop can find his Register in Gods Book, he is later then the
word written, and therefore this plea will not help him.

Parag. 5. To that, what is granted to personal worth, of present incumbents,
and given to promote the usefulness of the office; You say, It is fixed till
the office be found useless and abolisht, but till then it is injustice to take
it away, without which the usefulness of that office cannot be so well promoted.

I allow all this, and in as full words, page 4. of Case resolved; but I
affirm, this office by its encroachments (excluding Presbyters) and Canonical
privileges, which it challenges, is grown burthensom, instead of useful, and
the incumbents for the general much degenerate, both neglecting the main of a
Pastors office, preaching, and abusing their power to the hindering of it in
others: And for that which you add, of the forfeitures of other Corporations,
as that of Drapers, or Grocers, or the City of London it self. I believe, if
the King had conquered, you would have been as ready as any, to have impleaded
the Companies of London of forfeiture, for assisting in the War against him.
And who knows not, that Corporations may, and often do forfeit and lose their
Charters of privileges, by abuse and misdemeanors? For what you say, 'of
Parliaments power, Parag. 6. I would you would always speak so modestly: By
Parliamentarie power, when I speak so largely, I take it, as containing the
three estates, the King the head, and the Lords and Commons, as the body; yet I
abhor, to think of ascribing to them power, to make that which is unjust just,
as I do disdain that comparison, of the witness brought by me against
Episcopacie, to that brought against Naboth, by suborned Knights of the Posts;
for the testimonies I brought, were out of the Scripturures of Truth.

But Parag. 7, 8, 9. We have a great outcry made, but the best is, its a great
deal of cry, and little wool. The outcry is at these words; If King and
Parliament release the engagement, in the case of money, the engagement were
gone in law, though not in equity. The Order would be valid in law, though in
jurious. First, you question the validity of an Order of Parliament; but you
should remember, I speak of an Order past by King and Parliament, and that
amounts to a law, and later laws overruled former. Then you bid men take heed
of their purses, for I speak of sums of money. But this is but to make a noise,
for you know my Opponent brought in the instance of money, and I did but answer
about it. But the greatest outcry is at this, gone in law, not in equity, valid
in law, though injurious; behold (say you) law without equity: God bless me
from such law; I say so too; but the Divinity is good enough, by your leave:
For were not the Statutes in Queen Mary's time, laws, though injurious? And the
Martyrs brought to a legal trial, by the Statute-laws of the Land, though
injurious ones? This is so plain, that no rational man can deny it; and all the
show you make to the contrary, is but from the word Jus, because, that properly
signifies such a constitution as is just. But if an unequal Statute may not be
called Jus, properly, may it not be called Lex, or a Statute Law? your own word
Your self say page 40. Lex non obligat subditos in foro conscientiae, nisi sit
just. The law binds not Subjects in the Court of conscience, unless it be
just; But then this implies, in foro humano it does, which agrees to what I
say, but that you have a mind to quarrel.
page 94. l. 12. shows that you are not so ignorant, as not to know it, nor so
impudent as to deny it. And therefore your accusations here of Divinity without
conscience, etc. are Sophistical and childish, or malicious; whereas, you say,
I stretch my conscience, and justify a power in the Parliament to do injury,
and not only so, but a power to make laws to justify this injury; Its a most
false slander: I say, there is in King and Parliament that Peerless power, that
their agreement makes a law; but if they stretch this to unjust things, they
abuse their power, and become injurious, and sin, yet we have no plea against
them in law, that is, in foro humano, but in equity and conscience.

Parag. 10. You quarrel, in like manner, with those words. So if there be no
injury, the King and Parliament may cancel any obligation, which your dullness
or passion makes you not understand and so you play the ape with them. The
meaning is this, The King and Houses being the supreme power, what they
ratify, stands firm; and what they abolish, no man can claim by any
constitution of the Nation; And in matters not injurious, they may lawfully put
this power committed to them, into act.

Now Parag. 11. It may appear, that you well understood what I meant, in
distinguishing between law and equity, in that you say, "What is according to
law, true law, is lawful. Why do you say true law, but to note a distinction of
laws? Some are made by lawful authority, and so valid in foro humano, in man's
Court; yet that authority observes not the right rules of equity, but abuses
power to decree unjust things, and so it is a law, but not a true law, that is,
not a law for that intent that laws were ordained, to prevent injury, not
decree it. I conclude therefore, that you make these rehearsals of law without
equity, ad faciendum populum, against your own conscience; but the intelligent,
will see and deride this beggarly fraud.

Parag. 12. You harp upon the old string, that an office can forfeit nothing.
And I grant it, of such an office that is of God, and of such privileges as
are necessary or useful; but neither is Episcopacie such an office, nor their
large jurisdiction, and great pomp, such privileges.

Parag. 13. Runs on the same string, "touching an office instituted of God,
which Episcopacie is not, though Ministry be. And then kindly (as often
formerly) grant the question, that of privileges perchance there may be a
forfeiture, where they prove prejudicial to the public good; and so waves the
question from that which is de jure, of right, which he has been disputing all
this while, to that which is de facto, of the fact of prejudice to the public:
in which question, how confident soever he be in the negative, I must mind him,
that not he, and the Prelates, nor I, that are parties, but the King and
Parliament must be Judges.

For what you say, out of the great Charter, Parag. 14. ' We grant to God, and
confirm the Church of England free, etc. I answer, but the Bishops are not the
Church; you do not, I hope, approve that popish language, they were then but a
part, and an unsound part, being vassals to the man of sin. Yet William the
Conqueror did ill, to appropriate Churchlands for covetousness, and for it
might miscarry; so did they for the same cause, rob the Temples of the Heathen
Deities; whence the proverb, Aurum Tolosanum, in Aulus Gel. Noct. Attic. lib.
3. c. 9. Yet they did well, that conscientiously abolished both Idols and
Temples. What you add, that in strictness of Reformation, Episcopacy was
continued in England, as most useful for the Church. How this observation is
connected, I know not: It is a sudden motion; I may also justly take occasion
to give notice, that our Reformation has been counted defective, for keeping
up Episcopacy in its height; and not either abolishing it, or at lest bringing
it within the ancient limits with a Presbytery; (which now is offered by the
King.) And what other reformed Churches can the Author name, but it was part of
their Reformation, to take away Diocesan Episcopacy?

Parag. 15. You express a needless grief, to hear from a Preacher of the Word,
that the Bishops must lay down wealth, honor, and Mytres, or else the Crown
must run an hazard. Are you sorry to hear a Preacher speak the truth? has
not the Crown run an hazard in this respect, as well as others? But whereas
you say, I give notice of what has been the cause of my factious preaching,
you falsely slander; for though I know no cause that I should have had to
grieve, to see the Bishops stripped of their greatness in a fair way; yet I have
as seriously, and sincerely grieved for the hazard of of the Crown, as your
self; and have been as far from furthering it. For that you add, that few of
the Bishops have gained so much by the Church as their breeding cost their
parents; It will be credible but to a few, except to those that know at what
rates they made friends in the Court, to procure them.

Parag. 16. You tell me, I might have done well to have directed this passage
to the Parliament. Truly you say true, and those that know me, know I have not
been backward, to press, and persuade a condescension on their parts, as well
as on the Kings; and that in writing too: which on as good an occasion, as I
had to print my Case, may see the light. But the Bishops have not been so
innocent, as you make them; for schism, they did not prevent it, but partly
made it, by casting out both Ministers and people for their own inventions,
that willingly, and peaceably, would have held communion in all Gods
ordinances; partly occasioned it by neglect of good Discipline, and rigorously
requiring conformity to humane ceremonies: for Heresies, they did foster them.
How did the most of them connive at Papists? advance Arminians and Socinians,
while they pretended against Socinianism? Blasphemy in one kind they hindered
not, in that they let blaspemous swearers pass without discipline, and enjoy
the privileges of Sacraments. Atheism they promoted, by hindering the preaching
of the Gospel, which they were enemies to, for the most part, to uphold their
dumb Ministry, and for fear their idleness should be censured. They taught
rebellion against the Lord, in teaching men to profane his Sabboths: They
hindered not, but occasioned bloodshed, in oppressing Scotland with illegal
impositions, stirring up the King to war against them, and to break his
Pacification with them, which was the egg that has bred this cockatrice that
is like to destroy all.

This I speak not of all, but some of them; nor out of a delight I have to rake
in other men's sores; but to show you, that Bishops grew not into such odium
among the people for nothing; nor were they without miscarriages, that
occasioned such a violence against them; and yet for my part, I grieve, that
the peoples dislike of them had not acted in a more orderly and regular way.

Parag. 17. For Seldens distinction between the Abbot and the Abbey; it seems,
he is better at relating distinctions, then practicing them: And its good to
observe that distinction, where the man is Gods instituted Officer; but that
neither Abbot was, nor Diocesan Bishop is, but both humane creatures.

Parag. 18. Your quarrel is at my expression, of bringing Bishops to
moderation, which you, in a jeering way, say, is annihilation; but as wise a
man, as you, may be deceived; for though that relation or title of Episcopacie,
be taken away, wherewith man has exalted them, yet they may retain that place
that God has given them, to serve him as Pastors, in some parochial charge,
as they did before their Episcopacie; which he that disdains, or thinks
nothing, or that it is too low for him, I dare be bold to say, it is too good
for him.

Parag. 19. For that you say, that the King suffers for the Bishops obstinacy;
the more disrespective they, not to yield, that he may be enlarged, if that
would do it; you know what Gregory Nazianzen (not inferior to any of them) did
for peace; for what you relate here, and elsewhere, in an accusatorie way, "
of what is done to the Bishops and Clergy; I might object what has been done
to the Clergy of the other side, when under opposite power; but I have neither
furthered nor approved the oppressions of neither side, but bewail them, and
fear Gods judgments for them.

And therefore, in your Parag. 20. is slander out of malice or mistake, that I
have preached for the Bishops wealth, or Mytre, etc. but your opinion is at
last, if others be so violent to put him to it, the King and his posterity must
perish, e're you will consent to part with your greatness and honor. Sure, if
you count those that put the King upon this strait, his enemies, no wise man
will count you (who will rather let him perish by the rigor of others, then
relieve him by your condescension) good friends: you love greatness so, that
you will rather lose it with him, then release it, to contribute to his
preservation.

Is this your boasted of affection and loyalty? This shows what you pretend
love to the King for; to uphold your own greatness, not his, further then it
upholds yours.

Parag. 21. You conclude, that if the Bishops knew themselves guilty of the
difference between the King and Parliament, God forbid but they should part
with all they may, etc. And if they will remember the beginning of it in
Scotland, with the occasion, they may see guilt enough, especially he that
called it, Bellum Episcopale, who, it is to be feared, spoke the mind of the
rest. " But yet they cannot give up what is Gods, nor would I have them, but
for God, and to God; for his glory, both to promote a blessed peace, and to set
in its proper sphere Presbyter-Bishops of his own appointing, and support more
able of them to feed the flock of God, that may live diverse years without one
Sermon, for many a Diocesan Bishop.

Case of Conscience Resolved.
BEsides this argument, there be other insinuations brought in by the same
Author, that it would be dishonorable to the Kings memory, to be an
unfortunate instrument to pull down Cathedrals, and impoverish them, etc.

Answ. To abolish Prelacie, and seize the revenue of Prelates to private or
civil interest, undoubtedly could neither want stain nor guilt; such kind of
impropriation as happened in the days of Henry the 8. was cried out of, all the
Christian world over. Illam bonorum Ecclesiasticorum dissipationem cum
detestando sacrilegio conjunctam, tecum and cum bonis omnibus deploramus,
scelus universo orbi commune, says Beza, in respon. ad Sarav. de grad. Minist.
page ult. But who knows not the great defect amongst us of congruous
maintenance for Parochial Pastors, by whom the work of the Ministry is
chiefly to be performed? And if those large revenues of the Prelates, were
directed to supply with sufficient maintenance, all the defective Parishes in
England, there would be no danger of sacriledg. And this would not be to ruin,
but to rectify the devotion of former ages, and turn pomp into use, and
impediments into helps. A work, for which following generations should not need
to pity the king, as put upon it by misfortune, but rise up and call him
blessed, whose many other disasters ended in so good and useful a work. Had
the motives of Henry the 8. been as honest, to cast off Papal jurisdiction, as
the act was holy; and the improvement of Abbey lands, as conformable to divine
law, as the dissolution of Abbeys, to the rules of Divine wisdom: He might not
only have been honorable in our Annals; but, if I may so speak, a Saint in our
Calender. It was the circumstances of actions, in themselves glorious, which
made them a dishonor to him, though advantageous to the Church; which
circumstances being avoided in the thing in question, God and good men will
highly approve it, which is the only real, and regardable honor: Thus far my
first opponent.

CHAP. IX. Wherein is showed, that the converting of Bishops Lands to maintain
preaching-Ministers, would not be sacriledg, but a good work, in answer to
Doctor Boughen's 15. Chapter.
I Come now to answer to your 15. Chapter, wherein you dispute the Case,
whether it be lawful to confer Bishops Lands on Presbyters; and first you say,
the Church is like our Savior Christ between two thieves, Independents and
Presbyterians, but neither of them for our Savior. But the best of it is, your
tongue is no slander; for if preaching Christ, be being for Christ; I dare
boldly affirm, that the most of either of those that dislike Episcopacie, are
far more for Christ then you and your Prelates, a few only excepted; and of
them, the more they be for Christ, the less violent usually for Bishops;
especially for your Apostle-Bishops, which they account a fancy. After, you
say, I like theft, so I and my fellow. Presbyterians may be gainers; but your
position is false: I abhor theft as much as you do, nor do I look at the gain
of my self, or Presbyterians, but of the Church of God, for I am no pluralist,
whatever D. B. is; nor do I, nor many other Presbyters, expect any more means,
if this should be, but that the Church may have more Presbyters apt to rule
well, and labor in the word and doctrine, and be examples to the flock, we
having found in experience, that scandalous livings occasion scandalous
Ministers: And this we think is in the power of king and Parliament to do
without theft. The revenues annexed to Cathedrals, being intended for the best
good of the Church.

But Parag. 2. You acknowledge I am against sacrilegious alienation, but, I and
Master Beza cannot prevent it. Who can help it? We have cleared our own souls:
yet if the Prelates would have consented to resignation, when this case was
first presented, I verily believe that dishonorable alienation had been
prevented.

Parag. 3. You confess I would fain set a fair gloss upon a detestable fact.
But every thing is not detestable, which you call so; that which would tend to
have Christ more preached, would be profitable to the Church, and acceptable to
God. For Ordination, we have spoken before, and showed, that Presbyters have as
much power from God to ordain, as your Prelates, and are as good Bishops; only
the other, by custom, gradatim, have robbed them. We shall have a choice piece,
when you come to examine Divine right. I shall wish the Divines to be more
careful to provide patience to bear your railings, then perspicacity to discern
your subtilties: For you are not like to trouble their heads with much of the
latter.

Parag. 4. You say, If there be a diversion of the waintenance, who shall make
the conveyance, and When its made, its not valid, without the proprietary, and
that is God, etc. and what is separated to holy use, cannot return to common.
Good, but what is given to God, may be improved to the utmost for God; and
that's the aim, and would be the issue of the diversion ^poken of, that Christ
might more preached, even to those that have long sat in darkness, and in the
shadow of death.

Nor is every diversion, (as you say, Parag. 5.) a turning ^out of the right
channel? But out of the former channel; and the latter may be better, and so
righter, in regard of the chief intentions of the Donor. And this done, by the
unquestionable authority of the Land, will I doubt not be approved by as wise,
and as honest men, as you. Do not you your self, page 119. say, concerning
Abbeys and Pryories; That good and pious men have wished that the abuses had
been pruned off, and that the land had been disposed of, according to the
Donors intentions? What Is that but diversion from the corrupt way of Abbeys and
Pryoryes, to support other pious, and charitable uses?

Parag. 6, 7, 8. You tell us a story of the antiquity of endowing Churches, and
the riches of them. And that the use and Dominion of Church-goods, belonged to
Bishops, and this not only by custom, but by Canon: But withal you say, at his
charge, as it were, the Presbyters and other Clerks of the Church Were fed.

Sure, you have told a good tale for your self; for by it, it appears, that the
wealth wherewith the Church was endowed, was not given to any persons, but the
Church, in which the Bishop had no propriety, but power of use, for what he
himself needed, and of disposing the rest to Presbyters, and other Clerks;
which now the Bishop neglecting, and many Parishes in his Diocesses wanting
preaching Presbyters, for want of maintenance, and many that preached wanting
subsistence; and the Bishop, who you say, should maintain them, maintaining
Princely I my self once saw the Bishop of York, riding toward London, with
forty five men in his Livery. And I wondering at the number, was told by one
of them, that there was above twenty left behind, that wore their Lords Livery.
State, a number of Serving-men, etc. To divert a great deal of the maintenance
to preaching Presbyters, would be a returning of it into the old channel, by
your own confession.

But Parag. 9 The Bishops followed the steps of the Apostolic Church, for Act.
4. we read that the well minded, when they sold their lands, laid the prices at
the Apostles feet, not the Presbyters. How could they, when there was, as yet,
none ordained? But after, by the Apostles direction, there were Deacons set
over this business of Church-treasures. Good, and those Deacons continued, and
distributed Church-goods; some to the Pastor, some to the poor, some to other
pious uses; but when your Prelates grew Lordly, the, like not that, and
therefore by little and little they changed the Deacons office, and made
themselves proprietaries of the great revenues, and thereby great Princes; and
you can abuse Scripture to confirm it, as the Papists do to exalt the Pope. But
Paul, say you, commanded Timothy, that the Presbyters be well provided for, 1 Timothy 5.17. And to what purpose was this charge, unless he were to provide for
the Presbyters of his Church? For very good purpose: as the Apostle shows you
himself, 1 Timothy 4.11. These things command and teach. He was to teach it,
others to perform it; for though he set Presbyters on work, in some sense, yet
it was not for himself, but Christ and his Church; and they who reaped their
spirituals, were to pay them temporals, 1 Cor. 9. And you dream, when you talk
of Timothyes table, or allowing maintenance. Alas, he had no Palace then, he
kept no Princelike table to feed his Presbyters; these fancies will be
ridiculous to learned men, especially to Bishops, to lay the charge on them, to
maintain all the Presbyters in their Diocese. Yet you say, in those times,
Bishops and Presbyters were used to live in the same house: What, all the
Presbyters in a Diocese? and in the Apostles time? Alas Sir, they were like
their Master, they had no houses, but what they hired, nor no tables, but where
they sojourned, as appears by Divine story: With what face can you deliver such
improbabilities?

But Parag. 10. You enquire, Whence the want of maintenance for preaching
Presbyters arises, and you answer, it is from the appropriation of tithes, at
the dissolution of Abbeys. This is true in part, but not in the whole; for I
believe, the greater part of Appropriations are held of Bishops, and Deans and
Chapters; and if the Bishops be to maintain the Presbyters, and withhold the
tithes, who is the thief now? At least, thus far, the attempt is just to
restore their impropirations: And I must tell you this too; That there was
scarce any Gentleman of any ingenuitie or affection to religion, but he made a
far more considerable addition, out of his impropriation, to the incumbent,
then either Bishops, or Deans and Chapters; Though the one purchased them, when
the other swore they came into them freely: Nay, some Gentlemen resigned their
impropriations freely: I can hear of no Bishop that has done so; though you
say, they are bound to maintain their Presbyters. You close with a jeer, but
therein discover your ignorance: Impropriations were injurious, you confess;
and if they be not valid in law, why do not you supply the cure of some great
impropriation, and recover the tithes in a legal way? if you cannot, my
position is truth; and so not dissonant from the God of truth.

Parag. 11. You bring my words, that if Bishops Lands were bestowed on
Presbyters: This would be, not ruin, but to rectify the devotion of former
ages, which you say, is somewhat like Cardinal Woolsey's pretense, who
dissolved forty small Monasteries of ignorant Monks, to erect two goodly
Colleges for the breeding up learned, and industrious Divines; was not this to
turn impediments into helps? was not this as fair a pretense as mine? yes, the
very same, and I think, few godly and rational men will disallow it: But you
would prove by the event, that this was not accepted of God, because his
Colleges were not brought to perfection. But vulgus res eventu metitur, its
for vulgar capacities to judge of things by the event, not Doctors of
Divinity. And had Cardinal Woolsey, think you, no other sins to make God
blast his design, but this pious attempt? Sure, no man that knows his story,
will so judge; " but this gave occasion to profuse sacriledg; but occasions are
not always culpable of ill events, unless they becauses also, as this was not,
but the covetousness, and igonrance, with other lusts, of ill-guided men.

Parag. 12. you enquire, what the meaning of these words is, this will turn
pomp into use.

I answer not what you say; but so that wealth, which of late, served for the
useless pomp of one only Princely Lord Bishop, would provide many able
preachers for the use and edification of the Church.

But you proceed, and say, that the power of Bishops, which were the main
impediments to schism and heresy, we have covenanted to root out, and have
brought in all helps to irreligion and Atheism, etc. But this is but a false
suggestion of yours; for though the power of Episcopacie (as Jerome says) was
first erected to prevent schism; yet amongst us of late, as I have showed, it
was the great occasion of schism, and the fautor of diverse heresies. That there
have of late appeared more heresies and schism among us then formerly, is not
because Episcopacie was pull d down, but because we were so long without
Presbytery settled, which is yet but lamely done; for where that is settled, it
would far better prevent the rise and growth of heresy, then Episcopacie; as
King James demonstrated to Mountague, Bishop of Bath and Wells; demanding of
him, upon the occasion of Legatts Arrianism, what the reason should be, that
Scotland was so free from schism and heresy, when England was far more
pestered with both. The relation out of a learned Author, you may take as
follows:

When Legatt the Arrian, and Weakman, Scoti paracl. contra Tileri praen: from
the relation of a Courtier of good credit, lib. 1. c. 8
that affirmed himself to be the Holy Ghost, were put to death; Mountague,
Bishop of Bath and Wells, asked King James seriously, whence it was, that
England did bring forth Sects, heresies, schisms, insomuch, that many families,
before we were aware, separated from us, and fled away; whereas no such thing
was observed to happen in the Church of Scotland? To whom the King, as most
skillful in this cause, most wisely answered; That such was the Discipline of
the Scotch Church, that it was impossible for such things to fall out amongst
them: for first (says the King) you must know, that every Church has its
Pastor always resident, and vigilant in his parish; and this Pastor has
joined with him Seniors and Deacons, which every week meet together at a set
time and place, for the censure of manners, that almost the whole flock is
known by face to the Pastor, and the conditions, disposition, and religion of
everyone, is made apparent: no heresy therefore can spring up in a Parish,
without notice taken by the Pastor; and to prevent the rooting of any error in
a Pastor, They have every week their Presbyteries, composed of all the Pastors
in a Shrievalty, or Deanrie, in the chief City of that precinct; and this, not
only to decide the more weighty questions touching manners; but also to try
doctrine it self: Here do prophecy at least two; whereof the first does only
open the text and expound it: The second does give the use, exhortation, and
application: This finished, the rest meet together, and the two speakers go
aside, until the Moderator of the Presbytery asks every ones opinion of the
doctrine delivered. And if (to say no worse) they do but smell out any thing,
either its forthwith buried by common suffrage, or if the Presbytery be divided
in any question, yet at least, the whole matter is hushed in silence until the
next Synod, which come twice a year. Hither come all the Pastors of the whole
Province, accompanied with their Elders, as the state of every Church requires.

The Moderator of the precedent Synod begins with a Sermon; and then, either a
new Moderator is chosen, or (which seldom falls out) the old is continued. The
question referred to the Synod, is either composed, or hushed up again in
silence, and referred to the National Synod, held once every year. Hither come,
not only the Pastors, but the King, or his Commissioner, and usually some of
all degrees, sufficiently furnished with judgment and authority to compose any
controversy; so Heresy is stifled in the very birth. So you may see, that
Presbytery is a better way to keep out, or under Schisms and Heresies, in King
James his judgment, grounded on experience, then Episcopacy: For what you add,
That the Pulpits and Presses, are locked up to all Orthodox men; Is false: if
to any, it is my grief: I am not to answer for others faults.

Parag. 13. You say, Its true, and not true, that by Parochial Pastors, the
work of the Ministry is chiefly to be performed. True you say, it is in the
Fathers sense, not in mine. But my sense, I shall prove to you, is Scripture
sense: For Pastors in my sense, are such as were ordained, Act. 14.13. and Tit.
1.5. in every Church, and were by the Holy Ghost, made overseers of them to
feed them, Act. 20.28. This you confess; for these places you understand of
Presbyter-Bishops. And I hope you will not oppose Fathers to Scriptures; if you
do, you know who must fall, Gal. 1.8. Its true, that the place of a Bishops
jurisdiction, was sometime called a Parish; But that Parish was usually not so
bigg as some Parishes in England now; If they were, how could six Bishops be
assembled to the censure of every Presbyter, as the Canon was: sure that's above
the number of all the Bishops that are in one of our Provinces, which grates
hard on your Diocesans, showing, how unlike they are to ancient Bishops. ' Nor
are the ordering of the Church, or ordaining of Presbyters, without the sphere
of Presbyters, by any law of God, but humane custom: No, nor are these the
chief works of the Ministry; No Doctor: Preaching, and sound Doctrine are the
chief acts of the Ministry, which deserve most reward, as you may see, 1 Timothy
5.17. and 1 Cor. 1.17. and therefore, when Saint Paul reckons up Ministers, and
their Ministerial acts, governing comes behind teaching, 1 Cor. 12.28. Romans
12.6, 7, 8.

But Parag. 14. You think to prove, 'That your Bishops do the chief work,
virtually, from an axiom in philosophy, propter quod aliquid est tale, illud
ipsum est magis tale. But herein you show your self as bad a Philosopher, as
Divine; for does propter quod, note out an efficient cause, or the final cause,
think you? You are therefore mistaken in your axiom, which is false, being as
if you had said, Presbyters are made Preachers, propter populum, for the
people: ergo. the people are more Preachers: A wise conclusion. We have a rule
indeed, quicquid efficit tale, est mag is tale. And I will grant, that they
that ordain Preachers, ought to be more Preachers themselves; but that, you
know, is false in experience, in most of your Bishops; therefore you should
know, that such Axioms, are true only in natural, not in voluntary causes, as
the Logicians will teach you. Neither are the Bishops the total causes of
Preachers: Alas, at the most, they give them but Commission to use their gifts
authoritatively, which gifts they have from God, and are the fundamental cause
to make them Preachers. Nor can Bishops alone ordain Presbyters; that I have
proved before. And what if I should prove it now by an axiom of philosophy?
Generare sibi simile, To beget his like, is the affection of a living creature;
And Presbytery, you know, is a living office, ergo, Presbyters may ordain
Presbyters. I believe, you will sweat to give a rational answer to it. What you
add about ordinary Courts of justice, and Parliament; Sir, though I count the
Parliament the supreme Court, yet justice is chiefly done by inferior Courts,
because it ordinarily lies on them, and the Parliament is only to supply and
rectify their errors.

But you proceed, and Parag. 15.16. Compare the Ministers to soldiers in an
Army, and to Mariners in a Navy, and your Bishops are as the General, they are
as the Admiral. So then, the people are no part of the Ship or Army, or else
you level the Presbyters with the people, whom the Holy Ghost calls their guids
set over them: Such similitudes you use to make. But every Preacher is not fit
to be a Bishop: that's your judgment; but the Holy Ghost says none should
preach, except he be sent, and none should be sent, but such as are fitted to
take the care and over sight of the Church, and that's the Holy Ghost's Bishop:
Whatever your opinion is, see 1 Timothy 3.5. Acts 20.28. Indeed, such a Bishop as
you would have, Monarchically to govern a whole Diocese of a Shier or two,
cannot be made ex quolibet ligno; but neither Scriptures, nor primitive times
acknowledge any such Bishop; But such a Bishop as may join with others in the
government of a Church: a meaner man may be without prejudice, for others
maturitie in judgment, may help his want of experience.

What you object, Parag. 17. about the Levellers Doctrine is suitable to this;
Is but a capritious fancy of your own; for God has comprised all ordinary
Ministers under the same name of Pastors; and therefore man can make no
difference among them, but for orders sake. Neither do I go about to level all
Benefices: you know there is a difference, in a great disproportion, which may
be for men of different parts.

But Parag. 18. You exclaim, because I say, there will be no danger of
sacriledg in my way. And first, you say, to overthrow Episcopacy, is to
overthrow the Church, and for that its not enough for you to abuse a Father,
but an Apostle too; for when Saint Paul says, we are built upon the foundation
of the Apostles and Prophets, Ephesians. 2.20. What Is that, says Beza, but Jesus
Christ? So the Apostle, who is the best interpreter of himself, explicates it,
1 Cor. 3.9. and adds, Plane est Anti-Christus, qui sibi tribnit quod unius
Christi est: He is plainly Antichrist, that arrogates to himself (or to any
other) what is only Christ's. What think you of this? Again, those that take
the Apostles to be the foundation, is it in respect of their persons,
authority, or doctrine? Their doctrine, I believe Sir; and will you compare
your Bishops, for doctrine, to the Apostles and Prophets: Who, as such, were
infallible; Nay, do you not confess the doctrinal part of the Ministry to
belong to the Presbyter, as well as your Prelate, and to be more performed by
them? and have you not made a fine proof of the fall of the Church with
Bishops, out of this place?

But you add, Parag. 19. What, no danger of sacriledg in robbing Father and
Mother? But you answer for me, that it is no sacriledg, because the means shall
still be settled on the Church: and that's a reason which you cannot answer: For
sacriledg is an alienating of that which was justly devoted for sacred, to
civil, or profane use; therefore change, so there be a continuance of holy
use, is no sacriledg: Nor shall we rob our Father; for, as you confess, holy
treasure was first given to the Church in general: The Bishops had not
propriety, but use of some, and with the rest they were to maintain the
Presbyters, which are wanting in many places, for want of maintenance. Now for
those, in whom authority lies to take care for the edification of the Church:
To dispose the Churches Patrimony, so as may be best for edification of the
Church, appointing it to maintain preachers, not pomp, will be counted neither
sacriledg, nor theft, by rational and good men. But you say, we rob the Church
of her husband too; for though a Church have 1000 Presbyters, yet she has but
one husband: so that great Counsel of Calcedon; but that Counsel spoke
according to the corrupt customs of those times, not according to the tenure
of Scriptures, who make all the Presbyters overseers over their particular
flocks, to dwell with them as men of knowledge, and to take care for them; and
that is to be in your sense husband, is it not? After you have made the Church a
widow without a Bishop, you add, while a widow, she can bring forth nothing but
a bastard brood, consider that; yes, I shall consider it, but to your shame:
what if a Church continue, as often it has, through covetousness and faction,
long without a Bishop, are all the Converts, begotten by the word of truth
preached by Prebyters, bastards? nay, what if Churches cast off Episcopacie,
are all her Presbyters bastards? Do you thus gratify the Papists, and abuse
all the Ministers of our sister reformed Churches? many of which far outstrip
you in all ministerial qualification; your assertion therefore is very
considerable, to discover what a Popish spirit you are of.

For Parag. 20. Whether your conclusion will follow on the premises, or mine, I
now leave to the judicious Reader. I would not have the King, for fear of the
people, to do any unlawful act: I disclaimed it in the very entrance of my
Case resolved; but I only persuade to what, for ought I yet see, I have proved
lawful; and that to rescue a perishing kingdom, and prevent the hazard of his
Crown; which, that it may be free, and flourishing on his head, is my daily and
hearty prayer, as those that know me can very well witness, notwithstanding
your ignorant calumniations, to the contrary.

Case of Conscience Resolved.
MY second Antagonist exceeds the first, both in subtlety and peremptoriness;
for he plainly affirms, that the King cannot desert Episcopacie, without flat
perjurie; and hence falls foul, both on those that would force him to it: and
also on those moderate Courtiers, that for peace sake, counseled it. He
disputes thus; There Is difference between laws and oaths: Where the supreme Jus
dominii is, there is a power above all laws, but not above their own oaths, in
whom that power is; for law binds only while it is a law, that is, till it be
repealed: But an oath binds as long as it pleases him, to whom it is taken:
The reason is, because the supreme power may cedere jure suo, and obliege
himself where before he was free; which if they do by promise, justice binds
them to performance; but if by an oath, (the matter being lawful) then are they
bound in religion and conscience; for an oath adds a religious bond unto God.
If this were not so, no oath were binding to them.

I answer; First, its a ground laid down by this Author in the same place, that
no oath is obligatorie beyond the intention of it; and then I first propound it
to consideration, whether the intention of this oath be not only against a
tyrannous invasion on the rights of the Clergy, not against an orderly
alteration of them, if any prove inconvenient; and to protect them against
violence, not against legal ways of change?

For first, this is as much, as is rational for a King to undertake; and
therefore in right reason, the oath should have no other sense, if the words of
the oath will bear it, as the words of this oath will.

Secondly, this oath to the Clergy, must not be intended in a sense
inconsistent with the Kings oath, to the people, first taken for their
protection in their laws and liberties; for then the latter oath will be a
present breach of the former, and so unlawful. Now one of the Privileges of
the People is, that the Peers and Commons in Parliament, have power, with the
consent of the King, to alter whatever, in any particular estate, is
inconvenient to the whole. And therefore he cannot afterward engage himself to
any particular estate, to exempt it from this power; for by that oath, at
least, cessit jure suo, in this Authors judgment; The Clergy and their
privileges, are subject to the Parliament, or they are not; I hope, they will
not now claim an exemption from fecular power: But if they be under
Parliamentarie power, how can it be rationally conceived to be the meaning of
the Kings oath, to preserve the Privileges of the Clergy against that power,
to which they are legally subject? or how were the oath in that sense,
consistent with the privileges of the nation, formerly sworn to by the king?
If the oath had such a sense in times of Popery, when the Clergy were a
distinct Corporation; yet when that exemption was abolished, as a branch of
Antichristian usurpation: The change of their condition must needs change the
intention of the oath, unless they will say, that the Crown stands still
engaged to them, to maintain such privileges as by Act of Parliament, were
long since abolished, which is, to make his oath to them contrariant to that
taken before, for the maintenance of the laws: Its apparent then, to make the
intention of the oath to be against a legal alteration by Parliament, makes it
unlawful, and so not obligatorie. And if it be not intended against legal
alteration, the king may pass a Bill for the abolition of Episcopacie, when his
Houses of Parliament think it convenient, and petition for it, without
violation of his oath.

CHAP. X. PARAG. 1. Wherein is showed, what the true intention of the Kings
oath is, for maintenance of Episcopacie, in answer to Doctor Boughen's 8.
Chapter.
I Come now to answer the 8. Chapter, wherein you were pleased to take in hand
this passage, beginning with my answer to my latter opponent, first; and yet
you did not make an end with him, before you undertook to reply to my answer to
my first opponent; which how judicious it is, let the Reader judge: for what
advantage you did it, you best know.

The question is, you say, Whether the King may desert Episcopacie without
perjury, a question too high for any subject; but you are enforced to make that
a question, that is harsh to loyal ears, lest you may seem to avoid my subtle
and saucie cavils, as unanswerable. Good words, Doctor: If the question be too
high for a subject, have not I the same plea for meddling with it, that you
have, being led into it by my opponents? but the truth is, the question is fit
enough for discussion, so it be done with reverence; whatever I am, I know you
will confess, that both my former opponents knew as well their duty to our
Sovereign, as you your self, and were as observant of it: when men are to act
by counsel or prayer for kings, unless they know, in Cases proposed, what is
conscionable for him to do, or not to do, how can they rightly perform their
duties? To balk such questions therefore, on just occasion, is not duty, but
flattery; and to leave kings and their Counselors without needful light: But
you have a quarrel to me, for saying my second Antagonist affirms, that the
King cannot desert Episcopacie without flat perjury, and say, his words are far
more mannerly; why did you not then set down his more mannerly words, but abuse
your reader with a falsitie? but you will prove the thing, that Episcopacie may
not be deserted without violation of oath, and the Church left to swine. No
Sir, we would purge it of swine, and dogs too, which they exposed its choicest
outward privileges to; but how do you prove it?

First, Parag. 2. You go a begging, telling one of my confession, when I do but
take the words of the oath from my Antagonists mouth, and dispute ex concesso,
that the oath is as he relates it, To protect the Bishops, etc, and then you
bring your observations, 1. Good Kings protect Bishops, 2. They ought to do it.
3. In right they ought to do it. But when I confess, that these words are in
the oath, must I therefore approve all that is in the oath, yea, and take them
in your sense too? I hope not.

Thus far I approve the kings protecting Bishops, within the limits of their
calling set them of God; but our Prelates have excluded their
fellow-Presbyters. But thirdly, as of right he ought to do; I take to be a
limitation how far he engages himself, that is, so far as a good king in right
ought to do, and if he go no further, he is injurious to none, though he
displeases many, as you say, Parag. 3.

Parag. 4. You add, the King has sworn to be protector of the Church under his
government, but that cannot be, unless he protect the Bishops, who are the
Ministerial spouse of the Church: This is a false inference, for though the
Ministry be necessary to the Church, yet not your Prelacie, which is but an
humane additament: your proof is presumptuous, to make any man a Ministerial
spouse of the Church, as well as it is for the Pope to be made a Ministerial
head of it.

Yet you repeat it, Parag. 5. With our frequent dish of no ordination without
them, which has been often enough answered. You conclude, if Bishops be of the
same order with the Apostles, you have Calvin's acknowledgment, that the Church
cannot stand without them: yea, and mine too, and yet never the nearer; for,
Ante Leves ergo. etc. as soon shall you find Hearts feeding in the middle
region of the air, as your Bishops among the Apostles.

You add, Parag. 6. that the Church cannot be without the Bishop, if we believe
Cyprian, that the Bishop is in the Church, and the Church in the Bishop; you
add, that the Church is in the Bishop, causally, etc. If you understand by the
Bishop, the Ministry, and by causally, as an instrument of its preservation;
I grant it, without any inconvenience: otherways we can grant the Church to be
causally in none other but Jesus Christ, the true head of it; nor is there any
other that is fountain of it: its as flat Popery to judge otherways, as to
make the Pope the head of the Church: nay worse: For Heart makes the Pope to be
the head; not as the fountain of life, as your similitude imports: but only in
regard of directing the outward functions; and yet for this, that mirror of
learning, Doctor Reynolds, does implead Mr. Heart of high treason against
Christ. And I remember also there, a witty and rational answer, that our
learned Doctor makes to a place cited out of Leo. He grants Leo was an ancient:
learned, holy, and witty man, yet a man, and a Bishop of Rome, etc. and applies
to him a saying of Tully to Hortensius, when he immoderately praised eloquence,
that he would lift her up to heaven, that himself might go up with her; so did
Leo lift up St. Peter, etc. So Cyprian was an holy man, but a Bishop, so he
might extol Bishops, that he might lift up himself with them. See confer,
between Reynolds and Heart. cap. 1. divis. 2. therefore your premises have not
yet force to draw my consent to their conclusion.

Parag. 7. You grant, "that the oath is not obligatory beyond the intention,
that is, say you, according to the common plain and literal meaning of it;
good: as the plain literal meaning is to be found out of the grammar of it:
and other circumstances, that may convince Reason of the intention of it.

You add, Parag. 8. That the oath is to the Clergy, The King must have respect
to them and their intention.

I answer, not mental, but what the words of the oath import, considered with
its circumstances; nor so much to the intention of the now giver, as the first
framer.

Now, I beseech you, if the King should have asked the Bishops, at the giving,
whether if a Case should fall out, that he must not only venture (which he has
done,) but lose his Crown, rather then fail to save them, whether they would
have said, yea, that is the meaning: Truly I believe not, and if they had, the
King and Peers, and people, would have hissed them out rather, then the one
would have persuaded, or the other would have yielded to have taken it with
that sense and intention.

Parag. 9. You enquire,, whether what has been done, has not been a tyrannous
invasion?

I answer, there has been too much tumult, and Ministers have suffered too
irregularly on both sides; but when the Houses present a Petition to the king,
with a Bill, for abolition of Episcopacie, that only is the regular way, that I
defend the king not to be engaged against.

Parag. 10. You say, it was his duty to protect you while it was in his power.

I answer, it was, and is his duty, so far as it was intended in the oath, but
was not to hazard the destruction of himself and kingdom, for your Prelates;
yet I advise not the breaking of his oath, as you would hint; but I limit the
intention of the engagement of the oath, as in reason it ought to be. If you be
not against an orderly alteration, (as you say, Parag. 4.) You grant the
question, for then if the Parliament lay down their swords, and come with a
Petition to desire his assent, notwithstanding his oath, he may assent, which
was the thing to be proved.

For my part, I abhor force upon a king; but if he might sign a Bill without
force, I see no reason why danger of force can make it unlawful.

To Parag. 12. I say, if the king has done his best to protect them against
violence, they can require no more, he has done as much as his oath does
require; now he may take care to preserve himself, issue, and people. And for
his Ministers, let them answer for themselves.

CHAP. X. PARAG. 2. Showing the right sense of the Kings Coronation Oath, from
this, that what he undertakes for the Bishops, must not be conceived to cross
what he has promised to the people; in answer to Doctor Boughen's 8. Chapter.
I Proceed now to answer your eight Chapter, whose very Title is ominious,
Whether the Kings Oath taken to the Clergy, be injurious to his other
subjects, and inconsistent with his oath to his people. Hereby you would
insinuate, that I affirm it is, whereas I affirm, it cannot be conceived so to
be, and therefore we must not put a sense upon it to make it so to be; and from
this ground, I impugn your false sense of the oath, namely, that it takes away
all power from the King, at the suit of his Parliament, to alter any of their
jurisdictions, whereof they show the grievance. Its therefore a calumnious
insinuation of yours, that I do set the liberties of the people against the
Clergies; Its your false inhansing your privileges above those of the people,
alterable by King and Parliament that is guilty of the incompatibilitie of
their privileges, if such an evil be; and therefore I say Amen to your prayer,
closing. Parag. 1.

Parag. 2. I agree that Gods law is unalerable by man: And I desire no more
from you then that, what is seled by man is alterable by man. For I plead for
alteration of no privilege, but what is from humane indulgence, and that such
an one too, that the Church may better want it, then have it in her Clergy.

That of Par. 3.4. Touching justness of laws, may pass with some Animadversion
of that of Ocham, that laws, nemini notabile afferant nocumentum: If by
nocumentum we understand damage. For the law to pull down the houses in Rome,
that stood in the Augurs way, (their principles granted) was just, yet it
brought notable damage to the owners, but the public good was to carry it
away: So laws among us against Monopolies undid some; yet the public emolument
made the law just.

Parag. 5.6. Are ignorant, trifling, or worse: For first, you quarrel at the
phrase, the protection of the peoples laws; who say you, made them Lawmakers?
Not I Sir, but when King and Parliament have made them, they have propriety in
them. The privilege of them is usually called part of their birthright. A man
may call an house his own, because he possesses it, and has the benefit of
it, though he made it not. So I call the laws the peoples: But yet the
following cavil is worse: For whereas I say, one of the privileges of the
people is, that the Peers, and Commons in Parliament, have power, with consent
of the King, to alter what ever, in any estate, is prejudicial to the whole; I
had thought (say you) this had not been a privilege of the people, but the
Parliament Representers, not the people Representees, etc. And again parag. 6.
How the Lords will take this, I know not; Can they endure their power to be
derivative? etc. Which all are but trifling and odious mistakes: For he might
well know, that by People, I mean all, in distinction from the King, of what
state soever, Peers, or others: Nay, does not he himself take it so? witness
his own expression, page 49. lin. 1.2. 'Vnder this word People, are
comprehended the Nobility, Clergy, and Commons of this Kingdom. How trifling
then are his exceptions, as though I set the people against the Parliament?
When under People, I comprehend, as himself does, all the Members of the
Parliament.

And yet more absurd is your trifling, parag. 7. in arguing against those
words, That the Peers and Commons, have power to alter whatsoever is
inconvenient, because it is in the Kings consent to confirm, or cause a law.
Since I add in the same place, as you confess in parag. 8. with the consent of
the King, and so ascribe not power of alteration without him, but with him:
sure (as they say) the ^agle is hungry, when she catches at such Flies.

As impertinent are your questions and answers, parag, 8.9. But parag. 10. You
proceed to number up the inconveniences that will arise to the people, by
stripping the Clergy of their immunities. But you must tie your self to the
immunities in question, else you say just nothing to the purpose. ' First, the
curse for sacriledg; but I have freed the alteration intended from guilt of
sacriledg, and therefore that is the curse causeless, that shall not come: If
no more be done, then by my case, I prove lawful. If any do proceed further,
and commit sacriledg: Whether many, or few, young or old, wittingly, or
ignorantly, I excuse them not, but join in your censure, parag. 10.11.12.

But parag. 13. When the Church is stripped of her means, 'what kind of Clergy
shall we have? Jeroboams Priests, the lowest of the people (say you.) And have
we not had many such, under the Bishops, in their, and other
Lay-impropriations? Nay, was it not a design to fill all the Parishes in the
Episcopal Cities, with the Singing-men of the Cathedral? Which was in a great
part effected: and were not they of the lowest, and many times of the worst
condition of the people? This is like to continue, and increase, if the Church
be farther spoiled. But if the Bishops, and Deans and Chapters lands be
employed to maintain Parochial Pastors; this will help to fill the Church with
able and learned Preachers, and encourage men to dedicate their Children to the
Ministry, and them to embrace it: because if they be learned and unblameable,
there will be more opportunity of competent, though not of so great promotion,
which was competible but to a few.

So the second inconvenience, pressed, parag. 13.14.15. is avoided also. parag.
16. All the inconvenience (you say) that Master Geree presses, is, that we are
not subject to the Parliament. But how far forth we are, and are not, we shall
hear anon.

Parag. 17.18. You tell me, I speak much of a first and 'second oath. I answer,
if that be an error, I was led into it by my first Opponent, that distinguished
between oath and oath; and the oath to maintain the privileges of the Clergy,
he says expressly, is taken after the oath to the whole Realm: neither do I see
any thing in your Analysis of the oath here, or the delineation of the oath, in
the beginning of your Book, that invalidates the expression of my Opponent in
realitie, though in some formalitie it does. For there I see, that the King had
particularly, and distinctly, engaged himself to the whole Realm, before he
came to the Bishops, which are the only part of the Clergy, about whom our
controversy is; and what he last promises to them, confirmed by his oath, must
not contradict what he has promised to the other: which promise must be
understood to have a prioritie in order, in the bond of the oath, as well as in
the bond of the promise.

Parag. 19. You speak of sending us to Magna Charta, to know who the People and
Commons of this Kingdom are, etc. whith only fills up so much paper, being
nothing to the question in hand.

But Parag. 20. You reckon up the Privileges of the Church, as you have
gleaned them out of Magna Charta, and Sir Edward Cook, in number 8. The second
is, that no Ecclesiastical person be amerced according to the value of his
Ecclesiastical benefice, but according to his lay-tenement, and according to
the quality of his offense. The latter clause is reason, the former a privilege
without reason, and prejudicial to the Civil state, and gives many
Ecclesiastical persons leave to sin impune. The fourth, That all
Ecclesiastical persons shall enjoy all their lawful jurisdictions, and other
rights, wholly without any diminution, or substraction whatsoever. I pray you,
if the Kings Coronation Oath engage so to the confirmation of this privilege,
that the king cannot consent to allow it by Act of Parliament; how can that act
be justified, that enables the Crown of England to appoint what persons else
they will, to execute all Ecclesiastical jurisdiction in this kingdom? If that
statute were lawfully made, notwithstanding this oath, why then may not another
statute be made against their standing, since by the former they may be made
unusefull? and yet the former, you brag, you "have engaged your selves to
maintain, in your oath of supremacy, Parag. 9.

The fifth privilege you name, is, that a Bishop is regularly the Kings
immediate Officer to the Kings Court of justice, in causes Ecclesiastical.
Whence I gather, that by our law, a Bishop is a kings creature, no Apostle; for
he was the immediate Officer of Christ; though subject, in doing or suffering,
to the Civil Magistrate, though heathen.

You conclude, that it is provided by act of Parliament, that if any judgment
be given, contrary to any points in the great Charter, it shall be holden for
naught, etc.

True, unless it be upon some particular statute of a latter Parliament, with
the king, enacting things to the contrary.

Parag. 21. You say, that I go forward, as if it were certain, that this to the
Clergy, was a several oath from that to the people.

I answer, I disputed upon my opponents proposals; and learned opponents do not
use to make their cause worse then it is, nor indeed does he; for though the
king swear but once, yet he ptomiseth the things he swears, severally, and
the promise of this to the Bishops, in question, is last; and therefore, in
competition, must give way to other engagements: neither do the statutes, for
confirmation of Magna Charta, bind the hands of succeeding Parliaments. Whose
hands, as the leaaned Chancellor Bacon observes, cannot be bound by their
Predecessors, if they see reason of alteration; a supreme and absolute power
(says he) cannot conclude it self. Hist. of H. 7. p. 145.

CHAP. X. PARAG. 3. Showing, that the Clergy are equally under the Parliament,
as well as Laytie, in answer to Doctor Boughen's 9. Chapter.
I Now come to answer your ninth Chapter, which is an angry one; which makes
me think that you were sorely puzzled: My Dilemma is, They are subject to the
Parliament, or they are not. He answers, subject they are to the Parliament,
consisting of head and members; not to the members alone, without the head; for
we are subject to the members, only for the heads sake. Truly, this grant is
all that I desire, or need; for the Parliament, I propose the Dilemma about, is
that which consists of head and members united; to which if they be subject,
then may these jointly determine of any of their privileges, in their own
nature alterable, as they do of those of the people. Indeed, the King and
Parliament ought not to take away any privileges that are for edification, but
such as prove impediments rather; but, of that they are to be Judges, in the
application of their power, and that is all needful to be said to parag. 1, 2,
3, 4, 5.

And yet I leave it with confidence to the judicious Reader, as also, what I
have said in the former Paragraph, touching a former and latter oath.

But whereas you ask, Parag. 6. with what face I can say, that the Kings oath
to the Clergy is inconsistent with his oath to the people, parag. 6. I wonder
with what face you can aver it, when as I directly say, it must not, and
therefore take off an interpretation of it, that would make it inconsistent:
whereas you say, the nation is weary of the Presbyterian government in three
years; its but a piece of none-sence, since this three years, (except a little
liveless show in the City of London, and some few places more) the truth is,
and our misery is, that we have been under no Ecclesiastical government at
all.

Parag. 7. You mention my words, if the oath had such a sense when the Clergy
were a distinct Corporation, on which you spend your judgment, if you know what
sense is. Truly Sir, you are the worst at picking out sense, that ever I knew,
of a D. D. My meaning is plain, if the oath had a sense to exempt them from
power of Parliament, it must be when they were a distinct Corporation, under
another Supremacy, which now you disclaim.

Parag. 8. You mistake, " in saying I am zealous in distinguishing you and your
Privileges.

I answer to the distinction brought by my opponent, that it is not such, but
that the Privileges of Clergy and People (I mean such as are alterable) are
equally under Parliamentarie power, for alteration on just grounds. And the
kings oath to you is as obligatorie, as to the people, in the right sense, and
intention of it, which the review of the Covenant says, is all the obligation
of an oath.

Parag. 9. You speak about the change of the condition of the "Clergy, as
though the intent were to make it slavery. Sure Sir, its far from my intent:
The English Laytie are not slaves. He that says, the Privileges of the
English Clergy, that they hold by law, are inviolable to them, while the law
remains; but that the laws concerning them, are alterable; makes them not
slaves, but equal in freedom to any English Lay-subject.

But Parag. 10. You would pretend to a little subtlety; for you say, the
change of the Clergies condition, from Popery to Protestancy, was for the
better or for the worse.

I answer, undoubtedly, for better, morally; for now we are in Christ's way. Let
every soul be subject, etc. Romans 13.1. Then we were in Antichrists way but yet
in a civil respect, we have not such exemptions or liberties as we had: we are
more under uncivil power, but this is for the better; for that liberty that is
without Gods leave, is not indeed a privilege, but a snare to the party
holding it. I confess with you, that the intent of the Kings oath, was to
protect his subjects in their several places, dignities, and degrees, and not
to suffer them to oppress one another; but not to deny any Bill, that upon
advisement, shall be presented, and manifested to conduce to the weal public.

You proceed, Parag. 11. The intention of the oath, is to maintain the ancient,
legal, and the just rights of the Clergy.

I have answered, it is to maintain them against illegal oppression, but not
against legal alteration, that you should prove, but do not. The continual
practice of the nation is with me, wherein by diverse statutes, many Canonical
Privileges have been altered, as 25. H. 8. all Canonical Privileges,
contrariant to the Kings Prerogative, and civil laws, and 1 of Elizabeth, in
giving power to the Crown to exercise all Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, by whom
she will appoint; and this is all that I affirm, that Privileges are alterable
by an orderly way in Parliament, and therefore you may take the Ghostly Fathers
place to the man of sin, which you would bequeath to me; you are fitter to
serve the Pope then I; you hold, no Bishop, no Church: but such passions I look
at, but as winchings when an argument pincheth.

For Parag. 12. I consent to Sir Edward Cook, in his opinion, of the Kings
engagement, to maintain the rights and inheritance of the Church; nor is he
against my limitation, for its known what his opinion was, of the power of
Parliaments; That they might alter what ever they saw inconvenient to
publikeweal.

In your parag. 12. You wilfully slander me, that I would "persuade the Laytie,
that the Clergies weal is their woe. I only affirm, that if all such
Privileges of the Clergy, that are in their nature alterable, be made
unalterable by the kings oath; (that let the kingdom sink or swim, the King
cannot consent by Act of Parliament, to alter them,) then are they inconsistent
with the people; and this I say again. And I am carried thereto, by evidence of
truth, and not any caninus appetitus after wealth and honor. Those that know
me, will but laugh at your rashness, in these mistaken calumnies.

The former part of your 14. Parag. is passionate nonsense, the latter part is
a contradiction; for you say, if this oath be not against legal alteration, in
the true and literal sense, etc. The King may not, without violation of his
oath, pass a Bill for the abolition of Episcopacie. What (I pray you) is legal
alteration, of any thing here in England, but alteration by consent of the King
and Parliament? How can this oath then, if it be not against a legal
alteration, be against an alteration by Bill in Parliament? which is the only
legal alteration of Privileges, founded on law in England; you are the
strangest opponent that ever I met with, you make nothing of giving the cause,
and railing at me for carrying it.

To as little purpose is all you conclude with, parag. 15. Whereas I say, he
may pass a Bill; you wonder, I say not, he must pass a Bill; you add, I say
that which is equivalent. He cannot now deny consent without sin; but yet Sir,
this must arise, not from any authority of the Houses, but from the condition
of the King, to preserve, or restore peace to his kingdoms: For the kings
negative voice, I always asserted it, as well as you, both in word and
writing; but I affirm, he has power of an affirmative voice, to confirm any
thing that is for good of his people, which he has not, nor ought not to swear
away.

It may be, you will say, true, if abolition of Episcopacie were for the good
of the nation.

I answer, that is to pass to another question, and to grant this in hand; but
besides, the King and Parliament are to judge of the goodness of it, for the
nation; and if they err, they are answerable to God alone.

Case of Conscience resolved.
SEcondly, I answer, from the expressions of the oath it self, as they are set
down by the same Author, page 74. To protect the Bishops and their Privileges,
to his power, as every good king in his kingdom, ought to protect and defend
the Bishops, and Churches, under their government.

Here you see, the engagement of the king, is but to his power, as every good
King ought in right to protect, etc.

Now such power is no further then he can do it, without sinning against God,
and being injurious to the rest of his people. When then he has interposed his
authority for them, and put forth all the power he has to preserve them; if
after all this, he must let them fall, or support them with the blood of his
good subjects, and those unwilling too, to engage their lives for the others
privileges; I think none need question, but that he has gone to the extent of
his power, and as far as good Kings are bound in right; for it is not equal,
to engage the lives of some, to uphold the honors of others. That were to be
cruel to many thousands, to be indulgent to a few. Suppose a king put a
Commander into a City, and give him an oath, to maintain the Privileges of it,
and keep it for him to his power; and this Commander keeps this town till he
has no more strength to hold it, unless he force the Townes-men to arms,
against that privilege which he has sworn to maintain. If this Governor now
surrender this town upon composition, does he violate his oath? I think, none
will affirm it: Such is the case with the king in this particular: when he has
gone as far in their protection, as is consistent with the weal of other his
liege people, which he is sworn to tender; he has protected them to his power,
and his obligation is no further by the words of the oath.

The only objection, as I conceive, which lies against this, is, that though
it be not in the Kings power to uphold them, yet it is in his power, not to
consent to their fall.

Answ. If the king should be peremptory in denial, what help would this be to
them? Such peremptoriness in this circumstance, might endanger his Crown, not
save their Miters. Besides, though it be in his power to deny assent to their
abolition, in a natural sense, because voluntas non potest cogi; yet is it not
in his power in a moral sense, because he cannot now deny consent, without
sin; for if he consent not, there will evidently continue such distraction, and
confusion, as is most repugnant to the weal of his people, which he is bound,
by the rule of government, and his oath, to provide for.

CHAP. XI. Showing, that the King is not bound to protect the Bishops honors
with the lives of his good subjects, in answer to Doctor Boughen's 16. Chapter.
I Proceed to the answer of your 16. Chapter, entitled, how far forth the King
ought to protect the Church and Bishops. You begin, it is confessed to my hand,
that the King is engaged, to his power, to protect the Bishops and their
Privileges, as every good King ought in right, to protect the Bishops and
Churches under their government. It is confessed, that these are the
expressions of the oath, as it is set down by the Reviewer; but you should
conceive, that I propose these two clauses, as limitations of the kings
engagement, that is, 1. To his power. 2. only so far forth, as in right he
ought; and I do not say, the engagement is put upon him by the Author, as you
ignorantly suggest, but that these are the expressions of the oath, delivered
by the Author; but he is not, in right, bound to protect their privileges
against an orderly alteration by act of Parliament, if any appear inconvenient
to the whole body, for that is not right.

Parag. 2. You confess, the King is not bound further to exercise his power in
protection of Bishops, then he can do it without sinning. And I after prove, he
cannot so protect them, as to deny a Bill in that circumstance of affairs he
and the land were in, without sin; what you answer to my proof, will be seen in
the sequel of this Chapter. How I have answered your proofs, that he cannot let
fall Bishops without mischief to his people, etc. in your eighth Chapter, let
the Reader judge.

In that you say, parag. 3. That the Kings interposing the power he has,
vexes my confederacy; Is I doubt your wilful ignorance; for the frame of my
Book might clearly enough hint unto you, that I, neither was of, nor liked any
confederacy against the King.

Neither have I, as you say, parag. 4. Confessed that what the King has done, is
right. Right it is indeed upon his principles: But I do not think, the King is
bound in right to maintain Bishops, in statu quo, in the state wherein they
were; and he is willing now to regulate them by their Presbyters. But whatever
I confess in justification of the King, is not (as you say) the justification
of an enemy; unless he that pleads, prays, suffers for the King, and his
just and Kingly liberty, be his enemy, because he is against the usurping
power of Bishops.

Parag. 5. If after all this, he must perforce let the Bishops fall, you and
your schism have much to answer for. Still a Slanderer; its none of my schism,
to force the King to let them fall; for though I prove, he may let them fall;
and that it is for the advantage of the Church, that they should fall; yet I
was always against forcing him to it; for, I think, it is much more reason,
that his conscience should be left free in its determination, then my own, or
any private man's, in as much as God has set him in so high a degree of
eminency in his Kingdoms.

But that you say, the sword was never drawn on the Kings side, to maintain
Religion established: They never learned to fight for Religion; It is an
ignorant speech, misbecoming a D. D. For what juster cause of War, or more
weighty, then to maintain Religion established? Its true, we may not fight to
set up a Religion (which is true) against the laws and authority of the land
where we live; that were against the direction to Christians, under Heathen
Emperors, Romans 13.1.2. But to join with authority to maintain Religion
established, (supposing it true) with the last drop of our blood, is the most
glorious quarrel; and so I doubt not, but the Royal party learned, though not
from you, yet from better Divines. For your clinch about good subjects; Its
frivolous; for the War costs blood on both sides, and the King loses on both
sides, for all are his subjects, and I doubt not, but he has good Subjects on
both sides, in regard of meaning, and intention, though its true, one side must
needs be in a grand error.

Parag. 6. You confess, it is an hard case for one man to engage his life for
the maintenance of another privileges. But who did so? Not a man (say you)
engaged himself, but by the Kings command, which you after prove, and state the
question us you please. But this is but to shuffle, and alters the state of a
question, to elude the force of an Argument, which you cannot answer: That
which I said, was, it was not equal for the King to engage, by his command, the
lives of some, to maintain the privileges of others, which I spoke upon this
supposition; That if the King had condescended in point of Episcopacie, the War
would have been at an end, Laws restored to exercise, etc. For both City, and
the Scottish Nation, would have closed with him: and for this cause alone, viz.
to maintain power of Bishops, I say, it would not have been equal to have
engaged the lives of others; nor were they willing, as I have been informed,
Nobles, nor others. It may be, the King thought condescension in this, would
not have set him and his people, in quiet possession of their rights; but I
cannot but wish, that it had been tried, that nothing lawful had been omitted,
by which there was any hope to have saved a great deal of misery, that his
Majesty, his Royal relations, and the whole Nation has suffered.

But Par. 7. You deny them to be others privileges, and affirm them to be the
peoples, because they reap spirituals from them. But truly I must tell you,
that the people reaped but little in spirituals from many of the Bishops, who
seldom preached themselves, and robbed many people of their spirituals, by
silencing their Ministers; and though there were no Bishops in England, the
people may reap spiritual things from the Clergy, as plentifully, if not more,
then ever they did; as well as without them, they do in other reformed
Churches. But what you add, " That in the suffering of the Clergy, all
Families suffer, you substitute Clergy for Bishops. Other of the Clergy may
be in better condition by the removal of Lording Bishops; but in your proof
that one of the Tribe of Judah, of the most remarkable Family, turned Priest:
That is so gross an oversight, that it is most unbeseeming a D. D. for its
expressly said, that young man was a Levite by birth. And the argument of Micah,
plainly proves him so, or else he had been in no better case with him, then
with one of his own sons, whom he had consecrated, if that would have made a
Priest. See Judge. 17. v. 5.13. The Levite indeed turned Priest, which was his
wickedness; for a Levite was not to do the Priests office. There is indeed an
ambiguous expression, touching this Levite, v. 7. A young man of Bethlehem
Judah, of the family of Judah. But if you had consulted Interpreters, you would
have found them generally agreeing that he was a Levite, though differing in
their opinions, how he was of the family of Judah. Some saying, by his Mother,
some referring it to the City, to distinguish it from another Bethlehem in
Zabulon, etc.

You add, parag. 8. What if Magna Charta do obliege all to stand up for the due
observation of these privileges? then we must acknowledge that we are bound to
obey his Majesty commanding, etc. Still you alter the question; for the
question is, Whether it can be supposed equal, that the King should stand bound
to engage the lives of many, for the privileges of a few Lord Bishops. I hope,
you think it not the meaning of Magna Charta, that every one should engage
their lives for every paltrie privilege of another. But its well you can now
confess, that Magna Charta is a great and justly magnified Charter. If you and
your Prelates had been of this mind formerly, and not been so deep in
breaking, and countenancing the breach of it in others, by illegal
imprisonments, impositions, fines, both of Laytie and Clergy: England might
have escaped this cannensem calamitatem, this mine-threatning calamity, under
which it is ready to expire; to which the breaches of Magna Charta gave the
first occasion, and the fairest color.

Parag. 2. You make an objection touching Abbots and Priors provided for by the
same Charter, yet since taken away by act of Parliament, which you confess. But
first, you you would have us observe, how they prospered that did it. Secondly,
that Master Beza and my self call it sacriledg. We do so, and that we judge the
cause why they prosper'd not that did it, because they did it with that sinful
circumstance of devouring holy things, which showed also their want of
sincerity in it. Thirdly, you say, that they are for it styled enemies of our
Sovereign. But they did not hear it, they were born long after the Statute of
25. Edward 3. Fourthly, you cite the Counsel of Chalcedon, that no consecrated
Monastery may be turned to a secular dwelling. I answer, Counsels may err, and
so may that of Chalcedon; if the profit of the house had been employed for
pious uses; I see no ground of complaint or censure. Fifthly, you say, you hope
I will make a difference between our Saviors institution, and man's invention.
Truly I do, and have proved Diocesan-Bishops to be no institution of Christ,
but man, in the foregoing Discourse. And lastly, I join With the wishes of
those pious men, and move (as you know) not a devouring but a diversion of
Chathedrals maintenance; (Besides what is requisite to maintain needful
preaching there,) to procure and encourage able Parochial Pastors (who are the
undoubted Ordinance of Jesus Christ) all the Land over.

Parag. 10. You do but beat the same bush again, in citing again Magna Charta.
I confess, the kings engagement to maintain the Privileges of the Clergy, so
far as he is bound by right; nor is any act of the king, or the Houses without
the king, valid against it; but king and Parliament joining, they may overruled
some parts of it, and upon just ground warrantably, as appears in all
experience, as in paring Episcopal Canonical privileges, niminishing their
jurisdiction by the high Commission annexed to, and set over Bishops, etc.

Parag. 11. You enquire, Whether it be equal to engage the lives of some, to
destroy the honors of others? This is impertinent to my Case, and though I
count not your Bishops, plantations of Gods right hand, yet since they had
footing by law, it has been my grief, that force has been used to pluck them
up, for me they should have stayed for his day; who has said, every plant that
my heavenly Father has not planted, shall be plucked up; but when I have made
complaint of this, it has been replied to me by many, that this was not the
cause of the engagement in war, though I believe the most considerable part of
the people had an eye on this; but this is on the by.

Parag. 12, 13. You take into consideration my Case, of a Captain, engaged by
oath to maintain the Privileges of Townes-men, and keep a town to his power,
whether he may not, notwithstanding his oath, make his composition, (if he
cannot defend it without the Townes-men, and they will not fight) without
violation of his oath? I think, none will affirm it. You do not only deny it,
but take the Name of God in vain, to make a jeer at it, does that become a
Divine? But let us hear your reason; because there is no town in England can have
such a privilege, as not to bear arms against the Kings enemies. Suppose it be
so, I am no Lawyer; yet you know its not unusual in cases, to suppose things
that are not, so they be not impossible, as this is not; for the king may grant
such an immunitie if he please, that none shall be compelled to bear arms, and
therefore it was but a shift; that error in the Case may be easily mended, and
it will pinch the Doctor as hard as ever it did; for suppose that so many of
the soldiers in the town are slain, or taken prisoners, that the Governor can
defend it no longer, then I hope Mr. Doctor will yield that he may make his
composition; so was it with the king, at the publishing my small Treatise; and
now, notwithstanding my former fails (as he says Parag. 14.) for want of skill
in law; the difficulty is returned on the Doctor, get out how he can.

I make an Objection, that though the king cannot in such a state uphold them;
yet it is in his power not to consent to their fall; this, I say, is the only
exception. The Doctor says, "its a just one, though not the only one; yet he
shows no other: but then he is angry for the phrase, peremptoriness, in denying
assent to the fall of Bishops, used to the King as uncivil. I am no Courtier,
(I confess) and may fail in phrase; yet peremptoriness in a candid sense, is no
more then resoluteness, so I mean it: but I will strive hereafter, even in
expressions, to cut off occasion from them that seek occasion. But you say, his
not consenting to the fall of Bishops, may keep him from sin. But you beg the
question; for I argue by my instance, in a Governor of a town, that there is
no sin in resigning upon composition; and your proof, that it is a sin to
consent to abolish Episcopacie, because an ordinance of Christ, waves the bonds
of the oath, and argues from the thing; the vanity of which I confuted, when I
met with it, Chap. 4.

Parag. 16. You answer, though the King cannot save your Mitres, but endanger
his own Crown, yet (say you) he shall avoid sin and save his soul, for without
consent, no sin. Neither in consent is there sin in this case, as I have
proved; and then a king, I hope, may do all that may be done, without sin, to
save his Crown: but in the mean time, the land may see how tender you are of
the king, that rather then you will consent to his signing a Bill when it may
save his Crown, he shall lose it. It Is a sign you love the Crown for your
Mitres sake; and if there must be no Bishops, then let there be no kings
neither. Rightlike him in the Tragedy, (...).

Parag. 17, 18. You examine, that I say in a natural sense, it is in the Kings
power to consent to the abrogation of Episcopacie, not in a moral sense,
because he cannot now deny without sin; the distinction you acknowledge, and
say, it should be the Kings care, that he incline not to sin. I say so too, he
must venture all, rather then sin; and if I thought it were sin, I should choose
death, rather then persuade him to it; but you confidently conclude, the King
breaks his oath, and sins if he consent. This I deny, the oath engages not to
dissent in this case, as I have proved: yet were Episcopacie an institution of
Christ, I confess also, it were sin to abolish it: but I have proved it a brat
of humane power; and what man sets up, you confess man may pull down.

But I prove, that the king cannot deny his assent to abrogation of Episcopacy
now, without sin, for else such confusion will follow, as is most repugnant to
the weal of his people; this confusion we have felt: but what says the Doctor
to this, Parag. 19. Thus shall sin vary at your pleasure, sin it shall be now,
that was none heretofore. Why Sir, is that strange, that circumstances should
change the morality of actions? I am ashamed, that a D. D. of mine own mother
Universitie should discover such ignorance in Divinity. Was it not a thing
unlawful in the Apostles time, after the Decree, Acts 15. to eat things
strangled, and blood, where offense was taken; but cannot you without scruple,
now eat a good blood-pudding, or a strangled capon? truly, if you cannot, you
would get more scorn, then followers, for such a silly fancy.

But you proceed, Parag. 20. Where there is no law, there is no transgression.
Is there no law, for a King to tender the weal of his people? yes, sure that
that requires him to be honored as a father; and therefore, if he withholding
his assent, occasion the keeping up confusion, repugnant to the weal of his
people, undoubtedly there is a law broken, unless there be some superior law to
check this. Oh, but Judge Jenkins says, its against the oath of the King and
Houses, to alter the government for religion. But I pray you ask, the Judge
whether it be against their oaths, to alter the religion, from Popery to
Protestancie? and withal, whether is greater, the religion, or the external
government of it? and if without perjury they alter the greater, why may they
not the less? for the trouble, that the learned in law shall be put to on
alteration: If you compare it with garments rolled in blood, let the Reader
judge, whether you be a prudent esteemer of matters.

But you retort, Parag. 21. If the King do consent to abrogate Episcopacie,
there will follow confusion, repugnant to the weal of his people. Your reason
is, that there are as many for Episcopacie (Common Prayer is another business)
as against it, though not so mutinous.

I answer, the danger of confusion is not from the number or quality alone, but
also from the power of opposers, which then was very great, and the adverse
party weak; therefore your retortion was feeble. I confess, the sins occasioned
by this confusion endanger temporal and eternal weal of people; that is it that
makes me so study the healing of it.

Parag. 22. You infer, that I mean to continue these distractions, unless
Episcapacie be abrogated* But you are mistaken in me; though I have no good
conceit of Episcopacie, yet I had rather it had continued, though to my burden
and suffering, then have seen so much sin and misery by an unnatural war; but
your expressions carry it, that your mind is so. Episcopacie may be held up:
Scelera ipsa nefasque hac mercede placent. You are as much mistaken in
objecting ambition, or avarice to me, as a cause of these evils: I have by Gods
grace, followed the dictate of my conscience, above these twenty years, against
my civil interest: and I hope, I shall not now become such a slave to lust, to
do such a horrid thing, to serve it.

You close this Chapter, Parag. 23, 24. with paraleling our present times with
the conspiracy of Corah; and when you can prove by Gods Law, such a difference
between Presbyters and Bishops, as God made between Priest and Levites, it will
give a pretty color to the business; but as long as Gods Word tells us, that
Presbyters are Bishops and Pastors, nor has he left any distinct orders among
Pastors, you may please your self, and credulous followers, with your conceit,
but shall not convict those of any guilt, that for peace-sake, move, that man
would abolish that difference of order which the wit of man made, and the
corruption of man has made hurtful. God make the Scepter of the King
flourish, but as for your Episcopal Mitres, they have been so stained by those
that wear them, that well may they get power, but I believe they will never get
beauty and glory in our Israel again.

Case of Conscience Resolved.
THirdly, I answer, that this Opponent in this Dispute, argues upon this
ground, that the supreme jus Dominij, even that which is above all laws, is in
the King: which under favor, I conceive, in our State is a manifest Error.
There Is a supremacy in the King, and a supremacy in the Parliament. But the
supremacy, or the supremum jus Dominij, which is over all laws figere, and
refigere, to make or disanul them at pleasure, is neither in the King, nor in
the Houses apart, but in both conjoined. The King is the supreme Magistrate,
from whom all power of execution of laws is legally derived. The Parliament is
the supreme Court, by which all other Courts, which derive their power for
execution of laws from the King by his Commissioners, are to be regulated; and
the King and the Parliament are the supreme power to make and disanul laws.
Since then this supremum jus Dominij, that is over all laws, is not in the King:
He cannot lawfully make any engagement to any against the laws, and legal rites
of others; for that were not cedere jure suo, sed alieno. This oath then to the
Clergy cannot engage him against the legal privileges of the people, or the
Parliament, which he is bound to maintain; one of which is, to be ready, by
confirming needful Bills, to relieve them, from whatsoever grievance they
suffer from any. And thus, I think, the Case is sufficiently cleared, that
notwithstanding the Kings oath to the Clergy at his Coronation, he may consent
to the extirpation of Prelacie out of the Church of England.

CHAP. XII. Wherein it is cleared, that though the King be the Supreme
Magistrate, yet that supremacy which is over all laws, is in this Kingdom, not
in the King alone, but in the King and Parliament; in Answer to Doctor
Boughen's 17. Chapter.
I Come now to your last Chapter, entitled, Whether there be two Supremacies
in this Kingdom? But why not as well, three? You know I make three supremacies,
but two fitted your Bow better, which you had prepared to shoot your Arrows in,
even bitter words: But I shall let you see, that as there is more vapor, so
more vanity and lightness in this, then in any other Chapter; and some of it
against your own words, and I believe more of it against your own light. First,
you begin to tell me, That I blame them that set up two supremacies, and yet
cannot see the beam in my own eye, and then calumniate at pleasure.

Yet all is but wind: I blame them that set up two absolute supremacies, that
had power to make laws independantly one of another: only the Clergy had the
better end of the staff; for the Laytie must be subject to their laws, but they
would be exempt from the Layties. This I condemned out of Marsilus Patavinus,
as an enemy to quiet, because such were always apt, and usually in act,
clashing one against another. But the supremacies that I speak of, cannot cross
one another, so no danger of disturbance. Again, Doctor, in sober sadness, do
you not know a difference between a supremacy, and the Supremacy? A D. D.
cannot be so ignorant. You cannot choose but have learned the difference between
absolute summum, and summum secundum quid. Chiefs, in some respect, may be
many, chief absolutely, but one; and when I say, a Supremacy, did not that
hint to you only a Supremacy secundum quid, in some respect only? and yet
more expressly, when I call it the supreme Court, that is, supreme, not
absolute: but in respect of judicature, there lies an appeal from all Courts to
it by petition, but from it to none. Is not this a Supremacy? Nay, do not you
your self ascribe as much to it, when you say, This I say, that the Parliament
is Curia Capitalis, the supreme Court of this Kingdom? Your own words, page
136. if Supreme, there is supremacy, quicquid dicitur de in est in; it cannot
be denominated supreme, but there is supremacy in it, in some respect;
denominatio fit ab inhaesione; did you not then cavil against conscience at a
supremacy in the Parliament, and raise dust to darken the light?

Parag. 2. After a light quirk, misbecoming a D. D. you ask Whether this be not
against the oath of supremacy, Wherein we swear, that the Kings highness is the
only supreme Governor of this Land, etc? How are my positions against this
oath? Do not I ascribe to the king, to be the only Supreme Magistrate? You
that could play with summum, and supremus; Can you tell us a difference,
between Magistrate, and Governor? If not, he that asserts the King the supreme
Magistrate, reaches the sense of that oath, which makes him supreme
Governor. Therefore I need fear no humane penalties against perjurie, for
this; No, Doctor, I hope once, the Lord will not hold him guilty, will more
make me dread perjurie, then all other penalties.

Parag. 3. you say, I clip his Majesty's wings, and say that the supremum jus
Dominij, which is above laws, figere, and refigere, is not in the King, to say
it is in him, is in our State a manifest error. What Is become of the oath of
Supremacy then (say you)? Safe enough say I, The King remains still supreme
Governor; he is said to be only so in government, which notes execution of
laws, and so does the phrases Ecclesiastical and Civil; but (you say) in your
estate it is no error. Sure Sir, in King Charles his Kingdom of England it is
an error; in which assertion, I should not have been so peremptory at first,
nor now, had I not received this light from his own pen, in his answer to the
Parliaments 19. Propositions, sent to him in Yorkshire; where first, he tells
them, that the experience, Col. of Remonst. and page 320. 321.
and wisdom of their Ancestors, has so molded our government, out of a
mixture of all the three, viz. absolute Monarchy, Aristocracy, and Democracy,
as to give to this Kingdom, as far as humane providence can provide the
conveniences of all three, without the inconveniences of any one, etc. And then
a little after. In this Kingdom, the laws are jointly made by a King, by an
House of Peers, and by an House of Commons, chosen by the people, all having
free votes and particular privileges. The government, according to these laws,
is trusted to the King, etc.

Have not I now followed my copy right? the supreme power to make laws, is
Aristocrati, call in three States, free to vote, and the King the supreme
Magistrate to execute laws. One would think, if this would not make you blush
for what is past, yet it may stop your mouth for future; and I need not say no
more on this point; yet I will give a little touch to show the vanity of your
flourishes.

Your Parag. 4. Is a mere flash, attended with the sparkles of light calumnies;
For I have not made one of two, I yet leave one absolute Supaemacie, as you
confess in the next parag. the Supremacy to make and unmake laws. This is
neither in King, nor Houses apart, but conjoined.

Here then we are fallen back to one Supremacy. Why did you then trifle so
much about two? But this (say you) is to skip from Monarchy to Aristocracie;
just as his Majesty has told you, in this government there is a mixture; its
Aristocratical in Legis lation, Monarchical for execution; and therein is the
excellency of it; the one being fittest for Law-making by solidity; the other
for execution by celeritie; and yet this D.D. jeers, as though this was never
seen before, because he wanted eyes: But now comes a precious one. He believes
it well appears, That supremacy over all Laws, to make or disanul them, is in
the King alone, at the Petition of both Houses. Ridiculum caput; for its as
much as to say, its in the King alone with the help of others; a notorious
Bull. That power is in a man alone which he can execute without the concurrence
of others; but this the King cannot do, without the Houses manifesting their
consent, and desire by Petition. Besides, have you forgot the statute, your
self quoted, page 85? That no Act of Par liament be passed by any Sovereign of
this Realm, or any other authority whatsoever, without the advice and consent
of the three Estates of the Kingdom, etc. Oportet te esse memorem.

But you will come to Scriptures, Fathers, and modern Authors, as Parag. 6.
'Peter ascribes supremacy to the King, 1 Pet. 2.13, 14. But that is clearly,
as I have said, as Supreme Magistrate, to whom others are subordinate, and this
admonition must be with limitation too, where Kings are supreme. You do not
think that the Apostle does level all Kings, and give them all one equal
supremacy; No, the Apostle had no power, nor would not attempt, to alter the
constitution of Nations. Now Grotius will tell you; some Kings are not supreme.
Those of Athens were under the power of the people, those of Lacedemon, under
the Ephori. See Grot. de jure bell. and pac. lib. 1. cap. 2. parag. 8. The
sentences out of Fathers, which you quote, parag. 6, and 7. speak of absolute
Monarchs, which you ignorantly, or flatteringly, say ours is; but our King
denies it, calling our government, a mixture of all the three, and a regular
Monarchy, Collect. of Declar. etc. page 320. 321. And that sentence cited by
you out of Grotius will confute you; That's the supreme civil power, cujus actus
alterius juri non subsunt. Whose acts are not subject to another man's censure;
For those acts that any do by the Kings authority, are the Kings acts; and the
Parliament has power to disanul these acts, and punish these agents, as the
King informs, Collect. of Remonstr. page 321. to show, the compleatness of
our government. Our Law indeed (says the king) can do no wrong; that is, he
cannot work, but by Agents: and the law takes no notice of him in it, but of
the Agents, to punish them.

But you proceed, Parag. 8. I ^^ow (say you) you rely more upon the laws of
the Land then upon the Word of God. But I believe therein you speak against
your conscience; what you produce, that the king is the supreme Head, is no
more then what I ascribe to him, to be supreme Magistrate, and in that he is
alone, and the head one; and therefore the Bull of two Supremacies, you speak
of, is but a Calf of your own fancy.

What you say, Parag. 9, 10. 13. Touching the Parliament being subjects, and
petitioning to him as subjects, and that Bills are not in force without him. I
confess: but these only deny that supremacy in the Parliament, which I never
asserted: but do not assert the supremacy in the king, to make, or un-make
laws, without them. Therefore all this is trifling.

Par. 11. You ask, What supremacy can be in that Court, that cannot lawfully
Convene, till the King summonthem? There is this; The supremacy of a Court, as
you confess, to be the supreme Court; that is, there is no appeal from them,
but appeals from all Courts to them: and you know, they can reverse decrees in
Courts, which the King cannot; he can pardon, not reverse sentences. They can
reverse Verdicts but not pardon offenders.

You add Parag. 12. The King is to regulate them for the time. I acknowledge it:
this Parliament only excepted, by a particular Statute, made in this
Parliament with the Kings assent. And for the manner, The king himself says,
they are free, and have privileges of their own. For the great Lawyers
judgment, you speak of, in Richard the 2. time, That if any in Parliament
proceed upon other Articles, or in other manner then is limited by the King,
etc. they are to be punished as Traitors.

I wonder, you will mention it, since that great Lawyer was flattering
Tresilyan, who by such ill Counsel helped to overthrow his Sovereign: and in a
Parliament, held in the 13, year of Richard 2. was for this, by the Lords in
Parliament, condemned to be hanged, drawn, and quartered, which was presently
executed on him, as our Historians show.

Your Collections, Par. 14. were disproved before: what you say ' for the Kings
regulating Courts of justice. You mistake, the Law is their rule, and that
regulates them, which if they transgress, he may punish them: but the law they
are sworn to follow, against any private instructions of his; that's clearly
known.

You sum up your arguments, Parag. 15. But they are all short of your
conclusion: for they conclude not against the Parliaments being a supreme
Court, which is all I assert, and you confess in the following page: Nay, in
this page, parag. 17. and what you have, parag. 16. 17. 18. 19. 20. Are
superfluous: For they only concludet he King to be supreme Magistrate, but
exclude not the Parliament from being the supreme Court: you say, but yet it is
the Kings Court. I deny it not; I deny him only to be above it, in the
capacity of a Court, though it sit by his writ. Therefore all you do here, is,
but lis de lana caprina, mere trifling.

And as captious a conceit is that, that you conceive not They have power to
make and alter laws at pleasure; for there is great danger in altering laws
without urgent cause. Who doubts it? What need you prove it? But to make up
want of proof in things to be proved? Who knows not, that wisdom and
moderation in Law makers, is to regulate that power that they may put forth
upon any, that they put it not forth, but upon just occasion?

Parag. 22. You infer, If the King cannot do any thing against the legal rights
of others, so nor Parliaments. True; they ought not to overruled or alter the
rights of other, but for the public good; but for that they may; you know
there were many had legal rights in offices in Star Chamber, and yet for
public good, the King condescended to a Bill of abrogation.

Parag. 23. You tell us, ' The King is above law. That is, say you, Common Law.
But this is your fiction; for the King says, he is a regular Monarch, that is
regulated by laws, so in a sense, under them. The common custom of our Nation
is, that actions may be commenced against the King at the Common Law; therefore
you speak against experience, in saying, that the king is above the Common Law;
which appears also, in that the Judges of the Common, as well as Statute Law,
are sworn not to deny, or delay justice to any, for any Letter, or Prohibition
of the king. And though his taking the Parliament into the joint assistance of
making laws, makes not them supreme: yet it hinders that supremacy of
laws-making from being solely in him, since he can do nothing without them.

For Parag. 24. I would not brand you, nor delude the people, as you object;
But only seek to give a rational sense of the kings oath, which they that
oppose, brand themselves. I did believe, what I expres'd in my good conceit of
the present Bishops tenderness to preserve the King from hazard; but if they
be all of your mind, I see I am deceived for; let the Crown, or life of king,
sink or swim, he shall have no consent from you to enlarge his conscience, to
consent to abolish Episcopacie, for the safeguard of either.

For Parag. 25. 26. I desire no more, then that the king should give every one
his own, preferring the public before any private. I confess the kings
readiness to confirm Bills, such and so large, as never were the like; but yet
I know, and you know, what danger the king and land has been, and is in, for
want of consent to let down Episcopacie: And in this exigent wherein we are, by
the corruption of man, I humbly give my advice, to promote Peace, and prevent
much of that blood, and misery, which for want of peace still continues; and
threatens worse to the Church (I confess) then either the want or presence of
Bishops.

But your Sun must set under a Cloud, and therefore, Parag. 17. you tell me, He
that slays a Prelate, to whom he owes faith and obedience, its Treason: you
amplify, If it be Treason to kill a Prelate, then how much greater to kill
Prelacy. Negatur Argumentum, egregie D. D. It follows not; for he that kills a
Bishop, kills a man, and he has Gods Image stamped on him. But Episcopacy, as I
have showed, is but (...), an inhumane creature; so he may be removed
regularly, without any injury to God. Besides, you consider not that Bishop is
a concrete word, including a man and Episcopacy, Concretum relativum, as the
Logicians call it. But Episcopacie is an abstract: your similitude only holds
thus, as it were worse to kill the species, then one man; so to abolish
Episcopacy, then to degrade one Bishop; If either were evil. But, in a regular
way, I have showed you, both are good; therefore, as I fear not your law, so I
doubt not of Gods approbation, being conscious to my sincere intentions, for
the good of King and kingdom, in it.

For your Conclusion, Parag. Vlt. I must mind you, that it cannot be better
then the Pr^mises, Conclusio sequitur deteriorem partem. Therefore I may
conclude, That would the abolition of Episcopacy make our peace, put an end to
blood, rapine, misery: The king may with safety and approbation do it. But if
God be not pleased to persuade his heart so far; If that moderation that he
would bring them to, would satisfy others: I think, as the case stands, they
may do innocently, and commendably, to close with him. Yea, I think, those, who
upon a serious consideration of the overflowing of all sin, with an high hand,
shall yield first; (that some government may be settled in the Church, Laws
recover their power in the Commonwealth, sin be prevented, Justice and amity
revived) they will be most acceptable to God, and ought to be so with men.

Deo gloria. Finis

Postscript.
THe sentence, you, after all, cite out of Doctor Burges, I may not pass over.
Observe the plagues of such men, as are never touched with the miseries of
others: They commonly fall under the same judgments which others, unpitied,
have tasted before. I thank God, this touches not me; for I have neither
caused, nor been senceless of the miseries of others. But have not many poor
Ministers been silenced, turned out of all, for things that others counted
trifles, and might have forborne them in, but they scrupled at as sins, and
could not submit? And have they not past unpitied by many Prelates and
Prelatical men? I speak not of my own Diocesan, whom I found most pitiful, and
would not be slack to requite it, with active sympathy, upon good opportunity.
But Doctor, you know what pity you vouchsafe them in this Treatise. Nothing
but Schismatics, and Heretics, justly ejected, etc. Therefore now, with
Joseph's Brethren, consider how you have been in a fault concerning your
Brethren, Genesis 42.21.22. and give glory to God, that he may lift you up, which
I heartily wish and beg of God; and so Doctor, fare you well.

Errata.
PAge 17. line 17. read officers. page. 18. line 24. dele and, p. 21 l, 10. chapter
p. 24. put in the margin against line. 7, 8, 9. Apol. cap. 39. p. 37. l. 31.
dele or. p. 49. l. 25. r. by. p. 61. in title of the 6. chapter for
explanations, r. exclamations. p. 70. l. 2. for me, r. men, p. 75. l. 14. for
can r, cannot, p. 95. l. 17. for one, r. me. p. 100. l. 2. for cause, r. casse.
p. 104. l. 24. for uncivil, r. civil. p. 106. l. 16. r. This must, arises. p.
112. l. 28. r. diminishing. p. 114. l. 20. r. (...), p. 116. l. 9. r. is, So
Episcopacy. p. 119. l. 18. read summus.


