THE DEFENSE OF THE Parliament of England IN THE CASE of JAMES the II.

OR, A TREATISE OF REGAL POWER AND OF THE Right of the PEOPLE, Drawn from
Ancient Councils, the Determinations of Wisemen, and more especially from the
Ordinances of the Doctors of the Church of ROME, as also from Reasons fetched
from the Law of Nature and of Nations.

Wherein is demonstrated that the Holy Scriptures are so far from being
contrary, that they do even assent thereto.

Written in Latin by P. Georgeson Knight. Translated by S. Rand.

LONDON: Printed, for Timothy Goodwin, at the Maidenhead, over against St.
Dunstans-Church in Fleet Street MDCXCII.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
A Man would think the Brevity and the Nature of this small Treatise, which is
composed of nothing else but Testimonies, Examples and Demonstration, should
have saved me the trouble to prefix a Preface before it, which usually being
nothing else but an extract of what is most useful in any Work, it did seem
supersluous in this place; but because, the Reader, at the first View, and
before he has read it quite over, might have found some things, defective in
the Order, and the Nature of the Proofs I have made use of, I perceive my self
obliged to render a Reason of both in this Preface; as for the Order or Method
it would, without doubt, have seemed more natural to begin these Proofs at the
Holy Scripture, and to have continued them by Reasons fetched from the Law of
Nature and of Nations, and at last to have concluded with the Testimonies of
the learned in all Ages of Christianity. I have taken a Course quite contrary;
and the Reason of it is, that the Holy Scriptures having determined nothing
positively nor precisely touching this matter; but has left the Law of Nature
and that of Nations in full force and virtue, without meddling with, or
infringing them, which I intend to make appear in refu^ing the Reasons which
those of a contrary Opinion, endeavor to draw from them, under pretense that
they every where teach humility and patience. Now every one knows that the
refuting of an Adversaries Proofs ought evermore to follow, and not to precede
the Thesis which one maintains. I have also made the Testimonies and Examples
to go before the Arguments, as being proofs, much more obvious and more popular
than those of mere speculation, being very sure that what has been always
believed and practiced, is generally the mind and sentiment of all Mankind, and
not that of some particular Persons. I have also had another reason for doing
this, which is that finding some examples, in ancient Records, running exactly
parallel with what has so lately happened in great Britain.

Now a word or to do must be spoken touching the Nature and Validity of the
Testimonies which I have related. At first sight a Protestant may be against
those Testimonies the Church of Rome brings in, either by her Counsels, or by
her particular Doctors, nay, and if he have but a pique against, and be but
never so little discontent with the alterations that have been made in this
Country, he will presently cry out against such like Authorities, and will not
be able to endure, that the Reformed should make use of them; his impatience is
rather an effect of his passion, then of a right discerning of the Truth; and
for to convince him that it is so, he needs do no more but to make these
Observations with me upon the Councils which I have alleged. First, That they
did not consist of Ecclesiastical Persons alone, as do those of the later Ages;
but of all the States of that Nation wherein they were assembled, and that all
their determinations and decisions (more especially in State Affairs) derived
all their Power and Authority, from the Power politic; their Decrees for the
most part being published under the King's Name, who almost ever assisted at
it, in Person; Together with the Grandees of the State, as may appear by the
Council of Toledo, I have quoted. Secondly, Although there was already a great
many errors and abuses in the Latin Church, yet for all that, it was then the
true visible Church, being it made use of no other Creed but that of the
Apostles and the Nicene, as one may see in the National Counsels of Spain, and
especially in that of Toledo, where they rehearsed always the Nicene Creed as
the Foundation and Arbidgement of the Faith of the Church; and by the way, that
I may speak my thoughts what has given the Mortal blow to the Latin Church, I
think it has been the Addition which Pious the IV. made of his own profession
of Faith to this Creed, for that very time, those who had tender Consciences or
any sense of Christianity, could not digest their being obliged by Oath to
believe all those impious and profane Additions, sincerely, and firmly, as the
Fundamental Truths of Religion.

The 3d. Observation that we are to make, is touching the Discipline of the
Latin Church; which, as well as its Doctrine were not by far so much corrupted
as they were in the Ages succeeding: Although the Peopes, Leo and Gregory the
two first of that Name, did very much enlarge the Philacteries of the Roman
High Priest, Yet, had they not set themselves up for Sovereign Arbitrators, and
Umpires of Divine and Human Rights; besides, the Opinion of the Infallibility,
had not then so much as entered into the mind of Man, so that these
determinatons and definitive Sentences of the Counsel, are much more juridical
and more suiting with the Order God has established in his Church, and indeed
deserve a great deal more respect and consideration then those of the Counsels
of the last Ages. Particularly, since the first Oecumenique Counsel of Lateran,
wherein things began to be regulated only according to the Fantasy of the
Popes, and not according to Scripture, nor Reason.

Now as for the particular Doctors of the Roman Church, I have not pretended
that they should be a Rule to the Reformed in this matter, but only indirectly,
that is to say, I do make appear by that, that all Christians have held the
same Principle, for one cannot deny but that the Reformation may have been
settled upon this Foundation; that the Power of Princes over their Subjects, is
not Absolute, neither in Spirituals or Temporals, there having been several
People who have shaken off the Yoke of their old Masters for the sake of
Religion, and not any People but would have done the same, if they had but had
power so to do, at such time as they had to do with a Sovereign, who went about
to oppress them.

In speaking my mind sincerely and freely as I have done of the Power of
Sovereigns, and of the Rights of the People, I have made no incroachment or
attempt upon the lawful Power of Kings, God forbid I should, there is not a Man
in the World more convinced, or more fully persuaded of the pre-eminence and
excellency of Monarchical Government above all others then my self, at such
time as it confines it self within its just limits. No Man of judgment will
ever condemn any sort of Government whatsoever, when is it settled, and is
agreeable to the Humor and Genius of the People.

What I have advanced that touches them the most to the quick is taken from a
Sermon, that Gerson Chancellor of the University of Paris, Preached before King
Charles the VI. and the Dolphin who found no fault with it.

If I have defended the Conduct and Proceeding of the Parliament of England, it
is because they have changed the Governor only, but not the Government; and
that it had substituted in the room of an Oppressor, a pious, just, and wise
Prince. Nay, and a Prince too, who was rightful Heir to the Crown, whom they
went about to dispoil and divest of his Rights, by a certain fraudulent way
never heard of in any Age.

Some may be apt to say, that this Treatise would have come more seasonably
three Years ago, then now, I grant that, but I had not then the opportunities
and helps I met with since, which were absolutely necessary for me, nay, I must
confess I had not so much as thought of it, had it not been for an insipid and
impudent French Book which has made a great Noise in the World; it is called,
Advis aux Refugiez, the impertinent Scribler of this Libel, by establishing
Absolute Power in a gross manner, which smells more of his Pension, then of
Love for Truth, has wickedly charged all those of his Nation of Rebellion, who
did not blindly obey the Will of their King, and involves the English Nation in
the same, if not in a greater for loving its Religion and its Laws. I was
moreover confirmed in my Design, by the reading of a posthumons Piece of Richer
Dr. of Paris, which was published the last Year, as well as the other, and upon
the same Accunt. I have in compiling this Piece, been more solicitous about
things, than words; and that is the Reason why one will scarce find in it any
Ornaments, but such as do naturally arise from the subject Matter: whether I
have succeeded well in the Design, I have propounded to my self, I leave that
to the Readers judgment; I will assure him only that I have been exceeding
faithful in whatsoever I have reported from the Authors I have quoted.

The Defense of the Parliament of England, in the Case of JAMES the Second.
NExt to the Questions that are conversant about Faith, there is not any one of
greater consequence we meet with, that falls under debate, than that Question
touching Regal Power; for it highly concerns the Public to understand whether
or no it be limited and circumscribed by humane Laws, or is to be accounted
supreiour to them all. It will be therefore worth our while, especially in this
new unexpected Conjuncture and change of the British Affairs, that have so much
astonished the World, to attempt some discourse of it exactly and succinctly.
But now to decide each Controversy that may arise concerning Regal power, as
well by divine as humane Rights, nothing seems more to the purpose, than to
begin with the Authority Ecclesiastical, tempered and allayed with the Civil,
for since it consists of both Rights, it deservedly holds the first place, and
amongst humane Authorities is looked upon as the greatest. Come on then, as
Studiers of brevity, laying aside any further preamble, let us hasten to the
matter in hand.

CHAP. I. Decrees of several Councils, whereby the Regal Power is
Circumstantiated and Bounded within its Limits.
THe Fourth Council of Toledo assembled out of Ecclesiastical From Binius.
Conc. Tolet. 4. c. 74.
persons and States of the Realm, Anno 633. which is named by the Spanish
Councils, The Grand and General Council, concerning Kings, that shall hereafter
succeed; We Enact and Decree this Sentence, ^aith the Council, that if any
amongst them, contrary to the respect due to the Laws, out of an haughty
arbitrary ambition to Lord it over his Subjects, shall assume and exercise
Cruelty and Tyrannical power, and shall abandon himself to unjust and vicious
excesses, and shall exercise cruelty over his People; Let him be condemned by
the Sentence of Anathema from our Lord Christ, and may be receive judgment and
condemnation from God, for as much as he has presumed to act wickedly, and to
bring the Kingdom to ruin and destruction: But as for Simithilana, who dreading
his own evil courses, has abdicated By others Cintillanus.
and forsaken his Kingdom, and divested himself of Regal Authority, It is by
and with the consent of the Nation Decreed, That we will never admit him or his
Wife, by reason of the exorbitant mischiefs they have committed, no nor his
Sons into our Unity or Communion; nor over advance or promote them at any time
to those Dignities and Honors from which they by their iniquity have lapsed
and fallen.

It Is to be observed, that this Convention or Synod composed of the States of
the Nation, or rather of the whole Nation in general, do, in the Synod put
Kings in mind of their duty, and withal do exert their power upon
male-administratours, and that not in words only but in truth and effect, as
evidently appears by the example of Simithiliana* between whom and King James
there is a most wonderful and particular resemblance, as also an exact
conformity and agreement between the Synod and Act of Parliament.

The Sixth Council of Toledo, assembled of Ecclesiastical persons VI. Conc.
Toled. c. 3.
and States of the Nation, An. 676. a Law of King Chintilanus about banishing
the Jews out of the Realm, being introduced with commendations annexed, the
Synod adds these words, But this is by us with all care and diligence to be
established, least the heat and energy of it, and our labor should abate, and
prove of none effect in our Posterity, wherefore by an unanimous consent of
heart and tongue, together with the consent of his Peers, and mature
deliberation of the Nobility, we decree and enact, That whosoever in future
Ages shall chance to be entrusted with the supreme management of the Realm,
shall never aseend the Regal Throne, before, amongst other obligations, and
solemn Oaths of conditions to be performed, he shall promise and declare, that
he will vever suffer the Jews to violate the Catholic Faith; moreover, that by
no manner of ways he shall be abetting to their treachery, or induced by any
neglect or covetousness, shall open the way to their prevaricating, who run
headlong to down right Paganism and Infidelity; but what is most aimed at and
desired in our time, is, that he should remain untainted and blameless for the
future, for in vain is it to do good, if perseverance in the same be not
provided for, wherefore at such time as, conformable to the said order he shall
be admitted and have access to the Throne to hold the reins of Government, if
he shall prove to be a violator of this promise, let him be Anathama,
Maranatha, from the presence of the everlacting God, and may he afford fuel to
everlasting Fire; yea, of the like punishment be any one of the Clergy or any
Christian whomsoever who shall be involved in his error be thought worthy:

By the Law of the Fiefs and Feudaries, which contain also Empires and
Kingdoms, a Vassal does not owe feality or service to his Lord once
excommunicated, nay he, is even absolved of his Oath of Allegiance, as may be
seen in Lib. 2. Feudor. Tit. 28. S. 1.

In this Decree of the Senate we meet with two things observable. First, That
the King is obliged by an Oath not to permit the Catholic Faith to be violated
or infringed; the other is, That in case he shall be found a violator of this
same p^omise, that he shall incur the censure of Anathema, lie and all his
accomplices and adherents. Both these do run exactly parallel with the case of K.
James, for he promised, when he came to the Crown, That he would not suffer the
Religion of the Church of England to be violated by the Papists, whose
banishment out of the Kingdom had been oftentimes debated; he stood not to his
word, nay he shows himself a Ring leader; and authoriser of such who
endeavored might and main the subversion of the said Religion, he is therefore
made justly sensible of the Parliaments severity in discarding and disowning
him. By this Deree it is likewise prohibited that none shall ascend the Regal
Chair except he be a Catholic: The same Synod, C. 17. adds moreover, Unless by
his demeanor and good conversation he be thought fit and worthy to be advanced
to Regal authority, much more unless he be judged fit, upon the account of his
orthodox Religion. This does very much countenance and justify the Parliaments
proceedings in their Act, whereby it is expressly provided, that none shall
ascend the Throne, except he be a favourer at least of the Church of England:
Now it will not be amiss to hear K. Beccesuinthus in the Eighth Toledo Council,
confessing, that the unrully desires of Kings had need of being checked and
restrained, who signed and ratified this Law for himself and Posterity, Since
then in the Ages successively last past, the immoderate unbounded covetousness
of Kings has Eighth Synod of Toledo, a Law of King Beccesuinthus enacted.
extended it self to the spoils and encroachments upon the people, and that the
lamentable Imposition, and burdensome Taxes have much augmented their lawful
Revenues, at length it is revealed to us by divine Inspiration, that seeing we
prescribe Laws and Statutes of respect and obedience to be observed by the
Subjects, it is meet we should, set some bounds of restraint and temperance to
the vicious excesses of Princes: Moreover out of our princely clemency and
after due consideration, as well for our selves as for all those who shall
succeed us in our glory, we, by Gods assistance do enact a Law, and do publish
and declare, that no King upon any private motive or impulse, or by any
Faction, shall take away by force, or cause to be taken away, any writings or
deeds concerning any thing due to another, so that he may prove himself
unjustly to be Lord of, and lay claim to the things so due to them.

K. James offended against this Law, when following his brother Cha. II. his
steps he vsolently by Quo Waranto, deprived Citizens of their Charters, and did
in a manner wholly cancel and disannul the Privileges and Immunities of the
Nation: King Beccesuinthus was not of these Opinions that Kings were Lawless,
who enacted a Law for himself and his successors.

Let us on the other hand return to the Synod prescribing VIII. Synods
Universal Decree in the Name of the Prince.
Laws to Kings, From hence; says the Synod, may Kings convince Men that all
things is owing to them, and depends on them, when they govern all things
wisely: whence they doubt not but that these things are due not to their Person
but to their Power and Dominion, it is Rights that make a King, not his Person,
for to be King does not so much consist in the ordinary meanness of personal
qualities, as in his honor and sublime grandeur, the things then that are due
to honor, are assistant to honor, and what Kings heap up and amass they leave
to the Kingdom, that forasmuch as the glory of the Kingdom casts a Luster upon
them, so they likewise do not imbezle or diminish the Kingdoms glory but render
it more glorious; besides it is requisite, that those who are constituted Kings
should have minds full of care in ruling, in acting with a great deal of
moderation, in decreeing righteous judgment, in sparing and having a tender
regard to such who are willing to obey, in procuring sew parties, in siding
with fewer. A little below that, Whilst the vastness of the propriety of
Princes includes all in the Bosom of its receivings, and nothing but the
Princely Belly is stuffed, all the rest of the Members of the Nation drained and
exhausted, languish and decay for mere lack of sustenance, from whence it comes
to pass, that neither the Commonalty can receive any succor and assistance,
neither can great ones maintain their dignity, because whilst the force of
Power has seized on all, the State of the Commonal^y are not in a condition to
defend the least Rights, the Synod do very warily and discreetly prescribe to
Kings their duty, and do withal neatly decypher to us a Kingdom ruled by a
Tyrant, such an one as is not to be found in this World.

The Spaniards grown weary of King Wamba's Government, shut him up nolens
volens in a Monastry to do penance, and compelled him to elect Ervigius Grandee
of Spain, taking no notice of Theofredus his Son; the XII. Synod. Toledo. c. 2.
to. ward the end. Salmat* is mistaken, who in defense, R. C. 4. p. 144. Printed
1652. affirms that Pope Zacharius was the first who absolved People from the
Oath of Allegiance, since that was done by this Synod seventy Years before
Zacharias, who lived seventy Years, who lived about the middle of the eighth
Century.
Twelfth Synod of Toledo was held on purpose to confirm this Ervigius, Anno
682. and this is the Language of the Synod, And by that means the Peoples hands
were loosed from all Bonds and Obligations of an Oath, which, during the Reign
of the said Wambal, were kept fast tied, paying duty and allegiance only to
this Prince Lrvigius, being at liberty, by all demonstrations of acceptable
homage, whom the very Divine Decree had foreordained to the Kingdom, and the
kind and courteous People in general wished for; wherefore these things
considered, and in acknowledgment of this favor we are to serve none but God
alone, and our King Ervigius, and we are to be obedient to him, and devoted
entirely to his Will, let us then perform with a ready mind, and without
reserve endeavor to do whatsoever may conduce to the welfare and security of
his Royal Person, whatsoever may promote the real Interest of him and his
Country.

Now must we hear Ervigius himself accosting and bespeaking the Fathers of the
Synod, For this in general I beg of you, says he, that whatsoever does not
comport with the Laws of our glory, if there be any thing that may seem
contrary to justice and equity, it may be rectified by your good disposition,
meekness and judgment: The XIII. Toled. Synod. Flavius Ervigius to the Holy
Fathers.
same Ervigius how much he esteemed the decrees of these Councils abundantly
shows in the Thirteenth Toledo Synod, which he Harangues after this manner, for
it is as clear as the Sun at Noonday, that whatsoever the sacred Assembly of
Prelates has thought fit to be observed, is by the special grace of the Holy
Ghost ordained and prefixed and settled to all eternity, and is inviolably to be
observed. I beseech you therefore, and conjure you, the whole Assembly of
reverend Prelates, and you most excellent Princes and Peers, who by your homage
and duty to the Court are obliged to sit in this sacred Assembly, I command
you, I say, by the Mystery of the holy Trinity, that if there be any thing
before you shall be judged needful to be decreed, or repealed, as well what by
us has been offered to your consideration, as also what else may have come to
your hearing on behalf of the People, that you would be careful to decide and
clear it with an unanimous vigor of justice accompanied with a due proportion
of mercy.

Ervigius behaves himself before the Synod with abundance of modesty, who
humbly implores their justice and mercy, and laying aside all lostiness of
mind, sensible of his own in abilities to undertake such a charge, submits
himself to its censure. We do not find it so now a days; no, no; but now you
must take notice, that the asorementioned Spanish Kings were of the Gothic
Race, but as to their Religion having renounced Arianisme, they became sound
and orthodox from the time of Ricared: they had likewise won the Kingdom of
Spain by force of Arms, and the ^ight got by di^t of Sword is accounted the
best Title by your Civilians. Now let us proceed to the French.

The first that presents himself is Childeric. the 3 d. the very last Mezeray
in the ^ life of Child. the 3 d.
of the M^rovingian Race, who was deposed by the Parliament and hurled into a
Monastry. Now there were present in this Parliament diverse Bishops, amongst the
rest was Boniface a Bishop of Mentz of great reputation, who set the Crown on
Pepin's Head, who was put in the place of Childeric.

No body can be ignorant of that notable Story of Lewis the Idem in the life
Lewis the pious.
pious Son to Charles the Great, who in the Synod of Compeign, composed of
Bishops and Peers of the Realm, Anno 833. was tumbled from his Throne and
forced into a Monastry. Synods in those days were made up usually of the Clergy
and the States of the Nation, which was much the best way, especially in
general Councils, for it is certain that for the most part the covetousness and
ambition of the Clergy commonly corrupt both Divine and Human right.

Nor after what manner the Capetians were by consent of all the French
substituted in the Room of the Carlovingians; and how Lewis the Eleventh was
surrounded with thirty six Commissioners, without whose Advice he could not
govern the Common wealth, as known to all, we omit.

But what on this Subject is beyond all exception, and may stop the Mouth of
the Patrons of Tyranny, is the Consent of all the Christian Princes in the
Convention of Arras: The business thus, Charles the Seventh, whilst he was but
yet Dolphin, commanded John, Father to Philip Duke of Burgundy traitorously to
be assassinated, thereupon a bloody War arose between the two Princes; but at
length by the mediation and procurement of the Counsel of Basil and Pope
Engenius, a Council was called, and held at Arras for composing Differences,
whereunto the noblest part of Europe had resort. It was says Mezeray the
noblest and greatest of that Age, thither did all Christian Princes (except
King Henry of England, who disputed the Crown of France with Charles,) send
their Agents and Plenipotentiaries, and Eugenius his Ambassadors: A Peace being
once clapped up between the two Princes, it was covenanted and agreed upon, that
if either of the two Princes should not stand to their words, but violate the
Articles of Agreement, that then his Subjects, absolved of their Oaths, might
lawfully send Succors to another Prince against the breaker of the Covenant:
here you may plainly see that all Princes do unanimously agree in absolving
Subjects of their Oaths of Allegiance; besides you may see that a Vassal does
covenant with his Lord upon equal Conditions, for Philip was Vassal to Charles:
So much the more is the simplicity of those to be laughed at, who dare affirm
that Princes are not so much as bound by Oath to their Subjects for performance
of the Articles of a Treaty, when God himself is obliged to fulfill his
promises, the Lord has sworn, and will not repent, and the holy Scriptures
Psalm. 110. 4. Heb. 6. 16.
declare that all controversies are decided by an Oath; as if Princes were
obliged to resemble God Almighty in respect of his power, and not in respect of
his faithfulness and veracity; But not to deviate too much from our present
purpose; If it were lawful for Subjects to levy War against their Prince, for
violating his word past to a Foreiguer, I cannot see why it should be deemed an
heinous offense to spurn and resist Tyranny, when they themselves are galled
and oppressed. The British History likewise furnishes us with a long series
of Examples of this Nature, but too great a Prolixity, especially in matters of
themselves, otherwise plain and evident, is tedious and troublesome: Let one
therefore, and that very considerable in its self suffice, which is this: John
surnamed Sans terre, or without Land, King of England and Duke of Britain
standing excommunicate by Pope Innocent the III. and his Subjects absolved from
their Oath of Allegiance, the Kingdom of England was devolved upon Philip the
August. Now Philip relying upon this donation of the Pope, having fitted out a
huge Navy, was just ready to fall upon and Invade England; when John by his
submission and obsequious compliance, regained the Pope's favor. Neither did
Philip for all that desist from his enterprise, for he gave his Consent, that
the Nobility of England should choose Lewis his Son, Husband to Jone K. John's
Niece for their King, and should Crown him in London accordingly; the Matter
proceeded to Suit and Trial before the Pope, still a great favourer of John:
the Ambassadors of Lewis who solioited his Cause at Rome, mainly urged that
John was never Liege King, because he was condemned by the Peers of France to
have his Head cut off, for the Murder committed on the person of Arthur his
Nephew, moreover, that if he were a King, yet that he had notwithstanding
forfeited his Crown, by turning a Tyrant, and that it was Tyranny, as they
said, to subvertand destory the Regal Power, the death of John stops the
Proceedings, and ends the Difference, and his Son Henry placed in his stead:
Pray let the French take special notice of this Passage, who are out of humor
and ill satisfied at the last Revolution and Change of the British Empire, and
if they are wise, let them take warning whilst they may, by their own
consession. Tyranny quite overthrows Kingly Power, and it evidently appears by
their own Example, that the Throne of a Tyrant may justly and lawfully be
possessed by another, and in truth it was but just, that the Parliament should
serve James the II: with the same Sauce as the Peers did John, not coming at
all short of him in deserving to be dethroned, then again John did not go about
to subvert the Established Religion then in Force, nor did he sorsake the
Kingdom and fly to the sworn Enemies of the English Nation, add hereto, that
William and Mary had much a better Claim and Title to the Crown of England, as
being Heirs presumptive, then ever Lewis had, who was no presumptive Heir.

I can hardly forbear the adding to this Example, that acknowledgment of the
Authority of the Parliament by Richard the II, in his solemn surrender of his
Crown upon their Sentence: I refer the Reader as to this point to the English
Historians, more especially to Henry Knighton, Canon of Leicester, in his Book
De Eventibus Angliae, who has at large and exactly insisted upon this dreadful
deposing.

Yet I shall take notice of one thing not customary with Tyrants, to wit, that
Richard did own and acknowledge the Peoples right in punishing bad Princes, and
did allow himself incapable of governing.

CHAP. II. Wherein the Absolute Power and Authority of Emperors and Kings, by
the Testimonies and Opinions of several learned Men is opposed.
THere are not wanting an innumerable company of Examples in History, of Kings
banished from their Kingdoms for ill managment, yet I thought good to produce
none but such, by which it may plainly appear that a Tyrant may be dethroned
not only with a safe Conscience, but conscience even dictating and allowing the
same. It will not be amiss to add to these the Testimonies of Emperors and
Kings; together with the Sentiments and Opinions of some learned Men of the
Roman Church. The first that offers himself is the renowned Emperor Trajan,
who, when he presented a naked Sword to Sura, according to the custom, in
creating him Prefect of the Praetorium, take this, or such like, says he, and
use it for me, if I rule justly, if unjustly, use it against me; next come
Adrian none of the worst Emperors, who promised that he would so behave himself
in holding the Reins of Government, as one who knew that it was the Peoples
business that was committed to his charge: But let they Heathens hold their
peace, yet the Christian Emperors Theodosius and Valentinianus, utter such
Truths as deserve to be Engraven upon the Palaces, yea, rather upon the Hearts
of Princes; It is a Confession, say they, To Volusius Prefect of the
Praetorium.
worthy the Majesty of him that rules, to profess himself a Prince bound up by
the Laws, so much does our Authority depend upon the Law: And indeed it is
somewhat more than Empire and Sovereignty, to make the Govenment obedient and
subject to the Laws, and by this Edict, we do decree that whatsoever is not
lawful for our Subjects, we do not pretend it to be to lawful for us; this
saying is not unworthy of the Confessor neither, for it was the Law of King
Edward, named the Confessor, touching the Office of a King: That if a King fail
in his duty, the Name of King is no ways consistent with him.

Now let us have recourse to the Doctors of the Church of Rome, and Pope
Zacharias deservedly leads the Van, who returned this Answer to the French,
consulting him about Abdicating Childeric, afor^said; That a Prince was
accountable to a People, by whose favor he enjoyed the Crown, because
whatsoever he possesses, whether Power, Glory, Riches or Dignity, he must
needs grant that he is beholden to the Commonalty for the same; and that it was
in the Peoples power both to constitute and appoint a King over them, and also
to abandon him.

Aenaeas Sylvius follows next, who was Secretary to the Council of Basil, and
came afterward to be Pope under the Name of Pious the II. Aeneas Sylvius puts
two queries, The one is whether a General Council has Authority over the Pope;
the other, whether or no the Catholic Faith do enjoin the belief of it, which
two, says he, when I shall have examined and stated, there will be no place
Aen. Sylv. de gestis Council. Basil. l. 1. f. 4. in fasciculo rerum
Expeterdarium and faciendarum Pristinae Editionis.
for doubting afterward; but that the Pope ought to be subject to a General
Council, the Reason produced before by the Bishop of Burgos does excellently
prove, for a Pope is in the Church just as a King in the Kingdom, now to imagine
that a King can do more then the whole Kingdom together were absurd, therefore
the Pope should not have power to do more than the Church. But like as Kings
sometimes by reason of male Administration and exercising of Tyranny are
ejected, and by the whole Kingdom excluded, even so by the Church, that is to
say, by a General Council, may the Pope, without all question be deposed.

Now let us hear what Thomas Aquinas, that Prince of the Schoolmen, says,
When a Tyrannical Government, which is not T^o 2a. 2ae quest. 12. art. 22. at
the end.
ordered for common Good and Advantage, but for the private ends of the Person
reigning is not just, troubles and commotions Lappning in that State, does not
pass for Sedition, the same Thomas lays it 2a. 2ae. quest. 10. art. 10. and
quest. 12. 2.
down for a certain and undeniable truth, that Principalities and Dominions are
not jure Divino, but de Jure Humano.

John Gerson succeeds him in his Opinions, who was a Master of Arts of high
Repute and Authority with the French, in a Sermon of his to the King, in the
Name of the University of Paris, Even as, says he, according to natural
instinct, all the other Members expose themselves for the Health and Safety of
the Head, in like manner should it be in the Body politic with Loyal Subject,
in respect of their Sovereign; on the other side the Head should guide and
d^^ct the rest of the Members, otherwise distraction would ensue, for the Head
could not last long without the Body; this truth is point bl^nk c^ntrary to
those who venture to aver, though erroneous^y the the Lord does not hold of, or
is obliged to his subject in any thing whatsoever, which is both against Divine
Right and Natural Equity, and the Trust reposed in Dominion, for as the Subject
owes Faith and Allegiance, Service and Assistance to their Supreme Lord, so he
in authority owes Faith and Assistance to his Subjects. One good turn requires
another. According to some Doctors, the Sin of Lucifer consisted in this, That
he would Joan. Gerson edit. Paris 1606. fo. 79. 8. and sequent. art. Prima
veritas.
fain have d^mineered and ruled over all other Creatures, as God, without being
obliged to protect and defend, or do them any service. Afterward at the end of
the Article, he adds: And if so be, the Lord do not deal faithfully with them
as Subjects, neither will they treat him as their Lord, according to that
answer returned by Domitius to a certain Consul, if (says he) you will not
have me for a Senator, neither will I have you for a Consul.

The same Author adds, As nothing can appear to corporal sight Secund. Verit.
more cruel or terrible, or more to be abhorred and avoided, then to behold a
humane Body waste it self, or to tear it self in pieces, or otherwise, in like
manner it is no less cruelty to the Spiritual sight of reason, to behold the
Parts of the Body politic to be divided and persecure one another, as a
Sovereign his Subjects, and there is in effect, a persecution in this, when
they interfere and deprive one another of their Offices and Rights, for
naturally every thing depends and maintains its own right, and does repel a
violent Action done to it, by violence, Vim vi repellere licet, it is lawful to
give a Man as good as he brings, hence it is manifest that they are in the
wrong, who tell Lords that all is their own, and that they may do what they
please, and are uncontrollable and unaccountable if they assume and appropriate
to themselves without any just Title thereto, whatsoever appertains to the
Subject. But what is the meaning of this, that violence can do all things, and
what will follow from thence? why, the same inconvenience will follow, as if
the Head should attract to it self, all the Blood, Spirits, and Marrow, and
Substance of all the other Members, and what would be the event of this, but
that it must prove it is own ruin and destruction. And a little below that,
adds, I confess I don't understand whence this error proceeded, for to assert
this, would be to cause Men tamely to submit like Sheep, and set Superiors like
ravening Wolves over them, or to let fly Kites amongst Chickens.

Like as Poison kills the human Body, so Tyranny is a Poison and Tert. Ve^is.
Mischief that brings infallable ruin and destruction to not only the Body
politic, but to the Regal also; For a Tyrant who by hook or by crook
appropriates all to his own advantage is very unnatural, it being manifestly
contrary to Civil Society, of which Aristotle in the fifth Book of his
Politics has spoken more at large, and may be comprised in this Distich.

Pauca Sciant, de se diffidunt, sint and egeni,
Sic rege subditos dire Tyranne tuos.
A Tyrant would have his Subjects to know little, to mistrust themselves, and
to be indigent; this is extremely contrary to a right Regal Power, which
chiefly aims at this, that Subjects should be powerful, wise and knowing, etc.
for what worse thing could the Peoples mortal enemy, or even the infernal,
devise, then necessitate them to be poor and divided; one would much rather
choose to be without a Prince, than have such a one, as the Fable goes of the
Frogs, who had a Scorpion for a King, that devoured them all. And yet a little
further, again we conclude, says he, that if the Head, or any other Member of
Civil State should chance to fall into such an inconvenience, as to desire to
lick up this deadly poison of Tyranny, each Member in its particular Station,
should use his outmost endeavor to prevent and obviate the same by all
expedients convenient to that purpose. And a little further, And therefore the
Person who abuses it, meaning the Power aforementioned, is rightly served, if
he be div^sted of it. Wherefore it is plain these Men who presume to lead their
King or Prince into so foul an Error, or into a condition of Tyranny, deceive
them and are their very Enemies.

The same Author in his Ten Considerations against Flatterers VII. Consider.
of Princes, says, It is a mistake to say that a Prince is nothing beholding
to his Subject during his Reign, because it is agreeable as well to Divine
Right as to natural Equity and Justice, and also to the chief Intent and Design
of Dominion, that as the Subjects are to yield Fealty, Assistance by Taxes, or
otherwise, and homage to their Liege Lord, so likewise the Lord on his part ows
faith and protection. Nay, and if so be, the Prince in an obstinate manner
persist in his wronging and persecuting them de facto, then this natural rule
is Vim vi repellere licet holds good and takes place, as does that of Seneca in
his Tragedies also, Nulla adeo grata est victima quam Tyrannus: At the end of
this Consideration, he yet adds, therefore Kings, who in an Arbitrary manner,
exact such grievances call them their Rights, no otherwise than the Pagan Idols
are called Gods, not because they are indeed so, but because they are called so
by them,

Thus far the Chancellor of the University of Paris, then which nothing could
have been spoken more pithily and elegantly, or more seasonably to cur present
purpose, indeed it concerns both People and Princes, that Kings should be good
proficients in the School of so great a Master. There is one Man whom all
Europe knows is but a poor Scholar in it.

Now let that famous civil Lawyer Bartolus come out and In his Treatise of
Guelph and Gibellin.
speak his mind. It is a just Cause, says he, that would have a tyrannical
Government laid aside, and as a just cause that is for a just Regiment.

Some later Writers bring up the Rear Bellarm. Peron. Francise. Torrensis and
Hen. Holden. To suffer, says the first, an Heretical or a pagan infidel King,
endeavoring to bring Men over to his Sect, it is to expose Religion to evident
danger; and Christians are not Bellermin. in Exca sat. Bar claij ca. 22 in
princip.
obliged, nor ought to tolerate a King that is an Infidel when Religion lies
at stake, for when Divine Right seems to clash with the Human, then indeed we
must stick fast to the Divine Right omitting the other, but now it is of Divine
Right to maintain and pr^serve Religion and Faith, which is but one only and
not many, but it is of Human Right to have such, or such an one for King.

The same Author in another place thus delivers himself, For Ibidem in 3.
respons.
albeit, we ought to give obedience to a King, whilst he is a King; yet it is
not Jure Divino, that we should not abrogate or change the Constitutions of a
Kingdom, nor deprive a King of it let him do what he will. And again, I taught
you but just now, that when we have once this or that King set over us, we are
bound to obey him jure Divino so long as he sits upon the Throne, but that it
was not de jure Divino, that he should always, so long as he lives, sit on the
Regal Throne, for it may so come to pass, that either he himself may Abdicate
his Regal Power, or may be brought low, being overcome by some other King, or
may be deposed upon some other account, as for Heresy or the like, now by what
means soever he cease to be King, obedience and homage likewise cease to be
due to him: A Man would swear Bellermin had written these things on purpose
against King James's ca^e. Peronius comes next, who in a Speech of his he made
to the States General at Blois, maintains stiffly that a King may be discharged
from his Office, but, as well became a Parasite of the Pope, he leaves this
Game to be played by him, and not by the People whom he terms the Beast with
many Heads, as if a General Council, in whose power it is to depose a Pope,
even by the Confession of the Assertors of pontifical Tyranny, were not quite
as much a Beast with many Heads as the States General.

Torenfis also insisting upon the same Principles with Beliermin, says, He
that holds that the Authority of the Church is greater then Torrensis d^ sum.
Pontif supra co^^ilij auth^^itate.
that of a Pope, seems to me to mean nothing else but that the King of the
Church, whose Regal Power is derived not from the Human Law, as is that of a
secular King, but from the Divine Law, does not at all differ from a secular
King, who if he proves troublesome and pestilent, and a Tyrant may be deposed by
the Subject.

To both these aforesaid, does Henry Holden a Doctor of the Sorbon subscribe,
in a Book he ventured to publish at Paris, The Anal. divin. fidei. l. 2. c. 9.
corallar. de homine in so^ietate constitute.
short and long of it is, says he, considering that all Society co mence h
from contracts and covenants entered into between the People and the Sovereign
Power, of which Government and Discipline, Laws and Rules interchangeably
ratified and agreed upon by mutual consent, are the Foundation of the Society
or Community, as well as the Form and Life of it; manifest it is, that if
Supreme Authority shall command any thing oppugnant and contrary to the Laws,
and having a design to erect an Absolute and Arbitrary Power shall say, stet
pro ratione voluntas, my will shall stand for a Law, by that very thing his
Subjects are ipso facto freed and exempted from their obedience to such an ones
Orders and Declarations. What has been hitherto said concerning non Obedience,
may be also transferred to open Resistance; for upon the same account that
Subjects are dispensed from paying Obedience and Service to a Ruler, by the
same right it may be lawful for them to resist and withstand the same
Government; for when the Emperor or King shall exceed and go beyond the limits
and bounds of his Power, and shall design to force things upon his Subjects,
and compel and constrain them to wicked and unjust things contrary to divine,
natural, and human Laws, it is evident from the Premises that it may be, and
is lawful for Subjects in such Circumstances by the Law of Nature, by all ways
and means they can he think themselves of, to stand upon their guard for their
own defense, yea, and sometimes perhaps do lie under an obligation so to do.

I should disert and be wanting to my Cause, should I omit on this occasion the
Testimony of grave Didacus Savedra Faxardus Plenipotentiary of the House of
Burgundy, who acquitted himself with so much Applause in those several
Ambassies he undertook for Philip the IV. whose words are the more consp^c^ous
and remarkable, for that they were written for the Education of Charles the II.
reigning at this day in Spain, they run thus, Let the Prince know and
acknowledge the nature of his (...) 20.
power also, n^r let him look upon it so Supreme and Absolute, but that some
part thereof at least resides in the people, which at the first they had either
a mind to reserve to themselves, or else natural reason did grant it to them
for their own preservation and defense, against the unjust and manifest Tyranny
of the Prince. Good Princes do not take it much amiss that their Subjects
should enjoy some sort of Freedom or other none but Tyrants exercise Absolute
Power in Government, the Welfare and Prosperity of the Public, arises out of
the due mixture and temperament of public Liberty accompanied with the
Prince's Authority, and is thereby mainly secured; not a pu^ssant Prince, but a
just upright Prince is the safest, nay, and he never Ioseth any thing in his
Government, who does not violate and infring the Privileges of the Subject,
besides' it is the part of a prudent Prince to grant and concede the free
enjoyment of his Subjects Rights and Privileges, especially when nothing of
the Prince's Authority is lost by such concession, which, then only suffers
some damage when he goes about to cozen and bereave Subjects of their
Privileges: may it suffice a Prince to leave that Crown he received from his
Ancestors as he found it.

Paper and Ink would fail me, should I endeavor to trace Be^an in controver
Angl. p. 120. Edit. p^im. Joan. Albint 1612. Ma^ian. l. 1. de institut. Regis
c. 6.
all those who were possitive in the opinion and have assented thereto,
especially them of Loyala's Tribe, those Becanus's, Marianaes and Suarezes,
nay, and the whole Gang of the Regicides, I ^orbear to name, as being the
professed Enemies of Kings, and consequently unfit for Witnesses in this Matter.

The courteous Reader may easily pardon me too, though I should not summon in
the Doctors of the Reformed Church as S^ar. desenfidei Catholic. l 3. c. 3. and
lib. 6. c. 4.
witnesses of this Truth, who are the rather to be consided in, as being
greater Divines, and more happily versed in Sacred Writ then the Papists be.
Yet seeing that this Intent of ours is usually objected and charged upon the
Reformed as peculiar to them, I supposed it will be my chief business clearly
to evince this, to be not only the mind and suffrage of one Nation, of one
Religion and Persuasion; but of all Christians, yea, and of all Mankind in
general; but that the Reformed did countenance this Opinion, the more noble
part of the Christian World may convince us, which did not suffer Power to
oppress and bear down Religion by the Tyranny of Idolatry and Superstition.
What is spoken of the Reformed in general, is not meant of every one in
particular, for I am not ignorant that there are a great many to be found
amongst them, either too much addicted to Tyrants, or else living under Tyrants
being timorous, have taught the quite contrary to this our Sentiment, even as
amongst the Papists, there is not wanting a good many Slaves of Tyrants,
because it is the main Design of the Roman Church, to subdue and captivate Man
to Man, and not to Christ.

CHAP. III. Wherein by Arguments brought from the Law of Nature and of Nations
is evinced, that there is no such thing as Absolute Power.
WE have produced but too many illustrious Examples, and grave weighty
determinations to overthrow the Absolute Power of Princes, yet peradventure,
some may desire that we would impugn and oppose it by Arguments deduced from
the Law of Nature and Nations; we shall not think much to gratify their
request, for there is a vast company of Arguments do continually flow from the
very Fountains of Nature it self, wherewith as by so many battering Rams, the
strong hold of Tyranny may be battered and levelled with the Ground.

It might perhaps stand us upon in this place, to enter upon a Discourse
concerning the Rise and Origin of Powers, but since, that is so long and
tedious considering our present design, we are willing to leave that task to
your Civiliars; it will serve our turn to have only touched cursorily upon some
of the chief Points which conduce to our purpose.

It Is believed by all true Christians, that if Adam had stood and persevered in
his primitive Integrity, his Posterity would never have stood in need either of
Laws or of Magistracy; Man being of unblamable life and upright conversation,
would have been a Law to himself, and would have acknowledged no Government,
but that of reason only. Amongst Persons perfectly equal, Human Nature would
not have sensibly perceived any outward Government, but that of Parents of
their Children, and that too, but until the Age of Discretion, and their being
capable of reason, but as soon as ever reason became impared and quite
debilitated by sin, like a Coachman jolted from his Box, it being no longer
able to hold the Reins; then the affections and passions of the mind, like so
many wild Horses whose guide was missing, begun to play their Pranks, and
disorderly to be hurried up and down, t^en the human Chari^t taking no notice
of curb or check, would have been apt to rusht upon Precipices, when the
Almighty commiserating Man's case, surrounded and hedged him about with Laws,
and applied a Magistracy over him, that might be able to bridle and restrain
the irregularity of his passions, and the exo^bitancy of his Astections and
Appetites, which was to conduct him in that way which was sh^wn him in it.
Hence it appears, that Laws and Magistracy are the Fruits and Conscquencies of
Sin.

From whence it is observable, first of all that Absolute Power cannot demand
or claim any Aid or Assistance from the Law of Nature, for it was not Nature
that created Kings, but the ^utual Consent of Men, for it is very idle and
frivilous which some prates of, a kind of res^mblance and adumbration of Kingly
Power in brute Creatures; now that some of them seem to rule over other of the
same Species, that rule, be it what it will, is no more but a P^iviledge of the
Sex, not of the Individuum: for example, the Bull seems to bear rule over the
Cows, though not over the Bulls, with whom he often trys a touch for Mastery; the
Ram seems to overruled the Sheep, but not the Rams with whom he s^ldom fails to
be at odds, and so for the rest. Moreover, Absolute Sway does seem to me
diametrically opposite to the Law of Nature, for as Justinian witnesses all
Men by the Law of Nature are freeborn, therefore they are their own, Instit,
l. 1. c. 2. Tit. 2.
and not another man's.

Now if any imagine he has hit the Nail on the Head, if he say Absolute Power
is an App^ndix of Sin, and annexed to it, by the occasion of which Human Nature
is brought into bondage, truly methinks such an one never weighed the Matter
considerately enough, true it is indeed, that since Sin, the cause of all
mischief and servitude, crept into the World, Human Nature has been brought
into bondage, but it is to sin and death, not to men. Neither will I deny, but
that Kingly Power, as also all Magistracy is the Appendix and effect of Sin,
for I have so stated the business before, but nothing can be inferred srom
thence, which may in the least favor Absolute Power, for seeing the whole
Human Nature is contaminated and polluted, and even overrun with sin; Princes
themselves, as Men, are born Servants to sin, and are the Vassals of death as
well as the meanest Peasants, all men's conditions upon that score are equal,
whence any one may easily infer that by the Law of Nature whether entire, or
lapsed, no right can be ascribed to one Man over another, abating the right
that Parents have over their Children.

II. Nor can Absolute Power call any thing more to back and assist it out of
the Law of Nations, because the Law of Nations is in a manner common to (...)
most Nations. Now not all in general, (nay, not the most civilized and po^^te
Nations,) do obey Kings, for they who do acknowledge Government, do not use it
alike after the same manner, as is manifest from the various Constitutions and
Models of Kingdoms. Amongst those who approach nearest to Absolute Power, if
they be narrowly sifted and examined, they will be found to discard and destroy
Absolute Power; nor indeed are we to pass by in silence, that the first Form of
Government instituted by God himself immediately was absolutely Democratical or
Aristocratical, wherefore its very plain and evident also, that Absolute Power
and Dominion is quite cont^ary to the Law of Nations, as never having been
ordained any where that we can learn. There remains still the Civil Law, under
which it may seem to seek shelter and borrow patronage; but now what that Law
is that justies out and destroys the Law of Nature and Nations, I cannot
conceive, unless it be plain downright dishonesty and injury.

III. If Absolute Power were allowed upon Earth, then the right of God, the
most just Creator and wise Governor of all things, would not differ about
temporals intensione as they term it, but extensione, from that created power,
which is for the most part blinded by covetousness, which is most impious to
think.

IV. The whole is bigger then its parts, and a Prince is but a part of a
Commonwealth, Ergo the Commonwealth is greater than the Prince: This
demonstration is strongly backed from the consideration, that a Commonwealth is
a whole, standing in need of a Prince nec ad esse, nec ad been esse, sed tantum
ad melius, neither as to its being, nor well-being, but only to its better
being; now when a Commonwealth is well and cannot be better; none but a perfect
slave to Tyrants will deny, but that it highly concerns the Commonwealth to
look about them and provide for their safety.

V. It is confessed by all hands, that Laws were enacted for the restraining of
Men's inordinate Lusts and Desires, whence it is most clear that whatsoever
power tends to the favoring Man's covetous Desires is altogether an unlawful
power; as modern experience that I may not rake into the records of Antiquity
sufficiently makes out: It is an in^ate disposition incident to Men, (they are
Lipsius his expression) to be insolent and immoderate in Government, nor is it
an easy matter to keep within compass a thing which is unbounded. Lipside
Constan. Lib. 2. Cap. 29.
But now Absolute Power does favor the unruly desires of Princes, therefore is
unlawful.

VI. All power is ordained by God for the benefit of Society, now Absolute
Power is the Calamity, bane and destruction of Society, therefore it is not
ordained of God.

VII. Whatsoever derives its beginning from another, is to be subject and
subordinate to that, to which it ows its beginning, especially in morality but
Regal Power derives its rise and beginning from the People, therefore ought
Regal Power to be subject to, and depend upon the People; the usual Answer to
this Argument is, that the first Proposition is not always true, as for
example, that the Pope is elected by the Cardinals, yet is he not subject to
them after his Election; but this answer is vain and nothing at all to the
purpose, Salmatius Edmund Riche^ius.
for the Cardinals in the Election of the Pope do represent the whole Church
together, which conferred this Trust and Charge upon them, and after they have
once acquitted themselves of it, they are no longer the Representives of the
Person of the Church, the Church it self ever remains superior to the Pope,
and at such time as she thinks good to lay down the Authority of a Pope, she
may commit it to the Cardinals; but that Regal Power draws its origin from the
People, if the business needed proving, it might be, without much ado,
demonstrated from the very Coronation of the French Kings. Mem. de du Tillet.
in the Chapter of the Coron^tion of Kings.
For after this manner does the Archbishop speak to him when he anoints him,
Maintain that State and Dignity in which you are placed to succeed your Father,
by the Law of Inheritance, by divine Providence, by our present delivering it
to you.

VIII. Besides there was ever a great difference between Subjects and Servants,
Subjects are always looked upon in the Scripture as Sons and Brethren, but
Servants are accounted as the vilest and most abject of Mortals, now then if
Deuteronomy. 17. 15. Matthew. 17. 25.
you ascribe Absolute Power to Princes, this difference and distinction would
be quite out of doors, because the Power of Lords over Servants cannot be
greater then Absolute, nay, and Subjects would be in a much worse condition
then Servants, for as much as the Power of Lords over Servants cannot be called
Absolute. If the Authority of Justinian the Emperor may be of any moment in
this matter; But at this time, says he, it shall not be lawful for any Man
whatsoever within our Empire, without some cause approved of by the Laws, to
Instit. l. 1. Tit. 8. c. 2.
exercise any unreasonable excessive cruelty upon his Servants; for by the
order of Antoninus, whosoever shall slay his Servant without cause, shall have
no less punishment inflicted on him then if he had killed another man's, but
even too great and extraordinary sharpness and austerity of Lords and Masters,
was restrained by the Order of the aforesaid Prince, for Antoninus being
consulted by some Governors of Provinces about such Servants who took refuge
in the Temple, or fled to the Statue of the Prince, gave order that if the
cruelty of Lords and Masters should appear intolerable, that they should be
compelled to sell their Servants, upon good Conditions, and the price to be
given to the Masters, and all the reason in the World; for it is expedient for
the Commonwealth, that none make ill use of what he has; The words of this
Extract sent to Aelius Martianus are these, the Power and Authority of Lords
over Servants ought to be just and blameless, nor ought any Person whatsoever
to be defrauded of his right, but it mightily concerns Masters, to see that
redress be not denied to those who shall lawfully require it for hardships,
hunger, thirst, or intolerable injury. M. Antoninus seems in these Clauses to
Counsel and Advice Servants and Subjects to take their parts against Tyrants;
Wherefore take cognizance of the Complaints of those of the Family of Julius
and Sabinus, who have fled for Refuge to the Sacred Statue, and in case they be
either more hardly used and entreated then justice requires, or if you shall
judge them ignominously wronged and abused; venire jube, cause them to be sold,
so that they may never any more fall into their Lords clutches, and if he shall
prove to act otherwise then becomes a subject, and shall not submit to this my
Ordinance, let him understand that I shall execute the severity of the Law
against him for such a default. This constitution of the Emperors does
altogether correspond with the Law of God, by which it is commanded, that if
any one shall deprive a Manservant or a Maidservant of one Eye, yea, or but
of a Tooth, then he shall be forced to grant them their liberty, Exodus 21. 26,
27.

God likewise commands that if any one induced by Poverty, shall sell himself,
he shall not be reckoned as a bond Servant, but as an hired Servant and a
Sojourner, he was to serve till the Year of Jubilee, and then to depart both he
and his Children with him, he shall return to the Possession of his Fathers,
Exodus 21.
he and his Children, for they are my Servants which I brought forth out of the
Land of Egypt, they shall not be sold as Bonds-men. Thou shall not rule over
them with ^igour, but shall fear thy God. You see that for some certain
reasons, that is to say, for cruelty, for hunger, or upon the account of
ins^fferable wrongs, that Servants might by Gods appointment, and by the
Emperors This is an incomp^^able D^monstration and not to be ^vaded.
Constitutions, which have now the force of Laws, be exempted from their
Masters commands and injunctions. Why may not then Subjects be withdrawn from,
and dispensed of their duty to Princes unsit to bear sway?

From the Second Book also of the Fiefs or Feudaries, Tit. 26. 5. it appears,
that the Lord is no less capable to commit an act of Treason against the
Vassal, than is the Vassal against the Lord, which if it shall so happen, the
Lord loses all his right over the Vassal; no, nor is that Power of Fathers
over Sons Absolute neither, though it be founded upon the Law of Nature, for a
Son is discharged from the Duty to a Farther, that with cruelty, and beyond all
reason misuseth him, or if the Father shall thunder out disinheritance against
the Son, the Laws shall carefully inquire into the occasions of disinheriting,
and if it be upon ^light Grounds or unadvisedly done, that disinheriting shall
be looked upon as null and of none effect.

Last of all, if all Subjects be but Servants, what becomes of Peers, withcut
whom a King cannot try a Peer, but if the King has need of Peers in passing
Sentence, by Votes, what signifies your Absolute Power; truly I am Antonin. was
an Heachen.
even ashamed of those Persons, who professing themselves Christians, have a
flighter opinion of Humanity then the Heathens have.

It is taken for granted amongst all the asserters and maintainers of Absolute
Grot de jure belli and pa^. l. 1. c. 4. n. 7. Salm. cap. 5. p. 164.
Power by Barklay, Grotius, yea, and by Salmatius the most daring and boldest
of them all, that the People did not part with, or make over all their right to
the Prince; as for example, they did not transfer all their right of choosing to
himself a Successor, in case the whole Royal Family be extinct. Salmatius
himself agrees with us in this matter, Where the Seed of the Royal Line, says
he, in hereditary Kingdoms is quite extinct, in such case the Power returns to
the People, to whom it may be lawful afterward, to confer the like Government
upon another Person, or change it into another form, neither did the People
grant to the King the right of Allienating the Crown, or making it belong to
another Dominion, and that for the public Good and Advantage, for fear least
some Stranger or other unfit Person should be set over the People.

Charles the VI. is a pregnant example of this, who, at such time as he
abandoned Charles the VII. his Son, and declared and appointed Henry King of
England his Son-in-Law Heir to the Crown, this disowning and grant was judged
by the People of France of none effect, and exploded; and so Charles the VII.
was again fully restored to his Crown and Dignity. Francis the First also
^ffords us a notable Instance of this same, that a King cannot warrant his
ali^nating the Dominion of the Crown, or make it depend on another
jurisdiction, who, after he had redeemed himself out of Captivity, wherein he
was kept by Charles the V. at the expense of several Provinces, the People of
France did stiffly maintain that it was not in the Kings Power to alienate the
Dominion, (as they called it) wherefore when the Salus populi, or public
welfare is in Jeopardy, the People ever reserved to themselves the Right and
Power of defending it, and by all ways and means of furthering and advancing it.

X. Here comes many more still who shall be witnesses against themselves, for
they say, That put the Case the King turn a common Enemy he G^^t. ut supra, He
reckons seven causes why he may be removed from the Throne Salm. c. 7. p. 24.
ma^y not be removed from the Throne, and thus speaks Salmatius, If so be out
of an hostile mind, he be fully bent upon the utter undoing of his Kingdom, he
does thereupon ipso facto, lose his right to it indeed, and may be justly
forsaken by his People; now he does then, become an open Enemy, when he does
not only shed his Peoples Blood right or wrong, but when he suppresseth
Religion, commits Adultery with other Men's Wives, defliwers Virgins, seizes
and appropriates to himself Men's Estates, breaks his word, does abrogate and
disannul Privileges and Charters, and every where shows himself a contemner
of divine and human Laws; for the Truth is, Thieves, Clippers and Coyners,
Whore-Masters, and perjured Persons are no less Felons, and do no less deserve
condign punishment and death, then Highway-men and Murderers; and to speak
freely, there are but a few practical Tyrants that are not guilty of all these
wicked Misdemeanors.

XI. All Christian Princes who are inclined and adhere to the Roman Church, do
pro^ess themselves subject thereto in matters relating to Faith and Good C^un.
Constan s^ssion 4. and 5. Basil. 12. and 18.
Manners; and so do the two Councils of Constans and Basil enjoin. Wherefore
when they commit any heinous Offense against Faith and Good Manners, no body
q^estions but that the Church may proceed against them by Excommunication, but
if despising a lesser Excommunication, they shall grow hardened in their
wickedness, let them be struck with the Thunderbolt of a greater, which
differs from deposition, or final reliction, only in term of time, and in
length, if they do not appease the wrath of their Judge by repentance and
amendment, it then may end in exterpation and deposition. History supplies us
with so many examples of this Nature, that who so requires to have them
produced, shows himself but an ignoramus in ancient Records; who knows not that
Henry the IV. King of France could never be acknowledged, till (his Ambassador
being beaten with a Stick by the Pope's own Hands) he had expi^ted, and was
punished for his Heresy as they suppose; who can be ignorant that Philip the
August for his repudiating Isemburga his Consort, and taking to Wife Mary Agnes
had very like to have lost his Crown and Dignity; if any would be certified how
far the greater Excommunication may proceed, let him have recourse to Philip
the August, wherein he may also meet with the Story of John Sans terre,
mentioned before, nay, and did not St. Germain Bishop of Paris, whose Authority
came far short of that of the Pope, inflict the penalty of Excommunication upon
Sigisbert King of Austravia? What Is the reason then, why the States of the
Realm (amongst whom is to be found A^bas Vrsparg. Chron. p. 46.
very many learned in the Law of Nature and of Nations) may not turn out and
depose a convicted and incorrigible, refractory Tyrant: especially since a
fault may be more descerned in Temporals then Spirituals, and seeing that it
spreads it self with more dangerous consequences amongst the People, and that
the Tyranny of a Prince does them much more harm then his Heresy.

XII. The imperial Dignity without all dispute is greater then the Regal, for
an Emperor can create Kings, but, to create an Emperor was never the Power of
any King, that was always left to the People, as their business only; but now
the Emperor, how high soever his Dignity be, pays homage to the Empire, why
then may not a King do the like to a Kingdom? the Empire may Lewis of Bavaria,
Winceslaus and others.
warrant their not standing by an unfit Emperor with their Lives and Fortunes
even by the Laws, which falls out ever and anon: Why may not then a Kingdom
forsake and dethrone a King unfit for ruling.

XIII. Again, Absolute Power sets the Door wide open not only to the disorderly
Vices of Princes, but also of the People; because Regis ad exemplum ^^us
componitur orbis, every one strives to follow the Fashion at Court, we read of
Cambyses, that when he was acquainted by some debauched flatterers that there
was a certain Law, which gave leave to the King, to do what he listed; married
his own Sister, and after that, did allow of such kind of marriages to wipe off
the scandal, and appearance of Sin: and it is not so long ago, since we saw,
the Husband (of a Wife debauched by the King,) to debanch and steal away the
Wife of another from her Husband, and all that connived at too, by reason of
the King's ill example. So that we see that the fear of God's Law is not enough
to restrain and bridle the King's lusts and unruly affections, for frequent
experience tells us, that it is not at all sufficient.

Tam facile and pronum est Superos contemnere testes Javenal 13. Sat. 13.

Si mortalis Idem nemo Sciat.
So easily Men with the Gods make bold,
When they alone behold the Sin we act,
No Mortal being witness to the Fact.
Except it be again and again inculcated to Princes, that God is pleased to
make use of Men appointed on purpose to vindicate and enforce his Laws in the
World, for there is nothing more common with Princes then to think the greatest
Power, to be the greatest License to do what they please, as may be exemplified
in Vortigerus King of England, who in the rage and heat of his Milton against
Salmatius.
Lust espoused his own Daughter.

XIV. If Monarchical Government were Absolute, it would be the less noble then
the Democratical, for Democracy is the Dominion over Freeborn Men, for it
implies a contradiction for a People in the same respect both to rule and obey;
but a Monarchy if it be unlimited is the ruling over Servants, but now the
Government over Freemen is a great deal more noble, then that over Servants,
even as the Authority and Power of a Father over his Son, does far excel the
Power of a Master over his Slaves: It makes not at all against us that God's
Power over his Creatures is Absolute, for I acknowledge that there can be no
certain conclusion gathered from God to his People, by reason of the vast
disproportion and immensity between his Nature and Power, and theirs. God
cannot abuse his Power. Moreover, God's Power over intelligent Creatures freed
from sin, which freedom is the only liberty os intelligent Creatures, is nobler
far, then the Dominion over Creatures subject to sin, which is the perfect
bondage of Creatures, and that I may speak what I think, truly your
Court-flatterers do put a base Affront upon Regal Authority and mightily
disparage it, when they have the confidence to make him pass for a Tyrant; not
but that Monarchical Power, to say the truth, has a certain transcendent
superlative Excellency and (...) above others, provided it be tied up and
regulated and owned by the Laws, which is not our present design to dive into
or discuss. It will suffice in this place, to lay the Foundation and
Superstructure of Monarchy or Regal Power, and withal to fortify and defend it
by overthrowing of Tyranny, and at the same time to demonstrate that those
immoderate cyers-^p of Regal Power, just like the Giants of old, whilst they
aim at building their Tower too high, do endeavor its downfall, and to be
crushed with its ruins themselves.

XV. If we allow Absolute Power, it must be either jure Divino or jure Humano,
but it is not by Divine Right, since God Deuteronomy. 17. makes an everlasting decree
against the unbounded desires of Kings, which I suppose will not be much amiss
to set down in this place, When thou shall come into the Land which the Lord
thy God gives thee, and shall possess it, and shall dwell therein, and shall
say, I will set a King over me like as all the Nations that are about me: thou
shall in any wise set him King over thee whom the Lord thy God shall choose,
one from among thy Brethren shall thou set a King over thee, thou may not
set a Stranger over th^e which is not thy Brother; but he shall not multiply
Horses to himself, nor cause the People to return to Egypt, to the end, that he
should multiply Horses: Forasmuch as the Lord has said ye shall return no more
that way, neither shall ^e multiply Wives to himself, that his Heart turn not
away, netther shall he greatly multiply to himself Silver and Gold, and it
shall be when he sits upon the Throne of his Kingdom, that he shall write
him a Copy of this Law in a Book, out of that which is before the Priests and
Levites, and it shall be with him, and he shall read therein all the days of
his Life: that he may learn to fear the Lord his God; to keep all the words of
this Law, and and these Statutes to do them, that his Heart be not lifted up
above his Brethren, and that he turn not a side from the Commandments to the
right Hand or to the lest; to the end that he may prolong his days in his
Kingdom, he and his Children in the midst of Israel.

Psalm. 2. 10. Be wise now therefore O ye Kings, be instructed O ye Judges of
the Earth: Nor is R^gal Power by Human Right, Absolute neither, for the
practice and custom of all Nations, as we already have plainly demonstrated,
are point blank against it; besides who can think People so mad and senseless,
that when they may live abundantly more happy under the Government of Kings,
who are subject and liable to Human Laws, than under those who are not
regulated by the Laws, nor observe them, I say are they so simple as to lov^
and admire those rather, who are found by experience to trample upon Laws.

XVI. Never was there yet any Law either Divine or Human, whereby the
Abdication of a Tyrant is prohibited; if there be extant any such that may seem
to speak in their favor, those relates particularly to their Life, and not to
the Administration of their Government. On the other Hand, the practice of
turning out Kings, received in all Ages foregoing, and confirmed by frequent
use, does plainly argue that the public Safety and Welfare is by all manner of
ways possible to be defended and secured, and that one single Person should not
be obeyed, at the cost of indangering the whole Nation, is a Law I think Nature
it self has enstamped upon the Hearts of all Men whatsoever, now where Divine
Laws are silent, who questions but that Nature may be listened to, as a Deity.

XVII. Mothing so much argues the badness and wrongness of the Cause, as that
the great Assertors are not consistant with themselves, and do often shift
Scenes, change and beg Principles as the Schools call it, but these Parasites
of Tyrants are not much unlike that in Terence, modo aiunt, modo negant,
sometimes they affirm it, by and by they deny it, sometimes, I say, they are
for having Kings to receive their Power and Authority immediately from God
alone, sometimes again, that indeed they owe it to God, but by the help and
assistance of the People, and that the People did fully and irrecoverably make
over and transfer all the right they had to them; then again, they will pause a
while, and demur upon the Case, ^ometimes they maintain their Ground, and speak
out without more ado, but let them come to a conclusion, and speak freely
whether they would h^ve the Government depend on God alone, or on the good will
and courtesy of the People; if they would have it depend on God alone, let
them produce that Law of God, whereby Absolute Power is orda^ned; for we can
show them the quite contrary. If they acknowledge the Peoples kindness to have
any hand in it, it does extremely behove them to make out this plain and
irrevocable transferring the Peoples right upon them, which, they never will be
able to do?

XVIII. Regal Right in all Nations is the self same as to its Rise and Origin,
if some Nations parted with more then they needed to have done to their
Princes, that produced from their ill-bred disposition knowing no better, or
from their want of skill in their own and the Nations Right. I will make it
clear to the meanest Capacity: Regal Power sometimes falls to a ^emale in some
Nations; not excepting those Nations that are reputed the most barbarous,
whether it be, that the Administration of Government be entrusted with her
under the Title of Queen, or Queen Regent; but now it is nonsense to think that
the Power conferred upon a Woman by the People is Absolute, therefore it does
not stand with reason that it should belong to a King, neither indeed does the
Regal Authority suffer any diminution when it is devolved upon a Queen either
by the King's death, or any other accident whatsoever.

XIX. Those amongst the Papists, who do least flatter and sooth Papal Tyranny
do assert that the Pope is capable of doing as much in the Church, as a King
can Amongst which we reckon Gerson Aen. Syl. and late writers Edm. Richer.
Elias du Pin. and many others.
do in the Kingdom, yet notwithstanding they briskly maintain, that a General
Council is Superlour to a Pope, and may depose him at will. But the Pandors of
the Whore of Babylon, who wonderfully extols her Authority above that of Kings,
do not deny, but that a Pope may, and ought to be deposed for Heresy:
Therefore according to all these Doctors a Tyrant may, and ought to be deposed,
for that the Pope, whose authority is above, or at least equal to Regal
Authority, may, and ought, whenever he shall turn Heretic, be removed from
holding the Reigns of Church Government.

XX. That Authority is the greater, that performs the greatest things, but Add
to these Beller. Peron. Torrensis and many Jesuits.
the Authority of the People creates both Kings and Emperors, but the Authority
of the King, cannot so much as create a King, therein does the Peoples
Authority, exceeds that of a King.

XXI. In all Christian Kingdoms there are certain Orders of Knighthood, by
which the most illustrious and renowned of the Subjects, together with the
King, are usually dignified and distinguished; the Sovereign of these Knights
is the Prince, who is equally bound, and even takes an Oath to obey the
Statutes of the Order, as well as the rest of the Members of that Order. Now if
the King in this Ceremony obliges himself by Oath, much more is he bound by
that Oath he takes at his Coronation, because this last Oath is absolutely
necessary, necessitate ^nedii, by a necessity of the means, as they term it;
without which the King could not be King: But the other Ceremony depends merely
upon choice, and is an indifferent Ceremony, having no Relation at all to the
Regal Office, and no ways beneficial to the Public; therefore the Coronation
Oath is more Strictly and inviolably to be performed, and does more firmly bind
Princes, than does the other.

We look upon it as a needless piece of work, to distinguish between the Rights
of one Kingdom and another; it is all one, for there are but two Originals of
Kingly Power, viz. Force of Arms and Election; Christians are unacquainted with
Lots, the Heathens seldom, or never made use of them; if a King, win a Kingdom
by force of Arms, yet for all that, he must not compel his Subjects to things
unjust and contrary to the Law of Nature and of Nations, if he do force them
upon such things; why, then indeed, when occasion serves, and when their
strength permits, Subjects may have recourse to their right of reducing the
King to his just Limits of Government, conformable to that celebrated Axiom,
vim vi repellere licet. It is lawful to repel force by force, for what was
taken away nolens volens mny also be recovered by force; if Election could take
place, yet we should have the better of it however, because there is no
Election without Obligations and Conditions, whereunto as well Princes as
People are to be equally bound and obliged; both Nature and Religion do alike
will and require it: For as much as God himself (as we but just now hinted) has
bounded himself by his Promise, so ought a man, how eminent in virtuous
Qualifications soever he may be to exercise Humane Dominion over other men, as
by no means to aspire to 'Divine Honors; who finds himself no whit better than
his Neighbors, and must not take too much upon him, nor so demean himself
amongst his fellow Creatures, as if he had attained to a degree of Divine
Perfection; for men create Idols, but do not create Gods. The right of
inheritance has no greater Right than the Law of Arms, or the Law of Election,
because a Successors Right and Power are entailed upon him by virtue of his
Predecessors; And Right is what the Subject granted and yielded to, and not
what Princes usurped to themselves. A Prince it is true, by inheritance obtains
the right of taking upon himself the Government of the Commonwealth, before any
other of the same Nation, but that Right does not procure for him, as I may so
say, so large a Power, and superlative a Government above others; for it was
not the Peoples intent and design, when they honored one Family with such high
Dignity, that it should thereby become prejudicial and more troublesome to
them, but rather that they should find the Family so much the more gracious and
bountiful, by how much they had, upon several accounts, obliged it to them:
It Is true indeed, it is somewhat an hard task to alter the Form of Government,
which are obtained by Inheritance, because Regal Power in one Family by long
possession, and confirmed by custom, pleads prescription, yea, and has
mustered up all its Forces to strengthen and uphold its Dignity; but
notwithstanding it does not thereupon follow that by Law or Right, their Power
is fuller or more valid, than if they were beholden to Election for their
Authority; in as much as it derived its Pedigree and Original from the Peoples
bare concession. It is confessed by all men, that the Almighty did out of a
tender regard to his People, grant them the liberty of making choice of what
Form of Government they thought most convenient, and most suitable to their
manner of living: It will be therefore agreeable to reason, to conclude, that
God did also grant them the liberty of changing the Government and Magistrates,
as by themselves so constituted, especially if they abused their Power, and
swerved from the true way conducing to the end propounded, that is an happy and
peaceable Life: For since Princes were ordained for the benefit and advantage
of Civil Society, it is more suitable and correspondent to the Goodness and
Wisdom of God, that Princes should depend upon the People, who can never be
wanting to themselves, than that the People should depend on Princes, who out
of a certain innate Principle, incident to all men living, being all for their
own ends, and for what they can get, oftentimes forget themselves, and their
Duty toward the Commonwealth, and spoiling all by forgetting the true end why
they were so highly promoted to that honor, make ill improvement of the Regal
Dignity, and of the end for which it had been conferred upon them, use it for
their own, and not for the Public Advantage.

CHAP. IV. Wherein is showed, that there can be nothing gathered from the Old
Testament, that does contradict all these Arguments, nay, that does not
mightily strengthen them.
THE Patrons who stand up for Absolute Power, do commonly appeal to the
Sentence and Judgment of Sacred Writ, and that with good reason, because
Scripture is the Judge of all Controversy, and is infallible, a most perfect
Rule, by the which Christians are to square every Conception of their Mind, and
also their Life and Conversation: God forbid then that we should deny such a
Judge, the discision of this Point in debate.

Our Adversaries produce that remarkable known Passage in the History of King
Saul, the substance of which we thus comprize: The Israelites now grown weary
of the Government of Judges, require a King of God, like unto the Kings of
other Nations; they don't forthwith obtain their desire, nor was it convenient
they should; but before God would comply with their request, he forewarns them
by his Prophet Samuel, of those things Kings would do, preter and contra
officium, besides and contrary to their Duty, and not altogether without
precedent; yet they did not for all that alter their mind; at length God
wearied by their improbrious Demands, granted them Saul for their King. I
cannot imagine what advantage the Parasites of Tyrants can infer from hence,
that can in any wise justify and authorize their Cause: Salmasius is not
ashamed Cap. 2. p. 43. 44, 45, 46.
to assert, that by those Admonitions, whereby he tried to reduce them to
better obedience, and to reclaim them from their erroneous Practices, to a
sound mind, did intimate and point at Regal Power, which was not known to the
Israelites: As if God should ordain the immoral and irregular Lusts of Princes
to be the Standard of governing; and had a mind that they should be exempted
from his Law, and unaccountable for what they did: To what purpose did he then
establish a proper and peculiar Law for Kings, as we described before? by which
^aw they were commanded to have Moses's Law near them, to apply themselves
carefully to the learning of it, to turn it over and over again continually;
and to that intent it came to pass Samuel delivered the Law written to Saul,
then chosen to be King, which he punctually observed, threatening him no less
than he did the People, with utter destruction, if he should depart from it:
For he spoke to Israel in these words; Behold, God has set him a King over
you, obey and serve God, ye and the King who is set over you, otherwise you and
your King Deuteronomy. 17.
shall perish; which doubtless put these words in King James the I. his mou^h,
when he drew up Instructions for his Son; Whom, says he, does the reading and
searching of the Scriptures more nearly concern than Kings themselves?
forasmuch as (...) l. 1. p. 4.
in that portion of Scripture which makes first mention of the most excellent
Kings of Israel, we find that they were not only invited and persuaded, but
expressly enjoined to be diligent in reading of, and meditating upon the Holy
Scriptures. Alas! how sew of the Kings and 'Queens (except William and Mary)
did ever think this Duty incumbent upon them? Yet Grotius behaves himself much
more modestly than does Salmasius, for he owns that those intimations and
warnings of Grotius vide supra.
Samuel, were so many Predictions of future Events, and not a description of
Regal Right.

For although Divine Providence did more tenderly indulge and encourage the
Israelitish Kingdom, than other Kingdoms, for the Messiah's sake, who was to
spring from the Royal Stock of Israel; yet that other Kingdoms should be
ordered according to the same Model, would by no means follow from hence.
Salmasius does not stick to say, That Saul and David were immediately ordained
Cap. 6. p. 195.
and appointed of God, that other Kings were but mediately only: Therefore
nobody should wonder why they were more sacred, and more inviolable than other
Kings. But if we consider this well, this distinction will be of little force;
nor can any Argument drawn from hence, serve their turn; for God granted them
such a King as they required, and they demand a King like to the Kings of other
Nations, and not a King of a new institution, as I may so say, such an one as
never was in the world before; God therefore grants them such an one as they
desire. If then Kings of other Nations could be dethroned, no body can
reasonably question but that the Kings of Israel might be so likewise:
Therefore the matter must come again to be tried by the Law both of Nature and
Nations, neither did the two Tribes at all doubt of it, when in Rehoboham's
time they shook off the Yoke* and placed Jeroboham over themselves; neither did
their Crime so much consistin that, as togetherwith rejecting Rehoboham, they
forsook also the Temple and Worship of God; neither was any other thing in the
mind of those forty, who betook themselves to the Cave of Engedi with David;
nay, they pretended to have a more desperate design in their heads, as touching
this matter, than had the two Tribes; for they persuaded him to make use of the
opportunity put into his hand, to rid himself from the persecution of the Son
of Kis, by making him away. Of the same opinion was also Abishai, one of
David's Worthi^s, and Brother to Joab, who stealing privily into Readiness Tent ^.
Sam. 24.
with David, who found Saul sleeping within the Trench, and his Speer sticking
in the Ground, at his Bolster, took it up, and offered his service to David,
saying. Let me smite him, I pray the with the Spear, even to the Earth at once,
and I will not smite him the second time. Now if any one shall narrowly examine
the History of Saul and David, he will undoubtedly find that the so strenuous 1 Samuel 26.
Assertors of Tyranny, have read the Scriptures, whereunto they so confidently
appeal, but very carelessly and cursorily; for even Saul himself never took
himself inviolable, or not to be meddled withal; for after this manner spoke he
to David, producing a piece of the Skirt of his Robe: Thou art more righteous
than I, for thou have rewarded me good, whereas I have rewarded thee evil; thou
have showed this day, how that thou have dealt well with me; for as much as
when the Lord had delivered me into thy hand, thou killedst me not: For if a
man find his Enemies, will he let them go away free? wherefore the Lord reward,
thee good, for that thou have done unto me this day: Neither did Saul boast of
or value himself upon his Unction, nor much insist upon his inviolability; nay,
he ingeniously confesses, that he was subject to the fate of other Mortals,
and that he had saved his life; he owned this wholly to the magnanimous
clemency and kindness of David, and not to his own Majesty and Dignity.

Now had the Royal Power, as a peculiar ^adge and Characteristical mark of
distinction, secured Saul from all attempts upon his Person, how chanced it
that the four hundred and Abishai understood nothing of that Prerogative, only
David by his prophetical Spirit, was able to pry into that business; nor in
truth could Saul have this Prerogative, whatsoever it was, either from the Law
of Nature, or of Nations, for then it would have been made known to all; but he
had it only by a Special Grant and Favor, which in all probability was
revealed to David, by God alone: Now the Son of Jesse had plainly signified,
that the life of the Son of Kis was in his hand, and that he was at his mercy,
for thus spoke he unto him, The Lord delivered thee unto me, nor did I lay
hands upon thee: He s^il^s him indeed the Anointed of the Lord, and confesses,
that 1. Sam. 24.
in consideration of this Unction, he was induced to spare his life. Yet it
does not therefore follow that he was inviolable; for if any one will refuse or
delay upon any account, to put a thing in execution, you must by no means infer
from thence, that it was not lawsull for him so to do; who knows not that Holy
men fearing God do oftentimes forbear doing some things, which otherwise might
be permitted to any one whatsoever. You know it is sometimes a great sign of
generosity toward an Enemy, not to take advantage of him; but Saul was not
affected with the same reverence and respect to David's Unction; for he
persecuted him with such inveterate malice, because he knew that the Son of
Jesse was anointed for King of Israel, taking no notice at all of Readiness other
Sons. Again, Absalom did not look upon his Father's Unction as sacred, who
endeavored might and main, to wrest the Sc^pter out of his hand; Nor did
Hushai, that wise and prudent Counselor to Absalom go about to deter him from
his enterprise, by magnifying to him David's Unction, but by magnifying his 2 Samuel 3
and his Men's valor and resoluteness, which he pretended, was not advisable
to be engaged, without a pretty considerable stout Party. But some may reply
that David durst not venture to lay violent hands upon the Lord's Anointed how
bitter an Enemy soever, and raging against him with a blood thirsty mind, nor
can this seem strange to any one that shall observe the signal and
distinguishing dispensation of God's Providence in this History; for without
God's permission, Saul had not entered into the Cave, wherein David, whom he
sorely persecuted, together with the forty Men of his Lifeguard lay hid, and
it was because God would have it so, that David saw Saul, and that Saul was
seen by him, that Saul should not hear the least noise or whispering of those
four hundred and forty Men, some of whom communed with David. Last of all, it
was not without the special providence of God, that the Son of Jesse should cut
off the Skirt of the Son of Kis's Robe, and he never perceive it: Does not the
Holy Scripture make mention, that God caused a dead sleep to seize Saul and his
Guard, when David accompanied with Abishai, slipped unawares into Readiness Tent. It
is more than probable, that all these things were disposed and foreordained of
God, to give the Children of Israel to understand the constant goodness, and
the meekness of the man so dear to him; and as the Scriptures declare, one
after his own heart, and who by his valor and magnanimity, was to be an
illustrious Tipe of the Messiah, from whose Loins the very Messiah himself,
commonly styled the Son of David, was to spring; if a man can indeed suppose
any thing of Man, in that sweet and gracious deportment of David toward Saul:
Was it not David's prudence, who being the Anointed of the Lord as well as
Saul, to secure his own life from the conspiracies of the People, by sparing
the life of Saul, as the Lord's Anointed.

Looking over the History of the first King of the Israelites, I find a notable
Circumstance which might have stopped the mouth of the pleaders for Absolute
Power, if they had b^t made the least Reflection upon it; The business was
thus, The Philistians having been put to the rout* and totally defeated by
Jonathan, Saul desirous of pursuing and gaining an entire victory over these
uncircumcised Philistians, gave a strict charge to all his Soldiers not to
touch any Victuals until the Evening; Jonathan being hot upon the pursuit, was
not present when the Prohibition was made, and consequently ignorant of the
same; now finding himself very much harassed, and half famished at his return
into the Camp, having light upon some Honey by chance, dipped the end of the Rod
that was in his hand in it, and did but taste of it: Now Saul consulting with
the Lord whether he should continue the pursuit of the Enemy, the Lord gave him
no answer; whereupon the King having a mind to know the reason of God's
silence, cast the Lot, which fell upon Jonathan, who presently confessed the
Fact; the King his Father swore he should suffer for it, and Jonathan began to
submit to this cruel unnatural Sentence, and prepared himself for death: When
the people to whom Jonathan had much endeared himself by his eminent
Qualifications, and who had so well deserved of the Nation, by his fresh
Victory over these Philistians, did oppose his intent, and withal swore, that
an Hair of his Head should not fall to the ^^ound, since that if there were any
fault, it was committed merely ou^ of ignorance: behold how the will of the
People does clash with the Kings, and how the Peoples will prevailed o^e^ his;
and reason good it should, nay, and all this passed in a peac^full manner,
without the least Sedition on the Peoples part, and without the least muttering
or complaint of the King, that there was any Violence offered him, or any
atempt or incroa^hment upon his Authority.

Neither does the Power of Ahab appear very much absolute, no more than that of
the former King; forasmuch as he could not possess himself of Naboth's
Vineyard, but by the fraud of cursed Jezabel, such as was scarce ever thought
of by the basest of men, or by the worst of women: Of Jezabel, I say, who first
suggested it, nor could he devise any other means to seize of this piece of
Land, but in raising up, and suborning False-Witnesses against this gracious
Man, and in causing him to be put to death as a Blasphemer. 1 Kings 21.


The Tr^nsactions of the Kings of Judah and of Israel do confirm this verity,
where you may see that they drew by their example, their Subjects into Idolatry
and all kind of wickedness, according as they were bygotted, and given to it
themselves, and did ^eclaim them, and hindered them from falling foul upon these
Rocks, according as they kept themselves aloof from them.

What was David's sense of his own proper Dignity Royal, is in the next place
to be enquired into; Scripture informs us that he was anointed by Samuel, as
Successor to Saul; howbeit, Saul being gathered to his Fathers, Abner, Captain
of the Guard to Saul, placed Ishbosheth, youngest Son of the deceased, upon the
Throne of Israel. What does David hereupon? Why, he wageth 2 Samuel 2.
war with Ishbosheth, under the notion of Competitor, not as an Usurper, for he
never impeached Abner of High Treason, for taking the Usurper's part, yea, he 2 Samuel 3.
even solemnized his Obs^quies, condoles his being put to death by Joab,
(because he slew Azael, Joab's Brother,) with Tears and Praises. Nor did David
look upon Ishhosheth as guilty of Usurpation, but pronounced him clear and
blameless, yea, and revenged his Death too, tho none of the King's Anointed, by
taking off the Murderers: From all which, I cannot choose but wonder how ever
it 2 Samuel 4.
could enter into the thoughts of those who stand for Tyranny, to seek refuge
for their case, in the History of Saul and David.

But the chief Masterpiece of Fawning-Courtiers, on which they lay the
greatest stress, seems to be this; that the Israelites never ejected, or ever
called any of their Kings to an account, in a Court of Judicature, although the
greatest part of them were very dissolute, wicked, and idolatrous; but what is
lawful is not according to St. Paul's sense, always expedient. It is the part
of a wise man when he designs to set about any business of concern, to have a
special regard to time and circumstances, least contriving unwarily, and not
timeing it aright, he lose himself, and fall short of his expectation. The
Israelites were but rightly served, if they underwent greater punishments then
others, who had set over themselves a King, as it were against the will, and
even in despite of God: They were even fain to smother and dissemble with their
grief for very shame, who had made a Rod for their own back. It Is also well
known, that the Law has not its force in time of war, nor can that people
defend their Laws, when surrounded on all sides with potent Enemies. Moreover
it is not in every respect true, that Kings were never any where by the People
of Israel thrust from the Throne, for the revolt of the Ten Tribes from
Rehoboham, and their election of Jeroboham, is plain down right abdication and
deposing.

Besides, we read how Athaliah, Mother to Ahaziah, invaded the Royal Chair
after her Sons death, possessing it and enjoying it for the space of six years,
2 Kings 11.
and was in the end delivered up to be put to death, by the Council of
Jehodada, the High Priest: We read that Amaziah perished by the conspiracy of
the 2 Chronicles. 25.
Citizens: of Jerusalem, that those who had a hand in the murder, did not
suffer for the same, as was the custom amongst the Jews; for they usually
punished 2 Kings 14.
their Servants or Ministers of State, who imbrewed their hands in the King's
Blood, which happened to not a few of them. I must needs confess, that they did
not deal justly, and according to the due course of Law, but the Assassinates
escaping scotfree, proclaims aloud, that such proceedings, in taking away
Amaziah, was allowed of, and acceptable to the People. Again we learn from Holy
Scripture, that the management of the Common-weal^h was taken from Vziah, by
reason of his Leprosy, and delivered to his Son Jothan. Why should we mention
those incomparable Heroes, the Macchabes, who carried on a War with prosperous
event, and greater glory, against Antio^hus, otherwise their Liege Lord and
Sovereign; And why? because they oppressed the Jewish Nation with unreasonable
cruelty, compelling them to the worship of Idols, by severe Edicts and
Pknalties.

What, did not the Jews frequently make insurrections against the Romans, under
whose jurisdiction they were? What was it moved the Romans to destroy the whole
Jewish Nation, to sack and race the City of Jerusalem, but the high spirit of
the Jews not brooking the Roman Yoke. Salmasius indeed confesses thus much,
That as soon as ever the Jews became subject to the Romans Government, they did
ever Chap. 4. p. 121, 122.
and anon rebel, says he,, as it were against their implacable Enemies, and
subverters of their Laws and Religion.

Nor do I ever perceive that the Jews mourned for the massacre of their Kings,
but rather bore it with a kind of indifferency, and unconcernedness: They did
not rent their Garments, nor put on Sackcloath, nor throw Ashes upon their
heads, according as received Custom, when any mournful Accident surprised them;
nay, seldom or never performed any Funeral Rites, by waising and lamentation of
the violent death of their Kings. What can we think of the silence of the
Rabbis of that Nation, who never so much as expatiated upon the Praises of the
Sovereign, forsooth, and almost perpetual power of their Kings; but on the
contrary, we learn from Salmasius, That Moses, M^imon^des puts this difference
between the Kings of Israel and those of Judah, David 's Posterity; that those
of David 's Family Cap. 2. p. 50, 51 and 55. Majmonidt, Halac Melac. Cap. 3.
should judge and be judged, but that the Kings of Israel should not have the
power of judging, nor could be judged themselves neither; and that Sechar had
quoted several Testimonies to that purpose.

How come such a proud haughty Nation as they were, and no small admirers of
their Privileges, not to be proud of their Kings being inviolable: For so far
were they from entert^ining any such conceits concerning them, that in case
they should have found them tardy, or committed the least offense against God's
Ordinances, they would have cited them before the Sanhedrim, to be whipped with
Rods, as well as the Highpriests.

I shall subjoin two Passages in this place, which may serve instead of a
definitive and decretory Sentence and Determination to all those who suffer not
their minds 1 Samuel 11.
to be prepossest and hoodwinked by prejudice. The first is, that the creation
of 1 Kings 11.
Kings is more than once ascribed to the People: This may be gathered from the
2 Kings 12.
History of Saul, of David, of Solomon, Azariah, Josiah and others. Concerning
2 Kings 14 and 21.
Rehoboham, Salmasius frankly owneth, The Kingdom now in its infancy, says he,
when Solomon the King^s death was once published and proclaimed, all Israel
being Salmas. cap. 4. p. 111, 112.
assembled to appoint his son King over them, they complained to him, etc. What
answer returned he to their just Petition? Why, he was so far from signifying
any compliance with, and favorable acceptance of their Petition; that he
positively threatened to lay heavier burdens upon them, and denounced the
punishment of them with Scorpions, whom his Father only chastised with rods. He
that was not yet a King to threaten thus, what would he have done if he had
once gotten the Crown on his head. I and after the Jews had mightily fallen
away from their pristine glory and renown, yet would they not resign up, or be
deprived of the privilege of creating their Leaders: For the Writer of the
Book of Macchabees, Lib. 1. cap. 13. gives us a relation of the Election of
Simon the valiant, As Soon as the People heard these words their spirits
revived, and they answered with a loud voice, thou shall be our Leader instead
of Judas and Jonathan Cap. 13.
thy brothers; fight thou our battles, and whatsoever thou command, that
will we do. Now what man so void of reason as to imagine that all they depended
upon the absolute will and pleasure of Kings, who conferred this Dignity Royal
upon Kings? What, do the People reserve no right to the thing that they
themselves create?

The other also we produce from Scripture, which plainly forbids the doing
wrong to the People, for the Scripture teaches us, that they and Kings are
bound and stand obliged to one another, by the mutual and interchangeable Bonds
of a Covenant.

All the Elders of Israel came together before the King in Hebron, and David
made a Covenant with them, before the Lord in Hebron; they first treated
concerning 2 Samuel 3.
the conditions, upon which the Son of (...) should have the Scepter bestowed
on him, and this Treaty was between Abn^r and the People; in the first place
Abner exhorts the people, and puts them upon conferring the Kingdom upon David;
afterward he prevails upon them to gratify his desire; presently he has
recourse to David, produce^h before him the result of the Treaty, that they
have given their consent; David signs and agrees to it; the Agitator between
the Parties, together with his Associates, having been splendidly and
cheerfully entertained: Abner having got what he would have had, and all things
necessary to usher in the business thus happlly concluded, I will arise, says
he, to David, I will go and gather together to my Lord, the King. all Israel,
that they may make a Covenant with thee: nor did the High Priest Jehodadah in
any other manner advance 2 Kings 11.
Josiah to the Throne of his Ancestors; for he made him and the people mutually
to contract and bargain together.

CHAP. V. Wherein are examined those Passages of the New Testament, which our
Adversaries endeavor to draw to their purpose.
HAving thoroughly sifted and discussed all the Succors that reinforce their
Cause, out of the Old Law, Let us now see whether or no the New-Law be more
favorable to them than that: They judge that Precept of our Savior's, Give
unto Caesar the things that are Caesar's, as the most material, and all in all,
in this their Cause. But if I understand Christ's meaning, this famous Oracle
of his does rather make against our nonresistant Parasites than for them: For
our Savior does not say all things are Caesar's, but before he would answer
this nice and cunning Demand, he thought it best to look upon the Inscription
of the Medal; nor is there any question to be made, but that if the Image and
Superscription had been Herod's, (such was the exactness of his Justice) he
would have commanded to render unto Herod the things that were Herod's:
Wherefore if the things that are Caesar's are to be rendered to Caesar: Now if
Caesar exact those things for his own, which are not so, by the Precept of
Christ, or at least the Precept standing good and in force, they may be denied
him; but the Honor, Life and Esta^es of Subjects are not Caesar's: The
Subjects are liable, in some respect in duty bound, to maintain his Dignity and
Prerogatives with all these. They are therefore obliged not to grudge venturing
their Life and Fortune, but it is to be at the disposal of the Nation, and not
as the Prince pleases,

But now the reason why we are commanded in the Holy Scriptures to honor
Kings, and even to obey them in such things as are harsh, and cross our
Inclination^, to pay Taxes, to pour our Prayers and Supplications for them,
this, if I am able to judge, does not at all make for Absolute Power; for we
are commanded to exhibit Honor to whom Honor, Tribute to whom Tribute, Fear
to whom Fear is due; to strive to outstrip one another in well-doing, to pray
for all men. I would fain know if any one can deny but this is also due to
Democratical Government; it is a thing granted by all Christians in general,
that all Honor and Reverence is to be paid to Princes, even to bad ones, so
long as they sway the Scepter, provided they do not incroach upon the Rites of
God Almighty, nor meddle with the Spiritual Concerus. But herein lies the main
stress of the Question, and turns upon this Hinge; Whether or no Princes, not
using their Power as they should do, and not administering the Commonwealth
aright, may forfeit their Regal Power; if they do so forfeit, as we have before
sufficiently cleared, we do contend that they may incur the Penalty of being
discarded, and we do readily consent with the Council of Basil in the same, Cui
piae non predest correctio, debita ei non parcat abscissio; to him whom pious
correction does no good, let not a deserved cutting off spare him, if so be it
be once by the States of the Nation declared, that they have forfelted their
Government; but I do not think it fit for any private Person, nor lawful for
diverse particular Persons together to pass this Sentence, even as it is not
lawful for any private Person to introduce a new form of Government into the
Commonwealth; but it is generally allowed by all, that this belongs to the
whole Nation, or at least to the better part of it.

But to the end we may cut off all means and occasions from our Adversaries, of
expecting any relief for the future from the New Testament; those Precepts by
which we are instructed in our Duty toward Princes and Magistrates, are to be
explained by three Observations. 1st. Those Precepts as we observe, are
recommended and enjoined to all who are in Authority over others, without
exception. Now the Authority of those that bear rule, is not one and the same
in all Nations; therefore the Laws of every Nation standing in full force and
virtue, holy men would introduce their own Laws without prejudice to the other.
2ly. The Apostles Rules respect particular men, not the whole Lump and Mass of
any particular Nation: For at such time as they were delivered, the Church did
not compose any body politic, nor did compose any, till a long time after;
nay, even the Apostles Authority was odious, and suspected by all Nations. 3ly.
The Apostles had nothing to do to determine what Laws every Nation were to make
use of; for our Blessed Lord would not have it, that his Church should make us
any politic particular Government; for since it was to be propagated through
all parts of the world, which according to the various disposition and humors
of the People, the forms of Government do very much differ, nay, and sometimes
are quite contrary one to another; it was but convenient that the Apostles
should leave the administration of Government to it self with this proviso,
that it should not contain any thing in it that might seem repugnant to the
Tenure of the Gospel.

CHAP. VI. Wherein is treated of the first Ages of the Christian Church.
BUT now because in the three first Centuries, out of an unparalleled example
of humility and patience, Christians never made the least insurrection against
the Heathen Princes, by whom notwithstanding they were most barbarously and
sundry ways tortured; this does not at all infringe or invalidate the force of
our Argument, for they were no ways in a capacity of behaving themselves any
otherwise, being destitute of Force, and all along subject wheresoever they
were to their Enemies; but we lose not one jot of our right, when we are
debarred the use of it either by open force or any other insuperable way
whatsoever, yet one or other may object, that the Christians might have entered
into Confederacy with the most moderate Heathens against those who were
cruellest and most violent, yet neither was it expedient for the Christian
Religion to subdue the World to it self; it was a piece of indecency, for if
after this manner to gain Triumphs over Idolatry, but so soon as ever it got
the upper-hand of the World by abundance of patience and conspicuously eminent
good living, and became, that I may use the words (...), the prevailing
Doctrine, Vales in Eusebium in Hist. Eccles. lib. 4. cap. 7.
then did God out of his tender mercy grant Princes to his Church, who might be
able not only to secure them and defend them from the Heathen, but even from
bad Christians too. Now at this day we are by God's blessing in the same
prosperous Condition, and without all paradventure, Christians may now use that
Authority wherewith they are empowered by God.

But if any man shall pretend to scandalize or blame our Cause, for not having
summoned all those they called Fathers, to give evidence to strengthen our
Cause in hand, let him content himself with this Reply; That we have already
given an account of the three first Ages: But as for the succeeding Ages,
Constantin the Great will answer for us, who levied war in Christ's Name
against Maxentius and Licinius, and managed it all along accompanied with
Soldiers that were Subjects to both those Tyrants; who, upon the account of his
noble and famous Exploits, in behalf of Christendom, is celebrated by the
Praises and Encomiums of all the Fathers. It will not be much to deviate from
our purpose, if we bring in, and join to Constantin, Constans the youngest of
all his Sons, who had some thoughts of going to war with Constantius his
brother, being an Arrian for the restoring of Athanasius, and the rest of the
Orthodox Bishops to their Seas, but was prevented by Up and down in Ec^le^.
Histr.
death.

So that I cannot but admire the maintainers of Tyranny should be so blind
amidst so clear light, and that with such an impudent confidence should, what
in them lies, bear down and oppres^ manifest Truth; and should peremptorily
assert, That till Augustines time, and not till after that time too, that there
was no mention extant in History of any private person, who assassinated his
King, or took up Arms against him; Salmas. cap. 4. p. 138.
that not the least Cabal of Christian Conspirators durst ever dare to do the
same, even to the most Pagan King; much less did any of the Peers of the Realm,
ever pretend to stain his Conscience with the like wicked cruelty: When it
plainly appears by the History of all those Times, that Magnentius, who listed
himself under the Banner of Christ, did cruelly and barbarously murder
Constans Augustus, his Benefactor, and an Orthodox Emperor: And when it is
certainly true, that Maximus, who was also in the List of Christians, did
treacherously slay Gratian a Christian, and one of the best Emperors. And to
name no more, it is evident that the most Christian King Theodesius did cu^ off
Maximus the Tyrants head, who was the Murderer of Gratian, after he had
overcome him in War, and taken him Prisoner. Now we have produced all these
before the Age St. Augustine lived in, not that we subscribe to, and approve of
all these (God forbid a Christian should be possessed with such a perver^e idle
Spirit) but only to prove by the way, that this was matter of fact, which our
Adversaries has the face to deny.

And indeed if any one, who is not prejudiced, shall peruse Ecclesiastical
History, he stall find, that the primitive Christians, who were eminent for
Authority and power, did no less exercise it, than those now a days: besides
the Christians of the first th^ee Cent^ries did not stop the cariere of Tyrants
by force of Arms, but by their Christian and virtuous Piety; not that God would
have them divested of that authority the Law of Nature granted to all Nations,
but it so seemed good to his Wisdom, that he might instruct all Nations, that
Christ's Kingdom was Spiritual, and that the World was to be brought under his
dominion only by Spiritual Warsare; but when the World was subdued to Christ,
the Church scattered ^ar and wide over the face of the whole Earth, then it
became very like to the Net in the Gospel, that enclosed abundance of good and
bad Fish. God out of his infinite goodness did graciously grant them Christian
Kings and Magistrates, whose business was to separate the good Fish from the
bad, who should conduct and rule the numerous Church, as a well Disciplined
Army: Moreover I desire you, to take Notice of one thing more, which puts this
Truth beyond all exception, and that is this, that the Christians of the first
three Centuries, did never suppress Heretics by force of Arms; but after they
had once got the management of Supreme Affairs in their own Hand, they soon
suppressed, not only Heretics, but even Schismatics too by Arms. I, and St.
Augustine himself sounded the charge to this Battle, which I do not so much
approve of.

It does therefore evidently appear, that the Christians of the Primitive
Church, supposing the Power of the Sword annexed to Magistracy, did forbear
using it, whilst they were destitute of a Christian Magistracy; but when once
they were Subject to a Christian M^gistracy, Christian Religion did never
deprive its Disciples of the Natural (...) Civil Law; and they publicly made
appear, that Christ came not into the World to destroy and subvert Nature, but
for the correcting and bettering of it. Away then with your Plagues of Mankind,
who, that they may curry favor with Tyrants, have the impudence to bring back
into more then Egyptian Slavery, those whom God has brought out of the House
of Bondage, whom Christ has redeemed with his Precious Blood, that they should
no longer be under servitude to Man.

And now methinks, we have abundantly evinced, both by the Decrees of the
Councils, and by constant usage and practice, as well as by the Laws of
Nations, by the determinations of the Doctors, by the confession of Emperors
and Kings, and last of all by the T^stimony of the Holy Scriptures, that
Tyrants may be deposed, that the unruly d^^ires of Kings may be restrained by
the Laws. It does therefore plainly appear, from the Premises, that the
Parliament of England, did very wisely and seasonably provide for the good of
the Commonwealth, when they rejected James the Second, who trod both Divine and
Humane Laws under foot, and in putting that Pious and Magnanimous Prince, that
Just Defender of the Faith, and of the Laws; yea, and true Heir to the Crown,
in his stead. We shall not wander abroad, to search here and there for Examples
and Testimonies beyond the Christian World; for since that the matter is to be
tried before Christians, and Christian Judges, reason requires, that it should
be decided by Christian Laws. We have culled out from that plentiful Stock of
Arguments, the choicest, and such as seem to have been offered to the World
with the most mature Judgment, in which Examples, Conscience and the Public
Benefit, would very well agree and conspire together. We omit those, that
either have too much to do with popularity, or preposterous violence and heat,
and such which smell too strong of Popish Tyranny, lest we should occasion
scruples to some good Men, and administer any cause of wrangling or quarrelling
to our Adversaries; and if I be not much mistaken, I have so explained and
cleared the History of Saul and David, that from it, I hope, for the future,
those passive obedient Parasites of Tyrants will not expect to find any thing
to encourage them.

The Appendix to this small Treatise.
WHen I had quite made an end of this small piece, I accidentally met with the
posthumous Work of Edmond Richer, Doctor of the faculty of Paris, no obscure
person, touching Ecclesiastical Power in Temporal Matters, it was published at
Cologne Anno 1691. wherein he makes as if he would lay some foundation for the
absolute Power of the King, but defends it with such sorry pitiful Arguments,
that although he had a mind to sacrifice Truth to Regal Power, yet in spite of
his Teeth, Truth (for it is stronger than any King) will bravely hold up its
Head against Error: nor would I have you take my word for it; let him have a^
hearing, bringing in his Evidence for Truth.

As to the Second Doubt, says he, I grant that every Commonwealth stands
upon its own Legs, and is sufficient for its self, by Divine and Natural Right
should it be either a Republic or a Monarchy, so it be done by a free Consent
of the Estates, and the Public Peace kept, for by what Right it does by the
undnimous consent of all, choose freely a Prince, by the same Right also may it
abrogate and disown that Prince, provided that in so abrogating, the Public
Tranquillity and Peace be not disturbed; for if the Public Peace suffer
thereby, it is far the wiser course to rest satisfied, and endure the
Grievances and Tyranny of one single person than of many, conformable to that
Precept of our Blessed Lord, not to plu^k up the Tares with harm to the Wheat.

In this Thesis, Richerius does not only settle and maintain the Right inherent
to the People to depose ill Princes, but does also mightily approve of the late
change that happened in the British affairs as lawful: For Charles the Second
dying without lawful Issue, it was in the Parliaments Power, either to elect or
refuse James the Second, by reason of his great averseness to the True
Religion, it was therefore in the Parliaments Power to eject him; but they
ejected him as one who did not administer aright; neither was the Peace and
Tranquillity disturbed in so abrogating him, neither were there more Tyrants
placed in his stead, but the true rightful Heirs to the Crown William and Mary;
and by rooting up the greatest part of the Tares, no damage to the Wheat
ensued; yea it because more pure and clean, therefore Richerius could have
desired nothing more in this Revolution.

Furthermore, the said Richerius tells us, that as well Reason as the Practice
of the Primitive Church do confirm, that it is altogether unlawful to shock the
Peace and Quiet of the Public, only upon the acco^nt of a Princes oppressing
or forsaking the Religion professed and established by his Predecessors, unless
at the same time he injure the Peace, with the State of the Kingdom.

We have before looked into the reason it self, and constant practice of the
Primitive Church; but for all that, Richerius must needs confess that it is
Lawful to restrain one that does injury to public Tranquillity. But this great
Parisian Doctor uses a strange kind of distinction, Except it so fall out,
says he, that he violate or corrupt the Peace, together with the state of the
Kingdom: He seems to make small account of Religion, who supposes that the
Religion of a Kingdom may be suppressed, and that yet the Peace of the Kingdom
may not b^ disturbed and destroyed; the good man knows that Religion is one of
the tenderest things in the World; and thus you see how Truth uses to compel
the Maintainers and Abettors of Falsehood to acknowledge her; and even, whether
they will or no, to extort an evidence for her against themselves.

Give me leave now to finish this Appendix with Richerius's own Words, We must
conclude then, says he, that it is one of the greatest Miracles that can
possibly happen t^ Mankind in any Civil Society, to be blessed with a good
Prince, which God out ^^ his mercy bestows on them, as he gives ill Princes in
his wrath.

O Fortunates nimium, sua si bona norint
Anglicolas --
What mighty blessings may the English find,
If to their happiness they are not blind.

Gloria Deo in Excelss.

