THE Germane Spy: Truly Discovering the DEPLORABLE CONDITION OF THE KINGDOM
and SUBJECTS OF THE French King.

BEING, An ABSTRACT of the several Years Observations of a Gentleman, who made
that the Peculiar Business of his Travels.

WITH A Continuation of Christianismus Christianandus.

LONDON, Printed for Randal Tailor, near Stationers' Hall, 1691.

THE Germane Spy: TRULY DISCOVERING The Deplorable Condition of the Kingdom,
and Subjects of the FRENCH King.
A Certain German Gentleman, a Subject to one of the Northern Princes, a Person
of great Uunderstanding, and no less devoted to the good Cause; being returned
some Weeks ago, by the Way of Italy, from the Kingdom of France, where he
Traveled a long time, and took an extraordinary Care to inform himself of all
things; with an admirable Exactness, has imparted to us in his own Language, a
Writing, containing several Remarks of considerable Importance, which he made
upon the present State of France; of which we find it to be our Duty, and for
the Interest of the Public Good, that the Nation should be informed: To which
effect, we immediately with great diligence, set our selves to Translate the
same.

And this we do so much the more willingly, because we find that several
Persons have formed in themselves such an advantageous Idaea of the Power of
France, by reason of the taking of Mons and Nyssa; that we deemed it proper to
disabuse those People, and all others that are led into the same Error.

Our Author begins with a Discourse of the Beauty of the Country, and
Temperature of the Climate, the goodness of the Fruits, the agreeable
Dispositions and Politeness of the Inhabitants, and their Assability toward
Strangers, which in truth is very great; and after he has entertained the
Reader for some time with these things, he tells us,

That the Miseries of those People, are not to be expressed; That there is not
any Nation under Heaven so oppressed, even in a time of Peace, neither
excepting the Muscovites nor the Turks; and that those distressed People are
reduced to such a Condition of Poverty, that though the merciless Exactors
exercise in those Places, ten times more Cruelty than an Hostile and Victorious
Army is wont to do upon a People newly subdued; nevertheless the King is not
able to raise the half of his ordinary Imposts, which he raised about three
Years ago, because the People have no Money, and for that the Kingdom lies so
like a Desert in many Places.

That this Year there will be a Failure of above Thirty Millions, upon the
Score of Non-ability to pay.

That all Manufactures are at a very low Ebb; as those of Silk, Linen, Paper,
etc. And that all the Artificers are either dead, or in the Wars; and that
their Trade is absolutely ruined, as well by Land as Sea, as well without as
within the Kingdom; and that Lewis XIV. receives but very little Money by it:
Which is the reason, he has been constrained to have recourse to violent Means,
which are never made use of, but when the State is ready to perish; such as are
the Creation of a great number of new Officers, the Borrowing of Thirty
Millions, the Augmentation of Officers Fees for large Sums, the extraordinary
Taxes upon the Clergy, his Command to sell a great part of his Plate, and the
enhauncing the Value of Money; by which means, the King has raised above a
Hundred Millions, without which he could not have paid his Men this Year.

That all Provisions for the Belly, as Corn and Wine, are sunk above the sixth
part of the Value, which they were formerly worth, and much less than what they
cost the Husbandman.

That they who have Lands to Let, cannot find Farmers, and that the Houses
tumble down, and the Lands lie untilled.

That they who have Offices, have no Profit by them.

That they who have Money due, cannot get the Interest of their Money i^ a long
time, unless they be such who have lent Money to the King some years ago,
because he thinks thereby to oblige all those that have Money, to lend it him.

That all the Subjects of that Kingdom in general, are all equally ruined: as,

The Churchmen, who formerly were very Wealthy and Powerful, but now their
Lands and other Estates no longer yield 'em any Money: And for the inferior
Clergy, they have nothing to do, for they neither Marry, nor Baptize, nor
Bury; all the Men being killed in the Wars.

The Grand Nobility live only upon their Pensions, and Court Employments: The
Gentry are a Body the most miserable in the World, and which ought to curse the
Reign of this King.

The Officers of Justice, of the Politic Government, and the Finances receive
no Benefit, either by their Estates or Emploiments, and yet the King loads them
every day with new demands.

The Universities, Colleges, and Academies for Riding, Dancing, and Exercise of
Arms, are all so low, that the Masters die for Hunger.

That whereas prudent Princes never make War, but with one Part of the Revenue
of their Subjects, and never Conquer, but to Enrich and People their Dominions,
Lewis XIV. has devoured in War three Fourths of all the Funds of the Kingdom,
and is hastening to eat up the Remainder; and that his own Subjects are a
thousand times more miserable, than the People which he has Conquered; as
appears,

First, In that the Lands and the Houses, one with another, are not worth above
the fourth Part of the Revenue, of what they were worth; besides, that there is
no Rent to be seen, and to fell them, they would not yield a sixth part.

That there is a fourth Part of the Houses, that fall to ruin; and a fourth
Part of the Lands, that are thrown up.

That the Husbandman, who formerly gained 8 Sous a day, living in the Country,
now gets not above two, and that paid him in Corn, of which a Bushel that was
formerly commonly worth 30 Sous, is not worth above five or six; and withal,
that there is very little Corn in the Kingdom, take it in general.

That by consequence, the King has devoured all the Money that was due to the
Rich Men of the Kingdom, by the Loans of Money to particular Persons; and this
exceeds above a third Part of all the Stock of the Kingdom. For Lands, Houses,
and Rents being eaten up, the Mortgages must fail.

That he has several times devoured the Offices and Employments of the whole
Kingdom, which he sold at dear Rates, and which were to him instead of a Grand
Principal Substance, which produced nothing to the Officers.

That all these Offices of Judicature, Civil Policy, and the Finances, could
not have cost less than eight hundred Millions, and that the small Wages which
they receive from the King, are swallowed up in the Taxes which they pay from
time to time.

That the innumerable multitude of these Offices, and of their exorbitant
Prices is such, that these People having but small Wages, and ill Paid, cannot
drain less than a hundred Millions a year* from the People, by the litigious
Pettifogging, their Cheating and Extortion.

That the King has dissipated above two Thirds of the Coined Money of the
Kingdom, as well by exhausting the Price, as by transporting it out of the
Kingdom, and besides that has devoured two Thirds of the Plate within these 40
Years.

That he has devoured the Estates and Lands of Cities, Corporations, and
particular Persons, by re-uniting them to the Crown Demeasnes.

That he has devoured several Hundreds of Millions, which he extorted from
those that were called Partisans, who were Farmers of his Imposts, whom he
despoiled and robbed, after they had robbed others.

That the Kingdom of France is dispeopl'd within these Forty years, above half
in half; but chiefly within these ten Years.

That there are in the Armies of the King of France, between six and seven
Hundred Thousand Men, including in the Number, a hundred, or a hundred and
twenty Toll-gatherers, and Subsidy Collectors; and are thus numbered: 50000
Horse, 18 Dragoons, 33^000 Foot, 30000 belonging to his Artillery, and
Provision, and Ammunition Wagons, and 50000 in his Fleets and Galleys, and
above 100 or 120 Camp-Varlets, which make up the number of 700000 Men, the
greatest part of which are Un-marri'd.

That there are destroyed and die every Year, few less than a Third part of
these Men, according to the Lists of Recruits, which are so many Females
excluded from Marriage. And that at the end of 10 Years, Marriage being so much
hinderd, above the half of any numerous Nation will come to be destroyed.

That the Lives of all the People lost within 10 Years, according to the
Estimate, which is made of Men and Women Slaves in Algier, amounts to several
thousand Millions.

That from the Example of Paris, where this Depopulation is least discerned,
the rest of the Kingdom must be extremely dispeopl'd.

That he is very well informed, that there are fewer People in Paris by a Third
part, than there were about Twenty years ago, and that they live in extreme
Misery there, notwithstanding the multitude of Coaches, and the great Court.

That the Houses, for the generality, still retain above half the value of
their ancient Hire; but that the Rent is ill Paid, and several of the Houses
stand empty; that the Tradesmen die there for hunger.

That there are hardly any Lacquies, Clerks, Proctors, or young Barbers to be
seen, as being all consumed by the War; and that all the rest of the Cities and
Towns of the Kingdom, are in a worse Condition.

That there may be still near Ten Millions of Souls in the Kingdom, and that
within the last ten Years, the number has lessened between 4 or 5 Millions.

That by the number of Parishes, which are Twenty Seven Thousand, compared with
the number of Men not Married, which are in the War, or in the number of
Collectors, that there ought to be 22 Men, and one fourth in each Parish one
with another.

That France can never recover it self, (though the Government should be
changed,) without a long Peace, and unless she abandon her Conquests and
Usurpations; by reason the Manufactures are carried into Foreign Countries, the
half of the People destroyed, the Money wasted, the Funds charged with more
Debts than they are worth; because the vast Army of Toll-gatherers and
Collectors is not dismissed; the Sale of Offices and Employments is not
suppressed; and because all those Officers drained, exhausted, and samish'd,
will lie sucking the People to the very Marrow, as well as the Court; otherwise
who can believe, though Trade were once again restored, that France can always
raise the same Sums, which she has done for a long time, unless these Maxims
of Injustice and Violence be restored, with which she is overwhelmed.

That the Money is extremely diminished in France: For that for a long time,
the King purchased the Alliances and Amities of all Princes, corrupted their
Ministers and other, Counselors, paid large Pensions to make them declare for
France, or only remain Neuters; expended upon Spies, both great Ones, and those
of lesser Note, considerable Sums; sent Armies out of the Kingdom into the
Service of other Princes; purchased Cities and strong Holds, as Dunkirk and
Casal, the Garrison of which Place stands him in a great deal of Money every
Year, as also Pigneroll. The Huguenots have carried out Thirty Millions. The
Horses sent for every Year out of Germany; Switzerland, and other Places since
the War, cost at least Six Millions every Year, each Horse brought from thence,
being Valued at 20 Pistols a piece; for that there are no Breeds of Horses in
the Kingdom, by reason of the incredible Poverty of the People, that cannot
compass it to have Stocks before hand.

That in Gold-lace, Embroidery, Cloth of Gold, Fringes and Gilding, there are
wasted in France above Ten Millions of Livers in that Metal, and in England
more; adding withal this Sentence, Ambitiosa Paupertate perit Gallia. Through
ambitious Poverty France is ruined: And in this is shown the Blindness of the
English Nation, who complain of the Transportation of their Money, and that it
is scarce, while they themselves in ten Years, destroy as much Silver by this
means, as there is Money in the Kingdom.

That all the Money which France raises by Contribution, does not exceed for or
five Millions of France, which is not above the Fortieth or Fiftieth part of
her Expense.

That the Trade which remains behind, is very little.

That the Profit by Privateers is not considerable.

Lastly, That the War, beyond Comparison, does less mischief to the
Confederates than to France; That the Confederates, for the most part, gain by
this War; That Germany in general, draws great Advantages from it, though
several Princes and States suffer by it; and that those Advantages advance to a
considerable Value.

That the Advantages will far surmount the Disadvantages, which Holland
receives thereby; and that at length she will gain much more than she does at
present, and will get a large Interest, by the principal Sums she now
disburses. That Spain will also be a gainer, though she loses at present.

That the D. of Savoy will find his Satisfaction for that he loses, and will
lose much less being United with the Confederates, than if he had closed with
Lewis XIV. upon the Conditions which he proposed; for that then he had been
despoi'ld past recovery, in regard that France never keeps her Word. But that
England gains more than any of the Confederates, though many People will not
believe it.

That in time of Peace, ten Thousand English, as well Masters as Servants,
travel into France, who spend three times as much, as the Revenues of Scotland
and Ireland; their Expense reckoned at a 100 Livers Sterling a piece, one with
another. They get, for the most part, above a Million Sterling by the Baubles
of Paris; and that now they get but little by the Manufactures of Goldlace,
Silk, large Hats, French Glass, Woodden-Combs, Paper, Linen, which are settled
here by the favor of the War; by the Salt, Brandy, Sider and Bear, which is
made here; by the small Quantity of French Wine which is consumed at present;
by the several Fruits Dry and Green, and French Sweat-Meats, which are little
esteemed.

That England is, at this day, much more Wealthy than France; and that if God
had afflicted England with such a Government, and a King of Lewis the
Fourteenth's Humor, she might do much more than France does now.

That therefore all Princes, that are tempted to imitate that King in his
Humors, to be a Conqueror and an Absolute Prince, ought rather to swallow
Poison, and quit the World, than to suffer themselves to be overruled by such
Barbarous and Cursed Passions.

That indeed, in some measure, Lewis XIV. is to be excused for his Attacking
Mons and Nyssa; as supposing him to have a good Correspondence, both in the one
and the other, and that his Design was thereby, to re-establish or maintain the
Reputation of his Great Power, of which he began to be somewhat doubtful; and
to prevent his Credit from falling, as well among the Rebels in Ireland, as
among his own Subjects, and at Rome, where there is such Disputing about the
Election of a New Pope; and that he thought this would strike a Terror into the
Confederates, especially the Duke of Savoy, who he troubles the most, and
therefore would oblige him to make his Peace apart, and others after, or
together with him. He was also willing to make the World believe, that the
Congress at the Hague, of which he had Intilligence 8 Months before, did
nothing astonish him. And therefore beleiving it was high time for him to
Attempt something, he picked out Mons, before any other in the Low Countries,
and took all his Measures to Crown the Enterprise with Success. And the Reasons
why he pitched upon Mons were these: Because it was a Place the most advanced
toward France, and for that the Confederates would sooner make an Invasion of
his Country on that side, than any other way; because it was a Place which
fetched great Contributions out of France, and the Conquered Provinces, and for
that being large and wealthy, it might serve to make a Magazine for K.
William's Army; and because that if the Confederates were so far weakn'd, as to
make a Peace to his Advantage the next Winter, he would rather keep it, than
Aeth, Oudenard, or Charleroy, which he had been once already obliged to quit,
to serve as a Bar to the Spanish Low Countries; besides that, it is the Capital
City of a large Province, which the Conquest of that Town would reduce wholly
under his Subjection. As for Nyssa, assuredly it was Bought and Sold; for that
otherwise it would have been a foolish attempt to have Attacqu'd it in the
Heart of Winter, being a Place Impregnable; and that the Traitors were agreed,
to cover their foul Play, to fire the Powder, under the Favor of the first
Bombs that Catinat should throw into the Town; by which means they should take
the French Money, yet appear honest Men. That as for the Circumstances and the
Soldiers killed by the Accident, it might all be so managed, as if the whole
had happened fortuitously, the better to cover their Intrigues.

Therefore it is presumed, that France went the best way to try, whether she
could by these means separate the Allies one from the other; and farther, that
there is no question to be made, but that France, by other Intrigues, supported
with Money, will do her utmost to make a Peace the next Winter; for that
othe^wise she is ruined for ever, notwithstanding all the outward haughtiness
she carries in her looks, and that it is the Interest of the Allies, not to be
too hasty, but to stand resolutely upon their Terms.

That whatever outward show Lewis XIV. makes, it will be impossible for him to
support another Campaign after this, but that he must be obliged to constrain
his Subjects to sell the last remainder of their Plate, and to raise the Price
of his Money at least half in half. And that all this will hardly suffice for
another Campaign; for that the farther he goes forward in these Excesses, and
the more his usual Imposts decay, the less Money he will have, and the more the
People will be ruined.

Having now given you a short, but faithful Account of the Miseries and
Calamities that the French King's Subjects groan under at home, as also the
sinking Condition of the State; which we may modestly affirm to be the Effects
of his Tyrannical Government on the one hand, and of his Infidelity and
Injustice toward his Neighbors and Allies on the other; let us now examine
the Particulars of his Transactions with each Neighboring Potentate for some
time past, and then let the Impartial judge, whether any thing but Oppression
to his People, and Ruin to his Kingdom, are likely to be the Events of such
perfidious Practices. We will begin with England.

How happy was the King of England, at his first Restoration, beloved by his
People, adored by his Parliament, and in perfect Union with his Neighbors the
Dutch! What might not those two Potentates in close Confederacy have done?
France trembled at the thoughts of it, and despaired of grasping Universal
Empire, unless she could divide this solid opposition, so pernicious to her
soaring Projects.

The French King well understood that the King of England, would he but put
himself to the trouble of knowing his own strength, and making a true use of
it, was in a condition not only to mediate, but to force a Peace among all the
Potentates of Europe. For by a strict Union with the Hollanders, he was
absolute. Master of the whole Ocean, and consequently of the Riches of the
World; insomuch that the Mines of America were not safe to the King of Spain,
but by his Permission; and by sending to the weaker side the assistance of his
Land Forces, formidable as well for their Courage as their Discipline, he was
able to have turned the scales of Victory which way soever he pleased. Now then
in regard that by the common Rules of Policy and Foresight, the French King
could not but be well assured, that whatsoever Princes he assailed, the other
would be as certain in the weakness of his Condition, to have recourse to the
two Grand Fortresses of Europe, Potent at Sea, and no less powerful by Land, to
prevent the R^vage of his Territories; whether the Dictates of Achitophelism,
and Machiavilism, might not in some measure justify the most Christian King,
in pursuing the best Methods he could to separate such a Conjunction, so
prejudicial to his aspiring Ambition and Self-interest, may not be so much,
perhaps, the Question; but whether he is not to be looked upon as the worst of
the whole Race of Cain, and as a Mischief and Pest which all Mankind ought to
eschew; who, besides the most unchristian like ways, by which he sought to
subdue his Enemies, treated his most faithful Friends and Allies with that
infidelity, that Treachery, that base and scornful Ingratitude, as he did the
King of England. By which it was plain, that all the Kindnesses and
Remuneration which the Most Christian Lewis intended the King of England for
all his Services, was only that he should have been the last, that for all his
Services and Assistences given to the French Crown, to the oversight of his
own Interest, and his

True it is, that notwithstanding the Convulsions that threatened his Kingdom
during his Minority, yet Mazarine having by a Conjunction with Cromwell,
surmounted all those difficulties, much increased his Power, and enlarged his
Conquests by new Acquisitions: (For Cromwell, whom for his pains Mazarine was
wont to call a Fortunate Fool,) gaping after the Golden Mines of Peru, to
supply his empty Coffers, contrary to all the Rules of English Policy, was
altogether for pulling down the distant Monarchy of Spain, and advancing the
neighboring power of France. Mazarine had the length of his Foot; and
therefore resolved to make the best of him, by pampering up his Gold craving
humor, and fostering his Animosities against the Spaniard. And so cunning was
Mazarine, that he granted the heedless Usurper whatever he demanded,
considering that when Cromwell had assisted him to do his work, in bringing
under the House of Austria, and by that means casting the Balance of Europe on
the French side, he should afterward have leisure enough to recover what he
had seemed to part with; which was afterward too unhappily verified by the
easy regaining of Dunkirk. Thus Cromwell being the first that raised the
Grandeur of the French, to which he contributed not a little by the War which
he made at the time with Spain; the two Princes that succeeded him, were so
wheedled and bewitched by the French Kings specious pretencees and fair
Promises, that they did, tho undesignedly too much assist, him to get up to the
Pinicle of Universal Dominion; as if this Most Christian King had made use of
Charms and Philters to fascinate their Eyes and Ears, neither to see themselves
so often abused, nor to hear the advices of their most faithful Counselors.

How happy was the King of England, at his first Restoration, beloved by his
People, adored by his Parliament, and in perfect Union with his Neighbors the
Dutch! What might not those two Potentates in close Confederacy have done?
France trembled at the thoughts of it, and despaired of grasping Universal
Empire, unless she could divide this solid opposition, so pernicious to her
soaring Projects.

The French King well understood that the King of England, would he but put
himself to the trouble of knowing his own strength, and making a true use of
it, was in a condition not only to mediate, but to force a Peace among all the
Potentates of Europe. For by a strict Union with the Hollanders he was absolute
Master of the whole Ocean, and consequently of the Riches of the World;
insomuch that the Mines of America, were not safe to the King of Spain but by
his Permission; and by sending to the weaker side the assistance of his Land
Forces, formidable as well for their Courage as their Discipline, he was able
to have turned the scales of Victory which way soever he pleased. Now then in
regard that by the common Rules of Policy and Foresight, the French King could
not but be well assured that whatsoever Princes he assailed, the other would be
as certain in the weakness of his Condition, to have recourse to the two Grand
Fortresses of Europe, Potent at Sea, and no less powerful by Land, to prevent
the Ravage of his Territories; whether the Dictates of Achitophelism, and
Matchavillinism, might not in some measure justify the most Christian King, in
pursuing the best Methods he could, to separate such a Conjunction, so
prejudicial to his aspiring Ambition and Self-interest, may not be so much,
perhaps the Question; but whether he is not to be looked upon, as the worst of
the whole Race of Cain, and as a Mischief, and Pest which all Mankind ought to
eschew; who, besides the most unchristianlike ways by which he sought to subdue
his Enemies, treated his most faithful Friends and Allies with that
Infidelity, that Treachery, that base and scornful Ingratitude as he did the
King of England. By which it was plain, that all the Kindnesses and
Remuneration which the Most Christian Lewis intended the King of England for
all his Services, was only that he should have been the last, that for all his
Services and Assistences given to the French Crown, to the oversight of his
own Interest, and his Peoples welfare, should have been rewarded with Invasion
and Conquest.

To make this Separation therefore between England and Holland, the most
subtle Mercuries of France were sent abroad with their Silver Wands, to lull
the British Argos asleep, and prevent his watching over the Hesperian Garden of
European Liberty; or rather with a deeper Intoxication of Aurum Potabile
Draughts, to allure his Ministers into a downright Falsification of their
Trusts. Nor was it possible for all of them to escape, being befascinated or to
resist those Golden Temptations; but, like People that must go through with
what they have taken money to perform, presently several artificial
insinuations of Injuries received from the Dutch, as to Amboyna, and the
Fishery, were whispered about in England, while at the same time the freedom of
the Sea, and the preservation of Trade, were with the same subtilty to be
disputed in Holland, on purpose to exasperate the jealousy of those People.
Things that might so easily have been adjusted where there had been the least
Condescentions to Reason, that it was undoubtedly above the reach of most Men's
understanding, that the Policy of Great Britain should prefer a trivial Quarrel
about Sprats and Herrings, (for the business of Amboyna had been compounded
long before,) above the common safety of three Nations, and that a Protestant
Kingdom, without being constrained thereto by some unavoidable necessity,
should ever fight with so much Rage and Fierceness for the Destruction of the
Protestant Interest: Or that English Counselors should advise their Prince to
run the Fortune of a French King, without any rational Prospect of Advantage to
himself. But it was plain that the Most Christian King was then laying his most
Unchristian Trains for the Destruction of England; and as palpable it was, that
the Dutch War was designed by the French to ruin the naval strength of both
Nations, and thereby to break the Balance of Europe. It was a Mystery beyond
unfolding, that the Chief Ministers of England should take such strange
Measures, so to mislead their Sovereign, that in order to the making good his
Title to the Kingdom of France, he should enable the French King to invade all
Christendom, and to extend his Empire beyond all bounds; or that to secure to
himself and his People the Sovereignty of the Seas, he should with so much
industry endeavor to force all the Dutch Ships, with all their Naval Power,
into the Arms of the French, and rejoice at their Victories as if by Conquering
the Land, the French did not at the same time become Masters of the Havens,
Rivers, and Fleets of the Dutch. And yet such was the vast Predominancy which
French Treason, and the hidden Conspiracies of French Counsels had over these
great Politicians, and the Asscendent which they had over the King of England,
that he was so kind to the French King, for setting him together by the ears
with the Dutch, that he sent him his Vice Admirals, and other Sea Officers, to
encourage and promote the setting out of his Fleets, and in pity of their want
of experience in Sea Affairs, took his raw Seamen by the hand, trained them up
in his own Fleets, among the best of his Seamen, and taught them that skill
which the English had been many Ages a learning; and all this in hopes to
enable the French King to assist him in beating his best and most secure
friends; wherein the French, according to their wonted Treachery, failed him
too, when they were put to the Trial.

All the World would have thought the King should not have so soon forgot the
Punic Faith of France in their kindness to his Person, while he was abroad in
Exile among them; or if then they might pretend the Interest of their Kingdom,
and palliate their faithless and inhumane Dealing with him by necessity of Self
preservation; yet no such necessity constrained him to forget the French King's
opposing his Restoration with so much violence as he did; and his Caballing
with his greatest enemies to keep him out of his Kingdom, more especially since
he was then so sensible of it, when it was recent in his Memory; that upon his
coming into England, he commanded away Monsieur Bourdeaux, the French
Ambassador, and would not suffer him to come into his presence.

But the Most Christian King knew full well how to work himself again into the
King of England's favor, and at length by throwing a French Dalilah into his
embraces, quite cut off the Locks of the British Sampson. All on a sudden
France seemed to be removed into England; nothing but French Baubles and Gugaws
pleased our English Gentry: A French Faction prevailing at Court, French
Mountebanks for Physicians, French Fashions, French Hats, French Lackeys,
French Fiddlers, French Dancing-Masters, French Tooth-Drawers, French Barbers,
French Air in our very looks, French Legs, French Compliments, French Grimaces,
and French Debauchery, to fit us for French Slavery: And had the French Disease
been then unknown in England, it is to be questioned whither it would not have
been entertained with as general a Consent as the Sichemites submitted to the
Pain of Circumcision, though to the hazard of being all destroyed by the French
Simeon and Levi, while sore and driveling under the Distemper. Nor is it to be
doubted but the French Christianity would have as easily made trial of such a
Design as they did of the rest of their Tricks, had they thought it would have
taken effect.

It is well known, that before the first Dutch War was entered into, the King of
England sought to make Alliances with France and Spain, but the Spaniards were
so Cock-sure of the French Promises, that they would not make any Approaches to
Friendship with England, without the giving up of Dunkirk, Tangier, and Jamaica.

As for the French, a Project of a Treaty was offered them, and promoted with
all earnestness by the Lord H -- s at Paris, but it was plainly discerned that
the principal designs of the Most Christian King was only to draw the King of
England into such an Alliance, as might advance his design upon Spain; and
therefore so soon as he had set the Dutch and us together by the Ears, and saw
that thereby the Balance of Europe was broken, he no longer minded Alliance
with England: But after many Proposals of Leagues, and many Arts used to
highten the jealousies between Us and the Hollanders, he at last sided with the
Dutch, though to so little purpose, that his Intentions plainly appeared to be
no other, than to see the two most Potent Obstacles of his Ambition destroy one
another, to the end he might with less Opposition invade his Neighbors, and
increase his own Naval Strength. Nay, the Juggle went much farther, for that in
the heat of all the War, he still kept Negotiations on Foot, and made overtures
and proposals of Peace, by means of the Queen Mother, whom in the end he so
far, and so treacherously deluded, as to ascertain her, and by her means to
assure the King of England her Son, that the Dutch would not set out any Fleet
the ensuing Summer, and yet underhand pressed the Dutch with all the Vigor and
Importunity imaginable to fit out their Men of War again, with a promise,
rather than fail, that he would join his Fleet with theirs against the English.
Now it was upon a Supposal that the Most Christian King was at that time a good
Christian and true to his Word, in pursuing his pretended Proposals of Peace;
and upon that faithless French Paroll it was, that the King of England put
forth no Fleet to Sea that Year, upon which followed that Fatal surprise of our
Ships at Chatham; then which a greater Dis-honour never happened to the Nation
since the memory of History. But at last, as we had been obliged to the Craft
and Treachery for the War and the Shame we received by it, so we were glad to
receive the Peace that ensued from his favor; which was concluded at Breda
between England, France, and Holland.

By this Treaty of Breda, the French were obliged to restore St. Christophers
to the English in the same manner and form as is expressed in the Articles; but
instead of performing their Engagement according to the true intent and literal
meaning of the Articles, they from time to time upon several unjust and
frivolous Pretenses, deluded and delayed the English Commissioners that were
sent to take Possession of it; till finding there was a necessity to comply
with us in so small a matter, while we were preparing to venture a second
quarrel in their behalf, it was at last surrendered, after four year's baffling,
to Sir Charles Wheeler. However to show the perfidiousness of French dealing,
before they delivered it they destroyed all the Plantations, laid the whole
Island waste, and left it in a much worse condition than if it had never been
planted. And as if the seizure and detaining of the King of England's
Territories had not been sufficient, they interrupted also the Trade of his
Subjects in those Parts, and assuming to themselves the Sovereignty of those
Seas, would not suffer any Ships but their own, to sail either by or about
those Islands; but as if it had been Criminal so to do, took and confiscated
several Vessels upon that account. From all which a Question will arise easy
to be resolved, whither any thing be recorded of the old Carthaginians more
perfidious than this; and whether the King of England might not have expected
more Honest and Christian dealing from the unbelieving Turk, than from the Most
Christian King.

It Is true, that after the Peace of Breda, the King of England was at liesure
to consider how the French King had abused him, by engaging him in a War with
his Protestant Neighbors, and how he had seemingly taken their parts to prolong
the War; that while they were battering, and bruising, and weakening one
another, he might have the fairer Opportunity, in violation of all the most
solemn and sacred Oaths and Treaties, to invade the Spanish Netherlands; and
observing with what a rapid Torrent of Victory he bore down all before him,
thought fit to interpose before the flame that consumed his next Nighbour,
should throw it is sparks over the Water; and therefore sent into Holland to
invite them to a nearer Alliance, and to enter into such farther Counsels as
were most proper to stop the Fury of the French King; which offer being by the
Dutch embraced with open Arms, a defensive League was concluded in five days
time between Holland and England, together with another for the repressing the
farther Progress of the French Arms in the Spanish Netherlands: In which the
Sweeds afterward making a third Party concerned, gave it the name of the
Triple League.

This was no way pleasing to the French King, however for a while he dissembled
his resentment of the Affront, though from the first moment he resolved to make
use of all his Charms, and Golden Magic to dissolve this Triple Knot, whatever
it cost him.

To this purpose the Duchess of Orleance, is said by the French to be sent over
hither, believing no Instrument so proper as the King of England's own Sister
to prevail with her Brother. King Charles met her at Dover, where their
endearments one to another were so much the more reciprocally prevailing, by
how much it happens that Princes more rarely than private Persons enjoy their
Relations: And when they do, yet their kind Interviews are many times attended
with some fatal disaster; of which though there was no appearance here in
England, yet the first News we heard of her upon her Return to France, was,
that she was dead: However the Affair was so dexterously managed, that a French
Ambassador was forthwith dispatched out of France, and an English Ambassador
sent to Paris, and as the French gave out, a private League was clapped up, to
the ruin of the Triple Alliance, to all the highth of Intimacy and Dearness;
as if upon dissecting the Princess, there had some State Philter been found in
her Bowels, or that a Reconciliation with France could not have been celebrated
with a less Sacrifice than that of the Bloud-Royal of England. This supposed
Treaty was a work of Darkness, not to be dived into in a great while, but
afterward the French King caused it to be made public, as we shall see by and
by.

It Is true, the Knowledge of this was of great Importance to England; but the
discovery was the most apparent Demonstration in the World of French
Perfidiousness, so enormous as it could not be imagined to have entered into the
Breast of a Most Christian King, so treacherously to expose the Secrets of his
dearest Confederate, after he had drawn him in by all the Assurances of his
assistance imaginable: And the reasons that induced him to make the detection
were no less Impious, though agreeable to the Practice of the French King; who
after he has made it his business to decoy in Princes, that lend an easy ear
to his Enchantments, or with too much facility suffer themselves to be overcome
by his Alluring Engagements, into any unseemly and dishonorable undertaking,
believes he has them then safely tacked to his Interests, and that they will
not dare to flinch from his Desings, for fear of being exposed to their People,
which he takes care in due time to have artificially instilled into their Ears;
a Maxim of Christianity which lies concealed from all other Men, but the most
Christian of Princes: And thus it was, that the French King having amused the
Emperor with the Noise of a Treaty, and at the same time brought the Turk into
Hungary, to join the Malcontents, to excite his Private Confederate the King
of England to follow his steps in Government Barefaced, causes a little Book
to be Printed and Published, with the Privilege Du Roy, Entitled, The History
of the Transactions of this Age, and therein ordered the Dover Treaty (as they
called it) to be inserted, and to that purpose furnished his Historiographer
with Notes and Directions by the Hands of his Secretary Colbert, to the end
that the King of England, being truly as he designed, set out in his Colors,
and despairing of being ever after trusted by his People, might be enforced to
take such Resolutions as Despair and Fury should inspire him withal, to the
Destruction of those he had so highly disobliged; there being nothing more than
the Subversion of England which the French King aimed at. It Is true, he was so
kind as to recall the Book, upon the loud complaint of the King of England's
Ambassador; however it was an apparent Demonstration to all the World, how
little trust or reliance there was in French Amity, and plainly shows that
there is no way to bind this mighty Sampson by Oath, Promises, Treaties, or by
any other the most Religious Ties and Considerations, which are no more to him
than Spiders Webs, but by an absolute clipping off the Locks of his Power, and
disabling him so as never to rise more.

But to return to the Triple League: In the end the French King by his wicked
Policy so contrived the matter, as to cause a new Rupture twixt the Dutch and
the English; and as if he had intended to be the Master of Iniquity, and to
make the King of England as bad as himself nothing would suffice till he had
prevailed with the King to attack the Dutch Smyrna Fleet returning home, and
dreaming of no such matter; which, as it was contrary to the Genius of the
English Nation, and to the Nature and Gentle Disposition of the King of England
himself, is wholly to be attributed to the Wiles and wicked Temptations of the
Most Christian Prince, who never ceased pealing it into the King of England's
Ears, that if he could but master the Wealth of the Smyrna Fleet, he should
never want Money again. And being thus betrayed by wheedling French
Hallucination, what can the French expect but the Severity of England's just
Revenge; wherein we may venture with the greater hopes of Success, as being
engaged with all in the common Cause of Christendoms Tranquillity.

Add to this, that when the French King thought the King of England was engaged
so far by the Smyrna Attack, as that he must needs go forward, the Most
Christian King then openly declared, 'twas none of his Quarrel, and that he
only engaged in it to assist the King of England, merely in respect to His
Person: By which means the King of England was again betrayed and necessitated
to declare War first, and to expect the Assistance of his Confederate
afterward.

Nor is it less observable, that the French King, in conjunction with a
Protestant Prince, to render him odious among all the States and Princes of
Europe, whether Protestant or Roman Catholic, gave it out, that the War
against the United Provinces was a War of Religion, undertaken merely for the
Propagation of the Roman Catholic Faith, and as the French Minister expressed
it in a Solemn Speech to the Emperor's Council, that the Hollanders being
Heretics, who had forsaken God, all good Christians were bound to Unite to
their Extirpation. To confirm which the more, the French Ministers, no doubt
not contrary to their Instructions, declared and assured many Princes, that to
let all the World see how far their Master was from any such Ambitious designs
as were laid to his charge, and to satisfy the World that he entered into the
War merely out of a Religious Zeal, and for the Glory of God; he was ready to
part with all his Conquests, and to restore to the Hollanders all the Towns he
had won from them, if they would but re-establish the True Worship they had
banished out of their Dominions. Such is the Most Christian King, who scruples
not to falsify with Heaven, so it may but support and color his falsehood upon
Earth.

Well, the Most Christian King, having by his Ungodly Policy thus engaged us in
a Bloody War with Holland, pursues his own design by Land with all the Vigor
Imaginable, in so much, that the swiftness and force of his Motion seemed to be
somewhat Supernatural; but all this while he leaves us to do our own work by
Sea. It Is true, his Fleet appeared among us, and made up a third Squadron under
white Colors, but under that Color of Innocence, they thought it such a crime
to shed Blood, that they always kept out of harms way: Rather they did us more
mischief than good, in regard that when our Admirals encountr'd the Enemy in
hopes of their Assistance, they always left the English in the Lurch to bear
the Brunt of the Engagement against the superior Numbers, which it was their
Duty to have attacked. A piece of Treachery so insupportable, that only they
who suffered it would have endured it, by which the whole English Navy was
absolutely betrayed by a faithless Allie, and by which the Lives of great
numbers of the English were lost, which by their Conjunction might have been
saved. So that it was apparent that those sacred Ships of the French were a
sort of Noli me Tangere's, not sent to assist their Confederares, but only to
sound the English Seas, to spy our Ports, to learn our Building, to contemplate
our way of Fighting, to consume ours, and preserve their own Navy, to increase
their Commerce, and to order all so, that the two great Naval Powers of Europe
having crushed one another, he might remain sole Lord of the Ocean, and by
consequence Master of all the Trade of the World,

Thus it happened, that after three Engagements of Ours against the Dutch Fleet
in one Summer, while nothing was tenable at Land against the French, it seemed
that as to us every thing at Sea was Impregnable; which was not to be
attributed either to want of Courage or Conduct, but was only to be imputed to
our unfortunate Conjunction with the perfidious French like the misfortunes
that happen to Men by being in ill Company.

This Misbehaviour of the French raised the Indignation of the English to such
a Pitch, that the Parliament resolving to give no more Money for the continuance
of the War; the King was persuaded to make a Peace with Holland; which was
concluded accordingly, toward the latter end of the Year 1673.

And to show that the King of England had all the reason in the World so to
do, we are to take a little farther prospect of the uprightness of the Most
Christian King to his Friend and Allie, who had at such a ^^a^t expense of
Treasure espoused his Quarrel.

For the French Army having passed the Wale, caused such a General
Consternation all over Holland and the Confusion they were in was such, they
could hardly resolve whether to yield or continue to defend themselves. The
States therefore sent away several of their Deputies, some to the King of
England, others to the Most Christian of Princes, to know of both upon what
conditions they would be willing to make Peace and Agreement.

Those that were sent to the King of England (to show how justly he intended to
have dealt with the French or whether it were out of Fear of giving him any
Jealousy or Offense,) were met as far as Gravesend; and being forbid their
approach to White Hall, were conveyed to Hampton Court, and there, as it
were, honorably confined, till his Majesty of England could hear from the Most
Christian King, whether those Deputies might be admitted.

But the other Deputies no sooner arrived at the French Court, but two
Secretaries of State were sent to them, who, without farther delay, demanded in
the first place what Power they had to Treat; and next, what Proposals they had
to make in order to a speedy Peace.

The Deputies answered, they came not to make Proposals, but to receive
Conditions from his Most Christian Majesty, as it better became them. Upon
which, to hasten them to a Conclusion, the French Ministers told them in short,
That whatever his Most Christian Majesty had conquered, in their Dominions, he
looked upon as his own already and therefore would not part with it, without an
Equivalent, as well for what he might farther subdue, before the conclusion of
the Treaty, as for what he had already in Possession.

With this Answer Monsieur De Groet, one of the Holland Deputies, posted back
to the Hague, and with no less speed was sent back again with full Instructions
and Authority, jointly with the rest of his Colleagues, to treat and conclude a
Peace with them.

No sooner was he returned, but Monsieur Louvoy, one of the French King's
Secretaries, gave the Deputies a Draught of a Treaty, or rather the Pretensions
of the King his Master; upon the granting of which, he was both willing and
ready to return to his former Amity with the States, and to conclude a firm
Peace with them.

Upon which two things are Observable First, that the Conditions themselves
were such, which, if granted would have made the French King as perfectly
Master of the Country, as if he had Conquered it by the Sword. And in the
Second place, That in all the Articles there was not the least word relating to
England, nor any more notice taken of the King of Great Britain, than if he had
not been at all concerned in the War.

And farther, to demonstrate that it was never the design of the Most Christian
Prince that the King of England should be a gainer by the War, Monsieur De
Groet declared at his second return to the Hague, when he carried the King's
Project along with him, that when the French Ministers were asked what was to
be done with England, they made Answer, that the States might do as they
pleased with England, and come off as cheap as they could, for that the French
were not bound by their Treaty to procure them any Advantages. A great
Happiness in the mean time for the King of England to be engaged in such a War,
with such a False and Treacherous Allie; for it is plain, that the Dutch had no
sooner signified their desires, but the Most Christian Prince had it presently
in his Head to have cheated the King of England. For could the Most Christian
King in that same dreadful Consternation of the Dutch, have got the Possession
of the United Provinces by the more concise, and less expensive way of Treaty,
he would soon have found an expedient to have defrauded his dear Confederate of
any share in them. Which was the reason the Most Christian Sophister spurred on
the consternated Dutch with so much haste, and with such a clandestine speed
pursued his Advantage, that the King of England might not have a Moment's time
to provide for himself.

But the King of England having served the Most Christian Prince more justly in
his kind, by a separate Peace with Holland, and the sudden Advancement of His
Highness the Prince of Orange, attended by the Fall of the De-witts, quashed
all the lofty Frenchman's hopes of gaining, either by Treaty or by Conquests,
what his thoughts aspired to. So that now, as if he had been arrived at the
Tropic of his Fortune, he was forced to roll back again with the same
swiftness as he ascended to the highth of his success. However that he might
not lose his old wont, as a mark of his displeasure, and as it were to punish
the English Nation for his disappointments, notwithstanding the Peace that was
still firm between the two Crowns, he let loose his Privateers among the
English Merchants, to that degree of Treaty-Violation, that from that time for
near two years together (Peace all the while, if French Peace may be called
Peace,) there was no security of Commerce or Navigation, but at Sea they
Murdered, Plundered, made Prize, and Confiscated all they met with. The French
Pickaroons lay before the Mouths of our Harbors, hovered all along our Coasts,
took our Ships in the very Ports, so that we were in a manner Blockt up by
Water. And if any made Application at the Sovereign-Port of the Most Christian
Solomon for Justice, they were most insolently baffled, except some few who by
Sir E. L's interest were redeemed upon somewhat easier Composition. For
evidence of which the following Papers, returned by certain Members of the
Privy Council, in Pursuance of the King's Order, as also the Register which was
annexed to it, of the several Vessels that were then complained of to be taken,
are a Memorial not easy to be cancelled.

So loud and so thick were the daily complaints of the English Merchants, of
their losses sustained by the French Privateers, in the Year 1674. and 1676.
notwithstanding the Public Amity between the two Nations, that the King
referred the Examination thereof to several Lords of the Committee of Trade,
who, upon due Examination of the Affair, observed that the Petition of the
Merchants, presented to the King the 31st. of May, 1676. was grounded upon
these Heads.

First, That their Ships and Goods, though manned according to the Act of
Navigation, and furnished with all necessary Passes, were daily seized, carried
into Dunkirk, Calais, Sherbrook, and other Ports, the Masters and Owners kept
close Prisoners, to force them by hardship to abuse their Owners, or else for
the relief of their own private Necessities (being commonly Stripped and
Plundered) to enter into the Privateers Service, which great numbers had done
with very pernicious Effects.

Secondly, That the delay and charge of prosecuting the Law in France, did
commonly make the Owners become losers of half the Value, when ever they were
successful.

Thirdly, That there was no reparation ever gotten from Privateers for what
they Plundered and Imbezl'd, which made them freely seize upon all they met,
and perpetually molest the Navigation of the King's Subjects; for which Reasons
they humbly implored His Majesty's Relief and Protection.

Thereupon the King was pleased to command that some of his Frigates should sail
forth to clear the Coast of those Privateers, seize them, and bring such as had
offended to make Restitution. Moreover the King ordered, that the Lords of the
Committee of Trade should take good notice of the particular Cases and
Complaints depending, that such as were of weight and merit, might be fitted
for his Gracious Recommendation for Relief: As also to survey the whole number
of Seizures which had been made upon his Subjects, in order to lay before his
Majesty what hardships had been sustained at Sea, and what sort of Justice had
been administered in France.

In Obedience to which command, they brought in a List of such Ships as had
been seized to the number of fifty three; and the Cases wherein the Owners had
repaired to the King for relief. Which, as in the General it supposed a Justice
in such complaints, so it left a suspicion of great hardships in the Methods of
Redress; besides that the number of Captives was no small proof of the facility
of Condemnation.

While the Lords were in the midst of this Examination, there was presented to
the Committee, as it was received from Monsieur Courtin, the French Ambassador,
an Extract of a Letter from Monsieur Colbert to Monsieur Pompone, one of the
French King's Secretaries, dated June 28th. 1676. in these Words.

FOr what concerns the Prizes, it would be a difficult matter to answer all the
Cases contained in Monsieur Courtin's Letter.

What I can say to it, is, That the Council for Marine Affairs sits every day
at St. Germans.

That all Privateers and Reclaimers know it.

That Sir Ellis Leighton, nominated by the English Ambassador, has always
notice of it, and is always present at it.

That not a week passes, but I give him two or three Audiences, and oftentimes
I send for him on purpose.

That his Reasons are all read, reported and committed; as likewise are all
Petitions of Reclaimers, and I shall tell you more, I acquaint him with the
Reasons upon which Judgment is given.

In giving Judgment, all Vessels which have any Appearance of being English are
released, and very often; and almost always; though we are satisfied that the
Ships are Dutch, yet they are released because there is some appearance of
their being English, and every thing is judged favorable for that Nation. And
it is no less true that all Ships that are taken are Dutch Built, that they
never were in England, that the Masters and all the Equipage are Dutch, that
the Cockets are for Persons unknown, and which are not oft-times so much as
named; that they carry with them only some Sea Breifs from Waterford or some
other Town of Ireland; that the whole Ships Company deposes, they were sent to
Holland; that we have found on Board three or four Vessels, Bills of Account,
by which it is seen that the English took two, three, and four per Cent, for
owning Ships and though it is impossible to avoid confiscating them, yet these
are the Ships which make such a noise in England.

To which the Lords of the Committee upon serious Examination, by way of Answer
represented to the King, That their Sentiments of the matter were quite
different from what was pretended by the French; for that they understood that
when the English Ships were carried into the Ports of France, many of the
Mariners complained of ill Usage, and some of Torment, their Papers being
seized, and their Persons under restraint, till all the Examinations were ready
prepared; and that then all their Writings were sent up to the Privy Council at
St. Germans, where judgment was definitively given, and seldom any reasons
for the Condemnation mentioned in the decree, and never any Appeal or Revision
admitted; and whether that were the Tenderness or the Justice pretended by the
French, they could not tell: But they appealed to the Ambassador Monsieur
Courtin himself, whether the Method of proceeding in England had not been quite
otherwise; and therefore that the different Methods of Justice and Clemency in
England, might have entitled His Majesty to a different acknowledgment, and
more advantageous effects from the French.

That as to the latter part of the Paper, it seemed to contain very harsh
Imputations upon the Trade of His Majesty's Subjects; and that only from some
ill practices perhaps found out, general Rules were made, which having entered
the Thoughts of some Eminent Ministers, that wondered that notwithstanding the
frequent and multiplied Recommendations of his Majesty for Justice, the event
of the French Trials should prove so unfortunate; that if his Majesty would but
cast his Eye upon the Causes annexed, he would soon see.

Whether, as it was imputed, all the Ships taken were Dutch Built.

Whether they were all such as never were in England.

Whether all the Masters and Mariners were Dutch.

Whether the Cockets were for Persons unknown, and oftentimes not named.

Whether in the whole List there was any more then one Ship from Waterford, any
more than six from the rest of all Ireland, or so much as one from Scotland.

Whether it were credible that all the Ships Company should swear they were
bound for Holland, when so many were taken coming from Holland.

On the other side, His Majesty would find in the List how many were English
Built, taken with English Colors, English Mariners, English Owners; some of
them known to His Majesty, and to whom the best Papers His Majesty could sign,
or the Treaties required were given all in vain.

So that if the Case were in the General quite different from what in the
General is represented, they hoped it was no crime for His Majesty's Subjects
to make some noise in England, when they are Damnified, and see their Goods
taken from them by Violence, and that Violence rather justified than redressed
by Law.

Wherefore considering that the Root of all these Disorders arose from the
Violence and Rapine of the French Capers, who were to be looked upon as
Disturbers of the Public Quiet, and Enemies of the Good Friendship between the
two Crowns; they were humbly of Opinion that His Majesty had just Occasion from
the injuries past, and those which were then depending, and which every day
increased, to make a serious Representation of all to the Most Christian King,
and not only to press for some better Method of repairing the Greivances
mentioned, but to insist upon the calling in of all the French Privateers; or
else that His Majesty ought to do right, and give defense to his Subjects,
from all the insolences which they so frequently met with. This was signed.

Anglisey Bath Craven J. Ernle Finch C. Bridgewater H. Coventry G. Carteret
I might here add the List it self, by which it plainly appears, that, contrary
to Monsieur Colbert's Allegations, the Ships so taken were all either English
Built, or Foreigners made Free, fraighted by English Merchants, owned by
English Men, and manned with English, with Cockets and Bills of Lading to
English. But it is sufficient for me to show, that the Ministers and the Masters
are Christians alike, Plunderers and Robbers, not only of Imperial Territories
and Royal Dominions, but Beasts of Prey, that turn the Seas into a Desert, to
gorge their voracious Appetites upon the Estates of private Persons; and that
upon the Account their Injustice and Rapines so wickedly and unjustly practiced
upon the People of England, no Nation under Heaven can have reasons more
allowable on their side to justify a War with France, than England has, for
the many Dishonours, Injuries, and Affronts so ungratefully done us, in
recompense of all the Kindness and great Services done them from time to time.

For what greater kindness could there be, than to furnish the Aspiring Monarch
with a continually recruited body of Ten Thousand of our English Youth, whose
daring Bravery and Courage made oftentimes a Rape upon Victory it self, to
force her on his side, and rescued once his whole Army from destruction; when
in consternation, and pursued by the Imperalists, upon the fall of Turenne? Yet
when by the importunity of the Parliament, they were recalled out of his
service, instead of fairly dismissing them, well paid, for Dunkirk or Calais,
from thence to cross over for Dover, which was their direct Way; they were sent
through Burgundy, through Liomois, and so through the Provinces that lead to
the Ports of Guyenne, that so the French might have time to debauch the
Officers and Soldiers. In short, the Soldiers who since their being in France,
had been accustomed to drink Wine, finding themselves in a Country where it was
almost as plentiful as Water, would not cross the Sea to go home and drink
Beer, but took pay under the Captains of the French Army in Catalonia, who were
for that purpose posted in their way. As for such of the Officers as had
nothing to lose in their own Country, they were likewise debauched after the
same manner, and dispersed at the same time in the Regiment of Fustenburgh,
which was in the Garrison of Perpignan: So that when the English arrived at the
Place where they were to Embark, they were not the Tenth of what they should
have been, had France dealt faithfully in the Business.

Thus we have run through the Treacheries and Infidelities of the French in
reference to England. There is no Question, but much more might have been said;
however, here is enough to show that there can be no safety in the friendship
of a Prince, who makes it his study to be injurious in all his Actions, and
faithless in all his Promises: Mendaciis and fallaciis tanquam praeclaris
Artibus gaudens. But such is the mischief of that pernicious Vice, desire of
too much Glory, that it constrains a Man to be perfidious, as it was said of
Cneus Domitius; Nimiae Gloriae Cupiditas perfidum existere coegit. And this was
a Maxim among the Ancients, that Fidelity, like the Soul, when it has once left
a Man, never returns again: And therefore with such a one, Bellum suspecta Pace
tutius est.

Now let us look Abroad, where we shall find the Most Christian of Princes,
stradling over Violations of Oaths by another Name, called Perjuries, and all
the Laws and Bounds of Justice which God and Man have provided against the
Inundations of Violence, to grasp the Universal Monarchy of Europe. There you
shall find him Invading, Burning, Spoiling, Plundring, Sacking, and
Depopulating the Territories and Dominions of his Peaceable Christian
Neighbors, hewing out his way through the Bowels of Christendom to the
Imperial Throne; and all this under Claims and Pretensions, abjured by all the
most Solemn Renunciations that Religion could invent. Yet in Re-vindication of
those Claims and reassumed Rights so religiously renounced, like another
Parentibus abominatus Hannibal, filling all with Blood, Massacre and
Devastation to Tyrannize over wasted Ruins, Cities laid Desolate; and desert
Mountains, rather than not to Tyrannize at all. Where he could not enter with
his Sword, he opened a Passage with his Gold for subservient Treachery, and the
Foundations of future Mischief into the Courts of most of the Princes of
Europe; deflouring the Fidelity of their Counselors, and ravishing the
Allegiance of their most Bosom Intimates, as if there had been a kind of
Omnipotency in the Power of France to make Treachery and Falsehood Ubiquitary.

Perhaps this may be thought a little too severe; but this is not a time to
Complement the Public Enemy of Christendom. This is a Season to speak out,
since the welfare of England is involved in the Common Fate of Europe. It is
the Business of England to evidence how the French have violated the Law of
Nations, which is common to all; and how they have labored to introduce such
Maxims into the World, as would destroy even the whole commerce of Mankind, and
render Humane Societies no less Dangerous than a company of Tigers, Bears, and
Lions. Nor is England less concerned to defend the Public Faith of Treaties
against the crafty Elusions and Quaint Evasions of the French, and to remove
out of the sight of Christendom such Scandalous Examples, which, by
consequences no less fatal than unavoidable, would expose the Weakest to the
Predominant Will and Pleasure of the strongest, and estabish Force, the Grand
Arbitrator of all the Proceedings and Affairs of the World. It is the Business
of England, in confederacy with Foreign Princes for the General Welfare of
Christendom, to betake Her self to such means and courses, as may put a stop to
a rapid Torrent against the Impetuosity, of which no Ties of Treaty, Marriage,
Oaths, Blood, Kindred, Friendship, or Condescension, can be Mounds and Bulwarks
strong enough to keep it within its Chanel. It is the Business of England, as
far as in Her lies, to defend the common Interest of all Princes and States
against a Prodigious Design; which for its Foundation, has nothing but an
Exorbitant desire of Conquest; no other End, than only Dominion; no other
Means, but force of Arms and Treacherous Policy; nor any other Bounds, but what
Chance and Fortune will be pleased to prescribe. Lastly, It is not only the
Business, but also for the Glory of England at this time, to recover Her former
Grandeur; and as She was wont to do, so at this time to decide the Fortune of
Europe, and pronounce the Sentence either of Her Freedom or Slavery: For
between these two, there is no Medium to be expected, nor Peace to be secured.
England for a long time has lain in a profound Lethargy, and therefore it is
high time for Her now to awake, and put Her helping hand to prevent the
Misfortunes and Calamities to which all Europe is exposed by the prevailing
Tyrannies and Oppression of France.

We are then in the next place to consider how like a Christian the Most
Christian King has dealt with the King of Spain, his Brother, His Friend, and
Allie, after a Peace the most Solemnly concluded and ratified, after the most
Sacred manner that could be imagined. Certainly the Calamities, the Miseries,
the Murders, Rapines and Devastations, and Innumerable Impieties that attend
on War, are so disagreeable from the Principles of Christian Religion, that
nothing ought to be more Seriously, more Moderately, and more Warily considered
than the Justice of undertaking it: And therefore said Herennius, Captain of
the Samnites, having entered into a War against the Romans, after all that
could be done to procure Peace, Rerum humanarum maximum Momentum est; quam
propitiis, quam adversis agant diis. Nor did he justify the War upon any other
grounds, than that his Countrymen were constrained to it, and had no other hope
but in their Arms. Justum est Bellum, Samnites, quibus necessarium, and pia
Arma, quibus nulla nisi in Armis relinquitur spes.

The Romans, though too blame perhaps in the Samnite War, (for which they
dearly paid, and well it might be wished the French might pay as dearly for
what they have done,) generally never entered into a War, but they set forth
the Justice of their Resentment, which for the most part was in revenge of
their Allies, or to succor their Friends and Confederates. Thus the first
Punick War was to succor Messana in Sicily, besieged by the Carthaginians. The
second in revenge of Saguntum, sacked by Hannibal, contrary to the League
between the two Commonwealths. And the third also for Reasons of the same
Nature: And so cautious they were to avoid the Scandal of being thought to make
War, merely out of an Ambitious desire to extend their Dominions, that after
they had vanquished and reduced the Rhodians, who had taken part with Perseus
in the Macedonian War, they let them go unpunished: Ne quis divitiarum magis
quam injuriae Bellum incoeptum diceret. And the same Author says, that in all
the Punick Wars, after the Carthaginians had committed many nefarious Acts and
Breaches of Faith to their Detriment, they never took any occasion to do the
like; Magis quod se dignum foret, quam quod in illos jure fieri posset
quaerebant: So that occasions of enlarging their Dominions were rather offered
than sought for by that Victorious Commonwealth. And it is observable, that
the Ceremonies of denouncing War that were first instituted by Ancus Martius,
the Heathen King of the Romans, were performed as Religiously, and with equal
Soleminty to the Ceremonies of their Divine Worship. For when the Fecial came
to the confines of the Country, against which the War was intended, Audi
Jupiter, he cried; Audite Fines, Audiat Fas: Hear O Jupiter, Hear O ye
Confines, hear Right and Justice: I am the Public Messenger of the People of
Rome, and come a Fecial, justly and piously sent, and let Faith be given to my
Words. After that, having made his demands, he again calls Jupiter to Witness,
and thus proceeds. Si ego injuste, impieque illos homines illasque res dedier
Nuncio Populi Romani Exposco, tum Patriae Compotem me nunquam sinas esse; if
satisfaction were not given by the Prince or People to whom he was thus sent
within three and thirty days, the Fecial returned again, and denounced War
after this manner. Audi Jupiter, and tu Juno, Quirine, Diique omnes coelestes
vosque terrestres, vosque inferni audite; Ego vos testor Populum istum injustum
esse, neque jus persolvere, etc.

Thus the more noble Heathen Romans, before they invaded the Borders of their
Enemies, invoked the Gods to Witness the Justice of their Cause, and the Wrongs
and Injuries of those that had incensed them to take Arms. On the other side,
the Most Christian King not regarding either God or Man, unexpected,
unprovoked, nay, after he had given assurances that he had no such design in
his thoughts, thundered into his Neighbors Territories, under the Protection
of League and Amity; and like a sudden Tempest, with Sword and Fire, levels all
before him.

Burgundos Fraud Petivit Such an Ignoble and Unprincelike way of entering into
Hostility, as looks more like Robbing upon the Highway, than a generous Method
of War: For that it was a base and ignominious surprizal against the Faith and
Honor of a King, besides the Breach of Treaty is apparent from two
Circumstances; the one that passed at Paris between the French King himself,
and the Marquess De la Fuente Extraordinary Ambassador from Spain, who being
upon his return into Spain upon the Death of the Old King, and not a little
apprehensive and jealous, that the vast Preparations made in France, were
intended against the Queen and the Young Prince, was very importunate with his
Most Christian Majesty, to give some new and greater Assurances to the Queen of
Spain, of the reality and sincerity of his Intentions, though it were but only
to quiet and settle her mind, against all the contrary Advices she received
from all Parts. Upon which the Most Christian King with all possible
Asseverations engaged his Faith and Royal Word to the Queen, in the Person of
her Ambassador, that he would religiously keep the Peace, and continue a most
faithful Friendship both to Her and her Son.

Another circumstance was that of the Arohbishop of Ambrun, who, after the
French Army was already in the Field, and had possessed Charleroy, some four or
five days before the News of it came to Madrid, protested and vowed in Verbo
Sacerdotis, and by all that was Sacred among the Roman Catholics, that his
Master intended nothing less than what was reported of him, and that he would
never break with the King of Spain, nor invade his Dominions as long as he was
under Age. And when the March of the French Army, and the Hostilities which
they committed, so little agreed with the Promises of the Most Christian King;
answer was made that it was no Breach, but only a taking Possession of what
belonged to him: But the only way to surprise Men, is to take them unprovided;
and the only way to take them unprovided, is to swear with all the
Asseverations imaginable, that you never intend to do them any harm. And this
is one of the Most Christian Kings ways of making War upon his Neighbors, so
far from giving them thirty three Days Notice of his coming, that he will
hardly allow them thirty three Minutes: But it is a meanness in a Prince
instructed by so great a Tutor as Mazarine, to be a slave to his Word; for
which reason Fides Gallica, is of late become Fides Punica, no sooner given but
as soon broken.

True it is that the French Academy has been long endeavoring to refine their
Language, by leaving off the use of some obsolete Words, by introducing others
of a new Coin, and enriching it with several quaint Expressions of a fresher
Date; but how they could alter the signification of Words, and call War by the
name of Peace, is a thing not easy to be understood: And therefore it were to
be wished, they would explain to the World what they mean by the word Rupture,
and how they can make a violent Invasion with Men and great Guns, to agree with
the Observation of a Treaty, which forbid all manner of Attempts by armed
Force, and was stipulated and contracted to no other end, but to prevent them:
That they would explain which way it is possible for Peace to consist with the
Fatal effects of War; and how it is to be imagined that wanting the Formality
of a Herald to Proclaim the Hostility, it should lose all its Terrors and
Injustice; since most Men of ordinary Reason believe that to be a Rupture which
opposes the very Essence and Being of the Peace, ranverses the very
Foundations, and discomposes all the Harmony of it.

Now the Causes that moved the two Crowns to make the Pyrenaean League, were
the desires of the Welfare, repose and ease of their Subjects. The effect was,
to put an end to the many mischiefs of the War; to forget and extinguish all
the Causes and Motives which occasioned the War; and to establish a Sincere,
Entire, and Durable Peace between the two Kings, and their Successors.

All which was ranvers'd by the first Invasion of the Spanish Netherlands,
which disturbed the Welfare and repose of the People, renewed the Public
Calamities, and rekindl'd all the Causes of the past Wars.

But to come to Particulars, the abandoning of Portugal was one of the
essential Fundamentals of the Peace, without which it never could have been
treated nor concluded. In reference to this, the Sixtieth Article runs thus:
For that His Majesty, meaning the Most Christian King, has foreseen and
feared, lest such an Engagement should be an unsurmountable Obstruction to the
conclusion of Peace; and consequently, reduce the two Kings to the necessity of
a parpetual War. And a little lower in the same Article, he goes on in these
Words: Although in consideration of the Peace, and considering the absolute
necessity his said Most Christian Majesty has been in to perpetuate the War by
the Rupture of the present Treaty, which His Majesty found to be unavoidable,
in case he would have any longer insisted upon prevailing in that affair with
His Catholic Majesty, to have obtained other conditions, than such as he
offered.

In the second place, it is plain that the King of Spain, to show how resolved
he was that France should abandon Portugal, rejected the French King's
offering, besides the places he was bound to restore by the present Treaty to
his Catholic Majesty; all the rest of the Places and Conquests, generally made
by his Arms, during the preceding War, provided that the Affairs of the Kingdom
of Portugal might be left in the same condition as they were then, as by
another part of the same Article it appears: So that when nothing else would
do, it was by the same Article concluded and promised as follows:

His Majesty will no farther meddle with that Affair, and obliges and engages
Himself, and promises upon his Honor, and upon the Word of a King, for Himself
and his Successors, not to give unto the said Kingdom of Portugal, either in
General, or to any Persons in particular, of what Dignity, State, Condition, or
Quality soever they be, now or hereafter, any Help or Assistence, Public or
Secret, Directly or Indirectly, of Men, Arms, Ammunition, Victuals, Ships, or
Money, upon any pretense or any other thing whatever, either by Land or Sea, or
in any other manner: As also, not to suffer that any Levies of Men be made in
any parts of his Kingdom or Dominions; nor to grant Passage to any that may
come from other States, to the Assistence of the said Kingdom of Portugal.

One would think that nothing could have been more authentickly expressed, or
in terms more clear or more particular, beyond the power of Nicety to find a
flaw, or to make any other interpretation of the words, contrary to the sense
and meaning of the Parties at that time. And yet the Most Christian King found
out a way to fail in all the Points, and all the circumstances of his Promise:
For notwithstanding his Honor, and the Word of a King, before the Treaty was
signed, Cardinal Mazarine, sent privately the Marquess of Cheases into
Portugal, to assure them, that though in order to the conclusion of the Treaty
then on foot with Spain, the French were forced to leave them out, and to
engage not to assist them; yet, whatever they promised, they would never
forsake them, but would still protect them against Spain, as they had done
before: And they kept their word with Portugal, because it was to the prejudice
of Spain. To which purpose, the Peace was no sooner concluded, but they
suffered several Bands of Soldiers secretly to convey themselves into Portugal;
which being complained of by the Marquess De la Fuente, such was the Punic
Faith of France, that openly they sent Public Orders to the Governors of
their Ports, not to suffer any Soldiers to embark for Portugal, but underhand
gave them other Orders to let them pass by way of connivance. Soon after M.
Turenne made public levies of Men, for the relief of Portugal, which the
Spanish Ambassador representing to the Council of France, received a cold and
scornful answer, that it was a particular Act of Marshall Turenne, wherein the
Court was no way concerned: Nor did the French cease to furnish the
Portuguieses with Corn, and all sorts of Warlike Ammunition and Provision.
Moreover, Letters were intercepted by the Spaniard, by which they were
ascertained, that all along after the Peace was concluded, the French fomented
and encouraged the obstinacy of the Portuguieses, and diverted them from
accepting the advantageous conditions that were offered them, by animating them
with the hopes of potent Succors, not only for their own defense, but also to
carry an offensive War into the heart of Spain. Other Letters were likewise
intercepted, Written from the Arch Bishop of Ambrun, and Monsieur Lienne
confirming the continual correspondence which was between them in favor of the
Portugals: Nor was this all, for the D. of B. was presently after the Treaty,
sent to lie with the French Fleet upon the Coast of Portugal, and stayed there
a whole Summer to secure the coming and landing of Provisions and Ammunition,
of which the Portuguieses were then in extreme want; and this at the same time
that the French offered to mediate an Accommodation between Spain and Portugal.
Nor was it long after the conclusion of the Pyrenaean Treaty, that Monsieur
Colbert made several Voyages into Portugal, to encourage them against the
Spaniards, and to enter into secret Alliance with them: And sometime after the
Spaniards took a French Vessel, wherein was found an account of the succors
which France had sent from time to time into that Kingdom; by which it
appeared, that France had paid at her own expense a standing Army in Portugal,
to support a War against Spain.

And to complete her Perfidy, at length she concluded a League offensive with
that Kingdom, of which these were the principal Conditions: That they would be
the Friends of each others Friends, and Enemies of each others Enemies, England
only excepted: That France should furnish them with as many Men, as should be
necessary to carry an offensive War into Spain, both by Sea and Land, and
should advance by way of Loan, the one half of the Pay for the maintenance of
the Auxiliary Troops. That France moreover should pay them every Year by way of
Loan, the sum of 300000 Crowns, and that all the Ports which should be taken
from the Spaniards upon either Sea, should be put into the hands of the French,
and that they should not treat either of Truce or League without joint consent.
This League to continue Ten Years.

By so many several Instances, let all the World be judges how little credit
there is to be given to the Punic Faith of France, or what any other Prince can
expect from his Honor, or his Promises in any matter whatsoever; who thus
foully forfeited such a most Solemn Engagement to the Crown of Spain. For that
a Treaty carried on between two Princes in order to a Marriage, which is one of
the most Solemn Negotiations that can be handled among Men, and confirmed by an
Oath, sanctified with all the most sacred Mysteries of Christian Religion, for
a punctual obligation of performance, should be thus inhumanly violated, is not
to be paralleled by any Example or Instance in History.

That noble example of the Roman Consuls, who bid Hanno not to fear, the
Public Faith secured him, is a thing of late unknown in France, where there is
no security or trust in the Honor or Royal Promise of the Prince. For his
truth to Portugal was only self-interest, to support the Portuguieses against
Spain, as formerly the French were wont to league with Scotland against
England; so that whether the Character of Amurath the first, Emperor of the
Turks, who is said to have been Homo fallax, qui datam fidem ex opportunitate
proferendi imprimis metiebatur, bella and pace simulato Egregius, may not fitly
be applied to the Most Christian King, is left for them to determine who have
felt the smart of his broken Leagues; which brings us to the second Breach of
the Pyrenaean Treaty. It is said, and acknowledged by the Plenipotentiaries in
33d. Article of that Treaty, that the particular Capitulation of Marriage
between the French King and the Eldest Daughter of Spain, bearing date with the
General Treaty, was of the same force and vigor with the Treaty of Peace, as
being the chiefest part thereof, and the most worthy, as well as the greatest
and most precious Earnest of the security of its Duration.

The Queen Mother of France, and Aunt to the Infanta, desiring nothing more
than the happy and suitable Union of two Persons that were so dear in her
Affection, to remove all impediments, and dispell the doubts and scruples of
the Spanish Counsel; found out an expedient, that by the contract of Marriage,
the Infanta should absolutely renounce all manner of Right or Claim, which she
might for ever have to the whole, or any parts of the Spanish Succession under
any Pretense or Title whatever, to the end the Spanish Monarchy might in no
case be liable, either to Foreign Subjection, or to be Dismembered: And they
were more inclinable on both sides to this expedient, because the way had been
opened for them before by the Example of the Queen Mother, whose Renunciation
was of the same Nature with the Pyrenaean, both in form and substance, and
grounded upon the same incompatibility of the two Successions.

The King of Spain believing the same sincerity in others as in himself,
hearkened to the offer, and thought that with such a precaution he might
reconcile the Spanish Law with the Salique, and fully secure the Liberty of his
Subjects. France on the other side acknowledged the thing to be just and usual,
and freely consented to it, for the sake of the general good that should result
from such a Peace, and confirm him in the possession of so many conquests.
Thereupon the Instrument was drawn up by consent, and the French King obliged
himself to ratify it.

Whence it is plain, that the Renunciation was an essential Member of the
Peace, the very Soul and an inseparable condition of the Treaty of Marriage,
without which it never had been projected nor concluded, and consequently
neither the Treaty of Peace.

Then again, that it was no private Act, but a Law and Pragmatick Sanction
established by joint consent of the two Crowns, is as clear from the words of
the Act it self; And in the fifth and sixth Articles of the said Treaty, it has
been decreed and resolved by joint consent, that is to say, of the two Kings;
and with one will, after serious consideration, etc. that both my self, and the
Children which God shall give me by this Marriage, are and shall remain
incapable, disabl'd, and absolutely excluded from any right or hope to succeed
in any of the Kingdoms, States, Signiories, etc. And a little lower,
condescending to this with the joint desire and earnest wishes of their
Subjects, Vassals, and Natives, who desire that it may have the force and
vigor of a Law and Pragmatick Sanction, and that it may be received and
observed as such; and some lines lower in the following Section, are added
these words: And it shall be decreed, by joint consent, that it is their
Majesty's Pleasure, that this Act shall have the force and vigor of a Law
Established in favor of their Kingdoms, and the public interests of them.

A little above the three moving causes are specified; And in regard it
concerns the Public State of both Crowns, that being so large, they may never
come to be united together, and to prevent all occasions that may happen of
joining them, etc, which is more fully explained two Pages lower. And having
jointly regard to the Public and Common Good of the Kingdoms, which God has
entrusted him with, which together with these belonging to the Crown of France,
are equally interested in this; that the Grandeur and Majesty which they have
upheld and maintained for so many Years together, with so much Happiness and
Glory to the renown of their Kings, may not be diminished nor fall to decay, as
of necessity they will diminish and fall, if by the means and cause of this
Marriage, they shall happen to unite and be joined together in any one of the
Children and Successors; the ill consequences whereof would cause such
discontents and afflictions to the Subjects, as ought to be considered: Then
the causes of the Renunciation are expressed to be the public good of the
Kingdoms, the preservation of the Grandeur, and Glory of their Majesty's; to
prevent the discontents of the People, and the Inconveniences which might
otherwise arise, and to facilitate for the future the Marriages between the
Children and Successors of the two Princes. All which causes being in their own
nature unalterable, and of necessity absolute, could not be fastened upon any
particular Act, nor limited to any testrictive conditions.

This League therefore thus grounded upon these Foundations, were such
Limitations and bounds to a Person aspring to the Universal Monarchy of Europe,
as were not to be fenced in with the common Ties and restraints of Oaths and
Treaties. And therefore so soon as the Old King of Spain was dead, the French
Lawyers, well understanding the humor of their Sovereign, and preferring the
little Quirks of Law before the Public Faith started up a claim for their King
in the right and behalf of his Wife the Infanta, notwithstanding her Solelmn
Renunciation, which was made a Member of the body of the Treaty, and as
sacredly sworn to by the French King himself; pretending that a great part of
the Spanish Low Countries was devolved to him in her Right by the Municipal
Laws, and Local Customs of those Countries. Whereas it is a thing well known,
that when Sovereign Princes enter into Treaties (which are indeed the true and
only Laws between Monarchs) they are regulated and confirmed according to the
Law of Nations common to all; and being so to be understood, it is an idle
thing for Civilians to imagine, that a consideration of Laws Municipal, or
customs belonging to any particlar Country, under the Dominion of either of the
Treating Princes, can be admitted to the overthrowing of a Treaty, or the
depriving either of the Parties of the Benefit and Security which he has
thereby.

But notwithstanding the Renunciation was so carefully Penned, as if a whole
Grand Council of Civil Lawyers had been called to out-doe all former Terms and
expressions used in such Contracts, and to find out new binding Clauses; to
prevent all possibility of Evasion, the French King was more easily induced to
believe that his own great Cannon-Law was above all other Law, and more
consentaneous to his Reason and h^s Designs; and therefore against the very
sense and end of the Renunciation, under the slight pretense of a Nonentity,
he betook himself to force and violence, and with a powerful Army fell on a
sudden upon Flanders, and other parts of the Spanish Territories, with such an
Inundation of War, that it was impossible for the unprovided Spaniard to resist
him; more especially, after such deep Asseverations, that all his vast
Preparations were no way intended against the Spanish Dominions.

These prosperous successes occasioned the Triple League, which put a stop to
the French Career, and brought on another Treaty, which was managed at Aken, or
Aix la Chappell^, in order to a new Agreement between France and Spain. The
Observation of which affords us another instance of that ye call French
Fidelity.

By this Treaty the French King was to remain possessed of Charleroy, Binch,
Athe, Doway, the Fort of Scarp, Turnay, Oudenard, Lille, Armentiers, Courtray,
Bergues, and Turns, and all their Bayliwicks, etc. and restore to the King of
Spain the County of Burgundy together with Alost. And to this Treaty all the
Princes of Christendom were invited to give the two Kings their Promises and
Engagements of Warranty, as to all the Contents of the Treaty. And by another
Article of the Treaty it was accorded, that whatever should on the day of the
Ratification of the Peace be found upon the Lands of France, should appertain
to Her, and that whatever in like manner should be found upon the Lands of
Spain, should appertain to the Crown of Spain; but, as if it were an
impossibility for France to keep her word, the Most Christian Prince designing
to make his Advantage of this Article, before the Ratification came, caused the
Ax to be set to a Wood of Overgrown Trees, which was upon the Lands of Spain,
and having felled the Timber, transported it into his own Dominions, that when
the Ratification should come, he might have an excuse for what he had done.

In like manner, though he were to restore all Burgundy by the Articles of this
Treaty without reservation, and though he were Sworn upon the Cross, the Holy
Evangelists, the Canons of the Mass, and upon his Honor, fully, really, and
bona fide to observe and accomplish all the contents of the Articles: yet he
both dismantl'd the strong Holds and Places of the County, carried away all the
Ammunitions and Warlike Provisions, and would have destroyed the Rich Salt Pits
of that Province, but for the powerful Interposition of England and H^lland.

Nor could this Treaty of Aix, so religiously sworn to tie up the French King
from exacting heavy Contributions from the Duchess of Lymburgh and Luxenburgh,
from laying new claims to some Towns as important as any of those that had been
granted him by the Peace; nor from confiscating the Estates of the Subjects of
the King of Spain, that refused to forswear their Allegiance, not sparing the
Royal House of Mary Mont. And as if these Infractions and Encroachments had not
been sufficient, they forced their way with great Quantities of Merchandise
through the Spanish Territories, without paying Customs, and not long after
enveavour'd to surprise the Town of Hainault. And in short, they did whatever
they pleased, plundered even the most sacred Places, and acted without remorce
or pity, whatever can be imagined by insolent and unconscionable Men.

This perfidious dealing of France with England and Spain, spreading over
Europe like a Gangrene, as it proved extremely prejudicial to some, so it
became no less pernicious to others of the Europaean Princes.

Among the rest, the Duke of Lorrain, by the Pyrenaean Treaty, was to be
restored to his Dukedom of Lorrain, with all the Places and Towns which he had
possessed in the Bishoprics of Mets, Toul, and Verdun. But France, after the
Exeeution of the other Articles of that Peace, delayed as long as she could the
performance of that part which related to the Duke, and still refused to
restore him to his Country, till she had made him condeseend to another Treaty
with her, whereby he was constrained to part with several other considerable
Places, besides what had been granted to him by the General Peace. Nor would
that Usurpation satisfy her voracious Appetite; for that after a Year and an
half of an unsettl'd Possession, during which time, under several unjust
pretenses, new quarrels were every day picked with him, till she forced him
with a considerable Army, to surrender into her hands his Town of Marsul.

Nor was it long after before the French again compelled him to sign a new
Treaty, still more disadvantageous than the two former; nor could he then, as
little as before, have any quiet Enjoyment of that little they had left him,
till they had worm'd him out of all. For every day the French encroached upon
his Jurisdiction, the Liberties of his Territories, and his Sovereignty it
self: He laid most Enormous Taxes upon the Duke's Subjects; he constrained him
to disband his Forces, and then to raise new Men again, as the Most Christian
Usurper thought fit. He was kept from revenging his own Quarrels, to take part
in that of others, all his Enemies were let loose against him, to stop the
progress of his Armies, as soon as he had gained the least Advantage. And in
few Words, the Noble Duke, who deserved a much better Treatment, was all that
while rather a Vassal to France, than a Sovereign Prince. Neither would this
satisfy the Ambition of the French King, who finding by many circumstances how
highly the Duke resented such Despotick Usage, he sent one of his Generals to
surprise and seize his Person, and to bring him either dead or alive. A new
French Mode of dealing with Sovereign Princes, not known in the more generous
Climates of Europe, and which may give us some Hopes of seeing the Northern
part of the World governed by Basha's as well as the Eastern.

But it is an infallible Maxim, that every Prince dispossessed of his Estate,
may hold for certain there will be nothing omitted on the Usurper's part, or
Conqueror in Possession, to ruin him if possible, and all his Generation.
Therefore it is not strange that the French King should leave no Stone unturned
for the Destruction of His Highness of Lorrain: From hence it was, that the
Imperial Governor of Philipsburgh, the same who afterward basely and cowardly
surrendered up that Garrison to Crequi, so notoriously and openly as he did,
attempted the Destruction of that Prince, by a Trap-door which he cunningly
caused to be contrived for that purpose in the Bridge of that Place; through
which the Duke, not dreaming of any such French Treachery so near him, fell
head long to the Bottom of the Ditch. For may it not be justly inferred, that
this Governor had capitulated and agreed with some Christian Minister of
France, to execute so greatfull a piece of Treason, more especially, since it
was by the Power of the Favorers of France at Vienna, that the Traitors
escaped altogether unpunished.

And now we are come to Vienna, it will not be amiss to take a short view of
the Most Christian King's behavior toward the Emperor, where he will be found
nothing changed either in his Morals or his Politics.

As for the occasion that ever his Imperial Majesty gave the French King, to
make such Bloody Wars upon Him, there is no body that can tell of any: Nor is
it probable that a Prince so good Natured, so Piously inclined, so much given
to Repose, and Peace, and so averse from contending with his Neighbors, or
making War upon his Inferiors, as he is said to be, should be an Aggressor:
But all the World knows that it has been long the Ambition of France to grasp
in his hands the Universal Monarchy of the fourth part of the Habitable Earth;
and this is that which makes the French King seek Occasions of Public
Universal Disturbance, and the better to succeed, to leave nothing unattempted
that force or fraud can procure. It is no Quarrel between Nations, bearing
enmity to one another, neither is it in revenge of Injuries received, but an
impotent Rage and Lust of Empire in one Man, that has set all Europe together
by the Ears; Delirat Ludovicus, plectitur Europa. One man is mad for the
Empire, and that madness of one man sets all Europe in a Flame.

Now for that the worst of Usurpers would be thought to have some glittering
pretense for their Injustice, therefore it is that the French King makes it his
business, to find out men of Wit and Cavil, to turmoil for Justifications of
his illegal Actions; such men are easily found, and the Temptations of Gold
makes them no less sedulous to gratify the Jupiter that commands the Golden
Showers; so that if they can but find him a Pretense of Claim, he will find
Armies and Bombs to make it good. Under the warmth of such Golden
Encouragements was Hatched that Elaborate Piece, Entitled, The just Pretensions
of the King (meaning the French King) to Europe; wherein after the Author has
laid it for a Foundation, that the Demesnes and Conquests of Kingdoms are
always the Demesnes and Conquests of Sovereigns, and that the Conquests and
Demesnes of Crowns cannot be ascertained or prescribed; he adds, That the
greater part of Germany is the Patrimony and Ancient inheritance of the French
Kings.

Charlemaigne possessed Germany not as Emperor, but as King of France. From
which Doctrine it is evident, that his Imperial Majesty, nor indeed any Prince
in Europe, can ever be safe, nor hope for any quiet, while the Ambition of
France is in a condition to lay such a claim to their Dominions. More
especially, since it is known by woeful experience, that the French King gives
no other Reasons for his unjust Violences, nor cares to give any other than
what the Lion gave to the weaker Beasts; one part is his Right, as King of the
Forest, another because he is able to subdue; the third he takes by Force, and
for the rest, touch it who dares.

Another Cunning, to set up a French Title is by the means of certain Scribes,
as good as ever Granger, so dextrous at the strokes of their Pens, that they
will imitate the obsolete Gothic Characters with that exactness, that you
would swear they were Written above Five or Six Hundred Years ago, and by that
means, they will set up a Dependence from such a distance of time, that
Beelzebub himself shall not be able to disprove it.

Upon these Foundations it was, that as if he were dealing only with the
Farmers of his Revenues, by a Public Declaration he erected a Sovereign Court
at Mets, composed according to the custom of France, of a dozen of his Lawyers,
who, by virtue of the King's Authority, and the Ministry of the Catchpoles of
that clandestine Jurisdiction, summon before them all such Kings and Princes as
are possessed of any Territory which the King is pleased to call a Dependence
upon any State, with which he has nothing to do; and when no body appears to
acknowledge the Jurisdiction of this Tyrannical and Universal Piepoudre, and to
give them an account by what Right they possess what their Predecessors have
for three or four Hundred Years peaceably enjoyed; presently the Most Christian
Prince makes his own Power his Judges and his Army his Advocates, and
immediately with Fire and Sword seizes upon the confiscated Dominion. And by
virtue of such Pretensions as these, he claims and has possessed himself of the
Dukedom of Lorrain, the Duchy of Deux Ponts, and the best part of Alsatia, as
being dependencies of the Bishoprics of Toul, Metz, and Verdun; and
consequently must be united to the Demesnes of the Crown of France.

Having then so clear a Title to the Empire, no wonder he pursues so dreadfully
the recovery of his Right. And yet the true Mother of the Child could not
endure to see the Bowels of her Infant ripped up before her Eyes; no, nor can we
believe the Most Christian Prince to be the Hereditary Father of those
Countries, which, in detestation of all Compassion, he so inhumanly ransacks
and depopulates; being then a Spurious Title, disowned by the Legitimate
Parents of all true Titles, Law, and Justice, which only fraud and force could
make good. Of both how dreadfully, and how too successfully the Ambitious
Monarch has made use in asserting his illegal claims, all Europe can too sadly
testify; no less lavish of his Gold than of humane Blood. The Grand Vizier,
and the Cham of Precopite Tartary, were his Pensioners, dazzled with several
Millions of his Louisian Medalls; the one to divert the Arms of Poland; the
other to keep his Imperial Majesty employed in the utmost Limits of his
Dominions, bordering upon Turkey, that he with the less resistance might revel
in the Ruins of the flourishing Gardens and Cities of the Rhine. And as he
tramples under foot all Faith and Honor at Home so by tampering with the
Ministers and Subjects of other Princes, he instructs them here to manage their
fidelity to the best advantage of his own Ambition, and by a Metal of his own,
tries what Metal they are made of before he deal with their Masters. And with
this sort of White Powder, which does execution without Noise, shoots down more
Citadels, Castles, and strong Holds, and takes in more Towns than all the
Thunder of his Cannon. In so much, that it has been observed, that when his
Ambassadors go abroad, they either carry along with them the Principal Engines,
or else they are sent after them; an Ambassador, or an Agent go before his
Army, and then usually a Conquest follows. (...) is his Motto: A new way to
Honor and Renown, unknown to Alexander, or any of the dull Roman Conquerors.

Had not the Steward of Commissary General Capellier's House been tainted with
this golden Poison, he had never been surpised by his Master in the very Act
of Traitorous Correspondence with the Minister of France, to whom he gave an
exact account of all he could discover in his Master's House. And to confirm
what his Master had detected, at length certain Letters, which the Steward was
to have received from the French Minister, were seized at the Imperial
Post Office in Frankford.

After the Peace of Nimeguen, the City of Strasburgh thought it self in full
security, confirmed by several fervent and vehement Letters, which the French
King wrote to them from time to time, and the assurances given them by his
Resident abiding in the City, that his Master desired nothing more than to live
in Peace and Amity with the Emperor, and with the Cities of the Empire. And yet
by the underhand, contending and tampering with the same Resident, a Traitor
was chosen Burghermaster, who acted altogether conformable to the Advice of
France. On the other side, the Magistrates and Burghesses being lulled asleep
by the fair Promises and Protestations of France, dismissed their Guard of
Switzers, which were the chief security of their City: But no sooner were the
Switzers departed, but Monsieur Louvoy with a powerful Army invested the City,
and forced them to surrender upon such Conditions as he was pleased to
prescribe them. After which the French King made no scruple to violate those
pitiful Articles which they granted them, and to treat them as Slaves like the
rest of his Subjects.

The Treaty of Nimeguen began in the Name of the most holy and indivisible
Trinity; and the end of it was, that there should be an immovable and unshaken
Peace between his Imperial Majesty and the French King, to stop the desolation
of so many Provinces, and the Effusion of so much Christian Blood; yet, no
sooner was the Emperor engaged against the Turk, and that Spain and her Allies
had laid down their Arms and disbanded the greatest part of their Forces,
relying upon the Faith of the Treaty of Nimeguen, but the Most Christian King
fell in upon Flanders with a more than Turkish Fury, Burning, Plundring, and
Levelling with the Earth whole Towns and Villages, on purpose to constrain the
People to revolt, and to become his Vassals to preserve themselves from utter
ruin.

The Correspondence of the Most Christian King with the Ottoman Port, is too
well known, and how it was at his Most Christian Importunity, that the Grand
Seignior broke the first Truce which he had made with the Empire, to second the
designs of Count Teckeley. whom France, out of a particular Zeal to the
Catholic Religion, assisted with Men and Money, and that prevailing charm it
was that wrought upon the Port to send back Count Caprara, and reject the
Propositions of Peace which he carried along with him. Of which the Marquess of
Seppeville, then the French Ambassador at Viena, failed not with all diligence
to give his Master Notice; who with no less sedulity dispatched another Person
to the Grand Vizier, to oblige and encourage him to contrive the Seige of
Vienna, urging him that it was for his Honor not to quit it; That the City was
at its last Gasp, and that it behooved him to take it, whatever it cost him, for
the sake of his Reputation, and the public Good of the Port; for that the
Seige having made such a noise in the World, he could not leave the prosecution
of it without Eternal Infamy to the Ottoman Empire, and the Grand Vizier;
adding withal, that to facilitate the taking of the Town, and to divide the
Emperors Forces, his Master would enter into Flanders with a Puissant Army,
which would infallibly oblige the Princes of the Empire, to recall their Forces
for their own Security. And in that point, he was as good as his Word to the
Turk, entering Flanders at the same time with Fire and Sword, as if he had been
second to Mahomet. But when Vienna was relieved, he was so far from partaking
in the general Joy of the rest of the Christian World, that he forbid his
Ecclesiastics to observe any Thanksgiving for the Victory of the Christians,
upon pain of incurring his High Displeasure.

Nor is it only by the assistence of open and professed Infidels, that the
French King fights the Emperor abroad, but by the means of his pretended
Friends, and nearest Counselors, who having fingered the Gold of France,
become Traitors to their Lawful Prince, and betray his very Cabinet Secrets.
This occasioned the misunderstanding that happened between the Duke of
Brandenburgh and Montecuculi, General of the Imperial Forces in the Holland War.

For in the Year 1672. when all Europe looked upon the United Provinces near
the brink of Destruction, the Elector of Brandenburgh, fore seeing the
consequences to be expected from the successful enterprises of France, took
the Field with a considerable Army, at what time Montecuculi was on his March,
with a design to act jointly. Upon which Turenne was sent to oppose those two
Armies, but by the several Marches and Counter Marches which the Elector made,
Turenne's Army was so tired and harrass'd, that about the end of the Campaigne
it was in so miserable a condition, that all Turenne could do, was to defend
himself; which caused the Elector to make a vigorus Remonstrance of all things
to be made to the Imperial Council. Which wrought so effectually, that positive
Orders were sent Montecuculi to join the Elector and fight Turenne, without
farther loss of time; so that nothing but Treachery, the mode of France, could
have prevented the Total Ruin of Turenne's Army. But the French Instruments in
the Imperial Court so ordered the matter, that Montecuculi's Orders were
changed, and an express command sent him, neither to join the Elector, nor to
fight Turenne. The Elector, who had received from the Court of Vienna a formal
Letter, which gave him an Account of the true Order which the Emperor had sent
his General to join him, and fight the shattered Enemies, wondered when
Montecuculi, being by him summond to execute the Order, refused to obey it: But
Montecuculi, who knew nothing of the Letter sent the Elector, could do no less
than follow his own Instructions.

The Elector was concerned in Reputation to make the Emperor sensible of
Montecuculi's proceedings; and if Montecuculi was strangely surpised, when at
his return to Vienna, his Imperial Majesty called him to a strict Account, why
he neither joined the Brandenburgher, nor fought Turenne, the Emperor was no
less amazed, when his General produced for his discharge an Order in exact
form, forbidding him to do either the one or the other. This was a perfect
Mystery, however, afterward it was found out to have been a contrivance
between the French Emissaries, and some of the Imperial Ministers, who having
easily found a way to intercept the Original Order, and in the same Dispatch to
transmit a false one under a counterfeited Hand and Seal. And thus perhaps it
was that General Souches, after the Battle of Senneff, drew off from the Prince
of Orange, and left him in the Lurch, under pretense of not having order to do
any more than what he had done.

Tarbrack was a Town upon the Borders of Germany, that stood conveniently for
the purposes of the French King, and therefore he resolved to fortify it. On
the other side, the Imperialists complained of it to the French King, as a
Truce and Treaty both at one time; but all the Answer they could get, was, that
the Royal Chamber of Mets had irrevocably decreed it to belong to the Crown of
France, and therefore the Imperialists had no reason to complain of a Sovereign
Monarch's fortifying his Frontier Towns.

His very proposals of Marriage are only snares to entrap such Princes as will
accept of his Matches; and because his main design is at the Empire, therefore
he strives to scatter his Circes and Medias among the Princes of Germany.
Believing Wives to be the fittest Instruments to betray their Husbands, and the
nuptial sheets to be the securest Harbors for Treachery.

Thus after the Marquess of Bethune's Sister was married to the King of Poland,
jealousies between the King her Husband and the Emperor were fomented, and
Factions set up in that Country, by the means of those Golden Rays which the
Sun of France displays in that Court by the Hands of the Bankers of Hamburgh
and Dantzick. And the more to encourage her to play her Gaime according to the
French Instructions, his Most Christian Majesty made her Father a Duke and Peer
of France, and promised to receive her as a Queen, and not as a Subject, if she
returned a Widow, in her own Country. Thus he thought to have caught the Young
Duke of Bavaria with one of his natural Daughters; but that Heroic Prince
despised the Motion. And if the French King were assured that the Young Prince
of Poland should succeed his Father, there is another natural Daughter of
France ready prepared for him; for otherwise, it would be a Daughter merely
thrown away, if she could not be in a Station to serve her own Country. For
that the main end of the French King, in giving French Wives to the King of
Poland, and the several Princes of Germany, is to divide the strength of the
Empire, and lessen the Authority of the Emperor, by separating from his
interest the particular Princes of the Empire by private Intrigues, and
distinct Treaties, which though it be contrary to the Treaty of Munster, yet
that signifies nothing to a Prince who has no such Veneration for Leagues as to
think them worth observing.

As for the French King's dealing with the Duke of Nieuburgh it was somewhat
Barbarous; for that, after the French King had caused him to Mortgage the
greatest part of his Estate almost beyond the hopes of Redemption, in
expectation of the Polish Crown, to which France had promised to advance him by
the assistence of a strong Party, which she had in that Kingdom, contrary to
the Treaties, as well with the Duke as with the Elector of Brandenburgh, and to
his reiterated Promises and Vows, both by word of Mouth and in Writing; he
underhand, by his Creatures and Agents, opposed the Duke's pretensions, and
endeavored with all the industry and importunity imaginable, to have the
Prince of Conde preferred before him, and all the rest of his Competitors; a
sufficient warning to all Princes how they rely upon the broken Reed of French
Integrity.

The Elector of Brandenburgh was environed with French Emissaries and Spies,
and some of his Principal Ministers so intoxicated with the Elixirs of France,
that nothing was said or done in his Palace, of which the French Envoy had not
swift Intelligence. And the World was well informed of all the Intrigues and
large Presents, which Monsieur De Rebenack scattered about in that Court; of
which the Agent himself was so unwary, or so foolish, as to make his boasts.

The Elector of Saxony better understood his own Interest, and therefore would
not bite at the Golden Hook, as one that disdained the treacherous Offers of
France; but the French King endeavored by other ways to raise him disturbances
in his own Family, and to set him at Variance with his Neighbors, which would
have strangely imbroild him, had not the Emperor in time provided against those
Mischiefs. However, lest it should be said there was any Court in Christendom,
wherein the French King had not some Plough or other going, he forbears not to
send into Saxony such as know how to accommodate themselves to the Humor of
the Country, more especially the stoutest Drinkers he can find out, who by that
means, making themselves familiar at the Tables of the Great Persons, watch
their opportunities in the highth of Jollity and Compotation to draw the Worms
out of their Noses, and dive into the bottoms of their opened hearts.

The Palatine Electors, neither Father nor Son, would close with the Interest
of the French, and therefore his most Christian Majesty sacrificed the
depopulated Cities of that Country to his Fury, even to the compassion of some
that were the Executioners of his Rage; a Depopulation which none but such
Monsters of Men as the Most Christian King employs would have undertaken; Men
so impious and fearless of God, that one of them being mildly reprehended for
the burning of a fair Town, replied, That he would burn God in Heaven, if his
Master the King of France commanded him to do it. But perhaps the Most
Christian King is of the Opinion of the Ancient Galls, believing there is no
way to give peace to a Country, but by rooting out the Inhabitants, according
to that of Tacitus, Galli, ubi solitudinem fecerunt, pacem appellant.

Nor could the Bishop of Munster, as cunning as he was, preserve himself from
being outwitted by the French infidelity. For that being comprehended in the
League of the Rhine, when he found himself attacked by the States of Holland
within the Empire, he implored the Aid of France according to the Guarranty,
but in vain; for which when he was about to make his complaint, he was of a
sudden overwhelmed with the Forces of France, and had not his Enemies used
Moderation toward him more than his own Allie, his Territories though the
Patrimony of the Church, had been laid in Ashes before now.

When the French King broke Faith with Holland, to the surprise of a great part
of their Country, he was so far from assigning any Cause, true or false, for
his Actions, that he only published a Declaration of War without any other
Reasons, than only the Ill satisfaction which His Majesty had of the behavior
of the States General toward him, being risen to that Degree, that he can no
longer without Diminution of his Glory, dissemble his Indignation against them,
etc. Therefore he had resolved to make War against them by Sea and Land, etc.
And commands all his Subjects courir sus upon the Hollanders, for such is Our
Pleasure.

Certainly it was never known that in any Age or Nation in the World the Sword
was drawn upon no better Allegations; a style so far from being Most Christian,
that nothing but some French Romance could parallel the Expression. All that
can be said, 'twas A-la-mode de France.

But Holland had no reason to wonder at these proceedings, considering what a
Prank the French King had played them before, when he pretended to join with
them in the War against England. At what time France, by virtue of a Treaty of
Guarranty with the States of the United Provinces, after several requests
ineffectally made by the States, found her self obliged to make a show of
undertaking to defend them against England; among the rest of the Articles,
there was one by which it was concluded and agreed in express terms, that the
Allies should not Negotiate, much less conclude any Peace or Truce with the
common Enemy, without the consent of the other, and without procuring the same
satisfaction for his Allie, as he would for himself. The States tied themselves
with that Integrity to this Obligation, that notwithstanding the considerable
Advantages offered them to treat separately; they would not so much as lend an
Ear to any Proposition of that Nature. France on the other side, had always
kept on Foot a private Negotiation, which nevertheless the Dutch had all the
Reason in the World to suspect, because of the continual Posting of Curriers
between Paris and London. However France confirmed them so authentickly in a
contrary belief, and gave them such positive Promises, that she would never
hearken to any Proposition, unless in a joint Assembly, for a General Peace,
that she ordered the Count D' Estrades, that in Case the States would not give
Credit to what he assured them as an Ambassador, he should quit that Character
for so long time, and pawn his Faith to them as a Private Person. A great
honor indeed to the Count d' Estrade, to have the Reputation of a Person that
would not tell an untruth, but under the Character of a Public Minister of
France, and that the Probity of his Person was above the Dignity of his
Employment. Though had he been so improvident to have been bound for his
Master, he must certainly have answered both the Principal and Interest; for
certain it is that England and France concluded the Peace without the consent
or so much as the knowledge of the States; neither did France make any mention
of them or their Interests, or of any reserve or relation to the General Peace.
But that which was more surprising was this, that after the French King had
thus concluded a private Peace with England, notwithstanding he had promised
the King not to exercise any Act of Hostility against him, he used all his
endeavors to oblige the Dutch to put forth their Fleet to Sea, engaging to
join with them, and agreeing upon all the Conditions necessary for that
purpose. A double headed piece of Treachery, fit to be recorded to the Eternal
Infamy of the Faith Breaker.

If we look into Sweden, we shall find that she was considered as more potent
than Denmark, and therefore a League was clapped up with them, to prevent the
Danes assisting Holland, and by that League the King of Sweden was to receive
by way of Pension or Gratuity, Sixteen Hundred Thousand Crowns. But the French,
upon second Thoughts, finding the Treaty with the Sweeds to be of little use to
them, refused to ratify it, and sent away Monsieur Trelon, to tell the King of
Sweden in short, that his Master declard it void; a quick and Majestic way to
rescind a Treaty at any time.

If we remove into Poland, there you shall find no body more busy than the
French King's Ambassadors at the Elections of the King, to procure the choice
of such a one as may be tacked to his Interest, or at least such a one as may
have no kindness to the House of Austria, and all this to enable him the more
to disturb the Peace of the Empire. In pursuance of which ungodly designs,
under a pretense of Advancing the Affairs of Poland, and settling a perfect
Amity with that Kingdom, the French King contrived a Marriage for the Polish
Prince, with a Lady of France. By which means he had a fair opportunity to send
thither as her Attendents, and for the more Splendour of her Fame, so many
expert Instruments of Mischief, that immediately they formed and settled a
Cabal with such Intrigues as in a short time enflamed the Nobility of that
Kingdom into Animosities and Factions, not likely to be so soon again
extinguished: And at that time they wrought so far, that the King soon after
became willing to resign the Kingdom; upon which, the Turk, seeing the great
Divisions that were raised among them, was the more easily allured in by the
French Cabal, who procured by Versallian's directions that Mischief, partly out
of revenge because they could not compass another King either of French Blood
or French Interest at the next Election, and partly, because the New King had
contracted a Marriage with the Emperor's Sister.

And now Poland, by reason of its Situation, being sheltered under the Wings of
the French Ambassador, is fixed upon by the French, to convey themselves from
thence into Hungary, and the Ottoman Port, for the better and more easy
carrying on their Intrigues between France, the Male Contents, and the Turk.
And first, it appeared by several Letters dispersed both in Constantinople,
Transylvania, and Hungary, that upon the 30th. of December, 1681. the War was
resolved upon, and Sworn to against the Emperor, in the Serraglio of
Constantinople, in the Holy Council, called the Divan, where the Mufti, High
Priest of the Mahomitan Religion, sits President. Which sufficiently laid open
the Authors and Procurers of that War, and clearly showed, that the French were
not ashamed, as if it had been a famous Action in them to take advice of the
Divan, and applaud the success of the Negotiation, as they did in their Letters
written backwards and forwards to the Rebels, in which they congratulated with
the Rebels; for having drawn the Rebels to their Succor, they promised each
other in their Letters all the Advantages they could expect, which aimed at no
less than to have driven the Emperor out of the best of his Dominions.

It was known that such of the Hungarians as were forced to run their Country
for conspiring against the Emperor, lived only upon such supplies of Money as
they received from the French, to the end they should not be constrained to
make their Peace with the Emperor, whose Clemency they were made believe
extended no farther than to offer it; so that they resolved to prosecute their
Enterprise upon the Promises that were made them from France. Which was the
reason that Akakia renewed and confirmed more powerfully than ever the League
and Alliance with the Malcontents in Hungary. The French Emissaries also,
without any shame of violating the Law of Nations, and in Countries where the
Solemn Treaty of Peace was in full force, though they had been manifestly
discovered in a secret Conspiracy, run on afterward more than ever with an
unparalleled Impudence, as if all things had been lawful for them to act
without control.

An Hunderd Thousand Florins were ordered at Paris to foment the Discontents of
the Hungarian Rebels, and quicken the Motion of the Turks; which sum was
delivered at Dantzick, and paid into the Hands of a Banker, who afterward
delivered it into the Hands of the French Emissaries, at several Payments, the
better to hide the Business. And the Sieur du Vernay Boucauldi, Count Teckely's
real Spy, caused to be delivered to the Sieur Valentine Nemessan 11300
Ducats, to oblige the Malcontents to take Arms again* and attack the
Citadel of Zatmar, after the French Mode; that is, to endeavor to gain the
Garrison or Citizens with Money.

These Tricks of the French Emissaries were so well known, that the Princess
Radzivilliana forbad the suffering any French to pass through her Country of
Saculia, fearing lest they should as in other Places, corrupt her People with
Money, and one being taken passing through her Country, was by her command
laden with Irons, and severely punished. Nevertheless they took other Roads,
and had frequent private enterviews with Valentin Nemessan, Peter Jagel, and
other particular Friends and Allies of Teckely. They made it their Business
likewise to have more and more frequent conferences in Transylvania, sending
first one, and then another to Paris with ample Accounts of their Proceedings,
and for farther Instructions.

Of all these things the Emperors Ambassador in the Court of Poland complained
to his Majesty, and desired that no French Man, not being an Ambassador, or
bearing some other Employment, might be permitted to stay in his Dominions.
Upon which the King gave Notice to the French Ambassador, to order Akakia and
Du Vernay to withdraw: The Senate also told the same Ambassador, that they well
understood that the French were they who had stirred up the Troubles in
Hungary; that they knew what Money had been given for it, what Cabals they had
held, and what the Sieur du Vernay kept ^very day. They declared him to be a
Spy, and that he had no other business to detain him about Leopold, but only
to treat with the Turks and Mahometans about drawing the War into Hungary. The
Ambassador answered, that Vernay was sent with him into Poland to manage the
Affairs of the Most Christian King his Master, and denied that either Vernay or
he had any commerce with the Hungarians or Turks.

But the Spanish Ambassador having made new Discoveries, renewed his complaints
to the King, who gave him Audience in the presence of Vitry the French
Ambassador, and before the whole Senate; where he spoke a long time against the
abominable Methods and Practices of the French, carried on by Vernay, to
promote the Troubles of Hungary, and bring the Turks into Christendom; but then
it was that Vitry, having no way to avoid it, declared Vernay to be joint
Ambassador with him from the French King* by that means to shelter a Traitor to
Christendom under the Protection of the Law of Nations.

Much about the same time the Castellan of Primislau perceiving that neither
His Majesty of Poland nor the Senate exp^ll'd the French Spies, and moreover
that their designs still succeeded better and better, refused to permit Vernay
to enter his Village of Nimoravia, but forced him to pass another way.

Vitry was highly incensed at this, and going directly to Court, laid before
the King the Affront and Indignity offered to his Associate Vernay, and was so
bold as to demand the Imprisonment of the Castellan for satisfaction; but the
King not enduring his Confidence, told him plainly, that it was to no purpose
to couch Vernay under the Quality of an Ambassador, for that the Tragedies he
acted under the vain pretense of an Ambassador, were too well known; that all
the devices of the French, and their contracts with the Turk were discovered,
that the places which Vernay had corrupted were named; their Resolutions and
Designs known, that he could exactly tell how much Money had been remitted from
France to Hungary, and how they had used Violence, Deceit, and wicked Practice
against the Emperor, to the misfortune of Christendom.

The Ambassador would have pretended to have cleared himself of these things,
which he said were wrongfully charged upon his Nation. But the King growing
hot, would not hear him, only told the Ambassador he would lay Ten Thousand
Pistoles with him, that he would undeniably prove all that he had said to be
true.

At which the French Ambassador stood amazed, and by his silence sufficiently
confirmed the thing. The rest of the French that were present also, in a
Consternation fixed their Eyes upon the Ground; not lifting them up, but to
gaze upon one another, as it were accusing themselves. So certain it is, that
the inward reproach of Conscience, and the secret Power of Truth, put the most
fierce and confident out of Countenance, and by reducing the Guilty to a
shameful Silence, force them to make some sort of confession of their Crimes.

Besides what has been recited, there were several Letters intercepted, which
cleared up the Truth of the French correspondence with the Turks and Hungarian
Malcontents. One from Monsieur Vernay to Count Teckely, wherein the French
Spy tells him, that he had received with great joy the Letters which he sent
him from the Camp before Filleck, enclosed in the Packets of the French
Ambassador at Constantinople. That he had endeavored to send Jaygell what he
had promised him, and what he had received, but wanted an Opportunity; farther
he desired the Count to order it so, that his Messengers should come to him by
Night, and directed him which Road they should take, to avoid the Searches of
the Polonians, concluding that he should take care in all things that the Count
should be pleased to command him.

Another Letter from Count Teckely to Vernay, wherein the Count gives Vernay
thanks to his faithful Agent Valentine Nemessani, and promises him to
acknowledge it, as occasion should serve; gives him an account of his taking
Cassovia and Filleck, and how he intended to prosecute his good Success.

Another Letter from Peter Jaygell Governor of Cassovia to Monsieur Vernay;
wherein Jaygell gives Vernay an Account of the taking and dismantling of
Filleck, that Teckely had been Proclaimed King of Hungary, and confirmed in
that Quality by the Great Turk, who sent him from the Port a Hat instead of a
Crown, a Standard, and a Scepter. He tells Vernay farther, that Nemessani was
gone to treat of Affairs at the French King's Court, and presses Vernay to
hasten the supply promised by the French King.

Sufficient Proofs of the pernicious and Most Antichristian Treacheries of the
Most Christian King to the ruin of Christendom. After all this, to show the
extent of French falsehood, you shall see that if it stand with his own
Interest, the French King will not stick to betray himself, and discover his
own Treasons; for that at the beginning of the Dutch War, when he saw the
Emperor arming himself in good earnest to assist the Dutch, to dissuade and
divert him from his purpose; and to engage him, had it been possible, not to
concern himself in the Quarrel, he very fairly offered to deliver into the
Emperor's hands all the Original Letters and Papers he had received from time
to time from his bribed Friends and Creatures in Poland and Hungary, to the end
that both his Imperial Majesty and the King of Poland might take such Orders as
they thought fit with those Traitors* whi^^ may serve as a fare warning and
determent to all those that prefer French Money before their Loyalty, and the
true Interests of their Country.

It Is true that for some time the Most Christian King made the raising of his
Seige from before Luxenburgh a great Argument of his Christian. Zeal and
Generosity to his Imperial Majesty, not to assail him when the Turk was at his
Doors, but the true ground of his retiring, was this notwithstanding his
specious pretenses, at the instance of the Confederates, all good Offices were
done by the King of England, and Memorials given, but all to no effect, till
the word Parliament was put into them. That powerful word had such a charm in
it, that even at a distance it raised the Siege; which may convince us of what
Efficacy a King of England's words are when he will give them their full
weight, and threaten with his Parliament.

Then it is that he appears that greater Figure which we ought to represent him
in our Minds, the Nation his Body, he the Head, and joined with that Harmony
that every word he pronounces is the Word of a Kingdom. Such Words are as
effectual as Fleets and Armies, because they can create them; and without this,
his Word sounds abroad like a Faint Whisper, that is either not heard, or which
is worse, not minded.

But to return to the French King, and bring him home to his own Dominions,
where you shall find his extraordinary Kindness to his then Highness the Prince
of Orange, in demolishing the Castle, and pulling down the Walls of the chief
City of his Principality of Orange, to save him the expense of a Garrison, and
Plundering and Exacting vast Sums of Money from the Subjects of another
Prince, living in Peace and giving him no Disturbance, merely under pretense of
entertaining the Children of Hugonots. Nay, you shall find him persecuting his
own Subjects under the Name of Heretics, and sending his Missionary Dragoons
to conver^ them by ransacking their Houses, robbing them of their Goods,
defiling their Wives, deflowring their Daughters, and inflicting upon the Men
torments more cruel and inhumane than those of the Ten Persecutions; and all
this while, they were under the Protection of several Edicts, solemnly granted
and ratified to them for the Exercise of their Religion without disturbance.

These are the Renowned Acts of Lewis XIV. displaying the lovely prospect of
his Falsehood to England, his breach of Faith with Spain, his Infidelity to
Holland, his Juggling with the Northern Princes, his Treacherous Aspiring to
the Imperial Throne, his vast Expenses to divide the Princes of Germany from
the Empire, his endangering the subversion of all Christendom by confederating
with the Turk, and his Violations of the Peace of his own Subjects.

In a word, it has been his common Practice to give the World all manner of
Disturbance, and to render France the common Enemy of the Peace of Manking, and
a public Pest among all States and Princes; in every Country and Kingdom he
either finds Combustible Stuff, or else makes it, and then sets Fire to it,
being at an excessive charge to find Fodder for the various Animals of Faction
in all Places. Which sort of Politics appear to be so much the more Criminal,
because there is no just revenging them, but that which obliges all generous
Nations to fight their Enemies with their Arms in their hands, and openly.
There being nothing so base as that which makes Men make use of wicked devices
and execrable Treasons as the instruments to ruin others; nor does he that
thinks to assume the Name of Great by unworthy Artifices, render himself a whit
the more truly Glorious: Souls truly Royal and Magnanimous have always despised
the Conquests they could more easily obtain by Cunning and Trapan, than by
Force and Arms: And it was out of their Opinion, worthy a Noble Spirit, that
Alexander the great sharply rebuked his Favorite Parmenio, who would have put
him upon a crafty contrivance, telling him, it was only fit for Robbers to have
recourse to Treachery, as their only means to compass their Theiveries. But
the French King is of another Temper, and thinks it more safe to conquer by
Divide and Impera, than by dint of Sword. He knows himself good at Burning,
witness Alsatia and the Palatinate laid in Ashes, and therefore thinks it
better to set other Countries, which he cannot otherwise come at, in a Flame by
Treachery and Faction, that having enough to do to quench their own Fires at
home, they may have neither Leisure nor Power to hinder his Projects abroad.

Doubtless then, since England has so lately seen her Neighbors Houses in so
sad a conflagration, it is a sufficient Justification for her to look to her
own, and to secure her self and all Europe from such Boutefeus, and the said
effects of their impious designs.

Seeing then there is so little ^redit to be given to the Carthaginian Faith of
France, and that all the Motions of that aspiring Monarch tend directly to the
subversion of the whole frame of the Government of Europe, and to erect a
French Tyranny over all the enthralled Princes of this same fourth and best
inhabited part of the World, there are two Motives which ought to excite the
Princes of Christendom, to take the common cause in hand: the one is interest
of State, the other the strickt obligation of Justice. The first is, the
general concern of all the Potentates of Europe; the second, the particular
interest of the Princes of the Empire. We shall only take notice of the former,
as being the most Universal, and most considerable in the World, and which will
lead us insensibly into the second. The grand concern is now to support the
Right of Nations, which is common to all, and to prevent the introducing of
Maxims into the World which destroy all commerce among Men, and will certainly
render humane Society no less dangerous and insupportable than that of Lions
and Tigers; to defend the public Faith of Treaties, and remove from the sight
of Christendom a scandalous example, which, by the fatal consequences of it,
will surrender the most feeble to the Will and Pleasure of the strongest and
most Potent; to stop the Inundation of a Rapid Torrent, against the impetuosity
of which neither Leagues nor Marriages, neither Oaths nor Ties of Blood and
Parentage, neither Amity nor Condescentions, are Mounds or Damms sufficient to
defend the common Bulwark of Christendom against a vast design, which has no
other ground than the Insatiable thirst of Conquest, no other end than
despotick Domination by dint of Arms, and slight of Intrigue, nor any Limits
but such as Fortune shall prescribe. In short, England is now to decide the
Fate of Europe, and to pronounce the Sentence of her Liberty or Bondage.

Nor does there want justification sufficient to pursue so great and glorious
an Undertaking to the utmost, when we consider the Maxims of France, which are
easy to be gathered from the past and present conduct, her insulting Monarch;
whose design was to have thrown his Wash-pot over the Empire, and his Shoe over
all the rest of Europe. The first Mixim of France is, to make War always
abroad, and to exercise her Young Nobility at the expense of her Neighbors. A
Maxim very Politic, and well adjusted for her own Advantage; but very
incommodious for all the rest of the World: For it is certain the Genius of
that Nation cannot long endure the Calms of a Lazy Peace, so that if you cannot
find employment for them abroad, they will be framing Commotions and
Disturbances at home. The Eldest Sons of all their Noble Families carry away
the Estates without leaving any thing to the Younger, but an empty Title and
their Swords; so that being little addicted to Learning, and disdaining the
life of Mechanics, nothing remains but War, or Thievery, to rescue them from
Misery; which is the reason that the Politics of France oblige her to be
continually picking Quarrels with her Neighbors, to evaporate those Flames,
which otherwise would prey upon her own Bowels.

Their second Maxim is, to insinuate themselves into all sorts of Affairs on
which hand soever it be, and to make themselves Vmpires in all business, either
by Force or Subtilty, by Threatenings, or under pretense of Friendship, to
wriggle themselves into Treaties of Peace where they are Parties interested, as
they did in that of the Bishop of Munster, and afterward in the Assembly at
Breda. There never was any Quarrel wherein they had not the cunning to pretend
some Interest or Right; and never any People showed the least inclination to
rebel, but they always made them their Allies. But experience tells us that
they never took part in any War but to inflame it the more, nor ever interposed
in any Peace, to Sow the Seeds of new Differences.

Their third Maxim is to make Interest of State the only rule of all their
Actions, without having any regard to the Faith of Treaties, or the Sanctity of
Religion, or any other Ties of Parentage or Friendship, according to the
Fundamental Principle of the D. of Rohan, That Princes commanded the People,
and Interest, commanded Princes: So that all that the Turks have gained upon
Europe from the time of Francis the First till this time, they owe to their
Alliances with France, and the Diversions she had made in their favor, by
giving disturbance to those that enterpriz'd any thing against the common Enemy.

Their fourth Maxim is, to keep, as much as in them lies, all Foreign States
employed and divided at home, or else engaged in Foreign War, (of which England
in particular has found the sad Effects,) and under pretense of assisting
sometimes one, sometimes another, to seek their own Advantages in the Troubles
of others.

These are the Maxims of Men that make haste to be Rich in Ignoble Conquests;
and the infallible marks of a profound and vast design, that must be stopped in
time, to stop the spreading of the Ambitious Grangrene; for from a Royal and
powerful Professor of such Maxims as these, there is no Prince that can be
safe in his Dominions. Among private Persons it is the most difficult thing to
deal with a Man of a large Conscience; how much more a most Herculean task it
is to cope with a mighty Potentate whose Conscience is no less wide than his
Ambition is Vast, who having eleven Millions of Sterling Pounds, torn from the
Bowels and Mouths of his poor and wanting Subjects, at command to maintain his
Wars, and bribe his way to Conquest through all the Fences of Religion,
Morality, and Common Justice, values not the tremendous Anger of Heaven, nor
the Violation of all the Laws of God and Nature, nor the preservative
Constitutions of Men to attain his ends. It is said of Tamerlane, though a
Scythian and Barbarian, that to one who earnestly importuned him in behalf of
Bajazet, he made this answer, that he did not punish a King but an impions and
nefarious Man. The same justification have the Princes of Europe, that they
fight not against the Most Christian King, but an Antichristian Usurper, who
conquers to oppress, and oppresses merely to support his Oppression, and show
the Grandeur of his Power.

England has more just pretenses to his Dominions, than perhaps he has himself,
at least far more just than what he has to the conquests which he has wrested
out of the hands of the Spaniard and the Emperor. England has the greatest
Reason in the World to recover her Ancient, and till lately uncontested Glory,
and assert her long continued Dominions of the Seas, usurped by the Assistence
of a purchased Navy, which if once destroyed, nothing but the same
opportunities could again recover. It is said that the Portcullis was added to
the Royal Badges of the Crown of England, to signify that the Kings of England
had a just Right and Title, at pleasure to shut up and open the Sea when they
thought fit; and it may still be proved by several substantial Evidences, that
the King of England's Title to the Propriety of the Sea, is as good and perhaps
better than any Title the French King has to any part of his Dominions by Land.
And the Letters are still to be seen in the Paper-Office at White Hall, if not
removed, Written by this King's Grandfather with his own hand to King James, to
ask leave for some few Vessels to Fish for Sowles, as he should have occasion
for his own Table; and it ought to be so again, for it is only fit that England
should guard the Seas, that so well defend and guard Her. Justice it self now
loudly calls to England to demand satisfaction for the illegal and vexatious
Depredations and Practices committed upon her Merchants, even at the time when
she was in strictest League and Combination with her, to the ruin of her
Trade, which is the Apple of her Eye, and the main support of her Wooden Walls,
her chiefest Glory, and, next under Heaven, her chiefest Safeguard and
Protection. She ought in Justice and Honor to resent the Indignities and
Affronts so lately put upon her, in making her that ought to be the Balance of
Europe, the Derision of her Enemies, and only the Pity of her Friends; such a
generous Animosity and Resentment as this would wean the English Nation from
that fond Dotage upon French Baubles, French Fashions, and French Vermin, to
the loss of above Sixteen Hundred Thousand Pounds Yearly to this Kingdom,
(there having been Yearly so much more imported of French Commodities, than
exported of ours,) which only serves to enrich the Capital Foe to our own
Ruin, and to fit us for the Yoke of French Slavery. For this is a certain
Rule, that the first step to the subducing of a Nation is to insinuate into
them a good liking, or rather a dotage of those that are to be their subduers;
and therefore it was, that the French King observing, that while the English
were under the Conjunction of the Triple League, there was a general humor in
the Nation in opposition to Frence, insomuch that they had thrown off the
French Mode and put on Vests, to the end we might look the more like a distinct
People, and not be under the servility of Imitation, which always pays a
greater reverence to the Original, than is consistent with that Equality which
all independent Nations should pretend to; I say the the French King observing
this, did not like this small beginning of ill Humors, wisely considering it
as a natural Introduction, first to make the World his Apes, and then his
Slaves; and therefore he set his Instruments at work to Laugh us out of our
Vests, which she performed so effectually, that in a Moment, like so many
Footmen who had quitted their Masters Livery, we all took it up again, and
returned to serve the French.

And happy would it be for England if she would cast off her French Modes, her
French Fashions, and French Humors, which only serve to corrupt and soften the
minds of those for whom it would be much more glorious to remember the Fields
of Poictiers and Agencourt, and rather to study the generous Examples of their
victorious Ancestors, than be the Slaves of French Imitation. The conquering
Romans retired indeed to Athens to improve their Learning; but it betrays a
poorness of Spirit inexcusable in the English, who have two such Magnificent
Universities of their own, to gallop to Paris for Breeding; as if Coupees,
Complements, Grimaces, and Shrugs of the Shoulder were the only Accomplishments
of a Gentleman. Surely it was much better both for England and the General
Peace of Europe, when the English taught them their running Sarrabands, and the
good Breeding of Obedience, nor will it ever be well, till the English become
their Tutors again: For certainly there is no Government in Europe under which
the People live so Miserably, as under that of France; the Grand Signior, or
the Ksar of Mosc^vy are not more absolute of the People than the Tyranny of
France. The French King may well be called Tyrannus, for he makes and abrogates
the Laws at his Pleasure; he cannot be said to Rule, but Tyrannize over Cities,
deprived of all the Franchizes and Privileges that render Societies happy, and
to dominier over a poor naked People, stripped of all things that make life
comfortable. So that the People may be said to Toil and Moil, but the Prince to
wipe off the Sweat of their Brows into his own Coffers. You would swear that
the whole Country were the habitation of Poverty, where Penury walks about in
wooden Sandals, single Petti^oates, and wrinckl'd Faces, as if the Products of
that fertile Soil were forbid to be touched by the Innocent Manurers of that
Terrestrial Paradise, where the Corn, and Wine, and Fat of the Land is carried
off to fit the Royal Magazines, or sold abroad to cram the King's Exchequer.
And after all this, when the sholes of Locust Publicans have devoured all, even
almost to the very Stalk, for the small remainder to bear the Burden of
insolent free Quarter, is not only Tyranny, but licentiated Inhumanity.

All these Calamities and Miseries has England yet escaped, though fairly
threatened with them, had not Providence been very merciful to Her. The
Husbandman plump and jolly, enjoying his Liberty and a fair proportion of his
Labors, does not fear what the Confusion of Babel never knew the horrid
Jargonry of

Aid, Octroy, Preciput, Equivalent, Crew, Taille, Estate, Subsistence de
quartier d'hyvere, Garinzons, Mort pays, Appointments de Governors, Debtes
and Affairs du Roy, Gratifications Extraordinaries, Deu Gratuit, Frais.

The necessary supports of Life, Wine, Beer, Sider, are not enhanc'd by,

Aids sur le Vin, Bierres and Cidres, plus le Huictieme Denier, le Souquest,
le Batire, Imposts and Billets.

The Markets are not pestered with Gabelles upon Corn and Meal, nor the Mills
with Measure Coupee.

No Tolls of pied Fourchue, nor Duties taken by weight upon every pound of
Flesh sold in the Shambles, nor Gabelles upon Salt* but what are laid on by
consent of the People themselves.

The Shop Keepers are not molested with the Gibbrish of the mark upon Paper,
the mark of Silver, the mark of Tinn, the mark of Hats, the mark of all
Stockins, Silk, and Woollen, the mark of Shoes, the mark upon all Stuffs,
Woollen, and Silk, the mark upon Linen, the Gabelle upon Jie, the control of
of Exploites.

The Gentry are not vexed with the Tax of free Gifts, Fifts, and Resists, and
Amortisements.

The pr^ce of Valuation, the mark of Gold, the two Soulx in the Pound, the
sealed Duty, the duty of Control, the registers Duty, the Priest for being
admitted to the Annual, and the Annual or Paulette.

A sort of Language of the Galleys, not understood by English Liberty, yet all
these and many other abominable Taxes, Tolls, and Impositions, are punctually
leavy'd one way or other at the King's sole Will and Pleasure, with many more
too prolix to be numbered, and what ever else his Absolute Power shall think
fit to impose anew, where ever any subjects of the French Monarchy have their
habitations, when his emergent occasions intimate a pretense, and must be paid
without any remorce or compassion to the half Famished Children and Families of
the poor People, crying out for Bread.

Certainly to conclude therefore as I begun, the Lician Chimaera, and Lernaean
Hydra that wasted all the Country round about them, and ruined the Inhabitants
with the scalding Flames and Pestilential Breath that issued from their
Pestiferous Jaws, were Types of Tyranny in General, so more particularly of the
present French Monarchy; but on the other side, we find that both Bellerophon
and Hercules continue to this day eternized for subduing those Monsters.

Such Fables as these, being the Offspring of great Reason, and wise Head
pieces, were not invented merely to please their Readers, but to instruct the
World, that Wars, which unavoidably must be attended with great Mischiefs and
Calamities, are not to be unjustly undertaken to do wrong for wrong's sake,
under pretense of Illegal Claims and Pretensions, but may be legally
enterpriz'd to repel injustice and violence, and to curb the lawless Invasions
of Right and Property, which are the original Blessings and Benefits of God and
Nature, the unjust Assailour of which becomes an Enemy to both; and a Monster
no less pernicious than either of those two: For those Monsters no question
were no other than two aspiring Potentates, that made unjust and cruel Wars
upon their Neighbors, without provocation given, and therefore were most
justly subdued by Bellerophon and Hercules, and they no less justly rewarded
for the benefit received by their glorious Actions, which even exceed all Fame.
Virtue is Virtue still unalterable; from whence we may conclude, that the same
Glory still attends, and that the same success will prove the subduing these
Chimaera's and Hydra's of Men, that for so long time have harras'd Europe with
wicked Wars, and impious Depopulations, merely to gain the Honor of being like
those Monsters, Terrors and Destroyers of Mankind.

A Catalogue of French Commodities Yearly transsported into England, by which
it appears that our Trade with France has been at least Sixteen Hundred
Thousand Pounds a Year, clear loss to this Kingdom.
1. THere is transported out of France into England, great quantities of
Velvets plain and wrought, Sattins plain and wrought, Cloth of Gold and Silver,
Armoysins and other Merchandises of Silk, which are made at Lions, and are
valued to be Yearly worth one Hundred and Fifty Thousand Pounds.

2. In Silk, Stuffs, Taffeties, Poudesoys, Armoysins, Cloths of Gold and
Silver, Tabbies plain and wrought, Silk-ribbands, and other such like Silk
stuffs as are made at Tours, valued to be worth above Three Hundred Thousand
Pounds a Year.

3. In Silk-ribbands, Gallowns, Laces, and Buttons of Silk, which are made at
Paris, Roan, Chimont, St. Estienes in Forests, for about one Hundred and Fifty
Thousand Pounds a Year.

4. A great quantity of Serges, which are made at Chalons, Chartres, Estamines
and Rhemes, and great quantities of Serges made at Amiens, Crevecoeur,
Blicourt, and other Towns in Picardy, for above one Hundred and Fifty Thousand
Pounds a Year.

5. In Bever, Demicastor and Felt Hats, made in the City and Suburbs of Paris;
besides many others made at Roan, Lions, and other places, for about One
Hundred and Twenty Thousand Pounds a Year.

6. In Feathers, Belts, Girdles, Hatbands, Fans, Hoods, Masks, gilt and wrought
Looking-glasses, Cabinets Watches, Pictures, Cases, Medals, Tablets, Bracelets,
and other such like Mercery ware, for above One Hundred and Fifty Thousand
Pounds a Year.

7. I^ Pins, Needles, Box-combs, Tortoise-shell Combs, and such like, for about
Twenty Thousand Pound a Year.

8. In perfumed and trimmed Gloves, that are made at Paris, Roan, Vendosme,
Clermont, and other places, for about Ten Thousand Pounds a Year.

9. In Papers of all sorts. which are made at Auvergne, Poictou, Limosin,
Champaigne and Normandy for above One Hundred Thousand Pounds a Year.

10. In all sorts of Iron-mongers wares that are made in Forests, Auvergne,
and other places, for about Forty Thousand Pounds a Year.

11. In Linen Cloth that is made in Bretaigne, and Normandy as well course as
fine, there is transported into England, for above Four Hundred Thousand Pounds
a Year.

12. In Household Stuff, consisting of Beds Matresses, Coverlids, Hangings,
Fringes of Silk, and other furniture, for above One Hundred thousand Pounds a
Year.

13. In Wines from Gascoigne, Nantois and other places on the River of Loyerc
and also from Bourdeaux, Rochel, Nante, Roan, and other places, are transported
into England for above Six Hundred Thousand Pounds a Year.

14. In Aqua Vitae, Sider, Vinegar, Verjuice, and such like, for about One
Hundred Thousand Pounds a Year.

15. In Saffron, Castle-sope, Honey, Almonds, Olives Capers, Prunes, and such
like, for about One Hundred and Fifty Thousand Pounds a Year.

16. Besides five or six hundred Vessels of Salt laden at Ma ron, Rochel,
Rouage, the Isle of Oleron, and Isle of Rhee, transported into England, and
Holland, of a very great value. So as by this calculation, it does appear, that
the yearly value of such commodities as are transported from France to England,
amount to above Six and Twenty Hundred Thousand Pounds.

And the commodities exported out of England into France, consisting chiefly of
Woollen Cloths, Serges, Knit Stockings, Lead, Pewter, Alume, Coals, and all
else, do not amount to above Ten Hundred Thousand Pounds a Year. By which it
appears that our Trade with France is at least sixteen Hundred Thousand Pounds
a Year, clear lost to this Kingdom.

FINIS

