A Funeral Sermon, Preached March 13. 1697/8.

FOR Mr. WILLIAM HARTLEY, of Newport-Pagnel, Apothecary.

Bis vivit, qui been vivit,
Is timeat mortem, qui ad Christum ire timet.
By J. GIBBS.

Blessed are the Dead that die in the Lord, from henceforth: Yea, says the
Spirit, that they may rest from their Labors; and their Works do follow them,

Rev. 14.13. LONDON, Printed for Mark Conyers, Bookseller, at Newport-Pagnel:
And Sold by A. Roper in Fleetstreet, and G. Conyers in Little-Britain, School.

TO THE Sons and Daughters OF Mr. William Hartley, deceased.
My Friends,
AT the Motion of your late deceased Father, which I could not withstand, this
homespun Discourse was Preached on the Subject, which was his own Choice; and
is to satisfy his Desire, (in this plain Dress) now presented unto you: His
Design in Printing it was (as he told you) to keep him fresh in your Memory,
that the Proverb might not be verified in you, Out of Sight, and out of Mind;
and (without doubt) to remember you of that which was then coming upon him.
Plain Discourses, if pertinent, do best suit with Funeral Sermons: Had it been
preached in a loftier strain, as possibly I could have done, if the occasion
would have permitted it, it might have pleased itching Ears, and curious
Palates, but would have been of little Use unto mean Capacities, the Welfare of
whose Souls in Preaching ought to be respected. I therefore did think it best
to use the plainest Language, that all might understand: And if the Lord will
add his Blessing, that all might be profited thereby, who were Auditors, or
into whose Hand it may come to be read. Not making use of Notes in Preaching it
cannot rationally be supposed, that my Memory should be so tenacious, as to
retain every Word or Sentence that was delivered, or that there should be no
Omission, Addition, or Alteration; yet I have recollected as much as I could:
And what is emitted, added, or altered, I hope will be no prejudice to the
Truth then ^^sisted on: Neither can it be thought that a p^i^t a Ne^men should
as much affect the Heart of the Reader, as Preaching, ^wa vote, might do the
Hearer: There is as much difference usually between Reading and Hearing, as
there is between cold Meat and hot, although the Meat be the same, (...) an
hungry Stomach may make a good Meal of it; or as there is let ^een Drink when
the Vessel is newly broached, witch is quick and palatable, and when it is at
the bottom, and is become flat, and untastable, yet it may serve to quench the
Thirst. The Subject treated on is very frequent and common, and yet too little
to awaken and rouse up our sleepy and slothful Hearts to serious diligence in
and about the great Concernments of our Souls; for Eternity, was that great and
necessary Truth which my Text holds forth; thoroughly believed, it would
produce better Effects in the Lives of Men, than do appear generally in the
World. That which will certainly, and must unavoidably come upon us, and how
soon, and how suddenly it may come, and by what means, we know not; and is of
the highest Importance, and deserves the greatest and deepest Consideration,
is that which my Text does acquaint us with, and the ensuing Discourse does
call for, and press unto. That this Use may he made of it by you (my Loving
Friends) and many others that heard it, and others that may read it, is the
Cordial Desire of

Your Kinsman, and Soul's Friend, J. G.

Job XXX. 23. For I know thou will bring me to Death, and to the House
appointed for all living.


IN the foregoing Chapter we have an Account of Job's Prosperity, v. 1, 2. to
the 7th. and in Metaphorical Expressions, v. 19, 20. As also of the Honor he
was in, being reverenced by Young and Old, Great and Small, v. 8, 9, 10, 11.
with the reason of this Honor, from v. 12. to the 18. This Chapter, wherein is
my Text, informs us of the sad Catastrophe that did befall him; first, his
Honor was laid in the Dust, and turned into the greatest Contempt, from v. 1.
to 14. and his Prosperity into the deepest Calamity, whereof he does most
grievously Complain, from v. 14. unto the words of my Text, wherein three
things are observable.

1. The Person speaking in this Pronoun I; this was Job. 2. The Person spoken
unto, in the Pronoun Thou; which is God. 3. The Thing spoken, or the Matter of
his Speech; bring me to Death.
For the opening of the Words, I shall propound and answer three Questions.

1. Who, and what a one he is, that did know. 2. What he knew, or the Object of
his Knowledge. 3. How he attained this Knowledge.
Of the first, it was Job; that most excellent Person, that for four things had
not his fellow then on the Earth.

1. For Piety and Godliness, Chap. 1. v. 1. His Picture was drawn by the Pencil
of the Spirit of God in four Lines, all which did speak him to be a most
excellent Man.

1. He was Upright. 2. Perfect; not with a Legal, or sinless Perfection, but
Evangelical. 3. One that feared God, and eschewed Evil; which contains both the
positive part of Holiness, and the privative. He was a worshipper of God, and
an avoider of Evil; this was attested by God in the Face of his greatest Enemy,
v. 8. with an Addition, None like him.

2. For Patience; who, when the Messengers of most sad Tidings came thick and
threefold, one treading as it were upon the heels of another; he blessed God as
well for taking away, as for giving; he was so far from Blaspheming God, or
venting an impatient word under his sore Afflictions, that he blessed God; and
it is said of him, In all this Job sinned not, nor charged God foolishly, Chap.
1. v. 21, 22. Presented to us as a pattern of Patience, James 5.11.

3. For great Affliction and Calamity he never had any equal; no mere Man did
ever suffer, as we read of, such hard things as he met with; his large Estate
swept away, his Children destroyed, Chap. 1. from v. 14. to 20. and his Body
smitten with most noisome Botches from Head to Foot.

4. A Non-such for recovery out of his deep Calamity, his Losses doubly
repaired in his Substance, having 14000 Sheep for 7000, 6000 Camels for 3000,
1000 Yoke of Oxen for 500, and 1000 She-Asses for 500; besides seven Sons, and
three Daughters, which were the Beauties of the Land, Chap. 42. v. 12. to 16.
This is the Man that had this Knowledge.

2. What he knew: viz. That God would bring him to Death, etc.

1. It Is he would bring to Death, that gave him Life; he took away what he
gave; it is he that breathed into him and into us that breath of Life, that
will stop it, and send him and us away.

2. It is he will bring unto Death, that supports Life, and preserves it during
his pleasure; Psalm. 66.9. He holds our Soul in life; in him we live, move,
and have our Being, as Daniel told quaffing Belshazzar, Dan. 5.23.

3. It is he that has appointed Death for us, whose Appointment is not subject
to disappointment: It is a Statute Law enacted by the Divine Wisdom, that all
are subject unto; which none can avoid, but stands more firm than the Laws of
the Medes and Persians, Heb. 9.28. This Law is unrepealable, and will surely be
executed.

4. It is he will bring us to Death, that has innumerable, and unaccountable
ways and means to do it; sometimes suddenly, without any previous warnings on
our own Bodies: Some by Fire, some by Water, others by the Sword, or Bullet.
Ah! how many Thousands have thus fallen in a time of War? Some by an Apoplexy,
others fall into Swoons, that revive no more.

Some he brings to Death by Chronick Diseases, or lingering Distempers, which
gradually by little and little do weaken and waste Nature, until Death comes;
as in Consumptions, Pthisicks, Dropsies, etc.

Some are taken off by Acute sharp Pains, as by the Cholick, Stone, Gout, and
such like; and no Man can give an Account of all the ways that God does bring
us to Death; but by one means or another, in one way or another, it shall be
done. So that the common Proverb is verified, That there is but one way of
coming into the World, but there are innumerable ways of going out of it.

5. He will bring us to Death, whose Power is unresistible. Alas! what a poor
weak Worm is Man? what strength has he when the Almighty God has to do with
him? Can he that is more feeble than a Moth, resist, or withstand, or bear up
against an Omnipotent Arm? Job 9.12. Behold, he takes away, and who can hinder
him? That is, none can; if all the Power and Strength of Men were combined
together, to preserve the Life of one Person, it would be in vain to attempt
it, when God will bring him to Death. Who has an Arm like him? Job 40.9. If
none has, then none can disannul his Judgment, ver. 8. No Man has Power to
retain the Spirit in the hour of Death, Eccles. 8.8. Therefore no Heart can
endure or hold out, nor can any Hand be strong, when God shall deal with Man,
Ezekiel. 22.14.

6. It is he whose Will is uncontrollable, He is of one Mind, and who can turn
him? He does whatsoever he will in Heaven above, and on Earth beneath: What he
is pleased to do, that he will do, and who dare question him, or say, What do
thou? Job 9.12. Psalm. 135.6. He has no Superior, therefore it is too great
Arrogance and Boldness in a poor sorry Worm, to call God to Account for what he
does, as interpretatively discontented Persons do.

7. He will bring unto Death: Who has set the bounds of our Lives, beyond
which we cannot pass, Job 14.5. And when the appointed Time is come, his
purpose in bringing to Death shall take place. There is an appointed time to
Man upon the Earth, Job 7.1. and until that appointed Time come, Man shall be
continued on the Earth, whatsoever Dangers he may meet with in his Passage
through this Wilderness, by one means or another God will preserve; some that
in probability have been near the Gates of Death, being given up of Physicians
for dead Persons, and their Friends weeping about them, have been brought back
from the sides of the Pit, and have outlived others more healthful, and far
more likely to live. And others, when the time appointed was come, have been
brought unto Death, when in Reason there was little Expectation of it.

8. He will bring to Death, that is, inexorable, when the Time determined is
come. It is not Prayers or Tears that shall then prevail to procure the
lengthening out of the day of Life. It is not crying, O spare me a little, that
I may recover strength, will serve turn. How many on their Deathbeds have with
Tears begged a little longer time, not being ready and prepared for Death? But
all in vain; whether prepared or not, it is not Wealth can purchase, nor Cries
procure an hour's respite, when the set time is come. A World of Wealth, as one
cried out, for an Inch of Time; but, had she it to give, she could not have
obtained it.

Obj. But did not God add Fifteen Years unto Hezekiah's Life, in Answer to his
Prayers and Tears? Isa. 38.1, 2, 3, 4, 5.

Resp. Fifteen Years were added from the time that he prayed and wept, but not
unto the time appointed for his Dissolution.

Me. This was that Excellent Person, that was the Non-such of the Earth in his
day. But it is every me: One may say, God will bring me; another, that God will
bring me; and so may every individual Person: So that none are exempted, none
shall be passed by, but all God will bring to Death. He does not say, I know I
shall die; but, God will bring me to Death. All that have ever been before us,
and they were innumerable from the Creation of the World, God has brought to
Death, but two; the one was Enoch, who was translated, that he should not see
Death, Genesis 5.24. Heb. 11.5. and Elijah, that was immediately carried up to
Heaven in a Whirlwind, 2 Kings 2.11. and all that shall succeed or come after
us, except those that shall remain, and be alive at the coming of the Lord, who
shall be caught up to meet the Lord in the Air, 1 These. 4.17. yet though these
shall not be brought to Death, they shall be changed, which is equivalent to
it; hence 1 Cor. 15.51. We shall not all sleep, but we shall all be changed.
The longest livers died: The Antediluvian Fathers, reported of Genesis 5. all of
whom lived, through the strength of Nature, and the Power of God, above 900
Years, except Mahalaleel, that wanted five Years of 900; and Lamech, that lived
777, and Enoch, that lived 365 Years before his Translation, yet they all were
said to die, as Adam, Seth, Enos, etc. So that though Men may live many Years,
and though they spend them in Mirth and Pleasures, yet it concerns them to
remember the days of Darkness will come, Eccles. 11.8. There is no Age of the
World, nor shall be unto the end of the World, but Man, that was born of a
Woman, has been brought to Death; and as no Age has been excused, so no Rank,
Quality, or Degree of Men have been exempted. The King as well as the Beggar
has passed through the Gates of Death; the Prince and the Peasant: hence Psalm.
146.5, 6. Put not your trust in Princes, nor in the Son of Man, in whom is no
help. The Reason of this Exhortation, His breath goes forth, he returns to
his Earth. Both are lodged together, one House holds them both.

The Honorable must come to Death, all his great swelling Titles of Honor
cannot secure him, nor can the mean and base Condition of others preserve them.

The Rich and the Poor also must come to it, and lie down alike in the Dust. We
find, Luke 16.22. that the Beggar died: So did the Rich Man; and in one thing
the Rich Man had the Advantage of Lazarus, for he, it is said, was buried,
possibly had a costly Coffin, and had great Splendour at his Funeral, and the
Poor Man hurled obscurely into some Hole; for though it is said, he died it
does not say, he was buried; well, yet the Poor Man had a far greater Advantage
at his Death; for when the Devils dragged the Rich Man to Hell, a Guard of
Angels was sent to convey the departing Soul of the Poor Man into Heaven.

The strong Man is brought to Death as well as the weak and feeble: Job 21.23,
24, 25. One dies in his full, or in the very perfection of his strength, whose
breasts were full of Milk, and his bones moistened with Marrow. Another dies in
the bitterness of his soul, that did never eat his meat with pleasure; these
shall lie down alike in the dust. By Strength no Man can prevail, the mighty
Men of Valor were brought to Death, those that in Old Times were called Men of
Renown. The stout-hearted are spoiled, they have slept their sleep, and the men
of might have lost their hands, wherewith they have done great Exploits, Psalm.
76.5. The great Conquerors of the World have by Death been conquered and
overcome.

The Doctor and the Apothecary: The one that has prescribed, and the other
that has prepared Medicines, whereby the Sick have been recovered, and Life
has been preserved, cannot devise nor provide a Potion that shall keep
themselves from Death. The Wise and the Fool. Solomon, Eccles. 2.16. propounds
a Question, How dies the Wise Man? And answers it, As the Fool. None by their
Politic shifts can evade or shift it off; the great Head-pieces that have been
in the World, have laid down their Heads in the Dust.

The Useful and the Useless. Some Men are Luggage to the Earth, who only live
to eat, and do no good in their Generation, whose Souls serve but for Salt to
keep them from putrefying, and rotting above Ground. But there are, and have
been others, that have been a Blessing in their Places, doing much good unto
those they have conversed with: Such a one was Job, Chap. 29.12, 13, 14, 15,
16, 17. And David, Acts 13.36. who served his Generation according to the will
of God, yet for all that, he fell asleep. Who more serviceable unto God and
Man, than the Holy Men of Old, Prophets, and Apostles, yet they did not live
for ever, Zech. 1.5.

Yea, the Godly and Wicked have been, and shall be brought to Death. Wickedness
shall not deliver him that is given to it, Eccles. 8.8. Nor shall the
Righteousness of the Righteous, for one event happens to them both, Eccles. 9.2.

Object. But does not Solomon contradict this Doctrine, who tells us, That
Righteousness delivers from Death, Prove. 10.2?

Resp. It is certain that Righteousness delivers from Death: But not from
Natural Death, for that is a Debt owing by all, and must be paid by all; but
Righteousness does deliver from the Sting or Curse of it. So that the Righteous
may with holy Boldness and Confidence Challenge Death to show his Sting, 1 Cor.
15.55. And also from Eternal Death, which is called the second Death, or a
Death after Death, Rev. 2.11. Chap. 20.6.

Will God bring to Death? That is, to Natural Death, which is the dissolving of
the Union, or loosing or breaking the Knot that did tie Body and Soul together,
2 Cor. 5.1. The word dissolved is taken from the overthrowing or demolishing of
Buildings, whereby the House that was compact, and in the several parts joined
together, being demolished, it is parted asunder. These two intimates, Body and
Soul, by Death are separated one from another.

Third Question. How did Job come to this Knowledge? Why, in the same way as
others do, or may attain it.

1. By the Letter of the Scripture: This does sufficiently bear Witness to this
Truth. Genesis 3.19. the Lord tells Adam, That he is Dust, and unto Dust he shall
return. Job speaks the same, Chap. 14.1. Besides the manifold Instances of
Persons that died, recorded in the Scripture, do plainly, and convincingly
demonstrate it.

2. Reason or the Light of Nature will tell us, that a House of Clay, that is
founded on a heap of Dust, such as our Bodies are, Job 4.19. how strong or
beautiful soever it be, will fall down. The Apostle calls it an Earthly House,
2 Cor. 5.1. If it was built of Stones, and the Foundation was a Rock, or
Marble, yet by one means or other it will decay, and may be overthrown. And if
this be all the Knowledge Men have, it will not much affect the Heart, nor
produce such Effects as the Matter does require. Men may, and many do know both
these ways, that they must die; and yet the Lord may take up the Complaint
against them, as he did against Israel of Old, for not wisely considering their
latter End, Deuteronomy. 32.29. Not duly expecting or preparing for it, not taking
care to order their Conversations as dying Creatures ought to do, but do still
carelessly neglect the Concerns of their Precious and Immortal Souls. But,

3. There is a Spiritual Knowledge of it, though the Object be Natural, which
proceeds from the Teachings of God, which Holy David prayed for, Psalm. 39.4.
who had the means both of Scripture and Reason to inform him, as other Men
have; yet this did not satisfy him, and therefore applies himself to the
Throne of Grace, that the Lord would teach him to know his End, and the measure
of his Days, that he might thereby be made to know how frail he was. For this
also did Moses pray, Psalm. 90.12. that he might be taught so to number his
days, that this Effect might be wrought, to apply his Heart to Wisdom. In the
foregoing Verse he had cast up the Account of the Years of Man's Life, but he
looked after, and did beg for another kind of Knowledge, than what his Reason
could Instruct him in. You therefore that have only that knowledge of your
Mortality, that Reason and the Letter of the Scripture teaches, be exhorted to
imitate these Holy Men, that you may attain that knowledge of it, as may
incline your Hearts to seek after the things that belong unto your Eternal
Welfare.

Having run through the words, by way of Explication, I shall lay before you
two Observations that arise from them.

1. That God will bring us to Death. 2. That it is a piece of the greatest
Wisdom, rightly and Spiritually to know this.
I shall only handle the first of these: How long soever, and what Lives soever
we live, yet we must die.

Reasons of the Doctrine.
1. God will bring us to Death, because we bring Sin into the World, which
opens a Passage for Death. Romans 5.12. As by one Man Sin entered into the World,
so Death by Sin; and Death passed upon all Men, for that all have sinned. Here
we see at what Door Death enters; though Man was made of weak and feeble
Matter, yet if Sin had not made the way, he should not have died; but our
Father Adam, the Representative of Mankind, transgressing the Law of Creation,
presently Death is threatened, Genesis 3.19. and that not to himself only, but to
all that should come out of his Loins, or his whole Posterity; and although the
Guilt of Sin, binding over to Eternal Death, be removed from some of his Seed,
by the Seed of the Woman, yet Natural Death must pass upon them all.

2. Man having sinned, God did not send us into the World with a Design of
spending an Eternity to it, but gives us a little Time to prepare us for an
Eternal Glory, which he has prepared for those that die in the Lord. Most Men
live as if they were sent hither only to eat and drink, and provide for their
Flesh; but the All-wise God had higher Ends in making so Noble a Creature as
Man, putting him into a Natural Capacity, by the Soul he has endued him with,
which is a Spirit and Immortal of an Immortal Glory. And the Lord has given
him time to seek after it, and appointed ways and means how he may attain it,
which time not being duly improved, and the means woefully neglected, proves the
occasion of men's Eternal Destruction. Hence it is that the tender Heart of
Christ did so condole the case of Jerusalem, Luke 19.42. They had the means of
attaining the knowledge of the things belonging to their Peace, but they let
slip the time, and made no good use of the means, until the things of their
Peace were hid from them. A fair Warning to us that are partakers of the
Gospel, and call aloud upon us, to seek the Lord while he may be found, and to
call upon him while he is near, Isa. 55.6.

3. God will bring us to Death, because of his Appointment: He has so
appointed, and ordained, and this cannot be frustrated. Men may ordain,
purpose, and appoint things that never come to pass; but it is otherwise with
the Infinitely, All-wise, and Almighty God; there can be no Contingencies
happen to make his Purposes and Appointments void.

4. Because he will bring us to Judgment, which follows Death, Heb. 9.28. There
is the Judgment of particular Persons at Death, for the Spirit returns to God
to be disposed of, when the dusty Body does return to the Earth, Eccles. 12.7.
The General Judgment, which is commonly called the Day of Judgment, is at the
Resurrection, when the Lord will bring back from Death again.

5. God will bring the Wicked to Death, to put an end to his Wickedness: When
he has filled up his measure, Psalm. 7.9. he shall Damn, Curse, be Drunk no
more; he shall no longer mock at Religion, nor Persecute God's People with
Tongue or Hand: He is a Burden to the Earth whilst he lives, and God will ease
the Earth of that Burden by his Death.

6. God will bring his People to Death, to give them Rest from all their
Labors, Rev. 14.13. They shall be carried out of the reach of a vexing,
tempting Devil, and from the malice and enmity of an envious World, and from
all the Tribulations they meet with whilst they are in it: John 16. ult. In the
World ye shall have Tribulation. They shall no longer groan under the Burden
of a Body of Death, have no more cause to complain, and fetch deep sighs from
the oppression of Guilt, nor bemoan themselves for the filthiness of their
Hearts, nor shall they any longer be without the light of the Sun, nor walk in
Darkness, as here often they do, from the hidings of God's Face. But,

7. God will bring them to Death, to bring them into Possession of the Eternal
Inheritance prepared for them, those Mansions of Light that he has been by his
Grace fitting and preparing them for, Romans 9.23. Col. 1.12. Or if you will, God
will bring them to Death, to bring them to the full, glorious, uninterrupted
Enjoyment of his blessed Presence, that they may ever be with the Lord; for
whilst they are at home in the Body, they are, in the sense forementioned,
absent from the Lord, 2 Cor. 5.6. So that by what has been said in these three
last Particulars, and many other that might be mentioned, which, the Time being
past, and my Strength much exhausted, I must forbear to insist on; it will
appear, though both Godly and Ungodly are brought to Death, yet there is a vast
difference between the Death of the one, and of the other. A little time I must
take to improve this Doctrine by Application.

1. If God will bring us to Death, this informs us,

1. Of the certainty and necessity of dying, unless God will change his Mind,
repeal his Statute Law, or has not Power sufficient in his Hand to execute it.
So that we may say, as the Woman of Tekoah did to David, 2 Samuel 14.14. We must
needs die, and be as Water spilt upon the Ground. For unless that first Law,
which was the Result of Infinite Wisdom, be rescinded by a Post-Act, which
cannot be supposed, or that there is a Proviso to exempt any from the common
Fate of Mankind; the first Law does stand in full force, and must certainly be
put into execution.

2. That seeing the Lord will bring us all to Death, this does inform us of,
and reproves the Folly and Madness of those that put this far away, upon a
presumption of long Life, and yet know not what the next day or hour may
produce, like the rash Fool in the Gospel, Luke 12.19. and it may fare with
them as it did with him, v. 20. What, will thou presume of length of days, and
on this Presumption defer thy Repentance? Alas! how many such are there now,
that are past Repentance? Does not the Lord denounce a Woe against such, Amos
6.1.3? What Bed do thou lie on, what is thy Pillow stuffed with, that can
sleep securely in thine Impenitent Condition? Do thou not fear, that when
thou sleep on thy Bed in the Night, that in the Morning thou shall awake
with the Everlasting Flames about thine Ears? I am sure thou have cause enough
to fear it.

3. If God will bring us to Death, it does greatly concern us to bring Death
near to our selves, before God brings us to it.

1. Believing the Truth my Text speaks of, I find that though it is generally
acknowledged that all must die, yet too few there are that do really believe
that they are of that number. Surely, was it believed, it would produce better
things than do appear in their Lives and Conversations. What Peter says
touching the dissolution of all things, and what use should be made of it, 2
Pet. 3.11. If Men did believe their own Dissolution, it would provoke unto a
Holy and Godly Conversation. What a poor Woman once said, lying on a Deathbed,
may many say in the like Condition; I often (said she) thought of Dying, but
would I had believed it: Believing brings that near, that is at a distance;
Janus-like, it looks backward and forward.

2. Seriously and frequently thinking of it, and meditating on it. Alas! how
few are there that busy their Heads in thinking of that which is costing, will
certainly come, and suddenly may come. This Subject requires our deepest musing
on it. Sad will be the surprisal, if Death should look in at the Window with
his austere Countenance, and sit on our trembling Lips before we have seriously
thought of it, expected it, and are prepared for it; we shall never wait for
that change which we never thought of.

3. Dying daily, as Paul said of himself, 1 Cor. 15.31. not only because of the
continual danger he was in for his work-sake, but because he was daily making
ready for it, fighting the good fight of Faith, that he might lay hold on
Eternal Life, as he exhorted his Son Timothy, 1 Epist. Chap. 6.12. Dying to the
World, to Sin, unto Self, and following the Captain of his Salvation, to oppose
and cut off the Enemies of his Salvation. By bringing Death thus unto our
selves, there undoubtedly will follow choice and excellent Effects. As,

1. Hiding Pride from us; pulling down the high Hearts, and high Heads. What!
shall Mortal, dying Dust lift up it self? Shall not the consideration of our
Frailty bring down our lofty looks? When a proud Thought appears, reflect on
thy Mortality, and think with thy self, whether such a Thought becomes such a
piece of Dust as thou art, whose lofty looks ere long must be humbled; surely
the thoughts and consideration of Death is enough to preserve from
self-exaltation.

2. Moderating our Affections unto our Creature-Enjoyments, and to beget
Temperance in our pursuit after, and use of them, as the Apostle, from the
consideration of the brevity of our Lives, does exhort unto, 1 Cor. 7.29, 30,
31. (...) all must be left when Death comes, both in respect of Use and
Enjoyment, undoubtedly setting Death in good earnest before us, will be a means
to Crucify us unto the World, and the World unto us. Shall that be lodged in
our Hearts, that we shall hold but a little while in our Hands, and will be
wholly out of our Eye? Did we really believe that it will not be long that we
shall have these things in our Possession, we should make the less of them
whilst we do possess them.

3. Quickening our dull and sleepy Hearts unto greater Diligence in seeking
after, and endeavoring to secure cur main and principal Interest, will a time
come, and may it be near to us, that will put an end unto all Opportunities,
for our Souls Eternal Welfare? O then, why are we so sottish, as to waste our
little time in Vanity or Drudgery of the World, when we have so great a
Concernment lie upon our Hand? And how sad will it be, if we miss the Time, and
lose our Opportunity?

4. If it be God that brings to Death, then let this Command us into Holy
Silence, and bring our Hearts into quiet Submission, when our chiefest Friends,
and dearest Relations are taken away; this Consideration, that God has done
it, should quiet our Minds, and charm us into the most profound silence; as
Aaron, Levit. 10.2. when by a most dismal stroke from Heaven two of his Sons
were cut off together, which did testify God's great Displeasure, they being
taken away in the Act of sinning, yet he held his peace; that is, he quarrelled
not at that Awful Providence, but with the greatest Patience did bear up under
it. So Psalm. 39.9. I was dumb, and opened not my mouth, because God did it.
Thus did Job, when all his Children fell together by an unusual and fearful
stroke, Chap. 1.18. A Minister's (...) impatiently lamenting the loss of her
late deceased Husband, and her Livelihood also by that means taken away, an
aged gracious Woman discoursing with her, that she might compose her disturbed
Mind, did ask her, who did it? She answered, God had done it. Then, says she,
be still; for if he has done it, he has done thee no wrong.

1. It is he that has an absolute and uncontrollable Right to dispose of us,
and all our Creature Comforts at his own Will and Pleasure; his Sovereignty
therefore should strike us into a Holy Dumbness, when under such chastising
Providence. 2. It is he that is too just to do us any wrong, and too good to
do us harm; and if neither wrong nor harm are done us, we have no reason to
mourn excessively, nor to give way to any Impatience. 3. It is he that can make
up our Loss, be it never so great; and if we carry it well, and put our Trust
in him, he will surely and certainly do it; who makes all things work together
for their good, who love him, and are the called according to his purpose, Romans
8.28. He can, you need not fear, supply the absence of your best Relations.
O but, may one say, I have parted with a most tender and loving Father. True;
but he was but an Earthly Father, and Mortal also: If thou gettest an Interest
in God, he will be an Heavenly, and an Immortal Father.

O, says another, I have lost a most Faithful and Constant Friend, the best
Friend I had in all the World. Be it so; then make sure of that Friend that
will never fail, and that will be so for ever; There is a Friend that sticks
closer than a Brother, make him your Friend.

O, says a third, the Lord brought unto Death a most Tender, Dutiful, and
Obedient Child, as ever Parent had. Well! is there not enough in him that has
taken thy Child from thee, to repair that Loss with unspeakable Advantage? It
may be thou did lodge thy Child in that Bed of Love; which the Lord had taken
for himself, and therefore, to make room for him, he has taken that Child from
thee. I remember the saying of a good Woman, who had only one Son, who by a
disastrous Providence was brought to Death; upon the News of it, answered, Now
I see God will leave me nothing to love but himself. And if that Love which was
set on thy Child, be placed upon God, when thy Child is gone, it will be
manifest, that it was his love to thy Soul, that thy Child was removed from
thee.

5. Use. My Text, and the Doctrine insisted on, brings very good and very bad
News: Very good unto the Godly, but very bad unto the Wicked.

1. It is your Mercy that are the called of God, and by Grace are brought over
to Jesus Christ, that God will bring you to Death, and ease you thereby of all
the Burdens and Grievances that whilst you are in this howling Wilderness you
are oppressed with; you by Death are delivered from the Body of Death, that
sometimes you groan under; from the Spirit of Bondage, Temptations of the
Enemy, and all Evils, both Corporal and Spiritual, that whilst here you are
annoyed or vexed with. 2. By this you will be brought into the Possession of
that Inheritance which is incorruptible, undefiled, and fades not away, 1 Pet.
1. 3. By this your imperfect Grace and Knowledge will arrive unto that full
perfection that your Nature is capable of. 4. And hereby you shall attain unto
full and entire Satisfaction; your Desires being so fully answered, that you
shall desire no more, neither can more be desired.
But 2dly, As this is good, the best News unto Saints, so it is the worst News
that can be to Sinners and the Ungodly that so live and die. For, 1. They leave
all their good things, and the things they take most Pleasure and Delight in
behind them, and must take an everlasting farewell of them. 2. Their Evil Works
will follow them, and the Reward of them will be their Portion, the Wages
thereof is Eternal Death, Romans 6. 3. They will have nothing to yield them the
least Relief or Comfort when Misery unconceivable will come upon them; not so
much as a drop of cold water to cool their flaming Tongue, Luke 16.24 which
whilst here was set on fire of Hell; that Tongue wherewith they blasphemed God,
by Cursing, Damning, and Swearing; and wherewith they mocked and derided the
People of God, his VVays, and Ordinances. 4. When God brings them to Death,
they are carried by the Devil, whom they have served, to be Companions with him
in that unquenchable Fire, that is prepared for them. 5. And that which
aggravates all their Misery, that they shall be endless, and despair of ever
having any ease or end of them.


FINIS.
Books Sold by Mark Conyers in Newport-Pagnel, where you may be furnished with
all sorts of Books and Stationary Ware; and where you may have Money for Old
Books, or Studies of Books.
Art's Masterpiece. Notable Things. True Art of Angling. Experienced Fowler.
The Cook's New-Years-Gift. Delight and Pastime. Pious Man's Directions. A Spark
from the Altar.

