Prince George's Letter to the KING.
SIR
With a Heart full of Grief am I forced to write, that Prudence will not permit
me to say to your Face. And may I eer find Credit with your Majesty, and
Protection from Heaven, as what I now do is free from Passion, Vanity or
Design, with which, Actions of this Nature are too often accompanied. I am not
ignorant of the frequent Mischiefs wrought in the World by factious Pretenses
of Religion; but were not Religion the most justifiable Cause, it would not be
made the most specious Pretense. And your Majesty has always shown too
uninterested a Sense of Religion, to doubt the just Effects of it in one whose
Practices have, I hope, never given the World Cause to censure his real
Conviction of it; or his backwardness to perform what his Honor and Conscience
prompt him to; how then can I longer disguise my just concern for that
Religion, in which I have been so happily educated, which my Judgment thoroughly
convinces me to be the best; and for the Support of which I am so highly
interested in my Native Country; and is not England now, by the most endearing
Tie become so.

Whilst the restless Spirits of the Enemies of the REFORMED RELIGION, backed by
the cruel Zeal, and Prevailing Power of France, justly alarm and unite all the
Protestant Princes of Christendom, and engage them in so vast an Expense for
the Support of it, can I act so degenerous and mean a part, as to deny my
Concurrence to such worthy Endeavors for disabusing of your Majesty by the
Reinforcement of those Laws, and Establishment of that Government, on which
alone depends the Well-being of your Majesty, and of the PROTESTANT RELIGION in
Europe. This, Sir, is that irresistible and only Cause that could come in
Competition with my Duty and Obligations to your Majesty, and be able to tear
me from you, whilst the same Affectionate Desire of serving You continues in
me. Could I'secure your Person by the Hazard of my Life, I should think it
could not be better employed: And would to God, these Your distracted Kingdoms
might yet receive that satisfactory Compliance from your Majesty in all their
justifiable Pretensions, as might upon the only sure Foundation, that of the
Love and Interest of your Subjects, establish your Government, and as strongly
unite the Hearts of all your Subjects to you, as is that of,

SIR, Your Majesty's most Humble, and most Obedient Son and Servant

The Lord Churchill's Letter to the KING.
SIR,
Since Men are seldom inspected of Sincerity when they act contrary to their
Interests; and though my dutiful Behavior to your Majesty in the worst of
times, (for which I acknowledge my poor Services much over-paid) may not be
sufficient to incline You to a charitable Interpretation of my Actions, yet I
hope, the great Advantage I enjoy under Your Majesty, which I can never expect
in any other Change of Government, may reasonably convince Your Majesty and the
World, that I am acted by a higher Principle, when I offer that Violence to my
Inclination, and Interest, as to desert your Majesty at a time when Your
Affairs seem to challenge the strictest Obedience from all Your Subjects, much
more from one who lies under the greatest personal Obligations imaginable to
Your Majesty. This, Sir, could proceed from nothing but the inviolable Dictates
of my CONSCIENE, and necessary concern for my RELIGION (which no good Man can
oppose) and with which I am instructed, nothing ought to come in Competition;
Heaven knows with what partiality my dutiful Opinion of Your Majesty has
hitherto represented those unhappy Designs, which inconsiderate and
self-interest Men have framed against Your Majesty's true Interest and the
Protestant Religion. But as I can no longer join with such to give a pretense
by Conquest to bring them to effect, so will I always with the hazard of my
Life and Fortune (so much Your Majesty's due) endeavor to preserve Your Royal
Person and Lawful Rights with all the tender Concern and dutiful Respect that
becomes,

SIR, Your Majesty's most dutiful and most obliged Subject and Servant.


