A WARNING AND VISITATION TO THE INHABITANTS OF GODALMING.

All you that read this, be not rash, but weigh it right with the true weight,
and the even Balance, the Balance of the Sanctuary, and then you will not
judge a miss of it; for it is not in hatred or reproach to any, but in love to
all Souls, in plainness and truth. And you Inhabitants of Godalming, be warned,
and seriously consider of this Visitation; for the Spirit of the Lord yet
strives with you as with the old World, but they not taking warning, were
drowned: Therefore prise your time, and despise not the Reproof of Instruction,
for such are brutish; but reprove or instruct a wise man, and he will love
thee; reprove a scorner, and he will hate thee; but the Reproof of Instruction
is the way of life to the Wise; and a wise man will hear and increase in
Wisdom: Be calm therefore, and learn of the Light which is the Way and the
Truth. T. P.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Simmons, at the Bull and Mouth near Aldersgate,
1658.

A Warning and Visitation to the Inhabitants of Godalming.
ALL ye Inhabitants of Godalming which have any desire after the Lord, read
this Paper with moderation, and I shall show you how you are deceived by him
you call your Minister, who has deceived the hearts of the simple by seeing
false Visions for you; who has called the drunkard, and swearer, and liar, the
proud, and covetous, and envious, and them that are in wrath and strife,
whoremongers, and idolaters, and such like unclean persons has he called
Christians, and his beloved, and tells you, that you will be deceived if you go
from him; but how can you be more deceived then you are already? for there is
no unclean thing can enter into the Kingdom of God: Then what will ye do in the
dreadful day of the Lord, when all hearts shall be made manifest, and every
secret thing brought to light? Then what will your being called Christians
avail you, so long as ye are out of Christ? For in him there is no sin; For he
that commits sin, is of the Devil; therefore if you commit sin, are you not of
the Devil, and do his work? Consider in the fear of God what you are doing, for
it is not his calling you, Beloved, will stand you in any stead in the day of
the Lord. Therefore examine your selves; Are your works wrought in God? Or do
ye believe that there is sin wrought in God? Or is not sin the work of the
Devil? Are the works of the Devil destroyed in you, yea or nay? If nay, then
Christ is not come to you, to work in you, and for you; for he came and comes
for this very purpose, to destroy the works of the Devil; but they are not
destroyed in you who continue in doing them; and Christ the Savior you do not
witness: Therefore what good does your false prophet do you? Is not the
Scripture fulfilled on him and you, which says, They shall not profit the
people at all, because they stood not in his counsel; and you may see you are
not profited at all; therefore why will ye spend your money for that which
profits you not? seeing the Lord has said so by the mouth of his Prophet, Jer.
23. Ye may read and search Scripture, and see whether ye follow the Ministers
of Christ, or of Antichrist; for Christ says, By their fruits they may be
known; Is this the fruit of a Minister of Christ, to cast into prison for
trespassing against him, as he says I have done? And does not he say, Forgive
us our trespasses as, we forgive them that trespass against us? Does not he
pray to his own condemnation, and ye with him, who do not forgive one another
their trespasses, but sue them at Law? So like Priest, like people; so is it at
this day, they make people light, vain, and wicked, as the Scripture says, and
the Scripture cannot be broken; and as the wicked priests did, so they do now;
search these Scriptures, Isa. 56. Jer. 5. 31. Hos. 6. 9. Mic. 3. Tit. 2. So may
you see that yours is not unlike the false prophets of old, but in their steps,
preaching for hire and filthy lucre, and putting into prison, as they did of
old; and therefore I cry against them, as they did in former days, such who
was in the same practices, having the good words and fair speeches to deceive
the hearts of the simple: O that you would consider these things before it be
too late! for what will ye do when the body comes to dye? Then will ye wish ye
had kept the Law and the Light, which is the Schoolmaster to bring to Christ;
for then shall ye know that God has not left himself without a witness in you,
which did testify against evil, and would have led you out of evil if you had
turned your minds to it, and gave up freely to be guided by that in your
consciences, which testifies against all evil before it be acted: So if you
love your own souls, turn your minds in to the light which checks and reproves,
and no longer rebel against the Lord which reproves you, and come out of
iniquity, for why will ye dye? your blood will be upon your own heads, and I
shall be clear when ye are judged; for do ye believe that it shall be well with
the wicked, that you harden your hearts against the Lord? Nay, the wicked shall
be turned into hell, and their prayers he will not regard: Do ye think God will
be mocked any longer with your vain oblations? Or do ye think that ye may join
with the wicked, and not partake of their sins? Or do the Drunkards or Liars
worship God? If you say, Nay, then come out from the Steeplehouse, and leave
the Priest and Drunkards alone together, and be no longer deceived by him you
call your Minister, because he has the good words and fair speeches to betray
the simplicity in you; but he has made himself manifest, for every tree is
known by his fruit; therefore if he bring forth evil fruit, he must be an evil
Tree: Consider, his fruit is covetousness, lying, and casting into prison, this
is manifest wickedness, such as no true Prophet or Apostle did; and no Minister
of Christ ever did cast any into prison for their bellies; nor such did not cry
peace to the wicked, as yours does; neither did they tell people that they
could not be free from sin here, as Priests now do; for they that the Son made
(and makes) free, are free indeed, John 8. 36. Then they are liars that say
none can be free from sin here; for if not here in this life, then I say never
shall; for there is no cleansing after death, but as the tree falls, so it
lies; and as death leaves, so judgment finds. Therefore consider in the fear
of God what ye are doing; Or do ye think that I am your enemy because I tell
you the truth? Did ye once love me? And now do ye hate me because I bear
testimony against your evil deeds in love to your souls? Or the more I love
you, the less I am beloved of you? For greater love has no man then this, that
a man lay down his life for his friend: So for your sakes I bear all things, if
by any means I may gain some; for my bowels yearns over the Seed of God which
lies in captivity, and longs to see his deliverance from under the bondage of
corruption, into the glorious liberty of the sons of God: For this is the
mighty day of the Lord, wherein all shall be left without excuse, and your
destruction shall be of your selves.

O! that ye did but know how the Lord does wait to be gracious, and how often
he knocks at the door of your hearts, and ye will not let Christ into your
hearts, but lets sin dwell there; ye have no room for Christ, for your hearts
are taken up with other guests, and Christ in the manger, trampled upon with
every unclean thing which dwells in your hearts, though he check you often
when you do evil: Is there none that is tenderhearted amongst you? Are you
altogether turned out of the way? And is your own ways best? Is your pleasure
better then Christ, and more esteemed by you then eternal life, that ye refuse
him that makes an end of sin, that ye will not turn at his reproof? Will ye
always kick against that which pricks you in the conscience for sin? Consider
what will be the end of sin, for it brings death; then what assurance of life
have ye? But if ye find that the witness of God in your hearts or consciences
give you not assurance of life, then return to it your hearts and minds to
believe in it, and obey it, so may you become the sons of God; but if you
refuse to obey the light which manifests sin within, then the wrath of God you
cannot escape. Therefore be warned, and repent, and come down from your high
thoughts, or imagining that God accepts of you, or your performances, for he
accepts only of his Son, and so those that are in his Son, he accepts of them
and their performances; for he is worshipped and served in spirit and in truth;
but none can worship there, that live in sin, as ye do who are after the
Steeple-house worship, which is fleshly and carnal worship; but they that
worship God in spirit, have no confidence in the flesh, but from it are
redeemed. Therefore I say, trust not in your Steeplehouse-worship, for God
abhors it, and all your worship, who are not turned from swearing and lying,
and evil-speaking, and such like wickedness, which is common amongst you;
therefore fear the Lord God every where, and turn your minds in to feel after
him, that ye may find him who is a spirit, the invisible God, only known in,
and by the spirit revealed, and now is the day that he will be found of those
that seek him in truth, and in sincerity; but he hides himself from the wicked
and covetous priests and people, for that is not to be named among Saints, it
is Idolatry; such is your Steeple-house Worship, and all the wicked that know
not God.

Therefore be awakened to righteousness; that is righteous which calls and
cries against sin in your hearts, and that will guide you to God if you obey
it; but if that ye disobey it, it will be your condemnation: Therefore prise
your time, and while you have time, fear God, and the fear of God is to depart
from sin; and slight not the day of your visitation, but take warning before it
be too late: From him who is witnessed by that of God in your consciences to be
a lover of your souls, who is known to you by the Name of

Henry Gill.

Something of a Letter sent to one newly convinced.
MY bowels over thee yearns, to meet thee in my Fathers love, to lie down in
everlasting peace with the Lambs of God, where none can make them afraid; my
soul longs to meet thee there; but truly first thou must bear the indignation
of the Lord, because thou have sinned against him; therefore freely give up to
him that which is for the sword, to the sword; that which is for famine, to the
famine; and keep nothing back; though the Devil will show thee the glory of the
World, and tell thee, thou may have it if thou will deny the light in thy
conscience, (or Christ which has convinced thee) and fall down and worship
him; or if he tell thee, thou shall never be able to overcome the World, and
that the World will hate thee, and thy friends, and it may be some of thy
House, and thou find little strength within, but trouble on every side,
fears within and without, and thou see sin exceeding sinful, and when thou
would do good, evil is present with thee; though it be so, faint not at it,
look not at that, but look at that which manifests it to thee, and wait
patiently upon the Lord, and keep thy mind in to the light, and love that which
shows thee thy condition and wretched estate; and join with that, and be of
good cheer, says Christ, I have overcome the World; take his yoke, and
strength thou will feel against sin, and power over it, as thou art faithful to
that which is made manifest to thee, till every thought be brought in
subjection to Christ, and thou be found naked, not having thy own
righteousness, but that which is wrought by Christ; so stand still, and become
a fool, that the Wisdom of Christ thou may receive; and keep thy mind from
wavering and being tossed to and fro, but keep in to the light, where the
Doctrine of Christ is learned, so thou will not be tossed by the windy
Doctrines of men of corrupt minds, which have the cunning sleights to deceive
the simple; such lie in wait, and have the true Prophets words, but out of
their life; and such would keep people always under the condemning power of the
Law; but the power of the Gospel which saves from sin, they come not to believe
in, and so are not saved by it, but still they sin, and are condemned by that
of God in them, which is the Law, which is Light; and here are all
Steeple-house-people, and priests, and all professors, mudled in the dark, and
cannot get out because they own not the light to lead through condemnation, to
peace; but I say to thee, Be of good cheer, though wrath be heavy on thee, and
the way hard and narrow, the transgressor must feel Judgment; for through
Judgment is redemption witnessed: So consult not with flesh and blood, but
keep in thy mind, and the day will dawn, and the day star will arise, and peace
and refreshment to the Seed will be known to refresh, and power thou will
receive to rule in thy heart; but take heed of being disobedient to the light
which reproves, for then barrenness and unfruitfulness, and the anger of God,
and his rebukes in flames of fire; but join with the pure that moves against
sin, and the birth immortal thou will know in thee brought forth. O how am I
pained till this be accomplished! least thou should faint in the Wilderness
where (other Professors and Steeple-house-people are) there is no Water to
refresh the plant of my Fathers renown, but their Waters fails, and the Rock
they know not: But seeing the Lord is bringing forth his Seed, take heed of
Pharoah's nature that must be plagued and drowned, that the Seed may serve the
Lord; so take heed that thou murmr not in the Wilderness, but wait on the
Lord patiently; so my love in tender bowels is to ^^^e, hoping the Lord will
remember his own which ha^^ lain in captivity; thou must pass through the Sword
to the Tree of life; take heed of feeding on the Tree of knowledge, for there
are the Professors and Priests of the World feeding, and imagining to build
Babel, but they are now scattered and confounded, for the Lord is come down;
but seek not thou (with them) for an easier way then through the Judgment, by
that which judges all evil; and look not at the greatness of thy sin, but
prise that which saves thee from any one, and power thou will feel increase, as
thou art obedient. So the Lord God of Power preserve thee to the end, and in
the end,

Henry Gill.

The End.

