THE NEW DISORDERS OF LOVE. A Gallant Novel.

Written by RICHARD GIBBS, of Norwich, Philo. Medici.

LONDON: Printed for R. Bentley and S. Magnes, in Russel Street, in
Covent Garden. 1687.

To his Honored Friend, RICHARD BERNEY, of Gray's Inn, Esquire; Eldest Son to Sir
THOMAS BERNEY, Knight and Baronet, of Norfolk.
SIR,
NEver till I had the Honor of your Conversation, was I sensible how uneasy
Ambition sits upon Mankind. This has made me labor long under the Pride of
presenting something to your Patronage; and designed it upon a Graver Subject
than what now implores your Protection. But considering the Politeness of your
Learning, and that there is nothing in the whole Circle of Sciences, that has
escaped the justness and severity of your Censure, I durst not stand the Test
of so nice and universal a Critic, in offering any Philosophical Essay to your
View. This made me change the Design of putting off some of my imperfect Tracts
under the Glory and general Approbation of your Name, in the Commonwealth of
Learning, into that of Contributing to your Diversion. A Relaxation of the Mind
from more serious Studies, is often necessary to the largest and most vigorous
Genius's; and I am sure by furnishing to your Recreation, I gratify all that
know you. Besides, Sir, I fancy the fair Sex will justify me in this Address:
and there is possibly a World of Ladies of a Noble Gentleman's Acquaintance,
whose Hearts, if we consulted, would tell us, with how much Justice the
Disorders of Love lay Claim to his Protection. And here, Sir, an infinity of
Matter presents its self for Panegyric. And might I expatiate, I could run
through a long History of the Glories of your Family; but that the World would
tell me, that as the best of Families might pride themselves in your Ancestors,
yet your own Virtues are so transcendent, that the most illustrious of your
Ancestors, can pride themselves in nothing more than you. And indeed, when the
whole Nation was almost tainted, your Loyalty was Ermine-like. And thus you
credited Arms, and Letters, and Good Mien. A Plain Dealer, Sir, would tax me
here, I am sure, with being wanting in your just Eulogies; but I am sure I
shall never be wanting in the Zeal, Respect, and Passion, wherewith I am,

Sir, Your most Obedient, And most Humble Servant, RICH. GIBBS.

A Catalogue of some Novels and Plays Printed for R. Bentley and S. Magnes.
NOVELS.
1 ZElinda, a famed Romance. 2 Happy Slave, in three Parts. 3 Count Brion. 4
Count Gabales. 5 Hatige, or, the Amors of the King of Tamaran. 6 Madam
Lavalier, and the King of France. 7 Madam and the Duke of Guise. 8 Mad.
Colonna's Memoirs. 9 Queen of Majorca, in two Parts. 10 Don Sebastian, King of
Portugal. 11 Heroine Musquetier. 12 Princess of Cleves. 13 Obliging Mistress.
14 Fatal Prudence. 15 Princess of Fez. 16 Disorders of Love. 17 Triumph of
Love. 18 Victorious Lovers. 19 Almanzor and Almanzaida. 20 Earl of Essex and
Qu. Elizabeth. 21 Neopolitan, or the Defender of his Mistress. 22 Nicostratis.
23 Amorous Abbess. 24 Homais, Queen of Tunis. 25 Pilgrim, in two parts. 26
Meroveus, Prince of the Blood Royal of France. 27 Life of the Duke of Guise. 28
Extravagant Poet. 29 Memoires Gallant. 30 Instructions for a young Nobleman. 31
Love Letters from the Cavalier to the Nun. 32 Gallant Ladies; or the Mutual
Conference: In two parts. 33 St. Lewis; or, the Politic Conduct of Queen
Blanch.
PLAYS.
1 Tartuff, or the French Puritan. 2 Forced Marriage, or the Jealous
Bridegroom. 3 English Monsieur. 4 All mistaken, or the Mad Couple. 5 Generous
Enemies, or the Ridiculous Lovers. 6 The Plain-Dealer. 7 Sertorius, a Tragedy.
8 Nero, a Tragedy. 9 Sophonisba, or Hannibal's Overthrow. 10 Gloriana, or the
Court of Augustus Caesar. 11 Alexander the Great. 12 Mythridates, King of
Pontus. 13 Oedipus, King of Thebes. 14 Caesar Borgia. 15 Theodosius, or the
Force of Love. 16 Madam Fickle, or the Witty False One. 17 The Fond Husband, or
the Plotting-Sisters. 18 Esquire Old-Sap, or the Night-Adventures. 19 Fool
turned Critic. 20 Virtuous Wife, or Good Luck at Last. 21 The Fatal Wager. 22
Andromache. 23 Country Wit. 24 Calisto, or the Chaste Nymph. 25 Destruction of
Jerusalem, in two parts. 26 Ambitious Satesman, or the Loyal Favorite. 27
Misery of Civil War. 28 The Murder of the Duke of Gloucester. 29 Thyestes, a
Tragedy. 30 Hamlet, Prince of Denmark, a Tragedy. 31 The Orphan, or the Unhappy
Marririage. 32 The Soldiers Fortune. 33 Tamerlain the Great. 34 Mr. Limberham,
or the Kind Keeper. 35 Mistaken Husband. 36 Notes of Morocco, by the Wits. 37
Essex and Elizabeth, or the Unhappy Favorite. 38 Virtue Betrayed, or Anna
Bullien. 39 King Leare. 40 Abdellazor, or the Moor's Revenge. 41 Town-Fop, or
Sir Tim. Tawdery. 42 Rare en toui, a French Comedy. 43 Moor of Venice. 44
Country Wife. 45 City Politics. 46 Duke of Guise. 47 Rehearsal. 48 King, and
no King. 49 Philaster, or Love lies a Bleeding. 50 Maids Tragedy. 51 Grateful
Servant. 52 Strange Discovery. 53 Atheist, or the Second Part of the Soldiers
Fortune. 54 Wit without Money. 55 Little Thief. 56 Valiant Scot. 57
Constantine. 58 Valentinian. 59 Amorous Prince. 60 Dutch Lovers. 61 Woman
Bully. 62 Reformation. 63 Hero and Leander. 64 Love Tricks. 65 Julius Caesar.
66 Fatal Jealousy. 67 Mounsieur Ragou. 68 Island Queen, or Mary Queen of
Scotland. 69 Empress of Morocco. 70 Commonwealth of Women. 71 The Noble
Stranger. 72 Duke of Millain. 73 The Knave in Grain. 74 Amends for Ladies. 75
Manamochy. 76 The Emperor of the East. 77 The Wedding. 78 St. Patrick for
Ireland. 79 Albumazor. 80 The Tragedy of Albertus.
Some Books Printed and Sold by R. Bentley and S. Magnes, in Russel Street in
Covent Garden.
BEaumont and Fletcher's Plays: in all, 51. in large Fol. Mr. Shakespeare's
Plays: in one large Fol. Volume. Containing 43. Plays. Bishop Brownrig's
Sermons in Fol. Dr. Comber's Companion to the Temple and Altar: In Fol. Dr.
Alistry's 40. Sermons: In Fol. Towerson on the Creed: in Fol. Hudebras
Complete: In 8 vo. Present State of England: In 2 Vol. in 12 ves. Enter into
the Closet: in 12 ves. Mr. Evelin's Calendarium Hortens. in 8 vo. Rules of
Civility: In 12 ves. Mauger's French-Grammar: the Twelfth Edition: In 8 vo.
French Common Prayer: In 12. French Psalms: in 12. French Testament and Psalm.
in 12. Moral Essays, in 4 Vol in 12. Plato's Apology of Socrates: in 8 vo.
Natural Hist. of the Passions: in 8 vo. Dr. Whitby of Idolatry: in 8 vo. Dr.
Whitby of Host-worship: in 8 vo. Dr. Whitby's Answer to Dr. Cressey: in 8 vo.
Prospect of Humane Misery: in 12. Cornelius Agrippa's Vanity of Arts and
Sciences: 8 vo. Bp. Andrew's Devotions: in 12. -- His Manual for the sick: in
12. Perswasives to the Communion. By the Author of Enter into thy Closet: in 12
ves.
THE NEW DISORDERS OF LOVE. A Gallant Novel.
TWO Persons of Quality in Picardy, being at variance about some Lands, plunged
themselves over head and ears in Law; and for a long while persecuted one
another. They were near Relations, and of the same Family; both bearing the
same Name, and the same Arms. Their Dispute was about the sharing of an Estate,
and of such great Consequence, as tended to one or the other's ruin. As they
were eminent in their Province, their mutual friends made it their business to
procure a Reconciliation, and for that purpose proposed a Match. They had no
more Children than one Son and one Daughter; and these friends having made them
understand, that the means of removing all their differences, was to marry them
together, they accordingly resolved so to do. The Son was not unhandsome, but
whymsical in his humor: and as the advantages of the mind are to be preferred
to those of the body, he was not in the best Repute imaginable in his
Neighborhood. The Daughter was agreeable, and promised much. She was yet so
green in years, as not to know the meaning of an Husband. Thus when they talked
of marrying her, she seemed indifferent; but when she knew it to be to her
Cousin, she was extremely afflicted. She told a woman that had had care of her
Education, that better would it have been for her, that her Father had been
cast in his Lawsuit. The woman made her answer, that she wondered to hear her
talk in that manner, and that there was nothing to be found fault with in the
Person that was proposed to her. As a Dispensation was necessary in this case,
they sent to the Court of Rome; and while the Messenger was on his journey, the
Marquess de Florange, so was her Suiter's Name, made love to her. He had lived
almost altogether in his Country; insomuch that his Deportment could not wipe
out the disadvantageous Impression she had entertained of him. On the contrary,
the more she saw him, the less she esteemed him; in him finding many bad, and
few good Qualities.

From that time she did naught but weep, foreseeing all the misfortunes
wherewith she was threatened. At last, the Dispensation being come, she could
not decline marrying him: but he enamoured her never the more after he was her
Husband, than he had done when he was her Gallant.

In a little while after the Wedding, a great Estate fell to Florange: and this
enabled him to spend at an high rate. His Wife studying to distance him, told
him then, that we lived now in a Reign wherein Martial Men were only valued,
and that though the bare thoughts of his absence troubled her extremely, yet
could she not but advise him to take upon him some Military Employ: That their
Lands lying in the passage of the Forces, the means to preserve them, was to do
as Persons of Quality did: That she had heard, how that in the time of his
Ancestors a Soldier did not approach 'em but with respect; and should be
overjoyed he might again have the same influence.

The Marquess de Florange was of a Family that had produced brave men; but the
Valor of his Ancestors had not reached his Person; insomuch that he had been
but one single Campaign in the Army: Nay, and he returned thence two months
before the rest, as in no wise delighting in that Profession. Thus finding
little satisfaction in his Wives Discourse, he replied, that her contrivance
lay to get him out of the way; but besides the Concerns of his Family, that
wedded him to his own house, he was in no wise inclined to give her that
satisfaction.

The Marchioness was picqu'd by his answer; and as this his carriage spoke his
little regard for her, she told him, that it was long since she had begun to
take notice of his ill humor; but that it was not fitting he should cloak his
Capriciousness with a Pretext that did an injury to others. And she happened to
mutter him out a Coward: and as nothing is so offensive as truth, the Marquess
fell into an extraordinary rage; and they proceeded to give one another hard
words.

Some days after, Florange being obliged to go thence to Paris, upon a Process
of Consequence, was at a plunge, whether he should take his Wife along, or
leave her at home. He began to be jealous of her, yet without cause; for as yet
she saw no body that either had a design upon her, or on whom she could be
accused of having any. But whether that Florange had a secret foreknowledg of
his misfortune, or that really he in her found some inclination to Gallantry,
ordered one of his Domestics before his departure, to have an eye upon her
actions. This Domestic was a middle-aged man, and seemed very discreet. He had
been in the Wars in his Youth, where he had learnt to live; but this was all
the profit he had made by them; for having been reformed upon the Pyrenaean
Peace, and being destitute of maintenance, he was forced to accept of the first
Employ that was proposed to him; and the Marquess de Florange's Father having
offered him his house, he accordingly listed himself in his Family, as his
Gentleman of the Horse, and to have an eye upon his Son, who was then very
young. The Condition was mean for such a man as he; but necessity made him pass
over all things. Yet though his Fortune was low, his heart was not the less:
and indeed he had never loved other than women of Quality, and from the time he
first saw the Marchioness, he found he was not proof against her Charms.
However, Respect kept him silent. But the Marquess his Commission beginning to
sooth him, he fancied some Change might happen in his Fortune, and that he
might insinuate himself into the Marchioness's good Opinion, he imparted the
Order to her he had received from her Husband; and assured her that he was more
at her Devotion than at any bodies in the world. The Marchioness was surprised
at this Discourse, yet not so much for the knowledge it gave her of her
Husband's Jealousy, as for this man's good will. For as he had been a long
while with the Marquess de Florange, and his Father, she could not apprehend
how he so lightly quitted their Interests, to embrace those of a person he but
lately knew. After that this thought had possessed her for sometime, instead of
guessing at what thus biased Grand Champ, so was the Name of this Domestck,
she imagined that he had perceived her innocence, and had only offered her his
service out of compassion.

In the mean while, if her Husband had not seemed over-amiable to her before
this, she then thought him altogether horrible, and at his return from Paris,
she had all the pain imaginable to endure him. He came back at length toward
the end of Summer, which was very bad that year, by reason of the continual
Rains. The succeeding Autumn was still more unpleasant, insomuch that all the
People of Quality in the Country, seeing the bad weather, talked of repairing
into the Cities. The greater part went to Paris; but the Marquis did not think
it convenient to carry his Wife thither, he thinking her of too Modish an
humor. He knew the Husbands were not in safety there; especially those that
are not overamiable, and have very lovely Wives. The Marchioness expected to
spend the Winter in that Town, he having promised she should in the beginning
of the Summer; but seeing he changed his mind, this still helped to make her
hate him the more. Nevertheless, as he himself did not overmuch delight in a
Countrey-house, he resolved to go into some small City, where the influence was
not so malign for married people as it might be at Paris. His Estate lay about
Soissons; and this was the place he chose in which to recreate himself during
the bad weather. This Town is so pretty, insomuch that the Marchioness loved it
however better than her Village. No sooner were they got thither, but that the
Kings Army in Flanders had Orders to separate, and march away to their
Winter Quarters. Many Officers in their Road to Paris, passed through Soissons,
and one among the rest, of an extraordinary merit, and of a very eminent
Quality; his Regiment had encamped the year a-fore near the Walls of the Town,
with five or six others, that had staid there for fifteen days, insomuch that
he had spent that time in making his Court to a Citizen's Wife; and he came
purposely to see her again, she having not used him severely.

After he had seen her, knowing Florange to be at Soissons with his Lady, he
paid him a Visit. They had made acquaintance at Paris two years before, but had
never seen the Marchioness, though he had heard her highly extolled. He found
her Fame was still short of her Beauty and Merit, insomuch that he could not
forbear telling Florange what he thought of his Choice. The Marquess; though of
a temper to be easily jealous, was not alarmed at the praises he conferred upon
his Wife, as knowing Courtiers to be prodigal of them.

The Marchioness, on her side, liked the Colonel extremely, and was as much
charmed with his good Mien as his Reputation; for he had performed Actions in
War that had made him very conspicuous.

The Marquess de Florange asked him what brought him to Soissons, because that
was not the direct way to go to Court; and as young people have commonly more
Vanity than Discretion, the Marquess de Mainville, so was this Officer called,
owned ingenuously the love he had for the Citizen's Wife, and that she was the
cause of his little journey. After this secret, Florange did not wonder to see
him stay some time in the City, and the more because that people began already
to talk of his Intrigue. As soon as the Rumor of it came to the Marchionesses
ears, she perceived her self vexed at the Choice he had made, as if she had
already interessed her self in him. She must needs see the Woman that had made
so fine a Conquest; but she saw her not, save with the Eyes of a Rival; for
though she was passably beautiful, she found her altogether unworthy of the
thoughts of a man of Honor. Mainville knew not what passed in his favor in
the Marchionesses bosom; but without penetrating into her sentiments, he had
such for her, as came very near those she had for him. He found her infinitely
lovely, and her Husband, on the contrary, seemed to him unworthy of possessing
her.

He had been told, that he was the most jealous of all men, insomuch that he
pitied her, being fallen into the hands of a Person, who so little knew how to
relish the happiness he had in possessing so beauteous a Woman. However, though
this thought possessed him wholly, he endeavored to conceal it as much as he
could from all the World, for fear of creating Suspicions in the Marquess de
Florange's Breast, who after that, would not fail of forbidding him to come to
his house, or of carrying his Wife back into the Country. Thus he resolved to
use so much Mystery in his Love, that no body should have the least inckling of
it, save the Marchioness, bounding all his cares to tell her in private what
she had kindled in his heart. Thus he for nothing reckoned the constraint he
lived in, being well enough satisfied, provided he gave no jealousy to her
Husband. He hoped hereby to render himself agreeable to the Marchioness, as
knowing that Women, above all things, prize Discretion. But the Sympathy they
had entertained for one another at their first enterview, had already produced
so much effect upon her, that there was no need of this addition of Civility,
to insinuate him into her good Opinion. And indeed whatever her Virtue could
dictate to her, to stifle certain agreeable motions she was sensible of in her
self, upon thinking on him, she could not overcome them. Thus she perceived,
that if she meant to preserve her Innocence, she must distance her self from a
place where she could not stay, without running the risque of being ruined. But
much ado had she to come to this Resolution, because nothing is so difficult to
reject, as agreeable thoughts; but considering it to be the only means to ward
off the afflictions with which she was threatened, she desired the Marquis de
Florange, that he would go to his Countrey-house; if not, that he would suffer
her to go thither without him.

He asked her, what could be the cause of so great a change; and her answer
was, that the Air of the Town injured her, and that that of the Country would
be much better for her. Yet as she looked well, he thought this to be only a
Pretext, and was not overhasty to grant her her request. Besides, he himself
hated, as I have said, the Country, insomuch, that for fear of being obliged
of returning thither, he desired the Marquis de Mainville to prevail with her
to spend the Winter at Soissons, telling him, that she would ever contribute
toward his Diversion, in case he made any stay in that Town. Mainville, who
had hitherto in vain waited for an occasion to speak to the Marchioness in
private, was over joy'd at this which Fortune sent him. He went at the same
time into her Chamber, and surpised her extremely by his manner of coming
thither; for he was quite out of countenance, and as a man newly laboring
under some great trouble. She asked him, what put him upon coming to see her,
he that had not been to see her since he came to Town: and this obliging
reproach affording him matter of entering into Discourse, he made her answer,
that it would be easy for him to satisfy her upon that point, if she would
take the trouble of hearing him. Thereupon he acquainted her how passionately
he had loved her from the first moment he saw her; but that having perceived
the jealous humor of her Husband, he had kept that strict hand upon himself,
that he believed neither he nor she had taken notice of his Passion. That
Florange sent him thither to discourse her upon business; but being unable to
live any longer without knowing after what manner she would receive the offers
of his service, he took that time to ask her, whether she would render him
unhappy, that he had blazed about his design to lie upon another; but that the
person he had pretended to love, served only for a Cover to his real
inclinations, since he was incapable of loving any other than her.

Mainville's Discourse seemed to be extremely grateful to the Marchioness,
since she was as fervently loved by him as she loved him; nevertheless she fell
a weeping, as if he had informed her of the Death of all her Friends. So
extraordinary a procedure put Mainville into an extraordinary surprise. He
asked her, why she grieved so very much; but the more he pressed her to answer
him, the more her grief seemed to augment. He then fell to eying her from head
to foot, fearing she was not over-wise. This thought had been capable of curing
him; but the Marchioness breaking silence, told him, he would not wonder at her
tears after what she had to acquaint him withal: That she loved him as much at
least as he could love her; and that this her weakness made her fearful: That
her Design was to maintain her Virtue; but that it was difficult to answer for
it, when one had such an inclination for a person, as she had for him. She then
informed him of the request she had made to her Husband, of carrying her back
to their Countrey-house, that she might have the means of shunning his sight;
and Mainville knew well enough that she spoke the truth, since he himself was
encharg'd to divert her from her Resolution.

As it is natural to flatter ones self, Mainville, instead of being alarmed at
her Virtue, thought only to thank her for her kind thoughts of him; but the
Marchioness interrupting him in the midst of his Discourse, told him roundly,
that he was not yet got where he imagined, and that the more she was sensible
of her weakness, the more efforts she was going to use never to see him again.
It is easy to imagine, that he attempted to inspire her with other Sentiments,
and exercised his utmost Wit for that purpose; but the Marchioness was a Woman
of Courage, insomuch that after having left him, she sent for Grand-Champ, to
desire a great service of him. That he had great Credit in her Husbands good
Opinion, and wished he would employ it so, in obtaining his permission for her
to return into the Country. Grand-Champ was surprised at this Discourse, as
knowing the aversion the Marchioness had for a solitary life. Thus his answer
was, that she thought not on what she said; and turning her Discourse into
Railery, he assured her he should ever be so careful of her content, as not to
procure her a thing as would so much accrue to her dissatisfaction. Then was
the Marchioness obliged to put on her most serious looks, to let him know that
she spoke in good earnest; and at length she did so thoroughly represent to him,
that it would be the doing her a kindness, that he promised her to do all he
could with Florange, to content her in her desires. The Marchioness in
discoursing Grand-Champ, was as free in her speech with him, as she might be
with a man whose Conversation could not be of any Consequence, insomuch that
she chanced to say, that she should be as happy with him in a Village, as if
she was in the best City in the world. This man did not want a good Opinion of
himself, insomuch, that interpreting these words at the foot of the Letter, he
thought he was happier than he had imagined. He had ever cloak'd his Love with
the appearances of Civility and Respect; he then imagined, that without being
too vain, he might give it less narrow bounds. Thus he resolved on the first
occasion, to bemoan himself for the Sentiments he had so long entertained for
her, not doubting but that the success would be answerable to his hopes.

The Marchioness did from day to day wait for her Husband's answer, when
Grand-Champ, to cut off what was least necessary, told her, that he found it
difficult to obtain what she desired; but that he would not desist however. In
the space between the Marchionesses request, and Grand-Champ's answer, she saw
the Marquess de Mainville again; and his Visits did not help to cure her of her
Passion. On the contrary, she became so sensible, that she was afraid, that if
these Interviews lasted any long time, she should have much a do at length to
reject his persecutions; for he was too urging. Wherefore she told Grand-Champ,
that she had a secret to trust him withal, but that being of the utmost moment
to her, to confide it only in the hands of a man, on whose discretion she might
rely; she would have him first swear, that he would never speak of it to any
body. Grand-Champ was pre-possessed, as I have said, with a great Opinion of
himself; and this discourse fully persuading him of his good fortune, he made a
thousand Oaths of Fidelity to the Marchioness, to induce her to declare her
secret to him. She thereupon told him, that though it was not handsome for a
Lady to own her weakness, she could not however conceal it any longer, without
rendering it remediless. That she had an inconceivable confusion for it; but
that he ought rather to pity than blame her; and so much the more, as that she
used her utmost endeavors, as that she might have nothing to reproach her self
withal: That she was going to unbosom to him, to the very secret motions of her
heart, that it would be for him to condemn her after this, if he found her
culpable.

Hitherto the Marchioness had said nothing but what entertained Grand-Champ in
his foolish hopes; but when she had declared to him the Passion she had for
Mainville, and that he had for her, he was, for all the world, in as great
confusion, as if he had been caught in doing some ill action. How Madam, cried
he, after some moments of silence, You love the Marquess de Mainville! the
Marquess de Mainville, who is over head and ears in love with a Citizen's Wife,
and who out of Courtship to her, has abandoned the Care of his Fortune? Yes, I
love him, the Marchioness replied faintly, and my desiring to distance my self
from hence, is only for that I am afraid of loving him too much. Many Women in
my place, would perhaps contrive the means of seeing him on all occasions; but
for my part, I mean to avoid him, because he has a secret Charm, against which
I cannot defend my self. Ah Madam! Grand-Champ replied, to whom all these words
were as so many stabs into his heart; seek an other Confident than me; I find
not my self proper to render you the service you require of me, and I should
deceive you if I had promised you. At these words he went his way, all
transported with anger, without vouchsafing to hear her farther. The
Marchioness did what she could to detain him, being very willing to clear all
his scruples; but she took her time ill, since the rage he was in to see
himself fallen from his hopes, put him into an inconceivable Despair.

As he had manifested a great deal of Passion in the reproaches he had made
her, it was no difficult matter for the Marchioness to know, that he was
Mainville's Rival. She called to mind a world of actions that Love had made him
commit, which she had not minded before; but which then confirmed her in the
thought she had of him, insomuch that she was extremely vexed that she had made
him her Confident. However, as there was now no Remedy, she fell to contriving
how to appease him, and fancied she might do it, had he any reason left. For
she represented to her self, that not being Mistress of her own heart, he ought
to be satisfied with the efforts she made to stifle her Passion, and with the
Resolution she had taken to withdraw into the Country. Said she likewise to
her self, that if he loved her, he would help her to obtain her Husband's leave
for that purpose, which she passionately desired, so to root out a Love, which
all agreeable as it was, yet made her labor under great apprehensions.

While she was expecting this from Grand-Champ's jealousy, Mainville being
alarmed at the instances she made to Florange, that she might leave the City,
did slily inculcate suspicions in the mind of that credulous Husband; sometimes
telling him, after a drolling manner, that his Wife was in love with some or
other in his Neighborhood. But Florange, who far from being tractable upon
that matter, was susceptible of the least thing, conceived such disadvantageous
impressions of her Conduct, that when she spoke to him again, of returning to
their Countrey-house, he not only denied her, but did it after such a
disobliging manner, that she was netled to the very heart. At first she had
recourse to her fears; but Grief having made room for Resentment, it came into
her head, to revenge her self that way he most apprehended. For some time she
found a certain pleasure in entertaining her self, with this thought; but her
Virtue having got the ascendant, she blushed for having been capable of
conceiving a thing to her so disadvantageous.

In a few days after, Grand Champ entered her Room with a wild, staring look,
and such as suited very much with the state of his Soul. He told her, that he
came to take his leave of her, and that he had at that time such concerns upon
his hands, as obliged him to be gone. His Complements surprised the
Marchioness. She endeavored to divert him from his Resolution, rightly
guessing at the occasion; but he made her answer, that he could not stay any
longer in a place where he should have daily before his Eyes, a Rack a thousand
times more cruel than Death it self. That after what she had told him, as he
knew the effects of Love, he did not doubt but that the passion she had for the
Marquis de Mainville, would rather augment than diminish; that he foresaw
strange Consequences, not that he suspected her of being ever wanting to her
Virtue, but out of the knowledge he had of her Husband's jealous humor, who
would be over joy'd to find a Pretext to use her ill.

Thus did Grand-Champ, under fine appearances, conceal the real Cause of his
discontent: for it was only Jealousy that induced him to desire to be gone. In
the mean while he put a thousand fears into the Marchionesses head, by the
misfortunes with which he threatened her: and if the love she had for Mainville,
had not already been very violent, his Discourse had been capable of clearing
her heart of it entirely. She could have wished it had been in her power so to
have done. And indeed that she might have a person to sustain her staggering
Virtue, she conjured Grand-Champ not to abandon her in her present Condition,
promising him to do all things imaginable to overcome her weakness. You Will see,
said she to him, that the love I have for Mainville, is not an effect of my
inclination; and that one's Star may be rectified, when it would hurry us into
the precipice against our wills. And indeed to what use would our reason be, if
we cannot put it in practice when we have need of it? and without this, what
difference would there be between Men and Beasts?

Grand-Champ was so troubled, that he could hardly understand one bare word of
what the Marchioness said; but seeing she pressed him a new to give her answer:
What would ye have me tell you, Madam, he replied to her, and will you force
me, willy nilly, to own my Crime to ye? I am as culpable as unfortunate; I know
what I am, and what you are; and the knowledge I have of both, has not hindered
me from loving you. I adore you, since I must needs tell you so, and you adore
the Marquis de Mainville. After this, the only course for me, is to distance my
self from hence; and tho you should pardon me the excess of my temerity, I
could not pardon my self for it, and for having dared to love you, without
being capable of exciting the same flames in you as you have excited in me. An
other inspires you with those agreeable movements, which I would make you
sensible of at the cost of my life. Thus it is no longer pleasant to me, since
I have nothing more to hope. At these words he would have gone his ways,
without staying for an answer; but the Marchioness re-calling him, made him
turn his Head against his will; and he observed an inconceivable grief in her
face. What would ye have of me, Madam, he then retorted, with an air wherein
Love and Despair did equally appear? Would ye have me suffer here all that is
most cruel for man to suffer? That I see every day before me the most lovely
Lady living, without daring to lift up my Eyes to her: Thus I contemplate the
love I have for the Marquis de Mainville, and that insensible to the one or
other, I lead out the most languishing life in the world: No, Madam, you ought
not to oblige me to this: you your self would be a loser, in suffering such a
Wretch as I am, to dare to tell you, that he loves you; and though you could
bear with it, yet it would not ease me; I should have ever before my Eyes the
Marquis de Mainville 's happiness; and perhaps that believing my self as worthy
of being beloved as he, notwithstanding the difference there is between our
Fortune, I should tell you things as might displease you. It is better for me
all at once to distance my self from the most amiable person breathing; and
though it cost me my Life, Death will be more pleasant to me than a sight that
will make me die every moment. At these words he would again have been going,
but the Marchioness holding him by the arm, told him, that if he was minded to
oblige her, he would still stay with her Husband: That she bore him not so much
ill will for his temerity, as she might have done at an other time, because she
her self knew the power of Love. That as to the rest, she was willing to forget
all things, provided he promised her never to speak to her of his Passion. That
Reason must govern him, as she promised him to let it govern her her self: That
she would have him to be a Witness of the efforts she was going to make, to
drive Mainville out of her heart; and that if she could not effect that, he
would, at least, be with her to mind her of her Virtue.

In fine, as it is impossible to resist what one loves, Grand-Champ could not
decline obeying the Marchioness, and continued to stay with Florange.
Nevertheless if she had so much indulgence for him, it was not without very
powerful reasons. She considered, that the excess of his Despair might prompt
him to reveal her secret, and that it would be better for her to constrain her
self, than be exposed to the anger of a Lover, who had just occasion to
complain. On the other side, as her design was to be virtuous, she imagined
that Grand-Champ's presence would be capable of keeping her in, and that
narrowly watching her actions, she should be ashamed after what she had told
him, of manifesting any Weakness.

Thus while she was studying all possible means for her security, Mainville
omitted nothing of what might give a happy success to his Love. He from time to
time found the means of discoursing the Marchioness; and his Conversation
ruined that Ladies Projects. She daily discovered some new Quality in him, as
rendered the Vice less hideous to her, insomuch that she was no longer so very
desirous to return into the Country.

Florange, all jealous as he was, perceived nothing as yet; but the Citizen's
Wife, whom Mainville had courted before, finding him more faint than ordinary,
examined the Cause of it, and was not long without detecting it. Her Rage, upon
this, was extreme; and she was upon the point of letting her jealousy break
out, without considering she should injure her self as much as the Marchioness.
However, still fearing to be deceived, she would have new Proofs of her Lover's
Infidelity, before she proceeded to Reproaches against him, and to Invectives
against her Rival.

This Citt, though not of Quality, did nevertheless make some Figure in the
Town, as being very rich, and passably handsome. She was one in all the
Merry-meetings of that place; and the season of the Carnival then requiring
people to be in Disguise, as is the Custom, Florange desired her to make one in
a Masquerade, which Mainville, and his Wife were to be of. And that they might
be the finer, they sent for Clothes from Paris, six for Men, and six for Women.
They were all alike, and suited well enough with an Entry. They meant to dance
at the Wedding of a very pretty Maid, that was to be very suddenly married.
That Day being accordingly come, they procured the admiration of all the
Company, who were not wont to see people that danced so well as did Mainville
and the Marchioness de Florange. After they had danced, these Lovers placed
themselves by one another, and Mainville, on whom the Citt had her Eyes fixed,
having caressed the Marchioness a little too much, it is difficult to express
her vexation on that account. Being transported with anger, she went instantly
to make a thousand Reproaches to that perfidious man; but having met in the way
a female friend of hers, that stopped her, she neither found Mainville, nor the
Marchioness, who had left their places to take others. She endeavored to find
them out in the Crowd, and the Resemblance of Clothes deceiving her, she said
to Florange, whom she took for Mainville, You betray me, Marquis, but I Will be
revenged on Madam de Florange, though I were to die a moment after Florange
knew the Citts voice again, and her Discourse making an impression upon his
Mind, that was but too susceptible of jealousy, he made way into the Crowd,
without giving her one word of answer. The Citizen's Wife's Rage was
inconceivable in this occasion; She imagined her self absolutely flighted, by
the manner of his leaving her, and wished she could extinguish her passion in a
moment; but not being able to effect that, she turned all her thoughts to
revenge.

In the mean while Mainville and the Marchioness being ignorant of what passed,
did in a Corner enjoy one another's Conversation, without dreaming, that love
was preparing them any trouble. Florange sought 'em over all, and finding them
stepped aside, he perceived his Fury to re-double. He had opened his Mouth to ask
them what they did there; but considering that the Bussle he might make, would
retort upon himself, he made semblance of being ill, that he might have a
pretense to go home. When he was come to his house, he bid his Wife prepare to
leave Soissons on the morrow morning. She asked him the reason; but without
vouchsafing to specify any thing, he contented himself with letting her know,
that he was not satisfied with her Conduct. She did not close her Eyes all the
Night long, making however less reflection on Florange's anger, than on
Mainville's cruel separation, she beginning to love him more than her own Life.
She lay contriving the means to bid him adieu; but not knowing how to do that,
she resolved to write to him as soon as it was day. In effect, she was already
thinking of having Pen and Paper, when a new Disquiet did utterly confound her
Repose. She knew not with whom to trust her Letter, and thereby plainly saw,
that it would be to no purpose for her to write. The day being come, she began
to slumber, when her Husband told her, that for a person that was to take a
journey, it became her not to sleep so late. Whereupon he made her get out of
Bed; after which he went into her Closet, and took thence her Ink and Paper,
saying, that he must rifle her of her Courtship, and deprive her of the means
of letting her Lover hear from her.

The Marchioness looked upon him then after a scornful manner, without making
him any reply; but she lost all her firmness when she was to take Coach; then
did she revolve Mainville's Despondency in her Mind, when he came to know of
her Departure; and her Lover's Affliction affected her more than her own Grief.
However, as Love becomes the stronger by persecution, she quickly perceived
that she loved him more than she had ever yet loved any body. After she was
come to their Country house, her Husband suspecting that she would not rest so
contented, if the Love she had for Mainville was in any wise strong, he left
her neither Ink nor Paper, besides forbidding his people to give her any,
though she asked for it.

While all this passed in this manner, Mainville dreaming of nothing less than
of what had happened, sent a How d' ye to Florange's Lodgings. The man he had
encharg'd with this Message being returned thence, and having brought him back
word, that he was gone that morning with his Wife, to return to his own house,
surpised him extremely. He would believe nothing of it at first, but it having
been confirmed to him from another hand, he presently judged, that so sudden a
departure was the effect of Florange's Jealousy. He likewise fancied, that
there was only himself in the Town that he could six it upon. Thus he rejected
his first thoughts, which suggested to him to run after his Mistress. Then
seeing that it would be to no purpose for him to stay any longer at Soissons,
he resolved to be gone to Paris, whence he had a design to send a man on
purpose to the Marchioness. As he was just ready to take Horse, the Citizen's
Wife came to his Lodgings, all transported with Fury; for she had newly been
told, that he was just a going, without so much as bidding her farewell. She
upbraided him with what she had done for him, and his little acknowledgment for
all, and forgot not to speak of what had passed the Evening before, accusing
him of being the most ungrateful of all men, in not vouchsafing so much as to
take the pains to undeceive her. Mainville being surpised at this reproach,
which he did not think he had incurred, caused the thing to be explained to him
at length; and seeing that the Citt's mistake had occasioned Florange's
Jealousy, he made her no great reparation for his Coldness; and on the
contrary, treated her with sufficient Contempt. After having dismissed her, he
departed the Town, on the Road thinking only of the Marchioness, who on her
side was only taken up with his remembrance. For without otherwise minding her
Husband's rigours, who treated her with sufficient indignity, and who had her
watched by five or six persons, to whom he had not been ashamed to discover his
Weakness; she wished for nothing else than to know what was become of
Mainville. Thus all her thoughts only tending that way, she took a Resolution
difficult to form, but which was a strong Proof of her Love. For forgetting all
the allarms she had had by having confided her secret in Grand-Champ, she
conceived a design to make use of him to be the Gobetween of her and Mainville,
and to let him hear from her. She knew not however what course to take to exact
this Service from him, after what she had said to him; for she dreaded his
Reproaches. At length Love being stronger in her than any other Consideration,
she conjured him, with Tears in her Eyes, to free her out of pain, and carry a
Letter to her Lover. You love me, Grand-Champ, said she to him, and I shall be
glad to know it in this Occasion. You Will make me die of Grief, if you refuse me:
whereas you will restore me to Life by doing me this Service. It will cost me
mine, Madam, answered Grand-Champ immediately, and you have the cruelty, to
desire that I should die the most cruel Death imaginable. But no matter, since
this must oblige you, it is for me to obey you without reply.

After she had thus got his consent, she asked him for Paper and Ink; which he
was obliged to furnish her withal accordingly. When she had writ her Letter,
she gave it him, begging him to make dispatch, that so Mainville might receive
it before he arrived at Paris, whither she suspected him to be going.
Grand-Champ, all pierced with Grief, took it from her hands, and pretending
some business, that he might get Florange's leave, he mounted on Horseback,
and overtook Mainville half way. Mainville, whom the Marchioness had made the
Confident of Grand-Champ's Love, trembled at her rashness in trusting him with
a matter of this consequence; but at the same time admiring the fidelity of
this Domestic, he would needs embrace him, and speak the sense he had of so
generous an action. But Grand-Champ retiring two steps back, to avoid his
Caresses, told him, that far from assuring him, that he was his Servant, he
would franckly tell him, that there was not a man in the World, that he hated
more than him; that he was well enough acquainted with the reason; and that if
he had stooped so far as to deliver him a Letter from the Marchioness, he
thought him possessed of so much delicacy, as not to confound the Character of
a passionate Lover, with that of an Unfortunate Rival: That he might judge of
his Love by the instance he had newly given of it, and the more this Love was
violent, the more the effects of it were to be feared.

Mainville took no notice that he heard his Menaces: and indeed far from
showing any resentment, he did what he could to gain so generous a man,
offering him a World of fine things, as of advancing him in War, and serving
him with all his Credit. But all these Promises did not work upon Grand-Champ,
to do any thing that was low, maintaining his generosity to the last. After
this Mainville made answer to the Marchioness, and put his Letter into the
hands of this Domestic. She had sent him Word in hers, of what had been the
Occasion of her Departure, and how out of the desire she had to see him again,
she would rather feign some illness, that she might go to the Waters of
Bourbon. She was overjoyed to hear, that Mainville would on his side be there;
for so he assured her by his Letter, insomuch that she only discoursed
Grand-Champ of her impatience till the season of the Waters was come. The time
betwixt this and that, said she to him, will last me a thousand years, and out
of the fondness I am under, of seeing him again, there will not be a day but
will seem longer than whole years to me. I own that hopes will in some manner
ease my pain; but whatever Blessing I expect from so dear a sight, I shall
purchase it dearly by the uneasinesses I am going to be under, for fear he
should fail his Word. Grand-Champ, continued she, May not the King march to his
Conquests in the time of Waters, and do thou think that Mainville can
dispense himself from following him? Honor is a thing very nice in the Soul of
a Man of Quality, and I am undone, if Mainville prefers it before his Love.

Grand-Champ hearkened to all this with a Countenance wherein Despair and Rage
seemed to triumph over his Passion. Nay, and sometimes was he just ready to
load her with Reproaches, if by a return very usual with Lovers, he had not
been more afraid of vexing her than of any thing else. However being no longer
able to stay in the presence of a Woman that set him a raving mad, he went his
ways without saying a word to her. But she was so possessed with her
Reflections, that she did not so much as take notice of what was become of him.

When it was at length the season of drinking the Waters, she asked her Husband
leave to go thither, and he could not hansomely refuse her, because she had
pretended to be sick, having besides slily engaged the Physicians to say that
she stood in need of them for her recovery. Nevertheless Florange being
resolved not to leave her one step, made semblance on his side, that the Waters
would be good for him, and went along with her. The Marchionesses spite was
extraordinary in this Occasion, and if she had durst, she had let it fly out to
strange Extremities. She then fell to thinking how to break off this Journey;
but making reflection, that so doing would but too clearly manifest her
Intrigue, she resolved to advertise Mainville of what occurred, that he might
take his measures for his seeing her on the Road.

Grand-Champ was again encharg'd to carry him this News; and having accordingly
done it with the same fidelity he had exerted the time before, Mainville took
Horse for Montargis, and stayed in the best Inn, where the Marchioness had writ
him word she was to lodge. Nevertheless he had no other Train than a Valet de
Chamber; and for the obviating all suspicion, in case he staid there any time,
he pretended to be sick, that he might at freedom wait the Marchionesses
coming. Two days after, she arrived there with her Husband; and no sooner was
she alighted, but that she gave Grand-Champ order to acquaint Mainville, that
she was desirous to see him. Mainville told Grand-Champ, that could not be till
after her Husband was gone to Bed; and as the Marchioness did not lie with him,
they would have all sort of leisure of conversing together. When Grand-Champ
had given this account to the Marchioness, Ah my God! cried she, That Is
impossible: How see me by Night? That Is seeking his own ruin, and the ruining
of my self. What would Florange say if he came to know it? and would there
after that be any mercy for me? What say you, Grand-Champ? give me good advice
in this matter. Grand-Champ, being enraged at what he did, and what he was
still obliged to hear, answered not a word; but seeing that she pressed him to
tell her his Opinion; How, Madam, he replied to her, Ought you not to be
satisfied with what I here do, but you must needs constrain me to discourse you
upon a thing of this nature? And to what purpose would it be for me to dissuade
you from seeing the Marquis de Mainville, since you will not follow my advice?
Why will I not follow it, the Marchioness answered; and should I not be glad,
that you would let me see that it was impossible to afford him this
satisfaction. No, Madam, it is not impossible, replied Grand-Champ, since that
you doubt of it, and you will infallibly see him in your Chamber, since you
only deliberate to know whether the thing be feasible or not. I thought you
would have declined it out of fear of wounding your honor; but the happy
Marquis triumphs over your Scruples. You at first told me, you meant to shun
him, with such a World of Precaution; and now you are no longer afraid of
singling him out to a private Rendezvouze. Ah, Grand-Champ, you are mistaken,
the Marchioness answered, and if he comes into my Chamber, I mean not, that you
shall go one step from me, that so you your self may be a Witness, that nothing
shall there pass, but what is honest; and that though I be wanting to Decency, I
at least am not wanting to Virtue. No, it is you that are mistaken, Madam, cried
Grand-Champ, if you believe you can be wanting to Decorum, without being
wanting to Virtue; for there is such a connection between them two, that a
person can no longer be said to be innocent, when she has once failed in her
Conduct, It is for you to make reflection thereupon; and if it proves my
misfortune, that my Remonstrances will nothing avail, you need only say what
you desire of me: I will still bring, if you order me, this happy Lover, into
your very Chamber; but do not oblige me to be present at a Conversation that
would make me mad.

As soon as Grand-Champ had made her these offers, she took him at his Word,
conjuring him to pay her this Service. She no longer insisted for him to be
present in the Room with Mainville; and this Circumstance cast him into the
utmost Despondency; for he framed such things in his imagination as she did not
in the least dream of; and which his Jealousy nevertheless made him think to
be real. The Marchionesses Chamber was at the end of a Gallery; and there was a
kind of Antichamber, where Grand-Champ had Orders to lie. The Marquis de
Florange having commanded him to watch his Wife's Conduct so narrowly, as that
he might be able to give an exact account of it. Thus it lay in his power to
let in whom he pleased; and the excess of his love requiring him to pay this
Service to his Rival, he introduced him into the Marchionesses Chamber, and
shut the door upon them. While Mainville was there, an Adventure happened in
the Inn, that made them both more than a little uneasy. One of the Servants
being in Love with the Maid, and fancying he had perceived some Bowels of
kindness in her toward him, he stole softly into her Chamber, and made her
start out of her sleep. This Wench being honest, beyond what is ordinary in
those of her stamp, being to the highest degree surpised at his insolence,
gave then a great Scream, which put all the house into allarum. The Marquis de
Florange awaked at this noise, as well as the rest, and having heard how the
case stood, he was heard to cry out aloud, kill him, kill him. For he had a
natural aversion for all those that endeavored to debauch other men's Wives;
fearing, that if he appeared indulgent upon the Article, it might give some
Gallant the Boldness to sparkle it to his. His Voice immediately struck
Mainville's and the Marchionesses Ears; and Mainville thinking it was him he
meant, drew his Sword at the same time, telling the Marchioness, that it would
not be so easy a matter as was imagined, to take away his Life. At these Words
he broke out of her Arms, that grasped him tenderly, as if she meant to bid him
a last farewell, and rushing out of the Chamber, he ran toward the place where
he heard Florange a talking. When he was got to the end of the Gallery, he
perceived him in his Nightgown, by the Light of a Candle, which a Lacquey held
before him. This Lackquey no sooner saw Mainville's Sword glitter, but that he
let fall the Candle out of fear, at the same time giving a dismal Schriek.
Florange, for his part made haste into his Chamber, having likewise perceived
the Sword; insomuch that Mainville finding no body to dispute the passage with
him, he entered his own Room, without Florange's being able to say, who had put
him to so great a fright.

In the mean while the Marchioness being under a most doleful disquiet for what
would happen to Mainville, went out into the Gallery to listen; but coming to
know, that the noise that had been made in the Inn, had been occasioned by the
Man and Maids Adventure; and hearing no talk of her Lover, she dispersed her
fears. After this Grand-Champ advised her to go to Bed, that if her Husband
should by chance come into her Chamber, he might not ask why she had sat up so
late. Hardly was she undrefs'd, but that Florange, who had had time to call all
his People to his succors, came, and knocked at her Door, with such a noise,
that a body would have said, he meant to break it open. Grand-Champ went and
opened it; and the first thing Florange asked him, was, if a man did not go out
of his Chamber with his Sword in his hand. He made him answer, that no body
could go out there, since the Door had been always shut, and that if he had not
heard his Voice, he would not have opened it. After this, Florange knocked at
his Wife's Chamber Door; and there she made him wait for some time, to make him
believe that she was in a deep sleep. At last she made semblance of awaking her
Woman, that was a Confident of her Intrigue, and who had been present all the
while Mainville staid with her. Florange taxed 'em both with their sleeping so
fast, after they had assured him, they heard not the least of all the noise
that had been made in the Inn.

As soon as Florange had left his Wife, he made reflection upon the Vision he
had had of the Sword, and relying upon what Grand-Champ had said to him, he
fancied the man to have come out of some of the next Chambers to that of the
Marchioness. Thus all was appeased in the Inn; after which all fell asleep
again, as if nothing had happened. There was only Mainville, the Marchioness,
and Grand-Champ, that could not be of those that tasted of Rest; for their
Amor furnished them with sufficient matter of anxiety. As for Grand-Champ, it
is easy to judge he was overwhelmed with grief, and that he could not think
of his cruel Destiny, without believing himself the most unfortunate of all
men. As to Mainville and the Marchioness, though they ought to be so satisfied,
being sure of one another Love, yet they had great cause of vexation. They had
hoped to have enjoyed one another Company for a whole Night together, and an
unhappy Adventure of a Man and a Maid, had disappointed their hopes. Besides,
they knew not when they might see one another again; for as they had not had
the leisure to take their measures together, Mainville was upon the point of
returning to the Army, and the danger he was going to run, did extraordinarily
allarum his Mistress.

The Day being come, Florange and his Wife continued their way; and being
arrived at Bourbon, they took the Waters, of which they had no great need. But
as it is not the same thing with those Waters, as with the Water of the Seine,
which one may drink of, without fear of injuring ones self, they spoiled their
Stomachs, either that they had already a Disposition thereunto, or that God
thought fitting to punish them for feigning to be sick. Their Indisposition
began with a great Indigestion, which at first hindered them from sleeping, and
a Fever coming thereupon, it was feared this Malady might have ill
Consequences. Thus for prevention, they had recourse to the most able
Physicians; but they exhausted their whole Knowledge, without giving any ease to
their Patients. This occasioned their Friends to begin to despair of their
Health. The Marquis de Mainville was then at the Army, whither he went after
the adventure of Monturgis. The Marchioness, thinking her self at the
Extremity, signified to him the state she was in; and he had no sooner learnt
this ill News, but that he resolved to go see her, let what would come on it.
There was no room for his desiring leave. The King granted none: Wherefore he
pretended himself sick, that he might have a pretense to be carried into a
Neighboring Town. As soon as he was there arrived, he won the heart of his
Landlord, and of a Physician, and prevailed with them to give out, that he was
in great danger; insomuch, that when any one came to pay him a Visit, they
said, he was not to be seen, by reason of the Violence of his Distemper. His
Servants had also Order to remain bare-headed in his Room, and when any Persons
came to enquire after his Health, they made them answer softly at the Door, as
if they had been afraid of disturbing his Head. In the mean while Mainville
having taken his measures thus well, went away Post in the dusk of the Evening,
and repaired to Paris, where the Marchioness de Florange was sick. He saw her
by Grand Champ's means, and found her in better Health than he expected. For
her Distemper, when just upon the point of tumbling her into her Grave, was
diminished all on the sudden; and but that her looks spoke her to have been
ill, a man would hardly have believed it, so well was she recovered. The
Marchionesses joy was great, to see so signal an instance of her Lover's
Passion. She embraced him with an extraordinary tenderness, and by insatiable
Caresses, testified she could never sufficiently express her acknowledgment.

Mainville, who was as foolish as are all people that are in Love, was charmed
with her affection, and neglected his Duty; insomuch that he was now but little
afraid of his Cheat coming to be detected. Thus giving all his Thoughts, and
all his Cares to his Mistress, his contrivance lay only how to be daily with
her; in which he found nevertheless some difficulty, because that Grand-Champ
was to depart that very Evening, to go into Picardy, whither he was sent by
Florange. Nevertheless, to return after having seen her but once, was a thing
he could not resolve on, finding he had hazarded too much to have such scanty
satisfaction. In fine, after having one while listened to his Reason, which
adviz'd him to return to the Army, and another while his Passion, that thwarted
those Intentions, this latter got the Ascendant, and he studied the means of
getting to speak, at least once again with his Mistress, For that purpose he
dressed himself up as a Physician, and under that Habit he had free admittance
into her Chamber, without needing any body to introduce him. Though that his
Features were too deeply engraved in the Marchionesses mind, for her to mistake
him, yet the surprise of that Lady was extreme, when he took her by the Arm, to
feel her Pulse. She immediately dimiss'd all the Servants out of the Room,
except her Woman, whom she did not suspect. Then giving Mainville a strong
Reprimand, for exposing himself and her too to such a danger, she forbid him to
venture so again, telling him, that he ought; at least, to advertise her of his
Disguise, to prevent her first surprise. Mainville excused himself the best he
could, rejecting all upon his Love, and upon his not having known that
Grand-Champ was to be gone till after he had left her. After this Conversation,
they began an other, extremely tender; and as they were going to engage deeply
into amorous softnesses, the Marchionesses usual Physician came in, who was
strangely surpised to find an other Physician at the sick Beauties Beds-head.
His Cheeks glowed for mere anger, thinking that he was slighted. He asked
Mainville, by whose Order he came thither, he whom he did not know to be of the
Faculty of Paris. Mainville was strangely non plus'd at his Question, seeing
how furious he was upon the matter: But making a Virtue of Necessity, he
replied, that he went no where without being sent for: That though he was not
of the Faculty of Paris, yet he was not the less expert; and that the
Physicians of Montpelier did in nothing come short of all the Physicians of the
Kingdom.

There is a certain Antipathy between the Physicians of Paris, and those of
Montpelier, insomuch that this Discourse still augmented the usual Physician's
Resentment. He took fire at the same time, and after having discharged his
Choler against this new Doctor, he told the Marchioness, that since she put so
much Confidence in an ignorant Fellow, she might make use of him, and that it
was the last time he would visit her. Nevertheless, upon his going away, he
went to Florange's Chamber, where his heart being full of what had befallen
him, he complained of the Affront that was done him. Florange was still very
sick, being nothing so near his recovery as his Wife was to hers. For he had
still daily Transports in his Brain, that made him rave; but being the most
jealous of all men, he immediately distrusted the Montplier Physician, and to
see if he was not mistaken, he at the same time took his Nightgown, and went
into his Wives Chamber. On the way he told the Doctor, that it was for his sake
that he took this pains, as being willing to conceal his Jealousy. The Doctor
was so transported with Anger, that he made not any effort to hinder him; and
though he knew well enough in his mind, that stirring out of his Bed did not
befit his present Circumstances, yet he was overjoyed that he had this
satisfaction given him. He Will be your Death, said he to him as they went along,
if you make use of him. He is but a mere Quack, and that you will presently
perceive by his Mien. As he entertained him with such like Discourses, to
animate him the more, they entered the Marchionesses Chamber; and Florange's
surprise was extraordinary, when he found that the Physician of Montpelier, and
the Marquis de Mainville, were but one and the same thing. How, cried he at the
same time, the Marquis de Mainville is turned Doctor! How can that be, and
since when is this Metamorphosis? I must be revenged, and offer up to my
resentment a Friend that ruins me, and triumphs over my Honor. At this Name
of Mainville, which was universally known, the true Physician remained as much
confounded as Florange: for he then plainly saw he had committed a great
mistake, in discovering what but for him had been concealed. He trembled for
fear, knowing how dangerous it was to incur the Indignation of a man of that
Consequence, Wherefore he would have given all he had to have retrieved the
Blunder he had made.

On the other side, Mainville and his Mistress were no less afraid than the
Doctor; but Love, which was the first cause of this Disorder, since it was it
that had induced Mainville to put himself into a Disguise, suggested a thing to
Mainville, that freed them both out of perplexity. He began to seize upon the
Marquis de Florange, crying, that his Frenzy took him; and that if they did not
carry him back to Bed, it was capable of being his Death. He at the same time
trod upon the Physician's Foot; and he understanding what this meant, joined
with him to make the poor Florange believe, that he was very ill. Good Lord!
what a furious transport, cried the Doctor at the same time, to take a
Physician for a Marquis, and to suspect him also of attempting upon his Honor.
My Lord, you must drink a refreshing Ptisanne, or else you are a lost man.
Florange was terribly enraged at this Discourse, as not over-well knowing
whether he raved or not. However, the two Physicians, his Wife, and her Woman,
ceased not dragging of him into his own Room, and putting him to Bed again in
spite of his teeth. Then had he a real Phrenzy, holding a thousand extravagant
Discourses. The Physician of Montpelier took that time to bid the Company
farewell; and the Marchioness saw him depart with less regret; judging, that
after what had happened, it would be putting him into too evident a danger, and
her self too for to detain him.

When Mainville was gone away, he went to his House who writes the Gazet; where
in consideration of some money, he had inserted, that he was extreme sick in
the Town where he was thought to be, and that there was no longer any hopes of
his Life. From thence he went to Florange's Physician, to whom he said, that he
pardoned him for having hampered him in so unlucky a business, provided he
would maintain to the very last, what he had so well began. He thereupon
acquainted him with what he had newly done, that so he might disabuse Florange,
if he continued to affirm, that he was paulm'd upon by his Wife. He told him,
that the Gazet was to be vended the next day throughout the City, and that this
fell out very pat for their purpose. After this, he went his ways for the Army,
where there was not the least suspicion of all the Pranks he came from playing.
Florange's Fit went away, having lasted full Fourteen Hours. He sent for a
Kinsman of his Wives, to whom he made his Complaints upon what had befallen him
the Evening before, telling him, that he could not keep her after this. This
man, who by chance, had read the Gazet in the morning, and knew besides that
Florange had raved all the Night, imagined at his hearing him talk of
Mainville, that he was still in his raving Fit. Thus without answering to his
Discourse, he told him, that he was only to be fed with good Broths, that so he
might be brought to his right Senses, and his Head settled. But Florange
bursting out into anger; My Head, said he to him, is too sick ever to be
settled; and I wonder that you, who are my Relation, as well as Madam de
Florange's, would make me believe, that I am a Visionary fellow. You are so in
truth, if there ever was one, this Kinsman answered, to conceive a jealousy of
a man, who at this hour is not perhaps alive. Mainville has been sick a long
time, and the state he is in, does with a Vengeance hinder him from thinking of
(...) Wife. Take my Word, Cou^, if you mean to fall out with her, use at least
a more probable pretext than this; for you will have no body on your side, as long
as you have this only to say against her. Thereupon the wonted Physician
entered, who had provided himself with a Gazet; and Florange going to take him
for Witness, that he affirmed nothing but what was true, had the confusion to
see himself still accused of raving. You think not of what you say, My Lord,
said this Physician to him; it is the Remains of your Distemper that make you
talk in this manner: The Marquis de Mainville lies at the utmost extremity; and
if he dies, it will be a great loss to his Family. Thereupon he took the Gazet
out of his Pocket, and read aloud the Article concerning this Marquis. After
this he highly extolled his Noble Actions; adding, that he might have pushed on
his Fortune much farther, but (...) hasty a Death. Florange's con^on was great,
after reading of the Gazet. He began to believe, that the violence of his
Malady was the occasion of his Suspicions; and after having more and more
confirmed himself in this Opinion, because that his Kinsman, and the Physician,
still continued to tell him the same thing, at length he was so well persuaded,
that he ask d the former pardon for the Complaints he had made to him.

The Marchioness had been thitherto under extraordinary fear; but being
informed by her Physician, that her Husband began to repent of his having taxed
her, she quickly dismissed her apprehensions. The rest of the Summer was spent
without furnishing her with any other Adventure; and her Husband being quite
out of danger, she went along with him to their Countrey-house. About the
beginning of Autumn they took a journey to our Lady of Liesse, in
acknowledgment of their Recovery; and Devotion having spirited Mainville to go
thither at his return from the Campaign, he accidentally met them as they were
in the Church. Mainville made no scruple of accosting Florange, twitting him
with his going from Soissons without bidding him adieu. Florange was in a rage,
that he was obliged to suffer his Conversation: Thus he received him coldly:
but Mainville having perceived it, made as if he had urgent Business; insomuch
that he himself freed him out of perplexity, by re-mounting on Horse back. By
this means he had not time to discourse the Marchioness; but his eyes finding
her more beauteous than ever, they explained to her in one moment all that he
had to say to her. After he was gone, Florange re-calling all his Idea's into
his memory, took it ill, that he should meet 'em so pat at our Lady of Liesse.
He imagined, that this could not fall out without his being advertised; and in
his heart he accused the Marchioness of it. After having performed his
Devotions in that Church, he returned to his own home, and on the Road spoke
not so much as one Word to his Wife; so spighted was he at this Adventure. When
he was come thither, he entertained Grand-Champ with the Encounter he had had,
and declared to him his Suspicions. Grand-Champ jumped with him in his Opinion;
but yet endeavored to undeceive him, that he might not expose the Marchioness
to vexatious Reproaches. He was still over Head and Ears in Love with her;
insomuch, that this Lady coming on her side to tell him, how Chance had brought
Mainville and her to an Interview, when she least expected it. That was no hard
matter, Madam, said he to her; and when one is of intelligence with chance,
things still more surprising happen out. The Marchioness being amazed at the
freedom he took of making her Reproaches, told him after a disdainful manner,
that it became indeed such a man as he to intermeddle in her concerns: That now
she plainly perceived her mistake, when she thought him an honest man; and that
all Servants returned sooner or later to their Character. It is impossible to
express how dismally the amorous Grand-Champ was mortified with this word
Servant. He had hitherto imagined he might one day come to touch the
Marchioness, if she once came to make reflection of all he did for her: But
losing all hopes after this last instance of her Contempt, he left her with his
heart full of rage. No, she does not deserve, said he to himself, the esteem of
a worthy man: She Is a mere Coquet, that is won by a gaudy outside; and I ought
to indulge my Revenge, unless I mean to pass for the most faint-hearted of all
Lovers. I serve a Rival, to please him; I rack my self to death, as a body may
say, to serve the man in the World I most hate; I espouse the interests of that
ungrateful Woman, to make her Husband believe, that he has a Wife extreme
discreet; yet for my reward she calls me Servant. -- No, I cannot think on it
without bursting into a Fury; and either I have no power over my mind, or I
shall quickly forget her.

As Grand-Champ was entertaining himself with this Discourse, and much other
stuff of the like Nature, that expressed the excess of his Resentment, word was
brought him, that a man inquired for him; and going to see who it was, it was
found to be a Person from Mainville.

This Marquis had made a stop at Villers-Cotterets, whence he had written to
his Mistress. His Messenger having presented his Letter to Grand-Champ,
besought him to make an answer as soon as possible to his Master. Grand-Champ
returned a moment after, and told the Messenger, that Mainville might come
about midnight, and that he should find the Park-door open: That the
Marchioness had not had time to write to him; but that this was sufficient.
This man made haste to return; and when half way, he met Mainville, who was so
impatient to know if the Marchioness would accept of a Rendezvouze, that he
required of her by his Letter, that he was mounted on Horseback, to avail
himself of it the sooner. This Messenger gave him an account of what
Grand-Champ had said to him; but at the same time adviz'd him to turn back,
saying, that he seemed to be in a strange Concern when he gave him his Answer;
and that either he was mistaken, or that it was not safe to trust to his Word.
Mainville made a mock of his fear, and continued on his way. But this Messenger
was not so much mistaken as Mainville imagined. For indeed Grand-Champ finding
that this occasion was favorable to revenge himself of the Marchionesses
slights, had carried Mainville's Letter to Florange, in the first Heat of his
Resentment, letting him by that see that his Suspicions were not over-ill
grounded. Nevertheless, he was cautious of telling him, that he was the Party
that had carried on the Intrigues of these Lovers to the point it was at. Far
from this, he made him believe, that this Letter was fallen by chance into his
hands; and that he had no sooner seen what it contained, but that he had
delivered it to him.

Florange being ascertained of his Dishonor, or at least, that he was robbed
of his Wife's Heart, did not hesitate one moment, as to being revenged. He,
with Grand-Champ, resolved to surprise Mainville in his Wife's Chamber, and
sacrifice them both to his Resentment. In the mean time Mainville still
advanced, not in the least dreaming of what was brewing against him. He found
the Park-door open, as Grand-Champ had sent him word, and slipping between a
Palisade, he got to the House-door, which was half open. Grand-Champ, the
better to make him fall into the Trap that was laid for him, had not only
described the House to the Messenger, but had likewise promised to stand behind
this last Door, whence he was to convey Mainville into the Marchionesses Room.
He had likewise told this Lady, that Mainville was to come to her, that she
might leave her Door open. Her eagerness to see him again, had made her fall
into the Snare, without requiring other assurance than Grand-Champ's Word. When
Mainville was come to the House-door, he really found this Domestic, who
conducted him as far as the Marchionesses Room, whose Door he found.
Grand-Champ, after that, withdrew; but by a surprising Recollection, he, who
only breathed Revenge, since the Marchioness had treated him ill, found himself
moved with Compassion, revolving in his mind the unhappy Condition to which she
was going to be reduced. In short, his Love got the upperhand in a moment. His
Eyes were all bathed in Tears, out of Grief for having been the Cause of so
lovely a Person's Death; and in a word, if nothing was to do, but to give her
the very last Drop of his Blood, to repair what he had done, he would willingly
have given it.

In the mean while he was to give an Answer to Florange, who had planted
himself behind a Palisade of Maple to see Mainville pass. This Husband had
heard him as he slipped by between the Trees: Nay, and had seen him; insomuch,
that growing weary of staying any longer in that place, since it was time to
come to slashing, he went his way, to know what detained Grand-Champ from
coming to give him notice. He found this Unfortunate Domestic Twenty Paces
from his Ambuscade; and having asked him, whether he had conducted Mainville
above Stairs, he made answer, No; and that he must needs have failed the
Assignation. Prithee, why that upon me, replied Florange in anger; for I saw
him pass by where I was. At these words he would have gone up into the
Marchionesses Chamber; but Grand-Champ stopping him by the Arm, told him, that
his going might cause him to miss his aim; that it was convenient for him to go
up first, to see if Mainville was there; that he would come and give him an
account at the bottom of the Stairs; and that afterward it would be for him
not to lose the occasion of being revenged. Florange, notwithstanding the
greatness of the Offense, could not yet put off a certain I ear that was
natural to him. Thus being willing that any other than himself should make the
first Paces, he complied with all Grand-Champ proposed, and staid for him at
the bottom of the Stairs. Grand-Champ seeing this, mounted above, without
losing of time; and having caused the Door to be opened, he extremely surpised
these Lovers, when he told them all was ruined. Being seized with Fear, they
asked him what had fallen out: But Grand-Champ, more undone than they, made
answer, that it was not a time to hold long Discourses, and that Mainville must
be gone at the very instant, if he meant to be alive a Quarter of an Hour
after. That he would find Florange at the bottom of the Staircase; and that to
pass safely, he must counterfeit his Voice, and tell him, that now is the time
for you to be revenged. That he could say nothing more to him at present, and
that another time he would unravel this mystery unto him.

At these words he took Mainville by the Arm, to shove him out, conjuring him
to make his escape, and at the same time to save the Marchionesses Honor and
Life. As this Discourse was too pressing to lose time in deliberation, he did
not stand upon much entreaty: Down stole he as softly as he could, holding by
the Rails, and finding Florange at the bottom, who stopped him, he whispered in
his Ear what Grand-Champ had said to him. Florange heard those words
distinctly, but did not know his Voice; insomuch, that thinking to find
Mainville above, he mounted hastily, breathing nothing but Revenge. Mainville
had left the Marchionesses Chamber Door open, and Florange entering therein,
with a Pistol in one Hand, and a Sword in the other, he sought for Mainville,
as the first Victim he ought to offer up to his Resentment. He was much amazed
to see only Grand-Champ, leaning against a Table, and the Marchioness on the
other side, not having the power to support her self. Where am I, cried he at
this sight, and what is become of Mainville? Speak Grand-Champ: did you not tell
me he was here, and coming up after me, how came you to be in this Chamber?
Grand Champ being prepared for all that Florange could say to him, and resolved
to save the Marchionesses Life at the expense of his own, looked upon him
fixedly, and addressing his Speech to him: Kill me, my Lord, said he to him,
since I have deserved Death: I am the greatest Cheat of all men, in having
falsely accused my Lady. I have made you conceive a false Opinion of her
Virtue, by forging to you a Letter from Mainville, to induce you to use her
ill: And what is still beyond all this, is, that Love is the occasion of all
these Crimes. There is not any other man, save I, continued he, that had any
intentions to seduce her: And if I had brought them about, I should not have
been so enraged, to undertake to make you shed a Blood that ought to be so dear
to you. I now perceive my fault; and to punish me for it, you need only to
pierce my Bosom. At the same time he presented himself before him, offering
himself to a voluntary Death: But Florange not being able to reconcile these
Words with what had been told him at the bottom of the Staircase; Do you kill
me, said he to him, or free me out of pain, by acquainting me, how you came
hither before me, and what is become of him that spoke to me before that I came
up. No body can have spoke to you, replied Grand-Champ faintly; and through a
prepossession of your Passion, you imagined you heard what no body can have
said to you. The sincere confession I have made to ye of my fault, ought to
convince you of it: for I would not expose my self to your Resentment for an
other. It is I alone that am culpable; and Madam de Florange, and the Marquis
de Mainville are innocent.

The Marchioness at first could not imagine the meaning of all this; but
beginning to apprehend something, she broke silence, to complain of her
Husband's Suspicions, as if he had really been mightily in the wrong, to doubt
of her Virtue. So as that poor Florange being in Despondency at so
extraordinary an Adventure, withdrew into his own Apartment, without having the
power to take any Resolution. After this Grand-Champ made the Marchioness a
sincere Confession of his fault; and as he was penetrated with regret, he would
in her presence have run himself through with his Sword; telling her, that he
could no longer live, after having so mortally offended her. But the
Marchioness leaping upon him, hindered him from executing his fatal Resolution,
and promised him never to call his Crime to mind. I shall have it in mind,
Madam, answered he, all my life long; but now it shall not be so long, so as I
may weary my self much in the World. At these words he went out of her Chamber
after a desperate sort of manner, and without considering that it was Night, he
took the first way he found, and did not stop till it was day. The Marquis de
Mainville had taken exactly the same Road, and Fortune would have it, that they
should both alight in the same Inn. Mainville had newly dispatched away a man
to Florange's Castle, to know what had occurred there after his departure; but
seeing that Grand-Champ could inform him the best of any body, he desired him,
that he would free him out of pain, and tell him all he did not know.
Grand-Champ, to satisfy his Curiosity, gave him a long account of the
Marchionesses slight, and of the revenge he designed upon her: and continuing
the rest of his Story, he acquainted him how when upon the point of sacrificing
them both, his Love for the Marchioness had saved them. Alas! then cried
Mainville, I should never have suspected you of Treachery. On the contrary, I
had so much confidence in you, that I have just now sent a Letter to you for
the Marchioness. Unhappy that I am; I have perhaps destroyed your labor: You
had set her Husband's mind to rights by your Address; or at least, you had left
him in an uncertainty of his misfortune; and my imprudence has spoiled All.

Grand-Champ had told his Story after so unconcerned a manner, that he seemed
now a Party indifferent; but hearing to what danger Mainville had exposed the
Marchioness, he seemed to recover new Sentiments. You are really very unhappy,
said he to him, in causing so much trouble to a Lady, who would ever have been
innocent, had she never known you. I ought nevertheless to be glad, that she
has occasion to complain of you, that so she may forget you: But as in this
occasion her All is at stake, I shall here wait for the return of your man,
that so if he has put your Letter into any other hands than hers, I may still
render her a piece of Service. He had no sooner spoke these words, but in came
that man, being a Peasant that Mainville had been forced to employ, as having
none of his own Servants with him, to whom he could give this Commission. They
asked him both at the same time, what was become of the Letter; and the Bumpkin
answered them, that he had given it to Grand-Champ. What sort of man is he,
cried Mainville immediately, all in Despair at his mistake? He is tall, replied
the Peasant, well made, and very neat. He then gave an account of the Person to
whom he had delivered his Letter; and Mainville and Grand-Champ, knew plainly
by his Pourtraict of him, that it was fallen into Florange's Hands. Thereupon
Grand-Champ entreated Mainville to lend him his Horse; for he was come a-foot;
telling him, that he was going to pay the Marchioness the last Service he
should pay her as long as he lived. Mainville gave him his Horse; and
Grand-Champ using dispatch, repaired to the House of a Peasant of Florange's
Village, and there wrote a Letter. He then encharg'd the Peasant with it, with
order to put it into the Marchionesses own Hands, as a thing of the highest
Consequence. This Peasant did dexterously acquit himself of his Commission; so
as that the Marchioness was advertised of the fault Mainville had committed,
and to make timely Provision for her self.

She received this Advice just in the nick: for her Husband designing to
convict her of her Intrigue from her own writing, had newly caused Mainville's
Letter to be delivered to her under hand, not doubting but that she would make
an Answer to it. And indeed she had already Ink and Paper to do it, when that
Grand-Champ's Letter made her change her style. Instead of writing to
Mainville, as she was going to do, she writ to her Husband; and leaving the
Letter upon her Table, she went to find out Grand-Champ, whom she entreated to
accompany her to one of her Relations, whither she had a Design to withdraw.
Grand Champ did not stick to grant her the Crupper of his Horse, and convoyed
her till such time as that he had put her into a place of safety.

In the mean while Florange was as impatient to hear of his Wife's Commerce, as
if it had been some good news he was to receive. Thus seeing that she delayed
her Answer too long, he sent her the Fellow he had caused to deliver
Mainville's Letter to her, to inform her, that she was to make more haste. This
man found her Chamber Door open; and having seen upon the Table the Letter she
had left there, he carried it to Florange, as thinking it to be the same he
expected. Florange opened it hastily. But what a wonderful amazement, when
instead of what he expected to find therein, he met with a thousand Reproaches.
She accused him among other things, of having himself contrived the Letter she
had received from Mainville; and he could not convict her of the contrary,
because he knew not this Marquis his Hand. She also acquainted him whither she
was gone, adding, that she would no longer live with a man that used her rather
like a Tyrant than a Husband.

Though Florange knew himself innocent, and that far from being disabus'd of
his Wife's Intrigue, he every day thought her more criminal, yet could he not
hear of her Departure without grief. He suspected that she was gone to tax his
Carriage, and that having no Proofs to convict her, her Complaints would
prevail in the Minds of her Relations over those he might make of her ill
Conduct.

Thus seeing that he had taken his measures ill, he did not waver to go seek
her out, and took Coach in that Design with his Wife's. Woman, whom he little
suspected of being privy to her Concerns: For she was a Gossip, that under the
Oloak of Devotion knew admirably well how to play her Part. He questioned her
however on the Road, whether she knew any thing of the matters in agitation;
But she affected a false Hypocrisy, meaning to persuade him of the
Marchionesses Honesty: and that besides, she was not a Girl to be concerned in
an Intrigue. When they were Two Leagues from the place they came, a Horse of
his lost his shoes, and they were fore'd to halt, to have him shooed again.
Florange was also a little sickish, which obliged him to go into an Inn to
drink a little Wine. While this passed, the Waiting-Gentlewoman, who had
alighted out of the Coach, saw a Company of People flocking together at the end
of the Village; and being naturally curious, as all Women commonly are, she
went on that waywards, to inquire into the matter. When she was come thither,
she was told a thing somewhat extraordinary; namely, that a man after having
alighted at an Inn, had sent back his Horse four Leagues thence, to a person of
whom he had borrowed it; that afterward he had put himself to Bed, pretending
he was sick, and had sent for a Chyrurgeon, who had let him Blood; but that
this Chyrurgeon was no sooner gone, but that he had himself untied his Arm; and
that in short, he had shed so great a quantity of Blood, that there were no
more hopes of his Life.

The Novelty of the thing redoubled this Woman's Curiosity; and so much the
more, as knowing that Grand-Champ had conducted her Lady upon the Crupper of
Mainville's Horse, she had great Suspicions it might be him all this Discourse
was of. Thus she resolved herself to see whether she was not mistaken, that so
she might afterward give the Marchioness a faithful account. As soon as she
had cast her eyes upon that Wretch, she really knew him to be the wretched
Grand-Champ, who was in a very bad Condition. He on his side was not wanting to
know her again immediately; and desiring the People to withdraw, as being to
discourse her in private. I die, he said to her, the most contented of all men,
since that Fortune, which hitherto had been against me, now favors me with
your Company, when that I least expected it, to be the Witness of my last
Words. You may tell Madam de Florange, that I have my self advanced my Death,
as after her slights not being able to survive. Perhaps that one day she will
regret so faithful a Lover. Be it as it will, I only wish her happiness. At
these Words a Convulsion Fit seized him; and the Damsel being willing that he
should die in other Hands than hers, called for the People again into his Room;
and while they were busy in contemplating this Unfortunate Lover, she made away
through the Crowd, without notice being taken of what was become of her.

Florange's fainting Fit had kept all his Servants about him, and hindered them
from knowing what passed, which their Ladies Woman was not sorry for, because
that it was to be feared, that if Grand-Champ's Adventure had come to his
Master's knowledge, he would have gone and discoursed him, and that Grand-Champ
would have told him all, for the discharge of his Conscience. In fine, after
that Florange had re-collected his Spirits, he took Coach again with her, and
they came to the Place of the Marchionesses Retreat. Florange made great
Complaints to their Kinsman, that his Wife went so away without saying a word
to him: But the Kinsman being prepossessed with what the Marchioness had told
him in her Vindication, answered him, that being of such an Humor, he ought
not to marry, since there was nothing that madded a Virtuous Woman more, than
when her Husband doubted her Virtue. For my part, added he, I shall never
advise her to return with you, at least, unless you express a mighty regret for
what is passed. Florange seeing himself baffled in this manner, would have
spoke of two Letters he had received; but his Kinsman replied upon him, that if
that was all he had to alledg against her, he might be gone as he came, and
that all his own Relations would espouse the Defense of his Wife. Thus was
Florange forced to ask his Wife's Pardon, though in his Soul he knew that the
fault lay not at his door.

Madam de Florange having need of the Protection of this Relation in many
things, and particularly in this occasion, wherein it was requisite to justify
her Conduct, of which it was impossible to hinder Discourse in the World, after
what had newly happened, did after this easily comply with the Counsel he gave
her, of coming to a Reconciliation with her Husband. They staid the rest of the
Day at his House, and all the next; and Florange being gone out for a moment,
the Waiting-Gentlewoman took the time of his absence to entertain her Lady with
the sad Adventure of the Unfortunate Grand-Champ. The Marchioness could not
retain her Tears at so piteous a Relation, and joining some Regrets to the
Tears she had shed, she told her Woman, that he merited a better Fortune. This
Discourse surpised that Maid, as knowing how much she had despised him as long
as he lived, insomuch that she could not hide her amazement from her. But the
Marchioness interrupting her, accused her of having an ill Opinion of her,
since that after all the Instances of Love thar Grand-Champ had given her, she
could not, at least, without being the most ungrateful person in the World,
hear that any ill was befallen him without being grieved. This is a tardy
gratitude, Madam, the Damsel then cried, and you would have obliged him much
more, if you had shown it while he was well. I have ever had a sense for him,
replied the Marchioness, but could not then show it without hampering my self
in troubles. Mainville would have been jealous, and perhaps that thinking me in
love with Grand-Champ, he would have sought out a Consolation for my
inconstancy, in the choice of an other Mistress. That is to say, Madam, the
Damsel answered, that you loved poor Grand-Champ, but did not love him so well
as Mainville. How dissembling are Women! I thought you as nice as any person
living in your Love: Nevertheless by what I perceive, you prefer Number before
Delicacy. It is very seldom known that a Woman dare talk in such a manner to
her Lady; but see what a Confident may do: and I fancy, that if this Maid had
been less informed of her Concerns, she would have been more cautious in her
words. Be it as it will, Madam de Florange imagining she might suffer, should
she leave her in these Sentiments, You mistake me in what I have said, answered
she, and you grossly confound Love and Acknowledgment. There is nevertheless a
great deal of difference between the One and the Other. The Motions of Love are
tender and passionate Motions, excited by Sympathy: whereas those of Gratitude
are only ordinary Movements, that are wont to arise from some Benefit that one
has received. But, Madam, replied the Damsel, if those Motions which Gratitude
excites, are so common as you say, they ought not, methinks, to occasion the
shedding of so many tears; and yet this is what you do. Tell me, I beseech you,
how this comes to pass: for I fancied, that People afflicted themselves in such
manner only when they were lively affected. This you are mistaken in, replied
the Marchioness, as you were but a moment ago, when you confounded Gratitude
and Love. A great grief never appears so much outwardly as does a mean one: and
one would have a bad Opinion of the sensibility of a Person, that should shed
tears at the newness of a great misfortune. One must remain seized till that
time diminishing the strength of the grief, leaves to man his wonted Functions.
Then it is that the Eyes distill themselves into Water, as a mark of his
Affliction. If I do not make my self well understood, added the Marchioness, I
am going to give thee a very familiar Comparison: Thou know that Cold, when
it is extreme, closes all things, and principally Rivers, whose course remains
concealed by reason of the Ice that appears upon the Surface of the Waters. It
is even the same thing with a great Grief in the Heart of Man. His Tears are
stopped; and as the Current of Rivers only appears when the Cold is diminished,
so his Eyes only shed Tears when the Affliction is no longer so strong.

These are the Reasons the Marchioness gave her Woman, to make her apprehend,
that she might bewail: Grand-Champ's misfortunes, without loving him.
Nevertheless, she bid her enquire after him, when that they passed by where she
had left him. That she needed only to feign some need to alight out of the
Coach, and that she might take that time to do what she bid her. The Morning
being come, they all set forwards on their Journey, and the Damsel having
performed her Commission, she was told, that Grand-Champ was dead but a moment
before. She acquainted her Lady with it when they were arrived; and these
Tidings renewed her grief.

During these Occurrences, the Marchioness had an Affliction which much more
affected her than Grand-Champ's Death. Mainville remained Two Months without
writing to her; and she did not doubt after such great marks of his
forgetfulness, but that he had got some new Mistress. She daily complained to
her Woman of her misfortune, and of Men's Inconstancy. They are all ungrateful,
said she to her, and the Ladies are fools for loving them. Their flames lact
only just so long as they find satisfaction therein; and as fondness only
increases by desires, as soon as these desires are fulfilled, these fondnesses
quickly become little or nothing. They never see you afterward, but out of a
luke-warmness: nay, nor would they see you at all, were they not afraid of
being taxed with ill-breeding. I leave thee to judge what a Lady can say after
this; and if being wonted, as she is, to the Movements of a tender and a
passionate Love, she rests satisfied with these Civility-Visits. Mainville, the
ungrateful Mainville, continued she, is not exempt from these weaknesses; and
thou see after all that I have done for him, what his ingratitude is.

Though Mainville paid the Damsel well for being in his Interests, she most
commonly durst not take his part, finding her self, that he was mightily to
blame in that he did not write to her. However, being unwilling utterly to
abandon him, she endeavored to give her Lady still some hopes, telling her one
while, that his Letters might miscarry, another, that he was sick, and that
otherwise she would have heard of him. But the Marchioness did not suffer her
self to be so easily imposed on: She knew that a Man of Mainville's Quality
sent a Messenger on purpose, when Two Posts had failed him; and that let a Man
be never so sick, he never forgets his Mistress.

About that time Fame, which carries throughout the whole Earth the Actions of
Great Men, blazed about, that Mainville had signalized himself above all others
in a Battle. At these News the Marchioness, who was as sensible to Honor as
any Woman in the World, found her tenderness to revive. The Resentment she had
of her Lover's forgetfulness, had made her discontinue writing to him: She then
took Pen and Ink, to express to him the satisfaction she had in his Heroic
Performances. Nevertheless she mingled soft and tender Reproaches with the
Praises she bestowed upon his fine Actions; insomuch, that one might say, that
her Letter was both a Letter of Love and of Civility. Mainville was exactly of
the Humor of those People the Marchioness had described to her Woman; too easy
Conquests became flat to him, and he had been for some time disgusted because
she had done too much for him. But Two Months Absence making him look upon her
then as a New Mistress, he renewed writing to her in very passionate Terms,
seeking sorry Excuses to color the little Consideration he had shown for her.
The Weakness of People in Love, is so extraordinary, that the Marchioness was
satisfied with his Reasons, as if they had been good. Thus their Intrigue was
renewed as before, and all as much charmed with one another as they had ever
been; they let not a Post slip without interchanging of Letters.

This Commerce lasted during the rest of the Campaign; and being ready to end,
Florange being at Paris upon a Lawsuit, and suspecting that Mainville writ to
his Wife, repaired to his own Home, to hinder him from seeing her at his return
from the Army. His Precaution was somewhat necessary, because that Mainville
was really resolved to see her on his way. Yet was it in vain: for though
Mainville knew him to be at home, as he would have been sorry to have come so
near to no purpose, he disguised himself, as a Miller's Boy, to see his Wife.
This being done, he mounted upon a Mule, with several Sacks under him; and in
this Equipage came to the Court of the Castle one day that he knew him out a
hunting.

He was informed, that it was the Marchionesses Woman that caused the Corn to
be measured before her, and who received the Meal; so as that he fancied it
would be no hard matter to make himself known. But this Nymph little dreaming,
that the Marquis de Mainville was become a Miller's Boy, began, without looking
him much in the Face, to rattle him, for that his Master had not the time
before restored all the Meal he ought to deliver: That is to say, in plain
English, that she accused him of being a little Thievish. Mainville laughed
heartily in himself at her mistake; but referring till an other time to rally
her for it, he got up to her to press her Hand, thinking, that after that she
would no longer take him for a Miller. But the Damsel, far from guessing what
that meant, called him insolent Rascal; which made all the People flock about
him, beginning to threaten him. Then the Damsel viewing him more earnestly, and
perceiving the fault she had committed, she was at a very great loss how to
repair it: for now was it a little too late, all People flocking to see the
Miller. The Marchioness accidentally returned from walking, and having inquired
why all her People ran that waywards, she was told the occasion, and going that
way her self, her surprise was extreme, when she knew Mainville. Nevertheless,
without making any thing known of her amazement, she said, that he ought to be
shut up, and that when her Husband was returned from hunting, he should order
what he deemed fitting for his Punishment. Her presence of Mind was admirable
in this occasion; for she freed him by these means out of her Servants Hands,
some of whom might otherwise have known him.

Thus was he led into a Tower appointed for Criminals; but he was no sooner
there, than that the Damsel came to fetch him thence, to convey him to her
Ladies Feet. He there forgot the Fright he had been in, when he saw himself
surrounded with all Florange's Domestics. These Two Lovers upbraided one
another tenderly, for having been so long without writing to each other; and
Love largely rewarded them for the pains it had made them suffer. However,
after several softnesses it became Mainville to think of being gone; for
Florange was every moment expected, and it was necessary to shun his Presence.
The Marchioness was the first to mind him of it, and he was so charmed with her
Presence, that it was quite out of his thoughts. But considering his Dress, his
getting off was difficult: for a Servant might see him go out, and he would not
have failed of stopping him, thinking he did a fine Job. The Marchionesses
Woman seeing their perplexity, offered to give him a Suit of her Clothes,
saying, that since she had done all the mischief, it was but Justice that she
should bring a Remedy. Mainville willingly received her Offers; and knowing
that he should find his Mule at the Park-Gate, he took leave of his Mistress,
after having assured her of a Love-Proof against all things.

He took his way along a Wood, that reaches from the Park of Florange's Castle,
to a small Village, but half a League thence. So far went he without any ill
Encounter. But when he was beyond it, he met with Florange, who was unhappily
returning from hunting. The other Hunters had taken through an other way, and
Florange was all alone, either in meditating on the Pleasure he had that day
taken in hunting, or perchance in thinking on something else that was not so
agreeable. No sooner did Mainville perceive him, but that he sought to get out
of his way; but Florange having by chance cast his Eyes on that side, fancied
him, by his Garb, to be his Wife's Woman, and in that Opinion he ran full speed
to him. As soon as he had overtaken him, he asked him, whither she was a going:
for Mainville being masked, he still took it to be the same Person. Mainville
made him answer, that he was mistaken, and that not knowing him, she did not
think her self obliged to give him an account of her actions. If you do not
know me, then Florange replied, you are certainly a Thief, since that this
Rigging belongs to my Wife's Woman. I took you at first for her, but I now
perceive that I am mistaken. I am neither the one nor the other, Mainville
replied, and you are mistaken in the Clothes as well as in the Person. Be
advised by me, pursue your way, without insulting me any longer; otherwise you
may pay for your intrusion. I am content, replied Florange; but first unmask
your self, that I may judge by your face, whether I am mistaken or not.
Mainville was far from doing it; insomuch, that Florange, who never was civil
in his Life, seeing that he excused it, set himself to snatch off his Mask.

Mainville went not to his Amorous Expedition without good Pistols, that in
case of Accident, he might be in a posture of defending his Life. Thus seeing
himself pressed, he drew out one of them from under his Petticoats, which
stopped Florange's Rage: for naturally he had a great respect for all sorts of
Fire Arms, running, at least, as fast in his Retreat, as he had done when he
came to accost Mainville. When he was in the Village I lately mentioned, he
began then to breathe, and sounding an Horn, he called all his Hunters, that
could not be far distant. They forthwith ranged themselves about him, and
Florange having related his Adventure to them, exhorted them to run after the
Unknown, saying, that he must needs be a High-way-man.

Mainville hearing the Call, did very much suspect that he was going to be
pursued; thus being very willing to escape further trouble, if he could, he
spurred on. But his Mule not going so fast as Horses, the Huntsmen overtook him
before he could get to a Wood he thought to have betaken himself to. They
called out immediately to him, to yield himself up; but choosing rather to dye,
than expose himself to the Discretion of his Enemy, he took his Two Pistols in
his Hands, and cried out to the first that advanced, that it should cost him
his Life, if he pretended to do any Violence to him.

In this nick of time there happened Officers to come by, that were returning
from the Army; and they seeing so many Men attacque a simple Woman, they sided
with her, assuring her, that no hurt should be don her, unless they were all
first killed. After they had thus offered their Services to Mainville, they
asked Florange, and all his Company, what that Lady had done to them, that they
used her with so little Civility; And as Florange had only spoke to them of his
Suspicions, they carried away Mainville in spite of Florange, and promised to
guard him whither he pleased. When he was gone a League from thence, Gentlemen,
said he to them, you have taken a great deal of pains, and I hope one day to
return the Civility: for though you know not who I am, yet do I know you. In
the mean while; if you are minded that the Obligation I have to you, should be
complete, you will suffer me now to go, without having the Curiosity of knowing
who the Person is whose Defense you have undertaken. At these words they all
made him answer, out of a persuasion that he was a Woman, that they would not
forsake her till they had brought her to her own Home; and Mainville seeing
their Obstinacy, unmasked himself, surprising them very much in making himself
known.

The Command he had in the Army, afforded him a great Authority. Besides, he
was of so considerable a Family, that many people were bound to have a respect
for him. Thus these Officers asked his Pardon for having obliged him to make
himself known against his will, as suspecting that he had put himself into a
Disguise upon some occasion that he was not willing should be known publicly.
Mainville being a well-bred Gentleman, told them, that after the Service they
had done him, it was easy for him to excuse their Curiosity. However that he
begged of them, not to make the least mention of his Adventure, because that
there were people who delighted in making the worst of all things. He embraced
them all after this; and thus having got himself off from this bad Business, he
went to find out his Servants, who were not far distant.

Florange, who was in Despondency, for that these Officers had made him miss of
his aim, making reflection of what had newly befallen him, fancied there must
be some Mystery underneath All, and returned to his own House with his Soul
full of Suspicion. At his arrival he asked his Wife's Woman, whom she had lent
her Clothes to; and this Question having puzzled her, she blushed, insomuch
that Florange having observed some Change in her Countenance, he pressed her
still more to tell him what she had done with them. She then stutter'd, saying
one while, she had lent no body any Clothes, another, that she had quite forgot
to whom it was. Florange judging by her Confusion, that something had passed
which it was not thought fitting he should know of, went directly to his Wife's
Chamber; to whom he put an Hundred Questions, that so he might get from her
some light into this matter. The Marchioness had newly been told what was
befallen Mainville and her Husband, and how the former had got out of the
other's Hands. Thus having nothing to fear on that side, she made him answer,
that he made a great deal of noise for a Garment, or so; and that she did not
enquire so much as he, with what her Woman did with her things. During these
Transactions, the Miller of the House arrived, and finding all the Doors open,
he mounted into the very Chamber where Florange was. My Lord, said he to him,
without first enquiring, whether he was in an Humor to hear him, I come to
assure you, that it was none of my Lads that was saucy to my Ladies Woman: they
are all at the Mill; and I neither challenge him nor his Mule, which you may
make what Example you please of. It is some Rogue or other, that says he
belongs to me, that so he may do me an injury; but good my Lord, let me beseech
your Worship, to protect me in this occasion, since you have the Knave in your
hands, and that you can by the force of torments, draw the Confession of his
Crimes from him.

What this man said, was Hebrew to Florange, who knew not what passed; but
being told the Adventure of the Miller's Man, he gave order for the fetching
him out of Prison, and that he should be brought to him that very moment. Those
that were officious to obey him, ran immediately to the Tower where he had been
shut up; but they found the Door of it open, and the Bird flown. Thus they
returned much amazed, to tell Florange, that some body had let the Prisoner
escape, and that they knew not who it was. At these words his Suspicions
re-doubled, so much the more as that he then remembered that the Damsel he
perceived had a Mule, and that there was great probability of her being the
Miller's Man.

He sent the Miller away very much satisfied, by telling him, that he meant him
no harm; but seeking to dive into this mystery, he asked his Wife, what was
become of the Prisoner, and by whose order he had been put out of Prison. He
must needs, the Marchioness replied, have found the Secret of making his Escape
himself, and I know no body here that would have been so bold as to have done
it without your Orders. The People that have been concerned in it, Madam,
Florange reparty'd, are more submissive to your Ladyships order than to mine;
and however you defend your self, yet do I smell out your Contrivance.

This Conversation was upon the point of being keen on both sides, when the
same Relation that had reconciled them, came in. You come very seasonably, said
Florange to him, to do me Justice. You accused me of being whymsical and
jealous; but I do not think you would harbor that Opinion, after what I have
to tell you. He thereupon acquainted him with what had newly happened, and did
firmly believe, that he was going to take his part, when the other called him
Visionary more than ever. You rave Cousin, said he to him, and I am very sorry
I must tell you, that you serve for a Laughingstock to all our Country. I
should make a Mock of you as well as the rest, were I not your Kinsman; but I
must at length come to that, as no longer finding any means of excusing you in
the World. I am not so mad, Cousin, replied Florange to him, as you would fain
make me believe: and if the like thing befell you, you would oblige me, in
acquainting me what you your self would say of it. I should say, his Kinsman
reparty'd, that a real, or a false Miller was come to my house, and that seeing
himself confined, he had forced his Prison. As to the Habit, which you make the
principal Cause of your Disquiets, I would still say, that my Wife's Woman had
lent it to some friend; that I had met with this friend on the way; that she
would not make her self known, and without tormenting my head, to dive into the
reason, I would let all people be at quiet at home, which would let me be so.
That is to say, replied Florange, that you would be a very convenient contented
Husband. So convenient, the Cousin answered, that I would never think ill of my
Wife, unless I saw it with my own Eyes. Besides, to what purpose, continued he,
d' ye so much shrift into a thing which can only afford us matter of trouble?
And should I not rather choose to live as all well-bred People do, than live as
you do. These Words vexed Florange, insomuch, that he was going to say some
disobliging things to his Relation, when that this latter, to avoid his ill
Humor, went his ways, without taking leave of him.

Some days after a Letter came from Paris to Florange, by which he had notice,
that his Lawsuit was ready to come to a Trial, and that his Presence there was
requisite. I intimated a while ago, that he had laid aside the Care of this
Lawsuit, to hinder Mainville from seeing his Wife. His Jealousy having then
rather augmented than diminished, he resolved to take her along with him, that
he might be the better secured of her Conduct. After that he was got to Town, a
person that pretended to be a Friend of his, but meant to banter him, as
knowing his Weakness, told him, that if he was so much concerned to know
whether his Wife was honest, he would furnish him with a good contrivance. That
he knew a famous Female Fortune Tellers, to whom nothing was unknown, and that
if he would consult her, she would acquaint him with such things as would
surprise him. Florange did not want Wit, so as that knowing out of what motive
this man discoursed him in this manner, he thanked him coldly for his offers;
adding, that it did not belong to all People to concern themselves in the
Affairs of a Husband and Wife. Nevertheless Florange considered in himself of
what he had said to him, and being silly enough as to imagine, that a Fortune
teller could convict his Wife of the Intrigue she had with Mainville, he
inquired, under hand, where those sort of People dwelt, and was not long
without being informed of the Lodgings of a Woman that pretended that way. None
but Fools went to her House, or Persons extremely credulous. Yet not one came
thence without being undeceived: for it was by Chance, if she spoke one Truth
among a thousand Lies. Florange repaired thither one Morning without any
Retinue, and desired this Woman to conceal nothing from him, of whatever
consequence the things were that she should find out, either by his Hand or
Physiogmony. The Fortuneteller, by his words, guessing at his Ingenuity, began
with making him pay beforehand; then discoursed him with what she was wont to
say to all those that were so silly as to come and consult her. Florange
knowing then how much he was in the wrong, to hope for any thing in her, told
her, that it was Pains and Money thrown away, as to come and see her; and as
she endeavored to save her self by a World of silly Stories, with which she
lured the most credulous, there came a Man into the Room, habited after a
capricious manner, and that would have Bug-bear'd little Children. His Habit
was Black, all done with streams of Fire; insomuch that one would have said,
that he had been a Devil that was returned from Hell, or at least, a Man that
had borrowed the form of one. He had a Mask that represented a Face to the
Life; but so dismal, that a body trembled to look upon it. This Mask was not
made of Past-board, as all others are, and you would have taken it for real
Flesh. The rest of his Habillement suited exactly with the Mask. He had Buskins
on, and instead of a Lyon's Skin, a Grotesque, representing the Furies, and to
his very Shoes one would have said, that they had been the Scales of a
Serpent, so well had Art imitated Nature. This Counterfeit-Monster held a Wand
in his Hand, with which he struck thrice upon Florange's Head. This poor
Marquis needed not this Overplus of terror, having been sufficiently frighted
at the sight of the Monster. He was more dead than alive; insomuch that he
would willingly have given the half of his Estate to have been from thence. But
his Fright was quite an other thing, when the false Devil spoke to him in this
manner; Since that thou believ'st that the Fortune Tellers is not capable of
telling thee thy Life, I am come my self to inform thee of all thou would
know: Thy Wife is more discreet than thou deservest; and though there be some
Appearances against her, these Appearances are less strong than truth.
Mainville is neither in love with her, nor she with him, and thou must only
accuse thy own Jealousy, if any one has been so spightful as to take a delight
in allaruming thee. The Letters thou have received are forged Letters, and if
thou continuest to be jealous, a great many more will be paulm'd upon thee.
Such as thou see me, my Business is to make the living mad, and I shall
neither spare my Contrivances nor my Pains, to disturb thy Quiet, unless thou
avail'st thy self of my advice.

It is hard to say which of the two, Florange, or the Fortune Tellers, remained
the most amazed at these words: for she could not apprehend who it was that
played this part. True indeed, that she was not unacquainted with the false
Devils Habillement, having her self caused it to be made, to fright such as
were fearful. But she knew not who could take it so in the nick, as to ^ay such
particular things to Florange. However to render the Adventure still the more
extraordinary, Mainville, and the Marchioness, being egged on by the like
Curiosity, came to the same place, and finding the House-door open they mounted
into the very Fortune tellers Chamber, without meeting with any body to ask
them their Business. The false Devil had not shut the Door, so as that
Mainville and the Marchioness entered therein, not in the least expecting the
People they there met withal. Florange's Fright was extreme at the sight of
them, imagining, that the Devil had made them come without their consent. But
that of Mainville and the Marchioness was no less, seeing Florange; for then
they thought themselves lost without Remedy. He that acted the Magician, or the
Devil, as you shall please to call him, seemed quite unhinged and nonplus'd,
remaining for some time without speaking ^ word. But all on the sudden
rec^vering his speech: Admire my Power^ said he to Florange: Here are (...) two
Persons that occasion thy Disquiet, whom I have caused to come hither on
purpose to tell thee what familiarity passes between them two: Thou will learn
their innocence from their own Mouths, if thou do not put confidence enough
in what I have told thee. Florange fell into a Swoon at these words; and the
false Devil seeing him in that Condition, repulsed Mainville and the
Marchioness with his Wand, telling them they had nothing more to do there. They
did not stay to be told it twice; and the Marchioness having with much a-do got
again to her Coach, in she stepped, with a Horror more easy to imagine than
describe.

Florange continued still some time in his Swoon, while that the false Devil
took the Fortune teller into an other Room, to tell her, that having had the
folly; as well as others, to come and see her, he had found that Chamber Door
open, wherein he entered. That meeting with no body there, and hearing loud
talking in the next Room, he had listened, and perceived Florange's Voice. And
having perceived at the same time upon the Bed, that Habit he had upon his
Body, he had put it on, to tell him his Fortune, as being informed to every
little circumstance of his Life. That she had seen the success of it, and that
it was her part now to maintain the Fame such an Adventure was going to gain
her in the World.

The Fortune Tellers was very glad that Chance had so well seconded her Cheats:
and all haughty upon this Event, she gave Florange a Check when he came to his
Senses again, for that he would not give Credit to the Wonders of her Art.
Florange would doubtless have asked her Pardon, if he had had the power but to
speak but one bare word; but he was still so much afraid, that all that he
could do, was to get to a Hackney-Coach that waited for him at the Door. When
he was got in he began to breathe, as thinking that the Devil had not so much
power over him there. He then promised never to see, as long as he lived, any
Fortune Tellers: and being got home, he used his Wife quite otherwise than he
had done of a long while, as apprehending, that if he should use her ill, the
Devil would rise up in her defense, as he had threatened to do.

After this, Florange staid still some time at Paris, and having met with
Mainville in a Company, he spoke to him as if he had never born him any grudg.
Nay, he asked him what was the Cause they did not see one another now;
insomuch, that Mainville would have been in a strange Maze, had he been
ignorant of the Fortune-teller's Adventure. But knowing what passed at her
House, and how much Florange was of a fearful Humor, he knew to what to
attribute his Change.

In the mean while Mainville and the Marchioness were not able to comprehend
whom they had the Obligation to of what was fallen out; for no body had ever
known any thing of their Concerns, save Grand-Champ and the Damsel I have
mentioned: and they knew very well, that neither of them two had revealed their
Secret. For the Marchioness had left her Woman at home; and as for Grand-Champ,
they could not suspect him, as knowing him long since dead. But whoever it was,
they were endebted to, they looked upon it as a great piece of Service: for
they began again to see one another, and that too without Florange's finding
fault. Mainville was not however wanting to have some Pre-caution, when he was
with the Marchioness, as knowing there is nothing so easy to kindle anew as
the Suspicions of a jealous Person.

Thus they lived in some sort of repose for a time: But as Prudence is very
rare in strong Passions, these Lovers forgot that Florange was naturally prone
to Jealousy, and that the least thing was capable of giving him Umbrage. They
were ever by one another, not being able to remain a moment without
enterchanging of Words: and when Chance separated them, one might in their
Faces read a certain Grief, as made those judge that had the least Concern in
it, that they were not in ill Terms with one another. Florange began also to
doubt that the false Devil had told him a Lie, when he assured him, that his
Wife was honest. The Devils, said he in himself, are Liars, and a Man must be
as simple as I to put trust to their Words. Besides there is something in this
matter that I do not apprehend: for their business being to molest Mankind, how
comes this, if he be a real Devil, to endeavor to cure me of my suspicions?
Thou art abused, Florange, added he, and like a fool, fallest into the Trap.
Are not thy Eyes surer than all that can be said to thee? And what have thou to
do with the testimony of an Other, when thou thy self do but too clearly see
thy dishonor?

Thus confirming himself daily more and more in the Opinion, that he had been
imposed on, he took somewhat extraordinary measures to shrift into Mainville's
and his Wife's Intrigue. He pretended not to take any notice of their
fondnesses, but resolved to surprise them, when they least expected it, and to
put them so many Questions in one another's Presence, that they should be
nonplus'd. He knew that the motions of the Countenance commonly discover what
lies most hid in the Heart: and when one does not find one's Conscience clear,
it is an hard matter to keep one's Judgment. Whereupon he one day asked them,
when they were in a deep Chat, whether there was not a great deal of Pleasure,
in entertaining one's self thus aside with what one loves, adding that they
must needs taste this happiness often, since it was but a few days ago that they
had thus been together alone. It is easy to imagine the Confusion these Lovers
were under at this Discourse; they were in such a Maze they could not give him
one bare word of answer. But Florange judging by the state they were in, that
his Suspicions were but too well grounded. To what purpose, renewed he, is it
for you to use fineness with me? and am not I so clear-sighted, as to know what
I ought to believe of it? You love tenderly one another, and I should have but
little regard for both, should I oppose so fine an Amity. The coolness he
affected in uttering these Words, did so to all intents disorder Mainville and
the Marchioness, that they did nothing but gaze upon one another, as if they
had complemented one another, who should answer him first. At last, Mainville
being confused to the highest degree, endeavored to undeceive Florange,
endeavoring to persuade him, that being so much his Friend, as he was, he
could not, without an extreme ingratitude, cast his Eyes upon his Wife. Let Us
leave our friendship there, answered Florange coldly, and I should be very much
too blame, were I contented with your Reasons, since, All dear as I am to you,
as you say, my Wife must needs he dearer to you than I am. She has Charms for
Men which I have not, and made as she is, she would have reason eo complain, if
under the Pretext of our Acquaintance, you refused to love her. And indeed, you
cannot put it out of my head, but that you do her Justice. Mainville being no
longer able to endure a Conversation that madded him, used then his utmost
efforts to insinuate into him, that he had never had any thoughts of the
Marchioness: But Florange turning toward her, And Madam, said he to her, will
you be as insincere as he, and will you maintain it to my face, that you have
been able to be so long exposed to the Cajollaries of a well-bred man, without
suffering your self to be affected. The Marchioness made him answer, that he
did her the highest injury, to put such a Question to her: That her Duty did
sufficiently inform her, that she ought to love him only, and that he ought not
to doubt but that she did all that her Duty directed her. A mere Resvery,
Madam, he replied to her, is that same Duty with which your Ladyship pretends
to entertain me; and a thousand Women, that are no less honest than your
Ladyship, tread it daily under foot; But since you assure me, that it is strong
enough, as to hinder you from paying to my Lord of Mainville 's merit what you
owe it, and that on the other side he vows, that the friendship he has for me,
hinders him from paying you what he owes you, you will both do well never to
see one another more. And indeed, it would be laying your Reputation too much
at stake, Madam, added he, any longer to suffer the Visits of a Man that has
not the sense to know your worth. And you, my Lord, said he, addressing his
Speech to Mainville, you would do me a kindness, never to set foot more in my
house: for I esteem my Wife, and do not love people that slight her so much, or
are so insensible, that thus they can resist so many Charms. At the same time
he scraped Mainville a long Leg, as much as to say, that it was time for him to
be gone, and showing him the Door, he made him apprehend thereby, that he was
not of a Humor so easily to be paulm'd upon in his Belief.

I shall in no wise go about to represent to you in this place, neither
Mainville's Amazement, nor the Marchionesse's Confusion. They could hardly
imagine what they heard; but however loath they were to obey Florange's Command,
they must submit; nay, and without reply. When Mainville was gone, the
Marchioness stomacking what had newly happened, and being unable to bear with a
separation from her Lover, she began to discharge her Anger upon her Husband.
She told him, that his Capriciousness was beyond Example, and that she needed
only to blaze about his Carriage, to put him out of repute with all the World.
Florange could have answered her, that as he had been out of repute a long
while, he had nothing more to manage upon that Point, but continuing in the
same manner he began, he made her answer, with a mighty serious look, that he
perceived the ingratitude of Women; that he had newly done her a great piece of
Service, in ridding her of a Man that was good for nothing; and that
nevertheless, instead of thanking him for it, she loaded him with Reproaches.

After this, the Lady could not expect to see Mainville again at her own House;
insomuch, that when they were minded to speak with one another, they were
obliged to borrow the House of some she friend. These Pre-cautions rendered
their Interviews much seldomer, and by Consequence much more agreeable, because
that Difficulty is wont to be a seasoning to Pleasures, though that all People
are not pleased with such a Ragoo. It was then a little after Christmas, a time
that Merriments and Feastings begin at Paris, when a Friend of Florange's
having been presented with a Nosegay at a Ball, made him agree, that he should
entertain his Lady with the Fiddles. The Lady being informed of it, sent notice
to Mainville, that he should not let that Occasion slip, without making
advantage on it; insomuch, that he disguised himself, that he might not be known
in the Assembly. It was numerous and fine; and as the Marchioness was weary of
dancing, she placed her self in a Corner, whither Mainville repaired
immediately to entertain her. He would have staid at her Feet till the Ball had
been ended, if a Lady had not come to take him out to dance with her. He could
not but out of Civility give her his Hand: But while he danced, another
Masquerader took his Place, and began to say such particular things to Madam de
Florange, that she was mightily surpised at it. His Garb was that of a Gypsey,
which had helped him much to the accosting of her. Madam, said he to her,
Ladies are commonly curious, and the Habit I wear, informs you, that telling of
Fortunes is my Province. If you doubt it, you need only to give me your Hand,
and you will presently perceive that I am no Bungler in my Profession.
Thereupon he gave her an Account of Mainville's Amor, from the beginning to
the very end, and when it came to the place of the Fortuneteller: It is to me,
Madam, added he, that you have the obligation of being freed from that ill
step. I had some Relation to that Woman, which obliged me to go often to her
house, and I came thither pretty seasonably to do you Service. After he had
given her this Account, he left her, without being to be persuaded to make
himself known, though she pressed him very much. But as he was going his ways,
Florange, who had observed his Conversation with his Wife, and who took him for
Mainville, by reason he had something of his Air, and of his Shape, stopped him
by the Arm, just when he was at the bottom of the Staircase, and told him,
that he had something to say to him. The Masque staid at these Words, and
Florange seeing that he was just ready to hear him. I thought, said he to him,
that after having admonished thee, never to see my Wife more, thou would
never have had the audaciousness to discourse her, and particularly in my
sight. But by what I perceive, thou make no account of what is said to thee,
since to the prejudice of my Prohibition, thou have been newly talking to her.
Now for once and all, either let this not happen again, or I shall use such
means as shall make you repent you did not take my Advice.

The Masque, that did not expect such a Complement, was very much surpised at
it; but having Reasons not to answer so keenly as he was talked to: I know not,
he replied, what you mean by this Discourse, and you certainly take me for an
other, having never spoke with your Lady before to day. Wherefore you could not
give me Instances of your jealousy, as you tell me. But since I now know that
makes you uneasy, I assure you, that for fear of disturbing your repose, I
shall carefully avoid meeting her, being very willing thereby to let you see,
that I shall ever Court the Occasions of obliging you.

Nothing could be more handsome than this Answer. But Florange being of a
Character to be furious, when one crept before him, it augmented his
Audaciousness; insomuch, that speaking a Language still more arrogant than the
former, he told the Masque, That Excuses were but slight Reparations, when the
Offenses were real. That thus he meant to chastise him for his imprudence, as
he deserved. And at the same time laying his Hand to his Sword, he obliged the
Masque, in his own Defense, to take one his Footman carried for him. Perchance
Florange would then have been glad he had not begun the Quarrel; but seeing
that the Masque did but parry, without making any Thrust at him, it encouraged
him so as to rush on upon him, and pushing blindly on, he ran himself upon the
other's Sword. However, the Masque received at the same time a Thrust quite
through the Body, which made him fall stone dead on the other side.

The noise they had made in quarrelling, had made the People run to part them;
and Florange's Friends seeing him all covered with Blood, and the Masque lying
in the Dust, asked him the Occasion of their Quarrel. It is my Wife, answered
he them, who is the Occasion of my Death. Hold me up, I conjure you; for I have
but one moment more to live. But if any of you would oblige me, let him go tell
her, that in shedding my own Blood, I have at least the Comfort of having taken
Mainville 's Life away. At these Words the Rumor ran immediately through the
whole Assembly, that Mainville was newly killed; and this News extraordinarily
afflicted the Marchioness. She gave deep Sighs, and without minding in that
moment either her Husband's Wound, or all that People could say of her Conduct,
she ran where the Dead Man lay, to see if her misfortune was without Remedy. As
soon as she had cast her Eyes upon his Clothes, she presently perceived they
had given her a salse Allarum; and studying to repair what she had newly done,
she went to Florange, and made his Friends believe, that the Tears she shed
were only on his account.

However, she gave her Woman Order, under hand, to enquire who the Dead Man
was; and this Damsel being curious enough of her self, resolved to use her
utmost Care. But this needed no great trouble; for as soon as the Deceased's
Mask was taken off, all the Servants of the House knew it to be Grand Champ;
and she her self going near the Body, quickly perceived that they were in the
right. For some time she could hardly believe what she saw, as being
pre-possess'd with his Death, upon the Account that had been given her her self
in the Village before mentioned: But you must know, that she had been
misinformed, because at the time they imagined he had breathed his last, he was
only fallen into a Lethargy, occasioned by the loss of Blood, and which he
recovered from some Hours after.

As the Marchioness had been well pleased to hear of Grand-Champ's Death,
instead of that of Mainville, it put her Husband into an incredible
Despondency. For besides the Grief he had to know his Wife's Lover still in a
Condition of disturbing his Rest, he was out of Countenance for having
wrongfully shown his Jealousy in such good Company: and what is more, he was
not without Regret for having killed the unfortunate Grand-Champ. But what
disquieted him more than all this, is, that the Chyrurgeons durst not ascertain
he would escape from his Wound, as finding it very dangerous. While he lay a
curing his Friends used their Interest to obtain his Pardon; and Grand Champ,
having no body to revenge his Memory, they easily effected their Business.
After this Florange recovered by little and little, and seeing himself in
perfect Health, he used his utmost endeavor to bring his Cause to a Trial,
that so he might return into the Country, where he fancied he should live more
at quiet than at Paris.

When he was in hopes of having it brought to Trial, the Defendants, who had
not over good Right, and who found an Advantage of deferring the Verdict,
bethought themselves of presenting a Request to the Council, by which they
required to have the Cause left to an other Parliament than that of Paris,
alleging, that Florange and his Wife had therein a World of Relations upon the
Bench. The Affair being examined in full Council, Florange's Parties obtained
what they demanded, and were referred to Rouen.

This Decree was extreme cruel to Mainville and the Marchioness, who
notwithstanding Florange's Prohibitions and Pre-cautions, did nevertheless
continue to see one another. They knew Paris to be the only place where
Intrigues could be concealed, and that in the other Towns, however great they
might be, one remains exposed to the Censure of all People; a Man of Quality
especially not being able to take a step without furnishing matter for talk.
Nevertheless having in their Interviews found Pleasures they could neither of
them renounce, without doing a great Violence upon themselves, they contrived
before they parted, how to see one another at Rouen; and no sooner was Florange
there, but Mainville came thither incognito.

A little before, he had, with his Credit, served a President of that
Parliament, who had had a great Concern at Court; insomuch, that not doubting
of his Acknowledgment, he went and alighted at his House. There, without
scruple, he declared to him what brought him to Rouen, and that he had occasion
for his Service. A thousand Persons in this President's Circumstances, would
have put on their Gravity, and have likewise told him without scruple, that he
might seek out an other Confident; but this President being very willing to
make Returns for the Obligation he had to him, and besides, being no Enemy to
Nature, he made him answer, that he might dispose of him, of his House, and of
all he had in his power. I Will not have so much, said Mainville to him; and all
I require of you, is to lend me one of your Coaches, when I go abroad with a
Parliament-Robes. For when I go to my Mictresses House, I mean to be taken for
you; and all that we are to have a care of, is, that it be not known that I am
here. Thus you must make me pass in your own House, for one of your own
Relations; and if People wonder that I make no Visits in the Town, you may say,
that I am sick. If this was the only thing to be remedied, answered the
President, the thing would be very easy. I know already, without your needing
to speak to me of it, that you have People here in whom you confide; and I may
say the same thing of mine, whom I need only to forbid speaking, that you were
at my House, to bind them to silence. But the Difficulty that I find herein is,
that you would, methinks, pay a Visit to the Marchioness under my Name, and
that when you are at her House, it should be thought to be me. Right, Mainville
reparty'd, And this is just what I desire: And if I can deceive the Public, I
will take my time so well, as never to go to her Lodgings but when her Husband
is abroad. I agree to it, the President answered; but you are going to set me at
odds with my Wife. She is jealous to the utmost extremity; and as soon as she
shall be persuaded, like others, that I visit Madam de Florange, I am very much
afraid I shall have little quiet at home. Let Us lodge our Secret with her,
answered Mainville then: It Is the means of being all our Safeties. I have
thought of that, replied the President; but two things hindered me, one is,
that she can only conceal what she does not know; the other, that it would not
be handsome for me to engage her in this Intrigue. Thus it is much better to
undergo her Jealousy.

Mainville showed himself Civil, by expressing, that he would not purchase his
own Content at the expense of his Friend's. But the President made him answer.
That nothing could afford him more Joy, than the doing of him Service; and
though he had spoke to him of his Wife's Humor, it was not to excuse himself
from the Business, but to take their measures so well, that they might keep
their Concerns secret. A Lover is easy to persuade, when it tends to his
satisfaction. Thus Mainville making but mean efforts to combat the President's
Civility, consented to all he required. He then caused a Coachman and two
Lacqueys, to be dressed up in the President's Colors; and when he went abroad,
not a Person, but took him for the President, by reason of his Disguise. And
indeed, all People saluted him in the Streets, principally those that had any
Process, pretending he would have some regard to their Civility, when he should
come to try it. However, for the better deceiving of them, he took care to
conceal his Face with his Handkerchief, so as that not any person living took
notice of the Cheat; so much the more, as that he never went to the
Marchionesses House, save when her Husband was gone to solicit his Judges,
which she failed not of giving him immediate notice of, that so they might not
lose the occasion of seeing one another.

This he sped in for five or six times, without Fortune's playing him any ill
Prank; but Florange's Parties being allarum'd at these frequent Visits, desired
the President thereupon, to decline being of their Judges, giving him to
understand, that visiting Madam de Florange so often as he did, he could not
assist at the Trial of their Suit, without giving them a great Suspicion. The
President could easily have undeceived them if he would, but that not being to
be done, without discovering his Friend's Secret, he sought out sorry Excuses
for the Visits those Parties fancied he made to the Marchioness. Thus he
replied upon them, that they were very much in the wrong, in suspecting him of
any partiality: That the seeing of a Woman did not render him the less honest
man: That every Individual had his Conscience to keep: That it was not a
sufficient Reason against his being a Judge at their Trial: and that on the
contrary, he was resolved to be on the Bench, to show how wrongfully they were
allarum'd. He thought thereby to serve Mainville, who had desired him to
embrace Florange's Interests as his own. But these Parties thinking themselves
lost without Remedy, after this Declaration, contrived to blaze about, in such
manner, the President's and Marchionesses Intrigue, as to oblige him to be the
first to draw off himself. They had heard since they were in the Town, that the
Presidents Wife was extremely jealous, and that upon the least appearance of
her Husband's Infidelity, she was wont to make an horrible bustle. Thus they
fancied, that they needed only to intimate the President's Visits to her under
hand, and that after this the Intrigue he had with the Marchioness would
quickly be public.

Having formed this Resolution, they signified to the President's Lady what
they were desirous she should know: and this News made her almost mad. She
immediately loaded her Husband with a thousand Reproaches for this new
Inclination, and would needs oblige him to promise her never to go more to her
Lodgings. She Is a professed Gossip, said she to him, and your frequenting of
her Company is only to abuse me. The President was at a very great loss how to
quiet this Woman, whom he knew hard to be governed upon that Article. He
endeavored to persuade her, that he saw Madam de Florange only out of respect;
and that if her Concerns had not been recommended to him by all her Friends, he
would pay her no more Visits. But his Lady falling into a Rage, and so much the
more, as that he would not promise her to see her no more, she resolved to
manifest her Jealousy in such manner, as that Madam de Florange should be
obliged to forbid him her House.

While that the President's Lady was thus preparing to disturb these Lovers
Repose, Fortune, that had spared them since they had been at Rouen, contrived
to play them a Prank, which they had all the trouble imaginable to free
themselves from. One Day that Florange had chosen to see his Judges, he was
taken with an Indisposition on the Way, that obliged him to return home sooner
than he expected. He found the President's Coach at his Door, and was mightily
pleased with the Honor he did him of coming to see his Wife, as judging thence
he would do his best for him, when his Cause came to a Trial. Wherefore he must
needs pay him his Acknowledgments: But at his entrance into the Marchionesses
Chamber, he was much surpised to find a man before her upon his Knees. The
Marchioness seeing him come in, was still more surpised than he: for it was
Mainville, who in the President's Robes, made her a thousand amorous
Protestations. Florange had luckily made a stop one moment, to consider upon
the manner of his Behavior in so extraordinary an occasion. The Marchioness
employed that small time to great advantage: For judging that Florange could
not have seen Mainville, his Back being toward him. Ah, my Lord, said she to
her Lover, all my Remedies are useless, and you will cover me all with Blood,
unless you put your Handkerchief before your Nose. Mainville, who had an
infinite stock of Wit, apprehended by these Words, that Florange must needs be
behind him, and seconding the Marchionesses Artifice, he took an Handkerchief
out of her Hands, with which she had rubbed her self, and which luckily for
them, was all over Blood, as having her self bled at the Nose but a moment
before. Then Mainville covered his Face with it; and Florange seeing him in
this Condition, was not sorry that he was so moderate, as thinking he had been
unseasonably allarum'd. Thus instead of quarrelling him, as he had resolved to
do a moment before, he made him a Complement upon his feigned Indisposition,
bidding his Wife send for a clean Handkerchief, and fair Water, to wash his
Face.

Mainville was in some sort of Security, through the Marchionesses Artifice:
but seeing that Florange was so very officious to serve him against his Will,
he knew not yet how he should get off from this Affair, when Fortune freed him
by a Circumstance that in all likelihood should have ruined him. The
President's Lady passed through the Street, and seeing her Husband's Coach at
the Marchioness de Florange's Door, she immediately resolved to go in, her
Jealousy inspiring her with a thousand extravagant things. Madam de Florange
knew her not; but seeing an handsome Woman come into her Room, and who seemed a
Person of Quality, she went toward her, to pay her her Civilities. The
President's Lady stepped back, with a scornful look, and then using her Tongue;
You ought, Madam, to be satisfied, said she to her, with caressing my Husband,
without loading me with your fondnesses. The Traitor is oftener with you than
with me; and I design henceforward to send all those that have to do with him,
to your House. After this, she fell to loading Mainville with a thousand
Reproaches, taking him for her Husband, as being deceived by his Garb and Wigg,
that was of the President's Color.

However, Mainville said not one word; which made the Lady the more believe it
to be the President, and that finding himself culpable, he durst say nothing in
his own excuse. Thus his Silence was a new Crime for him: She continued upon
the same Tone; and after she had pretty well discharged her Choler, she took
him by the Gown; saying, she would rather stay there as long as she lived, than
go away without him. Mainville, who would willingly have given all things to
have been away from thence, made use of this occasion to be gone; and being
entered with her into his Coach, he on the way, underwent all that a Woman can
say that thinks her self slighted. Thou do well to hide thy self, thou Cheat,
said she to him: But that Handkerchief thou hold'st before thy face, does not
hide from me the Motions of thy Heart. I know whom thou addressest thy Vows to;
and all the Caresses thou sometimes make me, are only for the better
deceiving me. In saying this, she snatched his Handkerchief from off his Nose:
But her Surprise passed beyond all that I can say, when instead of her Husband
she saw a man she did not know. For out of certain Considerations, the
President had not let her see Mainville, though he staid in his House; and when
she had asked him the Reason of it, he had stopped her mouth, by telling her,
that there were certain things which Women ought not to know. In the mean
while, Mainville's Disorder was no less in this Occasion, than that of the
President's Ladies; but being sooner recollected, Madam, said he to her, I know
that this Adventure surprises you: I beseecb you not to let it be known, and
you will herein oblige a Man of Quality, who is my Lord, your Husband's friend,
and a peculiar Servant of all that regards him. I would now tell your Ladyship,
continued he, what has induced me to disguise my self as I am; but it is better
that you be informed of all from his own Mouth, because, that not having the
Honor to be known by you, all would be suspicious I might say to your Ladyship.

In the mean while, the Coach jogged on, and they at length got home, without
any other illustration than this. The President was then in the Court of his
House. He was strangely amazed to see Mainville with his Wife; and making up to
them, to know how this came to pass, he was still in a greater maze, when
Mainville had told him aside, all that had befallen him. This is a bad
Business, said the President to him; and knowing my Wife's Humor, she cannot
fail of blabbing it abroad. However, to top upon her, he told her, that
Mainville was a man of Quality, who was hampered in great troubles; and that it
imported his Life, that People should not know of his being in Town: That
therefore he besought her not to say the least of it to any Body: and that this
was the Reason that had induced him to give him a Retreat at his House, without
telling her of it. You think me but an ill Keeper of Secrets, Sir, said his
Wife to him, as already suspecting the mystery; and all People have not so bad
an Opinion of Women as you, since that this Gentleman himself does not conceal
himself from Madam de Florange. Madam de Florange, the President replied to
her, is a Relation of his, and partakes in all that can befall him; insomuch,
that she will be cautious of discovering where he is. The President's Lady, who
was as malicious as any body living, and who had plainly observed how Mainville
had hid himself from the Husband. I believe, she answered the President, that
this Lady has still more Interest than you say, in keeping your Friend's
Concerns secret; but I very much doubt whether the Marquis de Florange has the
same Regards for him. At these Words she left them both there; and the
President knowing the spightfulness of his Wife, advised Mainville to leave the
Town, for fear her Twattle being told again to Florange, he might suspect the
Truth.

Mainville, notwithstanding the Pleasure he took in seeing his Mistress,
followed his Friends Advice, and departed Rouen. The Campaign began shortly
after, which solac'd him for this Adventure, as finding in the Employs of War
wherewith to make him forget for a while the Secrets of Love.

THE END.

