THE Great Mystery OF PROVIDENCE. OR, The various Methods of GOD in Ordering
and Overruling the Actions of Wicked Men and Devils to great and glorious
Purposes. With the Vindication of his Holiness therein. BEING The Substance of
several SERMONS preached by the Reverend, Judicious, and Orthodox Divine Mr.
GEORGE GIFFORD, Late Minister of St. Dunstan in the East, London.

HEB. XI. 4. He being dead, yet speaks. LONDON: Printed for S. Crouch, at the
Corner of Pope's-head Alley near the Royal Exchange in Cornhill, 1695.

TO THE READER.
NEXT to the Knowledge and Belief of a God and the Essentials of Religion,
there is not any Truth of greater moment or more needful to be rightly known of
all persons, than this before us, namely, How far the holy and righteous God
is, or may be concerned in, or make use of the evil Actions of wicked Men and
Devils, without any Impeachment of his Righteousness and Holiness, or making
him the Author or Approver of Sin; the Ignorance or Misunderstanding of which,
in all Ages, has exceedingly promoted Atheism and Irreligion among the Wicked
of the World, who take occasion from hence to think and say in their Hearts (if
not with their Mouths) either there is no God, or He is not a Righteous and a
Holy God. And the Consideration of the Prosperity of Wicked Men in their Evil
Actions, and the Suffering of Good Men thereby, have been an occasion of
stumbling and offense to holy Persons, as we find in Scripture. The Truth of
this matter lies in the middle, between two Extremes, as the Author hereof has
informed us, who was a very Judicious and Orthodox Divine, of great Note in
this City. I doubt not but the Reader, if he brings a serious Mind to know
Truth, and not to cavil at it, will find this matter so plainly and truly, though
briefly stated and determined, as to answer all material Objections of
Atheistical and Profane Gainsayers, and such as are wise in their own Conceit,
and to be a Foundation to good Men of Patience and Resignation to the Will of
God in all Sufferings and Calamities, public and private, from evil Men, and
instead of murmuring and repining, will cause them to adore that Infinite
Wisdom and Goodness, that can bring Good out of Evil, and over rule all the
Sins and Follies of Men, to the greater manifestation of his own glorious
Attributes, and the Good and Welfare of his Church. These Sermons having been
calculated only for a popular Auditory, the Reader must expect no other
Eloquence than that of the Apostle Paul's great plainness of Speech, which best
becomes Divinity, and especially the weighty Subject before us. Therefore I
shall conclude with only one Request to the Reader, That he will peruse these
Lines with the same Spirit which the Author declares he had in the delivery of
them, namely, with a holy Fear and Trembling, and then I doubt not but he will
receive that benefit and advantage by them as shall give abundant cause to
bless GOD for them, which is the Chief End of the Publisher,

J. D.

Advertisement.
A Discourse upon Usury, or lending Money for Increase: (occasioned by Mr.
David Jones's late Farewel-Sermon) proving by undeniable Arguments the
Lawfulness thereof, and answering his plausible Objections from
Scripture-Counsels and Fathers against it. Published at the request of several
judicious and sober Christians, for the satisfaction of all such as have or may
be concerned in this matter of so general and weighty importance. Printed for
Sam. Crouch, at the Corner of Popes-head-Alley next Cornhill.

GENESIS XLV. 8. -- So that it was not you that sent me hither, but GOD.


THE joyful discovery of Joseph to his Brethren, I have already spoken of out
of this Chapter, after his rough treating of them: after so many Fears and
Dangers, at last the Sun breaks out from these Clouds, and then he cries out, I
am Joseph. And there I handled, that this was an Emblem of God's dealing with
his own People; He leads them at first into crooked Paths, but then after all
these Tempests and Storms there will be Joy and Peace at the last. And I
proposed to you, how that after some great Affliction, but above all Spiritual
Desertion, when God has shown himself a long time as it were an Enemy to his
People, at last he shines forth, and says, I am your God and Savior. The
second thing I have handled, is, Joseph's pardoning and loving his Brethren,
that had so barbarously sold him to be a Slave: he is now so far from revenging
himself of them, that he loves and embraces them. And upon this I handled that
high and excellent Duty of loving and forgiving those that injure us; that the
true and noblest way of revenging Injuries, was, by overcoming Evil with Good.
I come now to the next thing, and that is, the Arguments Joseph makes use of to
comfort his Brethren that were so overcome with Shame and Fear. He does three
times repeat it; the first is drawn from the Providence of God in working this
great thing, It was not you that sent me hither, but God; as if he should have
said, Do not look any more upon Second Causes: It is true, it was a Fault in
you who sold me, but look upon the good Hand and Providence of God in it, God
sent me before you, and it was not you that sent me hither, but God. This so
frequent inculcating of it, was to raise up them, and also us, to a serious
Contemplation, how all the Evils of Men are ordered by the wise Providence of
God to good purposes. In this action God and they both worked together; they
sold Joseph, and God sent him for Good, for the preservation of God's Church in
Jacob's Family. I shall, by God's assistance, six here for some time upon the
Providence of God in overruling the Actions of wicked Men.

First, Here is an Ingeniosa Charitas; see how often Joseph repeats his
acknowledgments of the Hand and Providence of God in this matter. I observe
there is nothing will make us more willing to forgive them that have done us
any Injury, than to look up to the Providence of God, and refer all to that: we
are apt to look to Instruments and Second Causes, and not think of the Hand of
God in them.

Secondly, God sent me before you, to preserve you a Posterity, and to save
your Lives by a great Deliverance; and it was not you that sent me hither, but
God. I observe here God's gracious Providence and Care over his Church and
Children, so long before providing for their Safety. It is one of the most
excellent Observations of God's Providence toward his Children in the whole
Scripture, When God intended to bring a most dreadful Famine upon the World (in
which Jacob and his Family might probably have perished) yet God made a
provision for him and them 20 years beforehand, in such a way as Jacob and
Joseph never thought of; He sends Joseph 20 years before hand to be a Harbinger
for his Church and People: God, after a secret and ineffable manner, does order
all Events so, that at last they tend to the good of his Church; as we find
several cross Providence in this History of Joseph and his Brethren, yet they
all contribute to this good end and conclusion. This should teach us, in all
the Difficulties and Troubles that besal God's Church, and when we know not
what will become of us, to resign up all to the Providence of God, he will take
care and provide for us by such means as we little dream of.

Thirdly I shall treat of the Providence of God in governing and overruling
the Actions of wicked Men, It was not you that sent me hither, but God: and yet
certainly, Beloved, they had a hand in the Action. I observe from hence, it was
God that overruled their Counsels; all the Actions of sinful Men, yea, of the
Devils themselves, are ordered by a strange but yet most wise Council of God
himself. It is a point of great concern to resolve how the Righteousness and
Holiness of God can consist in ordering and ruling of the Sins of Mankind.
There is a great Difference among Interpreters, how to reconcile the Providence
of God in the Actions of sinful Men with his Holiness, Justice, and the Liberty
and Freedom of Mankind. Therefore,

First, I shall demonstrate from this Example, That all the Actions of Men,
even their sinful Actions, are under the Providence of God, they sold Joseph,
and God sent him.

Secondly, I shall enquire what Essiciency or Concurrence the holy God has in
the sinful Actions of Ungodly Men.

Thirdly, I shall enquire into the Ends of such Orderings, how God works, and
ordains the Actions of wicked Men to Ends beyond what they desired or designed.
This is a point that I look upon as most seasonable, to be well weighed and
considered under our present Disquiets and Fears.

I shall begin with the first, That the Actions of Men and Devils, both good
and bad, yea, all the Sins of wicked Men and Devils, are under the government
of the Providence of God. (1.) I shall prove the point by four or five places
of Scripture, the first shall be drawn from those general places in Scripture,
that ascribe every thing to the Will and Providence of God; so Psalm. 35.6.
Whatever the Lord pleased, that did he in Heaven and in Earth. There is nothing
comes to pass without the Will of God, Dan 4.35. He does according to his will
in all the armies of Heaven and Earth, and none can stay his hand. Voluntas Dei
est omnium rerum necessitas. There are many things, it is true, that are
contrary to the preceptive part of God's Will, but there is nothing comes to
pass without the Providence of God, or against what he would have done: yea,
the Devils themselves, when they most cross the preceptive Will of God, they do
then most fulfill the Will of his Providence; There are many devices in the
heart of man but the council of the Lord that shall stand. Whatever designs Men
or Devils may have, yet he tells us, they all act but according to the
providential Will of God. The (2.) Head is this, That such Actions as are
brought to pass by wicked Men, are said to be done by the eternal Council and
Ordination of God, they are the Contrivance of God's Decrees: it was so in this
case of Joseph, God had decreed Joseph's advancement in Egypt, yet this was not
brought to pass without the Sin of his Brethren. I will give you one Instance
in Scripture, That Action that proved the greatest Blessing to Mankind of any
in the World, yet was brought to pass by the greatest Villainy in the
Instruments that ever was in the World, I mean the Suffering of our Blessed
Lord and Savior, Acts 2.23. Him being delivered by the determinate counsel and
foreknowledge of God, you have taken, and by wicked hands crucified and slain.
In the same Action there was the Wickedness and Envy of the Scribes and
Pharisees, there was the Villainy and Treachery of Judas, in betraying of him,
yet he says all this was done by the determinate counsel and foreknowledge of
God. So Acts 4.27, 28. For of a truth against thy holy child Jesus, both Herod
and Pontius Pilate, and the Gentiles and people of Israel, were gathered
together, for to do whatsoever thy hand and thy counsel determined before to be
done. This is a singular Comfort, that all things come to pass not according to
wicked Men's Counsels, but according to what God does determine. (3.) Wicked
Men, when they do the unjustest actions, yet they are said to be the
Instruments of God's Providence, to execute his Counsels, his Designs, and
Purposes; I will give you some sew of them: Isa. 10.5. God's Church were to be
invaded by the Assyrians, O Assyrain, the rod of mine anger, and the staff in
their hand is mine indignation; I will send him against an hypocritical nation.
Well, look to the 7th Verse, Howbeit he means not so, neither does he think
so, but it is in his heart to destroy and cut off nations. That is, this proud
Prince thinks of nothing of God's Providence and Purposes in this matter, his
design is to gratify his Pride, and Revenge, and Covetousness, but God
Almighty gives way to it for other holy and wise ends. And again v. 15. Shall
the ax beast it self against him that heweth therewith? or, shall the saw
magnify it self against him that shakes it? There is a great emphasis in
these words, to show, that wicked Men and their Actions are all in the Hands of
God, as the Ax and the Saw in the Hand of the Workman. (4.) That even when
wicked Men go about wicked Actions, God is said to stir them up to it: so in
this Instance of Joseph, and in that Isa. 10.6. God is said to send the
Assyrians against an hypocritical Nation, to punish and chastise them. So 2 Samuel 12.11. you see there (Beloved) God threatens to raise up evil against
David in his own house, that is, by the Rebellion of his Son Absalom, and his
Villainy and Insolence against his Father's Wives and Concubines; but was God
the cause of this Wickedness in Absalom? No, but Absalom having these Lusts in
him, God permitted him to exercise them for the punishment of David's Sin. So 2 Samuel 16.11. Shimei does unjustly revile David, but says David, The Lord has
sent Shimei to curse David; but this was to punish David for his former Sins:
Psalm. 105.23. it is said, He turned the hearts of the Egyptians to hate his
people, and to deal subtly with his servants; He made use of their Sin for
righteous ends. (5.) I do observe out of Scripture that the Children of God,
whenever they suffered most unjustly from wicked Men, yet they have not imputed
it so much to the Instruments as to the Justice of God; as for example, I will
give you here an Instance in Joseph, It was not you that sent me hither, but
God, says he. Thus in holy Job you shall see what a complication of Wickedness
there was to bring about his afflictions, there was the Devil's Malice seeking
to ruin and destroy him, there was also the Malice of wicked Men, the
Chaldeans and Sabeans, and yet Job 1.21. he ascribes all to the Providence of
God, The Lord gives, and the Lord takes away, blessed be the name of the
Lord. So David, when his Son Absalom rebelled against him, still he cries, It
is the Lord, etc. Thus in the Book of the Lamentations, when Israel had been so
barbarously destroyed by their Enemies, yet they referred all to the Providence
of God: yea, (Beloved) in that act of the betraying and murdering of our
Savior, tho there was so much Wickedness in Men, yet our blessed Savior
expressly says, it was the cup that his heavenly Father gave him to drink; and
therefore in all unjust oppressions it is our work and duty to look above Men
to the Providence of God, therefore we must hear the voice of the Rod, and him
who has appointed it, and not dwell too much upon the Instruments or Second
Causes, they are but as the Ax or the Staff, or the Rod, it is God's Hand that
limits, orders, and appoints them for holy and gracious ends. And so much for
the first part, how that all the Actions of wicked Men are ordered by the Will
and Providence of God.

Secondly, I come now to enquire how far the holy and righteous God can or does
concur in the evil actions of Men; that He does so, is most certain, but how
far, is the Question, and most Interpreters have been puzl'd in this matter,
but I shall endeavor to do it first negatively, for I will tell you, the truth
lies between two Extremes; (1.) It is the highest Blasphemy for any, from these
places of Scripture, to charge God with being the Author of Sin. (2.) There is
another Extreme to be avoided, to think this Providence of God is only a bare
permission of Sin; and then I shall show you afterward more particularly of the
influence and concurrence of the most holy, wise, and good God in the evil
actions of wicked Men. First, Almighty God is not, neither can be, the Author
or proper Cause of any Sin: that I shall lay down for a great truth, that He
never works Sin it self, or moves us to sin inwardly; that He does not
necessitate Men to sin, because from these conclusions some Adversaries would
charge Sin upon God. God can neither do Sin nor compel us to sin; to affirm
this would be very Blasphemy; for, first, God is the Supreme Good, he is all
Goodness, Holiness, and Light, and there can be no Evil, no Darkness in him;
for to ascribe Evil of Sin to the Supreme Good, is to make light the cause of
darkness: Heb. 6.18. It is impossible for God to lie. Again, he that hates Sin,
he that forbids it and severely punishes it, it is impossible he should be the
Author of Sin. It would be the unjustest thing in the World for God to punish
that which himself causes. Again I consider, if God should do so, Sin would be
no Sin, for all Sin is that which is a contrariety to God's Will and Law; and
therefore the Apostle St. James tells us, Let no man say when he is tempted
that he is tempted of God, for God cannot be tempted with evil nether tempts
he any man. It is inconsistent with the holiness and purity of God, to be in
any wise the Author of Sin; therefore St Basil says, It is as high a Blasphemy
to make God the Author of Sin, as to deny him to be a God. No, beloved, all Sin
comes from the Creature, Thy destruction is of thy self, though God makes use of
it for gracious purposes; as for example, the Envy and Malice of Joseph's
Brethren came from themselves, but only God ordered it for the good of his
People. We must distinguish between the cause of Sin and the use of Sin; Man is
the cause of Sin and the Actor of Sin, but God can use Sin for purposes beyond
what Man designed by it. You know the Viper has Poison in it, which is of a
destructive nature, and yet a skilful Physician can make use of this Poison as
an Antidote against Poison. I will draw this as a second Caution, That in God's
ordering and making use of Sin there is more than his bare permission of Sin,
that is, to let Men be wicked, and take no farther care in it. No, I say, in
all those places I have quoted, as his sending Joseph into Egypt, etc. it
implies an Efficiency. The most Sins that are done in the World are done by
evil Men, and though God be not the Author, yet he is the Orderer, the Governor
and Disposer of them. A wise King can make use of a Traitor to bring to pass
his own ends, so God makes use of wicked men's Sins to work contrary to their
ends. So Joseph's Brethren never thought of bringing about God's end in their
malice against him. So a Physician applys Leaches to draw out corrupt Blood,
but they only desire to satisfy their Lust. So God makes use of wicked men's
Covetousness and Ambition to chastise his People, and do them good.

SECT. II.
I Shall now enter upon this great Point, (but I must tell you with as much
fear and trembling as ever I did upon any Subject) namely, How far the holy and
wise God does or may concur in the evil actions of sinful Men. I shall keep
close to the Scripture, and show you in nine particulars.

1. God does concur by permitting of them, that is, by not hindering the
committing those Sins as he might have done; and this is expressed Acts 14.16.
He suffered them to walk in their own ways, says the Apostle. I confess, it is
very clear so far, for no Sin in the World could be done if God did not permit
them. And I will show you several ways whereby God hinders the commission of
Sin: thus he hindered Abimelech from committing folly with Abraham's Wife, Genesis
20.6. so he hindered Balaam, when he came with a resolution to curse Israel, he
hindered Esau from hurting his Brother Jacob. Nay, the Devils in Hell are under
Chains, God can hinder them, and does hinder them, when he will. We read he
could not touch Job nor his Cattle, till God had given him liberty. There are
several ways and means whereby God does this, (1.) By taking away the power of
wicked Men, as he did of Jeroboam, when he stretched forth his hand against the
Prophet, sometime when he stirs up another power to deliver his People from
Oppression, sometimes by secretly enclining the Hearts of Men to do good to
such as they designed to hurt, as he did by Laban, when he went after Jacob: so
God sent Abigail to divert David from exercising his intended Revenge against
Nabal. Now when God removes these impediments, this is the first way of God's
concurrence, when he does it by his permission; and for this we are much
obliged to God, for keeping wicked Men and Devils in Bonds, and for limiting
their Malice and Enmity, for if God should give leave to them to execute their
Power and Malice, all the World would quickly be in flames.

2. God concurs in the evil actions of Men by a general concurrence and
cooperation in the action it self, for you must know God Almighty has an
immediate influence and concourse in all the actions of his Creatures, both
good and bad, Acts 17.28. In him we live and move and have our being. It is
that which all Christians and most Philosophers do agree in, That all actions
of the Creature do depend upon the motion and influence of the first Cause. I
will instance in those that curse and swear and blaspheme the Name of God, they
could not move their Tongues, if God did not give them leave, and cooperate in
the action: so the power whereby a Thief steals is from God. But here they do
not make God the cause of their Sin in a moral but in a physical sense: they
say well. That God does concur as to the natural action it self, but not to the
sinfulness in that action: God concurrs to the natural action, but the
obliquity of it proceeds from the wickedness of the Sinner's Will.

3. God does concur by his Providence, in administering occasions and
opportunities which wicked Men do abuse to Sinfulness. So Jer. 5.22. God tells
us of laying a stambling block in the way of Sinners; He gives or lays before
them things that perhaps are not sinful in themselves, as when he gives to
wicked men Health, Strength, Wealth, Prosperity, Beauty, etc. these have no
harm in themselves, but when they take occasion to abuse them to their Lusts,
and there are some that make their Table a Snare to them: Nay, those things
that in their own nature would tend to make them better, yet they take occasion
to make themselves worse by them: as for instance, How often does good
Admonition make some Men the worse? nay, I tell you, the very Divinity and
Miracles of Christ did harden the Pharisees Hearts; nay, sometimes when God by
his Providence does suffer Men to fall into wicked Company, as he did Joseph,
when his Brethren designed to murder him, God did at the same time order some
Midianites to go by, that they might sell him to them.

The fourth way of God's concurrence is, by withdrawing his Grace, and leaving
Men to the power of their Lusts. Wicked men have a violent inclination to many
Sins, which God in his Providence many times restrains, but when he leaves them
up to themselves, they quickly run into the commission of them, they are
oftentimes as a Dog chained up, that cannot do the Mischief he has a mind to.
When God says of wicked Men as he did to Ephraim, when he was joined to Idols,
Let him alone; when God leaves them so to their Sin, as to be without any
Afflictions or Terrors of Conscience, it is the most dreadful Judgment in the
World. And by this you may understand those Scriptures where God is said to
blind and harden Sinners Hearts: This is most righteous and just, that they who
despise God's Grace, and wilfully run into Sin, that God should punish them
with their own Sins, and say, He that is filthy let him be filthy still; O,
this is the most dreadful Judgment in the World, when Men are given up by God
to their own Lusts.

The fifth way is, when God leaves Sinners to the temptations of the Devil, or
of wicked Men, as, when he leaves them up to wicked Acquaintance, to tempt them
and flatter them in their sins. I will give you 2 or 3 Instances in Scripture:
thus God permitted a lying Spirit to go forth in the Nation of the Israelites,
God says Go, and thou shall prevail; so Ezekiel. 14. God tells them, that for the
Sins of the People he would leave them up to wicked and false Prophets, and
when they come to enquire of them they shall deceive them, and this as a
Punishment of their former Sins. So 2 These. 2. the coming and prevailing of
Antichrist is there said to be with all deceivableness of unrighteousness, with
all power, and signs, and lying wonders. God may suffer false Prophets to work
signs and wonders, and to come with all deceivableness of unrighteousness, but
what was the reason? because they did not receive the truth in the love of it,
that they might be saved; and therefore God gave them over to strong Delusions,
to believe Lies, that they may be damned. I pray God we are not in a great
measure concerned in this point; you see God has sent forth a lying Spirit,
whereby our Adversaries have drawn away thousands, what is the reason? because
they have not lived up to the Light of the Gospel. When Popery comes, it makes
People unnatural to Parents, to destroy Cities and Kingdoms; why certainly
Beloved, as the Apostle says, 2 Timothy 2.16. such are taken captive of the Devil
at his will, that is, whatever Sin the Devil gives them opportunity to commit,
when he tempts them to Uncleanness or Drunkenness, they are ready to act it:
such, like Judas, are given into the full possession of Satan.

A sixth way of God's Providence in sinful actions (and I desire you to take
notice of it) is a directing by his secret Providence the Sinner to such or
such a particular Object, which perhaps he was indifferent to before: as for
example sake, a wicked Man may be covetous, or angry, or cruel, now it may be
indifferent to him which of these Sins he commits, but God in his secret
Providence lets him go out upon one and not upon another, like a great Mastiff
in chains, it is indifferent to him who he bites and hurts if he be loosed, but
the Owner lets him loose upon one that he would have him hurt, and he
accordingly falls upon him. And therefore Solomon tells us, A man devises his
own way, but the Lord directs his steps. Nebuchadnezzar the great King of
Babylon was resolved to fall upon some of his Neighbors, he could not tell
whether he should fall upon Amon or Judea, now God in his Providence directed
him to fall upon Judea; so 1 Chronicles. 5.26. it is said, God stirred up the spirit
of Pull to go against Israel; and this is done without any Sin to be therefore
imputed to God. It is said, the hearts of Kings are in the hand of the Lord,
and he turns them as the rivers of water. It is an alusion to those Countries
where there was little Rain from Heaven, all their Gardens and Meadows were
watered by standing Waters or Pools, where they had Sluices and Gutters, which
they could pull up, and so let the Water run which way they pleased. So God can
order the Hearts of Kings as shall best please him.

A seventh way is, when God gives wicked Men power and success, and to prosper
in unjust actions: this is constantly verified in Scripture, and by Experience
in the World, that God may suffer good People to be afflicted and injuriously
dealt with in just causes, and wicked Men to prosper, and bring wicked and
unjust actions to pass: so when God raises up a great King to be a Scourge to
his Neighbors, he will give him Wisdom, Policy, and Success; and also when the
Lord is resolved to punish a Nation, he can take away their Wisdom and Success.
Thus God many times suffers the Tabernacles of Robbers to prosper, and suffers
good men for good causes to fall into the hands of wicked and unreasonable men.
Christ himself says, that the Power Pilate had to crucify him, he had it from
God; but you will say, Is this no prejudice to his Holiness? I answer no, for
God does not give wicked men Success as a reward of their actions, but to make
use of them as the Instruments of his Providence: as, suppose a King should
make use of a very wicked man to be his Hangman, this does not reflect upon the
Goodness of the Prince.

The eighth way of God's Providence in governing wicked men and their actions
(and I desire you to take notice of it) is, by limiting, governing, and
disposing wicked men and their actions, that they shall not be able to hurt
whom they will, nor when they will, but just so far as God would have it: as we
find in Joseph's Brethren, their design was to murder him, but (1.) God stirs
up Reuben to divert that purpose: well, afterward God, to bring his Ends to
pass, lets them sell him, and at that very moment orders the Midianites to come
by. How admirably was this matter ordered and limited by God? So, for the time,
God will not suffer wicked men to act at one time, and yet will suffer the same
to bring about their purposes at another time. So it was with the Jews, they
would oftentimes have taken Christ, but could not, because the hour was not yet
come; but afterward he tells them, I taught daily in the temple, and you laid
no hands on me, but now is your hour. So we may observe how God does sometimes
stop Fire from doing Mischief, and at another time suffers it to break out with
irresistible violence: so also, for the continuance of wicked men in their
actions, it is said, The Rod of the wicked shall not always rest upon the Lot
of the righteous. It may come upon them, but it shall not rest upon them: so
God will not suffer good men to be tempted above what they are able; wicked men
shall not be able to put one dram into the Cup of bitterness, more than what
God has appointed. Indeed, this is the foundation of all our Comfort, to
remember, that whatever we may suffer, wicked men are but as an Ax in God's
Hand, they cannot, as to time, or continuance, or degrees, go beyond what God
has purposed.

The last way is, by God's overruling and ordering the Effects of Sin beyond,
and many times contrary to the purpose and design of Sinners, and this makes up
the complete government of Sin. So it was in Joseph's case, As for you, you
thought evil, but God meant it for good, to bring to pass as it is at this day,
to save much people alive. You meant it for evil, and indeed, beloved, in one
and the same action there are different ends proposed. Many times wicked men
design nothing, but to bring about their own Malice, Covetousness, and Envy,
but God turns it to many wise and holy ends. So in Job's case, the Devil's
design was to make him curse and blaspheme God, but God's design was to make
Job bless him. So God is said to send Assyria against Israel, to punish a
hypocritical Nation, but he thinks not so, his design is to root up and destroy
much People; his design was to plunder and destroy, but God's design was to
correct Sin. So it was in the Sufferings of our Blessed Savior, the Pharisees
out of envy sought to murder him, Pilate only for fear condemned him; the
Soldiers, all that they meant was their Profit; but now the Envy and Malice of
the one, and the Covetousness of the other God overruled, to bring to pass the
greatest Blessing that ever befell Mankind, the Death and Resurrection of
Christ; so that God can make wicked men work his ends when they seem most to
cross them. Thus Physicians can make an Antidote to expel Poison out of Poison
it self. And I conclude this point in telling you, that the most excellent
Works of God's Providence that were ever brought to pass in the World are, when
He makes use of the sinful actions of Men to effect matters quite contrary to
what they intended. Thus I have endeavored to clear the Providence of God from
any mistake of Injustice or Unholiness, and have shown how the holy and wise
God overrules and governs the evil actions of wicked Men and Devils.

SECT. III.
I Come now to the third Point, and that is, That God Almighty can make good
use of the sinful actions of wicked Men, that what they intend for Evil, that
he can and often does turn to Good. This is here expressed in the Text, God
sent me before you to preserve life; and I will ground this upon another
expression of Joseph, Genesis 50.20. As for you, you thought evil against me, but
God meant it for good. You shall observe in this Story, that the design of his
Brethren was nothing but the gratifying their own Envy and Malice, in sending
him away; the Ishmaelites in buying him meant nothing but their own profit;
Potifer's Wife, we read, minded nothing but her own Lust, and yet all these
things were overruled by God Almighty for the good of his Church. I shall here
handle, that God Almighty does turn the Sins of wicked men to good, he makes
them serve his designs for good. I shall here vindicate the Providence of God
from the great Quarrel that has been against it in all Ages, by reason of the
actions of wicked men, and the great wickedness that is in the World; for, it
is a Saying of the Atheists, That if the World be governed by a God so just,
holy, and wise, why is there so much wickedness in the World? Can he not hinder
it? I shall therefore show you, that God's permitting so much Sin in the World
is a fruit of his infinite Goodness, because he can bring so much good out of
it. St. Austin says, God, that is infinitely good and powerful, would not
permit Sin in the World if he were not able to make that Sin turn to some great
Good. All wicked Men and Devils are under God's Dominion, he over rules all
their actions, and there is no Evil in second causes, but he makes it serve his
own holy and wise ends. It is true, Sin, as it is in the Creature, is the
greatest deformity, darkness, and disorder in the World, but God Almighty is
able to order it as a wise Physician can make use of Poison to expel Poison,
so, though Sin in it self be so evil, wholly evil, yet God Almighty can make it
serve his best and wisest ends. For the truth of this proposition, I may
observe to you, that the greatest actions that ever God brought to pass in the
World have been occasioned by the Sins of wicked men, as the occasion of
sending Christ was the Sin of Adam, and the bringing to pass our Redemption
could not be done without the concurrence of wicked actions; as, Acts 2.22. By
wicked hands you have crucified and slain him, says the Apostle; and Acts
4.27. For of a truth, against thy holy child Jesus, Herod, Pontius Pilate, and
the People of Israel are gathered together. Consider how much wickedness there
was in that act; the Treachery of Judas, the Envy of the Pharisees, the
Covetousness of the Soldiers, the Cruelty of the rest, and yet all this God
made use of to bring to pass the most glorious action that ever was in the
World. I will give you some more Instances of this, and mention two things,
whereby I shall more evidently demonstrate, That God does make use of the Sins
of wicked men for good purposes, (1.) for the manifestation of his own Glory.
(2.) For the great good he does thereby in the World. Romans 3.7. The truth of
God abounds by my lie unto his glory, and he makes the wrath of man to
praise him. I shall mention Five Attributes of God, that are more especially
illustrated by God's permitting and ordering the Sins of wicked men: (1.) The
Attribute of God's Patience and Long suffering, he proclaims himself, The Lord
God, merciful and long suffering: Where could there have been room for the
exercise of his Patience and Long-suffering, if there be no Sin? So Romans 9 22.
How should we know God's Patience, if with much long suffering he did not
endure the vessels of wrath fitted to destruction. (2.) The glory of his
Justice: God's punishing of Sinners could not have been known without the
permission of Sin: I will get my self glory over Pharaoh; how so? by executing
my Judgments upon him for Sin; For this cause have I raised thee up, that I may
show forth my power in thee, and make known my glory in all the earth. And
there is no question but the Glory of God is shown forth in the manifestation
of his Wrath, both here and hereafter. (3.) The Glory of his Mercy and Free
Grace appears in pardoning Sin; how could that have been done if there had been
no Sin? Romans 5.20. Where sin abounded grace did much more abound. In a word,
all the Riches of God's Mercy and Goodness and Free Grace to the Creature
supposes Sin, it could not be without Sin; had Man remained without Sin, Christ
had never died, there had been no Covenant of Grace. (4.) The Glory of God's
admirable Wisdom appears in ordering and governing the Sins of the World; the
chief part of his Wisdom consists in bringing to pass those ends by means that
seem most improbable and unlikely. Thus it is in matters of State Policy; it is
the greatest part of Wisdom to know how to govern evil and discontented
Subjects. There is nothing in the World so contrary in it self to the Glory of
God as Sin is, nothing that God more hates. Now, is not this the glory of his
Wisdom, to make wicked Men and Devils themselves, when they strive most to
oppose his glory than to do him most honor. I will give you several Instances;
sometimes in opposing the Counsels of wicked men, and taking them in their own
craft; and so He did Pharaoh, that what wicked men design for the ruin of his
People, he can turn it to their advantage. Nazianzen says, That the
Masterpiece of God's wisdom is, to make Enemies do his own work. Lastly, It
makes appear the greatness of his Power; the greatness of his power appears in
working without means, or contrary to means; it was to make a thing of nothing
when God created the World: yet there seems to be greater power in turning Evil
to Good than in making the World, because here is nothing to contribute, but
all as may be to oppose it: It is the Almighty Power of God that brings light
out of darkness, and evil out of good, and the greatest good out of the
greatest evil.

The second general Head is, to show the good that God works in the World by
wicked Men. I beseech you to mind these things. (1.) God makes use of wicked
men sometimes as the Instruments of his Vengeance to punish other wicked men;
thus many times he uses evil Angels, but especially evil men, to destroy his
Enemies, one wicked man to execute his Justice upon another: so he does when he
raises up great Princes to be Instruments of his Vengeance and Plagues upon a
wicked Nation. Thus God raised up Nebuchadnezzar to punish Israel when they had
sinned, but he dreamed nothing at all of serving God's Ends, but only his own
Ambition, but yet he was God's Instrument. Many times we are ready to quarrel
at God's Providence, when we see wicked Princes conquer, and destroy, and
invade when they have no just Right, but we consider not they are acted by a
higher Hand: sometimes God does it by private men, sometimes he raises up one
Oppressor to punish another Oppressor, sometimes he raises up rebellious
Children to punish Parents who had been disobedient when they were Children,
sometimes he punishes some persons with Treachery and Unfaithfulness, which had
been formerly treacherous and unfaithful themselves. (2.) God makes use of the
Sins of wicked men to chastise and punish his own People when they have
offended and sinned against him; God makes the Sins of wicked men as Rods to
chastise them, and bring them back from their wanderings. I will give you one or
two famous Instances of this, Isa. 10.5. O Assyrian, the rod of mine anger, the
staff in their hand is my indignation: see the 6, and 7, to the 12. ver. God
tells us he had a work to do by the King of Assyria, namely, to punish a
hypocritical Nation, but his design was only to kill and destroy. Another
Instance you have 2 Samuel 12.11. and so on. You know David had sinned a great
Sin, an indelible Sin, that God always remembered, though upon David's Repentance
God pardoned him, yet he told him, he would raise up a Sword out of his own
Bowels to correct him: first, one of his own Sons incestuously ravishes his own
Sister, then Absalom murders his Brother, then God raises up this Son to be a
scourge to him by lying with his Wives and Concubines, and after by raising up
a long Rebellion against him: And, how many Sins were committed in these
matters, and yet all this God made use of for chastising of David, and bringing
him to Repentance? I will give you a familiar Instance to illustrate this to
you, from a Leach's drawing of Blood; the Physician applys them, they draw
Blood to satisfy their natural inclination, but the Physician uses them to
draw away ill humors: so wicked men afflict God's people from the hatred they
bear them, but God designs it to correct and humble them for Sin, and so to
bring them to Repentance. (3.) God makes use of the Sins of wicked men for the
trial of the Graces of his own Children; and this is another admirable End, to
use the Sins of wicked men to make good men so much the better: This evidently
appears in the famous story of Job, the Devil merely out of malice tempts him
to curse God, but God makes use of it to increase Job's Graces. I will instance
in two points more; (1.) When God suffers False Prophets, Seducers, and
Heretics to go about to undermine the True Religion in a Nation, this is a
very sad Providence, yet God has his ends in it, to try his own Children, and
make them more steadfast in the Truth. So Deuteronomy. 13. the Lord tells them, He
permits false Prophets to come among them, such as may give Signs and Wonders,
which may come to pass: and see what is the reason of all this; The Lord thy
God does it to prove thee, and to know whether thou will love the Lord thy God
with all thy heart, and with all thy soul. And this same thing is more express
in 1 Cor. 11.19. where the Apostle tells them, There must be heresies, that
they which are approved may be made manifest. God suffers Seducers to come into
a Church, the better to establish good men in the Truths they have received. It
is true, ignorant and unstable men are quickly drawn aside to Errors, but when
the true Religion is shaken by Errors and Heresies, there is nothing makes good
men more to look about them, to examine diligently the Truths of Religion, and
to conform themselves more carefully to them: so the wicked Practices and Lives
of some makes those that are good men more diligent, more watchful, and more
exact in their Conversations, and it is but Reason, for good men ought to live
so, as to be God's Witnesses against a wicked World. Good men are the best in
wicked times and places; the best Protestants are those that live in Popish
Countries. Jer. 24. the Prophet makes mention of two Baskets of Figs, the one
exceeding good, and the other exceeding bad, which were to set forth the state
of the Church in that day, when there were great Corruptions among them, the
good are ordinarily very good, and the bad are very bad. Now it is our Duty to
be burning and shining Lights in the midst of a crooked and perverse
generation; when we see Intemperance abound, to be so much the more strict;
when we see Uncleanness not only to overrun the Land, but to grow bold and
impudent; now to be more severe and chaste, when you see People begin to be
atheistical, neglect the Service of God, then more firmly to resolve, As for me
and my house, we will serve the Lord. Evil times lay Obligations upon good
Christians to be so much the better. (4.) God makes use of the Sins of wicked
men to exercise the Patience, and thereby to increase the Reward of good men,
who had heard of Joseph's Chastity, if it had not been for the Lust of his
Mistress, for without wicked men there could be no Persecution, and if there be
no Persecution, where can there be any Rewards for Patience? In a word, had
there not been Persecution, where had been the Glory of Martyrdom? Thus God so
orders it, that when wicked men seek most to destroy the Church, then he makes
it so much the more glorious. It was a great Saying of a Martyr, Come ye wicked
Heathens, bring more Wracks, more Fire, more Torments, for hereby you add to my
glory. Lastly, the overruling Providence of God appears in making the Sins of
wicked men, which were acted on purpose to frustrate his Purposes, the very
proper means to bring them to pass. What was more contrary to God's Purpose of
advancing Joseph, than to let him be sold for a Slave, and thrust into Prison.
So in the Story of Haman and Mordecai in the Book of Esther, there was Haman's
Envy, and Pride, and Malice, and barbarous Design of destroying all the Jews,
yet God made all these cross Providence to be a means for the preservation and
advancement of his Church. Thus, beloved, God can do good to his Church and
Children by them that intended no such matter, as you may be sure. So Jehu was
a means to make a great Reformation in Israel, to purge them from Idolatry;
but, had Jehu any such intent? No, all his intent was to set up his own House
by it. Another Instance we have in Cyrus, who, like other Heathen Princes,
sought his own Wealth and Glory, yet he is said to be the Lord's Anointed, and
to be raised up for the sake of Jacob his Servant. Nay, how many times has God
made the Lusts of Men, the Ambition of Men, to serve those Ends of his, which
they never dreamed of. The Papists tell us, it was the Lust and Ambition of
Hen. 8. that was the occasion of our Reformation in Religion; why, beloved, we
deny it not but God can make use of these to bring about good ends. We read in
Acts 8. there was a great Persecution against the Church, and, what was the end
God had in it? It was to scatter the Disciples in all parts of Judea and
Samaria, where they preached the Word: why, if it had not been for this
Persecution, it is probable they might have continued too long in Jerusalem. So
1 Phil. 12. the Devil seeing St. Paul so useful a Minister of Christ, causes
him to be put in Prison, but what was the end of it? Those things which happened
to me are fallen out to the greater advancement of the Gospel, so that many of
the Brethren being confirmed by my bonds, have been so much the more bold to
preach the Gospel without fear. The Church of God, like the Vine, flourishes
the better for being cut and pruned, and it was grown a Proverb in the
Primitive Church, The Blood of the Martyrs is the Seed of the Church. I could
give you Instances of this Providence of God in many private persons, where the
malice of their Enemies has been a means to bring them to the highest
advancements. I could tell you of a person that was falsely accused of a
Murder, and having cleared himself, the then Emperor took great notice of it,
and advanced him to be a Captain, and afterward he came to be Emperor himself.
How many may say they had been undone if they had not been undone? And thus I
have cleared up this most excellent point, and there is not a point of greater
use for vindicating the Honor of God's Providence.

SECT. IV. Application.
I Shall now draw some Inferences from this Text thus opened, that may have an
Influence either for our Instruction, or for the Government of our Lives, when
we suffer by the Sins of wicked Men. I shall handle them by way of observation.

The first is, That God Almighty is just, and holy, and good, even in his
governing the Sins of wicked men: This shall be to vindicate the Holiness, and
Justice, and Purity of Almighty God, in his concurrence with the sinful Actions
of Men; it is one of the most difficult points in Religion, and one of the
greatest depths of the Providence of God; to clear it up, I shall begin with
this Story: that is, Joseph's being sold into Egypt: Here are two concurring
causes, his Brethren sold him, and yet God sent him. So it is said in the Acts,
The Patriarchs moved with envy, sold Joseph into Egypt. I shall here clear up
God's Justice in this matter. We read, there was first a Determination and
Decree of God to advance Joseph, for the preservation of Jacob and his Family;
well, to bring this to pass, God intends to make use of his Brethren and their
Envy and Malice to sell him into Egypt; God does not infuse Malice into them,
nor stir them up to Sin, for that was in their Hearts before. But first, God
does not hinder them. You heard before, how, when they first determined to
murder Joseph, God would not let it go that way, but when they had a mind to
sell him, he did suffer them, because it was for his Ends: and observe how God
ordered it, that the Merchants should happen to come by that very day to whom
his Brethren sold him. It is a hard Question, Why this Affliction is rather
attributed to God than to them, It was not you that sent me hither, but God;
but the reason is God's permission and offering them an occasion in his
Providence, which he knew would take effect; and therefore it was said, God did
it. I shall, as briefly as I can, open and answer this Question: In all the
Sins of the World, Let God be true, and every man a Liar, we must abhor and
detest all that does in the least attribute any Sin to be God's; God neither
infuses Wickedness, nor tempts or stirs up People to sin, but only by his
Providence permits, orders, and governs it for his own wise and holy Ends. I
will here answer some Objections briefly; (1) You will say, how can it stand
with the Holiness of God to permit Sin when he can hinder it? I answer, It can
be no stain to God's Holiness, for God does but leave the Creature to the
liberty of his own Will; and it was most agreeable, that those whom God has
made free and reasonable Creatures should not be constrained, but to leave
wicked Men and Devils to their own Wills, especially since God can bring so
much Good out of Evil. But secondly you will say, Why does God minister
occasion in his Providence? I answer, That does not reflect upon God neither,
for it is reasonable God should make a trial of the Obedience of his Creature
to him, but he could not know that, or that could not be known, if he did not
leave them to their own Wills. (2.) I do consider, that most of the occasions
that Men abuse to Sin, are such as in their own nature are good and naturally
would drive them to Goodness; for, what is it that they use to harden
themselves with, and abuse to Sin, but the very Blessings and Mercies of God.

Again, As to the other thing, God's ordering Sin to his own Glory, and the
Good of his People, that cannot be any Objection against God's Holiness or
Justice: What is more reasonable, than that God should bring Glory to himself
from wicked Men and Devils, force Glory out of them, above and contrary to
their Intents. It is an Instance of the great Wisdom Power, and Goodness of
God, that there can be no Evil, but he can regulate and order for good ends.
But then you may object. Does not the Scripture say, God stirs up wicked men,
and blinds them, and hardens them, and sends them strong delusions, that they
may believe a lie, and be damned? How can you in this vindicate the Purity and
Holiness of God? I answer, in all those places where God is said to harden the
Heart, etc. We must understand, in some places it imports but a mere permission
of God, or, at most, but withdrawing his Grace, and leaving Men up to the
Temptations of wicked Men and Devils. Secondly, God never withdraws his Grace
from wicked men till they, by their former Sins, have deserved it. So Pharaoh
first hardened his own Heart, and then God in a judicial way hardened his Heart
also: And, beloved, what is more reasonable, than that they that resist God's
motions, and give up themselves wilfully to be seduced, that God should leave
them up to the seduction of the Devil and wicked Men, he does but punish them
with their own Sin.

The next and greatest Objection, and most popular in all Ages of the World,
is, God's prospering wicked men in evil ways, and afflicting good men in good
ways This was the great Objection of the Heathens, especially the Epicureans,
and it has been a great stumbling to godly men; I remember four holy men in
Scripture were shaken, and almost overthrown at the thoughts of it, as Job, Job
21.6. David, Psalm. 73. Jeremiah, Jer. 12.1. and Habakkuk, Hab. 1.13. Certainly,
to Heathens, and such as deny future Rewards and Punishments, I do not know a
greater Objection: But to this I answer, (1.) It is certain, that this Life is
not intended by God to be the place of Punishments and Rewards, but only as a
Preparation for another Life. (2.) No Man or People were ever so righteous, but
they had Sin enough in them, which their own Conscience tells them deserves the
greatest Punishment. (3.) I do consider, that wicked men, when God advances
them, and gives them Success, it is not for their sake, or out of love to them,
but because he raises them up in his Providence to be his Instruments to
punish other wicked men; He does not give them any Success for their own
desert. Now, beloved, this is the most reasonable thing in the World, in all
Kingdoms the vilest of men are made use of for Executioners, and indeed there
is none fit for this work but the wicked: Does a Shepherd set his Sheep to
worry one-another? Godly men are not fit or qualified to kill or plunder other
men unjustly; therefore, I say, God does not make Instruments of wicked men for
their goodness, but because they only are fit for such Work as this is, to be
God's Executioners. I remember a Story, when Phocas had murdered the Emperor
his Master, and made himself Emperor, and a holy man complaining why God should
set so wicked a man over the Nation, the Answer was, They did not deserve a
better. It is for the same Reason that God sends Turks to oppress Christians.
Again consider, that wicked men, even in their wicked actions, have secret
Lashes of Conscience; or if they are advanced a little while, yet, as the
Psalmist says, God sets them in slippery places. That man that shall now see
Pharaoh so stout, and Herod so proud, stay but a while and you shall see one
drowned in the Sea, and the other eaten up of Lice. Again, though God suffer good
men to be afflicted of the wicked, it is for their good, it is to fit them for
God and Glory, it is to rub off their Rust and Rubbish, and fit them for God.
And lastly, I say as St. Austin does, Stay but till the Day of Recompense, and
there will appear no proportion between the Wicked's Prosperity here and their
Sufferings hereafter. So also between the Sufferings of Good Men here, and
their Eternal Happiness. Geographers tell us the World is round,
notwithstanding all the Hills and Mountains in it; but, how can that be? why,
they say, all these Hills and Mountains, in comparison of the circumference of
the Earth, are nothing. So the Sufferings of the good, and the Prosperity of
the wicked, may seem great to us here, yet compare them to Eternity, and they
are nothing. Suppose a Person is condemned to death for High Treason, and his
uncharitable Friend shall come and make him merry and drunk, whereby he forgets
his Condition, do you envy this poor man this Happiness, when perhaps in two or
three hours he must be hanged? So, if you could see a Wretch in Hell, after 40
years of Prosperity on Earth, he would tell you he had paid dear for his
Happiness: therefore the Prosperity of the wicked upon Earth is no more a stain
to the Holiness of God, than the Beams of the Sun upon a stinking Dunghill do
reflect on the Sun. It was an excellent Saying of Dionysius, All things that
are seen in the hands of second causes, when they once come to God's hand, he
turns and orders them to excellent purposes. Those things that are unjust in
respect of Men, yet are righteous as they are Instruments in the hand of God's
Providence: as, suppose thy Child or thy Servant shall prove wicked and
undutiful to thee, this is unjust in respect of them, but as they are
Instruments to punish thy Sins, they are just upon that account. I shall
conclude this first Inference by stirring you and my self up to the
contemplating and admiring the Goodness, Wisdom, and Justice of God's
Providence, in governing the actions of wicked men; this is the Masterpiece of
God's Providence, as Isa. 27.29. This also comes from the Lord of hosts, who
is wonderful in counsel. Here we see in the highest sense Sampson's Riddle
verified, That God can bring Meat out of the Eater, and Honey out of the
Carcass; and I tell you, tho we now quarrel at Atheism, Debauchery, and
Wickedness, God shall make manifest, at the last day, that all these things
have worked together for the Glory of God, and the Good of them that serve him,
and that we could not well have been without the malice and spite of wicked
men. So much for the first Inference.

The second Inference is this, That the concurrence of God in the Sins of
wicked men does not excuse nor extenuate their Sin, nor diminish their
Punishment. I am here, beloved, upon another deep point of the Providence of
God, That the Providence of God, his Decrees, and his ordering and governing of
sinful men, do not in the least excuse them from Guilt or Punishment, though God
brings Good out of their Evil. St. Paul proposes and answers the Question, Romans
3.7. If the Truth of God has more abounded through my Lie unto his glory, why
then am I reckoned a sinner, and not rather as we be slanderously reported? and
some affirm, that we say, Let us do evil, that good may come, whose damnation
is just. That is, why should God count them Sinners, or punish them as Sinners,
that have been Instruments to serve his Providence? This Objection some People
make use of, not only among Heathens, but Christians, you shall have them say,
I could not help it, if God had not put me upon it I should never have done it.
I remember a Story of a Woman, a Harlot, that had three Bastard Sons, which
afterward came to be very great and eminent Persons, as Peter Lombard,
Gracian, and Comestor, and when afterward she was come to Confession, she
said, she could not confess her self sinful in this matter, because her Sons
proved all such brave Men. But I shall refute this Opinion by these Five
Considerations.

First, The Providence of God is not given to be the Rule of our Actions, but
his Commands; the Rule of our Actions is his Command, and not what he does in
his Providence: as St. Austin says, We may will what God wills in his
Providence, and yet sin. A Parent lies sick, his good Son is troubled, uses all
means for his recovery, God has decreed his Death, he dies, the Son is
troubled, why the Son in all this does the Will of God, though it do not agree
with his Decrees: so a wicked Son may wish his Father's death, and God decrees
it also, he dies, yet though this Will in the Son was agreeable to God's secret
and providential Will, it is sinful. The Rule of our Actions is not what God
wills, but what God has commanded us to do in his Word. If God's providence
would excuse Sin, no wicked Men or Devils could have been guilty of Sin.

Secondly, I answer, Wicked men do not aim at the Glory of God in their Sins,
nor at the good God intends to bring about by them, their aims are different
from God's aim, as herein Joseph says to his Brethren, Tou thought evil
against me, but God meant it for good. Isa. 10. the Prophet says, God would
send a Heathen Prince against the hypocritical Nation of the Jews, to punish
them, but it is said, He meant not so; he does not intend to do God's Work, but
all his End was, to enlarge his Dominions.

Thirdly, The Good that follows from wicked Actions is not a natural Effect of
Sin, but comes only from the over ruling power of God, and so is merely
accidental to the Sin: as for example; Sin is directly naught, no Creature can
bring Good out of it: when a man sins, he is said to break God's Laws, and so
to reproach and dishonor God himself; now if God, contrary to the nature of
Sin, shall occasion Good by it, Sin is never the less Sin: as for example;
Poison is never the less Poison because a wise Physician knows how to make an
Antidote out of it to expel Poison.

Fourthly, It follows also, that it is righteous with God to punish wicked men,
though they are Instruments to serve his Providence by their Sins; God may use
them, and yet they deserve punishment, because God punishes them for their evil
Intentions, and not according to the effect of their Sins. Herod, and Pilate,
and Judas all went to Hell when God had done with them; so Absalom, when God
had by him punished David, then he takes him away.

Lastly, Does not the Intention of God's Glory excuse the Sin? I answer, No;
the Sin is not the less sinful upon that account, as Romans 3.8. for God needs
not our Sins to bring to pass his Glory, God will not have us break his
Commands out of a pretense to bring to pass his Glory: it is not lawful, for
the greatest Glory to God or Good of Mankind, to commit the least Sin; to break
God's Laws for God's Glory, is not lawful upon any pretense. And therefore they
that can deceive and do Injuries to others, and perhaps their whole Lives have
been a course of Injustice, and this under the thoughts and pretense of doing
good with what they get, and bringing Glory to God, it is nothing else but a
Delusion and Deceit: But thou Hypocrite, what need has God of thy Robberies to
do him service? So the Jesuits have determined, that in defense of the
Catholic Cause a man may tell a Lie, because it is to a good end, to carry on
their Cause. I shall show you something of their Doctrine about Equivocation,
from their own allowed Writers. (1.) It is determined, that officious Lies,
when they injure none, and do good to others, they are at most but venial Sins:
So the consequence is, if they tell an officious Lie for the preservation of
themselves, but especially for the honor of God, and the good of their
Society, it is but a venial, a pardonable Sin: this most of the Papists hold.
(2.) They tell us of the Doctrine of Equivocation, that some things, as they
are spoken, are directly Sins; but if we keep any other true sense in our
Minds, it is reconcilable to Truth. Again they tell us, Some things a man is
bound to deny, and that upon Oath, That if a Priest, from Confession, knows any
thing of Adultery or Murder in another, and he be examined in the matter, he
may lawfully forbear to tell the truth, or deny it; and the reason is, because
he knows it under the Seal of Confession. And they made great use of this
Doctrine in the Powder Treason. Again, they hold, When they are called before an
unlawful Judge, (as they hold us to be Heretics) they may lie and forswear;
but especially they hold, That no Civil Judge can judge a Priest. Again, they
hold, If they are accused before a Judge, and the Crime is not clearly proved,
and if they have any way to evade the Witnesses, they may lie and forswear
themselves with a mental reservation, till the case be made out as clear as the
Sun. Again, they averr, That at their Executions they may deny their Crimes
too, because when they have confessed to a Priest, and received Absolution,
they are in a state of Salvation, and absolved from their Sins. Therefore fix
this in your Hearts, That for the greatest Good in the World it is not lawful
to commit the least Sin.

SECT. V.
MY third Inference is this, If all the Sins of Men be ordered and governed by
God, the only true way to secure our selves from hurt by wicked men, is, to
make our Peace with God. It follows most directly true; for, if all the Sins of
wicked men be ordered, limited, and overruled by God, the most secure method
in all Troubles, is, to make our Peace with God, for if God be ours, all the
Malice of the Devils in Hell, and wicked Men on Earth, shall do us no harm.

The first Lesson we are to learn under every Rod, is, to believe God's Hand in
it. It is a thing, beloved, that we all acknowledge in the notion, yet
certainly one of the hardest things in practice: Micah 6. the Prophet tells us,
It is the greatest part of wisdom to bear the rod, and him who has appointed
it; for the greatest cause of our impenitency under God's heavy Judgments, is,
because Men generally look no higher than the Second Causes; we impute our
Troubles to our own Negligence, and the Malice of Men, but look not up to God:
Isa. 36.11. When thou liftest up thy hand they will not see it. So Jer. 5.12.
when the Prophet told them God had sent the Assyrian to punish them, they
denied it, and said, It is not the Lord. Beloved, we are loath, in any
Affliction we suffer, to acknowledge God's Hand in it; and the reason is,
because it would be a secret acknowledgment of our own Guilt. Thus, if there
happen to be a Defeat in War, we reckon it comes only by Negligence or
Cowardice; or if a Fire happens, we say, this is the Malice of Men, but we
never look up to God in all this. This is the great cause of Impenitence, for
how can we repent of our Sins, if we believe we are only injured by Men, and
not punished by GOD? We ought to believe there is no evil in a City but what
the Lord has done: all Evils that come either immediately from God's Hand, or
from the Malice, Wickedness, and Injustice of Men, GOD has a hand in all. Thus
Job, when the Chaldeans and Sabeans had robbed him, he ascribes it to the Lord,
and not to their Injustice, Isa. 10.5. When a plundering Army was to be sent,
it is said God sent them; so when Absalom rebelled and sought the ruin of his
Father, it is said, God would stir up evil to him out of his own house. So, 1
Kin. 11. when Solomon followed strange Women, then God stirred up Enemies
against him. God sometimes raises up base and sordid men to be Plagues and
Scourges to the most powerful People, for the Sins of such a People. So
Beloved, if we are proud and confident in our own Strength, our Sins may expose
us to be a Prey to the basest Nation in the World. Again, sometimes God limits
the Career of wicked men, as he does the proud Waves of the Sea, saying,
Hitherto shall thou go, and no further. When God has done with his Instruments,
he will destroy them: It follows then, that it is the greatest Folly for men to
seek to remove their Afflictions so long as they continue in their Sins against
God, for what Folly is it to look to the Instrument, and not to the Hand that
moves it? it is as if a poor Prisoner should court the Executioner, and not
seek to the Judge. All these are our Follies: For first, we can with no reason
expect God should remove his Judgments while we continue in our Sins; if God
does for a time cease Judgments, we must not take it as a Pardon of our Sins,
or a Removal of our Judgment, but only a Reprieve for a time: If God does
withdraw one Rod or Judgment that we may fear, he will find new ones to
chastise a wicked People; as the Angel cried, One woe is past, and another woe
comes. So long as we provoke God, though sometimes we may prevail against men
that are Instruments of his Wrath, we shall not always, he will have new
Instruments to do his Work. It follows therefore in the last place, our only
safe way is, to make our Peace with God, for if he rules and governs all, then
without him all the Devils and wicked Men in the World shall do us no harm; if
the Lord of Hosts be for us, all Devils and wicked (being of his Host) they
cannot act but by his permission; When a man's ways please the Lord, he makes
his Enemies to be at peace with him. When therefore we fear to suffer from
wicked men, or when we are under their hands, then we are to look up, and see
God's hand in all, and to make our Peace with him. I do not speak this that we
are to neglect all prudent and careful means to prevent Mischief from wicked
men; as for example sake, Suppose they do injuriously take away our Estates, or
assault our Lives, we are bound to use all Care, and to seek the Help of the
Magistrate to preserve our selves; nay, Magistrates are bound to use all
possible means to oppose those wicked men that would hurt us: God has never
promised to help the idle, slothful, and lazy, but the diligent, and those that
use all probable means in subserviency to God's Providence: nay, when God does
discover the Designs of wicked men, and put into a Nations hands the means to
prevent them, and they will not lay hold on them, it is a fearful sign of
Destruction. Beloved, I have often thought what in such cases we ought to do;
the first thing we ought to begin with, is, to look up to God above all Second
Causes, and to say, when any Trouble comes, Is not the Hand of God in all this?
There is indeed much Treachery, Malice, and Cruelty in Man, but is it not all
ordered by a wise and holy God. The second thing is, to enquire into the cause
why the Lord is angry with us; to search what Sin has gone before this
Judgment; when God cuts us short of our Estates, to remember how unthankful we
have been for them, and how ill we have used them. Thirdly, before we begin to
deal with our Enemies, we ought first to begin with our Sins, to subdue them,
and implore God's Help against them. It would be a better sign of England's
Happiness, to see us reform our Sins, than to see all our Enemies under our
Feet. Psalm. 81.13, 14.

If God orders and limits the Sins of wicked men, then our Duty is hearty and
fervent Prayer to Almighty God, for if he sends them, he has power to take
them away. Thus penitent Ephraim cries, Come, let us return to the Lord, for he
has wounded us, and he will heal us. Thus Jacob, before he contended with his
Brother Esau, he first wrestles and prevails with God in Prayer. Thus Moses,
when Israel was fighting with Amalek, his Hands were lifted up to God in
Prayer. So the good Emperor Theodosius, when he had laid all night prostrate on
the Ground in Prayer, and had thereby overcome God, then he got an easy
Victory over his Enemies. And, dearly beloved, I wish we had done so, or would
do so, I am sure this is one of the best ways to prevail with God under the
Circumstances we are in: There is none of you, but what are sensible of the
Danger we are now in, and as to the Instruments, there has been as much
Wickedness used as was ever known in any Nation, to contrive the Death of a
King, and the Subversion of our Religion; as to them it is without any cause at
all, yet in respect of God it is most righteous; and if He should give us up
into their hands, we must say, That God is righteous in all his ways, and holy
in all his works: That long Peace we have abused to Luxury, and other Sins, God
may justly take it away from us; but above all, for our living so negligently,
and being so lukewarm under that Religion God has given us, our Wickedness will
justify the worst Judgments that can befall us; but, beloved, God is merciful,
and has put some stop to the Designs of our Enemies; and, oh that we may now
return to the Lord by true and unfeigned Repentance. It is our Sins that give
Strength to the Papists and Jesuits; if we did but live up to the Religion we
profess, all the Jesuits in Rome and Devils in Hell can never do us any hurt.
It is not only a politic Reformation by punishing Offenders, that will do our
business, or by making severer Laws, no, these are good in their kind, but the
only way for us is, to be good, and walk answerable to the Gospel we profess. I
have indeed thought, if God Almighty please to make a full discovery of this
Plot, it will be a deadly Blow to Jesuitism, and to Popery it self, but we
cannot expect it without a Reformation of our selves.

Again, if God orders all the Sins of wicked men, then it is a Foundation of
true Patience and Comfort in all our Sufferings, to consider they all come from
a holy, wise, and righteous God. Dearly beloved, I will give you one Remedy
against all Discontents, Fears, and Troubles, and that is, to see God's Hand in
every Affliction; and I will show you how to improve them. It was a true
Argument the Saints used to content themselves with: so old Eli, when he heard
the sad news of Judgment denounced against his Family, It is the Lord, says
he, let him do what seems him good. So David, when he was under great
Distresses, I opened not my mouth, for it was thy doing. Thus when he was
reproached by Shimei, The Lord has sent Shimei to curse David. Thus we find
holy Hezekiah, when he was told of the ruin of his House and Kingdom, Good is
the word of the Lord. So our Savior, under his bitter agony, says, The cup
which my heavenly father has given me, shall I not drink it? So St. Chrysostom
tells us, All the Malice and Rage of Men, when it comes into God's hand, loses
its Sting. Plutarch wrote against them that deny the Providence of God, and
uses this Argument, That by so doing they did take away all Comfort from People
under their Affliction. Did I believe the Affairs of this World were ordered by
wicked men, and God was only a bare Spectator, I do assure you I could not live
with Comfort one moment; but when I know, that in all the Confusions and
Troubles which they cause here below, they cannot do one thing more than what
God has ordered and appointed, I lay my self down, and rest in God's Bosom, and
that for these Reasons, (1.) Because they are ordered by a God that is our
Sovereign Lord, and can do with us what he pleases. (2.) Though we deserve it not
from them, yet we have Sins that do call for it. (3.) When I consider, that
notwithstanding all these Confusions, yet God can limit and overruled all as he
pleases. And lastly, when I also consider that God can make all these things
end in the good of his Church, and make wicked men do his Work and his
Church Service against their own wills, where then can there be any room for
Discontent? When any Troubles come, that which makes them bitter, is, to
consider the Wickedness of the Instruments. We are apt to say, Oh that false
Servant, that treacherous Child, if God had done this or that, it would not
have troubled us. Why beloved, look into the Text, it is not they, but God that
did it, for holy and wife ends. Sudden and unexpected Accidents are great
causes of Afflictions, to have a Child or Friend cut off by some unexpected
Accident; yet we must consider, though there be such a thing as Chance or Fortune
to us, there is nothing falls out but by the Wisdom of Almighty God: As Deuteronomy.
19.5. compared with Exodus 21.13. God suffers not a Sparrow to fall to the
Ground without his Providence, much less will he do so by Men: all things that
are Chance to us, are eternally determined by God. I have heard many
tender-spirited persons say, Oh, I am afraid I have not done all I should in
this or that matter, as Martha said, Lord, if thou had been here, our Brother
had not dyed. But I say, when God has signified his Will by the Event, then we
are to rest satisfied; God knows how to order our Ignorance and Follies to his
own holy and wise ends. Again, when we think upon the Injuries of wicked men,
the best Comfort is, to quiet our selves, as David, The Lord has sent this
Shimei to curse David. Again, when we see a Deluge of Wickedness and
Profaneness overflow a Nation, it is one of the greatest causes of Sorrow to a
good man, as it was to David, Rivers of water run down mine eyes, because men
keep not thy law. It is a just cause of of Sorrow, that you are all called to
at this time, but yet, beloved, we ought not to be too much grieved: God will
not suffer his holy Name to be always profaned, God can make this
overspreading of Wickedness turn to the Good of the Nation: Prove. 19.31. The
counsel of the Lord shall stand; they cannot go one step further than God
orders, and he can and will overrule them. Again, this will be of great comfort
to us in all the Riddles of God's Providence, when we see holy men oppressed,
and wicked men, for a time, to prosper in all these intricate Providence; God
Almighty will bring to pass his own wise and holy Ends; adore the Lord when you
cannot comprehend him. The wicked have one Work to do, and God has another;
judge not of Providence by their present faces and appearances: He that had
seen Joseph afflicted, and in the Dungeon, how could he have thought that had
been the way to a Throne? therefore do not judge of God's Works before you see
the Effects of them: God has a Work and Purpose, and it shall be brought to
pass, let men oppose and cross it as much as they can; therefore it is one of
the greatest parts of Wisdom to resign up our Souls to God in the darkest
Providence, when we can see neither Sun, Moon, nor Stars; Lord, I resign up my
self to thee, though I cannot comprehend thy design at present. Lastly, If God
works together with wicked men, and turns all their Actions contrary to their
own meaning, why then we ought to work together with God. I shall show you how
we may draw Good from the Sins of wicked men; when the Sins of wicked men bring
me to see my own, and to watch and walk more holily with God, and more
diligently seek after Heaven and Heavenly things, when the Malice of my Enemies
is a means to increase my Grace, why then, beloved, I draw Good out of Evil.
Again, As to the Public, when we see Wickedness abound, we may draw Good out
of it: we may now look upon our selves to be Witnesses for God, and to live
well in the midst of a wicked Nation, when we see a Deluge of Drunkenness, to
abhor that Sin so much the more: So, as to the Spirit of Whoredom among us,
this should make us strive to be so much the more chaste and careful against
all Company that may tempt us: When we see a Spirit of Formality and Negligence
in the Service of God, this should make us so much the more fervent, and to
love Holiness the better: And when you see People come to such a measure of
Profaneness, as for many years together to omit the Lord's Supper, this should
make us more diligent in our Preparations to it. The best way to overthrow
Popery is, to live well, like good Protestants, and especially I would not have
a Protestant tell a wilful Lie; and by this means we may turn our present
Dangers to a good issue. If we thus repent, thus live, and thus pray unto God,
etc.

FINIS.

