A Glance on the Ecclesiastical Commission:

BEING A DISCOURSE Concerning the Power of Making and Altering Ecclesiastical
Laws, AND The Settling Religion; Whether it belongs to Our KINGS Alone, AND A
CONVOCATION: OR, Whether it must not be Asserted rather, No Meddling with
Law-Making, or Law-Mending, (whether Ecclesiastical or Temporal,) but by
Authority of Parliament?

In hoc Reges, sicut eis Divinitus praecipitur, Deo serviunt in quantum Reges
sunt, si in suo Regno bona jubeant, mala prohibeant, non solum quae pertinent
ad humanum Societatem, verum etiam quae pertinent ad Divinam Religionem.

Aug. Cont. Cres. l. 3. c. 54. London, Printed for W. Alchorne, 1690.

THE RIGHT OF Making and Altering Ecclesiastical Laws, OR Of Settling Religion,
Where it lies, DISCOURSED.
WHEN the Christian Faith was first Embraced by the Saxons, nothing had the
force of a Canon or Ecclesiastical Law, but what was Established in Parliament.
Spelman's Counsels, and our Old Historians, such as Malmsbury, Hoveden,
Westminster, Ingulphus, supply us with innumerable Instances of this kind, not
mentioning any Canons, but what had a Parliamentary Sanction.

The granting Charters of Execution to Abbeys, seemed more peculiarly to belong
to our Kings as Supreme Ordinary; yet the principal Grants of this Nature, even
that to Battle Abbey, by William the Conqueror, was, Consilio Episcoporum and
Baronum meorum.

After King William, the Popes came in time to Usurp such Authority over the
Clergy of this Land, as to do even what they pleased, until Henry the VIII. put
an end to that Usurpation, by assuming the Supremacy.

In this King's Reign ( An. 25. c. 19) an Act of Parliament passes, which
grants to the King a Power to assign Thirty Two Commissioners, (Sixteen of the
Laiety, and Sixteen of the Clergy) to Examine the Canons for the Abolishing the
Ill, and letting the Good stand: And it is Enacted in this Statute, that no
Canons shall be Made or Executed without the King's Consent. Upon this Clause
it was, that the Judges in King James's Reign grounded their Sentence, when
they gave him such a Power as I shall mention when I come to it. But other
Lawyers do deny, That any such bare Negative Words can be a Ground sufficient
for raising a Positive Rule, as they then did in this Case. It is rather
thought better Arguing from this Commission, that no Canons can oblige the
Laiety, unless their Representatives be at the Making or Establishing of them.

In Edward VI. Time, a like Power is granted to him by an Act, as this was to
his Father. Where, Note, That neither Henry nor Edward had any such Power
Inherent to the Crown; for else neither of them had need of any Act of
Parliament to give it to them.

In Queen Elizabeth's First Year, a Bill of the same Import was brought into
the House, and read Twice, and ordered to be Engrossed, but nothing came of it;
which nevertheless (though it passed not) affords us the same Argumentation.

In this Year was there an Act of a more grievous nature that passed, An Act
annexing to the Crown the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, which enabled Her, her
Heirs and Successors, with Authority to assign Commissioners for the Exercise
of the same. Here arises the High Commission Courts, which were so great a
burden to the Subject, during Her, King James, and King Charles the First's
Reign, until the 17th Year of the said Charles, and then was this Power
repealed.

I must take leave here to distinguish between the Power of Legislation,
whether in Ecclesiastical or Civil Matters, and this Power of Jurisdiction.
When the Parliament gave the Queen such a Power, it is not to be understood
they intended that She, or King James should act so Despotically in Maaters of
the Church as they did; but that they should have a Power of Judgment (or
Jurisdiction) only, and not a Power of making any Law Ecclesiastical or
Temporal, or altering any thing by Law Established about Religion, or
otherwise: For such a Power was, and is to be asserted always to belong only to
Parliaments. And this may be confirmed by another Act, the Act of Uniformity,
made the same Year, ( An. 1. c. 2.) wherein She is empowered, with the Advice
of her Ecclesiastical Commissioners and Metropolitan, to Make or Alter any of
the Rites and Ceremonies, if she saw just occasion. This Power now is different
from the former, or else it would not be given her in another Act; and it did
not belong to her Crown, or else it would not be given her at all: And it was
no more, but as to Rites and Ceremonies. Nothing else required in that Act of
Uniformity, or in the Matter of Religion, could be altered by Her, unless by
Parliament.

Nevertheless, in the Reign of this Queen, and in King James's, the Two Houses
were in a manner quite neglected in matters Ecclesiastical. The Queen sent
forth her Injunctions; and her Clergy, under her Name (but not under her Seal,
as is suspected by the Learned) gave out their Advertisements and Articles; and
the Queen her self did even Industriously endeavor to lay aside all
Parliaments as useless, when things of this nature were to be considered. The
Queen (I say) was very peremptory, in assuming to her self an uncontrollable
Power in Matters Ecclesiastical; but the Commons did the utmost they could to
maintain their Right, and toward the close of her Highnesses Reign, obtained it.

In the 8th of Eliz. Five or Six Bills touching Religion, and Church
Government, were read in the Lower House; but because the House was suddenly
broke up, nothing was done. In the 13. Eliz. Seven Bills for Reformation of
Religion were read, each Bill three times; but it was declared in the House,
That Her Majesty would not suffer these things to be ordered by Parliaments:
Notwithstanding which Message (as Sir Simon Dewes, in his Journal still has it)
the House of Commons proceeded, and sent up the Bills for Orders of Ministers,
Residence of Pastors, and Commutation of Penance, to the Lords: But the Bill of
Subscription only to the Articles of Faith, and Doctrine of the Sacraments, and
not to the Ceremonies or Government, passed this Session. In the 14. Eliz. the
Commons are on the other Bills again; but the Queen, by Mr. Speaker, declares
her Pleasure, That from henceforth no Bills concerning Religion be prefered, or
received into the House, unless the same should be first considered, and liked
by the Clergy.

In the 35. Eliz. Mr. Morris, Attorney of the Court of Wards, spoke smartly
against the Subscription enjoined by Regal Authority, and against trying the
Clergy who refused the same, by way of Inquisition: With him concurred Sir
Francis Knowles, and Mr. Oliver St. John; but Sir Robert Cecil stood up, and
told the House, That though he knew not what was in the Bill which Mr. Morris
had brought in, yet he remembered very well, that it being about Religion, Her
Majesty had straightly forbidden Them to meddle in such Cases: And Her Highness
soon after Commanded Mr. Speaker to declare Her Pleasure, That no Bill,
touching Reformation, be exhibited; and if any were, She charged him, on his
Allegiance, not to read them. But in the 39. Eliz. the Queen consented, that
the Parliament should proceed in the Reformation of the Church.

However King James coming to the Crown, he very soon orders a Conference at
Hampton Court, and makes Alterations in the Common Prayer, without help of
Parliament; and carrying it on his own Authority, calls a Convocation, and
confirms at once, 140 Canons and Constitutions Ecclesiastical. In his Second
Year he causes his Judges to meet, and give their Opinion; and they
(notwithstanding the Onerousness hereof to the Subject) do declare, That the
King, without a Parliament, might do thus, that is, Make and Impose Canons; and
Deprive, in case of Non-Obedience. Observe likewise, that this was an
extrajudicial Opinion, there being no Cause depending before them: Such
slippery Tongues and Judgments have Lawyers, when they are under the Temptation
of Flattering Princes. This you have in Crook's Reports.

After this Sentence, no wonder, that you find the Ecclesiastics growing up to
an Exorbitancy of Power, during the Reign of this King. And in the Reign of
Charles the First, Laud makes the same steps. New Constitutions are advanced,
high ensnaring things devised; The Et-cetera Oath, Sports on the Lord's Days,
imposed. The Nation cannot endure it, Stirs are raised, a Parliament forced to
be called, and they prosecute a Redress of these Grievances so vehemently, that
King and Archbishop, and the whole Hierarchy with Him, is brought to an end.

In Charles the Second's Reign following, there is this one thing Remarkable,
That out of favor to the Papists, he puts forth a Declaration for Liberty of
Conscience to the Dissenters; he goes not to promote it in the Houses; if we
have Liberty, it must hang upon his own Will, or not at all. This the
Parliament resents, and as Illegal opposes it, and constrains him to Revoke his
Declaration. Here was there a plain Conquest, and indeed Triumph over the
Dispencing Power of our Kings: And yet James the Second, taking the Throne,
resumes the same, and persists in it with that Obstinacy, as we all know, has
occasioned our present Revolution.

The thing that gave the Crown and Clergy their Advantage, was an Error
generally received by the common Lawyers, even by Sir Edward Cook himself, that
what Power in the days of Usurpation was, de facto, exercised in England by the
Popes, does, de jure, belong to our Kings: Whereas indeed, it was not that
Unaccountable Power the Pope assumed, but the Ancient Power only exercised by
the Kings of England, that was restored and united to the Imperial Crown: Or,
as I have de industria before distinguished, it was not any Legislative Power
without a Parliament, but the Power of Jurisdiction only was annexed thereunto.

There are these Reasons for this do appear: 1. From those Acts, and all those
Acts of Parliament in Edward the 6th, and Elizabeth's Reign, or any other since
Henry the 8th, which have given to our Kings or Queens any such Power as I have
before mentioned: For such Acts must have been needless, if they had that
Power, and more than that, by their Supremacy only. 2. From those Instances
that may be given, and more particularly in the matter of Marriages, wherein
the Popes took power to Dispense, and our Kings, don't and cannot, without the
Parliament, as in the late known Lord Ross's Case* 3. Ab incommodo. If these
Lawyers were in the right, then must not only all the Arbitrary Proceedings of
all our former Princes, which have been still so much blamed and redressed by
Parliaments, but even the doings of our late King James the Second, (they being
all and every one of them alike grounded upon this bottom) be justified against
the whole Nation, and We condemned. 4. Ab Authoritate, From Authority greater
than these Lawyers, and that is the Opinion of the House of Commons; who in
that Year (or a little before) when the Judges gave King James such a Power in
Ecclesiasticals, as I have before recited, did cause a Message to be delivered
to him from them by their Speaker, which I will set down in the words of the
Journal: Mr. Speaker in his Speech to the King, declared, That his Majesty was
misinformed if any Man should deliver, That the King of England has any
Absolute Power in himself, either to alter Religion, or to make any Law
concerning the same, otherwise than in Temporal Cases, by consent of
Parliament: 1. Jac. 1. Fol. 567.569.


The truth is, That during the Reigns of Elizabeth, James the First, Charles
the First, when Nonconformists were outed of their Ministry and Livings by the
Canons, and not by legal Trials, and the same Despotical Power was exercised by
those Princes and the Bishops against the Puritans, as was exercised by James
the Second, the Eyes of our Churchmen were generally shut: But when those
Proceedings were turned against the Church, upon the very same Foundation, by
the late King, I may righteously expect, that the Eyes of such Men now, as well
as others, especially of some of the Learned (though they had the beam of
Non-resistance in them before) should be opened to see and acknowledge these
Truths, or Assertions of this Paper, viz. That it was not a Power of making
Ecclesiastical Laws, but a Power only that belonged to our Kings before the
Pope's Usurpation; that was restored to Henry. That our Ancient Kings had no
Legislative Power out of Parliament. That all Canons derive their Force from
the King, in his Legislative Capacity, that is, as Incorporated with his two
Houses. That they could not of themselves, before the first of Elizabeth, grant
any Commissions for the exercise of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, which yet is
less than Legislation. That the branch of that Law of Elizabeth granting so
much, being Repealed by Charles the First, there can never be any other such
Courts legally Erected. That Benefices are a Freehold, and that no Minister
ought to be deprived of them but by his Peers, or Trial of a Jury. I will add,
That the Subjection, which is required in the Sacred Scripture, to the Higher
Powers upon pain of Damnation, is a subjection to the Powers that Are, not to
the Powers that are Not. Now the Powers that Are, are the Powers according to
the Constitution. In this Case then, let us hearken to Bishop Bilson, and let
Bishop Sanderson be attended in other Cases, wherein he was more skilful than
in Politics. If a Prince should go about to Subject his Kingdom to a Foreign
Realm, or change the Form of a Commonwealth from Impery to Tyranny, (that is
from Regal to Despotical) or neglect the Laws Established, to execute his
Pleasure: In these and other Cases, that might be named, if the Nobles and
Commons agree together to defend the ancient accustomed Liberty, Regiment and
Laws, they are not to be accounted Rebels. In page 520. of his Book, about
Subjection and Rebellion.

Upon the whole that is here related, there may arise two Questions; which are
to be held distinct, though apt to be confounded.

The first Question is, If these things be so, what then shall we think indeed
of the Power of the Bishops? Unto this, that which some Lawyers say, is, Edward
the Sixth makes a Law, That the Bishops shall hold no Courts, but in the King's
Name. Mary Repeals this Law, (or this part of it). King James Repeals that of
Mary. It follows; (say they) that Edward's Statute must be Revived, and is of
Force; If not, the Common Law starts up, and that is declared therein, to say
the same. Nevertheless, that other Lawyers have something counter to this, and
some considerable thing too, I am not so malignant to the Bishops, as not to
believe: Let them that can, and can make it good, tell what.

The Second Question is, And what shall we think of the King's Power, as to
this present Ecclesiastical Commission? As for which, I must confess my self so
thoroughly satisfied with the Good intended, that I will say no more than this
only. Whereas, It was an Act of Parliament, wherely Henry and Edward had, and
Elizabeth should have had, the Power to appoint Commissions of this kind, that
is Ecclesiastical ones; though with this difference, that those Commissions
were to Determine things, this Commission only to Prepare things for the
determination of a Convocation, and the Parliament; which Power yet of
Preparation, was to have been granted by an Act, if the Bill for Comprehension
had first passed, as was intended by both Houses; and so the same had been done
Now, as in former Reigns, and then all had been well out of doubt. I do humbly
move, both for the vindication of the Right of Parliaments, and Preservation
also of the Honor and Pains of the Commissionated Bishops and Doctors, and the
taking what they have so kindly done in good part; That the Bill only for
Comp^ehension be the more suddenly revived, and that will make up the whole
Matter.

When the Act should have gone before the Commission, because the Commission
should have bin Authorized by the Act; to put the Commission before the Act,
has bin to put the Cart (as we say) before the Horse: And consequently, if the
Bill be revived, and passes, and the Commissioners Authorized thereby to
present what they have Prepared to the Convocation, and the Convocation what
they shall Determine thereupon to the Parliamens, then will the Horse be
re-duired before the Cart, and we shall drive o^ fair^y, they being both set
right. The Truth is, the main thing which I^ Comprehension, is the business to
be attended; and let but that (which is already in the Bill) be Established,
the several things, by way of Improvement thereof, with respect to the Book of
Common Prayer, the Book of Orders, the Book of Canons, the Government and
Discipline of the Church (which last, do require a more profound Reformation)
may stay a due time to receive Perfection. They must have time to be Debated,
to be Compounded, and God knows when so great a Work can be done. There is no
need, no reason that we wait for the Act of Comprehension till then, unless we
tarry (and it be some Ill Men's Plot) to have non: at all.

FINIS.

