ELECTION AND REPROBATION Scripturally and Experimentally Witnessed unto, etc.
Wherein the Love of God in Christ is Freely and Clearly held forth to all
Mankind. Given forth in tender Love for a general Good, but more particularly
for the Comfort of all who in Sincerity seek after the pure God, with Desires
to walk in his Holy Undefiled Way. Also, Diverse other weighty things, needful
to be duly considered and rightly understood, witnessed unto, as aforesaid.

By one who travails in Spirit for the gathering of the scattered Nations (who
are like troubled Waters) out of their Sins, home unto God, by Christ Jesus,
the good Shepherd: William Gibson. Look unto me and be ye saved, all the Ends
of the Earth; for I am God, and there is none else, a mighty God and a Savior,
etc. Isa. 45. 22. God's Will is that all men might be saved. Christ gave
himself a Ransom for all, 1 Timothy 2. 4, 6. Despisest thou the riches of his
goodness and forbearance, and long-suffering; not knowing that the goodness of
God leads thee to Repentance? but after the hardness and Impenitency of thy
Heart, treasurest up unto thy self wrath against the Day of wrath, and
Revelation of the righteous Judgments of God, who will render to every man
according to his Deeds, Romans 2. 4, 5, 6. Printed in the Year 1678.

An Epistle to the Reader.
Reader,
REmember the Command and Example of Christ Jesus, and obey and follow the
same, who said, Learn of me, I am Meek and Lowly, and ye shall find Rest to
your Souls; if thou take his counsel and followst his example, then thou will
read in meekness and lowliness of Mind, and if thou so read, I question not,
but what I have writ in this following Testimony will meet with an answer in
thy Conscience, and some benefit may come to thee thereby, and if so it come to
pass, it will be matter of true rejoicing to me; for I do take great pleasure
in the Well-being of the Sons and Daughters of men every way, both in Soul and
Body.

It is certain, that the Holy, Glorious Lord God of Heaven and Earth does give
Life and a Being upon Earth unto all mankind, for one and the same purpose,
even that all should serve him with their Souls and with their Bodies, which
are his; it is equitable in God to require this service, therefore says the
holy Apostle, This is your reasonable service, at this the Law of God directly
pointed (given by Moses unto the Family of Abraham, after through sin mankind
was fallen from God) saying, Hear O Israel, Thou shall have no other Gods but
me, thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy Heart, and with all thy Soul,
and with all thy Mind; this is the first and greatest Commandment, and the
second is like unto it, Thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy self. Christ Jesus
in the days of his Flesh, did not only ratify and confirm this, and commend
the same to his Disciples and to the Multitude, but also opened or expounded
the latter, yea, enlarged the same unto his Disciples, saying, Love your
Enemies, do good to those who do despightfully use you* and persecute you.
Christ said to the Jews, Think ye I came to destroy the Law? I tell ye nay, I
came not to destroy, but to fulfill; those who did believe in him, and receive
him, he did endue with power, to love God with all their Heart, Soul and Mind,
and their Neighbors as themselves, yea, to love and pray for their Enemies;
and its written, as many as received him, to them he gave power to become the
Sons of God* and those Believers in him (who received him into their hearts by
Faith) were not born of flesh, nor of blood, nor of the will of man, but of
God, these were born of the Spirit, and led by it, and they are the Children of
God, who are led by the Spirit of God, as the Apostle says, Christ Jesus,
through the Grace, Favor and tender Mercy of God the Father tasted death for
Every man, as says the holy Apostle: and Christ says, I am the Light of the
World: mark that; he is not only the Life and Light of his Disciples, whom he
has gathered out of the World) who are not of the world, as he says, and
therefore the world does hate them) but he is also the Light of the World,
which lies in wickedness, and by his light shining in their dark hearts he
lets them see their sins, and reproves them thereby, and calls of them thereby
to Repent: Christ says, Every one that does Evil, hates the Light, and will
not bring their deeds unto it; but every one that does Truth, brings his
deeds unto the Light that they may be made man fest, that they are wrought in
God, who is LIHGT, as says the holy Apostle John: and he says, Christ is the
propitiation for our sins, and not for our sins only, but also for the sins of
the WHOLE WORLD; mark that: he is the common and universal Savior, who died
for all, lights all, and is the propitiation or Intercessor provided for all,
but none can have the benefit of his Death or Life, or his Light, or of his
Mediatorship unto their Eternal Salvation without Faith in him; Abraham saw his
day and believed in him and was glad, and the Fathers under the Law and before
the Law, believed God and his Promises, which are all yea and amen in him; the
Gentiles, who had not the Law in the outward Letter did the things contained in
the Law, showing the deeds of the Law written in their hearts; as says the
Apostle, by virtue of his enlightening and enlivening presence they were
naturalliz'd or made naturally to do the things contained in the Law; and so
were made partakers of that nature which is Divine, of which nature the true
Believers were and are made partakers, as the holy Apostle says, here take
notice, that nature, or the nature of man considered as he is in the fall from
God; man in and by this nature, fallen, corrupted and degenerated into a plant
of a strange Vine unto God; in this estate, in this nature he cannot do the
things contained in the Law of God, but contrariwise, as the Apostle says, the
natural man receives not the things of the Spirit of God, for they are
foolishness unto him, therefore those who without the Law in the outward Letter
do the things contained in it, these deeds are done by the verture of the
heavenly and divine nature or spirit of the Lamb of God, who as John Baptist
says, comes to take away the sins of the World [Mark] the sins of the World.
So it is certainly true which Christ Jesus says, without me ye can do nothing;
and this of old was and now is as true, in and among the Gentiles, as among the
Jews; there is not Salvation in any other; there is no name given under Heaven,
by which any can be saved, but by him whom the Father has given to be the
Light of the Gentiles, to open the blind Eyes, to bring the Prisoner out of the
Prison*house; as its written in the Scriptures of Truth: he is the Eternal
Word, who was in the beginning, by whom God made all things, as its written,
Joh. 1. God created all things by Jesus Christ, as says the holy Apostle Paul:
he is the Rock that followed Israel, of which Rock they drank, and of which
they did eat, they all eat the same spiritual meat, and drank the same
spiritual drink, they eat and drank of the Rock that followed them, and that
Rock was Christ: By Faith in this Rock Abel offered a more acceptable Sacrifice
than Cain; by Faith in this Rock Abraham offered up his Isaac, believed God,
and it was accounted to him for Righteousness; by Faith in him all the Just
lives to God, through all Ages: he is the Rock, on which the true Church is
builded, against which the Gates of Hell can never prevail, let them open as
wide as they can. It is as true in all mankind as it was in the holy Apostle,
he said, of my self I can do nothing, -- but he also said, I can do all things
through Christ that strengthens me; he is the blessed Seed, who bruiseth the
Serpents head, in all who believe in and follow him; in him the Election
stands: Gods will is, that all men may know him, and believe in him, and be
saved, as the holy Apostle says; and God who cannot Lie, said by the Mouth of
his holy Prophet Isaiah, Look unto me O all ye ends of the Earth and be ye
saved; the Apostle John says, that we have seen and do testify that the
Father has sent the Son to be the Savior of the World; and the Apostle Paul
says, Christ gave himself a Ransom for All; mark that, here is none Reprobated
by him from this Ransom. The holy Ghost spoke by the mouth of the holy Prophet,
God does not willingly afflict nor grieve the Children of men, Lament. 3. 33.
read the Chapter through, and the will of God is the Sanctification of
mankind, as says the holy Apostle, holiness becomes mankind through all
Generations, but sin is a Reproach unto any people, as its written, but more
especially to the Professors of Christianity.

The holy fear of the Lord God is the beginning of true, pure heavenly Wisdom,
and the secrets of the Lord are with them that fear him, as says the holy man
of God; let this holy fear have place in thy heart, and then the pure peaceable
wisdom of God will over-shadow thee: So unto the Grace of God which does appear
to thee, to teach thee to deny all Ungodliness, I do commend thee.

W. G.
London, the 8th day of the 10th Month.
ELECTION AND REPROBATION Scripturally and Experimentally Witnessed unto, etc.
Concerning Election and Reprobation.
John Blaneh Has taken upon him to speak concerning Jacob and Esau, page 157.
of his Manuscript, he says, Before the Children knew good or evil, Jacob have
I Loved, and Esau have I hated.

Answ. Reader, J. B. no doubt would have us take these words as words of the
holy Scriptures; but the Scriptures do not say, that God said he Hated Esau
before he knew Good or Evil; but when the Woman felt the Children struggling in
her Womb, she did enquire of the Lord, saying, How is it that it is thus with
me? and the Lord said unto her, Two Nations are in thy Womb, and two manner of
People shall be separated from thy Bowels, and the Elder should serve the
Younger. But he did not say when the Children were in the Womb, that he hated
Esau; though many Professors in England, Scotland, and elsewhere have so taken
it, but their mistake herein has been great, and greatly Hurtful and
destructive unto many. Reader, take notice that after the Apostle in the 9th
Chapter to the Romans has repeated what God said to the Woman while the
Children were in her Womb; he brings the following words (As it is written,
Jacob have I loved, and Esau have I hated) out of the first Chapter of Malachi,
where the Lord said to Israel by Malachi, Was not Esau Jacob 's Brother? yet I
loved Jacob, and I hated Esau, and I laid his Mountains waste for the Dragons
of the Wilderness: These words were spoken by the Lord, through the Prophet
Malachi unto the Offspring of Jacob, long after Jacob and Esau had finished
their Days upon Earth. Jacob was a plain faithful Man, made so and kept so by
the Spirit of the Lord, whom he loved: Esau was a profane Man, who relected
the Counsel of God, in Disobeying his good Spirit which he gave him to Instruct
him, by which he was lighted to know Good from Evil, and therein Power was
freely tendered to him (and Time) to believe and obey; so it was possible that
he might believe and obey: so that his Unbelief and Disobedience was not of
God, but of the Devil; not according to the Will of God, who would have all Men
and Women saved, but according to the Will of the Devil, who would have all Men
and Women destroyed, whom that profane Spirit, the Prince of the power of the
Air did Defile, Corrupt, and brought into Profaneness; so he that was the
False Teacher to Adam and Eve, who led them to break the holy Law of God, and
sin against him, the same led Esau into his Profaneness, because of which he
was hated of God: and the same Evil teacher led Cain to Kill his Righteous
Brother Abel, whose Sacrifice was accepted of the pure God, because it was
offered up with a Clean, Right and Harmless Mind, into which Mind he was
brought, and in the same kept by God his Maker, out of the Evil Spirit, which
corrupted his Brother Cain; and his God, who never slumbers nor sleeps, kept
him, yea, he gave him Dominion over the Evil, Hurtful Spirit, and he is
Eternally blessed, though he was slain by his Ungodly Brother: And God said
unto Cain [before he killed his Brother] Why art thou Wroth? And why is thy
Countenance fallen? If thou do well, shall thou not be accepted? And if thou
do not well, sin lies at thy Door, Genesis 4. 6, 7. God (who said unto Cain, If
thou do well, shall thou not be accepted?) did not Limit or hinder him from
doing well, nor did God fore-appoint him to do Evil; neither did he limit nor
hinder Esau from doing well, neither did he fore-appoint himself to do Evil.
Edom, the Generation of Esau said, We are impoverished, we will return and
build the Desolate places: The Lord said, They shall build, but I will throw
down* and they shall call them the border of Wickedness, against whom the Lord
has Indignation, etc. This Generation of Esau were rejected of God, because of
their Wickedness, Mal. 1, 2, 3, 4.
which (not God, but) the Devil was the Author of, and so their Destruction was
of themselves, who rejected the Counsel of God, who as the holy Apostle says,
Would have all men to be saved -- for there is one God, and one Mediator
between God and Men, the Man Christ Jesus, who gave himself a Ransom for All
[Mark that, for All] 1 Timothy 3. 4, 5, 6.

In the Prophecy of Obediah there is much said concerning Esau and his
Generation, and of the just Judgments of God against them for their Wickedness,
Verse 6. (its said thus) How are the things of Esau searched out! how are his
hidden things sought up! Verse 9, 10. God threatened to cut off every one of the
Mount of Esau; for said God, For thy Violence against thy Brother Jacob, shame
shall cover thee, and thou shall be cut off forever, Verse. 18. And the House of
Jacob shall be a Fire, and the House of Joseph a Flame, and the House of Esau
for Stubble, etc. Reader, here observe, God by his holy Prophet shows the
Cause, why his hatred was kindled against Esau, and his Generation, House,
Family or Offspring, and why he would cut off or destroy them, even because of
their Wickedness and Rebellion.

The Apostle Paul says, The Wrath of God is revealed from Heaven against all
Ungodliness and Unrighteousness of men, who hold the Truth in Vnrighteonsness,
because that which may be known of God is manifest in them, for God has showed
it unto them: and because when they knew God, they glorified him not as God;
and even as they did not like to retain God in their Knowledge, God gave them
up to a Reprobate Mind, etc. Romans 1. 18, 19, 21, 28. And again, he speaks
against those who did not know the Long-suffering and Goodness of God to lead
them to Repentance; and he says, God will render to every man according to
their deeds; and he also says, There is no respect of Persons with God, etc.
Romans 2. 4, 6, 11. And the same Paul puts the Question, saying, What if God,
willing to show his Wrath and to make his power known, endured with much
Long-suffering (on) the Vessel of Wrath fitted to Destruction? Romans 9. 22. Thus
it appears that God waited long upon the Evildoers to lead them to Repentance,
But when they knew God, they did not Glorify him as God, neither did they like
to retain God in their Knowledge; and after God had suffered and waited long to
lead them to Repentance, and they did not turn at his Call and Reproof, then he
gave them up to a Reprobate Mind: They had a time in which they might have been
made of an Heavenly, Spiritual Mind, in which they might have had Life and
Peace.

The Prophet Jeremiah says of the Apostatized Jews, who were the Children of
Jacob according to the Flesh, Reprobate Silver shall men call them, because the
Lord has rejected them, Jer. 6. 30.

Reader, the People of God called Quakers, do own Election and Reprobation, but
do utterly deny That God has ordained that some men should be Wicked, or that
he [WITH-HOLDS] his Light, Grace or Spirit from them, and so puts them UPON A
FORCE to be Wicked, for want of the gift of his Spirit, Grace and Light, and
afterward casts them into Hell, for not obeying him, when they had no power
offered or given to them (by him) to enable them to obey: No, God's Way is
Equal, as his Servants of old have testified, Where he gives much, he requires
of man accordingly; and where he gives less, he requires accordingly, and he
that is faithful in a little he will make Ruler over much. The Apostle Peter
said, The Saints were Elect, according to the foreknowledge of God the Father,
through Sanctification of the Spirit unto Obedience, etc. 1 Pet. 1. 2.

And we do deny that any Man or Woman is Elect of God, that is, Chosen of God,
without the Sanctification of, or by the Spirit of Truth, and Obedience unto
it. The Apostle Paul says unto the Saints at Rome, Those whom God did
foreknow, them he did predestinate (that is, fore-ordain) to be conformed to
the Image of his Son, (that is, to the Likeness of his Son) Romans 8. 29. But it
is certain that none can be made Conformable to the Likeness of his Son,
without he be Sanctified by the Spirit of Truth; and none can be so Sanctified
by the Spirit of Truth, but those who believein and obey the same Spirit; for
that is it which Christ promised should lead the Saints into all Truth. The
Apostle Paul writ to the Church of Christ at Ephesus, saying, Blessed be the
God and Father of*our Lord Jesus Christ, who has blessed us with all spiritual
Blessings in heavenly Places in Christ, according as he has chosen us (that
is, Elected us) in him before the Foundation of the World, that we should be
holy without blame before him in Love, etc. Ephesians. 1. 3, 4.

We do believe that God does foreknow those who become his, while they are
ignorant of him: And we do believe, that he has chosen them in his Son, before
the Foundation of the World, Christ the Son of God is the Light of the World,
he lights every one that comes into World, for one and the same Cause,
Purpose or End, even that all might believe in him and obey him, and through
Faith and Obedience might be Chosen or Elect in him, and so have Eternal Life
in him, He that believes in the Son of God has Everlasting Life, he that does
not believe in the Son of God shall not see Life, John 38. Again, the first
Epistle of John 5. 12. He that has the Son, has Life; and he that has not
the Son of God, has not Life: and such are not Elect in him, but are under
condemnation, because of their Unbelief, which Unbelief the Devil [not God] i^
the Author of.

Reader, thus we own Election and Reprobation, as did the holy Men of old; but
we deny that those who continue in sin, and plead for it term of Life, are in
that state chosen of God; and we do deny an UNCONDITIONAL Election and
Reprobation, (as held forth by many of the Professors in our time) for the
condition of Election is Faith in God and Christ, and Obedience unto the Spirit
of Truth, which is given to lead the Saints into all Truth, and to conviuce the
World of sin. And the condition of Reprobation and Damnation, is Unbelief in
God and Christ, and Disobedience unto, and Rebellion against the Spirit of
Truth. The Apostle Paul says to the Saints at Rome, If ye live after the
Flesh, ye shall dye; but if ye through the Spirit do mortify the deeds of the
Body, ye shall live: for as many as are led by the Spirit of God, are the Sons
of God, Romans 8. 13, 14. And further, the same Apostle says, His Servants ye
are to whom ye obey, whether of Sin unto Death, or of Obedience unto
Righteousness, Romans 6. 16. So here the holy Apostle declares the GOSPEL
conditions of Election and Reprobation; or choosing to Eternal Life, and casting
off unto Eternal Damnation.

Christ is the Elect, the Chosen of God. Behold (says God) my Servant, whom I
uphold; mine Elect, in whom my Soul delights. I will keep thee, and give thee
for a Covenant of the People, for a Light to the Gentiles, (to open the blind
Eyes) to bring out the Prisoners from the Prison, and them that sit in Darkness
out of the Prisonhouse, Isa. 42. 1, 6, 7. He is Gal. 3. 16. Genesis 3 15.
the blessed Seed, in whom the blessing is, to whom the Promise is, That he
shall bruise the Serpents Head, who brought in the Curse and Reprobation; He is
able to save to the uttermost, all that come unto God by him, Heb. 7. 25. he is
ordained of the Father to put an end to Sin, to finish Transgression and bring
in everlasting Righteou^ness. He is the Lamb of God, who tak^th away the Sin of
the World; he is ^the Author of eternal Saltation unto all them that obey him,
Heb. 5. 9. Mark, here obedience unto Christ is required in order to Salvation,
this is a Gospel Truth.

The Apostle Peter said unto the Jews, God having raised up his Son Jesus, sent
him to bless you, in turning away every one of you from his Iniquities, Acts 3.
26. (Mark) those who are blessed by Jesus Christ, and Elect in him, they are
turned away from their Iniquities by him; and in vain do they profess him, and
to be his Elect, who continue in their sins, and plead for their continuance
therein for term of Life.

God said by the Mouth of his holy Prophet Isaiah, Look unto me, and be ye
saved, all the ends of the Earth; for I am God, and there is none else, Isa.
45. 22. read the Chapter through. God does largely therein express by plain
words his Universal Love to Mankind. Observe Reader, he calls to the Heathen
even to all the Ends of the Earth to look to him for Salvation [Mark] that for
which one man is called to look to him, for the same all Mankind is called to
look to him (every one in the Day of their Visitation) viz. for Salvation.
Christ is the true Light, who lights every man that comes into the World,
according to John 1 9. he is the Light of the World, as he said, John 8 12. 12.
46 He said, Believe in the Light, that ye may be Children of the Light. So all
being onlightned by Christ, in the Light they may look unto God, and be saved,
if they believe in it: but if they believe not in the Light, but hate it, they
cannot have Salvation, Joh. 3. 19, 20. 1 John 1* 5. and such Perish, whose
Destruction is of themselves, and the Lord God is clear, for the Unbelief and
the Disobedience of those who Perish is not of God, but of the wicked One. God
said by the Mouth of David, ^y People would not hearken to my Voice, and Israel
would none of me; So I gave them up unto their own Hearts Lusts, and they
walked in their own ways: O that my People had hearkened unto me; and Israel
had walked in my ways! Psalm. 81. 11, 12, 13. God spoke by the Mouth of Hosea
unto Israel, saying, O Israel, thou destroyest thy self; but in me is thy help,
Hosea 13. 9. God said by the Mouth of the Apostle Peter, That the Wicked bring
Destruction upon themselves, 2 Pet. 2. 1. Read the Chapter through. Christ
Jesus said, O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou that killest the Prophets, and stonest
them who are sent unto thee! how often would I have gathered thy Children
together, even as a Hen gathers her Chickens under her Wings, and ye would
not? Matthew. 23. 37. Luke 13. ^4.

Reader, when Christ would have garnered the Inhabitants of Jerusalem unto
their Immortal Souls Rest, they rejected him; And he did not tell them that
they could not come to him, for they might have come to him, or else it had
been vain Words for him to tell them that he would have gathered them; But he
told them, they WOULD NOT come to him: So it was their own Self-will, which did
hinder them from coming to Christ and not Gods holy Will, for his will is that
all might be saved. God said by the Mouth of Solomon, That the Wicked would
have none of his Counsel; And he said, they despised all his Reproof: Therefore
(said God) they shall eat the Fruit of their own way, etc. Prove. 1. 30, 31.
Christ is the true Light, who lights every man that comes into the World (as
I have showed before) and he has tasted Death for every Man, Heb. 2. 9. The
Apostle John said, Christ is the Propitiation for the Sins of the whole World,
1 John 2. 2. And he further said, We have seen and do testify, that the Father
sent the Son to be the Savior of the World, 1 John 4. 14. The Apostle Paul
said, There is one God, and one Mediator between God and Men, the man Christ
Jesus, who gave himself a Ransom for ALL, mark for all: And he said, God's will
is, that ALL MEN might be saved; mark that: 1 Timothy 2. 4, 5, 6.

Reader, by what I have cited and writ in the holy Scripture words, and
according to them, it does plainly appear, that God has not Created nor
Foreordained any Man or Woman on purpose that they should be Wicked, and so to
be Damned, or Destroyed, or cast into Hell, but he does give to all People a
Day or Time of Visitation by his Grace, Light and Spirit, by the same to lead
them out of the broad way that leads to Destruction; and all those that
continue therein, till the Lord cease to strive with them (for their Salvation)
such perishing, their Destruction is of themselves, and the Lord God is clear.
I have no pleasure in the Death of him that dies, says the Lord; wherefore
turn your selves and live ye, Ezekiel. 18. 32. As I live, says the Lord God, I
have no pleasure in the Death of the WICKED, but that the Wicked turn from his
evil way and live. Turn ye, turn ye from your evil Ways, for why will ye die,
O House of Israel? Ezekiel. 33. 11.

The Apostle Peter Exhorted those who had believed in Christ, saying, Give
diligence to make your Calling and Election sure; giving all diligence, add to
your Faith, Virtue; and to Virtue, Knowledge; and to Knowledge, Temperance; and
to Temperance, Patience; and to Patience, Godliness; and to Godliness,
Brotherly-kindness; and to Brotherly-kindness, Charity: For if these things be
in you, and abound, they make you that you shall neither be barren nor
unfruitful in the Knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ* (but he that lacks
these things is Blind, and cannot see afar off, and has forgotten that he was
purged from his old Sins) For if you do these things, YE SHALL NEVER FALL; for
so an entrance shall be ministered unto you abundantly, into the everlasting
Kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, 2 Pet. 1. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11.

Reader, here thou may see that the Apostle took great care of those who had
believed in Christ, that they might make their Calling and Election sure: So it
appears that diligence in attending upon his Grace (by which they were saved)
was required of them, in which diligence they being found, the Spirit of Grace
did make them Fruitful in those good things before mentioned; and the diligent
did not fall, but made their Calling and Election sure: the same Apostle
Exhorted the Saints, saying, Beware lest ye also being led away with the error
of the Wicked fall from your own stedfastness; but grow in Grace, and in the
Knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, 2 Pet. 3. 17, 18.

Here again the Apostle shows not only his great care that the Saints might
make their Calling and Election sure, and so STAND, but also shows that it
was possible that they might be led away with the Error of the Wicked, and so
FALL, if they did not diligently attend upon the Spirit of Grace, which
teaches to deny all Ungodliness and Worldly Lusts, and to live Soberly and
Godly in this present World.

Heb. 3. 12, 13.
The Author to the Hebrews says, Take heed, Brethren, lest there be in any of
you an evil Heart of Unbelief, in departing from the Living God; lest any of
you be hardened through the Deceitfulness of sin. Here again the Apostle does
not only show his great care that those Believers might not depart from the
Living God, but does also show that they might depart from him, if they did not
diligently wait upon him, as aforesaid. Thus it does plainly appear, that Faith
and Obedience are Gods conditions, upon which God does Elect, that is, Choose
People to inherit Eternal Life. And the conditions, upon which God does Reject,
Reprobate and Turn people into Hell is Unbelief, Rebellion, Departing from him
into Apostasy. The Apostle writ of some who knew God, who when they knew him
glorified him not as God, neither were thankful; [but became vain in their
imaginations, and their foolish Hearts were darkened] and as they did not like
to RETAIN GOD IN THEIR KNOWLEDGE, God gave them up to a REPROBATE MIND, Romans 1.
21, 28. Now these knew God, and he gave them a time of Visitation, to the end
they might have been Everlastingly happy: So it was their own Self-will, and
unthankful Evil hearts, which did draw back from the Living God, which did
deprive them of Eternal Rest and Peace; God did not will that they should draw
back and depart from him; For Gods will is, that all People may be Holy: and as
the Apostle says, God's Will is, that all men may know the Truth, and be
saved, 1 Timothy 2. 4. verse. 5, 6. He says, There is one God, and one Mediator
between God and Man, the man Christ Jesus, who gave himself a Ransom for ALL to
be testified in due time. Mark Reader, Christ gave himself a Ransom for All;
here is none shut out by him, here is none Reprobated by him from this RANSOM;
he is God's free gift to the Gentiles or Heathens, as well as to the Jews, yea,
to be God's Salvation to the ends of the Earth: he is the Shilow, the peaceable
Savior, unto whom the gathering of all Nations must be, even as God has
promised; I will declare the Decree, the Lord has said unto me, thou art my
Son, this day have I begotten thee: Ask of me and I will thee the Heathen for
thine Inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the Earth for thy Possession,
Psalm. 2. 8, 9. He tasted Death for every man, Heb. 2. 9. He is the true Light,
which lights every man that comes into the World, John 1. 9. and 8. 12. 12.
46. He is the Propitiation not for our Sins only, said the Apostle, but also
for the Sins of the whole World, 1 John 2. 2. And we have seen and do testify,
that the Father sent the Son to be the Savior of the World, 1 John 1. 4. The
Apostle Peter says, God is Long-suffering to usward, not willing that any
should Perish, but that all should come to Repentance, 2 Pet. 3. 9.

Note Reader, the holy Apostles and the rest of the faithful Christians were
come to Repentance, and were Regenerated and Born of God, and so were new
Creatures in Christ Jesus But the Long-suffering of God is exercised toward
the Ungodly, who is not willing that any should perish, but that all should
come to Repentance; and he gives them time to repent, and does visit them with
his good Spirit in tender Love, to enable them to Repent; but many reject his
tender Love herein, and will not obey his Voice, as he said, Israel would have
none of me; and as Christ said to the Jews, Ye will not come to me, that ye
might have Life.

Christ Jesus the Son of God said unto the Angel of the Church of Thyatira,
That he gave the Woman Jezabel space to repent of her Fornications, and she
repented not, Rev. 2. 18, 21. Mark Reader, though God gave her Space, that is,
Time to Repent, yet she Repented; now her not Repenting proceeded from her own
[Self] willfullness, and not from God's holy Will; for inasmuch as God gave her
time to Repent, she was put into a condition by him to Repent, and therefore
might have Repented within the time he gave her to Repent, though afterward it
might be hid from her Eyes, as it was in the Case of Esau.

The Author to the Hebrews Exhorted the Believers in Christ, to Follow Peace
with all men, and Holiness, without which NO MAN shall see the Lord; looking
diligently, lest any man fail of the grace of God, (or fall from it) lest any
Root of Bitterness spring up and trouble you, and thereby many be defiled, Heb.
12. 14, 15, 16, 17. Here the holy Man labors to keep them to the Grace of God,
which does bring Salvation, which did teach them to deny Ungodliness, and to
live Soberly and Godly in the present World: For he knew that the Devil (who
did and does go about the Saints, ever seeking which of them he may Devour)
would seek to draw them from the Grace of God; and he knew that it was possible
that he might prevail upon them, and might lead them to do Despite against the
Spirit of Grace, if they did not Watch deligently against him; and he knew if
once they were drawn from the Grace of God, then the Root of Bitterness would
spring up speedily, by which many might be Defiled; but as a provision against
this Evil, he Exhorted them to Watch, as aforesaid; in which Watch they being
found, the Grace of God was sufficient to preserve and uphold them, even as the
Lord said unto Paul (that diligent Watcher) My Grace is sufficient for thee; my
strength is made perfect in Weakness: The Apostle Paul told the Galatians,
saying, Whosoever of you are Justified by the Law, (or seek to be Justified by
it) ye are fallen from Grace, Gal. 5. 4. The Author to the Hebrews says, He
that despised Moses 's Law, dyed without Mercy under two or three Witnesses; of
how much sorer punishment, suppose ye shall they be thought worthy, who have
trodden under Foot the Son of God, and have counted the Blood of the Covenant,
WHEREWITH HE WAS SANCTIFIED AN UNHOLY THING, and has done Despite unto the
Spirit of GRACE, Heb. 10. 28, 29.

Reader, here take notice that the holy Man of God, who writ this Epistle,
speaks of some who was Sanctified by the Blood of the Covenant, who afterward
did tread under Foot the Son of God, and counted the Blood of the Covenant, by
which he was Sanctified, an Unholy thing, and did Despite unto the Spirit of
Grace: Now he that did so, did fall from the Grace, as the holy Man said to the
Galatians. To the same purpose the said author speaks in Heb. 6. 4, 5, 6. For
it is impossible for those who were once enlightened, and have tasted of the
heavenly Gift, and were made partakers of the Holy Ghost; and have tasted the
good Word of God, and the Powers of the World to come; if they shall fall away,
to renew them again unto Repentance; seeing they crucify unto themselves the
Son of God afresh, and put him to an open shame, Heb. 6. 4, 5, 6. Heb. 10. 26,
27. These mentioned by the Apostle are Apostates, grown old in Iniquity, grown
ripe for Vengeance, grown past feeling, their Consciences seared with a hot
Iron, 1 Timothy 4. 2. But, note Reader, there may be some sliping and sliding in
the Spiritual Journey, after Man or Woman is come to know the Truth and a place
in it; this I say may come through want of watchfulness on the Creatures part,
and yet through the tender Mercy of the Lord snch may be renewed into savor
with God again through his righteous Judgments, and the Creatures unfeigned
Repentance: And this Repentance and renewing into favor with God is wrought by
the virtue of the Mediator and Advocate, Christ Jesus; At this the Apostle
points, saying, Mylittle Children, these things write I unto you, that ye Sin
not; and if any man Sin, we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the
righteous, 1 John 2. 1. But let all who knows the Truth, and has a Place or a
Habitation in it, keep in the holy fear of the Lord God steadfast, and lowly in
mind; and let none by what is here said take liberty to Sin that Grace or
Favor may abound, no, God for-bid, as says the holy Apostle, Romans 6. 1. The
Apostle Peter says, For if after they have escaped the Polutions of the World,
through the Knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ; they are again
Entangled therein, and OVERCOME; the latter end with them is worse than the
beginning; for it had been better for them not to have known the Way of
Righteousness, than after they have known it, to turn from the holy
Commandment, DELIVERED UNTO THEM. But it is happened (or come to pass) unto
them according to the true Proverb, The Dog is turned to his own Vomit again,
and the Sow that was washed to her wallowing in the Mire, 2 Pet. 2. 20, 21, 22.
Here the Apostle plainly shows, that some had escaped the Polutions of the
World, through the Knowledge of Christ Jesus, they had the holy Commandment
delivered to them; and they turned from it, and they turned like the Dog to his
own Vomit, or like the Sow that was washed to her wallowing in the Mire. God
did not will that they should turn from the holy Commandment which he had
delivered unto them, nor that they should turn into the Polutions of the World
again, out of which they had escaped through the Knowledge of our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ; for God who is unchangeable, has said, If any man draw
back, my Soul shall have no Pleasure in him, Heb. 10. 38.

The Apostle Paul said, We then, ^^ Workers together -- beseech you also, that
ye receive not the Grace of God IN VAIN, 2 Cor. 1. 6. Note, Reader, here the
Apostle shows his Godly Jealousy over these Corinthians, though they had
received the Grace of God, lest their receiving of it should be in Vain unto
them; this shows that the Apostle saw that men might receive the Grace of God,
and through their own Neglect, Sloth and Unwatchfulness might fall from it and
Perish; and certainly some did so, as Jude does show in his Epistle, and Paul
in his Epistle unto the Galatians, he said unto them, O foolish Galatians! who
has bewitched you? and he said unto them, Whosoever of you are Justified by
the Law, ye are fallen from Grace, Gal. 5. 4. and 3. 1. Note Reader, their
falling from Grace was not because the Grace was not sufficient to uphold them,
but because of their Sloth, Negligence and Unwatchfullness: the Apostle Peter
Exhorted those he writ to, To be good Stewards of the manifold GRACE of God, 1
Pet. 4. 10. those who were good Stewards did grow in Grace, and were saved by
it, as the holy Apostle says, By Grace ye are saved, through Faith; and he
says, It is a good thing that the Heart be established with Grace. It has
appeared to all men, as he says, Titus 12. 11. Ephesians 2. 5, and 8. Hebrews
13. 9. and its appearance unto all men is for one and the same Cause, Purpose
or End, even to bring Salvation unto all the good Stewards of the Grace, have
Salvation by it. But the Evil and Unjust Stewards do despite unto the Spirit of
Grace (read Heb. 10. 26, 27, 28, 29, 30.) and such are the Idle Stewards, wh o
are spoken of by Christ in his Parables, saying, Take that Unjust and Idle
Servant, who has hid his Lord's Money in the Earth, and Bind him Hand and
Foot, and cast him into utter Darkness, where there is Weeping and Wailing, and
Gnashing of Teeth. By this it does appear, that the holy Apostles did believe
and know, that the Grace of God, which brings Salvation, which has appeared
unto all men, is sufficient to bring and give Salvation unto all men. And those
who have not Salvation by it, the Fault is not in God or Christ, or the Grace,
but in themselves. The Sluggard is clothed with Rags; and the Rebellious shall
dwell in a dry Land; the Backslider God has no pleasure in, he shall be filled
with his own Evil Ways; and Rebellion is as the sin of Witchcraft, but the
diligent hand makes Rich; and he that is faithful in a little shall be made
Ruler over much: God rejects the Proud; but he teaches the Humble; he gives
increase of Grace and of Faith unto them. The holy Apostles great Labor and
Care was, to bring people to the Grace of God, and to keep them to it; they
knew the sufficiency of it; yet also knew that the Serpent (who drew Adam and
Eve from God, to sin against him) would labor to keep people in Rebellion
against the Grace of God, and also would labor to draw those into Rebellion
against it, who were come into Obedience to it; and they knew the Serpent might
readily prevail if a diligent Watch were not kept; and this our Lord Jesus well
knew, and therefore said unto his Disciples, What I say unto one, I say unto
all, Watch; WATCH and Pray lest ye enter into Temptation. The holy Prophet
said, I will hear what the Lord will say, for he will speak Peace to his
Saints; but let them not turn again to Folly.

In page 17. J. B. quotes the words which God spoke to Moses, saying, I will
have Mercy on whom I will have Mercy; these words Paul repeated in Romans 9. and
he added these words (viz.) whom he will he heardneth*

To the first I Answer, Paul speaking to the Geutiles, or Heathens concerning
the Jews, said, God has concluded them All in Unbelief, that he might have
MERCY UPON ALL. Mark that, upon ALL, Romans 11. 32. And Verse. 26. he says, All
Israel shall be saved. Verse. 27. This is my Covenant unto them when I shall
take away their sins.

To the second I Answer, God's Grace has appeared, and is a free Gift of God,
given unto all men, to teach all men to deny Ungodliness, and to live Godly in
this present World; he gives all a time also in which they may turn unto him
from their Evil Ways, and if they turn not to him in the Day of their
Visitation, the Lord does cease to strive with them for their Salvation, who
regard not the Day of their Visitation, Luke 19. 44. As he did with the People
of Jerusalem of old, who WEPT over them, and said, O that thou had known in
this Day the things which belong to thy Peace! But now they are hid from thy
Eyes, now your House is left unto you desolate, etc. Mat. 23. 28, 29. Luke 13.
34, 35. Thus it plainly appears that there was a time in which they might have
known the things which did belong to their Peace; but they neglecting that
time, God ceased to strive with them, and shut the Door of Mercy against them*
So when God ceased to strive with them, then they hardened SWIFTLY; for then the
Devil had them at his pleasure: Soit was and is he that does hearden peoples
Hearts against God, by leading them into sin; and this the Apostle well knew,
and therefore Exhorted the Saints, To Watchfullness and Faithfullness, lost
(said he) any of you be hardened through the Deceitfullness of Sin, Heb. 3. 13.
And though its said, God hardened Pharaoh 's Heart; yet I say, as the Apostle
says, God's Will is, that All Men may know the Truth and be saved; and I say,
there was a time when God would have softened his Heart, and have made him a
good man; but he withstanding the Day of God's tender Visitation, which was in
order to have made him a Tender hearted good Man; God ceased to strive with him
for his Salvation, and th en the Devil [That great Hardier of Hearts] had his
Will of him. And though God said to Pharaoh, I have raised thee up to make my
Power known in thee; yet God did not say to him, I Created thee on purpose that
thou should be a Wicked, Cruel and Hard hearted Man; NO, it were great
Blasphemy to say or think so; though after he was hardened, God suffered him
for a time to oppress his People, yea, to rise higher and higher in his
Oppression, yet afterward God's Power was known in his Destruction, and in the
deliverance of his own People.

Pharaoh said unto Moses and Aaron, I have sinned; the Lord is Righteous, and I
and my People are wicked, Exodus 9. 27. Again he said, I have sinned against the
Lord your God, and against you; forgive I pray thee, my Sin, Chap. 10. ver. 26,
27. Again, When Pharaoh saw there was Respite, he hardened his Heart, Chap. 8.
ver. 15. Again, Pharaoh hardened his Heart this time also, ver. 32. Thus it
plainly appears that Pharaoh justifies the Lord God in his Righteous
Judgments, which he brought upon him and his People for their Sins, and
condemns himself and his People, saying, I and my People are wicked. It is
certain that it was the Devil [NOT GOD] who led Pharaoh and his People into
Sin, by which their Hearts were hardened against God and his People. The holy
Apostle John says, He that commits Sin, is of the Devil, 1 John 3. 8. Let
no man say when he is tempted, I am tempted of God; for God cannot be tempted
with Evil, neither tempts he any man: But every man is tempted when he is
drawn away of his own Lusts, and enticed; then when Lust has conceived, it
brings forth Sin, and Sin when it is finished brings forth Death, Jam. 1.
13, 14, 15. And God's command is unto man*kind, that they should not harden
their Hearts; and its written, That he was grieved with those who did harden
their Hearts, Psalm. 95. 8, 10. Heb. 3. 10. and God has promised, That he will
take away the Stony or hard Heart, [which the Devil has made hard] and that he
will give them a Heart of Flesh, (or a soft heart) etc. Ezekiel. 11. 19. And David
says, Psalm. 51. 17. The Sacrifice of God is a broken Heart. And God said by
the Prophet to the People, Joel 2. 13. Rent your Hearts, etc. The Lord is nigh
unto them that are of a broken Heart, and saves such as are of a contrite
Spirit, Psalm 34. 18.

Christ Jesus said, The Men of Nineveh shall rise up in Judgment with this
Generation, and shall condemn it, because they Repented at the preaching of
Jonas: And behold a greater then Jonas is here, Matthew. 12. 41. Jesus upbraided
[yea, condemned] the Cities wherein most of his mighty works were done, because
they Repented not, see Matthew. 11. 20. to the end. God commands all men to
Repent every where, Act. 17. 30. Jesus said, Suppose ye that those Galileans
(mentioned, Luke 13. 1, 2, 3.) and those eighteen men on whom the Tower of
Siloam fell, ver. 4.) were sinners above all the Gallileans, and above all men
that dwelt in Jerusalem; I tell ye, nay; but except ye Repent, ye shall ALL
likewise PERISH. And Christ told his Disciples after he was risen from the
Dead, That Repentance and Remission of Sins should be preached in his Name unto
all Nations (or in all Nations) mark that, Luke 24. 47. Many times did Jesus
call unto the Rebellious amongst the seven Churches of Asia to Repent; as may
be seen in the second and third Chapters of the Revelations at large: Christ's
Parables concerning the stray Sheep and the prodigal Son: in Luke 15. 7. does
much hold forth the Universal Love of God to mankind; he said, I say unto you,
that Joy shall be in Heaven over one sinner that Repents, more than over
ninety nine just Persons, which need no Repentance. Again, There is Joy in the
presence of the Angels of God over one sinner that Repents, Luke 15. 10.

John the Baptist called the Pharisees and the Sadduces, who came unto his
Baptism, A Generation of Vipers; yet these he called to bring forth Fruits meet
for Repentance, Matthew. 3. 7. and 12. 23. Luke 3. 7.

In Romans 9. 32. Paul says, What if God willing to show his Wrath, and to make
his Power known, endured with much Long-suffering (on) the Vessels of Wrath
fitted to Destruction. Now mark, God suffered them long, and his Long-suffering
was to lead them to Repentance, as the Apostle says in another place.
Dispisest thou the Riches of his goodness and forbearance, and long-suffering;
not knowing that the goodness of God leads thee to Repentance? but after the
hardness and Impenitency of thy Heart, treasure stup unto thy self wrath
against the Day of wrath, and Revelation of the righteous Judgments of God, who
will render to every man according to his Deeds, Romans 2. 4, 5, 6. Now they not
Repenting, but in the hardness of their Hearts going on till they grew ripe in
Wickedness, their ripe Age in Wickedness fitted them for Destruction, which
Wickedness, [not God] but the Devil led them into.

In Proverbs God called to Fools and Scorners to turn at his Reproof, but they
did not return, and God said, Because I have called, and ye refused; I have
stretched out my Hand, and no man regards; but ye have set at naught all my
Counsel, and would have none of my Reproof, I also will Laugh at your Calamity,
etc. when your Destruction comes as a Whirlwind, then shall you call upon me,
but I will not answer; and they shall seek me, but they shall not find me, for
that they hated Knowledge, and did not choose the fear of the Lord, Prove. 1. 22.
to the end of the Chapter.

Here its clear that God calls Fools and Scorners to Repent, he wills that they
should Repent, and he puts them into a condition that they may Repent; he puts
them into a condition that they may Turn at his Reproof from the Evil which he
does Reprove them for; he puts them into a condition, that they may take his
Counsel, and choose the Fear of the Lord. It were horrible Blasphemy to say,
That though God called them to turn at his Reproof, yet he did not Will or
Intend that they should turn at his Reproof, choose his Fear, or take his
Counsel, or to say, he knew they could not do it, is likewise Blasphemy. And it
is Blasphemy to say or think, that God who commands people to be Holy, FORCES
and CONSTRAINS them to be wicked and ungodly, by WITHHOLDING his Spirit of
Grace and Truth from them, which should enable them to turn at his Reproof to
receive his Counsel and choose his Fear: without the Spirit of Grace and Truth
(which comes by Jesus Christ, who is the true Light, who lights every man
that comes into the world) NO Man or Woman can turn from sin, take Gods
Counsel, nor choose his Fear, but that all the Wicked might Repent, and Turn
from their Evil Ways, while the Day of their Visitation lasts. The Grace of
God, which brings Salvation, has appeared to All Men (as the holy Apostle
says) Teaching us, that denying Ungodliness and Worldly Lusts, we should live
godly in this present World. The Grace of God appears unto all people for one
and the same Cause, Purpose or End, even to teach all to deny Ungodliness, and
to live godly in this present World: but as Jude the Servant of Christ says,
The Wicked (not being Obedient unto it) turn into Wantonness; and as its
elsewhere writ, The Wicked do despite unto the Spirit of Grace. Isaiah says,
That the Jews Rebelled and Vexed Gods holy spirit, therefore he was turned to
be their Enemy, and Faught against them, Isa. 63. 10. Now for any person to say
or think, That it was the Will of God that they should Rebel against him, and
Vex his holy Spirit? this is horrible Blasphemy [Mark] these had the Spirit,
and did Rebel against it, and thereby did grieve or vex it, for which cause he
became their Enemy, and Fought against them [Mark] he did not become their
Enemy nor Fight against them until by their Rebellion; they vexed his holy
Spirit; so these Rebels being Reprobated from Rest and Peace with God, their
Destruction was of themselves, and the Lord God is clear. Nehemiah in his 9th
Chapter says concerning the Children of Israel, Lord, thou gave thy good
Spirit to Instruct them; but they Rebelled against thee. Now for any person to
say or think, that it was Gods Will that they should Rebel against him; this
is horrible Blasphemy, as I said before; or for any person to say or think,
that God gives his good Spirit to some persons on purpose that they may Rebel
against it, and thereby cause him to become their Enemy and to Fight against
them this is no less then Blasphemy.

The Apostle says, With whom was God grieved forty Years? was it not with them
that had sinned, whose Carkases fell in the Wilderness, to whom swear he that
they should not enter into his Rest, but to them that believed not? So we see
they could not enter in because of Unbelief; let us labor to enter into that
Rest, lest any man FALL after the same example of Unbelief, Heb. 3. 17, 18, 19,
and 4. 11, 1.

Note here Reader, the Apostle does not place the Fall of these rebellious Jews
(who came out of Egypt with Moses) upon the decree, or will, or
fore-appointment of God, BUT upon their Unbelief, Rebellion and Apostasy, which
the Devil, (NOT GOD) was the author of; for they might have entered, if they had
improved that help and ability which God gave them. Nehemiah said, God gave
them his good Spirit to instruct them, but they rebelled against it, they were
disobedient and rebelled against thee, (says he) and cast thy Law behind their
Backs and slew thy Prophets, WHICH TESTIFIED AGAINST THEM TO TURN THEM UNTO
THEE, and they wrought great provocation, etc. And Nehemiah said unto the Lord
God of Heaven and Earth, Thou art JUST in all that thou have brought upon us,
for thou have done RIGHT, but we have done wickedly, Nehem. 9. 20, 26, 33. read
the Chapter through.

Reader, by this it appears plainly that God had not reprobated these Rebels
from all Eternity, or ordained them before they were Born to slay his Prophets:
For says Nehemiah, Thou sent thy Prophets whom they slew, to turn them unto
thee. It were horrible Blasphemy to say that Gods will and purpose, and
foredetermination was that they should slay his Prophets which he sent unto
them to turn them unto him: And it were horrible Blasphemy to say, that God did
not will or intend that they should be turned unto him, but only told them so;
and it would be no less Blasphemy to say, that God both sent the Prophets to
turn them to him, and also sent them to slay the Prophets; this would render
God to be the author of Confusion, which cannot be; for he is the God of good
and holy order, and not of Confusion (as says the holy Apostle) nay, it would
render him the author of Murder, and so make him contradict his own holy Law,
which he has given unto the Sons and Daughters of men, whose command is
expressly, Thou shall do no Murder; yea, it would render him as contradicting
his own Charge and Commands unto the Sons and Daughters of men, who says,
Touch not mine Anointed, DO MY PROPHETS NO HARM, 1 Chrou. 16. 22. Psalm. 105.
15. Its plain that both Nehemiah, and the Author to the Hebrews did understand
and believe that the Fall, Rebellion, Apostasy, and Destruction of those whose
Carkases fell in the Wilderness, and those who afterward slew ^^e Lords
Prophets, were Effects of their sloth, negligence, want of watchfulness, yea,
want of keeping in the holy fear and dread of the Lord God: and so their
Destruction, Ruin and Misery which came upon them, was the effect and reward of
their own EVIL DOING, and so their Destruction was of themselves, and the Lord
God, did right, as Nehemiah has said; but those Rebels of whom he spoke did
wickedly.

The Author to the Hebrews being sensible of the goodness (FIRST) and
afterward the SEVERITY of God on them that FELL said unto the primitive
Believers in Christ, Let us labor to enter into THAT REST, lest any man FALL
after the same example Unbelief* By this it appears he saw that it was possible
these Believers might Fall, if they did not diligently attend upon the Lord
God, in whom is everlasting strength, who is the Keeper of Israel and of Worm
Jacob, he never Slumbers nor Sleeps; blessed are all they who cast their care
upon him, who put their whole trust in him he is, and will forever be unto them
a sun (that is a light) and a shield (that is) a defense or armor unto them;
all such will witness him to be a hiding place unto them out of the reach of
their immortal Souls Enemy (who as the holy Apostle said unto the Saints, Goes
about like a roaring Lion, ever seeking whom he may DEVOUR.) The Apostle said
unto them, Cast your care upon him, he eareth for you; humble your selves
therefore under the mighty hand of God, that he may exalt you in due time; be
sober, be vigilent, because your Adversary the Devil as a roaring Lion walks
about seeking whom* he may devour, WHOMRESIST STEADFAST IN THE FAITH, 1 Peter 5.
6, 7, 8, 9. The Apostle Paul writ to his Brethren, the believing Corinthians,
saying, I would not that you should be ignorant how that all our Fathers were
under the Cloud, and passed through the Sea, and were all Baptized unto Moses,
etc. and did all eat the same spiritual Meat, and did all drink the same
spiritual Drink: For they eat and drank of the SPIRITUAL ROCK that followed
them, and that Rock was Christ; But with many of them God was not well PLEASED,
for they were overthrown in the Wilderness. Now these things were OUR EXAMPLES
to the intent we should not Lust after EVIL THINGS as they also lusted. Neither
be ye IDOLATERS, as were some of them; as its written, the People sat down to
eat and drink, and rose up to PLAY. Neither let us COMMIT FORNICATION as some
of them committed, and fell in one day three and twenty thousand. Neither let
us tempt Christ as some of them also tempted, and were destroyed of Serpents.
Neither Murmur ye as some of them MURMURED, and were destroyed of the
Destroyer. Now all these things came upon them for ENSAMPLES; and they are
written for our ADMONITION: -- wherefore let HIM that thinks he STANDS,
take heed lest he FALL. There is no Temptation taken you but such as is common
to man: But God is faithful, who will not suffer you to be tempted above that
ye are able; but will WITH THE TEMPTATION also make a way to ESCAPE, that ye
may be ABLE TO BEAR IT; wherefore my dearly beloved, flee from Idolatry, etc. 1
Cor. 10. 1, to 15.

Reader, by what the holy Apostle here says, it is plainly manifest, that the
Fall and Destruction of these people* was their own Wickedness; for they all
eat the same spiritual Meat, and Drank the same spiritual Drink, which
spiritual Meat and Drink was Christ: so its plain that those that FELL; did eat
of the same Meat and Drink, which those did eat of, who did not FALL, the one
was as the Earth which drinks in the Rain, that comes often upon it, and
brings forth Herbs meet for them by whom it is dressed, and receives
blessing from God, as its written, Heb. 6. 7. the other is as the Ground, which
is often rained upon; and notwithstanding brings forth Briars and Thorns, and
(therefore) is REJECTED, and is nigh unto Cursing, whose end is to be burned,
as its written, Verse 8. It would be horrible Blasphemy to say, that it was
God's will that these people who fell should be Fornicators and Idolaters,
Murmurers, etc. that so God might damn them to all Eternity, and cast them into
the Lake of Endless Misery. And it were also great Blasphemy to say, that
Christ, who was the heavenly spiritual Meat and Drink, of whom they eat and
drink, COULD NOT or WOULD NOT keep them from Falling, or to say that it was the
Will of God the Father that he should not keep them from falling. For it was
their own corrupt Self-will, which was the cause of their Destruction, in which
they with-stood the tender Mercies of the Lord God, and revolted and went a
whoring from him: and this the holy Apostle well knew, and therefore said, God
was not WELL-PLEASED with them, for they were overthrown, etc. Now (says he)
these things were our EXAMPLES to the intent that we should not Lust after evil
things as they lusted: Neither be IDOLATERS, FORNICATORS, MURMURERS as they
were neither tempt Christ as they did, who FELL in one day three end twenty
thousand, as aforesaid* Now (says the Apostle) all these things came upon them
for Ensamples, and they are written for our ADMONISHION (or Warning) wherefore
let him that THINKS he stands take heed lest he fall: he knew their
standing depended upon God, in their diligent and full improvement of that Gift
and Ability which he had given them. And that which was the CAUSE of their
fall, was their Slothfulness, Negligence, WANT of holy Fear and true
Watchfulness, departing from the holy Fear of the Living God. Jude the Servant
of Jesus Christ was truly sensible of these things, and therefore said unto the
Saints, I will put you in remembrance (though you once knew this) how that the
Lord having saved the people out of the Land of Egypt, afterward destroyed
them that believed not; and the Angels which kept not their FIRST STATE but
left their own HABITATION, he has reserved in everlasting Chains under
Darkness unto the Judgment of the great DAY.

Note Reader, The Jews whom God brought out of the Land of Egypt, at that time
was in a state so near unto God, that they were not ONLY made partakers of an
outward Deliverance, but in that day they were in a condition in which they
might have had an Eternal or Everlasting Salvation to their immortal Souls; and
those who had not that SALVATION, but perished Eternally: their Destruction was
of themselves, as God said unto Israel; O Israel thou destroyest thy self, but
in me is thy help.

The Angels which fell had a State of Rest and Peace with God; this was their
first state which Jude here speaks of, but they kept not this First STATE and
Habitation, but LEFT IT, yea, Lost it, through Presumption, Irreverence and
Neglect of their Duty, whom God in his Righteous Judgments has reserved in
Everlasting CHAINS under Darkness, unto the Judgment of the great day, Jude 6.
the keeping and preservation of Angels and Men from falling is in their Humble,
Lowly, Constant depending upon God, in the diligent improvement of all that God
has given them for his Glory, and their Preservation, (Moreover) Even as Sodom
and Gomorrah, and the Cities about them in like manner, giving themselves over
to Fornication, and going after STRANGE FLESH, are set forth for Example,
suffering the Vengance of ETERNAL FIRE, etc. Jude 7. The holy Apostle Peter
also shows, that God did not spare the Angels that SINNED, but cast them down
to HELL, and delivered them into Chains of Darkness, to be reserved unto
Judgment; neither did he spare the old World, nor Sodom nor Gomorah, but by
Fire and Water did he overthrow them, making them an Ensample unto those that
after should LIVE UNGODLY, 2 Pet. 2. 4, 5, 6.

Note Reader, Here these holy Men show, that God spared not the Angels which
sinned, but cast them down to Hell. It would be horrible Blasphemy to say, that
God ordained, willed and purposed that they should sin against him, that so he
might cast them down to Hell; this is not only Unscriptural and Unreasonable;
but its wholly contrary to the nature of the holy glorious Lord God of Heaven
and Earth, who is LOVE, as the Apostle says, yea, a pure Fountain of Divine
Love, who made all things good, yea, VERY GOOD Genesis 3. 1.
in the beginning, who is of purer eyes, then to behold Iniquity, either in Men
or Angels, with approbation thereof, delight therein, or love thereto: He said,
Be ye holy, for I the Lord your God am holy: for he made all things good, and
he CERTAINLY WILLED that ALL Angels and Men should be Good, Holy and Clean,
according as he made Man and Angels in the beginning, but for want of DUE
REVERENCE, DILIGENT WATCHFULNESS, AND A TRUE AND FULL IMPROVEMENT of all that
God gave them for his own Glory and their own PRESERVATION; both Angels and Men
have SINNED, and the holy pure God NOT DELIGHTING IN THEIR SIN, but on the
contrary, being DISPLEASED AT IT, yea, grieved WITH IT; therefore does God
bring his Righteous Judgments upon the Angels who FELL, and upon Ungodly,
Wicked, Impenitent Men and Women, who do not turn unto him by Unfeigned
Repentance, while the day or time of their Visitation lasts. As its written,
God is Angry with the Wicked every day, Psalm. 7. 11. The Wicked shall be turned
into Hell, and all the Nations that forget God, Psalm. 9. 17. God tries the
Righteous, but the wicked and him that loves VIOLENCE HIS SOUL HATES: Upon
the Wicked he shall rain Snares, Fire and Brimstone, and an herrible Tempest --
For the Righteous Lord loves Righteousness; his countenance does behold the
Upright, Psalm 11. 5, 6, 7. He that justifies the Wicked, and he that
condemns the Just, even they both are ABOMINATION to the Lord, Prove. 17. 15.
To the Wicked God says, what have thou to do to declare my Statutes? or that
thou should take my Covenant inthy Mouth, SEEING, THOU HATE INSTRUCTION,
AND CASTEST MY WORDS BEHIND THEE; when thou saw a THIEF, thou consentedst
with him, and have been partaker with the Adulterer; thou give thy Mouth to
Evil, and thy Tongue frames Deceit. Now consider this, ye that FORGET GOD,
lest I TEAR YOU IN PIECES, etc. whosoever offers Praises glorifieth me; and to
him that orders HIS CONVERSATION ARIGHT will I show the Salvation OF GOD* The
holy, just, equal, merciful Lord God does not WILLINGLY AFFLICT NOR GRIEVE the
Children of men: Out of the Mouth of the most high proceeds NOT EVIL and
Good, as says the holy Prophet, Lamen. 3. 33. 38.

Reader, thus it does clearly appear, that the Damnation of the Angels that
fell, and the Damnation and Destruction of all Impenitent men and women IS OF
THEMSELVES, and the Lord God is clear, who says, As I live, I have no pleasure
in the death of the Wicked, but that the wicked turn from his evil way, and
live, Ezekiel. 33. 11. 18. 32.

The Apostle Paul said unto the Galatians, who had erred from the Truth, O
foolish Galatians, who has bewitched you that you should not obey the Truth?
etc. -- are ye so foolish having BEGUN IN THE SPIRIT, are ye now made perfect
BY THE FLESH? -- ye did run well: who did hinder you that you should not obey
the Truth? This persuasion COMES NOT of him that CALLS you; a little Leaven
leaveneth a whole Lump, Gal 3. 1. 3. Chap. 5. verse. 7, 8, 9.

Reader, by these Scriptures it does clearly and abundantly appear, that God
did not predestinate or fore-ordain, that Angels or Men should Sin against him,
and so be damned: Oh nay, he loves and delights in Holiness, but all Sin is
abominable unto him; yea, Sin is of the Devil, as the holy Ghost or Spirit has
spoken by the Mouth of the holy Apostle John; And because it is of the Devil,
as it is signified by the holy Ghost through the holy Man, Righteousness exalts
a Nation; but Sin is a Reproach unto any People, Prove. 14. 34. And therefore
the cry of the holy Ghost WAS AND IS unto the fallen Sons and Daughters of
Adam, Cleanse your Hands ye sinners, and purify your Hearts ye double-minded,
etc. James 4. 8. Let the Wicked forsake his way, and the unrighteous man his
Thoughts: Let him turn nnto the Lord, and he will have mercy on him, unto our
God, and he will abundantly PARDON, Isa. 55. 7. God said unto the Prophet, Son
of man, when the Land sins against me, by trespassing grievously, then will
I stretch forth mine Hand upon it, and will break their Staff of Bread, etc. --
and ye shall know that I have not done WITHOUT CAUSE all that I have done in
it, says the Lord God, Ezekiel. 14. 13, 23.

Note Reader, in as much as the JUST EQUAL Lord God of Heaven and Earth, will
not bring a temporal Judgment upon a Nation or Person, until they have given
him JUST CAUSE by their great Sin, Rebellion and Impenitency; much less will HE
Condemn, or Damn, or cast any Nation or Person into Hell, or endless Misery,
until they have given him Just Cause, by their Sins and hardened Impenitency;
which Sin, Hardness and Impenitency, the Devil (not God) is the author of, and
Sin and the Impenitency of all such who Perish, is according to the ordination,
will and pleasure of the Devil, the old Deceiver and Destroyer: and so is
ABSOLUTELY contrary to the will, decree and pleasure of the holy pure God,
whose will is, that all men may know the Truth and be saved, as the holy Ghost
says by the Mouth of the holy Apostle Paul. Again, God saw the Wickedness of
man was great in the Earth, and the VERY IMAGINATIONS of the THOUGHTS of his
Heart was ONLY EVIL CONTINUALLY; and it REPENTED the Lord that he had made man
on the Earth, and it GRIEVED him at his HEART, Genesis 6. 5, 6.

Note this Reader, here is a clear and undeniable proof, that God never did,
NO, nor never will Ordain, Predestinate, Foreappoint or WILL that any Man or
Woman should be Evil, Sinful, Wicked; or that any Man or Woman should employ
their Hearts and Minds at ANY TIME in that which is EVIL; muchless that the
Imaginations of the THOUGHTS of men and women's Hearts should be ONLY EVIL
CONTINUALLY. This Testimony of the holy Ghost or Spirit in Moses, gives a FATAL
stroke upon those who do imagine and speak so WRONG of God, as to place it as
the Decree, Fore-ordination and Appointment of God, that [Some] if not many men
and women should, yea, must be Wicked upon MERE necessity; they must have NO
help from God, to enable them to be Holy, Godly, etc. Neither are they able of
themselves to be Holy, yet must (as is Ungodlily imagined) be damned, cast into
Hell for Sin, Unholiness, Ungodliness, etc. When they COULD by NO MEANS be
Godly, Holy, etc. God having NOT willed that they should be so, and therefore
would not give them Grace to enable them to be SO, yet damneth them, and
casts them into Hell because they are not SO. Oh this is gross Darkness that
may be felt* These Ungodly Opinions and Words RENDER God (who has given Life
and a Being unto all Mankind) MORE CRUEL and Unnatural unto Man and Woman (the
Workmanship of his own holy Hands) than the most brutish of his Creatures are
unto their own young, yea, more cruel than they are one unto another: yea, the
Lion and the Bear in their kind do witness against these their ungodly Notions,
Imaginations and Words. WELL may it be said of these vain and ungodly
OPINIONISTS that they do not SPEAK RIGHT things of God, etc.

Oh the evil Effect that this abominable Doctrine has had, and has at this
Day, it is greatly to be lamented! But glory to the Lord God, the pure Light of
the Morning of his glorious Day has chased away the Smoke of the Pit of
Darkness from the Eyes of a Remnant, which has thus greatly clouded and
darkened the understandings of Mankind; and the Lord is daily blowing away this
cursed Smoke more and more out of this cursed Pit streams out the cursed dark
Breath of the old Dragon the Devil, who has corrupted both Earth and Air with
this his cursed Breath, who has made the Nations like the raging Sea, which
casts up Mire and Dirt, yea, like Beasts of Prey to Devour one another: But God
is risen in his great strength who will shut the Pits Mouth, and will seal him
down that he may deceive the Nations no more; to God be all glory, honor,
dominion and praise for evermore, for he is worthy.

Moreover, the great God, Has showed thee O man, what is GOOD; and what does
the Lord REQUIRE OF THEE, BUT TO DO JUSTLY, AND TO LOVE MERCY, AND TO WALK
HUMBLY WITH THY GOD, Micah 6. 8. Again, the great Lord God of Heaven and Earth
said unto the Children of Israel (that great People) I have set before thee
this day LIFE AND GOOD, AND DEATH, AND EVIL, in that I command thee this Day,
to love the Lord thy God, to WALK IN HIS WAYS, and keep his Commandments, etc.
-- I call Heaven and Earth to record this day against you, (says the Lord)
that I have SET before you Life and Death, Blessing and Cursing; therefore
CHVSE LIFE, that both thou and thy Seed may live, that thou may love the
Lord thy God, and that thou may obey his VOICE, and that thou may CLEAVE
unto him, FOR HE IS THY LIFE AND THE LENGTH OF THY DAYS. But if thine HEART
TURN AWAY, SO that thou will NOT HEAR, etc. -- I denounce unto you this day,
that ye shall SURELY PERISH, etc. Deuteronomy. 30. 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20. Again,
They have CORRUPTED THEMSELVES. -- A Perverse and Crooked Generation of the
Rock that BEGAT THEE; thou art UNMINDFULL, and have FORGOTTEN GOD THAT FORMED
THEE: Jesurun waxed fat, kicked -- he forsook God who made him, and lightly
esteemed the ROCK of his Salvation -- the Lord saw it, and he abhorred them --
and he said, I will hide my face from them; they have MOVED ME to jealousy,
with that which is NOT GOOD -- Fire is kindled in mine Anger, and it shall burn
unto the LOWEST HELL, Chap. 32. 5, 15, 18, 19, 20, 22. The Lord God said
concerning the Rebellious Jews, They have chosen their own ways, and their
SOUL delights in THEIR Abomination; I also will choose their Delusions, and
will bring their Fears upon them, BECAUSE, when I called none did answer; when
I spoke none did hear, but they did evil before mine eyes, and CHOSE that in
which I delighted NOT, Isa. 66. 3, 4. 2 These. 2. 10, 11. The holy Prophet said,
Justice and Judgment are the Habitations of thy Throne, etc. Psalm 89. 14.

Reader, by what is above written, it does clearly and abundantly appear, that
the duty of all mankind is to love God, to hearken unto him, to obey his Voice,
to do justly, to be lovers of Mercy, and all true Christians must obey the
Command of Christ, who says, be merciful, etc. and must walk Humbly with the
living God, who gives Life and a Being unto all Mankind; by whose pure power
they have their being continued upon Earth; and who of his free bounty gives
them Food and Raiment, Health and all necessary things which they do enjoy; and
without love to God, doing Justly, loving Mercy, and walking Humbly with God,
as aforesaid, Man and Woman cannot be accepted of God. The just equal Lord God,
who requires this of all mankind, does put all into a capacity so to do; And
men's doing contrary unto this, proceeds not of or from God, but of and from the
wicked one, the false Teacher, who led Adam and Eve to Sin against God.
Therefore let none who do WICKEDLY, say, It is Gods Will that they should DO
SO. For God who is Holy, who made man holy, just and good, his WILL is, that
all should be holy, who said, Be ye holy, I the Lord your God am holy. He
commands them to choose the Good and refuse the Evil, and they have Power
tendered unto them [by him] so to DO; and it becomes their Sin who do not SO;
such do not improve that which God has afforded them to enable and lead them
to choose the good, and such are the idle unjust Servants, who hide their Lords
Money in the Earth, as Christ said in his Parables, Such in their EVIL
SELF-WILL choose the Evil, [THE SIN] the Wages of which is Death, as says the
holy Apostle. Now for any person to say, that though God commands People to
choose the good, to choose Life; yet he does* NOT WILL or Intend that they should
obey this his command in choosing Life; this is horrible Blas phemy, or to say,
that he knows they cannot choose the good (by his help) they cannot choose Life;
this is also Blasphemy: For this would render the pure just, holy, equal Lord
God a Mocker in this great and weighty concern: the God and Father of our Lord
Jesus Christ has said unto HIM, Thy Throne O God is forever and ever; the
Scepter of thy Kingdom is a righteous Scepter: thou love Righteousness and
HATE WICKEDNESS; therefore God, thy God has anointed thee with the Oil of
gladness above thy fellows, Psalm. 45. 6, 7. Heb. 1. 8. Thus it plainly appears
that God and Christ loves Righteousness and HATES all Sin and Wickedness.
Therefore the Call of the Lord God WAS (AND IS) Let the wicked forsake his way,
and the UNRIGHTEOUS MAN HIS THOUGHTS: let him turn unto the Lord, and he will
have mercy on him, unto our God and he will abundantly pardon. God said by the
Mouth of the holy Apostle, Draw near unto God, and he will draw near unto you:
Cleanse your Hands ye sinners, purify your HEARTS ye DOUBLE* minded; be
afflicted and mourn, and WEEP: let your LAUGHTER be turned into MOURNING, and
your JOY into HEAVINESS: humble your selves in the sight of the Lord, and he
shall lift you up, James 4. 8, 9, 10. Again, Thou art NOT a God that has
pleasure in WICKEDNESS; neither shall EVIL dwell with thee, Psalm. 5. 4. But
know that God has set APART him that is GODLY for HIMSELF* Psalm. 4. 3. The
Apostle Paul said unto the Saints, My Brethren be strong in the Lord, and in
the power of his might; put on the whole Armor of God, that ye may be ABLE to
STAND against the wiles of the Devil: For WE wrestle NOT against Flesh and
Blood, but against Principalites of the DARKNESS of this World, against
spiritual Wickedness in high places. Wherefore take unto you the WHOLE Armor
of God, that you may be able to withstand in the evil Day, and having DONE ALL,
to stand; stand therefore, having your Loins girt about with Truth, and having
on the Breast Plate of Righteousness, and your Feet shod with the preparation
of the Gospel of PEACE; above all taking the SHIELD of Faith, wherewith you
shall be able to quench ALL the fiery Darts of the wicked, etc* Praying always
with all Prayer and Supplication [IN THE SPIRIT] and WATCH thereunto with all
perseverance, etc. Ephesians. 6. 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17. Again, The NIGHT
is far spent, the DAY is at hand: let us therefore cast off the WORKS of
Darkness, and let us put on the ARMOR of LIGHT. Let us walk honestly as in the
day; NOT in Rioting and Drunkenness, NOT in Chambering and Wantonness, NOT in
Strife and Envy; but put ye ON the Lord Jesus Christ, and make no provision for
the Flesh to fulfill the LUST thereof, Romans 13. 12, 13, 14. Again, the Author
to the Hebrews says, We ought to give more earnest HEED to the things which we
have heard, lest at any time we should let them SLIP. In the Greek in the
Margin its rendered thus (or let them run out like leeking Vessels) Heb. 2* 1.
Christ* Jesus says to the Believers, Take HEED to your selves, l^st at ANY
time your Hearts be over*charged with Surfeiting and Drunkenness, and the CARES
of THIS LIFE, Luke 21. 3. Again, The Apostle says, WATCH ye, STAND FAST in the
Faith; quit you like men, be strong, Ephesians. 6. 10, to 18. Again, the Apostle
said unto the Saints, Ye are all the Children of the Light, and the Children of
the DAY: we are NOT of the NIGHT nor of Darkness. Therefore let us not SLEEP as
do others, but let us watch and be sober: For they which SLEEP sleep in the
Night, and they that be drunken are drunken in the NIGHT* But let us who are of
the Day be SOBER, putting on the Breast plate of Faith and LOVE, and for an
Helmet the hope of Salvation, 1 These. 5. 5, 6, 7. Ephesians. 5. 8. John 3. 36.
Again, the Apostle Peter says, For this cause was the Gospel preached, also to
them that are dead, that they might be JUDGED according to men in the Flesh,
but LIVE according to God IN the Spirit. -- Be ye therefore sober, and watch
unto Prayer, 1 Pet. 4. 6, 7. Again, Christ said by John unto the Angel of the
Church in Sardes, I know thy works, that thou have a Name that thou LIVE and
art DEAD. Be watchful, and strengthen the things which remain that are ready to
die: For I have not found thy works perfect before God* Remember therefore how
thou have RECEIVED, and HEARD, and hold FAST and Repent: If therefore thou
shall NOT watch, I will come on thee as a Thief, and tho^ shall NOT know what
Hour I will come upon thee. Thou have a few Names even in Sardes, which have
not defiled their Garments, and they shall walk with me in White; for they are
worthy, Rev. 3. 1, 2, 3, 4.

Note Reader, Here is sweet, harmonious, wholesome and heavenly Counsel given by
many faithful Witnesses, to put on the whole Armor of God, and so to be
strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might to put on the Shield of
Faith, and the Armor of Light; and by this Power, Light and spiritual Armor
to withstand all the wiles of the Devil (to quench all the fiery Darts of that
Wicked one, who goes about like a roaring Lion, ever seeking whom he may
devour)* to stand, having our Loins girt about with Truth (that is indeed a
blessed Girdle) having on the Breast Plate of Righteousness, having our feet
shod with the preparation of the Gospel of Peace; the WAR NOT being against
flesh and blood, but against spiritual Wickedness, and against the Prince of
Darkness, etc. praying always in the SPIRIT, and watching thereunto, with all
perseverance not letting those things slip which we have heard and Received of
God; not to be like Leekey Vessels, which lets that run out, which is put into
them; not to be like the old, unsound Bottles which burst, etc. but to put on
the Lord Jesus Christ, and make no provision for the flesh to fulfill the lusts
thereof; to keep out of surfeiting, and over-charging our Hearts and Spirits
with the cares of this Life; not to sleep or slumber away our precious time, in
the Evil thoughts, words and works, of the Night, which the Devil (not God) is
the Author of, and has PLEASURE IN: God's will is, that all men should know
the Truth and be SAVED; and so he is willing that they should all put on and
keep on the Breastplate of faith and LOVE, and for an Helmet, the hope of
Salvation. Here the Unfaithful is called to Repentance, yea, the Back-sliders
is called to Repentance, to do their first works, to be watchful, to
strengthen the things that remain, that are ready to dye, etc. Now they who do
take this heavenly Counsel, they do the will of God, and in so doing they stand
approved in his sight. The diligent Watchers, who have and do put on and keep
on the whole Armor of God, as aforesaid, they do NOT FALL, but do grow in
Grace and in the Knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ more and more;
of such the Psalmist speaks, saying, Blessed is the man that walks not in
the Way of the Ungodly: he shall be like a Tree that is planted by the Rivers
of Water, etc. but upon the Wicked, who repent not, who forsake not their
Wickedness, God will rain Fire and Brimstone, and an horrible Tempest, as the
holy Ghost has said: and there is no Peace to the Wicked, says my God; but
the Righteous has said (in Truth) thou Lord wilt ordain Peace for us: for thou
also have wrought all our works IN US. And the holy Apostle said, We are Gods
workmanship CREATED IN Christ Jesus unto GOOD WORKS, which God before ORDAINED
that we should walk IN THEM, Isa. 26. 12. Ephesians. 2. 10. The Apostle Peter
opened his Mouth and said, Of a Turth, I perceive that God is NO Respecter of
persons, but in every Nation he that fears HIM and works Righteousness is
ACCEPTED with HIM; the Word that God sent unto the Children of Israel,
Preaching PEACE by Jesus Christ, he is Lord of ALL, etc. Acts 10. 34, 35.

Note Reader, He by whom all were and are Created, and he who according to the
flesh DYED for all, who enlighteneth the EYES of the UNDERSTANDINGS of ALL (in
some degree) whose will is, that all men may be saved; he is Lord of all, as
says the Apostle, he is no Respecter of Persons, but in every Nation ALL those
who fear him and work Righteousness, they are accepted with HIM. Here God shows
that he loves and delights in Righteousness, but HATES the contrary, and
therefore he calls ALL Men to Repent EVERY WHERE, as says the holy Apostle:
God's condiditions of ELECTION and Salvation; is Faith in him, and unfeigned
Repentance; and he does freely tender, yea, GIVE the true and real CAUSE of
Faith and Repentance unto all the Ungodly and Impenitent, to wit, Visitations
by the Spirit and Word of Truth, which does convince the World of sin, in which
the Grace, Love or Favor of God is held forth to all mankind, in enlightening
their Understandings, giving them thereby to know Good FROM Evil, by which he
also MOVES upon the Soul to CHOOSE the Good and REFUSE the Evil, which spirit or
word is of ABILITY to beget faith, and to work unfeigned Repentance; and does
IT in all, where the stubborn will of man does not withstand the Day of Gods
tender Visitation (given thereby) but IT IS possible man in his STUBBORN
SELF-WILL may so long resist, that God will strive NO LONGER with him for his
salvation; for he has said, My Spirit shall not always strive with man. God
said to the Wicked, with whom he had long striven, to gather them out of their
wickedness UNTO himself, WOE unto them when I DE^PART FROM THEM, Hos. 9. 12. I
HATED them for the WICKEDNESS of their doings, says God, V. 15. The
Righteousness which is of Faith speaks on this wise, say not in thy Heart,
who shall ascend into Heaven, that is, to bring Christ down from above; or who
shall descend into the Deep, that is, to bring up Christ again from the dead.
But WHAT says it? -- The WORD is NIGH thee, even in thy MOUTH, and in thy
HEART; that is the Word of Faith which we preach, Romans 10. 6, 7, 8. But I say,
have they not heard? Yes verily, their Sound went into all the Earth, and their
Words to the ends of the World, but they have not all obeyed the Gospel. But to
Israel he says, All day long have I stretched forth my Hands unto a
Disobedient and Gainsaying People, Ver. 18, 16, 21. Deuteronomy. 30. 11, 12, 13, 14.
Moreover God set Adam in a glorious state in Paradise, and he willed that he
should obey him, as he commanded him: and he put him in a condition, that he
might have continued in obedience unto him; so it was possible that he might
have continued in obedience unto him, and so have stood, and it was NOT
impossible that he should FALL, as the event has proved; and his Fall is NOT
to be charged or placed upon God, but upon himself, for want of a due and full
improvement of all that God gave him, to keep him from falling. God is able to
keep his Creatures, Man and Woman from falling: his Name, his pure holy Power
is a strong Tower, and in it IS Everlasting Safety. Man and Woman's being kept
from falling, consists in their constant diligent dependence upon him who made
them; he ONLY is able to keep them from falling, Jude 24. God is merciful,
slow to Anger, and abundant in compassion toward mankind, as he has signified
by the holy Ghost in his holy Prophets and Apostles; he is full of compassion
and tender pity, he is not willing that any should perish, but that all should
come to Repentance, 2 Pet. 3. 9. Christ Jesus has commanded his Disciples to
be merciful, saying, Be ye merciful, as your Father is merciful; he is KIND
unto the UNTHANKFUL and to the EVIL; and he causes his Light to shine upon the
EVIL and upon the Good, and sends his Rain upon the Just and the UNJUST, Luke
36. 37. Mat. 5. 45. The Prophet David says, The Lord is good to ALL, and his
tender Mercies are over all his WORKS, etc. Psalm. 145. ver. 8, 9 And he said to
his Son Solomon, If thou seek him, he will be FOUND of thee; but if thou
forsake him he will cast thee off forever: take heed, etc. 1 Chronicles. 28. 9, 10.
Moreover the holy Ghost says, Seek ye the Lord while he may be found: call
upon him while he is near, Isa. 55. 6. Again, Ho every one that thirsts, come
ye to the Waters, and he that has no Money; come ye, buy and eat, yea, come
buy Wine and Milk without MONEY, and without Price; wherefore do you SPEND
Money for that which is NOT Bread? and your Labor for that which satisfies
NOT* hearken diligently unto me* and eat that which is good, and let your Soul
delight it self in Fatness. Incline your Ear and come unto me, HEAR and your
Soul shall live, etc. Isa. 55. 1, 2, 3. Moreover the Spirit and the Bride say
come; and let him that hears say come; and let him that is a thirst come; and
whosoever WILL, let him take the Water of Life freely, Rev. 22. 17, etc.

Note Reader, Here is a general and comortable Proclamation of the favor and
good will of God to all people, every one has a T me or Day of Visitation
given unto them (by their merciful Creator) to turn unto him from their sin,
to eat that which is good; he says, Whosoever WILL, let him come, and take of
the Fountain of the Water of Life freely. So it plainly appears by this that
God would have all people eat of his Bread, and drink of his Milk and Wine
which he has mingled, and if they do not eat and drink thereof, and so live to
God by the virtue of the same, it is not because God fore-appointed that they
should NOT do so, but it is because they have given up their Minds and Ears to
the Whisperings and Lies of that old Deceiver, which first led Man and Woman
from God, and so he has corrupted their Wills; so has led them to love sin,
and to choose to abide in it all their Days; so the Selfish-corrupt-will which
the Devil has begotten in fallen Man, this WILL does not choose Christ nor the
Cross, which his true Disciples bear, nor the Bread of Life, or Water of Life,
nor Wine nor Milk, which they eat and drink of abundantly to their immortal
Souls strength, joy and comfort, and the Glory of the Lord. So it is true which
Christ said, Ye will not come to me that you may have Life. Moreover, he wept
over the Inhabitants of Jerusalem, and said, I would have gathered thy Children
as a Hen gathers her Chickens under her Wings, but ye would NOT. Mark, He did
NOT say, that they could not, but that they would not; and this his Testimony
is true, Gods Spirit which convinces the World of sin, MOVES upon the hearts
of sinners, to purify their Wills, that so they may choose the good, and refuse
the evil, and his Spirit does EFFECT this in all that do not withstand his
tender Visitation therein (and thereby) till the day of their Visitation be
over, or ended, when God moves by his Spirit upon the Soul of man in
Transgression, to lead him out of his Transgression: he requires a YIELDING on
the Creatures part, according to the saying of the holy Ghost through the holy
Apostle, who said, As ye have yielded your Members Servants to Uncleanness and
to Iniquity, even so now yield your Members Servants unto Righteousness, unto
Holiness, Romans 6. 19.

Note Reader, the merciful God has made the Creature able so to yield, and
therefore he does not require Imposibilities of him, who requires him SO to
yield; and if man prove so hard and desperate as not to yield* to serve God as
aforesaid, this his Hardy boldness, and Self-willfulness; and desperate
Uugodliness is the cause of his Ruin and Destruction: and so man destroys
himself, as God has said, O Israel thou destroys thy self, but in me is thy
help.

Note Reader, the fallen corrupt will of man, cannot choose the good and refuse
the evil; but the Spirit of Truth does visit man in this estate to PURIFY his
WILL, and so to enable andlead him to choose the Good and refuse the Evil: But
Man in this fallen, corrupt, ungodly bold WILL may; yea, many do with-stand the
tender Visitation of God's Spirit, yea, grieve and vex it, and do despite unto
it, and so cause God to be their Enemy, and to fight against them; as says the
Prophet, God complained and said, Israel would have none of me. He did not say,
I would have none of them, but he sent his Prophets to turn them unto him, and
they evil-intreated them, yea, slew them, for which his Wrath was kindled
against them, who commanded them, saying, Touch not mine anointed, do my
Prophets no harm. And he said, WOE unto the rebellious Children, who take
Counsel but not of me, that COVER with a Covering, but NOT of my Spirit, that
they may add Sin unto Sin, Isa. 30. 1. And he said concerning such rebellious
Ones, They have set at naught all my Counsel, and would have none of my
Reproof, etc. Such Rebels as these said unto God, Depart from us, we desire not
the Knowledge of thy ways. Such did not take the Counsel of the holy Ghost,
which says, Seek the Lord while he MAY be found; call upon him while he is
NEAR, Isa. 55. 6.

So as the Apostle Peter said, God is NO Respecter of Persons; but in every
Nation he that fears God and works Righteousness is accepted of him. God does
NOT Partially or IN dis-respect to SOME Persons, foreordain that they shall be
wicked, and so to be damned and cast into the Lake of everlasting Misery; NO,
that is contrary to his tender love, who gave his only begotten Son for the
Redemption of the World, which lies in Wickedness. We have all sinned, as
says the Apostle; and God has Mercy upon all, as HE says, and wills that all
may be saved: He sent his Son to seek and save that which was lost, and to
bring back again to himself that which has been driven away; God says
concerning him, Behold my Servant whom I uphold, mine Elect in whom my Soul
delights; I have put my Spirit upon him; he shall bring forth Judgment to the
Gentiles: A BRUISED Reed shall he NOT break, the smoking Flax shall he not
QUENCH: he shall bring forth Judgment unto Truth he shall not fail, etc. -- And
the Isles shall wait for his Law, Isa. 42. 1, 3, 4. Matthew. 12. 18, 20.

Objection, Its written, that without Faith it is impossible to please God, and
that the Just shall live by Faith: But its also written that all men have not
Faith; therefore those who have not Faith, (or never have) or NEVER had Faith,
God did ordain to be damned before they were Born.

Answ. This is a great Mistake; for God who cannot LIE, says, Look unto me,
and BE YE SAVED ALL the ends of the Earth, Isa. 45. 22. Gods Will is that all
men might be saved, 1 Timothy 2. 4. Again, As I live says the Lord God, I have no
pleasure in the death of the Wicked, but that the wicked turn from his way and
live, etc. Ezekiel. 33. 11. and 18. 31, 32, 33. The Grace of God which brings
Salvation has appeared unto all men; the Spirit of Truth, which does lead the
Saints into all Truth; the same does Convince the World of Sin. By this
Visitation and CONVICTION they are brought into a condition that they may
believe that which convinteth them of sin, and leaves them without Excuse,
justly to be punished for their Sin IN the SAME, is the true and effectual
means, cause and ground of Faith freely tendered to them, that thereby they
might be led out of the Sin of Unbelief by the Lord God; yea, it is his free
gift unto them, given to beget and work Faith in them: and if they STILL
continue in Unbelief, this gift will condemn them, and God justly will punish
them for their Rebellion, Hard-heartedness, Unbelief, etc. and it convinces
them of Righteousness, (in some degree) that thereby they might be led to do
that which is just and righteous in the sight of God, who is righteous (and in
the sight of men.) For the wrath of God is revealed from Heaven against ALL
Ungodliness and Unrighteousness of men, etc. -- Because that which may be known
of God IS manifest IN them; for God has SHOWED it unto them. For the Invisible
things OF HIM from the Creation of the World* are clearly seen, being
understood by the things that are made, even his Eternal Power and GODHEAD; so
that they are WITHOUT EXCUSE, Romans 1. 18, 19, 20. Mark, the WRATH of God is
against all Ungodliness and Unrighteousness of men, for one and the same cause,
namely, because that which may be known of God is manifest IN THEM: here the
holy, just, merciful God shows that he is not PARTIAL.

Reader, it is certain that the Spirit of Truth which does Convince the World
of Sin, and leaves those [without Excuse] (justly to be punished) who do not
believe, Repent and Forsake their Sins, and turn to God; the same IS sufficient
to GIVE Faith unto ALL men and Women: But God said, Israel would have none of
ME. And Christ said to the Jews, Ye will NOT come to ME that ye might have
Life. And Christ in pity and tender compassion WEPT over the Inhabitants of
Jerusalem, and said, I would have gathered thy Children together, as a Hen
gathers her Chickens under her Wings, but ye would NOT. [He did NOT say, Ye
could not] for he KNEW that it was possible that they might have come unto him,
(while the day of their Visitation lasted) but after that time was ended, they
could not; he said, O that thou had known (or experienced and enjoyed) in
this thy day the things which belong to thy Peace; but now they are hid from
thine Eyes*: Now your House is left unto you Desolate. Now those that would
not, and will not have God, nor Christ, nor the Spirit of Grace and Truth,
which God has given to lead out of the Sin of Unbelief, etc. these WILL NOT
have Faith: For they in their stubborn corrupt Self-will refuse God and Christ
the Author of it, and the holy Spirit, which is given to lead into the true
Faith, which purifieth the Heart, the Mystery of which is held in a pure
Conscience, as says the holy Apostle. Those who are so hardened by the Devil
(that great hardener of Hearts) that they will not have God, nor Christ, nor
the Spirit of Grace and Truth, nor Faith: this their refusing of God and
Christ, the Spirit, Faith, etc. is NOT according to the WILL and mind of God,
nor Christ, nor the Spirit of Truth; but according to the cursed Will and Mind
of the old Deceiver (who led Adam and Eve to Sin against God (and against their
own Souls) and according to their own cursed will and mind which he the old
Deceiver and Destroyer has begotten in them against God, Christ, the Spirit of
Truth, etc. And such hardened ONES Perish, whose Destruction is of themselves,
and the Lord God and Christ and the Spirit of Truth is clear, which has
Convinced them of their Sin, and Reproved them for the same (in secret) and
has waited, and long striven to lead them out of the same into Faith, INTO
love and pure obedience to the pure holy God, and Jesus Christ whom he has
sent.

Christ pronounced Woe against the Scribes and Pharisees, Hypocrites, for
OMITTING Faith; see Matthew. 23. 23.

Note Reader, here he pronounces Woe against them, because they had not Faith,
or were not in the true Faith; here the just God shows that he did not
withold the true and real means, and cause of Faith from them; but they in
their corrupt wicked WILL did resist the working of the same, till God ceased
to strive with them (for their Salvation:) So their being without Faith, and
perishing for want of it, was of themselves, and the Lord God, and Christ, and
the Spirit of Truth was and is clear of them and all such.

It would be blasphemous to say, that it was God's will that they should have
no Faith, (though he cried Woe against them, because they omitted it, and
condemned them for not being found in it.) But it is no very strange thing that
all men have not Faith, seeing many in former Ages, and diverse in this have
made SHIPWRECK of the true Faith which they ONCE HAD. The Apostle Paul charged
Timothy to Hold FAITH and a GOOD CONSCIENCE, which some having put AWAY;
concerning Faith have made Shipwreck, 1 Timothy 1. 18, 19. Moreover Paul said to
Timothy, The Spirit speaks expressly, that in the latter Times some shall depart
from the Faith, giving heed to seducing Spirits, and Doctrines of Devils,
speaking Lies in Hypocrisy, having their Conscience seared with a hot iron;
forbidding to Marry, and commanding to abstain from Meats, etc. 1 Timothy 4. 1, 2,
3. Moreover Paul told Timothy that Hymaeneus and Philetus had erred, etc. who
had overthrown the Faith of some, see 1 Timothy 2. 18. Again, Paul said to
Timothy, Hold fast the form of sound Words, which thou have heard of me in
FAITH and Love -- this thou know, that all they which are in Asia be turned
away from me, 2 Timothy 1. 13. 15. Again, O Timothy, keep that which is committed
to thy TRUST, avoiding profane and vain Bablings, and oppositions of Science
(falsely so called) which some professing have enred concerning the Faith, 1 Timothy 6. 20, 21.

Reader, thus it does plainly appear, that those who once had the true Faith
did depart from it, and fell into Apostasy, and so made Shipwreck of that Faith
which the Spirit of Truth had begotten in them, and such became as Trees twice
Dead plucked up by the Roots, etc. and as wandering Stars, (or wandering restless
Spirits) for whom is reserved the mist of Darkness forever, as its written in
the holy Scriptures, the Hearts and Consciences of such were grown very hard,
benumed and greatly insensible, eyes answering in a Spiritual sense that
saying, viz. Having their Consciences seared with a hot Iron, such are forward
and bold to commit Sin with pleasure and greediness, and to make a mock at true
Tenderness, holy Fear and true Watchfulness, and at the godly Sorrow, and
unfeigned Repentance of those whose Hearts God has broken by his Righteous
Judgments, through the effectual operation of the Word of FAITH, which is to be
known nigh in the Heart and in the Mouth, which Word is as a Hammer to break
the hard Heart, and as an Ax or Sword to cut down the Lust and Wickedness
thereof, and as a Fire to burn up the same, and as a strong Wind to drive away
the Ashes thereof. Woe, woe to the Ranters and Atheists, who have sold themselves
to work Wickedness with greediness, who make a Mock at God and at his Works in
Judgment and in Mercy unto the Children of men, who sport themselves in their
Devilish profane Conversations; woe to them, it had been better for them that
they had not been Born: And woe to all Apostates who are departed from the true
Faith, which they once had, who have sinned out the Day of Gods tender
Visitation to them, who are the Trees twice dead, plucked up by the Roots, whose
end is to be burned; it had been better for them that they had not had Faith,
then after they had it, to depart from it. Therefore let all People, who have
not sinned out the day of God's tender Visitation, HEAR and Fear the mighty
God, who is a consuming Fire unto the Wicked, as its written; and let all such
bow their Hearts and Minds unto God's searching Spirit and Word nigh in their
Hearts; and that will work true Faith, and increase the same, and will preserve
them from making Shipwreck of Faith; and it will beget a good tender
Conscience, and it will continue and uphold the same in all those who continue
to HEAR and Fear the living God, who as the Apostle says, Is the Savior of
all men; but especially of those that believe, 1 Timothy 4. 10. His Sun shines
upon the Evil and the Good, and his Rain falls upon the Just and the Unjust; he
is good unto the Unthankful and to the Evil, as is showed before: So God sends
and gives his Mercies unto the Wicked and Rebellious (in some degree) not only
in things Temporal, but also in things Spiritual (as is largely showed in this
Book) so that in the day of Gods Visitation unto them, he is a Savior unto
them, and saves and preserves them from Destruction: and he does suffer long to
lead the Wicked to Repentance, who says, As I live, I have no pleasure in the
Death (or Damnation or Destruction) of the Wicked, but that the Wicked should
turn and live. But when they will not turn unto him in the day of his
Long-suffering and tender Visitation, he casts them out of his favor forever;
as Christ has said unto the Goats set on the Left Hand, Go ye cursed into
everlasting Fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels. The Counsel of the
holy Ghost is, Seek ye the Lord while he MAY be found; call upon him while he
is NEAR, Isa. 55. 6. Again, They hated Knowledge, and did NOT CHOOSE the fear of
the Lord; they would NONE of my Counsel; they despised all my Reproof:
therefore shall they eat of the Fruit of their own ways, and be filled with
their own Devices; For the turning AWAY of the Simple shall SLAY them, and the
Prophesying of Fools shall DESTROY them. But whosoever hearkeneth unto ME shall
dwell SAFELY, and shall be QUIET from FEAR of Evil, Prove. 1. 29, 30, 31, 32, 33.

In Romans the first Chapter, the Apostle Paul speaks largely concerning some,
who, When they knew God, they did NOT glorisie him AS God, neither were
THANKFUL; but became vain in their Imaginations, and their foolish Hearts were
darkened: they changed the Glory of the Incorruptible God into an IMAGE made
like to corruptible Man, and to Birds, and Fore-footed Beasts, and Creeping
things; wherefore God gave them up to Vncleaness, -- Who changed the Truth of
God into a Lie (or rather for a Lie) and worshipped and served the Creature,
more than the Creator, who is blessed forever, Amen. And they became HATERS of
God, and even as they did not like to retain God in their knowledge, God gave
them up to a Reprobate mind, etc. Such become like the deaf Adder that stopeth
his Ear, which will not hearken to the Voice of Charmers, Charming never so
wisely, see Psalm 58. 4, 5. The Apostle Paul says, Tribulation and Anguish
upon every Soul of man that does Evil, of the Jew first, and also of the
Gentile; for there is NO respect of PERSONS with God, Romans 2. 9, 11. but Glory,
Honor and Peace to every man that WORKS Good, to the Jew first, and also to
the Gentile, ver. 10. Christ said concerning the Wicked This Peoples Heart is
waxed gross, and their Ears are dull of hearing, and their Eyes THEY have
closed, etc.

Note Reader, by what is above written, it does plainly appear, that there is a
time when man may seek after God and find him, and have eternal Salvation given
by him; yea, there is a time when HE is near, and then he being called upon
will hear and answer: But if man IN his SELF-WILL, carelessness and negligence
REFUSE this seasonable time, then he may seek, and NOT find, call, and NOT be
answered. Therefore blessed are all they who prize and embrace the time and day
of Gods tender Visitation, who said, TO day, if ye will hear my Voice, HARDEN
NOT your Hearts, etc. Again, They that hated Knowledge, who did NOT CHOOSE his
fear; these did harden their Hearts, contrary to the will and mind of God: they
set at naught ALL his Counsel, and would have NONE of his Reproof, Therefore,
says God, they shall eat the Fruit of their own ways, etc. For the turning
away of the Simple shall slay or destroy them, etc. But, says God, whosoever
hearkeneth unto me shall dwell safely, and shall be quiet from fear of evil. O
blessed and happy are all they who INCLINE their Ears, and diligently hearken
unto his Voice, and obey the same; with such he will make an everlasting
Covenant, and will give unto them the sure Mercies of David: he will give them
unfeigned Repentance, as he gave unto him, and forgiveness of their Sins, as he
did unto him, yea, he will remove their Sins as far from them, as the East is
from the West, Psalm. 103. 12. Isa. 55. 3.

Object. Its written, some are sensual, not having the Spirit, and they who
have not the Spirit cannot have Faith; for faith is the fruit of the Spirit,
and those who have not the Spirit, they have not faith, and those who have not
faith cannot be saved: Therefore all such God did ordain or fore-appoint to be
damned before they were Born.

Answ. I have before largely and clearly proved, that Gods will is, that all
men might be saved; he calls to all the ends of the Earth to look unto him,
saying, Look unto me and be ye saved. He gives all a Day and Time of
Visitation, wherein they may all seek him and find him, call upon him, and be
heard and answered by him, and receive in his tender Mercy everlasting
Salvation.

It is true that the holy Man of God has said, that some of Old did (and I say
many now do) separate themselves, Sensual, not having the Spirit; but this does
NOT at all prove, that such never had the Spirit* (in any measure) but the
Scriptures of Truth do clearly prove the contrary: For the Lord gave his Spirit
unto Saul, but because of his Disobedience and Rebellion against the Lord, the
Spirit of the Lord departed from Saul, and an evil Spirit troubled him, etc.
see 1 Chronicles. 16. 14. And Saul said, The Lord is departed from me, Chap. 28. 15.
When David had sinned against God in the case of Vriah, he greatly lamented and
unfeignedly Repented of his Sin, and prayed unto the Lord, saying, Cast me not
away from thy presence, and take NOT thy holy Spirit from me, Psalm 51. 11.
Read the Psalm through.

Christ said concerning the unfaithful Servant, Take therefore the Talent from
HIM, and give it to him that has ten Talents: for to every one that has,
shall be given, and he shall have abundance; but from him that has not, shall
be taken away even that he HAS, Matthew. 25. 28, 29. Chap. 13 12. Mark 4. 25.

Note Reader, here it plainly appears Saul had the Spirit of God, and it
departed from him, because of his Disobedience and Rebellion against God: God
did not will or fore-appoint that Saul should rebel against him; for after his
Rebellion, the Word of the Lord came unto the Prophet Samuel, saying, It
repents ME that I have set up Saul to be King, for he is turned BACK from
following me, and has not performed my Commandments; see 1 Chronicles. 15. 10, 11.
David who succeeded Saul in the Kingdom, did see that God took his Spirit away
from him because of his Disobedience and Rebellion, and therefore when David
had committed that great Sin against God in the case of Vriah and his Wife,
dread, terror and fear seized upon him, he was afraid that God would take his
Spirit from him, as he did from Saul; but in the BOWEDNESS of his Heart he fell
under the righteous Judgments of the Lord, and cried unto him, saying, Create
in ME a new Heart, O God, and renew IN ME a right Spirit: Wash me, and I shall
be whiter than Snow; cast me not away from thy presence; take NOT thy holy
Spirit from ME. He unfeignedly Repented, God heard his Petition, pardoned his
Iniquity, and received him graciously: He said, Make me to hear Joy and
Gladness, that the Bones which thou have broken may rejoice: Restore to me the
joy of thy Salvation, and uphold me with thy free Spirit, etc.

Christ shows in the Parable of the sloathful or unprofitable Servant (who
hid his Lords Money in the Earth, who does not improve that little which God
does give him) that he shall never be made a Steward of much, nor enjoy much,
but that shall be taken from him which he has, and he shall be cast into utter
Darkness, where there is Weeping and Wailing, and Gnashing of Teeth. Therefore
blessed are all they who despise NOT the day of small things, who despise not
the smallest, the lowest, or least appearance or manifestation of God, but do
thankfully receive and improve the same, in obeying and following God,
according to the understanding, strength and ability which God has given them;
such shall grow in Righteousness and Holiness as the Willows by the Water
Courses, as the Trees by the Rivers of Water, which bring forth their Fruit in
due season: But as for the Wicked, who despise the day of small things, who
improve not that little that God has given them, There is no Peace to them,
says the Lord God, they shall be like the Chaff which the Wind drives to and
fro. God is a Spirit, as Christ says; His presence fills Heaven and Earth,
as its written, he is Omnipresent, or present in all places.

Note Reader, besides what I have showed before, how God takes his Spirit from
the Rebellious; I further say, it may be properly said, that man has not the
Spirit when he believes not therein, neither obeys it, etc. and so is not
governed by it, and therefore no real Possessor of it, NOT being in UNION with
it in this latter sense he enjoys it not, he has not Rest and Peace in it,
because he believes not nor obeys it; yet this Spirit of Truth enlightneth
his Soul in some degree, by which he is Convinced of his Sin, and reproved for
it in secret THEREBY, and in this sense of God's Omnipresence, David said unto
God, Whither shall I go from thy Spirit, or whither shall I flee from thy
presence? If I ascend up into Heaven, thou art there; if I make my Bed in Hell,
behold thou art there, etc. Psalm 139. 7, 8. The Apostle John writes thus,
viz. Whosoever transgresses and abides not in the Doctrine of Christ, has
not God; he that abides in the Doctrine of Christ, he has both the Father and
the Son; see 2 John 1. 9. Here John shows, that those who do Transgress
Christ's Doctrine, have not God (who is a Spirit) ruling over them, governing
them: but those who do obey Christ's Doctrine are governed by the Lord God; and
such have both the Father and the Son, as the Apostle says.

Object. Many shall seek to enter the Kingdom of God, and shall not be able,
therefore (those who seek and are not able to enter the Kingdom) were ordained
by the Lord God to be damned before they were Born, and cast into Hell.

Answ. This is a gross mistake: One said unto Christ, Lord are there few that
be saved? and he said unto them, Strive to enter in at the strait Gate; for
many, I say unto you, will seek to enter in, and shall not be able. When once
the Master of the House is risen up, and has shut to the Door, and ye begin to
stand without and to knock at the Door, saying, Lord, Lord, open unto us, and
he shall answer, and say unto you, I know you not, etc. Then shall ye begin to
say, We have eaten and drunken in thy presence, and thouhast taught in our
Streets; but he shall say, I tell you, I know you not, etc. Depart from me all
ye workers of Iniquity, Luke 13. 23, 24, 25, 26, 27.

Note Reader, Christ did NOT tell him, who asked, if few were SAVED, that many
(no, nor that any) were ordained to be damned before they were Born, nor yet
that few were saved, but exhorted in general, saying, Strive to enter in at the
strait Gate, etc. This he knew they might do, before the Door was shut against
them: But when once the Master of the House was risen up and has shut the Door
against them, then those that would enter with their Sins, their
Night-Garments, their voluntary Humility, or vain feigned shows of Humility and
their Will Worship, their Self-righteousness, which is as filthy Rags and as
menstruous Cloth, and their polluted long Prayers in Hypocrisy, and their MERE
Fleshly Eating and Drinking, and Carnal Washings, boasting and glorying in the
Flesh, in opposition to and hatred against the Spirit of God and Christ, yea,
in Derision and Mockage at the same; these could not enter in at the strait
Gate, but must be cast out into the Lake of Endless misery, where there is
Weeping, and Wailing, and Gnashing of Teeth: Remember this, all you who call
upon God and Christ with your Mouths and Lips, but your Hearts are far from
him, following the Lust of the Flesh, and the Lust of the Eye, and the Pride of
Life, who spend away your precious time in Pride, Covetousness, Envy, Wrath,
Strife, Drunkenness, Gluttonny, Whoredoms, Oaths and Cursing, ungodly Laughter,
vain Talking and idle Jesting, Sports, ungodly Plays and Games, Revellings and
Dancings, Whisperings and Back-biteings, Lying and Slandring, evil Imaginations
and Thoughts, and abominable Idolatries; The BARE Name of Christian will not
profit you any thing, while you are out of the true Christian Faith and
Obedience, in Rebellion against Christ: O that you would consider your latter
end! O that you would seek after God! O that you would unfeignedly seek
Repentance; there is Mercy with God that he may be feared, and sought after BY
YOU, while the Day of your Visitation lasts, before the Door of Mercy be
FOREVER shut against you: but if you will STILL go on in your Wickedness, you
will in a very little TIME grow RIPE for Vengeance, and the Lord will CERTAINLY
be TOO strong for you, and will cut For as many as are led by the Spirit of
God, they are the Sons of God, the Spirit it self bears witness with our
Spirits, that we are the Children of God, Romans 8. 14, 16.
you down as in a moment, and will bring you into everlasting Punishment, as the
just reward of your wicked ungodly Works, Words, Imaginations and Thoughts. For
the holy Ghost says by the Mouth of the holy Apostle Paul, Be NOT deceived,
God is not mocked, for whatsoever a man sows that shall he also reap; he that
sows to the Flesh shall of the Flesh reap Corruption; but he that sows to
the Spirit, shall of the Spirit reap Life everlasting. If you live after the
Flesh, you shall DYE; but if you through the Spirit mortify the Deeds of the
Body, then shall you LIVE. His Servants you are to whom you yield your selves
Servants to OBEY, whether it be of SIN unto Death, or of OBEDIENCE unto
Righteousness, Gal. 6. 7, 8. Romans 6. 16. and 8. 13. Moreover, mortify your
Members, which are upon the Earth, Fornication, Uncleanness, inordinate
Affection, evil Concupiscence and Covetousness, which is Idolatry, for which
THINGS SAKE the Wrath of God comes on the Children of Disobedience, in the
which ye also walked SOME TIME, when ye lived IN them: but now ye also put off
ALL these, Anger, Wrath, MALICE, BLASPHEMY, filthy Communication out of your
Mouth; Lie NOT one to another, etc. Put on CHARITY, which is the bond of
PERFECTNESS; and let the PEACE of God rule in your Hearts, to the which YOU are
also called in one Body; and be ye thankful, etc. Col. 3. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 14,
15. Read the Chapter through. Again, Be ye therefore Followers of God as dear
Children, and walk in Love, as Christ also has loved us, and has given
himself for us an Offering and Sacrifice to God, for a sweet smelling savor:
but Fornication and ALL Uncleanness, or Covetousness, let it NOT ONCE be named
among ye, etc. neither Filthiness nor foolish TALKING, nor JESTING, which are
not convenient, but rather giving of Thanks. For this you KNOW, THAT NO
Whoremonger, NOR Unclean Persons, NOR Covetous man which is an Idolater, has
ANY Inheritance IN the Kingdom of Christ and of God. Let no Man deceive you
with VAIN Words; for because of these things comes the Wrath of God upon the
Children of Disobedience; be NOT ye therefore partakers with them: for ye were
SOMETIMES DARKNESS, but NOW ARE YE LIGHT IN THE LORD; walk as CHILDREN of the
LIGHT (for the FRUIT of the Spirit IS IN ALL GOODNESS, and Righteousness, and
Truth) and have NO fellowship with the unfruitful WORKS of Darkness, BUT rather
reprove them: For it is a SHAME even to SPEAK of those things which are done of
them IN SECRET; but ALL things that are reproved, are made manifest BY the
LIGHT; for WHATSOEVER DOES make manifest IS LIGHT. Wherefore he says, AWAKE
thou that SLEEP, and arise from the DEAD, and Christ shall give thee LIGHT,
Ephesians. 5. to the 14. Read the Chapter through. Moreover, the Author to the
Hebrews says by the holy Ghost or Spirit, Follow Peace with all men, and
Holiness, without which no man shall see the Lord, looking diligently lest any
man fail of the Grace of God, or FALL from IT. (As in the Margin before) Lest
any Root of bitterness spiringing up trouble you, and THEREBY many be defiled;
lest there be any Fornicator, or PROFANE Person as Esau, WHO for one morsel of
Meat sold his Birthright, Heb. 12. 14, ^5, 16.

Note Reader, this is WORTHY of thy observation, that Esau SOLD his
Birthright; and the following words of the Apostle are these (viz.) You know
(says he) that afterward, WHEN he would have inherited the BLESSING, he was
REJECTED, etc. ver. 17.

Note, here the holy Ghost renders Esau a Profane Person, and rendereth the
SELLING and despising of his Birthright as a proof of his Profaneness, for
which he was rejected of God, and could not inherit the Blessing, though he
Afterward sought it, etc. The holy Ghost or Spirit said by Moses, Thus Esau
despised his Birthright, Genesis 25. 34. God did not fore-appoint Esau to be a
profane or wicked man; he did not fore-appoint him to serve and obey the
Devil, the Original and first cause of all Profaneness and Wickedness. It is
written, that Ahab SOLD HIMSELF to work Wickedness in the sight of the Lord, 1
Kings 21. 25, 20. So Wickedness and Profaneness always proceeded from the
Devil, and CORRUPT SELF; but all Purity and Holiness proceeds from God, who is
everlasting Holy: his command unto all People is, Be ye Holy, for I the Lord
your God am Holy: Without Holiness no man shall see the Lord, as says the holy
Ghost; and also says, Holiness becomes the Lords House forever. God DID NOT
SELL Esau to work Wickedness, but he sold himself, or gave up himself to the
Original of wickedness, the Devil; for after he was corrupted by him who is the
Original of all Profaneness and Wickedness, he despised his Birthright, and
sold it for a Mess of Pottage, and after he had done this God rejected him; but
before this, he had a day or time of Visitation, in which he might have entered
into Rest and Peace with God. In the Prophecy of Obediah there is much said
concerning Esau and his House, Family or Offspring, the Edomites, (as I have
showed before in this Book) God said to Esau IN HIS Generation, The Pride of
thine Heart has deceived thee: how are the things of Esau searched out! how
are his hidden things sought up! etc. For the Violence against thy Brother
Jacob shame shall cover thee, and thou shall be cut off forever: Thou should
NOT have rejoiced over the Children of Judah in the day of their Destruction,
NEITHER should thou have spoken proudly in the day of Distress: thou should
NOT have entered into the Gate of my People in the day of their Calamity, etc.
NOR have laid hand on their SUBSTANCE in the day of their Calamity, NEITHER
should thou have STOOD in the cross way, to CUT OFF those of him that did
escape; NEITHER should thou have delivered up those of his, that did remain
in the day of Distress: AS thou have done, it shall be done unto thee; thy
REWARD shall turn upon thy own Head etc. And the House of Jacob shall be a
Fire, and the House of Joseph a Flame, and the House of Esau for Stubble, etc.
Obed. 3. 6, 10, 12, 13, 14, 15, 18. This Prophecy of Obediah is but one
Chapter, read it through.

Note Reader, here God plainly tells Esau in his Seed and Generation, of the
many acts of Pride and Cruelty which he did, which he should not have done, and
because he did them, God was angry with him, and therefore rejected him, and
cut him off, and returned a reward* upon him according to his evil works: So
Esau's ruin, misery and destruction was of himself, the effect and reward of
his own rebellious evil Works, which the Devil (not God) was the Original and
cause of, and God was and is just in his righteous Judgments that he brought
upon him, and which he brings upon all such.

Moreover concerning striving to enter into the Kingdom, etc. Paul in the holy
Ghost says, And if a man also strive for mastery, yet is he not crowned (or
gains not Victory) except he strive lawfully, 2 Timothy 2. 5. Now all who strive
lawfully to enter the Kingdom of God, they must strive ONLY in the divine
heavenly Spirit, or Word of God, whereby every one that comes into the World
are enlightened (in some measure or degree) to know Good from Evil, according to
John 1. 9, 8, 12. and 12. 46. Psalm 27. 1. 2 Samuel 22. 29. Isa. 60. 20. Luke 2.
32. Acts 13. 47. John 3. 19, 20. Ephesians. 5. 8, 13. 2 Cor. 4. 6, 7. Ephesians. 1. 18.
Christ says, God is a Spirit, and they who Worship him, must Worship him in
the Spirit and in the Truth; for such the Father seeks to Worship him, etc.
John 4. 23, 24. God is Light, and in him is no Darkness at all: If we say, we
have fellowship with him, and walk in Darkness, we Lie and do not the Truth;
but if we walk in the Light, as he is in the Light, we have fellowship one with
another, and the Blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleanses us from all Sin, 1
John 1. 5, 6, 7. Christ says, I am the Light of the World, he that follows
me shall not walk in Darkness, but he shall have the Light of Life, John 8. 12.
The Apostle Peter by the holy Ghost gave a true Relation of the Voice which he
and others heard from the excellent Glory, concerning Christ Jesus, saying,
This is my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased, etc. After he had given this
true Relation, he further said, We have also a more sure Word of Prophecy,
whereunto Note, here the Darkness is within, in the Heart of man in the Fall,
and the Light shines to expel the Darkness* within, and the Day is to dawn,
and the Day Star is to arise in the darkened fallen man's Heart.
ye do well that ye take heed as unto a Light that shines in a dark place,
until the Day dawn, and the Day Star arise in your Hearts, 2 Pet. 1. 17, 18,
19. In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with. God, and the Word was
God, the same was in the beginning with God; all things were made by him, and
without him was not any thing made, that was made: in him was Life, and the
Life was the Light of men, and the Light shines in Darkness, and the Darkness
comprehended it not.

Take notice Reader, God is Light, God is a Spirit; Christ is the Light of the
World, as he says, yea, the true Light that lights everyone that comes into
the World. There was a Man sent from God, whose Name was John, the same came
for a Witness, to bear witness of the Light, that ALL MEN through him might
believe; he (to wit, John) was not that Light, but was sent to bear witness of
that Light, which was the true Light, which lights every man that comes into
the World: he was in the World, and the World was made by him, and the World
knew him not: he came unto his own, and his own received him not; but as many
as received him, to them he gave power to become the Sons of God, etc. which
were Born not of Blood, nor of the will of the Flesh, nor of the will of man,
but of God, 1 John 1. to verse. 14.

Note Reader, Christ in his Divinity, as he is the Word which was in the
beginning, by whom all things was made, he is the true divine Light, who
lights every man that comes into World: He said unto the World, whom he
enlightneth, Believe in the Light, that ye may be the Children of the Light.
The Children of the Light are the Children of God; for God is Light, as is
showed before. This holy Apostle John said, The Light shined in Darkness, and
the Darkness comprehends it not. Therefore was John the Baptist sent from God
to bear witness to that Light, which shines in Darkness, that all men through
him might believe; mark, all being enlightened by Christ, who is given for a
Light to the Gentiles, and to be Gods Salvation to the ends of the Earth (for
so it is written of him by the Holy man) therefore Gods will is that all
People, Male and Female, may believe in the Light, wherewith Christ has
enlightened them: this Light being believed in gives to see Christ, and leads
to him the giver of it, and to God the Father of Lights, with whom is no
variableness, nor shadow of turning or changing, as says the holy Apostle.
Mankind in the fall and alienation from God in their Sin, are darkened by the
God of the World who has blinded their minds: Man in that state is said to be
Darkness. The Apostle Paul says, For ye were sometimes Darkness, but now are
ye Light in the Lord; walk as Children of the Light: for the Fruits of the
Spirit is in all Goodness, and Righteousness, and Truth, Ephesians. 5. 8, 9. And so
here the Light and Spirit are joined together by the Apostle whose Fruits are
one, their Testimony and Work one, and they are one as God, who is Light and
Spirit is one, and not divided. For God being a Spirit and Light, and Christ as
he is the divine Word, is God, is Light, is a quickening Spirit; so the Light
and Spirit flows from the Father, in and through his Son, and thereby are all
men enlightened to know Good from Evil (in some degree or measure) this Light is
the Condemnation of all them that hate it. Christ says, This is the
Condemnation, that Light is come into the World, and men love Darkness rather
than Light, because their Deeds were Evil; for every one that does evil hates
the Light, neither comes to the Light, lest his deed should be reproved: but
every one that does Truth comes to the Light, that his Deeds may be made
manifest, that they are wrought in God, John 3. 19, 20, 21. To be turned to
this Light, is the great and weighty concern of the fallen darkened Sons and
Daughters of Adam, and therefore was that great and faithful Prophet John the
Baptist, sent to bear witness of the Light, that all men might believe; here is
none foreordained of God to be Unbelievers; here none is Reprobated by him
before they were Born: Christ according to the Flesh dyed for all; yea, his
Soul was made an Offering for Sin; by his divine Life and Spirit he enlightneth
all: He is the Propitiation, says the Apostle John, not for our Sins only, but
for the Sins of the whole World.

Reader, this is the COMMON Salvation that Jude speaks of in the beginning of
his Epistle: to believe in the Light as aforesaid is true Belief, or true Some
who believed not in Christ, said unto him, What shall we do that we might work
the works of God? he said unto them, This is the work of God; to believe in him
whom God has sent; see John 6. 28, 29.
Faith, which the Apostle Paul speaks of to Titus, saying, Titus, My own Son
after the COMMON Faith, Grace, Mercy and Peace from God the Father, etc. Titus
1. 4. Of this Faith Jude speaks in his Epistle, this was and is the common
Faith: For this Faith the true Christians stood (or contended) against all the
false Faiths among the Jews, and Heathens, and Apostate Christians; for this
Faith do the true Christians now stand against them all, and in this Faith is
the Victory over all false Faiths, and evil things; see 1 John 5. 4. This is
the true and living Faith, which is attended with Works of Righteousness, a
Godly Holy Conversation, etc. according to the Testimony of the Apostle James,
This is the Faith which works by Love, which purisieth the Heart, the Mystery
of which is held in a pure Conscience; see 1 Timothy 3. 9. In this Faith is the
command of God kept, who says, Be ye Holy, for I the Lord your God am Holy. In
this is the Doctrine of the holy Apostle fulfilled, who exhorted, saying, As he
who has called you is Holy; so be ye Holy in all manner of Conversation, 1
Pet. 1. 15, 16. The Apostle Paul says by the holy Ghost, God has made of one
Blood all Nations of men for to dwell on all the face of the Earth, and has
determined the times before appointed, and the buonds of their Habitation, that
they should seek the Lord, etc. because he has appointed a day, in which he
will judge the World in Righteousness, by that man whom he has ordained,
whereof he has given assurance unto all men, in that he has raised him from
the dead. It is rendered in the Margin, He has offered faith unto all men; see
Acts 27. 26, 31. Again, Paul says to Timothy, Now the end of the Commandment
is Charity, or Love out of a PURE HEART, and of a GOOD Conscience, and of Faith
UNFEIGNED, from which some having swarved, have turned aside unto vain
Jangling, 1 Timothy 1. 5, 6. Again, Paul says to the Galatians, For in Christ
Jesus, neither Circumcision avails any thing, nor Uncircumcision, but FAITH
which works by LOVE, see Gal. 5. 6. The Apostle Peter by the holy Ghost
says, That God put NO difference between the Jews and Gentiles, but PURIFIED
(both) their Hearts by Faith; see Acts 15. 6. Again, Paul said to the believing
Thessalonians, Your Faith GROWS exceedingly; see 2 These. 1. 3. Again, to the
Galatians, The FRUIT of the Spirit IS Faith, etc. see Gal. 5. 22. The Apostle
James signified by the holy Ghost unto the twelve Tribes of the Jews, the
UNIVERSAL LOVE of God, saying, If any of you lack Wisdom, let him ask of God,
that gives to ALL MEN LIBERALLY, and obraideth NOT, and it shall be given him;
let him ask in Faith, nothing wavering: for he that wavereth is like a Wave of
the Sea, driven with the Wind, and tossed, etc. A double-minded man is unstable
in all his ways, James 1. 5, 6, 8. Again, the Author to the Hebrews says, Let
us draw near with a true Heart, in full assurance of Faith, having our Hearts
sprinkled from an evil Conscience, etc. Heb. 10. 22. Again, the same Author
says, Now Faith is the Substance of things hoped for, the evidence of things
NOT seen; for by IT the Elders obtained a good report: through Faith WE
UNDERSTAND that the World was framed by the WORD of God. So that things which
are seen, were not made of things which do appear; by Faith Abel offered unto
God a more acceptable Sacrifice than Cain, etc. by Faith Noah being warned of
God, of things NOT seen as yet, moved with fear, prepared an Ark to the saving
of his House, by the which he condemned the World, and became HEIR of
Righteousness, which is by Faith; by Faith Abraham when he was called to go out
into a place, which after he should receive for an Inheritance, obeyed, etc.
for he looked for a City which has a Foundation, whose Builder and MAKER is
God; through Faith also Sarah received strength to conceive Seed, and was
delivered of a Child, when she was past Age, BECAUSE she judged him faithful
who had promised, therefore sprang there even of one, and him as good as dead,
so many as the Stars of the Skey in multitude, etc. These ALL dyed IN the
FAITH, etc. by Faith Abraham when he was TRIED offered up Isaac, and he that
had received the Promises, offered up his only begotten Son, (of whom it was
said, In Isaac shall the Seed be called) accounting that God was ABLE to raise
him up even from the DEAD, from whence also he in a Figure received him; by
Faith Isaac blessed Jacob and Esau concerning things to come; by Faith Jacob
when he was dying blessed both the Sons of Joseph; by Faith, Moses when he was
Born was hid, etc. by Faith, Moses when he was come to YEARS, refused to be
called the Son of Pharaohs Daughter, CHOOSING rather to SUFFER Affliction with
the People of God, than to enjoy the PLEASURES of Sin for a SEASON, esteeming
the Reproach of Christ greater RICHES than the TREASURES in Egypt; for he had
a RESPECT unto the Recompense of REWARD; by Faith he forsook Egypt, NOT
fearing the Wrath of the King, for he endured, as SEEING him who is INVISIBLE;
by Faith Israel passed through the Sea, as by dry Land; etc. by Faith the Walls
of Jericho fell down, etc. by Faith the People of God LIVED unto HIM through
ALL Ages, in all Afflictions, Persecution, Tortures and Punishments whatsoever;
see Heb. 11. read it through, Abraham believed in God, and it was counted unto
him for Righteousness; know ye therefore (says the Apostle) that they which
are of Faith, the same are the Children of Abraham. Note Reader, God
fore-determining to justify the Heathen through Faith, preached before the
Gospel unto Abraham, saying, In thee shall all Nations be blessed. So that they
which be of Faith are blessed with faithful Abraham; see Gal. 3. 6, 7, 8, 9.
Genesis 12. 3. Again, Now to Abraham and his Seed was the Promises made: He says
not, and to Seeds as of many, but as of one, and to thy Seed, which is Christ;
see Gal. 3. 16. Which Christ who was of the Seed of David and Abraham according
to the Flesh, as he is the eternal word, he is the true, spiritual and divine
Light, who lights every one that comes into the World, according to John 1.
9. and 8. 12. and 12. 46. as is showed before. The Spirit of Truth which
proceeds from the Father, John 15. 26. and 16. 8, 9, 10, 11, 13. which does
Convince the World of Sin, and Reprove it for the same, IN THAT is Faith
offered to all People; the work of that Spirit within does give (in some
degree) a true and real Testimony in the Souls of all Men and Women that there
is a God, unto whom Worship does belong: by this Spirit God does give just
cause unto all Men and Women to believe in him, (every one in the time of their
Visitation) and if they believe NOT, THEIR Unbelief is their SIN, which does
shut them out of the Kingdom of God, and such do destroy themselves, as God
has said, O Israel, thou Destroyest thy self. There are degrees or measures of
the Spirit of Truth freely tendered as Gods free gift to all to profit withal;
and as the measure or degree differs, (not in Nature) but in measure or
proportion, so the enlightening of the darkened understanding thereby is greater
or less, according to that which God has given, and the Faith wrought thereby
is more or less accordingly, and every one that delightly improveth the little
or LEAST measure; God who is faithful to perform, has promised, that they
shall be made Ruler over much, yea, they shall enter into the Joy and Peace of
their Lord; and the Faith of such diligent Improvers of the little shall grow
exceedingly, as did the Faith of the diligent Ones of Old, witnessed unto by
the holy Apostle, as is showed before. The Lord God is just and equal, who
requires Faith and Obedience according, or answerable to what he gives in all
Ages and Dispensations, (be it more or less (and NOT otherwise) for he is equal
in ALL his doings, just in all his Judgments; to him be all Glory, Honor,
Dominion and Praise throughout all Ages, yea, World without End, Amen.

Paul declared unto King Agrippa, saying, That Christ sent him to the Gentiles
to open their Eyes, and to turn them from Darkness to Light, and from the Power
of Satan unto God, that they may receive forgiveness of Sins, and an
Inheritance among them which are sanctified by Faith, that is in me (says
Christ) see Acts 26. 14, 15, 16, 17, 18. Again, Paul said, We Preach not our
selves, but Christ Jesus the Lord, and our selves your Servants for Jesus sake:
For God who commanded the Light to shine out of Darkness, has shined in our
Hearts, to give the Light of the knowledge of the Glory of God in the Face of
Jesus Christ; but we have this Treasure in Earthen Vessels, that the excellency
of the Power may be of God, and not of us; see 2 Cor. 4. 5, 6, 7. Christ said,
I am the Light of the World; he that follows me shall not walk in Darkness,
but he shall have the Light of Life, John 8. 12. Again, He says, I am the
Light of the World, etc. I came not to destroy the World, but to save the
World; He that rejects me, and receives not my Words, has one that judges
him; the WORD that I have spoken, the same shall judge him at the last Day,
John 12. 46, 47, 48.

Note Reader, that Christ is the Author and Finisher of true Faith, as it is
written of him, Heb. 12. 2. To believe in him, as he is the Light of the World,
is true Belief, or true Faith. He that believes on him is not condemned, but
he that believes not, is condemned already, because he has not believed in
the Name of the only begotten Son of God: And this is the Condemnation that
Light is come into the World, and men love Darkness rather then Light, because
their Deeds are evil: for every one that does Evil hates the Light, neither
comes to the Light, lest his Deed should be reproved; but he that does Truth
comes to the Light, that his Deeds may be made manifest that they are wrought
in God; see John 3. 18, 19, 20, 21. see also the 14, 15, 16, 17* verses, God is
Light, in him is no Darkness at all; if we say we have fellowship with him, and
walk in Darkness, we Lie and do not the Truth; but if we walk in the Light, as
he is in the Light, then have we fellowship one with onother, and the Blood of
Jesus Christ his Son cleanses us from all Sin; see 1 John 1. 5, 6, 7.

Reader, thus it plainly, clearly and evidently appears in the words of the
holy Scripture, that God and Christ is Light, and by God, in and through Christ
are all Men and Women enlightened (in some measure or degree) to know good and
evil, the one from the other; in and by this Light is true and saving Faith
tendered or offered to ALL. They who take heed unto this Light, which shines in
their dark sinful Hearts (and there convinces them of, and reproves them for
Sin) they do well, as says the Apostle; see 2 Pet. 1. 19. By this spiritual
and divine Light which comes from God, who is a Spirit, in and through Christ
(the second Adam, who is made a quickening Spirit (as it is written in the
Scriptures of Truth) is all true saving Faith begun, increased and finished.
Now those who strive to enter the Kingdom of God out of this Light and Faith,
are as Thieves and Robbers, who will not come to Christ the Light, the Door to
enter in by him, but would climb up by another way, and therefore must be cast
down; and though they strive never so much in their fallen corrupt Self-will,
out of the true Light and Spirit of God and Christ, yet can they not be able to
enter. The Apostle says, And if a man strive for mastery, yet is he not
crowned, except he strive lawfully; see 2 Timothy 2. 5. Again, Christ compares or
likeneth the Kingdom of Heaven unto ten Virgins, which took their Lamps and
went out to meet the Bridegroom, and five of them were Wise, and five of them
were Foolish, while the Bridegroom tarried they all slumbred, etc. and at
midnight there was a Cry made, Behold the Bridegroom comes, go you out to
meet him; then all those Virgins arose and trimed their Lamps; and the foolish
said unto the wise, Give us of your Oil, for OUR Lamps are gone OUT, but the
wise answered, saying, NOT so, etc. buy for your selves, etc. and while they
went to buy, the Bridegroom came, and they that were ready went in with him
into the Marriage, and the DOOR was SHUT; afterward came also the other
Virgins, saying, Lord, Lord, open to us, but he answered, and said, Verily I
say unto you, I know you not. Watch ye therefore, for ye know not neither the
Day nor the Hour wherein the Son of man comes; see Matthew. 25. to the 14. verse.

Note Reader, the Kingdom of Heaven is likened unto ten Virgins, five Wise and
five Foolish; both wise and foolish had Lamps, yea, and both had Oil (ONCE) for
the foolish said unto the wise, Give us of your Oil, for our Lamps are gone
out; This shows that they were once IN, lighted and burning, but through
sloathfulness they neglected to renew their Lamps with Oil, and so their Lamps
went out (which shows they were once in) and they could not enter with the
Bridegroom, for the Door was shut: So will it be with the hardened Apostates,
who tasted of the heavenly Gift, and have been made pertakers of the Power of
the World to come, who turned from the heavenly Gift delivered to them, who
made Shipwreck of that Faith which God gave them, and put away a good
Conscience which they once had, who have trampled the Blood of the Covenant
under Foot, whereby they were sanctified, who are grown past feeling whose
Conscience is seared with a hot Iron; such having sinned out the day of Gods
tender Visitation unto them, they are as Trees twice dead plucked up by the
Roots, whose end is to be burned; Wells without Water, Clouds without Rain,
carried about of Tempests, wandering Stars, for whom is reserved the mist or
blackness of Darkness forever. Enoch the seventh from Adam Prophesied of these,
etc. the Apostle Peter, and Paul, and Jude write of these in their several
Epistles, as may be read at large. Though these, like Balaam the Enemy of God
and of his People, should desire to dye the death of the Righteous, and have
their latter end like his (which is to enter into the Kingdom of God) and sit
down in Peace and Rest in it, yet can they not enter therein, seeing they have
refused, rejected, done despite unto, and what they can, trampled upon that
blessed Gift which God has given to lead thereinto. Again, the Disciples of
Jesus said unto him, Declare unto us the Parable of the Tares of the Field; he
answered and said unto them, He that sows the good Seed is the Son of man;
the Field is the World; the good Seed are the Children of the Kingdom, but the
Tares are the Children of the Wicked, the Enemy that sowed them is the Devil;
the Harvest is the end of the World, the Reapers are the Angels. Again, Christ
spoke a Parable, and said, Behold a Sower went forth to Sow, and when he sowed,
some Seeds fell by the Highway side, and the Fowls came and devoured them up;
some fell upon Stony places, where they had not much Earth, and forthwith they
sprang up; but because they had not deepness of Earth, when the Sun was up they
were scorched, and because they had not Root they withered away, and some fell
among Thorns, and they sprung up and choked them; but others fell in good
Ground, and brought forth Fruit, some an hundred Fold, some sixty Fold, some
thirty Fold. And Jesus said, Hear ye therefore the Parable of the Sower, when
any one hears the Word of the Kingdom, and understands it not, then comes
the wicked one, and catches away that which was sown in his Heart; this is he
which received Seed by the way side: but he that received the Seed into Stony
places, the same is he that hears the Word, and anon with Joy receives it,
yet has he not Root in himself, but dureth for a while; for when Tribulation
or Persecution arises because of the Word, by and by he is offended; he also
that received Seed among the Thorns, is he that hears the Word, and the cares
of this World, and the deceitfulness of Riches choke the Word, and he becomes
Unfruitful: But he that received the Seed into the good Ground, is he that in
an honest and good Heart, having heard the Word, keeps it, and brings forth
Fruit with patience; see Matthew. 1. Luke 8. 15. Again, The Kingdom of Heaven is
like unto a Net that was cast into the Sea, which when it was full they drew to
Shore, and gathered the good into Vessels, but cast the bad away; so shall it
be at the end of the World, the Angels shall come forth, and sever the Wicked
from among the Just, and shall cast them into the Furnace of Fire, there shall
be Weeping, and Wailing, and Gnashing of Teeth. Again, Jesus spoke a Parable,
and said, A certain man made a great Supper, etc. and sent his Servant at
Supper-time, to say to them that were bidden, Come, for all things are now
ready: and they all with one consent began to make excuse; the first said unto
him, I have bought a piece of Ground, I must needs go and see it, I pray thee
have me excused; and another said, I have bought five Yoke of Oxen, I go to
prove them, I pray thee have me excused; and another said, I have married a
Wife, and therefore I cannot come, etc. And he said, that none of those which
were bidden shall taste of my Supper; see Luke 14. 16. to the 24. verse. And
Jesus said, Whosoever does not bear his Cross, and come after me, cannot be my
Disciple. Again, Whosoever he be of you that forsakes not all that he has, he
cannot be my Disciple, verse 27. 33.

Note Reader, the Seed that is sown in ALL these several sorts of Ground is of
ONE and the SAME Nature (to wit, good) as it is written. The Righteousness
which is of Faith speaks on this wise, Say not in thy Heart, Who shall ascend
up to Heaven, that is, to fetch Christ from above, or who shall descend into
the deep, to bring Christ up again from the Dead, or who shall go beyond the
Sea to fetch the Word unto us, that we may hear it and do it, but what says
it, The word is NIGH THEE, even in thy Heart, and in thy Mouth, that thou may
do it; see Deuteronomy. 30. 11, 12, 13, 14, 15. Romans 10. 6, 7, 8. This good Seed is
sown on all these several sorts of Grounds, for ONE and the same cause or end,
even that it might take deep Root in all, and bring forth Fruit in all: and the
Lord God in mercy to all Men and Women, does put them in a condition and give
them a time, in which it is possible for this Word, the good Seed to take deep
Root in their Hearts; and to bring forth Fruit INALL, some thirty, some sixty,
some an hundred Fold: He can as he has promised, take away the Stony Heart,
and renew a right Spirit and Mind. God makes none of these Grounds evil or bad,
but the Devil does it; but God can change them from evil or bad into the good;
he can cut them out of the wild Olive, and plant them in Christ the true Vine.
But it is not wholly impossible that men and women, through their
Self-willfulness, Sloathfulness, Negligence, Presumption and Carelessness may
turn away their Hearts and Minds from the Voice of the living powerful Word of
God, and so give up their Hearts, Minds and Ears to the Devil, who led Adam and
Eve into Sin against God; they were placed in the Paradise of God, in the
likeness of God (which is Holiness and Purity) it was possible that they might
have stood in that glorious state, wherein God set them; but it was NOT
impossible that they could fall from that state. God cannot fall or change, in
God and Christ ONLY is infallibility, that which is the preservation of Men and
Angels from falling, or failing of their duty to God and Men, is the Word and
Power of God, and of Christ, but they that turn away their Minds, Hearts and
Ears from the powerful Word of God manifest in their Hearts: Satan the EVIL
Seeds-man, sows his evil Seed of Sin and Wickedness in their Hearts, to wit,
Unbelief, the fear of Persecution, the cares of this Life, and the
deceitfulness of Riches, Lust of the Flesh, Lust of the Eyes, and the Pride of
Life; yea, in many, Idolatry, Envy, Whoredoms, and many other Evils, so as
Christ says, He that sows and begets this Generation of Evildoers, and
nurseth them up, and makes them strong to do Wickedness, is the Devil. Christ
said to such, You are of your Father the Devil; for the Lusts of your Father
you will do; he was a Murderer and a Liar from the beginning, etc. The Devil and
his Generation are NOT the Elect, but the Reprobates; the Devil, or his Seed,
or Generation, CANNOT enter the Kingdom of Heaven, though they strive never so
much; but the Lake of Fire is the place appointed for them, there to be
tormented, as it is written. But Christ and his Seed, and Generation, who are
Born again, not of corruptible Seed, nor of the Will of the Flesh, nor of the
Will of Man, but of God, of the incorruptible Seed, which lives and abides
forever; these are the Elect of God, who enter into his Kingdom, and are in
safety, Peace and Rest with him: Here are the states of Election and
Reprobation, Scripturally and Experimentally witnessed unto. Again, Jesus said
unto his Disciples, The time comes, that whosoever kills you, will think
that he does God Service. Note, these are ungodly Thoughts, and the killing of
the Disciples of Jesus are ungodly Actions; the Devil (NOT GOD) is the Author
of these Thoughts and Actions: as Christ said unto the Murdering Jews, who
betrayed and murdered him, Ye are of your Father the Devil; he was a Liar and
a Murderer from the beginning. Now those who thought they did God service in
killing the Disciples of Christ, they thought (no doubt) this their work of
Murder, would render them acceptable with God, and so to have admittance to
enter into the Kingdom of God: But herein the Devil, the old Deceiver, had
greatly befooled them, and bewitched them, toxecated them, and made them mad.
The holy man of God told the Murdering Jews, how their Fathers Persecuted the
Prophets, and slew them which showed before the coming of the Just one, of whom
ye have been now the Betrayers and Murderers; see Acts 7. 51, 52. The Apostle
John says, Whosoever hates his Brother is a Murderer; and ye know that no
Murderer has eternal Life abiding in him; see 1 John 3. 8. 15.

Note Reader, that the Apostle in the holy Ghost, charge him that hates his
Brother to be a Murderer; therefore keep out of Hated, and love thine Enemy,
as Christ commands, and if thou so do, thou will not Hate and Murder thy
Friends, it being truly so, that Hatred is Murder in the sight of God; though
he that hates, do not, or cannot reach to kill him that he hates; then
actually to kill the Prophets of God, and Disciples of Christ, is Murder in
the highest degree, and is a great breach of the holy Law of God, which
commands expressly, saying, Thou shall do no Murder: Which good, and holy, and
standing Law of God, Christ came not to abrogate or destroy, but to fulfill, as
he said; who said, Love your Enemies, do good to them that despitefully use
you, and persecute you; and also said, Whatsoever you would that men should do
unto you, do you even so unto them. Blessed are all they who do his
Commandments, they have right to the Tree of Life, and to enter into the
Kingdom of God, therein to rest in Joy and Peace for evermore: but the
Unbelievers, Murderers, and Sorcerers, and Idolaters, and all Liars, shall
have their part in the Lake that burns with Fire and Brimstone, which is the
second Death; see Rev. 21. 18. and 22. 14, 15. Again, The Apostle Peter said
unto the Believers in Christ, If ye be reproached for the Name of Christ, happy
are ye, for the Spirit of glory and of God rests upon you, etc. but let none
of you suffer as a Murderer, or as a Thief, etc. yet if any man suffer as a
Christian, let him not be ashamed, but let him glorify God on this behalf; see
2 Pet. 3. 14, 15, 16.

Note Reader, here the Apostle plainly shows, that he that is a Murderer, etc.
is not a Christian; and if he suffer for his Murder, he suffers not as a
Christian, but as a great Transgressor of the holy Law of God given by Moses,
and not only so, but also a breaker of the glorious and spiritual Law of
Christ, which commands and leads to love Enemies, as I have showed before.
Again, Jesus Christ says, What is a man advantaged, if he gain the whole
World, if he lose himself, or be cast away? see Luke 9. 25. Again, What shall
it profit a man, if he shall gain the whole World, and lose his own Soul; see
Mark 8. 36. Again, Then said Jesus unto his Disciples, If any man will come
after me, let him deny himself (utterly deny himself, so the Greek renders it
in the Margin) and take up his Cross and follow me: For whosoever will save his
Life shall lose it, and whosoever will lose his Life for my sake shall find it.
For what is a man profited, if he shall gain the whole World, and lose his own
Soul; or what shall a man give in exchange for his Soul? for the Son of man
shall come in the Glory of his Father with his Angels, and then he shall reward
every man according to his Works; see Matthew. 16. 24, 25, 26, 27.

Note Reader, those that seek after the Lust of the Flesh, the Lust of the Eye,
and the Pride of Life, the Ungodly Gain, the corruptible Riches, and sinful
Honors and Pleasures, all which perish with using; they refuse or deny Christ;
they refuse to bear the Cross, which all his true and real Disciples bear: and
such in choosing, and getting their Ungodly Gain, Lusts and Pleasures, do lose
themselves, lose their own Souls, deprive themselves of the Kingdom of God; and
so their Destruction is of themselves, and the Lord God is clear. Woe unto them
that rise early in the Morning, that they may follow strong Drink, that
continue till Wine inflame them; and the Harp and the Viol, the Tabret and the
Pipe are in their Feasts, etc. but they regard not the work of the Lord,
neither consider the operation of his Hands; see Isa. 5. 11, 12. Again, the
Prophet says concerning the Wicked, Give them according to their Deeds, and
according to the wickedness of their endeavors; give them after the work of
their Hands; render to them their desert, because they regard not the works of
the Lord, nor the operation of his Hands, he shall destroy them, etc. see Psalm.
28. 45.

Note Reader, those who have not regarded the operation or work of God, these
in all Ages have been a Faithless or Unbelieving Generation; and such in their
Self-will have perished, and the Judgments of God have been and are just upon
them: But those in all Ages, who have regarded and loved the operation or work
of God, he has begotten It is said in the holy Scriptures, The Curse causless,
or without cause, shall NOT COME: But a Rod is for the fools Back; see Prove.
26. 2, 3. They are cursed Children, or the Children of the curse, who have
forsaken the right way, see 2 Pet. 2. 14, 15.
Faith in them, through his operation; and all such who have continued steadfast,
they have been accepted of him, and blessed by him. The Apostle Paul said unto
the Saints, Ye are buried with Christ in Baptism, wherein also ye are risen
with him through the Faith of the operation of God, who raised him from the
Dead; see Col. 2. 12. The Author to the Hebrews by the holy Ghost said, By
Faith Isaac blessed Jacob and Esau concerning things to come; see Heb. 11. 20.
By this it appears that God did not hate Esau in the Womb, before he was
Born; for if he had then hated him, or before he had done Evil, how could Isaac
have blessed him in that Faith which God gave him? For it was impossible for
Isaac in that Faith which is the gift of God, to oppose God's purpose
concerning Esau. For though in the words that Isaac uttered in the blessing of
Jucob and Esau, he tells Esau that he shall serve his Brother; yet he does not
tell Esau he was ordained to be damned before he was Born, nor yet that God
hated him in the Womb. I would have all those consider of these things, who
have so hard and wrong thoughts of God, as to believe that he hated Esau in his
Mothers Womb, or ordained him to be eternally damned before he was Born. The
Apostle Paul in the holy Ghost says, We must all appear before the
Judgment Seat of Christ, that every one may receive the things done in his
Body, according to that he has done, whether it be good or bad, 2 Cor. 5. 10.
Again, he says, For the love of Christ constrains us, because we thus judge,
that if one dyed for all, then were all dead, and that he dyed for all, that
they which live should not henceforth live unto themselves, but unto him which
dyed for them, and rose again: wherefore henceforth know we no man after the
Flesh* yea, though we have known Christ after the Flesh, yet now henceforth
know we him no more: Therefore if any man be in Christ he is a new Creature,
old things are past away, behold all things are become new, and all things are
of God, etc. see verse. 14, 15, 16, 17, 18.

Note Reader, first that under the Gospel Dispensation, every one must receive
a reward according to their Deeds, whether they be good or bad, as the Apostle
in the holy Ghost, here and elsewhere says, and as Christ says, as I have
showed before. Secondly, note that the Apostles did truly judge that Christ
dyed for all; and that those that live, might not live unto themselves, but
unto Christ that dyed for them and rose again; see 2 Cor. 5. 14, 15. Wherefore
henceforth know we NO man after the Flesh; yea, though we have known Christ
after the Flesh, yet now henceforth know we him NO MORE; therefore if any man
be IN Christ, he is a new Creature, old things are past away, behold ALL things
are become new, and all things are of God, etc. Again, Chap. 7. the Apostle
says, Having these Promises, dearly Beloved let us cleanse our selves from ALL
filthiness of the Flesh and Spirit, PERFECTING Holiness IN the fear of God.

Note Reader, here the Apostle Paul does not only speak his own Belief and
Sense concerning the Death of Christ, but also the belief Christ preached unto
his Disciples, saying, Let your Light so shine before men, that they may see
your GOOD WORKS, and glorify your Father which is in Heaven, Mat. 5. 14. The
Apostle who preached down the shadowy works of the Law, said, We are his
workmanship, created in Christ Jesus unto GOOD WORKS, which God before ordained
that we should walk IN THEM, Ephesians. 2. 10. The Apostle James says, Faith
without Works IS DEAD, being alone, as the Body without the Spirit is dead, so
Faith without Works is dead also. Ye see then how that by works a man is
justified, and not by Faith only. Abraham believed, and it was counted to him
for Righteousness, and he was called the Friend of God: These are not the
shadowy Works of the Law, by which no Flesh can be justified in the sight of
God; but these are the substantial Works of the Gospel, wrought in and through
Christ, in all his true and real Disciples, see Ja. 2. 17. to the end. The
Apostle prayed for the Hebrews or Jews, saying, The God of Peace that brought
again from the dead our Lord Jesus, that great Shepherd of the Sheep; through
the Blood of the everlasting Covenant make you PERFECT in every good Work TO DO
HIS WILL, working in you that which is well-pleasing in his sight, through
Jesus Christ, to whom be Glory forever and ever, Amen. Heb. 13. 20, 21.
and sense of the rest of the holy Apostles in this weighty matter, it appears
by his foregoing words, that their belief, judgment and spiritual sense was,
that Christ dyed for all, and that all were dead, as he says. Here the Apostle
Paul shows plainly that it was his, and his Brethrens belief; first that Christ
dyed for all; secondly, that the end of his offering up himself, and his dying
for all, was that all might live through him; thirdly, that they should NOT
henceforth live unto themselves in Sin and Wickedness, but unto him that dyed
for them, and rose again; that as he was raised from the Dead by (the Power)
and Glory of the Father; so they might walk in newness of Life, in
Righteousness, Holiness and Purity; see Romans 6. 4, 5. For this was and is the
true Christians mark; by this the Christians of Old knew one another to be the
REAL Members of the Church, or Body of Christ; and by this mark do the true
Christians know one another NOW; and not by the Profession of God and Christ in
words ONLY. After our Lord Jesus Christ was put to Death according to the
Flesh, and risen again, and ascended, the true Christians KNOWLEDGE of him was
not after the Flesh, but in, or after the Spirit; though they had once known
him after the Flesh, yet from THIS knowledge of him they ceased; Therefore,
says he, henceforth know we him no more. Their knowledge of him from
THENCEFORTH being in the Spirit, who by his spiritual BAPTISM with the holy
Ghost and FIRE, purged their Consciences from dead works, to serve the living
God in newness and holiness of Life; these were of Old, and such now are the
living Branches in Christ, the living Vine, they are NEW Creatures in him,
created in him and through him unto good Works, which God before ordained that
we should walk in them; the OLD sinful Works and Lusts of the Flesh are put
off, and past away, all things are become new, and are of God, as he says;
this is the Birth that is born of God; this is the Jacob that supplants and
overcomes the Profane Birth of the Flesh; this is the Birth that wrestleth
with God like a Prince, for the Blessing* and obtains it; this is the Birth
that is Elect of God* These spiritually born Children, are the Generation of
the Just, these are the Righteous Nation, which keeps the Truth; these are
they who are washed from all Filthiness of the Flesh and Spirit, perfecting
Holiness in the fear of God, as the Apostle exhorted: But those who do profess
God and Christ in Words, but DENY both God and Christ in WORKS, calling upon
God with their Mouths and Lips, but their Hearts are afar off, continuing in
their sins, and growing up in them more and more, taking pleasure in them, and
pleading a necessity to continue in them all the days they live upon Earth, or
until they go to the Grave; these, as Christ said (of such) are of their Father
the Devil, and the Lusts of their Father they will do, he was a Liar and a
Murderer, etc. these that repent not, that forsake not their sins, but grow up
in them, as aforesaid, these are the TARES (see Mat. 13. 39, 40.) he that sows
them is the Devil, as Christ said: these are the REPROBATES; this Birth of the
Serpents Seed is the Profane Esau which God Hates; this Birth is Cursed in its
first Conception, in its Youth and in its Old Age. Jesus said unto the
Rebellious Jews, The Kingdom of God shall be taken from you, and given to a
Nation, bringing forth the Fruit thereof; see Mat. 21. 45. And to such
Unbelieving Rebellious ones, he said, Ye shall see Abraham and Isaac and Jacob,
and all the Prophets in the Kingdom of God, and ye your selves thrust out; see
Luke 13. 28. Again, Christ said, Woe unto you Scribes and Pharisees, Hypocrites;
for ye shut up the Kingdom of Heaven against men; for ye neither go in your
selves, neither suffer ye them that are entering to go in; see Matthew. 23. ^3.
read the Chapter through: See Luke 11. 52.

Take notice of this, all ye Loose and Profane Livers, who call your selves
Christians, your Un-God-like and Un-Christ-like Conversations bring a Scandal
and Reproach upon the Name of Christianity; you cause the honorable Name of
Christ and Christianity to be Blasphemed against, by Jews, Turks and Indian
Heathens; O that the deep Sense of this your great Sin might fall upon you, and
that your Hearts might be truly broke in the Sense thereof! O that you would
yet Unfeignedly seek Repentance, before the Door of Mercy be forever shut
against you! there is yet Mercy with God for multitudes, therefore his holy
Will is that they should seek after him Unfeignedly, Repent and Turn unto him
from all their Abominations; but those who will not, but go on stubbornly in
Rebellion against him, he will cut down suddenly in his Righteous Judgments
SWIFTLY, even as a Mower cuts down Grass; therefore Fear, Tremble and Bow
before him, all ye Workers of Iniquity. And more particularly, consider of O
all ye several sorts of Teachers, Writers and Disputers, who have been and are
striving to draw and keep people from this swift and faithful and true witness
(which searches the Hearts, and shows People their Evil Thoughts, Words and
Actions, and Reproves and Condemns them for the same) Repent and cease from
this your Ungodly Work, or else God will take you away from this Cursed Work in
his fierce Anger.
these things, O all ye several sorts of TEACHERS, whose EVIL WORK it has been,
and is, to draw out and keep out Peoples Minds, from the Spirit of God and
Christ, by which alone their Hearts are SEARCHED, and their EVIL Thoughts,
Words and Actions showed unto them; this is the swift Witness, by which the
Living God does Reprove them, and Condemn them for the same: This is the
Faithful and True Witness, which neither BRIBES nor FLATTERY, nor THREATENINGS
can Corrupt, Destroy nor Stop ITS inward Convictions, Rebukes or Reproofs from
those who Rebel against it, and as it is faithful in witnessing against all
the Rebellious, so is it faithful in bearing witness to and with the Spirits
of all the Obedient, that they are the Children of God. And of this the holy
Apostles were Living True Witnesses, who said, Whatsoever is Reproved, is made
manifest by the Light: and also said, The Spirit it self bears witness with
our Spirits, that we are the Children of God: And also said, He that believes
in the Son of God has a witness within himself, and has set to his seal that
God is True: As many as are led by the Spirit of God, they are Sons of God; and
if any man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his; as says the holy
Apostle, Those who believe not in the Spirit of God and Christ, they are not
governed by it; they are NOT the real Possessors and Enjoyers of it; and such
have it not to save and deliver them out of sin, because they believe not in
it; yet this Spirit of Truth does convince the whole World (which lies in
Wickedness) of their sins, and does in secret condemn them for the same (every
one in the Day of Gods Visitation unto them) So the Spirit of Truth, which is
the Saints Comforter, which leads them into all Truth; the same is the
Reprover, Condemner, Judger and Tormentor of the Unbelieving, Wicked,
Rebellious World; see John 16. 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13. Ephesians. 5. 13. Jer. 17. 10.
Psalm. 7. 9. Mal. 3. 5. 1 John 5. 10. Isa. 55. 4. John 3. 33. Romans 8. 14, 16.
Psalm. 50. 21, 22. Amos 4. 13. John 1. 9. and 8. 12. and 3. 19, 20. Acts 13. 47.
and 26. 17, 18. 2 Cor. 4. 6, 7. The Apostle says, What man knows the things
of a man, save the Spirit of a man, which is in him; even so the things of God
knows NO man, but the Spirit of God; the Spirit searches all things, yea,
the deep things of God; see 1 Cor. 2. 10, 11. This was and is the KEY of all
heavenly saving knowledge, by this is man's Heart opened to understand and know
those things which belongs to his Immortal Souls Rest and Peace; and he that
believes therein is enabled thereby to do those things which are well-pleasing
to the Lord God, and keep out of those things which are displeasing to him: And
of this the holy Apostle was a Living true Witness, who prayed for the
Believers, saying, I pray God strengthen you by his Spirit in the INNER MAN;
see Ephesians. 3. 16. Col. 1. 11. Christ said unto the Rebellious Jews, who made
their boast of the Law (yet wrested the Sayings thereof, and brake it) Woe unto
ye Lawyers, for ye have taken away the Key of Knowledge; ye entered NOT in your
selves, and them that were entering in ye hindered; see Luke 11. 52. Nehemiah
said, Lord, thou gave thy good Spirit to instruct them, etc. -- Nevertheless
they were Disobedient and Rebelled against thee, and cast thy Law behind their
Backs, and SLEW thy Prophets, which testified against them, to turn them unto
thee; see Nehem. 9. 20. 26. Remember this all YE that hate and Persecute those
who Worship God (who is a Spirit) in the Spirit and in the Truth, and Repent
and cease from your Ungodly Works; if you will not, God will cut you off, and
vex you in his sore displeasure, in rewarding you justly, according to the
Wickedness of your doings. We to the Rebellious Children, says the Lord, that
take Counsel, but not of me, and that cover with a Covering, but NOT OF MY
SPIRIT, that they may add Sin unto Sin; see Isa. 30. 1. This Spirit was and is
the Covering, UNDER* which man and woman is blessed, and is in safety out of
the reach of that evil hurtful Spirit, which works in the Hearts of the
Children of Disobedience, who also goes about like a roaring Lion, seeking
whom he may devour, as says the Apostle, whom the true Believers did and do
resist (in the living Faith) and by the virtue of the good Spirit of God, with
which they were and ARE covered, and in it had and have Victory over him; and
such did, and do experience to their great Comfort the saying of the holy man
fulfilled, who said, Greater is he that is in us, than he that is in the WORLD;
see 1 John 4. 4.

O that the Haters of, and Mockers at this holy pure Spirit would seriously
consider what they are doing! O that they would consider their latter end, and
the account that they must give to God for these things! O that it were in
their Hearts unfeignedly to Repent, and turn to the Lord from these abominable
things, that so they might not be forever shut out of the Kingdom of God! O
that the Inhabitants of England and all Nations would believe in God that made
them! who is spiritual Light, who is a holy pure Spirit, who is Omnipresent, or
present every where, who said; Heaven is my Throne, and the Earth is my
Footstool, etc. see Isa. 66. 1. read the Chapter through, 1 King. 8. 27. his
pure Spirit lights every one that comes into the World. O that the great
multitudes in England and all Nations, who are in Strife and Contention, Hatred
and Envying, Murdering and Killing one another about Religion, and about
Earthly things, WOULD BELIEVE in this Heavenly Spirit that enlightneth them,
which gives them to understand, (in some measure or degree) what is Good, and
also what is Evil! O that they would bow down unto it, and become subject unto
the leadings and teachings of it, then would it teach them to love one another,
NOT to be like Cain, who slew his Brother, (because his own works were evil,
and his Brothers righteous) but it would teach them to do to all men, as they
would be done unto, as God has commanded; yea, it would teach them, as it did
good Joseph, who was kind unto his Brethren, who was cruel to him, who sold him
to the Ishmalites; yea, it would teach them to overcome the evil with the good,
as Joseph did, and as God commands: But because Multitudes and Nations
believe not in this holy, pure, peaceable, loving and long-suffering Spirit,
therefore it is that they are as the raging Sea, that casts up Mire and Dirt;
and many are as the cruel merciless Beasts of Prey, destroying one another;
yea, many oppressing and seeking to destroy Gods tender People (who have true
love to all, and desire the temporal and eternal good of all) who Worship him
in his holy Spirit of Truth, which leads into all Truth the faithful
followers of it; and because that Vengeance is not executed speedily or
suddenly, for these crying Abominations, therefore are the Hearts of the Sons
of men fully set in them to do Evil, as it was of Old; see Eccles. 8. 11. and
because it is thus, that many have given up themselves to Unbelief and hardness
of Heart, who have closed their Eyes, and stopped their Ears against the
Convictions and Reproofs of this pure, meek, merciful and compassionate Spirit
of God and Christ, whom he has sent, and have given up themselves to work
Wickedness with greediness; therefore there is great cause to take up a
doleful Lamentation and Mourning; and those whom God has made skillful in
Mourning, who greatly desire the Salvation of the Multitudes, Tongues,
Languages and People; these have Mourned and do Mourn, to see Multitudes
running on swiftly toward the Pit of everlasting Destruction, suddenly to be
sunk into it. Thus as of Old, many say in their Hearts unto the Almighty God,
Depart from us, we desire not the knowledge of thy ways. Thus they hate the
knowledge of God, they do not choose his holy fear, which is the beginning of
the pure peaceable Wisdom which comes from above, as says the holy
Scriptures; see Job 21. 14. read the Chapter through; see Prove. 1. 4, 7, 22,
29. read the Chapter through.

Well said the Apostle Peter; Our beloved Brother Paul in all his Epistles,
writes things which are hard to be understood, which they who are Unlearned and
Unstable wrest, as they do the other Scriptures unto their own DESTRUCTION.
Peter was an Illiterate man, and so an Unlearned man in Natural or Artificial
Learning of Tongues and Languages; but he was a man of great Learning in the
Heavenly Spiritual School of Christ: all who come to learn of Christ, Paul and
Peter's heavenly Master, they are taught by to understand their Words, and to
have unity with them, and such are of one mind concerning them: But they who
are not yet come to learn of Christ, as he is the Light of the World, they are
not come to a right understanding of the holy men's Words, which are Recorded in
the holy Scriptures; and this is the cause that they are not of one mind
concerning them; but in very many contrary minds, and in tumultuous
Controversies about the meanings of them. Paul does say (as is showed before)
that God's Will is, that ALL men should know the Truth and be SAVED.

This have I written in the love of God concerning Election and Reprobation
(for the Comfort and Encouragement of all those who are weary of, and heavy
laden with their Sins, who hunger and thirst after Righteousness, that they may
come to Christ Jesus, who dyed for them, and rose again (and ascended, as it is
written of him in the Scriptures of Truth) who has promised that he will give
them Rest; see Matthew. 11. 28, 29, 30. This is also written as a Warning unto
those who are at ease in their Sins, flattering themselves, speaking Peace unto
themselves in their Unchristian Conversations, and pleading for a necessity of
continuing in the act of Sin unto the end of their days upon Earth; and yet
vainly imagine, that they are the Elect and Chosen of God -- Jesus said, I am
the Light of the World, he that follows me shall not walk in Darkness, but he
shall have the Light of Life. The Pharisees therefore said unto him, Thou
bear Record of thy self, and thy Record is NOT true. But Jesus said unto
these Unbelieving Jews, If ye believe NOT that I am he, ye shall die in your
Sins, whither I go ye CANNOT come; see John 8. 12, 24.

Note Reader, These great professing Pharisees Opposed Christ Jesus, and denied
him to be the Light of the World. Too like these Pharisees are many Teachers
and high Professors of Christ (in Words) in our Age, who though they will talk
much of Christ, as he was born, and dyed, and rose again according to the
Flesh, yet can they not endure to hear him preached as he preached himself, and
as the holy Apostles preached him (to wit) the Light of the World, the true
Light which lights every one that comes into the World: This is the Stone
which all the Builders do reject and set at naught, who build up their VAIN
Religions, Faiths and Worships in the Serpentine Earthly Devilish Wisdom, in
Murder, Cruelty, Oppression and Idolatry; but when this Stone falls on them in
Judgment, it will grind them all to Powder; see Luke 20. 17. Psalm. 118. 22.
Mat. 21. 24. O Blessed will all they be who come unto and believe in this
Living Stone; their hard Hearts shall be broken by it, and made soft and
tender, and thereby be made fit to enter into the Kingdom of God, into which
nothing that is Unclean can enter; and their sins that are past, though they be
many, God will freely Pardon, Remit and Forgive them in his tender Mercy and
forbearance, in the Name (and Power) of the Lord Jesus Christ, who gave himself
a Ransom for all, as says the Apostle; see Romans 3. 24, 25. 1 Timothy 2. 4, 6.
Again, the Apostle Peter said, He commanded us to Preach unto the People, and
to Testify, that it is he which was ordained of God to be the Judge of quick
and dead; to him all the Prophets gave witness, that through his Name,
whosoever believes in him shall receive Remission of Sins; see Acts 10. 42,
43. Acts 2. 28.

Note Reader, The Command which the Apostles received from Christ concerning
Remission of sins, it was that they should preach the Remission or Forgiveness
of the sins that were PAST; they did NOT receive Command from Christ to preach
unto people, that they must continue in sin all their Days; NEITHER did he
Command them to preach, that he had paid the DEBT for all sins past, PRESENT
and to COME; NO, he nor his Apostles never preached this Doctrine; this
Doctrine proceeds from him whose Kingdom stands in Sin, who is the Father of
Lies, who first LEADS people into sin, and then tells them that they can NEVER
come out of it while they are on this side the Grave, and to encourage and
embolden them to continue in sin all their days; HE tells them Christ has paid
the DEBT for it ALL; and he tells them that God sees no sin in them, the Debt
being paid for all, etc. So tells them that they are the Elect, and therefore
cannot totally fall, etc. Its greatly to be Lamented, that many do GIVE UP
themselves to believe these his Lies, to their own Ruin and Destruction. We do
say, that NOT only the sins, which Man and Woman does commit in their Dark,
Unbelieving State is forgiven when they come to believe and repent; but ALSO
those who through unwatchfulness, negligence fall into some sin, after they
have believed and Repented, if THEY find a place of Repentance and so
Forgiveness; this forgiveness also is in the Name of the Lord Jesus Christ; but
we do utterly DENY that God or Christ does WILL or Ordain, that any Man or
Woman should live in sin ALL their DAYS upon Earth: And those who do continue
in sin all their days, who Repent not, who Forsake not, this their sin will
sink them into the Pit of Everlasting Destruction, where there is Weeping and
Wailing and Gnashing of Teeth, and when they are THERE, they will see how the
Devil has deceived and cheated them, and then they will know that Christ has
NOT paid the Debt for all their sins past, present and to come, but they shall
know he has not paid the Debt for their sins which they do never Repent of;
for which they must suffer Vengeance of Eternal Fire, as a just Reward from the
Hand of the Lord God, who said, Be ye Holy for I the Lord your God am Holy.

Concerning Eternal Life.
JEsus Christ said unto the Unbelieving Jews, Search the Scriptures (or, ye
search the Scriptures) for in them you think ye have Eternal Life, and they are
they which testify of me, and YE will NOT come to me that ye might have Life,
John 5. 39, 40.

Note Reader, Christ told them not that they COULD NOT come unto him, but told
them that they WOULD NOT come unto him; so their NOT coming unto him, Christ
does not place upon the fore-ordination or appointment of God, but he places
it upon their CORRUPT SELF-WILL; for as it is before expressed (in this Book)
God's will is that all Men might come to the Knowledge of the Truth and be
SAVED: This is a Gospel Truth, spoken by the holy Apostle, as he was moved by
the holy Ghost. Well said the Apostle Peter, the Scripture came not in Old Time
by the Will of Man, but holy men of God gave them forth as they were moved by
the holy Ghost (or Spirit) the holy Scriptures are things of God. The Apostle
says, What man knows the things of a man, SAVE the Spirit of a man, which is
in him? even so the things of God know no man, but the Spirit of God; but that
Spirit searches all things, yea, the deep things of God, 1 Cor. 2. 10, 11.
There is two weighty things to be considered and understood from the aforesaid
Words of Christ, the one I have said something to, Namely, that it was NOT the
Fore-appointment or Decree of God, which HINDERED those Jews, from coming to
Christ, but their own Corrupt WILL, etc. for Christ says, That men should
honor the Son, even as they honor the Father; he that honors not the Son,
honors not the Father which has sent him, John 5. 23. Christ the Son of
God, says, I am the Light of the World; [Mark that] he is not the Light of the
Saints and true Believers ONLY (for he said unto the Saints, Ye are not of the
World, etc.) but he is the Light of the World that lies in Wickedness; by his
Light in their Consciences, he does convince them of their sins and wickedness.
Now all that honor the Son, according to the Will of the Father, they do
believe this is Doctrine, and ^o do believe in the Light, wherewith he has
enlightened them, who is the true Light that* enlighteneth every one that comes
into the World, according to John. 1. 9. he said, Believe in the Light, that ye
may be Children of the Light: He tasted Death for every man, as says the holy
Scripture: He is a Propitiation, not for our sins only, but also for the sins
of the whole World, as says the Apostle John; as the Will of God is that all
men should believe in the Father, so his Will is that all men should believe in
the Son, and so in believing and obeying, both honor the Father and the Son.
The second thing which I may speak something to upon the foresaid words of
Christ, concerning the grand Mistake of those Jews, who would not come to
Christ; their Mistake was, that they thought to have Eternal Life in the
Scriptures; for though the Scripture testifies of him (as he says) yet the
Scripture does NO where say that Eternal Life is IN THEM, but they do testify,
that Life is in HIM: Therefore GREAT was their Error, who thought to have
Eternal Life where it was not to be had; and the same Error some are fallen
into, in our day, and their Error in this weighty matter is greatly to be
LAMENTED; and my Soul, with many more do greatly, desire that out of this great
Mistake they may be delivered. There are two great EXTREMES which many run into
concerning the holy Scriptures (in this our day) the one is that which I have
spoken to already, which IS in those who think to have Eternal Life in the
Scriptures, where it is not to be FOUND, but IN Christ (as I said before) the
other Extreme is run into by Profane persons, who do not value them and esteem
them as they are truly worthy, but in their Pride and Presumption greatly
slight them, yet make EVIL use of them many times in wresting of them to uphold
and justify themselves in their Ranterism and Debauched Wicked Conversations;
the State also of the latter is greatly to be Lamented, and it is the earnest
desire of my Soul with many more, that those might come to Unfeigned Repentance
for this their great EVIL, that so they might come to a true and godly use and
Esteem of the holy Scriptures, and so to have profit by them, and comfort in
them, as the true Believers had in Primitive Times, and such now have, Glory to
the Lord God for the same; it is the Spirit (or Light) of Truth, which leads*
the true Believers into all Truth, and (convinces the World of sin) that
gives a right Understanding, and leads to a right use of the Scrip^^^es this
Spirit was man's Guide before the Scriptures were written, by it men were made
holy, before they gave forth the holy Scriptures; this is the Key which opens
them and leads to a right use and application of them; but they whose Minds
are gone ASTRAY from this Spirit who have not, and do not LEARN of it; those do
WREST the Scriptures to their own Destruction, as some did in the Apostle
Peter's Days, against whom he testified; Christ told some amongst the earthy
Wise Jews, Ye neither know the Scriptures nor the Power of God; yet those were
great Talkers of them; and even as they knew them not, not owning the Key that
opens them, so many in our day knows them NOT, because they believe not in
the Spirit of Truth, which ONLY opens them.

Concerning Good Example.
CHrist suffered for us, leaving us an example that we should follow his steps,
who did not Sin, neither was Guile found in his Mouth, 1 Pet. ^. 21, 22. Here
the holy Apostle shows that it is the Duty and Practice of all true Christians
to follow the Example and the holy clean Steps of the holy man Christ Jesus,
who did not Sin: But those who do continue in Sin, and plead for a continuance
in the same all their days (upon Earth) who Sin (as they say) in their most
Holy Duties; these are very far from the holy Faith, and holy Conversation of
the Apostles and Ministers of Christ and all true Christians, and very far from
following his pure Examples, and his holy clean Steps.

The Apostle John says concerning Christ, Hereby do we know that we know him,
if we keep his Commandments: He that says, I know him, and keeps not his
Commandments, is a Liar, and -- But whosoever keeps his Word, in him verily is
the love of God perfected, hereby know we that we are in him; he that says, he
abides in him, ought himself also to walk even as he walked, 1 John 2. 3, 4,
5, 6.

Reader, see how these holy men of God agree in their Testimony in this weighty
matter: these holy men did abide in Christ, and Christ in them, they by virtue
of his divine spiritual dwelling in them, were strengthened and enabled in their
Lives and Conversations to follow that holy Example which he gave them in the
days of his Flesh, who went about doing Good, who never did Evil; and though
they had sinned, he redeemed them from it, and from the Devil the Author or
Original of it. And so many came to behold their good Conversation in Christ,
COUPLED WITH FEAR, as the Apostle exhorts; 1 Pet. 3. 2. John says, We know
that whosoever is Born of God sins NOT -- And we know that we are of God,
and the whole World lies IN WICKEDNESS. And we know that the Son of God is
come, and has give us an understanding, that we may know him that is true, and
we are in him that is true, even in his Son Jesus Christ; this is the true God
and Life eternal. Little Children, keep your selves from Idols, Amen. 1 John 5.
18, 19, 20, 21. Here the Apostle shows plainly who are true Christians [and who
are not] the true Christians are in Christ, who has redeemed them out of the
bondage of Corruption, into the glorious Liberty of the Sons and Daughters of
God; and such have the Spirit of Christ bearing witness with (or unto) their
Spirits that they are the Children of God [according to the promise of God]
Romans 8. 16, 21. And they are NOT TRUE Christians who Lie, or continue all their
days in Sin and Wickedness; these are the World, as John says. Certain it is,
those who go on in Sin, who plead a necessity to continue in it all their days
they live or abide upon Earth; these are NOT the Bride, the Lambs Wife, the
true Church, whom HE presents to the Father, a glorious Church WITHOUT spot or
wrinkle, or any such thing, Holy and without Blemish, as in Ephesians. 5. 27. But
those pleaders for, and continuers in Sin all their days, these are the
Harlot; these are the World that lies in Wickedness, whom the cursed One is
the God of, who has BLINDED THEIR MINDS; these are in the broad way that leads
to Destruction; IN VAIN DO these call Jesus Lord, who do not believe his
Commands, who are not governed by him* who do not that which he says: he said,
Learn of me, I AM MEEK AND LOWLY, and ye shall find rest to your Souls. A
Remnant has learned of him in this Age, and has found his Promise true, Glory
to the Lord God for the same, they have found Rest and Peace to their Souls in
him, THEIR PRINCE of PEACE; though they have Trouble and Oppression in the
World for his SAKE: yet these can truly say as the holy Apostles said of the
faithful followers of Christ of Old, GREATER IS HE that is in you, then he that
is in them (to wit, the World) by whom we overcome them; they are of the World,
therefore speak they of the World, and the World hears them: We are of God,
he that knows God hears us; he that is not of God hears NOT US; hereby
know we the Spirit of Truth, and Spirit of Error, 1 John 4. 4, 5, 6. The
Apostle Paul said unto the the Philippians, Brethren be followers together of
me, and mark them who walk so as ye have US for an ENSAMPLE: for many walk of
whom I have told you often, and now tell you, even WEEPING that they are
Enemies of the Cross of Christ, Phil. 3. 17, 18. to the end of the Chapter. The
same Apostle said to the Corinthians, Be ye followers of ME, even as I also am
of Christ, 1 Cor* 11. 1. The Apostle Peter writ unto the Elders of the Church
of Christ, saying, Feed the Flock of God which is among you, taking the
oversight thereof, NOT by constraint, but willingly; NOT for filthy Lucre, but
of a ready mind; NEITHER as being LORDS over Gods Heritage, but as ENSAMPLES TO
THE FLOCK, 1 Pet. 5. 1, 2, 3.

Reader, there are several things worthy of thy serious and weighty
Consideration, in these words of the holy Apostle Peter; the first is, that the
Elders of the Church of God and Christ did and do (as Instruments in ^od's
Hand, Ministering (that is, Serving) in his own Spirit and Power) feed the Flock
of God and Christ: Secondly, That they did and do take the oversight of the
Flock, not by Constraint, but willingly: God makes them willing by his heavenly
power, they are NOT made willing by Gold or Silver, Corn or Cattle, or any
earthly thing, neither do they AFFECT Titles of Eldership in Pride or Vain
Glory; but the False Teachers and Elders are made willing to Preach for Gold
and Slver, Corn and Cattle, and Earthly things; and how such affect Titles and
Earthly things more then the true Elders WORK is known to God, and it is
discerned by many in this Morning of his heavenly Day, which is dawned in this
our Age, glory to the Lord God for the same: Such who feed with the Fat, and
cloth with the Wool, and make a PREY upon the People, are in Balaams Way and
Error, who covet the Wages of Unrighteousness; yea, many in Cains way, in Envy,
Persecuting about these things, some even to Death; and for these things they
strive one against another; the strife is, who shall have the fattest Benefice.
The TRUE Elders and Ministers did not, nor do not take the oversight of the
flock of God for FILTHY LUCRE, but of a ready mind, which God begets in them
by his good Spirit; FILTHY Lucre is Earthly gain ILL GOTTEN. Christ Jesus
commanded his Disciples, (whom he made Elders, to watch over his Church)
saying, Freely ye have received, freely give. Those who esteem themselves
Christ's Ministers, yet take the oversight of their Flocks, and watch over
them, and teach them for Gold, Silver, Corn, Hay, etc. this their Gain is
ungodly, it is Ill gotten, because in the getting of it they break Christ's
Command (whose Servants they pretend to be) and in so doing they greatly
dishonor him: Yet still the Ministers of Christ have power to eat such as is
set before them freely, but not to force or compel by Persecution those who did
or do receive Spiritual things from them (the Spirit of God makes such willing,
there is no use for outward Force and Persecution in this concern) so then to
be sure they had not power by outward Force to compel those who did not believe
nor receive their Testimony, or to pay them for preaching, though the true
Apostles and Elders had power to eat, etc. and where they did sow Spiritual
things to reap Carnal, yet they labored with their own hands, that they might
make the Gospel without charge; so far were they from desiring or receiving any
outward thing for preaching from Unbelievers, that they labored with their own
hands that they might not be chargeable to the Believers; No, the Ministers and
Elders who were and are made by Christ, were and are men of nobbler Spirits
then to do so. The true Elders and Ministers were not, nor are not Lords over
God's Heritage, but were and are good Ensamples, and true Servants to the
Flock; And their Exhortation was and is, to walk as they had and have them for
Ensamples, Glory to the Lord for the same.

The faithful Elder and Apostle Paul, by the holy Ghost exhorted Timothy,
saying, Be thou an Example of the Believers, in Word, in Conversation, in
Charity, in Spirit, in Faith, in Purity -- Neglect not the Gift that is in
thee, etc. take heed unto thy self, and unto the Doctrine, continue in them;
for in so doing, thou shall save both thy self, and them that hear thee; see 1 Timothy 4. 12. to the end. Again, Chap. 5. 22. Lay Hand suddenly on NO man,
neither be partaker of other men's Sins; KEEP thy self PURE, etc. They are
blessed, who follow the blessed Example of the Lord Jesus Christ, and his holy
Apostles and the Elders made by him, who abide in his Doctrine, and in the
Faith which he is the Author and Finisher of, and in the love which reaches to
all People, both Friends and Enemies; which Love thinks no Evil, neither does
any Wrong or Evil; which Love is stronger than Death, it is not puffed up, it
does not behave it self unseemly: This Love is the fulfilling of the holy Law
of God, as says the holy Apostle. All who keep therein are PLEASANT to the
Lord, and honored by him with a truly tendered Heart, and lowly mind, and with
the pure Patience (in and through all Tribulation, Trials and Affliction, which
comes upon them for Christ's sake) in which they possess their Souls in peace
and quietness, being kept by the mighty Power of God, through the precious
Faith and Love which is shed abroad in them, BY and in Christ Jesus. He that
says he abides in him ought himself also to walk even as he walked; see 1
John 2. 6.

Concerning Original Sin.
IN page 10. J. B. takes upon him to say something concerning Original Sin; he
says to his Neighbor, I understand by you, that its contrary to the Doctrine
you teach, etc.

Answ. The Original or first cause of Sin, is the Devil, who abode not in the
Truth (as Christ said.) The Apostle says, He that commits Sin is of the
Devil, for the Devil sins from the beginning; for this purpose was the Son
of God made manifest, that he might Destroy the Works of the Devil, 1 John 3.
8. Jesus said, Whosoever commits sin is the Servant of sin, Joh. 8. 34.

J. B. says to his Neighbor (in the aforesaid page) You told me, you
questioned not at all, but all those Infants that dyed without actual Sin were
received into Heaven, having nothing to be laid to their Condemnation.

Answ. J. B's Neighbor has spoken very Soberly, and Charitably, and
Scripturally, and Soundly in this matter, though J. B. does ignorantly Cavil
against him for it; the Dark, Rebellious, Apostized Jews were like unto this J.
B. they said, The Fathers have eaten sour Grapes, and the Childrens Teeth are s
t on edge, etc. These Dark sayings displeased the Lord, and he Rebuked them for
them by the Mouth of his Servant Ezekiel, saying, The Soul that sins it
shall dye; the Son shall not bear the Iniquity of the Father, neither shall the
Father bear the Iniquity of the Son; see Ezekiel. 18. 2, 20. read the Chapter
through. Moreover the Lord said by the Mouth of the Prophet Jeremiah, They
shall say no more the Fathers have eat a sour Grape, and the Childrens Teeth
are set on edge; but every one shall dye for his own Iniquity; every man that
eats the sour Grape, his Teeth shall be set on edge, Jer. 31. 29, 30. Thus it
plainly appears that little Infants, who never acted or committed Sin, must not
be cast into Hell, for their Fathers Sins, but dying without actual Sin must
inherit the Kingdom of Heaven -- Jesus called a little Child unto him, and set
it in the midst of them, and said, Verily I say unto you, except ye be
converted and become as little Children, ye shall not enter the Kingdom of
Heaven, Mat. 18. 2, 3. Mark 10. 15. Luke 18. 17. Jesus said, Suffer little
Children, and forbid them not to come to me, for of such is the Kingdom of
Heaven, Mat. 19. 14.

Concerning doing Good.
J. B. thou art a great Enemy to the Command of Christ, who says, Be ye
Perfect, etc. page 26. Thou bring those words in Psalm. 14. which say, There
is none that do Good, no not one.

Answ. Those words were spoken of Mankind in the Fall, to a Generation of
Evil*doers. In the same Psalm God said, Have all the Workers of Iniquity no
Knowledge, who eat up my People as they eat Bread, and call not upon the Lord!
And in the next Verse he says, God is in the Generations of the Just and
Righteous. Here thou may see that there was a Just and Righteous Generation,
and those were Hated and Persecuted by the Workers of Iniquity, for the Good
that appeared in them, which though the Lord was the Principal Worker of, yet
they as Instruments in his hand were acted in what was Righteous and Good, Mat.
12. 34, 35. And Christ says, The GOOD MAN out of the GOOD Treasure of his
Heart, brings forth GOOD things; and the Evil Man out of the Evil Treasure of
his Heart, brings forth Evil Things. By this thy Ungodly Plea against
Christ's Command, thou declarest thy self to be one of the Evil Men, who brings
out of thy Evil Treasures thy Evil Words, against the plain Command of Christ
and of God, who said, Be Holy, for I the Lord your God am Holy: and against the
Doctrine of the holy Man, who says, Cleanse your Hands ye Sinners, Purify
your Hearts you Double-minded, etc. And again, Let the Wicked for sake his Way,
and the Vnrighteousman his Thoughts; let him Turn unto God, and he will have
Mercy on him, etc. Again, Without Holiness no man shall see the Lord; and
Holiness becomes the Lords House forever. And the Apostle said unto the Saints,
The House or Temple of God is Holy, which House or Temple ye are. And the
Apostle Paul said to Christian Romans, I am persuaded of you, that ye are FULL
the of all GOODNESS, etc. Romans 15. 14. And again to the Hebrews, Chap. 13. 16.
the Author says, To do GOOD and to Communicate, forget not, for with such
Sacrifice God is well-pleased. Again, Gal. 6. 10. Paul Exhorted the Saints, To
do GOOD unto all men, especially to the Household of Faith. And again to the
Thessalonians, Ever follow that which is GOOD. And again, Hold fast that which
is GOOD, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 15, 21. Again, Paul to Timothy, the first Epistle, Chap.
6. Verse. 18. Charge them that are Rich in this World, that they be not
Highminded, that they do GOOD, and be Rich in GOOD WORKS, etc. Thus it appears
from the Testimony of the holy men of God, that the People of God, both under
the Law and Gospel, were commanded to do that which was GOOD, and by his power
they were enabled to do GOOD: So this is written in Love to J. B. as a just
Rebuke for his Contempt of Christ's Command, and encouraging People to continue
in that which is Evil.

Concerning the Righteousness of God, and also of Man's own Righteousness.
J. B. (as a Plea for Evil*doing) says, All our Righteousness are as filthy
Rags; and says, the Church confesses so, Isa. 64. 6.

Answ. In this Chapter the Prophet Represents and Lamenteth the Sinful,
Apostatized State of the Jews, saying, Our Iniquities have carried us away like
the Wind, all our Righteousness is as filthy Rags. In the same Chapter he also
says to the Lord, Thou meetest him that rejoices, and works Righteousness,
those that remember thee in thy Way. Here again thou may see that there were
two Generations, one remembering God in his Way, and working Righteousness
therein; and the other in their Iniquities, which carried them away as the Wind.

J. B. Though all the Righteousness of the Jews in their Apostasy were and are
as filthy Rags; yet the Righteousness of the true Christians (the Church in
God, made of Living Stones chosen and precious) are not as filthy Rags: It were
horrible Blasphemy to say so, for Christ is the Righteousness of the true
Christians, as says the holy Apostle, But of him are ye in Christ Jesus, who
of God is made unto us Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification and Redemption;
see 1 Cor. 1. 30.

J. B. Take notice of this, Christ was and is in the true Christians, made of
God unto them Wisdom, which Wisdom did and does lead them out of sin, which the
Wisdom of the Serpent has led into; so Christ the Power and Wisdom of God, who
leads them out of Unrighteousness (which is Sin) he did and does become THEIR
Righteousness, who Redeemeth and Sanctifies them. And this is the
Righteousness which we (the People of God called Quakers) own, stand and Plead
for, and NO OTHER: This is the Righteousness which the Apostle Paul desired to
be found in, and not in his own Righteousness, which was of the Law, which he
did sometime hold up in opposition to Christ the Substance, as may be seen at
large in his Epistle to the Philippians, Chap. 3. The same Apostle said of the
Jews, in their Apostasy (thus) For they being Ignorant of God's Righteousness,
and going about to Establish their own Righteousness, have not submitted
themselves to the Righteousness of God; for Christ is the end of the Law, for
Righteousness sake to every one that believes, Romans 10. 3, 4. Christ offered up
himself through the Eternal Spirit, as a Lamb without Spot and Blemish, who by
offering up himself once for all, put an End to the Jews Offerings of Lambs,
the Blood of Bulls and Goats, and all the rest of their Carnal Shadowy
Ordinances, which could not take away Sin, nor make the Comers thereunto
Perfect, as appertaining to the Conscience. But the Unbelieving Jews continued
their Sacrifices in opposition to Christ the Substance, who had ended them, and
so they sought to be justified by the Shadowy Works of the Law, which Christ
had ended; and though it was a Righteous thing in the sight of God that the
Jews should observe and practice those Outward, Shadowy Works of the Law which
he had commanded, until Christ had ended them, yet when Christ had ended those
Works by his one offering, and they still continued in them, this was an
Unrighteous thing in Gods sight, and therefore he rejected them, yet they
looked upon and judged what they did to be Righteous, and this the Apostle
esteems their own Righteousness, and so they did not submit to the
Righteousness of God, (WHICH IS CHRIST) but stumbled at the stumbling Stone, as
its written: And TOO like these are many of the Professors of our Times, who
hold up those JEWISH Shadows (which never were a Command to us Gentiles) in
Opposition to Christ Jesus, who says, I am the Light of the World, and he that
follows me shall not walk in Darkness, but have the Light of Life: and says,
Believe in the Light that you may be the Children of the Light. Now as
concerning Christ's putting an End to the Work of the Law, we do NOT believe
that Christ has put an end to the Command of God, who said, Thou shall Love the
Lord thy God with all thy Heart; and thy Neighbor as thy self: Thou shall do
no Murder: Thou shall not Steal, nor Covet any thing that is thy Neighbors:
Thou shall not bear False Witness, nor remove the Ancient Landmark, etc. But
we believe that Christ fulfills these Commands in all them that through Faith
and Obedience grow up in him (who is the true Vine) by leading them to do those
beforementioned things which God Commands: so the true Christians cease from
the Shadows [and in Christ by his Virtue and Power] do Love God with all their
Hearts, and their Neighbor as themselves, on which Commands, as Christ says,
hang all the Law and the Prophets, Mat. 22. 40.

Concerning Perfection.
IN page 24. J. B. says, speaking to the People called Quakers You hold that
Perfection in degree is attainable in this Life.

Answ. We do own the command of God, See Genesis 17. Genesis 6. 0. Deuteronomy. 18. 13.
Psalm 37. 37.
who said unto Abraham, I am God all-sufficient* walk thou before me, and be
thou Perfect. We say God was sufficient to enable him to keep his command; and
we believe he did so: And we do believe the Command of Matthew. 5. 48. Luke 6.
40. 1 Cor. 2. 6.
Christ, who said, Be ye therefore perfect, as your Father which is in Heaven is
perfect. And we do believe it is possible to keep this command of Christ, by
and through the Virtuous 2 Cor. 7. 1.
spiritual Presence of Christ, in and with the believing DILIGENT SOUL. And we
do Ephesians. 4. 11, 12. 13. Heb. 5. 14.
believe that the Gifts which were and are given for the PERFECTING of the
Saints, did and do accomplish that for which they were and are GIVEN. The
Apostle said, We Labor that Col. 1. 28. and 4, 12. 2 Timothy 3. 17. Heb. 12. 22,
23, and 13, 21, and 6. 1. James 1. 4. 1 Pet. 5. 10. 2 Cor. 13. 9. 1 John 3. 9.
we may present every man perfect in Christ Jesus. And we do believe that many
were perfected in Christ Jesus, though some Crucified Christ unto themselves
afresh, and put him to open shame, as the Apostle says. We do believe the holy
Apostle, who said, Whosoever is born of God, does not commit Sin: for his Seed
remains in him; and he cannot Sin, because he is Born of God.

Now as to J. B's Charge, That we hold forth and own, that Perfection in degree
is attainable in this Life.

I Answer, The Word Degree concerning Perfection, is neither our Word, nor did
I ever read it in the Scriptures of Truth, as used by him concerning
Perfection. But this word Degree he has thrust into his Charge against us,
thinking (no doubt) thereby to make it the more strong; but all his labor is
in vain: He does not declare what he means by the word DEGREE; but if by
Degree he mean a freedom from acting or committing Sin, such a Perfection we do
believe is attainable in this Life, by and through the mighty working of God
and Christ in men and women; and this is according to the command of God and
Christ, and the Doctrine and Experience of the holy Apostles: But if by the
word Degree, J. B. mean a Perfection of Glory in the HIGHEST attainment of
Glory that can EVER be enjoyed, then we DEEM that such a Perfection is
attainable in this Life, or while we dwell here upon Earth: For WE are of the
same Faith the holy Apostle was of, who when he was near to depart out of this
World, said, I have fought a good fight, I have kept the Faith; henceforth
there is laid up for me a Crown of Righteousness, which God the Righteous Judge
shall give unto me at that day; and not to me only, but to all those that love
his appearance.

J. B. has taken upon him to interpret the Apostle John's words, who says,
Whosoever is Born of God does not commit Sin; he cannot Sin, etc. J. B. says,
The meaning of these Words can be but this, Whosoever is Born of God, does not
make it his practice to Sin.

Answ. What Confusion, Falsness and Nonsense is this, to say that he who
commits Sin does not practice Sin; this is horrible abuse, and wresting the
holy Scriptures, which God will bring him to Judgment for: and if he do not
Repent, and cease from such Ungodly silly work as this, he will bring
Destruction upon himself. As I do understand this J. B. is one of that sort of
men, who do in their Confessions tell the Lord God, that they do Sin in their
most holy Duties. Now if their most holy Duties* have Sin in them, then there
is Sin in all those other things, which they call Duties, and consequently in
their Actions, which they do not account Holy Duties* and so they make it their
Practice to Sin; and so according to his own Argument Such who make it their
Practice to Sin, are not born of God: But to speak his mind more fully, I do
apprehend his meaning is, that the Children of God do not commit so much Sin,
as the Children of the Devil do.

Answ. When the Apostle says, He that is Born of God, does not commit Sin; he
also says, He that commits Sin is of the Devil. In the next verse he says, In
this is the Children of God manifest, and the Children of the Devil, etc. 1
John 3. 10. J. B. I ask thee, do not thou believe that God is GREATER then
the Devil? why then must Sin needs be in those who are Born of God? (as thou
would have it) Oh that thou saw thy Blasphemy herein! it would surely make
thee ashamed and bring Sorrow upon thee: But if in thy judgment those whom God
BEGETS, who are BORN of him, must commit Sin, and live in it all their days,
and Sin in their most Holy Duties. I ask, what DIFFERENCE do thou put between
God's Children, and the Devil's Children whom he begets, and who are Born of
him; for the Devil has a Generation of whom he is the Father, as Christ said
(see John 8. 44.)

For we believe that he that is Born of God is REGENERATED, that is, washed and
cleansed through the virtue of the holy Spirit of Christ, which is shed abroad
abundantly in the Hearts and Souls of the true Believers; and by virtue of
this, growing up in it, as the Branches in the living Vine are they redeemed
out of the ACT of Sin, and have dominion given them in and by Christ over IT,
and the Devil who is the Author of it; and such can say, as the Apostle said,
Greater is he that is in us, than he that is in the World (to wit) the Wicked,
BY WHOM we overcome them; and such can say as the Apostle said, Of my self I
can do nothing, but I can do all things through Christ that strengthens me; and
such can say, as the Apostle said, We are CONQUERORS, and more than Conquerors
through him that has loved us; and such do know Satan BRUISED under their
Feet, BY CHRIST the blessed Seed, whom God promised should bruise his HEAD: and
the Apostle told the Believers in Christ, That God whom they waited for should
suddenly come, and bruise Satan under their FEET. And the Apostle said, I
live, yet not I, but Christ lives in me; and the Life that I NOW LIVE IN THE
FLESH, it is by the Faith of the Son of God. [Mark] this Life was not a Life in
Sin; for Faith in the Son of God gives Victory over Sin and the Devil, that is
the author of it, Romans 6. 2, 7. and the same Apostle says, How shall we that
are dead to Sin live any longer therein -- and he said, He that is dead is
freed from Sin. And he also speaks in one of his Epistles of dying daily; and
in the aforesaid Chapter says, I am dead with Christ, etc. So he knew a time
of diyng unto Sin, after his understanding was opened to see the sinfulness of
it, and so dying gradually to it, he came to be dead to it, and so he said (as
before) I live, yet not I, but Christ lives in me. The Apostle Peter said to
the Jews, Unto you first God having raised up his Son Jesus, sent him to bless
you, in turning away every one of you from his Iniquities, Acts 3. 26. Mark J.
B. thus God sent his Son to bless People, in turning them from their
Iniquities; all Iniquity is Sin, and all Sin is of the Devil: so THEY who are
turned from Sin, which is the Devil's work, are under the Blessing: but they
that continue in Sin to the end of their days, who Repent not, who forsake
not, they are under the Curse. Christ says, Whosoever commits Sin, is the
Servant of Sin, John 8. 34. And the Apostle exhorted, saying, Resist the Devil,
and he will flee from you, James 4. 7. The Apostle John wrote to the Young Men,
saying, Ye are strong, the word of God abides in you, ye have overcome the
wicked One. Now mark J. B. these Young men were strong, the Word or Seed of God
did abide in them, and by his virtue and strength they had overcome the wicked
One, as he says; and he wrote unto the Fathers, saying, You have known him
that is from the beginning. He does charge NEITHER of these with the act of
Sin, or committing of Sin at that TIME, though they had all sinned; for says
he, If we say we have not sinned, we make him a Liar, and his Word is not in
us. But these had CEASED from Sin, according to the command of the Lord, who
said, Cleanse your Hands, ye Sinners, and purify your Hearts ye double-minded,
etc. But to the Little Children he said, I write unto you Little Children,
because your Sins are forgiven you for his Namesake; but also said, Little
Children, these things I write unto you, that ye Sin not. Showing hereby that
though then all Sin was not vanquished or overcome in them, yet they were to
wait to grow up into Christ, and in him to Reign over it, as the Fathers and
Youngmen did.

J. B. here take notice John writes to three states, the weakest of which he
named his little Children, who though they had a love to him, and the Testimony
born by him, yet were they not established in Christ, over all Sin and the
Devil, the author of it, as the Aged and strong in Christ were. And as for
John's saying, If we say we have no Sin, we deceive our selves. I say and
affirm, that his so saying does no more prove him an actual sinner at that
TIME, then the Apostle James his saying, With the Tongue we curse men, proves
James a Curser of men at that time, which is just no proof at all: For James
writes to the twelve Tribes scattered, many of whom were wicked, and unruly
Tongued, and Cursers, as he said; and he being a natural Jew, who sprung from
the Loins of Abraham, as did all the Jews; in that sense he called them
Brethren, but he was then no Curser, but abode in the Doctrine of his Master,
who said, Bless them that Curse you: And James said, That man's Religion is Vain
that has not a Bridle to his Tongue. And if James had been a Curser at that
time, his own Religion had been VAIN, and he himself condemned by Christ and by
the Apostle Paul also for a Hypocrite, for judging that in them which HE ACTED
HIMSELF, but he was a holy Man of God and lived in the Possession of the Good
he exhorted them unto, and out of the bad he reproved them for -- So John in
the same way and manner speaking in condescension, he allowing those his little
Children to have some relation to him, he being a faithful Labourer and
traveller for their conversion, says (with respect to them) If we say we have
no sin we deceive our selves, etc. John says, that which we have heard and
seen declare we unto you, that you also may have fellowship with us, and truly
our fellowship IS with the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ: This then is
the Message which we have heard of him, and declare unto you, that God is
Light, and in him is no Darkness at all: if we say we have fellowship with him,
and walk in Darkness, we Lie, and do not the Truth; but if we walk in the
Light, as he is in the Light, then have we fellowship one with another, and the
Blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleanses us from all Sin, 1 John 1.

J. B. Here take notice John, had fellowship with the Father and Son, and he
wrote to the little Children and others, That they might have fellowship with
him, etc. which none can have when and while they are committing sin, which is
the Devils work (but may when they have repented and forsaken it.) Christ said
to his Disciples, Ye CANNOT serve God and Mammon, ye must forsake the one and
cleave unto the other. This Mammon signifies Earthly Riches, and if man cannot
serve God and them at one and the same time (that is) set them up as Idols in
his Heart, then to be SURE Man cannot serve God and the Devil both at one time;
for Light has no Communion with Darkness, nor Christ with Belial, nor the
Temple of God with Idols. Now the words of the Apostle John, are as follow, He
that commits Sin is of the Devil, for the Devil sins from the beginning;
for this purpose was the Son of God made manifest, that he might Destroy the
Works of the Devil. These words we truly own, as we do the other, which are, He
that is born of God does not commit sin: That is, we do as absolutely believe
that he that commits sin is of the Devil, when and while he commits sin
(which is the Service of the Devil) as we believe he that is born of God does
not commit sin. In the same Chapter the same John says, Let no man deceive
you, he that does Righteousness is Righteous, even as he is Righteous. And
further says, In this the Children of God are manifest, and the CHILDREN OF
THE DEVIL; whosoever does NOT Righteousness is NOT of God, etc. 1 John 3. 7, 8,
9, 10. The Apostle Paul says, Romans 6. 16. Know ye not that to whom ye yield
your selves servants to obey, his servants ye are to whom ye obey, whether of
Sin unto Death, or of Obedience unto Righteousness: And further says, Gal. 6.
7. If you live after the Flesh you shall dye, but if ye through the Spirit
mortify the deeds of the Body ye shall live; he that sows to the Flesh shall
of the Flesh reap Corruption, but he that sows to the Spirit shall of the
Spirit, reap Life Everlasting. Now who reads what is here written with a
spiritual Understanding, may see that John's Saying, if we say we have no sin,
etc. does not prove that he was THEN AN ACTUAL SINNER, though it does show that
the little Children, who stood in some relation to him, as aforesaid, had not
yet over grown all sin (as we have EXPERIENCE in this Day of Gods mighty Power,
wherein he is making his People WILLING and also ABLE to forsake Sin, and the
Devil, who is the author of it) and we do say, there is a TIME which is given
by the Lord God to Mankind to see their sins, and a time to be made truly
Sorrowful for them, and UNFEIGNEDLY TO REPENT and to be forgiven in the Name of
the Lord Jesus Christ, who tasted Death for EVERY MAN; and a TIME to grow up IN
Christ, into Dominion over Sin, and the Devil, who is the Author of it; so that
we say this Work is wrought GRADUALLY in men and women, people are not so soon
converted, washed and cleansed from all their sins, as they come to the sight
of them, but there is a STRONG Spiritual Combat or Warfare to be known after
man is convinced of his sin, before he be WHOLLY dead to it, and redeemed from
it, and the Devil who is the Author of it: and all who believe in the Spiritual
and Divine Light of Christ, which shows them their sins, and PATIENTLY wait
THEREIN, they will see this Work wrought in order to their Salvation; though
they first sow in Tears, they shall certainly afterward reap in Joy, and
though their Temptations, Troubles and Sorrows may be many, God will certainly
deliver them out of them all.

J. B. As for thy interpretation of John's Words (that is) He that is born of
God does not commit Sin: It is Unscriptural, Unreasonable and Ungodly; it is
not the holy Scriptures, nor the Greek Copies, which thou call the Original
that is thy Rule for this thy Ungodly Writing and Perverting of John's Words,
but thy own Wicked, Dark and Sinful Imaginations; I desire thou may find a
place of Repentance, and so forgiveness at Gods hand, and cease from such
Ungodly Work as this, for if thou do not, God will reward thee according to thy
Ungodly Deeds, and the Cup which thou must drink (as the reward of thy Work)
will be Bitter. John says, In this is the Children of God made manifest, and
the Children of the Devil; whosoever does not Righteousness is not of God: But
thou arguest, That the born of God do commit sin, which is Blasphemy; but
seeing this is thy Ungodly Opinion, that the born of God does commit sin; I
say, the born of the Devil does no more but commit sin; so here thou put'st not
a right difference betwixt the Righteous and the Wicked, and so thou art not
God's Minister or Mouth to the People, but in these thy Ungodly Interpretations
of the holy Scriptures thou art the Minister and Mouth of the Father of Lies,
who has led people into sin, who tellest them they must never come out of it
on this side the Grave. Thus thou and many others have made agreement with
Death, and a Covenant with Hell for Term of Life, and if you do not know this
Covenant broken by Christ Jesus, and by him be led out of sin, your Reward will
be Miserable in the World to come: but we greatly desire your Unseigned
Repentance and Salvation.

What a Wild Distracted Interpreter of the holy Scriptures is this J. B? If he
go on to interpret the rest of the Commands of God and Christ, as he has done
these Commands to be Perfect, Holy, etc. what* Mad Work will he make? it
appears it is not the Scriptures of Truth, nor the Spirit of God that must be
his Rule, but rather the Temptations of the Wicked One, which has large room
in his Unbelieving Heart, as this Ungodly Plea does largely manifest. Gods
Command is, Thou shall do no Murder: Now according to J. B's Wild
Interpretation of the beforementioned Commands, he may say, Those who are born
of God may or must Murder: But they may not Murder with that allowance that
some other Murderers do, or they must not do so much Murder as some others do.
Again, God says, Thou shall not Steal: But J. B. may say by his Mad Rule of
arguing; they may or must Steal; but they who are born of God may not or must
not Steal with that allowance that others who are not born of God do, or they
must not stteal so much as such do. And after this his Ungodly way of arguing
he may deal thus with the rest of the Commands of God and Christ.

J. B. to strengthen thy Plea for the Devil, and Sin, which is his Work; thou
mentionest Paul's Words, who said, That which I would not do, that do I.

Answ. Paul and all the Saints, who did (and do) wait diligently upon God, did
and do grow from one degree of Grace unto another; and Paul did grow up in
Christ unto a better and stronger State: He said, I am Crucified with Christ,
etc. I live, yet not I, but Christ lives in me; and the Life that I now live in
the Flesh, I live by the Faith of the Son of God. And he said, I can do all
things through Christ that strengthens me. And he said, I have fought a good
fight, I have kept the Faith, etc. And he said, The Law of the Spirit of Life
in Christ Jesus has set me Free from the Law of Sin and Death. Thus it does
appear that he did out-grow those Weaknesses which he does mention in the 7th
Chapter to ^he Romans; see Chap. 8.

J. B. says, David brake the sixth and seventh Commandment.

Answ. I say, David repented, bore the Righteous Judgments of God for so doing,
and did so no more, and was forgiven; he did not say, that he must continue
breaking the commands of God all his days, as many of the Priests and
Professors of England and other Nations do; he prayed to God to cleanse him
from his secret Sins, and from Blood*guiltiness, and God heard his Prayer, and
did so; and it is written, that David turned not aside from any thing that God
commanded him all the days of his Life, save only in the matter of Vriah the
Hittite, 1 Kings 15. 5. David is said to be a man after God's own Heart, 1 Samuel
13. 14. So he was before he committed that great Sin, in the case of Vriah and
his Wife; and so he was after God had sanctified him through his Righteous
Judgments and Mercy: he prayed to God to Wash him, and he said, I shall be
whiter than Snow; make me to hear joy and gladness, that the Bones which thou
have broken may rejoice: Create in me a new Heart, O God, and renew a right
Spirit within me -- take not thy holy Spirit from me, Psalm. 51. 7, to the 15th.

J. B. in page 26. thou chargest the Apostles, That they all at one clap
forsook or denied Christ. To prove this thy Charge, thou bring, Mark 14. 50.
66. which does not prove thy Charge against them ALL; Peter did deny him, but
when the Cock crew, he turned about and Wept bitterly: Here was timely and
unfeigned Repentance; he did not say, he must continue denying his Master all
his Days, but he soon became a valiant follower of Christ, and a sufferer with
him and for him. Mark says the others fled, but does not say, they all at once
denied their Master: but it appears by their leaving of him at that time, that
they did not so boldly confess him before his Enemies, as afterward they did.
But let J. B. consider, that this weakness which appeared in them, was before
the Holy Ghost was come upon them in that FULLNESS, which after the Death and
Resurrection of their Master they received: The Holy Ghost was NOT yet given,
because Jesus was not yet glorified, John 7. 39. But after theywere endewed
with Power from on high, they confessed him with great boldness and suffered
with him and for him Boldly. J. B. here thou make Ungodly shifts to plead for
Sin term of Life, which plea of thine is to uphold the Devil's Kingdom, which
stands in Sin, and thy plea is against the Kingdom of Christ, which does stand
in Holiness and Righteousness: God will reward thee according to thy Deeds, if
thou do not come to unseigned Repentance; but it is thy Repentance and
Salvation that we desire.

In the aforesaid page, J. B. quotes David's words, who said in Psalms 14. 1.
and 53. 1, 3. There is none that does good, etc. Which Paul repeats in Romans 3.
11, 12. to the 20. where he does plainly open
the Words of David thus, Now (says he) we know that what things soever the
Law says, it says to them who are under the Law, that every Mouth may be
stopped, and all the WORLD may become guilty before God. The same Apostle
says, Christ is the end of the Law for Righteousness sake, to every one that
believes, Romans 10. 4. The same Apostle said to the Saints, Sin shall not have
dominion over you: for you are not under the Law, but under Grace, Romans 6. 14.
The same Apostle says, Knowing this, that our old man is crucified with him,
that the Body of Sin might be destroyed; that henceforth we should not serve
Sin, Romans 6. 6. And he says, How shall we that are dead to Sin live any longer
therein, Romans 6. 2. And the same Apostle says to the Galatians, If ye be led
by the Spirit, ye are not under the Law, Gal. 5. 18. None are true Christians,
but those who are led by the Spirit of Christ: as the Apostle says, If any man
have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his: And as many as are led by the
Spirit of God, they are the Sons of God, says the holy man of God: and such
are not under the Law, being come out of the Transgression, upon which (or
because of which) the Law was added. Besides in the 14. and 53. Psalms, and in
Romans 3. David and Paul show that God had a People in those Days, which he
distinguished from those workers of Iniquity; he said, Have the workers of
Iniquity no Knowledge, who eat up my People as they eat Bread, and call not
upon the Lord? and he said, The Wicked were in great fear; for God is in the
Congregations of the Righteous. Mark, God had a Righteous Congregation then,
though they might be few in Number, Psalms 14. 4, 5. and 53. 4.

J. B. quotes Jer. 17. 9. The Heart is desperately wicked, who can know it? The
Prophet does answer the Question in the Name of the Lord, saying, I the Lord
search the Heart, I try Reins, to give unto every man according to his ways,
and according to the Fruit of his doings. God has promised by the Mouth of his
holy Prophet, that he will take away the Stony Heart out of the Flesh, and that
he will give a Heart of Flesh, that People may walk in his Statutes, Ezekiel. 11.
19. And the Spirit of Truth, which does lead the Saints into all Truth, the
same does Convince the World of Sin, of Righteousness and Judgment: and
whatsoever is reproved and condemned by God in Men and Women, the same is made
known to be Evil, by the spiritual Light of Christ Jesus. Every one that does
Evil, hates the Light, and will not bring his Deeds to it: But he that does
Truth brings his Deeds to the Light, that they may be made manifest that they
are wrought in God, as says the Apostle.

J. B. God says, Woe unto the Rebellious Children, who take counsel, but not of
me, that cover with a covering, but not of my Spirit, that they may add Sin
unto Sin, Isa. 30. 1. Thou have given large Proof in this thy Pamphlet, that
thou art not covered with the Spirit of God; for if thou were, thou would not
thus wickedly wrest the holy Scriptures to cover thy self in thy Sins, neither
would thou rake up the weakness and failings of such amongst God's People,
who at sometimes did Evil, but Repented and forsook their Evils, and were
forgiven by the Lord, as in the cases of David and Peter. God made Man perfect,
and the Devil has brought man into Imperfection, by leading him into Sin and
Rebellion against God. So thy Plea for Sin and Imperfection term of Life, is a
plea for the Devil and his Kingdom, whose Kingdom stands in Sin; and thou art
in this thy plea against Christ Jesus and his Kingdom, which stands in
Righteousness, and Peace, and Joy in the holy Ghost: So be ashamed of thy
Ungodly Work and Repent.

Concerning God's dwelling in his People.
In page 23. J. B. says, If there be that in us, which if obeyed leads to
Heaven, then sure we bear a part in our Justification our selves which gives
the Apostle to the Ephesians the Lie, who tells us, we are saved by Grace
through Faith, etc.

Answ. God who cannot Lie has promised, that he will walk and dwell in his
People, and teach them himself. And the Apostle said to the Saints, There is
one God over all, through all, and in you all. Mark, God was in them all; and
the Apostle said, I live, yet not I, but Christ lives in me: and he said to
some, who questioned whether Christ did speak in him or no, Try your selves,
know you not that Jesus Christ is in you, except ye be Reprobates. And the
Apostle John said, God is Love, he that dwells in Love dwells in God, and
God in him [mark, God in him] and the Apostle John said, We know that the Son
of God is come, and has given us an under standing, that we may know him that
is true; and we are in him that is true, even in his Son Jesus Christ, and this
is the true God and Life eternal, 1 John 5. 19, 20. And it is written, He that
has the Son has Life, and he that has the Son has the Father also. Christ
in his Prayer to the Father said of his Disciples, I in them, and thou in me,
John 17. 21. to the end of the Chapter. Thus it plainly appears, that the
Christians did and do enjoy God and Christ within. God is a Spirit, as Christ
said; and the second Adam was made a quickening Spirit, as the Apostle says. So
God and Christ within is sufficient to lead unto Salvation, being obeyed: and
thus to own God and Christ within, did not, nor does not lead the Christians to
justify themselves, or as J. B. phrases it, To bear a part in their own
Justification, nor to give the Apostle the Lie, who says, Ye are saved by
Grace through Faith. Now mark the great Ignorance of this J. B. he grants that
People are saved by Grace through Faith. I ask J. B. then must not they who are
so saved have this Grace, and this Faith within them? would he have them to be
saved by Grace through Faith, and yet have neither Grace nor Faith in them? Oh,
gross Ignorance! The Martyr Stephen was a man full of Faith, and of the Holy
Ghost or Spirit. And the Apostle exhorted, saying, Be not drunk with Wine,
wherein is Excess; but be ye filled with the Spirit. The Apostle says, It is a
good thing that the Heart be established with Grace. And sure this Grace must
be in their Hearts, with which their Hearts were to be established. The Apostle
exhorted the Saints to teach and admonish, etc. with Grace in their Hearts,
Col. 3. 16. And the Mystery of Faith is held in a pure Conscience, as its
written in the holy Scriptures. The Grace of God that brings Salvation has
appeared to all men, as says the Apostle, Tit. 2. 11. And the appearance of it
is within Man and Woman, as I have proved by the Scriptures: and the Lord said
unto the Apostle, My Grace is sufficient for thee, my strength is made perfect
in weakness. They who do believe in the Grace, do know the sufficiency of it,
yea, of the least measure of it, to their comfort to preserve and save them;
but those who do despite unto it, and continue in Unbelief, shall come to know
the sufficiency of it to condemn them: And by this Grace which has appeared to
all men, the Lord will be clear of all the Wicked, who perish in their
Wickedness; yea, he will overcome them all, when he brings his Righteous
Judgments upon them for their Rebellion. Happy are all they, who do believe and
continue steadfast in obedience unto the Grace of God; but Woe to the Wicked, who
continue in Rebellion against it.

The People of God in scorn called Quakers, do believe and say as the holy
Apostle did, who said, We are not able to think a good Thought of our selves;
of our selves we can do nothing that is good. But we do believe that its
possible to grow to such a stature in Christ Jesus, by virtue of his spiritual
presence WITHIN, as that by virtue thereof the TRUE BELIEVER may be ENABLED to
do all things which God does require of HIM; and of this belief was the
Apostle, who said, I can do all things through Christ that strengthens me.
Through the tender Mercy of God we are made sensible, that as Christ said, so
it is, Without him we can do nothing. And the Apostle said, We are God's
Workmanship, created in Christ Jesus unto good Works, which God before ordained
that we should walk in them: And it is God that works all our Works in us.
And so said the Prophet, and so say WE; see Isa. 20. 12. Ephesians. 2. 10.

Postscript. Being a Scriptural Testimony to the perfect Works of God in his
People.
COme out from amongst them, and be ye separate, says the Lord, and touch no
unclean thing, and I will receive you, and I will be your Father, and ye shall
be my Sons and Daughters, says the Lord God Almighty; see Isa. 52. 11. 2 Cor.
6. 16, 17. read the Chapter through. The holy Apostle says, God forbid that I
should glory SAVE (or except) in the Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom
the World is crucified unto me, and I unto the World: For IN Christ Jesus,
neither Circumcision avails any thing, nor Uncircumcision, but A NEW
CREATURE; and as many as WALK according TO THIS RULE, PEACE be on them, etc.
Gal. 6. 14, 15, 16.

Note Reader, they that come out from amongst the unclean, who touch no unclean
thing; these are the Elect of God; these are his Sons and Daughters, Servants
and Handmaids; these are new Creatures in Christ Jesus; these are Crucified
with Christ; these are in and through him Crucified to the World, and the World
is Crucified to them: and as many as WALK according* to these new Creatures
RULE, they walk according to the commands of God and Christ, expressed in the
holy Scriptures of Truth, who says. Be Perfect, be Holy, for I the Lord your
God am Holy. And God is perfect, and his way is perfect, and his work is
perfect, as it is written, 2 Samuel 22. 31. Psalm. 18. 30. Deuteronomy. 32. 4. Christ
says, Except a man be Born again, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God,
John 3. 5. Matthew. 19. 28. Tit. 3. 5. Those who are Born again, are new
Creatures; these Worship God in the newness of the Spirit of God and of Christ,
in which they come to see the Promises of God and Christ fulfilled, who said, I
will walk in them, etc. I will teach my People my self; I will write my Law in
their Heart, etc. Ephesians. 46. Levit. 26. 12. Rev. 21. 3. Jer. 31. 33.

Christ said, I and my Father we will come and make our ABODE with you. The
Conversations of all such are sweet and clean according to the commands of God
and Christ, and the Doctrines and Examples of Christ and his holy Apostles; and
such are the true owners, and lovers, and esteemers of the holy Scriptures And
NOT those who make their bost of their love to God, and Christ, and to them;
and yet in their EVIL Lives and Conversations denyboth God, and Christ, and
them; living in, (and loving) and pleading for a continuance in Sin to the end
of their days, all which is directly contrary to the commands of God and
Christ plainly laid down in the Scriptures. And God said unto Rebellious
Israel, O that thou had hearkened to my Commandments, then had thy Peace have
been as a River, and thy Righteousness as the Waves of the Sea! Isa. 48. 18.
Blessed are they who do his Commandment, that they may have right to the Tree
of Life, and may enter in through the Gate into the City; for WITHOUT are Dogs,
and Sorcerers, and Whoremongers, and Murderers, and Idolaters, and whosoever
loves and makes a LIE, Rev. 22. and 14. Christ prayed for his Disciples,
saying, I pray not that thou should take them out of the world, but that thou
should PRESERVE them FROM the EVIL, John 17. 15. Again, when he taught them
to Pray, he said, Pray thus, Deliver us FROM ALL EVIL, etc. And Jesus said,
Whatsoever ye shall ask in my Name, that will I do, that the Father may be
glorified in the Son, John 14. 13. The Apostle John says, And whatsoever we
ask, we receive of him, because we keep his Commandments, and do those things
that are pleasing in his sight, etc. And he that keeps his Commandments,
DWELLS IN HIM, and he IN him: And hereby we know that he abides IN US* by
the Spirit which he has given us, 1 John 3. 22, 24. see also John ^^ 23.
Again, Jesus said, All things whatsoever ye shall ask in Prayer, believing ye
shall receive, Matthew. 21. 22. Christ said, If ye abide IN ME, etc. ye shall ask
what ye will, and it shall be given unto you, John* 15. 7. Jesus who says, Be
perfect, etc. also says, If a man love me, he WILL keep my words, and my
Father will love him, and WE will COME unto him, and make OUR ABODE with him:
he that loves me NOT, keeps NOT my Sayings, etc. John 14. 23, 24. Again, He
that has my Commandments, and keeps them, HE it is that LOVES ME; and he
that loves ME, shall he beloved of my Father; see verse 21. Again, Jesus said,
If ye KEEP my Commandments, ye shall abide in my Love, even as I have kept my
Fathers Commandments, and abide in his Love, Chap. 15. verse 10. Again, the
holy Apostle John says, By this we know that we love the Children of God, when
we love God and KEEP HIS Commandments. For this is the love of God that we KEEP
his Commandment; and his Commandments are NOT GRIEVOUS, 1 John 5. 2, 3. Again,
Circumcision is nothing, and Uncircumcision is nothing, but the KEEPING the
commands of God, 1 Cor. 7. 19. God who said unto Abraham, I am God All*
sufficie^^ walk thou before me, and be thou perfect. He said, Abraham obeyed my
Voice, and kept my Charge, my Commandments, my Statutes and my Laws, Genesis 26.
5. And Christ said unto the Rebellious Jews, If ye were Abraham's Children, ye
would do the Works of Abraham. Christ says, Every one that is perfect shall be
as his Master, Luke 6. 4. The Apostle Peter prayed for the Believers, that God
would make them perfect, 1 Pet. 5. 10. Jesus said unto the Rich Young Man, If
thou will be perfect, go and sell that thou have, and give to the Poor, and
thou shall have Treasure in Heaven; and come and follow me; see Matthew. 19* 21.
Again, he prayed to the Father for his Disciples; he said, The Glory which thou
gave me, I have given them, that they may be one, even as WE are one; I IN
them, and thou in me, that they may be made PERFECT in one; see John 17. 22,
23. And Jesus said, Neither Pray I for these ALONE, but for them ALSO that
shall believe on me* etc. verse. 21.

Note Reader, this blessed Prayer of Christ Jesus, was and is for (or on the
behalf of)* ALL who truly believe in him t his is truly comfortable to all true
Believers in this age, glory to the Lord God for the same. The Apostle said, We
speak Wisdom among them that are PERFECT; not the Wisdom of this world, etc.
but the wisdom of God in a Mystery, etc. see 1 Cor. 2. 6, 7. Again, Paul
exhorted, saying, Be PERFECT, 2 Cor. 13. 11. The Apostles labored, that they
might present every man PERFECT IN Christ Jesus; see Col. 1. 28. Paul preached
Christ WITHIN the Colossians, the hope of Glory, verse 27. Again, Epaphras who
is one of you, a Servant of Christ saluteth you always, laboring for you
fervently in PRAYERS, that ye may stand PERFECT and Complete in ALL the will of
God; see Chap. 4. verse 12. Again, the Apostle gives Testimony to the
Inspiration of God, which gives a right understanding of the things of God,
and to the holy Scriptures, etc. saying, These Gifts are given that the man of
God may be PERFECT, THOROUGHLY furnished unto ALL GOOD WORKS, 2 Timothy 3. 16, 17.
Again, the Author to the Hebrews prayed for them, That God would make them
PERFECT in every good Work to do his Will, Heb. 13. 21. Again, Strong Meat
belongs to them that are PERFECT (so it is rendered in the Margin) who by
Reason of use have their Senses exercised to discern both Good and Evil, Chap.
4. 14. Moses the Man of God said, Give ear, O ye Heavens, and I will speak, and
Hear, O Earth, the words of my Mouth: My Doctrine shall drop as* the Rain, my
speech shall distill as the Dew, as the small Rain upon the tender Herb, and as
the Showers upon the Grass; because I will publish the Name of the Lord;
ascribe ye greatness unto our God; he is the ROCK, his Work is PERFECT, etc. a
God of Truth, and without Iniquity, Just and Right is he; THEY have Corrupted
themselves, their spot is not the spot of his Children, etc. Do you thus
requite the Lord, O Foolish People! Deuteronomy. 32. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. read the
Chapter through; see Chap. 31. 27. to the end.

Reader, Many Sweet, Heavenly and Comfortable Sayings I have Collected out of
the holy Scriptures, whereby Gods Love unto all Men and Women is clearly held
forth IN CHRIST Jesus, the blessed Seed, whom God has promised shall bruise
the Serpents Head, who brought in the Curse, Death and Reprobation, by leading
Man and Woman into sin: Your Sins, says God, have withheld good things from
you, Jer. 5. 25. Christ is God's free Gift (as I have plainly showed before)
both unto Jews and Gentiles, to be his Salvation to the ends of the Earth; he
tasted Death for every man, as the Apostle says. He is the true Light who
lights every one that comes into the World; he says, I am the Light of the
World, he that follows me shall not walk in Darkness, but he shall have the
Light of Life: He said, Believe in the Light that ye may be the Children of the
Light (as is showed before) The Children of Light are the Children of God, for
God is Light, and in him is no Darkness at all, as says the Apostle, 1 John 1.
5. Again, Chap. 3. Verse. 5, 6. John says unto the Saints [concerning Christ]
Ye know that he was manifest to TAKE AWAY our Sins, whosoabideth in him sins
NOT. Again, He is able to save them to the uttermost them that come to God by
him, Heb. 7. 25. O blessed are all they, who believe in, and faithfully follow
him, the Lamb of God, he takes away their Sins: he being made Perfect, is the
Author of Eternal Salvation unto ALL them that OBEY him, Heb. 5. 9. Daniel the
Prophet, who prophesied of the coming of the Messiah, which is Christ Jesus,
and of his Sufferings, he declared the End or Effects thereof, Namely, To make
an END of SIN, to finish Transgression and to bring in Everlasting
Righteousness; see Dan. 9. 24. to the end. Jesus Christ said, To this end was I
born, and for this cause came I into the World, that I should bear witness unto
the Truth; every one that is of the Truth hears MY VOICE, John 18. 37. And
Jesus said, I came to call sinners to Repentance. He that COVERS his Sins
shall NOT prosper, but whosoever confesses and forsakes them, shall have Mercy,
Prove. 28. 13. These are faithful Sayings of God, spoken through his Son, and
his Prophets, and Apostles; here is a Cloud of witnesses, who in a sweet Unity
and Harmony and Clearness, speaks forth the Universal Love of God to Mankind,
in Christ Jesus, in sending him to make an end of Sin, the Devils Work: The
Wages of Sin is Death, as says the Apostle, which NOT being Repented of and
forsaken, brings into the Pit of endless Torment; a BARE confessing of Sin
without repenting and forsaking will NOT bring Men and Women to lay down their
Heads in PEACE with God. Therefore Woe unto those who go on in their sins unto
the end of their Days upon Earth, Raking up and down in the Scriptures of
Truth, to gather up the Failings and MISCARRIAGES of some among God's People,
who for want of diligent Watchfulness were overcome by their Souls Enemy, but
Unfeignedly Repented and Ceased from the Evil, and did learn to do well, and so
were forgiven; as in the cases of David and Peter, w hose Miscarriages at a
time or some few times, is now made as TEXTS on them to preach up IMPERFECTION
and SIN for Term of Life. Woe to those sort of Preachers, if they do not Repent
of this Unchristian and Ungodly Preaching, and cease there from they will not
only Destroy themselves, but also those who give up themselves to believe and
love their sinful Doctrine, who by this Wicked preaching do take courage and
GREAT boldness to continue in sin, and to love it, and to commit it with
greediness, yea, to drink it up abundantly, even as an Ox drinks up Water, and
to pull it and draw it upon them, as with Cords and Cart*tropes, as its
written. This sort of Teachers God is against, his Soul is grieved by them from
day to day: Oh! that they would consider it, and lay it to Heart and Repent
before it be too late. The Woes were of Old, and now are, unto all those
Preachers and Hearers, who are covered, and NOT with the holy pure Spirit of
the Lord God, in which spirit God is worshipped, as Christ says. Woe to the
Rebellious Children, who take Counsel but not of me (says the Lord God) who
cover with a Covering, but NOT of my SPIRIT, that they may ADD Sin unto Sin,
Isa. 30. 1. Woe unto them that call Evil Good, and Good Evil, etc. Woe unto them
who justify the Wicked FOR a Reward, etc. Therefore as the Fire devoureth the
Stubble, and the Flame consumes the Chaff, so their ROOT shall be Rottenness,
and their BLOSSOM shall go up as Dust, because they have cast away the Law of
the Lord of Hosts, and despised the Word of the holy One of Israel. Woe to them
that are Wise in their own eyes, etc. Isa. 5. 18, to the 25th, read the Chapter
through. Woe to the Wicked, it shall be Ill with him, for the Reward of his
Hands shall be given him. What mean ye that ye beat my People, etc. and grind
the Faces of the Poor, says the Lord God of Hosts? Moreover, the Lord says,
Because the Daughters of Zion are Haughty, and walk with stretched-out Necks,
and wanton EYES, etc. Therefore the Lord will Smite with a SCAB the Crown (or
Top) of the Heed of the Daughter of Zion. Jerusalem is Ruined, and Judah is
Fallen, because their TONGUE and their Doings are against the Lord, to provoke
the Eyes of his Glory. They declare their Sin as Sodom -- Woe unto their SOULS,
for they have Rewarded EVIL unto THEMSELVES, Isa. 3. 8, to the 18th, read the
Chapter through. In this Chapter the Proud and Wonton Women of our Age may read
their pattern, and see whose Ungodly Example they follow, and also they may see
what Ruin, Destruction* and Misery they brought upon themselves, as the just
Reward of their Ungodly Lives; and seeing God did thus punish the Proud and
Wanton Women under the Profession of the Law, certainly he will not justify
such Persons or Practices under the Profession of Christ and his Gospel; for
though the Law could not make the Comers thereunto Perfect, as pertaining unto
the Conscience, yet (then) God did not leave himself without a Witness in them:
(he gave them his good Spirit to instruct them, as Nehemiah says, but they
rebelled against it;) but Christ and his Gospel can make them that come to him
Perfect, even as pertaining to the Conscience; and that which makes the
Conscience good, and brings it into a perfect cleanness, the same keeps Man and
Woman clean in their Conversations outwardly, and such who do believe in and
obey Christ Jesus, he teaches them to be truly Meek and Lowly and Humble,
according to the blessed Command and Example which he gave in the Days of his
flesh, who said, Learn of me, I am Meek and LOWLY in Heart, and ye shall find
REST TO YOUR SOULS. The Apostle Peter in the holy Ghost exhorted the Women to
be subject unto their own Husbands -- (And said) whose Adorning, let it not be
the outward Adorning, of Plating the Hair, NOR of WEARING of GOLD, etc. But let
it be the hidden Man of the Heart, in that which is NOT Corruptible, the
Ornament of a Meek and Quiet Spirit, which IS in the sight of God of great
PRICE: For after this manner in the Old Time, the holy Women also who trusted
in God Adorned themselves, etc. 1 Pet. 3. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Again, the Apostle
Paul says, I will in like manner also, that Women Adorn themselves in MODEST
Apparel, with SHAMEFACEDNESS and SOBRIETY; NOT w th Broidred HAIR, or GOLD, or
PEARLS, or Costly Array; But (which becomes Women professing Godliness) with
GOOD WORKS, 1 Timothy 2. 9, 10. So all Women both Old and Young ought to obey the
Command of Christ, who commands to be Meek and Lowly; and ought to follow the
good Example of these holy Christian-Women, who were clothed and beautified
with a Meek and Humble Quiet Spirit, and with good Works, as the holy Apostle
Exhorts. Depart from Evil, and do good, and dwell (or live) for evermore. I
have seen the Wicked in great power, and spreading himself like a green
Bay Tree; yet he passed away, and lo he was not, I sought him but he could not
be sound. Mark the PERFECT MAN, and behold the Upright, for the end of that man
is PEACE; see Psalm. 37. 27, 35, 36, 37. Dearly beloved, I beseech you as
Strangers and Pilgrims, abstain from fleshly Lusts, which WAR against the SOUL;
Having your Conversation Honest among the Gentiles, whereas they speak against
you as Evildoers, they may by your GOOD WORKS, which they shall behold,
glorify God in the Day of Visitation, 1 Pet. 2. 11, 12.

Reader, Take notice, here David owns Perfection; he says, Mark the Perfect
Man, behold the Upright, for the end of that Man is Peace: Thus it plainly
appears that God and Christ, and the true Prophets and Apostles and holy Men
and Women were and are for Perfection, Holiness* and Uprightness; but the
Devil, Antichrist, False Prophets, False Apostles, and all Wicked Men and
Women are for Imperfection, Ungodliness, Unholiness, Sin and Wickedness, who
plead for a continuance in Sin until Men and Women go to the Grave: This Plea
for Sin and Wickedness, is not a Plea for God and Christ, but for the Devil,
who is the author of Sin. In the Grave there is no Repentance, neither is there
any Purgatory (as some do falsely teach) to purge people from their sins after
they are dead and put in their Graves. No Unclean thing can enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven; therefore blessed are they who come to Christ Jesus and
follow him, who came to take away Sin and bring in Everlasting Righteousness;
to wash and cleanse from all Filthiness of Flesh and Spirit, and to strengthen
his to perfect Holiness in the fear of the Lord God; unto which the holy
Apostle exhorted, as is showed before.

These things have I written in Testimony to God's Universal Love to all
People; and of his delight in Holiness and Purity; and of his Hatred to all Sin
and Wickedness.

I am a Lover of Truth and Righteousness, and a real Lover NOT of only my
Friends, but also of mine Enemies, according to the Command and Example of
Christ Jesus my Lord William Gibson.

THe Author of this Book desires that it may be diligently spread among those
People, who think that Christ did not dye for all men; who think that God would
NOT have all People to be saved, but vainly imagine, that he has ordained some
to be Damned before they were Born, that by the Spirit and Light of Truth
shining in their Hearts, and the plain Scripture Testimony, they may be
convicted of this their great and destructive Mistake.

ERRATA.
PAge 1. Line 2. for 157. read 15. p. 3. l. 5. f. himself r. him. p. 5. l. 26.
f. 38. r. 3. 36. p. 11. l. 13. put in (not.) p. 12. l. 21. put out (Heb. 6.) p.
21. l. 26. put in (of.) p. 37. l. 18. put in (renew) next before purify, p.
43. l. 8. f. profecy r. prosperity, l. 17. f. forefooted r. fourfooted. p. 60.
l. 29. put out the Parentheses. p. 171. l. 21. f. Judger r. Judge. p. 74. l.
20. put in (him) p. 78. l. 4. f. is r. his, p. 89. l. 31. f. deem r. deny:
Reader, this is a great Error, and it wholly alters the sense of the matter, it
renders me as though I did affirm that which in reality I do deny. P. 94* l.
14. r. Gal. 6. 7, 8. p 98 l 36 r the Reins. p 104 l 9 f Commandment r
Commandments.

THE END.

