Cardines Coeli: OR, AN APPEAL To the Learned and Experienced Observers of
Sublunars and Their Vicissitudes, whether the CARDINAL SIGNS OF HEAVEN Are not
most Influential upon Men and Things?

Proved by X. Remarkable GENITURES, etc, In a Reply to the Learned Author of
COMETOMANTIA: Wherein the Character of GASSENDUS is Defended; And sundry other
Starry Truths are Justified.

By JOHN GADBURY, Student in Physic and Astrology.

Qui Artem aliquam destruit long deterior est imperito, nec vacat men's illius
Malitia, Desidia, and Ignorantia.

Cardan. Tantae dignitatis est humana Genitura, ut in eam omnes Coelorum
partiter atque terrarum potestates conspirent, atque miraculose suis in
explicabilibus donis exornent. Naibod.

Coment. in Cap. 1. Ptolom. -- Why Art should be Excluded -- from the
Cognizance of Nativities I cannot see; since Praedictions according to the
Precepts of Art, for many Ages known and approved, have been found so True.

Dr. R. Gell. Stell. Nov. page 9. LONDON: Printed Anno Domini, MDCLXXXIV.

To the Truly Honorable, And constantly LOYAL (my ever Honored Friend,) Sir
EDWARD DERING, of SHARSTED in the County of KENT, Knt: One of His Majesty's
Commissioners of the PEACE for the said COUNTY.
Honored Sir,
NOt so much for your Countenance and Encouragement to Me, (though that is a
favor I shall ever covet) as to the TRUTH, do I at this time appear before
you, and pray your Judgment in a Cause, (which against my will) I am made a
PARTY to, by a Learned, yet unknown ADVERSARY. I am (Learned Sir) for the
Truth's sake assaulted! And I cannot but with an humble security promise my
self, where I have ever found (even in Arduous Cases) a Refuge, that Divine
URANIA can never fail of finding her ASYLUM. It is not I therefore, but TRUTH
that seeks your Noble PATRONAGE at this Time.

My ADVERSARY seems to be a Beneficed Man, though not the Poor One he Styles
himself; (that I look on only as Complement to my Lord Bishop) and gives us to
understand that he can by the Canon, wear a ShortGown: (I hope he intends not
to Lengthen his Garment by Plowing Furrows upon the Back of my Reputation; I
never did him wrong: I do not know him.) But, as for Me, (Learned Sir) I have
not the Honor of either Benefice, or Gown to boast of. Yet, when I consider I
have your Favor, I esteem that every whit as Great, and as Dear to Me.

The Great Doctor of the Gentiles tells us as Truly, as Eloquently, -- That all
are not Israel, that are of Israel. And I find a Man may be in Orders and
Beneficed too, and yet have somewhat of the Salamander in him, which may make
even the Flames of Contention his Delight. I could willingly hope better of my
Learned Adversary, though, all things considered, I have but little Reason.
For, I believe I am the First Man, that have been questioned for matter of Fact
in Art, after Twenty Four years time; (and I think my Antagonist is the First
CLERGIMAN that ever served any Man so) whereas if either the Divine or Moral
Law had been valuable with Him in this matter, a Seven years space must have
Limited us both, and covered my Imperfections (had I been guilty) with an
AMNESTIA, or a JUBILEE.

It is my great unhappiness not to be acquainted with that most Noble Lord and
Excellent PRELATE before whom my Adversary has Arraigned me, that I might have
presumed to entrust my Cause with Him: For I am fully persuaded He would do me
Justice, as Fame tells me He does to the whole World. But I have an Humble Sign
Ascending at my Birth, and dare not be Confident, but where I am thoroughly
Known. And that is another Reason (most Honored Sir) why I implore your Worthy
Judgment between Me and my Opponent.

I have had, and ever shall have, an Honor and Reverence for the Church, and
all the Worthy Dignitories thereof, esteeming them the Lawful Ambassadors of
the Blessed Jesus. And, could I be Reasonably persuaded that either my STUDY or
PRACTICE of ASTROLOGY were UNLAWFUL, and prejudicial to Either, I would never
Set a FIGURE, or make an ALMANAC more. So much unwilling am I (Sir) to Offend
those I ought to Obey; So far should I be from Opposing the truly Venerable
Persons of that Sacred Order.

But, (Learned Sir) when I know that many of our best Authors in ASTROLOGY have
been DIVINES, who have not only largely Cultivated, but liberally Defended the
ART, I cannot believe that I ERR in pursuing so Harmless, so Useful, so
Veritable a STUDY, Sed, sub Iudice lis est.

The Matter is before you (Honored Sir) and your Noble Judgment is Prayed in
the Case. I will not be afraid, or troubled at whatsoever CENSURE you shall
please to Pass; For I am well assured that your Knowledge in Art is such, as
renders you a most Proper and Capable JUDGE in this Affair: and I dare believe,
That (like Soloman) you will Judge Righteous Judgment: Let the Mothers of both
Children (or Arguments) Plead, (as animated by their Passions) never so
waywardly, or in Favor of their own Cause, or Issue.

Let the TRUTHS of ASTROLOGY Rise, and Shine under your Favor and Protection;
and, the ERRORS pretended to belong thereunto, be ever Banished, and Disowned,
as by your Honored Self, so, by All that shall dare to profess themselves
Subjects of URANIA. Thus begging your Pardon for my presumption in this bold
Address: (which I can almost promise my self, from your Noble Nature, the
occasion considered.) give me leave hereby to Thank you for all your Manifold
Favors; chiefly those afforded me in the time of my greatest Distress, when
you so Generously interposed on my behalf, and helped to stop the Mouths of
LIONS, that were then opened against Me:) and heartily wishing both to You, and
to your most Excellent and ever Virtuous LADY, all Happiness both here, and
hereafter, -- I remain,

(Most Honored Sir) Your ever Obliged, and most Faithful, Humble Servant, and
Honourer, JOHN GADBURY.

To the Impartial Readers.
AS a very Learned Divine most truly said of Religion, so may I as justly of
Astrology. -- It is a common thing for its Enemies to throw Dirt in the Face
thereof, and then persuade themselves that it is Natural Complexion. They
present it in a Shape most Ugly and Deformed, and then bring That as a Plea
wherefore they esteem it no more, or give it no better Entertainment.

Needs must the greatest and transporting Beauty in the World appear uncomly,
and carry a Cloudy Aspect with it, if compelled to wear the Vizor, or bear the
Marks of Pride and Calumny, and to suffer under the Scars of Ignorance and
Prejudice. Might but Urania be permitted to keep her Native Color and
Complexion only, Her brightness is such, that it would Outshine all other
Objects, and dazzle the dull beholders. But to be Beautiful, is blessed Urania's
Crime.

Os homini Sublime dedit, etc. -- Nor were those Glorious Lamps of Heaven made
only to stare on, but to Study and Contemplate: else the meerest Animal, and
most contemptible Creature in the World, had equal advantage of them with the
greatest Philosopher; And the severest endeavors of the most Industrious and
Painful Student, would bear no price, or be of any valuable esteem among Men:
But the Hog would be preferred to Venus.

For Men to believe the Stars in the Heavens are of no more use than the Signs
at Shopkeepers Doors; or, that they are less Vertual and Attractive than a
little piece of the Magnes- Stone, is to suppose them most unworthy the curious
Design of their Maker; and so to call his excellent Wisdom into Question, for
placing such Vast and Glorious Bodies at such Distance from us, and in such
exact and proportionate Order over Us, to so Ignoble and Inglorious a Purpose.
And for a Man to know that there are Stars, and not be acquainted with their
Influences, is to as little purpose, as for a Physician to know the names of
Drugs, and yet be utterly Ignorant of their Virtues and Uses* Of so mean, nay
so vain use, is Astronomy without Astrology: though the One be Universally
beloved by Men, the Other generally disesteemed. So Erroneous, so Partial are
Men in their choice of things, that they Elect the Shell before the Kernil,
believe the Body to be more Rich and worthy, than the Soul that animates and
invigorates it.

They are self tormentors, (says the Learned Thomas Albius) who fret that
those things are unknown, which are publicly known to others, but are unknown
to them; because upon some extrinsecal prejudice they neglect enquiring into
what others have said. Which Race of Men is at this day most frequent with the
Courtiers of Science, but withal most insufferable For what can be viler than
to shut the Eyes against things most manifest to the understanding, upon the
Calumnies of such as profess they know not these Things, which others
constantly affirm are most evidently comprehended.

Being sometime since in discourse with a Learned and Reverend Divine about
this Vain and prejudicate humor of Men. -- That merely because others had
condemned Astrology, They would do so too. -- He very mildely and Iudiciously
Replies, -- That such Persons were Fettered in Chains of Darkness: For (says
he) to be Ignorant only, is to be in a State of Darkness; but to be in an
Ignorant Prejudice, is to be in Chains.

The late Right Reverend Father in God, the most Learned Doctor Saunderson,
Bishop of Lincoln, happening upon the Doctrine of Nativities, was pleased to
expend not less than Five hours one afternoon, in the perusal thereof. Which
when He had done, His Lordship's then Secretary (and my very good Friend)
prayed his Opinion thereof, and also of the Art it self. Whose answer was, That
He thereby perceived there was some Learning in the World of which He was
Ignorant. That the Art might be Lawful, if not Unlawfully used. That He knew
the Stars had Powerful Influences, but that Gods Grace was more Powerful. A
most excellent and Divine Truth! Worthy the Tongue of so great and so good a
Prelate! Worthy to be Written in Letters of Gold, to be a Memorial for future
Generations to follow.

That most Excellent and Pious Martyr, and Prelate Archbishop Laud, in his
Sermon to the Parliament March the 17th. 1628. on Ephesians. 4. v. 3. gives his
Vote for Astrology, (unless you will believe he made sport with so great a Man
as Ptolemy, upon so solemn an occasion, and Burlesqu'd both Him and the Art
together; which He was too Learned, too Wise, too Good, and too Grave a Man to
do.) In these Words -- Join then and keep the Unity of the Spirit, and I Will
fear no Danger, though Mars were Lord of the Ascendant in the very instant of
this Sessions of Parliament; and in the second House, or joined, or in Aspect
with the Lord of the second; which yet Ptolemy thought brought much hurt to
Commonwealths. Cent. Aph. 84. And that you may know this most Exellent Orator
did not vainly Quote Ptolemy, or inculeate his Fears of that so great
Convention, I will give you the Scheme thereof, which without doubt He had most
fully considered. -- It Is this. --

Here you may see, Mars was truly in Aspect to the Lord of the Second House,
and in opposition to the Governess of the Horoscope also, posited in the Angle
representing Fears, etc. Which proves that this thrice Learned and most
Reverend Prelate understood Ptolemy in the sense he ought to be understood. And
it is for that end I produce the Scheme of Heaven which He in that His most
Excellent Sermon referred to. There is no question but this Good Bishop saw
other remarkable things in the Figure; but because His Grace was pleased to
omit mentioning of them, and remember only the violent Influence of Mars, it
will become me also to conceal Them.

None ever yet condemned Astrology that thorougly understood it. Picus Earl of
Mirandula, who wrote largely against Astrology, though a great Scholar in the
General, yet I dare not allow him such in this Learning. For he died before the
thirty third year of his Age And what Experience in so Abstruse an Art could he
attain unto in so short a time, had all his years (since his Judgment began to
take place) been employed in this Study? surely very little! Many can talk of
Robin Hood, that cannot shoot in his Bow. Dwarfs cannot tak off Giants Caps.
Falsehood may be dressed up in as fine words, as Truth; and a Painted Courtezan
may sometimes look more Glaring, than an excellent Native Beauty; at least to
common Eyes. -- Let our pretended Refuters show us their Experiences they would
convince us by, and if upon examination we cannot clear our selves, we will
submit. But we expect then that They will do the like: That is but Reason.
Picus was a Learned Man and a great Rhetorician, and had read and wrote much
for his time; but that is not enough to make an Astrologer. This Noble Man had
an afflicted Mercury, which made his Study in such Arts his Disease, not his
Delight: And such a Native can never be a true Servant or Votary to Divine
Urania. Sextus ab Heminga, was a very severe and sower Enemy to the Stars, and
Truths of Astrology: yet the Learned Morinus Physician to the King of France,
is not afraid to pronounce Him therein a very Ignorant Fellow, and one that
understood Nothing of the Science he went about to Refute. Mr. John Chambers
wrote a bitter and Sarcastical Discourse against this Art: He was Learnedly and
Mildly answered by Sir Christopher Heydon, which Book, when he saw, and therein
found his Sapless Sophistry refuted; he replied not, but soon after died.

If my Antagonist will only pretend to oppose the Errors practiced under
pretense of this Art, and keep to That; He, and I, are at Unity; and can never
differ at all. I am naturally a lover of Truth, and so much do I abhominate and
abhor Falsehood, that I can, and frequently do, fall at odds with my self, when
at any time I happen to discover an Error in my Judgment, although my Aim and
Design be nothing but the Truth. I am better pleased when people tell me of my
Mistakes (so they do it not upbraidingly) than if they gave me Money: and do
really lament my misfortune in not knowing better, and blame my over hastiness,
or negligence in not minding better the Rules which I ought to follow. And no
man can be guilty of Errors in Astrology, but upon One of these two Grounds.
The Caelestial Clock-work always goes True, though, by reason of Humane Frailty
we do not always truly observe it.

This excellent Art of Astrology, (though my Antagonist thinks it be now near
its Vertex, and therein allows some Truths to be discovered by it, though in
other cases allows it no Kin to Truth at all: (Let him answer for that) is, God
knows, but very darkly and obscurely understood. The greatest of our Knowledge
in these Caelestial Speculations, is the least part of what we are Ignorant.
And that part of it which is known to us (such is the misfortune of all Mankind
since Adam"s Transgression) we too often apply to a wrong purpose, and by our
neglect, haste, or ignorance, Club to our own Deceptions. We frequently Cheat
our selves with a Non-cause, instead of a True Cause. We too commonly give
Judgment under Cross Ascendants, without consideration, and so bring
disparagement unto our selves and Art together.

But is not all Mankind liable to be imposed upon by the Spirit of Deception?
Does not the same misfortunes attend all other Arts and Sciences? It would undo
the Learned Grammarian, should he be compelled to Plead to all the Actions that
Priscian might bring against him in a year. Yes! though he had a favorable
Jury, and chosen out of his own Fraternity too; if (like our late Associators)
They, to Perjure themselves, did not return an Ignoramus. The exact Logician
does not always Prove. Nor can the Quaint Rhetorician constantly Persuade. Does
the Skilful Physician always Cure? Or is the Curious Musician at all times true
to his Notes? No sure! It Is Time and Chance that happens to all! To the Poor
Astrologer among the Rest! And there is no Perfection on this side Heaven; I
mean to be attained unto by Humanity. Humanum est Errare: As we are Men, we are
Subject to Error.

But, what then? To Err is not the Astrologers Peculiar, you see: it is no
more his Province or Talent, than of a Master or Doctor in any Other Faculty or
Mystery; although it be more frequently, and therefore most unjustly objected
unto him as Such, by his unkind and unconsidering Adversaries. And this I can
affirm with the greater assurance, because my Learned Opponent does hereunto
set his Seal. p. 282. Comet. allowing Law, Divinity, Physic, etc. liable to
Errors and Abuses, as well as Astrology. As indeed so they are, and constantly
are observed to be; the more is the Pity.

Happy would it be with Arts (as the Painter in Quintilian said) when Artists
themselves are Judges. And when it is otherwise, no man is tried per pares. The
Blind can never Judge or distinguish well of colors. Caecus de coloribus ne
judicet. He is only fit to Censure a Science, that truly and thoroughly
understands it; according to that of the Stagarite.

-- (...) (i. e.)
Who knows Art, may justly Judge thereof.
To conclude: when my Antagonist comes again my request is, that He would bring
His Name with Him, and not compel me to Play at Cudgels with the Clouds, or,
receive Wounds from Unseen Lightning. In the Interim, He may (I hope at least)
by this my Answer, know, that I have not put any Frauds or Falsehoods upon the
World; (can my Opponent say so, and say True?) And also that I have not wronged
Gassendus; Nor yet did I Prestigiate in the Nativity of R. Cromwell, or, in
Major General Lambert' s March: And He may likewise rest satisfied, that I have
not injured Mr. Lilly; nor affirmed All Things good in Vincent Wing's Geniture.
He may be convinced, that Cardinal Signs are not to be Laughed at; nor the
Aphorisms of Astrology blown away by every trifling Breath. That I did not
Suite Gustavus Adolphus, with Cicero, Arch bishop Laud, O. Cromwell, etc. That
the most Learned and Judicious Astrologers have not Reprobated the Doctrine of
Genitures; nor has Ptolemy refused to approve of, or teach Horary Questions.
That it is not My Book, but His, that has furnished the World with Light and
Ludicrous Stuff, ( His own Words) and that of His own Making too.

In all which particulars, I am sorry He has given me a Provocation to
discover His Nakedness; or rather He (being a Clergyman) has discovered it
Himself. He knows I have Labored by Letters for a Prevention of this Paper
Contest: which Himself. (as a Christian) ought to have done before He began the
Quarrel But my Letters not finding Him at Leisnre to endeavor a Cure of the
Wound He had unjustly and surprizingly given Me, I was necessitated to make
this my Appeal to the Sons of Minerva, (the Uertuosi of this Learned and
Enquiring Age,) against this my Ignote Opponent; for the more speedy Healing of
my much Blasted Reputation. -- I am,

(Gentlemen!) Yours, and URANIA'S Meanest VOTARY, JOHN GADBURY
Brick-Court, by the Deans-Yard, Westminster. October 4 1684.
Errata Corrigenda.
PAge 2. line 8. read Censure, p. 5. l. 13. for though, r. but, p. 13. l. 17.
r. Sun, l. 33. r. Firnicus, etc. p. 14. l. 32. r. Genethliaque, p. 15. l. 5. r.
One kind, or Other, p, 16. l. 17: dele it, l. 24. r. saw, p* 18. l. 19. r.
Sublunary, l. penult, r. illa, p 23. l. 4. r. Argolus, l. 5. r. Origanus,
Morinus, l. ult, r. better able, p. 27. l. ult, r. the Astral, p. 28. l. 19. r.
Brothelry l. 33. r. These: p. 30. l. ult, r: Concisc, p. 34. l. 32. for Person,
r. Poison, p. 35. l. 31. r. Calumniare, p. 40. l. 29. r. Meteorologist, p. 55.
l. 3. r. or Memory. In the Preface to the Reader, p. 6. l. 21. r. (...),

Besides, sundry other Litteral Faults, as mis-pointings, mis-spellings,
turning of Letters, and sometimes the omission or redundancy of a Letter, etc,
which the Candid Reader will, (as guided by Charity) of himself Correct.

CARDINES CAELI: OR, THE Equinoctial and Solstitial Points, The most
Influential upon Men and Things. etc.
. 1. IT is an Excellent Rule, which the Learned Dr. Henry More gives us in his
Mystery of Godliness, Lib. 9. cap. 4. p. 461. That Men should be so modest as
not to think That utterly un-intelligible that Themselves for the present
cannot apprehend; and believe that God imparted all knowledge to the World for
Use, and not for curious and vexatious Speculation. -- And had my Learned
Opponent but read, and well considered this Rule, He would scarce have given Me
the Honor of this Literary Combat. Nay, had He either truly known Me, or but
set so many Schemes upon various occasions, or seen so many different Genitures
as I have done; I am confident He would have thought there had been no need of
his inviting Me to this unhappy (and yet it may be useful) Contest.

. 2. When I had once read this Learned Person's Piece which He calls
Cometomantia, and well weighed the vast and various Learning, the quickness of
Fancy, the commanding and flowing Eloquence of the Author; and at the same time
reflected on My own Inabilities and want of Skill for the maintaining of such a
Duel; I began to consider what I had Wrote that could justly provoke so great a
Son of the Muses. It Is not usual for Lofty Eagles to catch at Silly Flies. And
I am the more driven into admiration that this Giant in Learning keeps himself
behind the Curtain* concealing his Name, but yet defends Himself, and Book,
with an Angel and Flaming Sword, as God was pleased to Guard the Tree of Life.

. 3. I well knew that I never published any thing to the World but with an
upright Mind, and Intention to befriend it; and if My misfortune have been such
as not to be plainly and charitably understood, yet I hoped never to have
incurred the Sensure of obtruding Frauds upon it, as now, by this my unknown
Antagonist, I am charged.

. 4. Every Man has as good a Title to his Reputation, as to his Life or
Fortune; and ought as carefully and zealously to secure it. And although my
Antagonist be a Person of such Intellectuals, and Acquisitions, as may make a
Mean Man more afraid than ashamed to take up his Gage; yet, finding my Credit
and Veracity wounded, I resolved to give him the best Satisfaction I was able
in my own defense; with an assured hope thereby of Healing up the Gash that He
had unkindly given Me.

. 5. This Task I also found incumbent upon Me for another Reason; For when I
remembered that I had now been a Student in Astrology more than Thirty years,
and had nearly as Many (as well as I was able) defended it; and knowing that
Great is the Truth, and it must prevail, even against the most Towering
Antagonist; I could not be easily brought to believe those things to be False,
which by Experience I had so often proved otherwise: Especially when I had
taken nothing upon Trust, nor credited any thing because Ptolomy and Cardan
said so, but because by a constant Experimental proof of their Doctrine, I
found they had spoken True. Therefore it is that I esteem my self engaged to
give this Opponent, and the World together, (to which also He has rendered Me
accountable) as clear Satisfaction to these things I stand chargable with, as I
am able: In the doing whereof, I hope to acquit my self of having broached or
maintained either Paradoxes, or plain Falsehoods under the specious pretense and
Guarranty of Astrological Truths.

. 6. As for this Learned Gentleman's impugning sundry of the main Principles of
the Art, I hold not my self concerned at all (unless Obiter) to make any reply;
He directing himself therein, not to Me in particular, but to Astrologers in
General, of whom I am Minimus: and do therefore hope, if at least there be any
need (a thing I question very much, the Art having been often and Learnedly
defended already,) that some Person more worthy than my self (like another Sir
Christopher Heyden) will step in, and ease Me of that Task, which I do not
esteem to be my particular Province.

. 7. In page 257. of Cometomantia, this Author is pleased to fall Foul upon the
Doctrine of Genitures ( my DIANA indeed!) taxing it as liable to Fraud and
Deceit. In this He has neither injured Me, nor the Truth; for there is no
Science in the World that can boast of its being free from either: No, not*
Divinity. But not thus content, He is pleased to fall roughly upon Me by Name,
citing some passages out of my Collection of Genitures, which He thinks
gratifies his humor and design in dealing with Me: but how justly, and with
what fair show of Reason, (will, I hope, by God's Blessing,) soon appear.

. 8. This Doctrine of Genitures (by the way) is the most Noble, Worthy, and
Delightful, of all the parts of Astrology; and has in all Ages had many Great,
Wise, and Learned Favorers and Defenders. And good Reason there is for it,
since it is daily demonstrated, by fresh Experiences, to be True and certain,
in the various Accidents and Fortunes (good Reader be not offended at the word)
attending on Humane Kind: I wish all the other Parts thereof, were as well and
as truly understood.

. 9. The Great Oracle of this present Age, (though lately Deceased, I wish I
could not tell the News) The excellent Author of Religio Medici, has given his
suffrage for it; and on its behalf, thus Learnedly and Modestly Argues. -- We
need not labor with so many Arguments to confute Judicial Astrology; for if
there be a Truth therein, it does not injure Divinity. If to be born under
Mercury disposes us to be Wity, under Jupiter to be Wealthy, I do not owe a
Knee unto those, but unto the Merciful hand that has ordered my indifferent
and uncertain Nativity unto such benevolent Aspects. Rel. Med. Sect. 18. And,
as if God had inspired this Excellent Man with one of his greatest Truths, the
very particular verity here impugned and contended against by my Antagonist;
Sect. 23 He most truly and happily predicts, and that according to the Rules of
Art, thus* -- If there be any Truth in Astrology I may outlive a Jubilee, as
yet I have not seen one Revolution of Saturn, nor has my Pulse beat thirty
years. This ever to be admired Author was but twenty eight years Old when he
wrote that curious piece of Learning. Yet, for an Infallible proof of
Astrology, and his excellent Skill therein, He lived unto almost Seventy years
of Age, to the Honor of God, the Father of all good Arts, thereby affirming
that Divine Axiom, That the Sun, Moon and Stars do constantly praise their
Maker, and that even by the Science of Astrology; Even that Art, I say, which
only teaches and instructs us how to understand their Influences.

. 10. Nor is it hard for an able Astrologer to give an account of some, never,
or at least, rarely failing Instances of the Truth of this Art, which the
Aphorisms thereof (allowed by this my Learned Opponent: and I thank him for
that, for so far He is a Friend to what He opposes) do most plainly and
liberally affirm and prove. I say, the Aphorisms allowed by my Antagonist:
(For, He will not sure, own some part of the Centiloquium, and disallow the
rest.) Which if He keep to, then has He Warranted the Doctrine of Genitures,
which He labors to confute; And as for its being liable to Fraud and Deceit, I
will not refuse to grant him that, that being no Plea against its Verity; when
He is pleased in p. 282. to concede, that both Law and Physic, yea, and
Divinity too, are subject to the same Misfortunes.

. 11. What if diverse Astrologers happen to have different Opinions upon the
same Horoscope? This does no more annul or Destroy the Truth of the Doctrine of
Genitures, then the several Judgments of sundry Lawyers upon the same Case, or
Statute, does impugn or invalidate the Law. Bradshaw, Dorislaus* Cook,
Harrison, etc. (those sad wretches) understood Bracton, Fleta, etc. all in a
Republican sense, whereby our late Glorious Sovereign (with many of His
Nobility, and other of His Faithful Subjects) was barbarously Murdered. But the
Learned Forster, Mallet, Bridgeman, Palmer, Finch, etc. Interpreted them in
favor of the King and Monarchy, by which means Rebellion has been punished,
and the Church and State supported. Veritas est Vna, says; the Excellent and
Reverend Bishop of Salisbury, in his Sermon at the Lord General Monk's Funeral;
p. 3. And I will be bold (with that Reverend Prelate) to affirm* -- That Truth
is but one; though the Pilates of the world may always be enquiring what it is.

. 12. Theologers do also vary in their Commentaries and Expositions on several
places of Scripture; Raise several Doctrines of different Natures from the same
Text: as was evident in the Learned Stillingsteet's Sermon, called the Mischief
of Separation: and the Opposition he received to it from five several angry
Antagonists. Nay, Curse ye Meroz, suffered the Rack in the late Rebellion, and
was forced to speak in the behalf of Treason and Sedition; when we know it
bears another Interpretation, and may be pleaded for the Honor and Safety of
Government* The truth whereof Mr. Hickringill has proved both from the Pulpit
and in Print; though since indeed he has been Anomalous in some things, though
the comfort is he does not persist.

. 13. If then it be so clear, plain, and Sun-like a Truth, that the Noblest and
most useful Sciences, or Mysteries, are liable to Fraud and Deceit (I will
keep to this Learned Objectors words) and yet in themselves are not the worse
or less serviceable to Mankind. Why should Astrology, and therein the Doctrine
of Genitures, be rendered the less worthy or useful, or yet thought more cheaply
of, for being liable to the same? Let the chaff be winnow'd from the Wheat, the
Dross be separated from the Oar, the good Wine from the Dregs, i. e. Purge and
Refine Astrology as much as you will, or can; but have a care of destroying it.
Promote no Bills of Exclusion against Legitimate and long Experienced Truths;
least the Honor of him who guides Arcturus and his Sons, be thereby Eclipsed,
and the native Glory and Influences of the Stars, by such Artifices come to be
darkened Men may err, the Stars can not; let not the Art suffer for the
error, or insufficiency of the Artist. It Is unreasonable, it is unjust.

. 14. But, to be ingenious, I will confess that among the many things which I
have published to the World, I may not possibly have performed all of them with
an equal wariness: (Show me that Author that ever did so!) and am very glad if
at any time I meet with so much Civility from any Gentleman, Scholar or
Artist, as to give me a kind and friendly notice thereof, that I might thereby
be taught to avoid the like misfortune for the future. I am not Obstinate in
Opinion; yet can, and dare struggle hard for a Truth. But am most certain,
whatever it be in my Nature (by reason of Adams transgression) it is not in my
Will to promote Error: and no Man can choose his Temper or Complexion.

. 15. I had Jupiter in Sagitary at my Birth, and the Moon in his Domal
Dignities, in a benign Sextile of Mercury; and Trine to the Lord of my
Horoscope. And to the Honor of God, and Credit of Astrology, I can very justly
say, that I abominate Fraud and Falsehood both in my self and others; as those
positions naturally incline. I Honor the Truths of God and Nature wherever I
find them: and, methinks, when I meet therewith either in Man or Book, I can
scarce forbear paying a respect, even to Adoration; the Image of God (in my
Opinion) being there; and, Magna est veritas. And if at any time I have been so
unhappy as unwarily to promote any thing that looks like Fraud or Deceit, my
Will not consenting thereunto, I own it a Fault to be repented of. It is
certainly a Crime to commit Fraud, or be guilty of Deceit: but to teach others
so to do, duplicates the Error*

. 16. But here, by the way, I must premise, That if in the Art I Study, there
should happen to be any False Principles shuffled in, and inhabit among the
many True Ones, and that I have unwittingly imbibed any of them, not
discovering them to be such; (for Truth has its Counterfeits as well as Coin,)
I hope I shall not therefore, by Men of Learning and Reason, be esteemed a
wilful abettor to Error and Falsehood. For to suffer such Censure upon so poor
and weak a ground, would conclude Costs and Damages against all Writers in any
Faculty whatever. What Science is there free from Error? Or what Man dares to
call himself a Master of Truth, or Perfection in any one Faculty? We are only
Men, and must own St. Paul's Motto, Scimus ex part. The forenamed excellent
Prelate, in his admirable Sermon on the Mysteries of the Gospel, most truly
tells us, -- The Notions of Truth and Falsehood lie more abstruse than those of
Good and Evil, and Men are more apt to be deceived in their wit, than in their
honesty. p. 14. And in p. 26. of the same Sermon, He most justly exclaims, --
Even in Geometry and Arithmetic how many things are forcibly concluded to be
true, which are inexplicable, un-immaginable, incomprehensible. And again, --
No Truths are so liable to mistakes and prejudice, as the professedly
Mysterious. p. 14. ut aute. -- In curious Speculations it is very easy to Err,
and to be imposed upon: And of all Liberal Sciences, Astrology is the most
Mysterious. It is called a Secret Art, although it be now so publicly
Disputed, Professed.

. 17. I was Condemned by my Stars (God so permitting it) to be an enquirer into
Astrology: The Moon and Mercury were both Subterranean, and in Friendly Aspect
at my Genesis; and as I have been convinced of any Errors in that Knotty and
Difficult Science, I have abandoned them, as may be seen in several Tract's
which I have published to the World, viz. Britains Royal Star; Nuncius
Astrologicus; Obsequium Rationabile; The Just and Pious Scorpionist, etc. Nor
shall I fail to follow the same course for the future; and as I discover any
thing therein, really Rotten and Unsound, will not be afraid or ashamed to own
them, and make them known. But, I must assume the Liberty to tell the World,
that what my Learned Opponent has laid at my Door for an Error, I am so far
from seeing, or knowing it to be such, that I doubt not (by God's assistance)
to evince it the contrary, by plain and well grounded Experience, (for that is
the Foundation whereon I chiefly build) and that to His and the Worlds
Satisfaction.

. 18. To come more closely to the matter, the Learned Objector is pleased in
the first place to Question our Principles; and thereby He thinks to disable Me
for the Contest. If We poor silly Astrologers were such inconsiderable Brutes
as He seems to make Us, and altogether unable to answer for Our selves; yet, it
is not fair for him to take away even a Poor Cripples feeble Crutches, and then
to beat him with them. Contra Negantem Principia, etc. Against him who denies
Principles, who shall maintain a Disputation? Let Me assume the liberty of
Questioning the nine Digits in Arithmetic, and I will soon be able to set all
the Masters of that curious Art upon an almost un conquerable difficulty, how
to make any reasonable Harmony with their Numbers. Whereas by allowing them,
of what excellent use are they found in Astronomy, Physic, Music,
Trigonometry, Trade, etc. -- But as I have said before, I will leave the
general cause of Astrology to be defended by some more Learned and Able Pen,
and only concern my self to prove, that the very Principle upon which I am
Impeached, is Firm and Good, and so far from being shaken or weakened, though
briskly impleaded by the Antagonist, that it carries the Face of Truth in it,
and ever will be found to do so.

The PRINCIPLE is this,

. 19. Cardinal Signs possessing all the Angles of a Nativity, renders the
Native Famous and Notable in his Generation.

This is a Truth so Conspicuous, Great, and Undeniable, not only in the
Genitures of Men, but of Kingdoms, Cities, Castles, etc. and, in all the other
parts of Astrology, the Cardinal Signs on Angles are ever of so Famous and
Remarkable signification and import, that it stands in need of no other Proof,
than the attestation of Antiquity, and the consent of Modern Astrologers. And
thus it has been proved before this Learned Opponent, or my self were born;
and will remain a Truth, when We shall be no more.

. 20. The year it self is governed by the Cardinal Signs, or Points of Heaven.
The Moveable Feasts of the Church depend upon the Equinoctium Vernum, the grand
Cardinal Point of all. The Church begins its Year at or about the Vernal
Equinox. Nay, God has honored the Cardinal Points of Heaven, by dispensing
his greatest blessings and benefits unto the world under them; and thus in the
time of the Law, as well as Gospel. The Jews Pascha, and their Feasts of
Azymes, and Tabernacles were appointed to be Celebrated under Cardinal Signs.
God sent his own dear Son (our Blessed Savior) into the world, and permitted
him to suffer on the Cross for our Sins, both under Cardinal Signs. The
greatest Actions of the world depend upon Equinoctial and Solstitial Points,
viz. Aries, Cancer, Libra, Capricorn; and if instances of Men's Births may pass
for proof (and I know no reason why they should not) I could produce a
Multitude to confirm it.

. 21. Now knowing it to be purely rational for us, from a constant experience
of an Effect, to conclude the cause thereof Aphoristically true; and that
Ptolomy, and all other Astrologers have made their Aphorisms from a continued
Observation of the Truths they contain, and so wrote Probatum's on them. From
the same ground of Observation, I adventured in my Eighteenth Aphorism, Printed
at the end of my Collectio Geniturarum, to assert, -- That Cardinal Signs
possessing the Angles of a Nativity, makes the Native (of any condition or
capacity) most Eminent and Famous in his Generation; and to do such Acts, that
after Ages shall admire. -- Which said Aphorism, together with my illustration
thereof, upon the Geniture of that Immortal Arch bishop of Canterbury (as the
Reverend Dr. Pierce justly styles him) Printed in my foresaid Book of
Genitures; is the presumed ground of my Adversary's dissatisfaction.

I shall therefore endeavor to support the Truth thereof, -- 1. By sundry
Authorities, and Reasons. 2. By Experience from 10 Notable Genitures, which
Astrologically do little less, than Demonstrate the Truth of it.


. 22. First, by Authority. Cardinal Signs, as Cardan teaches, Sig. 5. Aphor.
129. are the grand Distinguishers, and Dividers of the several great parts of
the World. Nay, we know the several prime Seasons of the Year are observed to
receive their beginnings under the Cardinal Signs. And thus the Learned
Childrey, (my late worthy Friend) Prebend of Salisbury has truly termed.
Capricorn the conception of Vegitables, and. Aries the birth of them. Iudag.
Astrol. p 13. Sect. 26. And suitably we see. Cancer to be the Perfection and
Glory of them; and to. Libra we most reasonably and justly attribute their
decay. And this is of so constant, certain, and undoubted verity, that every
Year gives us a fresh Demonstration thereof, and no man that has his Senses
serviceable unto him, will offer once to deny it. The Learned Vossius, who is
willing to exclude Starry Influences, yet affirms, That the greatest motion of
the Winds and Tides are observed about the Equinoxes, viz. the two principal
Cardinal Signs. If then it be found reasonable to allow it the true office and
business of Cardnal Signs, to Distinguish, Divide, and Declare, not only the
Grand parts of the World, but likewise the most Eminent and Observable Seasons
of the Year, viz. such as all the Creation are affected with. Then, by an
Argument, a Minori, They may most reasonably be pre-sumed to Distinguish, and
Denote the most Active and Prodigious Persons, of any degree, when they shall
be found posited on the Angles of their Genitures. But Experience is a most
constant and never failing- Evidence of this Truth, as shall be more fully
shown anon.

We might further confirm unto you the Truth of this Aphorrism, or Argument by
an Observation taken from the most common and ordinary acting belonging even to
Domestic Employments or Housekeeping. It Is even become a Proverb, that of all
Drink your March-Beer bears away the Bell. And why so? why should March have
the Reputation? but because the Sun is then in the Equinox, i. e. the chiefest
of the Cardinal Signs. And let it be observed, I pray you, whether the rest of
the Cardinal Points be not also peculiarly influential in this matter; although
not fully so much as Aries, yet much more then any of the other Eight Signs,
termed By-corporeal, and Fixed.

. 23. Nor is it thus in the grand Seasons of the Year only, which are marked
out by the Suns progress through the Cardinal Signs; but in the peculiar
Quarternions of the Moon also, as she passes the Equinoxes and Solstices: ever
remembering, that as the Sun has the greatest virtue in Aries, the Moon has
most power in Cancer. And of this Truth every good House-wife may frequently
make trial if she pleases, in Baking, Brewing, etc. For the Lunar Year (though
it be a lesser,) is as complete, as the Solar: and the Moon transiting the
Cardinal Points in her Circuit, is as surely, though not so largely serviceable
to the use and necessities of Humane kind, as is the Sun. Let any one, for
Experiment sake (it is not much trouble) make use of the same requisites, as at
other times, either in Baking, Brewing, etc. when the. Moon shall be in.
Aries,. Cancer,. Libra, or Capricorn,. and put those Signs on the Angles also,
at the beginning of the Work: and, having used your ordinary honest endeavors,
as when no such care is taken, then observe the Issue; and if you find a better
effect, of your Labor, than at any other time when the Moon and Angles are not
so related, I hope you will not refuse with me, to attribute somewhat to the
Virtue and Dominion of Cardinal Signs, beyond any of the other Eight. Let Me
also remember that it is happily observed by a Learned Reverend Author (of whom
the World will receive e're long, a Plenary Account of the Influences of the
Stars in the alteration of the Air, etc.) that the vigor of the Moon is most
seen in the Tides, upon her Appulse to the Equinoxes and Tropicks. Which
Observations the Philosophical transactions happen to confirm: And the Learned
Virtuosi know that it is no great Secret.

. 24. But to make this more Conspicuous by Authority, let us call to mind what
the Learned Ludovicus de Regiis affirms, Aphor. 24. that Equinoctia Signa and
Tropica, etc. Equinoctial and Tropic Signs are the Horoscopes of the Kingdoms
of the World, and those are principally subject to them, who at their beginning
(or first possessing of them, by Conquest, or otherwise) had either of them
Horoscopical. And why so? but because Kingdoms are the most Glorious Bodies or
Constitutions of the World, as the Cardinal Signs are the chiefest, and most
noted among the Twelve. How? Those Kingdoms who at their beginning had either
of them Horoscopicals? Why, this over-reaches the matter in question, and more
than proves what I have asserted. My Aphorism only affirms, Those Persons to be
Eminent that had all the Angles of their Genitures possessed with Cardinal
Signs. But this Author tells us, (and that truly too) That those Kingdoms are
most subject to Cardinal Signs that had either of them Horoscopical. And
Astrologers teach, that the Heavens Operate upon Men, Cities, and Kingdoms
equally with respect to their Natures and Differences.

. 25. Now if Kingdoms, etc. the most Eminent and noted Bodies of the World, are
subject to Cardinal Signs, and naturally owned by them; It Is a natural
Consequence, and follows without drawing or straining; that Men born under them
according to the Limits of my Aphorism, must be most Famous and Notable, and
not less than the wonder of the Age they live in, (with respect to the Sphere
of their Activity) and Admiration of Posterity. Good Sir remember, I do not say
that they must be most Famous for Actions of Honor and Virtue, only; There may
be such that are, and have been as Famous for bad Deeds, as for good Ones: For
Treachery, Murder, Perjury, etc. as for Prowess, Piety, Charity; for Burning of
Cities, as well as for Building of them. And many Persons that have been, or
are the grand Fevers of their Countries, Companies, or Families; are, or have
been as Famous as any that are, or have been the most Fortunate and Successful,
in, and for their Support. Honor, and Preservation. Catiline will be as long
lived in the Treasury of Fame, as Cicero: And Oliver Cromwell will be remembered
as often as the Glorious Albemarl shall be mentioned.

. 26. But we proceed with our Authorties; Cardan, Aphor. 6. Seg. 7. affirms,
Quando Saturnus in Libra fuerit, and Jupiter in Cancro, tunc magna in mundo
mutationes contingent. When Saturn shall be in Libra, anst Jupiter in Cancer,
mighty changes and alterarions will happen in the World. And what is the
reason? both Saturn and Jupiter are the Superior Caelestial movers, and
therefore bear, or carry with them greater power and force, than any of the
other Planetary Bodies, as having the largest Orbs to move in, consequently are
endued with ability to Act and Perform the greatest and most stupendous
Changes and Alterations. They are the greatest Wheels in the Caelestial
Clock-work, and all the lesser motions wait, and attend upon them. Moreover.
Cancer and Libra being Cardinal Signs, when those stately Superior Planets are
gotten therein, they inherit the greatest Authority and Energie which they can
possibly reach unto, whereby to Operate upon Sublunaries; because in those very
Signs they receive the Dominion of Exaltation. The more Potent any Man is, he
is the better enabled to perform his Intentions, and that to the most Eminent,
and Worthy, or unworthy purposes.

. 27. The prudent Dassipodius assures us, Aphor. 79. That, Signa Equinoctialia
sentiuntur Dominium habere super statum Legum, etc. The Equinoctial Signs have
Power and Dominion upon the Constitutions of Laws, Religious Rights and
Ceremonies, Heresies, Schisms, etc. What! can Cardinal Signs influence the
Actions and Affairs of Kingdoms, Societies, and Conventions of Men, either in
Church or State? and shall we think them unable to Influence, or wing the
Actions, Passions, and Inclinations of single Persons? What Man of Reason can
be guilty of such a method of Reasoning, with hopes of credit or belief.

. 28. Nay, the never to be enough commended Cardan affirms for a Truth, Seg. 3.
Aphor. 117. Cometae -- In Cardinibus Regum Mortes, etc. That Comets (those
Heavenly Flames and Torches) when ever they appear in Cardinal Signs, they
betoken the Death of Emperors, Princes, Potentates, etc. Cardinal Signs you
see, still do carry a Signal of Wonder and Amazement in them: as if indeed they
were not designed by God to take cognizance of Mean or Ordinary persons or
matters. Yet further, does not the same Author teach us, that -- Animae per
cancrum descendunt, per Capricornum ascendunt. etc. Seg. 4. Aphor. 155. That
the Spirits of Vegitables, and the most vigorous Actions of the World Descend,
or lose their Energie by Cancer; and that they Rise, and recover fresh strength
by Capricorn. And surely it is not for nothing that the Sun (the most Glorious
Body of the World, the visible Deity, and Fountain of all vital Power) does
perambulate annually 23 Degrees and a half, toward the North, and as much
again toward the South, while this his stately, and constant progress is
bounded by the two Tropicks, Cancer and Capricorn: when as we see, that
according as is his Accession and Recession, to, and from those Famous Points,
so we have the larger or lesser Portion of his Presence; our Days are longer or
shorter; we have more or less Sunshine or Shadow: and all Creatures are more
or less Active, Brisk and Vigorous.

. 29. Yet again; hear the same Author (for we have not done with Cardan yet) he
tells us, that, -- He who is born at Noon when the Sun enters the Vernal
Equinox, will be Great and Famous without other Testimonies. Nor need we fear
to believe him, since at such a time all the Angles of the Caelestial Figure
will be adorned with Cardinal Signs. This is the most convincing Proof that can
be of the Truth of the matter in Question: Cardan asserts herethe very same
thing, with me, in the Aphorism impugned by my Adversary, although it be in
different words.

. 30. The Noble Firmicus, as an admirable and close proof of the Argument in
dispute, gives us the Natalitical Schemes, of sundry Famous Men, as Pindar,
Archilocus, and Archimedes; all which have Cardinal Signs on the Angles of
their Genitures. And let me modestly ask my Learned Opponent, whether all those
Men have not been Famous in their Lives and Actions? And, if they have not been
admired since their Deaths? and so shall remain to all Posterity? -- Here is
some Authority the Adversary will say, and Probability perhaps; but where is
the Proof? The Noble Firmicus.

, 31. Add in the Genitures of Homer, Demosthenes, and Hermadorus (for which all
Astrologers are Indebted to the same Firmicus) we find the Luminaries in
Cardinal Signs: And Genethliacal Astrologers do esteem the Moon alone, plus
quam dimidium Geniturae; the better half of the Nativity. Plato, indeed, that
Excellent Philosopher, and as high in the Treasury of Fame as any of them, has
none of the Cardinal Signs on the Angles of his Nativity. (which I rather make
mention of, to prevent its being hereafter objected to me) yet, nevertheless,
Saturn, Lord of his Horoscope was in. Libra, a Cardinal Equinoctial Sign, in to
* * and the was in to them all, and from Active Aereal Signs; which are
undoubted Arguments (as there placed) of an almost Immortal Fame. And this the
more certain, Eminent, and durable, for Saturn his being posited in Libra, the
place wherein he receives Exaltation.

. 32. And though we plead for the excellency of Cardinal Signs above all
others, yet, no Astrologers (that I know of) ever said that there might not be
Men very Famous born into the world, without having Cardinal Signs on the
Angles of their Genitures. For so to affirm, were to make Astrology purely to
depend upon Arbitrary Principles; and would be nothing less than to betray the
Interest of the whole Art for the sake of one particular Aphorism. A mere
madness! And he that shall offer to hold, defend, or plead for such an Opinion,
may be justly remitted ad Antyciras for a Cure. Astrologers have many other
Arguments of Eminent Honor and Fame, and its Opposites, besides Cardinal Signs
on Angles: as may be seen among the Aphoristical Authors of that Art, chiefly:
which were it pertinent to my business in hand, I could with much ease produce.
Albeit, it must not be forgotten what we said just now, that even in Plato's
Geniture, a Cardinal Sign is not meanly concerned, but most eminently helps to
Illustrate that great Man's Fame, viz.. in. and he posited in that very Angle
too, which represents Philosophy, Wisdom, Learning, Arts, etc. the true Cause
of that excellent Man's great, and never-dying-Fame. Which very Position
whispers into my Ear, a Secret worthy of further Examination of the honest and
industrious Genethliacaque, viz. A possibility of discovering the Terminus a
quo, or place whence Fame, (with its reverse, Infamy) has its Original. I
commend it to him, and to his more curious and careful enquiry, it being no way
proper for a Digression in this place.

. 33. Any reasonable Man would think that our Aphorism here contended against
were most happily and sufficiently supported by those Instances; and ought to
be allowed to wear the Livery and Character of Truth. And, unless it can be
proved, that there have been Persons born into the World with Cardinal Signs on
all the Angles of their Genitures, who having lived unto years of Maturity, and
have not been Famous in their Generation in one kind, i. e. for Honor or
Dishonor; Vice or Virtue; Wealth or Poverty; Learning or great Ignorance;
Courage or Cowardice; It must needs be conceded unto, that the Aphorism is Good
and Valid; and the complaint brought against Me for using it, is Unjust.

. 34. Well, but what then? Admit the Aphorism to be good: yet my Adversary has
a further design in dealing with Me, than it may be I am aware of; and would
fain render me guilty of sundry Repugnances, and Indicts me upon them: from
which Charge, he supposes I cannot so easily free my self. For, (says this my
Antagonist) a person and his actions being once known, you presently make some
Star, House, Aspect or other, answer to his actions, and make Those, to be the
certain Arguments of These.

This is the common Objection against Astrologers in general. And were it true
in the Objectors sense, I should readily acknowledge it nothing less than gross
Iugling, and the worst of Deceipts: and that such Practices cannot be too
severely Censured.

. 35. Now to give this Learned Opponent some satisfaction in this Point, and
not deal with him as Eugenious Philalethes did by Doctor More, turn him off
with a company of hot headed scurrilous words: I will tell him, that
Astrologers as aiming at Perfection in their Studies (although they must be
content to miss of so great a Bliss, with all of other faculties) when they
hear of any stupendous and amazing accident that has befallen any Man, they
presently endeavor, (possibly) to procure such Persons Nativity, to try by
their Art, what satisfaction may from thence be afforded, reasonably to own or
countenance the same. In the doing whereof they neither injure the Truth, nor
yet do wrong to any Man; but endeavor only to Infranchise the Rules of their
Art. A thing so reasonable, and so far from Iugling or Deceit, that it is the
only way to bring the Obelisque to a Point.

. 36. Does tthe Learned Physician commit Error, or practice Deceit (when
being put to it by the unexpected, uncouth Symptoms, and Diagnosticks of a
Disease, of which his Patient dies) when he shall give directions to Anatomize
the Corpse for discovery of the Latent, Mortal Obstruction, that bid defyance to
his worthy prescriptions? No sure: no one will offer to discommend or censure
such a proceeding; he endeavoring thereby no injury to the Dead Patient, but
to add to his own Experience, and to prevent (if it may he) the like Fatal
Dangers in others that are living, where the like Symptoms shall appear. And, I
would modestly demand of my Learned Opponent, what does an Astrologer
otherwise, when he endeavors to obtain and inspect Genitures after the Fact is
over?

. 37. But my Objector goes too far, and treads too severely upon the Heels, not
only of Mine, but of all other Astrologers Reputations, when He with a kind of
an assurance to himself, inculcates, that We are able to predict nothing truly,
but when We have observed the Event. If this were true it were something, but I
must crave leave to tell it this Learned Gentleman, that such practice is not
Prae but Post-diction, and desire that if any Astrologers stand chargable with
such Gulleries, they may be esteemed Mountebanks, not Physicians; Preachers,
and not Priests.

. 38. Yea, but He goes on, smiling, (as glad I perceive to think He has gotten
Me on the Hip,) and resolving to give Me the Cornish Hugg, says, Richard
Cromwell his Nativity is one of the meanest and poorest that ever I say says a
Student in Art (my Name and Book being Quoted in the Margin) there is not one
Planet Essentially Dignified. Cometom. p. 257. -- These words indeed I own; but
have no fair Title to the Sarcasm in which they come Apparel'd by the
Antagonist. And for a just and modest reply, I must in honor of Astrologick
Truth, and in defense of my self, together, be bold to affirm, that this
instance of Richard Cromwell, is most unjustly, and disingeniously urged against
me; unless he had been very certain I had prestigiated therein, which I am sure
he is not, cannot be. For, it is sufficiently known to many Persons of Worth
and Honor, yet Living, that what I published of Richard Cromwell from his
Geniture, was, not only my single Opinion, but the Judgment of all the Eminent
Astrologers of those days in Point of Art, concerning him and his Horoscope:
and this long before he was decently laid aside, to make room for Him whose
Right it was. And longer still before I adventured to Publish the same, and
that this was really so, I dare appeal to the Knowledge and Memories of the
most Worthy and Learned Elias Ashmole Esquire Dr. Francis Bernard, etc. Gentlemen
excellently versed in the Genethliacal part of Astrology; who were of the same
Judgment with Me, and possibly before Me too. Nay, the Honorable Sir Edward
Dering Knight, being then beyond the Seas upon the Death of Oliver Cromwell,
and his Knowledge of the meanness of Richard Cromwell's Stars, immediately
encouraged the Kings Friends there in Person, and on this side the Seas by his
Loyal Letters with this usual assurance, (...), insinuating His Majesty's happy
Restoration; and particularly did he write thus to a Worthy Learned Divine,
and a present Dignitory of the Church of England in the year 1658, a Copy of
which Letter I have seen, and I believe can yet procure the Learned Antagonist
a sight of it, if at least That would help to excuse Me from his unkind charge,
or satisfy him.

. 39. Yet further, Mr. William Lilly (from whom I own to have had this
Geniture,) was of the same Opinion with Me, and for the same Reasons too;
although afterward he was unfortunately engaged to write in favor of this
fortunately unfortunate Gentleman; even against his Judgment and Knowledge in
Art. Sed, auri sacra fames. It may also be remembered, and that most truly, --
That the difference between Mr. Lilly and my self had its original before the
death of Oliver Cromwell: And from the commencement whereof I never had the
least conversation with him: and therefore could not join in Judgment with
him, or receive any kindness from him, which could any way gratify my
Adversary, or countenance this his unjust Sarcasm of Me* -- That I knew nothing
of this Gentleman's Destiny until I saw his Scene Acted.

. 40. It is a wonder to me this Learned Antagonist did not say as much against
me concerning the King of Sweden's Nativity (which I own to have had from a
Copy that the aforesaid Honorable Sir Edward Dering procured in Germany, and
sent into England, as he received it from the Learned Olearius, Mathematician
to the Duke of Holstein, and has done me the honor to show me the very
original Scheme under the said Olearius his hand. I mention this to satisfy
the Learned Dr. More how I came by it, which he seemed to wish for, in his
Reply to Mr. Butler.) And His Majesty of Denmarks also; both which I published
to the World before Their Scenes were Acted. So that Astrologers are not always
guilty of Post-diction in the room of Prediction. Prediction is as clear as the
Astrological Day; but some there are who do in Solecaligare,

. 41 But my Learned Opponent may answer me to these things, by allowing, that
future Events may be predicted, but not to be attributed to Astrological Skill,
as he does, p. 235. -- A pretty Musical distinction! The Astrologer predicts
future accidents by his Art, but this must not be attributed to Astrological
Skill. That is, in plain terms, the Astrologer knows nothing by his Art, or
Quatenus an Astrologer. But how will this accord with what my Antagonist
allows, in p. 227. That the Stars do point out some Futurities to us. Do they
so? yes, they do indeed. And if so, why should not the knowledge thereof be
referred to Astrological Skill? Nay, this Learned Adversary of mine, (for such
he is, be he who he will) in p. 206. Agrees Astrology to be a part of natural
Philosophy, which from the knowledge of Caelestial Bodies Prognosticateth of
Events in the Sublimary Bodies here below; and consequently the Actions of Men,
who are partly made of these, depend in some manner on their influences. And
again, he acknowledges, in page 229. That, -- When the Astrologer is rightly
accomplished for his work, his Judgment may prove successful. May it so? why
then sure an Astrologer may predict some particulars, and yet not be thought a
Prestigiator; or his Art a mere piece of Leiger-de-main. But how must he be
accomplished right for his work? I will answer in the first words of the
Centiloquium, a te, and a scientia, viz. When he is, not only a Book-learn'd
man (though that I acknowledge is of excellent advantage) but also when he is
born an Artist. It Is from thy self and Learning! Ptolomy prefers the
accomplishment of Birth in the first place; then that of Breeding or Education.
Both together do the Feat to purpose. Nay, my Antagonist (sure the fairest and
most worthy Enemy, that ever any man met with!) in page 273. When he is
pleading against Astrology, brings in the Holy Father St. Augustine to support
it. This excellent Saint, willing to give Astrology its just due, (my
Antagonist says) expresses himself thus, -- In ille perspicuitate Corporum
Caelestium non omnes omnino motus Animi latere. That it is possible to arrive
to a notice of some motions and inclinations of the mind from the Astral
influences of the Body.

. 42. But this Learned Gentleman, as if afraid he had granted me too much, is
pleased to urge, p. 217. what no honest, or modest Astrologer will deny him,
viz. That no man can be positive in foretelling future Events of the Stars. [I
am sure then they can be foretold no way.] But now if he mean, that they cannot
be foretold in Specie, I agree with him: but if he mean in Genere, that no kind
of Events can be foretold; He then, not only opposes his own Concessions, but
contradicts St. Austin and the Truth together.

. 43. None indeed but such as are Divinely inspired can predict the particular
kinds of things; as Ptolomy most truly says, Gentil. Aph. 1. But what then?
Nice particulars are not to be Predicted; Ergo, nothing can. Is this Logic? --
Cannot an Astrologer, if he sees a direction impending in any man's Nativity,
which of it self portends Death, Predict this by his Skill? and yet not be
positive either to the precise time, or Distemper, etc. And, if he sees a King
or Prince to have a Glorious Geniture, as the Illustrious Frederick the III. of
Denmark had: Cannot He say, that this Prince (though he happen to be at present
in great troubles) will not only recover Himself from His misfortunes, Add to
the Glory of His Ancestors, and die peaceably possessed of His Honor, and
acquisitions? And this even by His Skill in Art, without opposing Ptolomy]'s
first Aphorism.

. 44. I affirm it for a Truth, that more than 20 years before my late
unfortunate troubles which befell me Anno 1679. I Printed the cause of them in
my Doctrine of Nativities, from my own Geniture. and that was Astrologically,
my Medium Caeli ad by direction, falling on the twelfth Angle of my Nativity.
Nay, I knew by my Skill, that it denoted the Frowns of Great Persons, Disfavour
of Men in great place and Authority, Imprisonment, etc. But now, I must
confess, I could not foresee the particular prejudice I suffered: I might as
well have pretended to praesage the particular Prison I was to be confined to.
I ever was, and I esteem it all men's Duty to be Obedient to the Lawful
Established Government both in Church and State; and was certain I neither
would, nor indeed could (for it is not in my nature to) Act, speak, or commit
any thing detrimental, or distasteful to either. I owed no Money, nor did I
ever care to be in Debt. I am of a peaceable cheerful Temper and Disposition,
not given to Quarrel; (and yet Mars was Lord of my Ascendent) was resolved not
to do any thing that I knew might bring me into the Disfavour of my Prince, or
His Counselors, etc. And yet, behold! how wonderfully God is to be Magnified
in his works? He would not alter the Caelestial clock work for my sake! But
when my Direction touched, a malicious Varlet, scarce known to me, one that I
had never conversed withal in my life; and, another whom I never before saw to
my knowledge: These came and swore High Treason against me, much to my
amazement, more to my wrong: but to the certain verification of the Truth of
God by the Stars, so long by me foreseen and expected, though not in the same
method it happened.

. 45. Sure this must be imputed to Astrological Skill. And yet we renounce the
Opinion that maintains, -- The first cause is tied to the Stars, God is not
bound to his Creation, but his Creation to Him. Neither has the Lord of all
Mercy and Goodness bound us his Creatures inevitably to the Destinies. Gods
Grace is of greater influence than all the Planets united. For, had I forborne
being concerned at that time in some very innocent secular affairs, that I
might have let alone; I had then not only prevented my own troubles by Ruling
my Stars, but possibly saved the Souls of those Wretches that falsely swore
against me; which without Repentance must needs be in a dangerous condition.
But yet, we must not say, that because the influences of the Stars may be
suspended, or diverted, that therefore their natural order and influence, as
God has pre-appointed to them, cannot be understood by Astrology.

. 46. But these are Truths the Learned Antagonist had not the knowledge of. For
had he been privy to, or acquainted with them, I fully persuade my self, that
He would have Lessened, or it may be totally waved his Sarcasm against me
concerning the Geniture of Richard Cromwell; For, I cannot believe he would
have had me published the same while the Owner thereof was in the Saddle of
Government, or yet in his Fathers time: That had been a pretty way indeed, to
have gratified an Enemy with a proof of the Truth of Astrology, and have run
the hazard of Hanging for my civility. No! I bless God, I have no such Foolish
or Dismal Stars in my Horoscope. Besides, I had read ingenious Cardan his Book
de Astrol. Interog. where he teaches his Disciples more wit than that comes to,
viz. Principi ne magnum Malum firmiter unquam praedixeris, etc. And that
Gentleman was then (though never by me) esteemed a Prince, and owned so by
Addressers from most parts of the Nation.

. 47. Having answered this concerning Mr. R. Cromwells Geniture, and I hope
fully to my Adversaries satisfaction, I find another Knot for me to untie;
another Load to disburthen my self of, and that is somewhat that I have Printed
concerning Major General Lambert, which he is pleased to re-mind me of, Thus.
-- Major General Lambert began his March 1659. November 3. 10 th. 15! A. M.
toward the North against General Monk. The position of the Heavens most sad,
the was in a watery sign, therefore he had like to have been drowned in
Yorkshire, riding through a River toward his Army. The words I own, but not as
they are recited: for the Learned Opponent has left the Marrow and Substance
of my Words behind him. Therefore to satisfy him, and acquit my self of being
culpable of any crime in this pretended Charge also, I will insert the reason
of that my Labor, with the Story cavil'd against, together.

. 48. The Experiment of Major General Lambert's March, being a great Ornament
to the Doctrine of Elections, which is very nearly allied to Nativities (as the
Penny is of the same Coin with the Shilling) both have the Impress of Starry
Truth upon them: and therefore it was I thought fit to subjoyn it to that
Gentleman's Geniture. Yet not to wrong Him, or to advance the Truth of Art by a
Fraud; but to gratify the ingenious Student in Art, with a Nativity and
Election together: which my Learned Oponent (if he be one) ought to have
thanked me for, and not requited my Pains and Civility with a Witty Droling
Catachrestick.

My own Words, un-guelt, are These.

. 49. This was the true positure of Heaven at what time Major General Lambert
put his Foot in the Stirrup to March toward the North to meet the Valiant Lord
General Monk, then advancing out of Scotland toward London: and a sad position
it is, and exactly agrees with that Major General's success he had by that
unfortunate undertaking. As the Moon was in a watery Sign, [in exact Conjunction
of Saturn, the cruellest and unfortunatest of Planets.] (All which words are
omitted) He had like to have been drowned in Yorkshire riding through a River
toward his Army; where his Horse left him to the mercy of the most merciless of
Enemies, the Water, from whence he with much ado escaped.

. 50. So that you see, it was none of my Judgment, nor did I say, that simply,
because the was in a watery Sign, (as my Antagonist is pleased to make me
speak,) but because She was in such a Sign in Conjunction of Saturn, etc. that
rendered the Expedition Infaelicitous and Dangerous.

. 51. What strange Shifts and Slights will some Men use to put an affront upon
Starry Influences, and to puzzle and confound the poor Astrologer? If we
publish a Geniture, or an Election beforehand, and praedict any thing that the
Event shall fairly answer, then the Devil is our Assistant (say our
Antagonists) and stands at our Elbow to help us. If we do it when the Person is
Dead, or the thing designed is over; then (say they) we put Frauds and Deceipts
upon the World; being soon able to make some Star, House, Aspect or other,
answer to the Action, and make Those to be certain arguments of These. Thus is
the Poor Astrologer treated for all his Pains!

. 52. After this manner of dealing, how shall I expect to Fare hereafter, if it
shall please God to lengthen my Life so far, as to Methodize some of my many
Hundreds, or (it may be) Thousands of Experiments of several kinds, which I
have faithfully made, and with great Labor and Industry accumulated in my long
time of Study? In vain have I visited Goals and Hospitals, and used all other
just and proper ways, to gain and heap up Experiments in Art; if after all, I
must hope to be no better dealt with, for those my many years careful and
painful endeavors after Truth? -- If this be all the Portion the Poor Artist
must expect, all the Reward he shall meet with; He that Studies the Stars is
the most unhappy Person in the World.

. 53. Can my Learned Adversary believe all those great and voluminous Treatises
which have been wrote by the Sages of Science, to be only the works of Knaves
and Mad Men. Cardan, Gauricus, Iunctine, Goclenius, Camerarius, Argelus,
Rothmannus, Orguinus, Hassurtus, and of late the Learned Mormus, cum multis
aliis, etc. All your Learned Labors are mere Trifles; of nouse at all; mere
pieces of Iuggle and Leger-de-main: Mists before the Eyes of Us Poor
Star-gazing Idiots; vain Phantoms, and aerie Idea's, to make us believe only a
Falsehood for a Truth; and force us with Ixion to embrace a Cloud for Juno. If
it be thus, why then our Adversaries are in the Right, and our cause is lost.
But, be it so then, however I am not alone deceived, I have a great deal of
Good Company with me in the same predicament: Nor have I alone been a Deceiver
of the World: others have trod the same Stage before me, and with me, and will
do after me. -- But, to come out of our Dream, we assuredly know, -- That Day
unto Day utters better Speech than this; and Night unto Night, teaches more
excellent Knowledge.

. 54. But e diverticulo in viam, to come to my Point again; my Adversary to
show his readiness to load me, and render himself at the same time Partial,
(which for his sake, I am sorry he gives me occasion to mention) He, wholly
omits my answer to such a Foreseen Objection. (He may see even by this that we
Astrologers can Foresee something; I wish we could as easily prevent them,) as
now he brings against me, viz. -- There are diverse Eminent Persons about London
that have heard me relate the misfortunes which happened upon that Expedition,
long before the conclusion thereof; even as soon us the March it self was
beginning. Collect. Genit. p. 167. -- What would my Learned Antagonist have? I
cannot imagine what he designs by his unkind curtailing my words and matter, to
make me speak as himself pleases, unless he contrive to Stigmatize Me and the
Truth together.

. 55. It is now more than 24 years since this Praediction and Experiment was
made; and therefore 'twill be hard for me to procure Witnesses of what was then
said or done. Yet* I affirm it an absolute Truth, without any mixture of Design
or Iuggle: and believe I may be able (if occasion require) to produce some
Evidence thereof; which I might been able to have done, had I been questioned
sooner. But should I be incapable of producing any, it is sufficient that I
affirm the Truth there Printed, and deny all Fraud, Iuggle, or Design therein:
And I do not doubt of bringing (as it is usual, and satisfactory in the Law, in
the Case of Spurious Issue Fathered on a Man) very Honorable and Worthy
Compurgators, who will not be afraid to affirm that they believe I speak
nothing in this matter but the Truth.

. 56. But alas! If a Man must be questioned for any thing of Fact after such a
time, viz. 24 years, it is odds, indeed (were not the supreme Law of Reason on
our side) but that the Antagonist would have the better, although in the
present debate he must be content to be at a Loss. -- But where all this while
is our regard to Truth? when we shall offer to Play at Push-pin after this rate
with a Science more Ancient than any other, that the knowing World can boast
of? Where is our respect to Humanity, when we shall provoke one another
unjustly? Where is our value for true Honor and Conscience, when we shall,
without color of Reason, fasten pretended Frauds of our own Coining upon the
Names and Reputations of Men we know not, and that never did us wrong? Where is
our Love to Christianity, or the blessed Author thereof; who has taught us
better Lessons, than to injure the quiet of another, or to cast Fiery Bombs at
the Innocent; and this without first asking a Reason of a difference, or fairly
proclaiming a War.

. 57. Had my Learned Antagonist (in case of dissatisfaction about any thing I
had wrote or published) but sent me a Letter of his Objections; as the Reverend
Dr. H. More did to Renatus dos Carts, etc. and that I had failed to give him a
reasonable answer; it had then been time enough to have hung out his Flag of
Defiance, and rendered me Odious in Print.

. 58. But, no more by way of Exclamation or Complaint. This Quarrel will (I
hope at least) quickly cease: I wish the Wars, Troubles, and Confusions of
Europe, and of Christianity were likely to be of as short a Date. For I dare
Augure, and that without a Figure (for in Schemes my Antagonist takes no
pleasure; though I really delight to contemplate them.) That less than 24 years
more will cover and conceal both our Persons, whatever it may do with our
Errors: which if either of us have committed any in Print, they will lay a
Title to a larger Alchocoden, and not meet their Oblivion so soon. It Is natural
for Men to live longer in their Issue (good or bad) than in their Persons.

. 59. Before I come to the second part of my Defense, viz. the Genitures
promised, I have one or two more parcels of rubbish to remove out of the way;
which I shall do with all Speed. One is this, -- My Antagonist charges me with
having affronted and abused the Learned Peter Gassendus. p. 258. These are my
Adversaries words, I will recite him faithfully, and wish he had so done by me.
Peter Gassendus, poor Man, because he wrote against Judicial Astrology, and
checked and confuted the Art of Genitures, had all things naught in his
Nativity. His ill habit of Body, and worser (if this censor, is to be
credited,) (meaning me forsooth) of Miud, is plainly to be seen in the Heavens.
Never was wretch so Bespattered by Man of Art.

. 60. It is my Antagonists design by this passage to render me guilty of doing
Injury to the Ashes of the Learned Gassendus: and to that purpose He insinuates
Me to be the real Author of the Judgment given upon Gassendus's Scheme; But if
He had pleased to have done Me Justice, He should have told the World the Truth
as I had done, which He could not but see and know, viz. That, that Character
was none of Mine, but a Quotation made use of by Me, (and not in such words
neither as He mentioned, but in words far different, as you shall see anon.)
The Author whereof was Mr. (now Dr.) F. B. a Learned Physician and Astrologer,
and very well able to defend his own work. Whose particular words I will
relate; together with the Provocation given by Gassendus, which occasioned that
Smart, but true Animadversion upon his Geniture, which himself gave to the
Learned Morinus of France.

. 61. The words which I made use of, and annexed to the Nativity of Gassendus,
are to be found in my Col Geni. p. 126. and Printed Anno 1660, viz. I shall not
need to observe any more on this Figure, then I find already done in an
Appendix to an Apology for Astrology, published lately by my Loving Friend Mr.
Vincent Wing; the Author of which Appendix is Mr. F. B. and my very good Friend
also, who has responded both like an Artist and Scholar to Gassendus' s
Objections against Astrology. For a sight of which I refer the Ingenious Reader
to the Appendix it self, and shall only present him with what relates to the
Scheme, viz. Here you may see the Malignant Planets. and: have the chief
Dominion in the Scheme;. is Lord of his Horoscope; peregrine Retrograde, and in
his Detriment, and unfortunate in. which made his Lungs much oppressed with
Phlegm, rotten and corrupt, of an ill habit of body, very sickly, subject to
Catarrhs, etc. That for Manners,. in. of. and both in ill aspect of the
Ascendant, made him of an evil Disposition, Envious, Suspicious, Revengeful;
Angry, Peevish, Contentious, Injurious, Fraudulent; a Liar, a Calumniator, an
Impostor; Covetous, a Robber of other Men's Honors; a false Friend, a
perfidious Traitor; a notorious Hypocrite, an Athiest, and (to say no worse of
him, than he does of Mr. Des Carts, though unjustly) a Toad swelled with Pride
and malicious Venom, as you may see in that Book against Des Carts* and other
of his Works. As he had. in.. and in the House of. so he had a wit apt enough
for Mischiefs, Quarrels, and contentions, Sharp in Disputation: as in. to the.
so it was turbulent enough; and had not. applied to a of also, he had been so
ill nature'd, he had scarce been sociable: But that good Aspect gave him so
much wit as to dissemble it under Zeal to Religion, and make that seem the
severity of his Devotion, which was the Morosness of his Nature.

. 62. These are the words contended against by my Antagonist: And I will not
refuse to confess they seem to sound somewhat harsh and severe: what then?
The.. or. of. and: is a harsh and severe Aspect, and that all Astrologers know:
and so little of the Character could be spared, that I might have gone further
in this Description, without injury to Astrology, and possibly too, without the
breach of good Manners.

But yet, supposing (which I do not grant) that the words were too harsh, and
that the same things might have been expressed in softer terms: Yet, I must let
my Learned Opponent know, -- That it is not customary for any man to speak of
his Enemy in the same Key, and Character, as of his Friend. In such a case the
Satyr should ever be debarred the use of his Whip. Gassendus had proclaimed War
against Astrology, injured the innocent Truths, and Professors thereof; not
confuted either It, or Them, as my Antagonist thinks. That Is a task not so
easily performed as talked of. But besides, what if it be made appear that
Gassendus's Rough and Moross dealing by the Truth, as well as by Des Carts,
has pulled this upon him? He has indeed given too broad, and too foul a
provocation for an Astrologer thus truly to depaint him. And that is the second
thing I promised to give an account of.

. 63. 2. The Truth of the matter stands thus. -- Dr. F. B. in reading Gassendus
Contra Astrologiam, met with many unworthy Provocations, Falsifications,
Scoffs, etc. against Astrologers, (which he could not possibly without a mark
of Indignation pass by,) and among the rest of his scornful and contemptuous
Expressions, These Unsavory, Obscene, and Ridiculous words, -- Nor are we to
say such an Infant was born infected with a foul and contagious Disease,
because the sixth House was his Horoscope, but, because his Mothers lower House
was Impure and Infectious. Apol. for Astrol. p. 122. -- In which words, here is
(1.) a great Truth of Art impugned, which the Author of the Character has very
well answered: And (2.) a Wity Falsehood is made use of in the room of Reason to
defend it. And can any Artist be patient under such affronts as these? Must the
poor Astrologer be laughed to scorn by the Waspish Spleenatick Gassendus, and
not be suffered so much as to speak for himself? or to reply upon his Adversary
without being termed a Bespatterer of him? If Truth offend either Gassendus or
my Antagonist, I cannot help that? nor shall I Trouble my self so far as to
make an excuse for the offense. The Scandalum Datum is of Gassendus's side; He
began the Quarrel, and was the real Aggressor.

. 64. But I would fain know to what purpose Gassendus gave his Nativity to
Morinus, if not to be inspected, and Judged by Astrology? And if Dr. F. B.
meeting with it, happened to observe the. of. and. therein (and that Artist
must be blind that could not) was it a crime for him to declare the Effects
which naturally Issue from such a position, according to the Judgments of
Astrologers? Or, for Me to Quote it from him with approbation, when I know he
has written like an Artist; What? shall Gassendus be suffered to Spit against
Heaven? Scoff at Starry Influences? Bespatter the honest Students in that noble
Art? Make sport at Gods Glorious Host? And shall no Man be permitted (having
his Geniture too, as given by himself) to acquaint him with Astral Cause of
such Drivels? May Gassendus, as his own Spleen swells, be allowed to call the
Renowned Cartesius -- a Toad swelled with Pride and malicious Venom; and for
his so fulsome, and Anti-Philosophick a Character be esteemed otherwise than
Ill-natured? Had I not seen Gassendus's Nativity, I could easily have Judged he
had had. ill posited, upon reading such words in him. Ill Water never flows
from wholesome Springs.

. 65. Howbeit, I do really love, my self, to keep within the bounds of Modesty,
and good Language, and good Manners: And do heartily wish Gassendus had not
given the occasiou for so rough (though true) a Treatment. I can look upon an
Ill position in any Man's Geniture with Pity and Compassion, rather than Scorn
or Derision: And bless the God of Heaven, that my own Nativity was not such. It
is He that has made us, and not we our selves. And nothing but a very severe
provocation (and not always that) can make Me speak a Harsh or Unpleasant Truth
of any Man. I affect evenness of Temper in all things.

. 66. But now, I wonder much how my Learned Antagonist could possibly overlook
such Brotherly in Gassendus [as the Mothers lower House being Impure and
Infectious,] and such Falsehood, (for I allow him too good an Astrologer as not
to know it to be such) as [ the sixth House was the Infants Horoscope] or, yet
the Beastly expression used against Des Carts, [That He was a Toad swelled
with Pride and malicious Venom.] I wonder I say, how he could overlook all
these things, and yet look so critically and steadily upon what was returned in
reply to him?

. 67. But letting this enquiry pass, what will my Antagonist say, if I produce
the Authority of Astrologers (for no other Authority is fit or allowable in
this case,) to confirm every part of the Character given to Gassendus; even to
the very Rotten Phlegm mentioned? will he still think that Gassendus has had
any wrong done him?

To this end, let Forman be consulted, as Printed in These: Astrol. p. 71.
Saturn (says He) works his malice more vehemently in than in any other Sign,
because. is his detriment being in. to. and is cold, moist, Phlegmatic, and
does augment the cold and Phlegm in. and make him more Venomous; for all Venom
and Poison is: and he causes the greatest Venom in. And, a little further --.
in the first 12 Degres of is cold in the first (Degree) and temperate in dryth
and Moisture, ingendring Diseases of much Phlegm, and mixed with thin
Melancholy, causing Coughs, Stopping of the Stomach, Shivering and Pricking
there, the black Plague, by reason the Blood is overcome with Phlegm and Water,
etc. And in p. 114. He says. in. indicates Phlegm Venomous, etc. This sure may
satisfy for the rotten Phlegm and Distempers mentioned in the Character.

. 68. Next, for the Manners which. and. conciliated give, let the Learned
Origanus be called to give Evidence, who has treated both largely and
Learnedly of the Genethliacal part of Astrology; and see if he do not fully
justify both Dr. B. and my self also in this matter. Si Saturno. associatur in
judicio morum, in prospera constitutione efficiuntur homines absque delectu
multa inceptantes, nec ea ipsa perficientes, quandoquidem Martis fervor
incitat, Saturni frigus, cohibet atque deterret: Ostentatores, Turbulentos,
Seditiosos, (...), (timide audaces) Immisericordes, Implacabiles, Fastidientes
alios, Inflatos, Gloriosos, Ventosos, Fraudulentos, Tyrannicos, Austeros,
Improbos, Inhumanos, etc. Orig. de Effectib. p. 3. p. 560. What thinks my
Antagonist now, that is so much concerned for the Honor and Cause of
Gassendus? would not Gassendus (think we) have received the same Character from
any other Astrologer (if at least, he had understood his Art) as here he has?
especially, if invited thereto by so pressing a Provocation.

. 69. In this Character of the effects of a.. or. of. and. all Astrologers
consent; See Ptol. Parv. p. 109. Mars and Saturn conciliated, -- In prospero
constitutione reddit homines citra delectum multa inceptantes ore libero,
laboriosos, turbulentos, timide audaces, rigidos, immisericordes, fastidientes
aliorum, asperos, bellaces, temerarios, seditiosos, fraudulentos, insidiatores,
implacabile ira, perturbationibus inhiantes, Tyrannicos, public rei
adversantes, Cupidos, contentiosos, illate injurioe memores, funditus improbos,
vehementes, intollerabiles, tumidos, inflatos, importunos, etc.

Lilly 542. Let. be associated with. and let him be well fortifyed, it shows
the Native will begin to undertake any thing, but seldom conclude; for what the
heat of. stirs up, the coldness of: destroys again; the Native usually proves a
Bragger, turbulent, fearfully bold, implacable, disdaining other Men, vapouring
windy people, Tyrannical, inhumane, given to all manner of Villainy, dessembling
both with God and Man. --

Cardan, Seg. 4. Aph. 24. Saturnus si Marti assimiletur, been depositas, erit
pertinax, crudelis, proditor, temerarius, loquax, iracundus, adulator, Deos,
homines, principesque odio prosiquitur, sicarius, nullis flecttetur precibus,
nullis rationibus, lusor ostentator, in rebus omnibus immoderatus, laboriosus
Miser, Nocens, facinorosus, incestus. -- And all this when well dignifyed.
What manners will they give then, when ill? I will not urge them, for the
Honor I ow to a Man of Learning that has had the unhappiness of being so
born. My Learned Antagonist may know by this, that I have rather wronged
Astrology, then the Learned Gassendus. Since to be severely true to the Art, a
much worse Figure or Character might have been drawn of him.

This Description is countenanced by all Astrologers: and the Experience of all
Ages proves it true. It was made before Gassendus was an Embrio; yet for Him
too, though not purposely or alone for Him; but for all others that have been,
are, or shall be Born under the like Malignant Aspects and Positions. So that
you see it is not only my single Opinion: And therefore Gassendus has not the
least wrong done him; nor need my Antagonist have been angry with me, for
Transcribing this Character, and Printing it with Gassendus's Nativity.

. 70. But, why do I thus labor among Astrological Authors to defend the
Character of Gassendus, and free my self from the reproachful Epithete of a
Bespatterer of him? when my Opponent has so fully supported my Opinion, and
(had there been never an Astrologer in the world left to assist me) made all
that I had said thereon Good? -- In his reply to an Objection brought by
Gassendus about the End for which Comets appear, my Antagonist tells the world
-- That Gassendus's Objection is a gross mistake, and proceeds from Pride and
vain Conceit, from Arrogance and gross Profaneness, as well as Pride; and
carries on the Plot and Design of Athiestical Spirits, who would exclude God
from the Government and Care of the World? Commit. p. 133.

Now, let the Impartial Reader Judge, whether this (though conaise) Character
of Gassendus, drawn by my Opponent, be not Comprehensive of All that my words
of him contain? Why should not now my Antagnist be angry with himself, and
Write against his own Book, with equal Fierceness as He has done against Mine;
for having (as he says) Bespattered the Learned Gassendus? Facinus, quos
inquinat aequat. This in Justice he should, and ought to do; though therein He
imitate the Grave Cat, viewing her self in a Looking-Glass.

Will he now offer to say, again, in favor of Gassendus, and in affront to me,
That -- Never was Wretch so Bespattered by Man of Art! Or, has He a privilege
to make Observations on the Manners and Writing of Gassendus? And a power to
debar the Poor Astrologer the same Freedom, when He shall be, not only
insultingly provoked (as you have heard) but boldly Challenged to the
undertaking, by an Haughty imparting of his Nativity to Morinus, for that very
purpose? -- I hope my Opponent will not now deny, but that Himself is the
better Artist at Bespattering: And therein I submit him the Waisters.

. 71. But yet, my Antagonist will not be so satisfied; but still supposing
himself in the right, and me in the wrong, as to this business of Gassendus, he
is pleased very briskly to advance against me with another Regiment of armed
words, in page 252. Thus, -- What work would this Man make with the Nativity of
the worthy Dr. Henry More, if he could get a sight thereof? He would read his
Life, and all his Writings in it at the first view? He would make the Lord of
his Ascendant plainly show him to be a Retired Melancholy Collegian all his
days; a Philosopher, and particularly of the Platonic Sect; And ( which is as
ugly a thing as can be in any Man's Geniture) a professed Adversary to the
Church of Rome; and all its corruptions. Thus, but more grievously he should
smart for writing against Dear Urania; and for daring to insert his confutation
of Judiciary Astrology into the Mystery of Godliness, and for Printing it
lately by it self. Thus, between Jest and Earnest (like another Heraclitus
Ridens) is my Learned Antagonist pleased to Buffet me.

. 72. A very pretty way has he here taken, to render me ill-natured and a
Papist together. -- For what wrong has Dr. Henry More ever done me in
particular, that, upon the sight of his Nativity, could I get it, I should be
supposed to deal ungentilely, or unworthily by him? Or, what good has he done
me, that I should trouble my self so far, as to write his Character by his
Nativity? And, what injury have I ever done, either to this my causeless
Adversary, or to the Church of England, as established by Law, that he should
thus subtly insinuate me a Papist; and that by virtue of my being (supposed)
so, I should be obliged to deal unkindly by Dr. Henry More, because he has
written against the Church of Rome and its corruptions? It is not material to
me, nor am I concerned against what, or whom Dr. More has written, as long as
he makes me no Party or Abettor to the Quarrel.

. 73. But, to reply more particularly to this grating Sarcasm (for it is such)
as for the worthy Dr. Henry More's Nativity, should it fall into my hands, I do
assure this my Antagonist, and the worthy Dr. also, that it should Fare much
better than Astrology or Astrologers have done in the hands of the Dr. and of
Gassendus. But, I should not promise him (in case I should give my self a
trouble about it) to do much therein at the first view* Yet, (having this
occasion given me, and certainly it is given me for some purpose more than
ordinary; or else my Antagonist has troubled both himself, and me, in vain) I
will hereby promise the worthy and Learned Doctor, That if he shall please to
impart his true Geniture, as freely to me, as Monsieur Gassend did his to
Morinus, I will make no unworthy use of it, but give him the just and plain
sense of what it naturally imports, according to the Rules of Art. I honor the
Doctors great Parts and Reading; and am not ashamed to own to have been
embetter'd by his Learned Labors. Nay, I also confess never to have heard any
Ill of him; excepting that of his severity against Astrology and Astrologers:
terming the Art a mere Inanity; a Sonorous Nothing, etc. The Artists Fugitives
and Vagabonds, etc.

. 74. These are harsh expressions in earnest, and do bespeak a debilitated. in
the Doctors Geniture, let his. be never so good. But such a value have I for
the Doctor, and his Excellent Learning, that I am willing to cast a covering
over his failings of this kind, rather than either to aggravate, or go about to
answer them. Possibly, the Doctor being of a searching, curious, inquisitive
Genius, might, in his Iuvenile years be prying into Astrology. and probably
meet with a Knave or unfaithful Fellow for his Guide therein; who, under
pretense of directing him the right way to Dear Urania's presence, might abuse
him and bring him to some Lascivious Housewife, or common Strumpet, who might
have the impudence to assume her name: And possibly for this, or some such like
Trick, He may have contracted an ill Opinion of Astrology, as Mr. Mervil most
unhappily wreak'd his wrath, and spit his Venom at the whole Clergy, for being
shamed upon at Play by a Dignitory of the Church.

. 75. But, in case it should be so, that the Doctor has in his more unsteady
years been Iuggle'd with, and perhaps promised more from his Stars, than ever
he has found true, or it may be is ever like: (for I know that there are
Fraudulent, as well as Honest persons, pretend to be Astrologers: and Des
Carts tells us, He had learnt to avoid the Gulleries and Frauds of such
Fellows, by that time he was 23 years old.) Yet, I cannot but persuade my self,
that upon second thoughts, and more mature consideration, the Doctor will never
account it just or equal to blame or reprobate a whole Society for the Errors
or Falsehoods of a single Person.

. 76. Now for Doctor Mores Nativity, it must either be Good, or Bad. If it be
Bad, it is to be Judged so by Astrology; and my Antagonist says, the Doctor
has confuted that; so that that is no capable Judge of it. If it be Good, he
need not be afraid or ashamed to show it; for no Astrologer (allowing his Art
unshaken) can make it either better or worse by his looking on it. So that
either way, the Doctor may, if he pleases allow us a sight thereof.

77. But now, a little for Exercise sake; what if I should suppose that the
Learned Doctor has. in. in his Genesis, in. of active in and violent. in. of
them both. Marry, and such Positions at the first sight would fright any
ordinary man, and make the very Stars themselves become his Disease; especially
if there were nothing found to alleviate such Hostile Positions. I will not, I
cannot say, the Doctor has those Aspects in his Geniture; but I will Jeopard
my small Reputation, and Skill in Astrology, that whatever his Nativity be, He
has somewhat more than ordinary to do with the Cardinal Signs; Non obstante
his being a Collegian all his days, and of the Platonic Sect. For, it is
impossible he should ever have been so Famous by his Pen, and have wrote so
much as he has done, had not his. been in some noted Position of the Heavens.
And if any of the Fortunes should chance to assist. at his Birth, then would
his Fancy and Genius be the more Exalted, Happy, and Flowing: especially if.
were in reception of him. And should it also prove true, that. were in in. to.
and to. both; which Positions do impede the Ingenuity, and disturb the
Judgment. Yet, if. were in. and reception of. and his. so supported by. as
before supposed; the prejudice would be thereby much lessened, if not totally
taken away. And so the Doctor by his worthy Accomplishments and Acquisitions,
may reasonably obtain upon the World, and deserve much more Honor and
Advancement, than the wearing of a Short Gown comes to, though possibly he may
not enjoy it. But then, if. and. both should Obviate and Cloud the.
notwithstanding his great and prodigious Parts, his Honor would be darkened;
and I should cease to wonder, why the Dr. should be a Collegian and Philosopher
all his days. The never shone splendidly in an Eclipse. The same Stars that may
denote Merit, do not always signify Honor and Reward.

. 78. Thus, and no otherwise, were the Doctors Nativity such, as here supposed,
and in my hands, would I descant upon it. A quite different way should I go to
work, to what my Antagonist Vainly and Ludiorously surmises. Alas! it is not
every one that has. and. in.. or. that must therefore be Ill natured, Moross,
Covetous, etc. or yet oppressed with Corrupt, Rotten Phlegm, or Sickly, etc. as
Gassendus was. For. and. may happen (tho in the said Aspect, etc.) not to be
Significators of either the Natives Person or Manners.

. 79. Besides, in the case supposed. in. in. and reception of. would help to
correct the Person one way; as. in reception of. would mitigate it another. Let
not the worthy Dr. therefore, refuse to impart his Nativity: for it may so fall
out, (in case Astrology be not confuted by his Pen, as my Opponent thinks it
is) that his Stars may be better, and more worthy the owning, than he is aware
of; and possibly his Astrologer will prove kinder to him (in hopes to oblige
him,) then he may believe he has merited.

. 80. Yea, but my Antagonist presumes, that had I the Doctors Nativity, I
should not only find out those strange significations therein, but also espy
out another most terrible thing thereby, viz. That of his being a professed
Enemy to the Church of Rome, and all its Corruptions, which is (says he) as
ugly a thing as can be in any Man's Geniture. -- And, why does my Adversary
think that I, of any Man, should busy my self so curiously (and to no purpose
in the World that I know of) as to Pry into the Doctors Religion? or concern my
self in his dealings against Rome? This is a brisk tonch of his kindness by the
by: and brought in by Head and Shoulders to render me a Papist, or at the least
Popishly affected. I perceive by this Oblique Irony (to say no worse of it) my
Antagonist is very credulous, and believes the Scandalous Villainous Prints,
etc. of the late Plotting Times, wherein I have been most maliciously and
wickedly traduced, as well as many of my Betters. -- Such a Sarcasm as this I
could easily bear in such profligate Fellows as Mansell, Dangerfield, Care,
Coley, etc. but for this my Learned Adversary to lick up the Vomit of such
Wretches, and spit it a fresh at me, concerns me more than a little.

. 81. I have indeed, been used by the Nonconforming Saints, as bad as if I had
been a Papist, They have burnt me twice in Effigy with the Pope, R. Mansell
(the Meal-Tub-Collonel) has joined the Popes determinations de Fide, and my
Praedictions de Facto, together; and Dangerfield has Printed me a good
Catholic in my Heart, (and that I shall ever desire to be; though the Man
means otherwise than he writes.) And charges me to have written a Popish
Ballad, whereby I encouraged the Plot. Care, has be-Papisted me an hundred
times over in his Packquet of Advice; and in other his Seditious Phamphlets.
Coley has sent me to my Beads, with as great and assured Impudence, as if he
had seen me make use of them. Calumminare audacter, aliquid haerebit. But would
any man of reason believe the Scommas of such Creatures as these? I cannot but
expect fairer Quarter from the Learned part of the World, than these sad Souls
have afforded. Such Fellows (like pretended assistants at a Fire,) help still
to add to the Bill of Loss: and would Assassinate their best Friends Reputation
for Money.

. 82. By the same method of Scandal the whole Body of the Clergy have been
dealt with, and termed Papists in Masquerade: The Kings and Governments best
Subjects have all of them been so served. But, are they ever the more Popish
for that? A Papist! Hum. Now, if my Adversary fails of his Conjecture, since
Astrologers are Fallacious, I am afraid He is an Astrologer too. I will appeal
to every Man of Letters, whether this be ingenious in Him, or prudently said? I
see the Gentleman is a Bigot, I hope He is not a True Protestant; for if he
call Himself of the Church of England: He must take heed, least some One or
Other pay Him in His own Coin. The quarrel is about the Truth of Astrology, or
Natural Philosophy, which He will confute: And when all is done, He gives the
World to understand, That I am a Papist; and then I am bloodily confuted.
Bellarmine thou lie! So do thou Astrologer! Give Him the Palm, He bears
away the Bell.

But to demonstrate this a most notorious and malicious Scandal upon Me; my
Adversary for his more certain satisfaction, may, if he please, see Me very
often in the Abby-Church of St. Peter's Westminster, in the time of Divine
Service; if that will convince Him. And I am almost morally assured He will not
Censure me as either Hypocrite, or Trimmer, by reason of my plain-dealing with
Him,

. 83. Notwithstanding, if I should learn so far of my Opponent, to speak
freely, as He often professes; (and wise Men will commend him for it) what if I
should take the same Liberty, and say, -- That of the Controversy between the
Church of Rome and Us, I am no Competent Judge: Am I the worse Christian or
Protestant for that? I trow not! I will be Judged by the Wise and Moderate.
Nay, I undertake it not; I find it not in the Stars. Howbeit, I am apt to pin
my Judgment it may be, on the Author of the Mystery of Iniquity, in many
particulars; bating me one blind Story of Pope Joan. (Now I spoil all again,
and a Papist I must be, Right or Wrong.)

. 84. Concerning which, I wonder much how so sharp, quick, and Ingenious a Man,
as Dr. More should suffer his Reason to be so far imposed upon, as readily to
give credit to so unreasonable, and improbable a Fable; which (though it do not
with me) may probably with others, bring All the rest that he has said against
the Church of Rome into question.

. 85. For, is it possible that Sexes should not be discernable from the Birth?
or if we should grant, that in changing Countries, Schools, or places of
habitation, when this pretended Pope might be taking her Ramble, she might (for
some particular reasons) with much Craft, and more Fear, conceal her Sex for a
time; (as many pretty Females we read of to have had odd vagaries sometimes)
could she (think we) be so happy as to do so always, and not be discovered?
What! No Green Sickness Longings, or unnatural eating of Chalk, Charcoals, or
Oatmeal, etc. at the time of her Virginity appearing? Or, when a grown Woman,
no prying Bedfellow, Servant, or Laundress, that could make discovery of the
Fraud, either by a Vision of her Person in so long time, or from her Mensurnal
changes? What! All sorts of People Tongue-ty'd; or bribed to silence? Not a
Person known neither, to be made use of in the affairs of Venus, when her
Disires grew with her Years? No diligent Matron to be found, or heard of, that
passed between Her, and Her Gallant? Never any notice who was Her Amintor? What
Countryman, Condition, or Complexion; (Sure she was in Psyche's Condition,
and had gotten such a kind of Lover, that no Mortal ever saw.) It Is strange,
that none of all these things could be made appear! No proof at all to be found
to corroborate the pretense! Why, this is just like Oates's Commissions! great
discourses of This, That, and the other, from Johannes Paulus de Oliva, the
General of the Jesuits; and yet not One to be found.

. 86. The Learned Dr. More, and his Disciple my Antagonist, may bribe and
blindfold their own Reason, and believe the greatest impossibilities to be
true: but that is no Rule, or Example for me. I am a Man of free thought, and
hate Fetters upon my Understanding. I cannot believe any thing to be true, that
carries an improbability, or unlikelyhood in the Front of it. No: though it
should be liberally Sworn to. --

. 87. The Author of the Female Prelate, Dedicated to the late Earl of
Shaftsbury, and the writer of the Protestant Almanac, may gulp down such a
Gullery without either Examination, or Consideration, of what they imbibe: They
have large Swallows in some cases. But for me to do it (simple Idiot that I am)
I should run the hazard of Choking. The Throat of my Reason is too narrow to
Gobble down such a Crude Potion easily.

. 88. Hear what my Noble Dr. Brown says to this matter, in his Popular
Errors: (who would have thought Doctors of Theology concerned in Errors
Popular?) He Sagacious and Honest Man could not digest it. But thus argues, --
Clearer confirmation must be drawn for the History of Pope Joan, who succeeded
Leo the Fourth, and preceded Benedict the Third, then many we yet discover. And
since it is delivered with aiunt and ferunt by many; since the Learned Leo
Allatius has discovered that ancient Copy of Martinus Palonus, who is chiefly
urged for it, had not the Story in it; since not only the Stream of Latin
Historians have omitted it, but Platina the Patriach, Metrophanes Smyrnaeus;
and the exasperated Greeks have made no mention of it, but conceded Benedict
the Third, Successor unto Leo the Fourth. He wants not grounds who doubts it.
Dr. Thomas Brown, Pseud. Epidem. p. 320. Edit. 1658.

. 89. Let the worthy Dr. More, and others, affirm this Fiction for an assured
Truth; and let the Author of the Protestant Almanac tell us confidently, that
the name of this Prelate in Petticoats, called Pope Ioau, was at first
Elizabeth Gilbert, and born of Dutch Parents: Let the witty Author of the
Female Prelate acquaint us, that her name was Ioanna Anglica, and that she was
a German Lady. Yea, no doubt the German Princess (she is not forgotten yet) was
one of her Byblows.

. 90. For is it not strange that we hear not of any of this Female Popes
Nephews preferred, or of any Favors she extended to her Quondam Companions. We
find no account of any respect she ever paid to the places of her Birth, or
Breeding, to satisfy succeeding unbelieving Ages, or Persons. None of her
Deeds, Religious, Civil, or Natural can we any where read of, but only that
improbable one, of Her being delivered of a Child in the streets (careless as
well as Friendless Woman that she was,) and this too, as she was going a Solemn
Procession. No notice at all belike of the approach of the Birth; no Pains or
Tokens attended her, like other Women; That the Procession might have been put
off for a time: But, poor Pope, Sick or Well, she must Obey. Why, every
Midwife, nay every simple Woman, that has but wit enough to Get, and Bear a
Child, is able to refute this Fabulous Story.

. 91. Sure this Scene was acted when Popes had not the power of the Keys; Her
Popedom being somewhat like to Sancho's Government, was neither able to serve,
or preserve Her, with the use of common necessaries and assistances, that even
an Alewife with us, in such a case, can easily procure, if not command. No news
neither what became of the Child? Whether it died young? or lived to years of
Maturity? If died young, where buried? If it were so happy as to live, in what
place? How Educated? To whose care committed? etc. -- All Records of her Famous
Acts obliviated: no notice how she came to be Elected, but in a Drammatick
Poem: no mention of any Struggling Interests at that time, which Party should
carry it? Italy, France, Spain, Germany, etc. No Monument, Inscription,
Epitaph! Or indeed place of Burial to be found. The most unhappy Papess sure,
that ever was.

. 92. Old Time we know, has long Locks, and can cunningly cover some things
that never were. Some Lies have the luck on it, to be told under a popular
Ascendant, or else they could never command the belief of the World so long as
they do. What is it that I would not give in Reason, for to procure Pope Ioans
Geniture? Such a thing would more assure us of the Truth of the Story, than any
thing the many Authors which Dr. More talks of, have said in the defense of it.
We can procure the Nativities of Ovid, Julius Caesar, Nero, Domitian, etc.
Persons of greater Antiquity than Pope Joan: History and Cronology in these
does happily befriend us. But in the Story of our Pope Joan, they are
altogether Barren and unserviceable. Partiality in divided Records ( says the
late quoted Oracle of Reason Dr. Brown) has much depraved History, wherein, if
the equity of the Reader do not correct the iniquity of the Writer, he will be
much confonnded with Repugnancies. But Dr. More has said it, and therefore it
must be true.

. 93. Now leaving this Digression of Pobe Joan; let us come to our business
again. My Antagonist pursues me thus, -- Thus, (says He) should Dr. More Smart
for writing against Dear Urania, for daring to insert his Confutation of
Judiciary Astrology into the Mystery of Godliness. and for Printing it lately
by it self. This is a groundless fear of my Adversary: for I know not why the
Dr. should Smart for writing against Dear Urania, any more, then another should
for his defending of that Innocent Beautiful Lady. -- Denique non omnes eadem
mirantur amantque
Horace.

The Doctors Reason is one way informed, Mine another: and both of us may enjoy
our Sentiments Lawfully enough, provided we do not injure the Truth. Urania,
that is a Chaste and Virtuous Nymph in my Eyes; may yet appear deformed, and
possibly have proved a Iilt to the Doctor; and, having long held him in hand,
(giving him now and then some glimmering hopes,) at length rendered all his
Courtships vain. Possibly, I might be Born her Friend and Favorite: the Doctor
not. Mental Marriages are made in Heaven as well as Corporal. And in such a
case, a man had need to have Good Friends there. It Is not only Poeta, but also
Astrologus Nascitur, non fit. And we certainly know, that ex quolibet Ligno,
non fit Mercurius.

. 94. As for Dear Urania, it is not every one that would, that can be fully
acquainted with her, or press upon her Privacies when he pleases. Yet, Gracious
that She is, She denies access to none, but confers her Favors on all,
according to their Capacities. She admits one Man to Gaze upon her at a
distance, viz. The honest Country man and Shepherd, who is pleased thus to
behold her Glittering Glories; 'twould dazzle, if not strike him blind, to come
nearer. A Second works about her Gardens and Orchards: The young Inamorato, or
Smatterer in Science. A Third, repairs her Palace, viz. the Laborious
Calculator of the Planets motions, Eclipses, great Conjunctions. A Fourth,
adorns her Presence Chamber, Dining Room, etc. a Predictor of general
accidents, with all the variety that attends Kingdoms, Countries, and Cities. A
Fifth, she Smiles most obligingly upon, viz. the happy Metereologist, who
consults all the various motions of the Air, Winds, and Seas, (for they also
are within Vrania's Province) and thence acquaints us with Tempests,
Lightnings, Thunders, Earthquakes, Inundations, Plagues, etc. A Sixth, she
vouchsafes to Salute her Ivory Hand, viz. The Learned Genethliaque, (and Oh!
that I could lay a Claim to such, and so great a blessing.) Who Studies the
Nativities of all persons; thence discovering their Tempers, Humors,
Complexions, Inclinations, etc. with variety of what Prosperity and Adversity
does attend them; and nearly the Times thereof. And this is a Benediction in
earnest* and greatly to be coveted. O terque quaterque Beati. More than thrice
blessed must that man be; that arrives to such an acquaintance with the
Glorious Urania.

. 95. Thus far, but no farther, can any man hope to come. Urania is a Virgin,
and Spotless: and never did any, never can any Mortal wholly enjoy Her. To be
but Her Retainers, or Domestics, is to be the most happy of all Men! what
Commendations! what Praises! what Eulogiums! would that great Queen of Sheba
have thought this Caelestial Princess worthy of, that could give such Noble and
Pompous ones, to King Solomon, who was but a Mortal! Let this poor Panegyric
upon Urania's Excellent Perfection, Modesty, and Iuctice, be excused. I could
do no less: She has been Kind and Gracious to Me, beyond what She has to many
Millions of my Betters. I cannot speak too much, I cannot speak enough in her
Praises.

. 96. To proceed; well! but the Doctor must Smart, says my Antagonist, not
only for writing against the Dear Urania; but for inserting his confutation of
Judiciary Astrology in his Mystery of Godliness. -- No reason for this at all
neither. The Doctor is Lord of, and over his own Labors, and surely may do
with them as he pleases. Possibly he may think that Confutation (as he is
pleased to Christen it) better to become that Book, than it may be, I, and some
others Opinion. But that shall break no Squares, nor breed any difference. If
the Doctor, and this my Learned Antagonist be contented with its inhabiting
there, I am not displeased. Only, by the way, (since my Antagonist has given
me this occasion) I must with my wonted Freedom tell him, that however he
thinks the Doctor has confuted Astrology in a few Sheets of Paper; I am of
belief, that before he have completed his Victory over it, he must be
constrained to write a great many more: and possibly then too, be content to
miss of his end. For, alas! The several large Tomes of Ptolemy, Gauricus,
Cardan, Iunctine, Garcaeus, Goclenius, Naybode, Origanus, Argol, Morinus,
Leovitius, Bonatus, Haly, etc. are not to be blown away with so light a breath,
as this my Antagonist imagines. The weighty and excellent Reasons of these
Learned Men will not be overcome, or fall into a Swoun, at the Scent of his
Perfumed Socks.

. 97. And for the Doctors Printing the same thing afterward by it self, That
is none of my business or concern. Let the Learned Mr. John Butler, his
Antagonist, (whose Province it is) take notice of that. Which I am told he
will; and also very shortly give the Doctor that just satisfaction as it
requires. In the interim, I shall take leave to tell the Doctor, and my
Opponent also, -- That I have often heard of Homers Illiads being comprised in
a Nut-shell, yet could I never see them crowded into so small a Room. All
reports are not to be believed.

. 98. But now, my Antagonist, to make himself and Friends merry, goes merrily
on with me, saying, -- But look you now, because Uincent Wing published a Piece
against Gassendus (wherein this excellent Man's Objections against Astrology are
pretended to be answered) and was himself a well willer and Brother
Philomathemat. his Nativity has all things good and laudable in it. -- Pray
Sir who told you this? not I, I am sure. For where will you find in my Writings
that I say, that Uincent Wing's Nativity has all things good and laudable in
it? I beseech you, what, or whose Nativity can that be, that can claim a Title
to so much happiness? such a Native must be no company for Mortals! All
Genitures have the Malefiques as well as Fortunate Stars in them, although not
alike posited.

. 69. What strange kinds of Fetches has this Gentleman? And what Wiles does he
make use of, to fasten something upon me (though he scarce know what) to my
disparagement and to render me contradictory to my self? I have spoken nothing
but the Truth of Uincent Wing. And had the Learned Gassendus been blessed with
the like Stars for Health and Manners, as was the Laborious and Ingenious Mr.
Wing I should not have refused to have mentined them.

. 100. Yet, A little further, my watchful Antagonist is at me again in these
words, -- He tells us, that William Lilly, his Enemy, though Fellow Astrologer,
had the Moon in Pisces, a Wet and Drinking Sign, which made him a piece of a
Good Fellow. Behold! How this Gentleman seeks a quarrel against me! I am so far
from charging Mr. Lilly with this as a Crime (as my Antagonist inculcates, or
else, in this, he has said nothing) that I only in my Collection of Genitures,
subjoyn to Mr. Lilly's Nativity, Mr. Lilly's own words, and what himself has
said of his having the Moon in Pisces, (in his Epistle to his Almanac 1645.)
which he says, made him a piece of a good Fellow, And this my Antagonist might
have seen Quoted by me, if he had pleased. But none so blind as they that will not
see.

. 101 But, where does my Antagonist find the words -- Wet* and Drinking? I am
very sure my Book furnishes him not. That was my Opponents own wity addition
for the Jests sake. And let him be merry with all my heart. And if he delight
to Burlesque the Truth, let him also be as Free with me; much good may it do
him; I cannot suffer in better company.

. 102. Nay, this my Antagonist may, if he please find, that in my Obsequium
Rationabile, or defense of Scorpio, where I have occasion to bring in the
Learned Doctor Fisk's Geniture, who also had the Moon in Pisces, I very plainly
tell Mr. Lilly, (with a tacit reprehension for his jesting with serious
things;) That the Moon in Pisces, signifies something else, besides a good
Fellow. Neither had I, of any man, any reason to make sport with the Moon in
Pisces, (unless with the Bald Knight in the Apologue, I resolved to laugh at my
self) it being one of the best positions in my Geniture; and of which I have no
cause (I bless God) to be ashamed.

. 103. I will now make my Adversary himself Judge, whether he has dealt truly
with me, in laying at my Door the Levity of another? as also his soon after
suggesting, -- That such Fancies are oftentimes the products of a Capricious
and Fanciful, of a Spightful and Malicious Brain. Good Sir! not too fast.
Festina lent. Fair and softly goes far. Either what you have urged against me,
must be True or False. If True; I beseech you prove it to be such. If False; it
will appear then, that it is not my Brain that is Capricious, Fanciful,
Spightful, and Malicious; but Yours. In pure Justice Sir, I expect your
Retractation as you are a Clergyman and a Christian.

. 104. My Antagonist, as if he had been in the right all this while, Rears
another Story upon the former Sandy-Foundation, for me to Demolish: affirming
thus, -- And for this reason, as well as some others (particularly because
these Men have undertaken to Calculate the Nativities of Buildings as well as
of Humane Bodies; of hard Stones no less than of soft Flesh:) the most Learned
and Judicious Astrologers have not ascerted the Doctrine of Genitures; although
in other things they have defended Astrological Judgments. p. 260. Commeto.

. 105. Would not an ordinary Reader believe there were some Truth, at least, in
a Story so smoothly told? And that the Doctrine of Genitures was really
Renounced and Reprobated by the most Learned Astrologers? -- How hard is it for
any man, even the most Learned, to oppose the Truth and escape undiscovered?
It Is difficult (Learned Sir) to kick against These Pricks, and not to come off
wounded.

. 106. If I should demand of my Opponent, what Learned and Judicious
Astrologers those were which he talks of, that have denied the Doctrine of
Genitures? I am persuaded it would very much puzzle, if not confound him, to
name them. -- Sure, he does not mean Picus, Erastus, Gassendus, Doctor More,
etc. for his Learned and Judicious Astrologers? These have been all Enemies
unto the Art; and have wrote most violently against it. And, I am very certain,
that Ptolemy and Iunctine (both which he produces to confront Astrologers, and
confute their Follies in some things) can be none of the Persons he means: for
both of Them very largely Assert the Doctrine of Genitures. Yes, and those of
Buildings too: Of hard Stone, no less than of soft Flesh. And this I hope most
fully to prove from them, if that will satisfy the Learned Objector. Who sure
talks at this strange Rate, not that he believes what he says, but only to try
what acquaintance I have with those Learned Authors; and how able I am to
defend the Art I profess.

. 107. First then for Ptolemy, the Prince of Astrologers, as this Antagonist
most truly Styles him. That he is no renouncer of the Doctrine of Genitures,
but on the contrary, a great Friend to the Genethliacal part of Astrology; as
the Third and Fourth Books of the Quadripartite most egregiously prove: For in
them he Handles the whole Art of Nativities. And what thinks my Antagonist? can
this be true, and yet he no Friend to the Subject? Let but my Opponent
seriously, or indeed but cursorily consult those Books, (and if he please,
Cardan, and Naybode their Commentaries upon them) and he will quickly find
cause to Retract this his Rash and Unadvised Ascertion. And, if he do not take
all Genethliaques for Madmen or Fools (and my self for the greatest among
them) he would never sure once offered to have imposed such an Ascertion upon
the World to believe, and upon Me to answer.

. 108. A little further: the Centiloquium (which my Adversary allows to be
Ptolemy's, and makes use of it as such, for Proof of his Doctrine of Comets,
etc.) abounds with Genethliacal Aphorisms. And, among the rest, the 36 and 54
Aphorisms do evince most plainly the Nativities of Buildings; proving to us,
that hard Stone, no less than soft Flesh, is liable to Caelestial Energy. Hear
how he speaks in opposition to my Learned Adversary, thus, -- Aph. 36. In
Condendis Vrbibus stellis Fixis, quae confer habeunt utere. In aedificandis
vero Domibus, Erraticis, (i. e.) In the Building of Cities it is necessary to
make use of the Fixed Stars: But, in the Construction of Houses, the Planets.
Now, unless my Opponent can affirm and prove, that Houses and Cities are not
such things as cousist of hard Stone, Ptolemy hereby proves them subject to the
Influences of the Stars. Again, in Aph. 54. Dominatores in aedificationibus,
ubi copulantur stellae subterraneae, edificii erectionem impediunt. (i. e.)
When the principal Lords, or Governors of Buildings are joined to Planets
Subterranean, they impede the progress of them. These are Ptolemy's words in
his Centiloquium, allowed by my Adversary. What thinks he now? Does Ptolemy
deny the Doctrine of Genitures, whether it be of hard Stone or soft Flesh? Or
not? I cannot now (methinks) forbear blushing for my Antagonist.

. 109. And, to strengthen this Argument a little more, I shall here beg leave
to borrow a few Lines from that excellent Divine and Philosopher, Mr. John
Gregory, of Christ-Church, Oxon: which will prove a great Ornament to
Astrology, and also to the Question under Debate.

. 110. The Ascendant of a City (says this excellent man, from Haly) is that
Sign, cujus ascensione quis incipit collocare primarium Lapidem; which rises
in the Horoscope at the laying of the first Stone. Notes on Script. p. 30. He
likewise affirms, that the Art of this is taken out of the first part of
Apotelesmatical Constructions, called by Ptolemy, Catholicon. Tetra. lib. 1.
Where he acquainteth his Astrologer in giving Judgment of the Ascendant of a
City to take knowledge of the Sun and Moons place in the Zodiaque, which they
had at the laying of the Foundation; but especially of the Ascendant as the
most principal Angle. And in p. 32. He further says, -- Now, because that in
the Nativities of Cities, as in the Genitures of Men, the Astrology is the
same, (here you see, that hard Stone, and soft Flesh are under the same
Astrological care, and cognizance) therefore after consideration had of the
Life and Being of the City from the Horoscope, the next care taken was of the
(...), or part of Fortune, the second Ascendant so called in the Figures of
Men. And a little before this, in p. 31. we meet with a famous Instance of this
practice (for which we are indebted to this Author, and Gauricus) that in the
Instauration of Rome by Pope Paul the Third, Gauricus drew the Figure of the
Heavens. Vincentius Campanatius observed the time by his Astrolabe; toward the
Instant whereof he cried out with a loud Voice, Ecce adest hora precisa Decima
Sexta fere. Then immediately Ennius verulanus the Cardinal laid the first
Stone. He goes on saying, these Catholic Nativities were so much believed by
the Ancient Kings (says Haly) that they enquired into the Genitures of all the
principal Nati under their Dominions. Where, if the Planets were found to look
with a malicious Eye upon the Nativity of the Kingdom, Interficiebant eum
puerum, quod ejus Regnum erat contra Regnum ipsorum.

. 111. It Is possible the Superstition might go too far. But allow it to be
Superstition, and to have over-shot it self; yet, that there is Truth lodged
even in some Superstitious practices, these Learned Men, and Instances prove.
And that Ptolemy, you see, is mistaken, and misunderstood by the Author of
Cometomantia: and so also are the rest of the Learned Astrologers, -- When he,
with a strange confidence asserts -- That the most Learned and Judicious
Astrologers have not asserted the Doctrine of Genitures. -- Which in
opposition to his said Assertion, we see they have very remarkably; and that,
not only of Men, but of Buildings too: Not only of soft Flesh, but of hard
Stone.

. 112. And, although this practice of the Ancient Arabians, was, by their
Superstitious severity, abused: yet, I see not but that very excellent use
might be made thereof, even among Christians. For, if any person were found to
have a Geniture that should cast a malicious Eye upon that of the Government,
though I should not give my Vote they should therefore be barbarously or
inhumanly Butchered; Yet, sure it were no injury to the principles of Humanity,
good policy, or of Religion, to have such persons kept from prejudicing the
Government, or of rendering it troubled and uneasy, by preventing the
Advancement of such into places of Trust and Honor. -- For if it be a Truth
(and sure the Sages of former times were not all Blind) that some Persons may
be born Enemies to a Government. The only way to make them so, and prove the
Stars true, is to capacitate them by Preferment, or great places of Trust, to
disturb, and (in time) destroy it. But, this is a String ought to be touched
very tenderly. Astrology, although it can lay a just Title to many excellent
Truths, has not in this Age arrived to that strength of Perfection, as to give
a casting Vote in the case; and it may be will not be able in many Ages to
reach unto it. And know good Reader, that in all things I shall ever Submit,
but shall never presume to prescribe to Authority.

. 113. But Secondly, Having proved my Antagonist to be mistaken in Ptolemy; let
us see how far Iunctinus is serviceable to him, and his cause. The Learned
Iunctinus is also an allowed Pillar of Astrology by the Opponent, and therefore
the better Judge in the present Controversy, And if we but peruse his Speculum
Astrology, as well his larger, as lesser Volumes bearing that Name, we shall
certainly find him so far from refusing to Ascert the Doctrine of Genitures,
that he has, as much as any Man (nay more than many other Astrologers)
Installed and Enfranchised the same. Vid. Spect. Astrol. Printed at Lions, Anno
1572. And, that the truth of this matter may more plainly appear, and my
Antagonist receive the great satisfaction, he may find that this his Chosen
Author Iunctinus, has owned the Doctrine of Genitures to be of so Large and
Comprehensive an extent, as to contain even the Horoscopes of Buildings, no
less than those of Men, of hard Stones, as well as of soft Flesh; as Ptolomy
had done before him. In p. 313. of the beforesaid Book, this Learned Author (in
favor of the Nativities of Buildings) has inserted the Nativity of the Noble
City of Venice, with an Astrological Judgment thereon. Which for the Honor of
Astrological Truth, and the advantage of Artists, and full Conviction of my
mistaken Adversary in this Point; I will here produce as follows.

The Nativity of the City of Venice.


. 141. HAec Civitas hactenus suam libertatem conservat ex prudentia scientiaque
suorum Senatorum. Verum Anno 1551. Solis labor qui in 26 grad. cancri in
horoscopo ipsius civitatis Eclipsabitur, pollicetur seditiones and multa mala
in statu Senatorio, and tandem plures ex plebe mala morte terminum significat.
Qua propter magna detrimenta patientur etiam prelio Navali superabuntur, and
recipient damna maxima a proditoribus suis. Veruntamen exaltabuntur super alios
Vrbes, and custodient suam libertatem: ut insinuat Sol in radice positus in
Culmine Caeli, in suo theono and triplicitate, qui dabit audaciam in periculis,
ac pro Aristocratia conservationem: sunt tamen ipsi Senatores ad literas apti,
ut insinuant Mercurius and Jupiter in nona Domo conjuncti, quae est Domus
Scientiarum. Vnde apparebunt sapientes in omnibus actionibus and rebus
publicis: Et ad publicam utilitatem erunt omnes paratissimi: qua propter nomen
eorum erit insigne ac gloriosum, ut ostendit Sol in Culmine ipsius Caeli
positus. Jupiter and Mercurius in nona Domo decernunt Religionis
conservationem, ac utilia itinera per aquam, cum Divitiarum augmentatione; sed
experientur aliquod accidens in eorum substantiis. Quoniam, Sol Dominus
Secundae Domus est male affectus cum part fortunae. Si quis autem interrogaret
utrum Mars in diametro Soli, decernat Regnum diuturnum and stabilia?
Responderem, quod Imperia non sunt Eterna; sed mutabilia secundum influxus
Caelestes: Et ut dicit Lucas Gauricus, vir Doctus and Excellens in judiciis
Astrologicis, quod venetiarum Senatores Dominii Sceptra ministrabunt ad calcem
virginei part us, 1880. Anni. Quoniam Mars in quarta loco Caeli, nonsolum
ostendit haec, enim vero demonstrat quod in bello plerumque infelices erunt,
and in Pacis tempore fortunatissimi; si superavint haec tempora. 1583. 1585.
1603. 1607. 1625. 1666. 1691. 1699. 1770 1880. Praeterea spicam Virginis cum
Saturno qui ex diametro respicit Solemn, Dicimus significare, quod non
transibunt Anni 52. quod Civitas haec manebit in Terra. Vt declaratur a Luca
Gaurico his versibus.

Virginei partus seclis bis Octo peractis,
Epilogo Emergens faecunde Colonis,
Praebebit miseris alimenta a frugibus altis,
Nec Pisces Nautae capient in littore sicco.
Sed varios puere stores, and gramina pingues
Laeta boves, hasta non remis pulchrae juventus
Certatim ludent, mestu spectante Senatu.
. 115. Sure my worthy Antagonist will not now persist in his Opinion, but
believe with me, that it is not possible for Astrologers to speak against
Themselves and Science together. He may now most plainly see, that the most
Learned and Judicious Astrologers (even his own selected Ones) do not refuse to
ascert the Doctrine of Genitures, because of the Genitures of Buildings. I
wonder much, why so Learned a man (as he in other things has shown himself, I
mean in his Discourse of Comets) should offer to obtrude so strange a Paradox
(to say no worse of it) upon the World? If yet this be not of power sufficient
to convince him, (and I am sure half so much in the like case would have struck
me Dumb) He may be further satisfied by a sight of sundry other Nativities of
Cities, Forts, Castles, etc. with Judgments on them, given by Gauricus,
Iunctinus, Garcaeus, etc. Of which our before quoted Learned Gregory has also
taken notice.

. 116. I think there is but very little more for me to reply unto, or that I
stand particularly chargable with by the Pen of my Opponent. So that I may with
freedom come to the second thing promised, for the support and Honor of the
Energy and Influence of Cardinal Signs, which they are, by experience, found to
have over Men. And this shall be (as I promised) by Ten several experimental
proofs, in the Genitures, of as many Remarkable and Prodigious Natives in their
kinds; (for all of them stand not on the same Level) which I esteem little less
than Demonstrative of the Truth they are brought to prove. For the Learned
Author of the Leviathan (however he may have been mistaken in some things) is
most certainly in the right, when he affirms all Knowledge to be nothing but a
Train of Experiences.

. 117. The Genitures which I shall select for this particular Service (from
among many others) shall be these Ten following.

1. Carolus Gustaevus King of Sweden. 2. The Great Duke of Guise. 3.
Archbishop Laud. 4 Lord Treasurer Clifford. 5. Mr. Thomas Hobbs, 6. Mr. H.
Burton C. C. Oxon. 7. Michael Nostradamus. 8. Gregory Lopez, the Hermit. 9. Sir
Theodore Mayerne. 10. Oliver Cromwell.
. 118. Where, by the way, I must beg my Adversaries Pardon if I suite them not
to his mind: for my business in these matters, is not Heraldry, but a proof of
the thing in Question. I Study Truth, not Titles. The Scepter and the Spade, in
this case, are equal to me: And a Poor Hermit, is as serviceable to my purpose,
as a Prince, Bishop, or Philosopher.

. 119. But, before I begin, I must presume to acquaint my Opponent, that it was
not my Work, but His, to SUITE Gustavus Adolphus, with Cicero, Archbishop
Laud, and Oliver Cromwell. I very well knew that Gustavus Adolphus had not all
the Cardinal Signs upon the Angles of his Geniture, and therefore He could not
SUITE to my purpose in that case. But Carolus Gustavus His Nephew, had them so;
and He it was that I mentioned, and not the Other: As may be seen in my
Collectio Geniturarum, fol. 89. The very place which this my Antagonist is
offended at, though it be not quoted by him. Of this Error therefore, my
Adversary, if he be not a Presbyterian, must needs Repent.

I. CAROLUS GUSTAVUS, King of Sweden.


. 120. THis great Prince his Geniture does not meanly plead for the Honor and
Power of Cardinal Signs upon the Angles of a Nativity. Not only as the Native
from a Private Gentleman (in a manner) came to be advanced to the Honor and
Power of a Throne, or Kingdom, as he was; and that by a strange accident too,
viz. By the Resignation of Queen Christina of Sweden, his Uncles Daughter. (It
is not an ordinary or common thing for Princes to part with their Scepters or
Diadems) but also, for his extraordinary Prowess; and ever to be admired Acts
in War, against the Kings of Poland and Denmark, Duke of Brandenburgh, States
of Holland, etc. all at a time. He was esteemed for the space he Reigned, the
Scanderbag of Christendom, and put it into many terrible Feverish Fits. He
came to the Crown in June 1654. And in February 1659. He died in the Island of
Funen. His Empire was but short, yet very violent: and his Story will ever
remain the wonder of Princes and Learned Men. It Is none of my business here to
Register all his Stupendous Acts. It Is sufficient they were Cardinal; and like
those Signs possessing the Angles of his Illustrious Geniture.

II. The Great Duke of GUISE.


. 121. IF my Reader be desirous to acquaint himself with the Glorious Heroic
and Daring Actions of this Great Prince, the better to see, and consider
thereby, how they are answered (in a great measure) by the Cardinal Signs on
all the Angles of his Geniture; He may read them at large in his Memoirs,
Printed and Published in the English Tongue some years since, and commonly to
be had among the Booksellers. I mention it only for a proof of the thing in
question, and to fortify the Aphorism impugned by my Antagonist. But this not
to exclude the Force and Power of other eminent Arguments very observable
therein. Here are, you see, no less than three Planets in Cardinal Signs,
besides their possession of the Angles: The Sun is in his exaltation, in
Horoscopo, in Sextile to the Moon; Saturn is in Aries, in Sextile of Luna
likewise. And benign Jupiter is with spica Virginis. All which have eminent
signification of wonderful Actions; and, with the other, render the Nativity
Stupend and Prodigious, and so were the Life and Actions of this Valliant and
puissant Prince.

III. The most Reverend Archbishop LAUD.


. 122. THis Excellent Prelate, and most Pious Martyr of the Church; the great
promoter of Learning (as may be seen by his many Noble Gifts to the Vniversitiy
of Oxford) and Envy of an enraging Multitude; was born for Great and Glorious
Actions, and to arrive at great Dignity, (which he did, though but of mean
Descent and Parentage) agreeable to the Cardinal Signs on the Angles of his
Scheme. Never was any Reverend worthy Man more Teased and Worried, than he was,
as well by the Learned as the Rabble. Prin, Peter's, etc. Spit their Venom at
him to purpose, when upon his Trial, and under the greatest Afflictions* As may
be seen in that Book, called Canterburies Doom; set forth by Prin himself. The
Rabble-Rout (God knows by what Anarchical and Shismatical Instruments set on)
would have destroyed him without a Trial. And, accordingly flockt to Lambeth in
great Multitudes, threatening to Stone him, and pull his Palace down about his
Ears. The Invidious long Parliament designing to curry Favor with, and please
the Multitude, at length agree to make an Ordinance, whereby this admirable Man
is Murdered. I know that there is something else besides Cardinal Signs on all
the Angles, to countenance these violences. I will also grant my Antagonist
that such nice and curious, nay, astonishing particulars, could not be foreseen
by Astrology: Nor know I any Astrologer that ever did pretend to go so far in
his praedictions. Howbeit, He must be most stupidly blind that cannot plainly
discover the cause of a popular Rage, and general Violence, in this Prodigious
Nativity. This most Reverend and Pious Native, seems to have his sufferings
somewhat parallel, to Him, who cried out to the Multitude, Are ye come out as
against a Thief, with Swords and Staves to take Me? Mat. 26. Our blessed Lord
and Savior.

IV. The late Lord Treasurer CLIFFORD.


. 123. I Shall not offer any injury at all either to the Honor and Memory of
this Noble Native, if I shall say, That of a private Gentleman, and merely from
his own Merits, He came into the Favor of his Prince, who employing him in
several Embassies and Affairs beyond the Seas, which he discharged with
Prudence, and great Faithfulness: from whence at length he came to be the Prime
Minister of State in England. Which great and very remarkable advancement this
his Geniture does most admirably discover; (partly) by having the Cardinal
Signs possessing all the Angles thereof. Few private Persons are known to
arrive at such Eminent Honor and Grandeur: Few of them are capable of such
Stupendous Advancements. -- You must remember (good Reader) that I am not now
Calculating this most Honorable Persons Nativity, (though I must confess I had
once the Honor to do it) nor do I intend to consider it so far, as to compare
it with all the Parts of his Life; which were, both, very Eminent and Various,
and generally known to be so, by all the Intelligent part of the Kingdom. I
only produce it here, as an Argument, strong, and powerful, to Evince the
Influence and Energie of Cardinal Signs upon the Angles: That being the
particular business in question.

V. Mr. THOMAS HOBBS of Malmsbury.


. 124. THis Excellent Native, and profound Philosopher, was but of private, or
mean Birth (as I have been told) yet, by his excellent Skill in Languages and
Sciences, He mightily advanced in Reputation, and grew into the acquaintance
and Favor of diverse of the greatest Personages, as well of other Nations, as
of our Own. And though he were no Dignitory of the Church; or Eminent at the
Bar; or ever practiced in the Noble Paths of Hippocrates and Galen, (advantages
indeed, which he never coveted) yet he arrived at the Honor of Great Caesar's
Favor: who, out of His Royal Bounty, and Innate Love and Regard to Learning;
and in consideration of this Natives vast parts; allowed him 200 l. per annum,
during his Life. A Princely Munificence! Now, who ever he be that considers
well the manner of this Learned Natives Life; (which notwithstanding his
Eminent Acquisitions, and large Intellectual Abilities, and how that he was
more affected with the Barren name of a Philosopher, than with any of the
Honorable and Spreading Titles that spring from the Court, Church, or the Law,
etc.) will believe with me, that Cardinal Signs on the Angles of a Nativity are
of no small signification in the Reputations, Actions, and Affairs of men.

VI. Mr. HENRY BURTON, of Christ-Church Oxon; Author of the Anatomy of
Melancholy.


. 125. MR. Henry Burton, a Native of Leicestershire, and the Author of that
most admirable work, entitled the Anatomy of Melancholy, Published under the
assumed name of Democritus Junior; was, in a manner, a Collegian all his days;
as my Antagonist says of the Learned Doctor Henry More. (But he was never the
worse for that) and, by the numerous Quotations made use of in the aforesaid
excellent Book, may be supposed to have been as Melancholy, and to have read
as many Authors. He had in and Doctor More (as we have supposed, and believe)
had there. is 's delight, but 's detriment. -- Dr. More, was, and is, an Enemy
to Astrology; Mr. Burton was not only a great Friend unto it, but a most
excellent Proficient in it: He so much approved of it, that he advised a man
troubled with Melancholy, to Calculate a Nativity, to divert at least, if not
to banish that Surly Humor. Nay, his respect unto this Noble Art was such,
that (like another Septimus Severus) He ordered his Nativity to be inscribed on
his Monument, Septimus Severus the Emperor, being Excellently acquainted with
Astrology, and considering his Nativity before his Expedition into England, he
caused That, and This Praediction together, to be Inscribed in the Roof of his
Judicial Palace, (as a Monument of his knowledge herein -- That He should
never return again. According to which Praediction He died at York in England;
after He had Ruled the Empire 18 years.
where he now lies Buried at Christ-Church in Oxford: of which Royal Foundation
he was a Student and Fellow.

In his life time he had delivered it scatteringly in that his worthy work. In
p. 3. of his Epistle thereunto, you will find these words. -- I never Travailed
but in Map or Chard, in which my unconfined thoughts have freely expatiated, as
having ever been especially delighted with the Study of Cosmography. Saturn was
Lord of my Geniture, culminating, etc. And Mars principal significator of my
Manners, in partil Conjunction with mine Ascendant. Both fortunate in their
Houses, etc. I am not Poor, I am not Rich; nihil est, nihil de est; I have
Little, I want Nothing. All my Treasure lies in Minerva's Tower. -- And, in
page 16. of the same Learned Epistle, he says, -- A good Divine, either is, or
ought to be a good Physician. A Divine in this compound mixed Malady
[Melancholly] can do little alone: A Physician in some kind of Maladies much
less: Both make an absolute cure. Alterius sic altera poscit Opem. Hor. And
it is proper to them both; and I hope not unbeseeming me, who am by Profession a
Divine; by my Inclination a Physician. I had Jupiter in my Sixth House. I can
say with Beroaldus, non sum Medicus, nec Medicinae prorsus expers: In the
Theory of Physic I have taken some pains, etc.

. 126. Thus you see, this thrice Learned Person was not ashamed of his
Geniture, or afraid to own his Stars; though by them (for so it pleased the
God and King of Stars, to order his uncertain Horoscope) he was condemned to a
Collegiate private Life most of his days; ( Saturn was not Lord of his Geniture
for nothing.) Nor did he offer for this once to quarrel with his Stars, or
contend against the Dear Urania.

And here, I cannot but call to mind, how, and by what kind of accident, I came
first to Study the delightful, yet abstruse Art of Astrology; by the Practice
whereof I have gained many Enemies; and among the rest, the ill Opinion of this
my Learned Antagonist. And the true proximate occasion was thus, -- In the year
1650, as I well remember, I was one night reading in my Bed (as it was my
custom then to do, in some Book or other) in the Anatomy of Melancholy: And
coming to this passage of the Author, which I have but just now cited, viz. Of
his having Jupiter in the Sixth House, which made him a Physician: I was really
non-plust, and Planet-struck for that bout; and forced to lay aside my Book:
being unwilling to read what I could not understand. I then endeavored to go
to my Rest, but in vain; My active Genius was Watchful, and constantly
solicited me, even in my Dreams, to enquire, and discover if I could, what
Jupiter in the Sixth House meant? Nor could I be at quiet when awake, until I
had received some satisfaction about it. I had then (and blessed be God that I
had) some small acquaintance with the Learned Dr. Nicholas Fisk, unto whom I
repaired and imparted my difficulty: who presently gave me such satisfaction in
the Point, as I was then capable of receiving; that I hold my self obliged,
even in Gratitude, to own and remember his civilities; which was so agreeable
and delightful to me, that from the same time I became his Pupil, and that
little of Astrology which I understand, I Learnt from Him.

. 127. The Reader will, I hope excuse me for this Digression, it being somewhat
irrelative to my present purpose. For my business in the inserting of this
Learned Man's Geniture, was not to tell Stories, but to Evidence the Energie
and Power of Cardinal Signs, when placed upon the Angles of a Nativity. And,
yet, I am apt to think my Reader (unles he be over severe) will not esteem this
short History unworthy the Recording.

This Excellent Nativity was courteously given me by my worthy Friend George
Ent Esquire (lately deceased) Son to the Excellently Learned Sir George Ent,
(sometime) President of the King's College of Physicians.

VII. MICHAEL NOSTRADAMUS Physician and Astroloster.


. 128. OUr Aphorism impugned receives great confirmation from the Geniture of
the Learned and Famous Michael Nostradamus also. This is a Nativity somewhat
like to the Reverend Mr. Burtons. But this Native having the Sun in the Medium
Caeli, Indicated to him greater and more public Honors whilst living; though
Mr. Burtons be every whit as Eminent for Fame Post-Mortem; yet both were
Diurnal Genitures. The Sun is not so Glorious, (though he may be as Clear) at
eight a clock in the Morning, as at Noon. A Meridian Glory is always the
greatest, and the most dazzling. This Native was Physician to three Kings of
France; (no small Honor I assure you) and was Author of those Stupendous
Prophecies which pass under his name. They were of late years turned into
English by Dr. Theophilus Garencieres. The Book has procured him both a good,
and a bad Fame. His. was Retrograde, in a popular of. but in. of the three
Superior Planets,.. * The One advanced, the Other lessened his esteem. But yet
his Angles had Cardinal Signs on them.

VIII. GREGORY LOPEZ, the Spanish Hermit.


. 129. FOr a Man to forsake Virtue and a Religious Life, with all its Ties and
Obligations, and to pursue the Pleasures and pleasing Vanities of the World, is
no wonder at all; because the strictness and austere injunctions of the One,
are so contrary and averse to Flesh and Blood: and the allurements and
inticements of the Other are so agreeable to Men's Appetites and Desires, that
they think they can never Surfeit of them. But, for a Man in the prime of his
time, in the Flower of his Age, viz. At Twenty One years Old, to forsake the
World, (the only time that people covet to enjoy it) as this Gregory Lopez did;
and to leave all the contents and pleasures, the delightful Charms of all the
deluding Sirens it contains; and this on purpose to Espouse an Hermetical Life,
or Anchoretical State and Strictness: To despise Riches and Honors, and all
other Temporal advantages, (things grievous for Flesh and Blood to part with)
and to covet Hardship, and Want; to expose himself to the extremity of Summers
Dust, and Winters Dirt; to the fierce Scorching of one Season, and the terrible
cold Freezing of the other; This is not only a wonderful and amazing matter in
it self to consider; but a most signal proof, that poor Mortal Men (as God has
been pleased to Engrave it in the large Book of his Creatures) are Governed by
their Complexions, as They, are ordered by the Stars.

. 130. This also is a signal instance of the true and inherent Virtue that
waits or attends upon Cardinal Signs, when they shall be placed on the Angles
of a Nativity. Let other Artists trouble themselves with the peculiar Astral
Causes of Pious Gregory's being in Love with Poverty, and a strict Religious
way of Living: (which in this his Scheme are eminent and visible enough) my
business is only to show, -- That those Natives that have Cardinal Signs on the
Angles of their Geniture, (be their Condition, Birth, and Breeding what it
will,) are still found to be Eminent and Famous in their Generation, for
something or other.

IX. Sir THEODORE MAYERNE, Physician.


. 131. IN the Geniture of this Famous Physician you find all the Cardinal Signs
on Angles, as in the others produced, and therefore does it justify the
Aphorism impleaded. If any man doubt of the Famousness of the Native, I let him
know that he was a Stranger to this Country, being Native of Geneva; yet had
he the Honor to be Primier Physician to King James of ever blessed Memory: Nor
was he Famous only for Learning and Honor, but Notable for Dishonor too: For
being a great enquirer into the secrets of Nature, and a lover of Chemistry,
with those of the first Age wherein that curious Art was Studied in these
Northern parts; He was (with the worthy Quercetan) Banished Paris, for an
Innovator in Physic, etc. The Edict against him you may see Printed in an
English Book, Entitled, Medela Medicinae. These opposite instances of this
Learned Natives Fame, do most remarkably plead for the Energie of Cardinal
Signs upon Angles: which is the thing to be proved.

X. The Geniture of OLIVER CROMWELL.


. 132. TO make my Decade of instances complete, pray take this Famous Geniture
to do it: it is as good a proof of the Argument I labor to defend as any of
the rest I have produced. This Prodigious Native had all the Angles of his
Scheme adorned with Cardinal Signs. His mean Birth (I speak in comparison of
the Grandeur he rose to, for otherwise it was not mean) and wonderful
Advancements are sufficiently known: and, I think I may say, will scarce ever
be forgotten. I shall speak little more of this Stupendous Geniture, but refer
my Reader to what I many years since, have wrote and published thereof, in my
Collection of Genitures. -- And so I conclude this my Denary Circle of
instances for proof of the Argument contended against, (yea, even Laughed at)
by my Antagonist: And do from all of them affirm it for a natural Truth, (and
no Laughing matter or Trifle, by my Opponents Favor) That Cardinal Signs on
the Angles of a Nativity, do ever denote persons so Born to be Famous, and that
publicly too, in one Kind or Other.

. 133. In the room of these Ten Genitures, I could have produced many Scores,
of the same kind, had it been necessary so to have done. But these are
super-sufficient to support the matter in question; if any thing at least, will
satisfy some sort of Men. For, in every One of these Natives, you will find
something or other very Eminent, and perhaps Prodigious.

I. Carolus Gustavus King of Sweden, was Eminent in his coming to the Crown,
and then proved a great Warrior, and a most vigilant Active Prince. II. The
Duke of Guise, was a Prince of most Eximious Valor, and of Stupendous Daring
attempts. See his Memoirs. III. Archbishop Laud, a most profound Scholar, a
most Pious Prelate, and a Glorious Martyr. The Breath of an enraged Multitude
ruined Him. IV. The Lord Treasurer Clifford, raised by his Merits: An Excellent
Statesman, an Honorable Councellor; and a Faithful, Loyal Subject. V. Mr.
Thomas Hobbs, an admirable Philosopher, and wonder of his Age. Refused Honors
and Preferments. In his Life somewhat Hermetical. VI. Mr. Henry Burton, a
Living Library, an University of Learning. No Art or Science was he stranger
to; as his Learned Book proves. VII. Michael Nostradamus, a great Philosopher
and Physician; a Man of most Miraculous and Amazing Notions. VIII. Gregory
Lopez, an Hermit, and a wonderful example of Piety, Obedience, Charity and
contempt of the World. IX. Sir Theodore Mayerne; an Excellent Physician, and a
sufferer for being one of the first that made known the Noble Art of Chemistry.
X. Oliver Cromwell, Famous by his Rebellion, as was ingeniously observed by the
Learned Olearius in his Letter to my Honored Friend and Patron, Sir Edward
Dering, (when he returned him this Nativity in requital for his Civility in
imparting the King of Swedens, etc. The words of his Letter animadverting upon
this Nativity are These, --. in Horoscopo and sub finem proprii signi
stimulavit hominem ad arma capienda etiam contra Superiores ausu Saturnino ob
oppositionem. aperuitque homini viam ad tantum gravitatis fastigium. So that it
appears that this Learned man (who was excellently Skilled in Astrology as well
as all other parts of Learning) took notice of that remarkable. of. and. from
Cardinal Signs on the prime Angles of his Geniture; made the more Famous by.
his being in a Cardinal Sign also, in. to them both.
. 134. I could (I say again) for these X. Genitures have produced you as many
Scores; and all of them of Cardinal Signs on all the Angles; and all belonging
to Men of Fame, Good or Bad. In which number I might have shown you the
Notorious Nativities of the Salamanca Doctor, Captain Bedloe, Tom. Dangerfield,
Peter Gill, Sir William Wallers Constable; with a great number of other such
profligate Wretches: But I was loath to Nauseate my worthy Readers Eyes with
their Schemes, or their Ears with their horrid Stories. And yet I must tell you
that even Wicked as well as Worthy Instances, prove the Argument in Question.

. 135. Now, I say it here again, unless my Antagonist will be pleased to
produce, or indeed can produce, as many Nativities (known to be true, as these
I assure him are, to a very small matter, if not absolutely so.) Of persons
Born with the Cardinal Signs on all the Angles, That have not been Famous in
their Lives and Actions, in One kind or Other, and that to popular Notice; He
must needs yield the Argument and own the virtue of Cardinal Signs, chiefly
when posited upon the Angles of a Nativity.

. 136. And here I had resolved to have lain down my Pen; but finding how my
Antagonist magnifies himself against Astrologers very unreasonably, in p. 161.
I held my self constrained to make some further reply to him. He says, The
pretenders to Astrology go beyond the Wisest Patriachs and Founders of their
Art. They exceed the Limits of their Science; and Sentence is passed against
them by their own Judges. And to prove this, he vouchsafes to name two of Them,
viz. Ptolemy and Iunctinus. -- You may remember I have, but a little before,
refuted my Opponents Opinion of these two Learned Persons touching their
denying the Doctrine of Genitures. I shall now enquire what farther service or
assistance they are able to afford him for the strengthening his present
pretenses

. 137. Ptolemy (says this Gentleman) tells us in his first Aphorism, That
Generals only can be foretold by Art, and those alone who are Divinely
inspired, are able to praedict particular Events. An Astrologer may tell the
Propension and Inclination of a Man from his natural Temperature, and this from
the Stars. But he cannot from that general Inclination, tell what determinate
Effects will ensue. He ought to content himself with a general Judgment, and
not be definitive in special cases, in particular and individual accidents.
This (says he) is the Decision of the great Father of Astrologers.

Unto all which I do not know one Astrologer that will not most readily set his
Hand and Seal. And how then can this make against Astrologers? or any way
favor their Adversaries Cause.

. 138. Why, (says my Oponent) it makes against the Doctrine of Horary
Questions, which descend even to the most particular and personal Affairs. --
He goes on, If this Doctrine of Ptolemy's be true, what resolution is to be
expected about the Marriage of such an Individual Couple? The particular Events
of this Famous Voyage? That Counselors Cause? This Merchants Adventure? That
Soldiers Engagement, etc. -- And, why did not he put in, of that Patients
Distemper too? Which sure he would have done, but that he had before granted,
That the careful observing, and due attending of the Times of the Heavenly
Aspects and Influences, are very useful in Physic. p. 117. And how can they be
useful in Physic, I pray, and not in other Affairs relating to Health or
Profit? Since the times of the Aspects and Influences are Universally
Operarive, and may as well, and as certainly be observed in These, as in the
other. Heaven has as many Salutiferous Aspects, and Influences, as it has
Valetudinary: and must therefore be useful and effective to Mankind, in the One
sense as well as the Other, we being subject to both equally.

. 136. No! says my Antagonist, that must not be admitted: For then we allow of,
and introduce Horary Questions. A thing Ptolemy is against, if at least my
Opponent do not mis-represent him. But, Sir, are you sure that Ptolemy is
against Horary Questions? Yes, says he, not only in the First Aphorism (as you
have heard) but in the Fifth too: Which runs in these words, -- Potest qui
seieus est, multos stellarum effectus avertere, quando naturam earum noverit,
ac seipsum ante illorum eventum praeparare. A wise Man may avert many (not all)
the effects of the Stars, when he knowing their Natures, does happily Arm and
prepare himself before the happening of the Event.

. 140. I am glad my Antagonist allows the Centiloquium to be Ptolemy's. for
by that Concession I am armed powerfully to demand of him, how he knows Ptolemy
to be against Horary Questions? For if the Centiloquium be his, the Question is
at an End. Let him be pleased to peruse these several Aphorisms of Ptolemy,
seriously at his leisure, viz. the 14.17.28.32.45.57.64.83.90.91.93.94.97. And
then tell me whether Ptolemy does Reprobate the Doctrine of Horary Questions?
And let him also consider what will become of all his Florid Nothings written
against them.

. 141. But, I beseech you Sir, what Astrologer is he, who pretends, in
opposition to Ptolemy, to foretell particular Events? As for the several
seeming Musical Objections here brought, if they are rightly considered and
examined there is nothing of Harmony in them. If by his Individual couple in
Marriage, he means a couple already Contracted; It is then no Question in
Astrology; if they are not contracted, they are no Individual couple. So that
the Objection is (as Dr. H. More says of Astrology) a mere Sonorous Nothing.

. 142. Then for the Seamans Voyage objected; no man, sure, was ever so Mad as
to pretend to Praedict the particular Events thereof. The Astrologer can only
consult in the General, whether Successful, or unkind? He cannot tell how far
Successful or disadvantageous? He may as well pretend particularly to know when
he shall arrive at Cales, Lisbon, Iamaica, etc. which I acknowledge with
Ptolemy, is not Science, but Witchcraft to do. But I hope to satisfy the World
in this Point more fully in my Astrological Seaman. In the mean time, I shall
adventure to affirm, that --

. 143. He that contends against Horary Questions, are vouches Ptolemy for his
Authority does nothing but Fish in the Air, And we may easily guess what a Fry
he is like to catch, or be Master of.

. 144. I wonder that any man of Learning should offer to use Ptolemy thus! But
this is of an equal Stamp and Currency for Truth, with his being brought in to
oppose the Doctrine of Genitures, as well of Men as of Buildings. -- Poor
Ptolemy, you see, is dealt ill by in both! And much worse than my Antagonist
charges Me to have dealt with the Learned Gassendus. I would advise all Persons
for the future, that shall pretend to write against Horary Questions; First to
consult Haly, and Bonatus, those Learned and Volluminous Authors, who of all
Others have most liberally Ascerted and most largely Taught them. And when they
have fairly refuted these Two, I will then say, They may be called the
Cozen-Germans of Hercules. In the mean time we will keep unto the Truth of what
Ptolemy warrants concerning Horary Questions, and to what our Assiduous
practice confirms; and that sometimes even to Amazement.

. 145. Having found how unfit Ptolemy is for the ungrateful service which my
Author has put him upon, we will hear what he says from Iunctine. And here he
acquaints us, for the support of the present Objection, That ( p. 164.)
Iunctine says -- Those Astrologers who will needs know, and praedict all kinds
of particulars, are Fools. -- Marry, and so say I. And what Astrologer is there
does my Adversary suppose, that will offer to gainsay Honest Junctinus in this?
For my own part, I shall be so far from denying it, that I will even adventure
to add to it, and enlarge Iunctinus's Censure of such kind of Men, viz. They
are, not only the greatest of Fools, but of Madmen too! For what is a poor
simple Man, whose Breath is in his Nostrils, and cannot absolutely promise
himself to meet the Sun the next day: (vile Dust and Ashes that he is!) What is
he, I say, That he should dare presume to Predict all Things? To do so, is the
Privilege of a Deity only. And although some advantage may be derived to Men
from Horary Questions; yet no Man was ever yet so Bold and Daring, (yet some
have been too much guilty of the Bold extremity) as to pretend to know, and
praedict All Particulars.

. 146. Some there are we know, even in this Age, as well as in Iunctines time,
that may possibly have screwed their Pegs too high; and may have strained their
Art to Pretenses unjust, and unlawful. Let Them answer for Themselves, I will
be none of Their Advocate. I am sure the Honest Astrologer that makes Truth his
Aim, and not Worldly advantages, will never become one of Iunctines Fools: For
he, (as all the Honest Arabians were wont) will begin, and pursue his practice,
not with an impudent positiveness, but with a (...), and an humble wary hopes
and probability of meeting an effect of the matter in Question.

. 147. But my Antagonist being in good humor says, the same unhappiness
attends the Noble professions of Law and Physic, as does Astrology: and also
that Divinity it self is not free from such Misfortunes. And why then should
One be recriminated upon, and made chargeable with the injury, more than
another? since all are equally liable? Let the Sober Honest men of all
professions be encouraged, and the Knaves and Abusers of Science, only,
condemned and exploded. For so it becomes Men to Act.

. 148. It is a great Favor afforded us by the God of Stars, that we know any
thing at all of the Caelestial Movers, and of their Influences. And we ought to
be modest in our Dealing with those Dazzling Glorious Creatures, the Stars. We
have Nimble, Sharp, Quick-sighted Adversaries, who are coustantly upon the
Watch, and lie in Ambush to Ensnare us.

. 149. We know the Influences of the Stars, are not (as Iunctine wisely and
worthily observes) like the commands of the Praetors; but may, (in some measure
at least) be resisted by Ptolemy 's wise Man. For they are in subjection to the
command and will of God, their Creator, even as we our selves. But yet, for all
this, we know there is verity in Horary Questions; provided the Scheme be
Radical, and by the Artist honestly considered and Judged: And, also that they
are defended, and taught by Ptolemy, and (as he has made appear) no where
denied by Iunctine. Both which Anthors my Antagonist is pleased to take for his
Seconds in this Quarrel; although they stand him in no stead, but have both
failed to own him, and his Cause.

. 150. If my Antagonist will still continue to impugn the Doctrine of
Genitures, and Horary Questions, and yet allow of Astrology (as you see he
does) what a strange kind of Astrology will he leave us? or what a Monster will
he make this Noble Art appear, might he be allowed thus to Lacerate it? He
would afford us an Astrology, but what sort of one, we know nor? He will be
content to indulge us the Name of Astrology; for the matter or substance
thereof, we must (like Diego's Legatees) find that where we please.

. 151. Let my Learned Antagonist before he Destroy our Principles, show us his
own; write his Introduction, and give us such Rules as he would have us to
follow: And if they appear to be better, truer, and more Solid, than Those we
have already, I do hereby promise him to become his Disciple. (I am sure he is
a Gamaliel in other things, at whose Feet I should not be ashamed to sit and
Learn.) For I profess my self (now after a more than XXX. years Study) to be
but an Enquirer still; and I fear me, must be content so to die: Non obstante
any new Discoveries my Antagonist shall please to make therein.

. 152. My Antagonist has but one Lash more at me as I can find, and that is in
p. 270. In these words. Those Astrologers who are subject to a bad Fate (though
their Skill may be good) are apt to Err in their Judgments ( it is one of the
Aphorisms in Gadbury) a ticklish business indeed! We had need first consult Mr.
Astrologers Nativity, before we desire him to search into our own. In answer
whereto, I demand, does He think it impossible for an Astrologer to be liable
to a bad Fate? If He do, my beforementioned late unhappy Troubles (at my Cost)
resolves his Doubt. Nor is there any need for Him to consult Mr. Astrologers
Nativity before he go to him; Common Fame will inform him whether he be
Laboring under good or bad Influences; as it does of a Lawyer, Physician,
Merchant, etc. But to retort his witty Quibble, if himself be ignorant of
Astrology, to what purpose would he consult the Astrologers Nativity? If he
understand it, Then may he be his Own Astrologer, and save the labor of going
any where else. Oh! the wondrous Wit of an Enemy to Astrology! What a ticklish
business has he got by the end to make himself Sport withal? or rather to
render himself a Sport to Others? If neither Divine, Physician, or Lawyer be at
all times equally capable of giving Sound and Unerring Advise or Council, Then
neither is the Astrologer. Sed verum prius, Ergo, etc. And thus we have freed
our other Innocent Aphorism again, and do affirm it (as before) for a splendid
Verity.

. 153. I have now done: and that something more than at First I intended; and,
it may be, more than my Antagonist expected. And shall leave his more numerous
Objections against Astrology in General, to be answered by some more able Pen
and Brain. Resting satisfied to have said thus much, or little rather, in
defense of my self and Labors, which I found most unjustly, and unreasonably
assaulted.

FINIS.

