engraved portrait of Timothy Manlove TIMOTHEUS MANLOVE Med: licentiatus Divini
animi nuncius, et interpres non ineligans Imortalitatis animae non ita pridem
vindex Iam conscius August 3: Anno Dom^: 1699. Aetat vero: 37 Proematuro fato
cessit


THE COMFORTS OF Divine Love. Preached upon the Occasion of the much Lamented
DEATH Of the Reverend Mr. Timothy Manlove. With His Character, Done by another
Hand.

LONDON: Printed for Tho. Parkhurst at the Bible and Three Crowns in Cheapside
near Mercers-Chapel. And Sarah Button Bookseller at New Castle upon Tyne, 1700.

A Short Character of Mr. Timothy Manlove.
HE was a Man of a fine Complexion, and comely Aspect: Of pregnant Parts, and
a ready Wit, which made his Conversation very pleasant, and engaging.

He had a clear Head, and an admirable Capacity, and Skill to digest things in
their proper, exactest Order. His Judgment was correct, and solid; his Memory
strong, and tenacious; his Invention so fruitful and ready, as always to
furnish him with a copiousness of Words to express himself by; and his
Expressions were full and well Chosen.

He was considerable in his Learning, which he was improving in daily.

Being designed for a Physician before he studied Divinity, he had attained to
a great Skill in the Niceties of that Art, and practiced it with Ease, as well
as Success.

He was every way qualified as a Divine. He had all the Accomplishments of a
Preacher, and the Graces of Pulpit-Oratory: An excellent Mien, a free
Elocution, an unaffected Gravity, and a becoming Seriousness; all which set off
what he delivered with very great Ornament.

His Voice was clear, and regular; strong and lively, and exactly modeled into
a sweet harmonious Pronunciation: And as he had the Voice of a Divine Charmer,
so he charmed wisely. He did not amuse his Hearers with a Train of Pompous
Words, but edified them with plain, practical Discourses, most suitable to the
Noble Simplicity of the Gospel.

He had a great Sense of Religion upon his Mind, and especially a composed,
reverent, and heavenly Deportment in Prayer; in which his very Look, as well as
Expressions, did excite to the most serious Devotion.

There never seemed to be a cloud, either upon his Thoughts, or Affections, in
his Public Exercises; He had flame and vigor to bear him out to the Last, and
he rather chose to leave off with Affection, than to proceed with Flatness.

The Last Day he appeared in Public, he was observed in Prayer to have the
most profound Thoughts, and exalted Expressions of the Divine Attributes; and
in his Last Sermon, with the most affectionate sacred Eloquence, he displayed
the Happiness of Heaven. Preaching (from Heb. 2.3.) upon the Doctrine of the
Great Salvation that Christ came to declare to the World, which within a few
Days after, he left his mournful Hearers to apply.

TO THE READER.
THE following Discourse was Preached without the least Thought of offering it
to Public View: And yet I was persuaded to yield to the Publication of it, to
prevent the Printing of more imperfect Notes.

The Excellency of the Subject sets it above all the supposed Ornaments of the
Finery of Words or Rhetoric: The great thing that I minded in the Preaching
it, was only to Represent it in plain Intelligible Words. To have attempted any
thing more, would have been a wrong to the Matter, which has so great a Luster
in it self, that it needs to borrow nothing from Art. And if any thing of that
had been offered, it would have had no better Success, then the laying the
Dawbery of Paint upon a Resplendent Diamond, which would cloud and darken its
Refulgent Brightness.

Now Reader, since thou have it in thy Hand, do not seek for that which was
never intended Thee, but consider seriously the Matter, and work it upon thy
Heart, till thou be rooted and grounded in a deep Sense of Gods Love, that so
thou ma^st be filled with Love to Him. This is a Subject worthy of thy Study,
and has in it such admirable Variety, as will make it always Pleasant without
Weariness, and will also furnish. Thee with a Cordial in thy deepest Spiritual
Distresses. That this little Discourse may be thus useful to Thee, is the
Earnest Prayer of

The unfeigned Desirer of thy Spiritual Happiness, R. Gilpin.

SERMON I.
ROMANS VIII. 35, 36, 37, 38, 39. Who shall separate us from the Love of Christ?
Shall tribulation, or distress, or persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or
peril, or sword?

(As it is written, For thy sake we are killed all the Day long; we are
accounted as Sheep for the slaughter.)

Nay in all things we are more than Conquerors, through him that loved us.

For I am persuaded, that neither death, nor life, nor angels, nor
principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come,

Nor height, nor depth, nor any other Creature, shall be able to separate us
from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord.


MY last Discourses to you, were an Explication of that great Command and
Counsel of our Blessed Lord Jesus; Of striving to enter in at the strait Gate.
In my Directions to you for your regular pursuit of this important Charge,
among other things I recommended to you the Apostle Paul's Prescription, Gal.
5.16. Walk in the Spirit, and ye shall not fulfill the Lust of the Flesh.

It was my Purpose at this Time to have made a further Progress in that Matter,
but having received an Intimation, that my dear Brother and Fellow. Labourer
now Deceased; had found such Comfort in his Meditations on this Scripture in
his Prospect of Death, that he expressed his Desires, that his Funeral Sermon
might be upon this Text: His pious Desire (that others might ^e comforted with
the Comfort where with he was comforted of God) prevailed with me (though upon
a short Warning) to turn my Thoughts to this Scripture, and the rather, because
(your Hearts being softened by this mournful Providence) the Truth contained i^
this Text might possibly make the dee^er Impression upon you.

I cannot let you into the full Understanding of the Apostles Triumphant
Conclusion, except I lead you to the first Rise and Head of it. In ver. 1. He
give us the Consequence of his former Doctrine, he had largely asserted and
proved in the foregoing Chapters, That we are justified by Grace, and freed
from the Law. From these Truths he lays down this comfortable Conclusion as
most evident and certain. There is therefore now no Condemnation to them which
are in Christ Jesus. This Conclusion is full: No Condemnation, neither by God,
nor Law, nor Conscience; and it is universally true to all that are in Christ.

But because this Conclusion is the Cornerstone, and must sustain the weight
of all the superstructure, he first limits it to those that are in Christ, and
explains what he means by giving them their true Character. They walk not after
the Flesh, but after the Spirit.

Next he proves his Assertion, by its Parts. 1. That there is no Condemnation
to such. This he argues in the Four following Verses. His Argument is this, the
condemning Law is superseded, he grants there was a Covenant of Works, which
being broken, was to us a Law of Sin and Death. It charged us with Sin, and
that dueness of the Curse. But then he shows there is another Law (which he
calls a Law of the Spirit of Life) that is a Covenant of Grace, promising Life,
as also the Assistance of the Spirit: And this Law being a remedying Law sets
us free from the former.

2. The Limitation and Character of the Persons to whom this Freedom is
limited, he proves and explains in the following Verses, showing that it must
be the natural Genius and Temper of those that are in Christ, to mind the
things of the Spirit; as those that are after the Flesh will naturally mind the
things of the Flesh, ver. 5.

From the great Love of God, and the sure Foundation of it, he proceeds to make
some Inferences, as 1. That then we are Debtors to God in point of Holiness,
ver. 12. and in ver. 31. He heaps up many Inferences of Consolation.

1. That if God be thus engaged to be for us as our Father and Protector, none
can be against us to our hurt.

2. He infers, that seeing God has given us Christ, we may expect what ever
shall be necessary for the Compleatment of our Happiness.

3. He infers, that the malicious or erroneous Accusations of Men, are of no
Consideration, ver. 33. Who shall lay any thing to the Charge of Gods Elect?
Because, 1. There is no Tribunal but Gods, and if he acquit us, it is no matter
who Condemns us. 2. Christ did all his Work of Redemption completely, ver. 34.
Not only Dying, but Rising again to make Intercession for us.

4. Hence he infers in a Triumphant Assurance, the impossibility of our
Separation from the Love of God, ver. 35. Who shall separate us from the Love
of God? etc. That the Strength of this Inference may more fully appear, I shall
distinctly Note these Particulars.

1. The Subject spoken of, The Love of God. Whether it be God's Love to us, or
our Love to God is questioned; some think both are intended, and that it is
impossible that it should fail on either Part. But surely Gods Love to us is
chiefly intended: For on our part in it self it is too possible, that under such
Temptations our Love and Faith might fail. But the impossibility arises from
God's Will: He will not suffer our Love to fail. So that ultimately the not
failing of our Love, is resolved into Gods unchangeable Love. And beside the
Expressions of the last Verse of this Chapter. The Love of God which is in
Christ Jesus our Lord, does clearly Point at Gods Love to us.

2. The next thing asserted is our Non-Separation from this Love. The Word in
the Greek (...) is the same Word that is used, Mat. 19.6. with respect to the
Jewish Divorces. So that the meaning is, Though Gods Love may sometime be
hidden, yet there will never be a Divorce or Eternal Separation.

3. The Impossibility of this Separation appears in this Discourse two Ways.

1. By an Enumeration of those things that might seem possible to effect a
Separation, but cannot; these the Apostle ranges into Two Classes. 1. No kind
or degrees of Sufferings. Here he reckons up several hard things. Shall
tribulation, distress, etc? 2. No outward Powers. Neither fear of Death, nor
hope of Life, nor Devils, nor persecuting Rulers, nor height of Advancement,
nor depth of Ignominy and Reproaches; and least any thing else should be
pretended, he adds, nor any other Creature, as an, etc. including all.

2. The Impossibility of this Separation is implied in his manner of speaking
by continued Interrogation, Who shall separate? As also by his Assurance, I am
persuaded; (...) though it sometime signify no more than a Moral Persuasion,
yet here it signifies undoubted Assurance, like the Phrase in Romans 14.14. and 2 Timothy 2.12. I know and am persuaded.

The Doctrine I shall now draw out of these Words, is this;

The Consideration of the Infiniteness and Unchangeableness of God's Love, is
sufficient to guard our Hearts from all Affrightments, that may arise from all
that may befall us in this World.

To make way for the Application of this Truth, I shall explain and prove these
Three Things.

I. That God's Love to Elect Believers is Infinite.

II. That this Love of God is Unchangeable.

III. That the Consideration of Gods Infinite and Unchangeable Love, is a sweet
Cordial in all Distresses, and a Guard against all Affrightments of Fear, to
all that are in Christ.

I. That God's Love to Elect Believers is Infinite, admirably Great. All Gods
Attributes, even those that are called Communicable (such as his Power, Wisdom,
Justice, Love, etc.) are in God infinitely, eternally, and unchangeably. His
Love therefore in Scripture is crowned with the Epithet [Great] His great Love
wherewith he loved us, Ephesians. 2.4. His Love, his Power, his Understanding are
commensurate with his Infinite Greatness. Thus David argues, Psalm 147.5. Great
is our Lord, and of great Power: his Understanding is Infinite.

But that we might have a more easy Satisfaction and Apprehension of the Love
of God, the Scripture commends the greatness of Gods Love to us, under Three
Considerations.

The First is by comparing the wonderful Greatness of God, with the Object of
his Love. This Consideration Holy David insists on, Psalm 113.4, 5. The Lord is
high above all Nations, and his Glory above the Heavens: Who is like unto the
Lord our God, who dwells on High? That is, He is so great, that his merciful
regard of the highest created Beings, Things in Heaven, much more of the lower
World, Things on Earth, is so far below his glorious Greatness, that it is a
kind of abasement to him to behold them, ver. 6. He humbles himself, to behold
the Things that are in Heaven, and in the Earth. He humbles himself to behold
these things that are so far below him. That would be a strange unaccountable
Love, that should make a great Prince set his Heart upon a Worm or Fly, to
regard, feed and watch over it; and we are as mean if compared to an Infinite
God. The Nations are as the drop of a Bucket, or the small Dust of the
Balance: They are counted to him as nothing, and if any thing can be lower,
less than nothing, Isa. 40.15, 17. The Inhabitants of the Earth, are but as
Grasshoppers, ver. 22.

This Consideration was David's Meditation in Psalm 8. when his Thoughts were
upon the Wing, mounting upward toward the excellent Glory of the Divine
Majesty, he almost loses the sight of Man. What is Man? v. 4. At last his
Contemplation carries him to an Admiration of Gods Love and Care over so low a
Creature. What is Man? But oh how great is God's Love in being mindful of him,
so as to visit him! Which is further explained by Job 7.17. What is Man that
thou should magnify him! That thou should set thy Heart upon him! That
thou should visit him every Morning! But if we should place Man in an higher
Degree, and consider him as a Servant, yet still Gods Love loses not its
Luster, because at best we are but unprofitable Servants, Luke 17.10. If we
should do all that we are commanded, we do but that which was our Duty to do,
and which we owe to God upon the Right of Creation; yet we merit nothing. God
has no Advantage or Profit by our Service, Job 22.2, 3. Can a Man be
profitable unto God? What gain is it to him that thou make thy ways perfect.

If Man at best be so far below the Desert of God's Love, How great will this
Love appear, if we consider Man as sinful! Thus we are become Enemies, not only
breakers of his Law, but opposite thereto, and withal were helpless, and could
do nothing for our selves. Both these the Apostle takes Notice of, Romans 5.6. as
a transcendant Manifestation of God's Love; and ver. 8. God commends his Love
to us.

2. The Scriptures set forth the greatness of Gods Love, by the great and
wonderful Benefits bestowed on us. We usually measure Love by the Fruits of it.
The Fruits of Gods Love cannot be numbered; particularly the Promises are so
laden with them, that they are justly called exceeding Great and Precious
Promises. In the gross, They are things that pertain unto Life and Godliness, 2
Pet. 1.3. All spiritual Blessings in heavenly Places, Ephesians. 1.3. The Blessings
of this Life and that which is to come, 1 Timothy 4.8. All that is within the
Circumference of Grace and Glory, Psalm 84.11.

3. But above all Gods Love is magnified by the Method, which his Infinite
Wisdom pitched upon for the bringing about his Purpose of Love; this was the
sending Christ to Die for Sinners. This was such an adorable Mystery of Wisdom
and Love, that the Angels desire to look into it. Christ himself speaks of it
as transcendant beyond Comparison. God so loved the World, that he sent his
only begotten Son, etc. John 3.16. and in 1 John 4.9, 10. The Apostle
represents it as the most glorious Public Manifestation of Love. In this was
manifested the Love of God toward us, because that God sent his only Son into
the World. Herein is Love, etc.

II. The second thing that I am to explain and prove, is, That this Love of God
is Unchangeable. It is frequently called an Everlasting Love, Jer. 31.3. I have
loved thee with an Everlasting Love. His Mercy endures for ever. Having loved
his own, he loved them unto the end, John 13.1. And it must needs be so, if it
be considered.

1. That Gods Nature is Unchangeable. God asserts it, Mal. 3.6. I am the Lord,
I change not. Psalm 102.25, 26. The Heavens and the Earth shall perish, but
thou shall endure. Thou art the same, and thy Years shall have no end. James
1.17. With God is no variableness, neither shadow of Turning.

The Unchangeableness of Gods Nature is evident by the very Light of Reason.
All that believe the Existence of God, will yield, that Deus est ens
necessarium and Independens. God is a necessary and Independent Being. That God
is Self-existent is an Original and Fundamental Idea, which we are to have of
God. This Monsieur Abbadie proves in his Vindication of the Christian Religion,
Sect. 2. Cap. 2. And from this necessity of his Being, he deduceth his
Immutability. For if God depend not upon any other Being, nor receive any thing
from any other Being, his Essence cannot then be varied. And if his Nature is
Unchangeable, his Will is also Unchangeable. It is true, God does sometime
change his Promises and Threatenings, but his Purposes he changes not. Mutat
Sententiam sed non Decretum. Men usually change their declared Purposes,
because all Men are Liers, and so break their Promises; or they Promise without
due Consideration, and when any thing happens which they foresaw not, they
repent. But it cannot be thus with God. My Counsel shall stand, I have purposed
it, I will also do it, Isa. 49.10, 11. The Reason of this we have in Numb.
23.19. God is not a Man that he should lie, neither the Son of Man, that he
should repent.

2. That Gods Love is Unchangeable will further appear, if we consider that his
Love is bottomed upon a certain Foundation, His own free Purpose, and Christ's
Purchase. This Reason the Apostle does not obscurely suggest in the Text, None
can separate us from Gods Love, because it is a Love to us in Christ Jesus our
Lord. Had it been built upon the sandy Foundation of our Merit, we might have
feared the failure of it upon every miscarriage or failure of Duty.

III. The Third Thing to be explained is, That the Consideration of Gods
Infinite and Unchangeable Love is a sweet Cordial in all Distresses, and a
Guard against all Affrightments of Fear to all those that are in Christ. For,

1. Those that are in Christ being reconciled and pardoned, may be assured,
that however God may change his Countenance toward them, yet he will not change
his Heart. He may be angry, but Anger and Love are consistent. All Men may be
convinced of this. Parents may be angry with their Children, and yet love them.
It is true, that Parental Corrections will be grievous to ingenuous Children,
they will mourn under them; and thus God's Anger will be an heavy Burden to his
Children, as their Complaints and Sorrows do abundantly Witness. Yet God would
have us to consider his Love in his Rod, Heb. 12.6. Whom the Lord loves he
chasteneth. To be without Chastisement is an Evidence, that we are Bastards,
and not Sons. God may be angry but he never changes his Love into hatred.

2. The greatest outward Afflictions are so managed by God, that if we could
duly observe his dealings with us, we might perceive his Love intermixed with
the Lashes of his Rod. All the while he manifests a fatherly Pity and
Compassion. Fury is not in him. He has a gentle Hand to the weak: He remembers
their Mold and Fashion. They have also secret Supports and seasonable
Deliverances.

3. All these Distresses are so far from separating his Children from his Love
that as he orders them, they Work together for their good. Their Graces are
hereby exercised, increased, and made bright, as your Vessels are by scouring.
So that their Distresses yield the peaceable Fruits of Righteousness to those
that are exercised thereby, Heb. 12.11. They are hereby brought into nearer
Communion with God; and at last, he lifts up the Light of his Countenance upon
them, like clear shining after Rain.

4. It is further evident, that all outward Troubles cannot separate them from
the Love of God, because he does evidently strengthen their Hearts under them,
so that they prevail not to draw them off from God. This Argument the Apostle
fixes on a Demonstration of what he had asserted, In all these things we are
more than Conquerors. It Is a glorious Victory to stand in an Evil Day, when
Satan has drawn up all his Forces against us: It Is a glorious Victory not only
to escape without Loss, but to gain by his Opposition; thus we out-shoot him in
his own Bow. And all this, sine Labor and Sudore, easily through Divine
Assistance.

5. All these Troubles do not so much as render us less Lovely in Gods Eyes.
God is not as Man; Men judge often by outward Appearance, Gods Children are
often blackened with false Accusations and Reproaches; but God will not judge
them according to Men's Misrepresentations. You have a clear instance of it in
that Scripture which has been so much abused. He has not beheld Iniquity in
Jacob, neither has be seen perverseness in Israel. The meaning is not, that the
Omniscient God does not see, or that an Holy God cannot be angry at the
Transgressions of his People. But thus we are to understand it. Balaam was upon
a Design of cursing Israel, Balak would have represented them as a Company of
Robbers, that came to destroy and invade a Country that was not their own, but
being not able to prevail, he gives this for a Reason, That God would not judge
of them as they had represented them, nor deal with them according to their
Desires and Condemnation.

6. The Consideration of Gods Love, has a Power in it to sweeten our greatest
Afflictions, and to take out the sting and venom out of the worst of out
Troubles. If we have Gods Love, we have more than all the World can give us, it
will counter-ballance all Troubles, and make up all Losses of outward Comforts.

Having explained these three Thing, I shall conclude with some Applicatory
Inferences suitable to the present mournful Occasion. As,

1. If the Love of God be such a Cordial and Guard, let it be our great
endeavor to get an Interest in this Love. This is the one thing necessary. If
any ask, How must this be done? I shall only tell them, they must seek to be in
Christ. The first Application of this Love is made in Conversion, though Gods
Purpose of loving was before. Yet we were Children of Wrath, till God by
Conversion, and the new Birth translate us from the Power of Darkness to the
Kingdom of his Dear Son, then and not till then is Gods gracious Purpose
brought into Act.

2. Let us adore, admire and meditate upon Gods Infinite Unchangeable Love. And
this not only in General, but in a Particular Application of it to our selves,
as the Apostle, Gal. 2.20. Who loved me, and gave himself for me.

3. It Is most natural to infer from Gods great Love to us, That it is our Duty,
and should be our Care, To walk worthy of the Lord unto all pleasing, Col. 1.10.

4. If the Love of God be so great a Cordial and Guard against our Fears, we
should make use of it as such, and oppose our Fears by the Consideration of it.
This was David's Shield and Buckler on all such Occasions, Psalm 23.4. He
resolves against his greatest Fears in a confident Reliance on Gods Love and
Presence. Though I walk through the Valley of the shadow of Death, I will fear
no Evil, for thou art with me. Yea in Troubles that carry the appearance of
Gods Chastisements, he is relieved by the Apprehension of Gods Love, Psalm
49.5, 15. Wherefore should I fear in the Days of Evil, when the Iniquity of my
heels shall compass me about. For God will redeem my Soul from the Power of the
Grave.

5. Let us not mourn as those that have no Hope, for the Death of Godly
Persons. They Die in Gods Love and Death is so far from separating them from
the Love of God; that it (...) Gods Porter to open the Door of Eternity to
them, and so to give them a^ immediate entrance into the full Enjoyment of his
Love. When Death has done its worst, they that enter into Rest go off with
Triumph. O Death where is thy Sting? O Grave where is thy Victory?

6. This may be a Caution against the usual Presumptions of Men, who are apt to
be too bold in interpreting Gods Providence in the Death of his Servants. They
are too saucy and bold with God, when they take upon them to assign a Reason,
why God takes any of his Servants out of the World, and so determine what Gods
Design is in so doing.

It has pleased God Almighty, and the All-wise Disposer of all things to make
another Breach upon us. It Is not long since he took Mr. Pell from us, and now
he has called home Mr. Manlove, both of them excellent Men, worthy Ministers
of the Gospel, singularly (both of them) fitted with Abilities for their Work.
They were successively my Dear Brethren, and Fellow Laborers in this Part of
Gods Vineyard. It must be acknowledged, that it is a stroke to be lamented; and
if we look upon the present Providence, we may have some Cause to fear, that
when God is discharging his Servants from his Work, and paying them their
Wages, That he may shortly break up his House with us.

Let none rejoice at it, nor say, Aha so would we have it. Neither should
others Despond: Who knows the end of the Lord? It Is easy for him to make up
our loss, if we submissively wait for him. If his Love be unchangeable to
single Persons, we may conclude it will be so to faithful Churches. There are I
hope many of you that hear me, that can stand forth and Witness, that you have
seen his Power and Glory in his Sanctuary: You have felt and tasted the Power
and Goodness of God in your Conversion, quickening and Comforting in his
Ordinances in this Place: And I hope, that Christ who delights to walk among
his Golden Candlesticks, will not now separate us from his Love, nor remove the
Candlestick out of its Place.

SERMON II.
ROMANS VIII. 35, 36, 37, 38, 39. Who shall separate us from the Love of Christ?
Shall tribulation, or distress, or persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or
peril, or sword?

(As it is written, For thy sake we are killed all the Day long; we are
accounted as Sheep for the slaughter.)

Nay in all things we are more than Conquerors, through him that loved us.

For I am persuaded, that neither death, nor life, nor angels, nor
principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come,

Nor height, nor depth, nor any other Creature, shall be able to separate us
from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord.


THIS Scripture I opened to you the Last Day upon a special Occasion, which I
then acquainted you withal. That Discourse had the better Part of that
Entertainment which the Apostle Paul's had at Athens, Acts 17.32. I have not
heard nor believe that any here had such slight Thoughts of Gods Love to Man,
as to mock at the Discourse; yet I have met with some that desire to hear again
of that Matter.

I need not repeat what has been spoken. But because the Love of God is a
noble Subject, and so vasily large, that our Thoughts cannot reach it to any
suitable Comprehension, nor can our Tongues express the Breadth, Length, Depth
and Height of it, Ephesians. 3.17. So that when we have said all we can, there is
still Matter for more: I shall now add something to what was spoken, which was
the less because I was forced to be short, to give Room for the Funeral which
waited our Attendance upon it.

All that I shall now add shall be

I. To speak something in General of the Love of God.

II. To set before you the wonderful Privileges and Advantages, that flow in
upon us from the Fountain of Divine Love. And then,

III. To recommend the Contemplation of Gods Love to you, that your Thoughts
may be taken up with the Wonders of it.

I. In General, the Love of God is not a mere Quality in God, but his very
Essence. God is Love, 1 John 4.8. This Love in God is a necessary result of his
Goodness, which is his very Nature. There is none Essentially, Absolutely, and
Perfectly Good but God, Mat. 19.17. This Goodness God lets forth to all
Creatures, yet not with an Equality; but so as might best show forth his
Sovereignty in doing with his own as he pleased: And his Wisdom in adorning the
World with a beautiful variety of Creatures, of differing Perfections according
to their different Kinds and Uses. Hence it is usual to distinguish the
Goodness of God into

First, A General Goodness to all Creatures. All that he Created he saw was
very Good. And ever since he is good to all, and his Mercy is over all his
Works. His Mercy is in the Heavens. Angels share in it, Psalm 36.5. And extends
over all the Earth, He preserves Man and Beast, ver. 6.

Secondly, A Special Goodness to Man. Though he be little, if compared with the
Infinite Perfections of the glorious God, that it is a Wonder that God should
be mindful of him, Psalm 8.4. Much more that he should magnify him, Job 7.17.
Yet is he so exalted above all his Fellow Creatures of the Inferior World,
that he is made but a little lower than the Angels, and Lord of the Works of
his Hands, ver. 5, 6. of Psalm 8. Nor has God left himself without a Witness
of his singular Care and Providence over him, in that he does good, and gives
us Rain and fruitful Seasons, filling our Hearts with Food and Gladness.

Thirdly, There is a most special Goodness to his chosen Servants, which David
in Contradistinction to the two former calls Loving Kindness; How excellent is
thy Loving Kindness, Psalm. 36.7. This most special Goodness is called Love,
which being understood in a most special Sense, differs from that common
Goodness which God imparts to his Creatures, in that it signifies Gods special
Delight and readiness to communicate and unite himself to the Object Loved.
Though this Love has not properly different Degrees in God, for none of his
glorious Attributes admit of a more or less, yet the Scriptures give us leave
to make a Distinction in Compliance to the weakness of our Understandings. So
that usually the Love of God is said to be Threefold.

1. A Love of Benevolence, Gods Eternal Good Will; this Christ speaks of John
3.16. God so loved the World, etc. And this is there spoken of, as Antecedent
to his giving Christ, and as a Cause of it. This Text is perplexed with
Controversy, because of the general Word [the World] which some labor to
stretch so as to comprehend every Man. But avoiding the Controversy, we may
understand the Text thus, God so pitied lost Mankind, Gentiles as well as Jews,
that he would not that all should perish, but that a Community, a World of
Elect ones should through Faith in Christ obtain Everlasting Life.

2. A Love of Beneficence, which signifies the Acts of Love brought forth in
Time, after we had a Being, in pursuance of his Eternal Purpose and Good Will.
Thus Christ's Death, our Justification and Sanctification are the Manifestation
and Application of his Love, and called so, Ephesians. 5.25. Rev. 1.5.

3. A Love of Complacency, by which God rejoices over those that are in his
Way and Method brought home to Christ. This is fully expressed in John 14.21,
23. Besides the Love of Benevolence, My Father, and I will manifest a more
intimate Love and kind Familiarity.

Though I purposely avoided the abstruse and difficult Questions about Gods
Love, yet these Distinctions are necessary for the answering some Objections
which might arise in your Hearts about the Unchangeableness of Gods Love. The
Love of Complacency and Beneficence admits of Variations, of less or more;
being but Manifestations and Emanations of Divine Love upon us, when yet his
Love of Benevolence is the same.

II. The next thing I promised, was a further account of the Privileges and
Advantages which accrue to us by the Love of God, which are so great and
numerous, that I cannot reckon them up in order to you. I must take up with
that of David, Psalm 40.5, 6. Thy Thoughts to usward, cannot be reckoned up in
order unto thee: If I would declare and speak of them, they are more than can
be numbered.

I will therefore in this Matter closely follow the Footsteps of those two
great Apostles, the great Admirers and Preachers of Gods Love. The Apostle John
in 1 John 3.1. reduces all the Privileges of Love to this one, That we should
be called, that is, have Power and Right to be, the Sons of God, as John 1.12.
This if rightly studied, will appear to be so great a Love as cannot be fully
expressed, but to be left to Admiration; Behold what manner of Love the Father
has bestowed upon us!

The Apostle Paul in this Eighth Chapter of the Romans, does as it were Comment
upon, and explain that of, 1 John 3. in pursuit of that grand Conclusion, Romans
8.1. There is therefore now no Condemnation to them which are in Christ Jesus.
That the Odours of this precious Ointment might be further diffused for the
Refreshment of all that are in Christ (which he describes by the Power and
Influence of the Holy Spirit over them) he sets himself to declare the
Privileges of such, and fixes first upon our Sonship; ver. 12. As the Apostle
John did, but he endeavors a more particular Enumeration of our Privileges,
yet so that he reduces them all to this of our being the Children of God. The
Advantages which he insists upon, arising from this grand Privilege, are Three.

First, If we are Sons, we partake of the Spirit of our Father, and this we do
several Ways;

1. We are Led by the Spirit, ver. 14. Whether we read the Verse backward or
forward it holds true, As many as are led by the Spirit, are the Sons of God.
And as many as are the Sons of God have been, and shall still be led by the
Spirit. Let us take in this Consideration together with that of Sonship; and
then say, Oh! What manner of Love is this, that we who were afar off, both in
respect of sinful Indisposition and Enmity, should be made so near, as to
become Children! That we should be changed in the Spirit of our Mind! That we
should by the Spirits leading, Teaching and Influence, be made conformable to
the Image of Christ, and so be made Partakers of a Divine Nature, and should
have the Spirit (by whom we were wrought up to this very thing) to be our
constant Tutor and Guide!

2. By the Spirit another Advantage is given, ver. 15. The Spirit is to us a
Spirit of Adoption, that is, a childlike Disposition, to Love God, to depend
upon him with a child-like Trust and ^onfidence, and in an humble boldness and
freedom, being made Children; God would not have us to Act under a ^^avish
Principle of Fear, which is a Spirit of Bondage, but by a free and ^ngenuous
Love.

3. The Spirit is also a Spirit of Witness and Assurance, ver. 16. The Spirit
(...) self bears Witness with our Spirit, ^^t we are the Children of God. It
is ^ecessary that Children should know their Father, it conduces much to their
Comfort and Government. This the Apostle urges upon the youngest Christians,
as their Privilege and Advantage, 1 John 2.13. I write unto yo^ little
Children, because ye have known the Father. The Spirit assists the Witnes^ of
our Conscience, clears our Doub^^ and gives comfortable Satisfaction These
Advantages we have by the Spirit, and all these are necessarily contained in
the Privilege of Sonship.

Secondly, Another Advantage by the Privilege of Sonship is noted, ver. 1^. If
Children, then Heirs. The same Lo^ that makes us Children, provides an (...)
heritance for us: This Inheritance (...) Apostle magnifies, 1. As Glorious at^
Great; so Glorious, that though (...) must suffer as Christ did, before (...)
come to the full Possession, yet the Gl^ry of that Inheritance is so great, the
our Sufferings are never to be mentioned, nor compared to the Glory that is
(...) be revealed, ver. 18.2. Because the Certainty of that Inheritance, adds
(...) small Luster to the Glory of it. The Apostle shows us, that the Children
(...) (...) have a full Certainty of it, and (...) live and rejoice in the
Constant (...) Comfortable Expectation of it.

1. Not only by an Argumentation ^awn from our present Pressures and ^lictions,
for so the whole Creation ^aneth and expects a Freedom, ver. (...) 22. But,

2. We have the Pledge, and Earnest, (...) First Fruits of it already, ver. 23.
(...),

3. The Spirit helps forward and ^^^vens our Hopes, We groan within ^^^selves;
and to help us further, our ^^^pes are stronger by the Spirits Assi^^e in our
Prayers.

(...) By directing us to the Matter fit (...) prayed for. We know not what we
(...) pray for as we ought, we are not ^^^petent Judges of what is fit for us.

By exciting our Desires to an ear^^ess, even groanings that cannot be (...),
which is the Spirits Intercessi^^^ us, ver. 26. So that by our Pray^^^ our
Hopes are confirmed; our De^^^ come from himself, he knows and (...) them, and
returns the Answer (...) Prayers in inward Strength and Consolation, ver. 27.
He that searches the Heart, knows what is the Mind of the Spirit, because he
makes Intercession for the Saints, according to the Will of God.

Thirdly, Another Advantage of Sonship is also mentioned, ver. 28. All things
shall Work together for Good. Children expect Good, and not Hu^ from Parents:
So our Sonship assur^^ us, that whatever Troubles or Distresses we may meet
with, they shall at la^^ by Gods overruling Disposal, Wo^^ out our Advantage.
Oh what mann^^ of Love is this, that we should be ma^^ the Children of God! We
have the^^ by the Gift of the Spirit, to lead an^ teach us, until Christ be
formed in (...) and as a constant Guide of our Way And hereby also we have free
aceess (...) God, and Dependence on him: (...) have also the comfortable
Witness (...) our Interest in Divine Love, and F^ture Happiness in the
Enjoyment (...) God: And by the same Spirit we have our Taste of Heaven on
Earth, rej^^cing in the Hope of the Glory of God^ and in the mean time our
Troubles be come our spiritual Advantage.

I now take hold on the Opportunity, which these Considerations offer me to
urge you to a serious Contemplation of Gods Love to us. Let your Thoughts be
taken up with the Wonders of Divine Love.

1. You will find that all the Saints that have exercised their Thoughts upon
this Subject, have run themselves in^^ Wonder; and when they have ^ought and
spoken all they could, (...) have left the Rest to silent Admi^ion. This you
may observe in our ^essed Apostle in ver. 31. of this ^ghth Chapter. What shall
we then ^^to these Things? It is not only an ^ontroulable Certainty that he
means, ^o can contradict or say ought against ^se things? But an Expression of
the ^ccountable vastness of the Matter, ^^ch exceeded his Thoughts and Ut^ance.
What Tongue, what Words (...) fully declare his Love?

The Apostle John expresses a tran^^rt of Admiration in these Words, (...)
^ohn 3.1. Behold what manner of Love (...) Father has bestowed upon us! There
nothing among Men that can be likened unto it; if that Privilege and the
Persons upon whom it is bestowed be considered. For Us, who were Rebels and
Enemies in our Minds by wicked Works, to be made Sons! Is this the manner of
Men? Saul was convinced of David's great Love to him by this Consideration, 1 Samuel 24.19. If a Man find his Enemy, will he let him go well away? It is not
usual for Men so to do; but much less usual is it for Men to heap kindnesses
upon Enemies. God's Love to us, far exceeds all that can be found among Men.
David in Psalm 36. find some dark Resemblances whereby to erpress the extent of
Gods Mercy an^ Faithfulness. They are as high a^ Heaven, ver. 5. Thy Mercy is
in the Heavens; and thy Faithfulness reache^^ unto the Clouds. ver. 6. Thy
Righteousness is like the great Mountains; (...) Judgments are a great Deep.
But when he comes to speak of Love, he finds (...) above Comparison, and speaks
of it a^ an unexpressible Excellency, ver. 7. How excellent is thy Loving
Kindness. O God!

2. Least some should imagine that such Expressions of Admiration, are only the
high flights of some peculiar Favorites, and that Christians of the common
Rank are not much concerned herein, because it may seem to be above their
reach; I shall in a few plain Interrogations suggest to you some Things in Gods
Love, which will appear to be wonderful to all.

First, Who can tell the First spring of Love in God? What Extrinsical Motive
could possibly have a bending influence upon the Divine Will? Who ^uth been his
Counselor? Or who could oblige him by any Gift? Romans 11.34.

Secondly, Who can give an Account of Discriminating Love? Why was Jacob loved,
and not Esau? The Apo^^le resolves it, Romans 11.33. O the depth of the Riches,
both of the Wisdom and Knowledge of God! Is it not a wonder that God should
provide a Savior for fallen Man, and none for fallen Angels, and yet they were
more noble Creatures.

Thirdly, Who can bound the Extent of Divine Love? None but he that has set
bounds to the Ocean, which it shall not pass. Who knows the Extent of it, 1. As
to Persons, that shall be saved by it? How great will be the General Assembly
and Church of the Firstborn? The Rays of the Sun are not scattered by visiting
a multitude of Objects, no more is Gods Love lessened by having Mercy upon
many. 2. Who can bound the Love of God, as to the Conditions of those that
shall be saved. God does not fix his choice to the Wise, Great or Noble
Persons, 1 Cor. 1.26. Not many Wise Men after the Flesh, not many Mighty, not
many Noble are called. But being no Respecter of Persons, he gives his Love to
the most unlikely, and contrarily qualified, sometimes to the greatest of
Sinners, to Persecuters: Thus Paul reckons himself a Pattern to them which
should afterward believe, 1 Timothy 1.16.

Fourthly, Who can reckon up all the several Benefits of Love? Adoption,
Justification, Sanctification, and Eternal Life, are frequently mentioned: But
who can number his other Thoughts of Love to usward? Psalm 139.17. How Great
is the Sum of them! If I should count them, they are more in number than the
Sand. Who can give an account of his Gracious Visits, his Tokens of Love, his
particular answers of Prayers, his secret Strengthnings and Revivings? They
that have endeavored to compass and describe the whole Globe of Divine Love,
must leave vast spaces upon which they must write, Terra Incognita.

Fifthly, Who can give a true Estimate of Gods Love? It far surpasses all
outward Comforts. Life, and the Contentments of it, is the chief of outward
Comforts. But Gods Loving Kindness is better than Life, Psalm 63.3. It is above
what our Senses can inform us of, 1 Cor. 2.9. Eye has not seen, Ear has not
heard, neither has entered into the Heart of Man, the things that God has
prepared for them that Love him. What we have received already of the first
Fruits of this Love, will show that what is to come is a great Felicity. But we
cannot from all that know fully what those Pleasures are that are at Gods right
Hand for evermore, 1 John 3.2. It does not yet appear what we shall be.

3. I shall add, That though we cannot fully comprehend what is the Breadth,
and Length, and Depth, and Height of his Love which passes Knowledge, Ephesians.
3.18. Yet it is the Duty, and will be still the Advantage of all Saints to
endeavor to possess their. Hearts deeply with a rooted and grounded Sense of
Gods Love: This is the Apostle's Prayer for the Ephesians, and the Duty of all,
That they may be able to comprehend with all Saints, ver. 18.

That it is our Duty will appear by the Advantages, which will follow upon our
endeavor: Some of the chief I shall enumerate. As,

First, The Sense of Gods Love will make us Thankful. Thankfulness is a natural
return to great and undeserved Favors: The Heart being filled with this
fullness of Gods Love, will find it self straitened till it give it self ease by
venting it self in Praise, Psalm 116.12. What shall I render unto the Lord for
all his Benefit, toward me?

Secondly, It will make us Humble. The Glory of Divine Love will beget
Self-Reflections upon our Unworthiness: So it did with David, when God had
promised him many Blessings by Nathan. See how he lessens himself, 2. Sam.
7.18. Who am I, O Lord God? ^^d what is my House, that thou have ^ought me
hitherto? Undeserved Love ^akes an Ingenuous Spirit to take shame (...) it self
for former misbehaviour. When Gods Love to Ephraim had turned him to
Repentance, and so to Peace, he saw his former Miscarriages were (...) present
Reproach; this ashamed and unfounded him, Jer. 31.19. Ezekiel. 16.63.

Thirdly, A Sense of Gods Love has a special engaging and exciting Force upon
us to Obedience. It does not only oblige us, and make us Debtors, as ^om. 8.12.
But by a powerful Inclination, it does most strongly move and incline. Fear of
Wrath is a strong Compulsive, and we need it; but Love draws more effectually,
because it begets a delight to do the Will of God; and because Cords of Love
are the Bands of a Man, Hos. 11.4. Such obliging kindness as best suits a Man
of Reason and Ingenuity.

Fourthly, Sense of Love will mightily strength and encourage us against all
Sufferings. Love makes every thing easy. This was the Strength and Conrage of
all the Worthies mentioned a Heb. 11. This bore out all the Marty^ in all
Persecutions.

Fifthly, Sense of Love is that which gives sweetness to all Temporal
Blessing^. Riches, Honor, Peace, if they be no^ given in Love, may be our
great^. Plagues, and will afford no Satisfact^on. Divine Love expressed in
the^^ like the Philosophers Stone, change their Nature, and turns our rejoicing
in them to a rejoicing in God.

Sixthly, Sense of Gods Love lead us to a Delighting in God. This (...) one of
the great Duties recommended t^ us, Psalm 37.4. The Particulars of the Advice
given there, are all founded upon the different Dealings of God with the Godly
and Wicked, the Sum whereof is this: That God has a peculiar loving Regard to
Godly Men, as to vindicate them, ver. 6. To bless their ^njoyments, ver. 16. To
shelter them against Calamities, ver. 19. To direct their steps, ver. 23. If
God delights in his Love to us, we should delight our selves in Love to Him.

The Contemplation of Gods Love ^ill afford us sweet Thoughts. Love in is own
Nature is a sweet Subject of Me^itation, affording Desire, Delight and by; and
like a Plentiful Spring of Living Waters which can never be exhau^ed, it will
furnish us with such varie^^ of Matter, that we shall have no oc^^sion to be
weary of the Pursuit. Gods ^houghts of Love will still be Precious, salm 139.17.

Men can delight themselves in Works of curious Art and Contrivance, in Works
of Nature much more: With what delightful Diligence have some ^^en studied the
wonderful Contrivance of the Humane Body, yea even of Worms and Flies? Others
fill themselves with Admiration in studying the great Globe of Heaven and
Earth, and with Pleasure observe the Perfection of ^^eatures, as fitted for
their Ends and Uses, and the subserviency of them for the Beauty and
Establishment of the Universe, according to the Appointment of the Glorious and
Wise Creator: And why then should not Christians make (...) their Pleasure to
study the Infinite Lov^ of God? This is more especially o^ Concern, and will be
the Delight Work and Joy of Heaven to Eternity.

Seventhly, Sense of Gods Love as (...) is the greatest Cordial in all
Distresse^ so it is the greatest Guard against a^ Affrightments of Fear. The
Children of God are exercised with Fears frequently, but there are two special
Affrightments against which the Apost^ advances the Triumphant Assurance of
the Text.

1. The First great Affrightment that afflicted Christians are distressed with
is, That their Tribulations and Distresses are Argument of Wrath. Thus they are
ready to conclude, If God had loved us, would he have done thus unto us? This
is too frequent: Trouble brings Sin to Remembrance; and a trembling Heart fears
the worst: Thus Holy David discovered his Fear, Psal^ 6.1. O Lord rebuke me not
in thine Anger, neither chasten me in thy hot displeasure.

But a due Consideration of Gods Love will remove this Affrightment, in that
none of these things are undoubted Characteristical Marks of Gods Hatred; they
are no part of the damning Curse, but an humbling mark set upon us for our
Trial and Exercise, after all the damning Part was removed. Hence the Apostle,
1 Timothy 2.15. speaking of the Woman who had a particular mark of Displeasure set
upon her, tells us, She may be saved -- notwithstanding her sorrowful
Childbearing. And in this place, the Apostle takes away this fear, by telling
us, In all such things we are more than Conquerors.

2. The Second Affrightment is, That these Distresses might tempt us to turn
off from God and Holiness; and this might separate us from the Love of God.
This Affrightment is removed, by the Consideration that our standing is
bottomed upon Gods Unchangeable Love. It is possible enough for us and our
Graces to fail, if we had not a greater Strength than our own to bear (...) So
sure is Gods Foundation, (...) will take care for Perseverance. (...) great
Affrightment, which is too ^^nary with the Timorous, Ah I (...) shall fall and
miscarry at last, is, (...) sweetly answered, If it was Gods (...) that wrought
up your Heart to (...) him, it will keep you, that you (...) not depart from
him.

Eighthly, Sense of Gods Love to (...) will be a means to kindle and stir (...)
our Love to God. We Love him, (...) cause he loved us. Love begets Lo^ If God
has so loved us? Let us (...) deavour to Love Him.

FINIS.

