Something offered to the Consideration of all those who have a hand in putting
the late made Act, (entitled, An Act to prevent and suppress Seditious
Conventicles) in execution.
For the sake of such who have any tenderness toward the Innocent; and also
for the information of all others, who have had, shall or may have, a hand in
putting in Execution the said Act, I shall offer something to show, whom and
what Exercises of Religion are concerned in and by the said Act, and what not,
According to the most true natural genuine litteral sense and meaning thereof,
and no otherwise.
I Shall begin with the Title and Preamble of the said Act, and then come to
the Body of it.

This Act is entitled, An Act to prevent and suppress Seditious Conventicles.
It seems, there is, or may be, several sorts of Conventicles, as the word
Conventicle does import, which is a conveening of several persons together for
some end and purpose or other. Now there may be a convening of persons together
for good ends, as there may be a convening of persons together for evil ends.
There may be a convening of persons together honestly, and justifiably, upon a
Religious account; as there may be a convening of persons together in order to
the sowing or spreading of Sedition: which latter, this Act, by the Title of
it, seems to be made to prevent and suppress, as appears by joining the
explanatory word Seditious to Conventicle, viz. An Act to prevent and suppress
[ Seditious Conventicles.] And this does further appear by comparing therewith
the Preamble or Reason of the Act, which runs thus: For providing therefore of
further and more speedy remedies against the growing and dangerous practices of
[ Seditious Sectaries] and other disloyal persons, etc. Here the word [
Seditious] is used again, and joined to Sectaries and other disloyal persons.
Now the word Sectary, as it is generally accepted, does import persons of
several opinions or practices in matters of Religion, differing from the
established Religion of Nations, and such as for Conscience Sake cannot conform
thereunto. These, as truly such, For to such all the King's Promises of
Indulgence are renewed in his Declaration of the 26th of December. 1662. which
see more at large.
seem not to be the persons intended in this Act, but such, and only such, as
are seditious Sectaries, and under pretense of tender consciences, do at their
Meetings contrive Insurrections, or sow Sedition among the people; So that both
by the Title and Preamble this Act does pretend at least to be made to punish
seditious Sectaries, and to suppress their Meetings, and not to punish the
truly conscientious, nor suppress the Meetings of those who meet together not
under any color, but really and truly to worship God as he does require and
persuade them in their own hearts and consciences.

But as if the Title and Preamble were only specious pretenses of a Law against
seditious and disloyal persons, to color over foul intentions in the body of
the Act, which seems to look a quite contrary way, and is so made use of, and
runs thus;

Be it enacted, etc. That if any person, etc. shall be present at any Assembly,
Conventicle or Meeting, under [ color or pretence] of any Exercise of Religion
[ in other manner than is allowed, etc.] The words [ under color or pretence]
seem to relate to the Preamble of the Act. But then the matter of fact, or that
which makes the Meeting unlawful, so as the being present at it becomes an
offense, ought to have been expressed to be the plotting or contriving
Insurrections, or the doing of some action or other, that might render the
Meeting [ a Seditious Meeting, under the color or pretense of Religious
Exercise] which would then have held proportion with the Title and Preamble or
Reason of the Act; and might have been counted a reasonable Law, as all Laws
ought to be: For Right Reason, according to the Law of God, is (or ought to be)
the ground or foundation of all Law. And that Law that has not Right Reason
for its foundation, is null and void in it self; and will never be of, nor bear
any authority over sober and reasonable men, nor answer to the Witness of God
in the Consciences of the Transgressors. But this not being such, nor so to be
understood, as the Judges and Executors of the Law do declare, both by word and
practice. It seems to be an unnatural, unreasonable and unequal Law, and not at
all like what it pretends it self to be, Namely, An Act to prevent and suppress
[ Seditious Conventicles] or to prevent the growing and dangerous practices of
[Seditious Sectaries] and other disloyal persons, who under pretense of tender
Consciences, do at their Meetings contrive Insurrections, etc. I say, as
interpreted and made use of by our reasonless Judges, Justices and Executors of
the Law, it is so far from being what it pretends it self to be, to wit, A Law
to punish the guilty, such as pretend to one thing and do another, that it is
made use of to punish the Innocent; (to wit) such as are really, and do truly
what they pretend themselves to be and do, that is, are truly tender in
Conscience, and do meet (not only under pretense of Religious Exercise, but)
really and truly to worship God in a peaceable quiet manner, (or, to use the
Kings own words in the aforementioned Declaration) do modestly and without
scandal perform their devotion in their own way.

But it seems that principally which makes the Meeting unlawful, is, The
Exercise of Religion, being [ in other manner than is allowed by the Lyturgie
or practice of the Church of England, etc.]

If it be so that the Religious Exercise it self is that which the Law is made
against, and that, because in the manner of it, it may not be allowed by the
Lyturgy or practice of the Church of England; then this does make it further
appear to be an unnatural and unreasonable Law: For, as there is no reason
rendered, so there is no reason to be rendered, for the making of a Law to limit
or restrain all people in their Religious Exercises to the allowance of the
Lyturgy or practice of the Church of England. For the Lyturgy, upon which the
practice of the Church of England in this case seems to be grounded, has at
most but the ordering, direction and prescription of humane Authority for its
establishment; But the True Religion, and Religious Exercise, that God accepts,
as well to the manner as to the matter of it, must be performed according to
the ordering, direction, prescription and assistance of the Spirit of God; and
cannot (neither is there any reason why it should) be limited to the allowance
or prescription of the Lyturgy, or any humane practice or invention whatsoever,
especially if it be true: As it was said by some Judges and Executioners of
this Law, viz. That to worship God in Spirit and Truth, is to worship God in
other manner than is allowed by the Lyturgie or practice of the Church of
England. And if it be so, that the Lyturgy and practice of the Church of
England is so far degenerated from the Spirit of Truth, that neither the one
nor the other does so much as allow of worshipping God in Spirit and in Truth,
as these men say, O how can they blame those that separate from such a Church,
as from an Harlot or menstruous Woman, that a man cannot touch but he must be
defiled!

If the manner of the Religious Exercise be that which makes the Meeting lawful
or unlawful, then it seems the chief force of the Act is in these words ( viz.)
Shall be present at any Assembly, Conventicle or Meeting, under [colour or
pretence] of any Exercise of Religion, in other manner than is allowed, etc.
And then the words [ Color or pretence] in this place is not to be understood
to look back to those mentioned in the Preamble, who under pretense of tender
Consciences do at their Meetings contrive Insurrections, etc. but to look
forward to the manner of the Religious Exercise, and then the word Color is
improper in this place, which can no otherwise be understood, but to make the
pretense of Religious Exercise to be a color for some evil action intended:
but to take the word pretense apart from color, and then it may be understood
to intend no more than that which is beforehand declared or foreshewn of the
intention of the Meeting; and in this sense I am willing to understand and make
use of the word pretense in what follows: And then it is clear that the
principal offense in the Law is, the Religious Exercise it self, and that in
the manner of it.

There are several qualifications which must concur to make the persons present
at Meetings, Offenders against this Act; they are as follows.

1. The Meeting must be under pretense of some Exercise of Religion.

2. That Exercise of Religion must be in other manner than is allowed by the
Lyturgy or practice of the Church of England.

3. There must be five persons present, over and above the persons of the
Family.

4. The persons present must be of the age of sixteen years or more, and
Subjects of this Realm.

It seems this Act is not against all Meetings, but only against such Meetings
as are under pretense of some Exercise of Religion; neither is it against all
Meetings under pretense of Exercise of Religion, but only such as are in
private Families, and within the forementioned qualifications: For, 1. if the
Meeting be under pretense of Religious Exercise, yet if the Religious Exercise
be in no other manner than is allowed, etc. this Meeting is not within the Act,
although there be five persons or more present besides the persons of the
family.

2. If the Religious Exercise used, be in other manner than is allowed; if
there be not five persons or more present, of the age of sixteen years, and
subjects of this Realm, this Meeting is not within the said Act.

Quer. What Meetings then are those within the Act?

Answ. Such Meetings as are within all the qualifications, the principal of
which are the two first, viz. The Meeting being under pretense of Religious
Exercise in other manner than is allowed, etc. Then it seems the manner of the
Religious Exercise is the principal qualification that makes the Meeting either
lawful or unlawful; and that as it is either allowed or disallowed by the
Lyturgy and practice of the Church of England.

Then the Question is, What Exercises of Religion, as to the manner of them,
are, and what are not allowed by the Lyturgie or practice of the Church of
England?

Answ. Such Exercises of Religion as have prescript forms or manners for the
exercise thereof, and no other forms or manners are allowed of; Such Exercises
of Religion, if not performed in the same form or manner as is prescribed, are
in other manner than is allowed, etc. But all such Exercises of Religion as
have no prescript forms nor manners but the practice of the Church of England,
is, to leave all persons to use their own forms or manners, such Exercises of
Religion cannot be performed, in other manner than is allowed, etc.

Those Exercises of Religion used in private families which have prescript
forms, are Baptism, the Visitation of the Sick, and Administration of the
Communion (as they call it) to the sick person, and others with him. Now if any
of these Exercises of Religion, or any other that have prescript forms, be
performed in any other manner than is prescribed, at any Meeting where there
shall be five persons or more present, over and above the persons of the
family, this Meeting is within the Act, and the persons present, if within the
other qualifications, may be punished by it.

Those Exercises of Religion that have no prescript forms, are these, viz.
Preaching, Prayer out of Churches (so called) and Conference or the like. There
is no prescript form of Preaching, no prescript form of Prayer in private
(except as is before expressed) no prescript form of Conference, but every man is
left to use his own form or manner in all these Exercises of Religion; So that
these Exercises of Religion cannot be performed in other manner than is
allowed, etc. And then wherever these Exercises of Religion, or such like, are
used, and no other, that have prescript forms, though there be five persons or
more present over and above the persons of the family, yet this Meeting is not
within the said Act.

If it be the practice of the Church of England to allow all persons to use
their own forms or manners in such Exercises of Religion to which no forms or
manners are prescribed, then I query to all you Judges, Justices and Executors
of the Law, what Exercises of Religion have been performed in the Meetings of
those peaceable people, in scorn called Quakers, whom you have so violently
persecuted under pretense of the said Act, that has been in other manner than
is allowed by the Lyturgy [or] practice of the Church of England? I say, show
us and the Nation what they are, and how they have been performed in other
manner than is allowed, etc. And if you do not (as sure you cannot) then will
not the Nation, as well as we, see that you make the Law but a mere pretense
and color, under which you execute your own wrath, enmity and prejudice
against the Innocent. And then it is time for you to cease your false and
opprobrious language of Rebellion, Stubbornness and Disobedience to the Laws,
to those who are made subject in their spirits, not only to the Law of God, but
also to all just and equal Laws of men, and see your selves to be those
stubborn, disobedient and stiffnecked persons, not only against the Law of God
in your selves and others, but also against the Justice, Equity and Truth of
the Laws of this Nation; and also the very letter of the Law, under pretense of
which you have injured, wronged and spoiled so many hundreds, not only in their
Liberties and Estates, but very many of their Lives also. Oh surely the Lord
will yet again, as in days past, arise and plead the Cause of the Innocent and
Oppressed, and raise up the Spirit of Justice and true Judgment in this Nation;
and then in that day how will you be able to answer or make satisfaction for
the hundredth part of that damage and spoil you have made upon the Innocent! O
therefore that you might hear and fear, repent and do no more so, that the
Judgment threatened you might escape.

But to return. I shall take it for granted, till it be denied, that it is the
practice of the Church of England, to allow all persons to use their own forms
or manners in such Exercises of Religion as have no forms or manners
prescribed: And then I say, first, to you in Commission for the Peace, or chief
Magistrates of Corporations, that unless it does appear or be proved to you,
that there are private Meetings, where there is some exercise of Religion or
other used, that have prescript forms, and are used in other manner than is
prescribed, it is not lawful for you to find or commit the persons, present at
such Meetings, to Prison, for refusing to pay Fines wrongfully imposed on them;
but rather protect and defend the peaceable and quiet Meetings of such, who at
their Meetings use no other manner of Exercise of Religion but such as is
allowed by the Lyturgy [or] practice of the Church of England.

2dly. You of the Grand Jury, who have sworn to make your Presentiments free
from fear, favor or reward, and to present the truth, the whole truth, and
nothing but the truth, How can you with good conscience present any for being
present at an Assembly, Conventicle or Meeting, under color and pretense of
Exercise of Religion [ in other manner than is allowed, etc.] when nothing of
the Religious Exercise, or manner of it, has been proved to you; And if it
has, then ought you not to express the particular Exercise of Religion, with
the manner of it, in the Bill of Presentment, that it may appear to others, as
well as to your selves, that it was in other manner than is allowed by the
Lyturgy or practice of the Church of England?

3dly. I shall say somehing to you of the Petty Jury, in whom the final
Judgment in this matter does reside: You take this Oath following; viz. You
shall well and truly try, and true deliverance make, between our Sovereign Lord
the King, and the Prisoners at the Bar (whom you shall have in charge)
according to your Evidence. So help you God.

It seems you are sole Judges between the King and the Prisoners at the Bar, as
to the matter of Fact, and this you are to do truly, according to your
Evidence. Now when Indictments come before you upon the said Act, you are
warily to consider the Indictment, which ought to express the particular
Exercise of Religion used at such Meetings; but if it run only in general
terms, as hitherto they have done, that the persons named were present at such
a time, in such a place, at an Assembly, Conventicle or Meeting, under color
or pretense of Exercise of Religion [ in other manner than is allowed by the
Lyturgie or practice of the Church of England.] You being sworn to go according
to your Evidence, you ought to have clear and sufficient Evidence in all the
aforementioned particular qualifications; Also, that these very persons have
been twice before convicted of the like offense before two Justices of the
Peace, or the chief Magistrate of such Corporation where there is not two
Justices of the Peace, in due manner, and according to the form of the Statute
in that case made and provided; which must appear upon Record under their hands
and seals: which Record ought to express the matter of Fact, with all plainness
and clearness; not in general terms, for that is not sufficient, but ought to
express the particular Exercise of Religion, with the manner of it, that it may
appear to you, the persons were duly convicted as the Law requires. And this
you are to consider, that the matter of fact, which ought to be proved to you,
is twofold; the first and principal is, That the Exercise of Religion used at
such Meetings was in other manner than is allowed, etc. else the second matter
of fact, to wit, the being present at the Meeting, can be no offense: which
must be proved by showing, that the Religious Exercise used was some Exercise
of Religion to which the Church of England has prescribed a particular form,
and notwithstanding was performed in other manner than is prescribed, else it
cannot be in other manner than is allowed, etc. as is before expressed.

If these things cannot be proved, you are perjured men that shall give in your
Verdict, that the Prisoners are guilty in manner and form as they stand
indicted, when the principal part of the matter of fact is not proved unto you.
If the Judge shall say, as he uses to do, that having proved that the persons
mentioned were at the Meeting, and that the Meeting was upon a Religious
Account: here is the matter of fact clearly proved, and there needs no more to
find the persons guilty.

I say, and am ready to maintain it, That such Evidence is not sufficient to
prove the Indictment: For though this is matter of fact, yet it is not all the
matter of fact; nay, it is but the least part: for the principal matter of fact
is the Religious Exercise, being in other manner than is allowed, etc. and if
this be not proved, though the other be proved never so clear, yet you cannot
with good conscience, according to your Oaths, bring the persons in guilty in
manner and form as they stand indicted: For consider, the Indictment does not
only say, that the persons mentioned were present in such a place at a Meeting,
under color or pretense of Exercise of Religion, but also under color or
pretense of Exercise of Religion in other manner than is allowed by the Lyturgy
or practice of the Church of England: and so says the Act: But on the
contrary, ought to acquit or bring in the Prisoner not guilty of the
Indictment, lest the Judgment and severity of God (to whom alone in point of
Conscience you are accountable in this matter) take hold of you, as it has
done of some, who through fear have, contrary to their Consciences, consented,
with others, to the bringing-in the Innocent guilty, in manner and form as they
stood indicted: Witness Thomas Leader his Acknowledgment, in a Paper in print
under his own Name, entitled, The Wounded-Heart, or the Jury-mans Offense
declared, etc.

What I have written, I shall commit and commend to the Witness of God in the
Consciences of all concerned, especially you that may serve of this Jury, that
so you may see your own work more plain and clear before you, and be left
without excuse.

Written in the first month, 1665. By Thomas Gibson, Prisoner in Newgate,
under the unjust sentence of Transportation to Jamaica.
THE END.

