Miscellaneous LETTERS AND ESSAYS, On several SUBJECTS.

Philosophical, Moral, Historical, Critical, Amorous, etc. in Prose and Verse.

DIRECTED TO John Dryden, Esquire The Honorable Geo. Granvill, Esquire Walter Moile,
Esquire Mr. Dennis, Mr. Congreve,
And other Eminent Men of the Age.

By several Gentlemen and Ladies.

LONDON: Printed for Benjamin Bragg, at the White-Hart, over against Water-Lane
in Fleetstreet, 1694.

TO THE HONORABLE Sir JOHN TRENCHARD, Their Majesty's Principal Secretary of
State. And one of the Lords of their Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council.
Honored Sir,
I am so far from being Apprehensive of the Censure of any thinking Man, for
Dedicating a Book of this Nature to a Man of your Station, that I Am satisfied I
should have injured your Merit in choosing any other Patron for That, in which
the Glory of the ENGLISH NATION is in some Degree defended: for though I confess
the States Man (according to our Modern Notion) has little to do with the
ensuing Discourses; yet I Am very sure the TRUE ENGLISH MAN (a Name I know you
far more value) must extremely interest you in them; for the Patriots Zeal
ought to extend to the Glory, as well as Happyness of his Country: so that you
must be pleased to shelter with your Protection, a Piece that aims at a
Vindication of our known RIGHT and HONOR, which are impiously invaded, and as
weakly, as ignobly betrayed to a Foreign People, by a biggotted Veneration for
a former Age. But Poetry, Sir, will appear from the following Essays, to be a
Prize we ought no more to surrender to Foreign Nations than our Courage or
Liberty. For Greece and Rome, who have given us the noblest Examples of the
Latter, have been the most famous for the Former. And as we are not inferior to
either of those Commonwealths, in the Honor of Arms, or the Wisdom of our
Laws, so I can never yield them the precedence in Poetry.

Nor is this Glory I plead for, a mere Noitionary Fantout, which affords no
Benefit to the Public, as is evident from its very Nature and Design, as well
as the Authority of the Wisest Nations, who have Esteemed POETS very necessary,
as well as very Honorable Members of the Commonwealth. This Athens thought,
when on the loss of Eupolis in a Sea Fight, she decreed that no Poet should for
the future, ever venture himself in the War, least by one Fatal Blow, a
Treasure should be lost, an Age could not repair, for POETS were not born every
Day.

But this Veneration which Greece paid the Poets, is built on the innate
Excellence of their Art. Pleasure is the Sovereign Aim of all Men, it is that
which the Soul naturally and justly desires, and for which it is made, and what
the greatest Stoic persues; for it is impossible for any Man to desire Pain. Now
Poetry does not only make Pleasure, its Medium but its Aim, and so employs the
surest Means to obtain the noblest End. Majestic and delightful Numbers,
surprising and noble Thoughts, and Charming Expressions, awake all the
Faculties of the Soul, to receive the Mighty Lessons it imparts, which all
terminate in the most Solid, and Rational Pleasure. For they either establish
some Virtue by a great Example, or by the same, punish some Vice, or redicule,
and lash some Folly, that may be injurious to our Happyness; the Establishment
of which on the Basis of Virtue and Wisdom, fixes us in the sweet Enjoyment of
the Greatest and most lasting of Pleasures.

As a farther Proof of Poetry's, being a Friend to, and promoter of Virtue; and
an Enemy to Vice, it is observable, that all the Heroes and Men of Virtue of
Antiquity loved and encouraged Poetry, and that the worst of Princes, and
greatest TYRANTS always persecuted, and hated the Poets, as their known and
most dangerous Enemies, for they would spare no Vice in the most powerful
Offenders. Lucan feared not in the time of the greatest Tyrant of the Caesar's,
to extol Cato the most obstinate Stickler for his Countries Liberty against the
first of 'em; and he chooses rather to condemn Providence for the success, the
destroyers of the Liberty of Rome met with, than not praise Cato for dying with
his falling Country. Victrix causa dijs placuit, sed Victa Catoni. The POETS
indeed have been the bold Persecutors of Vice in all Ages, and have ever
rewarded Virtue with Immortality. They are beneficial to Posterity, by
conveying to it the most prevailing Motives Illustrious Examples, so that he
that is a generous Patron of the MUSES, is a Benefactor to Ages to come, as
well as to the Present.

Carmen amat quisquis, Carmine Digna gerit. is a certain Truth; For the very
Motives for performing Virtuous Actions, hold for the care of those that make
them eternal, viz. the good of Others, the public Benefit. To which Sir, your
whole Life and Endeavors having been zealously applied, I cannot doubt but you
will by your patronizing Poetry, complete the noble end of your Honorable
Ambition. Then may Posterity see in YOU, Sir, such a pattern of Fortitude,
Temperance, Wisdom, Justice, Bounty, and all other Virtues that make a Man
truly Great, that copying You alone, would make them all Happy and Good. I Am too
unskilful a Dawber to dare to venture on drawing so noble an Image, as both
your private and public Life compose. I can never reach up to that Generous
Constancy to your Friends i^ the midst of your Sufferings, which has to my
knowledge raised some to Wealth, if not Content. How can I ever hope to give
the least Idea of your present Character, when your Love for the Public Good
transports you from private Repose to Business, and the fatigues of State, that
more, than those only, whom youknow, may share in the Blessings of your
Administration.

An ungenerous Self-interest, separate from the Public Good, has been observed
to prevail over most Statesmen, which made the World put su^ ^st distinction
betwixt the S^ and the Patriot, as to mak^ (...) ^cileable; but You, Sir, (...)
general an Observatio^ (...) we all (...), that in you the Patriot and
Statesman are eminently united. Your Soul is too Large, too Noble, to be
wretchedly confined to so narrow a Game, as the Chase of your own priv^te
Happiness, without regard to the public; or rather you are so True an
Englishman, that you cannot be Happy, unless your Country be so too; and it is
not your own private Stores, but the Public that gives you Content; for your
Goodness is exalted so near to Perfection, that it cannot but be communicative;
we are so sensible of this, that we unanimously wish your Power to do Good,
were as boundless, as we know your Will. We might then hope a long wished Union
in those Minds, whose Variance with each other has produced a common Misery;
and till that be effected, we have alas! but little Hopes of any settled
Happiness. But what is worst, there is but small prospect of that, till Men
have learned your Virtue, Sir, of sacrificing all private Designs and Interests
to the public Good.

But I have unawares fallen into a Con^emplation of your Virtu^s, which I dare
not pursue; but as the Painter, who after he had given to the several Figures
of his Picture, the various forms and expressions of Grief, drew a V^il over
the Father's Face, as unable to express his: So, Sir, ought I, having given a
View of some part of your Merits, to leave the rest to the Imagination of the
Reader, better informed by your known Reputation. I have said enough to make
all Men admire, and love you, that do not know you; and it must be the Defect
of my Abilities, if they stop on this side the highest and most Awful
Veneration. However I have this Comfort, that I have raised the first Pyramid
(though a very poor o^ to your desert, to which greater Artists will in time
build up more Glorious Monuments, when you shall declare your self, the Patron
of the Poetic Glory of England, as you have been of her Interest. And these
Hopes makes me presume to Dedicate not only this small Book to you, but also my
self, and all the Endeavors of, Sir,

Your most Humble, And most Obedient Servant, CHARLES GILDON.

THE PREFACE.
THere is no Man, I think, doubts but that it is Variety that composes the
Regale of the Mind, as well as that of the Body, which has made me have a
regard to that in the following Book; for I have intermixed things Historical,
Moral, Amorous and Gallant, with the rougher Critical Discourses. Some will
gratify the Fancy, others the Judgment, or at least I designed they should. I
shall not say much for that part of the Book which is none of mine, because
that need no Defense; and I cannot urge much for the other, if the Reasons it
contains be insufficient for its Justification.

In the hurry of writing I forgot one very good Defense of a Passage in the
Othello of Shakespeare, which Mr. Rymer has loudly exclaimed against, and which
a very good Friend of mine advised me to insert in the Preface; it is this,

Awake what hoa! Brabantio, etc.
An old black Ram is tupping your white Ewe, etc.
Mr. Rymer will have it, that a rap at the Door would better express Jago 's
Meaning, than all that noise; but if Mr. Rymer would consult the Reason of the
thing he will find, that the noise Roderigo and Jago made, contributed very much
to their design of surprising and alarming Brabantio, by that, to transport him
from Consideration to a violent Passion.

I am sorry, that a Man of Mr. Rymer 's Learning should be so bigoted to the
Ancients, as to become an Enemy to the Honor of his own Country in that thing,
which is perhaps the only we can truly pretend to excel all others in, viz.
Poetry. Courage, Virtue and Wisdom, Greece and ROME will never be out-Rival'd
in, but I am apt to think they have both been outdone in Poetry by the
English; and though the latter once subdued this Island, yet were she now in all
her Glory, with all the Encouragements she gave her Poets, she would confess
her self conquered in Poetry.

For notwithstanding all those Encouragements Poets met with there, and the
want of 'em here in England, we have the Honor to have more and better Poets
than ever Greece or Rome saw. So that Poetry like a Tree, Transplanted to a
foreign Clime, grew not, with all their Care and Cultivation, so kindly, as
here without any. Poetry, being therefore our Native Right, I hope the moderate
Reader will excuse the Heat I sometimes run into in the Defense of it.

I hope too the Graver Gentlemen, the Precisians, will not be scandalized at my
Zeal for the Promotion of Poetry, because the Reason of it is, that it is
observable from History, that the Decay and Neglect of that, always was a fatal
Symptom of the Loss of Ancient Virtue, Power and Glory.

A COLLECTION OF Miscellaneous Essays and Letters.
To JOHN DRYDEN Esquire
May the 1^th. 16^.
I Hope, Sir, you will not measure my Love and Value for you by the Visits I make
you, for then you would extremely inj^e me; for I ^nnot be so impudent with a
Man I h^ an aweful Esteem for, as to int^de too often into his Company, for I Am
sensible I can in no measure atone for the loss of that time, my Visits would
^ob from your better Thoughts; and I rather satisf^ my self with the expression
of my Ze^l and Love in absence, than, at the expense of my ^iend, grati^e my
ow^e of his ^quent Company. But yet, I confess, this lo^ default of my Duty,
can be excused by nothing, but the unavoidable (...), about my Concerns in the
Country, which has divorced me as long from, Wh^ I value next you, my Books.

Mistake me not, Sir, I mean not my Scribbling, which I Am far enough from
valuing, and only comply with, by the compelling Obligation that taught the
Parrot, suum XAIPE. Nay, I have so l^le of an Author, that I have not
Arrogance, and want all Self Esteem, which some even as dull as my self abound
with beyond bea^ing, and which is, indeed, like a Wise, though an Evil, yet such
a one that is necessary. For a Di^idence of one'^ (...) in Writing, as well as
in Addresses to the (...) and the G^at, is seldom any advantage to a Man, at
least in this Age, where the highest Impudence Pa^ (...) a handsome Assurance,
and N^ and (...) for W^, and Rep^: (...) dispi^ a Man and a^ he cannot please
himself with wh^ he Writes, so he very hardly can ^ise to the (...) ^y that are
not duller. But when I was (...) to this C^se of Scribbling, I (...) my self
with a^ much of a Sto^, as I could, to (...) my self against public Censure;
and in my own de^ence soon believed Reputation but a Whim, since the Worst had
their Admirers, as well as the ^est, at least in our Age; nor could I persuade
my self that the next would be one (...) better in (...) Judgment. And to say
truth, there is nothing could make me have any tolerable Opinion of my self,
but the Love and Esteem I have for you; whom ((...) me leave to contradict my
self, and show such Arrogance) I do pretend to value, as much as any Man can:
and I defy my greatest ^nemies to do me Justice, and contradict me by any word
or discourse even where I had a Moral Certainty, you could never hear of it
again.

This, Sir, I urge, as a Praise of my self; for next to being a good Poet, is
to know how to value one; the first has given Immortality, the latter (when in
a Man of Quality) gained it. But lest the length of my Letter should do, what I
apprehend from my Visits I Will

Subscribe my self, Your Friend and humble Servant Charles Gildon:

To his Ingenious Friend Mr. George Isaacson, in de^ence of Personal
Reflections.
(...), (...) the ^th 16^.
YOU tell me you ha^ read (...) Book, and are extremely, (...) with the (...),
and sine Sense of it; but that yo^ cannot allow of (...) Personal Refl^ions. I
wish you had ^joyn'd your Reason for your Opinion, because I know you guide
your self extremely by Reason in all things, and also because you know I Am very
fond of a Reason to strengthen an Assertion that is brought against one I do
esteem, as I do Mr. -- But since you have not sent your Reason against him in
this particular, I Will give you mine for him.

Not to justi^e him by the daily Example of other Authors, which would be
tedious, and to little purpose, the very Reason of the thing its self
(supposing all the Reflections Just and True) should Vindicate his Practice in
that particular. For if Men must not be told their Faults, they will never mend
'em; and general Reflections will never do the Business, because the Devilish
good Opinion every Man has of himself, furnishes him with an Evasion from the
lash of g^neral Characters. Aristophanes kept many of the Athenians in awe, and
within moderate bounds by this means; and so regulated the City better than the
Philosophers, with their empty Sophisms, or the Laws, with their blunted Edge.
But after the Thirty Tyrant^ had put down this Liberty with their (...), the
(...) was lost in Comedy, and (...) could do nothing but Delight. I know (...)
^ays, That this Liberty deserved a Cur^, but that was, because it deviated from
Truth, and like other of the best Institutions, was perverted by Passion or
Interest to serve a turn. S^tire among the Romans took this course where the
Po^ts durst: and Catullus, that was no Sati^ist, told (...) of his Vic^, and
that publicly in Verse; yet Caesar had that Temperance to Caress him, though he
had committed his Infamy to as long a Life, as he could do his Noble Acts. But
if the Fops, Fools, and Scriblers of our Age, are overrun with Vic^s more
troublesome to the Public, than Caesar's venereal Sallies, without his
Moderation, and Modesty, Must they go unmarked? Must the Town be always
peste^'d with their insufferable Impertinences, because, though they have been
ridiculed in general Characters a Thousand times, will yet by no means believe
themselves touched: There is no Remedy for these Public Grievances, but
particular Reflections, and though, as you say, No Man is free from Follies that
may be exposed, yet they will be much diminished in them that have any sense,
by this means, or at least be made less visible; and then it is not much more
pains to be Wise, than to play the fool with Secrefie, and one might as well
shake hands with Vice for good and all, as to be at the fatigue to Sin with
discretion.

You wonder, you say, That (...) had not his Throat (...) for the Personal
Abuses he gave his Countrymen: But I must tell you, That Vice and Folly then,
though common enough, had not that lewd tie upon Mankind, as t^y have now. A Fop
or Knave, that was then exposed, had all the Audience against him, and to
redeem his reputation, ashamed of his ^olly o^ Vice reformed. Men came then
from a Play full of as many good Resolutions, as a very P^nitent Sinner ^om a
sensible P^lpit (...) of Death, and Judgment, but now they come away no more
affected, than a hardened Usurer from a Sermon of the Revelations. The World's
extremely altered since Aristophanes his days. we cannot endure to be thought
guilty of what we sondle and caress; Nay, now to touch upon a Vice that is grown
a Public Grievance, this Fop; or that Whore, that is hit, shall engage a whole
Party against you. To expose a Man by a particular, that is incorrigible by all
general Characters, reforms him not; but makes him preposterously fonder of
Vindicating his Error, than of mending it; and he had rather continue the
Public Jest, with the additional Scandal of having committed new Folli^s in
Defense of the Old, than come into the common rank of Mankind, and cease to be
singular, and troublesome. Men h^tofore did with their Folli^s, and Vices, as
some of our Modern Spa^ks do with their Mistresses, (...) them till they come
to be known, but then turn 'em off, to avoid the Scandal of a keeping (...).
But now Men are Wedded to 'em, they take 'em with Danm'd for better for worse,
till Death does them part; and think themselves, as much bound to ^ght a Man
for exposing them, as for attacquiny the Honor of their House, though in reality
they are no more obliged to do so, than a Man is to Vindic^te the Honor of a
Wife not only he himself, but the wh^ Town know to be a Whore, and have
contributed to the making her so.

After all this, you will ask me, perhaps, if I have not my share of Follies and
Vic^, that I am for falling so soul upon those of my Neighbors? Why, 'faith to
deal sincerely with ^ou, I have abundantly more than my share, which makes me
the severer in my Observation of other Men's to keep my self in Countenance. But
this advantage I have made of it, I have lessened the incredible number, my
Mind was overrun with, and shall endeavor to pursue the course ^ill I Have
brought 'em, within a more conscionable compass, for I never hope to clear my
self entirely.

I am, Sir, Your Friend and Servant Char. Gildon.

An Apology for Poetry, in an Essay directed to Walter Moil Esquire
IN an Age when every ignorant (...) sets up for a Man of Authority; and as
many as can but tell their Syllabl^ on their Fing^, without (...), without
Lea^ning, or any ^xcuse for Writing, a^ogate the Glorious Name of Poets, and,
by t^eir Scandalous (...) to it, bring the Pride of Conquer^rs, and the (...)
of Philos^phers, into an unj^st and shame^ul Neglect; It Is the Duty of an
humble and zealous Admirer of those God like Few, whom Art, Nature, and Heaven
have evidently exalted to that Supreme Dignity, to make an Apology for them,
who ought not to ^nk under the Crimes of this contemptible Race of wretched
Poetasters, who ought to be avoided by all that have the least Regard to their
own Repose. For this infamous Generation, these Bullies of Parnassus, forsaking
the humble, and quiet Call of their own Fortune, with a Sacrilegious ^mbition,
to make a Noise in the World, endervour a Rape on the Sacred Nine: and having
as little Modesty as Poetry, continually (...) the Favors and Enjoyment of
Calliope at l^h though like I^n they caress nothing but a Cloud, the Harmonious
Goddess vanishing from their Profane Embrace. These are Sparks, who, by
perpetually repeating them, talk themselves into so good an Opinion of their
own Performances, that they can never be brought to think ill enough of
themselves to be discouragd from their Poetical Vanity, in which they are
confirmed by the ignorant Applause of some, and the Unaccountable Diversion of
others, who have a Vanity in (...) ^ng themselves with caressing and indulging
their Folly; though this is something pardonable, since the Admonition given by
an old Poet to one of these Gentlemen's Inclinations would be almost fruitless,

Qu^d (...) Celsus ag^ (...) ^ndus
(...) quaerant (...)
(...) Palatinus (...) Apollo
They are not to be reclaimed, nay, the (...) of Thamyras would scarce effect
it, the Breaking their ^ute would not hinder their Writing, nor the loss of
their Eyes their Repeating, though perhaps Blindness might be some Advantage to
their Acquain^ance, by giving them a possibility of avoiding them; for a Seeing
Poetaster has an Hawk's Eye (...) one he intends to recite too, he spies him at
a distance, and swoops upon him before he can make his Escape.

These are the Banes of Society, and have brought an Odium on that admirable
Science they pretend to, with some People; who, though they have Wit, want
Judgment to distinguish betwixt Pretense and Reality. Others, who ought to have
regard to the Protection of the Muses, and are sensible of the difference of
Merit, and Impudence, are yet too sond of more ungenerous Pleasures, to
Sacrifice them to the Care of the Poets. There are a Sort of Men, that love
Plea^e, but are Sordid in their Choice of it; beyond measure preferring those
of the Body to those of the Mind. They value not what Expense they (...) at in
keeping a Whore for the use of half the ^own, yet are sordidly Penurious in
their Grati^tions of a Poet; a look, a sigh, a senseless word (...) the first,
can melt 'em into Profuseness, and Poverty, when the Noblest Thoughts, dressed
in the most Charming Numbers and Language, shall not move them to consider the
Necessity of the Author of them. Nay, though they value themselves as Men of
Sense as well as Fortune, their Dogs, and their Bottle are more their Care,
than the Darlings of Heaven the Poets.

Maecenas, and Augustus, were the only Keeping Patrons; the Poets were their
Mistresses, and never were they so happy, or wantoned so much in Pleasure, as
in their Intimacy with Virgil, Horace, Gallus, etc. Their Company was their
Regale, though Virgil (if we measure the Excellence of it by our Tests,
Facetiousness and Buffoonry) was none of the best. I Am extremely pleased with
Augustus, and could almost Sacrifice to his Memory when I read this charming
Expostulation to Horace -- -- Iratum me tibi scito quod non in plerisque
Ejusmodi scriptis mecum potissimum loquaris. An vereris ne apud Posteros tibi
infame sit, quod videaris familiaris nobis esse. You see he was ambitious that
Posterity by often reading his Name in Horace's Writings, should know how he
valued him. Had our Poets this Encouragement, they would surpass the Romans and
Greeks too, and England would have her greater Horace and Virgil; ^or as
Martial says,

Sint Maecenates n^n de^nt Flacce Marones.
And,

Ca^na prov^unt animo deducta Sereno.
But where there must be a care of Subsistence the Mind can never have that
Se^eneness it ought for so Noble and Sacred an Office. What therefore might we
not expect, should a (...) or Maecenas arise, from such who under all these
disadvantages have performed so well? I hope this Apology may remove some
prejudices that may oppose that Happiness, and provoke some better Pen to do
Poetry more Justice than my Time or Ability would permit.

If we regard the Antiquity of its Origin the Nobleness of its Subject, or the
Beauty of its Aim, or Design (which three Things are the Test of the Excellence
of Arts and Sciences, in reference to each other) we shall easily (...) Poesy
most ancient in its Rise, most honorable in the Subjects and Matters it adorns,
and most transcend^ntly excellent in its Usefulness and (...).

First, To say nothing of other Authors (...), Virgil proves from the Second
Book of (...) Evangel. Prep. that it is of a very early Date; and from hence
it is also evident, That it flourished among the most ancient of the Hebrews,
who were by several Ages of greater Antiquity, than the Grecian Poets. For
Moses, their Leader, having passed the Red Sea, inspired by a Divine Fury, sung
Praise and Thanks to his Omnipotent ^liverer in Hexameter Verse, according to
^phus in the Second Book of his Antiquity of the Jews. Thus the Royal David
too, composed Hymns to God, in various Numbers, as ^phus in the Seventh Book of
the Antiquities of the Jews, in these words confirms. David therefore (says he)
after he was delivered from War and Danger, in the Enjoyment of full
Tranquillity, and Peace, composed Songs and Hymns to God in various and
different Numbers, as Trimeters, Quinquimeters: with whom St. Jerome in his
Preface to the Chronicles of Euseb^s agrees, where he writes in this manner.
Lastly, (says he) What is more sonorous than the Book of Psalms? Which like the
Works of our Horace, or the Greek Pindar, now runs on Iambick Feet, now sounds
with Alcaic's, now swells with the Saphic Numbers, etc.

But to come to the Gentiles, we find Poetry so very Ancient that they know not
its Rise, but attribute it to their God Apollo, and the Muses; a^ Apollo, in
Ovid, himself assures us.

Juppiter est genitor: p^r me quod eritque fuitque
Estque patet, per me concordant Carmina ^rvis.
Apollo reciev'd the Harp from Mercury, and the^ was made President of the
Muses. By which attributing the Original of Poetry to the Gods, it is evident
that the Gentiles themselves looked upon it as a Sacred and venerable Thing,
above Humane Invention. From this Spring it descended as it were by Succession
to Linus, (the Son of Apollo and Urania.) And Orpheus, (the Son of Apollo and
Calliope) and Thamyras; These two last with Hercules, were the Scholars to
Linus. We need not instance Arion, Amphion, and Musaeus, who are Poets of a
very ancient Date. Their uncommon Praises, are celebrated in so extraordinary a
manner, that there can nothing be added to their Eternal Glory, their
Encomiums, indeed, transcending all Belief and Understanding: so much did
succeeding Ages think was due to the first Fathers of Poetry, as to make their
Performances more, than Mortal.

The Divine Orpheus, the Wonder of Better Nature, with the Music of his Lyre
and Song, drew Trees, Stones, and Beasts to be his listening Audience, which is
not so impossible, since Campa^ella proves that all things have Sense. But the
charming of Rocks, Stones and Trees, the taming Wild Beasts, and the stopping
the course of ra^id Torrents, were the least of his Performances, Hell lost its
Terror, and put on a more agree^ble Face, the tortured Ghosts forgot their past
(...) in the Heaven of their present Ease, and ^he very Furies, grew Mild and
Calm at the sound of his Melodious Verse, and Lyre; all which is ^dmirably
described by Ovid, in his Metamorphosis. These Powers did Antiquity give to
Orpheus, of ^he Sweetness of whose Poesy, 'twou'd be super^uous to produce the
Testimony of the most an^ient Authors. Arion and Amphion want not their
Miracles, of the Dolphin and the Walls of Thebes. Of the latter, Horace, Art.
Poetic.

Dictus and Amphion Thebanae condior Areis
Saxa movere sono Testudinis, and prece bland^
Ducere quo vellet. --
Though there be nothing more vulgar, and com^on, than these Fables of the
Ancient Poets, and Musicians; yet do they evidently demonstrate, that even from
those Primitive Times, down to our Iron Age, these extraordinary Praises and
Encomiums were only bestowed on this divine Power of Poetry; that Poets alone
seemed worthy by this most Sacred Art to have the next place to the Gods
themselves. So that this Universal Applause (if there were no other Motive)
ought to recommend it to our Admiration and Esteem.

But it is agreed by the universal, and unanimous consent of almost all Nations,
and Authors, that Poetry not only contains all other Arts and Sciences, but has
this Prerogative peculiar to it self That no Rules, no Masters with the best
Instructions, can teach it; unless those who apply themselves to this divine
Science, are destined to the Sacred Function, by Nature, and a Genius. Whence
arose that Maxim, allowed of by all Men o^ Sense, Poeta Nascitur non Fit. That
a Poet is Born not Made. And from hence it follows in my Opinion, That a Poet
derives the honor of that Name from his Nature and Genius, not from his Art
(...) This every Scholar has, That none but the Darling o^ Heaven and Nature.
This may be acquired by a Studious Pedant, That must be born, and grow up with
the auspicious Babe, for Poeta nascitur non fit.

I Am much mistaken if Polidore Virgil, do no^ comment on this Axiom in his
first Book De Re^ Inventor. Cap. 8. where he says, It Is certain tha^ Poetry for
many Reasons excels the other Arts an^ Sciences, either because no other Art is
to be acquir'^ but by a long Application to it, or because, as Strab^ in the
beginning of his Geography, against Eratosthenes, eloquently demonstrates, it
contains all others; because of all the Arts that Humane Wit has produced
Poetry alone, it taught by a Divine Inspiration, etc.

Cicero in his Oration for Archias the Poet, has lest us the Praise of Poets
(of which Name himself had been extremely Ambitious) in these words, Atqui sic
(says he) a summis hominibus, ^ruditissimisque accepimus, caeterarum rerum
studia, and Doctrina, and Praeceptis, and Art constare; Poetam Nature ^psa
valere, and mentis viribus excitari, and quasi divino quodam spiritu afflari;
quare suo Jure noster ^nnius Sanctos appellat Poetas, quod quasi deorum aliquo
dono, and Munere commendati nobis esse videantur.

You see, Sir, that Cicero confesses that divine Fire in Poets which himself
desired in vain, and that Poets seem to be recommended by the Gift, and Benefit
of the Gods, to our reception. ^f he that felt not this Sacred Fury was
sensible of this, we may credit Ovid, who by his own Experience says, De
Fastis, lib. 6.

Facta Canam, sed erunt, qui me finxisse loquentur.
Nullaque Mortali numina visa putent.
Est Deus in Nobis, agitante Calescimus illo,
Impetus hic sacrae semina mentis habet.
And Socrates in Plato affirms this Poetical Fury ^o be divinely inspired.
Plato in his Second Book ^f the Commonwealth, calls Poets the Sons of ^he
Gods, and in Lysis terms them, the Parents and Guides of Wisdom; and elsewhere
he ca^ Homer the Father of all Wisdom and Philosophy in these Words: (...),
Home^ was the Guide and Master of the Tragical Beautie^ and Virtues. And
Petronius Arbiter tells us, tha^ the Mind can neither conceive, or bring forth
i^ Poetical Births, unless it be impregnated wit^ great and boundless stores of
Learning; and for this reason he says in his Satyricon, that Eumolp^ spoke
oft'ner divinely, that is, Poetically, tha^ like a Man.

Those who endeavor to draw the Origin^ of Poetry from Singing, are not in my
Opinion much mistaken. For when the Ancients endeavored to declare the
Affections or Passions of the Mind in Song by the Sound, and peculiar Variation
of the Voice, as it were in a more Polite an^ Elaborate Speech; this rude and
unpollish'd Soun^ by degrees refind into an Art. Which, when (...) became
(wherever it was) so improved, the with it the Praises of the Gods or Heroes,
w^ celebrated into certain Verses or Rhimes, ga^ Birth to Poetry; which indeed
seems truly, and real^ to be derived from Singing, since with the Learned even
now, a Poet is not said, to Speak, b^ Sing. The ancient Germans, a Warlike
People had no other History of the Acts of the Kin^ and Leaders, but certain
Songs or Verses, b^ which they either extolled their Warlike Exploi^ or roused
the Minds of the Soldiers to fight, as (...) find in Polyaenus, Solon,
annimated the Athenians, to Battle. And the Lacedaemonians Sacrificed to the
Muses before they began a Fight; that we read that the noble Hero, Matthias,
King of Hungary, used to be so touched with the Acts of the ancient Heroes, as
he sung 'em to his Lute, that the force with which it affected his Mind, was
apparent in his Body; imitating Achilles, who sung the Praises of great
Commanders to his Harp.

Another Proof of the Antiquity of Poesy, are the Sibyls, the Oracles of the
Pythian Apollo, many of which are in Herodotus; Inscriptions, Monuments of
Victories, Pillars, and Obelisc's, all which afford cause to believe Verse to
have a very early Original. With these the Writings of the greatest and most
ancient Authors strew their Works by their Authorities and Sentences, to render
them the more palatable and efficacious. Nay, St. Paul is said to have
convinced the Athenians of the madness of their Idolatry, by part only of a
Verse of the Poet Aratus, and to have used that Verse of Menander to the
Christian Corinthians.

Evil Discourses corrupt good Manners.
Thus much for the Divine, and very ancient Origin of Poesy, and now we are
come to the Subject of it, according to our former Division.

Though other Arts and Sciences afford abundant matter, and a large Field for our
Thoughts and Consideration; yet none can stand in competition with Poesy; for
what is there in all the wondrous Variety, and vast extent of Nature that
falls not under the consideration of a Poet? All the Wonders, Mercies, and
Favors of the highest God, can in nothing be more gloriously expressed than in
Verse: Who can describe the Beauty of his Providence, the Bounty of his Gifts,
the Sacredness of his Mysteries, with such Charms, such Force, such Excellence,
as the Poet in his Melodious Numbers, Majestic Language, and Divine Thoughts.
Hence it was that the Royal Psalmist David, chose to appease the Anger of an
offended God, with the soothing Sacrifice of this Penitential Verses. To this
we add the Hymns of the ancient Hebrews, of the old Church, and of the Poetical
and holy Fathers of the New; who to make their Ejaculations and Jubilees of
Seraphic Love, reach late Posterity, put them into Verse, as the most
agreeable, and Kindred Repository of things so Sacred. Hence also (if with
these Books we may mingle the Profane) flowed all those Hymns, Odes, Secular
Poems, and Io Paeans to Jove, Mercury, Apollo, and the rest of the Imaginary
Gods of Heathens. So Sacred has Poetry been esteemed in all Ages, so Charming,
and so Comprehensive, that they always judged whatever was designed for the
Praises of Gods, Kings and Heroes, or for the common and universal Use, Profit
and Pleasure of all Men, ought to be delivered in numbers, in Verse, as
destined to all that was Sublime and Great. To this we owe the Geneology, and
noble Deeds of the Kings and Commanders in Homer, the common Father of all
Poets, and in Virgil his Competitor of Glory; these being wrote in noble Verse,
fill our Minds with fresh and wonderful pleasure, every time we peruse them.

To proceed to the several Institutes of our Life, particularly the spurs to
Virtues, and flight from Vice, the purgation of the manners, etc. The Funeral
Griefs, and Lamentations on the Dead, and finally all those particulars that
the Accidents of humane Life produce, desirable or pleasant, all which are, and
have been the subjects of Poems: Whence the ancient Greek Authors reduced all
things divine and humane, to five Heads.

The first they termed (...), under which they seem compendiously to have
placed all that was referred to the Praises of the Gods, the Rights of
Religion, and the Victories of the Heroes, and the Celebration of noble Acts.
The second (...), in which the Virtues of great and extraordinary Men, were
praised, as Elogium and Panegyrics. The third (...), the use of which was to
express the Virtues that tended to the purging and probity of the Manners. The
forth (...) which performed the Funeral Sorrow^ and ^amentations. The fifth
they called (...), under which was contained all that could be conducive to the
Delight and Pleasures of Mankind.

Poetry having been always generously employed none can call in question the
Nobility and Excellence of its Subject and Matter. Though some perhaps may
object, that Philosophy, Law, and History, etc. treat of other things of a
higher Nature, whilst they discover things from their Causes, or by Arguments,
prove to others those that are already discovered: But they are but very raw
Novices in the Academy of Poetry, who are ignorant that the Elements or first
Foundation of most, if not all Arts, as well as their progress, are derived
from Poetry, and the best Authors of all times have granted the Poets the first
Philosophers.

For from this Treasure, or Ocean of Arts and Sciences, are all the Rivulets of
Learning sprung, and have lifted up their Heads; nay, they have abundantly
drawn whatever they contain of Pleasure or Artifice, from Poetry, as from the
vast and Mother Rceptacle of all the Mellifluous Waters of Eloquence. To this
we may add, what Strabo says, viz. Poeticem Antiqui vocant Primariam quandam
Philosophiam, quae nos a pueris ad vitam institu^i, and cum Voluptat^ doceat,
cujusmodi Mores and affectus, and Actiones nostras esse conveniat. Quin nostri
h^mines Poetam vel solum sapientem esse per^ribuerunt; ob eamque rem civitates
Greciae pu^ros primum omnium Poeticis erudiunt: non utique merae obiectationis
gratia, sed ut prudentiae modestiaeque praeceptis imbuantur i. e. The Ancients
termed Poesy a more excellent kind of Philosophy, which should from our
Childhood inform our Lives, and teach us with Pleasure, what our Manners, our
Passions, and our Actions ought to be. Nay, our Countrymen would scarce admit
any into the Number of Wise Men, but Poets; and for this Reason, the Cities of
Greece ground Boys first of all in Poetry: not merely for their Delight, but
that they may be instructed in the Precepts of Modesty, and Prudence, or Wisdom.

And justly too did the Ancients term Poetry, a more excellent Philosophy; for
if the Excellence of a thing depend on its more or less aptness to obtain the
End it is designed for, this Prerogative is justly given to Poetry: The End of
Philosophy is to form in the Mind Idea's, and habits of Virtue, and they are
fixed there better by Pleasure than Pain, because the Mind is naturally averse
to Pain, and propense to Pleasure. But the stiff, and difficult Method of those
who are Simply Philosophers, perplexes us too much with Metaphysical Notions,
Logical Distinctions, and a long train of Arguments, which gives the Mind a
fatigue to gain the Knowledge it aims at; whereas the Poetic Philosopher
proposes a fairer, more adequate, compendious and comprehensive Instruction,
which the Mind is so far from laboring to Unriddle, and Understand, that it at
first sight perceives it, is in Love with its Beauty, and greedily takes the
charming Impressions it gives, whilst conveyed into it by Melodious Numbers,
betwitching Expression, Mighty Thoughts, and Illustrious Examples. That Great
Poet and Critic Horace declares how sit he thinks Poetry for the Instruction of
Youth in the First Epistle of the Second Book.

Os tenerum pueri balbumque Poet a figurat;
Torque: ab obscaenis jam nunc sermonibus aurem:
Mox etiam P^ctus praeceptis format amicis
Asperitatis, and Invidiae, corrector and Irae, etc.
The other admirable Verses that follow these, you are, Sir, extremely well
acquainted with, which so beautifully set off the several Advantages of Poetry.
And Hieronimus Vida (one of the best Italian Poets that have writ in I atin as
Rapin assures us) in the First Book of his Poetics is of the same Mind --

Postquam igitur primas sundi puer bauserit arts
Jam nunc incipiat rig^s acced^re fontes
Et Phaebum, and Dulces Musas ass^escat Amarc.
Add to this what Horace says in his de Art Poetica

-- Fuit h^c Sapientia quondam
Publica privatis secernere, sacra Prophanis, etc.
and the Ten following Verse which I have not room here to quote. Erasmus, that
wanted n^ Wit, calls i^ a Banquet composed of all the Delicacies, and
Q^intessence of all other Arts, and Sciences. And Melan^hon places the
Excellence of Poetry for the penetration into Men's Minds, next to the Sacred
Scriptures, especially Tragedy.

P^ets being, as you see, the Darling Sons of the Gods, born to gr^t and
sublime things, and the Corrector' and Guides of Common Life, they have not,
without Reason, been esteemed by the greatest Monarchs and Potentates of the
World, and made Instructors and Tutors to Kings, and Princes: I speak of true
Poets, not of of the little Mushromes of Parnassus, the Street-repeating
Poetasters. Thus Linus was the Tutor to Hercules, the tamer of Monsters, and
Tyrants: And Alexander the Great, with veneration, respected Homer, as the
Guide, and Director of his ^ife, reading his Works daily, in the heat and hurry
of the Conquest of the World, and slept with them under his Pillow. Ennius
instructed that great General Scipio African^s in Poetry, which he judged so
advantageous to him, that he took him with him in his most weighty Expeditions,
and chose to be Buried in the same Tomb with the Poet. Nothing has to me given
a greater instance of Caesar's value for Poets, than the Welcome he gave
Catullus to his Table, the same day he had fixed such a Brand of Infamy upon
him as remains in Catullus his Works to this day. Augustus, both the Patron,
and Judge of the Muses, Caressed that Noble Pair of Poets, Horace and Virgil^
^s his most intimate and bosom Friends, honored them as his Masters, and
shower'd his Beneficent Favors on them, who, without doubt in return,
introduced him to the Sacred Penetralia of the Muses, the divine Retreats of
Apollo: which made this Emperor keep the Birthday of Virgil every Year, as if
'twere the auspicious Feast of his own Success. The Emperor Julian made the
Creek Lyric Poet Ba^bylides his Master, or Director; and Gratian after he had
made a great progress in the most generous of Learning, he honour^d and
advanced his Master Ausonius even to the Consulship. And Arcadius and Honorius
erected a Monument to the Memory of Claudian, in the forum of Trajan.

^t nothing, in my opinion, challenges the E^eem of the World more for this
Art, than that i^ (...) thus the Barbarity, and Sordidness that so generally
rules Mankind, and destroys, that Happiness we falsely aim at by other means,

Emollit Mores (as Ovid has it) nec sinit esseferos.
A Man may be a Divine, and yet be Covetous, and Deceitful, two Banes of Piety,
Religion, and Morality; but a Poet cannot be guilty either of Avarice or
Deceit, I mean a True Poet, a Virgil, a Horace, A Dryden, a Waller. And,

-- Si carmina ^ndes
Nunquam te fallant animi sub vulpe latentes.
Hor. Art. Poet.
And,

-- Vatis avarus, (number:
Non^ m^re est animus: Versus amat hoc siudet u-
(...), Incendia ridet:
N^n fr^dom So^o, Pue^e (...) ullam
(...), and (...) s^undo
(...) piger and Malu^, u^lis Urbi.
There is no need of prosecuting the point of Esteem the Poets have been in, in
the better Ages of the World, I will not therefore insist on the Seven Cities
of Greece, that strove for the Glory of Giving Birth to Homer, nor on
Alexander, who, when he took, sacked, and burnt Thebes, spared the House of
Pindor, and sixth this Verse over the Door.

(...),
Burn not Pindar's House,
the same respect was showed his House by the Lacedaemonians when they destroyed
Thebes. I Will say nothing of the honor paid to the Memory of Schesitorus, in
the Octogonal Monument at the Gates of Catana in Sicily. 'Twou'd be superfluous
to take notice of the Value Polycrates had for Anacr^n, Archelaus for
Euripides, the King of Egypt and Maced^n for Menander, Ptolo^aeus Philadelphus
for Callimachus; and what I have said before of the Latins may suffice. But
it is no wonder that the Politer Nations should have this Esteem for the
Divinest of Arts, since the very Danes, looked upon ^f Old as more Barbarous,
have yet discover^ ^ll a-long such a veneration for Poets, and Poesy, that on
the Death of one of their Kings, they exalted a Poet to the Throne, as the most
worthy to succeed the Prince, he could Praise so well; as Saxo Grammaticus, and
Joan. Bocerus ^estifie.

Without doubt by this time it is sufficiently evident. That if any Art merits
Esteem, either for the Antiquity of its Origin, or the Nobility of its
Subject, Poetry must be granted the Prerogative of Precedence in Honor.
Wherefore I shall say no more for a Proof of these two points of its Original
and Subject, but now turn our Consideration to the third Branch of my Division,
viz. The End and Profit, or advantage of Poetry.

The Philosophers lay down two principal kinds of Studies, which are indeed
different, but not opposite; that is, the Contemplative and the Practical, and
they give the preference to the former, because Contemplation is pleasant for
and in its self, and therefore more Noble; but the Practical quatenus practical
is so only in regard of something else, and therefore less Noble than
Contemplation. But it is sufficiently evident, that the Study of Poetry is for
the most part Contemplative: Since no Poet is capable of forming any Noble
Poem, with elaborateness and perfection, unless he first dispose his
Speculations, and before consider, and weigh the Materials, and the peculiar
Artifice that must be used in setting them off to their best advantage, and in
the true Ligh^ and Colors. And one thing is here to be ob^d, That a Poet
through his whole performance, both whil'd he contrives, invents, and puts his
Thoughts in Meter, is still at the same time contemplating, so that he is
composed of Speculation and Action, whereas other Studies either only
contemplate, or only precisely put in Execution the destined Actions. First
therefore, in that way Poetry is Useful in its self, and therefore admitting
the former Axiom of the Philosophers, to be valued and persu'd, because
Speculative. And Secondly, It Is Useful in regard of something else, because the
Poetical Writings chiefly contain, the most beautiful, and inviting Doctrines,
and Instructions, the best of Precepts for the happy and laudable directing of
our Lives; Noble Sayings, and Deeds, Virtues, Rights and Manners of Nations.
From all which, that may be chosen for the common benefit of Mankind, that is
most justly imitable, and worthy in Virtue, that avoided, that is most
abominable and detested in Vice.

Contemplation and Thinking is peculiarly the Poet's Business, on this Depends
all the Beauties of Thought, and Expression. By using much to Think, they come
to a justness and trueness of Thought, they run not away by halves, with
imperfect Appearances that please the Imagination; they are not taken with all
that glisters, but by much Thinking dive into the Nature of Things, and fix the
Judgment to decide the Truth, or falsity of what is Charming, and Be^tiful, and
what seems so, at a sudden view. H^e proceed Justness, Proportion and Uarmony,
without all which a Poet loses half his Glory, and Reputation with good Judges.
From hence it is evident, That the End of Poetry is Noble, since it reaches the
greatest Pleasure and the surest Profit, of our Minds, and of our Life. Since
it is directed to the Praise, of the Omnipotent, the Celebration of Virtues, the
Rewards and Glory of Noble Acts, the Punishment and Infamy of Evil: Since to it
we owe all the increases of our Knowledge; and finally, since it effects all
these nobler l^nd, it aims at.

But methinks, Sir, I hear you say, What needs all this to prove the Excellence
of a Science, that carries a Natural Worth with it, and that so clearly, that
like an innate Principle it is confessed by all self-evident? for there is none,
however dull, but does, or has attempted Poetry, with more or less success,
whilst other Artts, and Sciences are not so universally caressed. All pretend
not to Philosophy, Mathematics, Law, Physic, or desire to be thought
Proficients in those Arts; but every one would be thought a Poet, as if without
being so, he could not be thought a Man, so essential to Mankind does the
universal and unanimous Ambition and Aim at it of every Man make it. I grant
you, Sir, this is a sufficient Argument to any sensible Man, that considers it.
But how few reflect on this, when they run down what they could not obtain on
their Endeavor; the greatest Railer against this divine Art, would be proud to
Father an excellent Poem. ^d it must be granted by them, That the greate^
^hilosophers. Historians, Orators, Physicians, Divines, Princes, Kings and
Emperors of all Ages have discovered this Desire we mention, and have made it
evident, That they either were, or fain would be Poets.

To pass over the Hebrews we have already mentioned among the Roman Emperors,
how few but have discovered this Ambition? Julius Caesar, Augustus, Nero,
Adrian, Gratian, Theodosius, Honorius, etc. Those of Julius Caesar.

Feltria perpetuo nivium da^ata rigore
Forte mihi posthac non adeunda vale.
Augustus often exercised this Faculty, particularly on Virgil's desire that
his Aeneids might be burnt; which begin thus:

Ergone supremis poluit vox improba ^rbis
Tam-dirum mandare Nefas? Ergo ibit in ignes
Magnaque doctilequi morietur Musa Maronis? etc.
Seneca gives us this Verse of N^o's composing with his Commendatory
Introduction, 1. D^ Nature. Quaest. Cap. 5. Quid ^rgo sit? Colorem non Ima^inem
ducunt; alioquin ut ait Nero Caesar diser^ssime.

Colla Cytheriacae Splendent agitata Columbae.
More of his we might borrow from Persius, if we (...) ^his Interpreters.
Adrian returns the Poet Flor^s his Complement sent him in these Verses,

Ego n^lo Flor^s Esse
Amlulare per Tabernas
Latitare per popinas
Culices pati rotundas.
Nay, he was so very Poetical, that when he wa^ a dying, he Versify'd on his
Soul,

Anima vagula blandula
H^spes comesque (...)
Quae nunc abibis in loca
Pallidula, rigida, nudula,
Nec ut soles, dabis jocos?
Those that are attributed to Gallienus, have more of a Poet, which he repeated
at the Wedding of his Nephews, as Trebell^s Pollio has it; holding them by the
Hands;

Ite ait, o pueri, pariter sudate Medullis
Omnibus inter v^s; non (...) v^stra columbae
Brachta non bederae, non vincant Oscula conchae.
And to say truth, it is pity Gallienus ever spoiled an Emperor since he would
have made an excellent Poet; for as Tr^bellius confessest, fuit enim Gallienus,
quod negari non potest, oratione, Poemate, atque Omnibus artibus Clarus. For
Gallienus was, says he, ^inent in Oratory; Po^try, and all other Arts. And
indeed his horrid Remissions proceeded from his being concent with whateve^
fortune would let him have; he wanted Ambition, and was, as Horace describes a
Poet M^litiae piger and malus. Jul^n's Epigrams are to be found in the
Anthology; and Ausonius informs us, that Theod^sius was no small pretender to
Poetry in these Verses.

Bellandi fandique potens Augustus, honorem
Bis meret, ut geminet titulas: qui praelia Musis
Temperat, and Get^m M^deratur Apolline Martem.
Arma inter C^brosque truces, furt^que nocentes
Sauromatas, quantum cessat de tempore belli
Indulget lat^s tantum inter castra Camaenis, etc.
In short, though the Spirit of Poetry decayed among the Romans, with their
Empire, yet was there scarce one that did not make some pretenses to the Muses.
Nay, look among the Clergy of former Ages, and you shall find Popes, Bishops,
Cardinals, etc. stand candidates for the Bays, as well as Socrates, Plato,
Democritus, Lycurgus, Solon, Aristotle, among the Philosophers and Legislators;
among the undignified Divines, Melanchton B^za, ^facomatus Art^medes, etc. the
Civilians, Ulp^n, Modestinus, Alciatus, Budaeus, Tur^bus, and a great many
others, too numerous to be here inserted among the Physicians, Ansonius,
Fracastorius, Cordus, L^bius Secundus, Sinetius, P^sthius, Sambu^us, etc. Nay,
even among the Critics, a morose Generation, the Scaliger's Father and Son, the
Dousa's Father and Son, Cam^ranus, Mycillus, Stigelius, etc. among the
Historians, Buchanan, Nat^ Comes, Lil. Gyraldus, Ra^pius, Meibonius, Baudius,
etc. Among the Rheto^itians, Pontanus, Angel. Polit^us, etc.

Thus much for Exotics; but (Sir) should I pretend to number the Poets, and
Pretenders to Poetry in our own Nation, as 'twou'd be superfluous, so 'twou'd
be endless. Search all Ranks and Degrees of Men, from the Beau Lord, to the
homely Swain, a keeping his Sheep, or driving his Hoggs; and as Cupid, so has
Apollo been at work with 'em; the S^lvia's and M^ia's, the Jones and Sue have
had their respective Tribute of Rhyme, and from the grave Doctor of Divinity,
to the little Country Curate, with his Problematic Crambo's, and Hypothetic
Propositions So that there can be no more doubt made of the former Assertion of
all Men's Desires and Pretensions to it, than that those are a Proof of its
received Excellence.

Before I conclude this Essay, I shall obviate two or three Objections, made by
some old morose Sparks, that have outlived that little Sense their more
sprightly years afforded them, and some Precisians, that build Piety and
Godliness in Spiritual Railings, and a mortified Phiz, which are but Feints, or
Blinds to Observers.

The first is, that it is a very useless and unprofitable Study, no Estates to
be got by it, at least in this Age: That it contributes merely to Pleasure, not
to our knowledge. To the first I answer, that it is very true, that there is no
hopes of rising to be an Alderman by Poetry; but then I must tell them, it is
not for those to apply themselves t^ that place the Desires of their Souls on
Money; for a^ they will never obtain that end by it, so will they never reach any
Excellence in the Art, as being not destined by nature to it; for to a Poet,
Heaven gives a large and noble Soul, above the Narrow aim of Baggs and Hords of
Treasure; and thus far I shall grant it an unprofitable Study, as Petronius
Arbiter has witnessed long ago:

Qui Pelago (...), magno se saenore t^llit
Qui Pugnas, and Castra petit, prae^ngitur Auro,
Vilis Adulat^r picto jacet ^brius Ostr^,
Et qui s^llicitat (...) ad Praem^ peccat:
Sola Pruinosis b^rrel Facundia Pannis
Atque (...) lingu^ desert invocat Arts.
No, there are the roating Billows, The Camp, the Court, and the City allotted
by Fate for those that thirst for Wealth; the Muses love Tranquillity, an Easy
and Contented State, and teach their Darlings, that

Nec vixit male qui Natus mori ensque fefellit.
The Riches the Poet gains is Fame: It terminates not with this life like
Money, and Estate, nor can his Spendthrift Son lavish the mighty Store he has
laid up, as the Miser's Son does what his Father got from Fools or Knaves. Nay,
the Usefulness of this Study is opposite to getting Estates as they are
generally got: It punishes Avarice, rewards Generosity, softens the Mind from
Barbarity to Compassion for the Miseries of others, cleanses it from Deceit and
Hypocrisy, elevates it from little base Designs, to Noble and Open Actions,
and so through all the Ends and Uses of this Divine Art.

As to the Second that it contributes merely to our Pleasure, not Knowledge,
that is evidently false, both from what has been said, and from a Consideration
that it yields not only a Necessary, but Noble Knowledge, that is, of Men, of
Manners, of Virtue, etc. Nor is there any Study or Art but has been attempted
in Poetry, as a short view will man eviden^. To pass over David and the Hebrews
Poets, whose Excellencies are lost by the general Ignorance, not only of the
Language they wrote in, but the Custom, etc. on which many of the Beauties
depend. Orpheus, Horner, Pindar, Horace, etc. have celebrated the Praises of
the Divine Power, though under the Names of their Supposititious Gods, and
Goddesses. Among the Christians, we ^ind Prudentius, Juven^us, Arator, Vidas,
Mauri^us, Sa^azarius, Vul^eius, and an in^able Company of Sa^red Writers.
Astrology, Astronomy, etc. has been treated of by ^ius, Aratus, Palingenius,
Manillius, Buchanan, etc. Physic's by H^siod, Ma^er, Lucretius, (...), and
others. Husbandry by Hesiod, Virgil, etc. Pastoral (...) and Spor^s,
The^critus, (...), (...), Dantes, etc. Hunting has been dis^urs'd of by Gratius
Nemesianus, Natales Co^, etc. Tragedy (which affords us a hundred ^able ^essons
of Knowledge, and Improvement) we owe chiefly to Aeschylus, Sophocles, and
Eurip^s (...) I think our English Tragedians, have ex^ell'd them, particularly
Mr. Dryden, who in (...), (...) ^ll always think, has (...) ou^ done Soph^les
Then for the Acts of Heroes, we have Homer, Virgil, Pin^ Lucan, S^atius, Cowly,
Sir William D'Avenant (...) this is a sort of Poem which Horace think, more
Instructive than Philosophy, in his second Epistle of his first Book to Lollius.

Trojani belli scrip^orem maxim Lolli,
Dum tu d^clamas Romae, Praen^ste relegi (quidnon,
Quiquid sit (...), quid Turpe, quid Utile,
Ple^us ac melius Chrysipp^ and Crantore di^s.
Nor are the Amorous Essays of Ana^, Sappho, Gallus, Catullus, Ovid, H^race,
Tibullus, Pr^pertius, with abundance of the Moderns, to be thought ill of by
the Precisians, as we shall by and by prove, but granted Improvers o^ our
Knowledge in the Nature of the passions, the fatigues, and pleasures of love,
as well as the Dangers and Impertin^ces of Intrigue. Opp^ wrote o^ (...),
Nicander of Antidotes against the ^iting of Venomous Beasts, of Herbs, and
Ga^dening. Ma^r and Palladius, of Plants. Mr. Cowly, of Medicine, S^renus,
(...), and M^llus: Of Weights, and Measures, Q (...) Fa^us (...); which Book by
some is attributed to (...), and Pythagoras, (...) in Verse of the Precepts of
Virtue, and Solon, and (...), of Poli^s or the Administration o^ the Common
Wealth: Wholesome, and Inst^uctive Satyr, H^race, Juvenal, Persius, Mr. Dryden,
Mr. W^herly in his Plain^ ^ler, and other Poets have given us; nor are the
little (...) to be ^orgot, having their Use and Diversion, though, I confess my
self no Admirer of that sort of Poetry, if it merit that Name.

From hence it is Evident, That we may not only learn all that can be
advantageous to our Knowledge, and by consequence that the accusation is false,
that it serves only to Pleasure; but also that All things that are the Subjects
of this Sovereign of Sciences.

There remains yet an Objection, some Men make no final bustle about, viz.
That Poetry is too profane in making use of so many false Gods, and Goddesses,
Fanus, Satyrs, and Nymphs, and the rest of the gay Race of Fancy; and that they
scatter the Seeds of Debauchery in the Minds of Youth, by their Amorous Verses,
their Lustful Songs, etc. for which Reason even Plato Banished them from his
Commonwealth.

The first part of this Objection, I Am confident, you will think extremely
ridiculous, and that it merits not to be taken Notice of. But when you shall
remember that in the Third Century the Christians were so Zealous, as to forbid
the reading of all Heathen (...), particularly Poets, on the A^count, and
consider, that we have some still (...) the same Mind here in England, that
would not have the Name of Jupiter, Mars, and Venus (no, not in Pr^pria quae
Maribus) come into their Childrens Mouths, especially their Worships, their
^overs etc. I hope you will allow that it is not wholly unnecessary to clear
even this Objection.

It Is true, these Fables cannot be condemned by any, but by those who are
incapable to dive into the admitable use of 'em. They must consider, that every
Art, as well as every Language. has its peculiar Beauties and Prop^ieties of
Elocution, to take which away (especially if, as Poets particularly do, we
represent Antiquity) is to render it almost insipid, and without its most
taking quality Pleasure, that best conveys Instruction. Rob Poetry of this
Be^uty of the Fables and the Gods (...) mean the ancient Poems, so full of
admirable Instruction by their means given us with Pleasure, and Delight) and
you destroy the Excellence of the best of Poets, rend^ing their Poems
Imperfect, and ^ame; and if any Christian Poets makes use of these Gods, there
is no fear certainly of their paying them any Vene^ation, when they only employ
them as the Vehicles of their Designs. But enough on this Point.

The other of the Looseness of Amorous Verses; it is a part of the Knowledge of
the World, to have a perfect view of all the Effects of Love, all its Ways,
Manners, and Expressions, and those who forbid the Reading of these, take away
an admirable Guide to those that must Live where not to be in Love, or have to
do with those that are so, is impossible, and Scandalous even in the P^ence.
There are other advantages of the ^wdest Essays of this Nature, which a Man of
Sense will make of them, and none, indeed, should read those ^ut such. And that
Plato banished Poets out of (...) Commonwealth, yet could he write things of a
more lewd Strain than the Worst of 'em, witness these Verses on the Kissing of
Agatho, done from his Greek by Decimus Laberius.

Dum Semibulco savio
Meum Puellum Savior
Duleemque storem Spiritus
Duco ex aperto Tramite:
Anima tunc aegra and Sauci^
Cueurrit ad Labia mihi,
Rictumque in or is pervium
Et labra pueri Mollia
Rim^a ^neri transitus
Ut transiliret nititur.
Tum si, morae quid plusculae
F^sset in Co^u Oscula
Amoris igni percita
Transisset, and me linqueret.
Et ^ra prorsum res foret,
Ut ad me fierem Mortuus
Ad pu^rum ut intus Viverem.
Petronius himself has scarce gone beyond this with his Gyt^n, etc. And his

Qualis nox fuit illa dii deaeque
Quam Mollis tor^us! haes^mus calentes
Et trans^udimus hinc, and hinc labellis
Errantes animas. Valete curae!
Mortalis ego sic perire (...).
Plato's Republic was but a Eutopia at best, and aimed at new ways of forming
the Minds of Men by Laws, not so agreeable perhaps to Man's Nature, as more
Politic Legislators have composed, who received this Noble Art, and honored its
Professors with Public Veneration; being sensible that it was the surest, and
best In^ctrix of Mankind, but that it gave Immortality to those that favored
it with their Protection, and Generosity.

O sacer, and magnus vatum labor, omn^ Fato,
Eripis, and populis donas mortalibus ^vum.
Whoever would raise his Mind above the Vulgar taste, and form in his Breast
noble Designs, must apply himself to a reading of the Poets; as Petronius
Arbiter has it.

Artis severae siquis amat essectus
Menteinque Magnis applicat --
-- (...) pr^os versibus annos
Mae^mque bibat faeli^ (...) fontem.
As there is a Natural Excellence in being a Poet, so is there in Esteeming one
and nothing, shows the Degeneracy of an Age more, in Honor, as well as sense,
than a Contempt of this Divine Science, and the (...) Masters of it. So that I
must in^er that this Present Age is at a very low Ebb of Both; that, though
blessed with as great Poets as ever Greece or Rome produced has so very little
regard to them, as not to make Public Sacrifices of its Dross to the Use of Two
such Extraordinary Men. There is a Plebeian Genius spread among us, and
Generous and Noble Acts, are contemned and laughed at. But then, Sir, in so
general a Defect to be Singular in Taste, challenges the more Honor; and this
makes me ashamed to offer so unpolished and hasty a piece as this at your Feet,
who are not only an excellent Judge of the most difficult Things, and even in
the first Bloom of your Youth, have Mastered the whole Circle of the Sciences,
but also have a peculiar Esteem for this I plead for, and by your admirable
Choice of those you converse with, show you can let none of your Hours be lost,
either with tristing Books in your Study, or Impertinent Coxcombs in your
Conversation: I should not have the Vanity to say this, were I so happy as to
be often blessed with your Company, I catch it but now and then unwilling to
make you do Penance for my Satisfaction; and this Consideration will oblige me
to put an end to this Essay, only desiring your leave publicly to declare my
self what I am; That is,

SIR, Your real Friend and humble Servant.

To Mr. T. S. in Vindication of Mr. Milton's Paradise lost.
SIR,
YOU will pardon me, I am confident, though in Opposition to your Thoughts, I
positively declare my self extremely well pleased with that part of Mr.
Milton's most excellent Poem, to which you discover the least Inclination:
Those Ancient, and consequently less Intelligible Words, P^rases, and Similies,
by which he frequently, and purposedly affects to express his Meaning, in my
Opinion do well suit with the Venerable Antiquity, and Sublime Grandeur of his
Subject. And how much soever some Unthinking have Condemned this his Choice.
You, who have Maturely weighed, how much deeper an Impression less used, (so
they be what you will grant his always are) Significant words, make on a
Readers fancy, than such as are more common; (you I say) must pay a vast
deference to Mr. Milton's great Judiciousness in this particular, no less than
to his entire Manage of every part of that Charming Poem, in which upon every
Occasion he discovers himself a perfect, unimitable Master of Language. Here
are you forced to give a profound Attention to the Universal Creator, speaking
like that Almighty, who by the Fiat of his Mouth made all things, and yet so
Gracious are All his Expressions, as if he valued himself more on his Good Will
to Man, than on his Prerogative over him: There, shall you read Man, addressing
himself Submissively like a Creature, who owes his Being to a better, wiser,
and higher power, and yet not so Abjectly, but you will easily perceive him to
be Lord of the whole Creation. Elsewhere, you may see an Angel discovering
himself, not a Little Man's Superior by Creation, in Place and Power more, but
in Knowledge most of all. In another place, behold Woman, appearing Inferi^r to
both these, and yet more Ambitious than (...), but then softer, much in her
Make and Manners, than her rougher Spouse, whom down right Sincerity, and
unaffe^d plainness, seem mostly to Delight. Nor can I now forget with what vast
complacency we have o^t together read the most Natural, Lively, yet (as their
Sexes) different Descriptions, our first Parents, separately make of their own
Apprehensions of themselves, at their first finding themselves Living
Creatures. Nay, the very fallen Angels are much Honored above the best of
their deserts, by the Amazing Relation, we there meet with of their Ambition,
Malice, Inveteracy, and Cunning; and never was Scene, so livelily shown, as
that of his Pandaemonium in the first Book. Once more, and you are no le's
astonished at his Description, than he makes the Angels, to be at the Report of
their Adversaries Thund^ing Fireworks. And yet, if his Matter requires a
Meaner Style, how much soever he speaks Loftily at one time, at another does,
even to a Miracle, suit his Speech to his Subject. This (I well know) has been
censured in him for Servile (...); but if it is well considered, upon what
proper Occasion he thus humbles his Style, 'twill be Accounted, (as really it
is) his Great Commendation: But in praise of Mr. Milton's admirable Dexterity
in this his Matchless Performance, since All I can say must come exceeding
short of his due Merit, that I bring not my self under the Correction of that
known saying. Praestat de Carthagine tacere quam pauca dicere. I shall venture
to add no more but this; though the Composing such a complete Poem on such, a no
less Obscure, than weighty Subject, was a Task to be performed by Mr. Milton
only, yet it is not out of doubt, whether himself had ever been able so to Sing
of Unrevealed Heavenly Mysteries, had he not been altogether deprived of his
Outward Sigh^, and thereby made capable of such continued (...), Inward
Speculations: as he who has the us^ of his Bodily Eyes, cannot possibly become
possessed with. This however must be Granted, as indubitably true; The bountiful
Powers above, did more than make him amends for their taking away his Sight, by
so Illumining his Mind, as to enable him most completely to ^ng of Matchless
Beings, Matchless Things, before unknown to, and even unthought of by the whole
Race of Men; thus rewarding him for a Temporary Loss, with an Eternal Fame, of
which Envy it self shall not be able ever to deprive this best of Poems, ^ir
its most Judicious Author.

In this Faith I Subscribe my self, SIR, Yours, etc.

To J. H. Esquire In Answer to the Question, Who was the Greatest Englishman.
SIR,
I Am extremely sensible under how many disadvantages I undertake the
Resolution of your demand, who was the greatest Englishman? And but that I have
this Satisfaction left me, that where the Meanness of my Thought is
Inconsistent with the Eminency of his Virtues, and my ill management of the
whole, looks like a lessening the Grandeur of his Actions, you will discover at
once Goodness enough to pardon me, and to entertain an agreeable Opinion of my
Hero; (but for this I say) I had not dared thus to expose my own Weakness, and
his Worthiness.

SIR,

I have pitched upon Thomas Cromwell, Earl of Essex, and Viceregent of England,
for this Man of Ten Thousand: A Man, who by his Merit alone raised himself from
the meanest Condition, to the highest Honor: A Man in nothing unhappy, so much
as to have lived in the Reign of Henry the VIII. of whom it was truly said,
That he never spared Woman in his Lust, or his best Favorite in the Wrath. In
whose chiefest Esteem our Cromwell did yet a long time remain: Admired by his
Friends, dreaded by his Enemies, carest by all, and in one Word, invested with
a more Extensive Power, than any Subject of England was ever before, or since
possessed of. He was born at Putney, in Surrey, where his Father lived, an
honest Blacksmith. In all the little Passages of his Youth, he discovered an
Active Towering Disposition, fond of Traveling, and covetous of Employments,
much greater than his Descent, or Education could pretend to; though Nature, the
better to qualify him for the Grandeur, to which he was designed, had endowed
him with an apprehensive Wit, a discerning Judgment, a prodigious Memory, a
Florid Elocution, and a resolute Soul, not to be discomposed by the greatest
Dangers.

By what helps he crossed the Seas, I know not; but there I find him in the Year
1510. perfect in many Languages. and after a while associating himself to some
Persons, deputed by the Town of Boston, to procure them two Pardons, for which
they had been long Soliciting in vain at Rome. Cromwell observing that the
Delays caused by the Pope's Ministers, proceeded only from their Griping
Disposition, resolved by a Witty Stratagem to effect that, which by Reason and
Importunity he could not: having one day prepared some delicious Jellies after
the English manner, as the Pope was returning from Hunting, he approached him
with these, and a Song, wherewith the Old Father Julius being extremely
delighted; upon Enquiry after their Business and Country, he immediately
stamped their Pa^dons, and ordered 'em a Dispatch, having first learnt the
Manners of preparing a Dish so agreeable to his Holiness's Palate. And this
little Contrivance is the more remarkable; for that the Court of Rome, which
goes beyond all others in Intriguing, were hereby fairly Outwitted: He served
afterward in the Duke of (...)'s Army at the Siege of Rome, and was in the
French Camp at the Defeat of Gatillion; as yet he had no true Sense of
Religion, though after his Journey to Rome, in which he got the N^w Testament by
Heart, he began to be be ter acquainted with the Principles of Christianity.
Upon his Return into England, finding Cardinal Wolsey the only Man in Favor,
he entered into his Service, and advanced himself therein considerably, by
acquitting himself faithfully of all things, wherewith he was entrusted; here
he discovered such forwardness in the suppressing of several Monasteries, given
by the King to the Cardinal his Master for building Christ's College, Oxon; as
that thereby he procured himself such abundance of ill Will from the
Superstitious, as that after the Cardinals Fall, he was represented to the
King, as the worst of Men; and the King, the more easily credited, reports
against him, because with much Zeal, and as much Ingenuity he pleaded the
Cardinals Cause in the House of Commons, (of which he was then a Member) and
this his Fidelity, to his declining Master, is the more worthy Praise, for that
it is rare indeed to see any one stand by a Falling Favorite.

When Cromwell felt the Dissolution of Wolsey's Family, he endeavored to get
into the King's Service; which Sir Christopher Hales, Master of the Rolls, and
my Lord. Russell happily brought about, though the King (as has been said) was
prepossest exceedingly to his disadvantage: My Lord (with a Goodness
inseparable from his Family) earnestly solicited his Promotion, not only out
of Gratitude (Cromwell having saved his Life at B^nonia) but also because he
sound him most forward to promote a Reformation in Religion, to which his
Lordship stood well affected; and it was ^ne Great Argument, made use of to
move the King) to favor him, that he was the most fit of ^ll others to (...)
the Int^igues of the Popish Clergy. The King, after having admitted him to his
Presence, asked him some Questions, and heard his Complaints against the most
Eminent ^ticklers for the Popes Supremacys: and as a mark of his special
Favor, he gave him the Ring from his Finger, and sent him to the Convocation,
which he having the King's Signet boldly entered, and seating himself among the
Bishops^ to their great Amazement and Confusion, tax^ them with such Crimes as
had brought them in t^ such a Praemunire, as that thereby (says he) yo^ have
forfeited all your Goods, Chattels, Lands^ and whatever other Benefits you are
possessed of^ By this means he enriched the King's Coffer wit^ 118840 l. which
the Clergy had raised by Subsidy^ that by Act of Parliament they might be
quitted from the Praemunire, into which Cromwell demonstrated they had run
themselves.

By such ways he Ingratiated himself very much with the King, who now conferred
the Honor o^ Knighthood upon him, made him Master of the King's Jewel House,
and soon after admitted him into the Privy Council; 1524 he was made Master of
the Rolls, and in the year 1527 he was installed Knight of the most Noble Order
of the Garter^ and afterward Created Earl of Essex, and Lord Great Chamberlain
of England; and as the highest Mark of the King's Affection and Esteem for him,
he was constituted Vicegeront in the King^ Absence. Thus being raised to the
very Pinnacle o^ Honor, like a Politic and Faithful Statesman, h^ was
continually studying the Security of the Government, and the most proper
methods for settling Peace and Tranquillity throughout the whol^ Kingdom; and in
order hereunto, he resolved upon Correcting the Vices of the Age, encourageing
Virtue, establishing Good Orders, and reforming Corruptions: And for that was
manifest, there would not be wanting great Endeavors to subvert the
Government: while Monasteries and such like Religious Houses (those Sources of
vicious plotting Wretches, whose Interest it was to adhere to the Pope) were
not destroyed, he induced the King to suppress (...) (...), then the small
Monasteries, and afterward the Abbys, till all the Religious Fraternities of
that sort in England were dissolved. And that he might be sure of Success in
his Resolution of settling the Reformed Religion, (of which he was a zealous
Asserter, securing the Professors thereof from the Popish Bishops Fury and
Rage) he persuades the King to ally himself to some Protestant Prince; and
accordingly a Match was made with the Lady Ann, Sister to the Prince of Cleve,
by whose Protection the Protestants were very much Emboldn'd to a more public
P^osession of their Religion. Thus did he fortunately carry on the Reformation,
to the larger growth, whereof he gave an extraordinary assistance, by obtaining
from the King a Grant for publishing the Bible in the English Tongue, whereby
many were helped to discern the Fallacies and Heresies of the R^omish Faith,
who before had taken up with what Trash the Priests had put upon 'em. Who now
are importunate for a Convocation, which the King summoned to adjust Matters of
Religion; in this Assembly Cromwell takes place of all the Clergy, by the Title
of Vicar General, and disputes strennously for the Protestant Faith. But his
Zeal on this Account procured him not a few considerable ^nemies, of whom
Bishop Gardener (the most subtle and inveterate of all others) was still
laboring to bring about his ruin, which at length, with a great deal of Joy he
thought he saw a fit time for the accomplishment of, and herein, indeed, he was
not mistaken. The King, by an inconstancy, natural to him, was grown weary of
his Queen, and his Love was now placed upon the Lady Katherine Howard; this
Gardener observing, took the Liberty to tell the King, that 'twas absolutely
necessary for the Quiet of the Kingdom, and Security of the Succession, to have
an English Queen; and at same time, with abundance of Cunning, he in^igates the
King against Cromwell, as the sole Cause of his unhappy Marriage with Q. Ann;
and this so wrought upon his Majesty, (who was ever violent in his Love and
Hatred) that imagining Cromwell was the only Obstacle to the Repudiation of his
Wife, and his Match with Katherine, he so hearkn'd to the Accusations of his
Enemies, as to give Consent that he should be Arrested (...) And accordingly by
the Duke of Norfolk he was Arrested in the Council Chamber, and committed to
the Tower, where he lay not long before h^ was attainted of High Treason. Some
of the Articles against him were, That he had dispersed many Erroneous Books
contrary to the Faith of the Sacrament; that he had Licensed many Preachers,
suspected of Heresy; that he said he would not turn to the Pope's Obedience,
though the King turned; but if the King did turn, he would fight in person
against him; and drawing out hi^ Dagger, wished that might pierce him to the
Heart if he should not do it; that hearing some Lords were plotting against
him, he threatened he would raise great Stirs in England. Though accused both of High
Treason and Heresy, his Enemies durst not b^ing him to a Trial; but against
all Law and Justice he was condemned, while confined to the Tower; during his
Imprisonment he requested one of the Commissioners, sent to treat with him, to
carry from him a Letter to the King; which he refusing with passion, and saying
he would carry no Letter from a Traitor: Cromwell asked him only to deliver a
Message from him, and upon his Consent. You shall recommend me to the King,
(says Cromwell) and let him understand that by that time he has so well tried
you, and thoroughly proved you, as I have done, he shall find you as false a
Man, as ever came about him. In all his adversity he was patient to a Miracle;
and when on the 28th of July he was brought to the Scaffold, and beheaded on
Tower Hill, he behaved himself with all the Gallantry and Constancy of a
Resolved Christian. He uttered fervent Prayers, and made a short Speech,
wherein he said he died in the Catholic Faith, meaning thereby no more (as from
his whole Life, and even at his Death, wherein he used no Popish Ceremony, it
must be concluded) than that he died in the true Christian Catholic Faith. Thus
fell this Great Man, and with him for a long time did the Reformation seem to
lie dead; his Death, who was the chief Instrument in it, putting such a stop to
that imperfect work, that not Cran^ himself, in that King's Reign, could ever
afterward gain any Ground for it: Nay, rather did it decline, for several
Preachers of the Reformed Religion were burnt in a short time after; by all
which it appears, how great a Loss the Church sustained, in being deprived of
so able and powerful a Member, who more than any, opposed himself with Great
Zeal against the Impudences and Contrivances of the Pope's Subtle and Malicious
Agents.

I shall not tire your patience, if I recite a passage or two of this Brave
Man's extraordinary Generosity. It is but too common for those, who from a low
degree, are raised to a high Estate, to look with the greatest Contempt upon
such, who have most obliged them; but our Cromwell in the full Enjoyment of all
his Dignities, bore himself with a Moderation, peculiar to himself. Witness his
taking notice of a poor Woman, who kept a Victualling-House, and had formerly
trusted him to the value of 4^ s. whom espying, as he was riding through
Cheapside, he ordered to be called to him; and after having acknowledged the
Debt, he sent her to his House, discharged that, and gave her an Annual Pension
of Four Pound, and a Livery, during Life. But what follows is much more
remarkable; As he was riding with some Nobles to the King's Palace, he saw one
footing it in the Streets, whom he thought he knew, immediately ord'ring his
whole Train to await him; he lights off his Horse, upon Enquiry, finding him
the Man he took him for, he embraces the Mean Stranger; and to the Wonderment
of all about him, invites him to Dinner: his have at that time prevented a
longer stay; and therefore he left the amazed Stranger, who Enquiring his Name
of my Lord's Attendants, began to be troubled with the reflections which this
unexpected Accident gave him. Cromwell, who had stayed some time with the King,
at his return home, finds him attending in the Court Yard, where again
Embracing him, he takes him to his Table, and after some time finding the Lords
who accompanied him, no less surpised at his Condescension than was the
Stranger: he makes 'em this Relation; You wonder to see me thus Obliging, but
you will be more amazed when I tell you I am more Indebted to this Very Man,
than to the whole World beside; for after the defeat of Gatillion, I came to
Florence so needy, that being forced to beg an Alms, this Worthy Merchant Mr.
Francis Frescobald seeing I knew not what in my Face that pleased him upon
Enquiry of what Country I was, pitying me in my Necessity, he took me home, and
gave me a Suit of Apparel, a Horse and 16 Ducats of Gold to bear my Expenses
to England; and now turning him about to Mr. Frescobald, And what, Dear Friend,
(says he) has brought you hither? The generous Merchant after he had recovered
himself out of the amaze this happy Providence cast him into, told him, That he
was become so Poor by his vast Losses, that of all the Wealth he formerly
enjoyed, but 15000 Ducats were left him, and they were Owing him here, and hard
to be Got too: Cromwell, after he he had obtained a List of his Debtors, sent a
Servant of his own, in his Name, to Demand those Sums for the Merchant: After
Dinner, taking his Friend apart, he gave him first 16 Ducats for those he had
received, then 10 for his Apparel, and 10 more for his Horse, and at last he
Gave him Four Bags, each quantity 400 Ducats for Interest: after all, he
passionately requested his stay in England, offering to lend him (...) Ducats
for 4 Years to Trade withal; but Frescobald having by Cromwell's Authority,
obtained all his Money (preferring before all his Native Country) after a
thousand Acknowledgements made him, returned for Florence, with a due Sense of
this so Extraordinary and Generous Entertainment.

But I am afraid, Sir, I grow too much upon your (...) and therefore will shut
up with the (...) Cra^er gave him in a Letter to the K^ on his (...) -- I have
fou^ (says he) that my Lord Cromwell has always lov^ you above all (...) Served
you with such Fi^lity and S^, (...) ^e no King of England (...) a be^ (...) and
it is my (...) t^ your Majesty may find a Counselor who both can and will
(...) his Trust as my Lord Cromwell (...) d^ne.

But alas, nothing could move that Inexorab^ (...), who (...) than ^orego his
unlawful Lust to the Lady H^ward (whom he dared not Marry while Cromwell lived)
Sacrificed this his Darling (...). And though it adds Greatly to my Lord (...),
Fame, that after his Death, he was (...) bewall'd by the King, who frequently
cried out for his Cromwell. Yet was not this a due Reparation to England for
the ^odd of such an Extraordinary Man whose Virtues were so Singular, his
Services so Signal, both to the Nation in General, and to the Reformation in
particular: whose Zeal to God was so True, whose Temp^rance so Constant in all
Conditions; who (in one word) was possessed of a Courage so (...) and a
Fidelity so rare, that I make no doubt you will with me Conclude, a Man Endowed
with all these, and many more Excellent (...), well deserves the Title of the
Greatest Englishman, which therefore I affix to Thomas Cromwell the Great Earl
of Essex, and so conclude,

SIR, Yours, etc. J. J.

Cloe to Urania, against Women's being Learned.
I Have, my dear Urania, so ill defended the the Cause you always (...), that
Lysander has convinced me that Lea^ning is not for (...) Sex; but before I make
an entire delivery of my Judgment to his Arguments; I thought sit to send them,
as well as I can remember them, to Urania, to see what influence they will have
on her; and how she will defend the Point against an Opponent, she has often so
well handled without one.

Lysander will have it, That Learning in common Prudence ought by the Men to be
denied us; since it would not only make us proud, and imperious, and aspire to
the command over Men; which, as we might by such Auxiliary force easily obtain,
the Charms of the Body alone giving us too great an Ascendant over Men; so we
should not want the desire of obtaining it, having got the means. Secondly,
That since, as he will have it, we were designed by God for Obedience, not
Rule; to be instructed by our Husbands, and to study only Household Affairs, it
would be Impious to raise us from the Office Nature had allotted us, to a
Nobler Station. Thirdly, That Learned Women are seldom Chaste, Learning
disposing 'em to Inconstancy, and Infidelity to their Husbands in longing for
foreign Embraces, and that betwixt a Woman's Desire and Act, there is nothing
but Opportunity.

This, in short, is the Substance of what he urged though with more advantageous
Circumstances of a ^ine turn of words, and several Examples to confirm his
Assertions, which whether true or false, I cannot determine. But one thing I
must not forget; that he much urged a Book called, Advice to a Daughter, the
Authority of which was too much Established for me to Condemn. (...) leave the
whole to the Judicious, and Ingenio^ Urania, whom I, and every one must own the
be^ Advocate for our Sex. But though I Will never dispute that Prize with you, yet
I shall always that of which of us is the best Friend, and you must confess,
that I am without reserve

your Sincere, and Faithful Cloe.

An Answer to the foregoing Letter in Defense of Women's being Learned. URANIA
to CLOE.
I Received yours; my Charming Cloe, the beginning of the last Week, but the
Niceness of the Subject, would not permit me to send you an immediate Answer,
being too much, at that time, taken up with other Affairs; but having now got
an Hour to my self, I shall cursorily consider the weight of Lysander's
Objections.

Lysander, I must confess, is a Man of a great d^ of Wit, and delivers his
Arguments on any Subject with that address, that they appear much stronger from
his Mouth, than in Writing; yet I must assure you, nothing I have yet seen of
his carries so little weight, as what you have sent me; which shows how bad a
Cause he had undertaken, since it could only furnish him with such weak
Supports, as he has produced. And I Am confident, your Love for Lysander, bribed
your Judgment to his side, which you have too much of to submit to such feeble
Reasonings.

Learning, he tells you, will add fresh Pride to our Sex, and kindle an
Ambition in us of Commanding over that of Man, which we should certainly
pursue, assisted with so powerful an Auxiliary, since with these Charms Nature
has bestowed on our Bodies, we go so far already, and discover a desire of an
absolute Mastery.

This is so Cobweb, and Vulgar a Sophism, that I Am amazed to hear it from the
Mouth of Lysander. Is he Ignorant of the Nature of Learning? or, is he not very
sensible that it teaches one to know ones self? the consequence of which must
certainly, in any Woman of sense, produce Humility, not Pride. It furnishes us
with Masculine, nay, Divine Thoughts, that are equally serviceable to our
selves, and Husbands. It makes us contemn the designing Flatteries of Men, when
they deifie that Beauty, which vanishes in a moment, and which Fools preserve
with so much Care, for a Bair, and Snare to both their own and their Admirers
Ruin. Learning teaches Wisdom, which can never render us so opposite t^ ^he
Established Economy of the World, as to make us once think so wildly, as to
attempt the inverting so prevalent, and inveterate a Custom as the Sovereignty
of the Men. Besides, Nature has formed us too weak, to effect a Revolution that
depends on the Force, and Strength of Body, as well as Mind; since Politics are
mere useless Theories, without Able Hands to put 'em in Execution. But if we
must needs suppose this mighty Revolution effected, who would not be willing to
be Subject to so agreeable a Power, in which Wisdom, and Beauty joined. But, my
Cloe, does Lysander forget that a great many Women without Learning direct
their Husbands, and have a very awful influence over them; but I ear^ing would
qualify that extraordinary Ascendant, by making that Rational, which was
before only the blind Effect of Passion and Fondness.

Lysander's Second Objection, That Women were by their Creator designed for
Obedience not Rule; to be instructed by their Husbands not to instruct them;
and to Study nothing but their Household Affairs. -- Partly depends of what has
been said to the first. Though, by the way, Lysander makes a little bold with the
Secrets of the Almighty in that Affe^tion, though I confess, the Curse that was
laid on Eve for her Transgression, might give him occasion to say so, though it
prove directly the contrary, as my Viridomar, has formerly observed; for if
Woman was created the Subject, and Vassal of Man, it had been no Punishment
to have inflicted that Subjection on her.

But, my Cl^e, I think it is evident, that Learning will not lessen that
Obedience it teaches them; which will therefore make them practice it as a Duty
of Reason, not Custom, and Imposition, two weighty and provoking Motives of
Opposition. As to the Second Branch of this Objection, viz. That we are to be
instructed by our Husbands, etc. Learning save's a Husband that is capable, the
Labor; and the Husband that is not, the Shame of attempting what he is not able
to perform; And by giving him an Emulation of his Wives Virtues, make him
endeavor not to be outdone by a Woman, in Masculine, and Rational
Excellencies, by improving his Mind with Nobler Qualifications; and not wholly
devote himself to such fordid Employments, and Diversions, which are generally
the whole Business and Entertainment of too many Gentlemen; I mean, the Bottle,
the Whore, the Dice, with Hunting, Hawking, Co^sing, and the rest of that
wretched Train, as if they were born never to think.

I come now to Lysander's last Objection, which is indeed the most infamous of
all the Scandals he endeavors to throw on Learned Women, viz. that their
Knowledge makes 'em seldom Chaste, and breeds in 'em wand^ing Desires. -- Were
this true, I must own it a very Substantial Argument, and I should yield that
all my Sex should be kept from the use of Books as cautiously, as Madmen from
Edge-Tools. But, my Cloe, the Assertion is too general to be true, to which I
my self could bring not a few Exceptions. The instances he produced, though you
doubt, yet to please him I Will admit, supposing therefore that such and such
Learned Women have been Whores, it still remains, that he prove this was the
effect of their Learning, not Nature, and that if they had not been Learned,
they would not a' been Whores. A Task, not so easily performed. But since a
bold Assertion is no proof of any thing, it may be justly confronted with an
opposite. I shall therefore affirm, That those Women, who, though Learned, are
Whores, would be much more prostitute without it; for though those Inclinations,
Nature and Constitution have given 'em, are not always entirely overcome by
Learning, yet are the violence of them regulated, and reduced to a greater
Moderation. It Is not to be denied, That Learning being very uncommon in Woman,
when it is found in one, it draws a more Numerous Train of Addresses from the
Men; but were it more common, they would by being divided, be more easily
resisted: Nay, the very Motive would be taken away, by the commonness of
Learned Women, the rarity of which, is the chief bait on these occasions.

Having thus run through Lysander's formidable Troop of Arguments, I shall add
a pleasant Fancy of my own, which is, That the Practice of admitting Women to
the Arts and Sciences, would convince the Infidels of the Jewish and Turkish
Persuasion, that Women have Souls, since they were not wholly taken up with the
Ornament, and care of the Body only, and then we might hope an equal Share in
the Paradise of Mahomet, with the Men, and not be shut out of the Synagogue by
the Rabbi's.

But that I may wholly obviate all your Scruples, I shall say one word now to
that celebrated Book of the Advice to a Daughter, designing at a better
opportunity to give a fuller Answer to a Book I have very little Esteem for.

I can never admit that an implicit Faith is more excusable in our Sex, than in
his; because I can by no means discover, that what he advances ca^ries any
thing of Reason with it. These are his Words. --

As to your particular Faith, keep to the Religion that is grown up with you,
both as it is the best in it self, and that the Reason of stayng in it on that
Account, is somewhat stronger for your Sex, than it will perhaps be allowed to
be for ours, in respect of the voluminous Enquiries into Truth by reading, are
less expected from you. --

Here you find a flourish of words indeed, but in my poor opinion, no very
weighty Sense. The stress of the whole lies on a false support; I mean, the
corrupt Custom of the Age; which, he says, will not Expect Our reading, and
search after the most Material of Truths, that this Life i^ given us for; if
Truth be obscured by so many Volumes, it is the fault of those in whose hands i^
has so long been reserved. If it be a Truth tha^ is also necessary for our
Future Happines^ to be rightly informed in; it is certainly equally our Duty to
enquire into it; and they are to blam^ who deprive us of the fittest means,
Learning (...) and it it be an incumbent Duty, 'twill be but (...) weak and
poor Excuse for continuing in an Erro^ because we were bred in one; Besides,
this wo^ hold on all sides, and must of Consequence be ver^ fallacious; and I
must needs add, That whateve^ Figure a Lady would make, by the Direction o^
this Advice, in the Court, she would make but (...) very indifferent one in
Reason. But it is evident, that he is not in earnest, when a little after he
prescribes a quite contrary Rule -- Let me recommend to you (says he) a Method
of being Rightly informed, which can never fail; it is in short this -- Get
Understanding, and practice Uirtue, etc. Now how she should get this
Understanding he leaves her, and us in the Dark; though I am confident it can
never be obtained to a degree of being Rightly informed without Learning;
unless he would have it by Inspiration, which I humbiy pres^me, is none of the
most solid Understandings in our Age.

But my charming Friend, I have detained you too long this bout to say any more
on this Subject, or Book, when we meet I Will give you more of my Sentiments,
which nothing could make me so free of imparting, but the Pleasure I have to
please such a Friend; though I shall never yield to you in sincerity, or any
other Duties that are ^ow'd to Cloe, by

Her faithful Friend, Urania.

Some Reflections on Mr. Rymer's Short View of Tragedy, and an Attempt at a
Vindication of SHAKESPEARE, in an Essay directed to JOHN DRYDEN Esquire
AS soon as Mr. Rymer's Book came to my Hands, I resolved to make some
Reflections upon it, though more to show my Will than my Abilities. But finding
Mr. Dennis had almost promised the World a Vindication of the Incomparable
Shakespeare, I quitted the Design, since he had got a Champion more equal to his
Worth; not doubting but Mr. Dennis would as effectually confute our Hypercritic
in this, as all Men must grant he has, in what he attempted in his Impartial
Critic.

But expecting thus long, without hearing any farther of it; I concluded some
other more important, or at least more agreeable business, had diverted him
from it; or that he thought it a^ unnecessary Undertaking, to persuade the Town
o^ a Truth it already received; or to give any farther Answer to a Book, that
carried its own Condemnation in its self. However, since I find some build an
Assurance on this General Silence o^ all the Friends of Shakespeare, that Mr.
Rymer's Objections are unanswerable; I resolved to besto^ two or three days on
an Essay to prove the contrary: Which may at least bring this advantage to the
Cause, to convince the World how very good it is, when one of my Inability, in
so little time, have so much to say for it, and that without going through the
whole Defense.

I indeed, like the most indifferent Counsel make the Motion, but leave more
able Heads to Plead the Cause. One great Satisfaction, I have (however I
succeed) is, that I speak before a Judge that is the best Qualified to decide a
Controversy of this Nature, that ever England produced; for in you, Sir, The
Poet, and The Critic meet in their highest Perfection; and, if the Critic
discover the Faults of Shakespeare, The Poet will also see, and admire ^is
Beauties, and Perfections. For as you have Learning, and strong Judgment to
discern his ^east Transgressions, so have you a Genius that can reach his
Noblest Flights; and a Justice that ^ill acknowledge his Deserts: And were
there no ^ther Arguments to be brought in his Vindication, ^t would be more,
than sufficient to destroy all ^is weak Antagonist has huddl'd together against
^im, that you give him your Approbation. This, ^ir, is really my Opinion, and
I Am sure the most ^ensible Lovers of Poetry will side with me in it: and secure
me from the Imputation of being so ^oolishly vain, to think I Can flatter You,
when speak of your Poetry, your Judgment, and ^our Candor; since whatever can
be said on that ^ubject, by any one below Mr. Dryden's Abi^ties, would be but a
very faint Shadow of the Mighty Panegyric of your Name alone.

The Method I shall observe in these Reflections (for my time will not permit
me to bring so confused a Chaos into a more regular Form) will be first to run
over the Pages of his Book as they lie, and give you some Animadversions in
part of those Absurdities they contain: for to examine all, would swell my
Letter into a Volume, and be five hundred times as big as the Text, like a
certain Reverend Dr. on Job. Next, I shall attempt a Vindication of Shakespeare,
where he more formerly attaques him.

In the first, I hope you will forgive me, if I use him with no more Respect,
than he does Shakespeare or You: And in the latter, I hope you will admit
Recriminations on those Patterns, h^ proposes to us for the Test, of
Shakespeare's Faults, as a sufficient Answer to what he Magisterially lays down,
as Self-Evident, with a Scornful, though Clumsy Jest, without any other Reason to
confirm it; if not as a Demonstration of that Injured Poet's Excellence. And
that we may from thence conclude with Mr. Rymer (as he ha^ it in his Preface to
Rapin) since his Standards o^ Perfection are equally culpable, That the
greatest Wits, both Modern, and Ancient, sometimes slip, a^ are liable to
Cavils: And by consequence, that all his Pains were needless to bring
Shakespeare into that Number, since his greatest Admirers eve^ confessed he had
Faults: Though no Man but himself I believe, ever Robbed him of all Excellence;
and I must say, That most that he produces are mee^ Cavils, and convict him of
being one of those Critics, that like Wasps rather annoy the Bee's, than
terrify the Drones.

But, indeed, the Lovers of Shakespeare may well forgive the Author of Edgar,
and this Short view of Tragedy, whatever he can say against his Excellence and
Genius; since being his Opposite, it is no wonder his Mind's not capacious
enough to Comprehend, nor his Taste Poetical enough to relish the Noble Thoughts
which the Ingenious have admired in Shakespeare ever since he Writ.

It has been the Fate of most Critics on Poetry, to Err in those Things they
Condemn in others, or to discover by their Writing, how ill quality'd they are
to judge of any thing, but the Regularity of the Structure of a Poem, which the
Known Rules of Art furnish them with, the chief formation of a Poet being
wanting; Nature denying them the Divitem Venam. Petronius Arbiter, so severe on
Lucan, and Seneca (for on them he reflects in his Satyricen) kept not clear of
that unnatural Affectation he condemned in them. Joseph and Julius Scaliger (as
Rapin observes) had the Art, but wanted the supply of Nature when they
attempted Poetry. But Mr. Rymer in any thing he has yet published, has not the
l^ast shadow of pretense to the Excellence of either of these. Petronius had
Wit, had Fire, a Genius, and Language; and tho the Scaligers were not Poets,
yet had they the Merits of pretty good Critics; but this Gentleman, has scarce
produced one Criticism, that is not borrowed from Rapin, Da^, or Boss^, and
mis-apply'd to Shakespeare. And for his Poetry, from the Heroic Tragedy of
Edgar, to the River zounds, he discovers not the least Genius, nor Taste of it;
and therefore must be granted a very incompetent Judge of such a Poet as
Shakespeare is.

Some of my Friends, whose Authority was very great with me, would needs have
me examine Edgar; but there were two things that obstructed my compliance with
them -- The First, That it was so abominably stored with Opium, that I could
not possibly keep my Eyes open to read it attentively; The other, That 'twas
such a Banter in it self on Poetry and sense, that all the pains I could take
about it, would be only to give him the vanity of imagining it worth any Man's
taking Notice of.

The Piece now under our Consideration is in a Vein something more merry, and
uncommon; for though it is frequent enough to meet with a dull Poetaster for a
Poet, yet it is something more rare to encounter a jolly Droll for a Critic.
Though, that with the abundance of Ill Nature, Conceit, and Affectation of
appearing a Scholar, is the Vehicle that carries off his Nonsense, with as ill
Judges of that, as he is of Poetry, and makes them take it for an extraordinary
Thing: and this will make the better excuse for my examining how very Monstrous
a Fantom it is, that is set out in so formidable an Equipage.

To pass over the Epistle Dedicatory, which like ^ays his Prologues, may serve
as well for any other Book as this, nay -- and for any other Lord too, as well
as the Noble Lord it is addressed to (whose generous Patronage of all that have
any Merit in the Republic of letters, ought to have secured him from such a
Profanation) And what is more, will do every jot as well, for an Advertisement
to the Courteous Reader, as for an Epistle Dedicatory, it being a Medly of
Stuff without Coherence, Design, or English. But to examine all that is
Unintelligible, false English, and absurd, would be an Herculean Labor, and
extend my Considerations to every Line. I shall begin with the Work its self,
not less abrupt, or inconsistent.

He begins with the Necessity of a Chorus, urging, That, as 'twas the the
Original, so it is the most Essential part of a Tragedy, because it keeps the
Poet, to the Unities of time, and place: But it is evident, from the Suppliants
of Euripides (as you, Sir, have formerly observed) and from Raci^es Hester, (as
Mr. Dennis has noted) that the Chorus does not necessarily do what Mr. Rymer
pretends; nor was it at all in Horace's Thoughts, if we may judge of them by
the Precepts he gives about it in his Art of Poetry.

But Mr. Dennis having evidently cleared this Point, I shall say no more of it;
but that if, as our Critic contends, it is the Poet's incumbent Duty to gratify
the Eyes, as well as Ears; this must be done without offending against Nature,
and Probability, as the Chorus does. (which is abundantly proved by the
Impartial Critic). But by those who have a more necessary Relation to the
Action and Fable, as the Senators of Venice in O^bello, whom (...) reflects on;
tho, as they have a Necessary concern in the Play, so could they not be
int^oduc'd wi^thout their Habits, which afford that Gratification to the Eye he
makes the Duty of every Poet without the help of so foreign, and unnatural a
Thing as a Ch^rus.

The 3d. and 4th. Pages are almost unintelligible, and at cross purposes one
Paragraph with another; for he will have it, That the words of Shakespeare do
not set off the Action, and then of a ^uddain he concludes the contrary, that
they do Next, P. 6. he has an admirable ^etch, to prove that Pronunciation is a
notable Vehicle, to carry off Nonsense, by showing that it set off the Sense of
Demost^nes. It Is granted, That a good and true (...), is a great help to Sense,
because i^ s^s i^ in its proper ^ight, as ill repeating (...) it in a false
one, and makes it lose its lust^e; as Martial sensibly obs^ves to Fidentinus.

Q^m re^as men's est, o Fidentine libellus.
Sed Male (...) recitas incipit esse tuus.
But it seems to me, That the Reason, which makes Good Pronunciation set off
Sense, must make (...) more visible; for the giving every Word, and Sentence
its true Emphasis, must make the ^lunder more obvious, to even those, who in
the Reading won'd perhaps over look it. I grant, that the P^p of the Theater
may, perhaps, dull the edge of our Judgment, but Pronunciation never can. But
were all this true, I cannot find that Shakespeare falls justl^ under his (...),
as to this particular; for he affirms, That (...), (...), and Pronunciation,
lose their force under a (...) Perusal; yet after such a Perusal, Shakespeare
does still maintain his Reputation with the greatest Genius's our Nation has
produced in Poetry: His Excellence therefore is not built on those Supports,
but i^ate Worth, and by Consequence all his incoherent bustle is to very little
purpose.

But the next Proof of the power of S^ew, Action, and Pronunciation, is
extremely merry. P. 8. He tells us, That Cardinal (...) was by them influenced
in his mighty Approbation of the Tragedy of Sir Thomas Moor, though there were
neither Poetry, nor Sense in it. Yet were not these able to by ass his nice Ta^
to fav^ur the Cul of Corn^l (who had more of a Poet, th^n one of our Fl^no's
(...)) which places the ^dinal ^n the Majores Numero, of the Division of Judges
made by (...), clear contrary to our Critic's intention. Well, I must say this
for him, That though his Reasons and Observations are ^ar from irrefragable, yet
his Rambles are admirable and u^accountable from a Comical Harangue against
Opera's, P. 9, 10, 11, 12. he runs to Verse burlesque and how long it had been
in Italy before it passed the Alps, I suppose, to show us he had read Pelisson,
quoted in the Margin, for the Devil a-bit had it to do with the Business in
hand. Thence with another leap, he jumps back again t^ Aesebylus his Persi^ns,
proposing it for a Model proportioned to our English Capacities. Of which, Page
the 13th having drawn in imitation in the Spanish Expedition of 1^88. our
Tragaedo didasculus dubs it the Invincible Armado. His draught indeed is very
nice and circumstantial, in the very serious, and at the same time extremely
Ridiculous Account of all the Incidents of this Draught to the very Beards of
the Spanish Grandees; the Tuns of Tar Barrels for the Heretics; and the
squabling of the Cabinet Council, about Preferments not yet in their Power. And
is it not as great an Error in Manners, as any Shakespeare is guilty of in the
worst of his Plays, to make the greatest Politicians of that Age such egregious
Coxco^bs? But what wretched Mortal is there of so very sorrowful or morose a
temper, that must not laugh to hear him say, That on this Occasion two
Competitors have just^ Occasion to workup, and show the Muscles of their
Passion, than Shakespears, Cassius, and Brutus? Could any Pugg in Barbary be so
ignorant of comm^n Sense and Reason as this? he must Pardon, the Expre^ion,
it is his own to a much greater Man, than himself.

It Is true, he tells us with his usual Magisterial Assurance. That these
Spanish Grandees of his Creation, have a ^ster Occasion for a Passionate Scene
than Shakespears, Brutus, and Cassi^s: But I (...) ask his Pardon if I
subscribe not to his Opinion: But to punish him sufficiently for this gross
Absordity, and Arrogance, lay down the matter barely as it is, proposing the
Occasions just as they lie in both these Authors, our H^storiographer, I mean,
and the inimitable Shakespeare.

First, Here is a Council of 15 of the greatest, old Politic Heads that Age
produced in Spain, quarrelling with one another about things out of possession,
In Eutopia, To be Kings of Man; Duke- Tr^ncalos, and Duke- Step^nos, etc. is
there either Nature or Possibility of this? so far is it from any probable
Ground.

On the other hand: Here is Cassius, a Passionate, Ambitious, and Avariti^us
Roman, impatient to bear a refusal of a Request he made for Lu^ius Pella, that
was found guilty of Bribery (a Crime himself was guilty of) looking on himself
of equal Power at least with Bru^us, and a Brother, if not Father of the War,
being Ambitious and Choleric too, as I said, could not but resent it as an
infringing his Authority, and Friendship; and by consequence discover his
Resentment at first meeting. But this is not all the Ground of ^his Scene: Here
is Brutus on the other hand, a ^evere follower of Virtue, to which he
Sacrificed ^is Friend and Father, Caesar, and could not therefore but resent
Cassius's deviating from Virtue^ his pretense to which made him his Friend. How
^ou'd he bear with Cassius in his Bribery and Ava^ice, who could not with
Caesar's Ambition? ^or ^n denying Money for the Payment of those Le^ions (on
whose Fidelity, not only their Lives, but ^he Fat^, and Liberty of Rome, which
was yet ^earer to Brutus, depended) he gave them up to Octavius and Anthony.

Is there any Parallel indeed betwixt these two Occasions? Can there be any
thing more Childish and trifling, than the first? And can there be any thing
greater, and more weighty than the latter (...) The Prize of Chymera's on one
side, and the Liberty, and Fate of the greatest Empire in the World; nay, Life,
Honor, Vi^tue, and all that can or ought to be dear on the other.

Let this be a convincing proof of the Genius and Judgment of our
Histortographer Royal, who could prefer his own dull Bu^lesque on Common Sense
to this incomparable Scene of Shakespeare, which is justly admired by all Men of
Sense.

But to proceed, If Desdemona's Character b^ below the dignity of Tragedy, what
are these Sp^nish Segniora's, who a^e to spend a whole Act (...) telling of
Dreams, which were likely to have (...) mighty influence on the Spanish
Politicians, (always noted for their Religion and Bigottr^ as to fur^ish out
Distruct^ns and Disorders (...) for an Act. The Draught of the next Act is e'^
^ot as merry: for it is very Natural indeed, a^ nicely according to Manners, to
bring in a Ki^ Philosoph^ng on Dreams, and Hobgoblins! unle^ he were to be such
a King as he so much admi^ in the Rehearsal; for a King Phiz by his form^
Profession, might be supposed to have some N^ble, if not Noble Thoughts (as our
Critic requi^ on the Matter.

The 16th. Page, is a brief, though fully as ridi^lous fumming up of what he had
said at la^ before, though the Fourth Act is above measure C^mical, where the
Spaniard is to be beaten off with a Vanguard of Dreams and Goblins, and the
Terrors of the Night.

For my part, on the first reading it, I thought him absolutely out of his
Wits, or what is all one, that he had a Mind to be lewdly, merry extremely out
of Season, or Play the Droll, to show how much he was better qualified for a
Farcewright, than a Critic. But being assured since by several Ingenious
Gentlemen, that he not only means it as a serious thing, but that the Doctors
do not think him Mad enough for ^edlam, I will turn the Advice he has the
extraordinary Assurance to give you, infinitely more justly to himself, that he
would undertake the Writing upon this admirable Plot; and for his
Encouragement, I assure him, it shall not (...) the Fate of his Edgar, but be
Acted, with a ^rm belief, that if it do not Pit^ox and Gallery-it, with any of
Shakespears: ^et it may bear the Bell (to borrow an extraordinary Phrase from
our Histor^ographer Royal) from ^he Devil of a Wise, or Dr. Faust^; because the
^ery excessive Extravagance of the Thought might, make us laugh, whereas Edgar
could provoke nothing but Sleep.

But his putting this on you, Sir, after so many Public Expressions of your
Friendship for him, and private Services (as I Am informed) done him, shows ^is
Morals, as faulty, as the Manners he has laid ^own for the Heroes of this
Anti-Tragedy. With that Face could he put so little and scurrilous an Affront
on you, in this Book, without provocation, who in his Preface to Rapin, did
prefer your Description of Night to all the Master strokes of the Ancients,
and Moderns. If you had no other me^its certainly the Judgment of Virgil
animated with a more sprightly Wit, deserved better from him than so mean, and
so ungenerous an Abuse. But now to the next Chapter.

To show he had read Plato, he quotes him P. 18. to prove what no body yet ever
denied that knew any thing of the Original of Tragedy. Nor has any one, that I
ever met with, pretended that there was no Poem, that had the Name of Tragedy
before the time of Thespis. But if from hence he would infer that Tragedy was
Acted before his time, he proceeds farther, than the words of Plato, or any
other Authority will warrant him, for till Thespis, it was only a Hymn to
Bacchus, Sung and Performed in Dances, and Gefticulations by the Chorus. But
then it had no Episode or Actor; and therefore Thespis was the Original of the
Tragedies, that are Acted, though lie built it on the Foundation of the religious
Goat-Song; this, not only Horace, but all the Critic's, I have met with,
affirm. And himself confesses, P. 19. that when it came to be an Image of the
World, it then had a secular Alloy, and was by Consequence altered from what it
was before, that is, from a Religious Hymn, to a Representation of Humane Life.
The End therefore and Aim of it being thus altered, the Mediums to that End,
must of Consequence, be altered too. The praise of Bacchus was no more
Necessary to forming an Image of Humane Life, than the Praise of Hercules, or
any other of the Gods. Now, if the Chorus be necessary, because 'twas the
Original of Tragedy, it is equally necessary the Chorus should celebrate the
Praise of Bacchus, as it originally did; but if Tragedy by the Alteration of
its end were set on a new bottom, we are no longer obliged to regulate it
according to its first Institution. So that I can see no reason, that because
Sophocles retained the Chorus, it was therefore a necessary part of Tragedy, or
if it be, why the Dancing and Music that was continued with it, was any more
mere Religion, than the Chorus its self, or a less necessary part of Tragedy,
since both were of equal date, as to their Rise, and End. But this only en
passant.

P. 20. Next, he le^s to the Care the Government had of the Theater, in
permitting no Poet to present a Play to the House till past Thirty. This
Observation might, perhaps, proceed from Self-Interest, hoping to persuade us,
that, upon another Vacancy, he is qualified for Poet Laureat, intimating, that
the older a Man grows, the sitter he is for a Poet, contrary to the ^udgment of
his Friend Rapin; from whom he (...) the Observation that the Athenians spent
more of the Public Money about their Chorus's, and other Decorations of the
Stage, than in all their Wars with Persia. From hence he soon passes to his
beloved Aristophanes (and to do him Justice, he always expresses an
extraordinary Passion for ^arces) though I am to seek in what he drives at in all
those Praises he bestows on him, for Running a Muc, (as he phrases it) at all
manner of Vice where ever be saw it, be it in the greatest Philosophers, the
greatest Poets, the Generals, or the Ministers of State^ Would he have our
Poets follow his example, and expose our Divines, Bishops, Lords, Generals, and
Ministers of State? If this be his desire, yet either h^ ought not to blame
them for their Defect in that or is in Justice bound to secure them from the
Penalties, they would incur by doing so: Scan. Man and some such odd things are
Bug-bears, the would have frightened his Aristophanes, from hi^ freedom, if the
Athenian Law, like ours, had secured Vice, and Folly in the Great ones, from
the attaques of Poets. He ought therefore either t^ moderate his Indignation at
our Poets for only exposing the Common Life of Mankind, or if (...) would have
none but Statesmen, and Generals ^dicul'd, let him lead the Dance; and fear not
the Success of Aristophanes, being so well qualified for a Parce-Wright; his
Propensity to that, influ^cing perhaps his Judgment in favor of this Gre^
Poet, above all those that succeeded him. The Quintilian, as good a Judge as
Mr. Rymer says (...) Menander, not Aristophanes, meo judicio diligen^ lectus,
ad cuncta quae praecipimus efficienda suffic^ Ita omnium Imaginem in vita
Expressit. Tanta in (...) inveniendi Copia, el^quendi facultas, ita omnibus
R^bus, Personis, affectibus accommodatus, ut omnib^ ejusdem operis Autoribus
tenebras obduxarit. B^ Mr. Rymer must be singular in his Opinion, (...) he
could not keep up his Character, as he is in the meaning of those two Verses he
quotes, Page 25.

Non minimum meruere d^cus, vestigia Graeca,
Ausi deserere, and celebrare Domestica facta.
He will have it, that non Minimum is but a faint Commendation; though it is
evident from the best of the Latin Authors, that non Minimum is used for
Magnum, if not Maximum. It Is perhaps used by Horace as a more Modest expression
of their Worth, that he might not incur the imputation of flattering by a
stronger Praise, those who were living. But I de^e him to produce non Minimum
in Cicero, or any other Author of Note, in a sense less than Magnum. Nor does
that Quotation out of the Sixth Book of Virgil's Aeneids, prove at all that
Virgil gave up the Cause, and yielded ^he Grecians more excellent in Poetry
than the Latins, any more than Horace did in the Epistle by him ^oted, for thus
it runs,

Excudent alii spirantia mollius era,
Credo quidem, vivos ducent de murm^re vultus:
Orabunt causas mel^us, caelique meatus,
Describent radio, and surgentia sidera dicent.
Tu Regere imperio populos Roman memento;
(Hae tibi erunt Arts) pacisque imponere Morem,
Parcere subjectis and debellare superbos.
From which it is evident that he meant only ^his, that Governing Nations, and
Justice should ^e their chief Care, and greatest Art, not that he thought the
Romans did not excel the Grecians in others too; for, I believe, none will
deny but Cicero was a greater Orator than Demosthenes, or at least as great,
and that Virgil was as great a Poet, as Homer. And for other Arts, Pliny was of
opinion, That the Romans excelled the Grecians even in 'em, as well as that of
Governing, when he says in the 36th Book of his Natural History, That he would
show the World conquered in the Works of Art, as well as by the Sword, and then
proceeds to Painting, Statuary, etc.

But, Sir, I fear, I shall tire your patience should I touch upon every Page;
I Will therefore step to P. 63. and with that and the 65th. make an end of my
Reflections, and then examine more particularly what relates to Shakespeare. P.
63. he expresses himself much against Rhyme in Plays, by which he not only
shows his Mind is much altered since he writ Edgar in Rhyme; but also makes it
the distinctive mark of Heroic Verse in English, as the numbers of Hexameters
are of Latin Heroics: But he gives us no Reason for the Parallel, for that
indeed would be to break an old custom, which he is very fond of. If therefore I
could produce no Argument against him in particular, yet must, a bare denial,
be granted equivalent to a bare Assertion: but the matter is not so barren of
Reason, as to be destitute of a very convincing proof of the contrary, viz. The
Numbers or Feet distinguish the Latin Verse, and the Numbers of Hexameters are
very different from those of Jambics, which is the Verse most used, at least
out of the Chorus, in Tragedy, so in English it is the Feet, or Numbers that
distinguish Heroic Verse from all others, whereas the Numbers are the same in
blanc Verse, as in Rhyme; so that they are equally He^oic Verse, and Milton's
Paradise lost, is a sufficient proof of this; so that according to Mr. Rymer
all Verse of ten Syllables are as improper for Tragedies in English, as
Pentameters are in Latin, for that is the consequence of his Arguments,

The second Paragraph of P. 65, That furnishes me with the subject of my last
Reflection, is a Masterpiece, composed of his beloved ingredients, the
unaccountable, and the unintelligible; for he tells us, that since the decay of
the Roman Empire, this Island has been more fortunate in Matters of Poetry,
than any of our Neighbors, etc. I must tell him that it must be a good-natured
Reader that (after all he has said) shall take his word for it; for I cannot see
how he can make it out, if Shakespeare be so far from a Poet, as not to be sit
to write Ballads, or what is all one, as ignorant of Nature as any Pug in
Barbary; if Ben Johnson be guilty of such Stupidity; if Milton, as he commonly
asserts, have nothing in him; and Beaumont and Fletcher are such, as he
represents 'em. He would do well to fix this Excellence above our Neighbors
^omewhere; for hitherto he has done nothing but ^rraign our greatest Poets. But
the latter end of ^his Paragraph as unintelligible as it is, must I find ^ass
for a Proof of this, if we will have any from ^im. We find (says he) the
British Poetry to this day: To confirm which, he proceeds thus. One of our
oldest Medals b^ars a harp on the Kevers, with the Name Kunobuline around it:
But what of that good Sir? What if it had Merlin, Gildas, and half a score more
about it, what is the consequence? I advise him in his next Book not to put his
Friends to such trouble to understand him; for my part I could never yet meet
with an Oedipus to solve the Ridle; for what has the oldest Medal to do with
the proof of our having the British Poetry to this day, unless the other side
of the Medal had furnished us with some of it, if he draw not the odd
consequence from the Harp; that where there is Music, there must be Poetry; as
where there is Smoke, there must be Fire, according to the laudable Observation
of our Matrons of Antiquity.

But there needed no Medal of Kunobuline to be produced; for the proof of the
early use of Potry in this Island, and that long before Virgil writ. The
British Bards are enough to justify that; we need not wait till the decay of
the Roman Empire, witness Lucan, Lib. 3. who writ of times that preceded Virgil.

Vos quoque qui fortes animas, belloque peremptas
Laudibus in longum vates dimittit is aevum
Plurima securi fudistis carmina Bardi.
But what is this to the Confirmation of his Assertion, that next the Romans we
excelled in Poetry? It Is not the number of Years, nor Poems that will establish
our Excellence, but the Quality; it is their Perfection, that must give us the
advantage of our Neighbors.

But to expect Reason, Method, (without which ^ll is confusion) and Meaning
from this Author is ^n vain, since he tells us in a former Essay he can ^eep to
no Method or Form, and that he is not cut ^ut for penning any Treatise. But
then why, in ^he Name of dullness, does he fly in the Face of Nature, and
spite of her appear in Print, not only as an Author, but Judge, bringing to
his Tribunal, those who were qualified with what he ^xtremly wants, viz. A
Genius and Judgment: ^is Judgment being so weak, that he could not ^eep
Coherence through one only Page. Being ^hus qualified, no doubt his censure of
the admira^le Shakespeare, must be extraordinary, which (...) shall, after I
have premised some general Consi^erations examine.

To survey the Ancients with an impartial Eye ^wou'd make one wonder at those
extravagan^ En^miums, and that inexpressible Advantage above ^e Moderns' some
of our Dogmatic Critics give ^m, were there not an extraordinary Vanity, in
^xtolling their Performances and Virtues, because ^y that means they arrogate
to themselves the ^eputation of understanding them better, than ^ther Men. This
makes Rapin tell us what an ^iversal Genius Homer was; and that all the ^rts
and Sciences are to be learned from his Works, though some others perhaps, not
less able to ^derstand him, can not discover any such Matter, (...) the Author
of the Dialogues of the Dead, very wittily intimates in the Dialogue betwixt
Homer and Aesop. These Gentlemen would cover all the Absurdities of this Poet,
with the specious Whim of All^gory, never thought of by Homer himself. But h^
may thank his Fate for allotting him a time s^ much remote from ours, else they
would not b^ fond of him to so unreasonable an excess, since the^ cannot allow
no excuse for smaller Faults in the^ own Countrymen of a later date, such ill
Patriots are these Partial Critics; for I desie Mr. Rymer and all of his
Opinion to parallel in Shakespeare, the Wounds, the Hatreds, the Battles, an^
Strifes of the Gods. And he must confess, if h^ be not a sworn Enemy to all
Reason, that Homer's Juno is a Character far beneath, and mo^
disproportionable, than that of Desdemona, the the first be of the Queen of the
Gods, Joves Sister and his Wife, and the other a Senators, Daughter of Venice,
Young Innocent, and Tender. (...) Desdemona be too humble for Tragedy, and
di^cover not Elevation of Soul enough for her Bir^ and Fortune: Homer's Juno
must be much too lo^ for an Heroic Poem, having no Parallel for Scolding but at
Billinsgate. For the furious curtain Lectures of a City Wife, who is supreme
Lady (...) home, are nothing to hers. This Jupiter finds, when the only Remedy
he has left to stop her Mou^ is to threaten to thrash her Divine Jackes, which
makes her Son Vulcan something concerned abo^ the Shame 'twill be to have his
Goddess Moth^ suffer the Bastinade before the Heavenly Cre^ Where is the
Nature? Where the Reason of this (...) If the Nobleness of his Thoughts, the
Majesty of (...) Expression, and Variety of his Numbers made ^he succeeding
Ages so fond of Homer, as to find some Excuse for his failures, in Conduct and
Characters; is not Shakespeare more ungenerously dealt with, whose Faults are
made to a pretense ^o deny all his Beauties and Excellence?

But it is not these Instances in the Prince of the Greek Peots, (with many
more, both as to the Conduct and Characters) that influence me to ^ncline to a
better Opinion of the Moderns I mean of my own Country) than Mr. Rymer; and
some of the Graver Pedants of the Age; the ^xcellence I find in Shakespeare
himself, commands a ^uster Veneration; for in his Thoughts and Ex^ressions he
discovers himself Master of a very just Observation of things; so that if he
had (which deny) no Learning, his natural parts would suf^ciently have
furnished him with better Ethics, ^han our Hypercritic allows him. But that
which ^ggravates his Malice is, he extends his censure (...) Ben himself, whose
skill in Moral Philosophy, ^e suppose, at least equal to his: But to give ^he
World some Satisfaction, that Shakespeare ^as had as great a Veneration paid his
Excellence ^y Men of unquestioned parts, as this I now ex^ress for him, I shall
give some Account of what have heard from your Mouth, Sir, about the ^oble
Triumph he gained over all the Ancients, ^y the Judgment of the ablest Critics
of that time.

The Matter of Fact (if my Memory fail me ^ot) was this, Mr. Hales, of Eaton,
affirmed that he would show all the Poets of Antiquity, out done by Shakespeare,
in all the Topics, an^ common places made use of in Poetry. The Enemies of
Shakespeare would by no means yield hi^ so much Excellence; so that it came to a
Resolution of a trial of Skill upon that Subject; the place agreed on for the
Dispute, was Mr. Hales^ Chamber at Eaton; a great many Books were sen^ down by
the Enemies of this Poet, and on the appointed day, my Lord Falkland, Sir John
Suc^ling, and all the Persons of Quality that had W^ and Learning, and
interested themselves in the Q^arrel, met there, and upon a thorough
Disq^sition of the point, the Judges chose by agreeme^ out of this Learned and
Ingenious Assembly, un^nimously gave the Preference to Shakespeare And the Greek
and Roman Poets were adjudg'd (...) Va^l at least their Glory in that to the
Englis^ Hero. I could wish, Sir, you would give the Public a juster Account of
this Affair, in Vindicatio^ of that Poet, I know you extremely esteem, an^ whom
none but you excels.

Shall we therefore still admire Shakespeare wi^ these Learned and Ingenious
Gentlemen, or p^ him in a Class below Sternold or Flecknoe, wi^ Mr. Rymer,
because he has not come close to the Rules Aristotle drew from the Practice of
the Greek Poets, whom nothing it seems can pleas^ but the Antic Forms and
Methods of the Atheni^ Stage, or what comes up, and sticks close to the^ in our
Language.

I can see no Reason why we should be so very fond of imitating them here,
without better proofs than the Critical Historiographer has produced. It Is
certain, the Grecians had not the advantage of us in Physics, or any other part
of Philosophy, which with them chiefly consisted in words; they were a
Talkative People; and being fond of the Opinion of Learning, more than the
thing it self, as the most speedy way to gain that, stopped their Enquiries on
Terms, as is evident from their Sophistry and Dialectic's. There can be no
dispute among the Learned, but that we excel them in these Points. Since the
time of Des Carts, when the Dictates of Greece began to be laid aside, what a
Progress has been made in the discovery of Nature? and what Absurdities laid
open in the School Precepts, and Terms of Aristotle.

But Ethics is a Study not so abstruse as the search of Natural Causes and
Effects; a nice Observation of Mankind will furnish a sensible Man with them;
which makes me unable to ghess how the Greeks should have so monstrous an
advantage over us in this particular, as some would give them, who are so far
behind us in things of greater difficulty; but it cannot be otherways whilst we
make that Age and Nation the Standard of Excellence without regard to the
difference of Custom, Age, Climate, etc. But I question not to make it appear
hereafter, that we much surpass the Greeks and Latins, at least in Dramatick
Poetry. As for Expression (the difference of Language considered) the Merits of
which is proportioned to the Idea it presents to the Mind, and for Thought, as
well as for Design. And had you, Sir, but given us an Heroic Poem, you had put
the Controversy out of doubt as to the Epic too, as your Oedipus (for all the
Quantum mutatus, of which another time) your All for Love, and some other of
your Plays have in the Dramatic, in the esteem of impartial Judges.

Had our Critic entertained but common Justice for the Heroes of his Own
Country, he would have set Shakespeare's Faults in their true Light, and
distinguished betwixt his, and the Vices of the Age; for as Rapin (a much
juster and more Candid Critic) observes, the Poet often falls into Vices by
complying with the Palate of the Age he lives in; and to this may we truly and
justly refer a great many of these Faults Shakespeare is guilty of. For, He not
having that advantage the Greek Poets had, of a proper Subsistence, or to be
provided for at the Public Charge, what Fruit he was to expect of his Labors,
was from the Applause of the Audience; so that his chief aim was to please
them; who not being so Skilful in Criticisms, as Mr. Rymer, would not be
pleased without some Extravagances mingled in (though contrary to) the Characters
such, and such a Player was to Act. This is the Reason that most of his
Tragedies have a mixture of something Comical; the Dalilab, of the Age must be
brought in, the Clown, and the Valet jesting with their Betters, if he resolved
not to disoblige the Auditors. And I Am assured from very good hands, that the
Person that Acted Jago was in much esteem for a Comoedian, which made
Shakespeare put several words, and expressions into his part (perhaps not so
agreeable to his Character) to make the Audience laugh, who had not yet learnt
to endure to be serious a whole Play. This was the occasion of that particular
place so much houted at by our Historiographer Royal,

Awake, what ho, Brabantio, etc.
An old black Ram is tupping your white Ewe, etc.
This Vice of the Age it was that perverted many of his Characters in his other
Plays: Nor could it be avoided if he would have his Audience sit the Play out,
and receive that Profit, that is the chief End of all Poets. To this same Cause
may be attributed all those Quibbles, and playing upon words, so frequent in
some part of him, as well as that Language that may seem too rough, and forced
to the Ear, up, and down in some of the best of his Plays.

After all, the Head of his Accusation is, That it is not improbable, that
Shakespeare was ignorant of the Rules of Aristotle's Poetics; and was imperfect
in the three Unities of Time, Place, and Action, which Horace in his Art of
Poetry gives no Rules about: for that which I have heard quoted from him, has
no relation to the Dramatic Unities,

Denique sit, quod vis, simplex duntaxat and unum.
as is evident from what goes before; but to the Coherence, Uniformity, and
Equality of any Poem in general --

-- Amphora caepit
Institui, currente Rota cur urceus exit.
It Is only the Conclusion of what he proposes about Seven Verses before,

Inceptis gravibus, and magna Professis, etc.
and this of Petronius is a just Interpretation of it in my opinion,

Praeterea ne sententiae emineant extra corpus orationis expressae sed intecto
vestibus color niteant. That is, it gives only a Rule that all Poems be of a
Piece and Equal.

So that since he could gather no Instructions in this Point from Horace, we
may excuse him for transgressing against them: and this defect his greatest
Admirers confessed before his Useless piece of ill-natured censure, and could
have Pardoned Mr. Rymer, had he gone no farther; But when he Robs him of all
Genius, and denies him the Elevation of a Shirly, a Fleckno, or a Jordan, w^
must modestly return his Complement, and tel^ him, That never a Blackamoor (as
he learnedly terms a Negro) in the Western Plantations, b^ must have a better
taste of Poetry than himself and that it is evident from the Woman Judges whose
Judgment, he assures us, seldom errs, b^ their continual Approbation of
Othello, Hamlet, etc. he is in the Wrong.

But should we grant him that Shakespeare wanted Art (though Ben Johnson denies
it) can he from thence infer he was no Poet? The dispute of which confers most
to the forming a Poet, (I mean, a Complete one) Art, or Nature, was never yet
agreed on; Horace joins them, Quintillian and some others give it to Nature:
But, till this Gentleman, never did any Man yield it wholly to Art; for that
all his Arguments both in this or his former Book seem to drive at.

A nice Observation of Rules, is a Confinement a great Genius cannot bear,
which naturally cove^s Liberty; and though the French, whose Genius, as well as
Language, is not strong enough to rise to the Majesty of Poetry, are easier
reduced within the Discipline of Rules, and have perhaps of late Years, more
exactly observed 'em. yet I never yet met with any Englishman, who would
prefer their Poetry to ours. All that is great of Humane things, makes a
nearer approach to the Eternal Perfection of Greatness, and extends as much as
possible its limits toward being Boundless: It Is not governed by Common Rules
and Methods, but Glories in a Noble Irregularity; and this not only in
Writings, but Actions of some Men. Alexander, Caesar, Alcibiades, etc. seemed
actuated by other Principles than the common Maxims that govern the Rest of
Humane Kind; and in them the greatest Virtues have been mixed with great Vices,
as well as the Writings of Shakespeare; yet are they granted Heroes, and so must
He be confessed a Poet: The Heroes Race are all like Achilles. Jura negunt,
sibi nata.

But as I do not think that to be a Great Man, one must necessarily be wholly,
exempt from Rules, so I must grant, That Virgil, Sophocles, and Your Self are
very Great, though generally very Regular; But these are Rarities so uncommon,
that Nature has produced very few of them, and like the Phoenixes of Honesty,
that live up to the Precepts of Morality, ought to have public Statues erected
to them. But yet the less perfect ought not to be Robbed of their Merits,
because they have defects, especially when the Number of those exceed these, as
in Shakespeare, all whose Faults have not been able to frustrate his obtaining
the end of All just Poems, Pleasure and Profit. To deny this, would be to fly
in the Face of the known experience of so many Years. He has (I say) in most,
if not all, of his Plays attained the full end of Poetry Delight, and Profit,
by moving Terror and Pity for the Changes of Fortune, which Humane Life is
subject to, by giving us a lively and just Image of them (the best Definition
of a Play) for the Motion of these Passions afford us Pleasure, and their
Purgation Profit. Besides, there are few or none of those many he has writ, but
have their Just Moral, not only of more general Use and Advantage, but also
more naturally the Effect of them, than that of the Oedipus of Sophocles, as
may be soon perceived by any one that will give himself the trouble of a little
Thought, and which will in some measure appear from what I have to say in the
particular Defense I shall now make of Othello.

To begin with the Fable (as our Critic has done) I must tell him, he has as
falsely, as ridiculously represented it, which I shall endeavor to put in a
Juster light.

Othello a Noble Moor, or Negro, that had by long Services, and brave Acts
established himself in the Opinion of the Senate of Uenice, wins the Affections
of. Desdemona, Daughter to Brabantio one of the Senators, by the moving account
he gives of the imminent Dangers he had past, and hazards ^e had ventured
through, a belief of which his known Virtue confirmed, and unknown to her
Father Marries her, and carries her (with the leave of the Senate) with him to
Cyprus, his Province. He makes Cassio his Lieutenant, though Jago, had solicited
it by his Friends for himself, which Refusal joined with a jealousy, that
Othello had had to do with his Wife, makes him contrive the destruction of
Cassio, and the Moor, to gratify his Revenge, and Ambition. But having no way
to revenge himself sufficiently on the Moor, from whom he supposed he had
received a double Wrong, proportionable to the injury, but this, he draws him
with a great deal of Cunning into a Jealousy of his Wife, and that by a chain
of Circumstances contrived to that purpose, and urged with all the taking
insinuations imaginable; particularly by a Handkerchief, he had conveyed to
Cassio (which Jago's Wife stole from Desdemona) to convince the Moor his Wife
was too familiar with him, having parted with such a favor to him, which she
had on her Marriage received from Othello, with the strictest charge of
preserving, it being a Gift of his Mother of Curious Work, and secret Virtue.
Othello, by these means, won to a beli^ of his own Infamy, resolves the Murder
of those, he concluded guilty, viz. Cassio, and his Wife; Jago officiously
undertakes, the dispatching of Cassio, having got his Commission already, but
is disappointed of his design, employing one Roderigo to that purpose, who had
followed him from Venice, in hopes by his means to enjoy Desdemona, as Jago had
promised him. But the Moor effectually puts his Revenge in Execution on his
Wife, which is no sooner ^ne, but he is convinced of his Error, and in remorse
kills himself, whilst Jago, the Cause of all this Villainy, having slain his
Wife for discovering it, is born away to a more ignominious Punishment, as more
proportioned to his Villainies.

The Fable to be perfect must be Admirable and Probable, and as it approaches
those two, it is more or less perfect in its kind. Admirable, is what is
uncommon, and extraordinary. Probable, is what is agreeable to common Opinion.
This must be ^e Test of this Fable of Othello; but then we must not take it, as
given us by our Drolling Critic, who very truly confesses in his former Book,
(and in that he is no Changeling) he must be merry out of Season, as he always
is; but as I have laid it down, else we should do Shakespeare a great deal of
Injustice.

I suppose none will deny that it is Admirable: that is, composed of Incidents
that happen not every day, his Antagonist confesses as much; there is therefore
nothing but the Probability of it attaqu'd by him, which I question not either
wholly to prove, or at least to set it on the same bottom with the best of
Sophocles, that of his Oedipus.

First, to see whether he have sinned against Probability, let us consider what
our Caviller objects, all which may be reduced to two Points. First, That it is
not probable that the Senate of Venice (though it usually employ Strangers)
should employ a Moor against the Turk: neither is it in the next place
probable, that Desdemona should be in Love with him. On this turns all the
Accusation, this is the very Head of his offending.

All the Reason he gives, or rather implies, for the first Improbability is,
That it is not likely the State of Venice, would employ a Moor, (taking him for
a Mohammedan) against the Turk, because of the mutual Bond of Religion. He,
indeed says not so, but takes it for granted that Othello must be rather for
the Turkish interest than the Venetian, because a Moor. But, I think (nor does
he oppose it with any reason) the Character of the Venetian State being to
employ Strangers in their Wars, it gives sufficient ground to our Poet, to
suppose a Moor employed by 'em as well as a German; that is a Christian Moor,
as Othello is represented by our Poet, for from such a Moor, there could be no
just fear of treachery in favor of the Mahometans. He tells us --

I fetch my Life and Being from Men of Royal Siege.
Supposing him therefore the Son or Nephew of the Emperor of Monomotopa,
Aethiopia or Congo, forced to leave his Country for Religion, or any other
occasion, coming to Europe by the convenience of the Portugueze Ships, might
after several Fortunes, serve first as a Voluntier till he had signalized
himself, and proved himself worthy of Command; part of this may very reasonably
be drawn from what the Poet makes him say. Now upon this Supposition, it
appears more rational, and probable, the Venetians should employ a Stranger,
who wholly depended on themselves, and whose Country was too remote, to
influence him to their prejudice, than other Strangers, whose Princes may in
some m^ure direct their Actions for their own Advantage. But that Othello is
supposed to be a Christian is evident from the Second Act, and from these words
of Jago; -- And then for her to Win the Moor, were it to renounce his Baptism,
etc. Why therefore an African Christian may not by the Venetians be supposed to
be as zealous against the Turks, as an European Christian, I cannot imagine. So
that this Bustle of Littora littoribus Contraria, etc. is only an inconsiderate
Amusement, to show how little the Gentleman was troubled with thought when he
wrote it.

No more to the purpose, is that Heat he expresses against Shakspears giving a
Name to his Moor, though Cinthio did not, though History did not warrant it.
For this can be no more objected to our Poet, then the perverting the Character
of Dido, and confounding the Chronology to bring her to the time of Aeneas, is
to Virgil; the first as it is not mentioned in History, so it does not
contradict it; but the last is a plain opposition to express History, and
Chronology. If Virgil be allowed his Reason for doing that, Shakespeare is not
to seek for one for what he has done. 'Twas necessary to give his Moor a place
of some Figure in the World, to give him the greater Authority, and to make his
Actions the more Considerable, and what place more likely to fix on, than
Venice, where Strangers are admitted to the highest Commands in Military
Affairs.

It Is granted, a Negro here does seldom rise above a Trumpeter, nor often
perhaps higher at Venice. But then that proceeds from the Vice of Mankind,
which is the Poets Duty a^ he informs us, to correct, and to represent things
as they should be, not as they are. Now it is certain, there is no reason in the
nature of things, why a Negro of equal Birth and Merit, should not be on an^
equal bottom, with a German, Hollander, Frenchman, etc. The Poet, therefore
ought to do ^stice to Nations, as well as Persons, and set them to rights,
which the common course of things confounds. The same reason stands in force
for this, as for punishing the Wicked, and making the Virtuous fortunate, which
as Rapin, and all the Critics agree, the Poet, ought to do, though it generally
happens otherways. The Poet has therefore well chosen a polite People, to cast
off this customary Barbarity, of confining Nations, without regard to their
Virtue, and Merits, to slavery, and contempt for the mere Accident of their
Complexion.

I hope I have brought by this time as convincing proofs for the probability in
this particular, as Mr. Rymer has against it, if I have not wholly gained my
Point. Now therefore I shall proceed to the probability of Desdemona's Love for
the Moor, which I think is something more evident against him.

Whatever he aims at in his inconsistant Ramble against this, may be reduced to
the Person and the Manner. Against the Person he quotes you two Verses out of
Horace, that have no more reference to this, than -- in the Beginning God made
the Heaven and the Earth, has to the proof of the Jus Divinum of lay Bishops,
the Verses are these,

Sed non ut placidis coeant immitia, non ut
S^rpentes avibus geminentur, tiegribus agni.
unless he can prove that the Color of a Man alters his Species, and turns him
into a Beast or Devil. It Is such a vulgar Error, so criminal a fondness of our
Selves, to allow nothing of Humanity to any but our own Acquaintance of the
fairer hew; that I wonder a Man, that pretends to be at all removed from the
very Dreggs of the thoughtless Mob, should espouse it in so public a manner a
Critic too, who puts the Poet: in mind of correcting the common corruptions of
Custom. Any Man that has conversed with the best Travels, or read any thing of
the History of those parts, on the continent of Africa, discovered by the
Portugueze, must be so far from robbing the Negroes of some Countries there of
Humanity, that they must grant them not only greater Heroes, nicer observers of
Honor, and and all the Moral Virtues that distinguished the old Romans, but
also much better Christians (where Christianity is professed) than we of Europe
generally are. They move by a nobler Principle, more open, free and generous,
and not such slaves to sordid Interest.

After all this, Othello being of Royal Blood, and a Christian, where is the
disparity of the Match? If either side is advanced, it is Desdemona. And why
must this Prince though a Christian, and of known and experienced Virtue,
Courage, and Conduct, be made such a Monster, that the Venetian Lady cannot love
him without perverting Nature? Experience tells us, that there is nothing more
common than Marches of this kind, where the Whites, and Blacks cohabit, as in
both the Indies: and Even here at home, Ladys that have not wanted white
Adorers, have indulged their Amorous Dalliances, with their Sable Lovers,
without any of Othellos's Qualifications, which is proof enough, that Nature
and Custom, have not put any such unpassable bar betwixt Creatures of the same
kind, because of different colors, which I hope will remove the improbability
of the Person, especially when the powerful Auxilarys of extraordinary Merit
and Virtues come to plead with a generous Mind.

The probability of the Person being thus confirmed, I shall now consider that
of the Manner of his obtaining her Love. To this end we must still keep in mind
the known and experienced Virtue of the Moor which gave Credit, and Authority
to what he said; and then we may easily suppose the story of his Fortunes, and
Dangers, would make an impression of Pity, and admiration at least on the bosom
of a Woman, of a noble and generous Nature. No Man of any generous Principle,
but must be touched at suffering Virtue, and value the noble sufferer, whose
Courage and Bravery, bears him through uncommon Trials and extraordinary
Dangers. Nor would it have less force on a Woman of any principle of Honor and
tenderness; she must be moved and pleased with the Narration, she must admire
his constant Virtue, and Admiration is the first step to Love, which will
easily gain upon those who have once entertained it.

Dido in Virgil was won by the Trojan stranger she never saw before, by the
relation of his fortunes and Escapes; and some particulars of the Narration of
Aeneas, carrys full as ridiculous and absurd a Face as any thing, Othello says;
the most trifling of which is,

And of the Cannibals that each other eat
the Anthropophagi, and Men whose Heads
do grow beneath their Shoulders.
for all the rest is admirably fine, though our wonderful Critic cannot relish
it, there is a moving Beauty in each Line, the words are well chosen, and the
Image they give great, and Poetical; what an Image does Deserts Idle give? that
very Epithet is a perfect Hypotyposis, and seems to plac^ me in the midst of
one, where all the active hurry of the World is lost; but all that I can say,
will not reach the excellence of that Epithet so many properties of such a
place meet in it. But as for the Cannibals, etc. and the Men whose Heads grow
beneath their Shoulders. I have heard it condemned by Men whose taste I
generally approve, yet must they give me leave to dissent from them here, and
permit me either wholly to justify Shakespeare, even here, or at least to put
him on an equal bottom with Virgil, in his most beautiful part. For the fault
lies either in the Improbability of those things, or their Impertinence to the
business in Hand. First Probability we know is built on common Opinion; but
it is certain the Canibals have been generally believed, and that with very good
grounds of Truth; so that there can be no doubt of the probability of that.
Next for the Men whose Heads grow beneath their Shoulders, though that is not
established on so good a Foundation as Truth; yet the general Traditionary
belief of it in those days, is sufficient to give it a poetical probability. As
this was not Improbable, so neither was it Impertinent; for it is certain, that
whatever contributed to the raising her Idea of his Dangers and Escapes, must
conduce to his aim, but to fall into the Hands of those, whom not only the fury
of War, but that of Custom makes Cruel, heightens the danger, and by
consequence the Concern, especially in a young Lady possessed with the legend
of the Nursery, whence she must have amazing Ideas of the Danger of the brave
Moor from them.

But at worst, Shakespeare is on as good a bottom as Virgil, in this particular;
the Narrative of Aeneas, that won the Heart of Dido, has many things full as
trifling and absurd as this, if not far more? For is there not as much
likelihood that there should be a People that have their Heads grow beneath
their Shoulders, as the Race of the Cyclops, that have but one Eye, just
beneath their Forheads, and that Polyphemus his Eye was as big as a Grecian
Shield, or the Sun; or that he could wade through the Sea, without being up to
his middle. Can there be invented any thing so unnatural; as the Harpys in the
third Book, who had the Faces of Virgins, Wings, Feathers, etc. Of Birds, and a
human Voice, as is evident from the infaelix vates, that foretold 'em they
should not build their destined City, till they had eaten their Tables, or
Trenchers, (which by the way was a trivial and ridilous sort of a pun, as the
event showed, when Iulus found out the Jest,) nor is Scylla a more natural
mixture. But let us hear the description of all three, from Virgil himself,
least I be thought to injure his Memory, first of the Harpys in the Strophades.

Virginei volucrum vultus, faedissima ventris,
Proluvies, uncoeque Manus, and pallida semper
Ora fame. --
The beginning of Horace's Art of Poetry, Humano Capiti, etc. seems a Copy of
this; nor is Scylla a more Homogeneous Composition. --

At Scyllam caecis cohibet spelunca latebris
Ora exsertantem, and naves in saxa trabentem:
Prima hominis facies, and pulchro pectore virgo
Pube tenus, postrema immani Corpore pri^is
Delphinum Caudas utero commissa luporum.
Then for the Cyclop Polyphemus, the Grecian he takes abord, tells him his Eye
is

Argolici clypei, aut Phaebeae lampadis Instar.
and a little after lest this shou'dbe taken'as an hyperbolical magnifying it
by the terror of the fearful Greek; in his own Person, he says of him

-- Graditurque per aequ^r.
Jam medium, (...) fluctus latera ardu^ tinxit.
The Absurdities in Homer are much more numerous than those in Virgil. (I mean
those that must pass for such, if this in Shakespeare is so,) But because they
relate not to this particular, I shall say nothing of them here. All these I
have remarked in the Narration of Aeneas, hindered not, but that it won the
Heart of Dido, though firmly bent against a second Amor,

Iile meos primus, qui me sibi junxit amores
Abstulit: ille habeat secum, serv^que sepulchro.
especially one that was not like to be so very Honorable. Desdemona had no
such tie, to steel her He^ against Othello's Tong^e, no n^ ^ason to curb that
Passion she never felt before, when the prevailing Virtue of the Moor, att^ her
Heart; well may we therefore believe Desdemona should yield to the same force,
that conquered Dido, with all her Resolutions and Engagements, to the memory of
(...). Hear how she cries out to her Sister Ann,

Quis nov^s hic nostris successit sedibus hospes
Quem sese ore ^erens? Quam forti pectore and Armis?
Credo equidem, nec vana sides, genus esse deorum.
Dig^neres animo^ timor arguit, heu quibus ille
^actatur fatis, quae bella exhausta canebat.
and at the beginning of this fourth Book,

-- Haerent infixi pectore Vultus
Verbaque --
and the latter end of the first Book confirms this

Multa super P^iamo Rogitans super Hectore multa.
could Aeneas his Story not, one jot more moving or probable make a mere
stranger pass for a God, with the Carthaginian Queen at first hearing; and must
it be incredible, that the same shall not make Othello pass for so much as a
Man? The Parallel is so exact, that I am apt to think, Shakespeare took the Copy
from Virgil. Nor can it justly be urged, that these things were believed by the
Romans, since they were so far from believing these trifles, that Seneca in his
Epistles, laughs at those Fables, that constituted their Hell, which was of
much greater consequence. But supposing they were believed, the same will hold
good for Shakespeare, in this particular, I vindicate him in: for it is built on
as vulgar and general a tradition, as these Fables of old were, so that the
advantage is equal betwixt these two great Poets in this particular.

By this time, I hope our Drolling Caviller, will grant it no such monstrous
absurdity for the Doge to say,

I think this Tale would win my Daughter too.
since without doubt, that short summing up of what was only the subject of his
tale to Desdemona, with only the supposition of the particulars, must move any
generous Breast.

But should all I have said fall of clearing the Probability of the Fable from
Mr. Rymers Objections, yet ought not that to rob Shakespeare of his due
Character of being a Poet, and a great Genius: unless he will for the same
reason deny those prerogatives to Homer, and Sophocles. The former has often
lost the Probable, in the Admirable, as any Book of the Iliads and Odysses will
prove; and the latter, as Rapin justly observes, has not kept to probability,
even in his best performance, I mean in his Oedipus Tyrannus; for (as Rapin has
it) Oedipus ought not to have been ignorant of the assassinate of Laius, the
ignorance he is in of the Murder, which makes all the Beauty of the intrigue, is
not probable; and if a Man would play the Droll with this Fable of Oedipus, it
would furnish full as ridiculous a Comment, as witty Mr. Rymer has done from
this of Othello; and sure I cannot err in imitating so great a Critic.

First, then let all Men before they defend themselves on the Highway, think
well of what they do, lest not being Mathematically sure he is at home, he kill
his own Father, which perhaps is something dangerous in this Age, where such
boon Blades frequent the Road, and such good-natured Ladies have the disposing
of our fate.

Next, let every Younger Brother, that ventures to ride in another Man's Boots,
be very circumspect, lest he marries his own Mother.

Thirdly and Lastly, This may be a caution to the few Fools that dote on
Virtue, that they trustto a rotten Reed that will be of little use to 'em,
since all is whirled about by an unavoidable necessity.

These are much more the consequence of this Fable of Oedipus, than those
wondrous Truths, he draws from that of Othello. Nay, the moral Sophocles
concludes his Oedipus with, will serve as justly for Othello, viz. That no Man
can be called happy before his Death. But the whole Fable of Oedipus, though so
much admired, is so very singular and improbable, that it is scarce possible, it
ever could have happened; on the other hand, the fatal Jealousy of Othello,
and the Revenge of Jago, are the natural Consequences of our ungoverned
Passions, which by a prospect of such Tragical effects of their being indulged,
may be the better regulated and governed by us. So that though Othello ends not
so formally with a moral Sentence, as Oedipus does, yet it sets out one of much
greater Value. If it be a fault in Shakespeare, that it end not with such a
sentence, Sophocles is guilty of no less in his Philoctetes, which not only
concludes without any Moral, but is also incapable of being reduced to any, at
least of any moment. Whereas the Morals of Hamlet, Macheth, and most of
Shakespeare's Plays, prove a lesson of mightier consequence than any in
Sophocles, except the Electr^, viz. that Usurpation, though it thrive a while,
will at last be punished, etc. Besides the worst, and most irregular of
Shakespeare's Plays, contains two or three such Fables, as that of Philoctetes,
which answers not one of the ends of Poetry; for it neither pleases or profits,
it moves neither Terror nor Compassion, containing only a dry account, without
any variety of the persuasions of Pyrrhus, to get Philoctetes to go with him to
Troy with the Arrows of Hercules; who, after he had by Treachery gained 'em, as
foolishly restores 'em to him again, and Troy might have stood long enough, if
Hercules had not come from the Gods, to bend the stubborn Fool, that rather
chose to be miserable himself; with his endless (...) and his Complaints of his
Foot, something like the Tumors, Chilblains, Carnosities, etc. raked together
by Mr. Rymer. And all that can be learnt from this Play of Sophocles is,

First, That we never send Boys of our Errand, unless we have a God at command
to make up the business he has spoiled; if we mean our business shall be
thoroughly done, and not the fate of a Nation sacrificed to a pain in the Foot.

Secondly, Not to trust Strangers we never saw before, for a fair Tale, with
our Safety and Treasure, without a Mathematical Demonstration of their Fidelity
and Trust.

Lastly, That all Men with fore Feet should not despair of a Cure.

But I have dwelt so long on the Fable, that I have not time enough to discuss
the other parts, as the Characters, Thoughts, and Expressions, so fully as I
ought; especially, the Thought and Expression, for 'twou'd require a Volumn
near as ^ig as Shakespeare, to set them off according to their worth; with all
the proofs from Grammar or Rhetoric of their Truth and Justness. The Fable is
looked upon by Rapin, and after him by our Gl^ner of Criticisms, as the Soul of
the Play, and therefore I may be excused for my prolixity in its defense, and
allowed a little more time for a full Justification of the other parts of
Shakespeare, attaqu'd with less Reason and Justice. Mr. Rymer has taken above
ten Year to digest his Accusations, and therefore it cannot in reason be thought
I should not in half so many days be able to perform all the work he has cut
out: Nor can I proceed to a particular consideration of all the Characters of
this Play at this time. Desdemona I think is the most faulty: but since our
Antagonist will have Jago, the most intolerable, I shall consine my self to
that.

What I have said in the beginning of my Vindication of Shakespeare, must here
be recollected on Jago's behalf; besides which, I have some other
considerations to offer, which I hope will lighten the insupportable load of
Contempt, and Ridicule cast on him by our Caviller.

First, Therefore in our Judgment of Jago, we must follow the Rule of Horace,
so much stood upon by Mr. Rymer.

Intererit multum
Cholcus an A^yrius, Theb^ nutritus, an Argis.
We are not only to respect the profession of the Man in our Judgment of the
Character, but we must also have an Eye to his Nation, the Country he was born
in, and the prevailing temper of the People, with their National Vices; by this
Rule we shall find Jago, an Italian; by Nature Selfish, Jealous, Reserved,
Revengeful and Proud, nor can I see any reason to suppose his Military
Profession should to powerfully influence him to purge away all these
Qualities, and establish contrary in their room. Nor can I believe the
quotation from Horace, which our Caviller produces, can justly be extended to
all degrees of Soldiers.

It runs thus in Horace.
-- -- Honoratum si forte reponis Achillem
Impig^r, Jr^cundus, inex^rabilu, Acer,
Jura neget sib^ Nata, nibil non arrog^t armis.
It Is plain from what goes before, and what follows after that Horace meant not
this, at least for a general Character of all Soldiers, but only as a direction
for the drawing Achilles, or such a Hero; for h^'s enumerating the Manners, of
those public Characters, that were generally made use of by the Romans in their
Tragedies, for this follows.

Sit Medea ferox invictaque Flebilis Ino,
Perfidus Ixion, Jo vaga, trist^ Orestes.
And a few Lines before he is giving the Characters of several Professions and
Ages, from whence he proceeds to these particular Characters of Achilles, Ino,
Medea, etc. drawn from the known Stories of them, and this is confirmed by what
he joins to this;

Siquid inexpertum scenae committis, etc.
That is, if you take known Persons, that have for so many Ages trod the Stage,
this must be their Character; but if you bring some new person on it, that was
never there before, then take care that your Persons preserve that Character
you give 'em at first, etc.

I know Rapin gives a Soldier these qualities; Fierce, Insolent, Surly,
Inconstant, which partly are the effects of their manner of Life, but I cannot
conceive these to be opposite to those other in Jago. The Characters or
Manners, as the same Rapin observes, are to be drawn from Experience; and that
tells us, that they differ in Soldiers according to their Nature and
Discipline; that also tells us that the Camp is not free from Designs,
Su^plantings, and all the effects of the most criminal of Passions, and this
indeed is evident from the Draught Homer gives us of the Grecian Camp, where
Love was not judged so contrary to the Character of a General, as Mr. Rymer
would have it thought: Achilles and Agamemnon having both their admired
Captives. And let Mr. Rymer say what he please, I can prove that 'twas the Love
of (...), that troubled Achilles, and confirmed his anger, as well as the mere
(...) of having his prize taken from him, but of that in another place. In
short, the (...) of Homer differs as much from the Soldiers of Mr. Rymers
acquaintance, as Jago does; nor is he the only Soldier that could dissemble.
Sinon in Virgil and Neoptolemus in Sophocles, are as guilty of it as he.

But granting that Jago's Character is defective something in the Manners,
Homer and Sophocles have been guilty (the first much more, the other not much
less) of the same: what are the Wounds, Scuffles, Passions, Adulteries, etc. Of
the Gods and Goddesses, obvious to the meanest Capacity, and beyond all
dispute? Is not the Character of Oedipus Coloneut of Sophocles, as Rapin
remarks, extremely unproportionable to Oedipus Tyrannus? And though Mr. Rymer is
so severe, to deny that the Character of Jago is that of a Soldier, because so
different from his Military Acquaintance; yet I Am confident h^ would take it
extremely amiss, If I should deny him to be a Critic, because so contrary to
all the Critics that I have met with, playing the merry Droll, instead of
giving serious and solid Reasons for what he advances.

The other Characters of this Play I must deser till another time, as well as a
thorough defense of his Thoughts and Expression, both which he wholly denies
him; and with an extravagantly wonderful Assurance publicly tells us; that the
Neighing of a Horse has more Humanity, (for that is his Wittycism) than the
Tragical Flights of Shakespeare.

Mr. Rymer's Friend Rapin tells us, that the Thoughts are the expression of the
Manners, as Words are of Thoughts, that is the natural result of the Manners,
which being already cleared from his Accusations, the vindication of the
Thoughts are included in them, as well as their Condemnation in his Charge
against the other, for he disda^ns to be particular in his proof. Then for the
Expressions of Shakespeare, none but Mr. Rymer can find fault with 'em. The
excellence of expression consists in this, that it bear a proportion to the
Things; that is, that it give us a full Idea of 'em; that it be apt, clear,
natural, splendid, and numerous. There is scarce a serious part of Shakespeare,
but has all these qualities in the Expression.

To omit several Scenes in Hamlet, particularly that betwixt him, and his
Fathers Ghost: I Will only instance in two or three Speeches, that are, and have
been on the Stage in our Memory, which may give some sample of the Poetry,
Thought, and Expression of Shakespeare. The first is in the Midsummer Nights
Dream, now acted under the name of the Fairy Queen. Act the Third, T^nia speaks
thus,

Titan: Be kind and courteous to this Gentleman.
Hop in his Walks, and Gambol in his Eyes,
Feed him with Apricocks and Dewberrys,
With purple Grapes, green Figgs and Mulberrys,
The Honey Baggs steal from the Humble Bees;
And for Night Tapers crop their waxen Thighs,
And light them at the fiery Glowworms Eyes;
To have my Love to Bed and to Arise.
And pluck the Wings from painted Butter-flyes,
To fan the Moon Beams from his sleeping Eyes.
Nod to him Elves, and do him Courtesies.

is not this extremely poetical and fine? The next I shall take from the 2d.
Scene of Richard the Second.

York. Then as I said the Duke (great Bullingrbook)
Mounted upon a hot and fiery Steed,
Which his aspiring Rider seemed to know,
With slow but stately Grace kept on his course
While all Tongues cried God save the Bullingbrook.
You would have thought the very Windows spoke,
So many greedy looks of Young and old,
Through Casements darted their desiring Eyes
Upon his Visage, and that all the Walls
With painted Imag'ry had said at once,
Jesu preserve thee, welcome Bullingbrook.
Whilst He, from one side to the other turning,
Bare-headed lower, than his proud Steeds Neck
Bespeak them thus; I thank ye Countrymen.
And the still do^g thus he passed along,

Duchess. Alas! Poor Richard where rides he the while?

York. As in a Theater the Eyes of Men,
After a well graced Actor leaves the Stage
Are idly bent on him that enters next
Thinking his pra^lo to be (...)
Even so, or with much (...) Men's Eyes,
Did scowl on Richard: No Man cried God save
No joyful Tongue gave Him his welcome home. (him.
But Dust was thrown upon his Sacred Head
Which with such gentle sorrow he shook off
His Face still combating with Tears and Smiles,
(The Badges of Grief and Patience)
That had not God (for some strong purpose) steeled
The Hearts of Men, they must perforce have melted,
And Barbarism it self have pitty'd him.

Are not here all the Beautys of Thought, joined with all those of expression?
is it possible any thing that has but the least Humanity, should be dull enough
not to relish, not to be moved, nay trans^orted with this? I must confess, it
has fired me, so that I think our Critic better deserves the Arraignment
Tib^rius gave the Poet, for ill representing Agamemnon, whose Character at
best, was but a Child of Fancy, and therefore subject to the Poets Will, but to
Blaspheme such a visible Excellence, Merits the highest contempt, if not a
greater Punishment.

Shakespears Numbers carry such an Harmonious Majesty, that what Rapin and some
other Critics say of Homer, is justly his due; they give a noble Beauty to the
meanest things. It Is true, the Words he sometimes uses, by their absol^teness
renders some of his Expressions a little dark, but then we must remember the
great alteration our Language has undergone since his time; but examine well
the sense of his Words, you will seldom find him guilty of Bombast, (though laid to
his charge by Mr. Rymer,) that is Words and Thoughts ill matched. On the
contrary, they are generally so well sorted, that they present us with so
lively and sensible an Image of what they import, that it fixes it self in our
Minds, with an extreme satisfaction; and the more we view it, the more it gains
upon us.

I shall hereafter step into the Scenes with Mr. Rymer, and also examine his
Narrations, Deliberations, Didactic and Pathetic Discourses, which are all that
are made use of in Tragedy, in which if he sometimes err, he has yet performed
well; and amidst his faults you shall find some thoughts of a great Genius. I
shall only now observe en passant, in defense of that Scene, betwixt Jago and
Othello, that we ought not to be imposed on by positive assertions, or think
because Mr. Rymer tells us so, that half words, and ambiguous Reflections, do
not naturally work up Jealousy, or that it is not natural, for Othello to catch
at every blown surmise. These Assertions of our Critic show him to be very
ignorant of the very nature of this Passion, for as it is reduced to the
primitive Desire by the Moralists, so it is thus by them defined,

Jealousy is a fear of loosing a good we very much value and esteem, arising
from the least causes of Suspicion. now it is evident even from the trifling,
and false Objections of his enemies that Shakespeare had this very notion of
this passion. For this reason it is, he makes Othello swallow the very first
bait laid by Jago for him. Cassio is found with Desdemona, and on Othello's
approach, consciously retires, which though he did to avoid his Anger not
Jealousy; yet Jago improves the opportunity to his purpose, with an -- I like
not that; then to awake the Moors Jealousy by degrees, he takes occasion from
Cassio's departure to question him -- did Cassio when you wooed my Lady know of
your Love? Which he pursues with half-words, and ambiguous Reflections, that
plainly imply more than they barely express, in which he discovered, fear to
speak out what he desired Othello should know, the natural consequence of which
is the touching a jealous Nature, with curiosity in a thing, that so nearly
related to his Happiness. Every word roused some surmrize; and as Ovid observes,
cuncta (...) Amantes, Lovers fear any Appearance. But more of this hereafter.
In the in the mean while I Am pretty confident, every Man's own Sense will supply
my defect of a particular defense of the working up of Othello's passion of
Jealousy.

And now Sir, it is time to turn my Thoughts from a defense of Shakespeare, to an
excuse of my own Transgression, in addressing this Essay to you without asking
your Leave. I Am not for asking pardon for an Offense, before I have committed
it, and then I am willing if possible, to extenuate it from all its heightning
Circumstances; and Sir, I hope I have enough to say for my Self in committing
this.

First, I knew your Nature so well, that though no Name, could have given more
Authority to my defense of Shakespeare; yet would you never have consented to
the manner I thought my self obliged to treat his accuser in; for though he has
had no regard to the public Friendship you have expressed for him; yet I know
you have not resented the grosness of his public abuse of you, with indignation
enough to permit me to deal with him in the same manner; for what was said of a
great Lord, is fully as true of you, viz. that you are

The best natured Man, with the worstnatur'd Muse,
for though there is nothing so strong and so cutting as your Satire; yet is
there nothing ^o easy and so affable as your Temper and Conversation. Pardon
me, I will speak what I know of you, and let my Enemies make the best on it,
whose Malice I value not, if I can but prevail with you to forgive this boldness

The Ingenious and Honorable Theocrine to Theopompus; showing Her the
faithfullest of Lovers, and most Pious of Children.
ALL your Letters are at last arrived safe, though it happened with them, as in a
great many other things: what should a came first, came last, by which I Am
sorry to find, that one who is to judge of Souls, knows no better how to judge
of Merit; else whatever your request had been, it had been granted. I wish all
that can serve the generous Theopompus, had my sense of his deserts, then
should the Friend of my dear Poliarchus be raised, as far above those self
Interest'd Wretches, as his Soul now is, and Generosity was above theirs. For
most of the sordid World, neither know how to reward the living, nor how to do
justice to the dead; but these are crimes unknown to all that were inspired
with the Friendship for our dear Poliarchus.

There are few of the Troubles that attend us in this Life, but when we
seriously examine their Cause, we shall find we our selves in one kind or
other, have in some degree contributed to 'em. For who can be of a generous
Temper, and not bear a part with the Afflicted? this has (as it it does with
all that are good) made you sensible of my sufferings, which has by an
unforeseen Consequence brought the trouble of many impertinent Letters on your
self; for it is impossible to suffer you ever to give over that pleasing
Melancholy Subject you so ingeniously entertain me with. The Death of my
Poliarchus is as lasting in my Memory as I am: and as I am the most unfortunate
of Women by his loss, so can all other Afflictions be but like drops of Water
into the abyss of the Sea: Yet have I met lately with an additional Grief, that
bears a much greater proportion. That dear Mother I have been in care for, is
now taken from me to augment the number of the blessed above; my tender Love, and
grateful Duty, was such for my unequaled Parent, that had I not known how to
live after the Loss, and Affliction you saw me in, I could scarce have
supported this; but That has made me know that there is a vast difference
betwixt Tears shed for those whom Death chooses, and Those who make choice of
Death, rather than live without what they too much valued. This vast conflux of
misfortunes, gives me a greater desire to be assured what knowledge my departed
Friends will have of me at our meeting in their blessed abode, for since I Have
committed the sacred Memory of Poliarchus to your care, (which whilst I live,
can never dye.) I am eternally entertaining all, I can get to listen, with my
sad Story; bu^ you can make it from age to age endure. Time the certain cure,
of all other ills can never lessen mine, so that I often resolve to seek out a
solitude, where if Reason cannot overcome my Grief, Grief may overcome me, and
make my wretched days short as I wish 'em, and my unhappy state requires.

I am extremely sensible of your generous compassion, and must tell you that
when I first converst in this kind with the ingenious Theopompus, my Esteem
could then be grounded on no other score, but what great value he had for what
deserved Love and Esteem from all the World, my best and dearest Poliarchus:
But now you have engaged me the way that most prevails with Humane Nature, by a
Real Sense of my Pain. That is so generous a piece of good Nature, that it is to
be admired wherever it is found; and in return, I would if I could forbear
tormenting you any more with my Grief. But Ah! How can I cease my complaints to
one, who so tenderly apprehends 'em, and so excellently applys the Cordial of
unequaled Advices. This makes you often troubled with my Melancholy Life; for
I declare I had rather read your obliging Expressions for our dead Friend, than
all the finest things the greatest of Mankind can say on any other Subject, but
not to tire you all at once; I shall here conclude, that I am

your Friend, and Servant. Theocrine.

To ACME, before I had seen her.
I Ought not in Prudence (Madam) to let you know the unreasonable extent of
your Charms, for fear it destroy the Happiness I aim at in your Pity; Cruelty
and Pride being generally the effect of so Unlimited a Power. Yet, since you
cannot pity, without knowing the Sufferer, I must inform you, Divine Maid, that
I have increased the number of your Slaves, without so much as the pleasure of
seeing you for all the Sighs you have cost me.

Love indeed is an Offering that ought to be laid on the soft Altars of Beauty;
But, Madam, sure never was by any, but my self, on that of an Unknown Deity. We
keep the Bleeding Victims of our Hearts, as long as we can, and only yield 'em
up to the Irresistible Force of the present Fair One.

This, Madam, is the common Condition of Lovers; but as my Passion has an
extraordinary Object in you, so have your Beauties an uncommon Influence on me:
for Charmed by I know not what Divine Witchery, I Sacrifice my poor Heart to
your very Name, without putting you to the expense of one killing Look, to
oblige me to it; Report has often engaged the Curiosity, but never till now won
the Affections.

The first mention of you inspired me with all the tender Thoughts of Love; and
being obliged to personate the Lover in Print, I had Recourse to the Divine
Idea, I had formed of you, Madam, to qualify me for it; you were the only
Heavenly Muse that I invoked, which abundantly furnished me with all the
Transporting Ruptures of Love. But alas! Madam, while I too much gave way to
Imagination, it carried me to a View of those Joys, none but you can impart, at
left too charming fair one, so much justice is due to the most uncommon of
Lovers, as to permit him the Blessing of your Conversion.

Ah! Madam, excel the rest of your Sex in Perfections of Mind, as much as you
do in those of Body, and let not Pride and Cr^y level you with 'em; like a
lawful Prince maintain the Gloro of your Empire, by the happiness of your
Vassals, and be not like a Tyrant, proud of their Destruction, at least permit
the address of

the greatest of Slaves, Septimuis.

To ACME, after I had seen her.
WHat ever Doubts you were pleased to make of my passion before I saw you,
Madam, because so uncommon; yet since I have now seen you, I hope you can no
longer suspect the Reality of my love, for sure you must know it is impossible
to behold that Face with an unwounded Heart. 'Twas not at least possible for me
(who came preingag'd with strong desires) to see you, without the extremity of
Love.

I sighed and languish'd for you before, without the pleasure of feasting my
greedy Eyes with the delicious banquet of your Looks. How often did I envy
those your Eyes made slaves, whilst I fell a victim to your very Name, without
a sight of that Heaven I died for? How often have I said,

How blessed, how more then happy must be Prove
Who from her looks drinks in full draughts of Love,
For after Pain he meets with present Joys;
With a too envied Fate, dissolves and Dies,
In the vast Beatific Vision of her Eyes.
these were my thoughts then Madam, and Imagination fell short of Reality; for
I would not for a thousand greater torments, than the vast increase of my
passion has brought me, have been without that too too fleeting pleasure of
seeing you last Sunday. It Is true, that was not sufficient to calm all my
Griefs and Sighs. An empty view of Heaven, was not the utmost bounds of my
Longing: and Love took it only as an earnest of greater Satisfaction, and now
makes use of it, but to aggravate my sufferings, which nothing but your Pity
can lessen.

I would not Madam, put you to too great an expense of Pity at once, I only
desire your leave to adore you, and a reviving look now and then to support my
languishing Soul. I wish I must confess your welcome Pity should extend so
far, as to admit the humblest and most loving of your Slaves sometimes to your
Conversation; I wish too -- but should I trouble you with all my Wishes, it
would be endless, and thought perhaps presumptuous, for they are extravagant,
and have no limits but in you, soaring as my Love, and Boundless as your Charms:

And cannot a Wreath thus tossed, thus distracted with such hopeless Wishes,
merit your Compassion? Can nothing but Death atone for my loving you? And oh
too charming Acme! I wish I were but as sure of your Pity. as I am of being the
most miserable of Men whilst I live, and soon a Ghost without it.

Give me leave Madam, to hope you will not always deny it me -- mistake me not.
This hope is not built on an overweening Confidence in my own Merits, (yet if
Love be so I have the greatest) but on that noble Idea, I form of your Mind
from the Beauty of your Body, for sure Nature cannot be so proposterous in the
most Solemn of her Works, as to leave such outward perfection unfinished
within. And pity Madam, is the greatest and most consummate attribute of the
Noblest Mind, as Beauty is of the Body.

Nay, Beauty is of no use nor Advantage without Pity, and the cruellest of
your Sex must at last have recourse to it, after they have foolishly sacrificed
many of the precious hours of flying, and irrecoverable Youth to a barbarous
and unaccountable Custom; if they resolve not, still more foolishly to fling
away the greatest, and most valuable of Heavens Blessings Beauty, and Youth
without making use of 'em.

The Misers of Money have more Reason', than those of Beauty: for the former
have the store they spare still by them, to gratify their Ambition or Pleasure
of viewing it; but the latter deny themselves the enjoyment of that Treasure,
that has no other use, and which they cannot preserve with all their care; and
it is the height of folly to spare that, which though we use not, flys swiftly
fromus without any Advantage and which can never be recovered.

Be not therefore, my adorable Acme, so improvidently Provident, of the
fleeting Store, as o complement a senseless and customary Barbarity, at the
expense of your Justice and Reason; they both demand your Pity and your Love.
For Retaliation is the Law of Justice, Love for Love, and Heart for Heart, as
well as Eye for Eye, and Hand for Hand. And Reason would persuade you to lay
your coming Years out in Pleasure, and none so innocent, so lasting, and so
vast a^ Love.

Love's the most generous Passion of the Mind.
The safest Refuge Innocence can find.
It Is founded in Nature, the World and all Mankind owe their beings to'^.

It Is true Madam, I am not formed with all that nice proportion, and that
curious shape, that Fops are so proud of, and Women so much cover; hut yet my
Mind (nor is it a boast to say so) excells them. I dress not like a Bian, nor
do I move by Art, but then, too charming Acme, I do not love by art as he does.
My Form, my Mien, and my Love are of a Piece, plain and sincere, and only
informed by Nature.

If all this merit not your Love, it must your Pity and Friendship, and on any
Terms I would be admitted to the number of your Slaves.

Septimius

To the Proud Acme.
THe sending back my three last Letters, Madam, makes me suppose you can take
no great Pleasure in detaining the former, and that I now do you a very
grateful Office in sending for 'em. And Madam, you cannot doubt but that it must
be a wondrous Satisfaction to one so infinitely enamored, as I am, to please
you at any Rate. If you send 'em not, I'shall conclude, that how-ever
unacceptable the Offerer was, the Sacrifice was welcome; but if you return 'em,
I shall have the mighty comfort amidst my Sighs, to kiss something that has
touched those Hands, that are not used to bestow any Favors on Men in my
Circumstances.

Well, Madam, since you are so cruel, it is well I Have some other Balm in store
for my wounded Heart; for Women to me like Scorpions, have always been their
own Cure. If their Eyes have pierced my Heart, their Vanity, Folly or Pride,
has generally restored it to perfect Health. And I am sensible that I shall
never be entirely undone or l^st in Love, 'till I meet with one as free from
aff^cted Co^ness, as from affected Languishments, and such pretty artificial
Tweers, designing Glances, betwixt Invitation and Denial, as are no small
Auxiliarys in Acmes Conquests. The only Bond, Madam, that ties my poor Heart
for ever, to the Oar of Love, is an Innocent, Free, and Obliging Kindness,
Sense, and an Agreeable Conversation and Humor, with an Exemption from Defects
of Constitution, and Body, that shall be nameless, for Reasons best known to my
self. And 'till I meet with such an one, my Heart, I thank my Stars, has so
much the command of it self, as to admit as much, or as little of Love as it
pleases; else Madam, in what a miserable pickle should I now have been do you
think? -- Sighing, Mourning, and Dying, to no purpose? besides, cursing, Fate,
Stars, Planets, and all that (as Mr. Bays says) for a damned Ingrate?

But since it is now over no more of that, thou wondrous fair one, lest you
should think me yet your Power: but as my Passion for Acme, had a plaguey odd
Beginning; so shall it here have full as Odd an ending. -- For the Duce (or any
thing, but your Eyes) take me, if I am not at this very individual Moment
within ken of the very place, whence I set out in my Voyage of Love; in which
since you will not permit me to be your Fellow Traveller. I wish you un bon
Voyage. Adieu,

Ma Belle Dame, \ Adieu, Septimius.

To the Ingenious URANIA.
LETTER I.
I Was extremely uneasy, Madam, to be on such unequal Terms with you, whilst
you know where to direct to me, tho I don't to you; and I confess, I thought it
as great a Grievance as Vizor Masks, by which Women have the unreasonable
Advantage of walking invisibly, when Men are forced every where to go
barefaced: Yet as those would be more tolerable, if none but the Ugly and
Indifferent wore 'em, so should I with the greater Ease dispense with my
Ignorance of a Direction to you, had you either none, or else less Wit than
your Letters prove you have: For it is that Divine Charm that makes me desire to
settle a Correspondence with Urania. Nor is this Desire opposite to your
Resolution of remaining unknown: For there shall, upon Honor, be no further
Inquiry made after you than you shall allow; tho G -- persists in his Opinion,
that you sacrifice your Wit and Sense to the Reputation of that trifling Sex
you are not of; this not only the Wit of your former, but the polite Accuracy
of all your Letters persuade him, since you are not only free from the false
Spelling of most Women, but are so entirely exempt from false English and
Grammar, that you discover a better Acquaintance with Lilly, than to have passed
no further, than that Caution you quote from his Accidens; besides some
Beauties in the mere Writing down your Thoughts, which few Men Practice or Know.

I am of the same Opinion of you, Madam, I declared in my former; and because I
would fain have you a Woman, believe you firmly to be so: And though G -- be so
positive, that the Diffidence you pretend of your self, is nothing but a
cunning Subterfuge from the surest Evidence of your Sex, your Conversation, yet
am I (taking you still for a very Woman) both pleased and dissatisfied with it;
for though I am pleased, because it seems the Child of Modesty and Discretion,
which seldom join with Wit, especially in a Woman; Yet am I dissatisfied with
it, since I find 'twould deprive you of what it qualifies you for;
Conversation, I mean, with Mankind, since that, not only secures you from the
Fate which the Imprudent of your Sex, have for want of it, incurr; but also
because it renders you more desirable to Men of Sense.

But Madam, were we such formidable Creatures as you seem to make us, that you
could not Converse with us but you must be Ruined, yet is there no Danger from
me, who have none of those engaging Accomplishments, that are the wondrous and
bewitching Engines of your Sex's Destruction; as Wit, Shape, Dressing, Dancing
and Singing; with the rest of the gay Train that take with the Fair: For I
assure you I Am Ugly enough, and Dress ill enough to be a Wit, and yet am Dull
enough to be Handsome, and a Beau. I can neither Sing nor Dance, and am yet
very Impertinent; for though I talk little, yet even that is nothing to the
purpose. So that, Madam, from such a Man, the most distrustful Lady need fear
no Stratagem on her Affections, since they are generally taken by the Eye or
Ear; and if neither of them be won, the Fort of your Heart is secure, and
Impregnable.

But referring this wholly to your self, all I shall beg, is a settled
Correspondence with you, whether you be a real or counterfeit Woman; and shall
therefore conclude with acknowledging my Error in not taking more Notice of
your Welsh Friend; though it may well be Pardoned, if the Wit of the Indict^r
disarmed all my satyric Rage, and made me rather sacrifice a just Indignation
to her Praise, than forsake so pleasing a Theme, for so fruitless a Labor, as
chastising those inhospitable Britains, who would no more now have understood
or improved the wholesome Satyr to Practice, than they did their Duty, when they
made the Ingenious Urania their Enemy; whom to retain my Friend, shall be the
Endeavor of,

Madam, Your humble Servant, Viridomar.

LETTER II.
April the 2d. 93.
HAving at last recovered your Letter, Madam, I send this Answer to prevent
your Trouble of Transcribing another Copy. First therefore, Madam, I must tell
you, I Am infinitely Proud that you do me the Honor to six your Correspondence
with me; nor would I for the World have the Happiness of this intercourse of
Letters broke off on any Account, much less on one so trivial as you mention:
For there is not a Line you send, but I esteem it more than the whole Revenue of
the Post Office. Though I must confess I could wish (and that with all my
Heart) that you were not leaving the Town, because I find by this Letter, that
there is no Danger of your Heart, if I should be admitted to your Conversation:
For I assure you, Madam, I am far from a Phoenix; though I may perhaps, have
some Pretense to those your darling Qualities: And I hope the Ambition I shall
always avow to be the Friend of Urania, will excuse the Vanity of being more
Particular.

I hate Ingratitude where ever it is, and cannot therefore think them Hero's, who
espouse the Quarrel of the Ungrateful, let their Personal Bravery or Courage
be never so great. Then, Madam, for Dissimulation, I can say this, that I Am far
from loving it, and only practice it sometimes on Compulsion, as a necessary
Evil; and to say Truth, the evident Necessity of it, has made it lose the
Infamy of a Vice, with almost all, and gained it the Reputation of a Virtue,
with the Politic and Wise: Nor can indeed any Man be free from it, unless he
design to purchase the Name of a Madman, and frighten all he knows from his
Company. Consider it a little, Madam, and I Am confident you will allow a little
Dissimulation necessary to the Decorum of good Breeding; for you cannot think it
proper to tell this super annuated Matron, that all the Paint on her Face will
not hide the telltale Marks of Old Age; or that pretty prattling Virgin in all
the gay Bloom of her Youth, that she is a Fool, and that she should be silent if
she have not a mind to sacrifice all the Trophies of her Eyes, to the
Impertinence of her Tongue: Or that Beau of Sixty, that all his Charms are
borrowed from his Dress and Garniture; or that he is more the Creature of his
Vallet, than of God Almighty, since the Vallet, has so extravagantly
Transformed him from what God made him. And so on, to the rest of the Follies
and Vices of Mankind. This would be to make one's self more unacceptable than a
Memento Mori in the midst of Joy and Pleasure. But to proceed, Madam, I Am free
from Hypocrisy: Nor can I think any one an Hypocrite but an Athiest; nor any
one an Athiest but a Fool. As for the Two next Endowments you require, viz. a
Great Soul, and a true Nobleness of Mind, the Practice and different Opinions
of the World, have rendered the Terms so ambiguous, that the Definitions of
Philosophy are of small Use: I must therefore desire you to explain in your
next, what you mean by them, that so I may find how far I can pretend to 'em;
for I Would fain be qualified for the incomparable Urania's Friend. Generosity (if
I mistake not your Sense of the Word) has been my Vice and Punishment. In
short, Madam, if by Good Humor you mean Good Nature, I can put in some Claim
to it; but if by it you understand a brisk Jest and jovial Air, much Talk and
more Laugh; Faith, Madam, I must own I Am not fond of making any Pretense to it.

Thus much for the Qualities both Negative and Affirmative you require in a
Friend: Then as for the Follies and Vices you Abominate, I thank my Stars: I Am
not very guilty of 'em, and think Affectation equally criminal in Gayety, as
well as Gravity.

And now, Madam, since you have described the Phoenix that must win your Heart,
give me Leave to present you with a rough Sketch of her (that is almost as rare)
that must make an absolute Conquest of mine, (for as for transient Amorets, one
indifferently qualified may do.) She must be moderately Fair but no Beauty;
(and that is the reason I hinted at in my last, that I was sorry you told me you
were no Beauty) or at least, if possible, only so in my Eye: She must be
neither Proud, nor Affected; as Witty as Urania, yet as free from Opiniature
and Obstinacy as I think her. I mean not by Wit, those noisie Repartees of the
Cocquets of the Town, which you with justice Condemn, but a sensible
Apprehension of things, which I Am confident you cannot mean, when you term Wit a
Scandal. In fine, Madam, she must be Easy and Free in her Conversation, very
Grateful, very Generous, and very Loving in her Nature: And when I find one so
qualified, I Am entirely her Slave.

But whilst I pursue my Thoughts, I find my Letter grow too long, which is one
Fault of a whining Lover, who being much your Aversion, I Will here conclude with
an humble Request that I may have Leave to hope I shall one Day be so Happy, as
to be admitted to your Conversation: For that, Madam, I must own is the
greatest Ambition of

Your humble Servant Viridomar.

LETTER III.
YOur Raillery, Madam, on my Loss of your Letter, is as Just, as Witty; and I
confess with a great deal of Confusion, I can make no Apology for it, unless an
Assurance that I Will never trust your Letters in my Pocket again, at least with
any other Papers.

I think my self extremely Happy that I can please Urania in any thing; and
truly, Madam, 'twas the real Value I have for you, that made me alter the
Medium of our Correspondence, because my Brother had the Assurance not only to
reflect upon the Direction you sent me, but also to show your Letter to more
than I desired should have that Pleasure without your Permission. This Dealing
with his Brethren of -- might be Pardonable, because they have some Dependence
on him; but the Respect that is due to your Merit, and the Justice that is due to
me, might have curbed his Curiosity within the Bounds of Good Manners.

I hope, Madam, you will forgive me this Discovery and Heat, for your Letter has
made me an irreconcilable Enemy to Dissimulation, who before was never any
Friend to it. You have Madam, new Molded me to your own Desire; and that Vice
appears now so very Ugly and Unmanly, that I Am extremely ashamed I ever said a
word in its Vindication: But above all, I shall think it a crying Sin, to
dissemble with the Divine Urania, and for that reason, Madam, I must tell you,
that my Conversation with both Sexes, has given me some reason to think I Am
pretty well acquainted with the general Inclinations of Mankind; this, when I
read your account of your self, makes you seem to me to describe an Angel, not
a Woman: The glorious Image you give me of Urania, by the Virtues she doats on,
and the Vices she abhors, is so extremely uncommon, that it looks like the
divine Draught of some Inspired Poets Fancy, when he informs us, by a great
Example of his own Creating, what we should be, and not like a Reality. And
your Prose has the effect of his Numbers, conveying Instruction in its most
grateful Vehicle Pleasure, and so fixes the noble Idea in my Soul, and makes me
in love with your Mind, before I see your Person: And you shall never persuade
me, that Conversing with you, can ever lessen my Esteem for you: For tho the
Writings of some of the most Ingenious afford a more agreeable Entertainment,
than their Company, yet we may lose a great deal of their Excellency by not
taking their Thoughts right; which made Martial tell Fidentinus, that by ill
repeating his Verses, he made 'em his own: Besides, Madam, there are a thousand
Graces in the delivery that abundantly improve the Sense, a fair Lady speaks,
which must increase her Esteem, and which we lose when Absent. And, Divine
Urania, since your Heart is secure in very good hands already, I can see no
reason, (forgive my Freedom) why you should deny this Favor, since I leave to
your self the management of the Interview, and give you my Word, that you shall
have the entire government of my Discourse and Actions.

But, Madam, tho I have a more earnest longing to Converse with Urania, than
Slaves for Liberty, the sick for Health, the poor for Riches, and the Ambitious
for Honors; yet Divine, unknown, such a respect I have, such a profound
Veneration for you, that I would Sacrifice even this Content (which perhaps is
not of less value than even Life it self) to your least Inconvenicy, if I was
sure it could not be obtained without prejudice to Urania.

I have a great deal to say about the Greatness and Nobleness of Mind you
describe, but that would be too long for a Letter that has already exceeded its
just Bounds; and I hope, I may have the liberty to deliver my Sentiments by
word of Mouth; only I must say that reason, not Opinion, general or particular,
ought to decide so weighty a Point. But upon the whole, Madam, by the Vices you
lay down as its Opposites I may presume to make some small pretention to it.

I would fain know what more than good Nature goes to the composing good
Humor, since Urania says there is more; I take not good Nature in that general
sense you hint at, but for a freedom from Malice, Envy, Moroseness, etc. but if
any part of Gaity be required, I Am at a loss, for I Am naturally of a Melancholy
disposition, and dull heavy Conversation, as I formerly told you; and perhaps
this want of an Airy Temper, with a little foolish Modesty I Have always been
troubled with, is that, that has made me still so Unsuccessful with the Fair,
that none could ever be in Love with me, whilst others with as few Brains, more
Vanity, and if possible, less agreeable Persons have prevailed. Waller says,
Women stoop to the Forward and the Bold, which are no ingredients in my
Character, at least in Love, and my Converse with your Sex. So that, Madam, I
hope you will scruple no more to give me leave to wait on you, and as I prove,
admit me into your Esteem, at least as far as cold Friendship will allow; or
discard me for ever, a greater Curse than which cannot fall on the Head of,

Madam, Your Humble Servant, and (if you will give me leave to say so) True
Friend, Viridomar.

LETTER IV.
May 5. 83.
COming to Town last night, and having perused yours, I think your Anger,
Madam, against the Bookseller, very just, since it is indeed a Scandal to any
Name in the opinion of the most Sensible part of the Town, to be in these
Mercuries: and the Zeal I was told you had for 'em, made me read your first
Letters with some Prejudice, till spite of all that disadvantage, your Wit and
Address raised my Admiration, which with each Letter increasing, begot this
importunate desire, you resist with so causeless and severe an Obstinacy.
Causeless, Madam, because my Opinion of a grant of a Request, pursued with that
ardour and importunity, would be pure as your Style, and just as your Thoughts;
for I Am none of those censorious formal Hypocrites, that can receive the
Favor, and yet condemn the Benefactor that bestowed it. Severe to Extravagance
to make the very Desire its own Obstacle, after our most reasonable Parts have
brought us acquainted. Sure, Divine Urania, you will grant, that our
Correspondence is in reason a more honorable Introduction to Friendship, than
a Visit or two with a Friend; yet after this last, the most scrupulous Lady
will permit one to wait on her.

You must therefore, Madam, Pardon me, if what you have urged, do not reconcile
me to your Denial; nor have you by any means as good Reasons for this, as
against Dissimulation; for there you opposed the common Practice generally
Erroneous, but here vindicate its falsest Principle.

The Body of good Humor I have, but want the Spirit and Life, Facetiousness,
which perhaps your Conversation may inspire, as Dull as I am.

Your Letters Madam, can never be too long, for as you find I can never write a
short Letter to you, so I desire none from you but long ones, since their
perusal is, if not the only, yet the greatest Pleasure of,

Madam, Your Humble Servant, and Admiring Friend, Viridomar.

LETTER V.
ASsure your self, admired Urania, that this generous Compliance of yours with
my repeated Importunities to see you, shall never cause any opinion but what is
the natural Result of your Conduct in it; that is, that you are a Lady of Sense
and Honor; and I only think you have used too much Caution in this tedious
delay: You have sacrificed abundantly too much time to Formality and Custom,
for it is those two, that make the Ladies more hard of access than Men. My first
Letter had been sufficient to have gained me admission to any Man, nay, to
Hobbs himself; and where our Esteem for a Lady is of the same nature, viz. a
Love of her Mind, bounded with a just Friendship, all delays are but needless
Cautions. I only urge this, Madam, to show you how far I Am from entertaining
any ill thoughts of the dear Favor you bestowed on me in your Last; and I Am
abundantly assured, that the satisfaction of your Conversation will answer my
Expectation; for whatever you may think of dull Terrestrial Conversation (true
in reference to what my Alloy will give it) it is my opinion it cannot be dashed
with much of Earthly Dullness where Urania is to give it Life and Spirit.

You have reason I must confess to be something cautious in making a new
Friendship with one you know not, since you have been Deceived; so much
deceived in one you thought you might so well depend on as Asdrubal, whose Name
was well suited to his Nature, and if of his own choice, certainly his Punick
Faith made him so fond of a Carthaginian Name. But since Experience cannot
secure you in a Friend, I fancy Madam, 'twould not be Impolitick to try what
Chance will do; throw your self entirely on that, and be absolutely my Friend
without any more Caution. Mr. Dryden says,

-- There Is a necessity in Fate
Why still the brave bold Man is Fortunate.
The Cautious sift, things with a too nice and jealous Eye to be easily Happy,
whereas, if we will really be so, we must a little contribute to the cheating
our selves into an opinion of it; for Happiness is nothing but Opinion; and tho
this sometimes end too soon, yet it makes some amends, by the Pleasure it gave
us whilst we entertained the dear Amusement; whereas, the Cautious are always
in pain to avoid Pain, which is like dying for fear of Death. Let not therefore
the perfidious Ingratitude of the faithless Carthaginian influence your
Judgment of Viridomar, who is not only an irreconcilable Enemy to Ingratitude
and Insincerity, but a hater of all Common Wealths, because they have always
signalized their Ingratitude, and indeed lie under a necessity of always being
so: So that the thing you dislike in me, ought to be your greatest satisfaction
and assurance of my Fidelity and Honor, in choosing rather to Suffer, than
Triumph; for I have a Soul ambitious as any Man; but, Urania it is a brave
Ambition governs me; I would be Great and Just, but rather Just than Great. I
would be Great, to have it in my power to do Good, to destroy those Villains
that Influence the Best of Princes, and make them act contrary to their
Natures; for I could show a Path Princes might tread to Power, Wealth and
Honor, consistent with the Love, the Interest, and the Glory of their
Countries: But could I make my Country the Envy of Europe and Mistress of both
the Indies, and of a lasting Unity at Home, I would not part with my Faith, my
Honor, nor my Sincerity to effect it. Let not Asdrubal therefore be the Rule
of your Judgment of Viridomar, but assure your self I would not yield to you in
Faith and Sincerity: And as you will atone for all the faults I have
experienced in your ^ex, so I Will act with such an emulation of your Virtues,
that I Will force you to confess I differ from most Men. Oh! I would Die before
I Would make my Friend and Benefactor my Tool, my Step to pass the dirty Plashes of
my Fortune, and then Regard her no more, as Asdrubal has done: No, let me be
Just and Poor, rather than thrive by Villainy. A Woman qualified like Urania,
ought to be valued above the World, and shall by Viridomar, if she admits his
Friendship.

I tell you my whole Soul, Urania, you see it naked as Heaven, and void of all
Disguise; I Am weary of this Villainous World, and the endless as well as
bootless Impertinencies of the Conversations of my own Sex, a wretched Circle
they move in, of Profaneness, Nonsense and Hurry; I have had too large a share
in this foolish Prize, these destructive Baubles of the Town, that Men like
Fools, bedeck themselves withal; proud of their very Infamy: I Long I Sigh for
a dear Refuge from them all, and nothing like the Converse of Urania, whose
Sense, as well as Sex, affords a more reasonable and calmer Joy; the sense of
it transports my Mind with such a strange Impetuosity to establish a Friendship
with you, that I Am extremely uneasy till I see you, and shall expect Friday
with the most impatient desire, when according to your appointment, I Will
certainly wait on you, and with this send you the thanks of the most grateful
Mind, for this Generous Condescension to the Importunity of,

Madam, Your faithful and sincere Friend and Humble Servant, Viridomar.

An Essay at a Vindication of Love in Tragedies, against Rapin and Mr. Rymer.
Directed to Mr. DENNIS.
THE short yet just Account you give in your Prefatory Epistle to the Impartial
Critic, of the Reasons that hindered the Gracians from bringing the tender
Scenes of Love on the Stage in their Tragedies, makes me wish you had proceeded
to a full Vindication of the Practice of our Poets in that particular; and
indeed this Letter is designed to provoke you to such an Undertaking, which
would effectually stop the ^lamours of some Cynical Critics, that will not
allow any thoughts of Love agreeable to the Majesty of Tragedy.

The chief Arguments indeed which these Gentlemen bring, are from the Practice
of the Ancients, (the cause of which, you have given in the above quoted
Epistle) whose Authority they are of opinion should outweigh Reason. But since
the Ipse dixit has been so long laid aside in Philosophy, as an enemy to our
Enquiries into Nature, I can see no reason why it should be of so much greater
force in Poetry; since it is perhaps almost as prejudicial to our imitation of
Nature in This, as to our discovery of it in the Other. As far as the Ancients
and the Rules Aristotle draws from them, agree with the Character you give
these, of being nothing but good sense and Nature reduced to Method, I shall
close with them; but when they either deviate from this, or reach not up to
what may be done, I must think it but just to withdraw my self from the
subjection of the Stagyrite, who has had a Reign long enough over the Minds of
Mankind, and an Empire that far exceeded the Extent and Continuance of his
Royal Pupil Alexander.

But to deal fairly with our Opponents, I shall first propose all their
Objections against this Opinion I Defend, as I find them in Rapin, and his
Copier, Mr. Rymer; and then examine how far they are from being fortified by
Reason, as their Admirers boast. I shall begin with Rapin; and that he may be
sure to have Justice, I shall Quote him as his Friend has Translated him.
Reflect. 20. p. 110.

Modern Tragedy turns on other Principles: the Genius of our (the French)
Nation is not Strong enough to sustain an Action on the Theater, by moving only
Terror and Pity. These are Machines that will not play as they ought, but by
great Thoughts and noble Expressions, of which we are not indeed altogether so
capable as the Greeks. Perhaps our Nation which is naturally Gallant, has been
obliged to the necessity of our Character, to frame for our selves a new System
of Tragedy, to suit with our humor. The Greeks, who were Popular Estates, and
who hated Monarchy, took delight in their Spectacles, to see Kings Humbled, and
high Fortunes cast down, because their Exaltation grieved them. The English,
our Neighbors, love Blood in their Sports, by the quality of their
Temperament. These are Insularies sep^rated from the rest of Men; we are more
Humane. Gallantry moreover agrees with our Manners; and our Poets believed that
they could not succeed on the Theater, but by sweet and tender Sentiments; in
which perhaps they had some Reason: For in effect, the Passions represented
become Deformed and Insipid, unless they are founded on Sentiments conformable
to those of the Spectator. It Is this obliges our Poets to stand up so strongly
for the Privilege of Gallantry on the Theater, and to bend all their Subjects
to Love and Tenderness; the rather to please the Women, who have ^ade
themselves Judges of these Divertisements, and ^surped the Right to pass
Sentence. And some besides have suffered themselves to be prepossessed, and led
by the Spaniards, who make all their Cavaliers Amorous. It Is by them that
Tragedy began to degenerate; and we by little and little accustomed to see
Heroes on the Theater smitten with another Love than that of Glory; and that by
degrees, all the Great Men of Antiquity have lost their Characters in our
Hands. It Is likewise perhaps by this Gallantry that our Age would devise a
Color to excuse the feebleness of our Wit, not being able always to sustain
the same Actions by the greatness of Words and Thoughts.

However it be, (for I am not hardy enough to declare my self against the
Public) it is to degrade Tragedy from that Majesty, which is proper to it, to
mingle it in Love, which is of a Character always light, and little suitable to
that Gravity of which Tragedy makes Profession. * Hence is proceeds, that these
Tragedies mixed with Gallantries, never make such admirable Impressions on the
Spirit, as did those of Sophocles and Euripides; for all the Bowels were moved
by the great Objects of Terror and Pity, which They proposed. '^is likewise for
this that the Reputation of our Modern Tragedies so soon Decays, and yields but
small Delight at two Years end; whereas the Greek please yet to those that have
a good Taste, after two Thousand Years; because what is not grave and serious
on the Theater, tho it give Delight at present, after a short time grows
Distasteful and Unpleasant; and because what is not proper for great Thoughts
and great Figures in Tragedy, cannot support it self. The Ancients who
perceived this, did not Interweave their Gallantry and Love, save in Comedy. *
For Love is of a Character that always degenerates from that Heroic A^ of which
Tragedy must never divest it self. And nothing to me shows so mean and
senseless, as for one to amuse himself with whining about frivolous Kindnesses,
when he may be admirable by great and noble Thoughts, and sublime Expressions.
* But I dare not presume so far on my own Capacity and Credit, to oppose my
self of my own Head, against a Usage so Established. I must be content modestly
to propose my Doubts, and that may serve to exercise the Wits, in an Age that
only wants Matter. But to end this Reflection with a touch of Christianism, I
am persuaded, that the Innocence of the Theater might be better preserved,
according to the Idea of the ancient Tragedy; because the New is become too
Esseminate, by the Softness of later Ages; and the Prince de Conti, who
signalized his Zeal against the Modern Tragedy, by his Treatise on that
Subject, would without doubt, have allowed the Ancient, because that has
nothing that may seem Dangerous.

Then for Mr. Rymer, in his jovial way of Criticism, he condemns Love on the
Stage in these Words, brought in indeed by Head and Shoulders.

After all, it is to be observed how much that Wild-Goose Chase of Romance runs
still in their Heads some Scenes of Love must every where be shuffled in, tho
never so Unseasonable.

The Graecians were for Love and Music, as mad as any Monsieur of them all, yet
their Music kept within Bounds, attempted no Metamorphosis to turn the Dramma
into an Opera: Nor did their Love come Whining on the Stage to Esseminate the
Majesty of Tragedy. It was not any Love for Briseis, that made Achilles so
Wroth, it was the Affront in taking his Booty from him, in the Face of the
Confederate Army. This his Stomach could not Digest.

-- -- Nec gravem
Peleidae Stomachum cedere nescii. Hor.
These are the Pillars and Supports of the Gentlemen of this Opinion; so that I
hope, if I can but obviate these Objections they bring, I have gained the End
proposed to my self in the Justification of the Practice of the best of our
Poets, in presenting us with the tenderest Scenes of Love in Tragedies. It Is
true, the Charge of both these Critics, is directed against the French Poets,
but in the excluding Love, as derogatory to the Majesty of Tragedy, it reaches
our Poets, who do the same. I have Quoted Rapin at large, because one part of
the Reflection seems to answer the other to my Hand; for the ground of his
Accusation is the deviating from the Practice of the Ancients; for which he
gives so good Reasons, that 'twould have been a madness not to have formed a
new System, since the Genius, the Character, Humor and Manners of the People,
required as much. He says, that, In effect the Passions represented become
deformed and insipid, unless they are founded on Sentiments conformable to
those of the Spectator. But before I proceed to any particular Reply, I shall
draw the Objections both contain, into short and positive Heads, to make their
Confutation the more Evident.

The whole Charge therefore, may be reduced to these three Heads, the 1.
Motives the Moderns (particularly the French) had to Introduce Love into
Tragedy. 2. The Objections against it: And, 3. The Effects of it. First, As to
the Motives, Rapin tells us, they were the Necessity of the Character, Manners,
and Temperament of the People, (which, without doubt, was the Poet's Duty to
regard.) Next, to gratify the Women Judges, (which is the Poet's Duty as a Man,
both in Regard of his Profit and Sex, especially when the Interest and ^ower of
the Women strike in with the Character, Manners, and Temperament of the
People.) Lastly, To excuse the Feebleness of their own Wit. These are the
Motives Rapin sums up of this Innovation on the Stage; which, as I have before
observed, are a sufficient Justification of it, even according to himself: But
for the last, it is only a morose Caprice of his own Fancy, for certainly there
is as much Wit required to the Just, and artificial Management of the Passion
of Love; as those of Fear and Terror, and those other Species of Passions that
are subservient to the moving of them.

I shall therefore pass to the Objections, which are four in Number, the First
and Chief (in some Men's Opinion) is, That it deviates from the Practice of the
Ancients; who, as the Inventors of Tragedy, challenge our Imitation. It Is they
must be our Model, and as we make more or less Approaches to that in the
Fabrics of our Plays, we are in a greater or lesser Degree of Perfection. I
grant indeed, that the Ancients were the Inventors of Tragedy; nay, and of
Comedy too; it is their due Glory. Nor will I pretend to rob 'em of it. I will
also grant, that there is some Regard to be had to their Performances, as to
their Model; but then I deny that by the Rules of Reason, we are obliged to a
servile Observation of their Precepts, or Practice, without all Addition, or
Improvement. Had the Practice of the First Inventors been of such Inviolable
Authority, Thespis had brought Tragedy to its Perfection, and one Actor, and a
deal of Chorus (more ridiculous than an entire Opera) had been the non plus
ultra of the Stage. But if it were lawful for Aeschylus, Euripides, Sophocles
and others, to improve upon the Model Thespis had left them, why should other
Poets, great as those in Genius, be deprived of the same Liberty, provided it
be for the Advancement of the Profit, and Glory of Tragedy? Upon this Condition
I do suppose, none will deny the Moderns this Liberty to forsake the Steps of
the Greeks. But that our Alterations are for the better, will appear from the
After-proofs, as well as from what I shall here say on this Particular.

First, Then it is evident from what you, Sir, have urged in the Impartial
Critic, That the leaving off the Chorus is for the better, since it frees it
from an unnatural Part, which took up so large a Share of the ancient
Tragedies; and in that, delivers it from the absurdest Improbabilities in
Nature, which are as destructive to the End of Tragedy as any thing that can be
introduced. Next, it has enlarged the Bottom on which the ancient Tragedy
stood, and by Consequence extended its Use and Advantage further. It has made
it a more perfect Image of Humane Life, in taking in that which has so great a
Share in it, LOVE; which whether it be derogatory to the supposed Majesty of
Tragedy, I shall next examine; if not, my Assertion is evident.

This indeed is the next Objection of our Adversaries, who tell us, That the
Lightness of Love degrades the Majesty and Gravity of Tragedy, diverting it
from Great, and Noble Thoughts, and Sublime Expressions, to whining about
frivolous Kindnesses. This I confess is the heaviest Charge in Reality, if
true, and therefore I shall take the greatest Pains to remove it; for if Love
be not guilty of this, it is evidently an Improvement, and therefore to be
continued in that Possession of the Stage, it has gained with so universal an
Approbation.

All the Arguments I shall bring to prove that it is not derogatory to the
Majesty of Tragedy shall be drawn from -- the Consideration of their Beloved
Ancients; the very Meaning of the Word Majesty; and the Nature of the Passion
of Love, and its Place in Regard to the others.

First, It Is evident from the very Concessions of Rapin, the Agreement of all
Critics, and the very Nature of the Thing, That Tragedy is not of greater
Majesty, and Dignity, than an Epic Poem. In his Fourth General Reflection, he
tells us, That from Homer's Epic Poems, Sophocles and Euripides took the
Haughty Air of the Theater, and Idea's of Tragedy; and begins the second
Particular Reflection thus: The Epic Poem is that which is the Greatest, and
most Noble in Poesy. To prove which he spends all that Reflection, and the
magnifying of it takes up the Third and Fourth, and at the End of the Tenth
particular Reflection he tells us, That All ought to be Majestic in an Heroic
Poem. This also seems to be confessed by Mr. Rymer, when he, speaking of Love's
effeminating the Majesty of Tragedy, Instances an Heroic Poem, viz. the Iliads
of Homer, foreseeing perhaps that that might be objected against his Assertion,
which is still in full force notwithstanding his saying, That 'twas not the
Love' of Achilles for Brifeis, that made him so wroth, but the Indignity
received in the Face of the Confederate Army. But besides this Concession of
our Opposers (which is indeed Argument good enough ad Hominem) the very Nature
of the thing proves the same. Hero's and Kings are the Subjects of both, and
the principal Character of an Epic Poem, consists in the Narration (as Rapin
truly observes) in which it is only opposed to Tragedy, which consists
altogether in Action.

The Majesty of an Epic Poem being thus demonstrated equal, if not superior to
that of Tragedy. If I can prove by the Practice of Homer and Virgil (the
greatest of Heroic Poets) that they esteemed not Love derogatory to the Majesty
of their Poems, it is Proof-sufficient that it cannot degrade the Majesty of
Tragedy, which is not greater than the other.

But this is evident from the Iliads of Homer, and the Aeneids of Virgil. Homer
in his Iliads makes Achilles and Agamemnon in Love, one with his Captive
Briseis, the other with Chryseis: For Agamemnon tells Achilles and the Council
of the Graecians, that he preferrs Chryseis to Clytemnestra the Wife of his
Youth; and that she is not inferior to her in any of her Qualities or
Beauties. He often calls her Beautiful Chryseis, and always speaks very
feelingly when he mentions her. And Achilles his Anger had not rose to that
Degree, but that he was deprived of his Rosie-Cheek'd Briseis. Horace was of my
Opinion, in his Second Epistle Book 1. Hunc Amor, ira quidem urit utrumque
Which you very justly English thus, Whose injured Love^ in both strange Fury
breeds.


For the Rise of Agamemnon's Passion is evidently from his Love to Chryseis, as
he plainly confesses in his Expressions; and that of Achilles was not only
exaggerated, but confirmed by the same Loss of her he Loved. Ovid in his
Amors, lib. 2. is of the same Mind.

Thessalus ancillae sacie Briseidos arsit:
Serva Mycenaeo Phoebus amata duci.
And in other Places he has to the same purpose. Besides in the Third Book of
the Iliads, when Hector proclaims the Challenge of Paris, to fight Menelaus in
single Combat, the Condition is, that the Victor should possess Helena for his
Wife. If this be not below the Majesty of an Epic Poem, certainly the Nobler
Scenes of Love cannot be below that of Tragedy. But the Case is yet plainer in
Virgil, for the Fourth Book of his Aeneids, is wholly on the Intrigue of Aeneas
and Dido, where that Divine Poet has given the finest Draught of that Passion
that Antiquity can boast of. But if this Criminal Passion of Dido and Aeneas,
do not degrade the Majesty of an Epic Poem, can the same, or less Criminal, be
below that of Tragedy? ^his Book is not arraigned by our Critics for any
Defect in this, and by others allowed as noble a Piece as any of that Poet, so
that Love is not such an Enemy to Noble Thoughts, but that it is consistent with
them; nor to the Majesty of Expression, as this Fourth Book of Virgil evinces.
Besides, we find in the Alcestes of Euripides, an Attempt of Love, and
something of it in the Ajax of Sophocles; nay, it is the Foundation and Fable of
the Phoedra of Euripides.

Thus we see the Enemy beat from one of their beloved Holds, the Authority and
Practice of the Ancients. I shall now therefore, proceed to the very Meaning of
the Word Majesty; by which we shall be able to discover how far it will
contribute to the Confirmation of our Position.

To let alone the Grammatical Etymology of the Word, and take it in its
Poetical Sense, where it is Metaphorically used, it means something that is
Great and Pompous. And Horace in the fourth Satyr of his First Book, means
this Majesty we talk of, when he says,

Primum ego illorum dederim quibus esse Poet as
Excerpam Numero: Neque enim concludere versum
Dixeris esse satis; neque siquis scribat uti nos
Sermoni propriora, putes hunc esse Poetam
Ingenium cui sit, cui men's divinior, atque os
Magna sonaturum, des nominis hujus honorem.
So that Majesty, is nothing else but an Elevation of Thought, and Expression
above the Common and Vulgar Discourse. By this Explanation of it, it becomes
intelligible, and we shall see, that the Critics would only amuse us with
Words. Now if they can prove by Reason, that the Thoughts and Expressions of
Love in its several Effects and Emotions, cannot be exalted above the Vulgar,
and Common Discourse, then is Love of too low a Character for Tragedy. But if
Love be not incapable of this Elevation, then is our Point gained in this
Particular too, which will be evinced from the next Proof, drawn from the
Nature of the Passion of Love, and its Place in regard to the others.

A Passion is more or less Majestic, (and by Consequence, more or less fit for
Tragedy) in regard either of the Rank or Degrees of the Passions, of the
Sentiments it inspires, the Effects it causes, the Actions that depend upon it,
or in sine, the Influence it has on the Life of Mankind.

If the First, it is evident that Love has much the Pre-eminence above Terror
and Pity. Des Carts reduces all the Passions to Six principal Heads,
Admiration, Love, Desire, (or rather Concupiscence, Joy and Grief.) Dr. Moor
reduces them to Three Heads only, Admiration, Love and Hate. The first of which
being placed in the Brain, and being but the Step to the other, he with the
Schoolmen reduces them yet to Two, the Concupiscible and the Irascible; which
Des Carts terms in other Words, properly Love and Hate. So that we see Love on
all Hands, appears to be a Primitive Passion, out of several Degrees of which,
and its Opposite, are the rest compounded and derived. Fear or Terror is
derived from Desire, Desire from Love, Commiseration is derived from Grief,
Grief from Hate; and is compounded of Love and Grief. So that if we respect the
Degrees of the Passions, Love is the more Excellent, as being a Primitive
Passion; but Fear and Pity, only under-Species and Derivatives from it: So that
in Nature, Love is more Noble than those. Let us therefore proceed to the
Sentiments i^ inspires, etc. By Sentiments I mean the Thought^ that a Lover
derives from the Passion he is possessed with. But these are so different, that
we must run through the several Conditions of Lovers to make any Judgment of
'em: For those Thoughts that proceed from Anger, Fear, Jenlousie, Hope,
Despair; nay, and Hate, with the rest of the Passions, are to be looked for in
a Lover, according to his several Circumstances. But take him in his most easy
and tranquil Station, when tendrest Desires are fanned with sure Success, his
Thoughts are more or less elevated, according to the State and Degree of the
Person that is affected. Those of a Shepherd might be too low, those of a Beau
too Gay and Light, but those of a Hero must retain something of his Character,
and must be Noble as the Object that inspires, or the Person that receives the
Inspiration. The Two First indeed may be below the Dignity of Tragedy, but the
latter can no more derogate from that, than from the Character of the Person.
But supposing the most tender and the softest Scenes of a Hero's Love are not
Majestic enough for Tragedy; yet must they be Granted as lofty as those of his
Griefs; and in the latter, Horace will have the descending from the haughty Air
and Majesty of Tragedy, not only allowable, but absolutely necessary: De Art
Poetic^:

Et Tragicus plerumque dolet sermon pedestri
Telephus and Peleus, cum pauper and exuluterque
Projicit ampullas, and sesquipedalia verba,
Si curat cor spectantis tetigisse querela, etc.
There is a time therefore when the Hero not only may, but ought to quit his
Grandeur, in Horace's Judgment; and that is when he is in Distress and in Exile.
And why is it less lawful to depart from this Majesty (that is, supposing Love
requires it) on the Account of the tendrest Hours of Love? This is more natural
in my poor Opinion, than in the Case justified by Horace. For to Love, is
natural to all Great Souls, and I think, as Noble and Essential to their
Character, as any that make it up: But it may be doubted whether a Hero, that
is, a Man of Invincible Courage, can suffer all his noble and towering Thoughts,
all his Elation of Mind, to be so depressed by Adversity, as to submit to
sordid and mean Grief and Sorrow: This may be the Reason why some Critics have
reflected on the Oedipus Coloneus of Sophocles, as too low and mean for the
Dignity of a Hero furnished with Resolution, Courage and Virtue in his other
Play of him. It Is true, it is the general Frailty of Mankind to be dejected in
Misfortunes; but Tragedy, as our Critics contend, should be something better
than the Life, something more Philosophical, affording a Draught of what Man
should be: Now it is certain that Philosophy will not allow Fortune any
Influence on the Thoughts and Mind, at least so far as to make 'em degenerate.

Thus we see if Love were what our Adversaries would have it, yet is it as
reasonable to be allowed, as what their Masters hold necessary in Tragedy. But
this is a Concession I am by no means obliged to make; for I am not of Opinion
that there is any Necessity that the most tender Scenes of Love, should be void
of that ^evation of Thought and Expression, that constitutes Majesty. or that
they should be delivered in that Sermon pedestri, Horace judges so requisite
to the Expression of Grief. This is evident from Virgil's Fourth Book, and the
All for Love of Mr. Dryden: Both which abound with noble Thoughts and Language.

But the tender Scenes are the least Advantages Love brings to Tragedy. There
are a great many beautiful Occasions offered to the Poet by it; from the
Effects of it; the other Passions concerned in it, of Descriptions; etc. as we
may find in all the best of our Plays, particularly in that admirable Piece of
the best of Poets, which I mentioned but now, viz. All for Love. It Is the Love
of Anthony and Cleopaira, that furnishes the Occasion of all the admirable
Scenes of that Play: The same is to be said of the Fourth Book of Virgil's
Aeneids.

To conclude this Point, it must be granted that Love in its Nature, must
inspire Noble and more August. Thoughts or Sentiments, than Grief or Terror.
For the Soul is more dilated, and exerts its noblest Faculties more in Love,
than in Sorrow or Fear; which both contract the Soul and its Operations. Love
pushes a Generous Mind on to Great Actions, to render it self more agreeable
and taking to the Object of his Desires than others. Whereas Grief and Fear are
Opposites to all that is Great and Noble. All the Steps to Love are Great, and
much akin to that Glory Rapin will have the only Object of an Hero's Passion;
for Admiration is the first Illustrious Step by which a Man mounts to Love: And
to acquire Admiration, a Man must perform something extraordinary: For it is not
the Beauty or Manly Fabric of the Body, that are supposed capable alone of
making that Impression on an Heroine, (for such must the Mistress of a Hero be)
it is his Acts that render him Admirable and Charming in her Eye. And indeed,
common Experience will convince us, that a Person of Quality that has
Signalized himself by any Noble Deeds, shall gain the Fair much easier than a
Son of the Earth unknown to Fame, and yet not born to Reputation. Love
therefore, being the Spur to Noble Actions, cannot but inspire Noble Thoughts
or Sentiments, and Noble Thoughts being agreeable to the Majesty of Tragedy,
Love in respect of the Sentiments it inspires, cannot derogate from that
Majesty; which is the Second Proof I proposed in Defense of the Nobleness of
this Passion. From whence I shall pass to the Third and Fourth, which have an
immediate Dependence on these, and are pretty well cleared, by what I have
produced toward the latter end of this Second Particular.

In the next Place, Love is either opposite, or agreeable to the Majesty of
Tragedy, by its Effects, or Actions that depend upon it. If the Noblest
Actions, and the most Tragical Events be agreeable to the Majesty of Tragedy,
the Effects of Love are. Witness the Performances of the Hero's in some of the
best of our Modern Plays; and the Catastrophe's of many that depend on the
Effects of Love, as that of the inimitable, and so often mentioned All for
Love, etc. Besides, it is already proved, that Love provokes to Noble Actions,
in the foregoing Paragraph; and Noble Actions are properly dignified for
Tragedy; therefore the Actions that depend on Love, are not derogatory to the
Majesty of Tragedy. Nor do the other Effects of it afford (...) less Noble
Subject for the Poet, the many Passions that depend on them, the Jealousies,
the Revenge, the Anger, the Contests of Desire, of Hope and Despair, etc. give
unexpressible Beauty to any Poem: There is nothing so fine and moving, as the
curious touching of the Passions, for those are the Engines that are to work
the Effect of Tragedy, in producing Terror and Compassion. The Distractions and
Disasters of those who are Sacrificed by Love, are of a more general concern
than those that are made miserable by Ambition, or other Villainiest and this
brings us to the Last Test that is to try whether Love be such an Enemy to the
Majesty of Tragedy, viz. The Influence it has on the Life of Mankind. And here
I believe Rapin places the chief Distinction betwixt Majesty, and the Lightness
of Love. For he supposes the Influence Love has on Mankind, is of that light
Nature, that it can produce nothing but soft whining about trifling Kindnesses;
whereas Ambition, which is a Love of Glory, furnishes the Poet with Incidents
as well as Thoughts, that are Noble and Surprising; which, with the Augustness
of expression, compose what he understands by Majesty. But it is evident from
what has been said, and Experience, that there are as many Noble Actions, as
many extraordinary Events, and as many surprising Thoughts, the Effects of Love
of Woman, as of the Love of Glory, both which are the Ingredients that Virgil,
and Homer, and the other Great Poets of Antiquity composed their Hero's of.
Achilles had his Briseis, his (...), etc. Pyrrbus his Hermione, (...) his
Omphale, Megara, Dei^, etc. (...) his Te^messa, (...) his He^, Her his A^che,
(...) his C^a, Dido and L^. And none of the Hero^ Rac^ wounded the Goddess of
Love but Di^s (...) So Heroical a Passion is the Love of Woman, that I must
think it (...) Majestical, as that of Ambition and Glory. The Love of Paris
gave Homer the Ground of hi^ Poem, viz. the Trojan War, founded on the Rape of
Helena, by her Trojan Admirer; which shows that the Influence it has on
Mankind, i^ very great, when it was so powerful to prevai^ with the Trojans to
keep Helena for the Lov^ Paris bore her, at the Expense of their Peac^ and
Safety. And Dr. Burns in his Answer to Varillas, observes very truly against
that Historian, that Interest or Ambition, are not the only Motives of the
Actions of Mankind, there is much to be attributed to the Passions, and of
them, none more Violent and Sovereign, than this of Love. Tragedy t^erefore
would not be a perfect Image of Humane Life, if it left so considerable a Share
of it untouched, as Love Commands or Influences.

Having thus proved (as I think at least) that Love does not degrade the
Majesty of Tragedy, and that it therefore ought not, for that, to be discarded
by our Tragic Poets, I shall now prove by the very end and design of this Poem,
that it is necessary to be preserved by them; and by consequence, that the
Possession of the Stage the Moderns have given it, is an Improvement of Tragedy
and not a Derogation. The end of Tragedy is, as Rapin more than once assures
us, the rectifying the Passions by the Passions themselves, in calming, by
their Emotion, the Troubles they would excite in the Heart. From hence it is
evident, that unless Love betaken in, the most predominant and violent of
Passions, Tragedy cannot perfect its Cure, since it must leave the most
considerable Distemper (for so are all the Passions that are not regulated by
Reason) without any Remedy. But in his 17th. particular Reflection, where he
mentions the and of Tragedy, he seems to contradict himself, when he first
says, Pride and Hardness of Heart, were the most important Fa^lts (not most
important to be cured if not general, by so public a Cure) to be regulated, and
yet a little after he tells us, that Man is naturally timorous and
compassionate: Now he that is naturally compassionate, can never be accused of
Hardness of Heart, with any Show of Reason and Justice. But something must be
said to reduce the end of Tragedy to their Notions; whereas it is indeed the
regulating all the most important Passions and Vices of Mankind, which
contribute to the Disturbance of his Peace and Happiness, and obstruct his
Progress in Virtue. Now it must be granted that Love, as well as other
Passions, when it has past the Boundaries of Reason, becomes destructive to our
Happiness and Virtue, and ought therefore as much to be Purged as Fear or Pity.
In short, if the chief Aim of Tragedy be the moving of Terror and Compassion,
it is evident, Love is extremely conducive to that end, and therefore not ill
made use of by our Poets.

The next Objection that is made against Love in our Tragedy, is, that it
discovers a Weakness of Genius. For Rapin tells us that it discovers a Weakness
of Genius not to be able to sustain an Action on the Theater, with moving
Terror and Pity only. But he here supposes that Love does not contribute to the
same end, as I have made evident already. He must be extremely out of Humor
with the Moderns, else he would never make this an Objection against their
Strength of Geni^s, which is an Argument of their Judgment; for they evidently
saw by the Performances of the Gr^s, that Terror and Pity, could not be moved
always by the barren Repetition of the same Method to it: And it were to be
wished that Sophocles and Euripides had been sensible of this, they would then
never have failed in keeping up the Dignity and Majesty of the Theater, as they
have in some of those few Plays we have of theirs. For we find a great
Sterility in some of those Seven Plays of Sophocles, as to the Design and End
of Tragedy, as well as Noble Thoughts. What Terror or Pity can P^iloctetes
move, or where are the Great and Noble Thoughts to support it? Where is the
Majesty of Oedi^s Coloneus, which Rapin himself grants to be low and
degenerate? Nor can I discover the mighty Pity and Terror that can be moved by
the bringing in a Madman on the Stage, and a company of dead Sheep about him.
I Am sure 'twou'd make an Audience here laugh. Nay, I must declare (nor am I
troubled at what Use the Critics will make of it) I think his Masterpiece
outdone by Mr. Dryden in his All for Love, both in the Intrigue and Discovery;
which are built on an abundantly more probable Foundation, and not one jot less
surprising and fine. Nor will I yield that the Thought and Expression of
Sophocles at all excel our English.

The last Objection Rapin conjures up against Love, is, That it is opposite to
the Reformation of the Stage. I can discover no such matter in any or at least
in the best of our English Tragedies; and by Corneil's Discourse on his
Theod^a, we find the French Theater more Chaste than the Pulpit. Nor can I
discover any thing in ours that comes short of that Purity that becomes Ladies
of the severest Honor to hear: I cannot say that for the Comedy of our Stage,
which as to Tragedy I think needs no Reformation.

To pass therefore from the Objections against Love, to the prejudicial
Effects, our Plays owe to it; I find them too in Number^ 1. That it hinders
those admirable Impressions those of the Ancients made on their Audience. 2.
That it causes the decay of a Tragedy's Reputation, in a Year or two.

The first he builds on a Fallacy, viz. The wonderful Impressions the Perseus
and Andromeda of Euripides had on the Abderites. This is not to be attributed
to the Excellence either of the Poet or the People, who were so gross to think
Democritus Mad, when in the most reasonable Employment of his Studies, the
Dissection of Animals: Besides, the true cause of this Success of these Poems,
is not to be granted to the Excellence of the Poet, but the Distemper the
People of that City were Infected with at that time, being all Poetically Mad.
As a Witness of the truth of this, hear the Account Coelius, lib. 3. Cap. 4.
(as I find it Quoted) gives of it.

It Is reported, that the Abderites in the time of Lysimachus, were Infected
with a new and strange kind of Distemper, the progress of which was in this
manner: First of all, an extreme violent burning Fever seized them, and ^ag'd
through the whole Town; on the Seventh day, the Blood in great abundance, burst
out at their Noses; and some of them were affected with violent Sweatings,
after which the Fever ended; but still a very ridiculous Distemper possessed
all their Minds, they all ran Mad after Tragedies, thundering the Iambics about
as loud as they could possibly bawl, but what they chiefly Sung, was the
Andromeda of Euripides, and the Words of Perseus. This strange and uncommon
Madness diffused it self very far, till the Winter and the severe Cold coming
on, put an end to this Evil.

Thus he: -- And can there be any thing more unfair, and absurd, than this
condemning our Plays, for not making such Impressions on the Audience as the
Andromeda of Euripides did on the Abderites, who were Distracted with a Fever,
that made them Ravished with any Poetry; for we find, that it was not the
Andromeda of Euripides only, but chiefly That they Recited.

But were it true, that these Plays of the Ancients made these wondrous
Impressions on People in their Wits, I Am sure it is not our Poets fault, that
ours are less Efficacious; the Passions cannot be more finely touched than in
All ^or Love, and several other Plays of Mr. Dryden, Mr. Otway, etc. We must
therefore attribute it to another Cause. The Audience, at least the Major part
of it, was composed of People not acquainted with the dismal Catastrophe's of
Princes, which History now so abundantly furnishes us with, and so the uncommon
Miseries of Princes on their Stage, influenced them; as I have seen a Ballad of
some Tragical Story, without any Poetry in it, draw Tears from some of the
Female Mobb, and make the Male shake their Heads, and go very sorrowfully away.
But our Audience that is generally composed of the better sort, are not so
easily moved with these Events, they being made familiar to 'em by History and
Observation; with these the nice touching of the Passions chiefly move; and I
my self, dull as I am, have often experienced those effects in me, for which
the Critics boast so much of the power of the Ancient Poets.

The other Effect is Ridiculous, viz. That it causes the decay of a Tradegy's
Reputation in a Year or two. I know not indeed how far this may hold good
against the French Poets; but I Am very sure it is evidently false as to our
Plays. Witness all Mr. Drydens; the Orphan, and Venice Preserved, of Mr. Otway;
Alexande^ and Others, of Mr. Lee's; which are still in Esteem, after several
Years, and every day increasing their Reputation.

Finally, Since the Motives that are urged a^ the cause of this Innovation, are
either falsl^ pretended, or sufficient to Justify it; since the Objections are
invalid, and the Effects not (...) Defective as our Adversaries would have
them: We must conclude, that Love is an Improvement of the Old Dramma, and
ought therefore to be Continued.

I desire you will excuse the length of my Letter, and hereafter confirm what my
Arguments have aimed at, both by your Practice and better of your own; since
you have both more leisure and better Penetration and Judgmeat, to secure so
Noble a Cause against the frigid Opposers of it. Woman is a glorious part of
the Creation, therefore I would willingly see the Love of them Established on
as Noble a Foundation, as the Love of Glory, in the opinions of Men, which in
Reality is so far more Excellent and Happy. It Is a Cause indeed, that deserves
a greater Champion than my self; and, I hope, 'twill find one in you.

To my Honored, Ingenious, and Learned Friend, Dr. Midgely, about SLEEP and
its Medicinal Property.
ALL your good Nature, your readiness toserve your Friend, as my self have
experienced; our Learning, Ingenuity, and the other Quali^es that justly render
you dear to all that know you, will not atone for one great Fault you are
guilty of. That fault indeed is an excess of an uncommon Virtue; yet since an
enemy to your own Good, it must be condemned by those that love you: Your
Modesty I mean; for by this you keep your self too much Unknown. This hinders
you from pushing forward in the World, whilst Men of abundantly less Parts,
both Acquired and Natural, Shoulder one another for Pre-eminence. Your Modesty,
Doctor, does an Injury to the Public, as well as to your self, in robbing both
of the Advantages to be derived to and from each other.

My self not long ago, played the Physician with Success, tho I am yet to seek
in the cause of it: One complaining of some approaches of an Ague, and Feverish
Symptoms; I gave him something that could have none or very little influence in
his Cure; a little Chalk scraped very fine to take in a Glass of Ale, and bid
him Sleep after it, and this perfected the Cure. I am apt to believe the Sleep
that he got, (for he slept heartily all that Nightand part of the next Morning)
was the chief Remedy; the grounds of my Opinion I Will here give you.

Sleep, according to Galen, is nothing else but the Quiet or Rest of the Animal
Faculties. This Definition is taken from the Effects. Aristotle terms it, the
Impotence of the Senses, with a great deal of Reason, which his Interpreters
rightly observe, is not a destruction and loss of the S^ses, but a difficult
and clogged Sense: For, a Man that is a Sleep, is not without his Senses, tho
they are with some difficulty affected: The defect of Perception in the Senses
of a sleeping Man, is attributed to their Impotence and the force of Sleep, by
which all the Senses and Animal Actions are locked or bound up. But Galen in
the above quoted Definition, does justly term Sleep, the Rest or Repose of the
Animal Actions, because both the Vital, as the Pulses and the Breathing, and
the Natural Actions, as the Concocti^ of the Ventricle, which are very well
continued in Sleep, do not Cease, but are then more justly performed. As for
Example, The motion or beating of the Heart is thought to be stro^ Sleeping
than Waking.

But as for the Matter of Sleep, I find it thus in a Modern Author Defined,
So^us est va^r quidam benig^us. Sanguinis, Spiritus, and (...) Arteria, qui per
venas ^ugulares, and per arterias carotidas fer^ur ad cerebrum and sensum
commu^em vincit. Sleep is a certain friendly Vapor of the Blood, the Spirit,
and the more humid Artery, which is conveyed by the jugular Veins and Carotid
Arteries to the Brain, and make the Sensum commu^em. This must be confessed to
be some description or account of Sleep. There are therefore three requisites
to a gentle and composed Sleep; a temperate Brain, a friendly Moisture, and a
quiet Mind; for many though they sleep in all appearance, ye^ ^re disturbed in
their Minds, as is evident from the Example of Dido, when in Love with Aeneas.

-- -- Ph^nissa nec unquam
S^lvitur in so^os oculis, nec pect^re N^ctem
Accipit. -- -- --
But she was quite Restless, and without Sleep.

As to the efficient Cause of Sleep, I think it the Brain, which is the first
Sensory, tho Aristotle makes the Heart so. Whence I believe, proceeded our
common Saying when we are very much disposed to Sleep, that our Heart's a
Sleep. It Is therefore the Refrigeration or Cooling of the Brain that causes
Sleep, as the Calefaction, or Warming of this first Sensific, is the cause of
our Awaking, and keeping Awake. The former Author tells us -- Somnus fit cu^
sese (quamvis non quiescat) relaxat primum Sen^cum, quo Spiritus animales
redintegr^tur. Hoc auctem (...) a blandioribus vaporibus s^blatis Sanguin^ ac
suavi pit^ta in cerebrum: Quibus refriger^is, and in roscidum (...) coactis,
nervor^ ^eatus o^tur and quasi boligantur.

The chief end therefore of Sleep is, the restoring of the animal Spirits; and
that the Actions of the whole Animal acquire new Strength, and begin afresh: As
it is in Ovid.

Q^d c^t alterna requie, durabile non est
Hoc reparat vires, fessaque (...) ^vat.
But besides this primary and chief end or effect of Sleep, there are others,
as that the Coction of the Ventricle may be the better effected, and the
Distempers and their Symptoms mitigated: For Sleep better concocts our
Nourishment, mitigates the Matter of Distempers, and lessens all Symptoms. This
is the reason that Children ^e often Cured of very great Sicknesses by Sleep
^lone.

But not to enter into a Discourse I Am so very (...) qualified for as this,
I Will pass to a more plea^t and easy Task; I mean; the Religious use ^he
Ancients made of Sleep, and the manner of ^ring Distempers of the Priests of
Aesculapius or (...), heretofore; to whom whilst they slept (...) their
Chapels, those Medicinal Gods, dis^s'd their Remedies for the Distempered that
^ght their help, and Advice to those who ^ght their Counsel. Thus Quartilla in
Petro(...) Arbiter tells Encolpius and (...), that she ^d sought Help of the
God Priapus in her Sleep, ^r her Ag^e, and Encolpius Comforts her in these
^ords a little after, when she desired they should ^ot divulge the Secrets of
the Rites of Priapus, which they had seen, Nam neque (says he) s^cra ^quam
(...), and si quod praterea aliud ^emedium ad Tertianam Deus illi (...), ^turos
nos Divinam providentiam, vel (...) ^stro. That none of 'em would divulge the
^ites of her God, but on the contrary, would (...) the expense of their own
hazard endeavor (...) assist his divine Providence, if he should reveal any
other Remedy for the cure of her Ague. And S^tonius in the Life of V^spasian,
says, Orantes open valitudine demonstrat^ a Serapide per quiet^ restituturum
oculos, si inspuiss^. This was a common thing in Antiquity to take the
Responsa, or Answers of the Gods by Dreams, for Ille incubat Jovi, signifies,
He sleeps in the Capitol, to receive the Oracles or Answers of that God. Thus
the Sick used to sleep in the Templ^ of Aesculapius, to receive Remedies in
their Sleep from him. There was a famous and celebrat^d Temple of Aesculapius
in Epida^ras, to which the Sick used to go on Pilgrimage from several Places.
Extraordinary Examples of this kind of Cures one of your Profession (which ha^
yielded the World abundance of Learned, Ingenious and Witty Men) produces the
first Cha^ and first Book De art Gymnastica; I mean, Hieron. Mercurialis. He
will have it that Hippocrates formed his Body of Medicine from these Nocturnal
Revelations of the Gods; that is from the Tables that were hung up in the
Temples, with an account of them. An tota^ (says he) Medicina partem, qu^ ad
sanos and victus ratione^ pertinet, ex ta^ellulis, aliisque do^riis Aesculapii
Templo dicatis Hippocrates con^averit? An. ver^ tota^ in c^andis Morbis
versantem Clinecem vocatam, quemadmodum Varro, Strabo, atque Plinius,
cr^didisse videntur, mihi plane co^rtum non est: Nisi quod fuit ^os liberatos
Morbis in Templo eju^ Dei, quod auxiliatum esset scriberet. Isque impri^is
illis temporibus usque ad Antonini Imperatoris at atem, non modo in Graecia,
verum etiam in Italia per^uravit. Uti pr^ caeteris, ex Ta^ella Marmor^ Romae in
Aesculapii Templo in Insula Tiberina inventa, and usque in hunc diem apud
Maephaeos conser(...), intelligere licet, in quae Graece haec leguntur. I am
not certain (says he) whether Hippocrates Co^pos'd all that part of the
Medicinal Art, which relates to the ordering of both Health and Diet, one of
the little Consecrated Tablets and other Gifts in the Temple of Aesculapius, or
only that part of the Curing of Distempers which is nominated Clinick, as
Varro, Strabo and Pliny seem to have thought: But that 'twas a Custom for the
Sick to write in the Temple of that God the Remedy that had Cured them; which
Custom continued to the time of Antoninus, not only in Greece, but also in
Italy, as we ^ay above all others understand from the Marble Table found in the
Templet of Aesculapius in Rome, (...) the Tiberine Island, and preserved till
this day by the Maphaei, in which this that follows is in Gre^.

1. (...), etc. In these days he gave an Oracle to one Claudius ^at was Blind,
that he should come to the Sacred Altar, and kneel down; and then come from the
Right side to the Left, and p^ five Fingers on the Altar, and lift up his Hand
and put it on his own Eyes: And he saw perfectly in the Presence of the People,
who Congratulated him, and Rejoiced, tha^ such great Miracles were performed
under our Emperor Antoninus.

2. (...), etc. The God gave an Oracle to Lucius, that had (...) Pain in his
Side, and was despaired of by all Men^ that he should come and take Ashes from
the Altar and mix them with Wine, and put them on his Side upon which he
Recovered, and returned his Thanks t^ the God, and the People Congratulated him.

3. (...), etc. Julianus vomiting Blood, being despaired of by (...) Men,
received an Oracle from the God, that he shou'^ come and take off from the
Altar Pine-Apples, an^ eat them for three days with Honey, and he Recovered,
and publicly in the Presence of the People gav^ Thanks.

4. (...), etc. The God gave an Oracle to Valerius Ap^r, Blind Soldier, That he
should come and take the Bloo^ of a White Cock, and mixing it with Honey,
compose a Medicine for his Eyes, and wear it for three days on them; and he
saw, and came and Publicly returned Thanks to the God.

And I guess (continues Mercurialis) by these verses of Tibullus, that the same
used to be done in the Temple of Isis.

Nunc dea, nunc succurre mihi jam posse mederi,
Picta docet Templis multa Tabella tuis.
You may find more of this kind in Joseph Scaliger, in his Indicibus
Inscriptionum antiquarum, a Grutero Collectarum. And indeed this seems to be
something of the Practice of the Jews, to take Divine Oracles as they slept in
the Temple: For thus I find it in the 3d. Chapter of the First Book of Samuel,
ver. 3. Samuel slept in the Temple of the Lord, where the Ark of God was. 4.
Then the Lord called Samuel, and he answered and said, Here I am. We may gather
from Geor. Fabricius, that this Custom of sleeping in Temples or Churches, is
still continued in Italy; for he says be observed at Padua, young Country
Fellows and Lasses, to lie in the Church of St. Anthony on a certain Night.

And now I think it is time to Wake, having rambl'd as if in a Dream, from one
thing to another; from my just Acknowledgments, to my Emperic Exploit; from
thence to the Medicinal Power of Sleep, and thence to its Religious Use: So
that if I would not have you Sleep too in spite of the Variety, I must
conclude here as always, that I am,

SIR, Your extremely Obliged Friend and Humble Servant, Char. Gildon.

To LUCINDA.
May the 10.
I Received yours this Morning, which has put me so much out of Humor, that
it ought to be no wonder if I write in a Style different from my former. I told
you in mine, the Judgment of the Men of Sense, of your Beloved Athenians. I
have the Honor to know some of the greatest Wits, and best Judges of Sense and
Learning; who unanimously agree in as contemptible an^ Opinion of them, as they
express of their Adversaries at all Times.

But after all, Madam, I shall be very little concerned if you put the worst
Construction you can upon my Demeanor in this Business, since it is pardonable
in me, who, you know owned my self for a little necessary Dissimulation, till
you made me a Convert to universal Sincerity, which I Will always preserve for
the future. But I never pretended my Life exempt from Faults or Follies -- No,
on the contrary, I confess I have been more guilty of both, than most; and
among that Number, I reckon this and some other foolish Trifles that shall be
Nameless: But I design to set a stricter Guard on my Words and Actions for the
future, and not let any Bye Respect betray me to say or do any thing I may
repent of without the Power of retrieving. This Change I partly owe to some
Inconveniences I have drawn on my self by Inconsideration; tho I own to you,
even now, that I chiefly owe it to your well-acted Sincerity. You drew I
confess, Madam, the aimable Picture of a fine Woman (I wrong the Noble Idea you
gave me of your self, by giving it the Title of Woman) And oh! that the Lovely
Piece had charmed your Heart as it did mine; it won me so entirely, that I hope
I shall never act contrary any more to the divine Virtue of Sincerity; from
which, Madam, I must tell you, with a great deal of Distraction, that you
extremely, deviate, who could in your last assure me, that you made no Enquiry
about me, when to my certain Knowledge, you could not know me to be the Author
of that Book but by a very nice Enquiry. Woman indeed, was so well known to me,
that 'twas my Fault to be so monstrously imposed on, as to believe there could
be any one of the Sex qualified with a Virtue so opposite to a Woman's Nature
as Sincerity. That indeed, was the golden Work, the Chemistry of my
Conversation has been so long in Chase of; and oh! you made me fondly believe
I Would found the mighty Treasure in you because you glittered: But alas! the
golden Fantom vanished like those deluding Hopes, and I find a Woman of Wit and
Sense exalted with Sincerity, is as mere a Fancy as the Philosopher's Stone.
That was the Beauty that chained my Soul to Mirtilla, and made me value her
above all Sublunary Goods; that made me sigh for the Enjoyment of her
Conversation; but now the gay vision'^ past, and you have waked me to find you
a very, very Woman.

I have been too tedious on this Paragraph of your Letter to give a precise
Answer to the rest, I shall reserve that till another Time, and only now tell
you, First, That you do me but Justice to think no worse of me for the
Declaration of a Truth, you desired to know, with all the Sincerity in Nature;
for Madam, I must always own 'twas such a Vencration I had for you, that I
could not but be free and sincere with you. Next, That Liberty like Religion is
a Word of a double Meaning, and ^qually pernic^ous to Human Kind. Mistake me
not, Madam, I mean as to the villainous Use that has always been made of both;
not as to true and real Religion and Liberty, which I Am for as much as any, and
am so good a Patriot, that I Would rather be tortured an Age for the least good of
my Country, than do the least Action against the r^l Interest of it. Lastly,
That tho it would yet be extremely grateful to be admitted to your
Conversation, yet since you obstinately persist to have it so, I must submit to
your Conditions, but I desire you would put me to as little Expense of Patience
as you can, because I still earnestly desire to obtain what I have with such
Ardor requested, that is, the Conversation of Mirtilla, in Hopes to make you by
my real Sincerity my Convert, as your pretended Sincerity made me yours; which
would be an extraordinary Happiness to

Madam, Your Humble Servant, and Sincere Friend, Lycides.

A Short View of Old Rome, in a Letter to URANIA.
NEver wonder at Ovid's Trouble for being Banished from Old Rome, since we find
that St. Augustine made it One of his Three Wishes, to have seen it in all its
Glory; as it was when Ovid lived. I Will give you but an imperfect View of it, as
I can collect it from Pliny, and you will confess it raises in you a most
Magnificent Idea; what must then the Noble Remains that were in St. Austin's
Time give him?

I will begin with the Grand Ci^co built by Julius C^sar, a Work not of Ages,
but of a few Years (for he Reigned but five, reckoning from his first coming to
Rome after his passing the Rubicon.) It was Three Furlongs in Length, and one
in Breadth; surrounded with Magnificent Buildings, able to contain two Hundred
and Sixty Thousand Spectators. The Palace of Paulus, all adorned with Phrygian
Columns. The Temple of Peace built by Vespasian with all the Beauty, Art, and
Expense could bestow. The Pantheon built by Agrippa, to Jove the Avenger, when
Valerius Ostiensis a famous Architect, had covered that Theater in which Libo
exhibited Shows and Plays to the People of Rome. Can we admire the Expenses of
the barbarous Kings, in the raising the Pyramids, when the very Ground for the
Building the Forum cost C^sar the Dictator in those Days, above Ten Thousand
Sestertii; and if the Expense and dearness of things be of any Force. Publius
Clodius who was killed by Milo, lived in a House that cost 1484 Sestertii,
which seems to me to fall but little short of the Extragance of Kings in their
Palaces; but in those Days the Romans were Admirers of any great Works however
less beautiful, as the Vastness of the Ramparts of the Capitol, with its
prodigious Foundations. I cannot omit the very subterraneal Magnificence of
this ^ity, even in the wondrous' Conveyances of the Common-Shoars, so Spacious,
that one might have Sailed under a Pendulous City, through Rocks, which have
been Penetrated to let in seven Civulets, which flowed in with a rapid Course
like a Torrent, to carry away all before them; which being increased and
agitated by the Rains from above, beat and dashed against the sides with great
Vehemence: Sometimes the River Tyber ran back into these Channels; where though
the several Streams at their meeting fought and made a great deal of do, yet
the firmness of the Pile and Buildings, resisted its unruly Force. These
admirable Arches out braved Ages, Earthquakes and Ruins, from the time of
Tarquinius Priscus, to the Destruction of Rome; for that King it was that Built
them; who when he undertook to perform a Work of that difficulty both for
Length and Danger, by the Hands of the Roman People, put to Death all those
that fled from the Fatigue of the Undertaking; for the pursuance and perfecting
of which, he made use of a Remedy unheard of before or after; which was, That
all the Bodies of the Citizens that were executed on this account, should some
be fixed on Crosses and exposed to the view of the People, and others in their
Presence given for Food to the Wild Beasts and Ravenous Birds; which produced
this effect, that they that beheld 'em, struck with a shame to be daunted at
any Undertaking, with a bold Zeal for the Honor of the Roman Name, which had
often preserved them at the lowest ebb of Fortune in Battles, pushed on the
Work with all the fervor imaginable; which the King observing, took hold of
the opportunity to enlarge his Impositions upon them, making them extend those
subterraneal Passages to that bigness and height, that a Cart very much laden
with Hay might easily pass through them. But all I have already said, is
inconsiderable, if we compare it to one Miracle, which is this, When Marcus
Lepidus and Quintus Catulus were Consuls, there was no Nobler Structure in Rome
than the House of Lepidus himself; but within Thirty five Years after, that was
not the hundredth part as big as innumerable Palaces that were then Razed.
Marcus Scaurus, when he was Aidile, with his private Wealth and Abilities
performed a Work beyond all that ever^ was made by any before, designed not for
time, but Eternity; and this was a Theater, in which were a tripple order of
Scenes to the height of Three hundred and sixty Columns, the lower part was of
Marble, the middle of Glass (strange kind of Luxury!) and the uppermost were
adorned with Golden Tablets, the Brass Statues betwixt these Pillar^, were in
in number Three thousand; and the Pit it self was capable of holding Fourscore
thousand Spectators. To this I may add a greater Prodigy, effected by Caius
Curto, who followed the part of Julius Caesar in the Civil War; for when at the
Funeral of his Father he saw he could not surpass Scaurus in Pomp, Wealth,
Beauty, and Nobleness of the Structure, Magnificence of the Furniture and
Decorations, resolved to outdo him in Ingenuity: Therefore he caused two most
spacious Theaters of Wood to be made near to one another, and hung them on a
Versatile Balance or Hinge; so in the Morning when the Plays were performed,
they were Back to Back, (as I may say) but in the Evening after all the People
were in them, they were whirled about on their Hinges, the Scenes of both
descending as they met together, and Composed in a Moment an Amphitheatre, in
which immediately were presented the Fights of the Gladiators. What can we most
admire in this, the Invention; or the Inventor? The Artificer, or Designer? Him
that durst imagine such a bold Effort, or him that could reduce it to Practice?
But that which seems most strange to me, is, that the People should be so mad
to venture themselves in so ticklish and uncertain a Seat. Behold, (says Pliny)
This is that People that have Subjugated the whol^ Earth, which has stifled
Kingdoms and Nations, and gives Laws to far Countries, a certain Part and
Portion of the Immortal Gods, compared to the rest of Mankind: Behold them I
say, swinging in a ponderous Machine, and clapping and loudly applauding to
their own Danger. Behold all the Roman People aboard two Vessels as it were,
which were only separated from Destruction by two Hinges that supported them,
gazing at the Combats of the Gladiators, with Pleasure, tho they were so near
Perishing themselves if the Machine failed. What might not he have persuaded
the Roman People to, who could so easily prevail with them to venture into a
hanging Theater, as if he intended to Sacrifice the whole Nation, at the
Funerals of his Father, or at least bid fair for it. Had Caligula prepared such
an Engine, he need not have been at the expense of so fruitless a Wish, as that
all the Romans had but one Neck, that at one Blow he might Dispatch 'em. But
after the Hinges were so worn by Use that they would no longer turn, he varied
it and left it in the form of an Amphitheatre. After this, what need I tell you
of the Golden Palaces of Nero and Caius, or the Aquaducts of the King Quintus
Martius, or those Additions which Agrippa made to them when he was Aedile, who
besides the Reparations of the Old, made Seven Hundred Lakes, and an Hundred
and Five Fountains. Built a Hundred and Thirty Magnificent Hostels, and Adorned
these Buildings with Three Hundred Statues of Brass and Marble and Four Hundred
Marble Pillars, and all this in the space of One Year. And for the eternal Fame
of his Aedileship, he gave Shows to the People for near Threescore Days,
besides an Hundred and Seventy Bagnio's, as a free Gift; which Places were
afterward increased in Rom^, to an infinite Number. But the Aquaeducts that
were begun by Julius Casar, and finished by Claudius, far surpassed the former.
But if we should nearly consider the abundance of Water that was used in
public, in Baths, Fish Ponds, Houses, Conduits and Gardens, in the Suburbs, and
Villa's as well as City, the Arches that were built to convey it, the Mountains
that were cut through, the Valleys that were levelled, we must grant that there
could be nothing more Admirable in the whole World. Next let me pass to the
Rareties of Art, as the Statues and Obelisc's which were brought to Rome from
abroad: First the Thebane Obelisc, was made and erected by the Labor of Twenty
Thousand Men: The King himself when it was set up, fearing that the Machines
would not be of sufficient Strength to support the vastness of the Weight,
without an extraordinary Caution of the Workmen, to make them take the more
care in erecting it, caused his Son to be fastn'd to the very top of it, that
their Endeavors for his Safety, should conduce to the happy placing the Stone.
The Prodigious Wonders of this Work made Cambyses when he took this City of
Thebes, and came almost to the Pedestal of this Obelisc with Fire and Sword, to
command the Flames to be extinguished, he being struck with Astonishment at so
awful a Pile, who had no Compassion for the City its self. In Alexandria,
P^olomaeus Philadelphus set up one of Eighty Cubits, which King Nect^is had
caused to be hewn out of a Rock; but it proved much a greater Difficulty to
carry it to its Place and erect it. Some say 'twas carried a Shipboard by the
Famous Architect Satyrus. Others, that a Channel was cut from beyond the place
where the Obelisc lay, under it, to the River Nilus; and then Two very broad
Vessels joined together, and so deeply laden, that they might when they came up
the Channel, go under the Obelisc, (it reaching like a Bridge, from one side of
this Cut to the other) And being come exactly under it, they unloading them, by
degrees the Vessels rose out of the Water, and so lifted up the Obelisc from
the Ground, and thus bore it down into the Nile. Out of this same Mountain
there is a Tradition, that Six were cut of the same Magnitude, and that the
Master Workman had Fifty Talents given him for a Reward. But this Obelisc was
set up in Arsinoe by the forementioned King, in Honor of his Wife Arsinoe, who
was also his Sister; and from thence Maximus when he was Prefect in Egypt,
Transported it, tho such a vast and unwieldy Cargo for a Ship; and placed it in
the Forum, having cut off the Top of it, designing to put one of Gold in its
Room, which afterward notwithstanding he neglected. There are Two more at
Alexandria, in the Portico's of the Temple of Caesar Forty Two Cubits high,
which King Mesphees made. The chief Difficulty was to Transport them cross the
Sea to Rome, in Ships of the First Rate. Nor must I omit that Obelisc which was
placed in the Grand Circo by Augustus, which was made by King Semnesertes, in
whose Reign Pythagoras was in Egypt: It was One Hundred Twenty Five Foot, and
Three Quarters high, besides the Basis of the same Stone. But that which was in
the Field of Mars, was made by Sesostris: Both contain Inscriptions of the
Egyptians Interpretations of Natural things, by their Philosophy. This last
Augustus applied to a wonderful Use, turning it to the Gnome of a Dial,
receiving the Shadow of the Sun, and by it distinguished the Length of the
Days, Nights and Hours, on the Pavement, which he had made to the Proportion of
the Obelisc, and divided with Lines and Marks of inlaid Brass, on which the
Shadow decreased and increased by degrees, and so artificially denoted the
Motions of time. A thing says Pliny, in my Opinion, worthy the Knowledge of
Posterity. There was another Obelisc in the Vatican Circo of Caius and Nero:
And this alone amongst them all, wat broken in the making. The Son of Sesostris
made this, as well as another of an Hundred Cubits in height, and Consecrated
to the Sun by the Order of the Oracle for the Restoration of his Sight, after
he had been Blind. There was a Statue of Hercules in the Beast-Market, which
was for nothing so remarkable, as its Antiquity and Title; for it is said to be
Consecrated by Evander to him: And it obtained the Name of Triumphal, from
being Habited in Triumphal Garments, as often as there is any Triumph. The
Statue of Janus with his Double Face, must not be forgot, consecrated to him by
King Numa, which was Adored and Sacrificed to, both for War and Peace; his
Fingers being so contrived, that they denoted in Three Hundred Sixty Five Days
the Year and Age. Mum^ius having Conquered Achaia, replenished the City with
Statues: The Luculli too, brought not a few into it. Before the Burning of the
Capitol by the Faction of Vitellius, there was in the Fane of Juno, a Dog
carved in Brass licking of his Wounds, which was of such a noble Boldness, that
the Value of it was beyond Purchase; and therefore Consecrated to the Goddess.
In the Capitol was a Statue of Apollo, of that prodigious Height, that it was
called a Colossus; and this was brought from Apollonia, a City in Pontus, by
Marcus Lucullus: It was Thirty Cubits high, and cost One Hundred and Twenty
Talents. Like this is that Colossus of Jupiter, Consecrated by Claudius Caesar.
Besides, these in Rome, were an Hundred other Colossuses of a lesser Magnitude.

To say nothing of the admirable Pictures that Pliny mentions, all far beyond
Raphael, Angelo, Titian, and our Modern Artists, we may in short, Reflect, That
Rome must indeed be a Divine Sight, whence all the Noblest pieces of Art that
the Conquered World afforded, were Transported by the Conquerors to Rome, to
contribute to its Majesty and Glory. Add to this the Politeness of the People
Ovid left, and the Brutality of those he went to; and we may well cease to
admire at his Impatience, and Flattery of his Persecutor Augustus, for a
Return. But you may see a more perfect Draught of this City in Fabricius his
Collation of Old and New Rome. I am,

Madam, Your Friend and Humble Servant, Viridomar.

To the Charming and Ingenious URANIA.
I Will no more accuse my Fortune, Urania, since she has given me so generous an
Antidote against all her Venomous Influence, as your Friendship, that furnishes
me with a very satisfactory Retreat from all the violent Onsets of my ill
Stars, where I can unload my Soul, and communicate all my Complaints. If I meet
with Villai^ies and Ingratitude, the common Offspring of Trust and generous
Offices; I Am sensibly pleased, that I can with assurance of Pity, tell my
Charming Friend my Pain. This is the occasion of this Letter; for, tho I have
no Villainy to complain of at this time, having had no Trust Betrayed; nor any
Ingratitude to Resent, because I have not been in a Capacity of Obliging the
Person I addressed to; yet have I still abundant reason to Sigh for the
continual ill Luck that attends my Endeavors.

I know Urania, you have often told me, that it is a very false Measure to judge
of others by my own Inclinations; and your Advice, I must grant, carries a
great deal of Reason; for whether my Inclinations are just or unjust, I Am ten
to one in the wrong, when I judge of another by them; since Mankind differ not
only in their Sentiments of the same thing, by the different Appre^ensions each
Man Naturally has; but the very Circumstances and state of our Affairs, give a
various turn to our Sentiments; so that we differ not only from one another,
but even from our Selves, as our Fortune alters our Condition. But when I was
mistaken in Pollio, I followed a more common and received tho not less
fallacious Guide, than the former, that is, Report. Pollio has the Reput^tion
of a Generous Man, and may be so perhaps to others; but I Am sure he does not
distinguish betwixt those who are and are not fit Objects for his Generosity. A
pleasant Companion diverts and seasons our Hours of Conversation, and permits
not our Judgment to weigh the Merits of the Person that affords us so agreeable
an Entertainment. And this perhaps has misled Pollio, who has met with
Ingratitude enough from some of that Character, whom he has highly Obliged; for
perhaps, even I could almost grant were not unpleasant, if not witty Company.
But Alas! one of Pollio's Experience should know, that Men of that Faculty,
have seldom any just Notion of things, at least of Uertuae and Honor: They are
their own Gods, and Sacrifice all to themselves; their very loosest and gayest
Hours, that one would think free from Design, are like the Miser's Presents to
a young heir Apparent, only to draw some Advantage to themselves in Vanity or
Interest. And I must say, I never knew one of these Witty Companions that ever
abounded much with Sincerity. Not that I would extend this Observation beyond
all Exceptions: But I Am sure Prudence should choose where there is less
probability of Deceit. On the contrary I have courted his Friendship as well as
Generosity; That with a real Desire, and This on no very great Matter, but have
scarce met with a Return answerable to my Expectation. In short, Urania,
'twou'd be tedious to tell you all my thoughts of Pollio now; what they were
when I wrote the following Verses, these will let you see; the effect they had,
I shall conclude this Letter with.

To POLLIO. The COMPLAINT.
I.
It Is now dead Night, and hushed is every thing;
The busy Cit, and the laborious Clown;
The cringing Parasite, and haughty Gown;
The Plotting Statesman too,
And with his Gilded Cares the King,
Are all at sweet Repose.
What when awake they all refuse;
And Sleep, Death's Image, seemed as Death will do,
To Have equaled the poor Cottage and the Crown,
No Wretch but me so much Unblest
As not to be at Rest;
Of Hope forsaken, and by Fate Oppressed;
Despair with all its wild Anxieties,
Drives Quiet from my Mind, and Slumbers from
(my Eyes.
II.
Why do I Live? Why hug my boundless Woe,
When Friendly Death sets wide the Gate,
That leads to a more happy State?
For not at all to be,
Is better than the ills of Life to know,
When Priestly Barbarism does reign
Almost in every Heart;
And scarce one good Samaritan is found,
That with one sordid Ragg will part,
To Cloth the shuddring Wretch, or bind his gaping
Why sooth I then my present Pain, (Wound.
With the faint Shadow of a fansy'd Ease,
Rather than Cure the Disease,
With Balmy Death, its sure and lasting Remedy?
III.
When th'ills of Life too great and numerous grow,
They are the Summoners of Fate:
And it is too foolish a Debate
(Punished by present Pain)
To argue if we should Obey or no.
In torturing Dreams I Have often found
My self with threatening Dangers compassed round.;
Over Hills I fly, over Vales, over Shades in vain,
The fansy'd Terror meets me when I light,
Or close behind
Pursues my Imaginary Flight:
But when my Laboring Mind
From near Destruction, can no Refuge find,
I Wake, and all the racking Scene withdraws,
The Horrors past, are lost in present Joys.
IV.
So in the gloomy Dream of Life, I see
My tattered Bark in Fortune's boistrous Sea.
To every Wind in vain I shift my Sail,
Sinister Faie allows no Prosperous:
In vain I strive to reach the distant Shore,
For all around the angry Billows roar,
And on each side increase the unequal War.
Ten thousand Waves, each big with certain Fate,
On one poor sinking Bark with fury Beat:
My Sails are useless, and my Rudder lost;
By clashing Surges to and fro I Am tossed;
Within no help; no Succor from without,
Despair and Ruin hem me round about.
Approach then Death, this racking Scene destroy;
Ah! Wake this Tempest-beaten wretch to long-
(sought Calms and Joy.
V.
(Night!
Ha! what bright Dawn thus breaks this dismal
What Welcome Beams their friendly force unite,
To raise my drooping Soul with their auspicious
(Light!
Behold the golden Glory spreads apace,
The Heavens assume a calmer Face,
And all the loud tumultuous Billows cease!
The threatening Storm is Over-blown,
The scattered Clouds now disappear,
And the grim Terrors of Despair
Are all dispersed and gone.
Whence, Ah! whence these Rays Divine,
That with so strong, so kind a Luster Shine?
VI.
Lo! now the Heavenly Cause draws near;
See, see the mighty Goddess Hope appear!
Her fluid Robes, which subtle Threads compose
(From the thin Brains of fond Projectors Spun)
Her naked Beauties to the Eye disclose;
Beauties far brighter than the Midday Sun;
Fairer than Fancy ever drew Womankind,
Though the vain fancy of a Lovesick Mind.
Her spacious Front, and her inviting Eye,
Are filled with humble Majesty.
False Joys around her smiling Visage Play,
To sooth depending Wretches Pain,
In spite of damned Delay
And its long Melancholy Train.
Her Head with Laurel, and with Myrtle's Crowned;
With her left Hand where ever she goes
She thinly strows
The Warriour's and the Lover's Wreaths;
But Courtiers flat'ring Promises,
With liberal Hand she scatters all around.
VII.
Her right Hand boundless Stores does hold
Of Liberty, of Happiness, and Gold.
Which though she seem to promise every one
That waits about her Visionary Throne,
Yet fast she grasps the wished for Treasure,
And does in scanty Portions Measure,
To Few, and Late, the tardy Pleasure.
A Thousand curling Clouds she sits upon,
Of Color various, and of Matter rare,
(As Acme Beauteous, subtle as the Air;
Soft as the Downy Bosom of that Charming Fair.)
Exhaled from the Wanton Wishes of Mankind,
And all the Numerous Vanities of his sickly Mind.
Avarice, Ambition, Love, untasted Bliss,
With all the gandy Train of fond Desire,
The Bigots future Joy, and States-Man's coming
That set the foolish World on Fire, (Happiness,
The Pompous Pageant's mighty Frame support.
Numerous and vast is the Resort
That throng her wide Imaginary Court.
As far as ever her friendly Beams extend,
Ranged in their differing Stations they attend;
All near, or distant, dart a longing Eye
On this Loved flattering Deity.
Beyond the reach of whose enlivening day,
Beyond the Influence of one kind Ray,
Despair in tattered sable Weeds Arrayed,
Lurks with a ghastly Troop within the baneful Shade.
VIII.
Hark! hark! methinks her melting Voice I hear;
Her Voice, that is softer far
Than happy Lovers Billing Whispers are!
Gently methinks the Goddess Chides
My causeless fond Despair,
While Pollio lives, who never Wretch denied
That on his bounteous Nature yet relied,
And spite of the effects of black Ingratitude
To damp the generous Flame,
Bounty and he are so the same;
To imploring Want he must, nay will do Good,
Let Galba Laugh, Eat, Drink and Whore,
And in that thoughtless Circle spend his Store,
And when he is Dead, be never thought on more.
So let him die like other Sots and Brutes,
Oblivion best a Life like Galba's suits.
But since a more Heroic Fire
Does wiser Pollio's Breast Inspire,
And moves him to Dispense
To drooping Poesy a kind Influence;
Let him but cast one Smile on me,
By which from Anxious Cares set free,
In Verse Immortal l'd convey his Name,
To the last Boundaries of Fame,
And late Posterity should see him sit
Among the Sacred Patrons of Almighty Wit;
For of their Patrons, Poets have these Odds,
They Poets make, but Poets make them Gods;
To Mortal Glory, give Eternal Date,
And rescue Merit from destructive Fate.
By this last Stanza, my dear Urania, you find what I then thought of Pollio,
but I must tell you, my opinion is much altered by his Carriage since. Not
because he complied not with my Desires, but because he has not dealt like a
Gentleman by me. If Oftentation be the Motive of his great Actions, and a
present Vainglory be the mover of his Liberality, he has a great many of his
Rank, that carry a mighty Name in the World; for few have learned this noble
Maxim, that Virtue is its own Reward. And yet methinks the present Applause of
Fools should not be grateful to a Man of Sense. But if Pollio had not that
Nobleness of Spirit to do a private Good, yet methinks he should not submit to
do a little thing, as you know some of his Demeano^r to me was, especially in
detaining what was trusted to his Virtue, without doing what was expected from
that Trust. But I Will confine you no longer, Urania, to my Complaints, who am

Your faithful Friend, Viridomar.

Of the MOON.
The History of the Temple of Diana at Ephesus, etc. In a Letter to my Learned
and Ingenious Friend, Dr. Midgly.
I Have lately been looking over again Bishop Wilkins his World in the Moon,
and cannot but agree with him, as I formerly did, that it is most reasonable to
think that Planet capable of Inhabitants, since we know it is a Solid Opacous
Body; that the Light it has, is only Borrowed; and since the Discoveries made
by the Telescope of Galileus, show that it is every way qualified for an
Inhabitable World. But whether the Inhabitants be so much Wiser than us, as
Cyrano Bergerai makes'em, I cannot tell, neither am I willing to allow them that
Advantage, since their Planet has such a dependence on our Earth, as to be
obliged to move round us, as its Center. I should rather agree with Ariosto,
that makes it the Lumber House, or Repository of all things that are lost in
this Earth of ours, even to the Wits of his Hero Orlando, Bottl'd up in
Bottles, like the Virtuoso's Air: But then you will answer, if I allow the Moon
the Receptacle of all that is lost on our Earth, that by consequence it must be
the Juster, Honester, as well as Wiser Abode, since Honesty and Justice have
long been lost here, as well as Wisdom. It Is true, Doctor, if the Inhabitants
there are one jot the better for 'em, I must yield the Cause; but I hope our
Virtues as well as Wits, are Bottl'd up from their use; else I should wish the
Bishop I mentioned but now, had perfected his Discovery, and fixed a
Correspondence betwixt us, for doubtless 'twould yield us abundance of
Commodities needful for us, as well as Wit and Honesty.

However it is, methinks we have a greater Image of this friendly moving Light
of the Heavens, than the Primitive Poetical Philosophers: They made it but a
Woman, but we a World, that contains perhaps some Millions of finer Women than
Diana: Tho it is probable not all so Chaste, if they are not made of a much
different Matter from that of our Earthly Ladies. Though I cannot blame the
Ancients for making it a Woman, from its Inconstancy, which is so natural a
Folly of the Sex, that it must be thought Characteristical: And perhaps the
Origin of this Fab^lous Lady Moon, might be from some Aegypti^ Hieroglyphic of
a Woman with a Crescent on her Head, to denote her changable Nature and
Affections.

But whence-ever it came, they had Names enough at her Service, above an
Hundred in number, too long to insert here. The Poets therefore gave her a
Coach too: It was but a Coach and Two; whereas her Brother Phoebus had his
Coach and Four. Manilius, lib. 5.

Q^drijugis and Phoebus equis, and Delia bigis.
Ovid gives her a pair of White Horses, though others differ, and will have her
drawn by a Mule, or young Heifers, or Horses of various Colors.

They made her a Huntress, because assisting at the Birth of her Brother
Apollo, made her hate all Men; for she was so Frighted at the Pains her Mother
underwent, that she obtained of Jupiter (for nothing but a God could secure a
Woman's Maidenhead) a perpetual Virginity, as Callimachus tells us. And Cicero
in his Natura D^orum, lib. 2. says she was Feigned to assist at the Birth of
her Brother Apollo, tho Born at the same Birth, because she came into the World
before him. Jupiter therefore according to the same Callimachus, made her
Goddess of Hunting, Highways and Havens, and bestowed on her Bow, Arrows and
attending Nymphs, as so many Maids of Honor. Hence Horace,

M^tium cust^s (...); Virgo
Qua labor antes vero puellas
Ter vocata audis, (...); let^o,
Diva trisor^is.
Callimachus says, Diana's Chariot is drawn by White Hinds. She often changed
her Habitation, and had need therefore of some Vehicle, for now she was above
in the Heavens, now beneath, among the Infernals. Nor is her Figure more
certain than her abode, for as a Friend of mine has it,

Now with a full Orb she the Darkness does Chase;
Now like Whores in the Pit, shows but half of her Face.
In Athens, the young Ladies that were so big with Child, that they could not
wear their usual Girdle, or Zone, put it off in the Temple of Diana, whence she
got the Appellation of (...). To her were offered the Zones or Girdles of Women
with Child, as the Garlands were to Venus at Marriages. This Goddess also
presided over Fishers: And the Poets tell us that they used to Sacrifice
Bullocks to her; but Horace Sacrifices a ^oar to her, and Ovid a white Hind.

She had a most Magnificent Temple at Ephesus, ^amous for its Building, and
remarkable for its Destruction; of which Natalis Comes gives us this Account.
H^it Diana (...) Templorum, and Augustissimum Ephesinum, etc. The most
Magnificent and Famous of the Temples of Diana was at Ephesus, which was Built
by the care and Industry of all Asia, Two hundred and twenty Years under the
direction of the Architect Chesiphron; it was Four hundred and twenty five Foot
in Length, and Two hundred and twenty in Breadth; in which were an hundred and
twenty seven Columns, erected by as many several Kings; and these Columns or
Pillars were wonderful in their Length as well as Beauty, for they were sixty
Foot in Height; thirty six of which were very Noble, and with incredible Art
Carved with their several Chapiters answerable to the Magnificence of the
Pillars. Besides which, there were an abundance of exquisite Pictures and
admirable Images or Statues, correspondent to the Grandeur and Magnificence of
the Temple: All which Herostratus an Ephesian, set on Fire and Destroyed, to
purchase to himself perpetuity of Name, since he cou'^ not effect it by his
Virtues or Parts. This Combustion of Diana's Temple happened about the I^ o^
August, on the day that Alexander the Great, King of Macedon was Born, as
Plutarch says in the Lif^ of that Prince. But the Ephesians made a Law^ that
none should mention the Name of Herostratu^ for the future, under the most
severe Penalties, so to deprive him of the enjoyment of that which he aimed
(...) the obtaining of by so great a Villainy. Thus fa^ Natalis. A Description
of the Ruins of this Temple, and all the Cautions used by the Founders o^ it
against Earthquakes and other Expected Causes of Ruin, Pliny gives us in his
Natural History.

Among other Fables of her, the Poets make her in Love with Endy^ion sleeping
on Lat^s, a Mountain of Garia, and that she Enjoyed him according to Catullus.

Ut triviam furtim sub Latmia saxa relegens
Dulcis ^mor gyro devovet aerio.
So weak was the Power of a God to keep her a Maid! Nay, they make her very
Fruitful too, for besides Sons by this Amor with (...), they give her fifty
Daughters.

Where three Ways meet, the Ancients used to perform the Rites of Hecate, who
is called by three several Names, Luna, Artemis and Hecate. About the New of
the Moon, the Richer sort used to send a Collation to those Places where three
ways met, in the Evening, as a Supper for Hecate; but the Poor used to devour
these Nocturnal ^unkets of this Goddess, and give out, that she her self had
eat them, as the Priests and their Tribe in Daniel; though indeed these Suppers
were but very Parsimonious; so that an ill Supper got the Proverbial Name of a
Feast for Hecate; for the Poetical Divinity taught that the Ghosts would
subsist with very little Nourishment. But that Hecate was the same with Luna,
^or Diana, is evident from several Places, particularly from Raphael Regius, in
his Comments on the 7th Book of Ovid's Metam.

And here I think it is time to make an end of this Lunary Essay, lest I be
thought to take so much pains about her Goddess-ship for the Influence she has
on me. I would not incur the Imputation of a Madman for her sake, whatever I
might for the sake of some Earthly Cynthia, perhaps fully as Inconstant; and
might deserve a greater variety of Names from her numerous Follies, than Diana
from the several Places of her Worship. But whatever Influence the Ethereal or
Terrestrial Cynthia's may have on me, I Am confident, that neither they, nor any
other Cause can be Powerful enough to turn me to any thing that should diminish
my Value and Esteem for you, or the pleasure I take in being what I shall ever
Subscribe my self,

SIR, Your Obliged and faithful Friend and Humble Servant, Charles Gildon.

An ESSAY at a Vindication of the Love-Verses of Cowley and Waller, etc. In
Answer to the Preface of a Book Entitled, Letters and Uerses Amorous and
Gallant.
Directed to Mr. CONGREVE.
AS in my two former Critical Discourses of this Book against Mr. Rymer's Short
view of Tragedy, a Zeal for the Honor of my Country in its greatest Ornaments,
her Poets, Engaged me; so here I cannot help challenging the same Pretense,
since I cannot suppose them deficient in Love, without derogating from the
Justness of their Characters. But I must confess I have not the same hopes of
Success in this; for there I had to do with an impotent Opiniator; but here
with a Gentleman of a great deal of Wit and fine Sense. There I addressed to
Parties already sensible of the Justice of my Cause; here to one who is
prepossessed of the contrary. But on the other hand I have the greater
satisfaction here of being Worsted by one whose Wit can better defend an Error,
than I the Truth; and I Am of Opinion, that it is a nobler Fate to fall by the
Hand of an Hero, than Conquer a Dastard Pretender. And though my Prudence might
be called in Question by this Attempt, yet my generous Ambition will merit a
Magnis tamen excidit Ausis. One thing I must possess you of in my favor, that
my unhappy Circumstances allow me not time to use all the Caution I ought, or
search all the Reasons might be urged in this noble Cause; so that I am not
only Viribus, but Opibus impar: However, I hope the Design will gain me the
Opinion of a Good English Man, if my Performance should not attain that of a
good Critic, which will sufficiently compensate my trouble; for I should be
prouder to be thought a Zealot for the Glory as well as Interest of my Country,
than the greatest Wit, and most Learned Arguer.

I shall never deny the Ancients their just Praise of the Invention of Arts and
Sciences; but I cannot without contradicting my own Reason, allow them the
Perfecters of 'em so far that they must be our uncontroverted Patterns and
Standard: For our Physicians have found the Prescripts of Hippocrates very
Defective: And as in Physic, so in Poetry, there must be a regard had to the
Clime, Nature, and Customs of the People; for the Habits of the Mind as well as
those of the Body, are influenced by them; and Love with the other Passions
vary in their Effects as well as Causes, according to each Country and Age;
nay, according to the very Constitution of each Person affected. This makes me
hope, that the Ingenious Author of the Letters and Verses Amorous and Gallant,
guides himself by a fallacious Rule, when he makes the Ancients the Standard of
the Excellence of the Moderns (or indeed when by exalting those, he wholly
deprives these of all Honor) in Love-Uerses. His Charge is reducible to these
two Heads, viz. The Occasions and the Performances. He will have it, that the
Occasions on which their Poems are written are sought out, and that none meet
with 'em but themselves, whilst those of the Ancients are such as happen almost
to every Man in Love. Next, That the Verses of the Moderns, are filled with
Thoughts that are indeed Surprising and Glittering, but not Tender, Passionate,
or Natural for every Man in Love to think. This is the sum of his Charge against
'em; of which in the Order I Have placed 'em. First, As for the Occasions; I
cannot remember any Subject chosen by either Cowly or Waller, (for we have
nothing to do here with Petrarch a Foreigner) that seems to be sought out, or
unnatural for a Man in Love to choose; and if some of 'em do not happen to every
Man in Love, they are yet on an equal Bottom with the Ancients, many of whose
Subjects or Occasions, are far from happening to all Lovers, as none who can
pretend to any knowledge of their Writings can deny. Corinna's Parrot died, and
Ovid writes its Funeral Elegy; but sure none will contend that this is an
Accident common to all Ladies who have Lovers, and those Poets too. Catullus
addresses one Copy of Verses to the very Sparrow of Lesbia, and in another
deplores its Death. A great many Lovers may have Mistresses who never take a
Voyage during their Amor, and yet Ovid has an Elegy ad Amicam Navigantem; and
so may ten thousand true Lovers, especially such as are Poets, never venture on
any other Billows, but the Frown of their Fair ones; and yet Propertius tossed
in another Storm, Writes to Cynthia upon it. And indeed to reduce the Subjects
or Occasions of Love-Uerses to any particular Standard, is highly Irrational,
and must only be the effect of want of Consideration, for the various
Circumstances and Fortunes of the Lovers must diversifie and alter the
Occasions of writing to their Mistresses: So that there is no Occasion that is
General, and that can reach all Men in Love, but the Cruelty of their
Mistresses on their first Addresses, (that is, their not immediate Compliance)
for Jealousy is not Universal, or at least to extend to the Beating of her a
Man Loves; yet Ovid Writes ad Amicam quam verberaverat. I must confess, I cannot
see the least Reason why the Name and Gloves of a Mistress, with the Place of
her Birth, are not as just Occasions to Write on as the Ring given to a
Mistress, or her Parrot or Sparrow; or a great many more I might enumerate out
of the Ancients. A true Lover thinks every thing that belongs to her he Loves,
worthy his Thoughts; and the more our Modern Poets extend their Reflections
beyond the Ancients in this, so much the greater Lovers they show themselves.
But the Place of one's Mistress's Birth is not only worthy a Lover's Thoughts,
but even an Universal Occasion, since no Lover but must meet with that
Occurrence in whatever fair one he adores, among all the beauteous Daughters of
Eve.

By what has been said, Sir, it is evident that our Moderns are not inferior to
the Ancients, in their Judgment in choosing Occasions on which they write to
their Mistresses: Or, That this Ingenious Gentleman has either through Want of
Advertence, or out of Design expressed himself ambiguously, or at least not
with that Clearness that is requisite to a conclusive Argument; which cannot be
excused when the Honor and Merit of such great Men as Cowley and Waller is
concerned; nay, the Honor of our Country.

I come now to the Second Accusation, which is, that the Moderns fill their
Verses with Thoughts surprising and glittering, but not natural for every Man in
Love to think. This lies under the same Fault as the other does, of being too
general to be of any Force, it either condemns all that the Moderns have wrote,
it casts off every Thought in their Love-Verses as not tender and passionate, or
does nothing at all, for it instances no particular. I Am confident the
ingenious Gentleman will have so much Candor, as to confess that there are a
great many very tender and soft Thoughts, and passionate Expressions in
Cowley's Mistress, as in this one, that now occurrs to my Mind: Then like some
wealthy Island thou shall lie, etc. but if there be some, nay, a great many
tender, soft, and passionate thoughts in our Moderns, then is this general
charge not at all conclusive against 'em. Besides, Thoughts natural to a Man in
Love, is an obscure Expression, it conveys no clear Idea of any thing to the
Mind; or, what is fully as erroneous, it seems to level the Thoughts of all
Mankind, but it cannot be doubted, but that in the very same Circumstances the
Thoughts of different Men will be various, and more or less Excellent and
Noble, as the Wit, Judgment, Fancy, and the other Qualities of the Mind of the
Person affected, are more or less Excellent and perfect: And I am confident
your ingenious Friend (whom I honor for his Wit, tho I differ from his
Opinion) will allow me, That one of Mr. Cowley's Genius would no more have the
Thoughts of a Fop, a Beau, a Tinker, a Shepherd, or any other ignorant and
unelevated Mechanic, in Love, than out of it. Again, Thoughts surprising, and
glittering without particular Instances of 'em, as they prove nothing, so can
they not be well answered, for an Instance would have made us apprehend what he
takes for surprising and glittering; but without that, or any Definition, we
wander in the dark, and I can at best but only ghess at his meaning. If by
Thoughts surprising, and glittering he means extraordinary and uncommon, I Am
apt to think he will allow them very natural to Mr. Cowley or Mr. Waller in any
Circumstance. A Man that is used to a good Habit of thinking, cannot be without
extraordinary Thoughts, on what concerns him so near as the Heart of his
Mistress. Lastly, As to far-fetched Similes, it is an Expression very obscure
and ambiguous; and I must acknowledge my self wholly to seek in his Meaning, if
a Simile be just, and hold an exact Analogy to the thing it is applied to, and
of the thing it is designed to heighten, I presume it cannot come into the
Number of the far-fetched, and whenever the Gentleman will please to instance
in Particulars in either Cowley or Waller, I engage to fellow them with those
that are full as faulty, even according to his own Definition, let that be what
it will, (for I suppose it cannot be much amiss from so accurate a Pen.) And
till then I may supersede any particular Defense in this. Besides, it is not to
be supposed, that the Verses written by Lovers are the Extempore Result of a
sudden Gust of Passion, like the Inspirations of the Delphic Prophetess; for
I Am confident he will agree with me that the Excuse of Love will not free a Poet,
that lets them pass so from the Censure of Boileau

Un so^ en ecrivant, fait tout avec plaisir
I Will na point en ses verse l'ambarras de Choisir.
A Poetizing Lover, must be allowed not to be absolutely out of his Wits, and
that it is possible for him to study, and consider what he says in so solemn a
Manner to his Mistress.

After this bold Assertion without Proof, he advances to examine which are in
the right, the Ancients or the Moderns; the Rule of our Judgment in this, he
justly makes the End the Poet aims at, viz. The obtaining the Love of his
Mistress, tho I cannot see why he should suppose that contrary to, or
inconsistent with getting Fame and Admiration, since Admiration is a certain
Step to Love. When I read Mr. Dryden's Works, I cannot help Loving him. If I
should not love and respect him and any other Poet that thinks well, and
expresses his Thoughts nobly, I should sin against my Reason. Ovid urges his
Fame and Reputation as a Motive for his Mistress's Love, and if that can move a
Man of Sense, why should we think the Effect would not be the same on a Woman
of Sense, and Generosity? And indeed, in every one but an absolute dull, insipid
Fool, which no Lover can think his Mistress.

The End of Love-Verses being the gaining the fair ones Heart, he proceeds to
the best means of obtaining that End, viz. The convincing her that you love
her. I must deny this Assertion too, for tho Love in the Severity of Justice
require Love; yet is that an Argument that ought not always to prevail, since
it is a Plea that is common to a great many, for so the fair one ought to
surrender to 'em all; a Liberty no Lover would willingly allow his Mistress on
any Consideration whatever. But how often does Experience tell us, that this
best Way fails? Or indeed, how seldom does it hit? Admiration is the only just,
and unquestioneable Parent of Love; for the Senses or the Mind must be first
won with some Perfection, either real or imaginary. Whatever therefore can
ravish Fame from the envious censorious World, may justly be supposed able to
give Admiration to a Mistress. Nor is this inconsistent with the true and
lively Representation of the Pains, and Thoughts attending the Passion of Love;
for sure the Advantage of Art in Poems cannot destroy the End which is not to
be obtained in Painting without it, viz. a lively Representation of Nature.
Similes, ^ne Thoughts, and shining Points, if they be just, and good, must
certainly give a greater Idea of any Pain, than a bare and unpolished Rhyme,
without Beauty or Grace. This gives us a weak, a faint, an unmoving Vi^w of the
Pain; That sets it close to us, magnifies and enlarges it: This gives it you as
the reverse end of a Prospective Glass does Objects, That as the right end of
it; so that if a Representation of our Pain be the Path to Success, Art will be
no ill Help and guide in it; unless we'll suppose that our Mistress would be
more sensibly touched with a Grubstreet Ballad, than a Copy of Verses by a
Cowley or a Waller. But indeed, the Pain a Lover feels cannot be truly, and
with Life represented without Similes, as is evident from the very Nature of
the Mind, when in ^ain: For it is an universal Measure of our Judgment of things
to compare them with something else; and the Mind in expressing its Pains
endeavors to make it known in its full Greatness: to give therefore the
greater Image of it, it generally seeks out something by a Comparison of which
it hopes to obtain that End; Comparison being the only Distinction of Degrees
of things. This makes it narrowly in these Circumstances, regard and observe
that Train of Ideas that continually pass before it, to call out such as are
most proper for its purpose: For it is evident, (as Mr. Lock remarks) to any one
that will but observe what passes in his own Mind, that there is a Train of
Ideas constantly succeeding one another in his Understanding, as long as he is
awake. An Assertion therefore of an Ingenious Friend of mine, to the Prejudice
of the Moderns, against Similes in the Expression of the Passions of Love and
Grief, is contrary to the very Nature of the Mind. For let any Man endeavor to
retain any particular Idea firmly and without Alteration, he will sind it not
in his Power to do it any considerable time, such a necessary Succession and
Variation of Ideas (the Origin of Similes) is there in the human Mind. But
because it is said that it is the nature of Grief to confine the Soul, straiten
the Imagination, and extremely lessen the Number of its Objects, I shall only
oppose the Assertion of this Gentleman (whom I have always allowed a Man of
great Wit and Sense) with an Observation of Mr. Le Clerk, (whom I Am sure no Man
that knows his Works, will deny to be one of the best Philosophers of the Age)
in the 6th. Chapter of his Ontologie and the 4th. Paragraph, he has to this
purpose -- This being so, we observe that the time seems short to those who
spend it in Mirth, or any Employment they perform with Pleasure and Desire; but
on the contrary, Tedious and Irksome to the Unfortunate, and those that are in
Pain, or to those that are against their Wills, obliged to some troublesome
Business. For we keep the Idea that is Grateful and Pleasant to us, as long
without Variation as we are able, and thus by the viewing of the fewer Ideas,
the time we spend in Pleasure and Content, seems the shorter; whilst on the
contrary, our Minds endeavor to drive away a troublesome Idea, and strive to
substitute some others in its room; Turning, Winding, Changing, Adding and
Diminishing it, as the uncasie inquietude Prompts. Thus the time seems longer
than it would do else, by that vast and numerous Train of Ideas, which, as I
may say, show themselves en passant to the Mind, with an incredible Rapidity
and Swiftness. From this just and rational Observation of Mr. Le Clerk it is
evident, That Similes are not so unnatural in expression of Grief or Pain, as
some Ingenious Gentlemen contend: For the Mind (especially that which is used
to an Expression of its self in Allegory and Similes) will easily in this
Number of Ideas, meet with some that will answer the End, the Mind is born to
with so much Impatience and Desire: For it is here also evident, That Grief
multiplies nor lessens the Number of the Objects of the Mind.

From what has been said 'twill appear, That Similes cannot be an unnatural
Expression of this Passion, or any Effects of it. I shall therefore proceed to
those few particular Instances the Author of the Preface gives, by which he
draws a short Parallel betwixt the Ancients and the Moderns. I am pleased, says
he, with Tibullus, when he says, he could live in a Desert with his Mistress,
where never any Humane Footsteps appeared, because I doubt not but he really
thinks what he says: But I confess, I can hardly forbear Laughing, when
Petrarch tells us he could live without any other Sust^nance than his
Mistresses Looks. I confess, I must even here dissent from him too; for if you
go to the Rigor or Severity of the Reason of both Expressions, they are equally
impossible, and in Impossibilities as well as Infinites, there are no Degrees.
For I can see no greater Probability of Living in a Desert where there were no
Humane Footsteps, than on the Looks of a Mistress only; unless like (...), he
would feed on the Leaves of the Trees, and Grass of the Ground if there were
any; which is not very kind to hope his Mistress would comply with. But
supposing it impossible, is there any Necessity of a Lovers saying nothing that
exceeds the Bounds of Possibility? especially in Poetry, where Hyperbole's are
justifiable almost to Extravagance. That certainly would be most unnatural of
all, for the Thoughts of a Man really in Love, are naturally Extravagant even
to Impossibilities; tho poss^ quia posse videntur. The very Definition of this
Passion in Ethics, shows it violent and exorbitant. But we may in favor of
Petrarch and Mr. Cowley, (who make use of the same Thought) say that they mean
the Diet of their Love, is a Look of their Mistress.

I must confess, I Am extremely surpised to find your Ingenious Friend an
Advocate for that which would make all the Sir Courtly's Compositions of the
Nation, the Standard of good Verses; when he himself is really so well
qualified to write like Cowley and Waller, and has by his own Practice in those
Verses that are Published, better confuted his Preface, than all I can pretend
to say.

To my Honored and Ingenious Friend Mr. Harrington, for the Modern Poets
against the Ancients.
AS the Justice and Generosity of your Principle, the sweet Agreeableness of
your Humor, the Vivacity of your Wit, and the strength and force of your
Judgment and Penetration, justly endear you to all your Acquaintance, so they
qualify you for a Judge of the present Controversy betwixt the Moderns and the
Ancients, for the Prize of Glory in Learning and Poetry. Monsieur Perault (whom
I have not yet had the Opportunity to Read) has given it to the Moderns, Rapin
to the Ancients: Mr. Rymer has with abundance of Indignation appeared on
Rapin's side. I cannot determine whether Mr. Perault has been too partial to
his own Countrymen, (an Error on the right side) but I Am sure Mr Rymer has
been extremely injurious to his; which has made me perhaps, too angry with him
in my former Discourses. But I assure my self that you are too good an
Englishman, to let Friendship to any Man, bribe you to condemn those rough
Effects of my Zeal for the English Nation. I will be more just than my
Adversary, I will yield that Greece had Great Poets, notwithstanding all those
monstrous Faults and Absurdities they abound with; tho he will not allow the
English any Honor, because they have been guilty of Errors. Nay, I Will say
more, that the Poetry of Greece was her most valuable Learning, for that still
maintains its Share of Glory and Esteem, whilst her Philosophy is now exploded
by the Universal Reason of Mankind. Homer, Pindar, Sophocles and Euripides,
will, as long as they are understood, preserve their Characters of Excellent
Poets, tho the Stagyrite with all his Volumes, is now shrunk from his
Ostentatious Title of the Philosopher, to that of a good Critic, or Grammarian.

Tho I grant the Gracians this, yet I cannot subscribe to the rest of the
Hyperbolicall raises some of our Modern Critics give them. For I confess, I can
discover no such Universal Genius in Homer, as they contend for, as that all
Arts and Siences may be learned from him: Virgil seems to me, more generally
Learned by far; and Mr. Cowley among our English Poets, may without Partiality,
be put up for his Rival in the Glory of Learning. As for the Numbers of Homer,
Rapin vastly extols their Variety, and yet confesses that to be the Property of
the Greek Language, which makes it the easier Task for Homer to perform, and by
consequence, lessens his Merit on that Account. But it cannot be denied that
Virgil has as much Variety in this as the Roman Language would allow; and as
was necessary for the Beauty of his Poem; and they are in his Descriptions
especially, so well chosen, that they extremely contribute to the Image of the
thing described; as Gemitus dedere Caverna: praruptus aqu^ Mons. The sound of
the first makes u^ as it were hear the hollow noise the Spear of Lyacoon made
in the Trojan Horse; the other Places in our View such a watery Mountain. Among
our English Poets, none can compare with Mr. Dryden for Numbers: His
Descriptions are all very perfect in all things; but his Numbers contribute not
a little to the force and life of the Representation, for they carry something
in them distinct from the Expression and Thought; as in his Description of
Night, What an Image of a profound Stillness does this following Verse set
before us,

The Mountains seem to Nod their drousie Heads!
I have not room nor leisure at this time to make a thorough parallel betwixt
the Ancients and the Moderns, and shall only cursorily runover the Heads. I
have touched the Universality of Genius, and the variety of Numbers (this last
being the Prerogative of the Language more than of the Poets.) Judgment I think
is apparently the due of the Moderns, who I Am confident would never have been
guilty of those Absurdities the Ancients abound with. Thuy seem to have been
Masters of but little Reason, when they made their Gods such limited and
criminal Beings-Homer often digresses from the Hero, that is the Subject of his
Poem, to entertain us with other Objects too remote from Achilles. You may,
Sir, easily perceive that I press not so hard as I might on the Ancients; that
I omit abundance of Improprieties, and Absurdities, ridiculous even to
Childishness, because I would not be thought to rob the Fathers of Poetry of
their just Value and Esteem; tho I confess I am of Mr. St. Euremont's Opinion,
that no Name can Privilege Nonsense or ill Conduct.

The Enemies of the Moderns will not deal so Civilly with them. They deny them
to be Poets because they have not strictly observed the Rules laid down by
Aristotle, but by that they discover themselves either ignorant or negligent of
the most chief and important end of Poetry, that is, Pleasure. Now, it cannot
be denied but he is the best Poet who takes the surest means to obtain the end
he aims at; in which, regard must be had to tho Humor, Custom, and Inclination
of the Auditory; but an English Audience will never be pleased with a dry,
Jejune and formal Method, that excludes Variety as the Religious observation of
the Rules of Aristotle does. And all those that exclaim against the ty some of
our English Poets have taken, must grant that a Variety that contributes to the
main Design, cannot divide our Concern: And if so, it is certainly an Excellence
the Moderns have gained above the Ancients. This would appear plainer if I had
room and time to instance in Particulars. The Plays Mr. Dryden has blessed tho
Age with will prove this; which if compared (as I hereafter intend) with those
of Sophocles and Euripides, either for the Plot, Thought, or Expression, will
gain him the Poets Garland from those two Hero's of Old Greece.

The Plagiarism objected to our Poets is common to the Ancients too; for Virgil
took from Homer, Theocritus, and even Ennius; and we are assured Homer himself
built upon some Predecessors: And though their thoughts may be something akin,
yet they alter their Dress, and in all other things we are satisfied with the
variety of the outward visible Form, though the intrinsic value be the same, as
Mr. Congreve's Song has it, Nothing new besides their Faces every Woman is the
same. In all things as well as Women the mere Variety of Appearance, whets our
Desire and Curiosity. I am,

SIR, Your Humble Servant, Charles Gildon.

TO THE HONORABLE GEORGE GRANVIL Esquire
An Essay at a parallel betwixt Philosophy, and the Love of Women.
Though I confess Horace has generally a very just Apprehension of Things, yet
can I never agree with him in his notions of Happiness. Lib. 1. Epist. 6.

Nil admirari prope res est ^a Numici
Solaque qu^ possit facere, and (...) Beatum.
for it is certain, that Happiness consists in Pleasure, but there can be no
Pleasure, without a Gentle and agreeable Emotion of the Passion of Admiration,
the Ground of Love and Joy, out of which all Pleasure is composed. As an
instance of this Truth, it must be granted, that as Uirtue is the chief Basis
of Humane Happiness, so 'twill never be embraced by any Man, that does not
admire and esteem its Excellence. And in the same manner, the other parts of
Philosophy lead us to Pleasure, by Admiration. For what pleasure is there in
Physics, which proceed not from that agreeable Wonder given us, by the strange
and surprising Variety, and force, we find in the Nature of corporeal Things?
Wh^ Pleasure does Metaphysics afford, that is not built on our Esteem? (and
Esteem is the only part of Admiration that contributes to Pleasure, for there is
a Pain attends despising, which is the other Division of it,) what P^easure I
say have we in this study, but what is built on our Esteem of the valuable
Certainty it furnishes us with in what ever it proposes? For there is nothing
more sure than Abstract Ideas, the subject of Ontology or Metaplysies. Again in
Pneumatology, does not the Contemplation of the Purer, and Superior Beings, to
the very Supreme, and first cause of all that Exists, fill our Souls with
excessive and amazing Delight and Wonder? Lastly, what Pleasure is there in
Woman, that soft summary of Man's Happiness, which derives not its self from
Admiration? Admiration, therefore is so far from being an Enemy to, t^t it is
the very foundation of our Happiness, whether we consider it in the Direction,
or Aim and End of our Life, that is in Philosophy or Woman.

Some Sir, may perhaps think I have made a very strange mixture, in joining
Philosophy and Woman; though I Am confident, so much Wit, Youth, and all those
other Accomplishments of a fine Gentleman, that render you the darling of both
Sexes, will not let you think I have degraded Philosophy in it, which will
appear from a short parallel drawn betwixt them.

Philosophy is either employed in the Consideration of Bodies, as in Physics
(...) of Beings in general, or Abstract Ideas, as in Metaphysics or Ontology;
or of Pur^ and Immaterial Essences, as the Souls, Angels, God, as in
Pneumatology, or lastly of Uirtue as in Ethics.

First, the Business of Physics is extremely un^ertain, for there the Mind is
employed about ^ery Obscure Ideas; and though some of our Ex^eriments, often
present us with certain Effects, ^et does it not always discover the absolute
cer^inty of the Cause, nor shall we ever be able to pe^etrate into the inmost
Nature, or all the qualitys of Matter, and till then we must be in the dark,
(...) to the true Causes; so that Physic's put us upon the chase of what we
have very little proba^ility of obtaining. On the other Hand, the love of Woman
is more certain in obtaining (...) well as more noble in its End, viz. a
perfect ^njoyment of, and a close Union with the Ob^ct desired, the effect of
which ends not with ^em, but is perpetuated by their Offspring, who ^e a part
of 'em, the admirable and certain Ef^ct, of a known Charming, and Generous
^ause.

Secondly, Metaphysics amuses us with mere Abstract Ideas, whilst the Love of
Woman, put^ us in a sensible Possession of a Real, not Ideal Abstract of all
the Beautys and Perfections of every Being on this side of the Eternal. The
Contemplation of whom, with the Created Spirits makes up Pneumatology; but we
wander in too uncertain a Path, in our Contemplation of these latter, to arrive
at satisfaction; for Fancy there directs ou^ steps more, than Judgment built on
Right Reason, and Evidence. And therefore that part cannon be comparable to
that of the Love of Woman, which gives us by the most prevailing way, the
Senses, a proof of the Existence of Spirits, if not distinct from, yet of a
purer Make^ than even the refined Body of Woman; for wha^ Lover is there that
does not feel, perfectly see^ some unseen Spirits da^ted from the bright Eyes
o^ the fair one he adores, which have a sensible influence on him, though he
touch her not; and these are Spirits that cheer, not shock our Natures, a^
those other Fantoms do.

Then for the Contemplation of the Supreme Being, the best Philosophers form an
Idea o^ him by his W^ndrous Works, of which what ca^ give a fairer I^ge of him,
than Woman, the most Beautiful, Good, and Compassionate being of the Universe?
Which made St. Austin compar^ God to a fine Woman viewing her own Perfection in
a Glass. It Is true that the Admirable Order and Economy of the Celestial
Bodies, their Glory and Light discover apparent Foot steps of the Eternal Mind:
these show us a powerful and a wise Being, but nothing has a share of his best
attribute of Goodness, but the best part of Man, Woman, his own Image. Besides,
the Confideration of the Universe is as I may say a voluminous Introduction to
the Contemplation of that Being: we are forced there to run through objects
distinct, and various in their Forms and Beauty, as well as vastly distant in
their situation, which all contributes to the Confusion and Imperfection of the
Image they present of the Power and Wisdom of God; and the Administration of
Humane Affairs is a too tedious, as well as a too controverted argument of his
Goodness. But Woman gives us at once a Beautiful and more Compendious prospect
of his Power, Wisdom and Goodness; for as Pliny says, never are the works of
Nature so admirable as in small things, and Woman is the Minature draught of
all his Attributes that are communicable to his Creatures; for in one fine
Woman we may read the legible Characters of an Almighty Hand. From whom also
had I time and room, I could draw the knowledge of the Moral Attributes of the
first Cause.

Lastly, Ethics teach us the Rules and Prescripts of Virtue, to secure us from
those Inquietudes, the Criminal and Vicious Experience: but this is only
subservient to, and prepares us for the enjoyment of Woman, in a more perfect
Degree; for it contracts and calls home all our Wandering Wishes and our loose
Desires, and directs them all to one Object, which like the Sunbeams
contracted into a burning Glass, must be of far greater Force, and by
consequence, give a greater and more exalted Relish of Delight, than when
scattered and dissipated.

Ethics only informs the Mind with a bare knowledge of Virtue, without having
power to influence us to the embracing of it, for there are a great many that
with Medea in Ovid may say,

-- Video meliora proboque
Deteriora sequor --
but Woman can effect what Philosophy is impotent in; for whilst that proposes
the mere unactive Theory, the Love of Woman reduces it to Practice, for when
that is necessary to please her a Man loves, all the Facultys of the Soul unite
to effect the noble Work.

It Is methinks such an Arraignment of the first Cause to run down that Sex,
which Heaven has made choice of to impart to so large a share, in giving
Immortality to Humane Race by the propagation of our kind, that they deserve
not to taste that Pleasure that is joined to so mighty a work. The greatest
Pleasure in the noblest Act, with the di^est of Creatures Woman.

But whether Philosophy or Woman have the right of Precedence, it is certain
they both afford us a Noble and agreeable Pleasure, without one or both, of
which we can never be truly happy. But yet by the Nil admirari of Horace, they
are thrown aside; for the cutting off Admiration, deprives us of all Pleasure
in either, that in both being built on Admiration. And indeed, this passage
seems to aim at a Stupid, and Pyrr^onian Indifference, or Indisturbance and
Insensibility, which can no more be arrived at, than it is to be desired.

But perhaps I mistake the sense of Horace, who it may be is only against that
variable and wavering Admiration, that is the Mother of Ten Thousand fruitless
Inquietudes and Troubles, by generating too numerous a Progeny of restless
Desires for every object that presents it self. This I confess is so far an
Enemy to Happiness, as it is to Constancy and Resolution its safe guard, and
which are so eminently conspicuous in you.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 17. Line. 3. read thus. p. 1^. l. 14. r. his. p. 36. l. (...). dele the
ad. the. p. 37. l. pe^l. r. t^. p. 41. l. (...). r. p^ely. p. 43. l. 1. r. be
(...). l. 3. add rashly or ma^sly. p. 44. l. 5. r. Yours. etc. l. 1. p. 45. l.
10. r. his. p. 46. l. 17. r. (...). p, 47. l. (...). r. (...). p. 50. l. 13.
add the p. 54. l. 6. r. containing. p. 55. l. 17. dele (...). p. 66. l. 11. r.
(...). p. 72. l. 3. 5. an. p. 83. r. Reputation. p. 84. l. 1. (...) (...). p.
110. l. 9. r. (...). p. 197. l. 8. r. Fl^ods. P. 195. l. (...). r. wh^ p. 1^5,
l. 9. r. Wretch.

There are many false Points and Com^'s and s^ Faults (...) here mentioned,
which the Reader is desired to excuse and correct.


