Iean Louis de la Vallette Duke of Espernon Pair and Collond General of
Fraince; Gouuernour and Lieutenant General for the King in Guienne, the Town
and Citadell of Mets, and the Country of Messin, etc.





THE HISTORY OF THE LIFE OF THE Duke of ESPERNON, THE GREAT FAVORITE OF FRANCE.

ENGLISHED BY CHARLES COTTON, Esquire

In Three Parts, containing Twelve Books.

Wherein the History of FRANCE is continued from the Year 1598. where D'AVILA
leaves off, down to our own Times, 1642.

Orationi, and Carmini est parva gratia, nisi Eloquentia est Summa:
Historia, quoquo modo scripta, delectat.
Plin. LONDON, Printed by E. Cotes, and A. Clark, for Henry Brom, at the Gun
in Ludgate Street, at the West End of St. Paul's, MDCLXX.

To the most Reverend Father in God, GILBERT, Lord Archbishop of Canterbury,
HIS GRACE, Primate of All England, and Metropolitan, one of His Majesty's Most
Honorable PRIVY COUNCIL, etc.
May it please your Grace,
THAT the Virtues of Great Persons are sometimes dangerous to themselves, is
too manifest in the Liberty I have taken to prefer the following History to
your Graces Patronage, your own Affability, and Bounty having procured you that
Inconvenience, and Encouraged me to a Dedication; I should not otherwise, and
at a greater distance of Favor, have presumed to impose upon your Protection:
a Truth I have not only thought fit to put your Grace in mind of, the better to
excuse my Presumption; but have moreover been prompted thereunto by an honest
Vanity I have, the World should take notice, that how private soever my Life
has been, I have not altogether conversed with Obscurity: but that I have had
the Honor to be sometime known unto, and to have been Favored by one of the
greatest Prelates, and the best Men upon Earth.

Thus (my Lord) by my own ill governed, though otherwise not very Criminal
Ambition, I am put upon a necessity of seeming to accuse that Virtue, I have so
just reason to magnify; and from whence I have derived so many advantages, to
color a boldness, that would otherwise admit of no Excuse. Neither will this I
fear serve me against the Censures of the Time, by whom I expect
notwithstanding to be accused of another sort of Vanity, that something of mine
may be worthy your Graces Acceptance; which if I should absolutely deny, the
Dedication it self would then convince me of a premeditated injury to your
Name. I cannot therefore avoid confessing I think this History so fine a thing
in it self, that if I be not the worst Translator that ever Writ (and there is
no Triumph due to the best) it may very well endure the light, and pass amongst
good natured men, with other things, that every day sally from the Press; which
is my true opinion of it, and nothing more.

A more Illustrious Image of Virtue, and Honor than is here represented in the
Person of the Duke of Espernon, in my little Reading I have no where met with,
a more exemplary Piety, a braver Courage, a more shining and unblemished
Loyalty, more inviolate Friendships, nor a nobler Constancy in all the shocks
of Fortune; so that I have sometimes thought, had there not been a little
mixture of Humane Frailty amongst so many excellent Qualities as he was Master
of to a very great perfection, the Story would have looked like an Idea of an
Hero only, and rather a Character of what a Brave man should be, than what any
man ever truly was. There are indeed some Passages in his History, that are not
altogether to be justified, though none that may not (methinks) be slipped over
amongst so many better Pages of his Life, like a Counterfeit Piece in a great
Sum of Current Gold.

If (my Lord) I have been so successful as to make a tolerable Copy of this
brave Original, and that my endeavor be graciously accepted, I have my end. I
have learned that the Best men are not always the hardest to please, and ever
the aptest to forgive; which being granted, I shall appear in a good measure
justified in the great freedom I have taken to recommend my Book to your Graces
perusal: and it has so much the better Title to your Acceptance, as it is the
Fruit of the most innocent part of my time; and offered with a Heart as
grateful for the many Favors I have received from your Graces Bounty, and as
full of Honor and Reverence for your Person, and Dignity as any Man, who in a
better, and more studied style may take the boldness to subscribe himself,

My Lord, Your Graces Most Humble, and most Obedient Servant Charles Cotton.
Beresford, this 30th. of October, 1669.
The Preface.
HAving about three Years since, and in the Vacancy of a Country Life, taken
this Volume in hand, before I had gone through the three first Books, I was
called away first by Employment, and after dismissed from that, taken off by so
long, and so uncomfortable a Sickness, that I found my self utterly unfit for
any undertaking of this, or any other kind, and consequently had almost given
over all thoughts of proceeding in a work, which at some melancholy times I
believed I might not live to finish. Being since restored to a better state of
Health, and coming to review my Papers, either the dislike of what I had
already done, the shame of having been so long in doing it, the indisposition
my Disease left still hanging upon me, the bulk of what I had undertaken, the
little leisure I conceived I might have wherewith to perform it, or all
together, had almost persuaded me to hold on the same resolution, and for ever
to let it alone: till recollecting my self, I remembered I had a greater
Obligation upon me (which nevertheless I do not think fit to publish in this
place) to go through with what I had already begun, than was to be dissolved by
any truant Humor, or private Aversion of my own. I therefore reassumed my
former purpose, and some months since took the Book again in good earnest in
hand, which when I have said, any ingenious person may reasonably wonder, how a
man in good earnest, and that has so little to do in the world as I have, could
be all this tedious time about such a piece of Work as this: To which (if what
I have already said will not serve for an excuse) I shall answer, that although
by my incapacity, my ill fortune, or both, I stand excused from public
Employment, I have notwithstanding so much private concern of my own to divert
me, and so few moments to bestow upon my self, that I wonder it is done so soon:
An Apology I might how^ver have spared, since my haste will I fear be too
legible in every Line.

And now that I have told my Reader why I have proceeded so slowly in the work,
I conceive it time (as men in Prefaces usually do) to give some account of the
motives that induced me to undertake it at all; which though they will arise to
no better reasons than what other men usually give for their Follies in such
cases, will nevertheless serve perhaps to satisfy such as are kindest to me,
and who will not render themselves over-hard to be satisfied in a thing wherein
I presume they would themselves be content to see me justified. It was not
therefore out of any ambition I had to be again in Print, I having suffered too
much that way already; nor to be reputed a good Translator, the best whereof
sit in the lowest Form of Writers, and no one can be proud of the meanest
Company; neither shall I pretend to be put upon it by my Friends, for that
would tacitly imply something of opinion they must have of my ability that way,
and I must be so just to (...) my worthy Acquaintance, as to dec^^re them men
of better judgments, than to be so deceived; besides the greater part of them
being better Frenchmen, than I pretend to be, such as have read the Original,
could never wish to see it blemished by so unskilful a hand: neither was I
prompted to it by any design of advantage, that consideration being ever very
much below my thoughts; nor to oblige the world, that being as much above my
expectation: but having an incurable humor of scribbling upon me, I believed I
could not choose a braver Subject for my Friends diversion, and my own
Entertainment than this, wherein I thought at least I discovered as much
Variety of Revolution, and accident as is any where in no larger a Volume to be
found; besides something of utility, here being a general account of the most
important Transactions of Europe for above threescore years together, and in
one continued series of Discourse, which are otherwise only to be picked up out
of several Authors, and most of them ^mitted in all: but that which gave me the
greatest invitation (besides the Character of Honor that continues throughout
the whole thread of his Life) was the great example of uncorrupted Loyalty the
Duke of Espernon ever retained in all his Exigencies, and Disgraces; a Virtue
which though none of the Nobility of this Kingdom (for whom this is chiefly
designed) need to be informed in, it is nevertheless a glorious Record, and
ought to be in History, that succeeding times may see after what manner a good
Subject (^ow powerful soever) ought to behave himself, how; or how unkindly
soever his Prince shall please to dispose of his Person, and Fortune. This
consideration it was, that after a first, and second reading of this brave life
(though every year of it contains variety enough to furnish out a History)
which I must confess to have been the greatest temptation that decoyed me into
this undertaking, especially when I reflected upon the times we our selves have
too lately seen, when Loyalty was not very much in fashion, or not to be owned
without manifest ruin. And although I know very well we have Examples enough of
Virtue, Bravery, Wisdom, Fidelity, and Honor in persons of our own Nation, as
well Kings as Subjects, Princes of the Blood, Generals, Ecclesiastics, and
Statesmen, both of Former, and the present Age, and the meanest of those Lives
sufficient to create as beautiful a Story; yet of those the Dead are many of
them already recorded beyond my imitation, and to Write in Praise of the Living
(besides the danger of standing suspected, either of Flattery, or Design) were
to offend the modesty natural to all generous minds.

In the next place, I am to acquaint my Reader, that the Author of this History
Monsieur Girard was Secretary to the Duke of Espernon, and a very extraordinary
person in himself, as you will find in the Texture, Disposition, and Elegancy
of the whole, in despite of my ill handling; by which advantages he must
doubtless be able to give the best, and truest account of any w^^ever, both of
his Masters private Affairs, and the general Transactions of that time, he
being (especially in the Duke's later Years) continually employed by him, and
the Duke himself being so eternally upon the Scene of Action, that we shall
seldom find him retired, and alone in the whole course of his Life. And
although his dependence upon this great person may render his testimony
suspected to some, he is however so generally allowed by the most Intelligent,
and such as are best read in the Affairs of that Kingdom, for a faithful
Historian, that the truth of the Story ought to Balance any other defect of the
work.

Lastly, in the behalf of my Bookseller Mr. Brom (to whose Kindness I owe
more, than I can pay him by this Impression) I am to say, that although I dare
not answer how far this History may suffer by my Oversights, or Mistakes, or by
the Faults escaped the Press, which (I know not by what accident) are very
many, and some of them very considerable; yet I dare pronounce it one of the
best things I have seen in that Language, I do not mean for the Excellency, or
Harmony of the Style, which in the Original it self, though the words there be
very Significant, Elegant, and admirably well chosen, is notwithstanding none
of the smoothest I have read: but for the importance of the Subject, wherein
you will find much of the Policy of that time, not only of France it self, but
moreover of the Courts of England, Rome, Spain, Savoy, Germany, Sweeden, and
the States of the United Provinces, together with a Narrative of all the most
celebrated Battles, Skirmishes, Rencounters, Combats, Sieges, Assaults, and
Stratagems for above threescore years together, with the Descriptions of the
Strengths, Situations, and distances of Cities, Towns, Castles, Cittadels,
Forts, Rivers, Countries, Seigneuries, Jurisdictions, and Provinces, and all
this collected, and delivered by a Judicious, and Impartial Hand, an
ex^raordinary effect of a French Pen, that Nation (especially in Records that
immediately concern their own Honor) having been commonly observed to be very
civil to themselves: So that methinks the Dignity of the Subject, and the
Ingenuity of the Author considered, a work how unhappily soever performed by
me, undertaken nevertheless merely for the common benefit, and delight, ought
not to be discountenanced, nor very ill received.

Yet do I not (though in the foregoing Paragraph, I have discovered something
of the Charlatan in the behalf of my Bookseller) hereby intend to beg any
favor for my self, or by these large promises to bribe my Reader into milder
Censures; neither do I think it fit to provoke him by a defiance; for that were
to be an ill Man, as well as an ill Writer. I therefore franckly, and without
condition expose my self to every man's Judgment, of which such as appear civil
to me are my Friends, and I shall owe them the same respect, when it shall be
my turn to Judge, as it is now to be censured: Those who will not be so, I shall
threaten no further, than to put them in mind, that if ever they attempt any
thing of the same nature, they will then lie under the same disadvantage I now
do, and consequently may meet with the same Injustice.

THE AUTHORS APOLOGY.
I Doubt not but many, who in the Front of this Book shall meet with no more
than the bare title of the Life of the Duke of Esperson, will be very much
surpised; and consequently I expect to be by them condemned for having
burdened the Press with so large a Volume upon no other account, than the mere
Narrative of one particular Life: but if such shall consider that this Life
continued for almost an Age, and that it was continually taken up in the
greatest and most remarkable Transactions of all that time, that consideration
will doubtless conquer their astonishment, and it may then perhaps fall out,
that instead of the Imputation I have so much apprehended, they will allow me
some Excuse, if not some Commendation, in that I have not been sparing of a few
words, to the end so many brave and glorious Actions might be the better, and
more truly known.

In treating of a Person so highly concerned as the Duke of Espernon was in the
general Affairs of the Kingdom, I have been constrained to tip up a great many
passages already upon Record, and so ancient, as near an hundred years ago; by
which means my work will in many places be stripped of that grace of Novelty,
which of it self would have been a considerable Ornament to it: but having
observed withal that many of the things already published, have not been
delivered with that laudable candor, and indifferency (the principal Virtue of
Historians) that the most exact have omitted many circumstances (which are
oft-times preferable to the main scope of the thing it self) and that several
Exploits, the Honor where of was absolutely, and indisputably due to him,
whose History I have undertaken, have been either disguised, or unjustly,
attributed to others who had no share in the execution, I conceived that by the
reverence to truth I stood obliged to clear those mistakes, and in several
passages to vindicate the Duke's honest intentions, against such at were
evidently passionate against his person, and emulous of his Honor.

These indeed were the principal inducements that have sometimes tempted me out
of the precise limits of the Duke of Espernon's Life, and that have administered
occasion to stretch some of his Actions beyond their natural extent, and beyond
what directly touched his own person; not that I needed notwithstanding to seek
matter out of the way of my design; for where could I possibly have chosen out
a more ample or a more illustrious Subject? there is hardly any so notable
event, or so high performance within the prospect of History, or in the
vicissitude of worldly revolution, of which glorious, and extraordinary
Examples are not here to be found Could any thing be imagined more active, or
more vigorous in his prosperity, or more constant, and even in all the
disgraces that befell him, than this great man was? Since then upon these two
principles, Valor and Fortitude, all life depends, and that from the manner of
a man's Behavior in Prosperities, and his manly supporting the Adversities of
Fortune, are extracted all the precepts for the conduct of Humane Life, what
utility may we not propose to our selves, from the great examples both of the
one, and the other, which are every where to be met with in the current of this
History?

It is not nevertheless, that we may not perhaps sometimes observe some flying
Clouds in this Serene Firmament of Virtue, that constancy so much celebrated
for the most eminent quality in him, of whose Actions I have undertaken to give
an account, having not always been acquitted from censure. He has been
sometimes accused of too severe, and too obstinate a humor, in that he would
never give place to time, nor accommodate himself to the necessity of Affairs;
and that he would never yield, not even then when he saw he could not contend,
but to his own manifest Ruin. I cannot deny, but that in this particular there
was something to have been wished, if men would have the Virtue of the Great
confined within the narrow bounds of common Prudence: but were it not in the
mean time to offer violence to those great Souls, elevated so much above the
ordinary condition of men, to subject their actions to the Rules of others? It
is very true that this Duke could never temporize in the least, nor ever gave
way to any thing that justled his Humor; that on the contrary he has often
pusht things on to the last extremes, and that from very trivial and light
beginnings he has pulled upon himself many, and great Disgraces: but if in this
particular any thing may be found wherewith to reproach his Conduct, what
Praises are not due to his Courage, that could never bend, nor bow under the
highest Persecutions? Something essential would have been wanting in his Life,
had he been always happy; and he contributed no little to his glory, in
sometimes promoting his own Misfortunes, they having made a discovery of
Qualities in him, which in a continual prosperity would have been totally
buried, and concealed.

So brave an Argument does, I must confess, deserve a far better Pen than mine
to do it right, and I am sufficiently conscious of my own imperfection, to
think my self infinitely below the dignity of my Subject; neither was it any
vain design of publishing my own Name, that prompted me to this attempt; and
had I had no greater a reverence to the Reputation of another, than any respect
to my own, I had never embarked in this design. I very well understand to what
a man exposes himself who submits to a public Judgment; but I have considered
withal, that it were a very great weakness to decline an honorable Undertaking
for fear of a little Censure. I do herein discharge a Debt, and I do it with
the best I have. I owe all things to him whose Life I have here Written, he
brought me up from my younger years by his bounty, nourished me by his Favor,
in the height of his Disgraces honored me with his confidence, and trust; he
moreover gratified me with several, and those signal Benefits: Is it not just
then, that at least I should manifest my gratitude by a few words?

Yet although I stand prepossessed by so many Obligations, I am nevertheless
more certain that no one shall find me out of that Consideration, corrupted in
my Benefactors Favor; who having undertaken to give a true and sincere account
of things, I shall by no means impose upon the public belief: Neither do I
indeed design his Elegy herein, but merely to give an exact Narrative of his
Actions, wherein the native truth shall be the only part of History he shall
receive from my Endeavor; all the rest shall be wanting, and I have had no
little ado to persuade my self to give my Book so eminent a Title, knowing what
Respect is due to that great Name, and to such, as in their better Writings
have given him his just Character of Honor.

I have not throughout my whole Work spoken to the disadvantage of any one
person, either out of Animosity or Design; and if m^ Passions went hand in hand
with the Interests of my Master in the time of his Life, they also went out
with his, when extinguished by the hand of Death. I do not nevertheless pretend
to have been so dextrous, as to have satisfied all those of whom I have been
obliged to speak in the order of the following Treatise, some Historical Truths
having perhaps slipped in, which may not be very acceptable to such, as would
have all things granted to them, and will not allow to others the liberty of a
bare recital: but I did not conceive my self obliged to submit to that
magisterial Law, and therefore have reserved the liberty (not extending to
injury) an honest man ought to be jealous of, that he may keep himself from
being a slave to other men's humors by a mean complacency.

I could some years ago have delivered this work to the Light, and had then
done it, had not the disorders of the time put all things into so great
confusion, that it was long before I could gather my Mesmoires, which were
dispersed into several hands, together again. Now at last by the command of
those who have most Authority with me, and at the instance of my Friends, I
here present them to your view. I wish they may give satisfaction both to the
one, and the other, and I could be content that satisfaction might proceed
further, and extend to the generality of men: but being I cannot reasonably
expect that good Fortune upon any other account, than merely as an act of
Favor, I shall make no difficulty to beg that grace of all such as shall have
the Curiosiry, or the Patience to read these followng Volumes.

The Reader is desired to look over the Errata, and to correct them with his
Pen, before he begin to read the Book.
ERRATA.
PAge 2. Line 3. r. la Valette, p. 3. l. 4. r. Alarmes, p. 3. l. 25. r. Arms,
p. 5. l. 3. r. Bellegarde, l. 15. r. Luxembourg, p. 11. l. 1. and 3. r. Rufes
l. 7. r. Rufec's, p. 12. l. 7. r. the merits of, p. 14. l. 16. ^. be went then
to this Siege, p. 16. l. 14. ^. R^nfard, p. 19. l. 7. r. Aul^is, p. 22. l. 18.
r. for that time, l. 38. r. to mate the League, p. 25. l. 29. r. with a
medes^y, p. 28. l* 37. r. (...), p. 30. l. 5. and l. 37. r. Chiverny, p. 33. l.
1. r. Requelaure, l. 18. r. concurring, p. 36. l. 26. r. it is not hard to
judge, p. 37. l. 31. r. with a more absolute, p. 42. l. 1. r. festering, p. 48.
l. 38. r. easily to succeed, p. 59. l. 40. r. Count de Candalle, p. 62. l. 1.
dele and, p. 63. l. 12. r. all things being, p. 64. l. 13. r. their own
Conf^^es, p. 70. l. 1. r. after this there, p. 80. l. 19. r. Lothes, p. 84. l.
23. r. contented, p. 92. l. 21. 1. (as he had, d. 93. l. 26. r. Seguenic^, p.
94. l. 17. r. of chiefest note, p. 108. l. 13. r. lost, p. 119. l. 1. r. than a
delay, p. 125. l. 20. r. Marth^nie, p. 134. l. 20. r. Humieres, p. 13^. l. 29.
r, Campaign, p. 142. l. 3. r. ^elloc, l. 21. r. v^st Levies, l. 3. ^. r. Frans^
is Redont, p. 145, l. 35. r. T^ulon l. 42. r. seduced p. 158 l. 39. r. and a,
p. 159. l. 6. 1. and those very adva^tage^us matches, p. 170. l. 12. r. into
Languedoc, l. 15. r* Pr^ve^sal. and so throughout the whole Impr^ssion, l. 35.
^. V^entadour, p. 173. l. 19. r. seduced, p. 175. l. 32. r. inveterat^, and
^^^^concilable hatred, p. 183. l. 42. r. since the taking, p. 184. l. 3. r.
60000. Crowns, p. 185. l. 20. r. favors, p. 186. l. 12. r. ^mus'd, p. 189 l.
20. r. with his reputation, p. 191. l. ^. r. as has been said, p. 198 l. 2. r.
instead of that Pr^vence, l. 5. r. Commission then, the Duke departed, p. 202,
l. 13. r. would often break out, p. 206. l. (...) r. would be de, p. 211. l. 8.
r. inveterate Iealous^e, p. ^12. l. 25. r. proceeding to, p. 213. l. 28. r. by
the return, p. 215. l. 15. r. of the Accommodati^^, p. 217. l. 5. dele his, p.
218. l. 39. r. and wherein if the, p. 221. l. 19. r. staid to expect him, p.
227. l. 11. the comma tobe placed after notwithstanding, p. 227. l. 20. r. and
still kep^, l. 28. r. in the Dukes; p. 229 l. 8. r. to the first, l. 31. r.
begi^ to grow, p. 231. l. 2. r. further instructed, p. 232. l. 24. r. compel
the King, p. 235. l. 29. r. of whom after having got* l. 34 r. Treasury, p.
238. l. 2. r. en^w, p. 243. l. 6. r. inveterate, p. 245. l. 15. r. intercepted,
p. 246. l. 21. r. and power, p. 249. l. 4. and 5. r. to mould them into the new
form, l. 13. r. restore to the Republics, p. 256. l. 7. r. judging. p. 257. l.
2. ^. Dr^uet, p. 267. l. 10, r. was preparing, p. 268. l. 6. r. to be cu^b'd,
g. 269. l. 15. r. ^er Regency, p. 270. l. 18. r. to repr^ach him, p. 274. l. 6.
r. able to mate, p. 227. l. 17. and ^4. r. Aulnis, p. 258. l. 19. r. nor any
intelligence, p. 29^. l. 12. dele how, p. 293. l. 36. r. Sisters falling sick,
p. 295. l. 16. r. convoyed, p. 297 l. ul^. r. opposer, p. 29^. l. 2. r
Ch^stelseraut and l. 13. a comma after the duke, p. 303, l. 34. r.
Counter-Scarpe, p. 304. l. 8, r. easily, p. 315. l. 28, r. determine of him, p.
319. l. 17. ^. Court, 326. l. 13. r. by the effect of, p. 339. l. 14. r.
Arnaut, p. 343. l. 21. r, his Voyage, p. 345. l. 29. ^. Mont^^chard, p. 356, l.
26. r. Saluisse, l. 38. r. not to be imagined, p. 364. l. 37. r. to recommend
him. p. 365. l. 33. r. his Kingdom, p 369. l. (...). r. this first Essay, l,
16. r, Governments, p. 374 l. 19. r. and with a submission, l. 20. r. to give
up their Arms, p. 386. l. 23. r. in his desire, p. 400. l. 7. r. upon The
Drawbridge, p. 401. l, 17. dele and. p. 40^. l. 42. r. Tho^^eins, p. 403. l.
25. r. Aulnis, p, 407. l. 33. r. his hands. p. 411. l. 5 r. companious, p. 414.
l. 27. dele and, p. 430. l, 16. r. so many important, p. 431. l. 26. r.
Sevebbes, p 434. l. 9. r. Vair^n, l. 36. r. Malagu^t l. 38. r. le ^ec d' Ambez,
p. 441. l, 31. r. the thirst, p. 450. l. ^. r. Olonne. p. 458. l. 11. r,
lasting repose. p. 459. l, 21. r. co^cur^ents. p 461 l. 31. r. ^e obtained it,,
p. 464. l. 26. r. at this time, p. 467. l. 35. r. could be, p. 469 l. 37. dele
the, p, 485. l. 40 1. Milla^t, p. 494. l. 8. r. being a woman, p. 495. l. 37.
r. been determined, p. 506. l. 10. r. inclined to the other, p. 507. l. 6. 1.
R^ffec, p. 516. l. 37. r, any extraordinary Assembly, p. 525. l. 39. r. be ever
committed, p. 526. l. 27. r. Cospian, p. 529. l. 34. r. would not deny, p. 532.
l. 7. r. had his instructions, p. 534. l. 13. and p. 538. l. 33. r. d'
Aguesseau, p. 536. l. 19. r. this house, p. 541. l. 30. r. companions, p. 545.
l. 17. r. started p. 554. l. 24. r. ^eimar, p. 555. l. 42. dele this, p. 556.
l. 29. r. granted to those who had, etc. l. ult. r. and, was not, p. 562. l.
35. r. he fortunately effected, p. 564. l. 31. dele on, before condition, p.
566. l. 9. r, this couticus, p. 569. l. 9. r. might be distedg'd, p. 570. l.
28. r. examples enough, p. 572. l. 14. r. that the Cardinal, p. 573. l. 15. r.
Kings, 31. r. did him, p. 575. l. 32. r. by how much it had been p. 578. l,
ult. r. Poyanne, p. 538. l. 27. r. Maub^uge. p, 592. l. 6. r. These desays, p.
601. l. penult, r. indisposition, p. 61^. l, 30. r. he had occastonality only,
p. 616. l. ^8. r. seen, p. 62^. l. ult. r. and to go away, p. 625. l. 18. r.
the trial of this p, 626. l. 19. r. to chance the Garrison, p. 628. l. 26, r.
the Baron of Anton, p. 636. l. antepenult. r. ought not to be suspected, p.
637. l. ^4. r. but proceedid. p. 641. l. 1. r. the Authors of this calumay, p.
642, l. 21. r. Seniqoux, p. 644, l. 11. r, escaped his pen, p 646. l. 8. r.
Metivi, p. 647. l. 10. r. what was to be so done, well, etc. l. 2. r. but of
God.

The TABLE.
A.
ABdy'd Uzerche in Limousin taken by Count Schomberg page 356 Accident by Lig
htning 597 Again Revolts 547 The Sedition there appeased by President du Bernet
548 Aglimant taken by Assault by the Duke de Candalle 280 Aix blocked up by the
Duke of Espernon, by Forts 151 The main Fort delivered up to Lafin, 169
Surpised from him by Monsieur I'Esdiguieres, 171 Demolished 172 Alanson D.
retires from Court 10 Aletz surrendered 462 Ambergris found upon the Coast of
Medoc in France 236 Amiens surpised by the Spaniard, 198 Again besieged by
Marshall Byron, 199 Surrendered to the King 200 Antibe taken by Assault by the
Duke of Espernon 148 Archbishop of Tholouze youngest Son to the Duke of
Espernon, promoted to the Dignity of Cardinal 379 Archduke of Austria enters
upon the Government of Flanders 192 Ardres surrendered to the Archduke 196
Arles surrendered to the Duke ^f Espernon 147 Arquien Governor of the Citadel
of Metz 265, 266 Arras Petar'd by Marshall Byron but in vain 201 Assassinate
attempted upon the person of Monsieur de la Valette, Father to the Duke of
Espernon 5 Assembly of the States at Roan 197 D'Autry Intendant de la Justice
390
B.
BAron de St. Surin, Governor of Royan 399 Barricades of Bordeaux 543
Barricades of Paris 72 Baussonniere Nephew to le Plessis Baussonniere in danger
about the Queen Mothers Escape 339 Bathes of Bannieres 487 Battle of Coutras 65
Battle of Dreux 7 Bayonne Preserved by the Duke of Espernon 566 Beaujeu slain
before Chartres 135 Bedossan slain 194 Bellegarde D. a Favorite 29 Bethune
Count sent to Treat with the Q. Mother 354 Bergerac surrendered to the Duke de
la Valette 580 Bezaudan slain in cold Blood 168 Byron's Conspiracy, 216 He is
sent Ambassador into England, 217 His Death 226 Birth of Henry de Foix the D.
of Espernon 's eldest Son, and of Bernard de Foix, and de la Valette his second
Son 129 Birth of Lewis Cardinal de la Valette the Duke of Espernon 's youngest
Son 130 Birth of the Dolphin, now King of France, 595 Blumet slain before
Chartres 135 Bourg relieved by the Duke of Espernon 129 La Boissiere slain at
Aglimant 280 Bravery of a Cooper 545 Breach betwixt the Duke of Espernon, and
Rucellay 359 Briet 's Coach-Horses killed by the Duke of Espernon 's Order 500
De la Broue an excellent Rider 275 Buckingham D. 447 Bustle betwixt Arquien,
and Tilladet, in the Citadel of Metz 267 Bustle betwixt the Duke of Espernon,
and Du Vair Guard des Sceaux 310 Le Buysson a Counselor in the Parliament of
Paris 334 Bishop of Luson afterward Cardinal de Richelieu comes to the Queen
Mother to Angoulesme 3^0 Bishop of Paris Monsieur de Ret^ created Cardinal 309
C.
CAdillac founded by the Duke of Espernon 210 Caen delivered up to the King 372
Cahors surprised by the King of Navarre 22 Callis besieged, 193 Taken by
Assault 195 Calonges Governor of Montpellier his Character 410 Cambray
besieged by the Conde de Fuentes 176 Cambresis taken by the Duke de Candalle,
and the Cardinal de la Valette 583 Campagnol carries Relief into Callis beyond
expectation, 194 His brave behavior there 195 Cannes surrendered to the Duke
of Espernon 149 La Capelle, le Catelet, and Corbie taken by the Spaniards 561
Captains fourteen hanged at Montauron, by the Duke of Espernon 145 Cardinal
Richelieu in disgrace, 480 Restored to favor, 482 He revenges himself upon his
Enemies 484 Cardinal de la Valette made Governor of Anjou, 488 His Death 604
Cardinal Richelieu made prime Minister of State, 428 His ambitious designs, 501
His first distaste against the Duke of Espernon, 503 Another, 504 He declares
himself opposite to the Duke of Espernon 429 Cardinal Richelieu comes to
Montauban, 464 He is there visited by the Duke of Espernon, 465 His expedition
into Italy 472 Cardinal de Medicis sent Legate into France 197 Cardinal
Aldobrandino sent Legate into France 208 Carricks of Portugal Shipwrack'd upon
the Coast of Medoc ^n Guienne 441, 442 Casal besieged by the King of Spain, and
the Duke of Savoy, 460 The Seige raised 461 Caumont enters into Arms, and
rescues his Pather in a Skirmish near Mauvasin, 6 Goes to the Siege of
Rochelle, and thence to Court, 7, 8 He puts himself into the King of Navarre 's
dependence, and accomp^nies him in his Escape from St. Germans, 9 He
withdraws himself from the King of Navarre 's Service 10 Caumonts second
Journey to Court, where he is very well received by the King, and the Queen
Mother, 10, 11 He receives the first bounty from the King, 13 He follows the
Duke of Alanson in the War, 14 He is sent Ambassador into Savoy 17 Caumont
Camp-Master to the Regiment of Champag^e at the Siege of la Fere 23 Caumont 's
first Suit to the King in the behalf of his elder Brother, and his high Favor
24 Caumont offers to fight the Duke of Guise, but is not permitted by the King
24, 25 Caumont advanced to the Dignity of Duke and Peer of France 26 Challenge
from the Duke of Espernon to the Marshall d' Ornano, 213 The Quarrel taken up
by the King 214 Challenge from the Duke of Guise to the Duke of Espernon 244
Challenge carried by Marsillac from Balagny to the Duke of Eguillon 283
Challenge from the Prince of Joinville to the Duke of Espernon 244 Chartres
surrendered to the King 114, 135 Chasteau-Neuf Guard des Sceaux in disgrace 507
Chastillon slain before Chartres 135 Church Lands in Bearn restored 306 Cicutat
taken by the Duke of Espernon 150 Cinque-Mars Grand Escuyer of France 634
Cisteron taken by the Duke of Espernon, 150 Citadel of Xaintes demolished 362
Civil War breaks out 431 Commotion of the Princes of the Blood to hinder the
Match with Spain 291 Comparison betwixt the Duke of Espernon and ^'Esdiguieres
405 Conspiracy of Angoulesme, 87 and sequentibus Conspiracy against the Queen
Mother at Angoulesme 363 Conspiracy against the Duke of Espernon 180, 181
Council of sixteen, and their practices 68, 69 Count de Brenne 344 Count de
Candalle slain at the storming of Sommieres 60 Count de Bethune sent to treat
with the Queen Mother 354 Count de Moret slain 496 Count de Soissons retires
from Court 572 Count de Soissons furiously exasperated against the Duke of
Espernon 273 Crequi made Camp-Master to the Regiment of Guards 228 La Croix
sent by the Duke de Luines to the Duke of Espernon 369
D.
DEath of the Cardinal of Guise 106 Death of the Duchess of Espernon 158 Death
of Pere Ange de Joyeuse 248 Death of the Duke of Cleves 250 Death of the Duke
de Luines 395 Death of the Count de Soisso^s slain at the Battle of Sedan 628
Death of the Duchess de la Valette 444 Death of the Duchess of Orleans 445
Defagues Massacred at Bordeaux 538 Description of the City of Metz 39
Difference betwixt the Duke of Espernon, and the Parliament of Paris 207, and
sequentibus. Difference betwixt the Duke of Espernon, and Villeroy Secretary of
State 42, 52 Difference betwixt Pope Paul the Fifth, and the Republic of
Venice composed by the King of France 246 Difference betwixt the Duke of
Espernon and the Archbishop of Bordeaux 507 Disorders of the Kingdom 284
Dispute betwixt the Duke of Espernon, and the Marshall d' Ornano, 210, 211
Another 238 Dispute betwixt the Dukes of Espernon, and Guise 243 Dispute
betwixt the Prince of Joinville and the Duke of Espernon 244 Dispute betwixt
the Duke of Espernon and the Baron de la Chastagneraye 274 Dispute betwixt the
Duke of Espernon and Cardinal Richelieu about the Portugal Carricks 446
Disputes betwixt the Duke of Espernon, and the Parliament of Bordeaux, 424, 429
Continued 436 Duel betwixt two Captains 170 Duel betwixt two Soldiers 286 Duke
de Candalle discontented at his Partage given him by his Father, 278 He is
Married to the Duchess of Haluin 278 His Voyage into the Levant, 280 He
misdemeans himself in Xaintonge, 294 He comes to his Father to Bordeaux, 443
444 His Death 600
E.
EDict de Crew erected 557 Edict of the Union with the League published at Roan
80 Education of the Duke of Espernon 's Children 275 English Land in the Isle
of The, 448 Are Defeated 455 Engagement betwixt the Duke of Espernon and
I'Esdiguieres 165 Enterview betwixt the King and the Queen Mother at Cousieres
366 L' Esdiguieres Created Constable of France 405 Esgarrebaques Governor of
Toulon, 172 Espernon Duke offered by the King his Majesty's Sister-in-Law in
Marriage, which he modestly refuses, 25 He is sent to Treat with the King of
Navarre, 31, By whom he is offered the Princess Katharine the King's only
Sister in Marriage 33 His dangerous fall near to Lions, 34, 35 He is offered
the Duke of Guises Daughter, since Princess of Conty in Marriage, which he
refuses, 36 He is sent with an Army into Provence, 50 His Exploits there 51
Espernon Duke Married to Margaret de Foix, and de Candalle 59 and sequ.
Espernon Duke beats up a Quarter of German Horse 63 Espernon Duke invested with
the Offices vacant by the Death of the Duke of Joyeuse, slain at the Battle of
Coutras, as also with those vacant by the Duke de Bellegarde, slain at the same
Battle, 65 He exposes himself to very great danger, 69 He retires from Court,
80 He returns to Court, and is well received, 111 He refuses to follow Henry
the Fourth, and leaves the Army, 119, 121 He is shot into the mouth at Pierre
Fonds, 134 He is sent Governor, and Captain General of all the Kings Forces
into Provence, 141, 142 His miraculous escape before Aix, 156 He is forsaken by
his Friends in Provence, 176 He is traduced by the Cardinal d' Ossat, 183 He
comes to the King to Amiens, 200 His expedition into Limousin 240 Espernon Duke
goes to the Hostel de Ville at Paris upon the Death of Henry the Fourth, 258
And to the Augustins, 259 His Harangue there, ibid. Espernon Duke
reestablished in Metz 267 Espernon Duke generously refuses to consent to the
Murder of the Duke of Sully, though his Enemy, 265 He divides his Estate
amongst his three Sons, 277 He rejects the proferr'd Alliance of the Marshall
d' Encre, 282 He falls sick at Angoulesme 295 Espernon Duke in Disgrace 297
Espernon Duke in great danger, 298 He retires from Court, 299 He presents
himself before Rochelle 303 Espernon Duke's preparation in order to the Queen
Mothers escape from Blois, 332 His Magnificence, 364 His Letter to the King 365
Espernon Duke, his Expedition into Bearne, 380 His successes there, 383 His
Generosity 384 Espernon Duke his Expedition against Rochelle, 389 His Actions
there 392 Espernon Duke goes to lay Siege to Royan 398 Espernon Duke created
Governor of Guienne, 403 He takes possession of his Government, 420 He falls
sick, 456 He entertains the Queen at Cadillac 503 Espernon Duke stops the
Progress of Rebellion in Guienne, 486 And thereupon is confi^'d to his House
Plassac, 528 He is Excommunicated, 505 Absolved, 532 He falls sick 536 Espernon
Duke goes against the Mutineers of Bordeaux, 541 And suppresses them 550
Espernon Duke aspersed, ibid. He receives some reparation, 553 He again falls
sick, 555 And again at Bayonne 563 Espernon Duke in the greatest Disgrace, 598
He is deposed from his Government, and cal^mniated, 599 Whereupon he again
falls sick, 600 And again at Plassac 618 Espernon Duke commanded to retire to
Loches, and upon what occasion, 619 and sequ. His arrival there 631 Espernon
Duke falls mortally sick, 644 His good disposition to dye, 646 His Death 650
Estampes taken by Assault 114 D'Estampes barbarously slain 168
F.
FAmine in Guienne 480 Father Arnoux a Jesuit 320 Favier sent to Metz as a spy
upon the Duke of Espernon 314 Faure a common Soldier receives a Cannonshot in
the Belly, of which he miraculously escapes 402 La Fere surpised by the Prince
of Conde, 22 Surrendered to the King 169 Fewd betwixt the Princes of the Blood,
and the Duke of Espernon, 273 Wherein the Queen Regent is favorable to the
Duke 274 Fontarabie besieged by the Prince of Conde, 563 The Prince defeated
there 596 Fontrailles 634 Fort of Aix demolished 172 Fort at Arras taken by
Assault by the Duke of Espernon 201 Frejus taken by the Duke of Espernon 150
G.
Guard des Sceaux du Vair 310 Gergeau taken by the King 114 De Gourgues first
President of the Parliament of Bordeaux, 418 His Letter to the Duke of
Espernon, 419 Which begets an open Rupture betwixt them, 423 His Death and
Character 459 Grillon 189, 190 Guines surrendered to the Archduke of Austria
196 Guise Duke retires from Court, and breaks into Rebellion, 29 He approaches
with his Army to Paris, 42 Comes to Court, 81 His Death 106 Guise Duke, Son to
the late Duke of Guise, created Governor of Provence, 174 He goes into
Provence with an Army against the Duke of Espernon 175
H.
HAM surrendered to the Archduke of Austria 196 Harangue of the Duke of
Espernon in the Hostel de Ville of Paris 259 Henry the third Proclaims War with
the Hugonots, 49 He forbids the Duke of Guise from coming to Paris, 70 Who
notwithstanding comes, 71 He resolves to put the Duke of Guise to Death 105
Henry the Third retires to Chartres 72 Henry the Third together with the King
of Navarre escape narrowly of being both taken at Tours 110 Henry the Third
sl^in at St. Clou 116, 117 Henry the ^ourth turns Roman Catholic 160 Henry the
Fourth comes to the Leaguer before Amiens 200 Henry the Fourths Expedition to
Sedan 245 Henry the Fourth raises a mighty Army 250 Henry the Fourths Speech to
the Queen in the Duke of Espernon 's Favor 251 Henry the Fourth slain by
Ravillac 253
I.
JAne Albret Queen of Navarre denied entrance into Lietoure by Monsieur de la
Valette 3, 4 La Iliere Governor of Loches 341 Joyeuse rises in favor, 15 He
is shot in the Face at the Siege of la Fere, 23 Advanced to the Dignity of
Duke, and Peer of France, 26 He is slain at the Battle of Coutras 65 Isle of
Maran surpised by the Duke of Espernon 394
K.
KAtharine of Bourbon only Sister to Henry the Fourth, Married to the Duke of
Bar 203 King of Navarre advances to the relief of the D. of Espernon at
Angoulesme 100 King of Sweeden wins the Battle of Lipsick 490 King of Navarre
makes his escape from St. Germans, 9 He joins Forces with Henry the Third of
France, 110 His First aversion to the Duke of Espernon augmented at the Siege
of Estampes 114, 115
L.
LAfin's Character 206 Laon Besieged 230 League take up Arms, 38 Their
Exploits, 41 They publish a Manifesto against the Duke of Espernon, and his
Brother, 75 Lendrecis taken by the Duke de Candalle 583 Letter from the Queen
Mother to the Duke of Espernon, 323 Another, 329 Another, 330 Another 352
Letter from the King to the Q Mother ibid. Letter from the King to the Duke of
Espernon 521 Letter from the Queen to the Duke of Espernon, and from the
Cardinal, 608 Answer to the Cardinal 's 609 Letter from Lewis the Thirteenth to
the Queen Mother after her escape from Blois 354 Letter from Lewis the
Thirteenth to the Duke of Espernon, 622 The Answer 623 Lewis the Thirteenth
resolves to arrest the Duke of Espernon 311 Lewis the Thirteenth his Expedition
into Italy, 461 He falls sick at Lions, 478 Recovers 480 Limoges Rescued by the
Duke of Espernon out of the hands of the League 125 Lorme 's Treachery 334, and
sequ. Lorrain Duke makes War upon France 471 Luines the great Favorite, 308
His Quarrel to the Duke of Espernon, 310 His design to (...) him, 311 Prevented
by the Duke's retiring 312
M.
MAdaillan calumniates the Duke of Espernon 635 Madam the Kings Sister falls
sick of the Small Pox at Poictiers 292 Marcelles attempted by the Duke of Esper
non, but in vain 153 Marshall Byron sent Ambassador into England, 217 And
into Switzerland, 218 Marshall Byron arrives at Fountain Bleau, 222 He is
beheaded 223 Marshall d' Encre takes Arms against the Prince of Conde, and his
Faction, 300 His Death 307 Marshall de Themines his difference with the Duke
of Espernon, 421 They are reconciled 423 Marquis de la Valette Marries
Mademoiselle de Vernevil Marquis de la Force revolts in Bearne 379 Marquis de
la Valette like to be slain by a Mine 401 Marsillac slain at the Siege of
Privas 284 Mascaron slain before Chartres 135 Match with the Infanta of Spain
concluded, 282 Matelet defeated attempting to relieve Callis 195 Maubeuge taken
by the Duke de Candalle 583 Mauzac surrendered to the D. of Esp. 144 Mayenne
Duke goes with a great Army against the Queen Mother, 356 He is slain by a
Musket-sh^t before Montauban 395 Minieux defeated, and taken Prisoner by the
Duke of Espernon 133 Miraculous escape 182 Mirebeau taken by the Spaniard 562
Moissac surrendered to the Duke of Espernon 144 Moncassin wounded at Tours 110
Monserrat described 409 Monsieur de la Valette defeats part of the Forcin Army
at Lizere 66 Monsieur Marries the Duchess of Montpensier 439 Monsieur retires
in discontent from Court, 471 He returns, 472 He retires again from Court 572
Monsieur retires into Flanders, 484 He invades the Kingdom (...) France 492
Monsieur de la Valette Brother to the Duke of Espernon, slain at the Siege of
Roquebrune 138 Montauban relieved by the Duke of Espernon, 144 Surrendered 464
Montauron surrendered to Mercy to the D. of Espernon 145 Montereau Faut-Yonne
taken by Petarr 115 Montmelian surrendered to the King's Army 208 Montmorency D.
declares in favor of the Monsieur, 492 He is taken Prisoner, 497 He is brought
to Tholouze in order to his Trial, 498 The Duke of Espernon intercedes for him,
but in vain, 499 He is beheaded 502 Montpellier besieged, 410 Surrendered, 414
Montpensier Duke Marries Katharine de Joyeuse, 203 His Death 247 Money sent by
the Queen Mother to the Duke of Espernon, in order to her escape from the
Castle of Blois 330
N.
NEgrepolisse taken by assault 403 Nevers D. presents himself with a great Army
before Metz 358, 359 La Noue, his attempt and Character 392 Noyon surrendered to
the King 135
O.
OAth Administered to the Queen Mother 320 Obeliske erected by the Duke of
Espernon in the Church of St. Clou to the Memory of his Master Henry the third
of France 269 Obsequies of the two Kings, Henry the Third, and Fourth of France
performed at one, and the same time 269 Office of Colonel General of France
erected in Favor of the Duke of Espernon 37
P.
PAris besieged 116 Parliament of Bordeaux draw up an Information against the
Duke of Espernon 519 Peace with the Hugonots concluded 436 Peace betwixt the
King and the Queen Mother concluded at Angoulesme 358 Peace concluded with the
Prince of Conde 286 Peace between the Crowns of France and Spain concluded at
Vervins 202, 203 Peace concluded with Savoy 209 Pedro Medici wounded at the
storming of Aglimant in Caramania 280 Perigueux Revolts, but the Mutiny is
appeased by Verthamont Intendant de la Justice 548 Peyroles deserts the Duke of
Espernon 177 Philip Cospean his beginning and advancement 236, 237 Pignerol in
Savoy taken by Cardinal Richelieu 472 Fimentel an Italian Gamester comes to the
French Court 235 Piviers open its Gates to the King 114 Plessis Baussonniere
sent by the Duke of Espernon to Marshall Byron 220, 221 Plessis Baussonniere
comes to the Queen Mother to Blois, 343, 344 His Death 489 Pompeo Targone an
Italian Engineer 393 Pont de Ce assaulted, and the Pass gained 372 Pontoise
surrendered 116 Princes of the Blood discontented 272 Prince of Conde returns to
Court, and appears dissatisfied with the Duke of Espernon, 269 He is confined
269 Prince of Conde offers some propositions to the Duke of Espernon, 610 Which
are rejected by the Duke 612 Prince of Conde made Lieutenant General in
Guienne, and some other adjoining Provinces 452 Prince of Conde arrives in
Guienne 590 Privas taken by Assault 462
Q.
QVeen Anne of Austria arrives at Bordeaux 296 Queen Elizabeth of England sends
a Complement to the Duke of Espernon, by Marshall Byron 219 Queen Mother sent
to Treat an Accommodation with the Lords of the League, 47 Which is concluded
at Nemours 49 Queen Mother sent to Treat with the King of Navarre 54, 55 Queen
Mother Mary de Medici attempts to recover her Liberty, 316 She addresses her
self to the Duke of Bouillon, 317 She escapes from Blois, 349 and sequ. She is
received by the Duke of Espernon, 350 She arrives at Loches, 351 Her Letter to
the Duke of Espernon, 352 Her Letter to the King 353 Queen Mother prepares for
War, and is deserted by all the Nobility, excepting the Duke of Espernon, 354
She departs from Angoulesme to go to court 366 Queen Mother begins a second
War, 370 but with ill success, 372 Whereupon an Accommodation ensues 373 Queen
Mother professes an open hatred to Cardinal Richelieu, 471 She retires into
Flanders 484
R.
RAmefort deserts the Duke of Espernon 176 Ramee a common Soldier receives a
strange shot before Royan, of which he as strangely recovers 402 Rebellion
breaks out in several Provinces of France, 577 Quieted by the Duke de la
Valette 580 Reiters enter into France, 54 They Article, and retire 64 Three
Remarkable Stories 616, 617 Reply of the Duke of Espernon to the King 240
Retreat of Houdan made by Monsieur de la Valette father to the Duke of Espernon
3 Retreat made by the Cardinal de la Valette 554 Revol made Secretary of State
106 Revolt of Montauban 431 Rhosne a Gentleman of Champagne 192 Richelieu
Brother to the Cardinal slain by the Marquis de Themines 362 Rochefort
surpised by the Rochellers 301 Rochelle surrendered to the King 457 Rohan Duke
takes Arms 462 Royan described, 398, 399 The Suburbs taken, 400 And the Town
by assault 402 Rucellay a Florentine, 317 He arrives at Sedan 321 Rucellay
Treats with the Duke of Espernon about the Queen Mothers Escape from Blois 328
Rucellay deserts the Queen Mother, 361 His Gratitude and good Offices to the
Duke of Espernon 377 Rupture betwixt the Duke of Espernon, and Villeroy
Secretary of State, 42 Which grows wider 52, 53 Rupture betwixt the Duke of
Espernon, and the Duke de Luines 309
S.
SAlly at Aix, 152 Two others 157 St. Afric besieged by the Prince of Conde,
454 But with ill success 455 St. Afric taken, and dismantled by the Duke of
Espernon 486 St. Blancart created Admiral of France 139 St. Germains surrendered
to the Duke of Espernon 126 St. Jean'd Angeli surrendered, and preserved from
being sacked by the Duke of Espernon 388 St. Jean de Luz taken by the Spaniard
565 St. Luc's Disgrace, with the reasons of it 19, 20 St. Tropes taken by the
Duke of Espernon, 150 Retaken by Mesples 179 Savoy practices the Marshall
Byron 286 La Sauvitat taken by Assault 580 Sedition of Guienne 535 Siege of
Perigueux raised by the Duke of Espernon 107 Sentence of Excommunication
against the Duke of Espernon 515 Separation betwixt the Duke de Candalle and
the Duchess his Wife 278 Sieurs de Vaous Brothers desert the Duke of Espernon
176 Skirmish betwixt the Dukes of Espernon and Guise 179 Sobole Deputy
Governor of Metz, 230 His ingratitude, 231 He is deposed from his Government
232 Society of the Jesuits reestablish'd in Metz 233 Socoa taken by the
Spaniard 565 Soubize invades the Country of Medoc, 434 He is defeated 435 Spain
and Savoy invade the Duke of Mantua 460 Spanish Forces invade Picardy, 561 And
Guienne 562 Spanish Army defeated by the Duke de la Valette 582 Speech of the
Duke of Espernon to the King 78 Speech of the Duke of Espernon in the Council
30 Speech of the Duke of Espernon to his Officers, 153 Another 173 Speech of
the Duke of Espernon to the Queen upon the Death of Henry the Fourth of France
254 Speech of the Duke of Espernon to the Parliament of Paris 209
T.
De Thou involved in the Ruin of Cinq-Mars, Grand Escuyer of France 635
Tilting at Bordeaux 440 Toiras sent by the Duke de Luines to the Duke of
Espernon 369 Truce betwixt Spain, and the United Provinces concluded 248
V.
VAlette Duke forces le Pas de Suze, 461 He is in disgrace, 597 Flies into
England, 598 He is in his Absence sentenced to Death 602 Varennes 621 Verneque
slain in the Levant 280 Verthamont Intendant de la Justice in Guienne 473
Villandry slain at Aglimant 280 Villebois taken by the Duke of Espernon 127
Villemur relieved by the Duke of Espernon 143 Vincentio Ludovici sent from the
Queen Mother to the Duke of Espernon 322
W.
WAR with England, 447 Whereupon follows a Commotion of the Hugonot Party in
France 451 War with Savoy 471 Worthy Act of a mean Fellow 551
THE HISTORY Of the LIFE of the Duke of Espernon.
The First Book.
JOHN Lewis de Nogaret, and de la Valette Duke of Espernon, whose History I
attempt to write, though he were, in the Progress of a long Life, for the most
part the Favorite of Fortune, stood notwithstanding no less obliged to Nature
for the advantages he came into the world withal by his Noble Extraction. The
Dukes Extraction.
He was descended from an Illustrious Family in the Higher Gascony, and so
ancient, that it has continued above five hundred years from Male to Male,
without intermission; a truth I could without much difficulty prove, out of the
Records, and Evidences in my Custody, did not his Genealogy, already drawn by a
more skilful hand, render that pains unnecessary in this place. I shall
therefore only undertake a Narrative of the ^rincipal Actions of his Life,
without troubling my Reader, or my self, with a superfluous Catalogue of his
Ancestors.

The matter, of which I intend to treat, is of it self so ample, as might find
work enough for a better Pen; and although birth be acknowledged by all to be
the foundation, upon which all superstructures of Fortune do ordinarily erect
themselves, I should not nevertheless make any mention of this Dukes, had not
the merit and virtue of John de Valette his Father such a relation to the
History of his Son, as will not permit their names to be separated without
manifest injury to the one, or the other.

Finding my self then obliged to look a little back, and to say something of
his Father before I come to him, I shall tell you (with the best Historians of
that time) that he was ranked amongst the greatest Captains of this Kingdom;
and that by the mere consideration of his Prudence, and Valor, without any
advantage of Favor, he was made Camp-Master to the Light Horse of France, and
the Kings Lieutenant General in Guienne; a Province abounding in Nobility, and
Gentry, and men of such spirits, as would have made a difficulty of their
Obedience to any Superior, where there had not been an indisputable
concurrence of Merit, and Blood. But these two qualities, happily meeting in
the person of Mounsier de la Valette, gave him so great an interest, if not so
absolute a power in that Country, that notwithstanding it was during the time
of his Government unquiet and mutinous in many places, and in some even to a
contempt of the Kings Royal Power; yet his Authority, never received in those
very places the least affront, or contradiction. He commanded Armies in chief,
which were led, paid, armed, provided for, and kept together by his Conduct and
Care; and I my self have seen many Acts and Monuments of that time which
sufficiently discover the Power and Dignity he preserved entire, even in the
most difficult functions of his charge.

It was he, who in the Battles of Dreux, of Iarnac, and of Moncountour, who in
the Ski^mishes of Iasennes, of Rene le Duc, and in all the most signal actions
of his time, exercising the Office of Comp-Master to the Light Horse, by his
courage and conduct won to himself a principal share of the Honor due to the
successes of the Royal Arms; and chiefly in the Battle of Iarnac, which he
undertook with so much prudence, and fought it with so much bravery, that D'
Avila.
they who write the Transactions of that time, attribute supereminently to him
the reputation of that days Victory.

It was he that made the brave Retreat of Houdan, one of the most memorable
Exploits of that Age, which, though it be recorded by other Writers, deserves
to be recited here; and the circumstances, which I have several times heard
repeated to the Duke his Son, will not render a relation suspected that stands
justified by our own Mr. De Tho^ D' A^bign^.
Historians.

The Hugonot Army had laid siege to the City of Chartres, and that of the King
was disposed to relieve it; but that being a work of greater preparation, and
leisure, than the condition of the besieged could well admit, the Royal Party
conceived, that to disturb the Enemies Camp with frequent Alarums would give
the defendants some convenient respite, till a sufficient succor might be made
ready to come. Mounsieur de la Valette was he that would take upon him to
execute this design, Remarkable exploits of John de la Valette the D^^e's
Father.
and accordingly keeping himself for the most part on Horseback, he gave so
good an account of what he had undertaken, that few days past wherein he
obtained not some signal advantage over the Enemy: Now beating up one quarter,
now alarming another, with such an active and unwearied diligence, as put the
Enemy to an unintermitted duty, and forced them continually to stand to their
Arms.

The Admiral Coligny, who commanded at this Leaguer under the Prince of Conde,
nettled at the inconveniences his Army suffered by these frequent inroads of
Mounsieur de la Valette, meditatated with himself a revenge, and to lay a Trap
to catch him: to which purpose he stole privately from his Camp with 3500
Horse; Mounsieur de la Valette having but 500 in all, lay baiting his Horses in
a Wood for the execution of his enterprise. The Admiral, who had observed his
motion, surpised him in this posture, set upon him, and charged him, almost
before perceived: notwithstanding all which, he found a brave resistance, and
Mounsieur de la Valette without being astonished, neither at the presence of so
great a Captain, or the inequality of their Armies, having given his Soldiers
time to mount, charged him several times with advantage, and made good his
Retreat for six Leagues together in the open Country of Beausse, the Admiral
never being able, during the retreat, either to break his order, or force him
to a general engagement: an action of so high a repute, that there are few
Historians who have not set a particular mark upon it for one of the most
memorable of that time.

If we yet pass from his public actions of Command, to enquire into the
private engagements of his single person, I can perhaps fit you with as
remarkable a story of that kind as you have read. Jane Albret Queen of Navarre,
a great Fautress to those of the Reformed Religion, of which she her self also
made public Profession, desirous to draw all places within her demean into the
same persuasion, presented her self before Leitoure to be there received. A
Town of so advantageous a situation, and therefore so considerable in Guienne,
that the successive Governors of that Province have ever had a particular
regard to the preservation of that place, Mounsieur de la Valette who had
received private Instructions from King Charles the Ninth, to have an eye to
the actions of this Princess, and to frustrate her designs; but with all
outward show of respect (the King being unwilling to break openly with her)
having intelligence, that she meant to attempt that place, prevented her by his
diligence, and at her coming refused her entrance into that Town. The Queen
highly incensed at this affront, makes her complaint to the King, who, to
satisfy her, seemed in public to condemn an action, which in his heart he
highly approved, commanding him to go as far as Pau, where the Queen then
resided, and there by all the submissive means imaginable to make his excuse.
Mounsieur de la Valette having received this command, attended only by one Page
very well mounted, and another inferior servant, takes his journey to the
Queen; to whom he humbly offered all the excuses, and submissions, that the
dignity of the offended party could reasonably exact from a meaner offender,
and for a higher of^ence: But this Princess, of a sex and condition not apt to
forget an Injury, was by no means satisfied with whatever he could say to
appease her; and whether it were, that she discovered to two Gentlemen of her
Court, whereof one was called Pinsons, and the other Bisquerre, that nothing
but the death of Mounsieur de la Valette could satisfy her; or that they of
themselves (as Courts ordinarily produce wicked instruments enough to execute
the passions of the Great) voluntarily meditated his ruin, is yet to be
discovered: But so it was that these two combined together to lie in wait for
him by the way he was to return, and to dispatch him. Mounsieur de la Valette
having taken his leave of Pau, without being able with all the submission he
could use, and with all the Interest he could make, to reconcile himself to the
Queen, was now on his own way home in the same equipage he came, when his
servant, looking accidentally back, perceived three men rush out of a Wood hard
by, and the two foremost (who were armed) to come upon the spur directly toward
his Master, the third it seems being (as it was afterward reported) one of the
Queens Domestics, sent rather to be a witness of, than an assistant in the
intended assasinate. Mounsieur de la Valette at the first sight apprehending
them for what indeed they were, and their business for what really it was,
immediately commanded his Page to alight, and having mounted his Horse, spurred
boldly upon them, with so much gallantry and success, that he left them both
dead upon the place. I have often seen the Sword he made use of in this
occasion, and have often heard the manner of the action related to the Duke in
the very same terms I deliver it here.

From this wise and valiant Captain (the Epithetes with which all the
Historians of that time have honored the Virtue of this great man) and from
Jane de Saint Lary de Bellegarde, Sister to the Marshall de Dellegarde, and
Niece to the Marshall de Terms, were descended Bernard, Iean Louis, and
another Iean de Nagaret, and de la Valette, the eldest in the year 1553. Iean
Louis in May, 1554, and the youngest died almost as soon as born. They had
likewise issue three Daughters, Helene, Catharine, and Mary, the eldest of
which having engaged her affection, before her Brother rose to favor, with the
Marquess of Rouillac a young Gentleman of good quality in the Country,
preferred him to many others her Brother afterward offered to her: The second
was married to the Count de Bouchage Brother to the Duke of Ioyeuse fellow
Favorite with Iean Louis, from which match sprung Catherine de Ioyeuse now
Duchess of Guise. The last married the Count of Brienne, of the House of
Luxemberg, and she died without Issue, within a few years after she was married.

The two Brothers Bernard, and Iean Louis, having been brought up in their
Fathers House till the ages of thirteen, and fourteen years, were from thence
sent to the College of Navarre at Paris, there to continue their studies;
where, amongst other instructions, they had particular charge often to see, and
diligently to observe Mounsieur de Villeroy, then Secretary of State, and a man
looked upon as an extraordinary person in that employment. Mounsieur de la
Valette esteeming him for his intimate, and assured friend, hoped in him to
establish such a friendship for his Children in their greener years, as might
one day be of great use and advantage to them: so hard it is, even for the
wisest to foresee the events of things, this very man proving at last, amongst
all the great Ministers, that governed the Affairs of that time, the only, or
the greatest enemy to their Advancement and Fortune.

After some years continuance of their studies at Paris, Anno 157^.
the report of a War, spread from all parts, so enflamed the noble courages of
these two young Gentlemen, that it was impossible longer to restrain them from
the exercise of Arms. They considered Letters now as an obstacle to something
nobler they conceived themselves obliged to profess; so that their Governor
fearing some sally of youth, should he carry too rude a hand over them, was
constrained to give Mounsieur de la Valette timely notice of the disposition of
his Sons.

Their Father either unwilling to cross them in their first desires, or loath to
discourage so early and so generous resolutions, and considering the maturity
of their age, now grown up to Man, and fit to undergo the hardships of War,
upon the first intimation called them home, to place them by his own side,
there to share with him the fortune of War, which chanced to be about the
beginning of the troubles that happened in the year 1570.

Mounsieur de la Valette, having by the great services he had done the King in
his Armies attracted the envy or jealousy of the other Chiefs, who were more
diligent at Court than he, was by their procurement sent away into his
Government to oppose, as was pretended, the designs and enterprises, that those
of the Reformed Religion daily practiced in several parts of that Province. And
whether this were effectively the true, or but the pretended cause of his
dispatch into Guienne, so it was that he was commanded there to reside, which
he accordingly did, and during that residence performed many notable exploits,
to the advantage of his Masters Interest: amongst which I cannot omit the
mention of one, that particularly relates to the honor of his second Son,
whose History I have undertaken, and to whom his Father had given the name of
Caumont, The first Exploit of Iean Louis called Caumont.
by which we shall for some time call him. In an encounter that happened near
to Mauvasin, whether Mounsieur de la Valette had carried his two Sons, he
charged so far into the Enemies Body, that his Horse being killed under him, he
was himself in manifest danger of his life, when Caumont seeing his Father in
that peril, threw himself desperately in amongst them, and being well seconded
by some few of the Troop, behaved himself so well as to disengage and bring him
off; paying in this first trial of his Arms, by an act of no less Piety than
Valor, part of the obligation due to him from whom he had received his being.
And this was his first exploit.

He past some years at this rate under his Fathers Discipline, Anno 1573.
but a Province was a Theater too narrow for the acts his courage was likely to
produce, ambition began already to make him aspire to greater things; which his
Father perceiving, and willing to encourage so generous a passion, resolved to
send him, together with his elder Brother, to the Siege of Rochelle, that was
then sitting down. He was the rather inclined to send them to that place,
because he himself was to have no share in the honor of that action, prevented
by the jealousy of the Mareschals de Byron, and Bellegarde, who although they
were both of them his near relations, and the best reputed Captains of their
time, employed nevertheless their utmost interest to hinder Mounsieur de la
Valette, from serving in that occasion. They very well knew his merit, with the
favor, and esteem, he had with the Duke of Anjou, who was to command at that
Siege, and foreseeing that such a concurrent, as he, was likely not a little to
eclipse the glory they intended to engross wholly to themselves, Anno 1574.
they carried on their design with that dexterity, that he was not so much as
once called to that service. This ill office was so much the more sensible to
him, as it made him lose the Mareschals Staff, which had been promised him
before; an injury that, no doubt, he would have discovered, how highly he had
resented, had he not been prevented by Death, the Arbiter of all Humane
Controversies. All he could at that time do (to let them see he understood them
to be no friends of his) was to forbid his Sons to see them, or to be presented
by either of them to the Duke of Anjou; desiring rather they should receive
that favor from the Duke of Guise, a Prince with whom he had acquired a great
interest, as having oftern served under his Command; but most signally at the
Battle of Dreux, where he fought at the head of the Reserve, with which, when
all other hopes were l^st, the Duke won that day, and wholly routed the Enemies
victorious Army. To him therefore he commanded his Sons to address themselves,
for their access to the Duke, an occasion the Duke of Guise embraced with so
much fervor, and presented them after that obliging manner, with that
honorable mention of the Fathers great Merit, and the great hope of his Sons,
that they could not possibly have chosen out a man, that could more handsomely,
more obligingly, or with greater integrity have performed so important an
Office. The infinite civility of the Duke of Guise, together with the singular,
and natural art he had to acquire men to him, gained Caumont so absolutely to
his service, that it was with no little reluctance, that he afterward withdrew
himself from him; which nevertheless he was shortly after enforced to do, the
diverse interests that swayed the one and the other, looking so several ways,
that it was not possible longer to continue their intelligence. Their
friendship began to grow cold, before it came to an open Rupture; Caumont not
having received from the Duke, that support, and assistance, he promised to
himself, from so powerful, and so sincere a frined, as he took him to be: But
that which struck the main blow was this: The death of Mounfieur de la Valette
immediately following the Siege of Rochelle, his several Employments lay vacant
by his decease, which made Caumont repair to Court, in hopes by the Dukes
favor at least to obtain the charge of Camp-Master to the Light Horse for his
elder Brother, (neither of them yet presuming by reason of their youth to
pretend to the Lieutenancy of Guienne) which the Duke of Guise not only
peremptorily refused to intermeddle in, but withal carried on the interest of
some other pretenders, with so much vigor and efficacy, that in fine he
excluded both the Brothers from all their Fathers employments. Upon which
unexpected unkindness Caumont retired so much dissatisfied with the Duke, that
since that time, neither his Brother* nor he, ever had any complacency for the
house of Guise.

The Brothers after this repulse spent some time at home in order to a
settlement of their own private affairs, which the quietness of that time (a
general Peace being before concluded) gave them leisure enough to do. But
Caumont Caumonts first J^urney to Court.
was impatient of this Country life, and seeing there was now no more
employment for his Arms, he put himself into an equipage to go to Court, to
try if he could, by his own endeavors, obtain that for himself, which the
memory of his Fathers great services had not power to retain to his forgotten
Family. It was about the end of the Year 1574. that he undertook this journey,
King Henry the Third being then newly returned from Poland, a Prince
in^^^nitely inclined to Peace, and to that, Catharine de Medicis his Mother
being also wearied out with the former troubles, they bent their ^oynt
endeavors to the continuing of Affairs in the same quiet posture they then
were, to the extinguishing of all old discontents, and to the avoiding all
possible occasions of new. They knew very well that none had power to beget new
mischiefs, or to disturb the present Peace of the Kingdom, except the Duke of
Alanson, or the King of Navarre, both which they politickly made, as it were,
prisoners to the Court, by the vigilance of Spies, though without Guards: or
other visible marks of restraint. The King of Navarre, as he whose Courage, and
great Qualities were more to be suspected, had the stricter eye upon him; and
although he professed himself a Catholic, yet his Fortune, and Confederates,
obliging him to the contrary Religion, they were in a perpetual jealousy, lest
he should at one time or another embrace the Profession, and Party of those
with whom his nearest concerns and chiefest interests lay. The Queen Mother,
one of the most experienced Princesses of her time, and a Woman whose Prudence,
and subtlety extended to all the Arts of Government, knowing as well how upon
occasion to order the allurements of Peace, as to guide and govern the more
important Affairs in the Tumults of War, being no stranger to the amorous
inclinations of the King of Navarre, Anno 1575. 1576.
by daily invitations to Plays, Masks, Revels, and other entertainments,
made the Court continually to shine in all the luster and temptation of Beauty,
if possible to divert the designs, and to soften the Martial humor of this
Prince, in the more delicate delights of vacancy and peace: which kind of life,
it may easily be imagined, could not be unpleasant to a man so young, and so
inclined as the King then was. The Court being now nothing but jollity, the
whole Nobility of France had nothing else to do, but to divide themselves
according to their several inclinations into the Parties, and Factions of these
two young Princes; amongst which Caumonts particular liking, and Affection to
his person, and great virtues having inclined him to the King of Navarres side,
he was by him received with so infinite respect and kindness, that in a very
short time he stood equal to the best in the highest degree of Favor, and
trust. Of which the King could not give him a greater testimony, than by
discovering to him his intended escape from Court, and by commending thereby so
important a secret to his fidelity, and assistance.

Our Histories have glanced at the grounds upon which the King took this
resolution, The memoires of Queen Mar.
which he shortly after executed with great secrecy, and a very slender train;
For pretending to go hunt in the Parks of Saint Germains, he thence with only
four or five of his greatest confidents (of which number Caumont was one) made
his escape. I have often heard him say, that he thought himself so obliged by
that favor, that he had never separated himself from that Prince, had not he
first separated himself from his obedience to the Church.

He accompanied him in his retirement as far as Alenson, Aubigne.
whither the King was no sooner come, but that his Physician invited him to be
Godfather to one of his Children. The Ceremony was performed in the Hugonot
Congregation, and after their Directory, as it may be presumed, it was
beforehand determined it should be. Whereupon Caumont, taking the usual liberty
the King had ever till that time freely allowed him, converted all the passages
of that Ceremony into Mirth and Laughter: But the King, afraid no doubt lest
this should produce some effect that might hinder his main designs, secretly
chid him, for what he had already done, giving him caution for the future to
forbear such railleries, and to behave himself with more respect in occasions
wherein he himself was so seriously concerned. Which sharp reproof giving
Caumont sufficiently to understand, that although the King did not as yet make
public profession of that Religion, yet that he was notwithstanding so
moderate, and so lukewarm a Catholic, that he only wanted a handsome
opportunity to do it. He resolved also to quit his service upon the first
occasion that fairly presented it self: An effect (besides his own Devotion to
the Church) of a solemn Promise his Brother and he had jointly made to their
dying Father, never to serve other than a Catholic Prince. From thenceforward
therefore, he sought all opportunities, civilly to disingage himself from the
service of this King, which soon after a light Indisposition of body gave him a
handsome Pretense to do; for finding himself not very well, and continuing foam
few days in the same distemper without any amendment, Caumont. withdraws
himself from the King of Navarre.
he entreated leave to retire into the privacy and convenience of his own
house, for the recovery of his health; which the King (though he doubtless well
enough understood the meaning of that request) without any difficulty, or the
least show of unkindness, freely permitted him to do.

France began now to see it self threatened with the approaching troubles, which
the Duke of Alenson's, and the King of Navarre's departure from Court,
(happening much about the same time) shortly after produced in the Kingdom;
neither could the Queen Mother, notwithstanding her great vigilance, and care
to prevent those disorders, the discontents of these two Princes, together with
those of the Hugonot Faction, were likely to bring upon the State, with all her
industry and prudence hinder men, in that Crisis of Affairs, from running into
the tumult of Arms. It was in this juncture of time, that Caumont prepared
himself for a second journey to Court: C^umont's second journey to Court, and
the beginning of his Favor.
He had had the honor to be known to the King, first at the Siege of Rochelle,
and afterward in his dependence upon the King of Navarre; so that these
preceding habitudes and acquaintance, made him resolve to go, and tie himself
directly to his Majesty's person and service. Having therefore left his own
house with this resolution, he takes his journey to Bordeaux, where the
Marquess de Villars, a great friend and an old companion in Arms of Mounsieur
de la Valette his Father, and now Governor of Guienne, then resided; and where
he was not a little busy to provide against the disorders which at that time
threatened that Province. Caumont at his arrival gives him a visit, acquaints
him with the true design of his journey, and withal offers his service, if he
had any to command him to Court Villars readily accepts his offer, charges him
with Letters of Credit to the King, and, the ways betwixt Bordeaux and
Poitiers being very difficult to pass by reason of the continual inroads of the
Hugonot party, he informs him of the particular state of the Country,
instructs him in the safest ways he was to pass, and finally gives him a full
account of the posture wherein his Majesty's Affairs then stood; that he might
thereupon receive new orders from the King and Council. Caumont, being glad to
present himself to their Majesty's with the advantage of so considerable a
service, departs, thoroughly instructed in all the Affairs of Guienne, from
Bordeaux to Angoubesme; where he further discourses about his Government with
the Marquess of Rufee, Governor of that Town, and Country, and by him finds
matters there to be in no better a condition, than those of Guienne. Rufee had
made a late denial of that place to the Heads of the Hugonot party, to whom by
the Treaty of Champigny, made with the Duke of Alenson, it should have been
delivered up for a Cautionary Town. He informs himself of the reasons of Rufees
refusal in this case, with other things that concerned the Kings Service in
that Country, and continues his journey from thence to Poitiers, by the houses
of Gentlemen his acquaintance, sometimes with Convoys, but for the most part in
the slender guard of his own inconsiderable train. At last by short and wary
journeys he arrives at Court, which was then at Blois, though with infinite
difficulty and danger; such was the disorder, and confusion, that raged in all
the Provinces through which he was to pass. I heard him a few days before his
death relate all the particulars of this journey, without omitting the least
circumstance that befell him by the way; not without admiration, that a man
after threescore and odd years should retain so perfect a memory of such petty
accidents (if such ought to be called so) as gave a beginning to the
establishment of so prodigious a Fortune.

Being come to Court, Anno 1577.
he presented himself to the King, delivered the several dispatches he had from
Villars, and Rufee, giving his Majesty a particular account of all they had
given him in charge. The King immediately commanded him to address himself to
the Queen Mother, and to inform her fully of the same things, being at this
first Conference highly satisfied with his dexterity, and judgment, and
mightily taken with his behavior, and the gracefulness he observed, in
whatever he said, or did: neither indeed could there be a more accomplished
Gentleman, than he was at that age of two and twenty, as I have heard men of
great judgment say, that very well knew him in those times. His Conference
with the Queen Mother proved no less to his advantage with her, than that he
had had with the King had done with him; she was pleased to give him a gracious
audience, and to take a great liking to his Person; so that the King coming (as
it was his constant custom) in the evening to confer about business with her,
and asking her if she had seen Caumont, and what her opinion was of him? the
Queen made answer, That she had seen, and discoursed with him, and that it was
upon men of his condition and merit, that his Majesty ought to repose the
Trust, and Confidence of his most important Affairs: which she said as not
being unwilling (to the end she might still keep her dominion over the Kings
affections) that Caumont, though the King had many Favourties already, should
yet make one of that number; that so his heart, being divided amongst many,
might not too violently incline to one. The King told her he was of her
opinion, and the approbation he found in her judgment having justified his own
inclinations, after he had entertained her some time with merits of the Father,
and the good qualities of the Son, he from thenceforward took a resolution to
receive him into a degree of favor, and to place him near his own person,

Yet was it not immediately, notwithstanding this auspicious beginning, that
Caumont's favor began to appear; neither did he on his part cultivate his
springing fortune with an assiduity, and diligence unbecoming his Spirit, and
Blood, for whatever testimonies of favor and esteem the King daily discovered
to him, there was nevertheless no occasion of action, which he did not greedily
embrace, and for which he did not continually neglect all Court Interest,
preferring his Honor and Duty before all other Advantages of Fortune. At his
return from one of these expeditions, he soon discerned a coldness in his
Majesty toward him; and his Court Rivals, who very well saw how precipitiously
the Kings Affections were bent upon him, had not failed on their part, by their
ill offices to weaken that interest during his absence, with all the Art, and
Malice they had: but his brave services having acquired his Masters Esteem, he
soon recovered his former possession of Grace, and at last settled himself so
firm in the Kings Bosom, that the favor, which had for a long time before been
divided amongst many pretenders, was at last established without reservation in
Ioyeuse, and him, though he had still the greatest share.

I have already observed, what an effect Caumonts negotiation about the Affairs
of Guienne had produced with the King and Queen; neither was he so blind to his
own interest as not to see it, nor so negligent as not to improve it with all
the industry he had. Nor was his diligence less effectual with the Queen
Mother, who bore the greatest sway of Affairs, than with the King himself, she
ever receiving him with great demonstration of Favor, and Esteem; which he to
continue, or to increase, contracted great Familiarities with some of the Maids
of Honor of chiefest trust about her, and from their Friendship received no
few good Offices in this Foundation of his Fortune.

But neither these good Offices, nor the Favor he was by their procurement
seated in, had yet produced any thing to his benefit; it is true he was looked
upon with an Eye of Favor, the King would often speak to him, and in all
appearance he was in a hopeful way, but still this was hitherto only appearance,
and he reaped no other advantage by it until the Duke of Alenfon's expedition,
which was the first time he tasted of his Masters Bounty. After the Treaty of
Champigny, which was a little before this time, the King having designed
absolutely to disingage his Brother the Duke of Alenson from the Hugonot Party,
had to that purpose given him the command of an Army against them. Upon which
occasion Caumont failed not to prepare himself to make one, which the King so
well approved of, that coming to take his leave, his Majesty having first
publicly commended his generous design, ordered him twelve hundred Crowns of
Gold, The King's first Bounty to Caumont.
out of his privy Purse, to put him into a handsome posture: A largess so
seasonable as enabled him to put himself into a better equipage, than otherwise
he could conveniently have done; and as he had a mind above his present
Fortune, he laid out all the Kings Bounty in Horses, Arms, and other Furniture:
but above all, he bought himself the finest Tent, that could possibly be seen.
The Rendezvous of the Army being appointed to be at Romorentin, the King and
Queen Mother, being then at Blois, would themselves see it; and there dismiss
the Duke of Alenson, with all possible demonstration of Honor, and Kindness.
Caumont failed not to Muster up his Equipage, upon this occasion; and for the
better advantage, caused his Tent to be set up in that part of the Camp, that
lay most in view of the Queens Lodgings, to the end chiefly, that her Maids of
Honor might more conveniently see it. The King who never failed (as I have
observed before) to visit his Mother once a day, as he was one day leaning with
her in her Chamber Window, took particular notice of this Tent, which being for
its fineness remarkable above the rest, the King and Queen both fancied it to
be Caumont's; and the better to be satisfied, sent one purposely to enquire; at
whose return, finding it to be so indeed, his gallantry was highly commended by
them both. Soon after coming to take his leave of the King, and to receive his
Commands, he was dismissed with so high testimonies of Affection, as might for
the future give him just occasion to hope for greater things. These
observations may perhaps seem light to some upon such a subject; but since
Fortune suffers nothing to be lost to happy men, and that she is industrious to
collect, and improve the least of their actions to make them succeed to their
advantage, I thought it not altogether improper, by her example, to make
mention of these passages; which, how inconsiderable soever in themselves, have
been nevertheless the steps, and gradations, by which this great man afterward
rose to such an eminence of Fortune.

The Duke of Alensons expedition succeeded according to the Kings desire, he
took la Charity, and Issoire, and the Army was in a condition to perform
greater things, had not the over-strict League, and Friendship betwixt the Duke
of Alenson, Caumont follows the Duke of Alenson in the War.
and the Duke of Guise (his Lieutenant General in this Employment) begot a
suspicion in the King. To break then this Friendship, the King began to hearken
to overtures of Peace; which, although they were not presently concluded, yet
the mere proposition was pretense enough to call home the Duke of Alenson, and
to give Caumont opportunity to return to Court. At his coming back he was less
favorably received, than he had reason to expect, through the jealousy of
those who had been more industrious to improve the Kings Favor, than he had
been: Yet could not this hinder him (a new occasion of the Siege of Brouage He
goes to the Siege of Brouage.
presenting it self) once more to expose, and abandon, his springing Favor to
the malicious Offices of his Court-Concurrents. He went to this Siege, where he
behaved himself so well (as he had done before at la Charit^, and Issoire) that
in all these expeditions he still won the great liking, and approbation of his
Generals; who, being just to his merit, in the testimony of his actions,
confirmed the King more and more in the opinion, he had before conceived, of
his Worth and Valor.

This esteem of Caumont took at last so deep root in this Princes Breast, that
it was no more in the power of Envy to shake it; and he had him in so high
consideration, that he never used him with the least severity, nor ever gave
him the least injurious word; an indulgence not common to his other Favorites,
who were often subject to very passionate language: But the King in his noble
nature was pleased to spare a heart, which, he had before observed, was too
stout to submit to Injuries, what advantage soever might accrue by such a
patience. Of which (now we are upon this discourse) I shall give you an
instance in this place; although the thing happened not just at this time, but
after Caumont's more apparent Favor, not tying my self, in these youthful
relations of him, so much to the order of time, as to the truth of things. The
King his Master being an infinite lover of neatness in Clothes, and being none
were admitted into the Bedchamber without his white Shoes, black Velvet
Galoches, his long Stockings, and other Vestments wherein they were to observe
a punctual Decorum, no wonder if the Favourties, who were continually in the
Kings Eye, were especially tied to these strict rules of decency. Caumont
appearing one day before the King unbutton'd, his Stockings untied, and in a
greater negligence, and disorder, than he was wont to be, received a sever
check; nay his chiding proceeded so far, as that the King forbad him ever to
appear before him again in the like posture. Caumont in his heat interpreting
this for an absolute command, without condition, immediately withdraws himself,
resolved (as I have since heard him say) to take Post, and for ever to retire
himself from Court. But the King, who very well knew what an impression his
words had made with his Favorite, and fearing lest the rashness of his Youth
might make him commit a fault to his own ruin, commanded him presently to be
called back; saying, That his heat and folly would destroy him, if he were left
to himself; but that he had in him withal Qualities, of which good use might be
made: and, that he would therefore have an eye to his preservation. Upon his
return the King having changed his Humor, Caumont changed his Resolution, not
without considering upon how light an occasion he was like to have forfeited
his Masters Favor, and to have destroyed the hopes of his own rising Fortune;
And from the knowledge of his fault drew this advantage, to become less hot,
and passionate for the future, and to observe such an elegancy and neatness in
his habit, even to an extreme old age, as might serve for an example to the
younger sort of men.

The Surrender of Brouage His return from the Siege of Brouage to Court.
was soon succeeded by a Peace concluded at Bergerac about the end of the year
1577. by which cessation Caumont had liberty to return to Court, and there
without any more divertion, or impediment, to husb^nd his Masters Royal
Inclinations toward him.

But as he had many Concurrents in the same Design, Anno 1578.
so the King for some time suspended the declaration of his Favor; though
Caumont was one of those to whom his Majesty showed a particular Inclination,
and whose freedom, and boldness was nothing displeasing to him: His Wit, fine
Fashion, and a particular Grace he had in performing all his exercises, gave
him a great advantage over the other young men of his condition; which he
managed so well, that he still out-shone all his equals, and appeared the true
Favorite in men's opinion, though his Favor was not yet so fully manifest. All
this year 1578. past in this deliberation, and the Court was in suspense which
of all the pretenders to favor would prove to be the Favorites indeed, when
at last the King in the beginning of the year 1579. Anno 1579.
at the Ceremony of the institution of the Knights of the Order of the Holy
Ghost, appearing public with Caumont, Darques (afterward Duke of Ioyeuse) St.
^uc, and D'O in the same Livery with himself, there was then no further dispute
of their favor; and upon this discovery, all the Courtiers according to their
inclinations, or interest, divided themselves into the several Parties, and
dependencies of these four great men.

We have now brought Caumont upon the great Theater of the World, exposed, not
only to the sight, but also to the censure and envy of most men. We shall
hereafter see how he disengaged himself from those snares, and designs that
were laid by his Adversaries to undermine his greatness, during the space of
threescore and ten years, which he lived after his first rise of Favor.

From the time of this establishment of his Fortune, he had the good hap to
have all the most eminent men about the Court, either for Arts or Arms, to
apply themselves to him. Mounsieur du Perron, one of the greatest Ornaments of
his Age, was of this number, together with Rousard, Des Ports, and many other
persons of great Merit, and Esteem. But amongst them all, Caumont taking
particular notice of the great worth of Mounsieur du Perron, and considering
his Virtue to be above all the advantages, he in himself was able to procure
for him; took an especial care to prefer him to the Kings knowledge, and at
last, with the a^^iduity and recommendation of a true friend, placed him in his
Majesty's chiefest confidence; an Office which he afterward continued with so
constant a friendship, as contributed no little to that greatness, to which he
was sometime after advanced.

Saint Blancard since Marshall of France, and Duke de Biron, with the greatest
part of the Gascon Nobility that then followed the Court, put themselves also
into his dependence: his Employments, and the great credit he had with the
King, having in a short time afforded him means to gratify a number of gallant
Gentlemen, and to acquire many Friends, and Servants, whose Valor and Fidelity
contributed much to the preservation of his Life, and Fortune. But his youth,
having been bred up in the rudeness of War, required some necessary
improvements, the better to fit him for his Masters conversation, who was
himself the most accomplished Prince of his time. The King would take care for
his second Education, that he might be the more proper for those Employments,
which his Majesty's confidence in him, and the necessity of the present times,
were shortly to call him to; and to that purpose commanded Des Ports to be
continually about his Person, which he accordingly obeyed; and not only by his
diligence bettered him in the French Tongue, which then first began to purge it
self from the Barbarism of past Ages: but having withal found in him a capacity
that out-stript his Precepts, he in a short time infused into him such general
notions, as, having opened his understanding, made him capable of those
important negotiations in which he was afterward employed.

The same affection which had made the King so solicitous to embellish his
Mind, made him no less careful to establish his Fortune; though he still
concealed the daily progress of his Bounty from him, not being willing it seems
that he should so much as trouble himself with the management of his own
Domestic Affairs; but commanded Fontenay Mareuil a Gentleman of quality, and
of whose integrity his Majesty had a particular Esteem, to take upon him that
care, and twice a week to bring him an account of Caumonts business, as another
Person of Quality did of that of Ioyeuse. From these two Gentlemen the King had
still advice, of all Offices, and Revenues, that fell vacant; out of which his
Malesty made choice of such for his two Favorites, as he thought most proper,
and advantageous for them, and commanded their dispatch; which afterward
Caumont, and Ioyeuse were to solicit, but without the least dispensation,
notwithstanding their Favor, from the due and customary forms of Law; where,
if any difficulty, or opposition chanced to arise, his Majesty ever interposed
his Justice to overruled them, if justly they were to be overruled: neither
did they ever receive any Grace, or Largess, which did not either first pass
the Seal, the Chamber of Accounts, or an Act of Parliament.

In these beginnings, the two young Favorites were continually called to all
the Councils, not to give their advice, from which by their immaturity, and
inexperience, they were exempt, but to inform, and to inure themselves to
business: Which the better to exercise them in, the King himself was pleased
often in private to propose weighty questions to them, and to make them debate
them before him, without exposing their early Opinions to the Experience of his
graver Council initiating them with his own Precepts, and forming them with his
own hand; and that rather with the tenderness and indulgence of a Father to his
Children, than with the authority of a Master over his Servants,

About this time (as I have already observed) the Order of the Holy Ghost was
instituted, and the first Ceremony was already past: where, although Caumont
had no share, by reason of his Youth, but was deferred to the next Creation,
which happened a few years after; yet his Majesty, though he judged him too
young to be admitted into that honorable Fraternity, thought him
notwithstanding sufficient to treat with Philibert D. of Savoy, Caumont's
Embassy to Savoy.
though he were one of the most discreet, and most circumspect Princes of his
time. This Prince had raised a considerable Army, which he intended to employ
against the Genoveses; and the King, who was obliged to protect them,
dispatched Caumont to the Duke to dissuade him from that enterprise. His
negotiation in this Affair met with great difficulties, and infinite
oppositions, both from the House of Austria, the League, and the Pope; which
nevertheless he overcame with that dexterity, that having untied all those
knots of State, he obtained full satisfaction for the King his Master, and
acquired so much Reputation, and Esteem with the Duke, as at the same time to
obtain a signal Favor, and a timely assistance for himself. The occasion this.

The Marshall de Bellegarde his Uncle, having for some time possessed the Kings
Favor, was at last, through the ill Offices of some, fallen into disgrace, and
had thereupon retired himself into the Marquisate of Saluzzo, of which Province
he had the Government; and whither being come, he had chased Charles Birague,
the Kings Lieutenant in that Marquisate, out of all the Places and strong holds
he had formerly possessed; which he had taken upon him to do, without any order
from the King: and indeed Bellegarde unsatisfied with the Court, rather
endeavored to fortify himself, and to secure his own interest, than to stand
upon the niceties, and punctillio's of his duty. This disorder gave a hot alarm
to all Italy, who knew not to what Bellegardes designs might tend; and the
Queen Mother, desirous in time to prevent any ill consequence, had her self
taken a Journey to accommodate the business, and had composed it to the Kings
satisfaction, and seemingly to the Mareschal's too, who had received a
ratification of whatever he had done: but the Marshall was no sooner returned
into his Government, than he fell immediately sick, and of so violent a
distemper, as in few days carried him away, not without vehement suspicion of
poison. Many being persuaded, that his turbulent spirit having given the Court
an apprehension, that a discontented man of his Courage, would be hard to be
continued in the due limits of his Obedience, they thought it better at once to
dispatch him out of the way, than to be at the continual trouble would be
necessary to contain him in his duty.

His Son, whom he le^t very young, and much unsettled in his Government, soon
found himself in danger to be turned out by the Faction of the People, the
whole Country in general, favoring the Biragues, Gentlemen of good quality,
and Natives of that Country; whom doubtless they would have restored to the
Government, had not Caumont, in the time of his Embassy in Savoy, obtained some
Troops from the Duke for his Kinsman's assistance, with which he brought him so
opportune, and so effectual a succor, that he soon suppressed the Faction,
placed Bellegarde secure in his charge, and left him strong enough to defend
himself; until the King, whose interest required a Minister of greater
Experience in that Country, called him from thence to place la Valette,
Caumont's elder Brother in his stead, giving to Bellegarde in recompense the
Governments of Xaintonge, Angoumois, and the Country of Auluis.

It was during the interim of this Voyage, that the disgrace of St. Luc, one of
the Favorites, was concluded. D' Aubigne tell us that he learned the cause of
this disgrace from St. Luc's own mouth, and thereupon tells an impudent Story:
but they who well consider this malevolent Author's way of writing, will easily
judge it his own invention, to bespatter the Kings reputation; against whom
(besides the interest of his Party) he had a particular spleen, having been ill
used, and slighted upon many occasions. Of which he himself cannot forbear to
complain in his History, and which confession in it self is sufficient to
discredit all the calumnies he has forged against the Honor of this Prince.
Here then take the true reason of his disgrace.

The King, falling in love with a Lady of great Quality, St. Luc's disgrace.
had made Caumont, and St. Luc the confidents of his Passion; shortly after
which Caumont was sent upon the Embassy of Savoy, spoke of before: and St. Luc,
in this interval of his absence, discovers the secret of the King's love to his
Wife, who was of the Family of Brissac, and his Wife immediately to the Queen,
who could not long dissemble her discontent to the King her Husband; but
reproached him with his Love, and that with so many circumstances, that in
effect he could not much deny it. The King infinitely concerned at the
infidelity of his Confidents, to whose discretion he had only entrusted that
secret, falls upon St. Luc, Caumont being out of the reach of his anger,
complains how basely he was betrayed, and in fine, reproaches him with the
discovery. St. Luc excuses himself, and, that he might do it with the better
color, charges Caumont (whose absence exposed him to that ill office) with the
fault; but the King, who had before begun to distaste St. Luc, ever since his
Marriage with a Wife, who was very partial to the House of Guise (a Family
whose designs were every day more and more suspected to him) was still in his
own Judgment more inclined to condemn him, than Caumont of the Treachery. Yet
for the better clearing of the truth, which he was impatient to know, he
addresses himself to the Queen, pressing, and conjuring her, to tell him
freely, from whom she had received the knowledge of his Love, at the same time
confessing on his part, the naked, and undisguis'd truth, the more to oblige
her to deal clearly, and heartily with him. The Queen though at first she
defended her self with many excuses, and was very loath to betray her
intelligence, was at last (as there are few secrets which are not communicative
betwixt persons of so near relation) overcome, and confessed that it was from St.
Luc's Wife she had received that secret. There needed no more to confirm the
King in the prejudice he had before conceived against St. Luc: and his Majesty
believing there was more of design, than levity in this miscarriage, from
thenceforth conceived a mortal animosity against him, and was resolute to his
ruin; yet would he defer the discovery of his displeasure till Caumont's
arrival, who was now upon return, that he might first know, how ill an office
his companion, and friend had attempted to do him. Caumont was no sooner
returned, than the King ask't him what opinion he had of St. Luc's friendship?
who answered, That he took him to be his best friend, as he knew himself to be
his; and that there was a particular, and strict friendship betwixt them. The
King told him he must no longer continue in that error, and thereupon
acquainted him with the whole story, and with the resolution he had taken
against him. Caumont (notwithstanding the ill Offices he had received) failed
not in this occasion to perform all the duties of a true friend, but employed
his power with the King, to persuade his Majesty into milder resolutions: but
not being able with all he could say to prevail against the just indignation he
had conceived against him; and seeing him exasperated to such a height, as was
like enough to transport him to the greatest extremities, he gave notice to St.
Luc speedily to retire from Court, which he accordingly did, and fled to
Brouage. This is the true story of his disgrace, which I have received from a
more faithful, and less passionate hand than that of Aubign^.

It was at this same time of Caumont's return from Savoy, Anno 1580.
that the King found himself engaged in a more dangerous Affair, than this
before related. The Hugonot Party began now to break out into open
insurrection: and their Rebellion was of so much the greater consequence, by
how much it interrupted, and overthrew all the designs he had laid, to
establish the peace of his Kingdom. The King having had, and with great reason,
the greatness of the House of Guise long suspected to him, had determined with
himself, but insensibly, and with all security, to abate that growing
greatness; and to bring his designs the better to pass, and with the least
noise, he continually disposed all the great employments, and most considerable
Offices, as they fell void, into the hands of his own Creatures, without
distributing any part into the power of the Guises, or of any that he knew
depended upon them, or that he suspected to be of their Faction. The House of
Guise easily enough penetrating into the depth of this design, had fortified
themselves more than ever, in their Confederates and Friends, to oppose by
strong hand this project of the Kings; and covering with the pretense of the
Catholic Religion (of which they had long assumed to themselves the titles of
Protectors, either their Ambition (or what they called by a more specious name)
the necessity of their Defense, were ready to break out into open Arms. The
King, advertised of their designs, was resolved to prevent them, and for a time
to lay aside his milder Maxims, and to chastise their insolence with an armed
hand: but because he should have wanted means, and strength, if at the same
time, he should undertake the House of Guise, the Hugonot Party (which he also
intended to cut off in due time) should appear in Arms, he tried to moderate
the last, by commanding all the Edicts that had been made in their Favor, to
be strictly, and inviolately observed. He granted to the King of Navarre all he
could reasonably desire, treating with him like a Prince, that he neither
thought it safe to raise too high, nor that he had a desire absolutely to
subdue. A proceeding that in all appearance was likely to continue the Peace on
that side. And the King had very great reason to hope, that this Prince, and
those of his party, would at least give him leisure to suppress the Family of
Guise, who as they were dangerous to him, were also their open, and declared
Enemies. The suppression of which had at this time been a matter easy, and
inevitable, had Affairs continued in this posture. But all these considerations
were overruled, and overthrown by so little means, that certainly it is worthy
our astonishment to consider how light, and how contemptible things will
pervert the ordinary course of humane prudence.

The Queen of Navarre in this juncture of time retired from Court, much
dissatisfied with the King her Brother, as she her self declares in her own
Commentaries; and as she was a Princess of a dangerous Wit, a great Spirit, and
one that conceived the highest point of generosity to consist in revenge, she
thought she could not do the King her Brother a more sensible injury, whose
designs she very well knew; nor consequently better satisfy her own revenge,
than by stirring up the King her Husband against him. Yet thinking her own
interest too weak of it self to prevail in a thing of this consequence, she
thought fit to assault him where he lay most open to her, and where he had the
least power to defend himself. Having therefore in her train a great many very
fine women, and such as were well disciplined in Love Affairs, she won so far
upon their obedience; as that they behaving themselves according to her
instructions toward the King her Husband, and the young Nobility about him,
soon made as many Lovers, Au^ig^e.
as there were Servants attending his Person: and by that means seated her self
absolute Mistress of that Court. The King of Navarre pre-possest with these ill
Councils, resolved upon taking Arms, which he did with that secrecy, that the
blow was given before the noise was heard. The design was great, and vast (as
they usually are in all commotions) but when it came to execution, all their
great projects ended in the surprisal of two important places. The first was
Cahors ^etard by the King of Navarre, the other la ^ere, by the Prince of
Cond^; Mounsieur Chatillon, in Languedoc, nor Mounsieur Lesdiguieres, in
Dauphine not being able to do any considerable service for their party.

The King advertized of this disorder, found himself necessitated to alter his
first resolutions, and to turn his thoughts to the present danger; so that
instead of pursuing the suppression^ of the House of Guise, and their League,
he was constrained that time, not only to wink at their Faults, but to employ
their Persons, and make use of their Interest^y to stop this unexpected
Rupture. In which he carried himself with that wisdom, and diligence, as gave
no little astonishment to his Enemies, when they saw he had in a moment set
three great Armies on foot, to attend their motion, and to oppose and frustrate
their attempts. They had principally built their designs upon the opinion of
the Kings negligence, which they interpreted cowardice, and sloth. But they
soon perceived themselves abused in that belief, and found in this occasion,
that the pleasure and ease, he was something addicted unto, had not unnerv'd
him from vigorous action, when his Honor and Interest called him abroad. There
is one thing very remarkable in this occasion, which is rarely observed in the
order of Humane Affairs, that all things succeeded absolutely according to the
Kings Designs; and Fortune, who is wont to delude the wisest Counsels,
submitted here to the Kings Prudence, and foresight. His Majesty had great
reasons not to oppress the King of Navarre, in this conjuncture; and though he
had just cause to be angry with him, yet, he had more to preserve him, to the
end that he might in his person maintain a Party to make the League, who were
directly opposite to him. He therefore sent against him the Marshall de Biron,
rather to spin out the War in exploits of little moment, than to end it at one
blow. Into Dauphine, where there was little, or nothing to be done, no more
than in Languedoc, he dispatched the Duke of Mayenne, Affairs being at this
time in such a condition, that his Majesty was constrained to serve himself
with some of those Heads of the League, who were already sworn to it: but he
did it withal in an occasion of so little importance, that the Duke was therein
likely to acquire no great reputation to himself, nor no great advantage to his
Faction. But on the contrary, for what concerned la Fere, as being a Town near
to Paris, and in Picardy, where the Hugonots had as yet no other footing, such
troublesome neighbors standing highly suspected to his Majesty, he dispatched
thither the Marshall de Matignon a S^bject of great Merit, and approved
Fidelity, to labor in good earnest the recovery of that place. In this Army
marched the Favorites, of which Caumont and Ioyeuse in this expedition got the
greatest name; the last by a Harquebuss shot he received in his Face, and the
other by the taking of the Town; of which success the Historians of that time
attribute to him the chiefest reputation. He had entreated of the King the
charge of Camp-Master to the Regiment of Champagne, that he might have some
remarkable employment in this occasion, and with that had obtained the command
of a Quarter; so that, nothing necessary being wanting to the advancement of
his work he raised by the industry of an ^talian Engineer, a Cavalier by favor
of which, having planted a battery, Aubigne.
that looked directly into the place, and that shot into the Enemies Defenses,
he reduced them to that extremity, that not daring to show their heads upon the
Walls, they were soon forced to a capitulation. The first overtures of
Surrender were made to Caumont, who most pressed upon them; which the Marshall
de Matignon, being displeased at, as jealous of the honor they had done him,
to the prejudice (as he conceived) of the command he had at that Siege, he
immediately granted to the Deputies, which Caumont had out of respect wholly
referred to him, their own conditions, without once calling Caumont to the
determination; an injury he so highly resented, that he could not govern his
passion from breaking out at the instant, but smartly continued his Battery
against the Town (notwithstanding the Articles agreed upon, and signed) and
ceased not till the Kings Troops were entered into it. But he shortly after had
a better revenge: for departing the Camp, without taking leave of the
Marshall, and arrived at Court, he obtained from the King the Government of
that place, which the Marshall had importunately sued for, and kept it many
years after. By this exploit the War ended, which having been undertaken rather
out of a capricious humor, than mature deliberation, had the same success,
that commonly attends precipitous and indigested Counsels. The Peace that
followed, kept Caumont at Court, where his favor daily increased, till it came
to such a height, that there was no employment, or benefit, with which the King
his Master was not highly pleased to gratify him.

Before he obtained the charge of Camp-Master to the Regiment of Champagne for
himself, he had procured for la Valette his elder Brother, that of Camp-Master
to the Light Horse; an Employment that had been so worthily discharged by their
Father; which I have often heard him say, was the first grace he ever begged of
the King, having it seems a desire to retrive the Offices of his Family for his
Brother, and to give him the first advantages of his Favor, reserving nothing,
save future hopes for himself: but those hopes were not long suspended, for the
esteem the King had of him, being founded upon his courage, and fidelity, had
begot in his Majesty so great a passion for him, C^umont's high Favo^r.
that his thoughts were wholly taken up with the contrivance, how to make him
great; and he has often been heard to say, he would raise him so high, that he
would not so much as reserve to himself the power to pull him down.

The Historians of that age give him from henceforward an advantage over
Ioyeuse in the Kings Favor, and would make us believe it was so apparent, as
to beget a jealousy in Ioyeuse; but that is a secret I never learned from
Caumont's mouth; though it may be presumed that his carriage, and conduct, was
more likely to please the King; Ioyeuse having such a vanity to boast, and make
a show of the credit he had with his Master, and of the favors and
liberalities he received from him by inordinate profusions, and expense, as did
not only bring many inconveniences upon himself, but great murmurings and
discontents upon the King: whereas Caumont, who had rather be powerful and
esteemed in effect, than in outward show, made a sober, and profitable use of
the interest he had in the King; and made his greatness more apparent to
discerning men, by the established constancy that tied him fast to his duty,
than by the exterior ^opperies of pomp, which are but the faint reflections of a
true shining luster.

If this stability of his was commendable in any thing, it was much more in the
constant aversion he had to the League, to which nothing could ever reconcile
him; nor to the heads of that Faction: but on the contrary he took all
occasions publicly to exasperate, and affront the Duke of Guise, without
regarding the reputation of so great a man, or fearing the danger of so
powerful an Enemy; his animosity carrying him so far, as several times to beg
leave of the King, that he might fight him man to man, desiring with all his
soul to hazard his own life, that he might by an honorable way deliver his
Master, from the troubles, and apprehensions, with which the practices of this
Duke perpetually afflicted him, though his Majesty would never consent to it.
But Ioyeuse lived after another manner, maintaining a greater intelligence with
the House of Guise, than ought to have been betwixt so obliged a Servant, and
his Master's open, and declared Enemies; which doubtless was the chief cause of
the diminution of his favor, and in truth either prompted by the sole ambition
of seeing himself Brother-in-law to the King, to which honor he thought he
could not arrive without the Duke of Guise's assistance, or by the desire he
had to secure his Fortune on all sides, which is very often a ruinous maxim, he
ever industriously labored the friendship of that Family. Some believe that he
at first treated with them unknown to the King about his Marriage with a
Princess of their House, and Name, Sister to the Queen. It Is true he had
afterward the King's permission, and the overture, being once made, was pressed
by the King himself to a consummation of it: but it was his part to have
foreseen the inconveniences of this Alliance, and to have considered the
consequences before he had embarked himself.

As one of the King's chiefest cares was to keep such an equality toward his
Favorites, Anno 1581.
that they might have no occasion to trouble the delight he took in their
conversation, with complaints, or differences; so had he no sooner concluded
the Marriage of his Sister-inlaw to the Duke of Ioyeuse; but that he would
bestow another called Christina, upon the Duke of Espernon. I begin here to
give him the title of Duke, A proposition of Marriage for the Duke of Espernon.
because he had it before, although the thread of this discourse permits me not
to speak of his promotion to this dignity, till the following page. A
temptation delicate enough to flatter a mind so great, and so ambitious, as
that of the Duke; nevertheless he excused himself with a moderation, highly to
be commended in an occasion of this nature; neither was his prudence less to be
admired, than his moderation: and all the world have believed, that amongst all
the actions of his life, this was of greatest importance to the conservation of
his Fortune. Upon this refusal of his, diverse Judgments were made, all actions
of great men, especially Favorites, never wanting interpreters: such as were
justest to the Duke highly approved his conduct, that so prudently under the
shadow of respect, had rejected an advantage, that in it self carried only
noise, and show; though otherwise it might render him capable of pretending to
more solid things, and at least make him rival the extraordinary honor the Duke
of Ioyeuse had received; others that would less favorably interpret him,
discommended his carriage, as if by this refusal he intended tacitly to condemn
the Duke of Ioyeuse his Vanity, and Ambition; and these confirmed themselves in
their opinion, by the great disproportion they saw betwixt the moderate expense
at the Marriage of the Duke's elder Brother, and the prodigious profusion that
was made at that of the Duke of Ioyeuse; The journal of Henry the third.
where the expense was so great as amounted to above two millions of Livers, an
immense sum in those days, and especially at a time wherein the State was in
great necessities. This gave a great occasion of murmr, not only to the well
and ill disposed French, but even to such strangers as were affectionate to the
Crown of France; whereas that of Mounsieur de la Valette, which was solemnized
at the same time with Anne de Batarnay, was past over with very little noise;
not but that the King would also in this occasion have powered out his
liberality: but the two Brothers, having discreetly avoided an unnecessary
expense, soberly husbanded their Masters purse, to his and their own reputation.

From the time that his Majesty had determined to raise his two Favorites to
the honor of his Alliance, Anno 1582.
he honored them both with the Dignity of Duke, and Peer; and purchased in
Caumont's name the Manor of Espernon, to the end, he might bear that Title.
But his Letters Patents, having been carried to the Parliament, received at
first some difficulty in their verification, as it had before happened, in the
case of Ioyeuse: which difficulty arose from the place the King had given in
those Letters to the two new Dukes, having there ranck'd them immediately after
the Princes of the Blood, which the other more ancient Dukes, The two
Favorites made Dukes and Peers of (...).
being highly displeased at, opposed; and had so wrought the Parliament to
their Favor, that the King was forced to send them a peremptory command to
pass over all oppositions, telling them (amongst other terms of favor) that
having chosen Caumont, and Ioyeuse, for his Brothers-in-law, and intending to
place them by this Alliance so near his own person, he could not endure they
should make any difficulty of receiving them into the degree, he had assigned
for them; that Honor being far inferior to what he had already conferred upon
them by that choice: Upon which, there being no more contest, the thing past
according to his Majesty's pleasure, and was recorded without reservation.

Though the King seemed to have his thoughts wholly taken up with these little
domestic Affairs, Anno 1583.
and to intend nothing but the advancement of his Favorites; yet was he not
even in this without a further end, and design: for perceiving himself too weak
by fine force, to crush the two powerful Factions, that divided the whole
Kingdom, he tried to accomplish that by policy, which he could not effect by
power, in depriving both sides of all kind of authority and trust; advancing on
the contrary his Favorites, and such as he had confidence in, to all the
Offices, and Employments he possibly could; neither was there any grace, or
favor to be obtained, but for them, or for such of their creatures, as wholly
relied upon their fortune. Neither met this design of his with any opposition
from the Hugonot Party; who, the more they were his open and declared Enemies,
the less were they in his way, and gave him the less trouble: For the Court
being suspected to the King of Navarre, the Prince of Cond^, and the other
Chiefs of their party, kept them at such a distance, as deprived them of the
means to sue for Governments, Offices, and commands of places; nay, it was a
favor to let them enjoy those they already had; so that living retired, and at
ease, but without credit, or consideration, their interest by degrees mouldred
away, and grew weak of it self: which was the posture the King would have them
in. But the heads of the League were in a far different condition, they had for
many years upheld their credit at Court, had discharged successively from
Father to Son, the greatest Offices of the Crown, were possessed of many
important Governments, and very considerable places, and by the greatness of
their Birth, and Services, by the reputation of their valor, and other eminent
qualities they were Masters of, endeavored to eclipse the Majesty of the King;
who, being less inclined to oftentation, lived a more retired life than they.

It was necessary to abate the growing greatness of those powerful, The state
of Affairs at Court, and the Kings cond^ct.
and dangerous Subjects; to effect which (which was the chief and most
important Affair of State) the King first exhibited a public and general
prohibition to all sorts of people, excepting the Queen his Mother, and the
Queen his Wife, not to presume to ask any thing of his Majesty, whether Money,
Offices, or Commands; reserving wholly to himself the disposition of all such
things, and that of his own voluntary grace, and bounty, and upon due
consideration of the party's Merit. And to the end that the over free access to
his person, might not give occasion to those he most suspected to exceed the
limits of this prohibition, he seconded that with another. That no person of
what quality soever, should come into his Cabinet, without he were called: but
from this general rule he made a particular exception for his Favorites, whom
he made free to enter at all hours, like enough on purpose to nettle the House
of Guise; though they were not the only men offended at it, almost all the
great men about the Court, being sensibly concerned, to be deprived of a
privilege, that was now only reserved for five or six of his Majesty's
Creatures.

The Lords of the House of Guise, being by this means excluded from all hope of
increasing their power by new acquisitions of trust, the King began to contrive
how he might gently withdraw what they already had, out of their hands; and
carried it so, that so often as there was any vacancy, by the decease of any of
their creatures, he immediately conferred those places upon some of his own;
and if at any time any of their Partisans were content to take money for such
charges, as they were seized of, the King would stick at nothing that might
satisfy them, to the end he might dispose places, into secure, and faithful
hands. The Duke of Ioyeuse by these two ways, that is by the King's gift when a
Government fell void, or otherwise by Contract, had obtained the Government of
Normandy, with Haure de Grace, ^aen, and other places: the Government of Anjou
for the Compte de Bouchage, his Brother; the Lieutenancy of Languedoc for his
Father, with many other important Governments and Places. The Duke of Espernon
had also the Government of Metz, and the Messin Country, that of Dauphine,
Boulogne, Calice, la Fere, Loches, the Citadel of Lions, and some others.

As it was necessary for these two great meant to find out assured Friends, and
faithful Servants, into whose hands they might safely commit so many several
places of trust, as the King's bounty had possessed them of; so was it the Duke
of Espernon's care to provide himself of such persons; and supposing he could
find none, who were likely to be more faithful to him, than those of his own
Kindred and Relation, he to that purpose called the greatest part of them about
his person. His elder Brother had by his recommendation the Government of
Dauphine, The Duke advances his own Relations.
in which employment he behaved himself so well, that he preserved that
Province entire in his Majesty's obedience during all the commotions of the
League: neither were his Services confined within the bounds of his Government;
he passed over several times into Provence, and secured that Country against
the attempts of the said League, when assisted both by Spain and Savoy. He also
opposed the power of the Hugonots, which was very considerable in both these
Provinces; so that France has to him only the obligation, that Dauphin^ is not
now in the Savoyard's hands, as well as the Marquisate of Saluzzo. Montcasin
the Dukes Cousin was put into Metz, Cajan his Brother had the Regiment of
Champagne, and soon after the Lieutenancy of Xaintogne, Angomois, and the
Country of Aulins. And many other places were disposed into the hands of
several men of trust, and quality, who depended upon the Duke.

But he had yet a Kinsman in Gascony, to whom, next to his Brother, he had a
particular regard above all others, which was Roger, afterward Duke de
Bellegarde, Son to Mounsieur de Terms, the Duke's Uncle by the Mothers side,
and Heir to the House of Bellegarde. This young Gentleman, being bred up
according to his condition, to all the exercises becoming a person of his Birth
and Quality, was by the Duke brought to Court; where he continued the care of
his Education in his own House, keeping him still to his Exercises, till he was
grown excellent in them all: but the Duke was not content to oblige, him only
in this, he further employed his care, and good Offices to place him in the
Kings esteem, wherein he succeeded perhaps beyond his own desire; Bellegarde
arriving to such a degree of Favor, as grew at last suspected to the Duke
himself.

Some years past over in these Court practices; Anno 1584.
neither from the time of the Treaty of Peace with the King of Navarre, in the
Year 1580. until the beginning of the Year 1584. were there any Affairs of
importance, save those of the Cabinet. The King constant to his first Maxims,
continually labored the ruin of the League, and of the Hugonot Party; neither
was he, in his own nature, more inclined to advance those he had a kindness
for, than he was bent to weaken, and depress those who were suspected to him.
The Duke of Guise, The first commotion of the League.
the Cardinal his Brother, their Relations, and Confederates, seeing all things
directed to this end, and not being able to endure the condition of private
persons to which they saw the King endeavored to reduce them, set on foot
great practices, both within, and without the Kingdom, and tried all imaginable
ways they thought might help to fortify and secure themselves. And as they had
hitherto been proceeded against without violence, so had they carried on their
practices without noise: but at last finding the King more openly labored
their ruin, which was already almost inevitable, they would no longer forbear
to unmask themselves, nor to publish their long premeditated designs by an open
Rupture.

In the beginning then of the Year 1585. Anno 1585.
the Duke of Guise retired himself to Ioinville, and there received into his
House the King of Spain's Deputies, together with the Sieur de Meneville
Attorney to the Cardinal of Bourbon, who did all the business of the League in
France. Where also the Duke of Mayenne his Brother, and diverse others of his
Partisans, repaired to him. At which Assembly it was resolved to break out
suddenly into open Arms, upon such conditions, as the Historians of that time
have already declared, and which is nothing to my business.

The King, who was soon advertised of this Conspiracy (which was now no longer
a secret) to hinder it from taking any dangerous effect, and in due time to
provide for the safety of the Kingdom, assembled, together with the Queen his
Mother, such persons as were of chiefest trust about him, and whose Counsels he
ever made use of in debates of greatest importance, to deliberate, and advise
what, in this posture of Affairs, was best to be done. These were the Dukes of
Espernon, of Joyeuse, and of Retz, the Chancellor Chiveruy, Bellieure, D'O,
Villeroy, and Villequier. The Duke of Espernon as the youngest, being commanded
to give his opinion first of the Proposition in hand, freely Remonstrated.

That so long as the ambition of the House of Guise had contained it self
within some moderate limits of respect to their Sovereign, he had infinitely
commended his Majesty's Clemency, that so long had winked at their faults,
expecting when Subjects of their quality and merit should come to themselves,
and see their own error. That in the beginning of great Crimes, Patience was
almost a necessary Virtue, and that it had often obliged such Offenders into
their duty, as it would have been a matter of some difficulty to have reduced
by force: but that this Patience had its bounds as well as other Virtues, and
that the excess of it degenerated into Vices, of all other most pernicious to
Princes. That he would never advise his Majesty to cruelty, because it was
dreadful, and inhumane, though it often begot tht Sovereign power a more
absolute respect. That profuseness begot love, at least in the receivers; and
that the other mistakes of Princes were seldom altogether unfruitful; whereas
an excessive toleration rendered them contemptible to all the world. That from
contempt men fell into hatred, and from hatred ran headlong into attempts. That
above all things Princes should fear being despised, which is infallibly
destructive to Authority; as on the contrary, Fear and Respect supports it.
That it was his opinion, the King without further deliberation should have
recourse to Arms. That his Enemies not having yet the assistance of Strangers,
and the Forces they expected at home not being yet united, would be easily
suppressed. That his Majesty ought not to suspect his own strength in this
occasion; that so good a cause as his could want no Soldiers, and that his own
Royal Courage would give vigor, and encouragement to all true Frenchmen to
maintain his Authority, not only against his Rebellious Subjects, but against
all the World.

The Chancellor Chiveruy, the Duke de Retz, and the Marquis D'O, were of this
opinion, and the King himself had too much experience, and too much judgment,
not to be of the same; but the Duke of Ioyeuse, Bellieure, Villeroy, and
Villequier, were of a contrary advice: to whom the Queen Mother adhering, the
King, who had ever a great deference to her Councils, cooled in the inclination
he had to that of the Duke of Espernon, and was overruled into mildness, and
moderation; which as they are usually, the ruin of all Affairs of this nature,
so they proved to be of this.

They thenceforward therefore began to treat about this War, and that by
propositions not like those of a Prince to his Subject; but such as were more
proper betwixt enemy, and enemy, that stood upon equal ground. The King, before
he would resolve upon the last remedy of Arms, first caused the Duke of Guise
to be sounded, to try, whether or no, he would by fair means be prevailed with
to leave of those practices his Majesty very well knew he entertained against
his Service, and his own Duty: which having in vain attempted, and finding his
obstinacy to be such, as was not to be overcome by gentle ways, he presently
dispatched away into Germany, and Switzerland, to make speedy Leavies both of
Horse and Foot; and conceiving he could not in the present necessity receive so
prompt, and so certain a succor from any, as from the King of Navarre, his
Majesty would try if he could not gain him to his Interest, that they might
jointly oppose the first fury of the League, that erected it self to their
common prejudice. In which deliberation there was notwithstanding an almost
invincible difficulty, namely the difference of Religion; for the King, what
need soever he had of the King of Navarre's assistance, could never persuade
himself to join with him in Arms, if he were not first a Catholic; wherein the
respect to his Conscience prevailed with him, above the consideration of his
Fortune, and Kingdom.

This point therefore, The King sends the Duke of Espernon to treat with the
King of Navarre.
upon which so much depended, was to be discreetly managed: and the Duke of
Espernon as Supreme in the Kings confidence, was, before all others chosen to
treat with the King of Navarre about this great Affair; which, that it might be
carried with the greater secrecy, the Duke pretended a visit to Madam de la
Valette, his Mother at Caumont, whom he had never seen since his advancement to
favor; nor whom (a rare example of Virtue, and Moderation in a person of her
Sex, and Condition) he could ever, with all the instance he could use, prevail
with, to come to Court, nor persuade to leave the sweet repose of her own
House, nor the modesty, and retiredness of her former life.

Things being thus ordered, the Duke began his Journey from Court with a Train,
and Magnificence; that is still remembered in all the places, through which he
past. He had above 500 Gentlemen, and many of those men of very great quality
in his attendance: so great authority and esteem, he had already acquired;
neither did that authority and esteem ever decline, but were his inseparable
Companions during his whole life. The King writ to all the places, through
which he was to pass, to receive him with the same respect, and to pay him the
same honors they would do to his own person: which was absolutely obeyed, if
not overdone, the Duke receiving infinite and unusual civilities, both at
Orleans, Poitiers, Bordeaux, Toulouse, and in all the other Cities through
which he passed. At last he arrived at Caumont, where he had the satisfaction
of seeing his Mother, who was no more dazzled with the immediate sight of her
Son's greatness, than she had been before elevated with the report of it. She
discoursed with him of Affairs of State, and of the advantages of his own
Fortune, with the Gravity and Authority of a Mother, but of a Virtuous and
Prudent Mother: and I have heard him say, That he received more safe and solid
Counsels from the pr^dent simplicity of that good Lady, than from the subtlety,
and experience, of the most practiced Courtiers.

After having staid some days in her company, and his chief business being not
to receive a dispatch there, he parted thence toward the King of Navarre, who
was then in the County of Foix. The King did him the honor to meet him as far
as Saverdun, where they had the first Conference. The second was at Pamiers, in
the same County of Foix, whither the Duke of Espernon (who could by no means
avoid the great crowd of Nobility, and Gentry that came from all parts of
Guienne, and Languedoc to see him) came so extraordinarily accompanied; that
the King of Navarre, who (designing to continue the same honor to him)
intended to have met him a good way out of Town, was advised to expect him on
foot at the Gates of the City, his own Friends and Retinue, being too few to
make up a number, that might hold any proportion with that the Duke brought
along with him.

In these two Conferences the Duke delivered what he had in Commission, D'
A^^igne.
fortifying the propositions he had to make with so many, and so powerful
Arguments; that the King of Navarre clearly satisfied of his own good,
discovered at last a great inclination to perform what the King desired of him,
viz. his Conversion to the Roman Catholic Religion. He evidently saw the
eminent danger, whereinto this great conspiracy of the League was likely to
precipitate him; with the advantages he might have by running the same fortune
with the King, of defending himself, and his Interest, by his Majesty's
Authority and Power.

Requelaure, and many other persons of good quality about him, fortified him in
this good deliberation; but he was dissuaded from it by a far greater number of
the other opinion, who represented to him, the hard usage he had received at
Court, the hazards he had run in his own person, and the persecution those of
the Reformed Religion, who were his Servants, and Friends, had suffered from
thence.

They did not stick further absolutely to impute all the hard measure the
Hugonot Party had received to this King; although the greatest violencies had
been exercised upon them in the Reign of Charles the Ninth, expressing as
passionate a hatred against him, as the League so impudently manifested in
their Rebellious Actions. And certainly the Misfortune of this Prince is never
too much to be lamented, nor the unsteddiness of his condition too much to be
wondered at; having his Kingdom divided by two Factions, so directly opposite
to one another that he could never serve himself by the one, to defend himself
from the other; and both sides, though implacable enemies betwixt themselves,
concurred nevertheless always in this, that they both equally desired his Ruin.

At last, after many Conferences, the King of Navarre gave the Duke his final
Answer at Pau, whither he had invited him to come, to this effect.

That he was the Kings most humble Servant, that he would justify himself to
be so upon all occasions, and that he would never separate himself from his
Service and Interests, if his Majesty did not constrain him to it, by
condescending too much to his Enemies Counsels: but that he could not, for any
consideration of Honor, Riches, or any other advantages that could be proposed
to him, depart from the Religion he had embraced, and was so firmly established
in.

It was in this pleasant Palace of Pau, and amongst the magnificences and
delights, that place then abounded in, that the Duke had first the honor to
see the Lady Catharine, the King of Navarre's only Sister, since Duchess of
Bar; in whom the Duke's Merit, who was then in the flower of his youth, and the
meridian of his favor, made such an impression, that she began from that time
to honor him with her favor, which she continued to him to her death. And it
is certain that the King her Brother (who perhaps did not think himself so near
that height of fortune, to which he soon after arrived, and who doubtless would
have been glad to have engaged the Duke absolutely to his Interests) made him
some propositions of Marriage with this Princess; but the condition of the
time, and intervening accidents, permitting that Treaty to pass no further, the
Duke was forced to content himself with the advantage of so glorious a
friendship, which was ever after dear, and precious to him, the whole remainder
of his life.

The King of Navarre to multiply still more entertainments, and favors upon
the Duke, would needs have him yet to give him the satisfaction of another
visit at Nerac; which the Duke could not handsomely deny, though the Kings
commands were something pressing for his return to Court: and as it is likely
the King of Navarre spun out the time, that he might more maturely deliberate
upon an Affair of so great importance; so was it the Duke's interest to give
him that leisure he desired, if possible to make his negotiation succeed
according to the King his Masters desire. But in the end finding he could not
overcome those traverses, and difficulties, that his Majesty's enemies still
strewn in his way, he prepared himself for his departure; and then it was,
that opening the last, and most secret part of his Commission; he told the King
of Navarre, That though he had denied his Majesty the satisfaction he desired
of him, yet that the King nevertheless considering him as his Kinsman, and next
Heir to the Crown, if God should please to dispose of him without Issue, had
given him in charge to let him know, that he would be well pleased, he should
use his best endeavor to preserve himself in a condition to oppose the League,
that was confederated to the ruin of the Royal House and Line. That since they
could not unite their Arms to resist their common Enemies, he should at least
assure himself of the places already in his possession; which his Majesty took
to be much safer, and much more at his devotion in his hands, than those that
should hereafter be possessed by the League. And that although in the present
state of Affairs he could not openly favor his designs, by reason of their
difference in Religion; nor avoid being instant for the restitution of those
cautionary places, that had been granted to him; yet that he should
nevertheless be very well satisfied with whatever he should do to his own
advantage. After this Declaration, which was received by the King of Navarre
with infinite demonstrations of Obligation and Respect, the Duke took post for
the Court at Lions, where the King impatiently expected his return.

He was now arrived within view of the City, and all the Court were mounted to
honor his arrival, the King himself having much ado to forbear going out to
meet him; when a strange, and unexpected Accident was like to have turned all
the Honors prepared for his welcome into the Funeral Pomp of his Obsequies:
For one of the Gentlemen, who came out to meet him, having accidentally
entangled the Chape of his Sword in the Duke's Bridle, the Horse took such a
fright at it, that he immediately ran away with his Master; nor could the Duke
stop him with all the art, and force he had, from throwing himself, and his
Rider headlong into a dreadful precipice; the place, very remarkable by the
greatness of the fall, and the wonderful escape, is to this day called
Espernons Leap; neither was there any man present, who did not confidently
believe the Duke certainly bruised to pieces: an opinion so firmly grounded in
every one, that the report of his Death was immediately carried to Lions, which
made as many several impressions in men's minds, as their inclinations were
different, toward him. But the King was afflicted beyond imagination, though
his Majesty was not long in that error: For some of the company, having
immediately descended the precipice, found the Horse, who by good fortune fell
plum upon his feet, and bore the whole weight of the fall, killed stone dead;
but the Duke miraculously escaped, with only a slight hurt in the Shoulder.
This accident set all the Court Wits on work; neither was there any, who did
not write something upon this occasion; but that which most pleased the Duke,
was an Emblem, that was presented to him. The body of the Emblem was a figure
of the Duke himself, hanging upon the brow of a precipice; so as that he seemed
to be irrecoverably falling from that prodigious height; when Fortune running
to his succor, withdrew him from the danger, with this Motto in Italian, the
first words thereof expressing his name, Eper non lasciarti may. A Motto the
Duke at first took for a good Omen; which time, and his own good conduct after
turned into a kind of Prophecy; and causing it to be engraved in a Cornelian,
and set in a Ring, he wore it many years upon his Finger, as a mark of his
gratitude to Fortune, or rather Providence, which is effectually that we call
Fortune; to which he ever attributed all the successes of his life, rather than
to his own conduct.

By this accident the Kings affection to the Duke seemed to be augmented, The
League makes the Duke of Esp^rnon's Voyage a Pretense to stir up the people.
at least it made a greater show of tenderness, than in former occasions, his
Majesty never almost departing his Chamber during the time he was constrained
to keep his Bed: and it was in this condition that he gave the King a full
account of his Journey, and Negotiation; a thing that furnished the League with
a sufficient pretense to decry the Kings actions; neither did the Chiefs of
that Faction fail to cause it proclaimed in the Pulpits (as it is usual to make
Holy Places and Religious men the Scenes, and Instruments to blemish the
Actions of Princes) that his Majesty was strictly united with Heretics: and
that this slander might the better be believed, the Duke of Espernon's Voyage
(whom they endeavored to render odious to the people, by calling him the
Abetter of that Party) was first brought upon the stage; they published that
Negotiation to be a conspiracy against the Catholic Religion, which was no way
to be opposed, but with their Swords in their hands: So that this was the first
Pretense they made use of, to color their Rebellion.

But before they would proceed to the effects of so violent a Rupture, The Duke
of Guise attempts to win the Duke of Espernon to his side by giving him his
Daughter.
the Duke of Guise, who would have been glad to have won the Duke of Espernon
to his Party, by that means to remove those Obstacles which the Dukes Vigor
and Fidelity ever had, and were still likely to oppose to his Designs, caused
him to be treated with about a match with his Daughter, since Princess of
Conty: a Princess that for the beauty of her person, the vigor of her mind,
and many other endowments, and excellent qualities, had few rivals in the
Kingdom; neither was the Duke of Espernon so blind, as not to see the honor he
should receive by this alliance, had it been proposed in a more quiet time; or
had the Duke her Father been upon better terms with the King: but knowing he
must by such a match abandon his duty, or at least be obliged to favor designs
he could by no means approve, the last consideration so absolutely prevailed
above the other, that he scarce deliberated upon a thing that was likely to
stagger his fidelity; and how dangerous soever it were to declare himself an
open enemy to the Duke of Guise, which he must of necessity do by refusing his
alliance; he rather chose to run that hazard, than to faulter in the least in
the duty he owed to his Prince and Benefactor.

It is hard to judge, what passions of grief, and despite, the Duke of Guise
was possessed withal, to see his designs so frustrated, and his offer so despised
by this refusal, which was in it self no light offense; neither did he
afterward meditate any thing more, than his revenge; and how to destroy him he
could neither by civilities, nor by threats acquire unto him: but his fury was
raised to the height by a new Honor the Duke and conferred upon him: which was
the second Pretense the League took hold of to justify their proceedings. The
second pretense of the League.


The King had some time before this bought the Duke of Mayenne out of his
charge of Admiral of France, which the Duke had the rather laid down in favor
of the Duke of Ioyeuse; and his Majesty desirous to confer upon the Duke of
Espernon also some Office of the Crown (to continue the same equality he had
ever observed in their Fortunes) proposed to the Duke of Guise a very
advantageous recompense in lieu of his Office of Grand-Maistre to the Kings
Household; and it seemed probable he would follow the example of his Brother the
Duke of Mayenne, who doubtless had not quitted so important a charge without
his elder Brother's advice: but the Duke of Guise notwithstanding would never
comply with his Majesty's desire; and though the King would never permit him to
exercise any function of his charge, thereby to make him weary of it; yet was
he still more obstinately bent to keep it, nor would ever consent (as he said)
That his Enemy should possess any of those charges he had exerciz'd, and been
invested withal. The King seeing him so obstinate, and perhaps not more
solicitous to advance the Fortune of his Favorite, than willing to spite the
Duke of Guise, resolved with himself to erect, purposely for the Duke of
Espernon, an Office, so honorable, and so great, as should by its authority
and power infinitely surpass all other the highest, and most important
employments both of the State and Crown: The Office of Colonel General of
France erected.
and this was that of Colonel General of France; an Office formerly divided
into two, on this side, and on that side the Mountains, of which Andelot had
possessed the one, and Strozzi the other; and after Andelot's death they were
united in Strozzi, who remained sole Colonel. After Strozzi's decease, the King
having by an Edict reunited these two Offices into one, made it an Office of
the Crown, under the Title of Colonel General of France, caused that Edict to
be ratified in Parliament, attributing to it the absolute power to name in
general Officers for all the vacant places in the French Militia, without so
much as excepting from this nomination, that of Camp-Master to the Regiment of
Guards: He established for the Colonel a Sovereign Court of Justice, or Council
of War, to determine of the Lives and Honors of Military men, without calling
any other to it, than his own Officers; adding to it besides several Graunts,
Privileges, and Pensions, and finally (to sum up all his bounty) his Majesty
delivering the Commission into the Dukes hands, told him, that nothing troubled
him, but that he knew not how to invest him into a more absolute Authority, and
that he could not add a part of the Royal Dignity to his charge. And it is
certain, that in giving the Duke the Governments of Metz, Toul, and Verdun, his
Majesty would have given them in Sovereignty, and have demis'd to him the Title
of the Crown: but the Duke displeased with this proposition, as an injury
offered to his Obedience and Loyalty, complained to the King, that his Majesty,
honoring him with so noble an employment, should go about to deprive him of
the dearest Relation he had, which was that of his Majesty's most humble, and
obedient Subject, an honor that in his soul he preferred before all titles of
Sovereignty, and all the advantages of Fortune his Majesty could prefer him to;
and thereupon received both the Governments, and the charge of Colonel General,
under the Kings Authority.

From this new advancement the League, as I have said before, derived their
second pretense for the taking of Arms; they looked upon the Duke of Espernon's
new Honor, as an offense to their whole Party; and the Duke of Guise took it
for a particular injury to himself, and thereupon openly published.

That there were now no more Employments, The Duke of Guise's complaints.
Riches, or Honors, save only for the Duke of Espernon, and la Valette his
Brother. That the State was only impoverished by profusions made in their
favor. That they were the true causes of the peoples oppression. That the
Treasure, set apart for the extirpation of Heresy, was by them perverted to
their own uses, and particular profit. That the greatest Dignities, the most
important Places, and Governments of greatest concern, were too many advantages
for their ambition. That whilst the Kings good Servants were neglected, and
kept under, there were new Offices, with unheard of Privileges, contrived, and
erected for them. That if the power they had over the King were longer
suffered, they would equally ruin the State, and Religion. That the Duke of
Espernon was therefore to be removed from Court, if men desired to see an end
of public Miseries. That his Majesty being delivered from his Counsels, which
were equally violent, and interessed, would doubtless for the future be more
favorable to his good Subjects, and better inclined to the Catholic Cause.

At the same time a Manifesto was published by the Cardinal of Bourbon, who was
the declared Head of that Faction, containing principally the foregoing
complaints, and immediately after followed the rising into Arms. The League
takes up Arms.
The first design of the League was upon Metz, as if they meant to strike at
the heart of the Duke of Espernon's Fortune; a place so considerable, that the
Duke had reason to look upon it, as the surest foundation of his greatness:
neither did he in his latter years condescend to any thing with more
unwillingness, and reluctance, than to the surrender of that place, that
proposition seeming to him, as though men were bent to the total ruin of his
House; nor could he ever have been persuaded to have stripped himself of such a
defense, upon a less consideration, than the investiture of his Son the
Cardinal of la Valette into that Government; who being younger by forty years,
than himself, he might reasonably hope, it would continue in his Family at
least during his life: but God was pleased to dispose it otherwise.

To make a right judgment of the importance of this place, it will be necessary
to consider its Site, and condition; and the share it has ever had in the
Duke's Fortune does indeed require it should be something insisted upon. The
description of the City of Metz, and i^s importance.
Metz then is a City something bigger than Bordeaux, or Orleans; that is to
say, one of the greatest, and the fairest in the Kingdom, full of Inhabitants,
and those a rich and industrious people; to whom the neighborhood of Germany
gives great facility, to an advantageous Commerce. She was in former times
thought beautiful enough to be the Metropolis of Austrasia, once the
Inheritance of one of our Kings: but when the Empire of Germany began to
decline, and that the Princes who were Subject to it began to withdraw
themselves from their obedience (every one being ambitious to be Sovereign in
his own Dominions) many Cities, which were also in the same subjection, allured
by the tempting sound of Liberty, followed the same example. Of these Metz was
one, who for many years took leave to govern her self by her own Laws, annually
creating Sovereign Magistrates, disposing absolutely of the Lives and Estates
of her Subjects, Coining Money, and in all things taking upon her the Authority
of a Sovereign Jurisdiction; in which condition she maintained her self, till
the Year 1552. that the Constable Montmorency, passing with the King's Army
that way, totally freed her from all kind of Homage to the Empire, and settled
it under the Protection of the Crown of France. It Is true that King Henry the
Second, in whose Reign this Conquest was made, continued to this City her
ancient privileges; but withal to assure himself of his possession, he did
exceedingly fortify it, establishing a Governor of his own, and causing a
Citadel to be built, which was mightily cried up, for one of the best, and most
exact of that time: but this was before Sieges were turned into a Science, and
that the industry of man had left little to Fortune, in this kind of War. It
does not now carry that Reputation; and in this condition it was when the Duke
entered upon his Government, only with this difference, that what its own Laws
had formerly performed by their own Virtue, during its independency, was now
executed by his order, under the Authority of the Royal Name, the Duke (as I
have said before) absolutely refusing to accept it upon other terms. He
annually appointed, and created the Supreme Magistrate, whom they call (...)
Sheriff.
Maistre Eschevin, and appointed him his Council, and Judges, who were to
determine in Sovereignty, upon the Lives, Honors, and Estates of all the
Inhabitants: but withal the Duke had Authority upon occasion to censure them,
had power to remove them from their Magistracy within their year, if he saw
cause; or to continue them beyond their term, if he thought fit. It is then no
wonder if he were infinitely respected in a place, where all things so
absolutely depended upon him: but that which was indeed very rare, and very
commendable, was, that in so unlimited a power, and in the course of above
threescore years, that this City continued in his Custody, he behaved himself
with that Justice, and Moderation, that not so much as any one Citizen ever
complained of his administration; neither is there any now living, that do not
yet remember, with a kind of delight, the indulgence, and sweetness of his
Government.

Whilst the Duke stood seized of a place of this consequence, and so disposed
to his service, it was no easy matter to cut him off; such a retirement being
a sufficient refuge from all sudden danger: neither (the Town being entrusted
in the hands of valiant, and faithful friends) had it been convenient (even
when he was most remote from it) to provoke him; lest a place of that
importance, should have taken part in his disgrace, and followed the humor of
his discontents. It was therefore by the taking of this Town, that the League
would begin to labor the Duke's ruin, and in that the advancement of their
own Affairs.

The most considerable Forces, the League had then on foot, were those of the
Duke of Lorain; a Prince who having till this time contained himself Neuter in
all the Affairs of France, upon this occasion thought fit, it seems, to declare
himself partial to his Family, in hopes nevertheless to join Metz, Toul, and
Verdun to his own Dukedom: neither was his design unlikely to succeed; for the
two last having made no great difficulty of receiving the Duke of Guise, he had
reason (considering the intelligence he had in the City) to expect the same
from Metz, had not the Duke of Espernon by his vigilance prevented him,
seasonably re-inforcing the Garrison, with diverse Gentlemen his particular
Servants, and a good number of Soldiers; by whose coming it was so well
secured, that the League thought it not fit to attempt it.

This great storm, thus blown over, the Duke, alarmed by the late hazard this
City had run, resolved to establish himself in that important possession, so as
that for the future it might be secured from the like danger; and to that
purpose some of his friends having rendered the Governor suspected to him by
some carriage of his at such time as the Army of the League were approaching
toward him, though the grounds of this mistrust were not in the Dukes opinion
clear enough to countenance an open rupture with him; yet were they sufficient
to make the Duke remove him from that trust, and to call him about his own
person, instituting Sobole, who before was only Lieutenant of the Citadel, in
the absolute authority both of the City, Citadel, and Messin Country; adding
withal ten thousand Crowns in Gold to mend his Equipage, that he might with the
more honor support the honorable charge he had seated him in; a bounty we
shall hereafter see how Sobol^ requited: but that being the business of another
time, I shall refer it to another place, and pursue my former Subject.

The Leaguers not contenting themselves with those petty successes in Lorain,
The Progress of the League.
and being made wise and active, by the example of the Kings ruinous
supineness, who sat still, in vain expecting the arrival of his Foreign
Forces, almost at the same time by the several Captains they had disposed into
diverse Provinces, surpised a great many of the chief Cities of the Kingdom,
and made no light attempts upon the rest. The Duke of Guise after the taking of
^oul, and Verdun, (which I have spoke of before) possessed himself yet of
Meziere, by which he assured to himself the whole Country of Champagne: The
Duke of Mayenne took the City, and Castle of Dijon, which made him Master of
the D^tchy of Burgundy: la Chartre seized of Bourges, Entragues of Orleans; the
Count de Brisac of Angiers, and many other Cities of that Province. Vaillack
had hoped to have done as much by Bordeaux, by the neighborhood of
Chasteau-Trompette, of which he was Governor: but the Marshall de Matignon
broke his design, and Mars^lles, by the Loyalty of her good Inhabitants,
maintained it self against the Faction of some who labored to betray it into
the power of the League: but the enterprise of the Citadel of Lions succeeded
better with Mandelot, who was Governor of the City, and one of the Duke of
Guise's firmest Adherents; who having been formerly awed into his duty by the
Citadel, in which le Passage had been placed by the Duke of Espernon, to
preserve a City so important to his Majesty's Service; he who beforehand had
been made privy to the Duke of Guise's Designs, as soon as ever he heard they
were in Arms, failed not suddenly to begirt the Citadel; and being assisted by
the people (who naturally hate to be bridled by a Fortress) having surpised le
Passage, who little suspected any such thing, made himself Master of the place,
and immediately razed it to the ground.

It was upon this occasion that the ill will which had so long been concealed;
yet had continually been fostering in the Bosoms of the Duke of Espernon, and
Mounsieur de Villeroy, broke out; from which quarrel, in the succession of
time, sprung so many, and so important consequences, The Rupture betwixt the
Duke of Espernon and Villeroy.
as do not only take up a large share of the Dukes Life, but also make up a
considerable part in the general History of that time; which obliges me in this
place to discourse, both what I have received from the Dukes own mouth, and
what I have gathered from the Commentaries of Mounsieur de Villeroy himself.

Mounsieur de Villeroy had been from the Dukes infancy Secretary, and Minister
of State; a friend to Mounsieur de la Valette the Father, and a man of great
Credit, and Interest, in the King's Council; he had seen the beginning, and
increase of the Dukes Favor, at which he ought not in reason to repine: but on
the contrary had cause to believe, that such a friend as he, would fortify him
with the King, and be no little assisting to support that Trust he already
possessed in the management of Affairs. And in effect the Duke had a true
affection, and esteem for him, who as he was ever very respective, and
constantly fixed to all his Fathers Interests (whose memory he had in the
greatest veneration) it is certain had a particular consideration for all his
Friends; of which number Mounsieur Villeroy being one, the first years of the
Duke's Favor were past over in a strict correspondency with him: but at last
Villeroy perceiving the Dukes Credit proceeded so far, as wholly to possess
that interest in the Kings Bosom he pretended to share, he began in the end to
grow jealous of a Prosperity, he ought so much the more to have cherished, by
how much it was likely to be more useful to him; and thenceforward began openly
to thwart all his opinions in Council, raised up a party against him, to lessen
his Reputation there: and the Queen Mother nettled to see her Authority weakened
with the King, by the great power the Duke had with him; desiring nothing more,
than to have him removed, that she might recover her former possession, could
find no one so ready as Mounsieur de Villeroy to second her Passion, and the
animosity she had conceived against him. They jointly advised that it was
necessary to sacrifice the Duke to the malice of the League; and that the King
ought to abandon him for the general satisfaction; a Counsel that had been
voluntarily followed by the Duke himself: and I have heard him say, he would as
willingly have retired then from Court, as he did not long after, could he have
obtained the Kings permission: but his Majesty very well perceiving that his
Favorite was only a pretense the League made use of to cover their own
ambition, that it was the Royal Authority they aimed at, and that their design
was only to remove so good a Servant, with less difficulty to make themselves
Masters of Affairs; the more obstinately they insisted upon that Article, the
more resolute his Majesty was to protect him.

The Duke very well informed that Villeroy was one of those, who contributed
most to his Persecution, and seeing how publicly he professed to desire his
ruin, resented it with an Animosity proportionable to the Injury received;
which was the more violent, by how much the offense came from a person he had
never done any ill Office to, and whom he had ever made it his business to
oblige. They were in this posture of unkindness, on the one side, and the
other, when happned the taking of the Citadel of Lions; before which time it
was thought, Villeroy had secretly treated of a Marriage betwixt Alincourt his
Son, and Mandelot's only Daughter; not having dared publicly to do it by
reason of the intelligence Mandelot held with those of the League: but having
upon this occasion taken up Mandelot's Interests against le Passage; that is to
say, against the Duke himself, le Passage being his creature, he offered to
undertake for Mandelot's fidelity to the King, provided his Majesty would
please to consent to the Marriage proposed, and settle upon Alincourt the
Government of Lions in reversion, in favor of the match; which the King, being
reduced to the necessity of taking all men for friends, who were not actually
otherwise, was sorc'd to allow of, and to ratify what he could not well
impeach; by that means trying to draw Mandelot over to him: but the Duke
exasperated to the last degree could no longer smother his passion, nor
dissemble his animosity against Villeroy; but spoke freely, and aloud to his
disadvantage, and of the Correspondence he held with the League, which was the
first effect of their open, and declared Hatred.

The end of the first Book.
THE HISTORY Of the LIFE of the Duke of Espernon.
The Second Book.
AFter the Surrender, or rather the Revolt, of the many places already
mentioned, the Duke of Guise, conceiving it necessary to press nearer the King,
the sooner, and with less difficulty to obtain his ends, ordered the General
Rendezvous of his Army to be at Chalons. Which place he made choice of for two
Reasons; first, because by the nearness of it to Paris, The Duke of Guise
approaches with his Army near Paris.
(being but three little days Journey from thence) his presence would be apt to
fortify the Citizens in their Devotion to him, and secondly, the number of his
Confederates being so great, and some of them of so great Authority in the
City, he could by their means continually infuse into the people such
dispositions, as might best serve his purpose: hoping by this means, either to
incline the King, to satisfy all his demands; or at least to be able to raise
such mutiny and confusion in the City, as might give him opportunity, at one
time, or another, to effect that by fine Force, he could not obtain by the more
moderate ways of Addresses, and Treaty.

Then it was that his Majesty perceived the manifest peril his Person, and his
Affairs were in, and then would he take up Arms for his own defense; which he
had no sooner resolved, but that at the same time he saw it was too late, and
impossible to be done. The Reiters which he had raised in Germany could not
come to him, (the Duke of Lorain having denied them a passage through his
Country) and all the Forces within the Kingdom were either engaged with the
League, or with the King of Navarre; so that the King was left utterly naked of
all defense, save of those few Servants he had about his own person: Nay even
those who, in the beginning of these troubles, would with all their hearts have
assisted him to punish to Duke, whilst merely in the condition of a Rebel,
durst not, now he was grown to that formidable height, and become the head of a
strong Party, attempt to succor a weak, and disfurnish'd Prince, against an
armed and prevailing Subject.

The thoughts of War then being altogether fruitless, and impossible in the
posture the King then was, he must of necessity have recourse to the Treaties
of Peace; to which resolution he was further necessitated by the King of
Navarre's breaking into Arms, at the same time, which I should not however have
mentioned for a second Motive his Majesty had to satisfy the League, had this
Prince pretended no further, than simply to defend his own Fortune with those
Forces he had already had in France; for then his designs might have been
favorable to the King, and either have kept the Army of the League wholly
employed; or at least have diverted their designs: but he fearing at once to be
oppressed by the Union of two Catholic Armies, had recourse to strangers for
aid. The King knew he had treated with the Queen of England, and with the
States of Holland, who both of them assisted him with Men, and Money, and that
all the Protestant Princes of Germany, made extraordinary Provision to send him
a powerful succor; so that he now evidently saw, he must in good earnest close
with the League, and join with one of the Factions, to preserve himself from
being a Prey to both.

The Queen Mother had for many years been employed Mediatrix in all the
accomodations of Peace that had been concluded in France; The Queen Mother sent
to Treat of a Peace.
and it was commonly believed, she was not then altogether without such an
Interest in the Duke of Guise, as might have established this to the Kings
satisfaction: I never heard the Duke of Espernon say she was partial to that
Faction; and though he received several ill Offices from her in his declining
Favor, he notwithstanding ever retained a constant Respect for so great a
Princess, who was his Masters Mother, and ever defended her Honor against all
the calumnies of the time. It Is true he thought she was not altogether
displeased that there should ever be a party on foot in France, such as might
oblige the King her Son to make use of her Counsels and Mediation; her great,
and ambitious spirit ill digesting the calms of peace; and worse enduring to be
deprived of an employment; in which she had ever been as successful as
necessary. Her therefore the King passionately entreated to labor an
Accommodation with the Duke of Guise, an Office she as cheerfully undertook,
and two days after began her Journey toward Espernay, where she had appointed
the Duke to meet, and whither he accordingly came, together with the Cardinal
of Bourbon. In the first overtures she found a spirit puffed up with success, and
wholly averse to Peace: but when he had more deliberately considered, that it
was not yet time to weaken the King's Authority (which he thought was
absolutely at his mercy) that there would afterward remain the King of Navarre
a powerful, active, and diligent Enemy, backed with great Forces within, and
ready to receive greater from without the Kingdom; he conceived it requisite to
subdue him first, that he might afterward dispose of the Kings Affairs with
less opposition: so that he altogether fell from the extravagancy of his first
demands, and only insisted upon the suppression of the King of Navarre, which
he called the extirpation of Heresy; though it was in effect in order only to
the establishment of his own Power.

The King had so openly declared himself an Enemy (as effectively he was) to
this new Religion; and it so much imported him to clear himself to his Subjects
from those aspersions the League had cast upon him, that he was now
necessitated to declare against the King of Navarre in the most severe Form,
the League could themselves invent; yet was it not without the greatest
reluctance imaginable, that his Majesty was constrained to that extremity
against a Prince, whom (as has been said before) it was not his interest wholly
to suppress: but having lost the opportunity he once had, whilst they were
weak, and inconsiderable, of chastising the Heads of the League, he saw himself
now necessitated to grant them that, he could no longer, without apparent
Ruin, refuse. His Wisdom then prompting him to submit to the necessity of
Affairs, he made a show of complying in all things with their desires; and that
he might with less difficulty incline the Duke of Espernon to consent to a
resolution he had ever before been so much against, he privately told him, That
he did not consent to those things that were exacted from him without very
great Aversion, but that he hoped to reap from thence a signal effect, and a
very great advantage to his Affairs; that the Party of the League was now too
strong to be suppressed by force: that they had brought their Armies to the G^tes
of Paris, and that Paris it self was corrupted in their Favor: That he very
well saw the time to chastise them was now past, and that he now knew (but too
late) what he had lost in letting the occasion slip, wherein they might have
been punished, when he had advised him to it; but that such an opportunity
would certainly return again, and that then his evil Counselors should never
dissuade him from making better use of his time: That in the mean time it was
necessary to dissemble, that they might the better look into their Enemies
Interests, to discover their weakness, and to make use of that discovery to
their ruin: That there was no Party so strong that was not defective
somewhere: That it was necessary to discover where that defect lay, and that it
was impossible to make that discovery, without engaging with, and being
interested in the cause they meant to overthrow: That being Head of the League,
as they would have him declare himself to be, he should be able to strew such
difficulties in the way of their Designs, as that they would find themselves
perplexed in every enterprise they should undertake. Though the Duke of
Espernon had much rather his Majesty would have defended his Honor, and
trampled Authority, by the Arms of those few good Catholic Servants he had,
and to have joined with the King of Navarre (with whom he did not think an
accommodation impossible) and with such Foreign Forces, as were affectionate to
the Crown; yet seeing it was now expedient to submit to the necessity of the
time, he humbly acquiesc'd in the good Pleasure of the King his Master.

In this posture of Affairs the King writ to the Queen his Mother, that she
might conclude the Treaty upon such Conditions, as she thought fit; and, for a
further testimony of his Candor, and sincere intention herein, sent the
dispatch by the Duke of Espernon, whom all the world knew to have the greatest
power with him, and the greatest Antipathy for the League; to the end that the
Lords of Guise might not in the least doubt the observance of a Treaty, that
was ratified on his part, by a person who lived in so eminent a degree of
favor with him.

This employment of the Duke's, though it was only intended to countenance the
Queens Negotiation, and to make it more easily succeed, did nevertheless
incense her in the highest degree against him. She looked upon his
interposition, as proceeding from a diffidence the King had in her, and not
daring to manifest her dissatisfaction to him, she threw it wholly upon the
Duke, and took from thence a new occasion to augment the ill will she had
formerly conceived against him. The Treaty was notwithstanding concluded at
Nemours, wherein the Lords of Guise had the full of their own demands, whether
against those of the Hugonot Party; or in their own particular favor. They
were to command the Armies, The Treaty concluded at Nemours.
that should be set forth against the Hugonots; and over and above the great,
and advantageous Governments they were already possessed of, the King delivered
over twelve, or fifteen of the best Cities in the Kingdom into their hands;
together with vast sums of money: And then it was, that men were undeceived,
and that all men plainly saw they minded more their own private Interest, and
the establishment of their own greatness, than they regarded the advancement of
the Catholic Religion.

The Treaty then being concluded, the Duke of Guise came to kiss the Kings
Hands at St. Maur des ^aussez, his Majesty so ordering it purposely to defeat
the Duke of the Parisians applause; from whence after the Ratification of the
Articles, the Duke returned into his own Government of Champagne, dismissed
with some feigned Demonstrations of Favor, which was also on his part received
with the same dissimulation.

From thence forward the King began with great artifice to spin out the violent
designs of the League, The War begun by the King against the Hugonots.
manifesting nevertheless such an animosity against the Hugonots, and so firm a
resolution vigorously to effect what had been concluded against them, as he
conceived necessary to satisfy a people jealous of his sincerity, and apt to
take up new suspicions upon every instigation of their own corrupted fancy:
And in order thereunto he went to the Parliament in great Formality, and State,
to cause an Edict to pass against those of the Reformed Religion; where after a
revocation of the cautionary Towns, of the Chambres Mi-parties, Chambres
Mi-parties were Courts of Justice established in diverse* Cities of France, in
favor of the Hugonots, of which Relig^on the one half were, and the other half
Catholics.
of the liberty of Conscience, and of other Concessions that had formerly been
granted in their Favor, they were prescribed by a day prefixed, either to
abjure their Religion; or to be declared enemies to the State, and punishable
to the last degree.

This first Act thus played, his Majesty assembled the Provost des Marchands,
and the Eschevins of Paris to demand money of them for the prosecution of the
War they had so ardently desired; which he also proposed to the Clergy, who had
showed themselves no less zealous than they: but finding both the one, and the
other equally cold in the business, after he had reproached them with their
unseasonable violence, which he said, had hindered him from bringing about by
easy, and infallible ways, the utter extirpation of Heresy (a thing he more
earnestly desired, than any of them) he told them flatly, that since by them
this business was first set on foot, it was reasonable, that they who had been
the promoters of it, should likewise be at the charge of the War.

His Majesty thought by grasping thus at their purses to take off their edge of
fighting, and by representing to them the charge, and incommodities of War, he
should at the same time imprint in them a hatred, and aversion to it. But what
reasons can prevail with a pre-possess'd, and exasperated multitude? The people
displeased at the difficulties the King laid before them, and suf^ering
themselves to be seduced by the malepert Preachers of the League, who by their
seditious Sermons had soon persuaded them into commotion, imposed upon the King
a necessity of beginning the War; and forgetting the respect due to the Majesty
of their Prince, gave him in plain terms to understand, that he should not be
safe in his own Louvre, if he did not forthwith betake himself to Arms.

The condition of the time, and the conditions of the Treaty lately concluded
with the League, equally obliging the King to fall into speedy action, and also
to serve himself with some of the Heads of that Party in this Expedition; his
Majesty to comply with his own necessity, and likewise to satisfy that
Article, dispatched the Duke of Mayenne into Guienne, against the King of
Navarre, the Duke of Guise himself desiring to remain in his Government of
Champagne, to guard the Frontiers, and that he might have in the other Armies.
He was also to set on foot such persons, as he knew were faithful to him: He
sent the Marshall de Biron into Xaintonge against the Prince of Cond^, and the
Duke of Ioyeuse into Languedoc, reserving for the Duke of Espernon, as a
Servant in whom he reposed the greatest trust, the Employment of Provence: The
Duke of Espernon sent with an Army into Provence.
A Government which being a little before left vacant by the Death of the Grand
Prior of France, Bastard of Valois, had been conferred upon him; and a Province
wherein (of all other) his Majesty's Authority had the greatest need of
support, having formerly been much weakened by the two contrary Factions that
divided the State: Whereof one was commanded by the Sieur de Lesdiguieres, Head
of the Hugonot Party; and the other by the Sieur de Vins, the Kings Lieutenant
there, but a man very partial to the League. His Majesty therefore desiring,
amidst the confusion that was made by these two Parties, to secure the Country
to himself, sent thither the Duke of Espernon, with a good Army, appointing
Mounsieur de la Valette his Brother, for his Lieutenant in that Service;
neither was he deceived in his choice: for in less than four months time,
Province, and Dauphine were wholly settled in his obedience, the only part
almost of the Kingdom, where his Majesty was effectively, and truly served; and
had he had many more such Servants to employ, his Affairs had certainly, and in
a very little time, changed their face, and the Royal Authority been rescued
from the Rebellious Insolence, that trod it under foot in most Provinces of
France.

The Office of Colonel General having given the Duke absolute Authority over
the Infantry, there was great contest amongst the old Regiments, which should
be preferred to follow him in this action, in which he made shift to satisfy
the ambition of the greatest part; his Majesty (who gave him absolute power in
matters of greater difficulty) being content, that his best Soldiers should
serve under his trustiest Captain: so that he drew out a good part of the
Regiment of Guards, of that of Ficardy, and Champagne, with other Companies out
of other Regiments, to the number of ten thousand Foot; to which was added
twelve hundred Horse, and twelve piece of Cannon, with their Equipage.

The Duke, Anno 1586.
having about the end of Summer led his Army into Provence, put them
immediately into vigorous Action. Vins was the first he undertook, who, having
before been worsted by Lesdiguieres, was in no condition of making any great
resis^ance; and Lesdiguieres, though victorious over the League, finding yet
himself too weak to oppose the King's Army, conducted by so experienced
Commanders, by withdrawing into his own strength, gave the two Brothers liberty
to make themselves Masters of Seynes, Breoules, Chorges, and many other
Considerable places as well in Provence, as Dauphine with wonderful expedition:
so that by these successes the two Factions, which had so long afflicted those
two good Provinces, being equally suppressed, the Duke had leisure to return to
Court, where his presence was not a little necessary to countermine such
Practices (of which Mounsieur de Villeroy says in his Mesmoires the Duke
suspected him to be Author) as were by his Enemies set on foot against him.
Neither did the Duke need to make any great difficulty of retiring from
Provence, considering the good posture he had brought Affairs into, and that he
left his second self upon the place, not only in fidelity, and zeal to the
King's Service, but also in valor, and experience; namely, Mounsieur de la
Valette his Brother: a man whose Virtues had acquired so great a Reputation
with all worthy men, that he is never to be spoke of, without very worthy
mention, and the highest Characters of Honor. But the Duke had no sooner
turned his back of Provence, and taken back part of the Army with him, than the
contrary Factions, encouraged by this Division of the Army, made head anew: so
that it was necessary to set another Army on foot to oppose them; the care of
which now wholly rested upon Valette: nor did there need a more active and
experienced Captain. His principal Exploits were against the League, to whose
succor the Duke of Savoy came in person, an ambitious Prince, and one that
watching all opportunities of enlarging his own Dominion, had from the Leagues
first taking Arms, joined himself with the Countess of Saut, the Sieur d^ Vins,
the Compte de Carses, and other persons of Quality of that side; neither has he
(what Treaties of Peace soever have been concluded with the League) ever
desisted from his first design of keeping that Country by force of Arms. But
la Valette after having won from him the so celebrated Battle of Vignon, did so
uncessantly press upon him, and in several other encounters obtained so many
advantages over him, that he forced him to retire beyond the Alps, and to let
Provence alone. Neither did Dauphine escape his diligence, for Lesdiguieres
finding himself too weak to meet him in the Field, gave him opportunity to
withdraw Geyssens from the Citadel of Valence, which he held in the name of
the League, having been placed in that command by the Duke of Mayenne, and to
recover Gap into the King's Obedience. So that the two Factions, that of the
League, and that of the Religion, being equally weakened by his Valor and
Conduct; he then so established those two Provinces in their duty, that it was
afterward no hard matter for him to continue them in that posture of
Obedience, until the death of the King.

Whilst Mounsieur de la Valette was employed about these brave Services for the
Crown, Mounsieur de Villeroy, a declared Enemy to the Duke his Brother, New
discontents betw^xt the Duke and Mounsieur de Vill^r^y.
was no less busy, with all the ill Offices he could contrive, to ruin both
their Credits with the King: Which though the Duke had long observed, and as
long forborne to take notice of; yet could he at last no longer restrain himself
from breaking out to a high, and public Rupture with him. It was at St, Aignan
that it happened, at the time the Army of Reiters were preparing to enter the
Kingdom; and that the King was consulting of the means to hinder their passage.
I have already given an account of the Animosities betwixt these two great
Ministers, and the Causes that produced them, which perhaps I should not so
punctually have done; neither should I now do it, had not D'Avila an Author of
great Repute for the History of that time enlarged himself more thatn ordinary
upon this Difference, as upon an accident very considerable, and of great
importance to the general Affairs that were then in agitation.

The Duke then, and Villeroy being upon these ill terms, the King at the
especial instance of the Duke had assigned a sum of 20000 Crowns only, for
the entertainment of Mounsieur de la Valette's Army, a proportion very
inconsiderable for the great end to which it was designed; but very great
considering the necessities the State was then in: which money Villeroy
(notwithstanding his Majesty's Order) having diverted to the Payment of the
Grand Provost, and his Archers, the Duke discovered it to the King in open
Council, complaining that a sum so disproportionable to the utility of his
Brothers Services should be diverted to another use. To which Complaint
Villeroy who was present replied aloud in his Majesty's Presence, That what the
Duke had said, was not true. It is easy to judge, whether the Duke, who was
then raised to the highest degree of Favor, were surpised with so tart, and
so unexpected an Injury. I have heard him say, That in his whole life, he was
never so sensibly offended; nevertheless he had so much power over himself, as
to forbear all kind of violence in the Kings Presence, so much as from any
extravagancy of words: neither made he other reply to Mounsieur de Villeroy but
this, That the Presence of the King which had encouraged him to give that
Language, obliged him to be Silent: but that he should repent it.

The King both disquieted, and displeased at this Quarrel, and willing to
interrupt them from proceeding further, went immediately out of the Closet,
expecting the Duke should follow him; but he staying behind, and being now no
longer awed by the Reverence due to his Majesty's Person, fell very severely
upon Mounsieur de Villeroy for the words past: some say he proceeded to high
threats, that he had his hand up to have struck him, and that he gave him some
very unhandsome language; though I never heard the Duke confess so much, in the
many times he has discoursed of that business: But Mounsieur de Villeroy
immediately went and complained to the King of the Duke's Threats, demanding
Assurance, and Protection from him; where receiving no very satisfactory
answer, he waited time, and opportunity, by working his own revenge to procure
his own Safety, which happened not long after, when we shall see the Duke's
Valor frustrate all his Enemies Designs. But let us in the mean time return to
the general Business.

We have already observed, that from the first insurrection of the League, the
King of Navarre not doubting, but that all their preparations were chiefly
intended against him, had earnestly solicited all the Confederates of his
Religion, not only at home, but in Foreign Parts to his aid: but when he
understood, that, by the mediation of the Queen Mother, The entry of the
Reiters into France, and the Kings prudent conduct in this War.
the Treaty of Nemours, had been signed by the King himself at St. Maur; he,
then foreseeing the storm that was ready to break upon him, very well knew,
that he should infallibly be overwhelmed, without a speedy succor. He
therefore again pressed his Allies immediately to send their Forces, if they
desired to find him in a condition to receive the effects of their Assistance,
his Enemies so passionately precipitating his Ruin. The German Princes spurred
on by this new Solicitation, and having yet been ancient Allies to the Crown of
France, would, it should seem, proceed with some show of respect, and thereupon
concluded amongst themselves to send first an honorable Embassy to the King,
before they would engage in so important a Quarrel. In this occurrence all the
Court expected some Civil Remonstrance on the German Princes part; but they
soon found themselves deceived; for the Ambassadors either prevailed upon by
their Confederates in France, or transported with their own Zeal to Religion,
and the passion they had for those of that Party, having publicly reproached
the King with his breach of Faith toward his Protestant Subjects, it evidently
appeared, that their design was not to mediate an Accommodation; but to push
things on to the decision of Arms, by giving the King a premeditated Affront. I
have heard the Duke say that he was present at the delivery of this Oration,
and that the King justly nettled at so saucy an Embassy, after having in the
heat, and apprehension of so great an injury, spoken with greater eloquence,
than ever till that time he had heard him do, he positively, and for a final
answer, returned the lie to whoever should reproach him with the breach of his
Faith. The Ambassadors dismissed after this manner, failed not at their return
home, to exasperate their several Princes to the last degree; who, being before
resolved upon a War, made speedy and great Leavies, and soon set such an Army
on foot, as they thought, joined to that the King of Novarre had already of his
dependants, should be able absolutely to subdue the Catholic Party in France.

The King, as he very well foresaw what inconvenience the entry of such a
multitude of strangers must of necessity bring upon his Kingdom, so did he by
all imaginable ways try to prevent their coming: and seeing that nothing, but
satisfying the King of Navarre could possibly divert that mischief, he once
more tried by the means of the Queen his Mother, if possible to win him to a
timely accommodation. Which being by her undertaken, after many delays,
scruples, and jealousies on both sides, a Conference was at last concluded on
at St. Brix, a private house seated upon the Banks of Charente near Coynack:
but this Conference nevertheless being able to produce no good effect, by
reason of that invincible difficulty, the difference of Religion, and the
German Princes hasting away their Armies into France, his Majesty was forced to
prepare himself to oppose them. A Resolution that he effected with so good
orders, and so prudent a Conduct, that their defeat ought to live for a
perpetual Monument of this Princes Wisdom, no man else having any voice in that
deliberation. It was he alone who by his own Wise Counsels rendered all the
attempts of his Enemies fruitless; it was he alone that overthrew them, and
that having by his own prudent orders made them suffer those incommodities that
unnerved them, and put them out of all defense, gave the Duke of Guise an
opportunity, to win a great deal of Honor, with little trouble, and danger. So
great an advantage it is to live in the public opinion.

The King having employed all his care, and art to hinder the Reiters from
entering into the Kingdom, and all to no purpose, and finding all Treaties, and
all moderate ways ineffectual to divert the blow, that was intended against
him, he at last put on his wonted resolution, and determined bravely to
encounter that danger, he then plainly saw he could not with all his dexterity
prevent. Having therefore in this determination assembled his Council, to the
end he might advise with his principal Ministers, about an Affair of this
important consequence; and having there laid open the business to them, he
found their opinions very different; neither is it strange that men of several
judgments should dissent in a resolution of this high nature: some advised him
to advance with his Army out of his own Con^ines, and there to expect, and
fight the Enemy: others were of a contrary opinion; neither did the one, nor
the other want reasons, or example to justify their advice. At last the King
himself delivered his own opinion, which was, To permit the Enemy quietly to
enter the Kingdom, but withal to make them pass through so many difficulties,
and to suffer so many necessities, that they should be already as good, as
overcome, before they should come to fight. He remonstrated to them, that to
encounter them fresh, and in their trim, as they came out of their own Country,
animated to War by the Interest of Religion, and by the compassion of their
Confederates, were to expose things to a doubtful event. That the loss of a
Battle, in the flourishing condition those of the Reformed Religion would be
after such a Victory, would endanger France, and the Catholic Religion. That
he had a desire to preserve both the one, and the other, and to ruin his
Enemies more leisurely: but withal more surely, and that there would
nevertheless be Honor enough in the Victory, provided it were absolute, and
entire.

This being then the final Resolution, his Majesty gave order forthwith, that
his Armies should be all ready in July following, to appear at Meaux, which he
assigned for the general Rendezvous; and, besides the present Forces that he
intended to set on foot, he commanded that in every Province, the Nobility, and
Arrierebans, which upon examination I find to be in effect the same thing with
our Train-bands
Train-Bands should be ready to march at the first Summons. He dispatched also
several Commissions for new Leavies, to the end, they might either serve to
fill up the old Troops, as they should grow thin; or to stand for a reserve in
case any thing should happen amiss to the main Army. He sent Commissaries on
purpose to beat down all the Ovens, and Mills that were in his Enemies way,
from the Frontier, as far as the place he had appointed for his own Quarters.
He caused all the Grain of the* Country to be fetched in, and stored up in the
good Towns, with all Artificers, and Tradesmen of what condition soever. He
caused all the defensible Cities to be fortified with Men, Victuals, and
Ammunition; and on the contrary, demolished all such places as were not
tenable, nor able to withstand a Siege. He commanded all the Bridges to be
broken down, all the Fords to be spoiled, and generally all things to be
destroyed, that might any way contribute to his Enemies advantage, or
subsistence. He further sent to the Duke of Lorain, that it stood with his
Interest, in this occasion, to do the same in his Territories; and having thus
disposed all things, and the Duke of Espernon having highly applauded what he
had done, he told the King with his wonted freedom, that there was one thing
yet left undone; which, though it were more in his Majesty's Power, and Royal
Disposition, than all the rest, would nevertheless be the hardest for him to
execute. The King commanded him to explain himself, and to tell him what that
thing was, promising withal to satisfy him in it; whereupon the Duke growing
more serious, told him, That he humbly besought his Majesty to command his Army
in Person, and alone without a Competitor that might dispute with him the
Honor of a Victory, that, by his Prudent disposition of Affairs, was as good
as certain to him. Which the King solemnly promised him he would: but
afterward, according to his custom, giving too much ear to the Counsels of
others, and not enough relying upon his own wisdom, he altered that resolution,
and dividing his Army into two, gave the better part to the Duke of Guise; and
so deprived himself of the whole glory of that Action, to bestow it upon
another. The Duke of Guise expert, and valiant, as any Prince of his time, had
those Forces no sooner committed to his charge, but that he immediately marched
them away to the Frontiers of Champagne, to observe the Enemies motion, and to
oblige them by his lying so near to march close together; which, considering
the spoil that had before been made of the Country, was as great an
inconvenience as they could suffer. The Duke of Ioyeuse had also an Employment
against the King of Navarre, to hold him in play in Guienne, and to hinder him
from joining with the Foreign Army, that came to his assistance. But the Duke
of Espernon was reserved by his Majesty to attend upon his own person; as one
in whom he reposed an entire confidence, and as a man whose sole and utmost
aim, the King evidently saw, was equally directed to his Majesty's Honor, and
to the Kingdoms safety: To him the King gave the command of the Vantguard of
his own Army; in which Employment he so behaved himself, both with his Valor,
his Advice, and his Experience, that the very Historians of that time,
M^smoires de la Ligue.
though envious, as the greater part of men are, of the greatness of
Favorites, could not forbear notwithstanding to attribute to him a very
considerable share in the success of that memorable Defeat.

And here give me leave without being blamed for a digression from my Subject,
Anno 1587.
and that upon the Duke of Espernon's word, a man better read than any
whosoever in the business of that time, to oppose his Testimony against a
Scandal D'Avila has published; not only to the discredit of the Duke of Ioyeuse
his Favor: but also to the infinite prejudice of his Honor. He says that the
King, at the Duke's dismission to go to the Army his Majesty had given him in
command, gave him this reproach. Che la Corte lo teneua in concetto di
poltrone, e chegli era been di levarsi questo fregio dal viso: which is to say,
That the Court looked upon him as a Poltron, and that he should do well to wipe
off that blemish. Toward the Dukes latter end, I read this History to him,
which was then newly published in France; and the Duke had very highly
commended the Author, though in many particulars he had not spoken very
favorably of him: above all he infinitely commended the exact care he had
taken to inform himself of the secret motives, by which the several interests
of that time were carried on; of which he does in truth for the most part
render a very precise, and very often, a very true account: But when he heard
these words, which were so highly injurious to the Duke of Ioyeuse, he could
not forbear crying out, ^ hat D'Avila was a liar, that he himself was present
when the Duke of Joyeuse took his leave of the King; that his Majesty could
never have had so great a kindness for a man of whom he had once entertained so
mean an opinion; that on the contrary be esteemed him to be as valiant, and as
brave a Gentleman, as any was in his Kingdom: And where D'Avila continues to
say that he was become burdensome to the King, that the King could no longer
bear it; and that he therefore sent him upon this expedition purposely to be
cut off: the Duke of Espernon bore witness, That he saw the King weep at the
Duke of Joyeuse his departure, than which there could not be a greater evidence
of his tenderness and affection to him. That had the King had a mind to have
been rid of him, and to have exposed him to the King of Navarre's Forces, he
would never have set him out with an Army, almost twice as strong, as that he
was employed against, and made up of as good Soldiers as any were in the
Kingdom: so that if he lost the Battle of Coutras, it was rather through the
chance of War, or through the Valor, and good fortune of the King of Navarre,
than by any default of his Army. And to answer yet further to what has been
writ concerning his Favor, of which D'Aubigne only speaks by hearsay, making
stories, as it is his custom at the random of his own passion, and fancy: The
Duke has told me that the King was indeed grown colder toward the Duke of
Ioyeuse, than he had formerly observed him: but that he only attributed that to
the Alliance the Duke had contracted with the House of Lorain, and that it was
only a diminution of ^avour, and never grew to a disgrace; and indeed, had his
Majesty conceived a positive aversion to him, would he have given such public
evidences of sorrow for his Death as he did? would he have honored his dead
Body with that excessive Pomp, and those unusual Obsequies? which were such as
gave all the Nobility occasion to murmur, having never before been allowed to
any, save to the Princes of the Blood, and to the Constables of France,
exclusively to all other great men of the Kingdom. The Historians of that time
have further discoursed of the jealousy betwixt the two Favorites: to which I
can answer on the Duke of Espernon's behalf, that I could never find by any
thing I could ever gather from him, that he had been in the least touched with
that passion; neither is it very likely, considering the advantage the Duke
visibly had in the Kings Opinion, there could be any jealousy on his part; but
if there had formerly been any such thing betwixt them (as it is hardly
possible but there must have been some emulation betwixt two concurrents in so
high a pretense as that of a Kings Favor) the Death of the Duke of Ioyeuse,
and a long series of time having worn out those impressions, there now remained
nothing more in the Duke of Espernon's memory, than the remembrance of their
near Relation, and former Friendship.

Some time before the Duke of Ioyeuse his Death, the knot of that Alliance had
been broken by the death of Catherine de Nogaret, and dela Valett^, the Duke of
Espernon's Sister; who having at the King's motion, and to the common
satisfaction of both the Favorites been married to the Count de Bouchage,
younger Brother to the Duke of Ioyeuse; after they had for four or five years
only lived together in a most perfect harmony, this Virtuous Lady died, leaving
one Daughter only behind her, namely Cathe^ine de Ioyeuse, the same, who having
formerly been Duchess of Montpensier, is now Duchess of Guise; a Princess of
undisputed Virtue, and such as has ever shone equally bright, throughout the
prosperities, and afflictions that have divided her life. The C^mpte de
Bouchage after having lost his Wife, finding nothing in the world either to
allure him, or to comfort him, retired himself from it amongst the Father
Capuchins; where he took upon him the Habit of that Order, and there continued
some years, under the name of Father Ange de Ioyeuse. It Is true, the Pope
having since enjoined his Superiors to persuade him abroad again, to the end
he might be Head of the League in Languedoc, that he obeyed his command: but it
was to return afterward into the same order again, as soon as Affairs would
give him leave, where he continued to his death, and died in great opinion of
Sanctity.

And since, upon occasion, I have been drawn aside to mention this Marriage out
of its due order, it is reasonable that I now speak of that of the Duke, The
Marriage betwixt the Duke of Espernon and Marguerite de Foix, and de Candalle.
which happened at this time. The Duke therefore having been offered a match
with the Sister-in-law of his King, and having been esteemed not unworthy to
marry with the King of Navarre's Sister, her Brother being at that time
immediate Heir to the Crown: It is to be presumed he might reasonably pretend
to the greatest Fortune whatsoever in France but amongst the many were proposed
to him, he preferred that with Marguerite de Foix, and de Candelle, Daughter
and Heir to Henry de Foix, and de Candelle, and to Mary de Montmorency, before
all the rest. The Father, and Mother of this Lady died both young, her Mother
of Sickness, and her Father at the Siege of Sommieres. For the Duke de Anville
his Brother in law, having undertaken that Siege, A^^igne.
the Compte do Candelle raised two thousand men amongst his Tenants in Gascony
to favor his Design; a very considerable supply in the weak condition the Duke
de Anville's Army then was; where being come, and finding the breach already
made, and the assault ready to be given, he entreated the Honor of the first
Assault might be conferred upon his men, who he desired might give immediate
proof of their Valor. A fatal request, which having been granted to him, his
men went on with very great courage to the assault; where, being as resolutely
received, they were at last beaten back: but the Compte de Candalle, not being
able to endure such a repulse, returned to the Assault, and putting himself in
his Doublet only at the head of his men, he repelled the Enemy, and won the top
of the Breach; when being now upon the point to carry the Town, an unfortunate
Musket shot in his Throat laid him dead upon the place. An accident, by which
the Town, already as good as taken, was again lost with the life of the
Conqueror. By the death of this Compte, his Daughter being then but three
years old, was left to the Tuition of Francis de Foix, and de Candalle Bishop
of Air, her Uncle by the Father's side, a Prelate who, having to the dignity
of his Birth, added a singular knowledge in the profoundest Sciences, and
chie^ly in the Mathematics, had the reputation of one of the most excellent
Men, not only of his own time, but also of all Antiquity; Yet did not his
diligence in study, though he were immeasurably addicted to it, hinder his due
care of his Niece, either as to the Education of her Person, or as to the
management of her Fortune; for he delivered her over when very young, to the
Connestable de Montmorency her Aunt, a Lady of singular Virtue, who had
earnestly desired it, that she might bring her up, as one of her own Daughters;
which she accordingly did: and under her excellent Tuition this young Lady grew
up to so great a perfection in all virtuous Qualities, that she won the general
Applause, and was admired above all others of her Quality in the Kingdom. To
these eminent endowments of Mind she had yet the advantage of her Birth, and
the reputation of her Fortune: For the first I shall need to say no more, than
that she was allied to almost all the Crowns of Europe, Tho^.
and that from her Family descended the House of Navarre, that her Family had
obliged Hungary with a Queen, Bem^^.
and France with a Gaston de Foix, with other Captains of so incomparable
Valor, as took place of the most eminent Leaders of their time. Their Estates
had also been very great, and there yet remained in fair demeasnes to the value
of above fourscore thousand Livers annual Rent; though to say truth, the
Affairs of that Family had of late years been so ill managed, that there now
remained but a very small part of that vast Revenue clear, and unincumbred with
Debts. Her Estate therefore required both a discreet manager to husband it, and
a man well furnished with money, to disengage it, and to restore it to that
Splendour, and Reputation, in which it had formerly been: And if the Person of
this Lady I speak of, was not endowed with all those Criticisms of form the
curious will have concur to the making up of a rare, and illustrious Beauty,
she had yet so much, and that set off with so graceful, and so winning a
Fashion, as obliged the Duke to become her Suitor; after which it was not long
before the King concluded the Marriage. The Solemnity was held at Bois de
Vincennes, the 7th. day of August, in the Year 1587. the King being then going
against the Reiters, who were already entered the Borders of France. It is not
long since I saw the Articles of that Contract, with the Inventories of the
Dukes Estate, both Personal and Real, then taken in the presence of the
Countess de Ryberac, and a Gentleman sent for that purpose on the behalf of the
Bishop of Air, and by his Letter of Attorney authorized to manage that
business. For the Bishop, what hopes soever they could give him of the
obtaining of a Cardinals Hat, if he would come to Court, he could never be
drawn from his Books, nor tempted to leave his Study: and his Ambition lying
another way, that is, rather to search into the solid Truth, than the vain
Appearance of things, he found a greater contentment of mind in his retirement,
and solitude, than in all the luster and bustle of the Court. There were few
Writers of that time that do not make mention of the Dukes great Riches, and of
the Kings unlimited liberalities toward him; and yet upon this occasion there
was only found in Land, The D^ke's Estate at h^s Marri^ge.
Jewels, Plate, and other Furniture, to the value of thirteen hundred thousand
Crowns; which if a man consider the difference berwixt this Fortune, and those
of many others, that we have since known, not only Favorites, but also men of
very mean beginnings, that have been raised to far greater Riches, in a much
shorter time, than the Duke was a Favorite, will appear no such prodigious
proportion. His Hostel at Paris was also part of this Estate, which I have
heard the Duke say, was then the best House next to the Queen Mothers, now
called l' Hostel de Soissons, and so little inferior even to that, that after
the Queens death he might have had it, advancing 10000. Crowns, in exchange for
his own. I have made this observation that we may consider to what a degree of
State, and Beauty the Structures of these latter times are got, when this
House, that was then the second in Paris, has now scarce any name, amongst the
many Structures that have been erected since.

Men have since been very liberal in their censure of the Duke's Economy, and
which many unjust to his Honor, and not very kind to him, have blemished with
the name of Avarice: I cannot deny but that the Economy of his House was
great, neither do I see why that should not have its due Honor amongst his
other Virtues; he being in this as much a Steward for the public, as for his
own private Interests: for who does not know that the Profusions of Princes,
and the Prodigalities of Favorites, are ever to be repaired by the Oppression
of the People? He was a good Husband it is true, but his good Husbandry, far
from the meanness of Avarice, served only to maintain his greatness, and to
enable him the better to support the luster of his Expense without being
chargeable to the King. It has ever been such, that from his first rise to
Favor, during the whole course of his life, no man ever maintained a nobler
Table at Court, a better Stable of Horses, a more numerous train of Attendants,
and those men of Quality, and good Fashion, more stately Furniture, nor a
greater number of inferior Servants than the Duke did. His expense in Building
infinitely exceeded all others of his condition, and all this without the least
abatement in his ordinary way of living, without any visible incommodity in his
Affairs, or without ever importuning the King his Master; which can only be
attributed to his Economy, and the prudent government of his Affairs, many
other great Persons, of far greater Estates than he, having never been able to
do such things, as he did with great ease, without apparent inconvenience, and
great disorder.

The King, willing upon this occasion of the Dukes Marriage to continue his
Liberalities, made him then a gift of four hundred thousand Crowns: but the
Duke had never other advantage by it, than the bare testimony of his Masters
good Inclinations toward him: For the Treasury being either wholly exhausted,
or containing no more than was necessary to defray the immediate War, the money
could no ways have been raised, but by a new Tax upon the People, which would
have bred new Discontents; and though his Majesty notwithstanding desired such
an Imposition might be laid; the Duke a truer Servant to his Masters Interests,
than a Friend to his own, would never consent, but obstinately opposed it. The
Papers are yet to be seen amongst those that were found at his Death, for an
eternal monument of this good Masters Affection, and for a testimony of the
small account the Servant made of a Benefit, that must be exacted with the
clamours of the People, and that was likely to pull down a popular Odium upon
his Benefactor.

Amongst the preparations that were made for the Duke's Marriage, the King was
still intent upon his business, not omitting any due care that might fit his
Army to receive the strangers; who were now upon their March, under the command
of the Baron de Dona, and were already advanced to the Frontiers of Lorain. The
Reiters enter into France.
There it was that the Germans first began to be sensible of those
inconveniences his Majesty's prudent Conduct had strewn in their way, which
still as they advanced further into France, where they promised to themselves a
great abundance of all things (upon the false hopes wherewith their Leaders
were prepossest, that the whole Court favored the King of Navarre, and that
they had only the Duke of Guise to wrestle with) they found more, and more to
increase upon them, all things removed out of their way that should any ways
contribute to the support of so great a Body. And then it was that they plainly
saw the vanity of those aerie promises that had been made them; they found
themselves in a few days oppressed with hunger, thirst, and sickness, their Arms
with rust dismounted, and useless, their Horses unshod, and themselves exposed
to all the other miseries, with which great Armies in long Marches, and in an
Enemies Country are usually afflicted: By which misfortunes their eyes being
opened, they began to fear, and to foresee those, that in a short time fell
upon them: but amongst all those difficulties, that which troubled them the
most, was their encounter with the Duke of Espernon; who, whilst they were
trying to find a pass over the River Loire, having continually coasted them,
and attended their motion with eight hundred light Horse, and five hundred
Harquebusses on Horseback, and having by his activity, The Duke Beats up a
Q^arter of the German Horse.
and vigilance found an opportunity to beat up a Quarter of twelve hundred
Light Horse, and to take the Cornets from them, they plainly saw by that action
what they were likely to expect; for they had been made to believe that the
Duke was won over to the King of Navarre's Party, a slander (which, having
been first spread abroad by the League) those of the Reformed Religion made
good use of, De (...) de Ligu^.
to encourage the strangers to enter the Kingdom: but they, having received so
smart a proof of the contrary, were now undeceived: and the more clearly they
were convinced of their error, the more did their fears increase; which
begetting at first private mutterings, and growing on to public murmurs,
proceeded at last to an open Mutiny.

The Duke, well enform'd of this disorder in the Enemies Camp, began with great
dexterity to manage their discontents to the King's advantage; he treated
therefore for an accommodation, both with the Reiters, and the Swisse: the
latter of which made up a considerable part of that Army, all their Infantry
almost being raised out of the Swisse Cantons; pressing nevertheless with his
flying Army the Rear of the one, or the other; at the same time that he
disturbed their March, and their Quarters with his Armies entertaining them
with overtures of Agreement, putting them at once in fear of the King's Force,
and in hopes of his clemency: by which different ways of proceeding to one and
the same end, the two Nations, equally perplexed, at last hearkened to an
Accommodation: which notwithstanding was concluded only with the Swisse at that
time, and with them the Articles were agreed upon, and Signed under the King's
good Pleasure, the 18. of November 1587. Which being afterward ratified by his
Majesty, they immediately retired into their Confines.

This great body thus separated from the Reiters, the remaining Army was in
such perplexity, that there was now nothing, but disorder, and confusion
amongst them; so that their courages being abated, by the extreme necessities
they suffered by their being abandoned by their Confederates, who made up the
best part of their Army, and by the fear of worse michiefs to come, they now
thought of nothing more, than of retiring from the extreme danger they saw
themselves envellop'd in: and then it was that they hearkened in good earnest
to the Propositions which were then offered to them afresh by the Duke, though
much harder than the former; neither could all the Entreaties, or Authority of
their Leaders, as well French, as those of their own Nation, prevail any thing,
or dissuade them from concluding a composition, and from retiring at last into
their own Country. The Reiters come to Composition, and retire.
The Articles with them were Signed the eighth day of December, in the same
year by the same Duke: by which it appears, that his courage, vigilance, and
Wisdom contributed not a little to the diversion of this dangerous storm, and
to the preservation of the Kingdom from so powerful an invasion, as that of an
Army consisting of forty thousand fighting men. Yet is it not to be denied but
that the Duke of Guise did also very brave service in this occasion; he
defeated great numbers of them both at Vilmory, and at Aulneau: but in the
condition they then were, ruined, and disarmed by the King's forecast, beaten,
and Disunited by the Duke of Espernon's Skirmishing, and Practices, it
infinitely much facilitated the Duke of Guise his Victories, to have an Enemy
reduced to such streights before he came to engage them.

But if the War was carried on with good success to the King in the
forementioned engagements, things succeeded much otherwise on his Majesty's
part with the King of Navarre: for the Duke of Ioyeuse having precipitated the
Battle of Coutras, the advantage of his Forces having blinded him even to a
Contempt of the Enemy (an ordinary presage of Ruin to whoever is too secure of
his Fortune) he there lost the Battle, The loss of the Battle of Coutras.
with his Life, the twentieth of October, in the same year; together with as
considerable a number of Nobility, and Gentry, as have almost fallen in one day
in any one Battle in France.

Some have believed that the King was neither so much displeased at the loss of
this Battle, nor conceived himself so much prejudiced by it, as he imagined
himself eclipsed by the Victory he soon after obtained over the Strangers; a
deplorable effect of this Princes misfortune, who could neither be afflicted
with his losses, nor yet absolutely satisfied with his success. We have already
told you the Reasons the King had not to desire the King of Navarre's Ruin; so
that he enjoyed in part his own desire in the loss of this Battle, which made
for the support of the King of Navarre, and his Party; by whose assistance he
thought with less difficulty to mate the ambitious Designs of the League:
Whereas the Victory obtained over the Reiters, only served to augment the Duke
of Guise's Glory, who was his real, and capital Enemy. Hence therefore
proceeded his disquiet, and affliction; and this was it that turned even the
prosperous successes of his Arms to his vexation, and trouble.

His Majesty fearing left the Duke of Guise puffed up with the vanity of the
popular esteem, and the opinion of his own merit, should take upon him the
assurance to ask some of the Offices, which were vacant by the Duke of Ioyeuse
his Decease, conferred them all immediately upon the Duke of Espernon; who was
in one day made Admiral of France, The Duke of Espernon gratified with all the
Offices vacant by the Death of the Duke of Ioyeuse.
Governor of Normandy, Caen, and Havre de Grace: and the dispatches were
delivered to him at Gergeau, the seventh of November, 1587. the Death of the
Duke of Ioyeuse happening but in the end of October the same year.

Neither was this the only advantage the Duke reaped from the ill success of
this Battle; for his Cousin Bellegarde, Governor of Xaintonge, As also those
of Bellegarde killed at that Battle.
Angoumois, and the Country of Aulnis, having there received a mortal Wound,
and dying soon after, the Duke had also the Governments vacant by his decease
conferred upon him: which, as we shall hereafter see, at his departure from
Court afforded him the benefit of a secure, and honorable Retreat.

Although the Victories obtained from the German Army were very great, and of
great moment; yet were not the Designs of the Enemy utterly ruined by the
Defeat, and Dissipation of those Forces beyond the Loire. For the Hugonot
Party, who were infinitely solicitous to add all the vigor and encouragement
they possibly could to their cause, were principally careful to reinforce
Mounsieur Lesdiguieres, who was effectually a very brave Commander, and one of
the main pillars of their Faction. There had been therefore four thousand
Swisse drawn out of the main Body of the German Army, Des Memoires de la Ligue.
and sent away into Dauphine to assist him there, and to make him able either
to oppose Mounsieur de la Valette, or (if Fortune so favored their Arms)
absolutely to drive him out of that Province, a Force, like enough to cut out a
great deal of work in those parts: But la Valette's Fortune being here constant
to his Valor, their coming only administered to him an opportunity, wherein to
share with the Duke his Brother the Honor that was to be acquired in the
Defeat of that Foreign Enemy: For opposing that great Body with only two
thousand Foot, and three hundred Horse, he cut them all off in their passage
over the River Lizere. Mounsieur de la Valette Def^^^^ part of the Fore^gn
Army. De ^hou.
Mounsieur de Thou says that there were not fifty Prisoners remaining; so that
this may be reckoned amongst the other great losses that Nation sustained in
this Expedition. And that which makes it yet more remarkable, is, that
Lesdiguieres, and Chatillon being advanced on the other side of the River with
three thousand Foot, and six hundred Horse to favor their passage, were beaten
back, and constrained to look on, whilst their Confederates were all cut in
pieces before their eyes, without being able to give them the least assistance.
By this handsome action so happily performed, the hopes those of the Religion
had conceived, of reaping any signal advantage from their Victory at the Battle
of Coutras, and by uniting with the Foreign Army, were utterly frustrated.
Neither can I forbear in this place to give Colonel The same who in D' Avila is
called Alphonso Corso.
Aphonso, afterward Marshall d' Ornano, his due share of honor, who fought it
with singular Valor; but still under Mounsieur de la Valette's Conduct, and by
his directions; with whom no man can dispute the absolute honor of that
notable Defeat,

After so many brave exploits achieved by the King for the defense of his
Kingdom, Anno 1588.
and after so considerable services performed by the Duke of Espernon, and by
la Valette his Brother, for the public safety; who would have imagined but
that his Majesty should have been welcomed home with a thousand blessings of
his people, and that so good Subjects should have received the praises due to
their Fidelity, and Valor? Nevertheless all these Victories, with the care,
industry, and hazards that produced them, wrought a quite contrary effect*
through the blind affection the giddy multitude had violently placed upon the
Duke of Guise. There was now no other discourse at Paris but of him; the
Pulpits, Courts, and Public Assemblies rung with his Name: it is to him only
that they owe their Lives, and Liberties, and it is only his presence they
desire. The King's own Person, and those of his most faithful Servants, are
become odious to the Parisians. They talk high of transferring the Regal
Dignity to the Duke of Guise. They scatter up and down Printed Libels, wherein
from railing against the King, proceeding on to the King of Navarre, they would
have him declared incapable of succession to the Crown, to the end there might
remain no title to dispute the Duke of Guise's Possession. Nay to such a
contempt of his Person and Royal Dignity they were grown at last, that these
discourses were frequent, and loud in the Kings own Family; his most obliged
Servants not daring almost to reply; renouncing by that poor and unmanly
toleration, their own interest, whilst they abandoned that of their Sovereign
and Benefactor. Neither was there any, save only the Duke of Espernon, a man
that slighted his own danger, and despised the malice of all mankind, when his
Masters Honor lay in the Balance, who generously exposed himself upon all
occasions, to the public violence, that he might preserve the integrity of his
Duty. Of which to give you an instance, it happened one day, in a great deal of
company, that the Archbishop of Lions, a Prelate of a ready Wit, and great
Elocution, but passionately zealous for the League, openly maintained, That the
Pope had Power to absolve Subjects from their Allegiance to their lawful
Prince: To which the Duke highly offended, as he had reason to be at so
dangerous an Argument, made answer before them all, That it would be as hard to
persuade him to that, as to make him believe that the Pope could grant a
Dispensation to a Prelate to lie with his own Sister: Now you must know it was
generally believed at Court, that this Prelate was too familiar with a person
related to him in that degree; and as injuries make the deeper impression, by
how much nearer they approach to truth: this so touched him to the quick, that
he from thenceforward conceived against the Duke a mortal, and implacable
hatred. Neither was he long in finding out a way openly to express it; for his
Arms being his Tongue, and his Pen (reputed one of the most eloquent of his
time) he employed them both with all the rancour imaginable, to blemish the
Duke's Honor; he set upon him with a thousand injurious Writings; nor did he
fail, for so much as in him lay, to stir up a popular Fury against his Life.

Neither did the Duke of Guise labor his overthrow with less vehemence on his
part, than the Bishop did on his: and as he knew the Duke's Interest to be very
great, and his spirit inflexible, and hardly to be reconciled; so was he not
content to endeavor his ruin obliquely, and underhand, but openly declared
himself the Author of what he did, the better to effect his desire. And see the
means he persu'd to work his purpose.

After the Reiters were driven out of the Kingdom, the Duke of Guise,
accompanied with the principal Heads of his Party, retired to Nancy; where
seeing the great Forces he had about him, and promising to himself wonders from
the precipitous affection of the People, he resolved to prepare some Articles,
which should be presented to the King in the Name of the League: Wherein, as he
conceiv^d himself in a condition to carry by a high hand, whatsoever he should
propose, he principally insisted upon the Duke of Espernon's removal from
Court; pretending him to be a great abettor of the Heretics, the better to
color the persecution he intended against him: interpreting after this sort
the affection the Duke had for the King of Navarre, and for all the Royal
Family, though grounded upon principles far distant from being any ways
interested in that Princes Religion, as his actions ever had, and then did most
clearly demonstrate.

But as it was very unlikely that the King to satisfy his Enemies, should
consent to the disgrace of his beloved Favorite, the Leaguers of Paris, to
impose upon him a necessity of accomplishing the desires of their Party,
conspired thenceforward to seize upon the person of the King, that so they
might remove all future difficulties that might lie in the way of their
Designs: neither did they fail much of executing that accursed Resolution. The
Council of sixteen was at that time first set up in Paris; neither is any
ignorant what that Council was, how impudent their Proceedings, and how great
their Authority with the People, even in the very face of the King himself. In
this Council it was one day agreed upon to seize upon the King as he came from
hunting from the Bois de Vencennes; D' Avila.
and it had accordingly been executed, had not the King (advertised of their
purpose) doubled his Guards at his return. That Plot therefore failing, A
Conspiracy of the sixteen upon the Kings Person.
there were diverse other Ambuscado's laid for him during the Carnival, that
often put him in great danger of being made a Prisoner to his own Subjects;
which being all happily evaded, by the timely information of one Nicholas
Poulin, a Lieutenant in the Provosty of the Isle of France, who was privy to
all these Cabals: Many of the Court, (who (as it is believed) favored the
Designs of the League) endeavored to render Poulin's Intelligence suspected,
that the King discrediting his report, might at one time or another fall into
his Enemies snare: But the Duke of Espernon in an occasion of this consequence,
making no difficulty of hazarding his own life, to search out the depth of
these practices, franckly exposed himself to infinite danger, that so he might
discover the certainty of so necessary, and so important a truth. Being
therefore advertised by the same Poulin, that the sixteen had concluded an
Assassinate upon him himself at the Fair of St. Germains, whither the Duke
usually repaired to divert himself, Du journal de Henry III.
with the entertainments of the season; he resolved to run the hazard, and
accordingly went. The Plot was to have been executed by the Scholars, under
whose name the Inhabitants of the Suburbs of St. Germains were ordered to slip
in to fortify the attempt; all which being discovered to the Duke, it was
certainly a dangerous, and almost desperate adventure, he thrust himself into;
and which must proceed from an unparalled affection, and a virtuous care he
had of his Princes safety, to run so great a hazard in so critical a time, when
even the Court it self was corrupted in the Conspirators favor. And the Duke
might excusably enough have forborne going to a place where the danger was
immediately directed against his own person, and might have made the
experiment, and have penetrated into the bottom of this Conspiracy, by another,
without endangering his own life: and doubtless he had done so, had he had only
his own Interest to consider in the case; but then things would afterward have
been left doubtful, and the King's life had been still exposed in the
uncertainty of the truth of those cautions had been given him; which the Duke
resolved by all ways imaginable to put out of future danger. He went therefore
to the place where he knew himself to be threatened with death; but that could
not affright him, provided he might secure the life of his Master; and being
thither come, found the intelligence had been given him, to be punctually true:
neither did they fail much of effecting their design; for a sort of young
people being gathered about him, began to murmur, and from murmuring grew
louder into clamours, making show at last, as if they would proceed to execute
what they threatened: whereat the Duke not frighted with their noise, put
himself into a posture to resist the violence intended against him; by which
resolute carriage, having with as much courage, as good fortune, disengaged
himself, he leisurely retired toward the Louvre, not a man daring to attempt
any thing upon him, as if even his Enemies had been struck with a kind of
reverence due to so brave, and so honorable an Action.

After there was no further doubt to be made, but that Poulin's intelligence
was true; and by how much the King's danger still increased, by so much the
greater was the Duke of Espernon's diligence, zeal, and ardour for the security
of his Majesty's Person: so that there passed not a night, wherein sometimes
with two, sometimes with three, or four Companies of the Regiment of Guards, he
walked not the Round into the most seditious Quarters of the City: and if at
any time he had notice of any extraordinary Assembly, thither it was that he
immediately repaired with a stronger Party; nor did he ever go to rest, till he
had first settled all things quiet, and had carefully provided for his Masters
safety. So that it is not to be believed how many of the Enemies Conspiracies
against the King's Person, were countermin'd, and frustrated, by his vigilance
and diligence. The sixteen seeing their Designs thus traversed, and fearing to
be prevented (for they now no longer doubted but that their Treasons were
discovered) dispatched away in all haste to the Duke of Guise, pressing him by
all means, to make what speed he could to Paris; hoping by his arrival in the
first place to be sheltred from the King's Justice, and in the next to reap the
fruits of their inordinate desires* Neither was the Duke long deliberating upon
this Journey; the time as he conceived, being as favorable, as he could
possibly wish, for him to raise his Fortune to that prodigious height, to which
his ambition had already designed it: For the danger of the Foreign Army being
already blown over, and the King of Navarre so depressed since, that it was
almost impossible for him ever to rise again, he thought he could never meet
with so happy an occasion, and consequently prepared himself without further
delay for his Journey* Of which resolution the King being advertised, and
knowing that he was now on his way, and already advanced as far as Soissons, he
dispatched away the Sieur de Bellieure to meet him, and to forbid him from
coming to Paris; a command that added spurs to his desire, which usually in
great spirits grows most violent, where it meets with most difficulty, and is
most eager when most forbidden. But by this message the Duke presently
imagining that his Designs were discovered, and doubting that if he did longer
defer to drive them on to their intended end, he was in danger to be prevented,
and to see himself involved in the disaster, that commonly attends men who
deliberate too long upon the execution of great Enterprises, he made all the
haste he possibly could; and turning aside from the ordinary Road, for fear of
meeting another command, which notwithstanding (his Ambition still presenting
to him the image of that greatness to which he aspired) he was resolute not to
obey; he came at ^ast with extraordinary diligence to Paris, surprising all men
with his sudden and unexpected arrival.

At this time (which made still better for the Duke of Guise) the Duke of
Espernon was gone to take possession of his Government of Normandy: where he
had been received with great acclamations of the people both at Rouen, Caen,
and the other principal Cities of that Province; so that all places there
continued quiet, and firm in the King's Obedience, Havre de Grace only
excepted, which alone stood out for the League*

But before the Duke's departure into Normandy, the King having (as it was his
custom) taken him one day in his company to ^resne, his Majesty there in a
private Conference discovered to him the trouble, and disquiet the Duke of
Guise's Resolution of coming to Paris had put him into, with the danger, to
which his arrival (the absolute power the Duke had with the People duly
considered) would expose both his Person, and Affairs; and there his mind
equally possessed with foresight, and jealousy, making him penetrate into the
events of things, as if they had been present before him, he prophesied to the
Duke almost all the misfortunes that befell him in a few days after. Whereupon
the Duke freely told him that he saw only one way to avoid those mischiefs his
Majesty foresaw, and that was to cause the Duke's Head to be struck off, even
in the Louvre it self, should he be so impudent as to come to Paris contrary to
his Majesty's express command; an advice which he fortified with so many
reasons, that the King bound himself with an Oath to do it; though when it came
to the test, his resolution appeared no more constant in this than it had done
before in other occasions, as we shall presently see.

But if things were thus determined on the King's part, the Duke of Guise was
no less diligent on his, and had omitted nothing that might any way conduce to
the effecting of his Designs: and that he might not, at his coming to Paris,
lie at the mercy of his Enemies, he had secretly, and by several ways sent
thither diverse of his best Commanders beforehand, with order to prepare all
those of his Faction in readiness to appear in Arms upon the first occasion:
and having thus provided for his safety, came himself to the City the ninth of
May, in the year 1588. and attended only with D' Avila says but seven, De
S^rres says eight.
twelve, or fifteen Gentlemen alighted at the Queen Mothers Lodgings; who
though infinitely surpised at his coming, went immediately along with him to
the King: by whom he was received (notwithstanding that his Majesty had been
before dissuaded from his first resolution) with so great a disorder in his
countenance, as plainly denoted the contrary passions, that were then struggling
in his mind. Which the Queen Mother perceiving, and knowing what a
determination the King had put on against him; the execution of which she
perhaps thought neither safe, nor easy; or perhaps willing to preserve the
Duke, she took the King aside, and wrought so effectually with him, that she
absolutely changed his mind (which was then wavering, and irresolute) from his
premeditated purpose. Yet could she not so qualify and appease him, but that
he gave the Duke of Guise very manifest tokens of the highest Indignation: but
after a few words, and those exceedingly bitter on the Kings part, the Duke
retired to his own house, where he more than ever continued his ambitious
Designs, and seditio^s Practices. For his vast Courage, the excess of which had
raised him above the condition, and debauched him from the obedience of a
Subject, would (as it is believed) now perfect the work had been so long before
contrived, and strike home to the main Design. All which though the King very
well knew, and though he endeavored all he could to prevent him, and to
deprive him of those means by which he was most likely to effect his purpose;
yet those his Majesty employed, proving too weak to divert so great a mischief
by their vain oppositions, only made the Torrent to swell higher, which soon
after overflowed the Banks with greater violence.

All the world has heard of the Barricades of Paris, The Barricades.
a day of all others the most infamous to the French Name, and to the inviolate
respect that Nation has ever born to their natural Princes, that ever happened
since the first foundation of that Monarchy. Of which, to write the
particulars, were to deviate impertinently from my Subject: It shall therefore
be sufficient to say, that the Duke of Espernon was not at Paris, when this
disorder fell; but they there found his richest furniture, upon which the
hatred, and avarice of the people wreak'd their utmost spleen, and extremest
rancour.

This storm of popular fury having continued the space of three days without
intermission, or abatement; and the King, after the disarming of his Guards,
and some other Forces he had then in Paris, having now no means left to defend
his Person, which he saw in danger every moment to fall into his Enemies hands;
the multitude preparing on every side to beset the Louvre, he made a virtue of
necessity: and to evade the danger that still increased upon him, walking out
at the back Gate of the Tuilleries, he presently took Horse in the Garden near
to the Stables, and, attended only by sixteen Gentlemen, The King retires to
Chartres.
retired with all possible diligence to Chartres.

The Duke of Espernon was no sooner advertised of this disorder, but that he
presently hasted from Rouen (where the news was first brought him) to the King;
The Duke of Espernon's arrival at Chartr^s.
and as he did believe, with very good reason, that his Majesty's Enemies would
not satisfy themselves with what they had already done, so he thought it fit
to go well accompanied; neither did he a little revive the Court at his
arrival, having above five hundred Gentlemen in his Train.

They who have undertaken the History of that time, variously report the Duke's
Reception at this place: D' Avila says his entertainment was very cold, and
that the King looking upon him as his Enemies Pretense, for all the mischiefs
they did, began to distaste him; yet he says soon after with a kind of
contradiction, that his Majesty never went less in his affection to him, nor in
the confidence he reposed in him, from the first beginning of his Favor.
Contradictions amongst the Historians about the Duke's Reception at Court.
Others write that he was received with great demonstrations of Favor and
Esteem: of which both the one and the other say true; observing the due order
of that little space betwixt the Dukes Entertainment at his first arrival, and
that he received after he had been two hours in private Conference with the
King.

It is most certain that this Prince afflicted with his Misfortunes, and
reduced more than ever to the necessity of dissimulation, did not at first
receive him with that excess of kindness he had formerly done; and it is
likewise true, that apprehending at first sight some just reproach from the
Duke's passionate affection to his Service, for that his Majesty had not put in
execution what he had resolved upon at Fresne, his Majesty put on an unusual
gravity at his arrival: But after he had talked with him, and that the Duke who
was too discreet, at such a time, to offer the least syllable that might
afflict his Master, had on the contrary raised his Spirits with new hopes, he
then opened his Bosom to him more than ever; and having received his wonted
good Counsels, entertained again the joy, and vigor, which seemed to have been
stifled in his Misfortunes, and began to meditate the means, and that with good
hopes of success, of restoring his Affairs to their former Condition. And then
it was that he caressed the Duke with his accustomed freedom, honoring him in
public with as high demonstrations of Favor, as ever. It was at this
Conference, that the Duke gave his Majesty an account of his Voyage, of the
good condition, wherein he had left his Government, and what his Majesty might
expect from thence: How all things were so well disposed there, that excepting
Havre de Grace, the League possessed nothing in that Province; and that even he
who commanded there, had given very good hopes of returning shortly to his
Duty: That the Sieur de Cara^ges, Governor of Rouen, formerly inclined to
favor the League, was made firm to his Majesty's Service, and that the people
in general were as well dispos^d, as good Subjects could possibly be: An
Account so highly satisfactory to the King, that he presently ^esolv'd upon a
Journey into that Province; it seeming to him neither decent, nor suiting with
his Honor to continue at Chartres; where to make a longer stay, would look, as
if he were there shut up, and forbidden all the other parts of his Kingdom.

Neither was it without design, that the Duke spoke so advantageously to the
King of the Forces of Normandy: And he could have wished his Majesty had
conceived the same opinion of all his other Provinces; to the end that growing
confident of his own Power, he might entertain the thoughts of Arms: For he
certainly believed, that should his Majesty once undertake a War in good
earnest, it would succeed infinitely to his advantage; that he would soon be in
a condition to re-establish his neglected Authority, and to make himself feared
of all his Subjects. But the King had already formed other Designs, and the
Duke of Guise seeming to him so strongly supported, that he could not depress
him by open force, without endangering at once himself, and his Kingdom; he
thought it safer, though less honorable, to lull him asleep with the hopes of
Peace, than by open War to provoke his already approved Power.

The Duke of Guise also seeing the King escaped out of his hands, and that he
could no more impose upon him those conditions he had proposed to the Queen
Mother during the Barricades, was likewise not averse to an Accommodation. So
that both Parties concurring in the same disposition, the business was quickly
set on foot by the Queen Mother; who as she had been of the first, was now the
Mediatrix of this Peace also. She had continued at Paris after the King's
departure, and had not failed upon all occasions to possess the Duke of Guise,
that the King was willing to be reconciled to him, and to forgive the Parisians
upon their due Submission. Whereupon the Duke, the better to sound the King's
intention herein, ordered the Parliament to attend his Majesty at Chartres, and
there to offer him the first excuses for a fault which in its own nature
admitted none: But the Provost des Marchands going before, and the Eschevins
following after, both the one, and the other returned with great satisfaction:
Which the Duke of Guise seeing, and interpreting this flexibility in the King
to an effect of Fear, he re^assum'd his former hopes, and again set on foot the
same propositions, which he had before so arrogantly insisted upon; to wit,
that War should be proclaimed against the King of Navarre, that there should be
Convocation of the States General, and that the Duke of Espernon should be
banished from Court, with a privation of all his Offices: Upon which last
Article he chiefly insisted, openly declaring, that there could be no durable
Peace, nor no sincere reconciliation, so long as he had so great an Enemy as
the Duke in the Kings Bosom.

The Queen Mother, as has been said before, had long been jealous of the Duke
of Espernon's Power, with the King her Son; neither indeed could she well brook
any Favorites, but those who stood immediately obliged to her for their
Fortune; an humor had made her so much the more impatient of the Duke's
greatness, because it was an advantage for which he was indebted to none, but
to his Masters bounty. She had often therefore pressed the King for his removal,
as the only means to satisfy the League, had propounded several honorable
Employments to color his disgrace, and not long before would have had him sent
Ambassador to Rome to justify the King from the aspersions, the League had
cast upon him to the Holy Sea: but his Majesty who was as perfect in the
Nature, and Designs of the Queen his Mother, as she was in his, had still been
constant to his Servants Protection; and the Duke, having been bred up in the
School of so politic a Master, had learned so much cunning, as had hitherto
ever rendered all those Artifices ineffectual, by which she had so often, and so
industriously labored his Ruin.

But at last the Queen (knowing how important the present occasion was to the
Kings Repose) embraced it with that fervor, that in the end it procured the
Dukes so long wished for removal. She had the management of the Treaty in hand
absolutely committed to her, with the choice of any two of the King's Council
to assist her; of which, such as she knew were affectionate to the Duke, you
may be sure msut have nothing to do in this business; so that it was no hard
matter, all parties concurring in the same design to conclude his disgrace: and
in conclusion, the King was plainly told, that it was absolutely necessary for
him to dismiss the Duke of Espernon, if his Majesty intended to have that
Peace, he seemed so passionately to desire.

To the same end there was then Printed a Manifest, The League Print a Manifest
against the Duke of Espernon, and his Brother.
subscribed by the Cardinal of Bourbon, as Head of the League; wherein the
whole Faction were very importunate for the Duke's total Ruin, together with
Mounsieur de la Valette his Brother; his bare removal from Court being now too
little to satisfy their Malice: the League in this sole point comprehending
the suppression of the Hugonot Party (of which they said the two Brothers were
the Protectors with the King) the redress of the people (oppressed to enrich
them) and the satisfaction of the great ones; who might easily be contented
with those Offices, and Governments, which the two Brothers now possessed to
their common prejudice.

The Duke who very well foresaw that he must either comply with the time, or
reduce the King to a necessity of taking up Arms to protect him (which would
have made him responsible to his Majesty for any sinister event that might
happen) chose the lesser evil; The Duke resolves to give way to the time, and
to retire.
and would rather alone undertake the defense of his own Fortune, than be any
ways the occasion of so great a mischief. He saw the Kings mind perpetually
fluctuating, and continually alarmed with the Counsels of his Enemies; which,
in his Majesty's astonishment, grew still more, and more prevalent with him; he
saw the powerful Faction of the League wholly Armed against his Person; neither
was there any who did not conclude his ruin inevitable in so dangerous a
conjuncture, should he be once, though but a moment, removed out of the King's
Protection: but he had courage enough to run the hazard, and his undaunted
Spirit (notwithstanding he very well understood his danger) made him resolute
with his own single Interest to stand the shock of all his Adversaries. I ought
here to add yet another Motive the Duke had to retire from Court, a thing
which will perhaps hardly be believed, though it be precisely true: but it
merits a due place in the Duke's History, as the noblest testimony of a
generous heart, and this it was. The Duke had understood something of the
King's intention to cut off the Duke of Guise, by those ways by which it was
afterward effected at Blois; and not being able to divert that resolution, he
chose rather to absent himself, than to be present at an action he thought so
unworthy of his Masters Authority, and Greatness, though it redounded to his
own particular preservation. It Is true, that in the first motions of the
League, he had advised the King to take up Arms, to chastise him; that he had
afterward counseled him to cut off his Head at the very Gate of the Louvre,
when the Duke came in contempt of his command to raise that Commotion in Paris;
and that he had offered himself to fight him hand to hand in Duel; but he could
by no means consent that his Majesty should commit an Act so unworthy of his
Name: And this in truth was as powerful a Motive as any, to oblige him to
retire.

There is great diversity of Opinions amongst the Historians of that time about
this retirement of the Dukes, whether, or no, it were franckly; and of his own
motion; whether he were dismissed with the King's good Opinion, and Favor; or
whether he went not away in a real disgrace; which they severally report,
Several opinions upon the Dukes retirement.
every man according to his particular passion: But D' Avila much better
informed in the Affairs of the Cabinet, than the rest, enclines to the more
favorable opinion, and says (very truly) that the Duke resolved upon this
retirement of his own voluntary inclination, and that to the King's great
grief; who notwithstanding, compelled by the necessity of the conditions
imposed upon him in the Articles of Peace, consented to it: And of this truth
there are two evident proofs; One, the great familiarity, and privacy the Duke
had with the King some days before his departure: and the same D'Avila records,
a very remarkable, and a very true passage upon this occasion. That the night
preceding this separation, the Abbot del Been, a great confident of the Duke's,
and a man in great esteem with the King, for his excellent parts, (of which his
Majesty made continual use in his Politics, a study in which he was strictly
regular) was shut up alone with the King in his Cabinet for many hours; not so
much as the Grooms of his Majesty's Chamber permitted to come in all the while;
by which he conjectures, and very rightly, that his Conference was in order to
some Instructions, which were to be conveyed by the Abbot (who was to accompany
him in his retirement) to the Duke, for his future Conduct, during the time of
his absence: And I have heard the Duke say, that he never in all his life
received so many Testimonies of his Masters Affection, as he did at this time.
His Majesty being pleased not only to chalk him out what he would have him do,
and what he would have him avoid, during his retirement; but also adding a
thousand Protestations, that he would sooner abandon his Crown, than his
protection; and that he had not consented to his departure, but with a
resolution to recall him speedily back to Court with greater Honor, and to
confer upon him greater advantages, than he had ever yet done: Commanding at
the same time the Abbot del Been, not to stir from him, to have a care of his
Person, and to be assisting to him with his Counsels, in whatever Accidents
might happen, and in all the difficulties, and dangers he well foresaw would by
his Enemies be prepared against him. The other proof, that the Duke was dismissed
in a high state of Favor, was this, that his Majesty made him at his
departure, Generalissimo of his Armies in the Provinces of Anjou, Maine,
Perch, Poictou, Xaintonge, Angoumois, and the Country of Aulnis, with absolute
Power to command: which certainly he would never have done, had his disgrace
been really true, and not merely dissembled to satisfy the insolent demands of
the League, and to comply with the necessity of the time.

Things being thus disposed, the Duke went to take his leave of the King, and
to receive his Majesty's final Commands; where, his affection in so great an
extremity, suggesting to him the honest liberty, a passionate, and faithful
Subject may justly take, he freely told him, That it was not without an
extraordinary violence upon himself, that he came to beg leave of his Majesty,
that he might retire into his Governments, where he hoped nevertheless to do
his Majesty better service, than if he should continue about his Person. That
to his extreme grief he saw of late his Majesty's safest Determinations, and
the Counsels of his most faithful Servants perverted by the Artifices of those
evil Ministers, who had usurped a greater share in his Royal Trust, and
Confidence, than was consistent with the prosperity of his Affairs. That the
Queen his Mother (however an excellent and prudent Princess) was
notwithstanding abused, as his Majesty himself was. That seeing no cure for
this evil, he had rather chosen to deprive himself of the Honor of being near
his Majesty's Person, than to be an unprofitable Spectator of those
inconveniences into which his evil Counselors were about to precipitate his
Affairs. That as to that hour no man could reproach him that any of his Actions
had been contrary to his Majesty's Service; so he would not for the future, by
a toleration unworthy a good Subject, and an honest Man, draw any jealousy
upon his Intentions. That by an excess of bounty, and oftentimes contrary to
his own desire, his Majesty had enriched him with so many Possessions, Honors,
and Offices, that he had nothing left to desire of Heaven, but Moderation in a
Prosperity raised so infinitely beyond his Hopes. That having received these
benefits to no other end, than to employ them in his Majesty's Service, he
should be ready to surrender all upon command, if by his Spoils any advantage
might accrue to his Majesty's Affairs. That for the sum of all Obligation, and
for a final Testimony of his Majesty's good Inclinations toward him, he had
only two Requests to make: the first, That his Majesty would never confer any
of his Offices upon any of the League; and the other, that so often as his
Enemies should by their Malice seek to ruin him in his Majesty's Favor, he
would please to recollect the infinite Obligations he had laid upon him; which
was the greatest pledge of Fidelity, a good Servant, and an honest Man, as he
pretended to be, could in his absence possibly leave with so good a Master.

The King though already prepared for the Duke's departure, yet touched with so
sad a Farewell, could not refrain from Tears; and his friendship producing the
usual effects that all true friendships ordinarily do in such occasions, made
him forget the conditions he was bound to perform, and once more to reiterate
all sorts of persuasion to make him stay: In which importunities, though some
have believed there was more of dissimulation, than real truth; yet it is
certain, that his Majesty in this proceeded with a most sincere affection, and
that looking more narrowly into the condition of his Affairs, and considering
he was about to surrender his Person into the hands of his Enemies, by whom he
saw himself already environed, he could have been content to have retained a
Servant of so approved Valor, and Fidelity about him. But the Duke having so
often tried, and so often found it impossible to settle the King's mind to such
resolutions as were most proper to secure his Dignity with Honor, could never
deliberate to look on, and see the continuation of those evils, for which he
could neither see, nor hope for any possible Remedy.

Remaining then firm in his resolution to depart, he made a voluntary surrender
of his Government of Normandy into the King's hands, which was as soon
transferred to the Duke of Montpensier, a Prince of the House of Bourbon, very
affectionate to the King's Service, and Father to Henry of Bourbon, likewise
Duke of Montpensier; the same, who in succession of time came to be the Duke's
Nephew by a Marriage with Catherine de Ioyeuse his Niece, she, who (as we have
said before) is now Duchess of Guise. And this, of all those Offices the Duke
stood seized of, was the only resignation the King would consent to, whatever
D' Auila is pleased to say to the contrary. He says that the King importuned
the Duke to make a surrender of all his Employments at once, excepting his
Government of Provence: but that the Duke, Who was a man of exceeding great
understanding, and bred up by the King himself in all the Stratagems of State,
raised so many difficulties, and made so many exceptions against the persons of
all those who were proposed to succeed him, that suddenly departing, before any
thing was concluded, he dexterously disengaged himself from so nice, and so
dangerous a Proposition. It is certain notwithstanding that the Duke was never
pressed to lay down any of his Offices: and if he did surrender his Government
of Normandy, it was not only a voluntary act, but founded upon mature
deliberation, and great judgment, as a Province that was near neighbor to
Paris, separated many Leagues from all the rest of his Governments, and in
which his Enemies had so great Interest, that his Presence would be necessary
to secure it; neither considering the strong Faction they had within, was it
certain to be secured. So that not being able amongst so many persecutions, as
he saw prepared against him, to maintain all his Charges at once, he rather
chose to part with that he was not likely to keep, at least without exposing
all the rest, than to abandon the other strong Holds, and Places in his
Possession; which though (particularly considered) they seemed to promise less,
than so important a Government as that of Normandy; yet that by their vicinity
to one another were more likely to be kept, and to be more serviceable to him.

Thus then parted the Duke of Espernon from Court in June 1588. and retired
himself to Loches, though far otherwise than in the equipage of a declining
Minister, or attended like a Favorite lapsed into disgrace; but with a
numerous train of above three hundred Gentlemen, and those of so good Quality,
as that he employed the most of them for the raising of such Forces, as he had
order from his Majesty speedily to set on foot. But that which rendered him
every where more considerable, than this outward show of greatness, was his
brave, and unbated Courage, of which he had given so many signal testimonies in
his Prosperity, that there was nothing left, but such a disgrace as this, to
give it the utmost test, The Duke re^^^^ into his Governments.
and the last trial of a noble Constancy. Being come to Lochis, he presently
set himself to look into the state of those Provinces newly committed to his
charge; where by establishing such order as he thought convenient, by the
dispatch of his Levies, and by disposing his men into the most important
places, he prepared himself betimes to encounter such Accidents, as the
severity of the time was likely to produce.

Soon after the Duke's departure, the King went his Journey into Normandy:
where the greatest Obstacle, being now removed, the Treaty of Peace went on
without any further impediment, and was presently after concluded; the King
(who had already determined how to dispose of the Duke of Guise) making no
great difficulty to grant him what he was resolved he should not long enjoy.

The Peace concluded, the Edict of Union was published, first at Rouen, and
then in all parts of the Kingdom; after which they immediately fell to the
raising of Arms, for the utter suppression of the King of Navarre, and his
Party. But above all things, the King was careful to hasten the necessary
Dispatches for the Convocation of the States General at Blois, in the beginning
of October next ensuing, an Assembly equally desired by the King, and the Duke
of Guise; but to different ends: The Duke hoping there by the joint suffrages
of the several Orders of the Kingdom to see himself placed in that degree of
height, to which his great Spirit, and vast Ambition, had so long aspired; and
the King resolving there, and at that time to quench his restless and
inordinate Ambition in a torrent of his own Blood. Thus do we often see the
purposes of the greatest Politicians deluded, who, when they think they have
brought their Designs by the most infallible Rules, and Maxims of Humane
Prudence to an almost certain Issue, find themselves deceived, and usually meet
with effects quite contrary to their expectation; giving us to understand, that
we ought not to commit our actions to the blind conduct of our own frail and
erroneous foresight, but into the hands of Providence, that governs all, and
that brings all things to their determinate end.

The Edict of Union being sworn, the Duke of E^pernon removed from Court, and
the King ^atisfied (at least in appearance) with the Duke of Guise's, and the
Parisians excuses; the Duke confident in the Queen Mother, The Duke of Guise
comes to Court.
(who was of late become absolutely powerful with the KIng) had nothing now to
hinder his coming to Court; so that upon his Majesty's return out of Normandy,
he immediately repaired to him, and having found him at Chartres, he there in
person delivered the same Apologies, he had not long before presented by the
Mediation of others. All which his Majesty received with a Dissimulation, that
was not only natural to him; but that by a long Practice, and by the continual
traverses, and difficulties of his Reign, was grown to such a habit in him,
that it was no hard matter for him to put on any kind of Language, or
Behavior, on any occasion wherein he was most likely to be surpised: So that
in outward show the King was so well pleased with no Company (as indeed it was
almost all he had) as with the Duke's, his Relations, and Confederates. Amongst
which the Cardinal of Bourbon, who was now also come to Court, was entertained
with extraordinary marks of Favor, and Respect; neither was there any
Commands, or Offices, Military or Civil, granted to any, but by their
recommendation: insomuch that some have thought the Duke of Guise by winning,
and submissive carriage, had made some real impression upon the Kings
Inclinations, and that his Majesty was disposed really to love him, as he had
formerly done, if he could have moderated his Ambition, and would have laid
aside those designs which rendered him suspected to him.

In a conjuncture so favorable to their Designs, neither the Duke of Guise,
nor those of his Faction slept in their Business; but with all possible
industry, still more, and more labored the Duke of Espernon's total Ruin, as
a thing that imported most of all to the confirmation of that Authority, and
Trust, to which they saw themselves by his removal already advanced: So that
the King being daily afflicted with a thousand Accusations against him, and
wearied by their importunities, was at last so far overcome, as to consent that
many of his Offices should be taken away, being not yet to be prevailed upon
for his absolute Ruin. Whilst the Duke was present, he continually by his good
Services fortified his Masters mind, against all impressions of calumny, his
Enemies could invent, to the prejudice of his Fidelity, and Honor, and had
ever triumphed in his Majesty's good Opinion, over the Envy and Malice of his
Detractors: but he was no sooner removed out of his Eye, than that Confidence
began to stagger, his detractors representing him for an Enemy to the Crown, a
Friend to the King of Navarre, and one that seducing daily all the Garrisons in
his Government to a Revolt, was upon the point to Proclaim open War against the
King himself.

In the mean time the Duke had very good Intelligence of all that passed at
Court; he very well knew that his Enemies made use of all imaginable ways to
destroy him, that the King was by them perpetually socilited against him; and
that consequently it concerned him in common discretion to frustrate their
Designs, and to provide for his own safety in the strength of those places he
possessed: Neither was he much surpised at the unexpected news of what the
King had consented to against him, he was very well acquainted with the
constitution of the Court, and had very well foreseen what would certainly be
attempted against him; but he could hardly persuade himself, that his Majesty
could ever forget his Fidelity, and good Services; yet did he not for all that
neglect his own preservation, that he might live to do him one day more, and
better Service: the only revenge this faithful honest Servant meditated for the
ingratitude of his Master.

He fell therefore presently into Consultation with his Friends, what course he
were best to take; a Debate wherein Opinions were very different: some there
were who advised him to return to Court, representing that his presence would
infallibly disperse all those shadows of mistrust, which by his absence his
Adversaries had had opportunity to possess the King's mind withal; that his
tried Fidelity would soon recover its former place in his Majesty's Opinion,
and that then he would soon be in a condition to return the mischiefs had been
intended against him, upon the heads of the first contrivers. Others there were
who gave him counsel to put himself into Metz, others to make immediately for
Provence, and some of those there to join with the King of Navarre; That to
that purpose he should first go into Angoumois, whither he might suddenly, and
with great facility convey himself, where he had a strong City to retire unto,
and where he would be in a Country very convenient to favor his Passage into
Provence, by the way of Guienne and Languedoc; the Friends he had in those two
Provinces being enough to make his way, through the one, and the other, should
he be put upon a resolution of retiring thither.

The first propositions being accompanied with great, and almost invincible
difficulties, the Duke wholly adhered to the last advice, and so far followed
it, as to retire to Angoulesme, without joining himself nevertheless (though
infinitely solicited so to do) with the King of Navarre. A thing impossible for
him to resolve upon, had he been so inclined, for two Reasons; First, by reason
of that Princes Religion, and secondly, because being a declared Enemy to the
King his Master, the Duke would rather have perished a thousand times, than
appear to favor, much less to engage with such, as he knew acted positively
against his Majesty's Service.

One of the Duke's old Servants De Guez was Bal^^c's Father.
De Guez by name, a man of fourscore and eight years old, but notwithstanding
so entire in his Judgment as discovered nothing of the infirmities of Age, gave
me not long since a full Relation of all these Circumstances. He was at this
time about the Duke's Person, and (as one of his principal, and most trusty
Servants) present at this Deliberation; when the Duke asking his particular
Opinion of all had been propounded to him, De Guez told him, that he believed
the resolution he had already taken, to be without all dispute the best,
provided it were put i^to speedy execution: but that it was to be feared, that
whilst he stood deliberating with his Friends what was best to be done, his
Enemies, who were very powerful, and already resolved what to do, might effect
something to the prejudice of his Fortune; and that the least moments were to
be husbanded in a business of so great consequence as this. An advice that
being soon considered of by the Duke, he immediately commanded that every one
should make himself ready to depart within two days; neither did he longer
defer it, but accordingly put himself upon his way to Angoulesme, and that very
seasonably, as by the following discourse will suddenly appear.

But before the Duke left Loches, he was presented with a discourse, by way of
Apology in the behalf of himself, and his Brother, against the Calumnies
contained in the forementioned Manifest, of the League: a piece so eloquently
couched, and set forth with so many powerful, and so pertinent Arguments, that
it is certain the Leaguers could afterward have wished they had never
assaulted the Duke by the way of writing, that so they might not have drawn
upon themselves so tart a Reply. I forbear to transcribe it in this place,
because it would swell this Volume with things that are elsewhere, and in
better language, The Duke publishes an Answer to the Manifest of the League.
than I should perhaps express it, to be found: But Mounsieur de Thou, one of
the most celebrated Historians of these latter times, thought it a Discourse
worth inserting at length in his History; and having translated it out of the
Original, into his own elegant Latin, has commended it to all the Nations of
Europe, where his works are read with an universal applause. And although the
Duke never thought of justifying his actions that way, and that he had so
little a share in this answer, as neither then, nor ever since, to know his
name, who undertook his Quarrel and Interest with so friendly a Zeal (a thing
somewhat hard to believe, that a man who would oblige the Duke at so kind a
rate, should deprive himself of the thanks justly due to so great an
obligation) he nevertheless took it upon him, and published it in his own name,
that all the world might be satisfied both with his and his Brothers Innocence:
and certainly it wrought upon all disinterested spirits impressions very
disadvantageous to the covert practices of the League.

Having caused this Declaration to be published, The Duke arrives at Angou^esme.
he departed toward, Angoulesme, where he safely arrived in July; and where
the several Orders of the City contented with great emulation, which should
give the greatest testimony of joy for his Arrival. Being thither come, the
Duke would needs take up his Lodging in the Castle; which although it was only
a rude pile of stone, and naked of all defense, (though by him afterward
fortified, and made more con^iderable) and though there was in the same City a
Citadel, much stronger, and more commodious, commanded by the Sieur de Bordes,
a particular creature of the Dukes; yet to show the Inhabitants how entire a
Confidence he reposed in them, he would rather choose to lie in the other, and
that with so much civility to the Town, as that he permitted not one of the
Soldiers he brought along with him so much as to come within the Walls of the
City.

Two days after his Arrival the Sieurs Nesmond, Chief Justice, and Normond
Consul of the City received dispatches from the King, Signed by Moun^ieur
Villeroy, wherein his Majesty positively commanded them, The King commands the
Inha^itants of the City not to receive the Duke.
not to admit any whomsoexer with any Forces into their City, without his
express Order; whatever they might pretend, or what Commissions soever they
should produce to the contrary. And indeed his Majesty had been so importuned
to exclude the Duke from this important place (being withal made to believe
that he had only left Loches in order to a closing with the King of Navarre)
that being unwilling to have that Faction strengthened, by so powerful, and so
active a Confederate, he had consented to this dispatch: but the Duke's
diligence having prevented this command, But too late
so frustrated the execution of it, that whereas it had before (had these
orders come in time) been a very easy matter to have kept him out, it was now
impossible to obey the Kings desire, he being got in, or to thrust him out
again, who had already made himself Master of the place.

The Consul notwithstanding communicated the Orders he had received to some of
his Relations, and most intimate Friends; where the greater part of those he
consulted about this business, being inclined to the League (and it is hardly
to be imagined how strangely that contagion had diffused it self throughout the
whole Kingdom, no Family almost being without one, or more of their Party; no
City without some notorious Ringleader of their Faction; nor no Province
wherein their Interest was not grown to a formidable height) it was soon
resolved upon, that (since the Kings pleasure could not now be fulfilled in the
precise Form his Letters prescribed) to propose to his Majesty other ways, by
which (as they conceived) they might work as considerable, if not a more
advantageous effect, for his service, than they could have done, by that it was
now too late for them to perform. The Consul therefore dispatched away to Court
one Souch^t his Brother-in-Law, a notable Leaguer, and a bold Factious Fellow,
to acquaint the King with his Design; which was, to seize upon the Duke's
person, and to detain him Prisoner in the City, till his Majesty's further
Order: who accordingly arriving at Court, and addressing himself to Mounsieur
de Villeroy, made this Proposition to him, and was by him very well received.
Villeroy promising to acquaint the King with the good affection of the
Inhabitants, and to give him a speedy answer. I shall not here make shie of
delivering plainly what I have received from the Duke's own mouth upon this
occasion, and that without fear of reviving Animosities long ago extinct; the
Duke, an Mounsieur de Villeroy having often since (and that with some kind of
delight) discoursed themselves into a better intelligence about this Subject:
So true it is, that time is a Sovereign Remedy for the most violent passions,
no former unkindness betwixt these two great Ministers being of force to hinder
the mutual esteem they had of one another Virtue in their later years, from
ending in a most sincere, and perfect Friendship.

The King's answer to Villeroy was, that he should be glad to have the Duke
within his power, Anno 1558.
that so he might hinder him from joining with the King of Navarre; but withal,
if it could not be done without endangering his Person, that they should by no
means attempt in, his Majesty being neither willing to have him destroyed, nor
exasperated, but only restrained within the bounds of his Duty: Which were the
very words his Majesty repeated to the Duke at his return to Court, graciously
adding, that it was in order to a speedy recalling of him about his own Person,
where he intended to use him like a Son (a title by which his Majesty was ever
pleased to Honor him in his Letters, and ordinary Discourse) as hitherto he
had ever done. But this was too nice a Commission for his Enemies to work upon,
who would by all means make use of this occasion the hair-brained Citizens
presented to them, to take a full revenge of former injuries: for after the
business had been communicated to the Duke of Guise, it was told Souchet by
Mounsieur Villeroy, that it was the King's desire, they should take the Duke
Prisoner, and that they could not do his Majesty a more acceptable service.
Whereupon Souchet having replied, that it would be an enterprise hard to
execute so, as to meet with no opposition; and that in such a case he desired
to know how they were to behave themselves: he was further ordered to take the
Duke alive, or dead; that such was his Majesty's intention, and that it was a
business of so great importance, that both he, and all others, who should be
employed therein, might certainly expect a recompense proportionable to the
merit of the Action. Some have further added, and it was a common report, that
a man utterly unknown to Souchet was disguised in his Majesty's Clothes, and
taught to pronounce this Command, as if it had come from the King's own mouth:
but however it were carried, certain it is that Souchet could not have returned
more fully persuaded, than he did.

At his return he acquaints the Consul with his Instructions (at a private
place without the City) who hoping to do the King a signal Service,
communicated the Order he had received to forty, or fifty, all active and
resolute men, of his most intimate Friends, and conferred yet further with some
Gentlemen of the Duke of Guise's Faction about it; so that having made himself
as strong as he could, and having writ to the Vicount Aubeterre, who was Head
of the League in that Province, to be ready to assist in an action so important
to the Service of the King, and the Catholic Union, he at last received the
Deputy into the City upon St. Laurence Eve, the day following without further
delay being designed for the execution of the Enterprise.

There are few Historians of any note, of those times, who have not given a
full description of this days business, The Conspiracy of A^goules^^e against
the Duke of Espernon.
and who have not thought it (though only relating to a particular person) an
action for the Novelty, and handsome performance of it, worthy to be recorded
amongst the general Transactions of that time. Mounsieur de Thou, D' Aubigne,
and D' Avila, have all made long Relations of it; and there were many Printed
Reports of it current in France immediately after the thing was done, of which
several old Copies yet remain; to all which I could refer my Reader, and spare
my self the pains of repeating it over again, could a business so highly
important to the Duke's Honor be left out of the recital of his Life, without
making my self guilty of an omission, Posterity might justly blame me for. Take
here therefore what I have collected, both from the Duke's own mouth, and from
some of his Servants; who, as they shared in the danger of this Conspiracy, had
also the Honor to do their Master signal Service in so memorable an Action.

The Duke living in great security in the City, and behaving himself very
obligingly to all the Inhabitants in general, but more particularly to those he
saw bore the greatest sway amongst them, spared no kind of good Entertainment,
that he thought might win the Consul over to his Devotion: a man, who besides
the addition of his Authority, was very considerable in his own Person, as
being descended from one of the best Families in the City, and a man of great
sagacity and valor. The morning of his enterprise therefore being St. Laurence
day, he going early, as it was usual, to give the Duke a Visit, was by him
entertained with extraordinary civility; the Duke not suffering him to depart,
till he had made him a promise to come again to Dinner: which the Consul,
thinking by that means to have his access into the Castle more open, and free,
for the effecting of his purpose, readily engaged himself to do: And in the
mean time returning home, he found Souchet, and with him some dozen of the most
resolute Fellows, and fiercest Leaguers of all the Town, got thither before
him. These were to begin the work, and the others to the number of five and
forty, or fifty, were lodged in the Houses nearest to the Castle, to be ready
to second them, when they had given the first Assault. Neither were these all
in the Conspiracy, for there were diverse others disposed into the several
Streets of the City to alarm the rest of the people (altogether ignorant of the
Enterprise) by telling them that the Hugonots had taken the Castle, by the
Postern-gate that looked into the Park, and to make them by this device run to
their Arms to repel them.

Things being thus ordered, the Consul first entered the Castle, taking along
with him Souchet Booted, and Spurred, as if he newly arrived from Court, with
another in the same Equipage; and being come into the Hall, where he met with
some of the inferior Servants, he of them inquired for the Duke, saying, He
had there two Courriers to present to him, who brought him good news from
Court. Whereupon the Servants who saw him every day with the Duke, and received
with great Demonstrations of Favor, and Respect, made no difficulty to tell
him, that he was in the Wardrobe: But whilst they were thus talking, six more
of the Inhabitants, who were also of the Plot, were come in under pretense of
paying their Service to the Duke, and to wait his coming out to present
themselves: And all of them, both the Consul, and the rest, Armed under their
Cloaks with Curasses, or Coats of Mail, short Swords, and Pistols.

The three first having passed through the Hall, and the next Chamber, without
giving any suspicion, came into the Wardrobe, where they expected to find the
Duke, who by good Fortune was just gone into his Closet, having taken in with
him the Abbot d' Elbene, and the Sieur de l' Isle Marivault, two persons in
whom of all others he reposed the greatest Confidence; and where they were
reading a Scandalous In which L^bel the Duke of Espernon was compared to Pierce
Gaveston, as I^an de Serres reports.
Libel, published to the King's dishonor, that had been sent the Duke that
morning. The Conspirators, without taking notice who were in the Wardrobe,
vigorously assaulted the first they met; and at their first entrance letting
fly their Pistols, betook themselves to their Swords, crying out as loud as
they could, Kill, Kill: At this noise the other six (who, dazzled with the
Cupboard of Plate in the Hall, had staid behind to pilfer) ran presently to
their Fellows, and all together joined in the Assault: The first that opposed
their Fury in the Wardrobe, was Signior Raphael Girolami, a Florentine
Gentlemen, and Sorlin the Duke's Surgeon; the two Secretaries, who were also
in the Chamber being for want of Arms able to make no resistance. But Sorlin
drawing his Sword, gave the Consul a slight hurt in the Head; and Girolami on
his side, having first mortally wounded three of the Assailants, was at last by
a Pistol shot laid dead upon the place; so that he being dispatched, and Sorlin
desperately wounded, the Consul and the rest of the Conspirators, had free
access to the very door of the Closet, where they called out aloud to the Duke
to yield, or otherwise he was dead.

The Duke had already at the first uproar, not knowing by whom he was
assaulted, nor what security he might promise to himself from the assistance of
his Domestics, and Friends, Barricado'd up the Door of his Closet, expecting a
further light into this disorder; D' Elbene, and Marivault, who were both with
him, having persuaded him so to do, and withheld him from going out, until he
first understood the cause of this Tumult, which was yet utterly unknown. There
were two Doors to this Closet, one at the further end of a little Gallery,
which was open; but there was no way to the second, but through this Gallery,
which being dark, and so narrow as only to admit one a breast, made the access
to the inner Door very difficult, and dangerous: so that by this means the
Duke, and those that were with him, had a convenience of making some kind of
resistance, till they might be better informed of the business. And I have
heard the Duke say, when talking sometimes of this Mutiny, that in the heat of
the Action, he removed with one hand, and with great facility, unwieldy
Truncks, and Chests, to Barricado up the Door; which, after he had a little
composed himself, and thought it necessary to go out, they could not scarce all
three, with all their strength united, remove again to their places.

At the same time that the Assault began, the An Al^rm Bell, which it is the
custom in France to ring upon any T^mult, or Insurrection.
Tocquesain rung throughout all the Churches in the City; at which Signal, the
people ran on all sides to Arms, lodging themselves in the Houses nearest
adjoining to the Castle; moved so to do by the outcry of the Conspirators,
dispersed into the several quarters of the Town, that the Hugonots had possessed
themselves of the Castle.

In the mean time the Conspirators immediately appointed for this execution,
and who were ordered to follow those already got in with the Consul, attempting
to possess themselves of the Gate of the Castle, that they might let in the
people, who came running in Arms from all parts, were opposed by some of the
Duke's Gentlemen, who were walking without in the base Court, to attend his
going abroad; of which the chief were Ambleville, Beaurepaire, Sobole the
elder, Lartigue, and some others. Neither was their Design prevented without
fighting; for Beaurepaire being killed with the blow of an Halbert, and some of
the Guards being knocked down by him, other of the Duke's Gentlemen, who were
walking at a further distance from the Gate, perceiving what they were about,
made all the haste they could, and came time enough to get in before the Gate
was quite shut; amongst whom were the Count de Brienne, the Duke's
Brother-in-law, Miran, Gohas, la Cost, and Des Emars.

All these Gentlemen being joined together, and having with much ado shut the
outward Gate, and left a sufficient Guard to defend it, ran up the Stairs to
see what was become of the Duke; where meeting no body to enquire of, they
believed him to be certainly dead, and all those that were with him: But after
having a little recollected themselves from the astonishment so strange a
solitude had begot in them, and having gathered together such other Gentlemen,
and Soldiers, of the Duke's Guard, as they could find in the Castle, they
resolved to set upon the Consul, and his Associates, and to that purpose made
directly toward the Duke's Chamber, the only part of the House from whence any
noise was to be heard.

The Conspirators seeing themselves alone, the Gate of the Castle shut, the
Duke's Friends, and Servants got together, and united, and (which most of all
perplexed them) that the people could not force their entrance so soon as was
requisite for their safety, would yet try by the same Door by which they had
entered, to recover the principal Tower of the Castle, and to make that good,
till they might be relieved from without: But the passage was so stoutly
maintained by the Gentlemen, and those of the Guard, who were joined to them,
that the Consul being mortally wounded, and some other of his Accomplices more
slightly hurt, the ardour of their first resolution began apparently to cool,
their Enemies being possessed of the only pass, by which they were to expect a
prompt, and necessary succor.

At this new uproar in the Wardrobe, the Duke having, amidst so great a
confusion of voices, distinguished some of them to be his own people, sallied
out of his Closset with the Abbot D' Elbene, and Marivalt; so that these
sallying out with Sword, and Pistol, by the Door of the Closset, whilst the
other Door toward the Hall was made good by the Duke's Friends, the Consul and
his Accomplices found themselves beset on all sides; and seeing no hopes of
safety by the way they had in vain, and with many wounds attempted to pass,
they resolved to get out by a third Door of the same Wardrobe, which yet
remained free, and that let by a back way to the forementioned Tower; and
accordingly carrying off the wounded Consul with them, recovered a little pair
of stone Stairs, the only refuge was left them, and where they intended to
defend themselves to the ^ast man: neither wanted they means so to do; for
being all armed, which neither the Duke nor any of his Followers were, and
resolute Fellows, as they had sufficiently made it appear; and having only a
narrow pair of Stairs to make good, they were not to be assaulted, but with
infinite hazard, in a place of so great advantage: which made the Duke resolve
upon putting fire to the Stairs, to the end he might there, as it were
besieged, keep them in.

Whilst these things were doing within the Castle, a Maid came running, and
told the Duke, that the Consuls Brother, with a great number of armed Men, were
upon entering by a hole they had made in the Wall, on that side next the
Curtain; which made him immediately repair thither, as where his presence was
most necessary, leaving only three of his Guard to make good the Stair-foot,
where the Consul and his Confederates were, that they might attempt nothing in
his absence. At his coming into the Court he found the Consul's Brother, and
another with him, already entered the place, who both of them strove with
incredible valor, to make way for the rest: But the Duke having soon killed
the first with his own hand, the other being no better handled by his
Followers; and having left a sufficient Guard upon the place, he ran presently
to another Alarm, no less dangerous, than this he had already taken so good
order in: For the Conspirators without having (as we have said before) been
able to force the great Gate, by reason of the vigorous resistance they had met
there, were run to another little Postern, that no body dreamed of, with fire
to burn it down; by which means, and by a petard they had also got to blow it
open, they doubted not to force their entrance that way; but the Duke arriving
opportunely upon the place, with some fifteen he had rallied together, after a
dangerous, and obstinate Conflict, beat back the Assailants, and so fortified
it for the future, that it was impossible for them afterward to force that
pass.

Whilst the Duke was thus busy without, those who were with the Consul upon
the Stairs, seeing the passage now guarded by only the three Soldiers, who had
been left to that purpose, attempted to make their way, and to escape, which
they hoped they might do whilst the Duke, and his Servants, were elsewhere
employed, intending afterward to force some of the Avenues (it being
impossible they should be all well guarded, the Duke having so few about him)
and to let in the rest of their Confederates to their succor: But the Duke,
with mavelous diligence presenting himself in all places where there was any
suspicion of danger, coming opportunely in, when they were already disputing it
with his Guards; and having, by the death of one of the Inhabitants, whom he
dispatched with his own hand, beaten back the rest, defeated them of all
further hopes, of escaping out of his Power. In which encounter he ran an
exceeding great hazard, for the Stairs upon which they fought having been
already loosened in the Joints by the heat of the fire, and moreover shaken by
the agitation of the Comba^ants, could no longer support it self from falling
down with a sudden ruin, the step whereon the Duke stood only remaining firm,
who without so miraculous a fortune had certainly perished in the fall. Miran,
a Gentleman of good understanding and great courage, told me some years ago
this Story: in which as he had himself a particular share, so has he often
assured me, that without the Duke's personal courage, great vigilance, and
noble resolution he did believe they had never escaped that eminent peril; that
in his life he never saw a man so constant in all kinds of danger; and that as
they who had faithfully served him in this occasion had doubtless deserved very
well at his hands, so stood they no less obliged to him for their own
preservation, than he to them for his, having done more toward it in his own
single person, than almost all the rest, all their endeavors put together.

The Inhabitants, who had this while possessed themselves of a House called the
Queens Castle, separated only from that wherein the Duke was assaulted by a
little Court, and of equal height with it, by pouring continual shot in at the
Windows, which were very large, and high, did not a little incommodate the
Duke; another inconvenience to be provided against, as it speedily was, and (as
that had already done for the other defects of the place) so well, that it was
almost impossible by strength of hand to force him.

The toil, and bustle of this Action having been sudden, and violent, and the
Fight almost unintermitted from the beginning, the Duke and those with him
found themselves so weary, and their strength so abated, that to refresh
themselves, and to recover a little breath, the Duke called for something to
drink; but upon examination there were but four Bottles of Wine, no Water at
all, and very little, and that course Bread, to be found in all the Castle;
neither was there any more to be hoped for, the Inhabitants being as they were
Masters of all the Kitchins, and other Offices, as also of a Well in the back
Court, which could not possibly be recovered from them, an irreparable, and
unexpected inconvenience to the Duke and his Followers, who saw themselves at
once assaulted with Enemies, within, and without, and more violently with
hunger, and thirst; two Enemies they could the worst defend themselves against;
a condition in which they continued for two days, and one night, and wherein
the Duke's constancy is no less to be admired, than in so gallantly defending
himself against the violence of his armed Adversaries, the necessities of
Nature being much harder to be contended withal, than the most obstinate
attempts of the most resolute Enemy.

Hitherto the Duke saw no signs of succor; Tagent his Cousin, and Lieutenant
in that Government was at Xaintes, with the Troops, and the Citadel, wherein
he had a trusty Servant, had made no show of standing for him, having not so
much as made one Cannon, or Musket shot against the City: For the Consul who
was no less circumspect than valiant, having, when he first plotted the Design
of this Enterprise, forgot nothing, that might any way contribute to the
success, had cunningly drawn Bordes Governor of the Citadel into the Town,
under color of some important Business he was to communicate to him, and had
there seized of his Person; so that at the same time the Duke was first
assaulted in the Castle, they who had Bordes in custody, brought him before the
Citadel, and with a Dagger at his Throat commanded him to yield it up: but he
scorned to do a thing so unworthy of himself in so great an exigency, and his
Lieutenant remained also firm in his duty, though it be true that the regard he
had to his Captains safety made him forbear to shoot, till the last extremity.

As if the Duke in so eminent a peril were not sufficiently disquieted with his
own troubles, he had yet present before his eyes the danger to which the
Duchess his Lady was exposed; who, being a little before the tumult began gone
out of the Castle toward the Iacobins, to hear Mass, was seized upon by the
Inhabitants, as she was retiring toward the Citadel, the way to the Castle
being shut up: Her two Gentlemen Ushers, the one called Piar, and the other
Seguencio, bravely offered to make some resistance, but were both wounded to
death, whilst they held her by the Arms; so that their Blood flew upon her
Clothes: Neither was the Duchess alone arrested after this manner, many of the
Dukes Gentlemen who were abroad in the Town, suspecting nothing, being also
taken prisoners; of which la Curee, since Camp-Master to the Light Horse of
France, was one, with St. Mesme, Blere, the Baron de Cose, de Ramel, and many
others.

In these extremities, to which the Duke was reduc^d, he let a Footman by a
Rope down the Castle-Wall, on that side toward the Park, to carry Tagent
intelligence of the danger he was in: but the Fellow was no sooner down, than
intercepted by the Inhabitants, who had every where set Guards to that purpose:
notwithstanding which, two of the Duke's Gentlemen, being gone early abroad a
Hunting, and upon the noise of the Tocquesain they heard from the City, being
returned upon the spur up to the very Gra^^e of the Citadel, to know the
meaning of it, were soon enform'd, and as soon turned full speed to carry
Tagent the news, who by them received the first intimation of the Duke's danger.

Tagent, upon the arrival of these two Gentlemen, caused the Trumpets
immediately to sound to Horse, and presently mounting with what Cavalry he had,
arrived with all possible diligence at the Gates of Angoulesme: It was in a
time when the Duke could hardly hold out any longer against hunger and thirst,
which for two whole days he had sustained, without any kind of refreshment,
that little provision before mentioned having been equally divided amongst his
Friends, the Duke disdaining to preserve his own life longer than he could also
support so many brave persons, as so franckly exposed themselves to all hazards
for his safety.

The people had in the mean time continued their first Fury, in which they had
been assisted, and advised by several Gentlemen of the Country, who took part
with the League; whereof those of chief note were Mere, a man who was a
particular Servant to the Duke of Guise, and who had been bred up in his
Family; la Messeliere, Les-Bouchaux, de Macqueville, and some others who were
drawn into that Faction, by the specious pretense of Religion, a Color by
which most men of that time were pre-possess'd, and abused. These having
invested the Castle on all sides, had summoned the Duke to Surrender, with
offers of free Quarter, and Bag, and Baggage to him, and his; a Summons to
which the Duke had smartly replied, That he would rather choose to die, than to
receive the least courtesy at their hands; and that he hoped e're long to
reduce them to such a straight, that they should be glad to receive conditions
at his.

It should seem that in this occasion the Duke's Enemies would also give his
Duchess an opportunity wherein to manifest her generous Spirit, that she might
share with her Husband in the Honor of so handsome an Action; for having
already found there was no good to be done upon the Castle by any violent means
they could practice against it, they threatened the Duchess, that unless she
did persuade the Duke her Husband to make a speedy Surrender, they would make
her serve for a Gabion before the place, whither they accordingly led her; such
were the Complements wherewith a Lady of her Birth, and Quality was entertained
by these rude people: but she, without being moved with their threats, made
answer to those who talked so impudently to her, That did the Duke her
Husband's Resolution stand in need of encouragement, she should her self desire
to be presented before him, that she might fortify him to persist in his
defense: but that being altogether unnecessary, their menaces to her were much
more impertinent; that nevertheless she could not but wonder, at their
insolence, and that she durst venture to Prophecy, she should e're long make
them repent it; and afterward turning toward Mere, who of all others had been
the most uncivil to her, she reproached him with his barbarous carriage, in so
handsome Language, with so masculine a courage, and so graceful an indignation,
as if she had foreseen all the good success, that soon after happened in this
business, contrary to all humane expectation.

The enterprise of which we are now speaking had been carried on with that
secrecy, and had so surpised the Duke, and his Family, that there were only
eight of his Guards to be found in the Castle, when this business began, all
the rest having been trapt in the Town; which small number were notwithstanding
so conveniently disposed into places of most danger, and were so expert in the
use of their fire Arms, that it was observed they never shot in vain; a
dexterity that has since grown to such a habit in all who have succeeded in
that employment, that they have ever signalized themselves by their Activity,
and Valor, above all others upon all occasions, and by those qualities
acquired so great a reputation; that the late King intending to raise a Troop
of Dragoons (as he did) for the guard of his own person, did them the honor to
choose six out of the Duke's company, to settle the Order, and Discipline of
that Troop.

If the Duke were himself vigorously assaulted without, he no less importuned
the Consul, and his Accomplices within the Castle, who nevertheless defended
themselves with great resolution; but seeing themselves pressed upon by the
fire, that by little and little still increased upon them; by hunger likewise,
and the Sword, and finding themselves weakened by their wounds to the last
extremity, their Ringleader at the point to die, and themselves out of all
hopes of relief, they let one of their company by cloth cut into shreds, and
tied together, down into the Castle Ditch, to acquaint the Sub-Consul, whose
name was Corlieu, with the condition they were in; who presently assembling the
people, and consulting with them about their Friends necessity, it was soon
resolved upon, that they should come to Propositions of accommodation; in order
to which the Sub-C^^sul presented himself before the Castle, and demanded a
Conference; which being granted, the Abbot D' Elbene, and Ambleville drew near
to parley with him.

But before they could come to any conclusion, the Consul, and those with him
being reduced to a final necessity, had surrendered themselves upon the Duke's
word; which notwithstanding he punctually observed to them without the least
injury, or violence (though the Consul died of his Wounds before the end of the
Action) yet as soon as he had them in his power, he ordered them to write to
those of the City, what danger their lives were in, should they any more offer
to assault the Castle: A Policy that obliged their Relations so to importune
the Sub-Consul to conclude the Treaty, that he again returned to the Castle to
entreat the Duke, that Ambleville, and D' Elbene might come into the City to
Treat with them, which Ambleville absolutely refused to do; it being, as he
conceived, inconsistent with his Honor, to abandon the Duke in a time of so
great danger: So that the Abbot (sufficient Hostages being first delivered in
for his security) was fain to go out alone, and was immediately conducted to
the Town Hall.

The Abbot had by his dexterity brought things to so good a forwardness, that
the Accommodation was upon the point to be concluded, to the Duke's Honor, and
satisfaction, when le Mere, who would by no means lose so fair an opportunity
of sacrificing the Duke, to his Master the Duke of Guise's hatred, broke off
the Treaty, by promising the people a speedy, and infallible succor from the
Vicount D' Aubeterre; who (as he said) having received express Orders from the
King, was with all possible diligence coming in to their assistance.

The Abbot then must return to the Castle, which he did, not without some
danger; so high was the insolence of the people raised by this little beam of
hope, though false, and imposed upon them. Every one now ran again to his Arms,
which they employed with greater violence than before; the Drums, the
Tocquesain, and the clamours of the Seditious rabble, indifferently compelling,
as well the Nobility, and Gentry, as the Commons, as well those who were averse
to the League, as the Leaguers themselves to join in the common mischief. The
hoped by a Petard which they intended to apply to a part of the Castle-Wall,
they knew to be very weak, to make a sufficient breach to enter at; which
accordingly playing, and having wrought some effect, the Gentry, and the people
presented themselves with great courage to the Assault; bu^^hey found greater
in the Defendants, who, though very few in comparison of the Assailants, after
a long dispute, forced them to retire, with the loss of a great many very
resolute men.

The next day about three of the clock in the morning, the Inhabitants heard
the Trumpets of the Duke's Cavalry, who were led by the Sieur de Tagent to his
Relief; the report of whose arrival having put life into the Commanders and
Soldiers of the Citadel, they began to shoot against the City, which till
then they had never done: And if the arrival of this succor encouraged the one
party, it no less coold the fury, and obstinacy of the other; who now began
submissively to sue for a conclusion of the Treaty, which they had so
insolently broken off the day before, and sent again to entreat that the Abbot
D' Elbene might once more come out to that purpose; a request the Duke made
then some difficulty to grant, though in truth he had the greatest reason to
desire it.

The Abbot nevertheless went out the second time into the City, but as vainly
as before; for the Baron de Touverae, with many other Gentlemen of the League
being arrived, and amongst others La-Caze, Quartermaster to the Vicount D'
Aubeterre's Company of Cuirassiers, put new vigor into the Inhabitants;
La-Caze assuring them, that the next morning the Vicount would infallibly come
to their succor, with three hundred Horse, and five hundred Foot; by which the
Citizens being re-assur'd, they now breathed nothing but War, the common people
being ever as forward to entertain rash and giddy resolutions, as they are
usually backwards, and cowardly in the execution of them.

The Abbot was therefore again to recover the Castle, and that with greater
danger than before, being first carried to the Gates of the Citadel, and there
constrained with a Dagger at his Throat, to forbid the Soldiers from shooting
any more against the City, which nevertheless they did not forbear to do: The
Duke (pressed upon now more than ever by those of the City) having found means,
from the high Tower of the Castle, to give a sign to the Commanders of the
Citadel, who might easily see it, to shoot continually, so to divert the fury
of the Enemy, that so violently assaulted him; a Command so well understood,
and so readily obeyed, that the confusion was now far greater in all parts of
the City, than hitherto it had ever been. Neither had it ceased so soon, had
not the Sieur de Nesmond, chief Justice of the place, a man of great authority
amongst them, and no less considerable for his quality, than his Employment,
with such of the principal Magistrates, as had not consented to this tumult,
resolved to join all their interests together to put an end to the business.

To that purpose therefore they assembled at the Bishops Palace. This Prelate
Charles de Bony by name, an Italian by birth, having long governed that Diocese
with great reputation of Virtue, and Piety, could not without infinite sorrow
behold these confusions, though authorized by the League, and palliated with
the pretext of Religion; so that in this Assembly, he, the Magistrates, and
some well disposed Citizens, having considered the peril the City was in, as
also their own particular danger, who were likely to be involved in the common
ruin, uniting themselves against the seditious, with some Gentlemen of Quality
of the Country (who being come in at the noise of this disorder, had stood
neuters during the whole Action) sent two of the most eminent amongst them to
the Duke, to entreat him, that he would please to consent that the
Capitulation, which had been agreed upon the day before with the Abbot D'
Elbene, might be Signed, and Ra^ified by Tagent, who was with his Cavalry in
the Suburbs; a request was readily granted by the Duke, who was now no longer
in a condition, had he been so disposed, to refuse it.

It had now been above forty hours since the Duke, or any of those who were
with him in the Castle had either drank, or eaten; their powder was all spent,
the men for the most part wounded, and those who were not, so worn out with
watching, fasting, and continual labor, that it was their courage only that
did support them; a support that would soon have failed them, with their lives,
had the Besiegers known their necessities, which were such as flesh and blood
could no longer endure: But God, who reserved the Duke for better occasions,
was pleased to deprive them of that knowledge, and so to order things, that the
impatience of two short hours delivered him from that eminent, and apparent
danger. The Abbot D' Elbene therefore went out the third, and last time into
the City; and, together with the Inhabitants repaired to Tagent; who, to the
Duke's great astonishment had all this while stood an idle Spectator, without
once endeavoring to enter the Town to his succor: It Is true, he signed the
Capitulation, which was all the share he had in this business: But the Articles
were no sooner Signed, than they immediately fell to breaking down the
Barricadoes, the people retired every one to their own Houses, and the Duchess
of Espernon was conducted to the Castle by the aforesaid Abbot. Where being
come, The end of the Action.
after she had given the Duke her Husband some tender, and affectionate
testimonies of joy for his deliverance; the first thing she did, in return of
the barbarous usage she had received, was to mediate their Pardons, by whom she
had been so ill used, with the Duke; who, though he had meditated a severe
Revenge upon them, who had committed so great an outrage against him, was
notwithstanding content to surrender his Animosities to the generous
intercession of this Virtuous Lady. He moreover set those he had taken
Prisoners with the Consul at Liberty, consented that Mere, with the other
Gentlemen of his Party, should retire to their own Houses, giving them a Convoy
of Light Horse for their defense; and by a notable effect of Generosity, and
good Nature, having restored the dead Bodies of the Consul, and his Brother to
their Relations, and Friends, he permitted them to be buried with public
Obsequies.

Lastly, he so franckly pardoned all the rest of the Citizens, that not any one
of them, who would afterward live in Peace, could ever perceive in him the
least memory of any former unkindness; but on the contrary, received from him
all the good Offices, and gentle Usage they could expect from a man, they had
never offended: by which exceeding Clemency, and by the protection both the
City and Country received from him, for the space of fifty years, which he
afterward held that Government, he so won the hearts of that people, that
there was not one of them who would not cheerfully have ventured Life, and
Fortune for his Service, and who have not, to this hour, his memory in great
Veneration, as the Father, Protector, and Restorer of their Country.

The King of Navarre, The King of N^varre endeavors to draw the Duke over to
his Party.
who was ever so intent upon his own Affairs, as to let no occasion slip, that
he conceived might any way serve to advance them; foreseeing that after the
Assembly which was to be holden at Blois, he should certainly have all the
Forces both of the King, and the League bent jointly against him, had not
failed to send to the Duke upon his retirement from Court, (a time very proper
to have taken his Resentments in the heat, had he been a Malcontent) with
offers of as high, and honorable conditions, as he himself could possibly have
proposed, if he would join with him. To which the Duke equally firm in his
Religion, and Loyalty, made answer, that he did beseech his Majesty to reflect
upon the infinite obligations he had to the King his Master; and then he did
assure himself, that his own generosity, would for ever condemn him of
ingratitude, The Duke excuses himself.
should he abandon his Service for any persecution his Enemies could practice
against him: After which, and many humble, and respective thanks for his
gracious offer, he gave him plainly, and freely to understand, that he would
rather perish; than to live obliged to any other for his protection, than to
him who was the sole Author of his Fortune.

But this Prince not checking, at this first refusal, would yet try if in the
business of Angoulesme, by his own Actions, and Presence, he could not work
more effectually upon the Duke, than by the mediation of Agents, he had
hitherto done; and to that purpose, being advertised of this enterprise (though
at a time when he was upon the point to fall upon the City, and Castle of
Clisson, in the lower Poictou, very considerable places, and which in all
appearance he was likely to carry) he nevertheless gave over the Design, to come
to the Duke's Relief: A deliberation that some have believed, was not so much
intended to rescue the Duke from the danger he was in, as to make use of that
occasion, in the Confusion the City then was, to seize upon it to his own use,
and to reduce so considerable a place into the hands of his own Party: But
whatever his Design was, he met intelligence by the way, that the Duke had
already disengaged himself from his Enemies, and was settled in a posture of
safety: by which though he found he should come too late to do the Duke any
Service, unwilling nevertheless to lose the thanks of his good intention, The
King of Navarre tries again to persuade the Duke, but in vain.
he sent to congratulate with him for his happy Deliverance, which he said was
so much the more glorious to him, as it was wrought out of himself, and
effected by his own Valor, and Constancy; advising him withal to consider how
many of the like attempts he was to expect from his Enemies malice; withal once
more offering to join his Interests with his, and to run the same Fortune with
him in all hazards. But the Duke answering still with the same civility, and
respect he had done before, without suffering himself to be tempted from the
duty he owed to the King his Master, continued constant in his Resolution,
never to take part with any, who were his open and declared Enemies.

In this place methinks the Duke of Espernon is chiefly to be considered, to
make thence a right judgment of the greatness and constancy of his mind: He had
scarce been seven years a Favorite, when he saw the prodigious Engine of the
League ready to fall upon him; a body so formidable, and so great, as having
already constrained the King himself to bow before it, made all those of the
Reformed Religion to tremble at its motion; no Authority was able to stop it,
no Power to resist it, yet could it never startle this young Dukes constancy:
But on the contrary, though he saw himself forsaken by the King, and exposed to
the malice of his Enemies; though he saw the people, in his own Governments,
raised in mutiny against him, and all things as it were conspiring together to
his Ruin; yet could he not even in these extremities ever submit to the King
of Navarre's Protection, though offered, and so handsomely offered to him: but
though alone in his own Quarrel, at least without other assistance than of his
Friends and Servants, he had yet the courage to defend his own Interests, and
the Service of his Prince, even against his Prince himself, who was now become
General of his own Enemies; Yet had he ever so excellent a Government over
himself, as to do nothing contrary to his Conscience, or his Duty: So that not
being to be moved either by the Menaces of the League, or by the Hopes he might
reasonably conceive from the assistance of those of the Reformed Religion, he
subdued those two Passions that exercise the most absolute Empire over the
minds of men, and that bear the greatest sway in all Humane Designs.

The end of the Second Book.
THE HISTORY Of the LIFE of the Duke of Espernon.
The Third Book.
WHilst the Dukes Enemies exercised his Virtue with these continual troubles,
The Affairs of the Court during the Duke's absence.
they were themselves no less afflicted with their own Ambition. The Assembly
of the Estates was held at Blo^s, where all things in outward show were
disposed in favor of the Duke of Guise: but still as he approached nearer to
his Object, the greater the height, and the more difficult the access unto the
place, to which he aspired, appeared unto him: That one remaining step he was
to climb, to reach the height of his desires, seeming to rise still further
from him, as often as he attempted to gain it. So that tired out with so many
present difficulties, and apprehending yet more those which were to come, The
Duke of Guise in suspense, whether or no he should pursue his Designs.
it is said he was often almost resolved to leave off his Designs, and to rely
upon the King's Word, that had so often assured him the enjoyment of his
present greatness, wherein also he doubted not without any great difficulty to
maintain himself. The Duke of Mayenne, either jealous (as some have thought) of
his Brothers Greatness, or else of a more moderate temper, than the rest of his
Family, had often advised him to this Resolution; but the Cardinal their
Brother, and the Archbishop of Lions, were the Incendiaries, that rekindled his
dying Ambition, and that hurried him on to that precipice, into which they
themselves at last fell with him: They represented to him by what infinite
labors, and industry they had placed him in that height to which he was
already arrived; That if he ever had resolved there to limit his desires, and
to content himself with a competent Fortune, he ought never to have undertaken
those pains, nor to have undergone those dangers he had so gloriously, and so
fortunately overcome; That the merit of his Ancestors had left him greatness
enough to satisfy an ordinary Ambition: but that if he ever had the thought of
rising above them, as doubtless he had, the way was open to him, and that he
had already overcome the greatest difficulties: That the greater part of France
stood for him, and that almost all Foreign Princes, and States were favorable
to him: That God himself seemed to take his part, by giving him a negligent and
voluptuous Prince; whose nature being softened, and unnerv'd by ease, and sloth,
had laid him open to his Designs: That it was an easy matter in the condition
himself then was, to make him sure: That not suddenly to do it, it was to be
feared the King might recover from his Lethargy; and, looking into himself,
might reassume his former vigor, and recover his almost lost Authori^y: That
the very fear the King then lived in, ought to be highly suspected to him: That
no Counsels were so violent and dangerous, as those that proceeded from
apprehension, or extreme necessity: That he infinitely deceived himself, if he
thought there could be any safety for him (what promises soever the King might
make) in that height to which he had already raised himself: That the Fortune
of a Subject was never more unstable, and unsafe, than when it rendered him
suspected to his Prince: That he must boldly therefore step out of the quality
of a Subject, if he would be out of the danger of a Sovereign. They further
remonstrated to him what Opinion all Europe, who were joined together in his
Favor, what all good Frenchmen, who were passionate in his cause, what all
posterity (to which he ought to have a greater regard, than to the present)
could have of his courage; if the Duke of Guise only should think himself
unworthy of that Dignity, to which all the world besides so passionately wished
he might arrive: That he ought then boldly to end, what he had so generously
begun, and so gloriously pursued; and that though death it self should follow
(which was not in the least to be doubted) it were notwithstanding more
honorable to perish in so brave a Design, than to survive the shame of not
daring to perform it.

The Duke of Guise, The Duke of Guise confirmed ^n his first resolutions.
whose ambitious and unquiet Spirit was apt enough to take fire at such
Counsels, as these haughty, and mutinous Prelates were fit to give, was soon
persuaded to renew his former practice; and, as if he had only suspended the
prosecution of his Designs to take a little breath, that he might fall on with
greater violence, he presently sent new dispatches to Rome, and into Spain,
still more and more to fortify himself in the Authority of the one, and
Strength of the other, assuring further to himself at the same time, either by
promises, or threats, by himself or by his Adherents, almost all the suffrages
of the several Deputies of the Assembly: which the King, to whom all these
practices were very well known, being enform'd of* and then seeing the manifest
danger he was in of losing both his Authority, and his Crown, The King resolves
upon his death
he determined to prevent the Duke by Counsels as severe and bloody, as his own
were rash and mutinous, and to cut him off before he should have time to effect
what he had so politickly, and so dangerously design'd^ A resolution which,
^eing soon agreed upon with some of the Nobility, his Majesty knew most
faithful to him, had the execution of it without further delay committed to
eight of the five and forty. These five and forty were all of them Gentlemen of
approved Valor, and for whose fidelity they who had recommended them to the
King, stood themselves engaged; so that of this Company (to which the number
had given the name) his Majesty made his most assured Guard (the greatest part
of his Domestics being become suspected to him) and as it were wholly
entrusted the safety of his Person to their Fidelity, and care: They attended
him wherever he went, they nightly kept Guard in his Antichamber; and (as
nothing is so powerful as benefits to win the hearts, and affections of men)
there was not one of them, who, besides his Salary of an hundred Crowns of Gold
a month (which was very much in those times) had not over and above either
received, or had not very good reason to expect, great recompenses from his
Royal bounty: So that these men being absolutely tied to all his Majesty's
Interests, it was no hard matter to induce them to make an attempt upon the
Person of the Duke of Guise, against whom the King had conceived a violent, and
implacable Hatred. I shall here say nothing of the manner and circumstances of
the Death of this Duke, nor of that of the Cardinal of Guise his Brother, who
at the same time came to the same violent end, most of our Historians being
particular in that Relation: but I can bear testimony that the Duke of Espernon
did neither then, nor ever since approve of that execution; and that although
he had received very hard measure from the Duke in his life, he notwithstanding
had his great qualities in high esteem after his death. And indeed he had so
often, and so generously employed those rare Endowments for the safety and
honor of the Kingdom, that his Virtue could never have been too highly
commended, could he have added the qualities of a good Subject, to those other
excellencies which rendered him one of the greatest men of his time.

A little before the Duke of Guise's death, the King had dismissed from Court the
High Chancellor Chiverny, and the ^ieures de Believre, and de Villeroy,
Secretaries of State, upon considerations that were then variously interpreted;
though the King would have the Duke of Espernon believe, that the chief cause
of Mounsieur de Villeroy's disgrace was the business of Angoulesme, which his
Majesty wholly laid to his charge; New Ministers chosen after the Duke of
Guise's Death.
and that the Duke might the better be confirmed in this opinion, the Sieur de
Revol, a particular creature of the Dukes, one that was, under him, Comptroller
of the Exchequer of Provence, and that had no interest at Court saving his
Protection, was received into his Place.

His Majesty had no sooner absolutely determined the Duke of Guise's Ruin,
than that foreseeing the consequences so bloody an execution was likely to draw
after it, he dispatched away Colonel Alphonso Corso, afterward Marshall
d'Ornano, to seize upon the Duke of Mayen^e at Lions, where he then resided;
which, if it could have been in time effected, his Majesty had in all appearance
been secured from the greatest part of those mischiefs which this action
afterward produced: but the Duke, having received the news of his Brothers
Deaths some hours before Alphonso's arrival, was already in great diligence got
to Horse, and fled out at one Gate of the City as Ornano entered at another to
surprise him, and by that means first recovered Dijon, and afterward Paris,
without any impediment: Where he was no sooner arrived, than that laying aside
that moderation he had ever manifested, during his Brother's Life, he declared
himself Head of that Party, he had ever till then, to his great Reputation,
seemed to condemn; and drawing together all the Forces of the League that lay
scattered up and down in several places, he of them, without stirring from
Paris, made a very considerable Army.

His Majesty easily judged that this storm would suddenly break upon him, and
failed not, out of that foresight, to call all his principal Servants about
him, which nevertheless made up but an inconsiderable Body, and such as could
no ways secure him from any attempt of the Enemy: So that he was advised to
send once more to the King of Navarre, to entreat him to advance with his
Troops to his succor, which notwithstanding the King not being able to
persuade himself to do, (his regard to Religion, and the (...) he bore to the
Pope, opposing that Council) he only at that time sent Orders to the Duke of
Espernon, who had then a considerable Force on Foot to come over to him; though
afterward, and after many deliberations, being also disposed to call in the
King of Navar^e, he sent to the Duke, that before he put himself upon his
march, he should first go to this Prince, to make the first overtures of this
business to him. The Sieur de Beaujeu was purposely dispatched to the Duke with
these Orders, which were no sooner received by him, than he departed from
Angoulesme to go to St, Iean d' Angely, where the King of Navarre then was; and
where having found him well disposed, and very ready to do his Majesty the
Service he desired of his Person, and Faction, he immediately made himself
ready to go to the King; The Duke called back to Court.
who, seeing his Enemies now ready to fall upon him, had sent a new, and
instant Express to the Duke in all haste to come, and join with him: which
express Order to satisfy with the greatest diligence, he rather chose to leave
the Negotiation he had already so successfully begun with the King of Navarre,
to the Duchess of Angoulesme (who soon after brought it to effect) than one
moment to defer his attendance on his Master in so critical a time, and on so
urgent an occasion.

All these great transactions happened at Court, Anno 1589.
after the Duke of Espernon had retired himself from thence into his
Governments. Neither was he in his retirement, or in his choice of the place he
retired unto, either unactive in himself, or in a Scene improper for his
Majesty's Service; for he was no sooner disengaged from the enterprise of
Angoulesme, but that he put himself immediately into a condition to awe many of
his ill Neighbors in the adjoining Provinces, so as either to continue them
in, or to make them return unto their duty: Some actions of the Duke during his
retirement.
For which purpose having increased his Forces, the first occasion he had to
employ them was against those of the Religion; who having be^ieg'd Periguex,
and upon the point to make themselves Masters of the place, at the Duke's
approach raised the Siege in great disorder, and retired not without some
considerable loss.

The Duke was after this preparing himself for greater enterprises, when
Beaujeu brought him those forementioned Orders from the King; by whom having
understood the great preparations the Duke of Mayenne made to come first to
Blois, and from thence to Tou^s, whither the King had then retired himself; and
knowing his Majesty almost naked of all defense, and as it were, exposed to the
violence of his Enemies, he thought it necessary upon the instant to move with
all his Forces that way, and at the same time by a Gentleman to give his
Majesty notice of his motion, that he might receive his Majesty's Commands upon
the way: By which Gentleman the King sent him presently word, that the most
important service he could then do him, was to put himself into Blois. For the
Duke of Mayenne having resolved to make his first attempt upon that place,
either by the ruin of the Castle to revenge in part the death of his two
Brothers, who there last their lives; or to make that City (which by its
vicinity to Tours, was very proper to watch all advantages against the King)
his seat of War; his Majesty conceived there would be little security for him
in Tours, should his Enemy possess himself of that Post, and had therefore bent
all his care, and endeavor to preserve it out of the power of the League.

His Majesty would have put the Marshall de Biron into that place, and
afterward, he having excused himself, the Marshall d' Aumont; but both the
one, and the other having refused the danger of defending, and with unequal
Forces, a place, that being in it self open on all sides, was not well to be
defended, and that was to expect the first fury of the League to be bent
against it, his Majesty turned his thoughts toward the Duke of Espernon; and
knowing that the difficulty of the undertaking would be no little motive to
make the Duke embrace it, his Majesty sent him word, that the Mareschals de
Biron, and d' Aumont had both of them already excused themselves from that
Employment; and that he only remained, from whose Valor and Fidelity he could
promise to himself so signal, and so honorable a Service in so difficult an
undertaking, and in so dangerous a time; that the defense of that City was of
pressing, and immediate concern; but that withal he should be infinitely glad
to see him, and that he therefore left it to his own free choice, and judgment,
either to come immediately to him, or to defer giving him that satisfaction,
till the occasion, which at present called him another way, should be past, The
D^ke's Forces.
and blown over. The Duke had then in his Army four thousand and five hundred
Foot, five hundred Light Horse, and three hundred Harquebusiers on Horseback,
besides other Levies he had ordered should be made in the Country, which
accordingly soon after came to him; of which he detained three thousand Foot,
with a proportion of Horse for the defense of Blois, and the rest he sent away
to the King under the command of Moncassin and (...) Cure^; from which Forces
his Majesty received no little assistance in the occasion that soon after
happened before Tours.

The Duke in the mean time, according to the King's Order, took his way toward
Blois, and interpreting the Liberty his Majesty had so freely given him,
(either presently to repair to Court, or to defer it (...) a fitter season) as
he ought to do; he conceived (...) by his duty,^ rather to deprive himself of
that present Honor, and Satisfaction, than any ways to neglect that Service
was expected from him. Advancing therefore with all diligence, and his way
lying through Amboise, where the Archbishop of Lions had been detained
Prisoner, A generous act of the Duke.
ever since the death of the Guises; he (although the Bishop was his capital
Enemy, and a man from whom of all others he had received the most sensible
injuries) would nevertheless go give him a visit in the Castle. The sad estate,
and present condition of this Prelate, had so far reconciled the Duke unto him,
that in return of all former injuries, after he had some time entertained him
with some consolatory Expressions, as toward his present Fortune; he
afterward made him a promise, as soon as ever he should see the King, to
labor with all his Industry, and Interest, for his Enlargement; as after he
did, it being one of the first Requests he made, and obtained, after his return
to Count.

From thence, having recovered Blois, he presently fell to fortifying the
place, and in few days put it into so good a posture of Defense, that it would
be no easy matter to force it. He also put into St. (...), a little Town upon
the Road, betwixt that, and Paris, the Count de Brienne, his Brother-in-law,
and the Sieur d' Ambleville, with eight hundred Men, the most part Horse; which
he did, not so much out of design to keep that place, which he knew was not to
be defended, as for some few days to stop the progress of the Duke of Mayenne,
and by that means to give the King some leisure to fortify himself: A design
that succeeded accordingly; for the Duke of Mayenne not being able to carry
this place by assault, and obstinate in the taking of it, having staid to lay a
formal Siege, D' Avila^
although he took it in the end, and in it the Count de Brienne, Ambleville,
and some other Gentlemen upon composition; yet having lost four days time in
the Action, he gave so much respite to the King, who had very great need of it,
to prepare himself. This block in the Duke of Mayen^e's way, was perhaps none
of the least things that concurred to the preservation of the Royal Affairs:
but whether it were or no, the Duke was however infinitely condemned for having
so wilfully set himself upon an Enterprise of so little moment, in a time when
nothing could be so advantageous as diligence to the execution of his Designs.

The Duke of Mayenne, measuring by this first Essay the opposition he was
likely to meet withal from the Duke of Espernon at Blois, altered his design of
attempting that place, and resolved without further delay to turn the torrent
of his Arms upon the King himself, and against the City of Tours, where his
Majesty then resided.

The King of Navarre had joined himself with his Majesty but the day before,
and had with his men taken up his Quarter in one of the Suburbs of the City;
whom his Majesty being gone to visit in his Quarters, and walking with him
abroad, the earnestness of their discourse had unawares drawn them so far out
of the Suburbs, that the Avaunt Coureurs of the Duke of Mayenne's Army mist very
little of surprising them both, and consequently of making an end of the War,
almost as soon as begun: but the two Kings notwithstanding being happily
retired within their strength, the Skirmish grew hot on both sides, and then it
was that the Duke of Espernon's Troops signalized themselves. For Moncassin
long, M^^^sieur (...) Tho^.
and bravely defending himself in the very face, and against the first fury of
the Enemy, was there wounded in the presence of the King, who was himself
Spectator of the Fight; and who, during all which with a constancy far from any
show of that effeminacy his Enemies had so often laid to his charge, himself
gave the whole direction, and continued in the danger till the end of the
Action.

The Duke of Mayenne being frustrated in his Design upon Blois, and baffled
before Tours, principally through the Duke's opposition, and that of his
Forces, seeing nothing was now to be effected, resolved to retire without
attempting any thing further at that time; upon which retreat happened the total
dissolution of his Army: whereas on the contrary, the Duke of Espernon's Forces
grew still greater in strength, and reputation; who having lately received a
recruit of fifteen hundred foot, and three hundred Dragoons, The Duke
re-inforc'd by new Supplies.
the Royal Army received a greater increase from those Regiments he had brought
over to the service, than from any other whatsoever. The King of Navarre had
not yet had leisure to draw his Forces together, they being dispersed into
several parts, as was most convenient for the preservation of such places as
were in the possession of the Hugonot Party; by which it may easily be
imagined, the King could have no very considerable Army; yet was it necessary
to make use of the disorder the Leaguers were then in, which obliged the King
upon great probabilities, and almost assurance of signal advantages to be
reaped by it, to resolve upon leaving ^ours; and to make directly for Paris. In
this March the King of Navarre commanded the Vant-Guard of the Army, The
Command of the Rear-guard reserved for the Duke of Espernon.
and his Majesty himself the main Battle, reserving the command of the Rear for
the Duke of Espernon, and that in the very face of the Mareschals de Biron, and
d' Aumont, and of all the other Nobility who were then about his Person.

It was at this time that the Duke came up to the King, The Duke's arrival at
the Army, and his favorable reception.
by whom he was received with all the honor, and kindness he could expect from
his Majesty's old Affection to him, now newly revived by the important Services
he had so lately received from his Fidelity, and Valor: And then it was that
his Majesty, never thinking he could sufficiently evidence the esteem he had
for him, endeavored (till better times should render him capable of a better
acknowledgement) principally to satisfy him concerning all things that had
past during his absence from Court, receiving him into a degree of greater
Privacy, and trust, than he had ever been in, in his highest pitch of Favor.

The Duke, that he might make a grateful return to those infinite testimonies
he received of the King his Masters great affection to him, sought on his part
all occasions to please him in all things; and knowing very well he could not
give him a greater, nor a more signal satisfaction, than to reconcile himself
to the Marshall d' Aumont, a man very acceptable to, and in great esteem with
his Majesty, but who had long been upon ill terms with the Duke; he went one
day franckly to his Lodging, and without regarding the formalities usual in
such Accommodations, there made him offers of Reconciliation, and Friendship;
the greatest violence imaginable to his own nature, of it self not easy to be
reconciled (an humor in which he has ever since persisted, but too obstinately
for the advantage of his own Affairs) but the desire he had to gratify the
King his Master overcame that difficulty, M^unsi^^^ de (...).
whose great Interest it was, that those few Servants, who continued about his
Person, and were faithful to him, should live in perfect intelligence with one
another. The Duke therefore having embraced the Marshall, told him, That he
was come with all freedom, and candor, to desire his Friendship, as also to
make him a tender of his; that the evil intelligence they had so long lived in
could not but be prejudicial to his Majesty's Service, which they both so
zealously desired to promote; That there had no o^^ense past betwixt them,
wherein their Honors could be any ways concerned; that if notwithstanding he
had entertained some little discontents, he desired him to forget them; as for
his part, and that sincerely, he would blot out all memory of his. The
Marshall, overcome by this generous, and unexpected freedom, as readily met
the Duke in his courtesy, like a true Frenchman, laying open his bosom to the
reconciliation with more sincerity, and affection than ever: Whereupon they
both of them went immediately to the King, who was not a little pleased at an
Accommodation so important to his Service; and having been particularly
informed of the Duke's manner of proceeding, gave it the favorable
interpretation due to so noble an Action; so that still more, and more
increasing the esteem, and kindness he had for him, he made it so highly, He
enters into higher favor than ever.
and so publicly appear, as gave D'Avila occasion to say, he was
reestablished in the highest degree of Favor he had ever been, as it was
effectually true, whatever D' Aubigne is pleased to write to the contrary.

The same D' Aubigne, a man very perfect in calumny, and with which he
continually bespatters all the King's Actions, contrary to the truth known and
received by all the world, says further, That they had much ado to prevail with
the King to march his Army out of Tours toward Paris; that the King of Navarre
was forced to use all manner of persuasion, and even a certain kind of violence
to bring him to it: but besides that all our Historians are contrary to him in
this, the King was observed after the death of the Duke of Guise, to be so
vigorous in all his actions, The King's generous Resolution.
that at Court they would ordinarily say, he had now re-assum'd that Lions
Courage, he had for some years suppressed. His whole discourse was nothing, but
of reigning with Authority, and of chastising such as would not acknowledge him
in their obedience, which his actions likewise confirmed. In the attempt upon
the Suburbs of Tours, Mounsieur de Thou (as being continually with the King,
and particularly all that day) gives this testimony, That although in this
occasion, which was very hot, his Majesty was surpised in his Doublet only, he
nevertheless gave orders with so much assurance, and gave so evident proofs of
Valor and Constancy in so great a danger, that the whole Army took it for a
happy Omen, and every man by his Example fortified himself with Courage and
Resolution. In fine (whatever men may say of this Prince) it is most certain,
that a Martial Disposition governed in him, as he had sufficiently made it
appear in his Youth, when he was merely led by his own natural inclination: but
it is likewise true, that being come to the Crown, and having learned by the
miseries of War, that Peace is the greatest good with which a Prince can
gratify his people; he endeavored by all means (and doubtless too
industriously) to establish that happy Government in his Kingdom. To this end
were all his Politics (which as I have said) he made his ordinary, and regular
study directed: but at last incensed at the ill success of so good a Design, he
absolutely resolved upon the taking Arms, never to lay them down, till he had
reestablished his Authority, and that in the highest degree any of his
Predecessors had ever done.

With this resolution then he departed from Tours in the beginning of May,
1589. The King marches from Tours to Paris.
The first Town upon his way that stood for the League was Gergeau, and this
little Town had the confidence to shut their Gates against the Royal Army: So
much were men's minds infatuated with zeal to their Faction. The Duke of
Espernon was ordered to go before to block up this place, and to cast up the
first earth against it, which he accordingly did; and the whole Army being a
few days after come up to the Siege, the King of Navarre advanced as far as the
Trenches, to see what progress they had made: A Prince whose Valor and Bravery
were so generally known, as that his Reputation was universally received, and
established in the opinion of all: But the Duke, who till this time had never
had the honor to be near him in any occasion of this kind, would now let him
see that he also was no Novice in matters of War: It Is true, he might have
chosen a fitter opportunity of giving the King a testimony of his own Valor,
without exposing his Person to so great a danger; but the heat of Youth
transported him: and I have heard him discoursing of this Action, and (always
accusing his own indiscretion) magnify to the highest degree, the King of
Navarre's courage, which appeared in great luster upon this occasion. D'
Aubigne, who was himself then present, gives this Relation of it; and I shall
make use of his own words, being in this case not much to be suspected, since
every body knows he was never very partial to the Duke. The King of Navarre
(says he) being gone to visit the Duke of Espernon's Trenches, the Duke showing
him-what he had done, leads him through the middle of the space betwixt the
Trenches, and the Town, in his Doublet only, and that so unconcerned, and so
open to the Enemies view, that Houeilles the Duke's Cousin, and CampMaster, as
also another of his people fell dead at their feet; when having gained a Guard
commanded by Belangreuille, they came out on the back side of that, and passed
within forty paces of the Courtine which played upon them all the while, and
laid two men more dead upon the place. The King of Navarre, and the Duke having
at last gained the blind of a Garden Door. Frontenack, and another (which other
must be D' Aubigne himself, who was Gentleman of the Horse to the King of
Navarre) earnestly solicited the Duke to retire, which he was about to do by a
way, perhaps likely to engage them in more danger than before, when the King of
Navarre staid him by the Collar of his Doublet. This is that he says: but he
adds after a thing wherein he is not so good a testimony, as of the first, and
which is not so true, viz. that the King being enform'd of this Action, spoke
highly against the Duke, and in terms that nothing tasted of Favor, and that
so soon as he saw him, he severely reprehended him, and reproached him, that he
would have destroyed his Brother. It Is true that his Majesty chid the Duke for
his rashness, telling him, That he ought to reserve his Valor for better
occasions, and not so lightly to expose the Person of the King of Navarre his
Brother, and his own; which were rather words of tenderness, than distaste; and
it is likewise very true, that the King of Navarre's Servants murmured highly
at it, endeavoring to possess the King, that the Duke had not engaged him in
this danger without Design: nay himself manifested something at his coming out
of the Trenches; for it was told the Duke that he should say to some of his
people, The King of Navarre's first aversion for the Duke of Espernon.
I think this man would be content to lose an Arm, to have my Brains beaten
out; which was never the Duke's intention, he being only spurred on by the
inconsiderate heat of Youth and Bravery, without any other Design.

From Gergeau the Army advanced towyrds Piviers, which immediately opened its
Gates, as also the City of Chartres surrendered at the first summon: but
Estampes stood out a Siege, which being foon after taken by Assault, some of
the King of Navarre's Soldiers ran on in their prevailing Fury even to the
Church of that Town, there committing all sorts of insolence; which the Duke
being advertised of, by the Guards he had placed at the Doo^s of this Church
(wisely foreseeing that the King of Navarre's people, who for the greater part
were men of the Reformed Religion, would not abstain from violation even of
Holy things) he ran thither himself to prevent further disorder; where being
come, and seeing the Chalices, and other Sacred Ornaments of the Altars in the
hands of the rude Soldier, not being able to endure that things, dedicated to
so Sacred Use, should be profaned after that manner, he furiously drew his
Sword, and ran the first Offender in his way quite through the Body; which by
chance happening to be one of the Dragoons of the King of Navarre's own Guard,
and in his own Livery, the Complaint was immediately carried to him, and by him
as soon to the King; of which the Duke having also notice, he presently
repaired to his Majesty's Quarter, to make his defense. There being come, and
his Majesty having demanded of him the reason for what he had done, he gave him
a particular account of the whole business: Whereupon the King of Navarre told
him with some bitterness, That he had no Authority over his Soldiers, and less
over his Domestics; to which the Duke made answer with a respective, but a
manly boldness, That the trust wherewith the King was pleased to honor him,
and the command he had given him in the Army, invested him with sufficient
Authority to chastise Impious, and Sacrilegious Persons; and that moreover
every good man ought to assume that Authority in Offenses of so high a Nature.
Their Dispute was like to grow into hotter terms, when the King imposed silence
both upon the one, and the other, not condemning the Duke's action
nevertheless; but desiring the King of Navarre to take care for the future,
that there might be no more offenses committed of that kind. Increase at the
Siege of Estampes:
Thus by little and little secret discontents against the Duke crept into the
King of Navarre's bosom, which many, envious of the Duke's greatness,
endeavored to augment: neither was the Duke blind on that side, nor was it
without some affliction that he saw himself so ill requited for the sincere and
uninteressed affection he had ever manifested for this Princes Service in his
greatest adversity: but having found by sufficient experience, that the best
Offices are not always the best recorded, he contented himself with the
conscience of his own integrity, and ever paying the respect due to the Birth,
and Virtues of this excellent Prince, in all other concerns of his command he
exercised his Duty to the utmost height of Authority he had ever done.

The Army advancing daily toward Paris, The taking of Mont^rea^ faut-yonne.
the Duke had order to make an attempt upon Montereau faut-Yonne, which he
carried by Petard; neither was it a service of light importance; for in the
sequel of Affairs, that which the Duke won in a few hours cost the King's
Enemies many months, and many good men to recover it. From thence the Army
being come to Pontoise, the Duke had there the storming of a Suburb, which was
very well fortified, committed to him; and which notwithstanding he carried,
though with as much hazard as ever he tempted in any action of his life. He was
himself the first that leaped upon the Rampire; and though in this assault he
had above a hundred men laid dead at his feet, amongst which were many Persons
of Quality, and Command, he nevertheless resolutely persisted in the
Enterprise, and forced the Enemy at the Swords point even to the Gates of the
City, whither he compelled the^ to retire; and where having blocked them up, he
pressed on the Siege with that vigor and conduct, that the place soon after
surrendered upon composition. The Surrender of Pontoise.
Thus did the King find all things give place to his Arms, as if Destiny had
smoothed, and levelled for him all the paths that lead to Death and Ruin; and
in this prosperity of his Affairs, his Majesty resolved upon the Siege of Paris.

Already were the Swisse, The Siege of Paris, and the death of Henry the Third.
and new raised Reiters come up, and joined with the Body of the Army; the
Officers were disposed into their several Quarters, and the King had taken up
his own at St Clou, and given the Guard of them to the Duke, in order to a
formal Siege. His Majesty's Lodging in this narrow Quarter was at the Hostel de
Gondy, as that which was most capable to receive him; and it was in this House
of Gondy that (whilst this great Prince was forming the designs of restoring
his despised Authority of chastising the temerity, and disobedience of his evil
disposed Subjects, of rendering his name venerable to all his Neighbors, and of
establishing the Peace of his Kingdom, having already almost extinguished all
the sparks of Division that had enflamed it) that I say an accursed Pa^ricide
in the Meridian of all his Glory, and in the Crisis of all his Designs plunged
a murdering Knife into his Entrails. Every one has heard who Jacques Clement
was, and the black story of his Bloody Assassinate: but no one could ever yet
penetrate so far as to discover by whom he was prompted on to this execrable
Act. The King feeling himself wounded, drew the Knife immediately from the
Wound, and struck it up to the haft in the Villains Face, at which bustle
betwixt them, one of the Grooms of the Wardrobe, who guarded the Closet Door,
into which his Majesty was withdrawn to give this wicked wretch a more private
audience, ran in to them, as also did several Gentlemen who waited in the outer
Room, who all of them drawing their Swords, by an imprudence in it self
criminal, if not excused by the violence of their Affections, gave the Caitiffe
an hundred Wounds; whereby in a moment he vomited out a life, that ought not to
have been dismissed, till after the horror of a thousand torments.

The King, feeling himself Wounded, commanded the Duke of Espernon to be
immediately sent for, who was then at the Post nearest to the City, putting
some Troops in order, which were to fall into the Suburbs of Paris; but at this
sad and unexpected news he ran in great confusion to the King's Lodging, whom
he yet found in the same posture wherein he had received his hurt, with his
hand still upon the Wound: At which sight, the Duke bursting out in tears, as
fearing a sinister event, his Majesty gave him comfort, by telling him he hoped
the Wound would not prove Mortal; and saying to him further these very words,
Thou see here (my Friend) the effects of my Enemies Treachery and Malice; but
I hope God will shortly enable me to bring them to condign punishment. To
which the Duke returning no other answer, than his tears, they laid his Majesty
upon a bed, and searched his Wound; which the Surgeons at the first
dressing, apprehended not to be so dangerous, as it was; so that all that day
was past over in this error: but that night, and the morning following, the
dolours of his Wound increasing, and at last growing to be extreme, it was then
judged that his bowels were pierced, and that Death must necessarily, and in a
few hours ensue. The King of Navarre had hasted with all diligence, at the
first bruit of this accident, and being come to his bedside, his Majesty said
to him almost the same things, he had said before to the Duke; and talked of
nothing the first day, save of the exemplary punishment he would inflict upon
his Enemies: but his Wound being at last judged to be mortal, and feeling in
himself that he drew near his end, all his discourse of Punishment, and
Revenge, was turned into that of Pardon and Oblivion: and certainly no Prince
ever made a more Christian, or a more constant end. He declared upon his
deathbed the King of Navarre nearest of his Blood, and and consequently right
Heir to the Crown, provided he were a Catholic; exhorting him at the same time
to abjure his own Religion, and to reconcile himself to the Holy Church,
commanding likewise the Duke of Espernon (whom he held by the hand) to serve
him upon that condition; after which, and a Pious Resignation of himself, he
gave up his last breath in the middle of his victorious Army.

We are now entering upon a new Reign, and one the Duke found very different,
from that wherein he had hitherto lived; for he now not only saw himself stripped
of all kind of Favor: but he further saw the envy, and hatred of the whole
Court directed against him. He was now no more called to Council, nor any
longer entrusted with his Princes secrets; but on the contrary every one
labored to diminish that greatness, to which his own Virtue, and his Masters
Royal bounty had already raised him. But we shall see how he overcame all these
difficulties: and the Justice of this new Prince at last giving the Merits and
Services of this virtuous man their due, we shall see him not only support him
in his own present Fortune, but also increase it by his daily bounty, and so
establish it in him, as to empower him to settle it in his own Posterity.

So soon as the King was dead, all the Roman Catholics of quality in the Army
assembled themselves together, to advise what in this occurrence was to be done
for the maintenance of the Catholic Religion in the Service of this new King:
And here their opinions were split into three several Councils; Several
Propositions about the new King amongst the Chiefs of the Army.
for some there were who thought it fit absolutely to acknowledge the King
without condition, or reservation, but those were very few: Others there were
who would absolutely abandon his Service, and join with the League; and those
were fewer than the first: But the third proposition, and that which was
concluded on by the most principal, and prudent Lords of the Army; amongst
which were the Dukes of Longueville, of Nevers, of Espernon, and of Luxembourg;
the Mareschals de Biron, and d' Aumont, the Marquis of Rambo^illet, and many
others, was to serve the King, and to tie themselves wholly to his Fortune,
provided his Majesty would please to give them some gracious assurance of his
speedy Conversion. The Lords Catholic send his Majesty their Resolution.
Which being delivered to his Majesty as their determinate Resolution, and the
condition prescribed as it were, by the King his Predecessor, he wisely chose
such a mean as seemed necessary to him in this occasion, for the establishment
of the uncertain state of his Affairs; and would by all means preserve that
moderation, and indifferency betwixt both parties, as should by an equal hope
in them both, keep both his Catholic and Hugonot Subjects within the bounds of
their duty. His Answer therefore was, His Majesty's Answer.
That it would appear to all the world very easy, and unhandsome in him to
change his Religion, only to satisfy his Subjects humor, and to receive a Law
from them in a thing, which in its self, of all other, ought to be most free:
That he desired to be instructed, and satisfied in his Conscience before he
proceeded so far, as to change his Religion: That to this purpose he promised
within six months to call an Assembly of men of known Piety and Learning, and
if occasion were, a National Synod, to whose final Decree he would absolutely
submit, and that in the mean time he would be careful to protect, and maintain
the Catholic Religion.

After diverse Messages of Treaty sent to, The major part of the Catholic Lords
submit to the King.
and fro, on either part, it at last ended in this, that many of the Catholic
Lords submitting to his Majesty's first Proposition; what he had then promised
by word of mouth, was now only more formally drawn into a writing
interchangeably delivered betwixt the King, and his Catholic Subjects, and
Signed by the greatest part of Men of Quality, that were then in the Army: But
the Duke of Espernon believing this delay of six months proposed by the King,
to be no delay, intended only to win longer time, and that at last their hopes,
and expectations would be deluded, demanded some further assurance, The Duke of
Esperno^ stands out.
than he yet saw of his Majesty's conversion; neither could he, notwithstanding
the importunities of all the Friends he had, be drawn upon other terms to seal
to that Writing. And this was the true, and only reason of his refusal, and not
what both Mounsieur de Thou, and D'Avila have reported of it. They say that the
thing which made him refuse to seal to that Instrument, was a contest which
happened betwixt him, and the Mareschals de Biron, and d' Aumont, who should sign
first; these as Mareschals of France, and in immediate command in the Army
pretending a priority; and he claiming a precedence as Duke, and Peer: a
difficulty that might easily have been overcome, had that been all. But the
cause proceeded from a principle of greater moment, than the trivial contest of
a ^light Ceremony.

The King however caused him by several hands to be over and over again
solicited, and importuned, to satisfy himself as other good Catholics had
done; and as the Dukes were the best, and the fullest Regiments of the Army,
and as his person, and his example (which were likely to be followed (as they
afterward were) not only by those under his own command, but by many others of
good quality in the Army) altogether rendered him very considerable: So did his
Majesty by all sorts of persuasions and promises, endeavor to detain him; The
Duke obstinate to leave the Army.
but all to no purpose. It Is true, he acknowledged the King for lawful
Successor to the Crown, as he had sufficiently declared in a time when the
greatest persecutions were practiced against him, and when he was only King of
Navarre, by which he had in part drawn the hatred of the Duke of Guise upon
him. And it is also true, that he had all the reason in the world to desire
that Prince should now become his Master, whom he had all his life labored to
raise to that Dignity to which he was now arrived: But he thought the Ruin of
the Catholic Religion inevitable, should things continue in the posture they
were now in; which made him rather choose to expose himself to all those
disgraces he knew his Enemies were preparing for him, than to serve his own
interests (whose advancement he likewise saw infallible in so favorable a
juncture) to the reproach, and prejudice of his own Conscience.

Fortified therefore still more and more in this resolution, he caused his
Troops to be made ready for his departure: these, at his first coming to the
King consisted of six thousand Foot, and twelve hundred Horse; which though
they were now much diminished in the Service, yet were they notwithstanding in
such a condition, as that there were hardly so many more French in the whole
Army, as he had under his sole command. The Marquis de Rocquelaure, and other
of his intimate friends labored by all imaginable means, to dissuade him from
his ill taken up resolution; but not being able to prevail, his Enemies would
have persuaded the King, The King persuaded to cause the Duke to be stabbed.
to have met his obstinacy with a Stab, a Counsel the Duke was as soon enform'd
of. But whether it was, that he thought this generous Prince, not to be
persuaded into so foul an action; or that he thought it at that time a thing
not easy to be executed, he had the assurance, notwithstanding the caution had
been given him, to go take his leave of the King, before he left the Army, and
to excuse his departure: A Ceremony that was passed over in few words; and I
have often heard him repeat the manner of it to be thus. The Duke goes to take
his leave of the King.
The Duke took along with him thirty Gentlemen of his Train, in whom he reposed
the greatest confidence, and of these he left some at the Doors of the King's
Lodgings, and others upon the Stairs, to facilitate his retirement, if any foul
play should be offered to him; and himself with only two more in his company
entered the Gallery. The last Journey he made to Paris, he happened to lie in the
same house, and showed us the place where he took his leave of the King. This
house did at that time belong to Mademoiselle du Tillet, his old, and intimate
Friend; a Lady illustrious for her courage and constancy, and passionate for
the Duke's Interests to that degree, that he has had few friends who have
justified their affection by so great, and so continued a fidelity. The King
was at the one end of the Gallery, when the Duke appeared entering at the other;
whom the King no sooner perceived, but that coming up to him, with an angry
countenance, and striking his stick with some vehemence upon the floor, The
King's angry Speech to the Duke.
he said. What Mounsieur d' Espernon, it seems you have refused to Sign the
Writing, which has been Signed without difficulty by most persons of Quality in
my Army, as good Catholics as your self! do not you, as well as they,
acknowledge me for your King? To which the Duke made answer, That he was his
Majesty's most humble Subject, and Servant; That there was not a person in his
Kingdom, who had more ardently desired to see him in the place where he now
was, should the King his Master die, than himself had done; That he would never
do anything contrary to his Service; that he had rather die, than once to
entertain so dishonest a thought: but that he did humbly beseech his Majesty to
excuse him, if being of a Religion differing from that his Majesty professed,
he could not attend his person; that being a thing he could not do, without
offering the greatest violence to his own Conscience.

The Duke had scarce made an end of speaking, when he heard a noise of armed
men behind him in the Gallery; and then it was that he certainly believed,
these were the men appointed to kill him, as he had been pre-advis'd: but he
was soon delivered out of that fear, when he saw the King move forward with a
smiling countenance to embrace them. These were two Captains of the King's
Light Horse; the one called le Baron de Saint Marie du Mont, a Norman; the
others name I have forgot: who, having upon their Guard (which was at a good
distance) received intelligence of the Death of Henry III. were come in all
haste to congratulate the King with his new Advancement* and lighted at the
Door of his Lodging, were come up in the same posture the news had surpised
them in upon their Guard to present their Duty: The Duke taking this occasion
to ^etire, withdrew himself forthwith to his own Quarter; but before he would
absolutely depart, he would first attend the Corpse of the King his Master, and
Benefactor, as far as Compeigne, whither they were carried with very little
Ceremony, the disorders of the time not permitting greater; and where having
paid his last duty, he returned to overtake his Troops, which were now marching
upon the Road of Loches toward Angoumois.

The example of the Duke's departure was followed by many others, so that in a
few days the Army was grown so thin, that the King had scarce any save
strangers left in his Camp, and even they in the end, for want of pay,
disbanded as well as the rest; and then it was that the Duke's Enemies, with a
redoubled malice, spoke loudest in his disgrace, and did all they possibly
could to animate his Majesty in the highest degree against him. There had
already passed (as you have heard) some secret discontents betwixt the King,
and the Duke, during the life of the late King; amongst which the business of
Gergeau, and that of Estampes had made no little noise; but to these many have
added, and likewise some endeavored to possess the King, that the Duke ever
impatient of a Rival in his Master's Favor, and less able to endure his
Majesty who was so much above him, had in that time done all the ill offices he
could invent to beget a misunderstanding betwixt the King, and him, such as
might cause a separation; and certainly so effectually had they labored with
him, as to make him believe too much; by which they had so incensed his
Majesty's mind against him, that doubtless he would have bent his whole
endeavor to the Duke's Ruin, upon the late refusal he had made of his
assistance, had not the necessity of his own Affairs diverted his designs
another way: but all these evil dispositions, though they still threatened worse
consequences, could not hinder the Duke from persevering in his resolution to
retire.

As his departure was of infinite importance, whether we consider it as to the
Fortune of the King, and Interest of the State; or as to the Duke's own
particular concern, and that there are few Historians of that, or later times,
who have not taken occasion to blame the Dukes proceeding herein: I think it
fit to say something here in his vindication, and to discover the reasons upon
which he built that resolution; which having received from his own mouth in the
same terms that I shall faithfully deliver here, every one may afterward (...)
what judgment of the Action he shall in his own discretion think most fit. He
told me that a little before his departure, The Remonstrances of the Duke's
Friends to persuade him to stay.
many of his intimate friends had endeavored to dissuade him from his Design,
by presenting before him the present juncture of Affairs, so favorable (as
they said) to the support of his immediate condition (so generally envied by
all) that he could not himself have wished a more advantageous conjuncture:
That as it was principally by his means, and assistance the King could build
any probable hopes of effecting what he desired; so were there present no
advan^ages (besides an indemnity, and oblivion of all passed unkindnesses, a
thing in it self highly to be considered) to which he might not reasonably
pretend: That he might now establish his own greatness in so sure a condition,
that it would be no hard matter to maintain himself for the future in the same
height, should the Kings humor chance to come about: That all men plainly saw
how much upon his departure, or stay, depended the standing, or dissolution of
the Royal Army: That upon his concurrence with his Majesty, depended that of
the greatest part of the Catholics, and the Ruin of the League, wherein were
his most capital Enemies: That by his assistance men might yet promise to
themselves the reducing of Paris, and in that the peace and settlement of the
whole Kingdom: That having in his hands the disposition of things of so great
utility to the public, and so great honor to himself, he neither ought to
envy his Country those advantages, not to deprive himself of the glory of so
admirable a success.

These were considerations that in their own weight, and laid home to him by
men he knew to be his Friends, were not unlikely to prevail, and to have
overcome his ob^^inacy, as doubtless they had done, had the Duke looked no
further, than his own Interest; and so he told his Friends, who had so freely
argued with him: He told them that he was not so little acquainted with the
business of the world, that he did not well enough discern all those advantages
they had proposed, as relating to himself: That he did very well believe his
Majesty, assisted by his Catholic Subjects, might reduce his Enemies to the
point he desired; but that from thence would infallibly ensue the subversion of
the Catholic Religion, which would likewise bring on the ruin of the State:
That instead of the Peace they proposed to themselves, after the League were
reduced to their obedience, they would see themselves engaged in a more
violent, and obstinate War than before: That those of the Reformed Religion
being grown more strong, and having a lawful, mighty, and active King to head
them, would doubtless establish their own Religion in France, and constrain the
Catholics to submit to whatever Law they would impose upon them: That it was
far better betimes to refuse to countenance the evil, which lay conceal^d under
the appearance of a present good, than to engage himself in mischiefs of so
inevitable consequence, and to forbear a while the fruits of a specious, and
alluring Peace, to enjoy it at better leisure, more permanent and secure: That
the King, what promises soever he had made, and what real dispositions soever
he might have to cause himself to be satisfied within six months, had
nevertheless been prompted by those of his own persuasion, to demand that
respite for no other end, than to keep the Catholic Forces about him, that he
might make himself Master of Paris: That having done that, which must
necessarily put an end to the War, and being wholly possessed by creatures
passionate for their ill received and new opinions, he would certainly be
continued in his Error by their restless practice: That there was a necessity
of a prompt, and sincere Conversion; not such an one, as was to be hoped for no
man knew when, and that then perhaps would be lukewarm, and unsound: That
whenever that should come to pass, they should see him stake his Fortune, his
Friends, and his Life, for a Prince whom he did ever acknowledge undoubted
Successor to the Crown: That in the mean time he made no doubt but his Enemies
(as they use to do) would lay all the disorders that should happen, at his
door, and hourly incense the King against him with all the malice, and artifice
they could invent; but that he hoped his Majesty would himself one day commend
his Zeal to Religion, which ought to be the first thing in every good man's
prospect, and which was also his sole object in that resolution, wherein he
would live and die: That he was retiring into his Governments, where his
Actions should justify the integrity of his heart, and that he would there
serve the King to his utmost power, by making War upon those whom he knew to
be enemies to his Service.

This was the Duke's Declaration to his private Friends, to which his Conduct
afterward was so conformable, as sufficiently demonstrated to all the world,
that he was possessed with a better spirit, than that of Ambition. It Is true,
his determination was in it self positive, and bold; and he had reason in all
appearance to apprehend a dangerous issue, and has himself ever acknowledged,
that according to the Maxims of humane Prudence, he herein committed a
dangerous error; but that having nothing but the sole interest of Religion for
his aim, he had reaped greater advantages by it, than he durst have proposed to
himself from any other resolution; and that he did believe it was from this
fountain he since derived all the successes of his Life; of which the most
signal was, that his Majesty himself after some time, having pierced deeper
into the candor of his intention, received him into as high a degree of
Favor, as any of his other Servants: but it was not until he had first
received many infallible, and continual proofs of his Loyalty and Affection.

Having after this manner deserted the Army, he soon arrived at Angoulesme;
where the first thing he did after his arrival, was to send the Pope an account
of his proceeding, and that he had been constrained to quit the Army, being
bound so to do, out of his respect to the Catholic Religion: It was also
requisite he should by a Declaration purge himself from the Calumnies cast upon
him by the League, who had delivered him to the people for a grand Confederate
with the Heretics: But other particular correspondencies he had none; for of
all Foreign Princes, the Popes were only they with whom he ever held any
intelligence; and whatever has been said to the contrary, he ever preserved his
fidelity unspo^ted from the practices of other Princes, who daily tempted him
with no contemptible offers to an intelligence with them; a virtue not to be
passed over in this part of his Life without a worthy mention, it being in a
time when few of the great ones of either party had so temperate a respect for
their duty; the misfortunes of the time, and the various Factions that divided
the Kingdom, seeming as it were, to give every one liberty to fortify the
interests of his own party, by all the Friends, and Confederates he could make.

The Duke having engaged himself before his retirement from the Army to serve
the King by all the ways he could, would now sit no longer idle, but gave
immediate order for the recruit of his Troops; and the experience of what had
formerly past, having given him sufficiently to understand what confidence was
to be ^epos'd in the people, he was now resolved no longer to depend upon their
giddy, and vol^ble humor; nor no more be subject to such commotions, as his
Enemies might attempt to raise amongst that credulous, and mutinous rabble. He
therefore caused a considerable Fortification to be speedily raised at the
Castle of Angoulesme, The Duke fortifies the Castle of Angoulesme, and the
Citadel of Xaintes.
the King having given him leave so to do, as also to raise what money was
necessary to the perfecting that work, upon the Province. He likewise raised
another at Xaintes, so that in a short time he secured himself from all
Surprises, like that of St. Laurence: but he had scarce time to settle this
good order in his Governments, when he was called away to look after other, and
those very considerable, Affairs, that immediately concerned the safety of the
Kingdom.

All the Provinces of the Kingdom being divided betwixt the King, and the
League, it was to be expected that the great Cities would likewise ^andy within
their own Walls, and stand up for the one party, or the other* as men's
passions, or judgments inclined them to the cause. Of this number was the City
of Limoges, where the Bishop, who was of the Family of Marthoine, assisted by
the Sieurs de Pompadou, de la Gu^rche, de Rastignac, de la Chappelle Biron, and
many other Gentlemen of Quality, favored also by many of the Inhabitants,
labored all he could to make the Town, and City declare for the Duke of
Mayenne, and his Faction, wherein nevertheless he at first met some difficulty:
but proceeding from persuasions to open force, he, by the assistance of those
Gentlemen, made himself Master of the City, and was upon the point to have made
himself also Master of the Town, when the Count de la Voute eldest Son to the
Duke of Ventadour, put himself into it, and made all possible resistance to
preserve it out of their hands: Yet had he not (his Party being so much the
weaker) been able long to have held out, had not the Duke of Espernon,
advertised of this disorder, come in to his timely succor: The Duke rescues
Limoges out of the hands of the League.
But at the report of the Duke's arrival, the Leaguers immediately dispersed
themselves, abandoning the City they already possessed, as he afterward turned
all suspected persons out of the Town, and settled it so well by the prudent
order he established there, that it never after started from its duty; but on
the contrary continued so firm, and maintained it self so well, that it was
almost the only City of the Kingdom which tasted not of those miseries with
which the Civil War by taking, re-taking, plunder, and other mischiefs,
infested all other Cities of France; a happiness that place principally owes to
the timely succor it received from the Duke of Espernon's vigilance and care.

The example of the Capital City, contained almost all the lesser Cities of the
Province in his Majesty's Obedience; neither was there any except that of St.
Germain which refused to keep within the limits of its Duty; The Du^e (...) St.
Germ^n, which surren^ers.
but that, declaring for the League, constrained the Duke to turn his Forces
that way to reduce it. Puiferrat, a Gentleman of the Country, commanded there,
who after some vollies of Cannon shot, surrendered upon conditions, that he, and
his Soldiers should have free Quarter, and march away with Bag, and Baggage; a
capitulation notwithstanding very ill observed, to the Duke's great
displeasure; who having appointed the elder Sobole's Troop of Light Horse for
their Convoy, without considering their Officer had been killed at the Siege,
the Cavaliers, incensed at the loss of their Captain, revenged his Death upon
these miserable people, and cut them almost all to pieces. A cruelty some
Authors have laid to the Duke's charge, though very unjustly; for had his
generous heart been capable of committing so dishonorable a crime, what
advantage could he have proposed to himself, from so ^oul a treachery*

And now was the Duke resolved to have cleared all that Province, when the
disorders of his own Government called him back to look after his own immediate
concerns. We have already given a Narrative of the Enterprise of Angoulesme,
The Duke called back into Angoumois to suppress the Leaguers there.
upon St. Laurence day, and further an account of the Clemency the Duke showed
to those who had treated him after so barbarous a manner: of which there yet
remained some, who (as they were most zealous for the League, and as they had
been most guilty of that sedition, mistrusting by the Conscience of their own
Crimes, that the Duke could never heartily pardon, and forget them) chose
rather, leaving the security and peace of their own Houses, to commit their
safeties to the guard of their own Arms, than to rely upon a promise they knew
they could not expect in reason should be observed. The Chavalier d' Aubeterre,
one of the principal sticklers for the League in that Province, having put
himself in the Head of these Mutineers, and having gathered together some other
discontented people of the Country, had of these composed a Body of Light
Horse, and some Companies of Foot, with which in this time of the Duke's
absence, he committed a thousand Insolences: nay, to that confidence were they
grown of their own strength, having committed such Riots, whilst there was none
to oppose them, that they at last shut up themselves in the Castle of
Villebois, which they intended should serve them upon all occasions for a
secure retreat; a place indeed of very advantageous situation, very proper for
close Fight, and that had all the Avenues unto it of so difficult access, that
Cannon without infinite labor was not to be brought up to force it. In this
place then they thought to remain in great security, and being but three
Leagues distant from Angoulesme, did by their continual sallies very much
incommodate that City. The Duke called now home by their insolences, sent them
presently a Summons to Surrender; to which they returned so haughty, and so
impudent an answer, that he saw he must be forced to Besiege them, as he soon
after did: and having, though with infinite trouble, planted two pieces of
Cannon upon the Hill where the Castle stood, he caused them immediately to
begin to play. The besieged endured above two hundred shot, without showing any
countenance of fear: but at last seeing a breach made, which put them out of
all hopes long to defend themselves, their insolence was turned into
apprehension, and astonishment, and their scornful language into terms of
entreaty, and humble supplication, submissively b^gging (as the utmost grace
they could expect) that they might be permitted to depart with the assurance of
their lives: to which the Duke would by no means consent, nor receive them on
other terms, than upon discretion; to which, after many difficulties, which
they had good reason to make, they were in the end constrained to submit. Their
Commander in Chief, Lieutenant to the Chevalier d' Aubeterre, called Maumont,
knowing very well, that both by the Law of Arms, and by the terms of the
Capitulation, he was to expect nothing but death, try^d to escape with the
soonest, by causing himself to be let down by Ropes into the Grass of the
Castle: but being pursued, and overtaken, he died more honorably than he
expected, being dispatched by a Pistol-shot in his head. As for his Accomplices,
the Duke separated those who had been concerned in the Conspiracy of Angoulesme
from the rest, whom seeing to be men so obstinate in their malice, as neither
reason could reduce, nor mercy reclaim, he caused eighteen to be hanged up
before the Gates of the Castle, and pardoned all the rest. It is but a very
little while ago, that an old man of fourscore and two years old, told me this
story, wherein he himself had been no little concerned, as being one of those
set apart for the Rope; for having before made one in the business of
Angoulesme; but his good fortune reserving him for one of the last that was to
die, and the Marquise de Mezieres who was at that time Mistress of the Castle
of Villebois, being then in the Country, and by some of the poor man's Friends
applied to, that she would intercede for him, she had so much time as to
entreat, and obtain his pardon; and this was I think the only man of those
former Offenders, who escaped that Execution; neither indeed could such a mercy
have been better placed, than on a man who knew so well how to husband his
life, when it was once more his own, as to preserve it almost an age after.
This Castle with the demean and territory belonging to it (one of the fairest
of that Country) was soon after purchased by the Duke, and since advanced into
a Duchy, and Peerdom, under the Title of the Duchy de la Valette: And I have
often heard the Duke lament the ruins he was forced to make of this Castle,
being before a delicate Pile of Stone, and very capacious; but never after
wholly repaired, there still remaining some monuments of the Rebellion as also
of the punishment, those desperate men suffered, who were the Commoters of it.

This execution, that would have appeared more like an example of Cruelty, than
Justice, had the Crimes of the Offenders been less, or not repeated, struck
such a terror into the rest of that Party, that they were not now so hasty to
appear for a side they had seen so roughly handled; so that the Duke did now
not only enjoy the repose of his Government, but gave sanctuary to many of the
King's Party of the neighboring Provinces, who were overmatch'd, or oppressed
by the League. I have already told you the occasion that called him into
Limousin, and I shall now tell you of another of the same nature, and of no
less importance, though it made not so great a noise in the world, that called
him into the Government of Guyenne. The Marshall de Matignon, the King's
Lieutenant in that Province, had his hands so full in, and about Bordeaux, that
the impossibility of his being present in all places, where his presence was
required, gave opportunity to Lussan, the Governor of Blaye, a man inclined to
the League, to lend some Gentlemen of that Party some Forces, in order to the
taking of Bourg; two little Leagues distant only from Blaye. This Town, though
of a very little circuit, is notwithstanding of very advantageous situation;
for besides that it stands upon an eminence of very difficult access, it
absolutely commands the River of Dordongne, as it also at least awes that of
Garonne, being not above a quarter of a League from the Bec d' Ambez, where
these two Rivers meet to make the Gironde. It must therefore needs be of great
advantage to the League to possess this place, by which means Bordeaux would be
absolutely deprived of the succor of two so considerable Rivers, by which the
City was continually, and abundantly supplied. The Leaguers therefore, spurred
on by these considerations, had laid Siege to Bourg, and were by the favor of
some of the Inhabitants of their Party received into the Town, without any
opposition; but la Ioviziere, a man of approved Valor, who commanded in the
Castle, defended himself so well, The Duke relieves B^urg.
notwithstanding the ill condition of the place, and the vigor of the
Assailants; who pressed hard upon him, that he gave the Duke time to come to
his Relief, at whose first appearance, the Enemy retired; when the Duke having
publicly commended the Governors Valor, and the fidelity of some honest
Inhabitants who had stuck stoutly to him in this occasion, withdrew the Captain
into his own Service, for the testimony he had given of his Valor, leaving
Campagno, after Colonel of the Regiment of Guards, and since Governor of
Boulogne, with a good Garrison in his room* as judging this place of that
importance, that it ought to have a person of no less Authority to defend it
against any attempt from the Garrison of Blaye, so near, and so dangerous a
Neighbor: Yet did not the Duke keep it long in his possession; for the King
not long after commanding him to deliver it up to him, he immediately obeyed,
though he had in a mann^r himself made a conquest of it: Some say that the
Marshall de Matignon, jealous of so considerable a neighbor as the Duke, had
earnestly importuned the King to retrive this place out of his hands.

The Duke having by these successes settled all his Neighbors in peace, Anno
1591.
whilst the rest of the Kingdom was in trouble, it was but reasonable that he
himself should share in that felicity, wherein his Valor and Vigilance had so
fortunately established others; and of this he received the first and most
happy fruits by the Blessing God was pleased to give his Marriage Bed; for
having been already three years Married to Marguerite de Foix, Countess of
Candale, without Issue, (the great, and various agitations, wherewith he had
been continually exercised all that time; scarce allowing him the leisure to
live in company with his Wife) at last this virtuous Lady in March 1591. was at
Xaintes brought to Bed of Henry de Foix, The birth of Henry de Foix, and de la
Valette* the Duke of Espernon's eldest Son.
and de la Valette his eldest Son, whom we have since seen Duke of Candale, and
whose Valor has manifested it self in most parts of Europe, where he acquired
the Reputation of one of the greatest Captains of his time: To these Military
Virtues, he had yet the addition of so many other excellent qualities, that it
was hard to say, which was to be most admired, his Valor in War, his Sweetness
in Conversation, or his Prudence and Dexterity in the Management, The birth of
Bernard de F^ix, and de la Valet^e, the Duke's second Son.
and Conduct of the most weighty Affairs. The year following 1592. the Duke was
enriched with another Son, Bernard de Foix, and de la Valette, who was bo^^ at
Angoul^sme, and who is now the sole Heir of that illustrious Family; a Prince
whose Virtues would furnish me, with sufficient matter for his praise, did not
his modesty impose my silence. The Birth of Lewis Cardinal de la Valette, the
Duke's youngest Son.
The third and last was Lewis Cardinal de la Valette, born at Angoulesme the
year following; one whom the Court esteemed, and acknowledged for the greatest,
and most accomplished Courtier that had there been bred for many years. He
render,d himself conspicuous in his profession whilst he continued in it, by
embellishing, and adorning an excellent natural ingenuity with the choicest
Flowers of Divine and Humane Learning; and doubtless, had he applied himself
wholly to his Book, might have gone equal to the most famous Churchmen of this
latter age: but the heat of his Courage having tempted him, out of the bounds
of his Spiritual Profession, he proved a better Captain, than the chance of War
would give him leave long to continue; for the Wars of Italy wherein he served
the State with unparalled Diligence, and greater Success, than was to be
expected from so few Forces, as he commanded, spurred on his untimely Fate, as
also his elder Brothers, who both of them in less than four months space, lost
their lives in the same Army.

Whilst the Duke had been employing his Power, Passages at Co^rt in the Duke's
absence.
and Person in these forementioned exploits, there had passed much important
action about the Person of the King; who after the Skirmish of Arques, and the
Battle of Y^ry, was grown to such a height of Power and Reputation, as had put
him into a condition to undertake the Siege of Paris; which doubtless he might
then have taken* if on the one side his Majesty had been less solicitous to
preserve the City (which would have been utterly destroyed should his Army have
entered by storm) or on the other side the Citizens had been less obstinate in
their defense: but their despair fortifying, and hardening them against their
necessities, which in truth were insupportable, they gave the Duke of Mayenne
time to fetch the Duke of Parma to their Relief, which for some years prorogued
the entire Victory his Majesty might then, but for his Clemency, have obtained.
After the raising of this Siege, the King's Army being much decayed by the
length, and ill success thereof, all the Catholics who had thus long served
his Majesty, even his most particular Servants, took the liberty, highly to
complain of his slow proceeding toward his intended Conversion; The King
importuned to hasten his Conversion.
as also the several Societies, and Companies of the Kingdom, generally sent
their Deputies humbly to beseech his Majesty to put an end to that good work,
which would likewise put an end ^o all his own troubles, and be the only means
to preserve his Kingdom; nay even the Court it self grew importunate in the
same (...), and were already laying the design of a third Party, which would
have involved the King in a new difficulty his Majesty had then no need of; but
to prevent all inconveniences, to stop men's mouths, and to hinder all these
Court-practices, his Majesty saw it necessary to renew the War with new vigor,
and by some notable, and important action, to gain a reputation to his Party.
He took therefore a resolution to call all the Nobility he could win over to
him, about his person, and that not so much to reinforce his Army by their
presence, as to hinder them (being at distance, and in full liberty to dispose
of themselves) from joining either with those Factions already formed by his
Enemies, or such as were now (even by those who had hitherto followed his
Fortune) forming against him. Nevertheless his Majesty knowing very well, that
the major part of those, who had separated themselves from him, had done it
merely out of respect to Religion, and that they would not easily be induced to
return, unless he first gave them some hopes, as to that particular; he sent to
assure them, that he desired nothing more ardently, than to be instructed in
the Catholic Religion, to the end, that with the satisfaction and safety of
his Conscience, he might make open profession of it to all the world. Upon this
assurance of his speedy Conversion (which notwithstanding was not accomplished
till some years after) the Duke of Nevers, with many other persons of Quality,
came over to him; The Duke of Espernon returns to Court.
and amongst others, the Duke of Espernon, whom his Majesty having also invited
to his Service, and who having only forsook him at the first out of scruple of
Conscience, that being now overcome by the resolution his Majesty professed to
have taken, he made no difficulty to return, and with a Train that sufficiently
denoted with what passion he embraced his Service; bringing along with him
three thousand five hundred Foot, four hundred Light Horse, and four hundred
Harquebusiers, on horseback. With which Forces (which the Duke had raised at
his own charge, and by his own credit) his Majesty being very well recruited,
D'Avila.
he resolved to make a new attempt upon Paris it self, and to assault it in
four places at once: A Design he intended to execute by Ladders, and Petards,
and to lead on one of the Divisions to the Assault in his own person, in which
the Duke of Espernon was appointed to attend him; and indeed of his men chiefly
consisted that Body his Majesty would in person lead on to the Assault. A
Design which, had not the Parisians had timely information of, had been very
likely to have taken effect: but the preparation of Ladders, and other
provisions for the attempt, being made at St. Dennis, and other adjacent
places, almost in the sight of Paris, the King's Forces no sooner appeared,
than the Parisians were also found ready upon their Walls, in a resolute
posture of defense; which his Majesty perceiving, he retired without making a
fruitless attempt in a Design which could not possibly, but in case of a
surprise, succeed: So that this Stratagem failing, he resolved upon the Siege
of Chartres, The Siege of Chartres,
which in the end he took, but not without much difficulty, expense of much
time, and the loss of a great number of men.

The Duke having considered that he might now have a fit opportunity during
this Siege to go to Boulogne, of which he had enjoyed the Government during his
time of Favor, to settle it in a posture of safety, he entreated leave of his
Majesty that he might undertake that Journey. This place (a Town of great
importance) had hitherto been commanded by the Sieur de Bernay, whom the Duke
had formerly placed Governor there, and in whom he had for many years reposed
an entire confidence: but at last Bernay, having by some odd carriage of his,
rendre^ himself suspected to the Duke, he was resolved to withdraw him from
that trust: And forasmuch as Picardy, in the utmost borders of which this Town
was seated, was very partial to the Leaguers, who were possessed of most of the
chief Cities of that Province, the Duke entreated his Majesty, The Duke goes
into Picardy.
that he might take five hundred of those Horse he had brought with him to the
Service, for his Convoy in this expedition; a request the King made no
difficulty to grant, his Majesty having no great use of Horse in this Siege: So
that departing in this equipage, he performed his Journey without the least
opposition, or show of an Enemy, withdrew Bernay from Boulogne, and placed the
Marquis de Rouillac, his Brother-in-law, in his stead, who served many years
after in that employment under his command: But though the Duke had met no body
to oppose him, as he went through the Country; the Duke d' Aumale, Governor
general for the League in Picardy, had nevertheless been meditating how to cut
him off in his return, and to that purpose had called Minieux, the particular
Governor of Montreuille, into his Design, where betwixt them it was agreed,
that Mini^ux should follow the Duke in the Rear, till he had dogged him within
sight of the Duke d' Aumale's Forces; so that being charged at once in the Rear
by Minieux* and in the Front by the Duke of Aumale, it would be impossible for
him, thus beset on all sides, and by Forces double to his own, to disingage
himself from so inevitable a danger. And certainly had the Order been as well
observed, as the Design was well laid, the Duke wou^d have had very much ado to
have freed himself from so manifest a peril: his good fortune nevertheless
delivered him from it by an accident, that in it self had been like enough to
have hastened his Ruin. An attempt upon the Duke of Espernon by the Duke of
Aumale.
This Minieux had for some time been the Duke's particular, and mortal Enemy;
and upon the pretense of not having been well used by him in the height of his
favor, had with great impatience watched an occasion like this, wherein to
execute his Revenge. Wherefore lying in Ambuscado with two hundred and fifty
Light Horse, upon the way the Duke was to pass, and the Duke of Aumale not far
off in a Wood within half a League of Pont de Dourice with seven hundred more,
Minieux impatient to be at it, and either fearing to lose the opportunity of
his revenge, or hoping to gain a rich Booty of the Duke's Baggage, could not
contain himself; but appearing sooner, than he should have done, he followed
the Duke so clo^e, till he was advanced within almost Musket Shot of his Rear,
which (the Bodies being so near) occasioned many light Skirmishes betwixt them;
until at last the Duke nettled to see himself so pursued, and trifled withal by
his Enemy, commanded Montestruc his Kinsman to go charge them with forty Horse,
himself at the same time seconded by the Baron de Chasteliers (since Baron d'
Ars) by Gohas, and Miran the chief Officers of his Party, giving so brisk a
Charge into the Enemies Body, that they were instantly put to rout. Minieux
routed by by the Duke, and taken prisoner.
The fight was not very obstinate, by reason the Commanders of the other side
were either wounded, or slain in the first Encounter, and there was none to
Rally, or Command* Minieux and his Son, Conteval his Lieutenant, and fifteen,
or twenty of the chief Commanders were trodden under foot, and the rest betook
themselves to flight. The Duke, who would not engage himself too far into a
Country where he had no other business, than to pass through it, thought it not
convenient to follow the pursuit; but contenting himself with those prisoners
he had taken upon the place, though they were exceedingly wounded, he went on
his way; but one of his Gentlemen (Bois Rufier by name) being stragled out to
discover the Country, fell into the Duke of Aumale's Ambuscado; who, being
carried by those had taken him before the Duke, was by him examined of his
quality* and who he was for? who answered, That he belonged to the Duke of
Espernon, showing him at the same time the Duke's Vant-Guard, which began to
appear upon a little eminence hard by. The Duke then further demanded of him,
if he had seen Minieux? to which he answered, That Minieux was the Duke of
Espernon's Prisoner, and withal recounted to him the manner of his Defeat;
which the Duke of Aumale was no sooner enform'd of, but that conceiving it was
not convenient, to engage in an uncertain Fight, where he had promised to
himself a certain Victory, he retired, without once daring to attempt any thing
upon the Duke, highly condemning and complaining of Minieux, who by his
rashness and impatience, had ruined so hopeful a Design.

The Duke, having thus rid his hands of his Enemies, went to put himself into
the danger of his Friends; at least those who ought to have been so, being
engaged in the same Service: but I dare not here publish all I know of this
business, lest I should revive the memory of an Action, that was then condemn^d
by the King himself, and that cannot be approved of now. I shall only tell you,
The Duke's ill usage at Corbie.
that the Duke having carried his Prisoners into Corbie, they were there
peremptorily demanded of him, and upon his refusal violently taken and detained
from him: A dispute that was on both sides carried on with such heat, as
brought the Duke's Person, who could not with any thought of patience endure so
great an affront, into very great danger: and the odds against him was so
great, that nothing could have been expected, but certain death, had not the
Sieur de Humierres the King's Lieutenant in the place, and the Sieur de la
Boissiere his Brother-in-law interposing, hindered the violence was preparing
against him, and mediated an Accommodation; which, though it could not
obliterate the memory of the offense, kept matters notwithstanding from
proceeding to the last Extremes.

Neither was this the last danger the Duke escaped in his return: for as he
proceeded on his way to Chartres, where the Siege still continued, he heard the
Marquis d' O his old friend was very busy at the Siege of Pierre Fonds, which
he had undertaken; whom the Duke going to visit, he was by him entreated to
stay there a few days, and by his Authority, and those Forces he had then with
him, to help him to bring his Enterprise to an honorable issue; which the Duke
as franckly consented to, and went immediately into the Trenches, to take a
view of the order of the Siege: where presenting himself with his usual bravery
to open view of the Enemy, and without other Arms, than his Corsset only, The
Duke shot into the mouth at Pierre Fonds.
he received a Harquebuss-shot in his mouth, that passing through one of his
cheeks, shattered his right jaw, and coming out at his chin, flatted upon his
Gorget: A shot that every one believed had certainly dispatched him. But being
carried to his Lodging, and his Wound searched, it was found to be nothing
dangerous; and in a few days he was in a condition to mount on horseback.

After all these good and evil adventures, the Duke being at last arrived at
Chartres, he went presently to give the King an account of his Voyage, The Duke
returns to the King.
not forgetting to make his complaint of the injury done him at Corbie, withal
humbly entreating his Majesty would be pleased to do him Justice; which the
King had in part already done, having ordered his prisoners immediately to be
restored: but their Wounds were such, that they all died of them, soon after
they were left at Corbie; so that they who had committed the injury not long
surviving, the Duke's Quarrel was at an end, and all thoughts of revenge were
soon extinct, and for ever buried in oblivion.

The Siege of Chartres continued yet some time after the Duke's return, which
la Bourdaisiere, Governor there for the League, had so bravely defended, as
often made the King to repent that undertaking, having lost before it the Sieur
de Chastillon, eighteen Camp-Masters, and, as may well be imagined from thence,
a great number of common Soldiers: Neither did those Forces the Duke of
Espernon had left with the King escape better than the rest, the King (willing
to husband the lives of his own Servants in whom he yet reposed a greater
trust, than in the Duke) continually exposing them to the greatest danger. Of
these Beaujeu, Mascaron, and Blumet, three Colonels were there slain, and also
many other Officers; by whose valor, amongst the rest (who perhaps had better
fortune) the place was at last (notwithstanding their notable resistance)
reduced to the necessity of a surrender. From thence his Majesty passed over
into Picardy, Chartres after an obstinate Siege surrendered to the King, and
soon after Noyon.
where he besieged, and took Noyon, and secured many other considerable Cities
of that Province to his obedience: when having after all made a little
digression into Champagne, the year, and that Champagne ended together; it
being necessary to dispose the Army into several Garrisons to refresh them: So
that the Duke, seeing the time of the year for further Service was now past,
asked leave of the King to retire into his own Government to recruit his
Troops, The Duke of Espernon retires into his own Government.
that they might be in a better condition to serve his Majesty the year to
come: to which his Majesty willingly consented, dismissing the Duke with great
testimonies of an entire satisfaction in his service, and an absolute oblivion
of all past unkindness.

The end of the Third Book.
THE HISTORY Of the LIFE of the Duke of Espernon.
The Fourth Book.
THE Duke solicitous by his Services to dispossess the King of those evil
impressions, Anno 1592.
his Majesty had, through the ill Offices of some, conceived against him, to
the prejudice of his Loyalty and affection; The Duke prepares to return to the
King.
did now resolve to raise far greater Forces, than before, for the Summer to
come. Neither had his Majesty on his part concealed his most secret Designs
from the Duke's knowledge; but on the contrary had invited him again into
action, and had reserved an Employment of great trust, Is hindered by the death
of Mounsieur de la Valette hi^ Brother.
and Reputation for him in his Army. The Duke also was prepared to go, and
expected with great impatience his Majesty's Order, for his setting out; when
he received the sad news of the death of Mounsieur de la Valette his Brother.
This Lord, after he had beaten the Duke of Savoy out of Provence, and made him
sustain such losses, Mounsieur de la Valette 's exploit^ in Provence, and (...).
as had forced him to retire into his own Dukedom, after he had settled
Provence and Dauphine in his Majesty's Obedience, and almost rooted out all the
seeds of the League in those two Provinces; after having by Treaties carried on
with infinite Conduct, and Prudence, interested the Republic of Venice, the
Dukes of Florence, and Mantua in his Majesty's Quarrel, and obtained from these
Princes security for thirty thousand Crowns a month, to transport the War into
the Duchy of Savoy it self; of which also he was to have the management (by so
powerful a diversion to oblige this Ambitious Prince to defend his own
Territories instead of invading his Neighbors:) Being, I say, upon the point
to execute a design so honorable in it self, and so important to the Crown, he
would yet first absolutely cleanse Provence from the contagion of the League,
that he might leave no Enemy behind to beget new mischiefs, when he should not
be near to suppress them. To this end therefore he dr^w his Ar^y into the Field
in the beginning of January, and went to besiege Roquebrune, that stood for the
League: A place, which though little, was nevertheless so strong, that
Mounsieur de la Valette's Battery, having played upon that side which was best
fortified, and not working that speedy effect he desired, he would remove (...)
other side; and in (...) impatience to put an end to an enterprise so much
inferior to his greater designs, would himself help to remove the Cannon to a
more advantageous place; where being exposed to the Enemies view, open, and in
his Doublet only (...) lost many of our best Captains) he received a Musket
shot in the head, the eleventh day of January; of which within thirteen hours
after he died.

All the Historians of his time celebrated the Virtues of this (...) highest
(...) of Honor; Mounsi^ur de (...)
the King himself appeared infin^^ely concerned a^ his death, by which he was
deprived of a valiant Captain, and a faithful Subject: Nay even (...) Enemies
lamented his loss (so great an interest has Virtue in generous minds:) but the
Duke hi^ Brother was afflicted to the last degree. He had ever loved him to an
example of Fraternal Affection, had never made any distinction betwixt the
interests of so good a Brother, and his own; he had invested him in a very
considerable share of his own fortune, he had bestowed upon him the Government
of Provence, with the Office of Admiral of France, he had been continually
assisting to him with his Purse and Credit, and had ever made him a partaker in
all the advantages of his Master's Favor: benefits, of which Mounsieur de la
Valette had, on his part, made so modest, and so virtuous an use, that he
thought himself obliged (having no posterity to provide for) to husband them
for the Duke his Brother's Service: Which grati^^de to h^s Benefactor was
rewarded by a good fortune to himself* for having little frequented the Court,
the discontents and disgraces which sometimes perplexed the Duke could never^
reach or reflect upon him, who had continually been abroad in action, and that
with so good success, that his merit made him by every one thought worthy of
that greatness he possessed; so that he was favored, and esteemed by all good
men, without the least mixrure of hatred, or envy. Neither was he, on his part,
wanting to his own Reputation and Interest; but ever behaved himself in all his
Employments with infinite moderation, sweetness, liberality, and noble Courage:
Virtues that established him in his Government with such Authority, and that
rendered him so considerable to the Princes bordering upon Provence, that their
respect to him begot in them a singular regard toward the Duke his Brother;
whom no man was willing (upon a light occasion) to offend, left this (whom all
the world knew to be so kind a Brother, and so good a Friend) by an injury
offered to so dear a Relation, might be tempted into extremities, that usually
are the effects of so just a resentment. It appears therefore by this, how
great a support he was to his Family: but this unfortunate blow deprived the
Duke at once of so considerable a Fortune, of so powerful an Assistant, of so
honorable Employments, and of the person of all others most dearly beloved by
him. The Office of Admiral of France was presently, and that by the Duke's
consent, conferred upon St. Blancart, The Office of Admiral conferred upon St.
Blancart.
since Duke and Marshall de Biron, his Kinsman, and intimate Friend; who (as
we have already observed) put himself into the Duke's Service in the beginning
of his Favor: but who afterward, by his good Services had advanced himself
very high in his Majesty's esteem. Some have said, that the King (to whom the
Duke's greatness was become suspected) had a good mind, at the same time, to
have disposed of the Government of Provence also: but that having considered
most of the principal Cities of that Province were in the custody of the Duke's
Friends, or their Substitutes, who had served Volunteers under Mounsieur de la
Valette; that the Forces, there residing, were made up of their Creatures, such
as only served upon the two Brothers account, it was to be feared the Duke's
Discontents would be humored by his Friends, who might interest themselves in
his Disgrace: So that his Majesty thinking it neither convenient, nor safe, as
Affairs then stood, directly to disoblige the Duke, was forced to comply with
the necessity of the time, and to consent, to what he could not well hinder
without endangering the Affairs of that Province.

Mounsieur de la Valette was no sooner dead, but that all his Officers
assembled themselves together, to advise, what, upon this accident, they were
best to do; where, without much debate, it was concluded, that to express the
affection, they had ever born their dead General, and the respect they had for
the Duke his Brother, to whom they would that affection should now descend, it
was fit to send to the King, humbly to entreat his Majesty, that he would send
the Duke of Espernon, to command them in the place of Mounsieur de la Valette*
declaring freely withal, that under the command of any other they should not so
cheerfully continue those services, they had for the time past so successfully
performed; and accordingly with this Message they dispatched away the ^ieurs d'
Esgarrebacques, and de Mespl^s (two of the most eminent amongst them both in
Valor and Condition) to the Court.

The Duke of Espernon, being advertised of the deputation of these two
Gentlemen to the King, by the Sieur de Peyroles (dispatched to him at the same
time by the Chief Officers of Provence) sent himself also to solicit his
Majesty, for that they had so favorably pursued in his behalf: The Duke
demands of the King the Government of Provence.
Representing to him, That the Government of Provence could not be reputed
vacant, whilst he was living, who had put it into his Brothers hands, upon no
other account, than to preserve it in his Majesty's Obedience; whilst himself,
with such as depended upon him, exposed his Life, and Fortune elsewhere, for
his Service. That the first, and true title, to that Government remained in
him, and that since he was so unfortunate as to survive his Brother, he had
that confidence in his Majesty's Justice, that he would not add to his
affliction by depriving him of an Employment, he had only transferred to
another, that he might himself be at more liberty to do him more, and better
service: And, as if the Duke had been already assured of his Majesty's Favor
to him, or that he would not seem in the least to suspect it, he published his
resolution of going into Provence, and made great preparations in order to that
expedition. The King foreseeing that the Duke would, of all others, be the most
acceptably received by that people, and knowing also, that in the confusion the
Kingdom then was, the Government of Provence wherein the Duke of Savoy, and the
League had made a dangerous progress since the death of Mounsieur de la
Valette) could not be maintained as it ought, otherwise than by the Duke's
^nterest there, thought fit not to contradict his claim; and consequently,
about the end of March the same year, sent him a Commission to go into
Provence, in quality of Captain General of all his Forces there, without
revoking the title of Governor, which had been granted to him by Henry the
III. as also without any confirmation of it; but commanding by particular
dispatches all the Cities, and all his Servants in that Province to
acknowledge, and obey him, giving the Duke in this some seeming satisfaction,
till he might find a time and opportunity gently to withdraw him from thence.

The Duke, having thus obtained leave of the King, prepared himself with all
expedition to depart from his Governments of Xaintonge, and Angoumois; but not
before he had first settled his Domestic Affairs; the chief of which was the
Inheritance of Mounsieur de la Valette, who, some days before his Death, had
made a Will, wherein, it is true, he had made the Duke his Heir; but with so
little advantage to him, that the very particulars of the Will, exceeded the
value of his Estate. He had given great Legacies to all his Friends, and to all
his Servants, of which he had not omitted one, who was not very liberally
rewarded. He had moreover given many pious Legacies for public Buildings,
Foundations of Convents, and Hospitals; and with all this liberality, left so
many Debts behind him, that the Duke was advised not to meddle (...) the
Inheritance, as a thing that would certainly be a burden to him: But he, far
from embracing an Advice, which, though prudently enough given, he thought
would not be honorable for him to follow, could not think his Brothers
intention sufficiently fulfilled, if he did not add something of his own to his
Liberalities: A Resolution he so peremptorily executed, that all those who were
mentioned in the Will were satisfied, before the Testator's personal Estate
could be prized, or his Revenue gathered in.

Having thus settled this business, whilst his Friends were busy levying such
Forces, as he intended to lead into Provence, he had now nothing left to do,
but to begin his Journey, except to take a review of his Army: Of which the
Cavalry was commanded by the Sieurs de Chalais, d' Ambleville, The Forces the
Duke carried with him into Provence.
d' Ars, (who is still full of vigor at the writing of this History, and I
think the only Cavalier remaining of all the Officers of that Army) de
Touverac, de Miran, de Gohas, de Bordes, d' Estausan, de Puygailliart, young
Masses, de Boisseau, and some others; each having a hundred Light Horse in his
Troop. The Infantry had for Camp Masters, the Baron de Mata, Bonnouvrier,
Pernes, and la Roderie; the names of the rest I could not learn, time having
worn out their Memories: But the Commanders and Soldiers were such, that it
was not possible to see any where a more complete, nor a more spritely Body.
And what he found there.
There remained in Provence of those who had kept themselves together, since
the death of Mounsieur de la Valette, his own Troop of Gens-d' Arms, and that
of the Baron de Montaut his Cousin, consisting each of two hundred Cuirassiers,
with that of the Marquess de Cadenot, consisting of one. The Troops of Light
Horse under the command of Belloe, of Ramefort, of Lions, of St. Andiol, that
of Buous, with his Regiment of Foot, commanded by the Chevalier de Buous his
Brother, with the Regiments of Merarques, and de Valaveyre. Soon after the
Duke's Arrival in those parts, he was yet re-inforc'd with fifteen hundred
Foot, which the Sieur de Gouvernet brought him out of Dauphine; and the
Constable his Uncle, to whom he gave a Visit as he passed through Languedoc,
furnished him with three hundred Light Horse, under the Command of the Sieurs
de Poyraux, de Monteson, and d' Entragues. So that he no sooner came into
Provenc^, but that he had above ten thousand Foot, besides what he was supplied
withal from the Garrisons of the Country, which made up three thousand more,
and at least fifteen or sixteen hundred Horse. The Mareschals de Camp, to those
Forces he had raised himself, were the Sieurs de Megrin, and de Bonnouvrier,
and of those in Provence, Montaut, and le Passage, who having served in the
same quality under his Brother, he thought, by no means fit to be disobliged.

So many, and so vast Leagues, made at the Duke's own charges, could not but
very much exhaust his purse, which had before been weakened by the excessive
expense he had been at for the Service of the two Kings: For in his Voyage to
Henry the III at Tours, he had (as has been said) raised six thousand Foot, and
twelve hundred Horse, and in the last Campaign, he had brought to Henry IIII.
four thousand Foot, and eight hundred Light Horse, which could not be raised
without infinite expense: So that it is no wonder, if he was now reduced to
borrowing, as indeed he was, and did borrow a very considerable sum at
Angoulesme; where one particular man, Francois Redout by name, Sieur de
Nevillac, lent him, at his departure from thence, fifty thousand Crowns; The
Duke enforced to borrow money.
and which more obliged the Duke (a thing I have often heard him speak of with
great commendation of this Gentleman's proceeding) so generously, that he would
not so much as accept a bond for his Security, but only a Memorandum of three
or four Lines; so great a Confidence he had in the Duke's Integrity: Nor was he
deceived, his money being punctually repaid at the appointed day.

Things being thus ordered, The Duke departs from Angoul^sme.
the Duke departed from Angoulesme the fifth day of June, the same year taking
his way through Perigort toward Quercy; but there was no little contest
betwixt his Honor and Affection in taking leave of his Duchess, whom her
Virtue, and Fruitfulness, had rendered to him more dear than ever; and who on
her part, as if she had foreseen this parting should be their last, as indeed
it was, could by no means consent to this separation, though they were at last
both of them constrained, to yield to the necessity, his Duty and Honor
imposed upon him.

There accru'd no little advantage to his Majesty's Affairs, by this Armies
taking the way of Quercy; for the Marquis de Themines, since Marshall of
France* gave the Duke notice as he was upon his March, that the Forces the
League had in Languedoc, under the command of the Duke de Ioyeuse, had besig'd
Villo^nur, which though a little Town, was nevertheless very considerable for
its situation upon the River Tarn, and for its vicinity to Toulouse, being but
four Leagues distant from thence. R^nies a Gentleman of great Valor, who had
the command of that place, upon the first Alarm, had put himself, with about
fifteen, or sixteen Gentlemen of his Friends, into it: but it had been
impossible (having no body, but the Inhabitants to assist him) to have defended
it long without relief, and that no body, but the Duke, was able to give him:
Which Father Ange de Ioyeuse a Capuchin, the Duke's Brother-in-law, and then at
Toulouse, fearing he would do, and having intelligence of the Duke's motion
that way, he went, and met him upon his March, where he not only endeavored to
dissuade him from that Design; but also by all manner of Arguments to draw him
over to the League: conjuring him by all the ties of Friendship, and by the
most instant entreaties he could use, neither omitting the respect due to
Religion, nor the obligations of Friendship, and Relation, to divert him from
his purpose; but all in vain: for the Duke setting aside all those interests of
Friendship, The Duke relieves Villemu^^
and Alliance when they came in competition with the Duty he ought to his
Prince, was deaf to all Arguments and Entreaties, and in spite of them, and
him, advanced directly toward the place: But upon his Arrival, the Enemy, not
being able to dispute it with him, immediately retir*d to Tholoze, giving the
Duke, by that means, free liberty to fortify the Town; which he did so well,
as soon after gave the King's Party opportunity to gain in that place a very
signal Victory, by the death of the Duke de Ioyeuse himself, and the absolute
defeat of his Army.

But it was not in this occasion alone that the Duke's Arms were employed in
that Country; for the power of the League being as considerable there, as in
any Province of the Kingdom, their Designs were not ^imited to the reducing of
Villemur only; they had moreover almost blocked up Montauban, which City (at
that time reputed one of the best in France) was in great danger, if not
speedily relieved, to be lost. On one side it was awed by Moissac, on another
by the Castles of Monbeton, of Mauzac, and de la Court, besides many other
little places fortified round about, by which the Garrison, and Inhabitants
were so straightned, and kept in, that they were reduced to great extremity,
and scarcity of all things. The Duke relieves Mantaubon by the taking in
several Castles from the League.
This, the Duke being advertised of, and being also solicited by the
Inhabitants, to free them from these troublesome Neighbors, he presently went
about it, and to that purpose presented himself first before Moissac, which
surrendering at the sight of the Cannon, he removed from thence before Mauzac,
which did the same: but the other little places, not being so considerable, as
that his presence was necessary to reduce them, he left that part of the work
to the Sieurs de St. Megrin, and de Bonnouvrier, Mareschals de Camp to his
Army; himself, whilst his Forces were employed about those petty Enterprises,
making a step into Gascony to Visit Madam de la Valette, his Mother, and to
invite his Friends in that Country to go, and share with him in the Honor of
serving his Majesty in Provence.

By this little digression into Gascony, the Duke had an opportunity yet
further, to reinforce himself with some particular Servants of his, with whom,
having rejoined his Army, he found now nothing lest to do, that might impede
his March; so that he proceeded without longer stay, on his Journey to
Provence, where being arrived, and appearing with so gallant, and so numerous
an Army, it gave no small reputation to his Majesty's Affairs; nor struck no
small astonishment into the League: and, as he, in his experience very well
knew, that this reputation was no ways to be kept up, but by some honorable
Exploit, he undertook diverse Sieges at his first Arrrival (notwithstanding the
season of the year was far spent, it being now October) whereof that of
Montauron was the first. The Siege of Montau^on.
This City, though in its situation and strength incapable of any notable
defense, was nevertheless by the Commanders, (who had eighteen foot Companies
there, which the Duke of Savoy had put in, to entertain the Duke of Espe^non in
his first heat) thought tenable enough, and that the number of their men, which
were nine hundred resolute Soldiers, would supply the defects of the place; or
that (at the worst) the Duke of Savoy, being so near, and in the head of an
Army, they might defend themselves, till he should come to their Relief. This
Garrison the Duke of Espernon at his Arrival presently summoned to a surrender,
at the same time representing to them, that they were in a place, that could
not possibly resist the Force of great Shot, the Houses of the City making up
the greatest part of their Wall; and that they would do better not to put him
to the trouble of bringing up his Artillery, than by doing it to oblige him to
use them otherwise, than like Gentlemen, and Soldiers: To which they (defying
him, and despising his Admonitions) returned this peremptory answer, That they
had undertaken to defend that place, and would maintain it, or perish, and make
it good with their lives to the last man; An Answer that quickly set the Duke
to work, who immediately beleaguered the Town; where the Cannon having in a few
days made a wider breach than was nece^sary, the besieged desired they might
Capitulate. To whom the Duke sent word, There was now no Capitulation to be
granted to them, that they had lost that privilege, and that he would not
receive them upon other terms, than upon surrender to mercy; that they were
best therefore to deliberate, whether they would run the fortune of an Assault,
or presently submit to that Condition, it being the only, and final Favor they
were to expect.

Whilst these matters were in agitation, the Duke of Savoy, who had engaged
these men in this desperate place, and knew, as well as any, the danger they
were in, was advancing with three thousand Foot, and five hundred Light Horse
to relieve them; which the Duke of Espernon was no sooner enform'd of, but that
leaving a sufficient Force to maintain the Siege, he went out to meet him, and
bravely offered him Battle: But the Savoyard, not daring to run so great a
hazard, retired without any further attempt; so that the Besieged, being out of
all hopes of Relief, were forced to surrender to the Duke's discretion, where
their Insolence, and Rebellion received their due reward, and that in as high a
degree, and with the greatest rigor, the Law of Arms does permit: whereby they
were made miserable examples of the greatest cruelty. All the Captains found in
the place, to the number of fourteen, The Duke of Esp^rnon's sever^ty.
were immediately hanged up, and five hundred common Soldiers sent to the
Galleys at Taulon; the rest either escaped in the time of the Capitulation, or
were ^lain, during the Siege: A severity that ought not to have been practiced,
upon our own Nation. But the Duke would by this give the Duke of Savoy to
understand, that he, having violated the public Faith, and his League with the
Kings of France, as he had done, he would have no fair Quarter with him, nor
use him otherwise than as a mortal Enemy to the Crown, and Kingdom.

After this Action, the Duke conceiving himself no less obliged to protect his
Majesty's good Subjects, than to suppress his Enemies; his first care was to
secure the Officers of the Parliament of Provence (such as had declared for the
King from the beginning, and had retired themselves from Aix (the seat of
Parliament) from the time the City had revolted to the Duke of Savoy) in some
place of safety: For this purpose he could find no place so fit for strength,
and convenience as Manosque, where he seated them in great security, and
honor. And that the time might not pass away without some show of Action,
whilst the season would not give him leave smartly to follow the War; he in
this dead time of the year, with a strong party of Horse scoured the Country
all over the whole Province. Neither was this an unnecessary, or an
unprofitable diligence, by which he confirmed those Cities, already declared
for the King, in their duty; and also frighted those inclining to a Revolt into
better Resolutions: But the greatest advantage he reaped by it was, that by
this means, he informed himself, upon the particular places themselves, of the
general estate of the whole Province; and moreover, kept his men in action,
like a Captain that very well understood Order and Discipline to be the only
things, that establish, and support an Army, and the pest of great Bodies to be
sloth and liberty, which debauch Soldiers from their Duty, and have often
been observed to dissolve, and disperse the greatest Armies, when the Soldier
has been suffered to enrich himself by idleness, and license, upon the plunder
of his Quarters. He therefore provided for the subsistence of his men, by
imposing Contributions upon the Province, which nevertheless was not done
without the advice and consent of the Officers of Parliament; by whose
Authority, as well as his own, he ordered a certain rate of all things in the
Markets, and that at so indifferent a price, that the Commons found a greater
convenience in the Quartering of Soldiers, than in being without; so quick a
return they had for their Corn, and other Provisions, and so certain was their
pay. To this the Assessments, designed to defray these Provisions, were so
equally laid upon the whole Country, that no man could complain he was oppressed:
nor was there any who did not find his advantage in this necessary evil. In
fine, all things were settled so much to the general convenience, and
satisfaction of all, that I have an hundred times heard the Duke wish for such
an establishment in Guienne: but the contagion was there already spread too
far, and had taken too deep root, to admit so happy a reformation. By this
prudent disposition of things, the Soldier found himself provided of his share
of all things necessary where ever he came, according to the order prescribed:
Neither was he to exact more upon pain of death; a penalty that without mercy
followed the offense: by which severe Discipline, the King's Party, in those
parts, were in a short time observed to be very much increased.

The Duke, The Siege of Arles.
solicitous to maintain this Reputation of the Royal Arms, by some notable
enterprise, resolved to make an attempt upon the City of Arles; neither did he
herein make an ill choice, it being one of the most considerable places of
Provence, seated upon the Banks of Rosne, and inhabited by above three hundred
Families of very good quality, who here made their ordinary residence; besides
a vast number of Citizens, and inferior people. This City, like all others
which are situated upon Navigable Rivers, and daily expect to be supplied with
fresh Provisions, kept very little beforehand in store; which the Duke being
well enform'd of, contented himself with shutting up the River only above, and
below, and cutting off the Succors of the adjacent Country, by Quartering
several Troops on both sides the River: by which means, without much trouble,
or any considerable loss in a month, or five weeks time, this strong City was
reduced to a necessity of surrender, and to shake hands with the League, for
whom they had hitherto been zealous to the highest degree. Arles surrendered.
They came therefore to a Capitulation, in which the Duke was content to accept
of thirty Hostages for their future good behavior, and with that caution to
ease them of the burden of a Garrison; which in truth at that time, before he
was well settled in his Government, he could not well have spared, nor without
manifest prejudice to his Majesty's, and his own private Affairs. Nevertheless
what good security soever the Duke thought he had taken to bind them to their
Duty, the Inhabitants made no scruple afterward, in the Revolt of the Cities
of Provence, by their Rebellion to expose the lives of so many men of Quality,
who had generously staked their persons for the good of their fellow Citizens,
to the Duke's just indignation; though he by a clemency much more
extraordinary, than the severity he had showed at Montauron, dismissed the
Hostages to their own houses, without so much as putting them to ransom; which
in an occasion of this nature is no usual Favor.

After this success, the Duke yet undertook the Siege of Antibe, The S^ege of
A^tibe.
a place wonderfully well fortified, seated upon the Sea shore, and favored
with a very good Port; which the Duke of Savoy, since his last taking of it, to
assure his possession, had so fortified, and manned, that he thought it
impossible to be taken. The Duke of Espernon notwithstanding presented himself
before it, where having summoned the Governor to a surrender, and his Trumpet
being sent back with a scornful answer, he proceeded to a formal Siege,
advancing by T^enches, raising of Batteries, and duly observing whatever the
Method, and Discipline of War prescribe in the most difficult attempts. The
Town was defended for a while, but the Governor in the end retired into his
Fo^t, where he thought he should be in a condition to make the Duke spend his
time, and consume his Army unprofitably, and to no purpose.

This place had besides its own strength, A^bigne.
and advantageous situation, this further convenience, that every night, by the
Duke of Savoy's order, a Gally set out from Nice, that brought all the
refr^shments to the besieged, they could desire, carried away their Sick, and
Wounded, brought them in fresh Soldiers, and provided all things necessary for
them; which so continual Succor, and seasonable Supplies, swelled the
Governor with an opinion, that the Duke could never force him: Neither was the
Duke displeased at his confidence, hoping that this security of his would at
one time or another contribute to the success of his Design. He therefore
continued his approaches, and tried all ways imaginable to effect his
enterprise; when at last his Cannon having batterd the Curtain in a place not
much frequented, he perceived, that those within kept no guard there; by which
he believed they had not observed that breach, and immediately resolved to make
his advantage of that negligence. To this purpose therefore he sent a Sergeant
to discover the breach, who accordingly having gone in, and returned by a hole
big enough for a man to pass at his ^ase, he made his report to the Duke, that
there was so little order in the place, that no one so much as thought of
repairing that Breach, and that there was no Guard at all kept there. Upon this
intelligence the Duke resolved, that an Assault should the next morning be
made, on that side the Fortress; which, that it might the better succeed, a
general Assault was to be made show of, that the Defendants, being every where
employed, whilst they were deluded by false Alarms, fi^ty good men, chosen for
the purpose, seconded by an hundred more, and that hundred by a greater number,
might creep up to the Curtain, and slip in at the Breach; a Design that took
effect: In the execution of which, the Alarm having surpised the Governor in
Bed, and he running out in his Nightgown, and Slippers* to see what was the
matter, Anti^e taken by Assault.
was in that posture taken, as the Fort it self was by Assault. And here,
though by the Law of Arms all things were at the Conquerours discretion, the
Duke nevertheless proceeding in that moderate way he had taken up, after his
severity at Montauron, absolutely forbad all unnecessary slaughter, contenting
himself with detaining the Governor, and some of his Officers, prisoners. The
Duke of Savoy, who had made this place his chiefest Arsenal, had furnished it
so well with Artillery, that the Duke there found thirty brass Pieces, of which
fourteen were Royal Culverines, or Bastards, with great store of Ammunition,
which did him no little service in the prosecution of that War, against the
Duke of Savoy himself.

The Gally from Nice failed not the next night to come according to her custom;
and, if it had been thought of, to have answered her Signal by the usual
countersign, had infallibly been taken with the place: but in the heat of the
Victory, no body having remembered it, she retired safe to Nice, those who were
in her, by the omission of the Signal, and by the noise and confusion they
heard in the Town, concluding the Fort, and all, to be certainly taken.

From Antibe the Duke went to Cannes, The Surrender of Cannes.
which had revolted after the Death of Mounsieur de la Valette, a very good
Port Town, which nevertheless surrendered at the first Summons: So that hunting,
and every where unkennelling the Sav^yards, at this successful rate, who had
possessed themselves of most of the best Cities of Provence, he gave Mounsieur
de l' Esdiguieres, who was newly entered into Savoy, and who was deputed for
that Service by the Treaty, made a little before betwixt Mounsieur de la
Valette, and the forementioned Princes of Italy, great opportunity to make a
notable progress into that Dukedom.

Neither was it by these diversions alone that he favored l'Esdiguiers
invasion of Savoy, but by a more important assistance: for when the Duke of
Savoy (driven out of Provence on the one side by the Duke of Espernon, and
called home on the other to the defense of his own Dukedom, by the dangerous
progress l' Esdiguieres had there already made) returned upon him with all the
Forces he had; doubtless Mounsieur l' Esdiguieres had been in apparent danger
of some notable Defeat, if at his request, and in so urgent a necessity,
Mounsieur de Tho^.
the Duke of Espernon had not assisted him with twelve hundred Foot, and three
hundred Horse; which he sent him under the command of the Chavalier de Buous,
and to make the obligation the greater, had not also procured him from the
Constable (with whom the Duke had a very great interest) almost as many more
Forces, by which he was not only rescued from the present danger, but likewise
put into a capacity of attempting greater things than he had yet done. A
courtesy very ill requited, as we shall see in the following Revolutions of
Provence; the Duke having afterward no such enemy as he, whom he had so
seasonably assisted, in a time of the greatest nece^sity and danger.

The success that hitherto had attended the Duke, Anno 1593.
gave so great a reputation to the Royal Arms, and had so discountenanced the
Enemy, that there scarce remained a place in the whole Province, tha^ durst
shut their Gates against him: So that after the Duke of Savoy was retired (as
you have heard) into his own Country, the Duke had leisure, The Duke reduces
several revolted Towns.
and without much difficulty, to recover Frejus, Cicutat, Cisteron, St. Tropes,
with many other important places that had revolted after the death of Mounsieur
de la Val^tte, and to make himself Master of all Provence; Aix, and Marselles,
only excepted.

These two were the Capital Cities of the Province, the first considerable for
its circuit, and the seat of Parliament established there; and the other, for
its greatness also, and for the number of Inhabitants; but principally for the
Port, reputed one of the best upon the Mediterranean Sea. These two Cities so
far forgot themselves, their Duty, and Allegiance, that after the death of
Henry the III. (animated by an indiscreet zeal to Religion, which was ever the
Leaguers Pretense, to abuse the simplicity of the people) they rather chose to
create an Usurper in the person of the Duke of Savoy, and to submit themselves
to his invasive Government, than to acknowledge, and obey their own lawful, and
natural Prin^e. At the instigation therefore of the Countess de Saut, of the
Count de Carces, and some others of Quality in the Country, who were fierce for
the League, they sent a Deputation to this Duke, as far as Turin; where, by the
mouths of two Commissioners of Parliament, and many other Officers, and in the
name of the people, they made him a voluntary tender of the Principality of the
County of Provence. Whereupon the Duke, in acknowledgment of so free, and
unexpected an offer, had not only received them into, and promised them his own
protection; but likewise that of the King of Spain his Father-in-law, coming
himself in person to take possession of his new Province, where he had, almost
in all places, been received with all the honor and applause he could possibly
expect, or desire. An act becoming a giddy and rebellious people; who coming
afterward to recollect themselves, to consider what they had done, and how
great a fault they had committed against their Faith and Duty, were yet
resolved to persist in their Rebellion, and by taking measure of their own
offense, apprehending no possibility of pardon, determined to rely upon their
own strength; and creating courage out of despair, were resolute to suffer the
utmost extremities, rather than to recede from what they had so infamously, and
immaturely done. All which, although it was very well known to the Duke of
Espernon, and likewise what resistance was to be expected, from men made
desperate by their own Crimes: yet had he the courage to make an attempt upon
these two great Cities, The Duke makes an attempt first upon Aix, and after
upon Marse^^es.
if possible, to reduce them to their obedience, which, had Fortune contributed
any thing to the greatness, and bravery of the Design, had certainly taken a
happy effect.

The Duke having, upon mature deliberation, resolved upon these two
Enterprises, would begin with that of Aix, as appearing the easier to be
accomplished, Aix wanting those Succors by Sea, which Marselles, upon
occasion, was certain to have: But his Forces, being too few to form a regular
Siege, against so great a City, Forts built against Aix.
he was fain to supply that defect by erecting many Forts against it; which,
shutting up the Avenues, were, notwithstanding his want of men, sufficient to
block up the City. Betwixt these Forts, in a place of advantage, he caused a
Grand to be erected, that is to say, a greater Fort, after the form of a new
City, opposite to, and within a Musket Shot of the old; where the greatest
part of his Infantry were bestowed with great convenience, and from whence the
Duke could so perfectly discover, whatever could be practiced against him by
the Enemy, that it was impossible so to surprise him, but that he would be ever
ready to relieve any of his Quarters with great facility, should any thing be
attempted against them. The Cavalry, that could by no means subsist in the same
place, were disposed into several Garrisons, some nearer, some further off,
according as there was convenience of Quarters, of which those under the
command of Chastelliers, du Passage, de Buous, and de Ramefort were the
nearest, where they wanted no opportunities of signalizing their Vigilance, and
Valor: An order so admirably established, as in time reduced the City of Aix,
to such extremities, that they must certainly have fallen into the Duke's
hands, had not the Inhabitants declared a resolution of submitting themselves
to none, but the King; where notwithstanding the Duke was the only Author of
their submission, as he was of all other advantages the King obtained in
Provence, though still the artifice of his Enemies so skreen'd his merits from
his Majesty's observation, that he received very little thanks for his labor.

The Duke began to build his Fort in June 1593. The Count de Carces near allied
to the Duke of Mayenne (being Son by a former Husband to the Duchess his Wi^e)
commanded in the City, where the Inhabitants under his command, backed by some
Foot Companies belonging to the Duke of Savoy, which yet remained in that
Country, were so brisk, as, at the Duke's first sitting down, by frequent
Sallies to disturb his Building; The En^my endeavors by frequent sallies to
hinder the Duke's Works.
but were ever beaten back with so great loss, that they were at last content
to sit still, and suffer what they found they were not able to oppose. And here
I find my self upon a Scene of Honor, where the best Pen might be worthily
employed: where notwithstanding, should I make particular mention of all the
Skirmishes, Combats, and brave actions that happened upon this occasion, I should
fall into the error, which of all others I most pretend to shun, and trouble my
Reader with a long, and perhaps a tedious Narrative; though some of them are of
so shining a Reputation, as can, by no means, be passed over in silence.

Whilst the Duke therefore was very busy about raising his Fort, the Count de
Carces, who would try all possible ways to hinder that work, sallied out of the
Town at broad noonday with 400 Gentlemen, of which number was the Count de
Suze, Bezaudun, Camp-Mareschal, S. Marcelin, and Reglanette, with many more
Gentlemen of Quality, who followed by 2000 men, what of the Inhabitants, and
what of the Companies in Garrison, went with a design to overthrow the Works
already begun, and if possible to compel the Duke to retire. A Design, that as
it was brave in it self, so was the time wherein it should be executed as
prudently chosen; A great sally made by the besieged
for at so unexpected an hour most part of the Duke's Soldiers were either
sleeping in their Huts, or gone abroad to Forage so that the Duke had very few
about him: Neither, if the Infantry were in such disorder, were the Horse in a
greater readiness, which constrained the Duke, who had mounted at the first
noise of the Alarm, being able to get but very few together, with those few to
expose himself to withstand the first fury of the Enemy. Chastelier (whom we
have already begun to call the Baron d' Ars) hearing in his Quarters a noise,
and uproar, such as is usually occasioned by tumultuous Sallies, with the Sieur
de Buous, were the first, who with their Troops came in to the Duke's succor,
whom, as soon as come, he commanded to charge the Enemy; whilst himself, who
had soon rallied all who were in a condition to fight, following them close at
the heels, fell so furiously into the Body of the Assailants as made all give
way before him. The Count de Carces, seeing his men so roughly handled,
endeavored to recover an Hospital in the midway, betwixt the Fort, and the
City, with an intent there to rally his men, and to make good the place: but
the Duke falling in pell-mell amongst them, forced him to continue his flight
to the very Graffe of the City, where many of his men were slain; by which ill
success the Enemy having lost above 400 men, they were for the future better
advised, than to make any more such sallies, and suffered the Duke, in great
security, to continue his work under their noses.

Whilst every one thought the Duke wholly intent upon this Design of Aix, and
that men's minds were suspended in expectation of the event of that enterprise,
he conceived there was an advantage to be made of this general belief, that
seemed to falicitate an attempt upon Marselles it self; which, as it was very
improbable by open force to take any good effect, so was it to be carried on
with great prudence, and secrecy, to make it succeed: He therefore gave
private Instructions to all such Commanders as he intended to make use of in
this Enterprise, to make ready 3000 chosen Foot, and 400 Light Horse, An
attempt upon Marselles.
as also to prepare three Petards, with which in the beginning of a very dark
night, he silently rose from his Quarters, marching his men the direct Road to
Marselles. He had not as yet discovered his Design to any, when being advanced
about half a League on his way, and thinking it now high time to put his
Friends out of suspense, who knew nothing whither they were to go, he called
all the Chief Officers of his Party about him, and in a short Harangue, told
them, That if he had not sooner discovered his Design unto them, it was not for
any diffidence he had of their fidelity, which was already sufficiently known
unto him; that after the many testimonies they had, upon all occasions, given
him, of their Worth, and Valor, he had more reason to seek opportunities
wherein he might manifest his gratitude, than to expect any further proof from
them: but that as secrecy was the great promoter of all Enterprises of the
nature of this, wherein he now intended to employ them, he would not, should
any disaster happen, that the least color of blame should reflect upon any of
them; but much rather be wholly imputed to Fortune: but nevertheless all things
being so well ordered, as he conceived they were, there was no doubt to be made
of a successful issue: That he therefore conjured them resolutely to undertake
an action of the greatest advantage to the King, to his Majesty's Affairs, and
to their own particular benefit, and honor, that could possibly be proposed:
That every one there knew Marselles to be one of the most important Cities,
whether considered in the commodity of its Haven, or in its vicinity to Foreign
Countries, in the whole Kingdom: That this City reduced by the King of Spain's
promises, and the Duke of Savoy's together, had already put her self into their
protection; and persisting in her obstinacy, was ready to open her Gates to
Strangers, to receive their Garrisons, and to give away her liberty to them,
after having violated her Faith, and Duty to her lawful Sovereign: That should
strangers once get entire possession of that City, it would be lost for ever,
and that there would be no hopes ever to drive them from so advantageous a
post, what attempts soever could be made, against a place so strong, and so
easy to be relieved: That next to the public concern he considered the
reducing of this City as a certain and firm establishment of his own interest
in Provence; and that they themselves ought to look upon it as a pledge,
whereby that fair, and rich Province would be assured unto them, and that would
give them an entire authority over the people, who after so brave an exploit,
would no more be able to vie Merit, or Valor with them, as they had formerly
done: That such as had undertaken Enterprises of this nature were wont to
animate their companions with hopes of Booty; but that for his part he should
take a contrary way: That it was not his intent to ruin Provence, nor the City
of Marselles, but to preserve both the one, and the other for the King, to
establish himself there in order to his Majesty's Service, and to procure for
them other advantages, and by other means suiting to their great merit, and the
service they had performed: That this City once taken there could be no more
fear of wanting provisions for the Army, the convenience of the Port bringing
in all things necessary in great abundance, that the evil-affectedness of the
people would for the future be able to produce nothing to their prejudice, they
having in their own hands either the Keys of the Province to let in all
necessary Succors, or otherwise the Chains that would tie them fast to their
duty: That above all things therefore he most earnestly desired them to
restrain the insolence of the Soldier, whom notwithstanding he did not thereby
intend to hinder of the benefit they might justly make of the Inhabitants
Estates, which were already forfeited to them by by their Rebellion, and of
which they should soon be possessed by the Victory: but that he desired they
might be fairly divided amongst them, that they might the longer enjoy what
they got, and not lose, and destroy the spoil, as it otfen falls out in the
sack, and plunder of great Cities: That he would not upon this occasion suggest
unto them the remembrance of their accustomed Valor, that he knew by good
experience such exhortations were altogether unnecessary to them in bold, and
dangerous attempts; and that he only conjured them to follow his example now,
as hitherto they had followed his Person, and Fortune.

The Duke, having thus prepared his Friends for the Enterprise, continued on
his way; when, being come within sight of the place, he himself, with those
that had charge of the Petards, advanced up to the Gate: Of these the first
Petard played to as good effect, as was to be expected, having made a hole in
the Gate wide enough for a man easily to get through; which, though made wider
by the second, yet did not the Gate fall down, being supported by a great iron
Bar behind: The Duke therefore called for the third Petard, but in vain; no
Petard being to be heard of, no more than the man to whose trust it was
committed; which made them try to break the Bar with Axes, that they might have
the passage more free to relieve some of their men, who were already got in by
the hole of the Gate: But the Inhabitants, roused at the first noise of the
Petards, running to their Arms, made a stout opposition; where, having but few
to deal withal, the Assailants were with great ease beaten back, and the Gate
as suddenly Barricado'd up. It is not to be imagined how infinitely the Duke
was afflicted at this ill success, and the more, because he thought he had made
himself, as it were, Master of the event by the prudent conduct of his Design;
though he has since thought himself happy in failing of his purpose (so much
should men susspect their own desires in the choice of things that concern the
conduct of their lives) it being to be feared, that had the Duke been
established in the power the winning of this City would have seated him in, and
received those affronts, and that ill usage from Court, he afterward did in
the revolutions of Provence, the sense of those injuries might have prompted
him to do things no ways suiting with his Duty, as we shall see he was soon
after tempted to do. I do much wonder that none of our Historians have so much
as mentioned this Enterprise, who have some of them been very particular about
many others of the Duke's of much less importance; whose omission of this has
engaged me to insist longer upon it, than otherwise I should have done; that so
brave an Action might not be buried in oblivion: of which the bare Project
could not have been meditated by a mean courage, nor the Design carried on so
far by an ordinary prudence.

The Duke, The Duke returns to Aix.
being retired to his Fort very much discontented at his evil success, would
revenge himself of that disgrace by new, and brisker attempts upon the City of
Aix: Wherefore having intelligence that the Inhabitants already began to feel
themselves straightned for want of Victuals, he, to take from them all future
hopes of supply, immediately fell to destroying all the Fruits, and Corn of the
Country round about; and, not content to do them this mischief without, played
so many Cannon-shot into the Town, that not a man durst appear in the streets,
or abide in the upper rooms of their houses: But the besieged, ingenious in
their Revenge, contrived a way to pay him back some of his Balls by a
Counter-battery from the great Tower of the Church of Nostredame; a Pile of
great note, and fame, as well for its exceeding height, as for the excellency
of its Architecture, and Beauty. To the top therefore of this Tower, they made
shift to crane up two Culverines, and had a Cannoneer so expert, as not only
levelled them right against the Fort, but even against the Duke's own Tent
within it, where he made the strangest shot, that perhaps ever flew from such
an Engine. This Cannoneer, under the protection of some little Truce (of which
there happen many in such Sieges, either for the carrying off their Dead, or
some other occasion) had, unknown, crept into the Fort, and had there
diligently observed every part of the Duke's Quarter: He had also discovered
that the Duke every afternoon used to play at Cards in the Parlour of his Tent,
and had observed so much as the place where his Chair was constantly set.
Having thus informed himself of all these circumstances, he returned to the
City, where, after he had levelled his two Guns to his own desire, he was so
confident of his skill, as to offer odds, that in one of two shots he was about
to make, he would either kill the Duke of Espernon, or very much endanger his
life; when immediately giving fire, he proved in part as good as his word, the
shot lighting directly into the place, to which it had been by his eye before
directed. The Duke was at this time playing at Primero, The Duke's miraculous
escape.
and set betwixt two Gentlemen, one called le Po^y; the others name I could not
learn, who were both of them beaten to pieces, one over, and the other under
the Duke; who by an incredible vigilance of Fortune, being at that instant
bowed down upon the Table, to draw the money he had newly won upon a rest,
escaped that fatal blow; yet though he escaped death, it was not without two
great wounds, one by a piece of one of the poor Gentlemen's Bones, that pierced
deep into his Belly; and the other, by another piece of a Bone, in his hip; of
both which he carried the marks along with him to his Grave.

Those of the Town who were soon aware of the lucky hit their Cannoneer had
made, believing the effect of it to be greater, than indeed it was, would not
let slip an opportunity, wherein they conceived something might be executed to
their own advantage: wherefore they immediately sent out St. Romans, one of
their Mareschals de Camp, with an hundred and fifty Light Horse at one Gate,
The Inhabitants of Aix, imagining the Duke slain, make another sally.
and Bezaudun with the like number at another, to try, if in the confusion they
heard in the Fort something might not be attempted with success, who, had they
found a fit advantage, were to have been seconded by the entire Forces of the
City; but the Duke, notwithstanding the pain of his Wounds, omitting nothing of
his usual care, was no sooner taken up from the ground, where the sho^ had
beaten him down, than he commanded every one to stand to his Arms; by which
means the Enemy, whose design it was to have come upon the Surprise, seeing the
Duke's Forces ready to receive them, retired without fighting, being soon
undeceived in their false hopes, both of the Duke's death, and of the Defeat of
his Army.

The Duke's Wounds, which every one at first judged to be mortal, made his
Surgeons resolve upon removing him out of the noise, and tumult of the Fort,
into a Farm hard by; a place which to them seemed to be very secure from any
practice of the Enemy: But this opinion, instead of giving him that quiet, and
repose they kindly intended, had once more like to have cost him his life; The
Duke in a new danger.
for the besieged, who watched all opportunities of making continual attempts
upon the Duke's person, having observed that the place to which he was retired,
although covered by the Fort, was nevertheless at a good distance from his
Camp, and only guarded by a small party of Horse, resolved to try, either to
take him alive, or at least to kill him in his Quarters. To this purpose
therefore, sallying out of the Town with 400 of their best Horse, they
furiously set upon the Duke's Horse-Guard; who were all presently cut to
pieces, and Camseque who commanded them laid dead upon the place. D' Ars, whose
duty it was to relieve them coming fortunately in upon their Defeat, renewed
the Fight, where he so bravely withstood the Enemies fury, that after his
Brother Cere, had been wounded and maimed with infinite Blows, and himself
beaten from his Horse, and remounted by one of his Compagnions, he gave du
Passage, one of the Duke's Mareschals de Camp, time to come in to his succor;
by whose assistance the Enemy was at last forced to retire, leaving many of
their men dead upon the place, as the Baron d' Ars in this conflict lost the
most part of his Troop.

This Cannon-shot which at the little distance of 200 paces had only wounded
the Duke, was not so favorable to the Duchess his Wife, whom it killed
outright at the distance of 200 Leagues. This Lady had been brought to bed (as
has been said before) this same year 1593 of Lewis, since Cardinal de la
Valette) whom the grief for her Husbands absence (which was nothing diminished
by the course of time) had still so far kept back from the recovery of her
former strength, after her lying in; that what was only a little indisposition
at first, being much increased by her melancholy, grew to such a distemper, as
made her Friends at last begin to apprehend a mortal consequence from her
disconsolate life. To divert this ill humor therefore, they often persuaded
her to go abroad, sometimes to Church, sometimes on Visits; when being gone out
one day to hear Mass, at her return she espied one of the Duke's Footmen, who,
unknown to him, had been, by some of his Officers dispatched away to
Angoulesme, on purpose to prevent any false rumors, that might there be spread
concerning the Duke's accident, and so discreetly to acquaint the Duchess with
what had happened, that she might not unseasonably be surpised with the news of
his mischance; an honest, and a prudent care in them, though her destiny
rendered all these precautions fruitless, and vain: for she had no sooner cast
her eye on the fellow, who, being but newly arrived, had as yet spoke to none,
but that she called him to her, suddenly demanding of him her Letters from the
Duke: to whom, the poor Lacquy surpised, and da^nted at her demand, innocently
related that the Duke was wounded, and by a Cannon-shot: But, as if that word
had been the shot it self, the Duchess sunk down in a swoon, as one, that,
apprehending a Cannon shot could be no less than mortal, would not survive him
she concluded to be dead, and who was far dearer to her, than her own life. In
which condition she was presently taken up by her people, and carried home;
where all possible means was used to bring her to her self, as at last she was;
though it was only to make her more sensible of death, which followed the ninth
day after she had heard the unhappy news. Before her Death she made a Will, The
Death of the Duchess of Espernon.
wherein she bequeathed whatever was in her gift to the Duke her Husband; to
whom, recommending her Children, as the common pledges of their mutual
affection, she conjured him, for their sakes, never to marry again. Thus died
this young, and excellent Lady, in the six and twentieth Year of her Age, after
having manifested an indifferency for life, becoming her masculine Courage, and
Resignation unto Death, worthy her great Piety, and Virtue.

The Sieur du-Masses, Lieutenant for the King under the Duke in that
Government, dispatched a Courier to the Duke, to acquaint him with his loss, as
also with the Duchess her dying request unto him; who, after having given
public testimonies of his affliction, than which nothing could be greater, he
vowed to observe what she expected from his fidelity to the last hour of his
Life: A promise that he as faithfully observed, though in the space of fifty
years, that he survived this excellent Lady, he was offered many and great
advantageous matches, which he still refused; ever professing that the respect
he bore to his dead Ladies last request, did, and should withold him from
embracing a new Wife, and from embarquing in a new Fortune.

Fortune had hitherto so favored the Duke in almost all his Enterprises, Anno
1594.
that his Affairs had been carried on with great prosperity and success, and
the Provisions he had drawn from the Province, or bought with his own money, had
kept his Army in so good Discipline, The Provencials Revolt from the Duke.
and Obedience, that the Provencials had tasted very little of the
incommodities of War: Yet wanted there not some unquiet Spirits, who, enemies
to the peoples peace, as envious of the Duke's good Fortune, endeavored by all
imaginable ways to debauch from him the respect, and good will he had by his
noble carriage acquired from the greater part of the Country, and from the
better sort of men, persuading them, that his severe and hasty humor proceeded
from a purpose he had to usurp an absolute Authority over them; and, rendering
his best intentions so suspected to the people, as made them at last refuse to
pay their accustomed Taxes. It was by so much the easier to corrupt these
undiscerning spirits, by how much a certain emulation has ever been observed to
be betwixt the Provencials and Gascons, as seems to have been hereditary, if
not natural, to those two people: So that the Provencials not being able to
endure the dominion of those with whom they had ever disputed the prize of
Glory, and Valor, were easily tempted to shake off the yoke that either was,
or was pretended to be imposed upon them: After therefore (as has been said)
they had denied the Duke those Contributions, which, until then, they had
willingly paid, most of the Soldiers of the Country who were in his Army
retired themselves, and some of the chief Nobility pretended to favor at Court
by accusing him of inordinate Ambition; though all his endeavor to make
himself considerable in Provence, was only in order to his Majesty's Service.
The Duke seeing things in this ill condition, would by force have reduced them
to their former posture: but this remedy (which was by no means proper for the
constitution of that people) ripping up the memory of the severe punishments he
had in such cases inflicted upon several men in diverse places, served only to
make them desperate in their disobedience, and to incen^e them to the last
degree.

Thus did all those, who had manifested an animosity against the Duke, begin to
apprehend falling into his power, amongst which the Leaguers were in the
greatest fear; who, as their obstinate Rebellion had made their fault much
greater, than theirs, who like Soldiers had defended Montauron, so did they
fear a worse punishment, if worse could be, than had been inflicted upon them.
They saw their City of Aix reduced to the last extremity; neither would those
within stay till they could come to their Relief. The Count de Carces, a
particular Enemy to the Duke (besides the hatred that diversity of interest
does usually beget) above all things dreaded to fall into his hands: so that
Friends, and Enemies, those who pretended to be Royallists, and Leaguers
conspiring together to hinder the Duke's further advancement, he saw, almost in
a moment, all Provence in Mutiny, and Insurrection.

The King had already publicly embraced the Catholic Religion, King Henry the
IIII. turns Roman Catholic.
of which he had made open profession at St. Dennis, the five and twentieth day
of July this same year: whose Conversion having taken away all manner of
pretense from such as had declared they forsook his Majesty's Service upon no
other account, than the Interest of Religion; the Inhabitants of Aix conceived
they could now no longer continue in their Rebellion, without manifesting to
all the world that they were swayed by other considerations, than those they
had already declared; to which the Count de Carces (making use of this time,
and occasion) adding his persuasions, one while representing to them their Duty
to their Prince, and another the severity they were to expect from the Duke of
Espernon, animated, as he must of necessity be, by the hatred they had in this
Siege expressed against his Person, he at last prevailed with them to send away
speedily to the King, to assure his Majesty of their Fidelity and Obedience.
Mounsieur de Thou.
This was the first thing that discovered a disunion in the League: of which,
though the Duke of Mayenne highly complained to the Count de Carces,
reproaching him with weakness, and charging him with all the miscarriages that
should after happen to their Faction; yet was he deaf to his reproaches, and
the fear of falling into the Duke's hands, as he was upon the point to do (the
City of Aix, not being able longer to hold out) being more prevalent upon him,
than the respect of his Alliance, he resolutely persisted in his first Design.

But the Count de Carces was not satisfied with hindering the Duke from making
himself Master of the City of Aix only, the hatred he implacably bore him
proceeding yet further, and to contrivances of more dangerous consequence
against him. There was none who did not believe the King had a jealousy of the
Duke's Designs; amongst whom, the Count de Carces, Designs o^ the Count de
Carces against the Duke.
who understood it better than the rest, easily persuaded himself that his
Majesty would not suffer the Duke to increase his Reputation, and Power in
Provence, by the taking of Aix, one of the most important places of that
Province: And he further knew the Duke would as hardly consent to have his
Conquest, so near effected, forestalled, and the prey snatched out of his
hands: So that in this diversity of pretensions, he doubted not, but that the
King's aversion to the Duke, as also his mistrust of him, would be infinitely
increased; which in the end succeeded as he had foreseen, and projected. The
Estates of the Country, assembled at Aix, appointed Deputies to go make a
tender to the King of the obedience of their City, provided his Majesty would
please to protect them against the Duke of Espernon, whose power, they said,
was grown formidable, and his insolence not to be endured. It Is true, he had
acted vigorously against them, but they would not say, That had he proceeded
with greater moderation, they would ever have returned to their obedience, or
departed from the Faction, whose interest they had so precipitously, and
rebelliously embraced.

The Deputies found it no hard matter to obtain from the King what they
desired, Anno 1595.
as to the acceptance of their City, which his Majesty was very glad should
return into his obedience: but for what concerned the Duke of Espernon, against
whom their deputation was chiefly directed, they could nothing prevail at this
time; not that they failed on their parts with their utmost endeavor, and
eloquence, to render his Actions, and fidelity suspected, to set the Kings
heart more, and more against him: But whether it were that his Majesty would
not give credit to so partial, and so passionate accusers; or (which is more
likely) that in the present posture of his Affairs, not yet well settled, he
thought it not convenient to disoblige the Duke to such a degree; he would by
no means gratify them in that part of their deputation, that pointed at the
Duke's removal from his Government. He saw him powerful in the Country,
supported with great Relations, and possessed of many strong holds; in which
condition it had been dangerous to provoke him to the height: wherefore he
thought it best to choose a mean betwixt these extremes, and to give the
Deputies some satisfaction, without touching the Duke's Authority in Provence,
excepting in the City of Aix only; which, at the Deputies request his Majesty
would not absolutely leave at his discretion.

His Maje^ties Conversion had as yet produced no great advantage to, nor no
great alteration in his Affairs, saving that he had thereby assured many good
Catholics to his Service, who before were a little distracted in their Duty,
and suspended betwixt Loyalty and Religion: But the League still remained in
the same vigor, and the Spaniards hopes were yet as great as ever to carry the
Election of their Infanta to the Crown, in the approaching Assembly of the
counterfeit Estates of the League at Paris. All propositions of Accommodation
with the Duke of Mayenne had proved ineffectual, who was the more inflexible to
Peace, by how much his Kindred, and Confederates (the Count de Carces excepted)
continued firm in their union, which also of it self was not very likely soon
to dis^olve, where there were so many pretenders to the Crown, to which five,
or six of the Family at once aspired. In this conjuncture of Affairs, the King
willing to make much of those few Servants h^ had, and principally of the Duke,
that he might win time to order him at a better advantage, when the State
should be settled in a better condition, wholly referred all differences
depending betwixt the Duke, and the Provencials, to the Constable de
Montmoren^y's Arbitration: A man of all others, the most ^it to accommodate
those Differences, who being a near Ally, and a passionate Friend to the Duke,
and his Interests, could no ways stand ^uspected to him; and who his Majesty
knew would be well liked of by the Provencials: a people the Constable by
bordering upon them had had many opportunities several ways to oblige. Neither
did his Majesty altogether ^o trust to the Referree he had in public honored
with that Office, but that he at the same time sent private instructions to
Mounsieur l' Esd^guieres, and to Colonel Alphonso d' Ornano, The King sends
secret Orders to l' Esdiguieres, and Colonel Alphonso d' Ornano.
to have an eye to the Duke's Actions; and in case they saw him obstinate to
the taking the City of Aix, or that the Constable should in his Arbitration be
partial to him, that then they should openly undertake the protection of that
people, and by all means assure to his Majesty the pos^es^ion of that City.

Yet were not these orders, how secretly soever delivered, so closely carried,
but that the Duke had immediate knowledge thereof; at which unexpected
unkindness being infinitely surpised, and wounded to the quick, to see his
Services, and good Intentions rewarded by so apparent a mistrust, he took up
Resolutions, which though I shall by no means pretend to justify, yet that the
condition, and misfortune of the time may something serve to excuse: There was
scarce a great man of that Age that was not of opinion a man might lawfully
defend his own Fortune, even against his Prince, an error with which the Duke
also, having been pre-possess'd, and therein, by a number of ill examples,
confirmed, he was resolved not to refer the Controversy about Aix, nor the
interest he had in Provence to arbitration; but to maintain himself in that
Interest, and Authority, with all the Force, and Power he had: which made l'
Esdiguieres, who was soon enform'd how little the Duke was disposed to submit
to the King's order, after having conferred with Seignior Alphonso, and
concluded about the course they were to take, to retire into Dauphine, there to
prepare himself to pass over with all expedition, and with all the Force he
could make into Provence.

Whilst these little contests in Provence had been thus carried on, which had
taken up some time, the King's Affairs about his own Person were advanced into
a much better condition: The Deputies of Provence had been dispatched to Court
in January, at which time the League being at their height, his Majesty thought
it not convenient to give the Duke any public discontent: but from that time
three months were now elapsed (for this happened at the end of April) in which
time the King had found a way to possess himself of the City of Paris. The
possession of this great and populous City had drawn many others along with it
into his Majesty's Obedience, and diverse persons of great quality had followed
the examples of those Cities: the Spaniard now was possessed of few, or no
Towns in the Kingdom, and the League was so strangely declined, as to be only
now almost supported by the single Family of Lorain, which was it self also
upon the point to disunite; so that the King being no longer necessitated to
dissemble, began now to require of the Duke a more absolute obedience, than
hitherto he had done; when having raised him many enemies in the Country, and
appointed l' Esdiguieres, and Ornano with great Forces to make head against
him, he did not now so much fear his revolt, as formerly; nor consequently so
much care to disoblige him.

The Duke, who by the commotions of the people, by his Majesty's positive
command, and by the preparations that were made against him, very well saw what
he was to expect, would, notwithstanding how great soever his danger seemed to
be, rather choose to perish in Provence in the defense of his Honor, and
Command, The Duke is resolute to maintain himself in his Government.
than to go to Court, there to expose himself to the malicious Offices of his
Enemies. He very well saw the best he was there to expect, was to be stripped of
his Government; to which he conceived he had a better Title, than to any other
member of his Fortune. He had, in the time of his Favor, purged that Province
of the Factions of the League, and the Reformed Religion; he had since
maintained it against the Duke of Savoy, and the League combined together: It
had cost him his Brother's Life, much of his own Blood, and many of his
Friends, and Servants: so that what propositions soever could be made unto him,
he intended never to quit claim to his title there, and stood resolute to bury
himself in Provence, rather than by leaving it, to satisfy his Enemies
longing, who were hourly importunate with his Majesty to remove him thence. In
which resolution being every day more and more confirmed, he gave the Constable
(who as I have said was to mediate the differences betwixt the Provencials, and
him) plainly to understand his determination; entreating him at the same time
not to take it ill, if he did not submit a thing to Arbitration, which he could
by no means ever consent to part withal. Neither was it any hard matter for him
to satisfy the Constable who was infinitely affectionate to his person, and
who had much rather have had him for his Neighbor in Provence, than any other;
a consideration that perhaps especially moved the King to call the Duke from
that Government; The King resolves to remove the Duke from the Government of
Provence.
his Majesty not conceiving it convenient, that two persons so intimate, and of
so great Reputation as they both were, should possess two so con^iderable, and
so near neighboring Provinces.

Mounsieur de l' Esdiguieres observing how little the Duke was inclined to an
Accommodation, and suspecting that the Constable forbore to press him to it,
only to give the Duke more time to make himself Master of Aix, began to march
with three thousand five hundred Foot, and eight or nine hundred Horse toward
Provence, Mounsieur de l' Esdiguieres en^ers with an Army into Provence,
against the Duke.
and by the way was reinforced with some Troops that had served the League
under the command of the Count de Carces, and who were exceeding glad to be
employed against the Duke. Lafin (since famous for having been the Instrument
of the Marshall de Birons Ruin) happened to be at this time in Provence, who,
having some command in the Country, and having frequently conversed with the
Duke about the management of Affairs, had a great Ambition to have the honor
of composing these Differences: wherefore knowing Mounsieur de l^ Esdiguieres
to be upon his March, he went out to meet him; to whom he undertook, provided
he would advance no further, to persuade the Duke absolutely to submit to the
Constables determination: But Mounsieur de l' Esdiguieres, supposing that to
show himself with his Forces upon the Frontiers of his Government, would sooner
incline the Duke to that resolution, advanced as far as the Banks of the River
Durance, which separates Provence from Dauphine; where what he designed to
hasten an Accommodation, he soon saw served only to put things into a worse
condition, and to make the Rupture wider than before.

There had been of old a certain emulation betwixt these two great men, and
their Virtue having begot in each of them a great esteem for the other, they
had long, and equally desired an occasion, wherein they might make a decisive
trial of themselves, to see which by his merit could get the start in the race
of Honor, and stand fairest in the worlds Opinion: A noble, and virtuous
jealousy of one another Reputation; yet was there at this time something of
feud in the case, the Duke complaining that he had not received from Mounsieur
de l' Esdiguieres the return, nor acknowledgement he expected, for the good
Offices he had done him in the business of Savoy; to which were also added the
Difference in Religion, and the Diversity of Interest, things that were never
observed to promote Accommodations, nor to unite the wills, and inclinations of
men: by all which, the Duke being animated against Mounsieur de l' Esdiguieres,
perhaps more than he should have been against any other, he had no sooner
notice of his motion, than taking his approach for a defiance, he would let him
see, that he was neither astonished at his Reputation, nor daunted with the
Forces he brought along with him; and therefore immediately arose from his Fort
of Aix; The Duke goes out to meet Mounsieur de l' Esdiguieres.
where nor daring, as it was not fit, to leave his Quarters weakly guarded, he
took the Field with only 3000 Foot, though in Horse he was equal to Mounsieur
de l' Esdiguieres, and with these small Forces bravely faced ^im; who having
already passed the River, there was so little to part them, as reduced them
both to almost a necessity of fighting. In this little Battle therefore the
Duke advanced to begin the charge, which though it was of no great continuance,
ended nevertheless with the loss of many men on both sides, and wherein the
Duke showed himself no ways inferior to his Adversary either in Courage, or
Conduct, which is all I shall say, that I may not appear interested, and
partial.

All the Historians who make mention of this Action do say, that the two Armies
retreated without any considerable advantage on either side, that in truth the
Duke of Espernon carried away many prisoners of eminent Quality; but that
Mounsieur de l' Esdiguieres remained Master of the Field; by which report they
seem to give him the advantage of the day. Mounsieur de Thou writes to that
purpose, and so does d' Avila; though it be nothing strange in the last, who,
excepting in things, that merely concern the Affairs at Court, does, as to the
rest, only translate the other, and wholly follows his relation in what
concerns the business of the Provinces of the Kingdom. As to Mounsieur de Videl
who has writ the life of the Constable l' Esdiguieres exceedingly well, and
paid to the memory of a good Master the gratitude of a passionately
affectionate and faithful Servant; I must commend him for writing to his
Benefactors advantage in an occasion wherein he might with great truth do his
memory honor: but to make a right judgment of this action, it will be
convenient to relate the circumstances of it, after which it will be easier to
conclude, to which side the Victory inclined.

Mounsieur de l' Esdiguieres, A true account of the Action.
having passed the River Durance, took up his Quarters at Ourgon, and the
circumjacent Villages, where the fertility of the Country abundantly provided
for him: but the Duke on the contrary, who came to meet him, being constrained
to Quarter in a very ill Country, as at Eguiere, Sennas, Lambescq, and other
places thereabouts, his men suffered great want, and inconvenience; A
consideration that besides the promptness of his nature, made him eage^ to come
to the trial of Arms: In which resolution advancing still toward the Enemy, he
at last discovered him, standing in a place of singular advantage behind a
great Ditch, which the torrent of Land floods had worn, and hollowed into the
form of a regular entrenchment. L' Esdiguieres at the Duke's first appearance
immediately drew up into Battalia behind the Ditch, sending out his Vant-guard
only to fight, wherein he had indeed disposed his best men, under the command
of his Nephew Morges, in whose company (to his own misfortune) was Bezaudun,
who had formerly been Marshall de Camp for the League in Provence. The Duke,
seeing this Vant-guard come up with a countenance to fight, made his also
advance to meet them; which he would himself in person lead up, as he did, and
made so gallant, and so fortunate a charge, that after a short, but brisk
dispute, himself bravely fighting at the head of his men, they totally routed
the party, and drove Morges wounded into the very Ditch, that parted the two
main Bodies, killed a great many men (as he also lost some) and carried away
very many Prisoners, without leaving so much as one of his own men in the
Enemies hands: Yet had Mounsieur l' Esdiguieres the patience all this while to
see his men beaten, and trodden under foot, without once offering to come out
of his Trench; or, though he made some light skirmishes about the skirts of the
Ditch, without expressing any inclination to a total engagement; A coldness
that the Duke very well observing, and satisfied with his own success, which he
had infinitely hazarded, should he have made any further attempt upon the Enemy
in a place of so great advantage, contented himself with only facing some hours
in the Field, to try if l' Esdiguieres had any mind to repair his loss; but to
no purpose, he still keeping the ^ame station, and being by no provocation to
be ^empted, out of the advantage of his Post. And this is the truth of what
passed at this occasion, as I received it from honorable, and not to be
suspected, testimony, who were present at the engagement, and who impartially
related the story: though the sequel it self makes it plain enough; for had
Mounsieur l' Esdiguieres had the least imaginable advantage, is it to be
supposed that he would have suffered the Duke to have carried away so many, and
so considerable Prisoners before his face, as the Historians themselves confess
to be taken in this Battle? No doubtless! neither was it such a triumph for him
to remain Master of the Field, the Duke never intending to stay upon the place
of Battle; the ill Quarters he had been enforced to take up withal, upon his
March, in a very unfruitful Country, not permitting him to stay long there
without he intended to destroy his men: to which consideration was also added,
that he was in danger of losing his Fort at Aix, left but slenderly guarded, by
drawing so many men from thence upon this occasion; and therefore it especially
concerned him not longer to expose a place of that importance, which was indeed
the main cause that made him to return, but not retreat.

Amongst the Prisoners taken at this Battle was the Marshall de Camp Bezaudun,
whom I named but now; a Gentleman for his Parts and Courage of high repute
amongst those of his own Faction: but he would yet make himself more
remarkable, by professing, and that in public, an implacable hatred to the
Duke's Person; neither were words sufficient to express his Malice, nor did he
think it enough that he had by diverse calumnies bespattered the Duke's Honor,
The Duke'^ Victory fatal to Bezaudun.
unless he made his injuries more public, by printing several Libels, of which
he declared himself to be the Author, which indeed, was one thing that had
cherished in the Duke an animosity against him: but there was yet another by
which he was more justly provoked, and of which, those who have condemned the
Duke, for causing him to be, as they say, unhandsomely slain, have made no
mention. I think it therefore very fit to insert it here, to vindicate the Duke
from the aspersion has been unjustly cast upon him, about this Gentleman's
death.

Bezaudun, formerly in some engagement had the fortune to take a Gentleman
Prisoner, whose name was D' Estampes, a man for whom the Duke had an exceeding
kindness, and whom in the beginning of his restraint Bezaudun had used with
great civility; but suspecting soon after, and perhaps upon too light grounds,
that his Prisoner had not observed a due regard to the honor of his house, he
forthwith resolved to take a severe revenge: To which purpose causing himself
to be carried in a Chair into the Marketplace of Aix, being unable to walk by
reason of some Wounds he had received, he there caused his Prisoner to be
brought before him; where having demanded of him, in the presence of a great
many people, whom the novelty of the action had assembled together, if he
complained of his usage, D' Estampes made answer, that he was so far from
complaining, that he had highly commended it, and should do so as long as he
had life. You should not then have given me cause to complain of you, says
Bezaudun, and withal cried, kill him; which inhumane Sentence was scarce
pronounced, but that the poor Gentleman was, by some Bezaudun had brought along
for that purpose, immediately run through, and through, and laid dead upon the
place. This barbarous act, that possessed with horror all such as beheld it,
being soon brought to the Duke's ear, he then made a vow, that if ever the
Murderer fell into his hands he should receive the same measure: And such was
Bezaudun's ill fortune, to be presented to the Duke in a time when the murder
of his Friend was yet fresh in his memory; for the Prisoners taken in the
Battle, being immediately, and upon the place brought before him, and amongst
the rest Bezaudun, completely armed, with his Bever down; and the Duke asking
(as he had of the rest) who he was, the Prisoner himself made answer, that he
was Bezaudun; at which the Duke turning aside his head, as loathing the sight
of a man so odious to him, and against whom he had so often published an
implacable hatred, could not forbear to express some dissatisfaction with those
who had received him to Quarter: whereupon one of them, without more express
order, discharged a Pistol in his head, by which he was laid upon the ground;
the second was discharged by a Brother-in-law of his own, and both mortal. Thus
have you the truth of this business; which, had it been carried with less
cruelty, had doubtless been more to be commended, though the many offenses and
injuries the Duke had received being duly considered, it may in some sort
pretend to an excuse; especially the fact having been committed by no order
from the Duke, but by Servants of his, who conceived it would be an acceptable
service to him: Neither is it to be denied, but that the War has produced many
other actions of this nature, wherein as great severity has been practiced upon
far less provocation,

The Duke after this Battle perceiving l' Esdiguier^s to be palpably favored
by almost all who had formerly stood for the League in Provence, (many of them
having listed themselves under this Hugonot Captain) as also by those who were
affectionate to the King, seeing an Army likewise on foot against him twice as
numerous as his own, and not knowing in whom he might confide, even his own
Friends, and Servants being startled, to see the King's Authority, and name
made use of against them; began now to see that, to keep those few friends, and
places he had left, from revolting from him, it was absolutely necessary to
submit to an Accommodation: and to this he was the rather induced by the
necessity he saw of abandoning his Fort of Aix, it being impossible for him to
keep that, without putting the other places he held in the Province to manifest
hazard, his Forces being too few to defend them all against so many enemies,
The Duke at last is necessitated to an Accommodation.
as were conspired to his ruin. He therefore at last hearkened to Lafin, who
from the beginning had made himself an importunate Mediator for an
Accommodation, and in conclusion wholly referred himself to the Constables
award; by whose determination, which was delivered in June, the Duke was
obliged to give up the Fort of Aix (the main thing in contest) into the hands
of Lafin himself, by whom it was to be kept with 400 men, to be sent out of
Languedoc, until it should please his Majesty further to signify his Royal
Pleasure, as to the maintaining or slighting of that Fort, that in the mean
time there should be a general suspension of Arms in Provence, during which all
things should continue in the same posture they then were.

The Duke submitting absolutely, and without reserve, to this Decree,
accordingly delivered up the Fort of Aix unto Lafin, who entered into it with
the appointed number of men: but whether it were through the Officers foul play
in their Musters, or that the treachery of Lafin himself (of both which the
Duke complained) made him neglect to keep his Garrison in its full appointment,
so it was that in a few days they were reduced to half their number; neither
does Mounsieur l' Esdiguieres stick to confess, that he himself had a hand in
the business, that he had privately supplied the Fort with Soldiers of his
own, who still were to run away by his private order.

In the mean time the Duke of Espernon, under the assurance of this Truce,
lived in great security, and believing that nothing was to be suspected to the
prejudice of a Treaty, argu^d, and concluded as it were in the presence of all
men, took this opportunity, a little to divert, and repose himself, after the
continual action he had been turmoil'd in since his first arrival in Provence,
and to that purpose took a Journey into Languedoc, either as he himself
pretended to make a visit to the Constable; The Duke goes over to Languedoc.
or, as it was said by others, upon an amorous account to visit a Lady he had
an acquaintance withal in that Country: but whatever was the occasion, the
absence of their Leader, together with his example, made most of his Soldiers
to take the same liberty, rambling every one a several way: an advantage that
Mounsieur l' Esdiguieres very well knew how to manage; neither did he neglect
it, though what he did would have been interpreted breach of faith, had less
than the King's command stepped in to excuse it.

In this Journey to Languedoc, there happened a very remarkable quarrel betwixt
two Officers of the Duke's Army, A remarkable Duel betwixt two of the Duke's
Captains.
who went along to attend him; the one was Lioux, a Gascon, the other St.
Andiol a Provencial, both of them Captains of Horse, and equal in quality, and
esteem; though in this occasion the chance of Arms showed it self partial to
St. Andiol's side. These two Gentlemen upon some slight dispute, having agreed
to fight, went out of the Town together, to end their difference; where St.
Andiol being the stronger man, after some wounds given, and received on both
sides, closing with his Enemy, trip'd up his heels, disarmed him, and made him
ask his life; which being done, he was so far from the insolence of a
conqueror, that, desiring no other triumph than his own private satisfaction,
he restored Lioux his Sword upon the place, with all the complement, and
civility usual amongst men of honor upon such occasions. But how modest soever
St. Andiol was in his Victory, the business could not be so secretly carried
(they returning both bloody from the Field) that their friends took not notice
of what they had been about, who as soon enform'd the Duke thereof; desiring
withal, that he would interpose his Authority to make them friends: But the
Duke, out of respect to the Constable would transfer that good office to him,
who as readily undertook it, and who having his two Sons in Law the Count de
Auvergne (since Duke of Angoulesme, and the Duke de Vantadour in the house with
him, sent for them, and the Duke of Espernon, to be present at the
reconciliation, Saint Andiol was the first called in, who, being examined what
had passed betwixt Lioux and him, made answer, That it was true, some little
dispute had happened betwixt them, which had obliged him to seek the satisfaction
of a Cavalier; but that it was already determined, without any advantage on the
one side, or the other, that he was satisfied that he must ever declare Lioux
to be a very brave Gentleman, and that he was his Friend, and humble Servant.
After this Declaration, every one concluded it would be a matter of no great
difficulty to reconcile them, and expected Lioux would as readily embrace his
adversaries friendship, as he had franckly offered his, Saint Andiol being
reputed one of the bravest Gentlemen in the Army. He therefore was next called
in, and that rather to hear himself commended upon Saint Andiol's testimony of
his Valor, than to be questioned about a thing, of the truth whereof they
thought themselves already sufficiently enform'd. They therefore, upon his
coming in, told him, that Saint Andiol had given an account of what had passed
betwixt them, that he had assured them, they parted upon equal terms, that he
was his Friend and Servant, and that therefore nothing now remained, but that
they should embrace, and be good friends. To which Lioux made answer, That
before they proceeded so far, there must be a truer relation given of the issue
of their dispute, than, for as much as he yet heard, he could consent unto. An
answer that surpised the whole company, who feared it might beget a new
quarrel; when Lioux continuing his discourse, declared how every thing had
truly passed; acknowledging that he owed his life to his enemies courtesy; but
complaining withal, that Saint Andiol should make so light of his Victory, as
to deprive himself of the due honor of it; yet magnifying his noble behavior
toward him after so ingenuous a manner, that having by his franck, and
generous confession wiped off all disesteem, that usually (how brave soever)
cleaves to the losing side, he won himself, by his handsome carriage, as great
a reputation, as if he had been more fortunate, and shared in the glory of a
victory had been obtained in single dispute over his own person.

From the time that the Fort of Aix had been delivered into Lafin's hands,
Mounsieur de l' Esdiguieres had retired himself into the City, where he had
been received with all the reputation, and respect due to the Deliverer of a
people, as they looked upon him to be, and where, whilst he lay watching all
occasions wherein he might weaken the Duke's power, or lessen his repute (which
he called executing his Majestices Orders, and advancing his Service) he had
intelligence of the slender, and careless Guard was kept by Lafin in the Fort
of Aix, as also in many other places, which as yet were in the Duke's
possession: The Fort of Aix surpised by Mounsieur l' Esdiguieres.
wherefore making use of this negligence, and pretending some of the Duke's
people had broken the Truce (in having (as he said) taken some of his
prisoners) he took the Field upon the sixth of July, and without resistance
took the Fort of Aix, and favoring the revolt of Frejus, St. Paul, Troy,
Mirabel, and Cannes, gave the Inhabitants of all those Cities opportunity, to
drive out the Duke's Garrisons, and to withdraw themselves wholly from his
Party, and Obedience. As for the Fort of Aix, it was no sooner in Mounsieur de
l' Esdiguieres hands, but that he delivered it up to the discretion of the
Inhabitants, who were so diligent in the demolishing of it, The Fort of Aix
demolished.
that in two days time there scarce remained any footsteps of a work the Duke's
whole Army had for three months together, with great, and continual labor,
been industrious to raise.

Toulon soon after followed the revolt of the other forenamed places, Many
other places revolt from the Duke.
which was, of all others, a loss of the greatest importance to the Duke.
Esgarrebaques was Governor of the place, a man that had long served in that
employment, both under Mounsieur de la Valette, and under the Duke himself in
great esteem of Courage, and Fidelity: but at last the alliance he had
contracted with the House of Soulies, a Family that were nothing kind to the
Duke's Interests, having given his Adversaries, or rather his Envyers a
pretense to render him suspected to the Duke, he, to secure the place, and to
keep Esgarrebaques within the bounds of his duty, caused a Citadel to be drawn
out, and to be begun in his own presence, wherein he placed Signac, the
Governors Capital, and Mortal Enemy, with a sufficient Garrison both to secure
the Citadel, and to awe the City: But Esgarrebaques, either really provoked by
this ill usage, or else in this declining condition of the Duke's Affairs,
willing to disingage himself from his Service, making that his pretense, so
soon as the Duke's back was turned, assaulted Signac in his new Citadel;
where, the Fortifications being imperfect, and the access open, and easy on
all sides, he without much opposition took the Governor prisoner, and made
himself master of the place; putting himself immediately after into Mounsieur
l' Esdiguieres protection, which, in the Language of the Country, was to submit
himself to the King.

The Duke having intelligence of these disorders, of which his own absence had
chiefly been the cause, upon the first report thereof left Languedoc, and made
all the haste he could into Provence, to apply, if possible, some remedy in
this untoward posture of Affairs; though all he could do at his return, was
only to stop the Gangreen from going further, The Duke returns into Provence.
and to keep the Province from a general revolt: yet either not believing, or
not seeming to believe, that his Majesty's Order was in any of these
transactions, he began to prepare himself to recover by force of Arms, what by
treachery and surprise had been taken from him, when finding his Friends and
Followers startled, and wavering at the very sound of the Royal Name, which his
Enemies had made use of in all their designs, he thought it necessary, before
he fell to action first to undeceive them, and to clear that error. In an
eloquent Speech therefore he briefly laid before them, The signal Services both
his Brother and himself had done for the King in the conservation of that
Province, and that in the greatest confusion of the Kingdom, and at the lowest
ebb of his Majesty's Affairs; the Obedience he had manifested to all his
Majesty's Orders, and Commands, how severe soever they had been, and how
prejudicial soever to his own private Fortune. That as an evidence of his Duty,
and submission to his Majesty's Royal Pleasure, he had but lately surrendered
the Fort of Aix, that is to say, had divested himself of the possession of that
fair City; the Conquest of which, was, by their Valors made certain to him.
That notwithstanding so many, and so recent testimonies of his Loyalty and
Obedience, with which he knew his Majesty to be very well satisfied, his
Enemies still shrowding their malice under the shadow of the Royal Name, the
better to effect their own designs, had debauched, and reduced from him most of
the places he had lately been possessed of. That this affront reflected upon
them, indifferently with himself, since it had been with their Blood, together
with his Brothers, and his own, that those conquests had been dearly bought.
That therefore the injury being equal both to him, and them, he hoped they
would assist to revenge them, and to maintain his Fortune; which, as he owed it
in part to their Valor, so did he not so passionately desire its support for
any interest of his own, as to have means thereby to show himself grateful to
those who had been constant, and faithful to him, in all the disgraces he had
fallen into, and in all the attempts had been practiced against him.

His Friends being by this short speech reassur'd and confirmed in their
Fidelity and Obedience, and having thereupon expressed as great a Devotion to
his Service, as he could expect from men who had long been affectionate to him;
he forthwith took the Field to go seek out l' Esdiguieres: but he, after he had
delivered Aix from the Fort, that had so long kept them in subjection, and
cleared the neighboring Campaign by the revolt he had procured of the
forementioned places, retired into his Government of Dauphine, without engaging
himself further at this time in the Affairs of Provence; by whose retreat, the
Duke, having none left to oppose his designs, seemed to be now in a condition
not only to redeem his late losses, but also to make a new, and a further
progress into the Country, than he yet had done; and doubtless he had done so,
had things continued in this posture: but something new, and unforeseen fell
out, which gave the last blow to the ruin of his Affairs.

The Duke of Guise at last undeceived, and better read in the Spanish artifice,
which had so long abused him with vain proposions of Marriage with their
Infanta so soon as they could procure his Election to the Crown, and perceiving
also the declining condition of the League, which every day went less in
reputation, was in the end, with his Brothers returned into the King's
Obedience: to whom his Majesty (hoping the revolt of a man of his Authority,
and Condition from his Enemies Party, would draw the greatest part of those who
had set up their rest upon the Fortune of the Duke his Father, over to his own)
had granted very advantageous conditions; and be^ides the Cities of Rheims,
Chalons, Rocroy, St. Di^ier, Guise, and other places, which had formerly been
settled upon his Father, and his Uncles, conferred particularly the Government
of Provence upon him. The Duke of Guise made Governor of Provence.
The Government of Champagne had formerly been in the possession of the late
Duke; but his Majesty, having since his advancement to the Crown, gratified the
Duke of Nevers with that Office, he rather chose to dispossess the Duke of
Espernon, who by a thousand calumnies had been rendered suspected to him, than
to di^oblige the Duke of Nevers, whom himself had settled in that trust.
Neither was the Duke of Guise unsatisfied with the exchange, who (besides that
it was in it self at least equal with the other) had, by this mutation a great
opportunity, under the shadow of the Royal Authority, to depress one of the
most powerful, and professed enemies of his House, and Name: so that well
pleased with his new Employment, he only waited his Majesty's order to begin
his Journey into Provence, and by assistance of the Royal Arms to put himself
into possession of his new, and well liked of charge: But his Majesty who had
much rather by little and little to have withdrawn the Duke of Espernon from
thence, than to kindle a new War in that Country, and so soon again to put a
Sword into the Duke of Guise's hand, who was so lately returned into his
obedience, had first tried the way of negotiation (as you have heard) and after
made use of Arms under the conduct of Mounsieur l' Esdiguieres; by which
various ways having found he could neither reduce the Duke by reason, nor so
depress him by force, but that he was still in a condition there long to
subsist, he at last took a resolution to put an end to the work, and to effect
that by fine force, which he saw was neither by Treaty, nor by indifferent
Forces to be brought about.

His Majesty had in the beginning of this year proclaimed a War with the King
of Spain, which notwithstanding, before he would begin, or advance into the
Enemies Country, he would first settle his own Affairs at home, and visit some
parts of his Kingdom, which as yet he had never seen since they were reduced to
his Obedience, by his presence to encourage and confirm them in their duty to
him; of which the City of Lions was one, and thither it was, that his Majesty,
after having chased the Duke of Mayenne out of Burgundy, repaired, and where he
arrived in September, 1595. To this place Mounsieur de l' Esdiguieres being
also come to kiss his Majesty's Hand, and to give him an account of the Affairs
of Provence, he was thither followed by the Deputies of that Parliament, and of
some other Cities of that Province, in hopes that under his countenance, and
Interest at Court, their complaints against the Duke of Espernon would be the
better heard, by which his Majesty being tired, vexed at the continuations of
these troubles, and animated against the Duke by the reiterated ill Offices of
his enemies, fearing also that the ill usage the Duke had received from them,
might during his rupture with Spain, provoke him to join with the Spaniard, so
as to receive them into those Garrisons he held in Provence, he then took up
that final resolution to suppress him by Force, and by Arms to reduce him to
his Duty. Of this War the Duke of Guise, The Duke of Guise, and Mounsieur l'
Esdiguieres go against the Duke of Espernon.
as Governor of Provence, was to have the conduct, whom nevertheless his
Majesty judging too young to manage, without the assistance of some more
experienced Captain (especially having to do with the Duke of Espernon) he made
choice of Mounsieur l' Esdiguieres for that purpose, by the title of Lieutenant
General in Provence, under the Duke of Guise. Neither could his Majesty have
made choice of two Captains more animated against the Enemy they were to
undertake, the first being prompted on, besides the interest of his
establishment in that Province, by the antiquated and irreconcilable hatred of
his Family, the other by his jealousy already mentioned, and by the conscience
of those recent injuries the Duke had received at his hands.

And here, though every one might reasonably conclude that this torrent of Arms
was likely to overwhelm the Duke beyond all possible evasion, or recovery, yet
was his courage, and assurance no less eminent in this, than it had been in
other occasions of this nature. It Is true that he had discreetly endeavored to
divert it, by going to present himself before the King at Lions; where he
doubted not to clear those Accusations his Enemies had so falsely contrived, and
so maliciously preferred against him: But such was his ill fortune, that he met
intelligence upon the way, which assured him his Majesty was suddenly, and
unexpec^edly called thence into Picardy, by the inroads the Conde de Fuentes
had made into that Province, and by the danger the City of Cambray was in,
which at this time was closely besieged by the Spanish Forces: So that he was
constrained to return back into Provence, not without extreme affliction to see
his Majesty so positively bent to his ruin, with this hope nevertheless, that
time would at last justify his intentions, especially if he could in the
interim maintain his Affairs in any tolerable condition: a consideration that
made him resolute to defend his declining fortune more vigorously than ever;
The Duke resolute to stand upon his de^ence.
yet not with any design to do any thing contrary to his Majesty's Service, but
with an intent, if things came to the last push, rather to make a voluntary
surrender of his Government into his Majesty's own hands* (as he afterward
did) than to suffer himself tamely to be stripped of it, by his mortal, and
implacable Enemies.

The Army designed against him entered into Provence in November 1595. where the
Duke had Friends, and strong Holds enough to have held them long in play, had
they, to whose ^idelity he had entrusted the chiefest of his Castles and Towns
observed the Faith they had sworn unto him: but their revolt soon made him
understand, the influence of the Royal Name, and how unhappy a thing it is, to
have that appear against a man, how innocent soever his intentions may be, and
how well soever disposed to his Princes Service: for the Duke of Guise, and
Mounsieur de l' Esdiguieres no sooner appeared in Provence, but that there was
a contest amongst the Duke's greatest Confidents, who should first go over to
them. Amongst these the Sieurs de Buous Brothers, the men of all others in that
Country to whom the Duke had given the highest testimonies of Honor, The Duke
abandoned by most of his friends.
and Friendship, were the first who forsook him, and who, besides the prejudice
they did him by their ill example, carried over with them the two Regiments
they commanded in his Army, which was no little blow to his Affairs in a time
when it was no easy matter for him to raise new Forces.

The next in order that followed this virtuous example was Ramefort, one who
had been of longest acquaintance, and intimacy with the Duke, and whom he in
his time of favor had obliged by many benefits, and had since in Provence
committed Cisteron, one of the chiefest places he held there to his trust. This
man nevertheless no sooner knew the Duke of Guise to be come into the Country,
but that he sent to treat with him about the surrender of the place, upon
condition that he should still contitinue Governor there for the King.
Peyroles did the same for his Garrison of Riez, he continuing still Governor
of the place, to be held, and maintained for the time to come, in his Majesty's
name, as Cisteron was by Ramefort.

The loss of these two places having infinitely surpised the Duke of Espernon,
who by this carriage plainly saw how little assurance he could promise to
himself from the rest of his Friends, he began to apprehend an universal
Revolt; The Duke of Espernon enters into a general mistrust of all his
followers.
and in this apprehension, scarce knowing any more in whom he might confide, or
whom he might reasonably suspect, he chiefly began to mistrust the fidelity of
Mesples the Governor of Tropes, one of the principal places that remained in
his power, and in which upon the worst of accidents he thought to find his
chiefest refuge, and safety. This Gentleman a Bearnois by Birth, and a man of
singular Valor, had, by his gallant behavior in several occasions, wrought
himself much into the Kings opinion, and esteem; from whence the Duke
apprehending (perhaps too lightly) that possibly he might quit his Interests,
to be allured over to his Enemies side by the sound of the Royal Name, he
resolved to remove him from that command, as he presently did; and that, as he
conceived, without any injury, or offense, having done it without noise, or
giving the least evidence that his Faith was any way suspected to him: but
Mesples (perhaps glad of so good a pretense to abandon the Duke, whose Affairs
he saw daily declining) taking his unjust suspicion for the highest injury, and
the removing him from his Government for the greatest Affront and Indignity he
could po^sibly receive, resented both at so high a rate, that from that time
forwards he became one of his most violent and implacable enemies. He went upon
the very instant to seek out the Duke of Guise, where being arrived, he
immediately put himself into his Service, and having long commanded in St.
Tropes, and at leisure considered all the weaknesses of the place, advised the
Duke presently to besiege it, assuring him that it would infallibly be taken;
which the Duke giving credit to, immediately ordered him Men, and Cannon, to
force the place, whilst he himself went upon the enterprise of Marselles, which
he likewise brought to a fortunate issue. This Design upon St. Tropes had like
to have occasioned betwixt these two Dukes a memorable engagement; for the Duke
of Espernon not being able to suf^er such a place to be lost, without
endeavoring at least to relieve it, had suddenly gathered together all the
Forces he could make thereabouts to that purpose; but all those amounting to no
more, than about some 300. Light Horse, 60. of his Guards, and betwixt four or
five hundred Foot, he was like to do no great execution; yet was he resolute,
notwithstanding the infinite danger, to have made a brave attempt; when those
about him, seeing that only the desperate condition of his Affairs prompted him
to that precipitous resolution, not only dissuaded him from his purpose; but in
a manner constrained him to think of making his retreat: In which also the
danger was exceeding great; for St. Tropes being but four Leagues distant from
Marselles, whilst Mesples was busy about this petty Siege, the Duke of Guise
had made himself Master of that great, and populous City; where, having a good
Army at his Devotion, and receiving intelligence from Mesples, that the Duke of
Espernon was with a very inconsiderable Party about St. Tropes, he made with
all possible diligence to find him out, and to fight him. As the Duke of Guise
was advancing with this Design, the Duke of Espernon was upon his Retreat,
which (that craggy and mountainous Country affording him no other passage) he
was forced to make by the same way, by which the Duke of Guise was coming
against him. The Duke of Espernon's Forlorn-Hope was that day led by St.
Andr^e, who, so soon as he discovered the Enemy, gave the Duke present notice
thereof; who, not so much as dreaming of any such Encounter, was a little
surpised, and in some perplexity, what course he had best to take. His design
before was to have refreshed his men in the Village Du Val; but that being now
possessed by the Duke of Guise, and he not being in a condition to dislodge
him, who was much stronger than himself, he was forced to lay aside his
thoughts of repose, and to think of a speedy retreat. Neither was this without
great difficulty to be effected, there being no place near he expected should
receive him, and the Enemy being already in sight. In which general confusion
and astonishment, a Soldier of the Country who was then with the Duke, advised
him to retire toward Berjau, undertaking himself at the same time, to be his
Guide. Berjau was a little Town in the Duke's possession, but it was four long
Leagues from the place where they then were, and the River Argence was betwixt
them and it, which was no where passable but at Pont de Carces, the Lord of
which was no friend to the Duke, as may be gathered from what has gone before:
Yet was the Soldier's proposition nevertheless embraced (for in extreme
necessities and dangers, the first Counsels whatever they be are commonly
accepted) the Guide therefore put himself in the Front, and the Duke followed
after, leaving the Baron d' Ars, and Miran to bring up the Rear. In the mean
time the Duke of Guise advertised, by the Avant-Coureurs of his Army, that the
Duke of Espernon was so near, made all the haste he could to overtake him;
which notwithstanding he could not so suddenly do, but that the Duke had
already passed the River without difficulty, or danger, which the Duke of Guise
perceiving, and attempting to follow after, that he might engage him before he
could put his men into order, A Skirmish betwixt the Duke of Guise, and the
Duke of Espernon.
was received on the Duke's part by a counterfeit charge, which was put so
briskly home, that the Duke of Guise's Forces, who were not half got over the
Bridge, astonished at so unexpected a resistance, fell foul upon one another,
in which confusion above thirty Troopers threw themselves headlong for fear
into the River, and were there drowned, some also were slain; and certainly had
the Duke engaged with all his Forces, he had put Mounsieur de Guise into a very
great disorder: but he conceiving he had nothing more to do, than to make good
his own retreat, thought it sufficient by charging, and amusing the Enemies
Van, to win time for those few Foot he had to get the start; wherein if the
Duke committed an oversight, Mounsieur de Guise committed afterward a greater;
when after this little skirmish, having without opposition marched over the
rest of his Army, it had been no hard matter for him, had he made any haste, to
have overtaken the Duke, who marched no faster than a trot; whilst following
leisurely after, without pressing him to fight, he gave him leave to make his
retreat in great security without the loss of any, save some few of his worst
mounted men. Thus the Duke of Espernon lost at once both the Town of St.
Tropes, which was a very good one, and the Governor, who was a Gentleman of
great worth and merit; the one by the prevailing Arms of* his Enemies, and the
other perhaps by his own fault: he was at least condemned by his Friends, and
Servants, for entering upon too light grounds into a jealousy of this
Gentleman's faith: And certainly if ever we should make head against our
diffidences, and mistrusts, it ought chiefly to be, when we most labor under
affliction and disgrace; every thing at those times being suspected to us, and
our judgments, weakened by grief and disaster, being then most apt to be imposed
upon by the lightest impressions.

After the taking in of these places, the Duke of Guise, l' Esdiguieres, the
Count de Carces, and the other Chiefs of the Enemies Army retired themselves to
Aix, there to deliberate about the Affairs of Provence, and of the means by
which they were to work the Duke of Espernon's absolute, and final ruin. He
had at this time upon his hands at once the Duke of Savoy, All things averse to
the Duke in Provence.
the Duke of Guise, the League, l' Esdiguieres, Ornano, the Provencials, and
(which was of more dangerous consequence than all these known, and declared
Enemies) his own Friends and Followers were wavering and uncertain to him: yet,
as if all these, who were all men of great quality, and many of them of great
interest, and reputation in the Country, had been too few to do his business, a
wretched Fellow, bred from the Lees of the common people, obscure, and of no
name till then, would likewise put his helping hand to the work; who alone, and
contemptible, as he was, put the Duke into more manifest danger of his life,
than so many, and so powerful enemies armed, and confederated to his ruin, as
yet had ever done. His name was Bartholomew Bigne. a native of the
forementioned Village du Val, and a near neighbor to Brignoles; whither the
Duke having retired himself after the loss of the beforementioned places, and
having there assembled all his Forces together, to make head against whatever
new attempts might be preparing against him; A Plot against the Duke of
Espernon's life.
this cursed Villain, who had never received any particular injury from the
Duke, but merely prompted on by the malignity of his own nature, and a national
hatred against him, having long deliberated by what way he might infallibly
destroy the Duke, bethought himself at last of this impious, and abominable
mischief. He shut up in two Chests three Quintals of Powder, A Quintal is an
hundred weight.
to purchase which he had laid out all the money he had, or could procure; and
having observed the place where the Duke usually kneeled at Mass in the Church
of Brignoles, he entreated the Curate thereof to give him leave to bring the
two Chests into his Church, wherein he pretended he had locked up the best of
his Goods, to preserve them from the hands of the Soldier: which the Curate
readily promised him he should, provided he might first search them, to see
what they contained: but Bigne finding that to be a condition, that by no means
suited with his Design, left off the Curate, and seeing some other way was to
be found out to bring his purpose to pass, fell to hammering out new projects;
which were the less hard for him to contrive, by how much the same evil spirit,
who had suggested to him the heart, and boldness to meditate so great a
wickedness, was now also ready to prompt his invention, and to instruct him how
to execute his execrable purpose by a new way, where his first design had
failed. Out of hopes then of effecting his business in the Church, he by the
means of the Mistress of the House where the Duke lay, and with whom Bigne had
been formerly acquainted, wriggles himself into the company of the Duke's
Baker, and in discourse offers him three Sacks of Corn to sell, where betwixt
them the Bargain was soon struck up, and that being done, the Traitor losing no
time, the next day brings his three Sacks to the Duke's Lodgings, about the
time he was to come from Mass, and to go to dinner, and sets them in a little
place under the Chamber where the Duke used to eat. Where after he had disposed
them as he thought most conveniently for the execution they were to do, he goes
to seek out the Baker to come look upon his Bargain. In every one of these
Sacks he had put an hundred pound of powder, with only a little Corn at the
mouth to serve for show, that if by chance the first Sack that was opened
should fail of its effect, no discovery might be made of the Treason; but that
they might go to the next. Amongst the powder in every Sack he had conveyed the
wheel-lock of a Pistol, ready wound up, and tied to the string of the Sack,
after such a manner, that it was impossible to open any one without pulling
down the spring that was fastened to the Cord, and giving fire to the powder;
the three Sacks also were set so near to one another, that any one of them
taking fire, the others would also blow up, and so the three Quintals of Powder
must infallibly play at once. Things being thus ordered, Bigne waits near to
the Duke's Lodging, until he was come in, and had the patience to stay till he
saw him set down to dinner; when having him now in the Trap, and that the Duke,
as he thought, could not possibly escape, he then went to seek out the Baker,
to make him at once the Traitor, and the betrayed, and the innocent instrument
of his own, and his Master's ruin. The poor Baker was not hard to be found, at
a time of the day when usually all the Duke's domestics met together; so that
having presently met him, Bigne goes along with him to the Mistress of the
house, desiring her to open the door where the Corn stood; which she
accordingly doing, and he seeing things now brought to that pass, that the
effect was, as it were inevitable, himself insensibly, and unobserved slips out
of the House, and got into the Fields, making with all diligence for Aix. The
Baker in the mean time, with two young fellows that belonged to him in his
Office, went to visit the Sacks, where going to untye the first, he had scarce
touched the string, but he was immediately consumed by the devouring flame:
Neither did his men escape any better; and the violence of the powder was so
great, that it blew up the floor where the Duke sat^ at dinner, with the story
above it, the roof of the house only remaining firm. All those who were above
with the Duke, were blown up to the roof, and thence tumbling headlong to the
foundation, were many of them crushed to pieces under the ruins, the Duke only
by a miracle of Fortune remaining still sitting, and upright in the midst of
this subversion; for his Chair being placed upon a great Beam that butted upon
the Chimney of the Chamber, and the fire not having force enough to blow up
that, which at both ends was strongly fastened into the Wall, The Duke's
wonderf^l escape.
the flame only burnt his hair, and his beard, without any further harm to his
person. That which hindered the powder from doing greater execution, and from
blowing up the whole house, as in all probability it was like to do, was, that
the Windows being all open, the flame found a passage that way, and by that
lost much of its force within; otherwise the house, and all within, had
certainly been tossed into the Air, and consumed in a moment.

Bigne, who from without the Town had seen his mine play, believing the effect
to be infallibly such, as he had proposed to himself, ran in all have to Aix to
carry the news of the Duke of Espernon's certain death to the Duke of Guise; to
whom withal he declared at large the whole circumstance of his design, not
without the amazement and horror of all that heard him, that any man could be
guilty of so barbarous and inhumane a fact. As for the Duke of Espernon, he was
a man so well prepared beforehand against all the accidents of fortune, that he
soon recovered the astonishment this surprise had put him into; and doubting it
might be a stratagem of the Enemy in the disorder, and confusion, that must
necessarily attend so sudden a mischief, to make himself Master of the place,
made all the Soldiers he had in the Town immediately to repair to their Arms;
whilst himself mounted on Horseback, and attended by some Gentlemen his
friends, went to visit the several Posts of the City, to see that all was quiet
there: where having found all things right within, and that nothing of
suspicion appeared from without, it must of necessity be concluded that the
mischief arose, and that the Conspiracy must have been made within the Walls of
his own Lodgings. Diligent search was there therefore presently made, and the
woman of the house examined, who ingenuously confessed the bargain about the
Corn betwixt Bigne and the Baker by her means: whereupon they desired to see
the place where the Sacks had been set, but there was neither Sacks, nor the
men who had opened them to be seen, the fire having so consumed them, that
scarcely their bones could be found. They then sent to Bigne's house, who was
fled, and his house left void, his Goods and Family being removed to Aix the
night before: So that no further doubt being to be made of the Author of the
Fact, the Duke's heart began to be at rest; which before was a little unquiet
with the suspicion, that some of his own people might have had a hand in the
Plot.

Some who have made reflections upon the Duke's life, and the many Accidents by
which it had often been brought into extreme danger (which were at least as
many as any other great man's of his time) have sometimes drawn the several
hazards he has run, Reflections upon the several dangers of the Duke of
Espernon's life.
into comparison with one another, as he himself amongst his private friends
(so pleasant is the memory of dangers past) upon occasion delighted to do;
though he ever declared the conspiracy of Angoulesme, to be the greatest peril
he had ever been in; next to which he placed that of Corbie, where he confessed
his fear to have been much greater, than in the former, though the business
never arrived at that degree of danger, that was manifest in the other
accidents of his life. As for the precipice of Lions, the Cannon-shot before
Aix, and the Mine of Brignoles but now mentioned, though he acknowledged his
danger in all those to have been extreme, and that in all apperance, it was
hardly possible he could escape; yet the suddenness of them took away the
sense, and his good fortune, opportunely interposing betwixt him and those
mortal accidents, prevented his apprehension, and gave him no time to fear;
whereas in the other two, he had had leisure to see his approaching ruin, and
death coming upon him in all his ugly shapes, especially in the business of
Angoulesme, which he could not consider as one, but a concatenation of many,
and those mortal dangers, that succeeded one another for above forty hours
together.

At this very time, Anno 1596.
and in the height of these untoward occurrences, Mounsieur d' Ossat, since
Cardinal (a person equally to be commended for the integrity of his life, and
the excellency of his learning) writ very bitter things to the prejudice of the
Duke's Loyalty and Honor; which, though by the care of some of the Duke's
Friends, they were suppressed in the first impression of his Book; yet having
since been added in a particular sheet, The Duke of Espernon traduced by the
Cardinal d' Oss^t.
I think my self obliged not to suffer the public to be imposed upon by so
gross calumnies, and that it is my duty to interpose the truth in the Duke's
defense. This Prelate then, after having writ favorably enough to the King
concerning the Duke, in his Letter of the 22. of December, 1594. that having
given Pope Clement the VIII. an account of all things his Majesty had given him
in charge concerning Mounsieur de Guise, and the Government of Provence, his
Holiness sighing, replied, And what will they do with the Duke of Espernon? In
another Letter notwithstanding to Secretary Villeroy, bearing date the 17. of
January, 1596, writes thus, Marselles puts me in mind of the Duke of Espernon,
concerning whom they write from Lions, that after the taking of Cisteron, he
has sent to the King to make a tender of his submission, and obedience: but
they do not know that at the same time he he sent to Turin to the Duke of
Savoy, and to Milan to the Constable of Castile, of whom he had obtained 6000.
Crowns, that is to say, 5000. down, with which his Agents buy Horses, and Arms
at Milan, and 55000 more by Bill of Exchange to be returned at Genoa; which is
said to be two months advance of 30000. Crowns a month, given him by the Crown
of Spain, for being a good Frenchman, as he writes into these parts, he will be
so long as he has life, causing it to be reported that the money he receives at
Milan is money of his own, that he has there in Bank; as if even to have a Bank
of money in a Town belonging to the King of Spain, and to think it there secure,
were not a sign of no very good Frenchman. There has been a rumor in these
parts for some days that he has promised Boulogne to the Spaniard, etc. Thus
writes the Cardinal d' Ossat, with many other things of the like injurious
nature.

The Duke of Espernon saw all these invectives as soon almost as they appeared
in Print, and though in his own nature he was a man not much inclined to Books;
yet the quality of the Author having given a great reputation to this, he had a
great desire to see it, when, having it brought before him, and the place being
turned unto wherein he himself was concerned, it could not be perceived that he
was at all moved at the many reproaches he there found against him: but on the
contrary was so moderate and calm as to say, That he could by no means blame
the Cardinal d' Ossat for what he had written; and that being employed, as he
was, by the King in the most weighty Affairs of the Court of Rome, he had done
no more, than his duty in giving his Majesty a faithful account of what ever
was reported to him: That he knew very well many others at the same time talked
of him at the same rate, some out of spleen, and others perhaps out of a belief
the common bruit his Enemies had spread amongst the people had begot in them:
but that neither the one nor the other said true. That indeed the King of
Spain, the Duke of Savoy, and the Duke of Mayenne (measuring his discontents by
the provocations he had received) had all of them often sent to him, the first
to offer him his protection, and the two last their friendship and alliance.
That he had been solicited by a Religious of the Order of St. Francis on the
behalf of the King of Spain, by a woman of quality, the world believed had a
great interest in him, from the Duke of Savoy, and by the Abbot of Cornac,
since Abbot of Ville-Loin, a man of great dexterity, and prudence, from the
Duke of Mayenne: but he dedeclar'd, and bound it with an Oath, that he had
never hearkened to any such practice; That in truth, seeing himself pressed by
his own particular enemies under the King's Authority, and in his name, and
that alone he could not long be able to make a head against them, he had
sometimes been in suspense what he should do; and a little tempted by the
advantageous conditions these Princes had offered to him: but that
notwithstanding his Fidelity, and Duty, had ever so stoutly opposed his
Interest, and Passion, that he rather chose to surrender his Right to the
Government of Provence, and (which was far more insupportable unto him) to quit
the Field to his Enemies, than to make a longer resistance, by joining himself
with Parties, and Factions, contrary to his Majesty's Service, and Interest.
All which in the end he made so evident, that I cannot but admire, after so
manifest a justification by his Actions, any body could be so unjust, as to tax
him with any intelligence with Spain. To fortify which so odious a Calumny,
they ought at least to have proved, that he had received from thence, or by
their means, some kind of Assistance in his Affairs; by whom had he been
secretly favored, would they have husbanded their favor so ill, (...) not to
have drawn from him some effectual acknowledgement, and return, by the giving
up some one at least of those places in his custody into their hands? The same
Cardinal says that he had promised them Boulogne, though it was plain enough
afterward, how far he was from any such purpose; that he had received money
from Spain, and that he pretended for his excuse, it came out of his own Bank
at Milan, where himself had before laid it up; and that the one, and the other
were almost equally criminal: which were it true, no one could deny it to be a
Crime. But to answer to this point, I would fain know what he did contrary to
his Majesty's Service, after he received this money; and whether he was
afterward observed to favor that Faction more than before? No, it was so much
otherwise, that almost at the very same time the Cardinal sent this
intelligence against him, he went in person to the King, where he put himself
into his Majesty's hands, without Article, or Reservation, to be absolutely at
his disposal. Would the Spaniard have been thus tamely cheated of his money,
without speaking, had he parted with such a Sum? would he not have published to
all the world the Duke's infidelity, and unhandsome carriage? and would he not
at least have seized upon that Bank, the Cardinal d' Ossat writes of at Milan,
for his reimbursement?

Others have further added, that the Duke had a design to take this opportunity
of the Kingdoms distraction, to make himself a Sovereign Prince in Provence:
but let any one consider, whether after having conceived so unjust, and so
unruly an ambition, he would not betimes, and before he had proceeded to matter
of Fact, Other Calumnies against the Duke.
have fortified himself by a correspondency, and intelligence with Foreign
Princes, to have justified his usurpation? or whether, in common discretion, he
would not have confederated himself with those Factions at home that already
braved the lawful Authority? Yet is it most true, and it was evident to all the
world, that instead of doing the one, or the other, he fought with all the
power he had, and maintained the sharpest War he could possibly maintain, both
against the Duke of Savoy, though backed with the Spanish Forces, and also
against the League, of it self sufficient to have amazed man of less conduct
and resolution. It is very true, that he would fain have kept, and maintained
his Government of Provence against all pretenders, had it stood with the Kings
good liking; and that he was the longer before he could persuade himself to
give it up, hoping at some time or other, that his Majesty reflecting upon his
Services, might think him as worthy as any of that Command: but at last,
finding his expectation vain, and all he could do, or say, ineffectual to the
procuring of his Royal Consent, he rather chose to quit claim to a Title his
Majesty would not be prevailed with to approve, than by a longer obstinacy to
oppo^^ his Masters pleasure to the prejudice of his own duty.

Some who can endure no truths, but such as are couched in the worst
Characters, and that call all things flattery, which are not offense, may
perhaps think me too zealous in the Duke's justification: but let such, before
they too liberally determine, examine the Arguments I have used in his behalf,
whether there be in them any thing forced, or uneasy to an unbyas'd judgment,
or whether any thing can be contradicted in all I have said. It has been an
observation (almost to a rule) that the lives of great Favorites have ever
been the objects of the hatred, and envy of their own times; an injustice that
descending upon the Duke, not only in the usual forms of Calumny, but in an
extraordinary style, and with greater demonstrations of malice to him, and his
reputation, than to any other of this, or of almost any other time before him,
I thought it a duty to truth, to him, and to posterity (now that time has laid
open the falsity of those slanders, that have been published against him) to
discover the true causes, and reasons why he so long persisted in the defense
of his Government; and as far as I am able, at least to rescue those actions
from obloquy, which all disinterested, and worthy men will, upon mature
deliberation, think worthy of all commendation and honor. A design, which as I
have impartially undertaken, so have I not herein made use of my own Arguments
but only made a faithful report of what I have learned from the most
unsuspected testimony, gathered out of the best Historians, or received from
the Duke's own mouth, who must of necessity know the truth as well as any, and
much better than those who writ at random of affairs: Neither do I apprehend
why, what he himself reported for the justification of those actions which were
so unhappily interpreted should not be of as good authority for him, as what
was published to his prejudice by men who were profestly haters of his Person,
and apparently emulous of his Name, and Fortune.

The Duke of Espernon, The Duke of Espernon, rejecting all offers from Savoy,
Spain, and the Duke of Mayenne submits himself to the King.
having (as has been said) rejected all propositions made him by those who were
enemies to the King, would accept of no other protection, than what he expected
from his Majesty's Justice, and Bounty, however incensed against him. In which
resolution having set up his rest, he dispatched away Guez his principal
Secretary to the King, to carry him an assurance of his Fidelity, and
Obedience; who being arrived at Court, was presented to his Majesty by the
Marquess de Roquelaure; a man who in the Duke's severest persecution, and when
the tongue of calumny was most bitter against him, had ever preserved for him a
most entire, and constant Friendship, and who had made no difficulty in his
Majesty's greatest Passions (a time of all other the most dangerous to dispute
with Princes) to justify, and undertake for his Friends integrity, and to
uphold his interest with an admirable, and never enough to be commended
constancy. Guez then was by him no sooner brought into the Kings presence, than
his Majesty with a stern look presently told him, that if himself to whom he
was sent had no greater a kindness for him, than his Master had, who had sent
him, he should that hour cause his head to be struck from his shoulders, and
that he much wondered a man of sense, as he was, durst come to him from the
Duke of Espernon, whom he himself knew very well to hold intelligence with his
Enemies: To which Guez, who was very well assured of the contrary, replied,
that he would willingly submit to the punishment his Majesty was pleased to
threaten, if the Duke was guilty of those things whereof he stood accused: and
that he came to his Majesty on the behalf of a Loyal Subject, his most humble,
and faithful Servant, who had rather chosen to depend upon his Majesty's Grace,
and Favor, and to throw himself at his feet without condition, than to accept
of the most advantageous offers, could by his Majesty's Enemies be proposed
unto him. After which the King having asked him if he might rely upon his word,
and Guez having by many protestations confirmed, what he before had said, his
Majesty resolved to receive the Duke into his favor, and a few days after
dispatched away Mounsieur de Roquelaure himself, the Duke's most intimate
Friend, to give him assurance, that he might with all freedom come to Court,
where from his Majesty he should receive all the satisfaction he could expect,
or desire,

The Duke, without insisting upon greater precaution, or other security, than
what he found in his own Conscience, took his journey to Court, and that with
so absolute a confidence in his Majesty's Royal Word, that he would not so much
as open the Letters Mounsieur de Roquelaure brought him from the King; but at
his arrival restored them to his Majesty, sealed up as they were sent: by which
generous behavior, excuses, and reasons having given his Majesty full
satisfaction in all things, he received him into an honorable degree of
Favor, The Duke of Espernon received into Favor.
and soon after gave him the Government of the higher, and lower Limousin, in
recompense of that of Provence: A charge in truth that held no proportion with
the other; but that nevertheless bordering upon Xaintonge, Angoumois, and the
Country of Aulins, which the Duke already had, lay very convenient for him; and
besides, by being newly conferred upon him, gave the world to see, that his
Majesty did not look upon him as a Rebel. The King gave him moreover 100000
Crowns to defray part of the expense he had been at in Provence; by which his
Majesty seemed to acknowledge it had been there well employed, and it was
assigned him upon the Convoy of Bourdeaux. Thus did the Duke quit all his
pretenses in Provence, and remained at Court with the King.

I could here speak of the enterprise of Marselles without danger of
digression, it having been executed by the Duke of Guise, whilst the Duke of
Espernon was yet in Provence, and the rather because the Sieges of St. Tropes,
and Oriol, which were then in his possession, served much to palliate the Duke
of Guise's Design: but having no need to seek elsewhere, than in the particular
actions of the Duke of Espernon himself, to swell the bulk of my History, I
shall, how great and shining soever that action was, forbear to make a further
mention of it; the Historians of that time having given accounts of it at
large. And yet, whilst I omit the main thing so pertinent to my Story, I cannot
forbear to mention a remarkable circumstance, which I have from a very good
hand, and that I doubt not will be acceptable to my Reader, though it be
utterly from the matter of my Subject.

After the Duke of Guise had put an end to his enterprise, A digression upon a
remarkable passage.
a success of the greatest glory to himself, and importance to the State, that
could possibly have happened at that time; he thought it but reasonable to enjoy
the fruits of his Victory, by giving himself a vacation from the hardships of
War, to the softer delights of Liberty and Ease; which made him seek out all
the Diversions the Town could afford, that any way suited with the appetite of
his youth and pleasure. The chiefest of which was the frequentation of a
Gentlewoman in the City, of but moderate beauty, but of so admirable a wit, as
gave her, for a distinction of excellency above the other women of the City,
the name of the Marselles. This Lady had formerly been a Mistress of the Duke
of Espernon's, and was at this time highly courted by the Duke of Guise, with
whom the Duke being one night very pleasant in her Lodging, they there
contrived a piece of mirth, which in the issue very much failed their
expectation. Grillon Camp-Master to the Regiment of Guards, a Gentleman of
Provence, was reputed one of the bravest men of his time, and with good reason,
the signal testimonies he had in a thousand occasions given of his Valor
approaching nearer to the vanity of a Romance, than to the truth of serious
History. This Gentleman, after the recovery of Marselles, was dismissed from
the King to the Duke of Guise to be assisting to him in his reputation, advice,
and valor, for the conservation of that place: for his Majesty well knowing
what a longing, and watchful eye his Enemies had upon that City, and himself
also being very tender of so important a place, would spare no cost, not omit
no care to preserve i^ safe, from any designs without, or within by violence,
or practice. The Duke of G^ise then in the height of his mirth calling to mind
that Grillon was ordinarily called The man without fear.
l' homme sans peur, thinking it not impossible to show the world he was
capable of the Passion of fear as well as other men, and to make him lose that
name, with some other young men of his own gay humor about him, contrived to
have an Alarm suddenly given under Grillon's window, as if the Enemy had entered
the Town, and at the same time causing two Horses to be brought to the door of
his Lodging, runs himself up stairs into his Chamber, where with a
counterfeited distraction he hastily told him that all was lost, that the Enemy
had made himself Master of the Port, and of the City, that they had forced the
Guards, dispersed and beaten all that could make head against him; and that no
more resistance being to be made, he thought it better to retire, than to add
to their Enemies Victory by their own Ruin: that therefore he was come to call
him out, that they might make their retreat together; to which purpose two
Horses waited ready at the door of his Lodging, and that he desired him to make
have, lest they should be surpised by the Enemy before they could find means
to escape. Grillon, though he had been fast asleep at the beginning of this
false Alarm, and was yet scarce awake when the Duke of Guise told him this
story; yet, without being at all surpised, he called for his clothes, and his
Arms, saying withal, that too easy credit was not to be given to reports in
the tumult, and confusion of Alarms; but, that should the intelligence prove
true, it were far more honorable to die with their Swords in their hands, than
to survive the loss of such a City: which being all the Duke of Guise could get
from him, he not being to be persuaded out of that resolution, they went
together out of the Chamber; when being in the middle of the stairs, the Duke
being able to hold no longer, burst out into laughter: by which Gr^llon
understanding the Raillery, with a furious countenance grasping the Duke by the
Arm, and rapping out a terrible Oath, the usual preface to all his discourses,
he said, Young man, never make it your sport to try the Courage of a man of
Honor; for by the Death, had thou made in me a discovery of fear, or
surprise, I would have stabh'd my Dagger into thy heart; and so returned back
into his Chamber, without more words. This Story which I have from a very good
hand, a person of Quality, who had it from the Duke of Guise^s own mouth, I
thought too remarkable to be overslipt: Neither do I think Grillon to be less
esteemed for this ^ally of fury, which appears however to be wrapped up in very
good sense, than in the constancy of his courage, that would not consent he
should retire from, or outlive the loss of so important a City. And since I
have spoken of the blasphemies that were so frequent in his mouth, I shall tell
you what I have heard the Duke of Espernon say, who had him long under his
command; which is, that many years before his death, though he had a perfect
strength and vigor in all his other parts, he had nevertheless so great a
weakness in his tongue, that he could not articulate, or bring out one word
that any body could understand. God b^ing doubtless pleased by a manifest
judgment to punish him in that part, which by so many Oaths and Blasphemies had
so often offended against his Divine Honor, and most Holy Name.

The end of the First Part.
THE HISTORY OF THE LIFE OF THE Duke of ESPERNON, THE GREAT FAVORITE OF FRANCE.

ENGLISHED BY CHARLES COTTON, Esquire

The Second Part.

Nihil est aptius ad delectationem Lectoris, quam temporum varietates,
fortunaeque vicissitudines: quae etsi nobis optabiles in experiendo non
fuerunt, in legendo tamen erunt jucundae. Cic. Epist. 12. l. 5. LONDON, Printed
for Henry Brom, MDCLXX.

THE HISTORY Of the LIFE of the Duke of Espernon.
THE SECOND PART.
The Fifth Book.
THE Duke of Espernon, having (as before is said) taken his leave of Provence,
in the company of the Marquess of Roquelaure, soon after presented himself
before his Majesty at Paris, who was then but newly returned from his Voyage of
Picardy: The posture of Affairs at the Duke of Espernon's arrival at Court.
an expedition wherein he had met with very various success, Fortune having
played with both hands in the distribution of Honor and Disgrace. She had
indeed showed her self favorable to him in the Enterprise of la Fere, a place,
that being one of the most important upon the Frontier, and having by the
League been put into the Spaniards hands, had been so Fortified and Victualled
by the new Possessors, that the King judging it not to be recovered by fine
force, without the manifest loss of an infin^te number of good men, thought it
better to streighten it at a distance, by blocking up, and building Forts upon
all the Avenues, by which it could any way be supplied, or relieved, than to
hazard his men by a nearer and more regular Siege; a way, that doubtless was
the safest, and most likely in the end to succeed: but as no Counsels are so
perfect, as to point out the certain event of things, this way of proceeding
proved so slow, as gave the Enemy in the interim time and opportunity to bring
about other designs of such importance, as made the King sick of the success of
his own enterprise, even before it took effect.

Albert Archduke, and also Cardinal of Austria, was now newly entered upon the
Government of the hereditary Countries of Flanders, from whence the King of
Spain had lately called home the ^onde de Fuentes; ^ Prince, that stirred (...)
by the emul^tion of this Predecessor's exploits (who the year before had won
from France le Catelet, Dourlens, and Cambray) had put on a resolution to do
things, that should as far outshine the Conde's less achievements, as he
himself, in Birth, and Quality was superior to him in Name, and Person:
wher^fore* at his entering upon h^s command, having found the King set down
before la Fere, he thought he could not give a more glorious beginning to his
administration, than by force or policy to defeat that his Majesty's design. An
undertaking which for the difficulty and danger thereof, was every way worthy
the greatness of his mind; for the King having foreseen the Spaniard would
infallibly attempt a relief, had forgot nothing that might serve to frustrate
their endeavors. His Forces were great, his works about the place complete,
and perfect, and almost all the most experienced Captains of his Kingdom were
come in from all parts, to attend his Majesty's Person, and to signalize
themselves in so brave an occasion: all which being very well known to the
Cardinal of Austria, he durst not (notwithstanding his earnest desire to
relieve that (...)) engage his Army in* so dangerous an attempt, but rather
^earken'd to the Counsels of such as more warily advised to raise that (...)*
by an attempt upon some other place of a greater, or no (...) ^^portance.

Amongst the many opinions that were delivered in the Cardinals Council about
this Affair, the ill Fortune of France would have the counsel of a Frenchman to
prevail; that by the procurement of one of her own Sons, this Kingdom might
receive the greatest dishonor it could possibly sustain. And this was the
advice of Rhosne a Gentleman born in Champagne upon the Frontiers of Lorain,
one, who having in the infancy of the League devoted himself to the Duke of
Guise, and done him many signal services in his life; after his death
persevering in the evil cause he had before embraced, had put himself under the
Duke of Mayenne, and so far his too violent zeal to Religion; or the error of
his judgment (which might be deluded amongst the rest) were rather to be
excused, and pitied, than his carriage absolutely to be condemned: but after
the Duke of Mayenne was reduced to reason, and had given up his cause, his yet
engaging himself with the King's most implacable enemies made it manifest to
all, that his turbulent spirit would stick at no mischief he could any ways
effect against his Prince and Country. This man then discrediting in the
Cardinals Council all the diversions had been there proposed, as by making an
attempt upon St. Quintin, Montreuille, Boulogne, or Guise, gave advice to fall
upon Calice, at the same time offering himself to be the man that would
undertake, and accomplish the design. A proposition of so high, A design upon
Calice.
and generous a nature, that the Cardinals ambition, which was bent upon some
noble achievement, being fired thereby, he was afterward deaf to all other
Counsels, and so wholly bent upon an enterprise so suitable to the greatness of
his mind, that without further delay he gave immediate order to dispose all
things for the execution of that design. To which end his Army was forthwith
drawn into the Field, and there divided into three several bodies, to amuse the
King, and to keep him in doubt of the course he intended to steer: a policy not
very necessary to the concealment of his design, it being impossible any one
could imagine he durst so much as meditate the thoughts of an enterprise,
which, to all men's astonishment, he so suddenly effected, that the King had no
sooner intelligence of his motion, but that withal news was brought him of the
loss of the place.

Bidossan Governor of Calice, surpised with so unexpected a Siege, was in a
few days reduced to so great an extremity, that he was forced to dispatch a
Post to the King, to acquaint his Majesty with the Articles of his
capitulation, which was to make a positive surrender, if within six days he was
not relieved: at which unhappy, and unexpected news, his Majesty being beyond
all expression afflicted, he advanced with all diligence as far as Boulogne, in
hope that the convenient vicinity of that place would give him some opportunity
or other to send in some relief to the besieged before the time of limitation
should expire: neither did he fail to try all possible ways by which he
conceived it might be done; but all in vain, the contrary winds by Sea, and the
Enemies vigilance by Land still frustrating what ever endeavor he could use:
when one sole Servant of the Duke of Espernon's had the good hap beyond all
humane expectation to put himself into the place, Fortune being (it should
seem) resolved by the performance of one of his Servants to confer upon the
Master, though absent, A remarkable action of Campag^^^.
the honor of the bravest exploit that passed upon this occasion. The man
whose resolution was so eminent in this affair, was commonly called the black
Or younger Brother.
Cadet, a Gentleman of the house of Campagnol, who bravely undertook, and as
bravely performed the Action. His elder Brother by the Duke's Favor, was
preferred to be Captain of a Company in the Regiment of Guards, and his own
Lieutenant in the Government of Boulogne, as this also had a Company in the
Regiment of Picardy, with which he had likewise been gratified by the Dukes
Bounty. This Gentleman no sooner received intelligence of the Enemies motion
toward Calice, but that he immediately repaired to his Brother at Boulogne,
where he was at his Majesty's arrival there, and where his courage not
permitting him to sit still in so general a consternation, as appeared in all
persons about the King, he made a voluntary offer of himself to pass through
the Enemies Guards into the Town of Calice, with any number of men his Majesty
would please to commit to his charge, or to perish in the attempt. The valor
of the man was so well tried, and known, that the King doubted not in the least
of his performance to the utmost of what could by man be done: but the danger
was such, Cardinal Bentiv^g^^o De Thou.
that his Majesty was very unwilling to expose so brave a Gentleman to so
manifest a ruin; yet such was his importunity, and the occasion of such
importance, that at last three hundred men only were assigned him, with which,
by the favor of the night, and his own good conduct, he arrived safe at
Calice, without the loss of so much as any one man; so that certainly had he
carried a more considerable number of men, the Town had been saved: but as the
case then stood the must content himself with the honor of his own bravery,
without reaping any other benefit from the success of his attempt. The term of
six days being expired, the Enemy sent to summon the Town to a surrender,
according to the Articles of Capitulation betwixt them; to which summons they
had no other return than this, that the besieged were now acquit of their
promise, and that they had received a relief; an answer at which R^osne being
more enraged than the Archduke himself, he presently caused the Cannon to play
with greater fury, than at any time before during the Siege; when a sufficient
breach being made, he prepared the Army for a general assault. The assault was
accordingly given, in the beginning of which Bedossan being slain, Campagnol
took upon him his Authority, and Command, giving the Enemy after two hours
sharp fight a brave, and notable repulse which notwithstanding the breach was
so wide as was impossible long to be defended, by so few men as he had left;
which made the Enemy by frequent Messages often put him in mind of what he
himself knew as well as they, by representing to him the desperate condition
the place was in, and his own inevitable ruin should be longer persist in his
defense; offering him at the same time conditions of Honor, and Advantage if
he would deliver up the Town: but all to no purpose, he had not put himself
into that place with so much hazard of his life to depart thence in so great
security: the assault therefore was again renewed, and the Enemy again beaten
back: but coming up the third time with greater fury than ever before, and
bringing up still fresh Companies to succeed those who were beaten off,
Campagnol's men were in fine overcome by numbers, and constrained to retire; a
thing their Captain scorned to do, who, though alone and abandoned by all,
still fought with the same courage, and vigor, when his resistance, how brave
soever, being too weak to stop the torrent of a victorious crowd, he was at
last rather overwhelmed than overcome, and by a multitude taken prisoner: with
this resemblance nevertheless betwixt his honor and disgrace, that, as he had
appeared single in the defense of the Town, so was he also alone in his
imprisonment, the Enemy killing all that fled before them without humanity, or
respect of persons, excepting of his, who had so undauntedly stood alone in his
defense, wherein his Virtue was his refuge. D' Avila attributes this Action to
the Sieur de Matelet, whom he qualifies Governor of Foix, although Cardinal
Bentivoglio in his description of this Siege, Mounsieur de Thou, and D' Aubigne
make no mention of any such man. Yet it is true that Matelet had so great a
share in the business, as ought not to be passed over without its due report of
honor; for the King having commanded him with an hundred Gentlemen of his
Court to cut his way through the Enemies Army during the heat of the Assault,
and to put himself into the Town, it was no fault of his that his Majesty
failed of his desire: he did what was by valor to be done, though he was not
so fortunate as to perform his Majesty's command; neither was the Enemies Army
so thin, but that they had men enough to maintain the Assault, and at the same
time to intercept such petty succors as those: so that those hundred Gentlemen
were almost all cut to pieces with very little resistance; a panick fear having
made them blind to their own safety, and honor, excepting Matelet, who bravely
fighting as fortunately escaped.

Thus was Calice lost, the King himself in a manner looking on; after which
Guines and Ham were carried without resistance: successes with which Rhosne
being yet unsatisfied, he had moreover the confidence to undertake the Siege of
Ardres, which the same day that la Fere was surrendered to the King, surrendered
also to him; as if he had been in fee with Fortune, and that she had been
obliged to give him all the respite was necessary for the execution of his
Designs: for in effect, the same day that concluded the Cardinals Conquests,
had in all probability determined of his honor, and put a ruinous period to
all his Affairs, had his successes gone on with never so little a slower pace.

The King in the whole course of his life, Anno 1597.
was never perhaps more astonished, and afflicted, than at these disgraces; and
his great spirit was prone enough to prompt him on to an immediate revenge, by
obstinately settling himself to the recovery of the Places he had lately lost,
since the Cardinal's sudden retreat had put him out of all possibility of
fighting: but his prudence laying before him the difficulty of the enterprise,
he rather chose to give his Army some refreshment, which had been tired out
with the tedious Siege of la Fere, than anew to expose them to other dangers,
and such as were like enough to be the ruin of them all. Wherefore having
distributed them into the most commodious quarters upon the Frontier, to be in
readiness against the next fair season, he left the Marshall de Biron to
command them, with order upon the first opportunity, to enter into the Enemies
Country, and to make them feel his Majesty's Arms, whilst himself retired to
Paris, to consult with his Subjects, about the means he was to pursue in the
vindication of his own, and the Nations honor, for the Attempts the Enemy had
made upon his Crown, and Kingdom.

The King being come to Paris, and either not expecting, or not finding that
readiness, or ability he expected in his own people; who having been harrass'd,
and impoverished with past mischiefs, were now very unfit to supply him with
money, proportionable to the greatness of his designs: he saw he must of
necessity have recourse to Strangers, his ancient Consederates, and Allies: to
which purpose he dispatched away Ambassadors to Elizabeth Queen of England, to
the States of Holland, and to some Princes of Germany; during which
Negotiations, the Pope, who from the month of September, 1595. had given the
King Absolution in the persons of Messieurs du Perron, and d' Ossat, his
Majesty's Agents at Rome, desiring now to see an effectual re-establishment of
the Catholic Religion in France, and a reformation of such abuses as were
crept into the Church, during the disorders of the Kingdom, resolved upon
sending a Legate at this time, to appoint what was necessary to be done for his
entire satisfaction. The Pope sends his Legate into France.
Neither was this the only, though the principal end of this dispatch, this
good, and holy Pope having further a design to set on foot a Treaty of
Accommodation betwixt the two Crowns; conceiving he did not fully discharge the
Duty of the Common Father of Christians, if, after having given repose to the
King's Conscience, he did not also procure a good, and lasting Peace, betwixt
two the greatest Princes of the Holy Church.

To this good end Cardinal de Medicis the Pope's Legate failed not, according to
his Instructions, so soon as he arrived in France, to offer some propositions
of Reconciliation betwixt the two Crowns; which, though well received by the
King, yet did they not hinder him from making his preparations for a smart, and
vindictive War: he had (as has been said) renewed his Alliances with his
Confederates, and had further called an Assembly of several the most
intelligent persons of his Kingdom, by their joint advice to find out the most
easy, and indifferent ways of raising money upon his people for the prosecution
of the War; which Assembly, by reason of the Plague which was that year
exceeding rise in Paris, being not conveniently there to be Assembled, his
Majesty transferred it to Roan, An Assembly at Roan.
where they opened their Session in October, and continued it to the beginning
of the ensuing year. The Duke of Espernon had the honor to attend his Majesty
in this Voyage, and was also made privy to whatsoever passed in the Assembly,
where many grave directions were proposed for the Reformation of several Abuses
that were practiced in all parts of the Kingdom; but very little satisfaction
to the King concerning money, which was the main design in calling that
Assembly, rather than reformation of abuses: which notwithstanding his Majesty
wounded with the grief of his losses, what by husbanding his Revenue, what by
lessening his Expense, by augmentations upon his Farms, and other extraordinary
ways made shift to get up such a stock, as was enough to set a powerful Army on
foot, and such a one as should be sufficient to repair all his former disgraces.

After the dissolution of this Assembly, his Majesty retiring himself for some
indisposition into the Air of the Country, the Duke of Espernon conceived he
could not take a fitter opportunity than this, to ask leave to go look after
his own particular Affairs, and to settle his Governments in a posture of
Security, and Obedience; a request no sooner made to the King, but that he gave
his free consent, dismissing the Duke with all demonstration of respect and
kindness; and then it was that his Patent was sealed for the Government of
Limousin, instead of Provence, and dated at Folembray, a house of Pleasure, to
which his Majesty had retired himself to provide for his health at greater
liberty and ease. With this new Commission the Duke then departed from Court
toward Angoulesme, where his Children were bred, which he had scarce seen
since their Birth, especially the youngest whom he had never seen; a motive of
it self sufficient for a longer Journey: but neither the repose the Duke
intended to take, nor the vacation his Majesty intended to give, were of any
long continuance; for he was scarce arrived at Angoulesme, when he received a
Dispatch under the Kings own hand (his Majesty not at all thinking it below his
Greatness, that his Nobility should receive the Honor of his Commands
immediately from himself) wherein he acquainted him with the surprizal of
Amiens, as also of his resolution suddenly to sit down before it, for the
recovery of so important a place: at the same time conjuring him to make all
possible haste to come, and serve him in so glorious an occasion.

I shall not here enlarge my self in a relation of this surprise, it being an
action that made so much noise at that time, and that gave to great a
reputation to He is called by Iean de Serres, He^n^nl (...).
Hernando-Telles Portocarrero, who was the contriver and executor of it, that
there is scarce any Historian of our own, or any other Nation, who has not
particularly insisted upon this, above any other enterprise of the like nature;
wherein they all agree that it was a design the best contrived, the braveliest
carried on, and the most fortunately performed of any whatever of that kind.

The nearness of this place to Paris, it being but three little days journey
from thence, having alarmed the Parisians to such a degree, that they thought
the Spaniard already at their Gates, begat such clamours, and public
complaints amongst the people, that every one made very bold with the Royal
Name, accusing the King, as if he had held intelligence with the Enemy, and as
if he alone were the Author of this mischance: so that as if his Majesty had
not been sufficiently afflicted with the loss of this City (which more
concerned him, than them all) he must also endure the unjust reproaches of his
Subjects; the little respite he had taken for the recovery of his health,
passing, in minds prepossessed with fear, for supineness, and sloth; and his
love to the Duchess of Beaufort giving every one occasion to censure, and
condemn his Passions, by which, they said, he lay buried in negligence, and
pleasure, whilst the Enemy was in action, taking, and surprising his best
Towns, and Cities.

It was therefore necessary for the King without further delay to betake
himself again to Arms, and that (equally stirred up by his own immediate
danger, and the clamours of his people) he should abandon the care of his
health, to go expose his life to the hazards of War and Sickness. It was upon
the tenth day of March, that Amiens had been surpised, upon notice whereof,
his Majesty without loss of time, had writ to the Marshall de Biron, (who (as
has been said) he had left upon the Frontier) that he should with all
expedition, gather the Army together, and to sit down before Amiens to begin
the Siege. A command that could not have been sent to a more diligent, a
braver, or more able Soldier; and one, who so well knew how to manage such
Engines, and provisions of War, as the King (who himself was advanced as far as
Corbie) had taken care to send him; that his Majesty a^ his arrival before the
place found nothing wanting, or undone, he could at a distance have desired; or
have ordered himself, had he been there in person. A diligence his Majesty did
highly, and publicly commend, giving the Marshall a very noble Character for
the progress he had made in his works, and approaches, which could not have
been performed by any with greater care, courage, and conduct, according to all
the Rules and Discipline of War. Neither is it to be denied, but that Biron
served the King as bravely, as is to be imagined upon this occasion: wherein he
also knew well enough, if not too well, his own merit; his brave Service in
this, and other occasions having raised him to that degree of presumption, and
insolence, that he afterward, by his saucy reproaches to the King his Master,
deprived himself of those Honors, and Rewards, his Valor might otherwise,
with great justice have expected; and his vanity converting those actions,
which modestly carried would have been his immortal glory, into the instruments
of his disgrace, and ruin: of which in its due place I shall give a more full
account, as also of every circumstance that helped to precipitate him into those
misfortunes whereinto he afterward fell: and that because his Interests went,
for many years hand in hand, with those of the Duke of Espernon, they two being
linked together in an extraordinary strict League of Affection, and Friendship.

The King during his abode at Corbie, having taken care to send such numbers of
men, as the Marshall de Biron stood in need of for carrying on the Siege,
returned back to Paris, there to take order about Artillery for the Leaguer,
and money for the support of his Army; when all things being ready in June, his
Majesty accompanied with the Duke of Montpensier, the Count de Soissons, the
Constable de Montmorency, the Duke of Mayenne, the Prince of Ioinville, and
many other Lords of great quality, advanced himself to the Siege. Cardinal
Bentivoglio, who is very exact in the description of this Leaguer, has, amongst
the rest, named the Duke of Espernon for one of those who attended his Majesty
in this expedition: a mistake I do not so much wonder at in him, who of
necessity must take many things upon trust, as I do at d'Avila, who says the
same thing, and yet pretends to have been present, and wounded at this Siege;
when it is most certain the Duke was not there. I would not willingly deprive
him of any honor is his due; neither would I attribute to him contrary to the
known truth, things wherein he had no share: but the truth is, the Duke was so
long in making his preparation, and would come in so handsome an equipage to
the Army, that it was two days after the surrender of the place, before he came
up to the King: The Duke of Espernon comes to the King at Amiens.
perhaps one of the worst occurrences, and that did him the greatest prejudice
of any that befell him in his whole life; it being certain, that if, in this
expedition, he had by greater diligence expressed to his Majesty the real
Passion he had for his Service, he had so blotted out of his memory, all former
jealousies, and discontents, that no ill office could ever after have done him
harm: whereas his Enemies took now occasion to possess the King, that he had
either staid to expect the issue of this Siege, to make his own use of such
disorders in the State, as must necessarily attend any ill success; or that (at
the best) he had a mind the Royal Affairs should fall into the last necessity,
by that means to put a greater value upon his own Service: So that although he
arrived very seasonably for the recruit of the Royal Army, very much tired, and
worn out with the length of the Siege, and that he brought along with him 300.
Horse, an hundred and fifty Harquebusiers on horseback, and four Regiments of
Foot, as well equipt as men could be: yet was not his reception such, as he had
good reason to expect, his zeal to the Service having made him lose the honor
of the Service it self. It was nevertheless but two days after the King's entry
into Amiens, that the Duke came up to the Army; by which it appears he did not
in his Government lie expecting the event of the Siege, having been a month
upon his March; neither did he long lie idle after he was come, for ambitious
by some notable Action to make amends for his former default, A surprise
designed upon Arras.
he meditated a surprise upon Arras; an enterprise that having been
communicated to Marshall Biron, the manner of it was soon concluded on betwixt
them, and as soon consented to by the King, who by his own presence would
favor the success.

His Majesty after the surrender of Amiens staid no longer there than was
requisite for the ceremony of his entry, but put himself immediately in pursuit
of the Enemy; to let them see, that notwithstanding he had been so drained of
men, he was yet strong enough to remove the Scene of War to their own doors;
when, being advanced with his Army as far as Arras, the Duke of Espernon took
those Forces he had brought, and advanced to give a Scalado to a Fort, that was
a little separated from the main wall of the City; which he assaulted with such
vigor and bravery in his own person, that his men encouraged by his example
soon made themselves masters of the place. A success that gave the Inhabitants,
and Garrison of Arras so great an Alarm, that they all ran to that side to beat
the Duke back, and to secure that part of their Walls; where betwixt them the
conflict grew so hot, that the Marshall de Biron, who was at the same time to
Petarre one of the Gates of the City, had all leisure to perform it, without
any danger from the Curtain. And accordingly his first Petard played, and to so
good effect, that it laid all flat, which shut up the Raveline: The second beat
down the Drawbridge, and carried away the bottom of the Portcullice it self,
though by the Petard's being fixed too low, the perpendicular Bars remained yet
long enough to defend the passage, when the third Petard being brought up
(which doubtless had it played, had put an end to the Dispute) and the Engineer
just ready to give fire, he was from the top of the Gate taken upon the head
with a stone; by which blow Man and Engine were both beaten headlong into the
Ditch: an accident by which they were put to look out for another, but in vain.
there being never another to be found. In the mean time the Duke of Espernon,
who was still fighting with the Enemy, had no little to do to make head against
the Forces of so great, and populous a City; which nevertheless he bravely did
until the Marshall de Biron sending him word of his misfortune, desired him to
retire, as himself was constrained to do for want of a fourth Petard.

Aubigne is the man, (...).
of all our Historians that makes mention of this Enterprise, where he adds one
thing that is very remarkable, and very true, and that is, that the Marshall
enraged to the last degree, at the miscarriage of so brave a design, went up
and down cursing, and swearing, and railing at the King before all the Army,
and almost to his own face, that he had made him fail in the conquest of so
important a place for want of a Petard, accusing him of Avarice, where his
Honor and Safety were concerned; whilst he was prodigiously Profuse in the
entertainment of his Mistrisses, and in the procurements of his own desires:
Language, that, how indiscreetly soever spoken, was maliciously enough soon
conveyed to the King's ear, and which I have heard the Duke say, perhaps sowed
the first seeds of hatred in his Majesty's heart against him: Neither did the
Duke fail, like a true friend, to conjure him into a better government of his
passion, left his wild tongue might at some time or other, be the instrument of
his own ruin; although whatever power he might have with him in other things,
(as with a man that still mindful of the Duke's past obligations, when his
favor had given him many opportunities to express his affection to him, was
much at his devotion) yet could he never so govern the unbridled fierceness of
his (...); but that he would break often out into extravagancies of that kind.

As the surprizal of Amiens had suspended all propositions of Peace, Anno 1598.
that had before been preferred by the Pope's Legate, so did the retaking of it
(almost of course) set them again on foot; for the Spaniard seeing he had not
been able to keep a place of that importance when he had it in his hands, and
apprehending by that, the King's Power (which had been sufficiently manifested
at this Siege) would now extend it self into their own Territories, to the
danger of their strongest, and best Towns, of themselves renewed the
interrupted Treaty of Peace; in order whereunto, the Deputies of both Crowns
being met at Vervins, it was there, to their common satisfaction happily
concluded.

That which I observe to be most remarkable in this Peace, is, that the King,
what necessity soever there was upon him of regulating the disorders of his own
Kingdom, which were many (a thing never to be well done in the confusions of
War) would notwithstanding never consent his Deputies should meet to Treat,
till first the King of Spain had given him assurance, that all the places had
been taken from him in this last War should be restored: His Majesty choosing
rather to expose his Person, and Kingdom to the uncertain event of another War,
than that his Crown should suffer the l^ast prejudice by a Treaty of Peace;
(...) although he had hitherto been the loser, yet did ^is courage (...) him
hope so well of his Fortune, as to believe he should in the end bring her over
to his own side. So brisk an Article as this at first dash, and before the King
would proceed to any further Treaty, it is to be supposed would startle the
Spanish Gravity, and must reasonably meet with great difficulty, as it did in
the Councils of War, and Privy Council of Spain, it being evident that, in this
demand, the King would impose upon them who were the Conquerors the same
conditions he should have done, had they been already overcome, which made it
suffer a long Debate, though at last it was condescended to; The peace
concluded (...) Vervins.
and that being granted, no other difficulties were likely to arise: so that
this happy Peace was Concluded, and Signed by the Commissioners on both sides,
the second of May 1598. By the Articles of this Treaty the King was to restore
the County of Charolois, to the King of Spain, to be by him held of the Crown
of France; who in exchange restored the Towns of Calice, Ardres, Monthulin,
Dourlens, la Capelle, and le Catelet in Picardy, and Blavet in Britanny: which
Articles were Ratified, and Signed by his Majesty the eleventh of June; who in
gayety of humor, at so happy a conclusion, told the Duke of Espernon, That
with one dash of his Pen he had done greater things, than he could of a long
time have performed with the best Swords of his Kingdom.

This Peace was no sooner concluded, but that the Court put on a Face far
different from that wherewith it had appear^d when shaded, and overcast, with
the tumult and trouble of War and Business: nothing now was to be seen, but
State, and Luster; nor was any thing now thought on, but Feasting, and Mirth,
which also was much added to, by the celebration of several Marriages, which
were at this time consummate betwixt some persons of the greatest quality of
the Kingdom: The Marriage of the Duke of Montpensur with Katharine de Ioyeuse,
now Duchess of Guise, and Niece to the Duke of Espernon.
For Katharine the King's only Sister was Married to the Duke of Bar, Son to
the Duke of Lorain; and Henry of Bourbon Duke of Montpensier Married Katharine
de ^oyeuse, with many other Marriages betwixt Persons of great Quality, that
were also solemnized at the same time: but it not being my design to meddle
with those wherein the Duke of Espernon was not immediately concerned, I shall
only insist upon that of the Duke of Montpensier who contracting himself to so
near a Relation of the Duke's, that he, in a manner supplied the place of a
Father to her, it will be necessary I should say something of the reasons, and
conclusion of this particular Match.

The King since the Duke's return from Provence, had never exceeded to him the
favor of mere justice; he had, it is true, left him free in the enjoyment of
his Offices, his Estate, and Degree, without doing him any the least injury in
any thing that was his just, and immediate right: But as to the rest, his
Majesty not being able to forget his formention'd discontents against him, he
thought he did him a signal favor, in that he forbore to do him any public
disgrace. In this condition, the Duke, who saw himself seated at Court in a
station far inferior to that wherein he had formerly been, suffered not a
little in his own bosom from the King's coldness, and indifferency to him: yet
concealing his discontent with the true respect he ought to pay his Prince, and
Master, he avoided, at least, all occasions (the only refuge of a suspected
Minister) that might any way bring him into a greater disgrace: Yet even in
this condition his fortune would not forsake him, who, when all other means
seemed to be lost, that could probably restore him to any degree of his former
prosperity, sprung him a new tide to his stranded greatness, and such an one,
as not only lifted him off those sands wherein he was like to sink, and perish,
but raised him again to such a reputation, as was no little support to his
declining name, and power.

Kat^arine de Ioyeuse (whom I have already named) was only Daughter and Heir to
the Count de Bouchage, and Katharine de Nogaret, and de la Valette, the Duke of
Espernon's Sister; a young Lady, that besides the advantages of her Birth, and
Beauty, was also Mi^tr^^^ of very great possessions, having to her paternal
Estate added that of the great Favorite the Duke of Ioyeuse, as she also was
in expectation of that of the Cardinal de Ioyeuse her Uncle; which reckoned
altogether must needs make up so vast an estate, as must without dispute,
entitle her the greatest Fortune of France. The Duke of Montpensier likewise,
as born a Prince of the Blood, was also in high consideration, wherein the
advantage of his Fortune concurred with the eminency of his Birth, he having
alone a greater Revenue, than all the other Princes of the Blood: to which his
Valor, Liberality, and Courtesy, with other good qualities he was Master of,
had raised him to a very great esteem with the King, and made him no less a
Favorite to the People: so that he was not only the Aim and Ambition of the
best Matches of France; but stood also in the prospect of some Foreign Princes:
Amongst these the Duke of Lorain proceeded so far, as to offer him his Daughter
(who was afterward Married to the Duke of Cleve's) with eight hundred thousand
Crowns to her Dowry: a proposition that, being debated in the Duke of
Montpensier's Council, was very much liked of by some of his Servants, who
advised him to prefer this Match to the other Inheretrix of the House of
Ioyeuse; the fortune of the last, being part of it yet depending; whereas the
offers of the Duke of Lorain being present, and effectual, would very much
advance his Affairs, and establish his greatness at great liberty and ease. I
have been informed, and that by a person of Quality, who was consulted about
this business, that one main reason which induced this Prince to prefer
Madam^iselle de Ioyeuse before the other, was the consideration of the Duke of
Esperno^, because in marrying her, he conceived he should at the same time
espouse her Uncles Interests; from whose Authority he promised to himself
greater assistance, and support, than from any other Peer of the Kingdom. A
consideration that, prevailing above all other with the Duke of Montpensier,
disposed him determinately to resolve upon this Match, to which, by a
particular li^ing, he was before inclined. Wherefore having without further
deliberation caused it, by some Friends of his, to be proposed to the Duke of
Espernon, the motion was by him, who took it for a great honor, received with
all imaginable respect, and as readily consented to; by which the Duke being
encouraged, proceeded further to move it to the King himself; not without some
apprehension nevertheless, that the aversion his Majesty daily discovered to
the Duke might raise some difficulties at the first overture of his design,
though his fear proved vain: for his Majesty seeing it would be a Match of
considerable advantage to his Kinsman, and in his heart acknowledging the Duke
of Espernon to be a Subject of great merit, though, for some private
discontents, not very acceptable to himself, was not unwilling to oblige both
the one, and the other, by giving his free consent.

By this Marriage the Duke of Espernon's Affairs were not a little improved,
and if, on the one side, he (by the consideration of his desert) had preferred
his Niece before the Daughter of a Sovereign Prince; she on the other side, by
a very good return was acquit of that obligation, by introducing her Uncle into
the relation and support of a great Prince of the Blood, by whose means he was
soon after honored with a very near alliance to the Royal Family.

The Feasting, Anno 1599.
and other entertainments of the Court, did not so wholly take up the King,
that his Majesty was not nevertheless very intent upon his Affairs, he had a
mind to see an end of the Treaty with Savoy, which was not yet dispatched,
though it had been comprised in the Peace concluded betwixt the two Crowns at
Vervins: The Duke of Savoy had desired some respite to consider before he would
Seal; which having been granted to him, and he not being able to persuade
himself to the restitution of those places he had, contrary to the public
Faith, surpised during the disorders of the State, as by the Articles of the
Treaty he had been obliged to do: he had no mind, to put a thing to Arbitration
he was certain that way never to obtain, and that he was likewise resolved
never to part withal. The Pope whom himself had named Arbiter of all
differences betwixt the King, and him, was so far disobliged by the diffidence
he had manifested of his equal judgment (which the Duke had cunningly published
to that end) that his Holiness had excused himself from intermedling any more
betwixt them; a thing that having fallen out according to the Duke of Savoy's
hearts desire, he resolved now upon a Journey into France, to try if by his
submissions to the King, his dexterity with his Ministers, or his liberalities
in his Court, he could not procure, or purchase that, to which he could with no
show of equity otherwise pretend: but all his policy proved vain, and his hopes
were deluded, as they were like to be in a Court where the King himself was
alone the greatest, and wisest part of the Council; he must first corrupt him,
or at least very much deceive him, before he could persuade him to consent to
any thing prejudicial to his Crown, and Honor. The Duke of Savoy then, being
able to effect nothing by artifice, resolved at last upon returning into his
own Dukedom: yet, that his Journey might not be altogether without fruit, he
first caused the Marshall de Biron to be dealt withal, a man whom he conceived
his many discontents had laid open to his temptation; and him he first tasted
by Lafin, the same who had made himself a Mediator betwixt the Duke of Espernon
and l'Esdiguieres in Provence, The Duke of Savoy begins to practice with the
Marshall de Biron.
and who therein had abused them both. This fellow of a turbulent unquiet
Spirit, and one of those who had rather be doing mischief, than not to be doing
at all, was of late wrigled into the Duke of Savoy's Favor, and had tasted of
his bounty; by which he was qualified to offer from the Duke one of his
Daughters to the Marshall de Biron in Marriage, and with her several
Seigniories to be held in Sovereignty, with the assistance of the Forces both
of Spain, and Savoy, to maintain him in Burgundy: A Province contiguous to
their own Territories. Allurements so fitted to Birons ambitious and mutinous
nature, that he lent a willing ear to those dangerous propositions, and, as
some have believed, engaged himself without much Ceremony in the Treason, which
proved at last his dishonor and ruin.

This practice with Biron was the only thing the Duke of Savoy, with all his
policy, effected in France: which nevertheless he thought to be of such moment,
as made him afterward refuse to give the King that satisfaction he had
promised, and so to build upon the confidence of Biron's revolt, that having,
before his departure from Paris, engaged either to surrender to his Majesty the
Marquisate of Saluzzo, or la Bresse, with other Dominions at his own choice in
lieu thereof, and within three months time to perform it; he had now no more
regard to his word: neither would do the one nor the other, which obliged the
King to seek that satisfaction by force of Arms, he could by no other means
obtain, as he evidently saw by the delays and equivocations of this subtle
Prince.

His Majesty had before he resolved upon this expedition been sufficiently
enform'd of what means had been used to corrupt the Marshall de Biron: but
whether it were that he really believed the Marshall had been deaf to all such
propositions; or that by the testimony of an entire confidence in his Loyalty
this generous Prince would oblige a Subject to continue firm in his duty, who
by his brave Service had deserved so well of the Crown, and to look back into
his error, before he was gone too far; he gave him the Command of an Army
against the Duke of Savoy himself, with orders to enter by the way of his own
Government of Burgundy into Bress; in which employment Biron so well concealed
his practice, and so smartly pursued the War, that no action of his confessed,
the least intelligence with the Enemy. L'Esdiguieres also, who at the same time
entered by the way of Dauphine into Savoy, by his Valor, and conduct made so
considerable advances into that Duchy, that betwixt them in few days all the
Territories the Savoyard possessed on this side the Alps, were overrun by the
Royal Arms, except Montmelian, which was not but by Siege to be reduced.

It was in this occasion of Montmelian that the Duke of Esperpernon did the
King a very signal service: A place reputed so strong, and that had been so
fortified, and furnished, with all provisions of War by the Duke of Savoy, that
he was nothing startled at his other losses, as supposing this City to be an
inexpugnable Bulwark against whatever could be attempted against him. A
confidence wherein he found himself very much mistaken; for the Duke of
Espernon having the command of one quarter at this Siege, as Biron and L'
Esdiguieres had of the other two, whilst they were on all hands busy in their
approaches, found opportunity sometimes to confer with the Count de Brandis
Governor of the place, interviews, that being frequent, and allowed by the
King, wrought at last so good an effect, that the Governor promised to
surrender the City to the King, if within a month the Duke of Savoy did not
raise the Siege. A Capitulation of that dangerous importance to the Duke that
he labored by all possible ways, during the limited term to persuade the
Governor into a better resolution, and had so wrought upon him, what by
entreaty, promises, and threats, that he was grown infinitely wavering, and
uncertain what to do; which notwithstanding the Duke of Espernon who had drawn
the first plot of this great design, happily brought it to perfection in the
end; he absolutely confirmed by his persuasion the anxious Count in the terms
of his first Treaty, and thereupon received new Hostages from him: by which
dexterity he rendered himself the principal, and most effectual instrument of
his Majesty's victories in that Country, as also of the Peace which immediately
followed the Surrender of this important City.

Whilst the King's Designs succeeded at this fortunate rate in this little
Dukedom, the Princes of Italy apprehending, that after the ruin of the Duke of
Savoy, the sweetness, and facility of that Conquest would tempt the King to
advance further into the Country to seek new Victories, were instant with the
Pope to interpose his Authority with the King, to dispose his Majesty to accept
of satisfaction from the Duke of Savoy for what had past, that an Accommodation
might ensue: to which his Holiness being inclined, both by his own interests
(which could by no means admit of a War in Italy) and by the importunity of the
Princes of the Country, The Cardinal Aldobrandino sent by the Pope into France.
he dispatched away Cardinal Aldobrandino his own Nephew to the King, to be in
his name the Mediator of this Peace, as the Cardinal de Medicis had been before
of that which had been concluded with Spain.

Never Prince came from that Country in a prouder Equipage, nor with a more
honorable train, than did this Cardinal; a Magnificence to which his Majesty
being willing to hold proportion, both in regard to his own greatness, as also
to express thereby a greater respect to the Pope (to whom he was highly
obliged) in the person of a Kinsman so near, and dear unto him, he made choice
of the Duke of Espernon, amongst all the other Grandees of his Court, to be the
man should receive him; and that because he both knew him to be a person very
acceptable to the Holy Sea, as also one who knew as well how to behave himself
for his Masters honor, as any whoever, that was about his person. Neither did
the Duke deceive his Majesty in his choice; he received the Cardinal at the
head of the Army, which before had been drawn up into Battalia for that
purpose, accompanied with the most sprightly and gay Nobility, and Gentry of
the Court, conducting him with infinite demonstrations of Honor, and Respect
through the several divisions, until he brought him into the presence of the
King himself; and though I must tell you by the way, that the Duke's imperious,
and haughty humor was naturally very averse to the humility of Complement, and
the submission of excessive Civilities; yet when such an occasion as this
obliged him to it; no man of his time could perform such a Ceremony with a
better grace: and doubtless, if at ordinary times he would have been more
liberal of his courtesy, and have added that to those other excellent
qualities, which made him admired by all, he might have acquired thereby what
Friends and Servants he had pleased.

Soon after the Legat's arrival the Peace of Savoy was concluded, The Peace
with Savoy concluded.
wherein a Prince, whose interest it was to recover his own Dominions almost
entirely overrun by the King's Victorious Arms, was now to redeem his own with
what he had surreptitiously, and contrary to the public Faith snatched from
the King, during the disorders of his Kingdom, and which his Majesty was now
also ready to force from him, as he had already done the greatest part of his
own hereditary Territories in pursuit of that Quarrel: So that the Duke of
Savoy bought his Peace at a cheap rate through the Pope's timely mediation, and
all things were accommodated that were in dispute betwixt the King, and him:
although his Majesty, who very well knew what little trust was to be reposed in
the Faith of this Prince (a man that would never keep his word when it was for
his advantage to break it) would by no means be persuaded to withdraw his Army
out of his Dukedom, till first the Articles of the Treaty were performed. But
it neither suiting with decency, nor the dignity of his Majesty's Royal Person
himself to attend the execution of a thing already concluded, he returned into
France, leaving the command of his Army to the Count de Soissons, offering at
the same time the command of Lieutenant General to the Duke of Espernon who
excused himself; having taken up a resolution never to serve under less than
the Person of a King; as hitherto he had never done, nor ever after did in the
whole course of his life. The Duke of Espernon leaves the Court to go into
Angoumois, and goes into Guienne.
He therefore went back with the King, whom he attended as far as Grenoble;
from whence when his Majesty departed for Lions to consummate his Marriage, he
at the same time took his leave to return again into his Governments of
Xaintonge and Angoumois.

The Duke's journey into that Country gave him opportunity to pass over into
Gascony to view the Progress of his Building there, Anno 1600.
of which he had laid the foundation at Cadillac in the year 1598. For the
King, after he had concluded the Peace with Spain, from that time forwards, not
only wholly bent his own thoughts to the Embellishment of his Kingdom (in which
his principal design was first to Build his Houses, and to Beautify Paris with
many great and noble Structures; for at this time the Buildings of the Louvre,
Fountain-bleau, and other Royal Palaces were begun; as also the designs of the
Pont-neuf, the Place Royal, with other proud and stately AEdifices were
continued) but would likewise that other men should fall in love with the same
humor; and whether it were that his Majesty had a mind his greatest Subjects
should by his example employ themselves in the same designs, or that he
intended (as some have supposed) insensibly to drein their purses by this
chargeable employment; fearing perhaps that too great abundance of wealth might
make them more apt to entertain thoughts, and practices, that might discompose
the calm of Peace his Kingdom was now settled in: but so it was, that for one
or both these reasons, he engaged the greatest part of his Nobility, whom he
knew to be monied men, in vast designs of this kind: amongst whom his Majesty
conceiving the Duke of Espernon to be one the most at his ease, he was so
importunate with him, as to cause a plot for Cadillac to be designed in his own
Presence, ordered the charge of the whole to be cast up, and made one of his
own Architects to undertake for an hundred thousand Crowns to begin, and
perfect the work; upon which assurance the Duke (as has been said) in the year
1598 began the foundation; conceiving that such a sum, as that, he might
without inconvenience spare to gratify his Masters humor; though time
afterward gave him to understand how hard a thing it is to contain a man's
self within a determinate charge, after he has once set his hand to so tempting
a work as Building: this Pile, before it was finished, having cost him above
two millions of Livres. It Is very true, (and which seldom happens to
undertakers of such vast designs) that with this infinite expense, he brought
the greatest, and most stately pile of Building (the Royal Houses excepted) in
France, very near to perfection, the whole body of the Building being perfected
before his death, and nothing, save some few Ornaments left to finish; neither
had he left those to his Successors, had not the disgrace of being withdrawn
from his Government, which still afflicted him, diverted his thoughts from the
sole care of that design.

The Duke (as has been said) being come into Guienne to take a view of his
Building, A dispute betwixt the the Duke and the Mareschald' Ornane.
arrived at the City of Bourdeaux in the beginning of August, where he found
the Marshall d' Ornano, but newly there established Lieutenant for the King by
the decease of the Marshall de Matignon, who died of an Apoplexy, and where
their old Animosities, though great, were nevertheless on both sides so well
dissembled, as not to hinder a mutual Civility betwixt them, no more than these
civilities could hinder past jealousies from breaking out upon the first
occasion into a new and open rupture. This Marshall though an Alien born, had
yet by his Valor and Fidelity acquired so great a reputation in France, as in
the Reign of Henry the III. to be a great confident to that Prince; to whom the
Duke of Espernon having been a principal Favorite, it is nothing strange, that
a man of inferior credit should envy another in a higher degree of Favor:
neither if the Marshall were prepossessed with this antiquated jealousy, was
the Duke on his part insensible of the recent traverses he had in Provence
received from him; the greatest part of the disgraces he had met with in that
Country having been laid in his way by the opposition of l' Esdiguieres, and
him: all which put together, it may easily be imagined were likely to beget no
very good blood between them. To this the Marshall, a man of an imperious, and
haughty temper, and who only under a forced smoothness concealed a natural
arrogance, could with no patience endure a Superior; an humor that made him
with great anxiety look upon the Honors, which at the Duke's arrival at
Bordeaux, he received from the Parliament, with the other Orders of the City,
and which were also continued to him by the Nobility at Cadillac, who from all
parts came in to do him Honor: But if his impatience were great before, it was
raised up to the height, when he knew the Duke (who well enform'd of his
dissatisfaction, to make it yet more) had invited all the Nobility, and Gentry
of the Country to Bordeaux to a public running at the Ring; a solemnity that
being there to be kept where he was in Supreme Command, the Duke knew would
much more nettle, and afflict him.

It is very true, that the Duke might have forborne this Bravado to a man, whom
he knew to be so tender of his Honor, as the Marshall d' Ornano was; and
perhaps it was not well done to offer that to another, he himself would never
have endured from any man living in a place where he had commanded in Chief:
but having once engaged in the business, his great spirit (whatever might
succeed) would by no means give him leave to desist, especially when he knew
the Marshall was resolved by open force to oppose him. This was that, which
made what was before only a private discontent, to break out into open quarrel,
which grew so high that the Marshall addressed himself to the Parliament;
where, in the presence of them all, he complained what a commotion the Duke
went about to stir up amongst the people, to the prejudice, as he pretended, of
his Majesty's Affairs; acquainting them at the same time with his resolution to
make his Garrison stand to their Arms, to play his Cannon, and in fine to do
what in him lay, with all the power, and authority he had to break that
appointment, and to drive the Duke from the City. This declaration from a man
of his furious spirit, as it very much troubled the whole Assembly, so it gave
the first President D' Affis (one of the greatest men that Society ever had
since its first institution, and a particular friend of the Duke's, having by
him in his times of favor been raised to that dignity) occasion to make use of
his Eloquence in the best Arguments he could contrive to dissuade the Marshall
from that determination; but all in vain, he had already given out his orders,
and summoned the Gentry to come in to his assistance, though not a man, save
only one called Ruat, would appear: a thing, which though perfectly true,
appears almost incredible, that a Governor of so great Authority and Repute
should be able to procure no more than one single man, to serve him against the
Duke of Espernon in his own Government. Neither were the people better
disposed, than the Nobility and Gentry, to take Arms against the Duke; all men
on the contrary, of any note, both within, and without the City, so manifestly
appearing for him, that the Governor was forced to arm his Garrison of Corses,
and to call his Company of Gensd' Arms out of their Country Quarters into the
Town, which were yet apparently too weak to execute the Mareschal's design. And
this was in effect the main cause that hindered things from proceeding into a
greater disorder, the Duke, satisfied with the advantage every one plainly saw
he had over his Enemy, being the more easily inclined to the Parliaments
solicitations; who had sent their second President Nesmond to him, to entreat
he would not persist in his first resolution: at whose instance, and being
loath to disturb the Peace of his Country, as also to expose the great number
of Gentlemen of Quality, who were about him against a Garrison in his own
particular quarrel, and having a greater inclination to decide it in his own
person (when it might be done with less noise and tumult) with the Marshall
man to man, he was content to let things rest, till a fitter opportunity, and
quietly departed the City to his own house.

In this Journey to Cadillac he was accompanied with President Nesmond, a
Gentleman of great merit, and his particular friend (for whom after the death
of President D' Affis he obtained the Dignity of first President during the
Regency of the Queen Mother) with many other Principal Members of that
Parliament and City; whither he was no sooner come, but that the Gentry of the
Higher Gascony, at the report of this Quarrel, flocked to him in so great a
number, that scarce any occasion could have happened, wherein his interest in
that Country could have been more manifestly seen. And here the Duke, environed
with so many of his Friends, passed his time in that jollity and mirth, and
appeared so little concerned at any thing that had passed betwixt the Marshall
d' Ornano and him, as made every one certainly believe all had been absolutely
forgot: where, after having spent some days, and his company being retired to
their own houses, he himself also departed to go visit his paternal estate, and
from thence to Toulouse. From hence it was, that whilst every one thought him
more intent upon his recreations, than mindful of his quarrel, he dispatched
away a Page of his called Talanges, who continued long after in his Service, to
the Marshall d' Ornano with a Challenge, which I will here present my Reader
word for word, as I transcribed it from the original draught under the Duke's
own hand; wherein, though there be no studied style, there is nevertheless
something of a natural, and easy bluntness, that methinks sounds better, than
if it had been couched with greater care and art: the words are these. Sir, I
make no doubt, but that, when the toy took you to commit the action, and to
make the bustle you did against me at Bordeaux, the last of August, you did
then believe, knowing me for such, as the men of Honor of this Kingdom know me
to be, that that Carriage of yours must needs give me a just desire to talk
with you, as indeed I passionately do, and that after the manner commonly
practiced by men of honor of my Profession; which is the reason I have sent
this Page on purpose to let you know, that I am going to Court, where I shall
wait four months in expectation, either by return of this Bearer, or by what
other honorable way you shall think fit, of an assignment from you, of a day,
and place where I may have the happiness to embrace you in your Shirt, with the
Arms of a Cavalier, which are a Sword, and Poignard: that I may there let you
see it is not in the power of a Corse to affront a Gentleman of France, who
remains yours to serve you as much as by the courtesy you have showed to him
he stands obliged.

From Toulouse the 7th. of September. Signed, I. Lewis de la Valette.




And in a Postscript, I do assure you upon my Faith, that no one living knows a
syllable of what I have written to you, not the Page himself; and I do believe
you to be so much a man of Honor, as to carry it with the same secrecy.



The Page arrived in a disguise at Bordeaux, where he found opportunity to
deliver his Letter, and, without being discovered by any, returned to seek out
his Master at Paris: but the Mareschals action had made such a noise, that
(what secrecy soever could be used) it was hardly possible, but it must come
to the King's knowledge; and accordingly at the Duke's arrival at Court, his
Majesty questioned him about it, when, although the Duke made a show of being
wholly unconcerned, yet his Majesty having had intelligence, by other hands,
than either by the Duke, or any of his people of the Challenge that had passed,
positively commanded him to engage his word that things should proceed no
further; promising him withal, that he should have all satisfaction he could
himself in Honor desire: a thing the Duke in obedience to his Masters absolute
pleasure could by no means refuse; though by some Libels that came out after in
the Mareschals name, he was infinitely exasperated, and desired nothing more,
than to come to the decision of Arms.

The Marshall was soon after summoned to Court, Anno 1601.
where being arrived, and his Majesty having heard both parties concerning the
occasion of their Quarrel, ordered for the Duke this satisfaction: which
Writing I found in the same bundle with the Challenge.

That which was said by the Marshall d' Ornano in the presence of the King, to
the Duke of Espernon. My Lord,
To explain my self, The King reconciles the Duke and the Marshall.
and to satisfy you concerning what lately passed at Bordeaux, I shall in the
first place assure you, that I never knew, or esteemed you for other, than his
Majesty's most faithful Subject, and Servant; that such I ever have, and ever
shall declare you to be. It is very true that a jealousy, some flying rumors,
which I too easily believed, possessed me withal, made me do things, which
having found those reports altogether false, I have since been very much
afflicted at, I never having any intention to offend you; and I could wish I
had given a great deal I had never done them: I do therefore entreat you to
excuse me, and to believe me to be your Friend, and one that has a desire to do
you Service. As for the Manifesto, I am so far from approving any such thing,
that I never so much as saw it, never caused it to be writ; and ever have, and
do now disown the man that did it.




This was that which was said in the presence of the King by the Duke of
Espernon to the Marshall d' Ornano. Sir,
Since the King is pleased to think what you have said to be a sufficient
satisfaction, that you entreat me to forget what is past, and desire my
friendship, I rest satisfied; and shall be, as I have been heretofore your
friend to serve you.

At St. Germans en Lay the 25. of March, 1601. Signed Henry, and below Potier.




It was not without many difficulties that matters were thus composed betwixt
them, the Duke desiring something more for his satisfaction, and the Marshall
on his part ill digesting the distinction the King had made betwixt to serve
you, and to do you service: but that which touched him most to the quick was,
that his Majesty by one of the conditions of Accommodation, gave the Duke,
liberty when ever he thought fit, to call together the same Assembly in
Bordeaux, which had begot the former dispute; commanding the Marshall not to
oppose it: A License without which the Duke conceived his affront could not be
wiped off. And accordingly he some time after returned to Bordeaux, to have
made use of his Privilege, though it was then also interrupted by an accident,
of which in its due place we shall give a further account.

This satisfaction the King ordered for the Duke, though very sufficient of it
self, was not however the only testimony his Majesty gave him of his Royal
Bounty and Justice in this occasion; for the offense having been public, his
Majesty thought fit that beside the satisfaction had been given in private, the
Marshall should moreover pay the Duke some public civilities, to evidence an
absolute disowning of the Act: it was therefore ordered, that the Duke going to
Loches, as it was determined he should do, (I believe for that purpose) the
Marshall, who at the same time was upon his Journey into his Government,
should give him a visit by the way, as he did^; by whom the King writ a very
obliging Letter to the Duke, wherein he commanded him to entertain the
Marshall as His Friend; a command that was also on the Duke's part so
punctually obeyed, that the visit was passed over with great civility on both
sides: wherein the justice of this generous, and excellent Prince was eminently
manifest, who would use a man at this obliging rate, that had no share in his
Royal Favor.

Not long after this Accommodation, the 11th. of September the same year, the
Court was wholly possessed with the joy all good Frenchmen were full of, for
the Birth of the young Dolphin, whom we have since seen live a long and a
glorious Reign, under the name of Lewis the XIII, The birth of the Dolphin,
afterward Lewis the XIII.
of all other, a blessing of the greatest importance that could at that time
possibly have happened to the King, and Kingdom: in him all pretense of past
disturbances being determined, as the public Peace seemed to be for ever
secured. There was now no mutinous Subject, nor no ambitious Neighbor, who
seeing themselves fallen from their unjust, and imaginary pretensions to the
Crown, did not covet the favor, and friendship of a Prince so apparently
favored by the care of Heaven: but if on that side the Duke with other
virtuous Subjects of his condition, was in a high rapture of joy, there happened
to him soon after great occasions of affliction, that involved him in no few,
not no little inconveniences, which befell him by the discovery of the
Conspiracy of the Marshall Biron, that came to light in the beginning of the
ensuing year; wherein we shall notwithstanding see, that although this business
begat him trouble, and disgrace in the beginning, yet it brought him honor and
satisfaction in the end: having given him opportunity at once to express his
constant affection to his friend, and his inviolate Fidelity to the King his
Master.

I have already made mention of the great friendship that was contracted
betwixt the Duke, Anno 1602.
and the Marshall Biron, one of the most constant, The Conspiracy of M^reschal
Biron, and the Duke's carriage in that business.
and sincere I have known, their interests ever being one, and the same, and
their affections so united in all things, that nothing was a secret betwixt
them, if not in what concerned the interest of the King and Kingdom: but as to
concerns of that nature, what confidence soever the Marshall had in the Duke's
friendship it is certain, he had ever so great a respect to his fidelity, and
did believe him so impossible to be debauched from his duty, that he never
communicated to him the least syllable of any thought he had conceived to the
prejudice of the one, or the other: though it is to be wished, for the
preservation of so brave a man he had done it, because then the Duke would
doubtless have persuaded him into better resolutions. The King, who was very
well acquainted with all his designs, would himself sometimes talk to him in
terms easy enough to be understood, on purpose to make him come to himself, to
see his error, and to reconcile himself sincerely to a Prince, who proceeded
with that tenderness toward him, and who was pleased in his behalf to moderate
the absolute Authority, the knowledge of his Crime, and his own Royal Power
gave him over his Life, and Fortune; but that would not reclaim him: That way
then failing, and his Majesty's obliging language to him wanting force to make
that impression upon his obstinate spirit, he could have desired, his Majesty
tried yet further to overcome him by testimonies of confidence in his Loyalty,
and to divert him from criminal thoughts by conferring upon him his employments
of Trust, and Honor; amongst which that of Ambassador into England was one.

The King being in Picardy, received a Complement from Elizabeth Queen of
England, wherein she earnestly solicited the King for an enterview betwixt
them, at any place he himself would appoint; a request that his Majesty not
thinking it convenient to gratify her in, he dispatched away to her the
Marshall Biron, as it were his second self, to make his excuse, and to Treat
with her with all freedom of their most private Affairs. An employment wherein
Biron received extraordinary Honors, as also several cautions from this
prudent Princess, enough to have diverted him from his evil designs, had not
his destiny already blinded his judgment, and rendered him incapable of counsel.
She often laid before him the recent, and sad example of the late Earl of
Essex; she represented unto him what a Subject ought to apprehend even from the
greatness of his own Service, and Merit, if his Ambition was not moderated by
prudence, and whether it were that she had had some inckling (as many have
believed) of Biron's designs, or that she only intended by such discourses to
justify the execution of that unfortunate Earl, she laid before him a perfect
image of his own unhappy destiny; though all was lost to a man obstinately bent
to his own ruin.

This Queen also having heard of the strict friendship betwixt the Marshall,
and the Duke of Espernon, desired him at parting to tell the Duke from her,
that if, of his three Sons (which she owned for her Kinsmen, and Princes of her
Kingdom) he would send her one, she should gladly receive him upon his account;
and that the world might see the esteem she had of the Fathers Merit, would not
deprive his Posterity of that place in her Kingdom, which was due to the House
of Candale; wherein she had only one condition to make, which was, that the
Duke should give way, that a Son of his so sent, should be bred up in her
Religion; the only one she could by any means suffer in her Kingdom: A
Complement that the Duke thinking himself obliged to take notice of, he
presented her Majesty with his most humble thanks for the Honor she was
pleased to do him, and his Family in so gracious an offer; but that he should
ever prefer any Fortune or Condition his Children could attain unto in France,
making profession of the Catholic Religion, before any advantages could derive
to them in a belief contrary to his own.

The Marshall, at his return from England puffed up more than ever with the
vanity of his Ambition, and big with the Idea of those imaginary
Principalities, the Spaniard, and the Duke of Savoy had baited their practices
withal to catch him, could now no longer contain himself within the simple
meditation of his Treason, but began to deal with some persons of Quality in
the Kingdom, and endeavored to raise a commotion in Perigort, where the best
part of his Estate, his Relations, and chiefest Friendships lay: amongst whom
the Duke de Bouillion is said to be invited into his party to introduce those
of the Reformed Religion into that Country: Intelligence whereof being brought
to the King, his Majesty concerned at the importance of the thing, and justly
provoked at the Mareschals ingratitude, immediately took the Field, with a
resolution to stifle these disorders in their birth; when considering with
himself, that if he should fail of securing the Head of the Faction, whatever
he could do besides, would signify nothing to the remedy of the disease, and
that whilst he should be upon his March, his own promptitude and vigilance
would but serve to alarm Subjects already made jealous by the conscience of
their own Crimes; he broke off his intended expedition, and returned back again
to Fountain-bleau, from whence he had before departed: and where being settled,
he wholly bent his thoughts how to get the Marshall into his power; who being
in Burgundy (the neighborhood of that Province to Savoy favoring his designs)
did at great ease maintain his Correspondence with the Confederate Princes.
Neither was this a thing to be effected without great conduct, that a person of
his merit and reputation might not be driven to the last extremities of
despair. His Majesty therefore, that he might effect his design without noise,
spoke upon all occasions in public, very much to the Mareschals advantage; nor
was that all, he gave him moreover a very honorable, Bir^n in this Journey
betwixt Dijon and Montbelli^rd, was for four hours together in private
Conference with Wattevile the Duke of Savoy's Age^t. D* Serres, page 978.
and a very important Commission, to go renew an Alliance with the Swisse: an
Affair wherein, though many difficulties arose, yet the King who would by no
means have Biron baffled in his Negotiation, by sending a million of Livers
along with him, put him into a condition of making all things succeed according
to his Majesty's own desire. This was the last Service this Marshall performed
for the Crown, wherein he acquitted himself very much to his Honor, and
wherein the reputation of his Valor prevailed much upon that warlike People;
it has been said his dexterity did no less. And here I shall insert by the way,
that those who have believed the Marshall to have no more in his conduct, than
the mere brutality of a rough humourous Soldier, were not at all acquainted
with him: he was read to a sufficient knowledge of Latin, and Greek Letters;
and when ever he would make use of his Judgment and Eloquence, whether in
Negotiations, or Councils, in War or Affairs of State, he ever expressed
himself to be a man of no common qualities.

His Majesty had thought by these testimonies of his trust, the Marshall would
have been allured to Court, to have given an account of the good success of his
Negotiation; where he hoped, without further trouble, he might easily secure
his Person; but with what gentle language soever the King could flatter his
vanity, it was impossible to persuade him into that Journey, so many Accusers,
and Witnesses of his Guilt he found in his own Conscience against him. His
Majesty therefore not being able to bring about his design by this way, and
unwilling to live any longer in the apprehensions he had been put into by the
Mareschal's practice, resolved at last by a manifest disobedience to extract
from him a confession of his fault, which should either give him a reasonable
color to proceed against the Marshall as a Criminal, and a Rebel; or
otherwise oblige him to come, and deliver himself into his hands. He therefore
first dispatched away to him the Sieur d' Escures, Quartermaster-General of his
Armies; a man very acceptable to the Marshall, and in great credit with him,
for having long served under his Command, and immediately after President
Ianin, who also by his wisdom, and experience had won so great an esteem with
the foresaid Marshall, that he would seldom undertake any business of any
great moment without first consulting this politic Minister.

These two were sent with express Orders to represent to Biron part of the ill
Offices had been done him to the King; to which they added, That all the
endeavor of his best Friends could not so justify his actions to the King,
that his Majesty had not his fidelity in suspicion, until he should receive his
justification from his own mouth: that since only himself could defend himself
from Calumny, there was nothing to be deliberated of in the case, and that he
must suddenly resolve, either to give an account of his actions to the King, or
declare himself his Majesty's open Enemy, maintain an impudent War against his
Prince, and have himself and his Posterity branded with the durtiest and most
hateful of all Crimes, to wit, a Traitor to his Benefactor, King, and Country,
that he had to do with a Prince, whose Clemency was so well known to none, as
to himself, who had his great Services fresh in his memory, who expected no
less from his Courage and Fidelity for the time to come, and whose interest it
was as much to preserve him (knowing, as his Majesty very well did, the utility
of his Service) as it was to preserve himself, whose authority was to be
maintained, and established by men of his Conduct and Valor. Remonstrances
from men he loved, and esteemed, by which Biron was so encouraged, and
believing that Lafin had said nothing against him (as he had often, and fasly
assured him) that he resolved upon going to Court; in order whereunto he
presently set forth, taking the Road of Paris in the Company of President Ianin
only, d' Escures having been sent away before to carry news of his coming.

The strict, and inviolate Friendship that all the world knew to be betwixt the
Duke, and the Marshall, soon rendered the first suspected of having a hand in
the other's designs; neither was the Duke ignorant that his Enemies labored
with all the Artifice they had, to involve him in his Friends Treason; but how
perfect soever he was in their malicious practice, and how clearly soever he
foresaw the dangerous consequences were likely to attend a business of this
nature, he was resolute nevertheless, with a generosity hardly to be paralleled
in so critical an occasion, to be no ways wanting to his friend: wherefore
having notice that the Marshall was drawing near to Paris, and that a caution,
which would now come too late to divert him from coming to the King (a thing he
would by no means have advised him from) might perhaps awake his judgment, and
make him appeal to his Majesty's mercy, he sent the Sieur du Plessis
Baussonniere, a man in whom he had an absolute confidence, to meet him upon the
way.

This Gentleman had put himself into the Duke's dependence in his younger
years, and having left his Studies, wherein he had made a considerable
progress, had followed, and served him in Provence, commanding the Regiment of
Pernes his Brother inlaw, all the while the Duke was there in action; after
which, during the whole time of the Duke's life, which was very long, he was by
him continually employed in his greatest, and most important Affairs; in which
he ever gave so good an account of his Conduct, and Fidelity, that there was
scarce any Gentleman of his time in a higher reputation for Valor, Prudence,
and Integrity; insomuch that I have often heard the Duke say, if he were to
corrupt le Plessis, he should be to seek on which side to assault him, his soul
was so bravely fortified throughout. This le Plessis, according to his Masters
order, puts himself upon his way to go meet the Marshall: but as his Errand
could not but be dangerous both for the Master, and the Servant, the one, and
the other sufficiently knowing the violent suspicion the King had of the
Mareschal's proceeding; so did he endeavor with all imaginable caution, if
possible, to entertain him alone. I have often heard him tell the story, and do
very well remember every circumstance, which put altogether will make this
appear an affair of the greatest difficulty, and the best carried on, that
perhaps you shall meet with in the Duke's whole History; and wherein the
generous spirit an innocent Servant, and the Clemency and Justice of a good
Master, will as evidently appear. Le Plessis, perceiving the Mareschal's
Equipage coming at a pretty distance, lighted at a Barn a little wide of the
Highway, where, having with him one of the Duke's Footmen without a Livery, he
commanded him to call the first of the Mareschal's that appeared upon the Road;
which he having done, and le Plessis being not unknown to the fellow, he sent
him to tell his Master in his ear, that le Plessis staid to speak with him a
word or two in private. The Footman accordingly delivered his Message,
whereupon Biron straggling from his company upon some pretense or other, came to
the place where le Plessis stood to expect him, and where without being
observed by any, he had all liberty to discourse at leisure. Le Plessis had in
charge to tell him, That the Journey he was now upon to the King required his
most serious deliberation, and that he was now in good earnest to reflect upon
his own condition: That if he came with a confidence, some possibly might have
possessed him withal, that Lafin had not spoken to the King, he was abused:
That the Duke of Espernon did not know what had passed betwixt Lafin and him;
neither did he desire to inform himself: but that he might be assured, that
whatever he had done, or negotiated with him, or by him, was every tittle
discovered to the King; acquainting him with the several times and places, and
how often Lafin had been in private Conference with him: That he was herein to be
advised by his own Conscience, and to rely upon his Majesty's Grace, and
Bounty, if he conceived there was any thing that might justly be condemned in
his former Actions; there being much better to be hoped for, from his Majesty's
Clemency, and noble nature, than from the secrecy of what had passed betwixt
Lafin and him. This obliging and prudent advice, which ought to have been
received by the Marshall with so much the greater tenderness, by how much it
was preferred with the infinite hazard of him that sent it, did on the contrary
put him into so great a rage, that I have heard le Plessis say, he never in his
life saw any thing in so extravagant a fury. Biron asked him first of all, If
the Duke of Espernon esteemed him for other, than an honest man? To whom du
Plessis having replied, That had he had any other opinion of him, he would not
have persisted in his Friendship so long; he proceeded to tell him, That he was
come to give the lie, and to be the death of all those, who durst blemish his
Actions: That he was the same the Duke of Espernon and he Plessis himself had
ever known him to be: That for what concerned him, Mounsieur d' Espernon might
set his heart at rest. And then clapping his hand upon his Sword, after a
hundred wild postures, he further told du Plessis, That if any one durst make
an attempt upon his Person, he would make more arms and heads fly, than would
stand before him: So that instead of making use of his Friend's caution, and
good advice, he continued his way in his first obstinacy, and the same night
arrived at Fountainbleau.

At his arrival the King spoke to him of the business himself, gently
admonishing him withal to make an ingenuous confession of his fault: a thing he
was so far from being persuaded to do, that he seemed discontented and angry at
the motion.

Soon after he went to Paris, and dined at the Hostel d' Espernon, when the
King returning the same day from Fountain-bleau, the Duke and he went together
in the afternoon to the Louvre, to attend his Majesty; who having notice of
their coming went to the Window, through the glass to observe their carriage,
and countenance; which a friend of the Duke's, who was then with the King, gave
the Duke timely caution of, to the end he might comport himself so, as that his
Majesty might not by any behavior of his be fortified in those evil
impressions, with which he had before by his Enemies been prepossessed: though
the Duke carried himself quite contrary to his advice; and being more and more
confirmed, in the testimony of a good Conscience, and full of a just and
generous indignation to see his Fidelity suspected, walked with his face erect,
and his eyes fixed upon the Window where he knew the King stood: A carriage the
King very well observed, as he made others about him to do also. They were no
sooner come both of them into his Majesty's Chamber, who as yet had expressed
no public dissatisfaction with Biron (as being still in hope to regain him,
and to have an occasion to pardon him by the confession of his fault) but that
he presently made a Match at Tennis, wherein the King and the Count de Soissons
were to play against the Duke of Espernon, and the Marshall: and upon this
occasion it was that the Historians of that time make the Duke say, as a piece
of wit, speaking to the Marshall, That he played well, but that he made his
matches ill; as if by those words, which may admit of a double interpretation,
he would obliquely condemn Biron's designs, which never came into his thought;
it being his custom when ever he talked with the Marshall about that business,
not to do it in such ambiguous terms; nor so out of season, but seriously and
plainly, and in a secrecy, the safest for him he would advise. He several
times represented to him the ill Offices he had received, he confirmed to him
the same thing he had sent him word of before concerning Lafin, conjuring him
not to rely upon his Faith, which would certainly deceive him: But these second
admonitions were as fruitless as the first; and the King seeing that he could
neither by himself, nor by the Count de Soissons, the Mareschals intimate
Friend, who had dealt with him by his Majesty's absolute command, and in his
name, reclaim this obstinate spirit, nor make him reconcile himself to his
duty, by acknowledging his offense; he gave him over at last to the rigor of
Law, and Justice, who punished his Crime, by the forfeiture of his Head.

Whilst they were drawing up the Mareschal's Charge, his Majesty well enform'd
of le Plessis Envoy (it being a thing hard to be kept secret, in an Affair
where all things were so narrowly observed) referred the intelligence to the
deliberation of his Council. The Cabinet Council at that time consisted of the
Count de Soissons, de Sillery Keeper of the Seal, Sully superintendent of the
Exchequer, President Ianin, Bellieure, and Villeroy: In which Assembly diverse
conjectures being set on foot, to fortify the jealousies his Majesty had been
persuaded into against the Duke, it was by the major part voted necessary to
secure his person, or at least to make sure of le Plessis, and to put him to
the wrack, that from a confession extorted from him sufficient evidence might
be drawn to convince his Master: A result so approved by all, that the King was
himself almost the only man that opposed those two propositions. He told them
that as for the Duke, a man of his quality was never to be arrested, unless to
be condemned, that as yet there was nothing but suspicion, and conjectures
against him; which should they prove idle, and vain, he was never after to
repose any trust in a man, so undeservedly, and so unjustly offended: That for
le Plessis he was no more to be meddled withal than the other, without giving a
manifest distaste to his Master: That if one of them were to be secured, he
should rather begin with the Master, than the Servant; because the confinement
of the last would be an equal injury to the other; but that the effect would by
no means be the same, being the Duke, if he knew himself guilty, would by the
seizing of le Plessis be forwarn'd to make his escape: That he was therefore of
opinion to expect if in the Trial of Marshall Biron, nothing would come to
light that might justly bring the Duke in question, which if there did, and
that he should be found a Complice, there was no place he could fly to so
remote, where his arm would not be long enough to reach him.

If the King had intelligence of le Plessis's Envoy to the Marshall Biron, the
Duke was no less faithfully informed of what had passed in the Cabinet Council
concerning him; by which he understood that le Plessis Journey was not so great
a secret, as it had been convenient for both their safeties it had been, which
made him consult with le Plessis what was best to be done in so dangerous an
occasion. The Duke was not secure, the King would continue so constant in his
favor, that his Majesty might not at another Council be overruled into other
resolutions, and persuaded at last to put le Plessis to the question; a doubt
that made him think it expedient he should retire; that he being gone, no
evidence might appear against him, he having been alone entrusted with the
secret of this Affair: but le Plessis, who very well foresaw his flight, though
it might procure his own particular safety, would certainly be his Master's
ruin, could by no means consent to the motion. He rather chose to run the
hazard of the Wrack, (which he was ready to undergo, and of which, I have heard
him say, he had already the terrors in his imagination) than to expose the
Life, and Honor of his Master, which, after so strong a presumption, as his
withdrawing himself must of necessity give, would be in an apparent danger. He
therefore humbly entreated the Duke not to concern himself at the thought of
any thing that threatened him; assuring him withal, that as he had done nothing
contrary to his Majesty's Service, so all the Wracks and Tortures in the world
could never force him to say any thing contrary to the truth. Settled then in
this resolution, from which I do believe nothing upon earth could have removed
him, his wit suggested to him an expedient, by which in the end he secured both
his Masters Person and his own. He advised the Duke to prevent his Majesty by
an ingenuous confession of the truth, and to tell him himself what he had done:
for as the King could not imagine that the Duke could have had any notice of
that secret, it being improbable, the result of a Council held but that
morning, and consisting of men of so approved Fidelity and Trust, could be so
suddenly revealed; so was it not to be believed, that the Duke's voluntary
discovery of what he had done, could pass in his Majesty's opinion for a
premeditated thing. The Duke approving of this advice, put it as speedily into
execution; and the King intending to hunt in the afternoon, he mounted on
horseback, as he used to do, to attend him; where having followed and observed
his Majesty's motion with an extraordinary diligence, that he might find an
opportunity for his purpose, they light by chance into a solitary place, into
which his Majesty being insensibly stragled from the gross of his Train, there
were very few left about him. And here it was that the King turning toward the
Duke, fell upon the Discoure of Marshall Biron, who was now in the heat of his
Trial, complaining how ill he had used him, and how ungrateful a man he was: To
which the Duke replied, That as a Relation, and a Friend to the Marshall, he
could not without great affliction see so evident testimonies of his guilt,
that he had been at first very unwilling to believe he could be guilty of so
foul a Crime: but that now it did so manifestly appear, he could not think any
punishment enough to chastise so foul an Offense: To whom the King having
returned, What, it seems then you know nothing of the business? The Duke made
answer, Sir, I knew so little of it, that at his coming to this Town, I sent le
Plessis to meet him, and to welcome him to Court, which I should never have
done, had I thought him guilty. At which words, which touched the King to the
quick, his Majesty set spurs to his Horse, with an extravagance not very
natural to him, but which that unexpected answer had put him into: when having
taken a Career, and turning again to the Duke, with a countenance that
sufficiently expressed that he was angry at a discovery he had no mind should
have come from the Duke's own mouth. It seems then, said he, you sent to
Marshall Biron without my knowledge? To whom the Duke replied again, That he
did not conceive it necessary to ask his Majesty's leave to send a mere
Complement to his Friend: That seeing him come without a Guard, or any apparent
marks of disgrace, and his Majesty treating him with the same favor he used to
do, he had on his part used him at the same rate he had ever done: That it had
been a custom long observed betwixt them, that which of them soever had been
any time absent from Court, was at his return by some Servant of trust enform'd
by the other of all the little passages had happened during his absence: That it
was true, he had in this occasion continued this custom: That he humbly
besought his Majesty to believe nothing more particular had passed betwixt
them, and that he had rather dye, than once conceive a thought to the prejudice
of his Majesty's Service, or his own duty: That he hoped the event would more
clearly evidence the integrity of his actions; but that nevertheless he thought
it fit to give his Majesty that security in hand. The King being well satisfied
with the Duke's Reasons, but much more with the Confidence he perceived him to
repose in his Justice, and his own Innocence, all jealousies, that before had
been infused into him, to the prejudice of the Duke's Fidelity, and Honor,
vanished away, and he with the greatest care and assiduity, was more than ever
about his Majesty's Person. His Children (which a little before he had brought
to Court) had order to continue about the young Dolphin's Person, to be as it
were Hostages of their Father's Innocence, and the Mareschal's Trial being at
last over, all Witnesses and Parties examined, and heard without the least
mention of the Duke of Espernon's name in all their practice, his Majesty was
not a little satisfied with himself, that he had carried things with that
moderation toward the Duke upon this occasion.

This untoward business was soon after seconded by another, which, though of
far less dangerous consequence, began the Duke nevertheless as much trouble as
the first. The Duke as he was ever very circumspect in his duty, to preserve
his Fidelity entire to the King, so was he no less solicitous to maintain
himself in all advantages deriving to him as particles of any of his Commands.
That of Colonel therefore having been conferred upon him by Henry III. with
extraordinary privileges, as by his Patent does appear, he could not endure
the least violation of his Interest; but with a stiffness (that doubtless would
have offended a less equitable Prince, than that under whom he had the honor
to serve) was ever obstinate to maintain every punctilio of his right. One of
the greatest, and of the greatest Honor that was annexed to this Command, was
the power he had to name the Camp-Master to the Regiment of Guards when ever
that place should be void; and it happened now that Grillon, who had been
possessed of this Command before the Duke was created Colonel, was fail'n into
infirmities, that rendered him incapable of his Charge: Yet had his former
Services been such as made it very reasonable he should however make his best
advantage of it, as his Majesty was content he should; but having a singular,
and a very just respect for the Marshall de l' Esdiguieres, and a very great
affection for his Son-in-law Crequy, he intended the latter, having first
compounded with Grillon, should be preferred to that Command, intending perhaps
hereby, as much to clip the wings of the Duke's Authority, which he had as
Colonel over the Regiment of Guards, as altogether to oblige Crequy. The Duke,
advertised of his Majesty's purpose, could not forbear giving out aloud, that
he would never consent to it, and the King on the contrary was resolved his
pleasure should prevail: But in the end after many oppositions (which this good
Prince was pleased to endure from a Servant) the Duke, who had never discovered
his mind to the King, but by the mediation of others, was resolved to deliver
it to his Majesty with his own mouth, as accordingly he did; representing to
him with a liberty (which to his Subjects was none of the least felicities of
his happy Reign) the Justice of his Cause. All which, notwithstanding his
reasons, could not so prevail upon his Majesty's temper, but that he remained
as firm as ever in his first resolution. Which the Duke seeing, and conceiving
he could not consent to his Majesty's desire, without going less in the dignity
of his place, he rather chose to absent himself from Court, than to be
compelled by an express, and positive command to do a thing so much to the
prejudice of his Authority, and Honor; and accordingly very much dissatisfied,
retired himself to Angoulesme. The King, who was not yet totally cured of a
jealousy, still kept awake by the practices, the remainder of Biron's Faction
(not quiet extinct) yet kept on foot in his Kingdom, gave manifest signs of
discontent at the Duke's departure; and as he knew the alliance the Duke of
Montpensier had contracted with his Family, by his Match, had begot a strict
friendship betwixt them, so was it to him especially that he spoke of it with
the greatest freedom, and in terms (not without threats) of the highest
indignation. This Prince, who concerned himself as much at the Duke's Interest,
as his own, dispatched away to him in great diligence the Sieur de la
Chetardie, in whom he had an especial confidence, to let him understand the
King's displeasure, and to remonstrate to him the danger he would expose
himself unto, should he longer persist in opposition to his Majesty's pleasure,
who would herein be absolutely obeyed: A caution by which the Duke plainly
seeing he was reduced to a necessity either to bow, or break; he indeed chose
the latter, though not without high complaints of the injustice was done him,
which were neither so modest, nor so private, that they were not soon carried
to the King's ear: And though so stubborn an opposition in the Duke might
reasonably enough have more exasperated the King against him, yet such was the
noble nature of this great Prince, that it would not suffer him long to bear in
mind the memory of his offense; for the Duke had no sooner given his consent to
Crequy's admission, but that his Majesty commanded him the first thing he did,
to take a Journey a hundred Leagues from Paris, to see his Colonel, to take his
Oath betwixt his hands, to obtain his hand to his Commission, and to receive
his Order for his admission into his place: Civilities by which although the
King endeavored to give the Duke all satisfaction; yet could they not so far
reconcile him, but that at Crequy's arrival, he made him wait a whole day
together at his Chamber door, and expect some days after before he would
receive his Oath, or Sign his Commission: And although he was himself very
sensible that so many manifest aversions were sufficient to beget new distastes
in the King against him; yet was he not so much master of himself, nor had so
much command over his own Nature; but that he must put those affronts upon
Crequy, or rather upon the King, who made this business his own.

By these disputes (which in another time might have turned very much to the
Duke's prejudice) he got nevertheless this advantage, that the King to satisfy
him for the future in the interests of his Command, made a kind of agreement
with him (if a largess from a Master to his Servant may be so called) which
was, That his Majesty would indeed really, and effectually reserve to himself
the nomination of Camp-Master to the Regiment of Guards; Mounsieur Crequy made
Camp-Master to the Regiment of Guards.
as also to the other old Regiments: but with this condition, that the Colonel
should swear them, that they should be conceived to have their admission from
him, without which they were not to be received into the employment: That his
Majesty having provided for one Company in the Regiment of Guards, he was
content the Duke should in turn do the same for the next at his own
appointment: That of all the Foot Companies of the other Regiments, new and
old, the Duke when ever any should be vacant, should have the naming of the
Captains to the King to fill them up; and that no Captain soever, whether of
the Regiment of Guards, or any other Regiment should be admitted into, or
established in his Command till first his Commission was Signed by the Colonel:
But for what concerned those Offices, that depended upon the Duke's Command, as
Lieutenants, Ensigns, Colonel-Ensigns, Sergeants, and Serjeant-Majors,
Martials, Provost-Martials, Quarter Masters, and other Officers, that he should
place and displace them by his sole Authority, without any order from the King,
or his Majesty's taking any notice thereof. According to which Agreement the
Duke proceeded so regularly, and undisturbed in the Privileges of his Command,
that there was never after, during this Kings Reign, the least Dispute betwixt
them, saveing once, that the King thinking it fit to add two Companies more to
his Regiment of Guards, and having appointed their Captains, the Duke
interposed his Majesty's Royal Promise, humbly beseeching him to do him right:
an Argument so powerful to this equitable Prince, that of two Captains he had
named, he only provided for one, which was the Sieur de la Courbe, who had but
the second Company neither: the first being given to the Sieur de Bourdet by
the Duke's Recommendation, whose turn it was to name the first vacant Company:
yet did not the business pass without some dispute, though at last the King was
pleased rather to give way to his Servant's just desires, than to fail in the
least Article of his Word.

I shall here add (since I am upon this discourse of the Office of Colonel) a
thing that time has sufficiently justified to all France, which is, that the
Duke was so exceeding cautious in the dispensation of Commands, whether merely
depending upon his own Authority, or in his nomination only, that his Majesty
would often say, he never had better Foot Officers, than those of the Duke's
preferring. And in truth the French Infantry, whilst the Duke was permitted to
execute his charge, were kept in so good order, that perhaps no Militia in
Europe were better Disciplined, nor better Officer'd than they; a truth to this
hour confirmed by an infinite number of persons yet living, who have commanded
under him, and who were witnesses of his conduct. To which I shall further add,
and to his great commendation, a thing not to be contradicted; which is, that
he neither directly, nor indirectly ever made the least benefit of any Command
he disposed of, which I think had they been set to sale would, in the long
course of his life, have amounted to above two Millions of Gold, after the rate
they are sold now adays. And I do very well remember, that toward his latter
end, when he saw the selling of Offices began to grow in fashion, he did all he
could, and that the condition of the time would permit, to oppose it;
representing to the King, with very convincing Arguments, what a prejudice such
an abuse would be to his Service; although in the end seeing he could not
prevail with the Council to alter that toleration, he also gave some of his own
Servants, though very few, leave to make money of the Offices he had conferred
upon them: but I am certain, that for his own particular, he never converted
any the least employment to his own p^ofit: A thing perhaps such as thought him
solicitous of his own Interest, will hardly be persuaded to believe, as indeed
he was inclined to the saving side, and wary enough when it was fit for him to
be so: but never, upon any occasion where his Honor was concerned, that ever
taking with him the upperhand of all other considerations.

The business of Crequy, how troublesome, and how hard soever to digest, was
not yet the last of the same nature the Duke was to wrestle withal in this
years revolution, another following immediately after; which, as it nearer
concerned him, pierced deeper to the quick: neither had it so happy an issue as
the first. The Duke having in the year 1582. been by King Henry the III.
established in the Government of Metz, he conferred the Lieutenancy of the City
and Country upon Moncassin his Kinsman, and the Command of the Citadel upon
Sobole: but in process of time, which happened in the year 1585. having withdrawn
Moncassin from this employment to continue about his own person: Sobole, whom
he had bred a Page, and in whom he had an entire confidence, was by his bounty
raised to that degree, that he conferred upon him the command of the City, and
Country, together with that of the Citadel also; which was effectually one of
the bravest entertainments in France, Metz being at that time the most
considerable place of the Kingdom, and the noblest member of the Duke's Command.

In the Year 1594. the King undertook the Siege of Laon, to which, as to an
occasion wherein he expected to meet with great difficulties, he invited many
of his Servants of the neighboring Provinces. Amongst these Sobole was one,
who by the Authothority the Duke had given him in Metz, having got a great
interest in the Country, might with great facility raise a considerable party
of Horse, as he did, and at the Head of sixscore Light Horse, very well
appointed, and fourscore Carabins, went to serve his Majesty at this Siege. The
King received him with great demonstrations of favor, and not being well
satisfied with the Duke of Espernon, who being at that time in Provence, where
he did not behave himself to his Majesty's liking, after he had, as he
conceived, cut him out work enough there, he took occasion to raise him greater
difficulties about Metz, by lessening the Authority he had till that time ever
had over Sobole. And to that purpose after he had reduced Laon to his
obedience, and about to dismiss those Auxiliaries who had come in to serve him
in that Action, his Majesty sent Sobole word, That after so great a
satisfaction as he had received from his Services, he was as well disposed to
gratify him as he himself could desire; which nevertheless the present
condition of his Affairs not permitting him to do, at so honorable a rate, as
he could wish, it was for him to look out for something he had a mind to, which
should be as readily conferred upon him. Those who had order to make this
overture to Sobole, were further entrusted to represent unto him, That being
Governor of Metz merely by the Duke's toleration, he was subject upon the
first capricio to be removed; after which from the honorable condition wherein
he had lived for many years, he would find himself reduced to a very moderate
fortune: That though he could be assured the Duke's humor would continue
constant to him, yet ought the declining posture of his Affairs in Provence to
give him a reasonable Alarm: That all things in that Country were so averse to
him, it was all the Duke could do to keep his head above water; and that his
Affairs coming to an absolute ruin, as they evidently declined he would be in
danger to be left in Metz, without any support, or any colorable claim, either
to command, or recompense: That the King conceiving a Gentl^man of his Valor
and Merit, worthy a more certain fortune, did voluntary offer to make him his
own Lieutenant, in the Government of the Place and Country, under the Duke;
whose Authority being kept inviolate, he could have no just reason to reproach
him; for seeking to establish his own Fortune, without doing any prejudice to
his. It was no hard matter to persuade Sobole into a thing he believed would
settle his Affairs so much to his advantage; so that he greedily swallowed the
bait, and receiving a new Commission from the King, retired very well satisfied
with his Majesty's bounty into his Government: But as the first step into a
fault, makes men subject to stumble into another, after having once failed in
his Faith, he had now no more regard to his Duty; and conceiving he had good
title for the future to Lord it over the Inhabitants of Metz, with greater
Authority than he had formerly done; he grew insolent to the last degree.
Complaints whereof were soon brought to the Duke; where to him they accused
Sobole, for having raised money upon them by his own private Authority, and to
have committed many other insolences against them. The Duke was at this time
disengaged from the trouble of his Affairs in Provence, and the residence he
had since that time made at Court having informed him of Sobole's deportment,
he was questionless possessed with an indignation proportionable to the
offense: but he very well foresaw, that the King, who had in design raised
Sobole against him, would doubtless uphold him, and justify his own
Commission; so that he durst by no means act any thing in public against him,
not go about by open force to displace him: but on the contrary dissembled as
much as in him lay, both the knowledge, and the trouble of his fault; and when
continually importuned by reiterated complaints from the Inhabitants of Metz,
(a people he ever had in great consideration) he only admonished him to behave
himself with greater moderation toward them: but Sobole was deaf to all those
admonitions, and so far from slackning his hand, that on the contrary, to
render the Duke's good Offices fruitless to them, he contrived with himself to
accuse many of the principal among them to the King, for having (as he said)
endeavored to betray the Town, and Citadel of Metz to Count Mansfield,
Governor of Luxenbourg, for the King of Spain: Which he did, to the end that
his Majesty being prepossessed with so black an accusation, no one, not so much
as the Duke himself might dare to speak in their behalf. The business was very
strictly examined, and in the end discovered to be a mere calumny, which made
all the world conclude it had been inv^^^ted by Sobole in spite to deprive the
Inhabitants of their Lives and Estates: a malice so notorious, that the Duke
could no longer endure a people, whom he loved, and had ever protected, should
be so ill used by a man he himself had appointed to govern, but not to destroy
them: Which made him openly undertake their protection against Sobole's
violence, against whom the hatred the people had conceived, having provoked
them into arms, they besieged him in the Citadel; a thing the Duke was not
sorry for, hoping this would counsel the King to remove him, and that he being
out, the place could be supplied by none, from whom he might not promise to
himself better things than from Sobole.

What the Duke had so prudently foreseen, Anno 1603.
fell out exactly, as he imagined it would; for the King alarmed at the danger
of so important a place (it being very much to be feared his ill neighbors
would take the advantage of the evil intelligence betwixt the Governor and the
people, to seize the Town, resolved to go thither in person; and accordingly
with the Queen, and all the Court set forward in the beginning of the year
1603. A journey in which the Duke of Espernon was too much concerned to stay
behind; and in the issue whereof Sobole was deposed from his Government with a
pardon for all that was passed; which his ill carriage had made the reward of
his Service, and all the recompense he received for so brave a Command. After
his departure his Majesty resolved himself to dispose of his places; a thing
wherein the Duke of Espernon's interest did most of all consist, who till that
time had ever had the disposition of all Offices inferior to his own in that
Government; and by that means had been absolute over the City: but his
Authority being suspected to the King, who would have no other than his own
acknowledged in his Kingdom, his Majesty gave the Duke to understand, that
Sobole having resigned unto him his Lieutenancy to the Government of the City,
and Citadel of Metz, and the Messin Country, which his Majesty had formerly
seated him in, he was now resolved to settle men of Condition, and approved
Fidelity in his room, always reserving (which his Majesty would by no means
diminish) for the Duke his Authority in the place; that in order thereunto he
had cast his eye upon the two Brothers les Sieurs de Montigny, and d' Arquien;
to the first of which he would give his Lieutenancy to the City, and Country;
and to the other the command of the Citadel: but that the one and the other
should render him an obedience equal to his own person. The Duke, having well
enough foreseen how things would be, had nothing to oppose against his
Majesty's Royal Pleasure; but without co^^^adiction gave way to necessity, and
with patience (the only remedy remained) was content to expect some happy
opportunity that might re-establish him in the possession of a place so
important to his fortune, and whereof he saw himself at present absolutely
deprived.

During his Majesty's abode at Metz, the Provincial of the Fathers Jesuits was
by the Duke of Espernon presented to him; where the proposition preferred by
the Provincial for the re-establishment of his fraternity in France, was so
promoted by the Duke's mediation, that it was concluded on to his great
satisfaction. Neither was this the first good office the Duke had done them,
nor the sole testimony he had given of his affection, and respect to that
Society; he having ever been one of their most constant, and most powerful
Protectors in the time of their persecution, as he was one of their principal
benefactors after their re-establishment. Metz, that ever till then had made
many, and almost invincible difficulties of ever admitting them into their
Corporation, received them upon the Duke's single account, as he also procured
their admission into Angoulesme before he left that Government: Their College
of Xaints has no other foundation than what he bestowed upon it of four
thousand Livers a year in two fair Benefices, which put all together have
rendered him one of the principal Benefactors of that Society, by the
acknowledgment, and testimony of the most ancient, and most eminent men of the
Order.

The variety of accidents, The state of Affairs at Court during the Peace.
and business that had befallen the King in these last years, were yet too few
to take him wholly up, he still found leisure enough for his delights; and
although he himself took a particular account of all. Affairs, and was ever the
main director in all things; yet his abilities (which nothing was too big for)
rendered him so excellent at dispatch, that he still made way for his vacation
and pleasure. The Peace concluded with all his Neighbors, and his domestic
troubles extinguished, either by the punishment of the offenders, or by the
excess of his own clemency, gave him now sufficient leisure to look after the
reformation of such abuses as were crept into the state during the license of
War; an employment which, how becoming soever his Royal care, and how
profitable soever to the Kingdom, took up but a very inconsiderable part of his
time, the rest being dedicated to the Chase, to play, and to the diversions of
Love: entertainments that (as the passions, and humors of Princes (who are the
great examples of their people) do easily insinuate themselves unto their
Subjects Affections, or at least their imitation) were grown so much in fashion
at Court, that there was scarce any talk of any other thing; and if they had,
during this Voyage to Metz, suffered a little intermission, they were, at the
return of the Court to Paris, more than ever set on foot. It has been believed,
that though the King in his hunting, and his Mistrisses altogether followed the
pro^^ivity of his own nature; yet that for what concerned play, he had in that
as much design at least, as inclination. I have already told you, that his
Majesty having set down the bringing low the great men of his Kingdom by
imperceptible ways, to render them more obedient, for a Maxim of State, had
put them upon the humor of Building, to drain their purses: and doubtless his
engaging them in play, was in order to the same design: amongst whom the Duke
of Espernon, who already felt the smart of the first, and that very well
understood his Majesty's meaning in the latter, refused not nevertheless to
make one for his Master's satisfaction: but if he did it at first merely out of
compliance, his ill fortune at last made it become his revenge, and inclined
him so passionately to it, that he found himself in the end engaged in so
extraordinary losses, as were no little inconvenience to him. His Majesty would
often do him the honor to play at his house, ever inviting him to all his
Matches: And whether he retired to Zamet, or to any other place to evade the
tumult of Majesty and Greatness, the Duke of Espernon was always the first
invited; so that although he was not in favor, he was nevertheless in great
esteem: of which one of the most signal testimonies he could receive, was the
honor the King did him in permitting him to enter the Louvre in his Coach; a
favor till this time reserved only for the Princes of the Blood, exclusively
to all other persons of the Kingdom, the Duke being the first that unlocked
this Privilege for the Dukes, and Peers, though he enjoyed it alone during the
King's life; his Majesty, though often importuned by others of the same
quality, for the same honor, never consenting to have it drawn into example.
It Is true, that after the King's death, the Queen Regent, to accommodate her
self to the time, was content to abate much of the Royal State, and allowed the
Dukes, and Peers, and Officers of the Crown, the same Privilege: but the
respect to the Duke's person was that which first procured them that indulgence.

A famous Gamester called Pimentel, The story of Pimentel.
an Italian, came at this time into France, whose dexterity in gulling the
Court was such* that I cannot forbear to mention him in this place. It Is said,
and it is perfectly true, that this Cavalier hearing what an humor of play
reigned at the French Court, caused great number of false Dice to be made, of
which he himself only knew the high, and the low runners, hiring men to carry
them into France, where after they had bought up, and conveyed away all that
were in Paris, he supplied all the Shops with his own: By which means having
subjected the spirit of Play, and tied the hands of Fortune, he arrived at last
in France; where insinuating himself into the Court, he was by some of his own
Nation, who had great interest there, soon brought acquainted with the King.
Some have believed his Majesty understood the man well enough, and was content
to admit him for a Gamester, the better to bring about his own design of
impoverishing the Lords of his Court, whose Riches grew suspected to him. The
Duke of Espernon was one from whom he drew the most considerable sums; who
after having got all his ready money, and many of his Jewels, he moreover won of
him a piece of Ambergris, to the value of 20000. Crowns, the greatest that ever
was seen in Europe; and which the Republic of Venice, to whom it was after
sold, preserve to this day in their Treasure for a great rarity. The Duke had
not long been Master of it; a Country fellow that had found it upon the Coast
of Medoc, having but a little before brought it to him, as a thing due to the
House of Candale; of which the Duke was now the head. This Ancient and
illustrious Family, are possessors of many goodly Manors in Guienne, and
principally in the Country of Medoc, with as ample privileges as belong to any
of the greatest Territories of the Kingdom; of which one of the most honorable
is that of the Admiralty, which might also have been one of the most
profitable, had the Duke when the Spanish Carricks suffer^d Shipwreck upon that
Coast in the year 1627* been countenanced in his right; which, however at that
time set aside, derives to him nevertheless from a Title of above 300. years
standing, to all the wracks that should happen any where within the extent of
above fifty Leagues upon the Coast that bounds this Territory. But how just
soever his claim might be, it was impossible for him to justify his title
against the Power, that then under his Majesty's name exercised a more than
Sovereign Authority. The Sea of Medoc, one of the most tempestuous of the
Ocean, famous for Shipwracks, and for that reason called La Mer Sauvage, or the
wild Sea, has usually in stormy weather cast up Ambergris, and the best in the
world, upon that Coast; a truth I can with confidence aver, after having been
an eyewitness of the difference betwixt that, and the other which was brought
from the Indies in the Carricks. The people of the Country, by the profit
invited to this search, never fail, after a storm to rake all along the Shore
for this Commodity, wherein they have often very good fortune; I having seen in
my time a piece, which though much less than that I have already mentioned,
weighed above twenty pound, and was valued at above 20000. Livers, found by a
Country fellow in the year 1625. wherein he did all he could to cheat the Lord
of his due; to whom two thirds of the thing found does of right belong, and the
third to the finder, if he make a faithful discovery: but this fellow's fraud
being found out, the Duke was by justice favored in his claim, and made master
of the whole.

Whilst the Duke on the one hand lost his Money and Jewels at play, his
liberality at the same time acquired a Treasure sufficient to recompense those
losses, and that was the friendship of Messire Philip Cospean, The advancement
of Philip Cospean Bishop of Lizieux by the Duke of Espernon's means.
first Bishop of Air, afterward of Nantes, and lastly of Lizieux, where a few
years since he died in as high a reputation of Sanctity and Learning, as any
Prelate of his time. This good Bishop was at this time a young man, newly
arrived from Mons in Hainault, where he was born; who having run through his
course of Study at Lovain, under the tuition of Iustus Lipsius, with great
applause, had assurance enough to trust himself upon the great Theater of
Europe, and resolved upon a Journey to Paris: Thither being come, he first
undertook the Education of Messieurs de Rambouillet, and du Fargis, Pupils
worthy of so excellent a Tutor; when from private Precepts, proceeding to
public Lectures, he became Philosophy Reader, which he so admirably performed,
that he soon eclipsed the Reputation of the most famous Doctors of his time. Le
Plessis Baussonniere, who in the profession of Arms retained yet a great
inclination to Learning, being invited by Cospean's Reputation to his Lectures,
a particular friendship was soon contracted betwixt them; under the privilege
of which Le Plessis importuned Cospean to leave the Schools, and to mount the
Pulpit, encouraging his modesty with the applause he might infallibly promise
to himself from the equity and opinion of all judicious men. With much ado
Cospean was at last overcome by his Friends persuasions, so that he preached,
and in a short time got so high a repute, that le Plessis made no difficulty to
invite the Duke his Master to hear a stranger preach, that had no name at
Court. The Duke went the first time to hear him upon le Plessis account, where
being highly satisfied with the Eloquence of this new Orator, he afterward
drew most of the Court to hear him, where Cospean out-stripping the expectation
of all his Auditories, arrived in a short space to such a degree of Reputation,
that he became the model of queint Preaching; and doubtless by this stranger
Eloquence first mounted the Pulpit in France. The Duke of Espernon, not content
only to countenance the Reputation of so deserving a man, would further by his
bounty advance a Virtue, that he had first brought into the light; wherefore
the Bishopric of Air having been some time vacant by the decease of Francis
de Foix, and de Candale, and this Dignity being at his dispose, he preferred
the Merit of his Friend, to the consideration and respect of many men of
Quality, his Relations; and unknown to Cospean, dispatched his Mandamus to the
Bishopric, procured Bulls from Rome at his own Charge, and gave him Furniture
and Equipage necessary for the support of his Dignity, which would otherwise
have been very chargeable to him. A bounty this good Prelate would often
mention to me in the story of his Life, with the greatest acknowledgment; and
never was man more grateful for a Benefit, than he made it appear he was for
this all the days of his life. Neither if he, upon all occasions, highly
magnified the Duke's Liberality, was the Duke less satisfied with his good
Fortune, that had given him so happy an opportunity to oblige so excellent a
man; from whom, I have often heard him declare, he received more assistance in
his Affairs, more sweetness, and satisfaction in his conversation, and more
comfort in his afflictions, than from all the advantages he had derived from
Fortune besides, during the whole course of his long life.

All these things past during the calm the Court at this time lived in, a
tranquillity wherein the King, who by the sole reputation of his name kept all
things quiet abroad, and who had very little to do at home, began seriously to
think of improving his Revenue, and of filling his Treasure; his great, and
noble courage suggesting to him generous designs enough of employing it one day
to the glory of his own name, and to the advantage of his Crown and Kingdom. A
time wherein the presence of his great Ministers being not very necessary at
Court, where all things were carried on by his Majesty's own particular
conduct, every man had leisure to look after his own private affairs.

It was after the forementioned transactions that happened in the Years 1602. and
1603. Anno 1604.
that the Duke of Espernon, willing to share in the liberty of the time,
departed in the latter end of the last into his Governments of Xaintonge, and
Angoumois; where bearing still in mind the affront offered him by the Marshall
d' Ornano, A ne^ q^arrel like to rise betwixt the Duke o^ Espernon* and the
Marshall d' Ornano.
and thinking himself not clear in his Reputation, unless he returned again to
Bordeaux to renew the match had before by the Mareschals morosity been broken
off, he went again to Bordeaux in the beginning of the year 1604. to make ready
for a Carnaval; to which he had invited a far greater number of Nobility, and
Gentry than before, and where the preparation for Masks, Running at the Ring,
Balls, and Feasting, were made with great pomp, and vast expense. But the
Marshall, notwithstanding the Orders he had received from the King, conceiving
this business, what gloss soever might be put upon it, would be interpreted to
his disgrace, and would pass in the opinions of men at honor for a Bravado,
and an affront to him in his Government, could by no means persuade himself to
digest it, which made him very important with the King, that his Majesty would
please to absolve him from so injurious a condition; a thing the King (who had
him in great esteem) would as willingly have done: But his Royal Word being
already passed to the Duke, whom he knew to be as obstinate as the other, in
things wherein his Honor was concerned, and not knowing how at once to
satisfy two so different humors, matters were in all appearance going into as
ill terms as at first, when an accident fell out that soon took the Duke off
all thoughts of that Solemnity. The Duchess of Bar the King's only Sister,
happened to dye at this time which gave the King occasion to write to the Duke of
Espernon, that he assured himself all such good Subjects and Servants, as he
was, would rather lament with him for the loss of so dear a Relation, than to
think of Mirth and public Solemnities of Joy, at so unseasonable a time; a
command so much the easier for the Duke to obey, by how much he himself had
particular reason to be really afflicted at the death of that excellent Lady.
So that by this accident the Marshall d' Ornano saw himself disengaged from
one of the greatest extremities he had ever found himself involved in, it
having been otherwise necessary for him, either absolutely to disobey the King,
which he could not have done without incurring his disgrace, or patiently to
submit to an affront he himself had declared to be the greatest he could
possibly receive; and that ('it is said) he was resolved to have avoided by
laying down his Commission: such as were most perfect in his passionate nature
being confident, had it come to the push, he would certainly have ransomed
himself from that submission at the price of his Fortune.

The Duke continued some time after this in Guienne, and from thence returned
into Angoumois, where he spent the remainder of the year, without being called
thence upon any public occasion. All things (as has been said) were quiet, and
the King seemed to be wholly taken up, with the care of husbanding and filling
his Exchequer; wherein though some believed him to be merely carried on by a
natural inclination to the love of money; yet his designs which a few years
after disclosed themselves gave the world an account, that there was more of
design than avarice in the exact care he took to moderate the excessive expense
had by his predecessor been introduced into the Kingdom. The Duke of Espernon
nevertheless could have wished his Majesty had been more open handed to the
Garrisons in his Government, those of Angoulesme, and Xaintes being so ill paid
that they could hardly subsist; which putting him into an apprehension, that
those places (become now as it were Frontier Towns, since those of the Reformed
Religion had made a kind of separation in the State, of which Rochelle seemed
to be the Metropolitan City) might be lost in his hands, he continually
represented to the King the danger those Cities were in, but without being
regarded at all; which made him in the beginning of the ensuing year resolve
upon a Journey to Court, to try, if in person, and by word of mouth he could
not prevail more, than by continual importunities in writing he had hitherto
done: where being arrived, and presenting himself before the King, his Majesty
as'd him in what condition he had left his Governments? to whom the Duke
replied, That they could not possibly be in a worse; the necessity of the
Soldiery in Garrison being so great that he durst not undertake for the
security of those places committed to his charge. To which the King having made
answer, That they were used as others were: The Duke (who very well knew the
difference his Majesty made betwixt his Catholic Garrisons, and the
neighboring places possessed by those of the Reformed Religion) took the
liberty to tell him, that those who had so informed his Majesty had given him a
very ill account of his Affairs, the Garrisons of those of the Religion, who
perhaps were armed to the prejudice of his Service, being nothing in Arrear,
whilst the Catholics who were firm in their obedience, were ready to perish
for want of pay. The King nettled at so tart a reply, and angry that the Duke
should give him so public a reproach in the discovery of a truth, he had a
mind, for many reasons, should have been concealed, suffered himself to be so
far transported by his passion, that he could not forbear to tell the Duke, He
was perverse, and importunate: That he sought all occasions to displease him:
That he would have done him a greater kindness to have kept still at the
distance he was at, than to come into his presence only to offend him; and for
the close of all, that he had long observed he did not love him. To which the
Duke without being thunderstruck at the King's anger, which might perhaps have
surpised another man, less confident of his Fidelity than he, insisting upon
the last words, answered coldly, but after a serious manner, Sir, your Majesty
has not a more faithful Subject than my self in your Kingdom, and I had rather
die, than do any thing contrary to the least particle of my duty: A bold answer
from the Duke to the King, well received, and turned to his advantage.
But Sir, for what concerns friendship, your Majesty knows very well, that is a
thing not to be acquired but by Friendship. At so bold, and generous an answer,
there was none who was not astonished at the Duke's freedom, and that was not
ready to condemn his rashness; though the King himself, who knew how to put a
just value upon great actions, and how to interpret language of this nature,
was of a more favorable opinion, and gave no reply: but on the contrary,
reflecting upon what the Duke had said, converted his indignation into esteem;
and interpreting what others thought temerity, for an effect of honest liberty,
proceeding from a good conscience, resolved to make himself beloved, by the way
the Duke had laid him down, and from that time forward began to use him much
better, than he had ever done. Neither was the Duke wanting on his part, but
perceiving his Majesty's good disposition toward him, and adding the spur of
affection to what he had formerly performed upon the mere account of duty, he
at last obtained so great a share in his Majesty's favor, and good opinion,
that before his death he received as many testimonies of his Royal good Will
and Confidence, Anno 1605.
as any other person of his condition whatsoever in the Kingdom.

This confidence began soon after to appear, The Duke's expedition into
Limousin.
by the command the King was pleased to give the Duke over the Horse and Foot
he sent into Limousin; when tired out with the continual disorders, the excess
of his clemency begat every day in his Kingdom, he was resolved to take order
once for all, and by a severe and exemplary punishment to quiet the Rebellion
some of Mounsieur de Bouillons Servants openly maintained after his departure
out of the Kingdom in Perigord, Quercy, and Limousin. The Marshall de Bouillon
was seized of many very fair possessions, and had many Friends and Servants in
those Provinces; where the Nobility, Gentry, and Commons being also naturally
inclined to Arms, it was no hard matter to persuade them into commotion.

The King had been given to understand, that under the pretense of seeking
protection only from the Protestant Princes of Germany, and the Swisse Cantons;
the Marshall endeavored to interest them in the Quarrel of those of the
Religion in France, by possessing them (as it was said) that since the King's
Conversion, their usage was far different from what it had formerly been, and
the liberty of Conscience far more restrained, than it used to be. Neither did
his Majesty doubt, but that all of his opinion in his Kingdom, would easily be
induced to follow the Duke of Bouillon's discontent, who had acquired an
absolute reputation among them. He farther saw that many Catholics made no
scruple to join with him, to the end they might re-enjoy the license of War,
which would by no means be allowed them in the better times of Peace: He knew
that great sums of money were distributed for the raising of men; which money
was suspected to come from Spain, from whence all the intestine broils of his
Kingdom had ever been countenanced, and promoted. Evil dispositions, that being
all joined together, were sufficient to produce great disorders in the State,
and to reduce the King in spite of his heart to the necessity of a Civil War.
His Majesty therefore thinking it very convenient to prevent all these
disorders, and to suffocate them in their Birth, resolved to go in person to
Limousin, either by his Presence to appease, or by his Authority to suppress
the begun Commotions: but to dispose them to their obedience if possible before
his arrival, to chastise some Offenders without drawing the Odium immediately
upon himself, and to reduce every one to his Duty; he ordered the Duke of
Espernon to go before with six Companies only of his Regiment of Guards, and
four Troops of Horse; not doubting but with this little Body, together with the
Duke's Interest (which was very considerable in those parts, of which some
places were under his own Government) he would be able to give a better account
of his Expedition, than another perhaps could do with greater Forces. And to
the end that his Justice might accompany his Arms, he joined to the Duke Iean
Jacques de Mesmes Segnieur de Roissy, Master of Requests, with Commission of
Oyer and Terminer to sit upon the Life, and Death of the Offenders. This was he
so famous for his Integrity, and Valor, that was afterward Doyen to the
Council of State, where, though the esteem every one had of his Virtue was very
great; yet was it no more, than was due to his merit; although afterward in
the progress of a long life, he had this honor added to the rest he enjoyed,
to see his name illustrated by a noble Posterity; not any man scarce of his
condition in the Kingdom having supplied the State with so great and able
Ministers. The Duke having taken his leave of the King, advanced into Limousin;
where he would have Crequy Camp-Master to the Regiment of Guards to command in
person the Forces he took along with him, and where the most turbulent spirits,
at his unexpected arrival (which by his diligence had almost got the start of
any intelligence of his coming) medi^ated nothing less than their defense; some
of the most advised fearing to have to do with the Duke, or de Roissy, appealed
to his Majesty's mercy, and by the acknowledgement of their offense, obtained
their Pardon; others retired themselves to the Duke de Bouillon to Sedan, the
most imprudent, or the most unfortunate only falling into the hands of Justice.
Of which five or six suffered death, though many others were punished by more
moderate ways: so that before the King's arrival at Limoges, all those
Countries, that before breathed nothing but Sedition and Disorder, were now so
calm and still, that his Majesty had nothing to do, but by his Clemency to
settle Rebels, newly reclaimed from their Disobedience, in their Duty, and to
reward his faithful Subjects, by the demonstrations of his Grace and Favor.

The end of the Fifth Book.
THE HISTORY Of the LIFE of the Duke of Espernon.
The Sixth Book.
THE Affairs of Limousin, that had taken up the Duke of Espernon the whole
year, having been composed with the facility you have heard, A dispute betwixt
the Duke of Espernon and the Duke of Guise.
the King returned again to Paris, attended by the Duke, who had now nothing
left to do behind. The antiquated enmity, that so many years had been nourished
betwixt the House of Guise and him, continued still, which was ready to
discover it self upon every light occasion, and almost as often as they met to
come to a bustle betwixt them: In all which disputes, the Duke (notwithstanding
that that Illustrious Family, by the greatness of their Birth, and by their
Offices in the State, by their vast possessions in the Kingdom, and above all
by the great number of generous Princes of which it was composed, as also by
the potency of their Alliances, made up a great part of the Court) would never
give them the least ground, but ever sustein'd their power with great Spirit,
and Vigor; neither did he want such a number of Relations, and Servants, as
might secure him from the apprehension of the greatness of any. He had sometime
before this had a brisk dispute with the Duke of Guise, the King being at
Lions, which proceeded so far, that the Duke of Espernon by the hands of la
Pierre, one of the Duke's Gentlemen, received a Challenge from him, though the
Quarrel had been so public, and the Duke of Guise was so narrowly watched by
his Friends, that he could not get out into the Field; wherein the Duke of
Espernon was better served by his, who permitted him to go out of the City with
Gohas, whom he took with him for his second: but being called back by the
King's Command, who would himself compose their difference, that Quarrel was
soon at an end.

There happened at this time another, betwixt the Duke of Espernon, and the
Prince of Ioinville, Another quarrel betwixt the Duke of Espernon, and the
Prince of Ioinville.
now Duke of Chevreuse, and Brother to the Duke of Guise; for this Prince
having staid the Coach of a Woman of Quality at the outer Gate of the Louvre,
one night that the King had appointed a great Dancing at Court, and the Duke
coming out, with the Duke of Montensier to go home, the Ladies Coach so stopped
the Gate, that the Duke's could not possibly pass; wherefore he commanded the
Coachman to make way: But the Duke of Chevreuse, who was leaned upon one of the
Boots of the Coach, on the dark side where he could not be perceived, commanded
the Coachman not to stir, seeking (as it was plain enough) out of youthful
bravery, an occasion to quarrel: nor did the Duke fail to give him as good a
one, as he could desire; for not being able longer to endure the insolency of
so base a fellow, he cudgelled the Coachman so well, that he forced him at
last to give back. The Prince de Ioinville, who perhaps forbore out of respect
to the Duke of Montpensier, appeared not at all in the business at that time;
but in the morning sent the Gentleman of his Horse, le Comte by name, to
question the Duke about it: The Duke was yet in his bed, and asleep when the
Gentleman came, but being waked by the Groom of his Chamber, who never refused
admittance to any, he sent for him to his bedside; where being come, the
Gentleman told him that he was sent by the Prince of Ioinville his Master, to
know, if when he beat the Coachman over night, he did it to affront him? To
which the Duke returning no answer, but only asking him where his Master was?
and the other having answered that he staid at the foot of Montmartre with a
good Horse, and a good Sword to expect him, he, without more words leaped out
of his Bed, dressed himself in the Gentleman's presence, and having led him into
his Armory, took out thence two Swords of equal length; whereof he gave him the
choice; by which time the Master of his own Horse, being also come to him they
went all three together to the place. Being there come, the Duke found the
Prince de Ioinville ready to receive him, their Swords were already drawn, and
they were just going to it; when the Prince, who had his face toward Paris,
^eeing a Party of ^orse coming that way, and suspecting it was with an intent
to prevent them, showed them to the Duke, telling him withal that they must
spur to gain the Bois de Boulogne, and without more words turned his Horse that
way. The Duke, who by the distance of those he saw, conceived they had yet time
enough to end their dispute before they could come in to interrupt them, had a
great mind, without going further, to have dispatched the business there: but
being necessitated to follow the Prince, who was already upon the gallop
toward the Wood, he spurred after, though they could not make such haste, but
that they were interrupted before they could come there, and by their Friends
carried back to the City. Where the King, having notice of their Quarrel,
commanded them both to the Louvre, and there took up the bu^iness, making them
embrace in his presence, and promise to be good friends. That which was most
remarkable on the Duke's side in this occasion was, that the number of those
who declared themselves of his Party was so great, that they took up all the
space betwixt the Roll, to the Louvre; whilst the Duke of Ioinville was only
countenanced by those of his own Relation, whose interest in Paris was at this
time very much declined, from what it had formerly been in the life of the Duke
his Father.

Although the residence of this great City was very pleasing to the King, Anno
1606.
yet could not the delights that entertained him there, detain his Majesty from
visiting all parts of his Kingdom, where he conceived his presence to be
necessary for the advancement of his Affairs. We saw him the last year in
Limousin, The King makes an^ expedition to Se^n, wherein the command of the
V^nt-Guard is commit^ed to the Duke of Espernon.
and this invited him into Champagne, and as far as Sedan, to reduce the Duke
of Bouillon to his duty. This Duke keeping himself still at a distance from the
Court, and refractory to several Summons his Majesty had sent him to make his
appearance, and by justifying himself to obtain his favor, it was plain that
his refusing to come, was a contempt to the Sovereign Authority, and that
therefore his Majesty in the vindication of his own honor, was obliged to
chastize him. Neither did he longer defer, for that purpose to make his
preparation for a Journey to Sedan. In this expedition the Duke of Espernon,
whom the King began now much better to relish, and whose admirable care, and
vigilance, upon all occasions, gave his Majesty infinite satisfaction, had the
command of the Vant-Guard committed to him, and had matters proceeded to the
necessity of a Siege, was designed for one of the most important Quarters
against the Town: but the Duke of Bouillon having at last shut himself up in
the place, and not willing to pull upon himself the utmost effects of the
King's indignation, had recourse to his mercy; and by his submissions, together
with the Queens intercession (who ordinarily accompanied the King in all his
Motions) obtained of his Majesty an indemnity for all things past, upon the
most favorable terms he could himself expect, or desire. Whereupon he received
the King into the City the seventh of April 1606. with a Garrison of 300. men,
which by the condition of the Accommodation were to remain four years in the
Castle; during which time his Majesty would make trial of this new Convert's
perseverance in his duty: but that long space was, by his Majesty's favor,
reduced to a few months, the bounty of this generous Prince ever contracting
the term of men's disgraces; his displeasure being short lived, and of no
continuance; but his noble nature being ever constant to oblige all his
Subjects.

Though the following year was passed over without any disturbance in the
Kingdom; Anno 1607.
yet did his Majesty's Name, and Reputation give him opportunity, and by his
Authority, Power, to compose one of the most dangerous differences, that could
possibly have happened amongst Christian Princes, and that was the falling out
betwixt the Pope Paul the V. and the Republic of Venice: a disorder, that had
it not in time been taken up, would infallibly have involved all Christendom in
the Quarrel, and it is infini^ely to be feared, have given the Turk opportunity
in so great a confusion to have made a formidable advance into the very heart
of Europe. A danger that his Majesty (than whom none was clearer sighted) very
well forsaw, and (retaining a grateful memory of the obligations he had
received, both from the Holy Sea, and that Republic at his advancement to the
Crown) as soon undertook to interpose betwixt those two powerful adversaries.
The business was carried on by the mediation of the Cardinal de Ioyeuse, and
Cardinal Perron; wherein the one, and the other proceeding according to his
Majesty's wise direction, their endeavors were at last crowned with success,
and all things concluded to the satisfaction of both parties, but chiefly to
the Honor of France; which now appeared to be the Arbiter of all the Estates
of Europe. And indeed in those times all things in a manner were swayed by his
Majesty's will; his desire being almost a rule to all Princes in all Affairs:
Neither was there in the whole world a Kingdom to be found more glorious, more
flourishing, or more happy, than that of France, during the Reign of this
mighty Prince.

Yet could not all this reputation abroad secure him from afflictions at home;
neither could his greatness and bounty exempt him from the power of Death; who
first exercising his cruelty upon some of his Family, discharged in the end his
whole rage and fury upon his own person. The precedent year had ravished from
him one of the Princes his Children, and this deprived him of the Duke of
Montp^nsier his Cousin; The death of the Duke of Montp^nsier.
a Prince for whom his Majesty had as great a kindness, as for any whatsoever
of his Blood, as he made it appear by the true sorrow he manifested for his
death: but the Duke of Espernon was afflicted beyond all expression. I have
already given an account of the Alliance betwixt these two, and of the
particular Friendship that Alliance begot, I shall now further say, they were
inseparable in their conversation, their Interests went ever hand in hand with
one another, and it will be hard to find a Friendship so pure, and constant
betwixt two private persons, as they ever preserved entire, in the corruptions
and revolutions of the Court. Neither could the friendship of a Prince of his
extraction and virtue be otherwise than of great importance to the Duke; whose
prosperity and advancement had procured him so much envy, and consequently so
many enemies: yet was he constrained to submit to the inevitable necessity of
death, and to bear with patience a loss for which there was no other remedy.

This accident was yet followed by another the ensuing year, Anno 1608.
at which the Duke was almost equally afflicted: Pere Ange de Ioyeuse,
Father-in-law to the Duke of Montpensier, had been returned into the Order of
Fathers Capuchins from the year 1599. from which time he had continued in the
austerity of his Canon with so great zeal and sanctity, that he was become a
president of Virtue, and Holy Living to all the Religious Men of his Order: Yet
did he not (when returning to the observation of his Vow, he threw off all
worldly vanities, and desires) banish from his breast those true affections
which Nature and Reason had planted in his heart: but on the contrary had ever
in his greatest retirement cherished the Duke's friendship, as if he had been
his true Brother in Blood, as he was in Alliance and Affection. Neither was the
Duke on his part less sedulous to improve so virtuous an Interest, ever
honoring, and loving him, even in his penitential Sackcloth, at as high a
rate, as when he lived in the greatest Luster, in the most honorable
employments; and applying himself with greater diligence to the Interests of
his House, and to the advancement of his Daughter, than when he himself lived
upon the great Theater of the busy world: so that in different capacities of
living, their friendship continued still one, and the same, till death came to
cut the knot, The death of Pere Ange de Ioyeuse the Duke's Brother-in-law.
which along had power to dissolve it. This Holy man died at Rivoly in
Piedmont, in his return from Rome, in great reputation of Sanctity and Virtue,
which has since by time been made more manifest to all.

The following year affords so little considerable to be said of the Duke of
Espernon in particular (the Court being at this time wrapped in so great a calm
and security, Anno 1609.
that there is nothing of moment to be reported of any save the King himself)
that it might well enough be passed over in silence: But having hitherto found
out something or other to record in the foregoing years, I had rather travel,
not out of my subject only, but also out of the affairs of the Kingdom, than to
omit the most glorious proof his Majesty could possibly give of his Authority
with all the Princes, and States of Christendom in the conclusion of the Truce
betwixt the Crown of Spain, and the States of the United Provinces.

This great affair had been fruitlesly proposed almost from the very first
bustle of Arms in that Country; neither had endeavors been wanting even in the
heat of the most bloody executions (that the fury of War has perhaps produced
in any part of Europe) for the effecting of so good a work,, Treaties of
Accommodation having every year, during those troubles been constantly by some
or other set on foot: but the animosity of Factions, the difference of
Religions, and the variety of Events, that had ever kept Affairs on both sides
as it were in-equal balance, had so exasperated the minds of men, that scarce
any proposition of Peace would be endured. A work, it seems, reserved to be an
additional Ray to the King's Glory, The Truce betwixt Spain and Holland
concluded by the King's mediation.
whose reputation only could cut the knot of all those difficulties. Spain had
great need of Peace, which having often, without interessing the King in the
Affair, sought in vain, he was in fine constrained to apply himself to him to
procure it, and wholly to submit all things to his Arbitration. A task the King
(very well satisfied with so high, and public an acknowledgment of his power)
as readily undertook, and to that purpose dispatched away President Ianin, and
the Sieur de R^issy, to manage the Work: by whose prudent conduct, fortified by
their Masters Reputation, they effected that by the weight of Authority, which
perhaps their dexterity (how great soever) without great labor and expense of
much time, could not otherwise have brought to pass. So that things were
reduced to the point the parties concerned could themselves desire; from whence
followed an universal Peace amongst all Christian Princes.

It was into this tranquille condition, that the Affairs of Europe were first
to be wrought, Anno 1610.
before the King could begin to form it into the new mould he had long
designed; for this great Prince, born to reconcile Monarchy and Justice, being
unable to endure the proud Authority, with which the Crown of Spain lorded it
over all her Neighbors, and more impatient that by the expansion of his Empire
the Spaniard should reap advantages, which he conceived were more justly due to
his Birth, and Valor, he resolved to clip the wings of this soaring greatness,
to make him give back those Territories he usurped from his Neighbors, to
restore the Republics their ancient liberty, and finally to reduce his power
to the limits of his primitive possession. This in short is all that can be
said of the King's designs, and all that such as conceived they penetrated
deepest into his most private thoughts, could possibly divine; it being most
certain that he discovered the bottom of his design to none, which had it been
communicated to any, the Duke of Espernon would doubtless in this conjuncture
have participated of the trust: The King makes great preparation for War.
but as this great Prince would execute all things in his own person, so did he
here reserve to himself the secret of his resolutions; insomuch that though his
Army was all ready drawn into the Field, that he himself was immediately to
come up to them, and that in all probability there would be sudden action; yet
durst no one venture positively to determine whither that preparation was
directed, or who was to feel the first edge of his Arms: neither shall I
presume to deliver these conjectures for truth, nor suffer my curiosity to
transgress the bounds this mighty Prince in his wisdom prescribed even to the
most faithful Ministers of his Kingdom.

This brave and laudable ambition having long possessed his generous heart, he
had from the first Idea of his design wisely laid up for the means to effect
it, that it might succeed to his glory: and to that end, from the time peace
was first settled in his Kingdom, had been gathering, and had now got together
a prodigious Treasure: His Artillery and Ammunitions were all ready, and in
equipage fit to execute his vast designs. France was able to furnish him with
an infinite number of old Soldiers; neither, in the fair weather he had been
so solicitous to maintain at home, had he forgot to take a particular care of
breeding so many brave Captains, and good Soldiers in the Low-Country-Wars, as
were sufficient, in a very short time, to bring such raw men as should be
raised, into very good discipline. Besides the Forces of his own Kingdom, he
had made a League with all the neighboring Princes: The Duke of Savoy, the
Republic of Venice, the Duke of Florence, and almost all the Princes of Italy,
the Prince of Orange, and most of the Princes of Germany, with the Hanse-Towns
of the Empire were engaged to join with him: And the King of England had made
great preparation in favor of his designs; so that in all appearance, what, and
how great soever these designs might be, they were very likely to succeed.

Nothing then being wanting, but a pretense to give color to his action, the
death of the Dukes of Cleves, soon supplied him with one as good as he could
desire; for after his death, the succession to his Dukedom being pretended to
by all his Brothers-in-law, who were five, the Marquis of Brandebourg, the Duke
of N^whourg, the Count Palatine, the Duke of Deux Ponts, and the Marquis of
Burgau; all these Princes agreed to appeal to the King, and to stand to his
Arbitration: but whilst they were pleading their titles in the Court of France,
the Emperor (pretending all vacant Jurisdictions to be Fiefs of the Empire,
and that for want of Heirs Males, he had right to seize them in trust) had
there established the Archduke Leopold his Cousin, as his Deputy and
Governor, for, and under him: in order to which delegation the Archduke had
already, by the assistance of the Austrian Forces, possessed himself of the
best part of the Duchy by the taking of Iuliers; notwithstanding that the King
had publicly declared, he desired things might remain suspended, till every
man's Title was examined, and the true Heir could be known. And this was in
effect, all the reason could be given for this mighty preparation, though an
Army consisting of forty thousand French Foot, ten thousand Swisse, ten
thousand Horse, and fifty pieces of Cannon, with their Equipage; together with
the Leavies the confederate Princes were still, on all hands preparing to join
with him; giving all the world to understand, that so great Forces were
designed for some other end, than only for the Accommodation of a particular
Quarrel, all men were in suspense, and in great expectation of what the event
would be.

The Army then being in the Field, and the King ready to depart from Paris, his
Majesty would yet first take so good order to secure the interior Peace of his
Kingdom, that he might not, when at a great distance, and in the heat of his
Enterprises, be called back by Domestic troubles: A consideration that made
him determine to devolve his Royal Power to the Queen, and to cause her to be
declared Regent in his absence; and knowing that how good soever her intentions
were, and how sincere soever her administration might be; yet that the
sovereign Authority he left her invested withal, would require the Fidelity,
Courage, and Prudence of some great and experienced Minister to support it, he
cast his eye upon the Duke of Espernon, to confer upon him that great Trust and
Honor. In this resolution therefore, having one day called for the Duke, and
causing him to come into his Closet, where he was then with the Queen alone;
the Duke was not a little surpised at the favorable, and obliging Character,
his Majesty was then pleased to give of him to the Queen, on so unexpected an
occasion. He told her, That being upon the point to go out of the Kingdom, the
Government whereof he had, during his absence, committed to her care, he had
considered how necessary it would be for her to have a faithful Servant about
her person, upon all occurrences that might happen, and, in occasions where the
modesty of her Sex would not permit her to act in her own person, to be
assisting to her with his Wis^om, and Valor: That having to that end severally
weighed the abilities of all the chief Officers of his Crown, he had found
none, in whom the qualities necessary for so great an employment, were more
eminent than in the person of the Duke of De Serres says the King intended to
leave the Constable, and the Chancellor in tha^ trust.
Espernon there present: That having had a long experience of his Fidelity,
Wisdom, and Valor, he had determined to deprive himself of his Service, though
infinitely necessary to him in the prosecution of his designs, and to send him
back to her upon the first sally of his Arms. That she might repose an entire
and perfect confidence in him, as he himself also did, who knew him to be a man
of approved Fidelity, and Honor: That he was going to execute designs, wherein
he was likely to meet with many difficulties, and perhaps some danger; but that
whatever should happen, he desired her to rest secure in the Duke's vigilance,
and care, for which he would undertake both to himself and to her. After which,
turning to the Duke, he told him, That he did not require from him any
confirmation by new promises, of those things whereof he had assured the Queen
in his behalf: That he had had so many proofs of his Virtue, in the integrity
of his former Actions, it was not now to be suspected, that he conjured him by
the esteem, and affection he had for him, to justify his expectation, to serve
the Queen, and the Princes his Children, with the same Fidelity he had served
him, and to promise to himself for his reward, all the acknowledgement he could
reasonably expect from a grateful Prince, and a good Master. The Duke a little
out of countenance at what the King had said in his favor, made answer in few
words, That he did humbly acknowledge his obligation to his Majesty for so high
a Character, and for the unexpected Honor he was pleased to confer upon him,
which in the nature of it was far above all others, he had till then received
from his Royal bounty; and that if he had a thousand lives he would willingly
lay them all at his feet to express his gratitude for so signal a favor: That
he did humbly beseech their Majesty's to retain that favorable opinion of him,
and to conclude him the most unworthy of all their Subjects, and the worst of
all men, if he ever failed in the least part of his Duty.

After this the King told him he could not leave him at present with the Queen,
having occasion for him to command the Vant-Guard of his Army, till the Prince
of Orange should come up to him, for whom he had reserved that employment. A
thing the Duke knew before, as also that the King intended him the honor of
that important command in the mean time: But the election of his person in that
great employment of sitting at the Helm, did not a little displease, and
increase the envy of many of the greatest men of the Kingdom, who had long
looked a squint upon the Duke's Prosperity and Favor; though his Majesty,
having maturely, and upon very good grounds proceeded to that choice, was not
for any consideration, or by any arguments whatsoever to be dissuaded from that
resolution.

I know not how some, who envy the Duke's name, and memory, may entertain a
relation so much to his advantage; though were I put to prove the truth of what
I report, I could bring a great many persons of Honor, and Quality to attest
it; the Queen Mother, in the first Letter she writ to the King after her escape
from Blois, makes particular mention of it; than whom no one could be better
informed in this Affair, and has also several times since declared by word of
mouth, what she then published in writing: neither was it a secret at that
time, no more than I hope it will be suspected in this, where so many persons
are living of Reputation enough to give it Authority, should it be contradicted
by any, who perhaps are not so well informed.

The King having, as has been said, taken order to secure all things that were
likely in his absence, to disturb the peace of his Kingdom, prepared himself to
be gone: The Queen had been Crowned at St. Dennis the thirteenth of May, and
her entry into Paris was designed to have been, on Sunday the sixteenth, and on
the seventeenth his Majesty intended, without further delay, to set out toward
the Army. Nothing was now to be seen in Paris, but great preparations of joy,
and triumph, to honor the remaining Ceremony of the Queens Coronation; nothing
but demonstrations of the Kings Magnificence, and of the felicity of his Reign,
himself being most diligent in giving the Orders necessary for the state of
that Solemnity; when this Great and Illustrious Prince, the terror of his
Enemies, and the love and delight of his people, going abroad upon the
fourteenth of the same month, to view the preparation of those Magnificences,
was in a stop he (...) upon the way in the street de la Ferronnerie, by Saint
Innocents Church, The Death of Henry the IIII.
with three stabs of a Villain's Knife, laid dead in his Coach. The Duke of
Espernon had the honor to be seated by the King in the hinder part of the
Coach, upon whom his Majesty was leaning to whisper something in his ear; the
Duke of Monbazon, with the Marshall de la Vardin, was in one of the Boo^s, Who
were the Marshall de Roquelaure, the M^rquis de la Force, the Sieur de
Liencourt, and the Marquis de Mire^eau.
and other persons of great Quality took up the rest: at the first stab the
King cried out, I am hurt; at which the Duke of Espernon, who saw the next blow
coming, holding up his arm to divert it, received part of it in the De S^rres
says by a mistake the Duke of Monbazon ^eceiv'd the ^^ab in the right sleeve of
his Do^blet.
sleeve of his Doublet, that was struck through, though the King's Destiny
would not suffer him to receive it all; nor permit, that at the peril of his
own life, he should save that of his Master, as with all his soul he would have
done. The cursed Parricide proceeded yet to a third stab, of which the two last
were mortal, and with the second the King tumbled dead upon the Duke, who
received him in his Arms, his blood boiling in great quantities out of his
mouth. After this execrable act, the cursed Assassinate was soon discovered,
against whom those who attended the King, and amongst them Saint Michel, one of
his Gentlemen in ordinary, prompted by a just fury, had already drawn his Sword
to dispatch him; when the Duke, calling to mind, how much those Gentlemen had
been condemned who killed Jacques Clement upon the Murder of Henry the III. by
whose imprudent zeal, a further discovery from the wretches own mouth of the
Authors of that abominable Treason, was prevented, he cried out to Saint
Michel, and to the Footmen, who had drawn their Swords to the same purpose, to
hold, and upon pain of death not to kill him, but only to seize kis person,
that he might be delivered into the hands of Justice. A caution that served not
a little to the vindication of an infinite number of worthy men; on whom,
without all doubt, the various Factions that after broke out in the Kingdom,
would according to their several Animosities, have laid the blame of that
detested Fact, to serve for a pretense to their Insurrection. The Duke having
given this first order, commanded the Coach man to turn back to the Louvre, and
having spied in the King's Train, the Marquis de Monferrant his particular
Friend and Servant, he entreated him to go before, and from him to command the
Foot Companies that were upon the Guard before the Louvre, to stand immediately
to their Arms, and to secure all the Gates, to prevent any disorder in the
King's Household: In the execution of which command, and in the distraction the
sight of so horrid, and so unexpected an accident might reasonably put him
into, Monferrant met the Chancellor de Sillery, then going to Council in the
Louvre; who asking him the reason of that hurly burly, and of the Soldiers
running to their Arms, Monferrant told him the King was dead; at which the
Chancellor amazed, and in suspense how to believe it, grasping him by the arm,
and saying how is that Mounsieur de Monferrant! do you know what you say? the
Coach arrived with the Curtains drawn, out of which the King without any motion
was carried up in a Cloak, and laid upon the Bed in his Wardrobe.

The Duke, The Duke of Espernon's signal services to the State after the Death
of the King.
after he had paid this last Office to his dead Master, though surpised to the
degree may be imagined at so tragical an accident, was not long nevertheless,
before he recollected himself; when considering that the greatest testimony he
could give of his gratitude to his dead Prince, was to serve those he had left
to succeed him, he began to pay the Queen those services, he had but a few days
before in the King's Closet engaged himself to perform; though the Orders he
there received were not intended to have been executed so soon, nor upon so
fatal an occasion. The rumout of the King's death had already spread it self,
not only throughout the Louvre, but also over all Paris; at which the Queen,
being beyond all imagination afflicted, and dissolving her self into tears,
without any other thought, than how to humor, and satisfy her own grief; the
Duke of Espernon came into her Chamber, and after some expressions of sorrow,
which as a true Frenchman, a good Subject, and an obliged Servant he could not
forbear for the loss of so good a Master, he there told her: That he did not
come to her Majesty in hope to stop the current of her tears, the cause of her
sorrow being too great to admit of any present consolation; but that she would
ever have leisure enough to weep, when perhaps she might not always have
opportunity to provide for the Fortune of her Children, and the Safety of the
Kingdom, which in effect were one, and the same thing: That her Majesty might
better judge than any, what envy the King's prosperity had drawn upon him, from
all the neighboring Princes; and how much it was to be feared lest his own
Servants, no longer now restrained by the presence of this great Prince, might
in hope of novelty be debauched from their duty, if some good, and prudent
order, for the settlement of Affairs, were not suddenly taken: That to keep
things in the quiet posture they then were, her Majesty must speedily, and in
the first place, secure the Domestic Peace of the Kingdom, by continuing Pa^is
in the serenity, and calm of obedience, it then was: That the single strength
of the Kingdom, if united, and in good intelligence within it self, was of it
self sufficient to frustrate the designs of any that should attempt any thing
against the Crown of France: That for his own part, who had taken upon him the
boldness to give her Majesty this first advice, he there from his heart made
her an humble tender of his Life, his Fortune, and his Friends to do her
Service; that therefore she was only to command, what she would please should
be done, and that he would perish, or cause her Royal will to be obeyed. The
Queen awaked by so prudent a Counsel, and fortified by the resolution of so
generous, and so considerable a Subject, told him: That she wholly reserr'd all
things to his Vigilance, and Conduct, to be ordered, as he should in his wisdom
think most fit; wherein she recommended to his Fidelity, the care of her
Children, much more than any concern of her own, and that she should rest very
well satisfied with whatever he should do, knowing as she very well did, his
prudence, and affection to be equally so great, that nothing was to be added to
them.

The Duke without losing more time, went immediately out of the Louvre; where
the first thing he did in order to the Queens commands, was to bid the Officers
of the Regiment of Guards, to put their men suddenly into Arms. This great body
consisting of four thousand effective men, and those of the best, and the best
Disciplined in Europe, did not a little awe the Parisians, from leaping over
the bounds of their Duty: a strength that as it was absolutely at the Duke's
command, so did he upon this occasion know so well, how to dispose it into the
most convenient Quarters of the Town, that without all doubt, it was by virtue
of those Forces, he secured the peace of that Seditious City, and kept the
multitude from tumult and insurrection. Arquien, whom (as has been said) the
King had put into the Citadel of Metz, in the year 1604. was Lieutenant
Colonel to the Regiment of Guards, and consequently in the absence of Crequy,
who was Camp-Master to the said Regiment (and who was already gone up to the
Army, with the greatest part of the Nobility of the Court) was under the
Authority of the Duke to command it. Him therefore the Duke speedily sent for
to have given him orders, but he was no where to be found; for from the instant
that the King's death was certain, imagining the Duke would infalliby take the
advantage of the time, and his own Authority, to remove him from Metz, he had
taken post to put himself into the Citadel, hoping there he should be able to
maintain his ground: But the Duke who in the care of public affairs, did not
altogether neglect his own, which his Affection and Fidelity to the Crown,
rendered one, and the same with the other, judged by Arquiens absence what his
design might be, dispatched Mun de Sarlaboust Captain to one of the Companies
of the Guards, immediately after him, if possible to prevent him, or at least
to follow him so close, that he might arrive at Metz before Arquien could have
time to practice any thing to his disadvantage. The Duke had in Metz, besides
the ordinary Garrison of eight Companies (of which he had composed a Regiment,
called the Old Garrison) two Companies of the Regiment of Guards commanded by
Tilladet, and Fromigieres, since Grand Prior of Tholouze; all which were so
absolutely at his devotion, and their Captains so linked to his Interests,
their Fortunes wholly depending upon his Favor, as they had been raised by his
bounty, that not a man of them but was ready upon all occasions to be
absolutely commanded by him. To this he was confident of the Inhabitants good
affection toward him, who by the moderation of his Government, and by the
protection with which he had sheltred them from Sobole's Insolence, were wholly
acquired unto him: which interests, joined together, made the Duke confident he
should not want Forces sufficient to hinder Arquien from being received into
the Citadel, if Mun could get thither before him; or even there to force him,
should he happen to put himself into it, before his Orders could arrive. And
indeed all things succeeded to his desire, as shall in its due place be
declared. But we must first return to Paris, which at this time was the Scene
of the most, and the most important Affairs.

The Regiment of Guards being in the absence of Arquien drawn together by Saint
Coulombe, What ways the Duke proceeded in to cause the Queen Mother to be
decl^r'd Regent.
the eldest Captain, the Duke sent them order to advance; which being done, he
appointed part thereof for the Guard of the Louvre, with the Regiment of Swisse
which he (extending the Authority the Queen had given him, as French Guards
over that Nation also) had likewise commanded into Arms: The other part were
disposed upon the Pont-Neuf toward la rue Dauphine, and upon the principal
avenues that lead to the Convent des Augustins. He further entreated Mounsieur
de Liancourt Governor of Paris speedily to assemble the O^ Lord Mayor of Paris.
Prevos^ des Marchands, and the Sheriffs
Eschevins in the (...)
Hostel de Ville offering him withal a sufficient Guard to secure them; as
accordingly he he sent five hundred of the Regiment of Guards, under the
command of Captain Dnouet who remained there two days together upon Duty. These
Orders being given, the Duke himself mounted on Horseback, went toward the
Pont-Neuf to go to the Cloistre Nostre dame, there to confer with President
Seguier, without whose advice he resolved to proceed no further. This man whose
integrity, judgment, and affection, the Duke had in equal esteem, had ever even
in the time of his Favor, and in the greatest difficulties of his Affairs,
been with his Counsel assisting to him; neither didt he Duke at this time, or
since, resolve almost upon any thing (whether of general, or particular
concern) without first communicating the business to him, and consulting his
Advice. There was at this time none of the Princes of the Blood at Court, for
the Prince of Cond^ had some time before the King's death retired into
Flanders, and was at this time at Milan; and the Count de Soissons was at his
house at Champigny; so that no body being at Court considerable enough to make
a party, the Duke at his going out of the Louvre, found almost all the Lords,
and Gentlemen, who were then in Paris (and whom the suddenness and great
concern of that bloody Accident had assembled together) at the Gate ready to
attend him.

Being upon the way with this great Train, he had not gone far before he met
with the Duke of Guise, whom he found also very well accompanied, though with a
Train far inferior to his own. These two Dukes, nor their Families, were not
as yet so well united (the paternal hatred having been rather fomented by the
quarrels the Duke had lately had with both the Sons, notwithstanding his
Majesty's endeavor to reconcile them) but that there was greater expectation
this meeting should beget some new disorder, than that men so disunited betwixt
themselves should concur so suddenly, and happily in the public Service;
insomuch that their followers on both sides seemed only to expect a signal from
their Leaders to fall to blows: when the Duke of Guise, having with great
civility saluted the Duke, asked him how that sad misfortune had happened? to
whom the Duke in short related the manner of the King's death, with what had
after passed betwixt the Queen and him, and the Order he was by her Majesty's
Command going to take to prevent any tumult in the City: Whereupon the Duke of
Guise asking him, if there were not something for him to do in the Queens
Service also? the Duke replied, That since he asked his advice, he conceived he
might do both the Queen and the Kingdom a signal Service, by only showing
himself in the streets of Paris: That the people awed within their duty, by the
presence of a man of his condition, would be less apt to be seduced into
commotion; and that by the calm which would by that means be preserved in the
City, they might doubtless more effectually proceed to the establishment of
such good orders, as would for the future secure the peace of the whole
Kingdom. A counsel the Duke of Guise as readily followed, and the good Fortune
of France, having upon the instant extiguish'd all particular Animosities,
betwixt these two great Persons, so as to make them, beyond all expectation,
join in the common Service of the State. This happy union, and concurrence was
of no little importance to the conservation of the Peace in that mutinous City.
The Duke after continued his way to the President's House, to whom having
communicated his designs, he found them to be generally approved by him;
insomuch that before they parted it was concluded betwixt them, that that very
day, and as soon as it was possible, the Parliament should be entreated to
Assemble: the management of which being undertaken by the President, the Duke
went in the mean time to provide for the rest.

He began with the Hostel de Ville, The Duke goes to the Hostel de Ville:
where having found the Prevost des Marchands, the Eschevins, and Burgesses met
together, after he had first given them an account in brief of the sad Accident
had happened, he proceeded to exhort them, To confirm to his Majesty's Successors
the Love and Obedience they had paid to him during his happy Reign. He told
them that by persevering in their Duty, they might secure their own Lives, and
Estates, which would otherwise be certainly exposed to the violence and license
of Seditious men: That the least disorder of this nature, that should happen in
the City, would put the whole Kingdom into Confusion: That he therefore
entreated them to cause all their Gates to be shut, to the end that no one
might be permitted, either to go out, or to come in, who were either thought
able, or likely, to breed any disturbance in the public peace, to give order
to the Capains of the Train'd-Bands to have their Companies in readiness upon
any occasion might happen, and to walk themselves the round of the City, the
better by their Presence and Authority to keep every one in his Duty. He
further gave them notice, that he had already caused the Regiment of Guards
both French, and Swisse, to stand to their Arms, on purpose to suppress those
who should first make the least show of Insurrection; but that he hoped their
wisdoms would prevent a confusion, which would not so easily be composed, if
once grown to a head, as it might be suppressed in the beginning. A
Remonstrance, that, being delivered with great plainness, and vigor, wrought
so good an effect, that all the Magistrates unanimously engaged to do their
utmost endeavors for the conservation of the public Peace; as they
accordingly did: which was none of the weakest links that curbed the
headstrong multitude of that unruly City.

From the Hostel de Ville, The Duke goes to the Augustins, where he advises the
Parliament to declare the Queen Regent.
the Duke went to the Augustins, where that Session of Parliament had by the
King been appointed to be kept; the Palace having been before furnished, for
the Ceremony of the Queens Coronation, and where by the diligence of President
Segnier, he found them already Assembled. The Regiment of Guards had already
possessed themselves of the Pont-Neuf, and stood in order all along the Rue
Dauphine, to guard, according to the Duke's command, all the passes round about
the Convent des Augustins; a precaution, which though by the Duke merely
intended for the Parliaments security, was nevertheless misinterpreted by some
to be rather designed to compel them to execute his own particular Counsels,
than that every man at greater liberty might have freedom to deliver his own
Opinion; neither were the most prudent, and best disposed sorry (as has been
said) that the world should conceive there was some necessity upon them of a
speedy resolution in the present juncture of Affairs, forasmuch also as some,
who were prepossessed in their judgments, would be obliged to concur with them,
and disappointed, either from opposing, or deferring to declare the Queen
Mother Regent during the King's Minority, which was the only thing then to be
debated.

The Duke being come into the Hall where the Parliament was set with his Sword
in his hand, though not drawn, and in some disorder both in his Clothes, and
Countenance, began his Speech with some excuses; For appearing in that
honorable Assembly in so undecent a posture; after which he told them that his
Sword was yet in the Scabbard (his own words) but that if before he went thence
there was not order taken, for the security of the City, and Kingdom, by
declaring the Queen Regent, he foresaw (to his great grief) he must be
compelled to draw it against the Enemies of the Crown, and to fill the City
with Bl^od, and Confusion: That he knew there were some amongst them who would
ask respite to deliberate upon the things proposed; but that he must tell them
beforehand, nothing was so dangerous as delay: That in many great occurrences
it was wisdom, not to be too precipitous, and to proceed slowly, and by degrees
to a final determination; but that here it was quite otherwise, it being
necessary in this Crisis of Affairs to cut off all difficulties, and
immediately to resolve upon the thing propounded: That what might to day be
concluded without danger, could not be done to morrow without Blood and
Slaughter; and indeed what pretense could any man have to ask respi^e in this
case? what was required of them out of the rule of Equity, and nature? To whom
was the King's Fortune more properly to be entrusted, than to her who brought
him into the world, or to whose care the safety of the Kingdom, than to her,
who for the space of ten years, had with the late King been a Coadjutrix in
raising it to that degree of height, and reputation, wherein it now stood. He
told them that the Queen was a Princess for whom his Majesty from the hour of
his Marriage had never had any reservation in his most weighty and most ^ecret
Affairs: That he had made her his Companion in all his Expeditions: That he had
already deputed the Regency of the Kingdom during his absence into her hands; a
preordination after which he could not believe any one would dare to contradict
the Judgment of a Prince so great in himself, and so solicitous of the good and
welfare of his Kingdom: That therefore the most effectual means to preserve the
Peace and Tranquillity wherein France had been happy many years, was to concur
in the King's Judgment, and to justify his Election: That the discontents,
which governed in the minds of many men of very eminent condition, were very
well known to all: That those persons (it might easily be believed) wanted no
adherents: That the impatient humor of the French, in hopes to make their
advantage of any disorder in the State, would be apt to create more Mutineers,
if things were not settled in due season: That there was no time so fruitful in
Sedition, nor so proper for mischief, as when mutinous spirits were in suspense
whom to obey: That if ever this evil disposition was to be feared it was
chiefly now, when all the Forces of the Kingdom were on foot: That they would
doubtless soon be practiced on all hands; so that if by the prudence of that
Assembly such temptations were not prevented, those noble Troops designed for
the enlargement of the Borders of France, and for the glory of the French name,
would by an unhappy, and a sad revolution be seen to employ their Arms to the
ruin of their own Country: That they were therefore to take time whilst things
remained yet inviolate, and capable of the best impressions, to mould them into
the best form, which depended upon their immediate Election: That he had put
the Regiment of Guards, all the King's Servants, and his own particular Friends
into Arms, that they might at convenient liberty, and security deliberate of
what he then proposed that he knew very well what he now advised them to, was
without President; but that he hoped an Act of so great utility and importance
to the public good, would one day obtain the Authority of Example, and add to
the Dignity and Reputation of that Honorable Body; a privilege, by so much
the more their due, by how much they had never till then possessed it: That
they did not need to apprehend herein their Authority should be prostituted to
Arbitration, or be disputed by any; but that, how high and generous soever
their results might be, they should infallibly be executed, and that he, and
all his Friends were ready to lose their lives, or to cause them to be
inviolably obeyed.

The Duke's Oration being ended, the whole Assembly remained in a profound
silence, and being equally astonished at the Accident had happened, and surpised
at the Proposition was made, not a man on the sudden, durst either by word, or
action express his thoughts: only President Harlay in few words Gave the Duke
thanks for the affection he had manifested to the Service of the Kingdom, and
to the Honor of that Assembly; exhorting him to persevere in a passion so
worthy of his Virtue, and so becoming the place and honor he possessed amongst
them. Whereupon the Duke perceiving their silence still to continue, and
unwilling to give them occasion to complain that by his presence he had
extorted from them a resolution contrary to their sense and opinion, he retired
himself: But at his departure, that they might understand there was something
of necessity in the case, he told them aloud, That what he had propounded was
the best course they could take, and that they were therefore absolutely, and
suddenly to resolve upon it. Upon which last words the Sieur de la Guesle the
Attorney General taking hold, began in a short Speech to break the Ice, by
representing to the Assembly, That though what had been propounded by the Duke
of Espernon, seemed by the respect wherewith it had been delivered to be a
thing wherein they were free to determine; yet that what he had last said
implied a kind of necessity: but a necessity by so much the more, just, and
honorable, by how much the Peace of the Kingdom would not only be secured
thereby; but also a great advantage to their Body would certainly accrue: That
it was therefore in his opinion better immediately, and voluntarily to declare
the Regency to be in the Queen, than to stay till their consent should be
wrested from them upon compulsion, and perhaps in a season, when they should
have no thanks for their labor. Which being said, the whole Assembly forthwith
concluded upon the business, by that Act not only securing the Peace of the
Kingdom, but also introducing a great example to pitch upon the same, and an
equally salutiferous resolution in our days, when out great Queen Anne of
Austria was settled in the Regency, by virtue of the same Election.

I have often heard the Duke discourse of this Transaction, The reasons that
moved the Duke to press the Queen Mother should be declared Regent.
wherein though he acknowledged his proceeding to be by an unusual, and
something an irregular way; Yet that the Queens Regency being as yet not
authorized by the Suffrages of any of the Princes of the Blood (whose arrival
also should it have been expected, would probably have put all things into
Confusion) he thought it necessary to have it ratified by the consent of the
people: That to procure their consents, there was no way so plausible and
consonant to Law, as therein to interest all the Parliaments of France, by
prevailing with that of Paris, whose whose Act would be a kind of Warranty to
the rest: That should they have staid the coming of the Count de Soissons, he
would by his presence infallibly have swayed all things, according to his
inclination: That the Prince of Conde coming after would have been impatient at
his younger Brother's getting the start of him in an Affair where the priority
of Vote in the Election was in him: by which means the variety of their
interests not permitting them to concur in an Act, wherein each of them would
be ambitious to precede, a fraction betwixt them must of necessity ensue: That
for that reason he had used all diligence in pressing the Parliament to a
speedy resolution in favor of the Queen. In the carrying on of which Affair,
it is in my opinion something hard to determine, whether the Stars of France,
or the Duke's Prudence did most prevail: It is not to be denied but that both
the one and the other contributed very much to the happy performance of this
great work: But it is likewise most certain that the business had never been so
fortunately effected, if the Duke had less prudently foreseen what was likely
to ensue, or had proceeded with less diligence and vigor to the establishment
of this Election, to the general benefit of the Kingdom: wherein if he
performed a signal Service to the State, he did no less for the Prince, who
would have met with no little impediments to his rising greatness, had he at
his return, found the Count de Soissons settled, as it were a Co-partner in the
Government, by being possessed of some of the most important Employments of the
Kingdom.

Thus was this business carried on, France being, from the highest step of her
Glory, precipitated into the greatest extreme of her Misfortune; and the King's
Triumphs being in a moment overcast with the Funeral Black of his Obsequies:
but the re-establishment of the State, overthrown by so great, and so tragic a
Revolution, and the public happiness in an instant secured without one drop of
Blood; was it not an afternoons work of the Duke of Espernon? and can so great
a success without injustice, be attributed to any thing but to his prudent
Conduct? In the Narrative whereof I have not added one syllable more than the
truth: and doubtless there are many yet alive that can justify all I have
said. I know very well that the Historians of that time have not mentioned all
the particularities I have, as material to my purpose, insisted upon, and that
those who have been most exact have recorded but very few in their Relations;
which is in part the reason why I have more willingly enlarged my self in this
discourse, that I might impartially render, what is so justly due to Truth, and
Virtue.

The sad accident of the King's Death was so suddenly spread all over Europe,
The return of the Count de Soissons to Court.
that it seemed, as if his person, raised to the highest pitch of Honor to
which man can arrive, had fallen in the sight of all the world. The Prince of
Conde, who (as has been said) resided then at Milan, received the first news of
it from the Conde de Fuentes, which was immediately after confirmed by a
Courrier dispatched purposely to him from the Queen Regent, to invite him back
into France. The Count de Soissons, who was but two little days journey from
Paris, was much sooner informed, and at the same instant in all diligence
repaired thither, to see what this accident might produce; where he arrived the
sixteenth of May, two days only after the King's Death; but late enough
notwithstanding to find all things dispatched to his hand. So that matters
being already concluded, the Queens Authority established, the Parliament,
People, Soldiery, and whole City settled in their Duty, and nothing lest for
him to do, but to approve what was already done (and which he could no ways
hope to overthrow, had he disliked it) he was fain whether sincerely, or
otherwise to concur in the Election, and thereupon went to present himself to
the Queen, where he assured her Majesty of his Faith and absolute Obedience.

The Count at his arrival at Court, observing the Duke of Espernon to be seated
in that degree of Favor and Reputation, to which by his signal, and recent
Services to the Queen, he might justly pretend, he forthwith resolved to
contract a strict connection with him, as accordingly by making him a tender of
his Friendship and assistance against all whomsoever, he endeavored to do:
neither did he do it but upon very good consideration; for foreseeing that the
Prince of Conde returning to Court (as he soon after did) would infallibly take
upon him the preeminence, and degree due to his Quality, and Birth, he would by
that means labor so to establish himself before his arrival, that it should
not be in the Princes Power to shake him. To which end he could pitch upon none
so proper to support his Interest, as the Duke of Espernon, who was, at that
time, the most considerable person in the Kingdom. The Queen had appointed him
Lodgings in the Louvre, not conceiving her self secure (as she was pleased to
say) but under his Vigilance and Valor; all dispatches were communicated to
him; his Orders and Advice were in all things followed and observed, so that
would he have stretched his Authority to the utmost, or had he been ambitious
of favor, he might doubtless with great facility have made himself sole Master
of Affairs: but so far was he from desiring to appear necessary (though
effectually so) to the excluding those who had right to the Council, that on
the contrary he entreated the Queen to call, and admit into it, all such as
either by the privilege of their Birth, or by the repute of their capacities,
might reasonably pretend to that Honor; coveting no greater advantage, than to
have a concurrence with worthy men for the public Safety; and seeing he could
not, without drawing great envy upon himself, possess alone that preeminence in
the Administration, to which the King had designed him, he was content with the
rest to share that part, which could not equitably be denied to his approved
Fidelity and Wisdom.

Though the Count de Soissons had the forementioned reasons to seek the Duke of
Espernon's friendship, he had yet therein a further and a more important
design, and that was by the Duke's assistance to procure a Match betwixt
Mademoiselle ^de Montpen^ier the Duke's Niece, and his own Son Lewis of
Bourbon, since Count de Soissons: neither was the Duke so ill read in this
Princes intention, that he did not very well perceive at what part he took his
aim, which made him, though he received the offer of his friendship with the
respect due to a Prince of the Blood, nevertheless accept it with such a
gravity, and reservation as should no ways engage him to any partiality in his
favor, nor in the least restrain the liberty of his proceeding in that
concern. A coldness that so much disgusted the Count de Soissens, who expected
a greater complacency and freedom from him, that his affection so violently
begun, was not likely long to last. The first opposition he met with in the
Duke to his desires, was in the proposal he made him to give way that he might
cause the Duke of Sully to be stabbed in the Louvre. He was their common Enemy,
and the sole cause of all the trouble had befallen this Prince, and of his
retirement from Court, wherein the inury he had received was such, that
although the King had laid upon him his positive command to be reconciled, he
had notwithstanding rather chosen to abandon the Court, than to do it. The Duke
had also received from the Duke of Sully (a great Creature of the late King's)
all the ill Offices could possibly have been done by the most implacable Enemy;
which being not unknown to the Count de Soissons, he doubted not to have met an
Animosity in the Duke against him as great as his own, and to have found him as
prompt to his revenge: but he was deceived, the Duke excusing himself by
telling the Count he could by no means permit so great a violence to be offered
in the King's Palace; beseeching him to consider, that the Guards which he had
the honor to command, being principally designed to preserve the respect due
to his Majesty's Person, and Presence inviolate; and such as it ought to be, he
should commit an irreparable offense to his Duty, should he consent to favor
an act of so dangerous Example. An answer at which the Count, a man of a
furious, and choleric temper, was infinitely moved; yet his interest not
permitting him to break with the Duke, he for that time with an extraordinary
patience made the best shift he could to dissemble his discontent.

During these transactions at Court, there was something passed also at Metz,
wherein the Duke was no little concerned: you have already heard how Arquien,
Lieutenant Colonel to the Regiment of Guards, had immediately upon the King's
Death taken post to retire himself into the Citadel, of which he was
Governor, af^^^ whom the Duke had sent Mun, to spoil his Design; so that Mun,
who was much the younger man, having posted in great diligence, overtook him
some six Stages short of Metz; where he found him so bruised with riding, that
he was scarce in a condition to perform the rest of his Journey: When Arquien
who saw himself likely to be prevented, and in danger to be denied admittance
into Metz, by the Duke's Servants, plainly told Mun, That he made no doubt, but
that his Journey was occasioned by a just suspicion the Duke had conceived of
his sudden departure without his Order, and Command; that therein he must needs
confess he had been to blame; but that he had been prompted to that diligence
by a jealousy the Duke might perhaps have detained him by force in Paris, with
an intent to deprive him of his command in the Citadel: That he therefore had
undertaken that journey simply, and for no other end, than to keep his
possession of that place, which was the most considerable member of his
Fortune, and the only reward of his Service, but with no design to disserve the
Duke: That he was his Servant; neither did he desire to govern so much as in
the Citadel, but under his Authority, and Command: That for a testimony of his
Candor, and good intention herein, he promised Mun, if he would slack his
diligence, and let them go together, not to enter the Citadel, till first he
should by the consent of the Duke's own Creatures be permitted so to do,
submitting moreover, till it should be by them determined, that the Garrison
there should be divided betwixt them. A proposition that Mun conceiving to be
as fair as the Duke could himself desire, he condescended to the condition, and
accordingly in his company performed the rest of the Journey, arriving both
together at the City. Where being come, they immediately assembled the Duke's
Friends and Servants, which were Tilladet, and Fromigieres Captains of the two
Companies of the Guards, who were in Garrison at Metz, and Momas Camp-Master to
the old Garrison; amongst whom it was concluded, that Tilladet the elder
Captain should with an hundred men only of his Company enter the Citadel, till
the Duke's further pleasure could be known: a number that to the Duke's Friends
seemed sufficient to make good their Quarter, should Arquien intend any thing
but fair; as Arquien thought his would be able to maintain his Authority, and
to overpower the other, should the Duke be obstinately bent to exclude him
absolutely from his Command.

Things then being thus concluded, Arquien, whilst yet in the City, sent order
to his Lieutenant to receive Tilladet into the Citadel, with such Soldiers as
he should bring alon^ with him, not naming any number, as not suspecting any
foul play; a negligence which the Duke's Servants making use of to his
advantage, they caused above fifty more, and those the best men they could
choose out of all the Companies, to be added to the hundred, that by Article
were to be admitted; who being all without any difficulty received into the
Citadel it soon appeared Arquien's was not the strongest Party, and that the
advantage he had in number (his Garrison consisting of two hundred men) being
balanced by the quality of the Soldiers, Tilladet was rather in a condition to
give, than to receive the Law from him.

Arquien having thus, by an excess of faithful dealing, performed his promise,
went himself last of all into the Citadel, where he was no sooner come, but
that his Lieutenant at the first word told him he was no longer Master of the
place; to whom Arquien having replied, that an hundred men could not dispute
his Authority there, the Lieutenant gave him to understand, that almost twice
so many were already got in, which he had not dared but to receive, not knowing
the precise number of those he was to admit; at which Arquien, now sensible of
the oversight he had committed, was so enraged that he would presently revenge
himself upon Tilladet, and was ready to fall on, Tilladet also on his part
preparing for the Encounter; when the Friends of both parties, who were in the
City, came in at the first noise of the disorder. At their first coming they
found the Gates of the Citadel shut; but being opened in the end to such as
pretended to endeavor an Accommodation, it was with much ado concluded, that
for Arquiens satisfaction, Tilladet, to whom he chiefly laid the blame, as
contriver of the Treachery, and Surprise, should depart the place; but that
those Soldiers, already entered, should continue there, The Duke of Espernon's
Authority reestablished in Metz.
and that Fromigieres should come in to command them. Thus ended this dispute,
and thus was the Duke of Espernon's absolute Authority, though with some
trouble, reestablished in Metz, which from the time of Sobole's dereliction,
until now, he had altogether lost.

Fromigieres being received into the Citadel was still more and more fortified
by new Soldiers, which the Duke's friends continually slipped in from the City;
so that Arquien seeing himself in a lost condition, and also stung with the
conscience of his own fault, he returned in all haste back to Paris, at once to
beg the Duke of Espernon's pardon, and to implore the Queen Regents Justice.
Where being come, and finding the Duke inflexible to his submissions, and
positively resolute to hold what he had, seeing he was to expect no good
account from him, he thought fit, as his last refuge to appeal to the Queen.
Neither did he want interest at Court to support, and countenance his cause,
where besides de Montigny his Brother (a man of great merit and esteem, and
afterward Marshall of France) he had many Relations, and Friends, together
with the Duke's Enemies, who could not, without great heart-burning, see him
re-settled in so considerable a command. Of this number were the Lords of the
House of Guise, and their Family, who made up a great part of the Court, and
who being all averse to the Duke's greatness, endeavored by possessing the
Queen, that the action of Metz was an intolerable affront to her Authority, to
make her restore Arquien to his Command. They represented to her that this was
an Affair by the late King conceived to be of such importance to the State,
that his Majesty had made no difficulty to make a Journey thither in person,
and on purpose to retrive this place out of the Duke of Espernon's hands: That
his Fidelity ought at this time to be much the rather suspected, by how much
his Ambition was more inordinate, and less easy to be cured: That having,
under pretense of some trivial Services to her Majesty in the beginning of her
Administration, committed a violence of this high nature, he made it plain that
his sole aim was in this new face of Affairs to establish his own particular
greatness: and that, instead of endeavoring to continue Subjects in their
Duty, by the example of a Subjects Obedience, he had himself committed the
greatest insolence imaginable against the Sovereign Power, by dispossessing one
of the most ancient and faithful Servants of the Crown, from a place wherein he
had served, without the least blemish, or reproach. It is certain that the
Queen, how well satisfied soever with the Duke of Espernon, was notwithstanding
something staggered in her resolution at this Remonstrance: but the Duke having
also given his reasons, and represented to her of what importance it was to
have his Majesty's Authority in the City and Citadel of Metz, conjoined in one
man, that the emulation of two Governors might not produce mutiny, such as
would endanger the introducing of Foreign Power into the place; with how long,
and with what Fidelity he had served his Kings in that Government, the
Authority being united in his Person; he found the Queen so well disposed to
accept of his justification, that she was absolutely satisfied: so that from
that time forward, nothing was more thought of in that business, save only how
to content Arquien, in finding out for him some other command, that might hold
proportion with that Employment.

In the transaction of this Affair, Fortune, as upon other occasions, would
needs interest her self to appear in the Duke's Favor. De Vic Governor of
Calice was one of the principal Mediators in this difference, who on the one
side making profession of great respect to the Duke's Service, and on the other
of a strict friendship with Arquien, labored with extraordinary passion, and
diligence to satisfy both parties in their pretense, and had brought matters
to so good an issue, that nothing remained to their mutual satisfaction, save
only to find out a Government for Arquien, equal to that whereof he was now
divested: but there was none at this time vacant of equal value, which was the
only knot in the Affair. At last this poor Gentleman proved both the Mediator,
and the price of their Accommodation, who had acted so vigorously in the
Treaty, that, with posting to and again in the most violent heats of Summer, he
was surpised with a Pleurisy; whereof in six days he died. With his
Government Arquien was recompensed, who after that quit claim to the Citadel
of Metz, leaving the Duke absolute Master of it, as before; a possession he
afterward kept, till that a few years before his death he demised it in favor
of Cardinal de la Valette his Son.

Amidst these many important Affairs, the Duke was not unmindful of his
particular Duties; whereof one, and to which he conceived himself most
particularly obliged, was to manifest his gratitude to Henry the III. his
Master, and Benefactor. He had formerly after his death attended his Body to
Compiegne, where the misfortunes of War, and the confusion of Affairs, not
permitting at that time a performance of his Funeral Rites; and the Queen now
resolving to begin the Regency with those of the late King, he humbly begged of
her to give him leave to make use of that opportunity for the interment of
Henry the III. wherein her Majesty, doing an Act worthy her Piety, would add
little or nothing to the expense she was already resolved to make. The Queen
readily consented to his request; so that the Duke, accompanied with a great
number of Lords and Gentlemen, went to fetch the Body from Compiegne, from
whence he conveyed it to St. Denis, where it was deposited in the ancient
Sepulcher of the Kings of France. Neither was this the sole testimony the Duke
gave of his gratitude to his old Master, the Records of his Bounty and Favor
being so impressed in his memory, that they perished not, but in his Grave,
where all things are buried in Oblivion. A little before his death, causing a
Marble Pillar, one of the most celebrated pieces of Architecture of these late
times, to be carried, and set up in the Church of St. Clou; wherein he was so
curious, as to make it be wrought in his own House, and almost in his own
sight; his design being to found a Revenue of a thousand Livers yearly for the
Service of the Chapel where it was erected; which was also adorned with
Pictures, and paved with Marble at his own charge: but some difficulties
arising about the settlement of that Foundation, which could not be cleared
before his death, the thing (to his great grief) remained imperfect.

The Ceremony of these Obsequies, The Prince of Conde returns to Court, where
he appears displeased at the Duke of Espernon.
performed in the end of June, was immediately followed by the return of the
Prince of Conde to Court, where he arrived in July, and where all the men of
condition contended who should give him the greatest testimonies of joy for his
return. Amongst whom, although the Duke of Espernon was none of the latest, yet
was he not the best received. The Duke of Sully, who had great need of this
Princes Protection, had prevented others in the possession of his Favor, and
conceiving he should make himself more acceptable by rendering the affection of
other Grandees suspected to him; he had (amongst others) pointed out the Duke
of Espernon for one of those of whom he had most reason to complain. An ill
Office, that having at first preferred in general terms, he afterward pursued
by particular circumstance, telling the Prince that the Duke had doubled the
Guards of the Louvre at his arrival, and put all the King's Family into Arms,
as they had been to defend it against a common Enemy. Which impression the
Prince was more apt to receive, by how much he believed, that the Duke being
already in a great degree of Favor with the Queen, and very intimate with the
Count de Soissons, must needs be jealous of his return, which he could not
consider, but as a great power directly opposite to all his concerns; which
made him at the first interview receive him, not only with apparent coldness,
but also, not able to dissemble his dissatisfaction, reproach him for having
endeavored to possess the Queen with some suspicions to his prejudice. The
Duke, surpised at so unexpected an entertainment and so groundless a reproach
(he having altered nothing in the usual Guards that had been kept in the Louvre
since the King's Death) and nettled with the sense of so injurious an Office,
gave aloud the Lie to all those who had branded him with so false a Calumny.
Yet would not this public and generous profession of the truth so satisfy and
appease the Prince, that there was not still some remains of discontent in his
mind against the Duke. He did not think him so affectionate to him, as to the
Count de Soissons; and seeing him advanced to that height of Reputation with
the Queen, could not expect he should be favorable to him, in the design he
had to assume that place in Court, and to share that Authority in the
management of Affairs, which were due to his Birth and Greatness. So that here
the Court was divided, the Prince of Conde having his Faction, and the Count of
Soissons his, amongst whom the Duke of Espernon was the chief, and most
considerable member.

Yet did not this diversity of Interests produce any sudden ill effect, The
state of Affairs at Court, during the Queens Regency.
the Princes paying a due respect to the Queen, and being by her admitted into
the debate of Affairs, though the most important were carried on by other
hands. The Cabinet Council at this time consisted of the Duke of Espernon, the
Chancellor de Sillery, President Ianin, and Mounsieur de Villeroy; wherein the
Duke's Vote had the greatest sway, and his Opinions did usually prevail; by
whom it being conceived necessary for the honor of the Nation, and the memory
of the late King to pursue the Enterprise of Iuliers, which had been the
pretense of his Majesty's Arms, he propounded, and got it to be concluded that
the Marshall de la Chasire, with an Army of 10000 Foot, and 1200. Horse,
should be sent to assist the interested Princes in the restitution of this
Place. The issue of which expedition was as succesful as could be wished; the
places possessed by the Archduke Leopold were restored into the hands of the
Marquis of Brandebourg, and the Duke of Newbourg; so that Affairs on that side
remained in as good a forwardness as could be desired to be shortly composed
(as they were) to the satisfaction of the German Princes.

As in the occasion we spoke of last things were carried on for the honor, so
was it no less necessary for the safety of the Kingdom to give some
satisfaction, and assurance to those of the Reformed Religion in the beginning
of this new Reign; it being very much to be feared this Faction (which at this
time was very powerful) pretending a violation of the Edicts formerly published
in their toleration, might run into insurrection, to the ruin of the public
peace. Wherein the Duke was of opinion to prevent either the real jealousy, or
else the evil intentions of those who were likely to breed any Commotion, by
Declarations to confirm the ancient Edicts granted in their favor. It is very
true, that he had no kindness for their Religion; but he thought it
nevertheless unfit to violate the public Faith, where what he did then for
reason of State, he has ever since observed in his own particular
administration; so that though an enemy to new opinions, he was notwithstanding
ever very solicitous to maintain the professors of them within his Governments
in peace, and safety; and it has been observed, that although at Metz the best
Families of the City were of that persuasion, that they abounded in Xaintongue,
and Angoumois, and that Guienne was not free, it could never be perceived, that
he made any distinction betwixt them and other the Kings Subjects, except where
he found them refractory and disobedient to his Commands.

These precautions, so seasonably applied in this turn of State, secured the
Peace of the Kingdom both within, and without to so fortunate a degree, that a
more happy Government could not possibly have been wished. Which certainly if
we consider the great number of discontents within, before the King's death,
the distastes many persons of great Quality had taken, who breathed nothing but
revenge, with the Ambition that reigns in all Courts able to overthrow the
surest foundations, is infinitely to be wondered at. To which may be added the
envy of neighboring Princes, who could not without anxiety, and apprehension
suffer the height of prosperity to which France was already advanced; together
with the Artifices of such as usually in the troubles of a State seek to repair
the ruins of their own desperate Fortunes: all which evil dispositions could
not, according to humane imagination have found a more favorable juncture,
than during a Regency, to have produced their fatal effects; and yet never was
France at greater peace within it self, nor more respected of her Neighbors,
than in all the whole time of the Queens administration. Wherein though I dare
not, I confess, attribute the whole reputation of the good Government to the
Duke of Espernon alone (who having called the most prudent and experienced
Ministers of the latter Reign into his Councils, they ought also to share in
the praise) yet can I not in equity deny him the first place of Honor, he
having (without dispute, the greatest Authority, and consequently having ever
carried the greatest sway in the results of the most important Affairs.

This Power and Reputation being the ordinary objects of envy even amongst men
of equal condition, Anno 1611.
it is no wonder if the Princes of the Blood were jealous of the Duke of
Espernon's greatness; The beginning of the Princes discontent.
who (as they said) unknown to them disposed the greatest Affairs of the
Kingdom, wherein they particulary complained, that he had persuaded the Queen
to resolve upon a match, betwixt the King and the Infanta of Spain; a thing
which in his Minority was not to be done without the consent of the Princes of
the Blood, by reason of the interest which, by virtue of their proximity, they
had in his Majesty's Person. But the Duke was so well read in their
Privileges, that it is not to be supposed he could commit so great an error;
and he had diverse times proposed this Marriage to them, for the most
honorable, and most advantageous match could be found out for the King in all
Europe: although the Princes who began to suffer themselves to be led away by
the persuasions of those who could no longer contain themselves within those
bounds, which the virtue of Peace prescribed to their Ambition, had ever
opposed that proposition, and would never consent unto it. The Duke
nevertheless, as if he had foreseen the happiness would accrue to the State by
this Alliance, ceased not continually to fortify the Queen Mother in the
resolution she had taken to pursue that Treaty, and to bring it to a
conclusion; which, because it was carried on without their consents, they
pretended it to be without their knowledge: and this was all the ground of
their complaint.

In this point the Count de Soissons concurred with the Prince of Conde; he was
already broken off with the Duke of Espernon, Anno 1612.
and that to such a degree, that he appeared now more implacable in his hatred,
than he had before seemed violent in his love. I have already said, that
amongst the reasons which induced him to seek the Duke's friendship, the
chiefest was the Marriage of Mademoiselle de Montpensier with the Prince his
Son: A Princess, who had been so far honored by the late King, that he had
cast his eye upon her for a Match betwixt her, and the Duke of Orleans, his
second Son, and had spoke to the Duke of Espernon to that purpose; so that it
cannot appear strange in him, if after being prepossessed with the hope of so
glorious a fortune for his Niece, and so great an honor to his whole Family he
could not easily condescend to the Count's motion, wherein nevertheless he
excused himself with all imaginable Civility and Respect: But this Prince, of a
hot and violent nature, taking for injury the least contradiction to his will,
was so highly transported with fury at this refusal, that there was no extreme
to which he would not hurry his revenge, publicly threatening to assault the
Duke in the Streets, in the Louvre, nay in his own House. Thus do we see the
Duke at once oppressed with the open hatred of two of the Princes of the Blood;
upon which occasion, although he very well understood the deference due to
their persons, and upon that account declared he would ever give them way, and
retire before them; yet did he not conceive it convenient to have the same
respect, and consideration for such as under their countenance and protection
should make any attempts upon him. And it was in this occurrence, that the
Reputation and interest he had at Court did most evidently appear; so many
persons, who by his bounty he had obliged (principally in the dispensation of
those offices depended upon his own of Colonel) so many others who expected
their advancement from him, so many Lords of great Quality, who either by
Relation or Friendship were united to him; and so many others out of the sole
regard of his Virtue flocking about his Person, that he has often been seen in
the streets of Paris with seven or eight hundred Gentlemen waiting upon him:
And I have heard many of very good quality, who in those times declared
themselves his Friends and Servants, affirm, that when he has gone on foot to
the Louvre, as he would sometimes purposely do, his attendance, marching in
order, have taken up all the space betwixt the Hostel d' Espernon, and the
Court, which is at least 2000 paces; insomuch that the Van of his Train has
reached the Barriers of the Louvre, before almost the Rear was out of his own
Gates. Which (how strange soever it may appear) is nothing more than truth; as
an infinite number of persons yet living can witness. Neither was the Queen
(who had great interest in the preservation of a man had merited so highly from
her) sorry to see him in so good a posture, conceiving it of no little moment
to her service, to have a person at Court able to make a Power, that might
otherwise have been turned against her, and her Authority: and indeed it was
upon him she principally relied, as the chief of all her Servants, and the most
considerable person of her Party.

The Queen made this most manifestly appear in a very remarkable occasion that
happened at this time; The favors the Duke received from the Queen upon the
feuds betwixt him and the Princes.
of which take here the true story. The Baron de la Chastagneraye after the
Service he had so fortunately done the Queen in recovering her out of the River
Seine, at the passage of the Port de Neully (relations of which you will find
at large in many of our French Histories) had been gratified for that action
with the command of Captain of her Majesty's Guard, and was moreover very
graciously received by the Queen; advantages that creating him much envy,
either her Majesty's Favor, or his own Spirit, or both, engaged him in many
Disputes with several persons of the most eminent condition at Court; amongst
which he had principally one with Mounsieur le Grand Escuyer, since Duke de
Bellegarde; wherein his passion one day transporting him so far, as to speak
unhandsomly of him in the Queens presence, and before the Duke of Espernon who
was his Cousin German, the Duke conceived himself obliged to say something in
the behalf of so near a Relation, and thereupon gave la Chastagneraye some
smart reply, which he, unable to endure, as briskly returned upon the Duke
himself; who withheld by the reverence of the place, said to him only this,
That her Majesty's presence which had encouraged him to that offensive
language, tied his hands, and obliged him from taking any further notice of it;
resolving within himself to let the Quarrel alone at that time, and to call him
to an account at fitter leisure: but the Queen both to satisfy the Duke of
Espernon, and to do her self right, la Chastagneraye having violated the
respect due to her Person and Presence, committed him immediately to the
Bastile; from whence though he was the next day enlarged, yet the sense of his
disgrace having wounded him to the quick, the common bruit went that he would
revenge himself upon the Duke's person, and that he was countenanced in that
resolution by the protection of the Princes. A thing which above all other men
he was the most fit to undertake, both for his courage which was very well
known; and also having the command of the Queens Guards, he had better
opportunity than any to execute his design, and to practice upon the Duke in
the very Louvre it self, than in any other place, who never went accompanied in
her Majesty's presence, as he did in all other places. The first intimation of
this design the Duke received from the Queens own mouth, who, by a favor never
before, or since granted to any, permitted him to take a number of select
Soldiers in his own Livery for the Guard of his Person, to attend him in all
places, so much as into the Louvre it self; which favor was highly improved to
him, when for his greater security, she moreover gave way that he should choose
some Gentlemen of Quality of his most confident Friends to enter with him
armed, even into her own Cabinet. Those whom the Duke made choice of for this
purpose were Chetin, Brother to the Marshall de St. Geran, Sauue-Baeuf,
Bonneval, the Count de Maille, Castelbaiart, and Marillac, all men of approved
Valor: a Grace which though it gave great jealousy and distaste to the
Princes and Grandees of the Court, who were the Duke's Adversaries, her Majesty
thought it fit notwithstanding, to give him leave to defend his own life
against whomsoever would make any attempt against it.

Amongst these many and great disputes wherein the Duke saw himself involved,
The Education of the Dukes three Sons.
he forgot not the care of his Childrens Education; whom he brought up to the
most laborious Exercises, and for whom after a foundation of Letters, not only
of a bare knowledge in the Latin Tongue, but in the Principles of Philosophy
also, he took care to provide the greatest man, without contradiction, in
Europe, for the Exercises of the Body, especially that of Riding, which was the
Sieur de la Bro^e formerly in the Constable de Montmorencies entertainment;
after whose Death, the Duke gained him to himself by so great Benefits, that he
gave him at one clap ten thousand Crowns in Gold, with an Annuity of a thousand
Crowns issuing out of the Hostel de Ville of Paris, the most certain Revenue at
that time in France: Neither did he here limit his Bounties. Under this
Gentleman's excellent Discipline, his two eldest Sons arrived to such a
perfection in their exercises, that no young Lords of their condition in the
Kingdom went before them.

When they had acquired as much by precept as seemed necessary, he conceived it
time they should establish that knowledge by experience, and by observing the
manners and ways of living of other Countries; to which purpose having put them
into an Equipage suiting their quality, he sent them into Germany, to the end
that by the different Governments of the several little Republics of which the
vast body of that Empire is composed, they might be better enabled to judge of
good and evil customs, and extract a more certain knowledge for their own
future conduct in the Employments to which they were by him designed. They
arrived in that Country in a very troublesome time, when all ways were very
difficult, and unsafe; but the illustrious name of the Father, in greater
repute in any part of Europe, than in France it self (present virtues being for
the most part less considered) did not only open all ways, and secure all
passes to them; but made them also received with great respect, and honored
with many civilities, and favors by all the Princes, and Republics of both
parties. After having staid some time in Germany, and visited at leisure the
Cities, and most eminent places there, they went from thence into Italy; where
they made a considerable stay, and where for the greatest part they made their
residence at Rome, continuing still their Exercises; from whence they went to
visit the most eminent Cities of that sweetest part of Europe; where having
made an acquaintance with most of the Princes and Lords of that Nation, they
returned into France.

Whilst the two eldest were thus forming their minds and bodies to such
qualities as were either necessary, or at least becoming their condition; Lewis
the youngest of the three, designed for the Church, was with no less care
brought up in the knowledge of Letters; whom so soon as the Duke his Father
conceived to be of a fit age, he sent him to La Flesche to the College of the
Father Jesuits, where the discipline requisite for the profession he was to
take upon him, was in very great repute. He there continued several years, and
came not thence till he had first run through all the degrees, by which men
climb to the highest pitch of knowledge; and in effect, when he was called
thence to come to Court, he had made so happy a progress, that Cardinal Perron,
a great friend of his Fathers, having been by him entreated to discourse with
his Son, had an exceeding great opinion of him, and believed him likely to make
one of the greatest men of that age, if he proceeded in his profession with a
diligence proportionable to the great parts wherewith he entered into it.

The three Brothers arriving almost all at the same time at Court, the Duke
their Father began to think of establishing the greatness of his Family upon
the surest foundation; and thereupon considered each of them by himself, for
the dividing his Estate amongst them: wherein though they were all embellished
with so many excellent qualities, that it could hardly be discerned which had
the greatest merit; yet the Duke having designed to confer his own name upon
the second, that consideration inclined him a little more to him than the other
two. By Article at his Marriage with Margaret de Foix, Countess of Candale, his
eldest Son was to carry the name of Foix, and to inherit his Mothers Estate,
cleared, and augmented by the Duke's money: and his own name was also so great,
what by the virtue of his Ancestors, and what by his own, that he would not
leave him on whom it was conferred, inferior either in Reputation, or Estate
to any whomsoever of his condition, in the Kingdom. He had already by his
Service obtained from the Queen Regent the Reversion of all his Offices; viz.
of that of Colonel General of the Infantry of France; of first Gentleman of the
Bedchamber, an Office he had ever kept since his first Favor; of Governor of
the City, and Citadel of Metz and of the Messin Country; of the Provinces,
Cities, and Castles of Xaintes, and Angoulesme; of the City and Government of
Rochelle, the Country of Aulins, with the higher and lower Limousin; of the
City, Castle, and Territory of Boulogne, and of the City, Country, and Castle
of Loches: all which he at this time thus divided amongst his three Sons. To
his eldest, the Count of Candale, he assigned in present (causing him forthwith
to be admitted into it) the Office of first Gentleman of the Bedchamber, with
the Governments of Angoumois, Xaintonge, Aulins, and Limousin in Remainder; to
which he added the whole Estate of the House of Candale, amounting to above
fourscore thousand Livers yearly revenue in goodly Lordships; as also the
Duchy of Espernon, with the Earldom of Montfort, together with other Lands
arising to above fifty thousand Crowns a year: to which the Duke having
obtained an assurance of a Mareschal's Staff for this Son, so soon as a more
mature age and experience should render him capable of that Employment, he
conceived that a high Spirit, as his was, ought to rest very well satisfied
with so fair a Fortune.

To the Marquis de la Valette, his second Son, he assigned his Office of
Colonel, and the Government of Metz in reversion, with the rest of his Estate
whether hereditary or purchased; which made up a Revenue equal to the first,
together with his share of the Rents, and personal Estate.

For his third Son also he provided to the value of fifty thousand Crowns a
year at least in Church preferments; of which he was not content only to put
him into present possession, but gave him moreover a years Revenue advance,
that he might have wherewithal to maintain a port suitable to his condition: to
which he further added the survivancy of the Government of Boulogne, and
Loches, with the Office of chief Almoner to the King, which was a leading step
to that of great Almoner of France.

In this distribution of his Fortune, the Duke's paternal care and liberality,
might (a man would have thought) have amply satisfied the most aspiring
Ambitions, and the most avaritious Natures; neither could the two youngest
enough magnify the bounty of so good a Father, who by his Industry, and his
Blood had raised them to such a height of Riches and Honor: but some
malevolent Spirits, enemies to the peace and happiness of the eldest, by a
violence upon his nature, persuaded him he had not been kindly used in this
partition; that therein his younger Brother had the best, and most solid
Employments assigned to him; whereof Mea^^ng that (...) Colone^.
one was a Command of it self sufficient to oblige all the Gentlemen of France,
together with a Frontier much more considerable, than the best Province of the
Kingdom; whereas what was consigned to him, was only an Office of little value,
and no great repute at Court, with the expectation of a Mareschal's Staff,
considerable 'twas true, but a great way off; and that for his Governments,
they lay so in the heart of the Kingdom, that his Authority would be very
little, or nothing at all; by which means making him at first undervalue the
benefits he had received, they so debauched his gratitude at last, as to make
him publicly complain of his Fathers proceeding, and to despise all he had,
seeing he had not all he desired.

The Duke, advertised of his Sons discontent, labored all he could to reclaim
him, and make him see his error, which he afterward did; neither could any
thing be more grateful, and obedient, than he ever carried himself, so often as
he suffered himself to be governed by his own natural inclination.

Even before the King's death, the Fortune and Greatness of the Father, with
the merit, and Riches of the Sons, had rendered their Alliances so considerable,
that there were few persons of great Quality at Court, who had not been offered
to the Duke in Marriage with them; but amongst the several Matches proposed for
the Count de Candale, his eldest Son, the Duke preferred that with the Duchess
of Haluin, Grandchild to the Duke of Haluin, and Daughter to the Marquis de
Megnelay, The Marriage of the Count d^ (...) the Duk^^eldest Son.
the inheritrix of a rich and illustrious Family, before all the rest,
Whereupon a Marriage betwixt them shortly ensued, though discontents soon after
arising, grew at last to that height, that in a few years they came to an
absolute separation. Those who had the power to sow division in the
Marriage Bed, had the same to persuade the Count de Candale into an open breach
with the Duke his Father; the grief whereof (the most sensible of any he had
ever met with in the whole course of his life) as it was the cause of infinite
others, which befell him afterward, had like to have brought him to his Grave.
Yet did the Duke (as if he had already foreseen what did after fall out) all an
indulgent Father could possibly do, to reconcile himself to his Son, and his
Son to his Duty: wherein though Le Plessis (the usual mediator of all
differences in that Family) did as much as could be expected from an
extraordinary prudence, and a sincere affection, it proved all to no effect;
the Count either unable to support the injury he believed had been done him in
the partition of the Offices, or not well enduring the presence of a Father, he
was conscious to himself he had not kindly used, being resolved by a voluntary
Exile, to seek some repose for his troubled mind. He determined therefore to
forsake France, but the end of his Travel was not simply for diversion; neither
could he satisfy himself with the mere exercise of some Virtues only to be
practiced in the obscurity of retirement, and in the privacy of a Closet; it
was by painful, and perilous actions, and by exposing his life to the
uncertain event of great Enterprises, that he would qualify and sweeten his
discontents. Spurred on therefore by this generous resolution, he took the
second time the way of Italy, where arriving at the Court of the great Duke of
Tuscany, at a time when he was equipping some Galleys for the Levant, he
entreated that Prince to permit him with his friends to put himself aboard
those Vessels. There had not any person of his condition, for many years, gone
out of the Kingdom with so honorable a Train of Gentlemen, and those in so
handsome an Equipage, as the Count did; having above fifty Gentlemen of good
quality in his company, whom either their respect to the Father, or the esteem
of his own person, had prevailed upon to run the same fortune with him:
Loziere, de Themines, Monberaut, Calonges, Magnas, the two Brothers de la Tour,
Villandry, Cipierre, Vernegue, Monplaisir, de Vic, la Boissiere, with many
other Gentlemen of note, were of this number; when the Duke his Father, how
afflicted soever at his resolution, yet unwilling he should be exposed to so
infinite, and almost inevitable dangers, without some prudent and faithful
person to stand by him in all hazards, permitted Le Plessis likewise, who had
been very useful to him in his former Travels, to attend him in this sally
also; not doubting but he would by his conduct be as serviceable to him in his
military undertakings, as he had formerly been by his dexterity in other
Affairs.

The Duke of Florence having consented that the Count de Candale with his
Companions should embarque in his Galleys, they cours'd up and down the Coasts
of the Levant, performing some exploits by Sea, The Count de Candale's Voyage
into the Levant.
and making some attempts by Land, and always with good success: but the
particular design of this expedition being upon the Fortress of Aglimant, the
most important of all Caramania, they were to steer their course that way, and
to prepare themselves to assault it. This Fortress, favored by a good Harbor,
was manned with six hundred Turks, and moreover furnished with Artillery,
Ammunition, and all things necessary for its defense; which, as it lay exposed
to the inroads of the Christians, those who had the Guard of it, were so
vigilant to its preservation, that there could be no hope of effecting any
thing by surprise. Neither could the Admiral of the Tuscan Galleys ( Signior
Enguerrany by name) who was to answer for any miscarriage in the Enterprise,
resolve to hazard an attempt, in which he evidently saw so many, and almost
invincible difficulties: but the Count de Candale, having generously desired
the greatest danger might be conferred upon him, and his, his noble resolution
cut off all disputes, and the assault was forthwith concluded.

If in the proposition of this Enterprise the Count had evidenced the bravery
of his Spirit, he made it in the execution more manifestly appear. Don Pedro
Medici of the Duke's own Family, having resolved to make one in this Voyage,
would do the Count de Candale the Honor to fight in his Squadron, which having
had the precedence in landing, had the same deference continued to them
throughout the whole Action; which so succeeded to the Count's glory, that
after a stout resistance he forced the place by Petards, and took it; yet not
without the loss of some Christians, whereof some Gentlemen of Quality in his
own Squadron there lost their lives. Pedro Medici was himself desperately
wounded, Le Plessis more slightly; as also Monberaut, and some others: but
Villandry, la Boissiere, and Vernegue were laid dead upon the place A loss
however soon recompensed by that of the Turks, who had above 300. men slain in
the Fight, with two hundred and fifty of them made slaves, as two hundred and
forty Christians were set free: So that the Florentine General having seized of
all the spoil, the Count de Candale contented himself with the bare Honor of
the Victory. The Fortress was set on fire, and in a short space totally
consumed; the chiefest the ^urk had upon that Frontier, and that served as a
Port to being but five Leagues distance thence.

This action carried on with so great prudence, and performed with so admirable
Valor, was crowned with an universal applause: So that the Count de Candale
returned into France loaded with Glory and Praise, and Le Plessis having whilst
he was abroad sweetened his temper, and given him a better taste of his Fathers
Affection, at his return home, he also returned into his Duty and filial
Obedience; which made the Duke with an excess of joy receive him with open arms
into his bosom; a reunion that continuing some years, the Count lived at Court
in great Honor, and as high Reputation as any Gentleman of his condition in
the Kingdom.

At this time there likewise^ happened an absolute and perfect reconciliation
betwixt the Duke and the House of Guise; for as the refusal of the Marriage of
Mademoiselle de Montpensier had lost him the Count de Soissons friendship, so
did the consummation of that of the Duchess of Montpensier her Mother with the
Duke of Guise, acquire him that of that Duke, and all his Family.

This great Alliance in the revolutions, that after happened, was of no little
importance to the Duke of Espernon. The favor of Concino Concini Marquis d'
Encre began at this time to show it self, and to appear out of the
conceal^dness, and ob^curity, where it had till now lain hid, and to raise it
self to such a prodigious stature, as drew upon the Marquis the envy of the
whole Court. I do not here pretend to speak of the Birth of this Favor, nor of
the degrees by which it rose to that excessive height, to which it was so
suddenly advanced. I shall only say that this Marquis, finding himself too weak
to bear the great weight of Envy with which he found himself oppressed, sought
the friendship and support of the Duke of Espernon; who he knew was alone
sufficient to protect him against all the rest, and to whom, how ambitious
soever he might be in his own nature, he made no difficulty to submit. He had
in the spring of his favor received several good Offices from him, in
acknowledgment of which, or to interest the Duke further in his preservation,
he caused the Marriage of his only Daughter with the Marquis de la Valette the
Duke's second Son, to be proposed unto him; offering with her in Dowry the
Office of Constable for the Duke himself, so soon as the King should come out
of his Minority, of which the time was near at hand; and for the Marquis, Money
and Offices, as much, and as many as they could expect by the means, and
through the mediation of a Favorite, who, through his Wife, possessed an
absolute Empire over the Queen Regents will.

Would the Duke have taken the advice of many of his Servants, he had not
perhaps, as he did, rejected this p^oposal* but he would never suffer himself
to be overcome, either by the importunity of his Friends, or the consideration
of his own peculiar interest, The Marshall d' Encre seeks the Duke of
Espernon's Alliance, and is rejected.
as to that motion; insomuch that instead of receiving so advantageous offers
with some show of civility and respect, he failed little of rejecting them with
injury, and contempt, as he did with great disdain: nay he expressed great
offense, and unkindness against those who pressed him to it. An obstinacy that
I have often heard condemned by some, who believed the Duke had never fallen
into those disorders, whereinto he saw himself afterward plunged by the
Marquis d' Encres excessive favor, had he made himself Moderator, that is
Master of Affairs, as he might with great ease have done: but as he would
pretend to no favor himself, so could he endure no other Favorites; insomuch
that he would rather make it his business to pull this down, than by his
interest to serve himself in doing his own work.

Though by this repulse the Marquis d' Encre (upon whom all things depended at
that time) was infinitely cooled toward the Duke; yet did he not manifest any
disgust at all: The Duke was so necessary at Court, the Queen could not be
without him; he had propounded, and caused the Match with Spain to be resolved
upon, contrary to the opinion of the Princes of the Blood, and diverse others of
great condition, who followed their interests; yet could not the business be
carried on to the Queen satisfaction, if he did not remain at Court, to
fortify such in their first resolution, as otherwise might perhaps be taken
off by the consideration of the great power of those, who so stiffly opposed
it. It was therefore necessary to make use of him in this occasion for the
accomplishment of what had been first propounded by him: and in the end the
conditions of the two Marriages having been mutually accepted of in both
Courts, there was great demonstration of joy in both Kingdoms, France
particularly pouring out it self in magnificences to a degree almost of
profusion, could too much gratitude have been expressed for a blessing that has
already produced so much happiness, and that is likely to bring much more to
the Kingdom.

Whilst the Court was busy about the preparation for these solemnities, the
Prince of Conde, and the Count de Soissons, suddenly withdrew from Court; whose
retirement, together with some discontent those of the Religion made show of at
the same time, gave great apprehension, that matters were likely to come to a
speedy rupture: but the wisdom of the Queens Council having applied seasonable
remedies to this disorder, if they did not absolutely take away the effect of
what they feared, they at least deferred deferred it; so that the public Peace
was for this time secured. The Queen caused the Princes to be treated with, who
were at last content to return to Court, and to sign the conditions of the
Marriage; and those of the Religion, having by this little disorder procured
some inconsiderable concessions, referred to a fitter opportunity the design
they had to interrupt the main work, which they conceived would be infinitely
prejudicial to their Interest, and Safety.

I cannot in this place forbear another digression from my Subject, Anno 1613.
to speak of the acquisition the Duke made at this time of one of the principal
Servants he ever had in his Family, and one whose merit made him afterward
very eminent at Court, where he obtained no little Favor and Esteem with the
King himself; and this was the Sieur de Marsillac, a Gentleman of as great
valor, and as graceful a presence as any whatsoever of his time. This man had
formerly had a dependence upon Balagny (called the Brave of the Court) whom
Balagny had taken out of the Regiment of Guards, where he trail'd a Pike, to
put him upon one of the boldest, and most honorable Actions a Gentleman of his
condition could possibly undertake, A Challenge carried by Marsillac from
Balagni to the Duke of Eguillon.
and that was to carry a Challenge to the Duke of Eguillon, since Duke of
Mayenne. This business happened in the Reign of Henry the great, who did not
condemn him for it; and, though it was the first of this nature that perhaps
had ever been known in France, gave notwithstanding the Duke of Mayenne his
Father no satisfaction therein, what complaints soever he could make. I have
heard Marsillac himself tell the story: He adventured a poor younger Brother as
he was, to go execute his Commission even in the Duke d' Eguillon's own
Bedchamber, whose generosity and freedom he could never sufficiently commend,
he doing him the honor to go out with him alone to give his friend
satisfaction, without other caution, than his own bare word, though he could by
no means prevail with him, to let him be further concerned in the Quarrel,
being resolute to end the dispute without a Second; the only thing whereof he
could complain in the Duke's behavior toward him; though he gave him at the
same time as much reason, to magnify the extraordinary, and noble care he took
to conceal the action from the Duke of Mayenne his Fathers knowledge. He was in
the house when the Challenge was brought, and has often been heard to say, that
had he known his temerity, he would have caused Marsillac to have been tossed out
of the Windows, to have taught him what it was to bring a Message of that
nature to a Prince, from a private Gentleman: and doubtless he would have been
as good as his word, he was so highly incensed at the affront; which perhaps
served for an example shortly after to the Baron of Luz, in his challenge to
the Chevalier de Guise. As for Marsillac after the death of Balagny (who was
killed in a Quarrel) being entertained into the Duke of Espernon's Service, he
obtained under him in the command of his Guard, which he bestowed upon him, so
high a reputation, and esteem, that he was at last desired by the King; where
his Majesty gave him a Company in his own Guards, and his deserts were
infallibly raising him to a much higher fortune, if at the same time the King
expressed the greatest esteem and affection for him, he had not at the Siege of
Privas received a Musquet^shot in his head, which as it determined his hopes,
was also the reward of all his Service.

We here with a new year enter upon a new disorder, Anno 1614.
of which the immoderate greatness of Conchini was either the effectual, or at
least the pretended cause; New disorders in the Kingdom.
and doubtless his favor and insolence were raised to that excess, as rendered
him intolerable; either of which are sufficiently odious in whomsoever they
happen to befound; but being united in him, pulled upon him the hatred, or ^nvy
of all sorts of men. The most part of the great ones seeing themselves excluded
from all knowledge of Affairs (neither is it possible to satisfy all who will
pretend to that privilege) cast their eyes upon the Prince of Conde, to
interest him in their discontents; and the Hugonot Faction not being able
without great jealousy to see the Marriage accomplished, was no less ready
than those Grandees to break into open arms: The one and the other then being
in such a disposition, had jointly by the negotiation of the Duke of Bouillon
recourse to the Prince of Conde, persuading him to oppose himself to Conchini's
greatness, to demand punishment for those evils of which he had been the cause,
and a Reformation in the State; the old and common pretense of all such as
would infest the public peace. The Prince had ever since the death of the
Count de Soissons been in high consideration, not only by reason of his quality
as first, but also as it were sole Prince of the Blood; to which his admirable
endowments rendered him no less conspicuous, than did the preeminence of his
Birth: He was knowing, dexterous, and intelligent in all sorts of business,
beyond what could be expected from his age: notwithstanding all which great
qualities, something yet being wanting, that some conceived was required in a
person of his eminent condition, they had not allowed him that share in the
management of Affairs he either merited, or at least desired; an injury that he
very much resneting, and moreover animated by the persuasions not of the Duke
de Bouillon only, but also by the Dukes of Longueville, Mayenne, Nevers, and
Luxe^bourg, who had every one a particular pretext for his defection, made him
suddenly depart from Court, and retire himself to Mezieres in Champagne, from
whence, should he be smartly laid to, he might conveniently retreat to Sedan.
To this place he was followed by all the other discontented Lords: as for the
Duke of Vendosme, who had likewise promised to do the same, not being able to
get clear of the Court so soon as he intended (having been detained prisoner in
a Chamber of the Louvre) he nevertheless finding means to deceive his Guards,
escaped soon after to his Government of Bretagne, where he did what he could to
fortify the Faction by the interest he had in that Province.

This great number of discontents put the Court into strange disorder, the old
Ministers of State, who had seen nothing of a Civil War for many years,
apprehending this would certainly involve the Kingdom in a desperate confusion:
but the Duke of Espernon having considered that the Princes for the most part
had neither money, nor credit at home, nor no intelligence abroad, few places to
retire unto, and fewer friends amongst the people, whom the serenity of the
present Government had rendered very well satisfied with their condition, was of
a quite contrary opinion. The Duke (...).
He therefore advised the Queen Regent to cause them by the Regiments of
French, and Swisse Guards, with such Horse as were ready at hand to be suddenly
pur^^^d; assuring her, that if the King would please to put himself into the
head of this little Body, he might with the greatest ease imaginable, and
without resistance suppress a faction that had inconsiderately engaged in a
Rebellion without other ground than the mere instigation of some mutinous
spirits, and no other support at all. Not followed, to the great disadvantage
of the Royal Affairs.
It was the same advice he had formerly given Henry the III. in the time of his
favor, and in the first commotions of the League; which not having then been
hearkened to, had cost the King and the whole Kingdom so dear: but the same
Counsel had here the same success, the wisdom of the Ministers of State could
not give ear to an advice, wherein they apprehended so great a danger; so that
for want of having observed what the presence of a King does in a Kingdom,
where the respect to the Sovereign Authority has ever been so inviolate, as
that it seems to be a quality inherent to that people, they lost the most
favorable opportunity to have secured the present peace, and to have prevented
the mischiefs that ensued, could possibly have been wished. An oversight that
the Prince of Conde very well observing, as I have heard him say himself, he of
that observation (as we shall see hereafter) made a great advantage for the
King's Service in the Queen Mothers Affairs.

The advice of taking Arms being thus rejected, the Duke of Espernon refused to
have any hand in the ensuing Treaty, wherein he saw they were to purchase a
Peace he neither thought honorable, nor likely long to continue. It was
nevertheless soon concluded, and the Princes having at this time found no
disposition in the people to follow the humor of their private discontents;
nor being able of themselves to raise any considerable force, made no great
difficulty of selling a Peace, they would undoubtedly, have bought at any
price, had they once been made to feel the smart of War. But for this they had
great sums of money, that furnished them for another Rebellion, with some
other conditions, as that there should be a Convocation of the Estates General
for regulating such disorders as (they said) were introduced into the Kingdom.
And this was that called the Peace of Saint Menehou, according to the Articles
of which, there followed after a Convocation of the Estates, but not till the
Declaration of the King's Majority had first been ratified in the Parliament of
Paris; that Act having been thought convenient to precede the Assembly, to the
end that whatever they should there conclude, might be more authentic, and
admit of no dispute for the time to come.

During this Session of the Estates, and in the sight as it were of all France,
which in the persons of their Deputies seemed to be then present at Paris, the
Duke did an action which made a great bustle, and noise in the beginning; but
that in the issue, through the high consideration and esteem of his Authority
and Virtue, was passed over well enough. I have already said, when speaking of
the erection of the Duke's command of Colonel General in Title of an Office of
the Crown, that the King annexed thereto a Sovereign Justice, or Court Martial
over all the French Infantry. In any difference betwixt Soldier and Soldier,
the Duke, together with the Officers of that Body to which the Soldier did
belong, was absolute and sovereign Judge of the Offense; but if the difference
happened to be betwixt a Soldier and a Citizen, there he was to call some
Officers of Justice, together with the Officers of the Regiment to assist him.
Rules that, being entered amongst the Statutes of the Crown, are at this day
part of the Law, as they make up the most noble part of that brave command. It
happened that at this time, two Soldiers of the Regiment of Guards fighting a
Duel in the Pre-au-Clercs, a place within the Jurisdiction of the Abbey of Saint
Germans, the one being slain, the other was taken, and delivered into the hands
of the Prevost of Saint Germans, who detained him in the Prison belonging to
the Abbey. Whereupon the Duke conceiving this had been ignorantly done by the
Officer, who perhaps might not know how far in this case his Authority did
extend, sent the Prevost-Martial of the Regiment to the Bailiff to make him
understand the right the Duke had to demand his Prisoner, and withal civilly to
entreat him to deliver him up, that he might be brought to his Trial: But this
entreaty was answered with a surly and positive denial, which being, in the
terms it was delivered, carried back to the Duke, made him infinitely
impatient, that the Laws established in favor of his command, should suffer so
great a contempt: neither could he on the other side submit to pursue all the
due Forms, by which he was by order of Law and Justice to retrive his man.
Thinking it therefore the most expedite way to make use of his own Authority in
the case, he commanded the Lieutenant of the Company of which the Prisoner was,
to take a Squadron along with him, and by fair means or foul to bring him away;
which was accordingly executed: and upon a second refusal the Prison of Saint
Germans broke open, and the Soldier carried away to be punished according to
the rigor of the Law, but by those nevertheless who were his proper and
natural Judges.

Hereupon the Bailiff goes to the Parliament to complain of the contempt had
been offered to the Court by a violence upon their inferior Officers: upon
which complaint, and an Indictment Viva voce preferred by the Bailiff himself;
the Parliament issued out a Warrant to apprehend the Lieutenant for executing
his Colonels Order, with a Citation of personal appearance against the Colonel
himself: A proceeding, that as it could not certainly be approved by all,
surpised and nettled the Duke to the last degree. He complained of it to the
King, representing at the same time his reasons to justify the Act, and not
being able to support the contempt he conceived was cast upon his person, by a
body he had ever honored, and sometimes obliged, he would give the world an
account it was no easy matter to serve a Process upon him. That from the
Parliament had been granted out the sixteenth of November, and on the ninteenth
the Duke went thither in person, accompanied with five, or six hundred
Gentlemen, besides whom there also crowded as many more young Soldiers of the
Regiment of Guards into the Palace; insomuch that all the Base-Court,
Galleries, and the very Hall it self was full of them. The Duke pretended he
went to present himself in obedience to the Process had been issued out against
him, though no one could believe he went in such a posture with any intent of
submission: So that the Parliament advertised of his coming with so great a
Train, and not knowing his design, nor to what his passion might transport him,
suddenly adjourned, retiring every man his own way before their usual time.

As it is hard to govern a confused, and unruly multitude, a sort of young
hair-brained fellows, who attended the Duke, offered some indignities, and
affronts to some of the inferior Officers of the Court; and being most of them
in Boots, purposely entangled their Spurs in the Ushers, and Proctors Gowns,
thinking thereby the more to oblige the Duke, as they appeared more sensible of
his offense. An insolence that infinitely aggravated the business, which
without that had been foul enough of it self. A great complaint whereof was
made against the Duke, as responsible for all that happened at the Palace, every
one believing that, in the design he had to brave the Parliament, all things
were done by his order, which had passed in his presence.

If the Duke had manifested a resentment of the injury he had received from the
Parliament, the Parliament expressed no less for what the Duke had done to the
contempt of their Dignity; yet did they make no complaint thereof to the King;
but remaining in a profound silence (the truest sign of a violent affliction)
ordered a cessation of Justice, with a determinate resolution never to meet
again, till first a public and solemn reparation should be made.

This business, proceeding to such a height, put the King and Queen into a very
great confusion; they thought it neither convenient nor safe in this juncture
of Affairs, which seemed to threaten some sudden mischief, to disoblige the
Duke of Espernon; neither did they think it an easy matter to persuade him to
pay the Parliament any great submissions; who, on the other side, would in such
a case as this accept of no ordinary satisfaction. At last the King sent the
Duke de Vantadour to the Palace, to tell the Parliament from him, That by their
Body his person being represented, all the injury they pretended to have
received from the Duke of Espernon reflected immediately upon him: That his
Majesty also took it to himself, to whom it did belong, to vindicate his own
Honor, which he should be sufficiently able to do without any necessity upon
them of espousing his Quarrel: but that because the business had made some
noise, that might perhaps have given some offense to the public, he therefore
desired they should receive a public satisfaction, and such a one as should
satisfy the world of the great respect he had to Justice. That in order
thereunto it was his pleasure the Prisoner should be returned to the same place
from whence he had been taken, and by the same person by whom he had been
fetched away; and as for what concerned the Duke, who protested he had no
intention to offend the Parliament in what he had done, he should be desired in
his own person to make the same protestation before them.

Things being thus ordered, the Duke of Espernon the nine and twentieth of the
same month went to the Palace; when, though with no extraordinary Train about
his person, so many nevertheless of his Friends had conveyed themselves into
the Palace, as were sufficient to make head against his Enemies, should they,
by taking advantage of the place, or by pretending to do a right to the
Assembly, have attempted any thing against him. Being come into the great
Chamber, and having taken his accustomed seat, he, speaking with his hat on, in
few words Remonstrated: That having never had other intent, than to pay all due
respect to an Assembly in which he had had the honor for many years to have
some place, he could not but admire they should interpret what was an effect of
that due honor and respect, for a premeditated offense: That he was not
altogether so unthrifty of his own Interest, as to offer an injury to them,
which he could not but know would rebound upon himself: That he had, for two
and thirty years past, been a Member of that Honorable Body; during all which
time there had not been perhaps a man of his condition, more passionate for
their Service, than himself in the Kingdom: That he had set down amongst the
good fortunes of his life, the opportunity he had happily met withal of
expressing his good Affection to the Dignity of that Assembly, when after the
death of Henry the Great, of Glorious Memory, he had first advised them to make
use of their own Authority in providing for the Regency of the Kingdom: That he
had tendered them his Service upon that occasion, which had not been altogether
ineffectual to the putting them in possession of a privilege which would
doubtless be taken notice of in ages yet to come: That if any indiscreet
persons had made use of his name, either for the pretense of their insolences,
or in the prosecution of their own private revenge, he seriously demanded their
Justice, as the person most concerned in the offense: That he very well knew
his enemies would lay hold of that occasion, to make him appear in all the
fault; but that he did humbly beseech them to judge more favorably of his
intentions, and that all things past might be forgot (concluding his speech
with these very words) That he di^ entreat to be excused, if in a rude and
unpolished discourse, he had not given that satisfaction he could have wished
to their Learned Ears, who having been all his life a Captain of Foot, had ever
made it more his study to do, than to speak well. To which the first President
Verdun, after having gathered the Votes of the Assembly, returned this Answer:
That since the King was graciously pleased to incline more to Clemency than
Rigor, the Court by his Majesty's express Command, and in consideration of his
many brave Services, as also willing to make the best interpretation of what
had passed, accepted of his excuse; hoping thereby for the future, to engage
both himself and his Sons to pay those Services to the King and Kingdom to
which they were in gratitude obliged; and to that Court the Honor and respect
was due unto them. Of which he never after failed; neither at the hour of his
death, was there any person of his condition in the Kingdom, who had more
friends than he in that honorable Assembly, nor that had more reason upon
several occasions to magnify their Justice.

The end of the Sixth Book.
THE HISTORY Of the LIFE of the Duke of Espernon.
The Seventh Book.
SOon after the forementioned dispute betwixt the Parliament, Anno 1615.
and the Duke, the Assembly of Estates broke up; which, instead of the happy
Reformation was expected to ensue, was immediately followed by a War; upon
which the Council (after having long waver'd in the uncertainty of the Peace so
lately and so dearly bought) saw it necessary at last to resolve. The Commotion
of the Princes to hinder the Marriage with Spain.
The discontents of the Prince of Conde was again the cause of this, as it had
been of the late Commotion; and those discontents again founded upon the
greatness of Conchini, now advanced to the honor of Marshall of France. The
Marshall therefore finding the Prince had conceived an implacable animosity
against him, and very well foreseeing, that unless he freed himself from the
difficulties he would eternally strew in his way, he could never raise himself
to that pitch of greatness, to which he did aspire; he resolved to come to a
public Rupture with him, and to remove him from the King's Presence by a War
that should for a sufficient time secure himself from those obstacles he was
otherwise certain to receive from so powerful an Enemy. The Prince was already
retired in great discontent from Court; having as before, taken the way of
Champagne, that he might be near Sedan, his surest refuge, should he be
overmatch'd by the Royal Power: where after Conchini had long amused him with
the hope of some advantageou^ Accommodation he at one blow cut him off that
expectation, by causing a Summons to be sent him to be in readiness to attend
the King in his Progress into Guienne, whither his Majesty was resolved shortly
to take a Journey for the consummation of his Marriage; an Affair that having
ever been opposed by the Prince, he very well understood the meaning of that
Summons, and now plainly saw how he was to trust in the strength of his own
Arms. He had ever since the last breach been so solicitous to continue his
intelligence, and to maintain the League he had contracted with the Lords of
his Party the precedent year, that it was no hard matter for him to engage them
in this n^w Quarrel: the Dukes of Longu^ville, Mayenne, Vendosme, and Nevers
declared highly in his favor, and the Duke of Bouillon (whose interest carried
the whole Hugonot Faction along with it) did the same; so that all things were
apparently disposed for an intestine War, in all the best Provinces of the
Kingdom.

So many discontented persons, and those so considerable in themselves, put the
Court into no little disorder; the Kings Journey in order to his Marriage had
been resolved upon, and the time with the Spanish Agents concluded; which was
every where so publicly known, that the Honor of the King and the Queen
Mother was not a little concerned in the consummation of a thing, to which they
were so solemnly engaged: but there was scarce any who durst undertake to
overcome the difficulties were prepared to hinder that great Affair. For after
the retirement of all the forenam'd Princes, there was not any remained at
Court, except the Dukes of Guise and Espernon, who were capable of serving the
King in so dangerous an occasion; and of these the Duke of Guise, though in
show well enough with the Queen, stood nevertheless so suspected to her, that
she durst not trust an Army in his hands, lest by joining with the discontented
Princes (whereof the greater part were his Kindred, or nearly allied to him)
his Majesty's Person might be left wholly to their discretion; and although she
had not the same jealousy of the Duke of Espernon (no body doubting his
Fidelity) yet could not that command be conferred upon him, without giving
offense to the Duke of Guise.

In this anxiety then how she might satisfy them both, the Duke of Espernon
went one day to attend the Queen, where he made it his humble request to her
Majesty, The Du^e of Espernon's Service upon this occasion.
she would not in the least consider his particular satisfaction in this
occurrence: Telling her he should ever be very well satisfied, provided their
Majesty's were served as they ought to be: That he did hope they would, and
that he was doing something in order to securing their Journey so far as
Bordeaux; wherein he nevertheless pretended to no other Command, than barely to
ride in the head of those Friends, which he should make ready for that Service:
That perhaps a greater Authority might give distaste to some, who at this time
were by no means to be disobliged: That for what concerned the Princes, a good
Army interposed betwixt them, and Paris, under the command of some man of
Quality and Experience would be sufficient: and that for any thing could be
apprehended from those of the Religion, whose greatest strength were in Poitou,
Xaintongue, and Rochelle upon the way to Bordeaux, he himself would undertake;
his Governments in those parts giving him sufficient power so to do.

The Queen Mother, by this assurance being confirmed in her first design, ^
told the Duke that she absolutely resigned the King's Person, and her own to
his care and protection; that she therefore desired him to order all things, as
should seem to him the most convenient, as she absolutely left them to his
Valor and Wisdom: A Commission the Duke had no sooner received, but that
seeing himself authorized so to do, he caused the King's departure the
seventeenth of August to be proclaimed, persuading the Queen to confer the
Command of the Army which was to attend the Princes motion upon the Marshall
de Bois-Dauphin; advising her Majesty further, and in the first place to
provide for the security of Paris, that the Princes Servants, who had great
Authority in the City, might raise no commotion there in their Majesty's
absence.

After therefore that had been taken order for, by the securing of some eminent
and suspected persons, the Court departed from Paris, happily arriving in a few
days at Poictiers: and had not Madam the King's Sister fallen sick of the Small
Pox delayed their Journey, their Majesty's had been upon their return before
the Princes could have got their Forces together; but that unhappy accident,
having constrained them to stay near two months at Poictiers, gave their
Enemies leisure to put them into great apprehensions: which was also the only
harm they received from this insurrection.

At the same City of Poictiers there happened another disorder at this time,
wherein had not the Duke of Espernon, who was principally concerned in the
Affair, rendered himself unusually tractable, another obstacle to that Progress
had infallibly ensued. The Duke of Guise, from the time of his Marriage with
the Duchess of Montpensier, had pretended to the Wardship of Mademoiselle her
Daughter; who was Inheritrix to such a Fortune, as might reasonably induce any
man to covet the management of so brave an Estate, which nevertheless he could
not obtain, without the consent of the Duke who was great Uncle to the young
Princess: and he, having very good reason to believe the Duke of Guise did in
this claim, more consider his own interest, than that of the Duchess of
Montpensier his Niece, would never gratify him in that particular. But the
Duke of Guise conceiving his Service to be altogether necessary at this time,
took this opportunity to importune the Queen, either to cause the Duke of
Espernon to satisfy him in this point, or to give him leave to retire.
Whereupon the Queen spoke of it to the Duke, whom she found very averse to any
such motion; he humbly entreating her Majesty to dispose absolutely of all his
own concerns, but not to command him to neglect his Nieces interests: though in
the end, the Queen, who could promise to her self no good issue of that
Journey, without a good intelligence betwixt these two great persons, so far
prevailed upon the Duke, that he was content to satisfy the Duke of Guise; by
which means their friendship upon the point for ever to be dissolved, upon this
little occasion, grew greater and more firm than ever.

As it had been no hard matter to foresee how advantageous the long Sickness of
Madam, and their Majesty's stay at Poictiers would be to the designs of those
of the Religion, and others who were engaged in the Princes Quarrel: So had the
Duke of Espernon omitted nothing that might any way serve to divert the
dangerous effects of that untoward accident. And herein he had been especially
solicitous to put his Governments of Xaintonge, and Angoumois into a posture
fit for his Majesty's Service, upon that the security of that Voyage chiefly
depending. To this purpose therefore he had sent thither the Duke of Candale,
his eldest Son (already established in the succession of those Governments) to
keep them in Obedience: Nevertheless what he did for so good an end, succeeded
otherwise than he expected, news being brought him, that this Son had
entertained resolutions much contrary to his own, and having suffered himself
to be misled by certain ungoverned passions, was fallen off from his duty to
embrace new Counsels, and to follow new Designs.

Whether it were the sense of this miscarriage in his Son (which also
occasioned a new, and a wider breach betwixt them) or the apprehension of being
by this means made incapable of performing his word with the King and Queen,
that put his mind into that disorder whereinto he soon after fell; so it was
that he fell sick of so violent a grief, as every one expected would carry him
to his grave. Things nevertheless succeeded in his Government according to what
he had undertaken; their Majesty's after the recovery of Madam, having left
Poictiers, proceeded in great security to Angoulesme; neither there, nor in any
other place throughout the whole Journey meeting with any impediment at all.
But the Duke wounded to the soul with the violent sorrow^ of his Sons untoward
carriage was now no longer able to bear it out; but having conveyed their
Majesty's to the utmost bounds of his Government (that is to say out of all
danger, they there entering upon Guienne, where the way was clear to Bordeaux)
fell suddenly into so great a weakness, that he was carried back for dead to
Angoulesme: The Duke of Espernon falls desperately sick.
He lay above forty hours (a very extraordinary thing) without speech, pulse,
or any kind of motion; insomuch that not a person about him, but concluded him
absolutely dead: but at last his Spirits, which had been so long overcome with
grief, and his strength weakened by a very long abstinen^e, being stirred up by
a glass of Water (his ordinary and best Remedy, and which he ever made use of
in all distempers) he began a little to come to himself, with so great an
astonishment nevertheless, that he continued a great while without any kind of
knowledge; his sighs, which were the issue of his grief, being the only
evidence almost he gave that he was yet alive. Yet could he not, in this great
and total neglect of himself, forget the care of his Masters Affairs, he being
no sooner returned to a new life, but that he dispatched away the Marquis de la
Valette, who had continued about him, during his Sickness, to attend the King,
and Queen; that the Friends he had engaged in this Voyage, having himself as it
were present with them, in the person of so dear a part of himself, might
continue more diligent in their duty.

The Duke had the honor, during this Sickness, to be visited by several
persons sent purposely by the King and Queen to see him, by whom he received
very obliging Letters, under their Majesty's own hands; and when something
recovered, others of the same style and kindness. Mounsieur de Villeroy also,
after their old animosities, being become his very great friend, writ very
often to him; wherein he still gave him an account of all Affairs, conjuring
him to make all the haste he could to Court, where he said his Presence and
Service was never more necessary than at this time. Two of which Letters I have
seen, bearing date the twentieth, and four and twentieth, of October 1615. Not
that the Duke was nevertheless upon so good terms at Court, as he had formerly
been: neither did those Letters imply any such thing, it being hardly to be
expected he could be in any eminent degree of favor with the Queen Mother
(upon whom, at that time, all things depended) being out with the Marshall d'
Encre, whose Wife had so strange an ascendent over her Majesty's inclinations;
but that his Service could, in this juncture, by no means be spared: neither
did he, how evidently soever he saw his favor decline, fail, out of that
consideration, in any part of his Duty, being resolute rather to perish, than
that their Majesty's should suffer the least inconvenience. So soon therefore
as he was able to Travel, he went to Bordeaux, where he arrived the twelfth day
of November, and a few days after attended the King to Castres, a little
Village upon the great Road from Bayonne to that City; where the King would the
first time see the Queen his Spouse, and where the Duke, who was very perfect
in the Spanish Tongue, had the honor to entertain her at the Boot of her
Coach, whilst his Majesty, in a crowd of some young Lords and Gentlemen on
Horseback passed by incognito to view her.

The young Queen, Queen Anne of Austria arrives at Bordeaux.
arriving at Bordeaux the 25th. of November, found the Court in a very great
Alarm at the news of the Princes being advanced on this side the River Loire;
whose Forces being by this time united, and moreover re^inforc'd with some
Foreign Troops, were likely to make their Majesty's return to Paris very
difficult, and dangerous. An occasion wherein the Duke of Espernon's Services
were again of very great moment, who, during his abode at Angoulesme, after his
recovery, had made many Levies, which were all ready at Ville-Bois; a recruit
that consisting of 5000. Foot, and 400. Light Horse, and joined to the Forces
their Majesty's already had, absolutely secured their return through the
Countries of Xaintonge, and Poictou, possessed by those of the Religion, and
without any difficulty made good their way to Poictiers, and so to Tours,
notwithstanding whatever the Princes could do to oppose them.

In this return of the King to Paris, the Duke of Guise was made General of the
Army, which had hitherto served under the Marshall de Bois-Dauphin, and the
Duke of Espernon had also the absolute Authority of their Majesty's Conduct
conferred upon him; who, for fear of distasting the Duke of Guise would never
till then pretend to any command: an undertaking wherein he so acquitted
himself, as might give him reasonable expectation of a grateful return: But who
can promise to himself any fruits of his services, especially at Court, where
the best are usually rewarded with hatred, or envy? nor had the Duke's a better
acknowledgment, when having performed all that could be expected from a Loyal
Subject, and a brave Gentleman, and that their Majesty's by his vigilance and
valor were once settled in safety, there was nothing more thought of, than how
to revenge the Marshall d' Encre, even at the price of so good, and so
faithful a Servant.

The first evidence the Duke met withal of any manifest disgrace, The beginning
of the Duke of Espernon's disgrace.
was upon the occasion of a vacancy that happened in the Company of la Courbe,
one of the Captains in the Regiment of Guards: a Gentleman that having served
long, and with great Reputation in that Command, and happening to die in this
Journey; and his Son a young and hopeful Cavalier, having before his Fathers
death been admitted Ensign to that Company, the Duke, who had been a great
lover of the Father (whose brave and late Services seemed likewise to plead in
behalf of the Son) had moved their Majesty's in his Favor, that that Command
might be conferred upon him. Since the death of the late King, nor of long
before, had the Duke ever appeared zealous in any request he had not, without
any great difficulty, obtained; neither had he less, but more reason now, than
ever to expect the same favor, his recent Services having been of that
importance to the Kings Affairs: all which nevertheless being either not
regarded, or forgot; and the design had before been concluded to disoblige him,
prevailing above the merits of the Father, the pretenders Right, and the Duke's
Interest who interceded for him, la Besne, Lieutenant to the same Company, was
preferred before young la Courbe, how displeased soever the Duke seemed to be
at that Election. Yet did he not resent this ill usage so high as to leave the
Court, satisfying himself at present with manifesting his discontents bymany
and public complaints, though in vain, the Court now no more caring to offend
him: but on the contrary taking this occasion to exclude him from the Council,
where his candid, and unbiased opinions did nothing relish with such as would
have all things give way to their own private interests (and doubtless had he
at this time in the least bandied with his enemies, they would immediately have
attempted upon his person) that the Marshall d' Encre, and his Wife might by
so powerful an opposes be no longer traversed in their designs.

The Duke's Affairs were in this posture, when their Majesty's having first
recovered Poictiers, and afterward Chastellerant (where the Peace concluded at
Loudun was signed) arrived in the end at Tours; neither did the Duke there
fail, how ill soever he saw himself entertained, continually to pay all due
reverence to the Queen, when coming one day into her Chamber with a great many
other Lords and Gentlemen, one of the beams that supported the floor suddenly
broke; insomuch that all that side of the Room fell down with a sudden ruin,
overwhelming all those that stood upon it, to their exceeding great peril. Many
persons of very eminent quality were engaged in the danger of this fall,
amongst whom the Count de Soissons, then very young, was one, as also the Duke
Bassompierre, The Du^e in great danger.
Villeroy, and some others: The Duke being always very well attended, his
Servants suddenly leaped into the midst of the ruins, to relieve him, where,
though himself was dangerously engaged, and very much hurt in several places,
especially in one shoulder, he nevertheless called out to his Friends to run
and save the Count, himself also assisting as much as in him ^ay to disingage
him from the rubbish, and to put him out of danger by the Window of a low
Parlour; being much more solicitous of this Prince's safety than his own: who,
being by his own, and his Servants diligence secured, he afterward disengaged
himself from the ruins, and wounded, as has been said, was conveyed to his own
Lodgings. The Queen Mother, who, by good fortune had escaped the danger (that
part of the Chamber where she sat, being supported by the more faithful
strength of the other Beam that remained entire) sent very graciously to visit
all the persons of Quality, who had received any hurt by this accident, the
Duke only (who was designed for the worst usage) excepted. It is not to be
doubted, but that the Duke must needs highly resent so manifest a preterition,
by which he evidently perceived they intended to make him sensible of his
disgrace; so that fearing, should he continue at Court after so clear a
testimony of disfavour, something of a ruder nature might be put upon him, he
forthwith resolved to retire himself, as he did, but with high and public
complaints of the injustice was done him, and of the unworthy recompense he
received for all his Service. He spent two days before his departure in
visiting, and taking leave of his friends, forbearing nevertheless that
Ceremony to all he conceived not to be such, in what degree of favor soever
they might be at Court; he either having never understood, or having never been
willing to learn those mean Court Maxims that oblige men to dissemble their
resentments, and to give thanks for injuries received: declaring on the
contrary to all the world, that he went away with the dissatisfaction an honest
man ought to have for the loss of his time, and service. Notwithstanding at
last, taking his leave of their Majesty's, he was by the King and Queen very
civilly dismissed, The Duke of Espernon retires from Court.
though the Queen Mother received his last complements with the usual coldness
she had already begun to discover upon several occasions.

After this manner the Duke retired back to Angoulesme, his old, and ordinary
refuge, in all his disgraces, whilst their Majesty's continued their Journey to
Paris, where they arrived in June; and whither the Prince of Conde also
(imagining he had by the Treaty. of Loudon established his Affairs in so sure a
condition, that it was not in the power of event to work any alteration to his
disadvantage) came presently after; but he soon found that nothing is more
unstable, than a power, how great soever, that depends merely upon its own
strength, the sole name of a King (though a Child, and the public
administration managed by a man hateful to all) being sufficient to arrest him
in the very arms of all his Confederates, The Prince of Conde confined.
and even in the City of Paris, where he believed his person, through the
affections of the people in greater security, than in any other place of the
Kingdom.

All the Princes, and Lords, not only those then present at Court, and who had
engaged with the Prince in the late commotions, but also all the rest of their
party, astonished at so extraordinary a proceeding, and believing that after an
example like this, neither respect of persons, nor any security in general was
to be expected, they suddenly retired from Court; to whom the rest almost as
suddenly reunited themselves for their common safety. The Marshall, who
thought that by securing the Head of the Faction, he had likewise secured
himself from the danger of the rest, was infinitely surpised when he saw them
now united in more formidable numbers than before, and that the Lords of the
House of Guise also absented themselves upon this occasion; wherein
nevertheless he had this hope, that so many persons of equal quality would not
long agree together, especially if pressed home by the Royal Arms: An opinion
that made him resolve to set immediately such Forces on foot, as should be
sufficient to encounter, and suppress them in several places at once. Neither
did he care to reduce any by Treaty, save only the Duke of Guise, conceiving an
Accommodation with him would be more easily effected, than with any of the
other, by how much he had ever observed a greater moderation in him, and his
Brothers toward himself, than the rest; to which likewise the complacency the
Duke had ever manifested for the Queen in other occasions, gave him greater
assurance of a flexibility in him to her Majesty's desires in this, and that
without much difficulty a good intelligence might be established betwixt them;
as there afterward was, the Guises, having received caution for their
security, being content to return to Court.

This little negotiation being so happily dispatched, The M^reschal d' Encre
takes arms against the, Prince of Conde's Par^^z^ns.
the Marshall immediately betook himself to Arms, and so vigorously, that in a
very few days, three great Armies were set on foot, whereof one was sent
against the Duke of Mayenne, who was retired to Soissons; another against the
Duke of Nevers in Champagne; and the third against the Duchess of Nevers, who
with a generosity (something extraordinary in her delicate Sex) was resolute to
defend the Duchy of Nivernois, which was the Inheritance of the Duke her
Husband.

In this disorder of Affairs, Anno 1616.
the Duke of Espernon, apprehending that the hatred the Marshall had conceived
against him, was no less than that he manifested against the rest, and that he
would infallibly fall upon him, so soon as he had dispatched with them, he had
no mind to be surpised, nor to suffer himself tamely to be oppressed;
considering therefore that alone he should not long be able to resist the power
of the King, whose name his enemy had usurped in all his Affairs, he addressed
himself to the Duke of Montmorency, to engage him in his Quarrel; by whose
mediation he made no doubt to draw over l' Esdiguieres also. The Duke knew
those two to be no better satisfied with the present Government than himself;
who, although they were not openly persecuted as he was, yet the example of the
other persons of the same condition, making them reasonably to apprehend for
themselves, what they already saw others suffer; he doubted not, but that
without much difficulty they would be persuaded to embrace the union; neither
was he mistaken herein, the Duke of Montmorency, as also l' Esdiguieres,
absolutely engaging with him. So that these three Confederates, having
opportunity to concur in the work, through the mediation, and by the assistance
of several powerful friends the Duke had in Guienne, nothing could hinder them
from uniting, in so necessary a defense, and so just a Quarrel.

The Duke, Anno 1617.
notwithstanding he had thus wisely played his game, and that he was certain to
receive very great assistance from his Confederates, did nevertheless very well
understand, that as he was nearest to the approaching danger, so it would be
very necessary for him to put himself soonest into a posture of defense, that
the Marshall might not surprise him. His thoughts therefore were fully intent
upon the resolution of Arms; but he wanted not only a cause, but even a
pretense to color his preparation; without which only to go about it, was to
make himself Criminal in the highest degree: neither (the Court Minion being
absolutely his enemy) could he reasonably hope, either for a Commission from
thence for the raising of men in the King's name, and at his expense; or so
much as to be permitted to do it at his own charge. In this strait and anxiety,
what course to take, the Rochellers gave him as fair a pretense, as he could
possibly desire, to do that under the vail of Duty, and Obligation, which he
could not otherwise have undertaken, The Duke of Espernon's pretense for the
taking of Arms.
without incurring the highest censure. They had at this time surpised a
little Castle, near to their City, and situate upon the Seacoast, called
Rochefort; an enterprise condemned by all the world for the most senseless, and
unadvised, that could possibly have been undertaken, to begin a War by an
action of so little importance, in a time when themselves, and their whole
party were priviledg'd by so absolute, and inviolate a Peace. The Duke, who had
been at so great a loss before, and that could not then have wished for a more
specious pretense, it may easily be imagined was very ready to lay hold of this
occasion now; neither did he fail herein to aggravate the misdemeanour to the
height: but repeating all the Accusations he had formerly preferred against the
Ambition, and Infidelity of those of the Reformed Religion, and particularly
against those of Rochelle, he of them drew up a kind of Manifesto, which he
caused to be published in all parts of the Kingdom. In this Declaration he
forgot not to reckon up the several insurrections those of that Faction had
broke into, to make their advantage of every disorder, had at any time happened
in the Kingdom, notwithstanding all satisfaction had been given them by the
inviolate observation of ^everal Edicts granted in their favor: That they had
been observed for many years to call together Assemblies in Rochelle, without
either his Majesty's Order, or Royal Assent; from which such unjust and
unreasonable Propositions, and demands were usually sent to the King, as made
it appear they did not Treat with his Majesty in the quality of Subjects, but
like Free-States that were nothing allied to his Sovereign Power: That by such
a behavior it was plain enough, the City was arrived to the utmost degree of
License, and that the Rochellers could never satisfy their Ambition, till they
had introduced a popular Government amongst them: That if hitherto his
Majesty's Council had (contrary to his Judgment, and Advice) winked at the
progress of so dangerous a design; that nevertheless he, to whom the Government
of their City was entrusted, and who therefore was more concerned, than any
other to keep such in their obedience, as were committed to his care, was
resolved to chastise their insolence; which he nothing doubted, but by the
assistance of his own friends he should be able to do, and to make them know
they had hitherto been only strong in the weakness of our own Counsels. This
had in truth ever been his saying, and the effects made it appear he had made a
right judgment; so that under this pretense he took Arms; which, as it was
colored by a design that immediately pointed at his Majesty's Service, so did
he not scruple to make use of the King's money in the Levies he made upon this
occasion.

With these sums, though very small, and some money of his own, he raised four
Regiments of Foot, consisting of above four thousand five hundred men, and
betwixt five and six hundred Horse; to which were added sixscore Guards on
Horseback in his own Livery: a force, which though not very considerable for
their number, were yet such as he conceived sufficient to keep the Field
against any he had a mind to offend.

The Rochellers (who formerly had by many injuries highly incensed the Duke) no
sooner saw him resolved, and ready to advance in a posture of War, even to the
Gates of their City, but they began now to examine their Forces, which they had
not so well considered before the danger, and which the more they examined, the
weaker they found them to be: This City the Capital of a powerful Faction, and
that had so often disputed the King's Authority, enriched by an extraordinary
Traffic, and confederated with all the Protestant Princes of Europe, finding
it self in so weak a condition, that it could not in this necessity muster
2000. men, to sally out of their Walls; utterly without Horse, or the least
assistance from any of their Confederates and Friends: So that converting their
usual Rhodomantades, and Menaces into the most submiss terms of Humble
Supplication, addressing themselves by their Deputies to the King, they humbly,
and with all importunity besought his Majesty to interpose his Royal Authority
betwixt the Duke of Espernon and them, that he might not commence a War against
them.

Had the Rochellers made this confession of their weakness at another time, it
would doubtless have very well pleased the Council; and it is likely the Duke of
Espernon would have been countenanced in his design, to the end that City might
have been made to know, what they were one day to apprehend from their Prince's
indignation: but the Marshall d' Encre unable to endure that his Capital Enemy
should be in Arms, and consequently in a posture fit to frustrate the design he
had long projected of his ruin, made the Council resolve to dispatch away
Boissize, one of the Council of State, to the Duke with a positive command to
lay down his Arms.

Boissize at his arrival found the Duke with his Forces, quartered at Surgeres,
but four Leagues only distant from Rochelle, and ready to march up to the City;
neither did he fail with all the Rhetoric he had to dissuade him from that
resolution: Representing to him the danger of what he was about, lest the noise
of the enterprise in hand should alarm the whole Hugonot Party, whom the King
would by no means should be provoked; and in which case, of a particular
Quarrel, he would be the cause of a general War. With which commands from the
King, and Queen, he moreover mixed menaces of their highest indignation, should
he disobey; with many promises on the contrary of all satisfaction from the
Court, and the Rochellers if he would desist; all which, wanting force to
divert him from his purpose, the Duke gave order in the presence of Boissize to
sound to Horse, and nettled to the last degree, at the difficulties he saw
strewn in the way of his designs, marched directly toward Rochelle. Boissize
seeing his endeavors altogether ineffectual, and that the Duke was obstinate
in his first determination, after having highly protested against his
proceeding, went, and put himself into the Town, giving the Inhabitants thereby
to understand, that their Majesty's had no hand in the Duke's Enterprise, that
it was absolutely contrary to their order, and that therefore they were at full
liberty to arm themselves for their own defense. But this consent, though it
warranted their Arms, gave them nevertheless no other power, so that they were
to suffer whatever the Duke was pleased to inflict upon them: He quartered his
men in their best Farms, made his approaches up to the very Gates of their
City, and defeated some who (under the protection of their Counterscape)
attempted to oppose him; till in the end, after having maintained his Army, for
almost a month, at their charge, and that his fury was a little abated by that
little revenge he had taken in some inconveniences he had put them to, he grew
more flexible to a new Order he received from Court, and was at last content to
let them alone.

It was by Vignoles, that the Duke received this last Command, a man for many
years, well known, and highly esteemed by him, which rendered the Duke more
flexible to a Treaty with him, than the other; from whose mouth having received
his Majesty's pleasure, he made answer; That having now made a discovery to the
whole Kingdom of the Rochellers weakness, the disunion of their Faction, and
with how much ease they were to be reclaimed when ever his Majesty should think
fit, he was content to let them rest in peace: but that, if the King had
pleased, he might at this time have punished their insolence, as it was in his
power easy to do, he could without much trouble have done his Majesty a very
important Service; but he saw (to his great affliction) his Enemies, who were
prevalent with his Majesty, envied him the honor of this Action; but that he
must however give place to their malice in obedience to his Royal pleasure,
though in a thing very prejudicial to his Majesty's own peculiar Interest: That
therefore he would retire so soon as the Rochellers should surrender the Castle
of Rochefort into his Majesty's hands and; that after that act of their
Obedience, having no other particular concern, he had nothing more to desire of
his Majesty for his own private satisfaction, than that his Majesty would
please to assert, and avow what he had only undertaken for his Service in the
past occasion. Which being accordingly in another dispatch brought him by
Vignoles, and all those who had assisted, and served him in this occasion
comprised, he rose from before Rochelle; dismissing his Army nevertheless in
such sort that most of the Commanders (most of them having relation to him)
might be ready upon the least warning to reunite in the same equipage as
before.

What the Duke had expressed to Vignoles of his discontents by word of mouth,
did not nevertheless save him the labor of writing to Court in such a style,
as manifested he still retained the honest liberty his great spirit had ever
suggested to him, during the Reigns of his two former Masters. He therefore
sent a Letter to the King, in the beginning whereof having excused himself in
that he had not paid so prompt an Obedience to their Majesty's first Orders,
delivered by Boissize, and given reasons for it, that directly pointed at the
Honor of the King himself, which as he said he conceived to be very much
concerned in the business of Rochelle, he continued in these words: I have
hitherto, Sir, preserved my Hands clean, my Conscience incorrupt, my Reputation
entire, and my Fidelity without reproach; I have never conspired but to do you
Service, neither do I find my self guilty of the least thought disconsonant to
the Duty I owe to your Majesty, and your Crown: And although I am not used with
that Equity, nor rewarded with that Gratitude, that (without presumption) I
conceive I have deserved, and that every day I find something attempted upon my
Offices, by the diminution, and cutting off their just, and lawful privileges
(which were ever preserved inviolate to me during the Reign of the late King
your Father) yet nothing, Sir, can prevail with me above my Duty: neither is
there any so ill usage, nor so sensible unkindness, that can hinder me from
persevering to do well, being resolved to the last hour of my life to conquer
whatever just resentments I may have, and to forget all those injuries, for
which I can obtain no satisfaction, but at the public expense. A resolution,
Sir, in which I am infinitely fortified, by the firm belief I have, that all
the disgraces I receive, and all the foul play is continually practiced against
me, proceed from no dis-affection your Majesty has conceived against my person.
I know, Sir, that being naturally quick sighted, to distinguish betwixt your
false Servants and your true, you have ever honored me with your favor: But I
have this obligation to those who are enemies to your Crown, that they have,
upon all occasions discovered themselves to be particularly so to me; and have
endeavored by their artifice, to represent things otherwise to your Majesty,
than they really are, to restrain the liberty of your own Royal disposition,
from obeying the natural inclination you have to love, and cherish good men;
that as much as in them lies, they may alienate your Majesty's good opinion
from such, as by their long and faithful Services have deserved the best room
in your heart. I hope, Sir, nevertheless, that truth will one day prevail in
your Royal Breast over those little Arts, and that your Majesty will then be
pleased to distinguish your true and faithful Servants from such, as Authorized
by your Name and presence, oppress your People, invade your own Authority, and
continually disturb your Majesty's Peace by their inordinate and unruly
Ambition.

From Surgere the 25. of Feb. 1617.



I have the rather inserted the express words of this Letter, that you may see
after what manner the Duke took his disgrace, and how he behaved himself
toward his Enemies, notwithstanding they carried the whole favor, and sway of
the Court: the Marescbal d'Encre being manifestly pointed at in this dispatch.
We have since lived in a time, when to speak our discontents so plain, and
loud, would perhaps have been out of season: but in that wherein the Duke writ
this Letter, men were at least permitted to complain; and oftentimes those
complaints procured a relief, to such, as like the Duke, had the spirit, and
power to accompany those complaints, with the effects of a vigorous resentment.

After this manner ended the Enterprise of Rochelle, which gave some jeering
companions of that party, occasion to say, for a piece of wit, whatd' Aubigne
has recorded since, That the Duke of Espernon was come to make h^^ Entry before
Roch^ll^: though it has been thought this entry before gave the King from that
time forward to understand, it might also be made within, and that the
Enterprise was not above his power to effect. We have since seen him bring
about that glorious design; and it is certain that this action brought that
present benefit along with it, What advantage accru'd to the King, by the Duke
of Espernon's Enterprise upon Roch^le.
that the Council ever after looked with greater contempt upon the Hugonot
Party, and the strength of the Rochellers, than before: They now discovered the
weakness of these by the disunion of all the rest, and from thence judged
aright, that it being impossible for the separate Forces of this Faction
without great difficu^y suddenly to unite for their common defense, one party
might be suppressed in one Province, before any of the rest could put
themselves in a posture in another to relieve them. This opinion (that in the
sequel proved true) made the Council the bolder by their Arrest of the 23 of
June, 1617. to order the restitution of the Church Lands in Bearne; an Affair
that had for three years together been depending in the Council, and so long
fruitlesly solicited by the Deputies of the Clergy of France. Not that the
Council did not conceive it very just, but they looked upon it as a thing so
highly important to the peace of the Kingdom, that they durst never till now
give them that satisfaction. But the Duke's Enterprise cut off all
difficulties, by which the Rochellers having been constrained publicly to
confess their own weakness, it was conceived the King's presence would have as
much Authority in Bearne, as the Duke's had had in the Country of Aunis. I have
heard several persons of Quality, and those men of employment at that time (as
Mounsieur de Roussy and others) say, that the Service the Duke did the Kingdom
in this very occasion, was never duly considered, he having thereby first
discovered the weakness of the Hugonot Party, and perhaps chalked out the way
to their extirpation.

The Duke of Espernon having openly declared himself an enemy to the Mar^schal
d' Encre, and already made some preparation in order to (...) defense of his
Person, and Fortune, many persons who were afraid of persecution fled to him,
settling themselves at A^g^ulesme under his protection: Amongst whom Bulion, at
that time a Counselor of State, and since Sur-Intendant of the Finances, was
one; where he long continued in the Duke's Family, and who ever after retained
a grateful memory of that obligation, as he had good reason to do, the Duke
receiving him into his Arms in so critical a time, as he was threatened with no
less than death, had he fallen into the Mareschal's power. Guron, who was
likewise another of the proscribed, with many others, came to seek the same
refuge; all whom the Duke made no difficulty to receive into his protection.

The Duke having (as has been said) settled the Friends he had in his
Governments in such a readiness, as upon any occasion to make head against his
Enemy, took a Journey into Guienne, his native Country, in that great Province
to get together what numbers of Friends and Soldiers he could, for the better
defense of his Fortune; in which Voyage he increased his Forces to such a
degree, that being all joined together, they were able to make up a Body of
8000. Foot, and 1200. Horse. The extremity he knew the Duke of Mayenne to be
reduced unto in Soissons, and the Duke of Nevers in the places whereunto he had
retired, made him very well see, that the Torrent would suddenly break in upon
himself: notwithstanding how reasonable soever his apprehensions were, and how
necessary soever to put himself with the soonest into a posture of defense, it
might be, he could not however forbear to prefer the last Duty he owed to a
good, and vertuhus Mother, before his own particular preservation. This Lady
having been dead from the year 1610. in an exceeding old age, and lamented by
the Duke, as if she had been more immaturely ravished from him, he had ever had
a great desire to pay her memory the last office of her Obsequies: But the
great and important Affairs, which had detained him at Court having hitherto
frustrated that pious design, he no sooner now found himself in this little
interval of repose, The Du makes a great Funeral for his Mother.
but that he resolved without further delay to satisfy that Obligation:
Assembling therefore together at his paternal House of Caumont above 300.
Gentlemen of Quality of his Relations and Friends, he there by a magnificent
expense, manifested his gratitude to a person so near and dear unto him.

The Ceremony of this Funeral was no sooner performed, but that the Duke
departed from Caumont to Bordeaux, and from thence was also upon the point to
return into Angoumois, there to draw all his Forces together, with a resolution
to defend himself to the last, and rather to die with his Sword in his hand,
than to suffer himself tamely to be oppressed; when by le Chalart, Secretary to
the Marshall de Roquelaure, his intimate friend, he received intelligence of
the death of the Marshall d' Encre. The death of the Marshall d' Encre, slain
by a shot in the L^uvr^^
This Mareschal's death happened the 24. of April, 1617. and the news by an
extraordinary diligence came the 27. to the Duke; which how welcome it was to a
man who saw himself delivered from so powerful and so implacable an Enemy may
easily be imagined. He had very well foreseen, that with the assistance of all
his Confederates and friends, he could not long be able to resist the Power and
Authority of the King; with both which his enemy would have been armed against
him: and on the other side, the King himself being by this execution become, as
it were, the revenger of his particular wrongs, all his past actions would be
justified in the exemplary punishment his Majesty had inflicted upon the person
of Conchini.

In this excess of joy he departed from Bordeaux to Angoulesme, The Duke of
Espernon goes to Court.
and from thence soon after to Court, there to make a new tender of his
Fidelity and Obedience to the King, and to try in this new face of Affairs,
what foundation he could lay to his own future peace. He was in this Journey
attended by his two younger Sons, (his own misfortune, and miscarriages having
banished the eldest from his favor, and presence, ever since his Majesty's
Voyage to Angoulesme) and at his arrival received by the King with all the
demonstration of favor and affection, he could possibly expect, or desire: to
which Luines the new Favorite (willing to be supported in his rising greatness
by so powerful a friend) highly sought, and importuned his friendship, which
also by some good Offices he endeavored to acquire. One of the things the Duke
was most earnest with him for, and that Luines did most faithfully promise was
a Cardinal's Hat for the Archbishop of Toulouse his youngest Son, at the first
promotion: as for himself he was at the very first restored to the full, and
absolute Function of all his employments, having satisfaction given for all the
retrenchments had been made upon his offices, and commands, or any of their
perquisits and rights, and in fine stood in a very good degree of favor.

Yet did not this continue long, and whether it were the too prodigious favor
of Luines, (grown up on a sudden to a greater height, than that of the
Marshall d' Encre had ever been) that stirred up the Duke's old aversion he had
ever had for Court Mignions; or that his own private emulators, by their ill
Offices had rendered his humor suspected to Luines: but the Duke soon
perceived him to be quite another man from what he had been at first: At which
causless alteration, being highly nettled, and preferring (according to his
custom) a free, and professed enmity, before a faint, and dissembled
friendship, he inveighed publicly, and highly against the new Favorite; by
which means, and by cohering with other persons of condition, no better
satisfied than himself with Luine's promotion, he drew upon himself alone the
hatred, and jealousy that ought to have been common to them all.

The first thing the Duke de Luines did to disoblige him, Anno 1618.
was the breaking his word, who contrary to what he had promised, and made him
expect, concerning the Cardinal's Hat in favor of his Son, A Rupture betwixt
the Duke of Espernon and the Duke de L^^nes.
had preferred Mounsieur de Retts Bishop of Paris, and openly assisted him in
the pursuit of that dignity: To which was added, that they began afresh to
entrench upon his command of Colonel, some Foot employments having been
disposed without the Duke's consent; by which being further exasperated, he
highly complained to some of the chief Ministers: amongst whom Mounsieur du
Vair Or Lord Keeper.
Guard des Sceaux, one of the greatest Authority, having given him no
satisfaction, but on the contrary new matter of discontent, he was not long
before he took an occasion to let him see how sensible he was of the offense.

It was upon Easter Day in the year 1618. and in the Church of St. Germain de
l' Auxerrois, that the Duke took occasion to quarrel with him. The Dukes and
Peers who were then at* Court offended at the place the Guard des Sceaux du
Vair* not only in the Council, but also in all other both public and private
Assemblies, would assume above them, had generally addressed themselves to the
Duke of Espernon, as to the eldest of their Order, to interest him in their
discontent. It was also suspected that the Chancellor Syllery, (ill digesting
that a man so inferior to him in Dignity, should usurp upon him in State) was
willing enough to promote a business of this nature against him; and that being
upon very good terms (as he had ever been) with the Duke of Espernon, he had
also helped to blow the fire. However it was, or by whose suggestion soever it
first came into the Dukes head, little persuasion would serve turn to make him
passionately undertake a business, wherein he conceived his own Honor and
Dignity to be so much concerned. It was therefore resolved betwixt the Duke of
Moutmorency (of all others the most incensed against du Vair) the Dukes de
Monbazon, de Retz, d' Vsez and some others of the same quality, that he should
be affronted upon the first occasion, should he again offer to take place above
them. Wherein though it was a business of danger enough, to affront a Minister
so powerful by the favor of his Prince, and so violent in his own nature, the
Duke of Espernon nevertheless made no difficulty to undertake it; not having
(it should seem) consented to the first proposal, with an intent to leave the
execution of it to any other, than himself. Upon Easter day therefore (as has
been said) the King and all the Court being in Ceremony at Saint Germain de l'
Auxerrois, and the Guard des Sceaux having, according to his custom, taken his
place above all the Dukes and Peers, the Duke of Espernon violently pulled him
from his seat, and compelled him to retire. It may easily be supposed an action
of this kind could not pass without some untoward language; neither were those
words thrown away upon a man insensible of offense; the Guard des Sceaux going
immediately out of the Church, and expecting with great impatience the end of
the Ceremony, that he might complain to the Duke de Luines of the affront he
had received: Wherein nevertheless he did not reflect upon what had passed, as
an injury merely respecting his own person, But as a Party, and a Faction
formed, and made in the Court, by the Duke of Espernon, who had seduced all the
Dukes and Peers under the color of an imaginary pretense, to interest them in
his own private discontents: That this ambitious spirit so long inured to
Government, and Command, thought himself deprived of his lawful possession, if
removed from the absolute sway of the most important Affairs: That it was
through the sides of a Guard des Sceaux, that the fortune of the Favorite was
levelled at; and that it was only a trial, by attempting upon his creatures,
what opposition they were to expect when they should immediately fall upon his
own person: That it therefore highly imported him, whilst he had power to do
it, betimes to secure an enemy, that would not spare him, if he once got him
into his hands. An advice that made so much the deeper impression upon the Duke
de Luines, by how much he was before well enough satisfied of the Duke of
Espernon's hatred so highly manifested, by what he had publicly declared
against him. He therefore went immediately with the Guard des Sceaux to the
King; where being come, he insisted not much upon the scuffle betwixt the Duke
and du Vair, endeavoring on the contrary all he could to disguise that action
from looking like a particular Quarrel; but qualified it with the name of the
most impudent and audacious practice that could possibly be introduced into a
State, that a Duke of Espernon in the face, and presence, and in defiance of
his King* should dare to make a combination with persons of the greatest
quality in the Kingdom, to affront the Royal Authority.

The King was so highly incensed at a Remonstrance preferred to him by two
persons in whom he had so entire a confidence, that immediately, and without
reserving to himself so much as the liberty to consider the interest he himself
particularly had in the Duke of Espernons ruin, or to call to memory the long
and faithful Services he had paid to the Crown, he in this case absolutely
resigned over his own Authority to them; insomuch that at that very time (^
it is said) it was r^solv'd upon to arrest him. Nothing then remained but a fit
opportunity to effect their design, The King resolves to Arre^^ the Duke of
Espernon.
which it was also^ requi^^te should be such, as might seem ^o warrant the
success of the Enterprise, it being very unsafe ^o offend a man of his spirit
by halves; who having power, places, friends, and money to improve all those to
the be^^, and withal a very high discontent upon him, might do more mi^chief
tha^ any other person whatever of his condition in ^rance To which may be added
that from the time of his dispute with Mou^^sieur du Vair, the Dukes and Peers
at Court were scarcely ever absent from him, especially the Duke of
Montmo^^ncy, who was no (...) dear to him (not only out of respect to the
alliance betwixt them, but also by the particular love he bore him, and the
esteem he had for him) than one of his own Children, was inseparably with him:
They eat, went to Court, and made all their visits together, the Duke's two
Sons also continually attending upon him; so that it was no easy matter to
attempt four persons of their courage (and who were not without many Friends,
and Servants of great Fidelity and Valor to serve them upon all occa^ions) at
once. To all which, the Regiment of Guards were so made up of the Duke's
Creatures, that he seemed to be stronger in the King's own Palace than at home:
to avoid all which difficulties it was concluded to surround him by night in
his own House, and to seize upon his Person.

If the Duke had many, and those powerful Adversaries, his virtue had on the
other side acquired him so many Friends, and some of those so careful of him
upon this occasion, that he had timely notice of the design in hand, some say
by the Princess of County, others by the Chancellor de Syll^ry; but by what
means soev^r it^ came to his knowledge, upon the first r^mou^ of it (which (as
it did here) commonly fore^runs a more certain intelligence) he had taken a
resolution to withdraw himself, to defeat the effects of what was threatened,
and contrived against him: wherein though he was so far cautious as to prevent
the intended mischief; yet could he not forbear so unseasonable an of^entation
of the little fear he had in a place where so much was to be apprehended; as
doubtloss prompted his enemies sooner to push l^ome to the intended business.
He was for five or six days together continually seen riding through the
streets of Paris with so extraordinary a Train, under color of taking leave of
several of his friends, and acquaintance, that those who had before
premeditated his ruin, interpreting all for contumacy, and done on purpose to
brave them, resolved in the end upon a positive night, wherein with four
Companies of Swisse to surprise him in his own house, and to carry him away.
All which the Duke being likewise informed of from so good a hand, The Duke of
Espernon leaves the Court.
as that the intelligence was no ways to be suspected, he presently put himself
upon his preparation, to make his best use of that advice. This caution
therefore being sent him upon the sixth of May at night, and the surprizal
being designed the night following, he had so little time to lose, that he
immediately dispersed Tickets to all his most assured Friends, and Servants to
be in a readiness by break of day to mount to Horse; according to which
appointment, he found above 300* ready at the precise hour to attend him, who
after having convoyed him to his House of Fontenay in Brie (where they
conceived him lodged in a place of safety) most of them retired to follow their
own affairs.

This retirement of the Duke's being but ten little Leagues from Paris was so
far from frustrating the design of his surprise, that on the contrary it made
the bufiness seem more likely to succeed: the Duke de Luines therefore having
considered, that in this solitude he would have far fewer friends about him,
than in Paris, the former order was only one day deferred, and the Swisse
commanded to march away the day following, being the 8. of May, together with
some Brigades of Cuirassiers, and Light Horse to invest Fontenay. But the same
persons who had given the Duke the first intelligence, being no less vigilant
ot his preservation now than before, gave him also as seasonable notice of
this, as of the other design; giving him to understand that his danger was not
yet over, and that it concerned him with all diligence to convey his person
into some place of greater safety: Which advice having made the Duke resolve to
get again to Horse, so soon as all the Family had supped, and that every one
thought of retiring to his rest, he (having in the mean time with great
secrecy provided all things necessary for a tedious journey) commanded his
Trumpets to sound to Horse; his necessity enforcing him so to do at that
unseasonable hour, (though he was certain to undergo all the inconveniences of
a very dark, The Duke takes his way toward Metz.
and turbulent night) to get clear of the manifest, and approaching danger; at
that time therefore he set out toward Metz, the place to which at his
departure from Paris he had taken a resolution to retire.

By break of day the Duke, and all his company, arrived at Sezanne in Brie,
where both himself, and the Horse that were with him, were so weary, the rain,
the dirt, and all other incommodities of an ill journey having equally toiled
out, and dejected horse and man, that he had a great desire, and very great
need there to stay, and take some repose; though his Servants, conceiving him
to be yet in danger, were so importunate with him, that they got him to mount
again, making him to continue on horseback all that day, and the night
following; when arriving the next day at Montmirel, he found himself so weary,
and spent, with riding, watching, and the indisposition of Age, which now began
to grow upon him, that he was ready to faint; but being laid upon a bed, and
refreshed by sleep, he soon found himself well enough to proceed in his journey,
though with nothing so much precipitation as before.

Through so many traverses and difficulties it was, that the Duke of Espernon
waded to the foundation of the most glorious Act of his life, and which, in my
opinion, ought to be placed on the highest Pyramid of his Fame; I mean the
Queen Mothers escape from Blois: The Treaty^ for the Queen Mothers escape from
Bloi^ set on foo^ at this time.
of which the treaty began soon after the Duke's coming to Metz, where he
arrived about the 20. of the same month of May, having departed the 6th. from
Paris.

And then it was that the Duke de Luines highly, and openly declared himself an
enemy to the Duke, giving his friends plainly to understand, he could in no
wise repute them to be his, if they did not totally abandon the Duke's
interest; offering them at the same time his favor and protection, if they
would do it, and thundering out great threats against such as would not embrace
his Quarrel: wherein the constancy of the Duke's friends is highly to be
commended; who notwithstanding the greatness of the Favorite they had to deal
withal, the great promises wherewith he endeavored to allure them, and the
implacable hatred he publicly professed against their Friend, and Master,
would scarce any one of them be debauched from the fidelity they had professed;
whereas some on the contrary were so generous as to carry him intelligence of
Luines his proceeding so far as Metz, and of the offers he had made to withdraw
them from the Service, and Friendship they had promised, and sworn unto him.

The Duke very well judging by what had passed at Court before his departure
thence, and by the continuation of those practices since, that his enemies
intended to give the last blow to his ruin, began anew to consider of the
means to defend himself. He was very confident they would never offer to
attempt any thing against him by open force in Metz, neither would they be
easily induced to provoke him to the utmost extreme, the consequence being of
two dangerous importance: but doubted wisely withal, that no artifice would be
spared, nor no covert practice unattempted against him which were by so much
the more dangerous, by how much a man is oftentimes surpised with the effect,
before he is aware of the cause. There were in the City diverse ill affected and
seditious persons, whom he could never disgust, and whom Luines failed not to
deal withal to put in for a Party in Metz, who being in themselves of too
little authority for any thing of that kind, their malice converted to Spies
upon the Duke's Actions, to send continual intelligence to Court, whether
false, or true, and by their Artifice possessed the Duke de Luines with
jealousies, and fears, about things that were altogether uncertain, and vain.
To make therefore a better discovery of the truth, and to the end he might
penetrate with more certainty into the Duke of Espernon's intentions, Favier a
Counselor of State, and a man of great sagacity in Affairs, was sent away
under the shadow of a Commission, to reside sometime in Metz, and to try if by
his dexterity he could better guess at the Duke's designs; though all those
endeavors were equally fruitless to the Favorite, who had to do with a man
not easy to be pried into, nor surpised.

After Favier's return to Court, there happened so pleasant a thing at Metz, as I
hope, though mixed amongst more serious Affairs, will not much importune my
Reader, and that was this: The Duke de Luines continually expressing a great
desire to have constant intelligence of what was done at Metz, A pleasant Story.
and few being willing to undertake a thing the Duke's severe humor made
appear so full of difficulty, and danger, one fellow, a Courtier, and who
thought by such an undertaking to advance himself highly into favor, made a
voluntary, and brisk tender of himself for that employment, offering publicly
to go to Metz, and there to serve (as he said) Mounsieur de Luines, against the
Duke of Espernon: Which generous offer of his was as kindly received, and as
readily accepted; so that with good store of Crowns in his pocket to defray his
journey, he was presently dispatched away upon that design; yet not so soon, but
that before his departure from Paris, the Duke had notice of what a Mounsieur
was coming to brave him in his own Government. In a few days my Gentleman
arrives at the Gates of Metz, where at his first coming he was made to undergo
all the severities usually observed in Frontier Towns; they made him dance
attendance a good while at the Gate, where after having been sufficiently
abused, hissed, and hooted at, he was by four Soldiers of the Garrison
conducted to his Inn, who (it may be imagined) were not commanded to use him
with overmuch respect. But if this first part of his entertainment surpised
him, he was much more, when his Host coming to him at night, demanded his Name,
Surname, Country, Quality, and Age, with many other interrogatories, as if he
had been upon the Selette, that for which we have no word, because no such
thing; it signifying a low stool, on which Criminals in France are placed to be
examined.
Selette. From all, or most of these questions, he for some time defended
himself, till being threatened if he would not answer, to be proceeded against
as a Spy, he was at last constrained to do it; when as his answers came from
him, he saw them recorded in a great Book (ordered for that purpose amongst
other ancient rules established for the defense of the place) though he
conceived that under the protection of the Royal Name, which he had ready to
produce, he ought to have been dispensed from that Ceremony. He was scarce
recovered from his first astonishment, when he saw four of the Duke's Guards
(at that time called les Simons, a name very famous at Court) entering his
Chamber. Their first Complements (it may be supposed) were none of the most
obliging: neither did they long forbear to tell the new come Gallant, That they
were ordered by the Duke their Master, to have an eye upon his actions: That
the Duke very well knew upon what pretense he came to Metz, but that the true
cause of his coming was to him much better known, which was to do a di^^ervice
to the King, to observe the weaknesses of the place, and to give intelligence
thereof to his Majesty's enemies: That therefore they were not to leave him,
and that they very well knew how to prevent him from executing his malicious
designs: That in the mean time it would concern him to have a care how he
behaved himself, since no mercy was to be expected, if the least thing was
discovered in him contrary to his Majesty's Service. At this declaration the
poor man was put into a most terrible fear, he knew the Dukes Authority to be
absolute in Metz, and that whatever he should determine, though it should reach
to his life, and under what pretense soever it might be, would infallibly be
executed upon him: Whereupon he asked his Guards if there were no possibility
of safety for him? to which they replied, that doubtless yes, provided he
attempted nothing against the Crown. After which they entertained him with
stories of how many they had Bastinado'd at Paris, and after what manner the
Duke used to chastise several foolhardy fellows, who had imprudently attempted
upon his Honor. If he went out of one Chamber into another, they were
continually at his heels, and if ^e went to sleep, they lay down by him; never
ceasing day nor night to afflict him: insomuch that after having two days
endured this usage, such a terror seized him at last, that he fell down at his
Guards feet; weeping, praying, and conjuring them to assure the Duke that he
was his most humble Servant, that he acknowledged his fault, begged his pardon,
and did humbly entreat he would give him leave to depart the City. At which,
though his Guards seemed to comfort and assure him, advising him not to fear,
and protesting that the interest of his Majesty's Service only excepted, they
were there to no other end, than to do him Service: yet were all their
consolations vain, so invincible a fear had possessed him, and so wholly was he
taken up with the desire to escape from the danger, whereinto he saw he had so
precipitously engaged himself. The Duke, after he had a few days made himself
merry with mortifying his Gull, let him at last depart; who, as he had been
before at Metz, became afterward the Fable of the Court.

Yet did not the Duke spend his time altogether in diversion, having serious
business enough to take up his thoughts with something of more concern, and
those were the Affairs of the Queen Mother. This Princess after the death of
the Marshall d' Encre; having been constrained to leave the Court (where
Luines could not suffer a person of her Authority, and offended to the degree
she had been, to reside) had the Castle of Blois appointed by the King for her
retreat. To which place accordingly the Queen, (in this change of her Fortune,
being allowed to keep very few of her Servants about her) departed with a very
slender Train. The Bishop of Lucon since Cardinal of Richelieu) who had been
Secretary of State during the favor of the Marshall d' Encre, was one of
those who followed her in her disgrace, as Chanteloube also was another: but
the Abbot Rucellary and Italian, and very affectionate to her Service, was, as
a person altogether unnecessary about her Majesty, sent back into one of his
Abbeys: neither did the Bishop of Lucon remain long without another Order of
the same kind, by which he was first obliged to reside in his own Diocese, and
soon after to retire into Avignon.

The Queen Mother, The Queen Mother attempts to recover her liberty.
from the time of her departure from Court, had meditated nothing so much, as
how to recover her lost Authority, and to overthrow that of the new Favorites;
wherein, though she had communicated something to Messieurs de Lucon, de
Rucellay, and de C^anteloube, men of the greatest Fidelity and Conduct about
her: and though they had taken some pains for her satisfaction, yet could they
discover no possibility of effecting her Designs: Neither were they permitted
long to consider of the means, the entire confidence the Queen was discovered
to repose in them, being suspected at Court, having soon procured the
banishment of the two first (as has been said before) of which that of Lucon
had rendered him utterly incapable of all manner of correspondence with her: But
Rucellay a man of great courage, vivacity, and ambition, having for some time
concealed himself about Blois, and having from time to time in disguise taken
opportunity to consult with the Queen, was (after having rejected several
propositions) at last of opinion, that she should address her self to the Duke
of Bouillon, to try, if with the party of those of the Religion, who were
absolutely at his dispose, he might be induced to declare himself of her side,
and to attempt something in her favor.

The Queen being very well pleased with this proposition, The Queen (...) her
(...) to the Duke of (...)
Rucellay as cheerfully undertook to make the first overture of it to the Duke
of Bouillon at Sedan. I have often heard this Abbot (during five, or six weeks
that I was continually with him in order to the Queen Mothers dispatches, which
all passed through his hands after her escape) tell the whole story of this
negotiation; so that I am able to say something of my own knowledge, bot^ as to
the qualities of his person, and the circumstances of that Treaty, which
perhaps will not be altogether unpleasant to my Reader. Rucellay then was a
Gentleman of Florence, A Character of Rucellay.
descended from a Father, who by the Correspondence he had maintained with
Za^et, Bandiny, Cenamy, and some other active men of that Nation (who in those
times played their game so wisely, as to keep in with all parties of the
Kingdom) had made himself a Fortune in France. Amongst other advantages he had
there made to himself, he had got the possession of several Abbeys, arising in
all to a Revenue of above ten thousand Crowns a year; amongst which that of
Signy in Champaigne not far from Sedan was most considerable. His eldest Son
(which was he of whom I am now speaking) as most eldest Sons of the best
Families of Itlay (that education making them capable of the greatest Dignities
of the Court of Rome) was bred up to the Church: neither had he been wanting in
his industry to acquire all those qualities that were most likely to recommend
him to the highest Preferment. He had studied much, and particularly been
diligent to learn to speak, and write accurately in his own Language; wherein
he succeeded so well, that his own fine parts, together with the plentiful
Fortune he was Master of (he having no less in Secular Revenue, than in
Spiritual Entertainment) procured him so great a Reputation in the Court of
Rome, that he there obtained the Office of Clerc de Id Cham^re, a kind of
Secretary.
Clerk of the Chamber. Pope Paul the Fifth, under whose Papacy he was there
admitted, looked upon him with a very gracious eye, and though a young man,
entrusted his discretion with many secrets of State, not seldom making use of
his Pen in Affairs of greatest importance; and often saying, by way of favor,
that he discovered something in him of Signior de la Casa his great Uncle. All
which favors having possessed the Cardinal-Nephews with a great jealousy
toward Rucellay (as himself said) or he perhaps having failed on his part, in
a fit complacency to oblige them, he was by them persecuted to that degree,
that he was forced to quit the Court of Rome, and to retire into France. A good
part of his Estate lay in that Country, the Marshall d' Encre a Florentine, as
he was, commanded all there, and those of his own Nation having ever been well
received in that Kingdom, it appeared he could not make choice of a safer, nor
a more honorable retreat. He was thirty years of age, or thereabouts when he
arrived in France, where he was at first very kindly received by the Marshall
d' Encre, and soon after in great esteem with the whole Court, where with
twenty thousand Crowns a year, that he had coming in, he lived in so
extraordinary a degree of splendour, as equaled, if not out-went the greatest
Nobility of the Kingdom: no Table was so neatly served, nor so plentifully
furnished, as his; no man more nobly, nor more handsomely attended than he; to
which the presents he continually made of all the Curiosities wherewith Italy
so abounds, as by her overflow to oblige all other Nations, were so many, and
so considerable, as that single way of expense seemed alone to exceed his
Revenue. Neither did he win less upon the Ladies by his liberalities, and
extraordinary fine fashion, than he did upon the men by his more considerable
qualities; insomuch that he obtained the favor and applause of all. And
although the Marshall d' Encre had not as yet fixed him in any settled
employment in the management of Affairs, yet was he with him in so eminent a
degree of favor, as was a fair step (in the height the Court Favorite then
stood) to the greatest Offices of the Kingdom. The death of the Marshall
therefore, as it had put a period to all Rucellay's future hopes, so did it
possess him with such a grief, as was not to be comforted, but by the last
effects of an implacable animosity he had conceived against those who had been
the instruments of his ruin: And this spirit of Revenge it was that prompted
him to be one of those who animated the Queen against the new Favorites;
though such Counsels were not necessary to her, who of her self was sensible
enough; the particular injuries she had received, having already incensed her
to such a height, that she was very easily disposed to employ him in a Treaty
with the Duke de Bouillon, on her behalf. In this Journey Rucellay was to
undergo much trouble, and very great danger, he never daring to Travel, but by
night, and in disguise for the most part alone, and always without any
Equipage; for how circumspect soever he had been in his intelligencies to the
Queen, he could not however send them in so secret a manner, but that, she
being continually, and narrowly watched on all sides by spies set over her by
Luines to that purpose, some of his practices had been discovered: insomuch
that I have heard him say, he had notice given him, that several of his
Pictures were sent to the Magistrates, and other inferior Officers, that they
might know, and apprehend him in any of their respective Jurisdictions. Yet
could not all these difficulties fright him from undertaking this Negotiation,
and if he had before given several testimonies of his wit, and bravery upon
other occasions, he manifested no less in this of the constancy of his Courage,
his Wisdom, and Fidelity, which were very eminent, and of great use in the
conduct of this Affair. The main thing he apprehended in this undertaking was
the infirmity of his own tender, and delicate constitution; who whilst he had
lived in the calms of peace, the delights of Rome, or the effeminacies of the
Courts of France, had ever been so impatient of the Sun, and Evenings Dew,
Heat, and Cold, that the least intemperance of the Air would usually cause
strange alterations in his health; which notwithstanding he was no sooner in
Action, but that he found those little inconveniences left behind, as if he
had had no leisure to be sick.

Whether it were that the Favorites only guessed at the Queen Mothers
discontents, by the offense they had given her, or that they had some more
certain knowledge thereof, than mere conjecture, they were however very
vigilant to frustrate her Designs: To which purpose soon after her Majesty's
arrival at Blois, and the Banishment of the Bishop of Lucon, they had sent to
her Mounsieur de Roissy, under color of a Council for the management of her
Affairs. A man that in truth at another season would have been acceptable
enough: but in this juncture of time, and preferred to her by her enemies,
could not but stand highly suspected to her. Neither had he without great
reluctance taken upon him an employment of that nature; the principal end of
his Commission being, as it was, to discover the Queens practices and designs;
though neither his unwillingness could excuse him from going, nor all his art
and observation hinder the Queen from conferring sometimes in private with
those of her Servants in whose fidelity she reposed the greatest trust, when he
was there. Of which Luines being advertised, and willing not only to give
himself some present repose, but also to live in greater security for the time
to come, he resolved to take Religion into his assistance, and by a principle
of conscience to engage the Queen in an absolute dependence on his Majesty's
good will, and pleasure. To this end therefore he would exact from her an Oath
in the presence of God, and his Holy Angels (the very words of the Declaration
she was to make) That she neither now had, The extraordinary precaution of the
Duke de Luines, to make himself sure of the Queen Mother, fruitless.
nor for the time to come would entertain other thought, and desire than what
should tend to the prosperity, and advancement of the King's Majesty's
affairs: That she would, so long as she had life, pay all the Duty and
Obedience to his Majesty due, as to her Sovereign Lord, and absolutely resign
her Will into his Royal power: That she would have no correspondence neither
within, nor without the Kingdom in any thing whatsoever to the prejudice of his
Service, his Crown, and Dignity; but did, and would disown all persons of what
quality, or condition soever, that in her name should contrive any practice, or
conspiracy, contrary to his Majesty's pleasure: That she would moreover
discover all Propositions and Addresses inconsistent with his Service, together
with the persons themselves so addressing, and proposing, should any be so
inconsiderate, as to offer any such thing; and impeach, and make known whoever
should be so evilly affected; and that she would never desire to return to
Court, till the King should be pleased to order her so to do. Which
protestation was accordingly made betwixt the hands of Father Arnoux a Jesuit
Confessor in ordinary to the King, who had been expressly dispatched to the
Queen to receive it. Wherein we may discover the short-sightedness of humane
Wisdom; when this great Minister, thinking by this expedient to settle himself
in the security he so much desired, engaged himself (even by his own
precaution) in new, and greater difficulties than before. For as on the one
side Luines thought, that, through the persuasions of the King's Confessor, he
had captivated the Queen under the Empire of Religion, she on the other side,
satisfied to the contrary by Father Suffran her own Chaplain, and of the same
Society, conceived she did not violate her Oath, by attempting all ways to
recover her freedom; insomuch that making use of her enemie's credulity, she
pursued her business at greater convenience, than otherwise she could have
done. Neither was this the only benefit she received by this declaration;
another signal advantage arising thence, which was a very gracious Letter under
the King's own hand; wherein, to manifest how absolute a confidence he reposed
in her Word, and Oath, he gave her leave to go whither she pleased within his
Kingdom: which Letter served afterward as a pretense for her going from Blois,
as we shall see when we come to speak of that Affair.

Whilst at Blois the Court Agents were thus diligent to cheat themselves,
Rucellay was arrived safe at Sedan; where he had acquainted the Duke de
Bouillon with his Commission, and wherein he failed not with his best Rhetoric
to induce him to undertake the Queens deliverance. But the Duke, R^cellary
arrives at Sedan, and treats with the Duke of Bouillon, who refuses to engage
in the business.
who had no mind to stir from Sedan, where he thought himself so secure, who
was already wearied out with his late troubles, who in the conduct of those
troubles had run so great a hazard of his life, and liberty, and who likewise
foresaw many great, and almost invincible difficulties in the business
proposed, would by no means be persuaded to engage in that Affair. Contented
therefore to serve the Queen Mother with his advice, instead of that real
assistance was expected from him, he gave Rucellay this answer, That being old,
and infirm, as he was, well satisfied with his present condition, and upon so
good terms at Court, as to apprehend no ill usage from thence, it would be a
great indiscretion in him to deprive himself of the peace he now enjoyed, by
engaging in a new Quarrel, full of trouble and danger: That he was
notwithstanding the Queen Mothers most humble Servant, of which truth the best
testimony he could at present give, was to point out to her Majesty a Neighbor
of his, a man of a vigorous Constitution, though in a declining age, Wise,
Valiant, Rich, Strong in a posterity of men capable of great things, that was
withal possessed of many very considerable places, both in the Heart, and upon
the Frontiers of the Kingdom; and (which was more to be considered than all)
who was so nettled with the ill usage he had received at Court, that there was
no doubt to be made, but he would readily embrace any overture, that would
direct him to a just revenge. In the conclusion of which Character he named to
him the Duke of Espernon. Rucellay was not so ill read in Affairs, The Duke of
Bouillon advises the Queen Mother to treat with the Duke of Espernon.
but that he very well knew the person the Duke of Bouillon had proposed, was
of all other the most likely to do the Queens business: but besides that he had
no order to address himself to the Duke of Espernon, there had moreover in the
time of his being at Court, some difference happened betwixt the Marquis de
Roilhac, the Duke's Nephew, and himself; wherein the Duke's Authority having
protected Roilhac, Rucellay had not received that satisfaction, he might
otherwise reasonably have expected, for injuries of no ordinary kind. These
injuries therefore, being still fresh in his memory, made him very averse to
any Treaty with the Duke: neither was he ignorant how ill the Queen had used
him, at his departure from Court, after the many, and great Services, that
during her Regency she had received at his hands, which altogether put him into
a very great confusion. All these considerations nevertheless laid aside,
either out of the desire he had to serve the Queen, or to be revenged of the
Favorites, or to re-establish himself at Court, which he hoped would put on a
new face in the change of the Queens Fortune, he dispatched away to her with
all diligence to acquaint her how the Duke of Bouillon had excused himself, and
of the advice he had given concerning the Duke of Espernon, that he might
thereupon receive her Majesty's further Command.

This posting to and fro took up so much time, that the Queens Letters of
Credit to the Duke of Espernon could not come to Rucellay's hands, till toward
the latter end of July, nor he send them to the Duke till the month following;
I say send them, Rucellay having no mind to sound the Foard himself, nor to
make the first overtures of that Treaty in his own person, for the
forementioned reasons. He therefore employed herein one Vincentio Ludovici, a
man in whom he reposed an absolute trust, Rucellay sends Vincentio Lud^vici to
the Duke of Espern^n.
and one, who having formerly been chief Secretary to the Marshall d' Encre,
after a long, and very severe imprisonment he had suffered since the death of
his Master, had retired himself to Signy, and put himself into Rucellay's
protection. Where living in expectation of some considerable employment,
Rucellay proposed this negotiation to him, who as readily undertook it; and
having received full instructions, together with the Queens Letters of
Credence, came to Metz, where at the Moors-Head he took up his Inn, and from
thence sent to le Plessis (whom all the world knew to be the man in greatest
trust about the Duke) to entreat him that he would take the pains to come see
one of his old acquaintance, without further discovering himself.

I have heard le Plessis say, that by this Complement he presently guessed what
the business might be, that brought this man, whoever he was, to Town; yet
would he not appear upon this first Summons: but having a Valet de Chamber in
his dependence, that he had bred from a Boy, in whom he durst confide, and of
whose dexterity, and discretion, he had often made trial upon several
occasions, he commanded him to go to the Moors-Head, to see who it was desired
to speak with him, and to observe if it were a face he had formerly seen, or
one that was altogether a stranger to him. This man's name was Cadillac, which
I insert here, because we shall shortly find him a principal Agent in this
Affair.

Cadillac accordingly comes to the Inn, where his eye had soon found out his
man; he observed him, spoke to him, and by his accent soon discovered him to be
a stranger, of which he presently carried back a report to his Master; giving
him withal a description of his person. Le Plessis confirmed by this account in
his former opinion, would by no means confer with him till he had first
acquainted the Duke: but having received his Order, takes his way toward the
Inn. Thither being come in the confusion, and hurry that usually happens in
those houses of public entertainment, he soon found out the man he sought for,
runs to him, and embraces him, as if they had been the greatest friends in the
world, though they had never seen one another before, enquiring of him aloud of
their friends in Xaintonge, where this stranger had never been; who,
nevertheless very well understanding le Plessis meaning, delivered him the
services of several persons they neither of them both knew: after which le
Plessis drawing him aside, and entering into more particular conference with
him, received from his mouth the first overtures of his Treaty, which he also
undertook to carry back to the Duke.

No sooner therefore was he parted from Vincentio, but that he went to find out
the Duke at the Haute Pierre (the place where the Governors of Metz ordinarily
reside) where he gave him an account of the strangers business; together with
the humble request he made to be admitted to a further Conference with his own
person. Whereupon the Duke called for his two Sons, the Marquis de la Valette,
and the Archbishop of Tholouze, since Cardinal de la Valette (it appearing very
reasonable they should participate of the Counsel, who were to have so great a
share in the execution of the design) where amongst them it was concluded, that
the Duke should the next day give audience to this Envoy in the Abbey of St.
Vincent in Metz, belonging to the Archbishop of Tholouze. According to which
determination the stranger was early the next morning conducted thither, by the
foresaid Cadillac; whither the Duke coming presently after, under color of a
visit to the Abbot, he went to seek out Vincentio in the Chamber before
appointed for him, where he gave him his first audience in the presence of le
Plessis only, The Duke of Espernon receives a Letter from the Queen Mother, by
Vincentio Lud^vici.
and where Vincentio delivered him a Letter from the Queen Mother that
contained these words. Cousin,
I entreat you not to doubt the Fidelity of the person that shall deliver you
this Letter, but to believe whatever he shall tell you; leaving it however to
your own choice, either to return your answer by him, or by any other you shall
think fit, to the earnest request he shall make you in my behalf: promising you
withal that he shall propose nothing to you contrary in the least to the
Service of the King my Son, who shall himself one day give you thanks for the
assistance you shall now give me in this occasion, wherein you may also oblige
me whilst I live to be

Your very good Cousin, Marie.
From Blois this 18th. of July, 1618.



This Letter being read, and the Duke having asked the Bearer what he had more
to say, He represented to him the many and signal Services he had formerly
performed for the Queen, first in promoting her Interest when she was declared
Regent, and afterward throughout the whole course of her Administration:
telling him withal how infinitely her Majesty was afflicted: That she had not
acknowledged those Services at so just a rate, as the quality of them did truly
deserve: That nevertheless she having showed her self ready to gratify him in
several things of some importance to him, she doubted not, but that a generous
heart, as his was, would be apter to record those testimonies of her Favor and
Affection to him, than some little discontents, that could not so justly be
imputed to her, as to the necessity of the time, and the occurrences that
imposed them: That he very well knew the late King her Lord, and Husband had a
few days before his death (as if he had foreseen the persecution was preparing
against her) recommended her Interests to his care and protection, wherein he
had already in part so worthily performed the Trust that great Prince had
reposed in his Virtue, that she had reason to believe he would continue to
oblige her for ever: That she was now reduced to such a condition by the
violence of her Enemies; as after being deprived of her liberty, to think her
self in great peril of her life: That the King her Son, though his constraint
was less apparent, was not himself however exempt from the tyranny they
exercised upon her person: That it was in his power to redeem them both from
the slavery they were in; wherein, although she doubted not, but that the King
would one day acknowledge a Service of this nature to such a degree, as the
importance of it would justly deserve; she in the mean time would
notwithstanding take all the obligation upon her self, and engage to make him
see the effects of such a gratitude, as he might reasonably expect from a
Princess, who conceived her self obliged to his generosity for her liberty, And
hearkens to the Proposition.
and her life. The Duke having made answer to this discourse in such terms of
submission, and respect, as befitted a Subject to a Princess of her condition,
the Mother of his King, and one from whom, amongst some little unkindnesses he
had received many benefits, and signal favors, proceeded without more ceremony
to the negotiation; in the progress whereof, Vincentio in the Queens name
promised so many men, and places, and such sums of money, proposing withal so
great and so advantageous conditions for the Duke, as made him conceive the
proposition worth the thinking of, and to promise him in a few days a positive
answer.

He was no sooner therefore parted from Vincentio, but that he sent for his
Sons to deliberate with them about this Affair, in whom he met with young
spirits, full of heat, and courage, that presently advised him confidently to
embrace that motion, wherein they said there was no question to be made, but
that the issue would be glorious for him, advantageous to the State, and easy
to be effected in it self, through the concurrence he would certainly find in
most of the great men of the Kingdom, who were apparently dissatisfied with the
present Government, which was also no extraordinary thing in the best, and most
happy Reigns. The Duke on the contrary by a long experience become more
circumspect could not suffer himself so easily to be overcome; but considering
he was about to expose his Life and Fortune, his Children, Friends, B^t without
engaging himself at this time.
and Family for a Princess who had not at other times been over mindful of his
former Services, he had some reason to fear he should receive no better an
acknowledgement of this, than he had done of the rest. Besides he knew very
well that he should no sooner appear in Arms in order to the design in hand,
but that the Kings whole Power, and his Person would immediately be upon him;
and seeing no visible Forces sufficient to resist that Torrent, he could not
clear his mind from those apprehensions wherewith it was involved. He
represented therefore to his Sons, that all those Confederates they seemed to
rely upon, should they join in the Quarrel, would most of them vanish at the
very sound of the Royal Name: That the most discontented of them would be
reconciled to their Duty by the least satisfactions should be given them, and
that then he alone should do the work of all the other great men of the
Kingdom, at the price of his own particular ruin. So that after having again
and again considered of this proposal, he could not persuade himself to
condescend to the importunities of his Sons, and le Plessis, who was present at
this deliberation, all they could say being able to prevail no further upon him
at that time, than that Vincentio might in his name assure the Queen, he had a
passionate desire to serve her, provided it would please her Majesty to enable
him so to do, by letting him know what persons of quality she had won over to
her party, with what sums of money she could make for carrying on the War,
until when he humbly desired he might reserve to himself the liberty of his
promise, with an assurance of his Secrecy and Fidelity in the mean time.

Vincentio, after having staid eight days at Metz, went back with this answer
to Rucellay, who with great impatience expected his return; and who having
received this account of the business, thought they had done enough at this
first push, in prevailing with the Duke to hearken only to the proposal:
neither did he doubt, but that the difficulties he had represented, though very
rational in themselves, would in the end be overcome by the success of those
things, whereof the Duke, before he would give a determinate answer, desired to
be assured. He therefore in all haste signified to the Queen the Duke's
disposition to serve her, assuring her withal of the Duke de Bouillon's
Concurrence with the Duke of Espernon, provided the last would undertake the
Service. Whereupon her Majesty, secure of her Interest with the Dukes of Guise,
and Montmorency, and many other persons of great quality; and nothing fearing
also, but she should be able to raise a great mass of money, what by borrowing,
what upon her Jewels, and what by the Revenue of those Provinces would be
engaged with her, sent the same Vincentio a month after to the Duke, to give
him full assurance of all things he desired. Upon which second dispatch, the
Duke conceiving he might confide in the Q^eens word, engaged himself (though
not without some reluctance) to declare openly in her Quarrel, dismissing his
little Ambassador with a much better account, than before, and delivering him
a Cipher for his future Correspondence with the Queen; after which, and a
particular answer to the Letter her Majesty had honored him with by Vincentio
the first time, he launched so far into the Affair, that it was afterward
impossible for him to retire.

Rucellay having pumped the whole secret of this Negotiation out of Vincentio,
Rucellay takes himself the Treaty in hand.
and having no mind he should carry away the Reputation of an Affair of that
importance, and so successfully begun, resolved for the time to come to
undertake the Treaty himself, and laying aside his former aversions, with all
other respects (which he likewise conceived were not of so high a nature, as
ought to stand in competition with the Affair in hand) would treat with the
Duke in his own person. In order whereunto he advanced as far as Pont a
Moulins, a little Village about a League distance from Metz; either unwilling,
or not daring to venture himself in the City, till he first knew how the Duke
was disposed to receive him. From this place therefore he immediately sent away
for Cadillac (the same le Plessis had sent the first time to Vincentio) not
doubting but he would be the first should be sent to discover who he was*
Cadillac thus sent for by he knew not whom, would not go out to him without
first receiving his Masters Order, nor his Master give it him, till he himself
had first received an Order from the Duke: Neither could the Duke suddenly
consent to this intelligence, who, although he did not know the stranger to be
Rucellay, yet suspecting him to be some new Negotiator, and unwilling to have
so many entrusted with a business, upon the secrefie whereof depended his Life
and Fortune, he waver'd long before he would give way to an enterview betwixt
le Plessis, and this new Agent. He was at last notwithstanding content he
should go: but if he had at first made some difficulty of allowing this
Conference, before he knew Rucellay to be the man he was to confer withal, he
was so out of all patience when he knew the secret was committed to an Italian,
his enemy, and disobliged by him, that he was many times upon the point to have
recalled his word, and absolutely to give over the design. Le Plessis was then
forced to return back to Rucellay with a very unsatisfactory answer; who,
without being much out of countenance at this repulse (the Duke refusing to
admit him into the Treaty) or the seeing the civility he had advanced so far
toward a reconciliation rejected, told le Plessis coldly, That since the Duke
had a mind to do the business without him, he might, if he pleased, in good
time proceed; but that in the mean time he was to understand, that it was to
him the Queen had entrusted the secret of that Affair, and not to the other,
who had hitherto appeared in it, who was but his substitute, and by him sent to
make the first overtures to the Duke, presuming his own person might not be so
acceptable to him; but that he had seen the Duke of Bouillon, and treated with
him: That Vincentio had given him an account of all he had done at Metz, and
had delivered a Cipher to him: That he knew very well that he le Plessis in the
Canting of that Cipher was called Floze, the Duke by another name, and his Sons
by others. After which explanation he desired him to consider whether a man so
well informed in, and able ot give so good an account of the business, was fit
to be laid aside: That he could not but wonder the Duke of Espernon should
continue to use him so ill, who had never given him any offense; but on the
contrary had been highly offended by him, and his; that having so many and just
inducements to revenge those injuries, he had now sufficient means to do it,
were not his honor far dearer, than his ill usage was sensible to him: but
that he would tread all those considerations under foot, to preserve his
Fidelity to the Queen his Mistress, provided he should not be urged on to the
last extremes.

This Declaration, though something high from an Enemy, and very rough from a
man that pretended he came to Treat, carried nevertheless so much sting with
it, and threatened so much to the ruin of the design in hand, that the Duke saw
it necessary either to admit him into the Council, or to dispatch him out of
the way: the latter of which being too cruel for him to consent unto, and on
the other side it appearing of better advantage to treat with a man of the
Quality Rucellay was, than with Vincentio, who could do nothing, but as he
received Orders from him; the Duke resolved upon the first: So that Rucellay
being upon these terms admitted into the negotiation, Rucellay with much
difficulty admitted into the Treaty.
he came by night to Metz, and in disguise (as he always went) was conducted to
the Haute Pierre, where he had a Chamber made ready for him in the Duke's own
Lodgings; out of which he never stirred for a whole month together^ Being there
received, he had Cadillac appointed to attend him, as also one of the Duke's
own Valet's de Chamber, whom he knew was to be trusted, ordered to bring him
all necessaries from the Kitchen, and other Offices, without any bodies being
able to guess who this person might be, that was so carefully, and diligently
attended. The Duke went almost every day to see him, his Sons very often, and
le Plessis ofter than them all; by which regular visits in the Duke, and by the
great care was taken to seek out the best water (for Rucellay drank nothing
else, and was very delicate in that) it was suspected some Woman of Pleasure
was kept private in the house: A suspicion that perhaps contributed something
to his better concealment, and to the restraint of a further curiosity in such*
as possibly otherwise would have been more inquisitive into the truth of the
business, had they not entertained this mistake for the truth it self.
Resolutions taken betwixt the Duke of Espernon and Rucellay.
During this time of Rucellay's stay at Metz, things were fully concluded
amongst them; where above all things, it was though necessary, that a strict
League should be contracted betwixt the two Dukes of Espernon, and Bouillon,
that things might the better succeed. There had indeed some former Jealousies
happened to the discomposure of these two great men, but such as had rather begot
a coldness, than any disaffection betwixt them; which Rucellay undertook to
reconcile, as by the assistance of the Vicount de Sardiny (a very particular
Servant to the Duke of Bouillon, and a man absolutely devoted to the Queen) he
afterward did, though it wrought not that good effect, was expected from it,
as shall in its due place be made to appear.

The Queen having heard no news of Rucellay, during his abode at Metz, though
she had taken care to send to him, and in such an impatience to know how her
Affairs succeeded, as may be imagined in the condition she then was, writ a
Letter to the Duke in a borrowed hand (I think Chanteloube's, he being then the
only man of trust about her) and in a ^ustian style; the Queen here taking upon
her the quality of a Merchants Wife of Saverne, absent from her Husband: of
which these were the words. Sir, since the Sieur Artus (meaning Rucellay)
parted hence to seek you out, I have heard no news either of him, or you; which
so much afflicts me, that I must entreat you to write to me by this bearer, who
I am told by a friend of mine will soon be back, he being to ride post upon
some business of a Gentleman's, whose name I have forgot. If no accident have
befallen Sieur Artus, he is much to blame to leave me so long in suspense,
without giving me some account, whether he have paid you the money I delivered
him, or no; which though it be no great sum, I should be very sorry you had
not received. Oblige me therefore so far, as to send me word what the matter
is, as also of the state of your health, which I wish may be such, as you your
self desire. I forgot to tell you that the Armourer (meaning the Duke de
Luines) with whom we have the business you know of, has sought to me for an
Agreement; though I know not what to say to it without my Husbands advice, for
whom I have so much respect, as to do nothing, but what he shall think fit: if
he refer it to me to do what I think best, I shall make no agreement with him.
The Judges, who are to determine our controversy, will, I doubt, not very well
understand who has the wrong, and that our cause is good; God also being always
for the right, I hope we shall have as good an issue as we can desire. I shall
tro^^le you no further, than to conjure you to write me word, when I may hope
to be so happy as to see you; if your Affairs would permit, I could wish you
were ready to begin your Journey to morrow: however I shall refer that to your
discretion, humbly entreating you to believe, that I shall honor you all the
days of my life, as I ought to do, and shall pray to God to keep you in his
Holy Protection, and preserve you as long in health as I desire.

Sir, Your humble, and very obedient Wife, and Servant, Signed X.




It appears by this Letter, that Affairs were now in a very good forwardness,
some money having been sent by the Queen to Metz, which, Money sent to Metz by
the Queen.
as it was the most important place of her Party, and wherein the Duke had
resolved to leave the Marquis de la Valette his Son, he would not he should be
left without some money in his greatest necessity to assist him. He very well
foresaw that after the Queens escape he should be the first assaulted, and
exposed (as he afterward was) to the fury of the Royal Arms, and that upon the
preservation of Metz depended, in part, the life of the whole Action: but of
how great moment soever this place might be to the design in hand, the sums
nevertheless were very moderate, that were there left for its defense, arising
to no more in all, than an hundred thousand Crowns, carried thither by Wagon
from Saverne; of which sum Vincentio received an hundred thousand Livers for
the use of the Duke of Bouillon, who was to take Arms in favor of the Queen, a
part of the remainder only being left at Metz, for the raising of men necessary
for the defense of the Town, and to buy Ammunition.

The Duke having found by this money coming in, The Duke resolves to go serve
the Queen.
some, though very little effect of those promises, had been made him by the
Queen, did from thence conclude her Servants had provided so carefully for the
rest, that nothing would be wanting of all those things whereof they had given
him before so ample assurance: In which belief he set himself wholly upon his
preparation to be gone; of which also having given notice to the Queen, her
Majesty, whose condition was much worse than his, to quicken his haste, sent
him another Letter in the same Canting style. Sir, I shall make use of
Magurin's, A second Letter from the Queen in the same style with the first.
one of our Factors Pen (meaning Chan^eloube) to let you know, that I was never
more overjoyed in my life, than when I received the Letter you did me the
honor to send; wherein you give me assurance of your constant love, which is
so great a comfort to me, that what affliction soever God shall be pleased to
lay upon me, I shall notwithstanding rejoice in this, that my Husband loves me,
and that I shall shortly have the happiness to see him. Neither do I doubt of
his affection, who has so good a soul, that I know he can never forget her, who
in this world most honors and loves him; and that so soon as he has settled
all our Affairs where he now is, he will come to take order about those we have
in these parts, which praised be God, are already in a very hopeful way. But I
am in great pain to know the place where you are pleased I shall expect you;
for if you think it better that I go to our own house, than to stay longer
here, send me word, and I shall do what possibly I can to overcome the
incommodities of the season to obey you; but if it should fall out that I
cannot stir from hence, write me word how I may meet you upon the way; and
provided I be not put to rise too early, I shall do wonders. I expect therefore
your Commands, which I shall faithfully observe, beseeching you to give me your
instruction concerning all our other Affairs, that I may do nothing may turn to
our prejudice; it being impossible I should ever fail in obeying whatever
Commands you will lay upon

Your humble, and very obedient Wife, and Servant.




And in a Postscript, This shall be the last Letter I shall write, wherefore I
conjure you to remember to give me notice of your setting out, that accordingly
I may prepare my self

G. G.




And for the Superscription, as upon that before, A Monsieur, Monsieur Fabert,
being at this present at Saverne.



This Letter, which, betwixt persons so well read in one another designs,
might with great ease be explained, was by the Duke presently put into
deliberation; first, that a day might be resolved upon for his departure, and
next that something might be concluded about the order was to be observed in
going to receive the Queen. To this Consultation the Dukes two Sons, Rucellay,
and le Plessis, were only admitted, where (as it usually falls out) the nearer
they approached to the execution of their design, Some difficulties arise about
the execution of the design.
the harder it seemed to be effected. From the time the Duke had first engaged
his word to the Queen, he had been very instant at Court, to obtain liberty to
go into his Governments of Xaintonge and Angoumois, very well foreseeing, that
without such a formal leave, he should meet difficulties enough in the very
Journey it self, had he had no design to favor the Queens escape; but the more
importunate he had been to procure that License, the more obstinate he had
found them to be in the denial. They looked upon him, as it were mewed up in
Metz, and were resolved to keep him in a manner a prisoner to his own
Government, in that remote part of the Kingdom. So that the Duke in despair of
procuring that privilege, and seeing that under the color of some very
inconsiderable excuses, the King had a mind to make his presence at Metz appear
altogether necessary to his Service, he sent his Majesty a very full
Remonstrance of the urgency of his Affairs in those parts, with a repeated
supplication, that he would please to permit him to go: Not that he expected a
better success in this than in his former applications, he had lost that hope:
but by this new Address to lull the Duke de Luines asleep, who ought in reason
to believe, that this reiterated importunity pre-suppos'd an expectation in the
Duke to prevail in his request; and that consequently he would not depart from
Metz, till that were first obtained. This Letter was writ by the Sieur de
Balzac, and is, in my opinion one of the best pieces has flowed from his
admirable Pen; which notwithstanding I have not inserted here, forasmuch as the
Reader may find it printed amongst the rest of his excellent Works.

By this Letter it was, The Duke of Espernon's preparation, and the policy he
made use of to cover his design.
that, whilst he was making preparation for his departure, the Duke endeavored
to conceal his Design; wherein his policy was of infinite use, and this that
follows of no less. He had a mind to send away before his Stable of managed
Horses, consisting of thirty, what Gennets, and Barbs, the finest, and best in
France, and equipage he had ever been very curious to maintain, as he continued
to the last hour of his life. These horses that had been very unfit to travel
such Journeys, as he must of necessity take, had they staid to go along with
him, and that could not in the mean time be conveyed out of Metz, without much
notice taken, to hinder that observation, and to del^de such as were too
clear-sighted, and too prying into all his actions, the Duke caused, for
fifteen days together, bridled, sadled, and in all their equipage as they had
been to go a long Journey, to be led out at several Gates of the City: wherein
though it was given out by the Grooms, as done only to air them, left they
should become useless by standing continually still; yet for a few of the first
days they were seen to go out in that manner, no body believed other than that
they were the Dukes forerunners, who intended himself soon after to follow. An
opinion that made the people crowd in multitudes to gaze upon the sight, every
one certainly concluding at first, what was effectually the Duke's real design:
but in the end, seeing them, after a walk of four or five hours, continually
brought back at night, and that which at first surpised them by its novelty,
being grown familiar by the continuation of it, even the most penetratingly
inquisitive began to grow weary of their suspicion, letting them at last pass
to and again without any regard at all. And then it was that the Duke commanded
the Sieur de Campels the Gentleman of his Horse, who, till that time had been
as ignorant as the rest, at his next ordinary sally, to ride clear away, and to
go to a House near Sanserra, and upon the Banks of the River Loire, called
Reze, belonging to le Puigeolet his Lieutenant in the Regiment of Champagne,
there to expect him^ which was accordingly performed without the least notice
taken, or any noise at all.

This part being thus performed, le Liege, Major to Rembure's Regiment, a
Gentleman very expert in the Geographical Cart, and an excellent Quartermaster
for the lodging of an Army, came back to Metz, whom the Duke had sent a few
days before to discover all the ways, by which he was to pass into Angoumo^s;
by whose extraordinary diligence, the way was already chalked out, and divided
into Journeys, the Fords all sounded, and the whole thing exactly drawn into a
Map. After all which precautions, the Duke still living at Metz, as if he never
had design to part from thence, and having concluded with his Sons, Rucellay,
and le Plessis the day of his setting out to be the 22. of January the ensuing
year, all things were thenceforward prepared with the greatest secre^ie, and
diligence imaginable, to be ready against the time to come. The Queen Mother
had, as you have heard, signified in her last dispatch, that she was in hope
she might convey her person to any place the Duke should think fit to name,
thinking that the Letter she had received from the King (after the Protestation
she had made to Father Arnoux) would privilege her so to do, she having full
liberty given her therein to go whither she pleased into any part of the
Kingdom: but because that it was probable the design of that Letter was rather
to comfort her in her solitude, and to swee^en her captivity, than intended to
give her absolute liberty to dispose of her person; it was moreover thought
impossible so to order the time, that she could at a certain and punctual hour
transfer her self to a place where she might be free to dispose of her self at
her own choice: Especially considering that all those who were about her, the
major part at least, were Servants made, and corrupted by the Court Minion.
Which sole difficulty appearing invincible, it was at last resolved, that, to
avoid all suspicion, her Majesty should not stir from Blois, Anno 1619.
but that the Duke, or some other trusty person by him appointed should advance
thither, to receive, and convey her first to Loches, The Archbishop of
Tholouze, afterward Cardinal de la Valette, departs from Metz before the Duke
his (...).
and from thence to Angoulesme.

This resolution being taken, the Archbishop of Tholouze, attended only by his
own ordinary Train, parted from Metz eight days before the Duke his Father, to
go into Angoumois. The pretense of this Journey was to try to raise money upon
their Territories in those parts for their better support, they having not (as
was pretended) wherewithal to defray their necessary expense, the Duke's
Offices being now no longer paid him since his dispute with the Guard des
Sceaux; though indeed the true cause of his going was to confirm the Servants
the Duke had in his Governments there in their Duty, and to secure the strong
Holds he had in Xaintonge and Angoumois, by a seasonable prevention of any
practice from Court. There was also at the same time a dispatch sent to the
Queen Mother, to acquaint her with their resolutions, that she might make her
self ready against the day prefixed; the charge whereof Rucellay having taken
upon himself, he entrusted it to a young fellow whose name was Lorme, one whom
he had bred up of a Page, and by whom he had in truth been very faithfully
served at Court, in some affairs of no ordinary nature; though in this, and in
the most critical time for the ruin of the Enterprise in hand, he played fowl,
and stumbled into the foulest Treachery in the world. He had often been
employed to and fro upon this occasion, wherein he had ever acquitted himself
with great sincerity and discretion: but now, though he had not penetrated into
the depth of the design, yet guessing by the secrecy had been enjoined him,
that it must necessarily be of very great importance, what recompenses soever
he had been promised by his Master, he chose rather by his infidelity to obtain
them, than by a virtuous action to deserve them. Instead therefore of going to
Blois, and from thence to Confolant in Angoumois (where he was ordered to
expect the Duke, after he should be dismissed by the Queen, from whom he was to
bring an account of the precise day of her escape) he went directly to Paris,
where he addressed himself to some of the Duke de Luines his Servants, to be by
them presented to their Master; to whom he said, provided he might be secured
of a good reward, he would discover something of more than common concern. The
whole design in great danger to be ruined, through the infidelity of one of
Ruc^llay's Servants.
To this desperate pass was the state of Affairs reduced, when Fortune by a
strange and unexpected accident set the Machine again on work upon its own
proper Base. Those to whom Lorme had applied himself for admission to Luines,
looking upon him as an Impostor, either made no mention of him to the Duke at
all, or, if they did, represented him for such a fellow, as they themselves
took him to be, making him wait at the Gates for three whole days together,
without giving him either admittance, or answer. In the interval of which three
days le Buisson, a Counselor in the Parliament of Paris, heard by chance that
Lorme, Rucellay's man was in Town; which he had from one of his own people,
who, being of Lorme's acquaintance, had met him accidentally in the street. At
which intelligence le Buisson (a man passionately devoted to the Queen Mother,
privy to her designs, and an affectionate Servant of the Duke of Espernon's, by
reason of a Brother of his, a Lieutenant in the Regiment of Guards, who was one
of the Duke's domestics, being infinitely surpised; forasmuch as Lorme had at
other times ever been directed immediately to him, and not being able to
comprehend the cause of this alteration, began presently to suspect there was
some knavery in the wind. He therefore presently took order to have my
companion narrowly watched, and was by his spies as faithfully informed of his
being continually seen waiting at the Duke de Luines his Gate; by which
discovery judging aright at what he was about, and foreseeing what mischief the
sight of those Letters, he knew he had about him, would produce, he undertook a
dangerous, but a very necessary act, and that indeed proved the safety of the
whole design. By a supposititious hand, one that took upon him to be a Servant
to the Duke de Luines, he caused five hundred crowns to be paid down to Lorme
by virtue of which he retriv'd the Packet out of his hands, disposing so of
Lorme himself, that he was never seen or heard of after; by which means this
great design in the greatest danger imaginable to be discovered, and lost, was
again restored to its former condition.

The Duke, who as yet was totally ignorant of Lorme's treachery, and* who knew
nothing of it of above a month after, put himself in the mean time upon his
Journey; the order whereof at his setting out, and which he also continued
during the whole Voyage, The D^ke's prudent conduct in the manner of his
departure from Metz.
I shall here present you. Wherein we shall observe so admirable a conduct,
that we cannot forbear (notwithstanding the Duke's modesty) who ever gave
Fortune too great a share in all his performances) to attribute the whole
success of this enterprise immediately to his own prudence. No body knew of his
resolution, till the night before his departure, when all the Gates of the City
being shut, which at Metz (as at all other Frontier Towns) was commonly
betimes, he commanded every one to make ready for their departure the next
morning. He had some time before this caused eight thousand Pistols (his whole
stock at that time) to be sowed up in Girdles of Leather (which were all found
in his Truncks at his death in the same condition they were at his departure
from Metz) such as a man might, without much trouble, wear about him, which he
distributed to fifteen Gentlemen of his Family (whom he knew to be the most
faithful, and that were the best mounted) to take care of, with orders to
follow him wherever he went, should any cross accident befall him in the way.
His Jewels also, which were locked up in a little iron Chest, and carried in a
Male, was committed to a Valet de Chamber of approved fidelity, who had
likewise order not to stir from his person. He had fifty Gentlemen only in his
company, every one armed with a Case of Pistols, and a Carabine, forty Guards,
with each one a Musket, and a case of Pistols, fifteen Sumpter Mules, the
ordinary Officers of his Household, with several common Servants. With this
Troop amounting in all not to above an hundred good Horse (and that would have
been too little had he gone upon the account of a private quarrel only) the
Duke of Espernon adventured upon a Journey, contrary to the King's express
Order, from one extremity of the Kingdom to another, and thence to return back
again into the very heart of the same Kingdom, there to assist the Queen
Mother; resolved (contrary to the King's will) to make her escape from a place,
to which she had been, by his Majesty in the nature of a Prison, confined; and
without certainly knowing by whom he was to be assisted in his design,
undertook to change the face of a mighty State, so quiet, and so united within
it self, as that it seemed impossible either at home or abroad to be threatened
with the least danger, or trouble: Wherein, if the attempt was bold, we shall
find the execution no less worthy to be admired. He must alone make an end of
what he had alone begun, his good Fortune, it seems, to his Glory, ordering it
so, that not one great man of the Kingdom (either envying, or astonished at so
daring a design) would be drawn to embark in an action the honor and success
whereof could derive to none but the Duke of Espernon: Memoires de Monsieur de
Rohan.
So that they were content to let him bustle it out alone, whilst themselves
sat idle spectators of this haughty and noble Enterprise; though it was
certainly reported, and believed, that many of them had engaged themselves to
the Queen to serve her upon this occassion.

The Duke having thus ordered his little Train, and not being able to separate
himself from the Marquis de la Valette his most beloved Son, without taking his
leave, he called him aside, where embracing him with the tenderness of an
affectionate Father, he told him; That the greatest testimony he could possibly
give him of his Affection and Esteem, was (as he now did) to commit to his
Vigilance, and Valor the Custody of Metz, it being the principal member of his
Fortune; and to the conservation of which he ought to be the more awake, as it
concerned himself much more than it did him, who having but a short time to
live, could expect but a few years possession: That he might assure himself, he
should with the soonest be beleaguered with all the Forces the King could make;
and that no better was to be expected from the Inhabitants, how well affected
soever they might pretend to be; to oppose both which, much prudence and
constancy would be required: That upon the success of the Action, wherein they
were now engaged, depended not only their Fortunes, but their Reputations also;
which if it succeeded well, they should be loaded with Honor; but if
otherwise, be looked upon as Criminals, and Traitors: That therefore they were
to put on a Resolution rather to dye, than to fall into that disgrace; but that
it was much better to live, and to overcome, as his heart assured him they
should honorably, and fortunately do. By which few words the Marquis, being
confirmed in the generous resolution he before had taken, humbly besought the
Duke his Father to be confident he would never do any thing unworthy his own
Birth, or his expectation; when his tears having stopped all further expression,
he by that tenderness gave a much better testimony of his courage than
otherwise, and at a greater liberty of speech, his own modesty would perhaps
have permitted him to do.

The Duke was no sooner parted from his Son, The Duke goes out of Metz.
but that he presently went to Horse to begin his Journey, it being Monday the
two and twentieth of January, as had been before appointed. The Gates of the
City had not been opened since the evening before, and then only that by which
the Duke was to sally; which was also shut again so soon as he (who would
himself be the last man) was gone out: Neither of three days after his
departure was any one opened at all, the Duke having moreover (lest any Tickets
might be thrown over the Walls, or any persons let down, who might carry
intelligence of his motion to Court) left order with Paul, Lieutenant to a
Company of Carabines, belonging to the Garrison of Metz, night and day to scour
the Road to Paris, and to intercept, and stop all that should travel that way;
a precaution of so good use, that the last news the Court received of the Duke
of Espernon's departure, came from Metz, so well had all the Avenues been
guarded on that side.

The Duke, being now out of the City, pursued his way with great diligence,
taking as long Journeys as the heaviness of his Sumpter-Mules would permit,
which, though they tied him to one stage a day, yet was that stage always nine
or ten Leagues at least; and his good Fortune was such, that at this season,
commonly the most turbulent of all the year, the weather was so exceedingly
favorable and fair, that there fell not one drop of rain all the way; insomuch
that he not only could foard all the Rivers, but mounting every morning so soon
as the Sun was up, both he and all his company rid without their Cloaks all the
day long, as it had been the warmest time in Summer. The fourth day after his
departure from Metz, he passed by the Trenches of Dijon, where the Duke of
Bellegarde his Cousin being Governor both of the Castle, and Province, and
having the Sieur de Mun his Lieutenant in the Castle, the Duke sent for him,
who being it seems at that time out of the way, Fouqueroles Ensign to the
Duke's Lifeguard came out in his stead to receive the Duke's commands. Of whom
the Duke having inquired of the Duke his Master, he entreated him, so soon as
he should write, to present his Service to him, and to acquaint him with his
motion, but that nevertheless that complement required no such haste, that he
was obliged to do it otherwise, than by the ordinary way of the Messenger (the
Packet Office being at that time not erected in France) as he desired he would
not do; adding withal, that having been starved out of Metz, he was constrained
to go into Xaintonge, and Angoumois to live there upon his own Estate: Wherein,
though Fouqueroles promised to obey his Orders, yet he was not so good as his
word, he dispatching away an express Currier the next morning to the Duke de
Bellegarde, to acquaint him with the Duke's motion; by which means it was that
the King had the first intelligence of his departure from Metz, though it was
not before he had been eight days upon the Road, and that it was now too late
to stop him.

It is not to be imagined how strangely this news alarmed the whole Court, The
news of the Duke of Espernon's motion carried to Court.
the King openly saying, that he ever thought if the Duke of Espernon could not
obtain the leave he desired, he would infallibly take it: but the Duke de
Luines, conceiving that (in all probability) the Duke would never have done
such a thing without some design, thought fit to try if he could not effect
that by fair means, he saw was not to be done by foul; and to that end
dispatched away le Maine (otherwise called ( Chabans) to the Duke, with a
Letter from the King to Authorize his Voyage, together with all assurance of
satisfaction in his Affairs, as also a particular complement, that he would
accept of his Service, and that all things passed might be no more remembered
betwixt them. Which Envoy we shall in due time find upon his way.

Dijon being passed, the Duke continued his Journey without intermission,
baiting, or staying near the great Towns, till he had passed the River Loire at
Port de Vichi; from whence he sent a new dispatch to the King, to give him
notice of his Voyage into Xaintonge, and Angoumois; where he had (as he said)
no other design, than to live under his Majesty's obedience. With this dispatch
Baussonniere Nephew to le Plessis, (a Gentleman of as good Parts, and as much
Valor, as any other of his time) was sent away to Paris, where at his arrival
he was very well received; but happening to be still at Court, soliciting an
answer to his dispatch, when the news was brought of the Queen Mothers escape,
he ran a very great hazard of his life, his head being often brought into
debate, that in his person they might punish the high Offense done to the King
by the Duke his Master.

Two days Journey short of this Port de Vichi, the Duke's Quarter Masters (who
always carried Rucellay along with them in disguise, and who, the better to
conceal him, used him with no other respect, An Encounter by the way.
than as a Comrade) discovered two Parties of Horse standing in a Field, a
little distance from them, which at the first sight they apprehended to be two
Troops, where of mention had been made to the Duke, one of Light Horse
belonging to the Queen, and another of Carabines commanded by Arnout; which he
had been informed were disposed in Garrison near this part of the River (out of
an opinion had for some time been entertained at Court, that the Duke (whether
his Majesty would consent or no) would infallibly undertake this Journey into
G^ienne) to obstruct his passage. And indeed those Troops had wai^ed some time
thereabouts; but whether it were that they had accidentally only been Quartered
there, or that they had been tired out with expecting, or that the coming of
the Duke's great Horses toward Sanserra, (for they were now marched that way)
had made them alter their design: but so it was that the Duke received not the
least impediment from them. His people notwithstanding, something surpised at
the sight of these two Troops, returned upon the spur to give the Duke notice
of what they had seen; at which intelligence, as at a thing that required some
consideration, he made a little halt, when immediately with a cheerful and
confident countenance, he said to those who were with him. We are now come too
far my Masters, to return back again, we must either through, or dye. Which
being said whilst he was drawing up to charge, he sent to discover who they
were; when having word back, that they were two Gentlemen, who, being at Suits,
had raised men on both sides to take possession of a House in dispute betwixt
them, he continued on his way, this being the only Alarm he received throughout
the whole Journey.

But almost in the same place, Another Encounter with the Duke of Guise, missed
b^t a few ho^rs.
at least at the Pass of Briare, which is not far from it, the Duke missed very
little of an Encounter of far greater importance; which was that with the Duke
of Guise, who was retiring, dissatisfied enough with the Court, into his
Government of Provence. Neither had he been gone above two hours before the
Duke arrived at this Pass: whereas had he had the fortune to have come a little
sooner, the Duke of Guise would doubtless have had much ado to persuade the
Court, that so pat an Encounter had not been before compl^tted betwixt them. A
jealousy that the known friendship betwixt the Duke and him would have rendered
so plausible to all, that the Duke of Guise, not seeing a possibility of
jnstifying himself against so violent a presumption, could hardly have avoided
engaging on the Queens Party, seeing he must inevitably stand highly suspected
to the other; though the Duke of Espernon concluding him absolutely engaged in
the same design, did not much care to send after him, for fear of giving the
Court too great a discovery before Affairs were yet ripe: So that by this
means, and from the very business it self, wherein he was thought to be so
deeply concerned, as perhaps he was, the Duke of Guise took occasion to make
his own Game at Court, and to reconcile himself to the King, and the
Favorites, he sending thither, sealed up, as he received them from the Queen,
the Packets wherein she made her application to him, to engage him in her
designs.

The twentieth day after the Duke's departure from Metz, he arrived at
Confolant in Angoumois; where his Son, the Archbishop of Tholouze, together
with the Sieur d' Ambleville, the King's Lieutenant in the Province, and the
Duke's most faithful friend, and about three hundred Gentlemen more, came to
wait upon him. And here it was that the Duke was infinitely astonished and
surpised; he had all the way expected to find Lorme there, with the Queens
instructions about the manner of her escape: but his treachery (as yet unknown
to the Duke) having turned him quite another way, gave the Duke reason to
believe, either that the Queen Mother had altered her resolution, The Duke and
his party in a great confusion.
or that otherwise she had been betrayed, and that the whole design had been
discovered: The one or the other of which had been equally ruinous to him, who
must either way be certainly exposed single, and naked to his enemies
discretion. And as one mischief never comes alone, it fell out, that in the
heighr of this confusion, he was assaulted by another of no less moment, and
that consequently added very much to the perplexity he was in before. The man
of the house where Rucellay, and le Plessis lay, was one of the Or Cuirassiers.
Gend'arme of the King's own Troop, whose name was Betison. This man
discoursing with Cadillac le Plessis's Servant about the Affairs of the time
(the common talk of that kind of people) innocently told him, amongst other
things, that there was a bruit in the Country, as if the Duke were come to
carry away the Queen Mother from Blois. It could never be found out from whence
this rumor should arise, for it was so great a secret in the Duke's own
Family, that the very persons who were continually employed in it, had not the
least inckling thereof. Insomuch that Cadillac, who was himself as ignorant as
the rest, told his Master this story for a ridiculous thing: but le Plessis,
who took it after another manner, and that on the contrary was astonished to
the last degree, that an affair which had been carried on with the greatest
secrecy imaginable, should become the discourse of the people, went
immediately to acquaint Rucellay with what he had heard; who being no less
surpised, than he, they went both together to the Duke, who was yet the most
amazed of the three, and who by this was still more confirmed in his former
belief, that he was abandoned, and betrayed, wherein also the appearances were
so great, that his opinion was not indeed much to be contradicted.

Le Plessis, who had waded very deep into this Affair, could by no means
persuade himself that the Queen had any ways altered her resolution, yet did he
not know what to say to her silence; He saw his Master's Enterprise was no more
a secret, and that consequently he could not, without eminent danger make a
longer stay at Confolant, his residence in that little place giving too
manifest evidence of some secret design. The consideration whereof made him
resolve generously to expose himself to search out the truth of the business,
and to clear those doubts the Duke was in at the hazard of his own life. Le
Plessis takes a journey to discover how Affairs stood.
In the close of the evening therefore he departed from Confolant upon his own
Horses, to go take post at Chastelloraut, and from thence to Loches; where, as
he passed by he was to make sure of la Iliere, Governor of that place under
the Duke of Espernon. This Gentleman, however faithful, and affectionate to the
Duke his Master and Benefactor, was nevertheless at the first proposal very
much surpised with the greatness of this design, and to such a degree that he
could not on the sudden prevail upon himself to embark in an Affair, wherein he
discovered so eminent, and inevitable danger: Insomuch that le Plessis not
being able to overcome his apprehensions, and aversions, at this first
Conference, durst proceed no further in his Journey, it being above all things
necessary to make sure of Loches. In the inte^im he saw he lost a great deal of
time, and the Queen he knew, if she continued in her first resolution, must
needs be in great anxiety, and suspense. He had moreover great reason to
believe that the news of the Duke's Voyage was by this time arrived at Court,
and that then all possible diligence would be used (whatever they might be) to
prevent his designs. In which perplexity, not daring to depart from Loches,
without having first made Iliere firm to their purpose; or at least till the
Archbishop of Tholouze (who was to follow presently after him) should come to
secure the place, that being designed for the Queens first retreat, he found a
necessity upon him of committing the secret of this great and important Affair
to Cadillac's fidelity and discretion: Calling him therefore to him,
entreating, and conjuring him to be faithful, with great promises of reward, he
delivered him Letters for the Queen, with two or three words to the Count de
Brenne, that he might by his favor be admitted to her Majesty's presence. The
Count had hitherto, it is true, been entrusted with no syllable of the design;
but le Plessis knew him to be very faithful to the Queen his Mistress, and that
they had usually applied themselves to him to obtain Access, for several
private Messengers that had been sent to her Majesty about this Affair.
Cadillac acquitted himself very well in his dispatch, he came to Blois,
presented his Letter to the Count de Brenne, and was by him that very night
presented to the Queen, who entertained him some time alone in her Cabinet; and
who after having heard the humble request he made in his Masters behalf, that
her Majesty would please to send some trusty person to Montis (a post stage
distant only from Blois) with whom he might the next day confidently confer.
She made answer that she had no soul about her whom she durst trust; but that
he should immediately back to le Plessis, to tell him from her, that without
staying at Montis, he should come on as far as the Suburbs of Blois, where at
the little Moor he should hear further from her. Cadillac accordingly returned,
riding all night back again toward his Master, to acquaint him with the Queens
desire, whom at his arrival at Montis, he found got thither before him: La
lliere (who had never faultred in his duty, and whom the fear of his Master's
safety, rather than any consideration of his own, had made a little shie at
first) being upon better deliberation now resolute to run the Duke's fortune,
having it should seem set le Plessis at liberty to pursue his Journey: wherein
nevertheless he light upon an Encounter by the way, that had again almost
overthrown the whole design; and that had certainly done it, had he not by his
dexterity, and the vivacity of his judgment, managed it in such sort, as to
make it in the end contribute much to the good success of the Affair in hand.

You have already heard that upon the first intelligence the Court received of
the Duke of Espernon's departure from Metz, An unexpected and important
Encounter upon the way.
Luines had dispatched away le Maine to him with an approbation of his Journey
from the King; and it now fell out that this Gentleman in pursuance of that
dispatch, happened to meet le Plessis upon the Road betwixt Ambois, and Blois; an
Encounter that did not a little surprise le Plessis, who knew him to be a
subtle man, and no very good friend to the Duke, by whom he conceived he had
not been so well used, as he deserved to be. Neither was there any possibility
of passing by him unknown, they had been too long acquainted at Court for that;
and it was much to be feared, lest the meeting of le Plessis upon this Road
might make le Maine penetrate into the truth of his design, and consequently
endeavor to obstruct it. In this apprehension, I have heard le Plessis say,
That he was once in mind to have killed him; though considering that an act of
that nature was likely to draw after it consequences that might utterly
overthrow the Affair he had in hand, he quickly altered that resolution;
conceiving it therefore better not to avoid his Encounter, he went cheerfully
up to him, where after he had some time entertained him with great
demonstrations of intimacy, and friendship, he so ordered the matter, that he
(without discovering the true intent of his own) got out of le Maine the
business of his Journey, which was, that he was sent by the King, and the Duke
de Luines to the Duke of Espernon, to let him know that his Majesty was very
well satisfied with his expedition, and that Luines desired to be his Servant.
In order whereunto, having further inquired of le Plessis where he might find
the Duke, he made answer, that certainly at Angoulesme, where he arrived two
days before he came from thence. After this manner did le Plessis disingage
himself from this dangerous encounter, diverting le Maine from the way to
Loches, whither before he was going, to go enquire upon the Post Road some more
certain news of the Duke: Whereas had he held on his way, and met him at
Loches, as infallibly he had, the Queens Affairs had yet been in very great
danger, le Maine returning in all diligence to Court, having had leisure enough
to give Luines time, either to prevent the Queen Mothers escape, or at least to
have taken her upon the way, had she been gone from thence, Loches being but
one days Journey Post from Paris.

This untoward accident thus shuffled off, L^ Plessis c^ming to Blois, is
secretly admitted into the Queens Chamber.
and le Plessis being informed by Cadillac of the Queen Mothers order for him
to come into the Suburbs of Blois, he failed not to execute her commands; where
he was no sooner arrived, but that the Count de Brenne's Steward came to seek
him, to guide him to the Castle, and to lodge him in the Anti-Chambre of the
Count his Master. Night therefore being come, he was accordingly by him
conducted thither, when, so soon as every body was retired, and the Queen left
at liberty, and alone, she sent for him into her Chamber, to consult with him
what remained to be done; where after he had in few words given her an account
of the long, and dangerous Voyage his Master had undertaken, out of the sole,
and passionate desire he had to serve her, and that she had acknowledged that
obligation in the handsomest manner she could by words express, le Plessis
proceeded to represent to her Majesty the many dangers that attended this
delay, remonstrating to her: That it was now a great while since the Duke's
departure from Metz: That he had already waited four or five days in a Village,
in expectation of her Majesty's Commands in order to her escape: That the true
design of the Duke's Journey (though he believed it had no other ground than
mere suspicion) was already become the common discourse of the people: That he
had met le Maine going toward the Duke, upon the intelligence had already been
carried to Court of his departure from Metz; and that therefore it was very
requis^te her Majesty should make immediate use of the present occasion, which
perhaps might in two days be irrecoverably lost. To which the Queen made
answer: That she was of his opinion, and that therefore they were then
instantly to resolve upon the order, and the the means of her escape. Whereunto
le Plessis having replied, That that depended chiefly upon some man of Trust:
The Queen made answer again: That she had not one about her ( Chanteloube the
only man of all her domestics, to whom she had entrusted the secret of that
Affair, being dispatched away to the Princes, and Lords, which she either
conceived already were, or soon would be engaged in her Quarrel) in whom she
durst confide.

Whereupon, le Plessis conceiving there might be something of the humor of her
Sex, or Nation, in so general a distrust, of his own accord proposed to her the
Count de Brenne; who, he said, had sufficiently manifested his fidelity in
those Services he had already performed. A proposition the Queen did not seem
absolutely to reject, saying (which are her own very words), That 'twas true
she believed the Count to be a man of honor, but that notwithstanding she
thought him very young for the conduct of so important an Affair. Which scruple
being satisfied by le Plessis, undertaking to make him capable enough; and
seeing it was necessary to trust some one of the Queens domestics, he thought
a man of his condition, her Majesty's Gentleman of the Horse, and Brother to
the Marquis de Money, a most passionate Servant of hers, was the most proper of
all others to be made use of in this occasion. And accordingly, though it was
then very far in far in the night, went immediately to talk with him about it;
to whom (after he had felt his pulse a while, and found him very ready to
undertake any thing for her Majesty's Service ^ he at last declared the
resolution had been taken, to deliver the Queen Mother out of her captivity: a
design, that he told him was to be executed by a person of very great quality,
concealing however the Duke of Espernon's name) who had drawn great Forces
together in his Government, to favor her Majesty's retreat; and in conclusion,
that therefore he was the very next day to take order for Ladders, to get the
Coaches ready, and to lay in fresh Horses, with all the secrecy he in his own
discretion should think fit, to the end that the night following without
further delay her Majesty might be restored to her former Freedom. Not
forgetting withal to recommend to his consideration, what he might expect from
the gratitude of a Mistress, restored again to the whole sway of Affairs, her
due Authority, and Greatness; besides the honor he would infallibly acquire to
himself in so glorious an occasion.

The Count thus prepared and instructed, Preparation for the Q^eens escape.
accordingly made provision of all things necessary for the design; and le
Plessis himself remaining concealed in the Queens Cabinet (either to be, as it
were, a Hostage for his Master's fidelity, or to be present with his directions
in the execution of the design) sent Cadillac only back to the Archbishop of
Tholouze, to acquaint him with the Queens readiness, the night following to
make her escape. The Archbishop, who was to part from Confolans immediately
after le Plessis, had order to advance no further than Loches (that place being
designed for the Queens first reception) only to clear the Road in order
thereunto: but le Plessis by Cadillac entreated him to advance as far as
Montrichart, which was half way betwixt Blois and Loches; assuring him that the
Queen would infallibly come thither the night following, which happened to be the
22. of Feb. an exact month to a day after the Duke's departure from Metz.
Cadillac therefore posted with extraordinary diligence back again to Loches to
meet the Archbishop there; where being come, he found not only the Son, but the
Father also, entering together the Suburbs of the City. The reason of which was,
that though it had been at first resolved, the Son should go before with twenty
or thirty Gentlemen only, to make the less noise, and give the less suspicion;
yet could not the Duke his Father, when it came to'^, consent to let him go so
slenderly attended, where he apprehended the peril to be so manifest, and
great. He knew not, in the anxiety and doubt wherewith he was involved, what to
think of the Queens silence, of whom he had hitherto heard no news at all, to
which the rumor that was already spread abroad of his real design, having more
increased his apprehension, nature would not permit him to expose his Son to so
great an adventure, choosing much rather to run the whole hazard together with
him, than that he alone should tempt the danger, whilst himself lay idle and
secure.

Cadillac, The Duke of (...) hears from the Queen.
having discovered them at distance, spurred up to them, transported with joy of
the good news he brought; where he gave them a full relation of what had passed
betwixt the Queen, and himself, and of what he had in Commission from his
Master, together with her Majesty's readiness to depart, and the secrecy that
had hither to been preserved in the Queens Household: but he could give them no
account, why they had heard nothing from her Majesty at Confolans, she having
denied to le Plessis that Lorm^ had ever been with her, as it was too true; or
that she had ever heard ^ syllable from the Duke, since his departure from
Metz, which she said had put her into no little fear.

And here I cannot but wonder at the infirmities of men, and the ^isproportion
we may sometimes observe in the bravest and most heroic minds. The Duke of
Espernon had for six months together been continually projecting this design,
had foreseen all the accidents could happen, was come from Metz for no other
end, an^ had wished for nothing more than to see things at the pass they now
were: notwithstanding all which he was strangely astonished at this news, and
the immediate sight of the object representing to his imagination at once, what
^ he had only considered by particulars before, he seemed to stagger in his
resolution whether he should proceed any fu^ther or no in an Enterprise, the
last Act whereof could only crown all the rest, and secure him for what was
already done. He made Cadillac repeat above an hundred times in less than half
an hour, what the Queen, and what his Master had said, with what he had himself
observed: when suddenly, and of himself, grown generously resolute in his first
design, he commanded Cadillac to return immediately to le Plessis, and to
assure him, that the night following, the Archbishop his Son with fifty
Light Horse should infallibly be ready at Montrichart, and that the next day
after himself would follow with the rest of his party, to receive the Queen,
and to secure her retreat, should any thing upon the way be attempted against
her.

The end of the Seventh Book.
THE HISTORY Of the LIFE of the Duke of Espernon.
The Eighth Book.
IF the Duke had on his part been alarmed with these jealousies and mistrusts,
The Queen prepares for her escape.
the Queens Servants on the other side were in no less diffidence and fear.
These were upon this occasion reduced to a very contemptible number; wherein I
cannot but admire, that in so plentiful a fortune, as this Princess was
Mistress of (notwithstanding her disgrace) there was so little fidelity to be
found amongst her people, that she durst entrust the secret of this Affair to
but four of her domestics only. Of these the Count de Brenne was the chief,
the others were Mazure, and du Lion Exempts des Gardes are old Soldiers of the
Royal Guards, who as a recompense for their long Services are priviledg'd and
exempt from Duty, Taxes, and Imposts, common to the rest of the people.
Exempts of her Guards, and Katherine one of the women of her Chamber, an
Italian, and exceeding faithful. These being all strangers to le Plessis (and
the Duke of Espernon being not as yet declared undertaker of the Enterprise)
disputed very stiffly against her Majesty's resolution, as being very unwilling
to consent she should commit her safety to persons altogether unknown. The
debate whereof was very hot in the Queens Closet, whilst in the mean time her
Cabinets were packing up with her choicest Jewels, where though they could not
very well approve of the thing, yet had they not however neglected to fix the
Ladders; and Cadillac who had set out of Loches by eight of the clock that
evening, was got betwixt twelve and one, upon the Bridge of Blois, to give the
last blow to the design. He was here staid by the Count de Brenne's Gentleman
of his Horse, and one of the Queens Footmen, who had been to convey the Coach
out of Town, and who had orders to suffer one Currier only to pass; which,
though this were the man intended in that direction, yet would they not permit
him to pass upon his own word, but would themselves go along with him to the
Castle, though he had taken so exact observation before of the way from without
the City, to the Ladders that he served for a guide to those, who pretended to
conduct him. In the heat therefore of this diligence, he was not long e're he
recovered the first Ladder, by which having mounted the Terrass, he went to the
second, which from the Terrass lead up to the Queens Closet Window, by which
she was to come out. Being got up to the Window, which he found shut, he there
heard the noise the Queens Servants made in their Debate; who were not yet to
be persuaded out of the apprehensions they had conceived of her Majesty's
person, and safety. Which first fears had been infinitely augmented, by the
recovery of the Packet entrusted to Lorme, and retriv'd by le Buisson, which
the Queen had but that very night, and almost at the same instant received: by
which, though they were satisfied the treachery had failed of its effect, that
knowledge was nevertheless so far from making them secure, that on the contrary
it awaked their jealousy, and by rendering them more apprehensive of others
which they doubted might succeed, made them more circumspect than before:
Wherein though the Queen appea^'d the least surpised, yet did she not think it
as yet convenient to discover the person who was to assist her in this escape.
Whilst they were in this suspense, Cadillac knocked at the Window, who brought
news that would satisfy all their doubts. The Window was presently opened to
Floze his man (that being the phrase) who was no sooner within the Cabinet, but
that transported with joy, to see things so well prepared, he threw himself at
her Majesty's feet, telling her, that now all things were in as good a posture,
as her Majesty could her self desire; that Monsieur d' Espernon was at Loches,
Monsieur de Tholouze at Montrichart, and with them three hundred Gentlemen
ready to serve, and attend her Majesty, whithersoever she should be pleased to
go. This was the first time the Duke of Espernon had been mentioned in all this
Affair, whose name was no sooner heard by the Queens domestics, but that it
cleared them of their former apprehensions, no one after that once offering to
oppose their Mistrisses resolution. They making no doubt, but that a man whose
wisdom and power were so generally known, had taken order for all things
necessary for the Queens, and his own particular safety. Here then was a sudden
change of faces, not a person in the Cabinet, who discovered not alacrity and
satisfaction in their looks; especially the Queen, who without losing more
time, her self gathering up her Gown, that she might at better convenience get
out of the Window, The Queen goes out of the window of her Cab^^et.
gave the Count de Brenne her hand, who went out before her, her Majesty
following next, le Plessis the third, and after him all the rest. The Queen had
found so much difficulty, and trouble in this first descent, that she had no
mind to make use of the Ladder, to go down from the Platform into the street of
the Suburb, choosing rather (the earth being mouldred down in many places, by
reason the Terrass was not yet faced with stone) to sit upon a Cloak, which
being leisurely drawn down, conveyed her to the bottom with very great ease.
The rest, either by the same way, or by the Ladder suddenly followed, when the
Queen being immediately taken by the arms by the Count de Brenne, and le
Plessis. as they were leading her along the Suburbs, they chanced to meet some
of her own Officers; who seeing a woman led betwixt two without a Torch,
concluded her to be a Wench; which she hearing, said laughing to le Plessis,
They take me for a good one. Yet did not these encounters hinder them from
suddenly recovering the Bridge, where they were to take Coach; but being come
where they expected to find it, there was no Coach to be seen, nor any body
left to tell them which way 'twas gone. So that here they were in a new
disorder. The Queen knew not what to think of her people, nor le Plessis what
to imagine of the thing: they began to suspect one another, and (as it happens
in all dangerous occasions) every one was so intent upon their own particular
concern, that no one had reserved so much judgment as to advise what was best
to be done. In this general jealousy, and consternation, comes one of the
Queens Footmen, to guide them to the Coach; which they had conveyed into a
little blind lane out of the way, that it might not be taken notice of by such
as should have occasion to go over the Bridge. This fear then being then blown
over, all past jealousies and apprehensions now vanished, and were forgot. The
Queen put her self into the Coach, with the Count de Brenne, le Plessis, and
Katherine, the rest had all Horses ready to mount; the Queens Cabinets also
were all thrown into the Coach, one excepted, which by oversight was left upon
the place; but being missed, before they had gone two hundred paces, was sent
back for, and found; and it was worth the labor, having in it Jewels, to the
value of above an hundred thousand Crowns. And this was the last alarm. They
went out of the Suburbs, the Torches were lighted, and the Queen held on her
Journey toward Montrichart, without any further adventure worth repeating.

It has already been said, that the Archbishop of Tholouze had taken with him
fifty Gentlemen to advance as far as Montr^chart, to secure that little Town;
of which party Rucellay was one. They had over night possessed themselves of
the Gates, to be Masters of the Bridge, which affords passage over the River,
that almost environs the Town; neither were they ordered to stir from thence:
but le ^lessis, fearing the Queen should meet any accident, or receive any
fright by the way, dispatched again Cadillac in all diligence to the
Archbishop, to give him notice of her Majesty's coming; and withal to desire
him to send out twelve, or fifteen Gentlemen to meet her for her further
assurance: which was presently done, and Rucellay would needs command the
Troop, whilst the Archbishop staid behind to guard the Pass; which, should it
have been obstructed, would infallibly have overthrown the whole design.

Not long after Rucellay's departure, The Queen Mother is received by the Duke
of Espernon.
the Queen arrived at Montrichart, where she was complemented by the
Archbishop, and whence (staying no longer there, than fresh Horses could be put
into the Harness) she continued her Journey toward Loches, better attended
than hitherto she had been. About a League on this side the City, she was met
by the Duke of Espernon, with a hundred and fifty Horse (what Gentlemen, and
what of his own Guards) he having dismissed most of the Gentry, as not
necessary upon this occasion. At this meeting the Queen delivered the most
passionate expressions of Obligation, together with the largest promises of a
grateful return, a Princess of her condition could possibly make to a Servant
who had so highly merited from her; which the Duke having received with all
becoming respect, he was by the Queen commanded to come into the Coach; where
being seated, she began to tell him of Lorme's^ treachery, of which till this
instant he knew nothing; proceeding to acquaint him with greater liberty, than
by Letter before she durst do, with her designs; naming to him the persons she
conceived she had won over to her party, and giving him hopes of several things
which notwithstanding succeeded not according to her expectation.

The Queens escape had been carried with that secrecy, that not a soul in the
Castle had perceived it; so that it was far in the morning, when the domestics
appointed for the Service of her Majesty's person (seeing themselves not called
to their ordinary employments, and not knowing what to think of so profound a
sleep) resolved to venture into the Queens Chamber: Where being entered, and
not seeing the Queen, they looked for Katherine, who likewise was no where to
be found. Every one therefore being amazed at so strange a Solitude, they
sought, and called, but all in vain: neither could they imagine which way they
could be gone; the Ladders, by which the Queen had gone down, having been
thrown into the River, the better to conceal the manner of her escape. At last
having been some time in suspense, they had some news of the Queens motion,
which begot a new astonishment amongst them, though proceeding from several
motives. The most faithful and affectionate were glad she had recovered her
liberty; whereas those who had been corrupted by the Favorite (which were very
many) fearing on the one side they should stand suspected at Court, to have
been assisting to the Queen in her design, and on the other, lest her Majesty
(well informed of their infidelity) should punish the^ according to their
desert, knew not which way to turn, nor what to do. Whilst they were in this
confusion, her Majesty writ to the Marquise de Guercheville her Lady of Honor,
to let her and the rest of her women know of her arrival at Loches; The Queen
Mother arrives at L^ches.
where she would stay two days to expect them, and where both they, and her
other Servants, who had a mind to come to her should be welcome, excepting five
and forty, or fifty which (as suspected to her) she gave order should be turned
away; withal that such as could not come time enough to Loches, might find her
at Angoulesme, whither she was designed to go.

The Queen no sooner saw her self at full liberty, but that she began to
meditate of the means to defend her self from the Favourite's persecution,
which in all probability was likely to be violent enough; The Queen begins to
fall to her business, and in the first place endeavors to justify her escape.
as also to give the Duke the best color she could, to justify what he had
done. To this purpose therefore she delivered him the original of the Letter
the King had sent her under his own hand; whereby she was permitted to go
whither she would, into any part of the Kingdom: Which Letter she also
accompanied with another from her self to the Duke, a few days antidated, and
after the time of his arrival at Confolans; wherein she entreated his
assistance in the prosecution of her design. By which means the Duke was
cleared of the imputation the Court laid to his charge, that he had taken away
the Queen by force, and against her will; which had been a crime as well
toward the Mother, as the Son. The two Letters were these. The King's Letter
to the Queen under his own hand.
Madam,
Having understood you have an intention to visit some Religious places, I am
infinitely satisfied with the news, and shall be much more, if for the future
you would resolve to stir, and travel more abroad, than hitherto you have done;
as I conceive it may conduce much to your health, which is exceeding dear unto
me. If my Affairs would permit, I would with all my heart accompany you in my
own person, as I shall do with my Letters to the places where you go; to the
end you may be received, respected, and honored equally to my self, who am,
more than can be expressed,

Madam, Your most humble, and obedient Son Lovis.
From Paris this last of October 1618.

The Queen Mothers Letter to the Duke of Espernon, delivered to him with the
former.
Cousin,
I stand obliged to represent to the King my Son, the general Discontents of
his people at the ill management of his Affairs, and the troubles, which by
reason of his Nobilities being absent from him, I apprehend will ensue, to the
prejudice of his Crown and Kingdom. A duty, which as all good men inform me it
is particularly mine, I resolve to perform, though I were certain to lose
thereby that little remains to me both of liberty, and life. Both which you may
secure by permitting me to this effect to retire my self first to Loches, and
then to Angoulesme, and by assisting me in my way with your company, and
advice: wherein if neither the necessity, nor the justice of my intentions can
prevail upon you; yet the reading this enclosed from the King my Son ought to
do it: by which you will see he permits me to to travel whither I think fit,
expressing a desire that his Subjects should, in all places where I go, pay me
all honor, and respect equal to his own person: though I intend to make no
other use of it, than what shall be consistent with the good of his own
Service. Which, being performed, I do promise, and protest unto you, that when
his own good nature shall be as free, as my word is now, he himself shall thank
you for the assistance you have given me in an occasion so important to him,
and his own particular Affairs. The rest I will commit to the fidelity of this
bearer, that is, as to the time and manner of my removal, wherein I conjure you
not to fail: without nevertheless enjoining you, either secrefie, or care,
which your own wisdom will inform you to be very requisite: Only I shall tell
you, that by this you will eternally oblige me to you and yours. So praying God
to inspire you with this good deliberation, and to give you all the
satisfaction I desire. I rest,

Your very good Cousin, Marie.
From Blois the 14. of February, 1619.



This Letter of Rucellay's style (who now (although a stranger) undertook
nevertheless to serve the Queen in the nature of a Secretary) being dispatched,
it was necessary they should think also of writing to the King, to give his
Majesty notice of the Queens removal, and of the design she had to retire her
self to Angoulesme: In which Letter she represented, The Queen Mothers Letter
to King.
The ill usage she had for some time suffered at Blois, doubtless without his
Majesty's intention; but through the sole Tyranny of some about his person, who
exercised no less Authority over his Majesty's own Royal disposition; whose
insolence, and cruelty descending from her upon most of the great men of the
Nation, she had very great reason to fear, that so many men of quality being
discontented, and those discontents concurring with the dissatisfaction of the
people, oppressed by all sorts of violence, would, in the end, be the ruin of
his Kingdom. That therefore she had put her self into liberty, that she might
at greater convenience represent to his Majesty matters of so high importance
to him, and his Affairs; and had chosen to retire her self into the Duke of
Espernon's Governments, by so much the rather, by how much his fidelity, and
good affection to the Crown, had never suffered the least dispute: That the
late King her Lord, and Husband, out of the testimonies he had received of his
Virtue, and Integrity, had, but a few days before his death, advised her to
repose her confidence in him, above all other great Ministers of the Kingdom,
and that therefore she conceived she could not err in following the advice of
so mighty a Prince, and in committing her self to the conduct of so faithful a
Servant.

From Loches the 25th. of Feb. 1619.



The King had no sooner received this Letter, but that the Favorites began to
study an answer; which, though it were in show respective enough to the Queen,
The King's answer to the Queen Mother.
was yet full of threats toward the Duke. Wherein after his Majesty had
expressed to the Queen his astonishment at the violence the Duke of Espernon
had committed upon her person, he went on with great heat to declare: That of
all others he could never have suspected an offense of that nature, believing
there had not been that man in the world, who, in a profound and inviolate
peace, had had the impudence (which were the express terms of the Letter) not
only to execute, but even to meditate a resolution to attempt upon the liberty
of the Mother of his King. From whence his Majesty proceeding to menaces of the
most severe, and exemplary punishment, he in the end justified those about his
person from the ill usage whereof she complained; as having been done by his
own order, and that with as much favor and respect as any Son of a much
inferior Birth, could pay to a Mother: declaring withal, that he was resolved
to take Arms, thereby to put her in full possession of that liberty, her
enemies had taken from her; and to cause the honor, and respect to be paid her
which was due to her person. The rest was committed to the Count de Bethune,
The Count de Bethune sent to the Queen to tre^t with her.
who was sent away with this dispatch, and who was to reside with the Queen to
treat with her about an Accommodation; a Treaty his Majesty immediately set on
foot, not thinking it fit, till that way had first been tried, to commence a
War, wherein the Queen his Mother would be head of the adverse party: A respect
that did not long continue.

Whilst Bethune with this Commission took the way to Angoulesme, the Queen
Mother, who departed from Loches the same day that she sent her Letter to
Court, The Queen prepares for a War.
was there arrived. It was upon the first of March, 1619. that she entered the
City; where she was no sooner come, but that she dispatched away to all parts,
to dispose those who had promised to engage in her quarrel, to declare now in
her favor. Most of the Grandees of the Kingdom were at this time retired from
Court, and almost all dissatisfied with the present Government; yet whether it
were (as I have said) that seeing the Duke of Espernon had already so engrossed
the entire honor of the Action, they could not in reason expect to share with
him, who had alone executed the most glorious, and dangerous part of the
design; The whole burden whereof falls upon the Duke of ^spernon.
or that they had been taken off by the Favorites promises (who in this
juncture had not neglected to prevent the effect of their discontents) however
it was, they were glad to do their own work at the Duke's expense, and as they
had had no hand in the action, would not in the least appear in the Queens
behalf.

The Duke of Espernon therefore* with such Friends, and Servants as he had,
must alone stand the brunt of the Royal Arms, and undergo the utmost effect of
his Majesty's indignation. The Queen it is true granted out several Commissions,
and disburst some money, not considerable, for Leavies; all which, though it
signified little to the work, yet had she betwixt five and six thousand foot,
and betwixt eight and nine hundred Horse, that were raised in the Duke's
Governments by his own interest. He had from the beginning of the Queens
Regency made provision of Arms for ten thousand Foot, and six hundred Horse,
which were now taken out, and of so great use, that could the Friends he had in
Guienne have assisted him according to their affections, he had upon his own
account raised a very considerable Army: But the Duke of Mayenne, who was
Governor of that Province, having in this occasion been prepossessed by the
Favorite, (by whom the command of the Army that was to go against the Queen,
was conferred upon him) it was not likely he should suffer those Troops to go
out of his Government, which were to be employed against him; yet did not the
Duke fail however of a very considerable succor from thence; so great an
affection, and esteem they had for him in that Country: the Marquis de
Montferrant, and Foncaude Brothers, the Count de Calonges, and some other
Gentlemen of quality, all considerations laid apart, exposing themselves freely
to the persecutions of the Court, and the displeasure of a powerful Governor,
to pay that duty they owed, and had sworn to the Duke of Espernon, though
having opportunity to draw away their men by Files only, and that with great
difficulty and danger, they could not serve him so effectually as they desired.

Is the Queen found her self thus weak in the place where she was in person,
her party was in no better a condition in other parts of the Kingdom. The Duke
of Bouillon himself, of whom the Marquis de la Valette thought himself secure,
refu^ing so much, as to declare for the Queen, who having long expected what
the first success of Arms, and the issue of the Queens Declarations would be,
and seeing neither the one, nor the other (which novelty often renders
vigorous, and considerable) had produced any signal effect; he was content to
sit neuter and to attend the event: by whose example, some other persons of
condition, who had engaged to take Arms in Champagne, ^icardie, and the
neighboring Provinces, and that had been made to believe the Duke of Bouillon
would head them, refused likewise to stir, all the most zealous, and
affectionate to the Queens Service could do, being to come in in their own
persons, which signified no great matter. Of which number were the Marquis de
Money, Breaute, Bourbonne, Bethancourt, and some others. The Marquis de Themines
came in also of another side, though the Marshall his Father was on the
contrary party; but it was only to command the Queens Guards, of which he was
Captain; so that in effect the whole weight of the business lay still upon the
Duke of Espernon.

The Favorites were in a far better condition, The Favorites powerfully arm
themselves.
who after they had on all sides prepossessed the minds of the great ones, and
perverted the inclinations they might have had in favor of the Queen Mother,
had powerfully armed themselves, rather indeed against the Duke than her. The
Duke of Mayenne was in the head of ten thousand Foot, and twelve hundred Horse
(for the most part, old Soldiers) ready to enter into Angoumois. The Count de
Schomberg, the Kings Lieutenant under the Duke in Limousin, had received order
to make Leavies, to impede those the Duke was making in that Country; which
having done, he soon employed them in an Enterprise of greater noise, than
moment, though very disadvantageous to the Queens Interest. The Abbey d'
Vzerche in Limousin stood for the Queen, where some of her party had fortified
themselves; and the Count de Schomberg sat down before it; whereof the Duke of
Espernon having intelligence, he went in all haste to relieve them. His
diligence herein was notwithstanding fruitless, for the playing of a A fire
Engine covered with Leather like unto, but much bigger than a
Salsisse having put them out of all possible defense, they were forced to
surrender before he came. Neither was the place any thing considerable, though,
in the beginning of a War the first successes being of great importance, the
Duke would willingly have prevented this disaster; which, seeing he could not
come time enough to do, he set himself to repair that little loss, by some
signal advantage, The Duke of Mayenne enters with his Army into Angoum^is.
he might with great facility have obtained over the Count, when he received
intelligence from the Queen, of the Duke of Mayenne's being entered with his
Army into Angoumois. Which Army, though it was indeed a good one, and the
coming of it very well foreseen; yet its greatness being made more formidable
by report, it is not imagined to what a degree the Queen, and those about her
were terrified with its approach. The Duke had taken along with him for this
expedition of Limousin but very few Forces; but the life and soul of the Queens
party consisting in his person, and experience, her Majesty dispatched away to
him Post after Post, with so much importunity, that he was in the end
constrained to quit all his designs in Limousin, to return back to Angoulesme.

Before the Duke's return, the Archbishop of Tholouze, his Son, who had staid
behind to command those Forces, had been left with the Queen, having
intelligence of the Duke of Mayenne's motion toward Cognac, was jealous he
might attempt something upon that little Town, the situation whereof rendered it
very considerable, there being a stone Bridge over the River Charente: though
otherwise very weak in it self, and without any fortification at all. All which
notwithstanding the Archbishop, with two thousand men, went, and put himself
into it with a resolution either to preserve it, or dye. So that the Duke of
Mayenne, advancing to view it, was entertained with so brisk a charge, that he
had no hope of doing any good upon men so well prepared for their defense. Not
therefore to waste time to no purpose, he went on, and took up his quarters at
Chasteu-Neuf within three Leagues of Angoulesme; where the Duke of Espernon
being now returned, presented himself, and his Forces, to oppose him; so
disposing them into places of most advantage, that the Duke of Mayenne could
make no further progress into the Country: He made indeed some light
Skirmishes, but such as won no great reputation to the one side, or the other,
whilst the Peace was in Treating by the Count de Bethune.

It was doubtless by no ordinary conduct, that the Duke of Espernon, with so
few Forces as he had about him kept so considerable an Army as the King's in
play, and to manage the several sorts of people he had with him, with that
dexterity as to keep them from Mutiny, and Disorder: Such as have been engaged
in parties where the Royal Name has been opposed against them, and who have
commanded men, who have had no less to apprehend from the Sword of Justice,
than from those of the Enemy, will easily conceive, the Duke had never greater
use of his Prudence, and Valor, than upon this occasion; it being certain,
that had his Authority susser'd by the least accident of that kind, he had
infallibly been deserted by the greatest part, and consequently exposed to his
enemies discretion.

If the King's Forces were thus powerful in Angoumois against the Duke, The
Duke of Nevers with a great Army against the M^rquis de la Valette at Metz.
they were every whit as considerable in the Messin Country, against the
Marquis de la Valette. The Duke of Nevers had there an Army, nothing inferior
to that of the Duke of Mayenne; to which outward Force he had also added secret
practices within the City, and the Inhabitants whose affections were warped
with the fortune of the Duke's Family (which every one believed to be so
depressed, as never to rise again) were not the least part of the enemies
power. In which extremity (which could hardly be greater) the Marquis de la
Valette having reinforced his Garrison, The Marquis de la Valette defends Metz,
which was faithful to him, with some Leavies that came to him out of Lorraine
(where he found very good Friends) he so secured the place, that the Duke of
Nevers from that time forwards lost all hopes of doing any good upon it.

It is not to be believed what good effects the conservation of Metz, And by
that preserves the whole Party.
by the vigilance and bravery of the Marquis de la Valette, produced to the
advantage of the Queen Mothers Affairs, which was no sooner perceived
impossible to be taken from the Duke, but that they began to think it unsafe to
urge him to the last necessity, lest an extreme despair might prompt him to
desperate resolutions; The Peace concluded.
so that the Court began now to be more facile, and flexible to the conclusion
of a Peace; the resolution whereof had hitherto been so highly debated, and in
so great suspense.

The Treaty of this Peace received, it may be imagined, many difficulties, and
delays, when the Count de Bethune, having opened the first proposals in the
beginning of March, things were not fully concluded at the end of May. He had
with his Commission received express instructions, by all means if possible to
persuade the Queen Mother to exclude the Duke of Espernon from the Articles of
that Accommodation, with power, that being granted, to promise her all the
satisfaction she could her self desire; wherein I have often heard the Duke
highly commend not only the Queens constancy, The Queen Mothers generous
proceeding, as also the Count de Bethune's.
who would never hearken to that proposition, but the Count de Bethune's
generosity also, who being himself a man of great worth, and honor, could
never countenance so unhandsome an advice. But what one of the King's
Ministers, commanded, and authorized by him, and importuned by the Duke's
enemies, was ashamed to insist upon, was nevertheless with great eagerness
pursued by a person he had very highly obliged. It is of Rucellay I speak, who
ambitious, and puffed up with a vain opinion of himself, and the Services he had
performed for the Queen, was impatient, that any one should rival him in the
Queens favor, or take the freedom to oppose his Counsels: And it will be
imagined by such as have considered the former passages of the Duke's life, he
was not of an humor to be justled, either in the one, or the other by a man
upon all accounts so inferior to him. This disparity therefore both in their
persons, and judgments, which at first begot a coldness only in the Duke (who
was very unwilling (having loved, and esteemed Rucellay at a very particular
rate) to withdraw his friendship totally from him) proceeded at last (as it
commonly falls out in such cases) to a final and absolute rupture betwixt them.
It was at this time, and upon this occasion, that I withdrew my self from
Rucellay. Le Plessis, thereunto moved by the old affection he had born my
Father, had taken me from my studies, to place me with this man, in hopes that
one time or another I might by his favor be introduced into the Queens Family;
A breach betwixt the Duke and Rucellay.
but finding that after this breach I was become suspected to him, and that he
looked upon me, as one of the Duke's creatures, for having only been born in
his Government, and recommended to him by one of his domestics, I acquainted
le Plessis with my discontent, and the desire I had to withdraw my self from
his Service; who approving my resolution, and speaking of me to the Duke, he
was thereupon pleased to receive me into his dependence, from whom I never
after parted till his death; nothing but that inevitable necessity having the
power to separate me from him, which was not however till after three and
twenty years, without intermission, I had the honor to live in his Service. I
shall therefore henceforward be able to speak more regularly, than hitherto I
have done, of the Duke, and his Affairs, as having been an eyewitness of the
rest; though I can almost with the same certainty aver the truth of what I have
already delivered, the testimony of so many famous Authors, and what I received
from persons of great repute, now living, who have been assisting to me in this
undertaking, having no less authority with me, than what I have seen with my
own eyes, and collected out of my own observation.

The Duke was informed by the Queen Mother her self of the importunity
wherewith Rucellay had pressed her to seize upon the Castle of Angoulesme,
demonstrating to her at the same time with how great facility it might be
effected. Her Majesty went sometimes to walk in the Park belonging to the
Castle, where being admitted, as she ever was, without the least scruple, or
distrust, she might, he said, without the least opposition, thrust out the
Baron d' Anton, the Duke's Nephew, and under his Authority Governor of the
place; which being done, she would, he told her, be Mistress of the Duke's
Fortune; whereas one might now (with much more reason, than at Blois) declare
her a Prisoner, being as she was at the discretion of her Vassal: Endeavoring
moreover to render the Duke odious to her, by making his free humor, and some
complaints (the nonperformance of some things, had been promised by the Queen,
had perhaps extorted from him) appear like affronts, and indignities to her
Person, and Honor. But the Queen (as has been said) nobly rejecting so
unhandsome a proposition, her self gave the first intimation of it to the Duke;
who incensed, as he had just cause, at a practice so foul, and an advice so
pernicious to his Affairs, from that time forwards forbore any more, either to
speak to, or to treat with Rucellay; though he could by no means consent his
Servants, and particularly Marsillac the Captain of his Guard, should revenge
the injury by any outrage upon Rucellay's person, which he absolutely, and
expressly forbad, as to my knowledge it was high time.

In the heat of these disorders in the Queens Court, The Bishop of Lucon since
Cardinal de Richelie^ comes to Ang^ulesme.
and in the greatest difficulty of Affairs, the Bishop of Lucon, afterward
Cardinal Richelieu, came to Angoulesme; neither could he possibly have arrived
in a better time for himself: The Queen Mother was grown weary of Rucellay's
violent Counsels, and was moreover dissatisfied with some undecent liberties he
had taken in her presence; to which the Duke of Espernon was also highly
animated against him, desiring nothing more, than his removal, or at least some
notable disgrace; and to all this the Treaty of Accommodation was then upon the
point to be concluded; so that the Bishop of Lucon coming at so opportune a
season, could not fail of thanks on all sides, both from the King, and Queen,
how little soever he contributed to the work, and in the mean time of being
infallibly well received at the Queen Mothers Court. Which in my opinion was a
pretty criticisme in his good fortune, and from whence he, in the revolution of
time, derived all those other advantages, that preferred him at last to that
^eight of greatness, to which he afterward arrived. At his coming he first
alighted at the Duke's lodgings, protesting he would not enter the City, 'till
he were first satisfied, whether, or no, it stood with his good liking; and
afterward entreating he would please to give him leave to make his first
Addresses to the Queen in his Company. He was by the Duke (for ^ my self was
present at their meeting) received with the greatest freedom, and friendship,
he could possibly expect or desire; and soon after they went together to the
Queens Lodgings, where her Majesty was at that time persuaded by the Duke to
give him her Seal, which 'till then she had entrusted to none, and to admit him
the first in her Council, which accordingly was the next day performed.

Rucellay nettled to the quick, The reason of Rucellay's retiring from
A^goulesme.
that a new comer should in one day be possessed of what he could not by so
many signal Services obtain, and impatient, that he at so great ease should
reap the fruits of all his care and pains, from that time forwards began to
think of retiring himself from the Queens Court, to go put himself into the
King's. Yet was it not without highly complaining of the ill usage he had
received; nor perhaps without repenting his carriage toward the Duke, who had
been his very good friend, so long as he behaved himself civilly to him. A
resolution that being known to the Queen (however her self at that time in
great distress for money) she sent to present him with thirty thousand Crowns,
as an acknowledgement of the pains he had taken in her behalf; though he
seeming to be more offended at that than all the rest, that the Queen should
think any one could set a price upon his Services, scornfully refused it, and
went to put himself into the Duke de Luines his protection; where he was by
that Favorite at first received with great civility and respect, and
afterward into a very eminent degree of favor, and trust, both as to private,
and public Affairs. The Marquis de Money, Rucellay's intimate friend, had some
days before preceded him in this defection; the occasion of whose discontent
was, that he had not obtained the Government of Angers, which had been granted
to the Bishop of Lucon, for his Brother Richelieu Camp-Master to the Regiment
of Piedmont, at the Duke's Recommendation, who was as solicitous of all the
interests of that Family, as his own.

The departure of these two Gentlemen, Several ^^orders in the Queen Mothers
Court.
both of them of so great consideration in the Queen Mother's Court, soon begot
very great disorders there; which (as his profession more exposed him to his
enemies revenge, than that of the Bishop his Brother did him) fell wholly at
last upon Richelieu. The Marquis de Themines, a very intimate friend of
Rucellay's (though as ill satisfied as the rest) could not however leave the
Queens Court, as being tied there by the obligation of his Command: A
consideration that forcing him to continue there, he would nevertheless let his
absent friend see, how much he interested himself in his disgrace, by
quarrelling with those he conceived had most contributed to it: Wherein his
malice must of necessity be directed against the Bishop of Lucon, and those of
his party. Neither did the excessive favors they all received from the Queen,
a little add to the jealousy, and envy of her other Domestics, and Servants,
they having alone obtained all the Governments of Anjou, granted to the Queen
in this Accommodation; neither indeed was any thing granted, but to them, or at
their request, who alone absolutely disposed of all Affairs. Themines
therefore, having resolved to take upon himself the revenge of all the rest,
took occasion to require an explanation from Richelieu of some things, of very
little moment, which in the heat of the Debate (as it commonly falls out) grew
at last to an absolute quarrel betwixt them: Wherein having several times been
prevented from fighting, sometimes by the friends of the one party, and
sometimes of the other, one day the Marquis de Themines mounted upon a little
pad Nag met Richelieu in the open street; whereupon alighting from his Horse,
they talked together, but not long before their Swords were out; when the
Marquis stooping to get under Richelieu's Sword, which was longer than his,
received a thrust, which running all along his back, ripped up the skin only;
whilst at the same time he ran Richelieu quite through the heart, Richelieu
slain by the Marquis de Themines.
who fell stone dead upon the place, without being able to utter one word. I
happened (amongst some others) accidentally to be a spectator of this Duel; by
which unfortunace thrust, how many future Offices and Commands were made
vacant? and what might not this unhappy man have pretended to, and expected
from the infinite power of a Brother, so affectionate to him, had he lived to
see him in that height of greatness to which he afterward arrived?

Some days before this accident the Peace had been concluded to both their
Majesty's mutual satisfaction; The conditions of the Peace.
wherein the Queen (as has been said) had granted to her the Government of
Anjou, with the Castles of Angers, Chinon, Pont de Ce, with the other places of
that Province, being promised withal that she should see the King (as she did)
and from his Majesty's own mouth be assured, that when ever she pleased, she
might go to Court. As for the Duke of Espernon, after having received a
ratification from the Queen of those Services he had done for her, he at last
sued out his Pardon from the King, the only Pardon he ever stood in need of in
all his life; as having never (excepting here in the Queen Mothers quarrel) had
a hand in any commotion whatsoever. Both he and the Marquis his Son were
restored to all their Estates, Offices, and Honors, in the same condition they
were before the War, one thing only excepted which he could by no means obtain,
and that was the Citadel of Xaintes; which, that it might not be put into an
enemies hand, he was forced to consent it should be demolished.

During the time of this Treaty, the Council had generally been held in the
Duke's Lodgings, where the Bishop of Lucon was ever very diligent: he came
continually to the Duke's Table, waiting very often in the Parlour, and in his
Bedchamber, his vacancies, and leisure, an as^iduity, and respect that
promised for the future, an inviolate love and friendship; the Duke also on his
part was infinitely obliging to him, espousing all his Interests, and declaring
himself upon all occasions, highly partial, and affectionate to him:
notwithstanding all which, we shall in time see so strange an alteration in
them both, and so antartick to those good dispositions betwixt them, as will
sufficiently inform us* how little dependence there is upon the humors of men,
when an inconsiderate passion, a little interest, or (which is more light than
either) a mere jealousy, has power in a moment to overthrow the greatest and
most inviolate friendship.

Whilst this Treaty was in agitation, there happened yet another untoward
accident, though no great matter was made of it, and that was this. A little
before the conclusion of the Treaty, A conspiracy against the Queen Mother at
Angoulesme discovered.
a Powder-maker of Limousin came, and made an offer of his person to such, as
he very well knew were enemies both to the Queen, and the Duke of Espernon,
undertaking to insinuate himself into the Castle of Angoulesme, and to fire the
Powder in the Magazine; the quantity whereof was so great, as must infallibly
have blown up the whole Town, with the Castle, and have reduced them both to
ashes: Which fellow, though taken in the manner, and upon the point to execute
his cursed determination, had nevertheless no greater punishment for his crime,
than bare imprisonment, and that of a few days only, the Queen, it should seem,
desiring no other satisfaction, than that of having escaped the danger, nor
permitting he should so much as be put to the viz. The Wrack.
Question, that she might not be obliged to an animosity against those who had
either suggested to him the thought, or encouraged him in the execution of so
damnable a design: So that the Treaty received no interruption by this
practice, Bethune by his dexterity, and prudence, bringing it in the end to a
happy conclusion. All things therefore being resolved upon, the King (desiring
that those assurances, had been given to the Queen his Mother by his Agent,
should be further confirmed to her by some person of eminent condition and
Authority, sent to her on his behalf) dispatched away the Cardinal de la
Rochefoucault, whom he knew to be a man of great conduct, and exceedingly
acceptable to her.

The Duke, beginning from this time forward to live after the rate of a man
reconciled to his Prince, would do all the Honor he could to his Ministers;
and therefore treated the Cardinal, and Bethune with a magnificence that tasted
nothing of the incommodities of the late War: The Duke de Luines also desirous
to regain the Queens favor, The Queen Mother complemen^ed from Court. And the
Duke of Espernon.
and to satisfy her that he intended for the future really to become her
Servant, sent to her Brantes his younger Brother, and since Duke of Luxembourg,
to assure her thereof; by whom he also sent very civil, and obliging Letters to
the Duke of Espernon: to which the Marriage that was celebrated at this time
betwixt the Prince of Piedmont since Duke of Savoy, and Madam Christina of
France, having given this Prince, together with Prince Thomas his Brother,
accasion also to come pay their respects to the Queen; her Court seemed, in
that little place, little inferior to the Kings at Paris. The change of her
fortune invited moreover every day new Servants over to her, every one now
appearing as zealous to obtain her favor, as they had before been shie, and
cold in embracing her interest, and engaging in her quarrel. Upon which
occasion the Duke of Espernon, though very much incommodated with the expense
of this War (maintained almost throughout at his cost, and by his interest)
endeavored nevertheless all he could to turn the best side outward, pouring
out himself in so many magnificences, The Duke of Espernon's magnificence.
as perhaps he never had, in his most flourishing condition, so fair an
opportunity of showing the greatness of his mind, and fortune. After having
lodged the Princes of Savoy in the Palace belonging to the Bishop of
Angoulesme, furnished throughout with his own rich Hangings, embossed with
Silver and Gold, he entertained them with the pleasure of hunting a Stag,
presenting them with two very beautiful Coursers, he had supplied them with for
that Chase. After which he treated them three several times with so much
splendor, and magnificence, that it could hardly have been greater at Paris.
The Tables which were forty times covered, were at every covering served with
five several Courses; neither was the profusion less at the entertainment of
the Cardinal de la Rochefoucault, and Brantes, wherein if the excess made the
Duke's liberality highly esteemed, it gave no less reputation to that little
Country, which could of it self furnish all sorts of provision in so great
abundance.

It was not by the Cardinal de la Rochefoucault alone that the Queen Mother was
complemented from the King, and assured of his good inclinations, and affection
to her; Luines who had a desire so soon as was possible to allure her from
Angoulesme, sending moreover thither le Pere Berulle, at that time General of
the Congregation of the Oratory, and since Cardinal, to settle her mind in a
full confidence, and security. This Father, a man of great Virtue, and no less
Capacity, was very acceptable to the Queen, and in no less esteem with the
Duke; to whom he had another quality of it self sufficient to commend him,
which was his near relation to President Seguier, the Duke's most intimate
friend. After this person had disposed the Queen, so soon as she could, to come
to the King, he afterward treated at great liberty, and freedom with the Duke
in the behalf of the Favorite, from whom he delivered him other Letters full
of affectionate expressions; promising him withal in his name all sorts of good
Offices, and Service; to which the Duke having answered with the same civility,
the Queen was in all appearance likely to be very secure, and the Duke very well
used for the time to come, whose discontents, as they had been the occasion of
the War, their satisfaction ought in all probability to have settled the Peace
of the Kingdom; though notwithstanding this fair outside of Affairs we shall
see things fall out quite contrary in the ensuing year.

But to go on with the Subject in hand, The Duke of Espernon sends a dispatch
to the King by the Archbishop of Tholouze.
the Duke, seeing all things now perfectly reconciled, conceived it very fit
for him to write to the King, to excuse what was passed; which he accordingly
did, and indeed in terms of very great submission, and respect, though
nevertheless far from any meanness, or so much as any acknowledgment of the
least offense: Wherein he represented to his Majesty, that having obeyed the
Queen his Mother, whom he had ever known passionately solicitous of the
Kingdoms prosperity, he never so much as imagined, that the reverence he should
pay to a person so nearly related to him could be reputed for a Crime: That
although in the very act of taking Arms (to which he found himself obliged by
an inevitable necessity) he might possibly have given his Majesty some
distaste, he nevertheless conceived he had by his behavior therein so amply
justified his good intention, that no impression ought to remain in his Royal
Breast, but what should be to his advantage: That he could confidently say,
that without so much as ever reflecting upon his own grievances, and disgrace,
he had governed his passion from resolutions that might evidently enough have
succeeded; wherein he had sufficiently manifested the Reverence he bore to his
Majesty's Name, and Arms, though in the hands of his own particular enemies:
That he called all good Frenchmen to the test, whether ever his own interest,
or animosity had transported him to any action contrary to his duty; and
whether he had not ever preserved his fidelity unspotted, and pure, during all
the disorders of this Kingdom: That he had now remaining but a short time to
live, and that he should himself conclude he had already lived too long, could
he find himself guilty of the least thought contrary to his Majesty's Service,
and his own Duty: That his Conscience being clear in that particular, he
demanded no other recompense for his Services passed, than only a little repose
in his old age; expecting an occasion wherein he might honorably dye for his
Majesty's Service: which was the conclusion of his Letter. Dated at Angoulesme
the 7th. of June, 1619. The Archbishop of Tholouze his Son was dismissed away
with this dispatch, who had also another Letter for the Duke de Luines, in
answer to those the Duke had received before.

The Queen in the mean time was preparing for her departure, but her equipage
being not to be made ready so soon as was desired at Court, where she was with
great impatience expected, the Duke de Monbazon, Father-in-law to Luines, had
yet time to come kiss her Majesty's hands, which was nevertheless, by giving
her new and greater assurances of all the good usage she could desire, to press
her with the soonest to part from Angoulesme, The Queen Mother departs from
Angoulesme to go toward the King.
and to separate her self from the Duke. In the beginning of August therefore,
according to the Favorites desire, she departed from Angoulesme; in which
Voyage the Duke only attended her to the borders of his own Government, not
caring to engage himself nearer to a Court, to which he was so lately
reconciled; where the Queen at his taking leave, after many gracious
expressions of the infinite obligation she had to him, The Queens parting with
the Duke, her complements, and Present.
presented him with a Ring of very great value; together with a request that he
would continually wear it for her sake, as he did almost to his death: This
Ring was a Diamond cut into a heart, and is at this day reputed one of the
finest and cleanest for its size in France; and this was all the Recompense he
received for his Service he had done the Queen, and for above two hundred
thousand Crowns he was out of purse upon that account, which nevertheless was
more than he expected in the condition she then was; having proposed to himself
in the undertaking no other acknowledgment, and reward, than the honor to
serve her effectually, and well upon this occasion.

The Queen after her departure from Angoumois, arrived in a few days at
Cousieres in Touraine, a house belonging to the Duke of Monbazon; where Luines
(accompanied (like a Favorite) with many persons of very great quality) came
first to wait upon her, complementing her with the greatest civility, and
respect imaginable, as he was also very graciously received. And here the
Queen, who had no mind to be kept any longer at a distance from the King her
Son, endeavored with Luines (and that with all the insinuation, and artifice
her haughty and imperious nature would permit) to remove those difficulties,
which, as they had been the causes of their former separation, were most likely
to oppose their concurrence now. The next day after her arrival, The King and
Queen Mother come to an enterview.
the King with all his Royal household came also to Cousieres, where at their
first enterview there was nothing but mutual manifestations of great affection,
and tenderness on both sides: from whence their Majesty's went the same day to
Tours, where for some days they continued together; but in the end, after all
this dissembled kindness, the King returning toward Paris, left the Queen more
dissatisfied to see her self obliged to go to Angers, after so many assurances
that had been given her she should no more depart from Court, From whence she
departs dissatisfied.
than she had been before pleased with these demonstrations of Honor and
Respect, wherewith they had endeavored to deceive her credulity, and to
flatter her sincere intention.

From thenceforward therefore she so far resented L^ines his ill usage, The
Queen Mother disposed to a new War.
as to meditate a revenge, and how by a second War to procure, what by this
first Peace, she saw, she could not obtain; neither was the Bishop of Lucon
(become now absolute with her) sorry to see her so disposed: He considered,
that whilst his Mistress remained thus excluded from Court, her power being so
small, his could not consequently be very great; a consideration that made this
aspiring spirit, who already had proposed to himself no less than the
Government of the Kingdom, suffer, if possible, with greater impatience, than
the Queen her self, those obstacles that he saw were opposed to the level of
his haughty Ambition, and vast designs.

Animated therefore with these reflections, he began to labor a good
intelligence betwixt such, as he knew were dissatisfied with the present
Government, to reunite them in the Queens Interest, as discontented as they:
Neither was it any hard matter to win many over to her side, the happy issue
the Duke of Espernon had single, and alone, procured to this Princesses
Affairs, having got him so great a reputation, that the major part of the great
ones of the Kingdom made no great difficulty of engaging in a cause, they had
seen so easily, and by so little means to succeed. Of this number was the Count
de Soissons, and the Countess his Mother, the Dukes of Longueville, and
Vandosme, the Grand Prior of France, the Dukes of Mayenne, and Retz, with many
other Princes, and Lords of very eminent condition. Had the Duke of Espernon
not been concerned in the first business, he could never have been drawn into
this; so many confederates of almost equal quality, giving him to apprehend
more from their ill intelligence betwixt one another, than he could reasonably
hope from their union: but the Queen, who reposed her chiefest confidence in
him, who had already made trial of his Service, and found it so successful to
her, did so ply him with reiterated favors, and entreaties, that he could not
handsomely avoid engaging in her behalf. Neither had he so long stood off, that
he had fewer particular grievances than the rest; but having engaged his Faith
to the Duke de Luines, it would have been almost impossible to have persuaded
him to break his word, had not Luines himself given the first example: and on
that side it was, that the Queen assaulted the Duke, by representing to him the
non-performances of those things had been promised, and that as it had been
principally through his assistance she had obtained all that had been granted
to her, she expected he should see the Articles of the Treaty fulfilled;
endeavoring to persuade him, that his own honor was no less interested
therein, than her satisfaction.

And that he might the better taste her reasons, she failed not to prepossess
him with all sorts of civilities, and favor, honoring him with some presents,
whereof one was a very fine Watch, set all over with Diamonds, and very
curiously wrought; which she accompanied with a Letter as kind, as could
possibly be writ upon such an occasion, wherein, amongst other obliging
expressions she told him: That the Diamonds, wherewith it was embellished, were
not more firm than her affection, and that he might assure himself the Services
she had received from his generosity, should ofter come into her memory, than
the hand of that Watch should point out hours every day: To which words (which
were, it seems, the way of writing at that time, and none of my invention) I
have neither added, nor diminished: But by this complement, and several other
testimonies of affection, and esteem, the Queen having awaked the passion the
Duke had to give her always all satisfaction, The Queen Mother reengages the
Duke of Espernon in her quarrel.
she gave him consecutively a full account of her determination, of all the
persons of quality she had made to her party, and of the powerful means she
intended to make use of to reinstate her self in that degree of honor, which
was due to her Person, and Dignity: Whereupon the Duke considering this second
action, as dependent upon the first, solemnly engaged himself, and made an
absolute promise, once more to serve her.

If the Queen was thus diligent to form, Anno 1620.
and redintegrate her party, Luines, on the other side, was no less industrious
now, than he had been before, The Duke de Luin^s endeavors to gain him first
by la Croix le Blere.
to break and disunite it. He very well knew the Queen to be discontent, which
she had her self so publicly professed; that could be no secret: He was
moreover informed, that most of the great persons in the Kingdom had engaged
with her; and though he doubted not, but that the Duke of Espernon, from whom
she had for the time passed received so many good Offices, continued still his
ancient fidelity to her; yet would he notwithstanding feel his pulse by la
Croix de Blere, whom he dispatched away to him to that purpose. This Gentleman
therefore comes to the Duke to Angoulesme, in the time of the Carnaval; where
he found him taken up with entertainments, that nothing relished of the
meditation of an approaching War, making merry with the Company of the Town,
which at this Festival was increased with several Families of the neighboring
Gentry.

La Croix, who would by all means make use of his dexterity, to sound the
Duke's intention, met with a person in him, that was not easy to be pried
into; so that the Duke, after having discoursed with him, in general terms, of
the Queen Mothers Interests and Affairs; and having returned a civil answer to
Luines his Complement, dismissed his Ambassador, perfectly instructed of what
he concealed from none, and of what he did not care Luines himself should know.

The first Essay having given the Favorite no great satisfaction, who already
saw, that Affairs began to grow hot, with the season; that the Count de
Soissons, with the Countess his Mother, had left the Court, that the Duke of
Mayenne had done the same, and that the Duke of Longueville, and the Brothers
of Vandosme were already in their Government in actual Arms: He would therefore
be no longer in suspense, what he was to expect from the Duke of Espernon, who
of all others he had the greatest mind to withdraw from the Queen Mothers
Interest; well enough foreseeing, that if the youth and inexperience of most of
the other Lords were not governed by his prudence, they would be easy enough
to deal withal. And afterward by T^iras,
He therefore dispatched away Toiras (since Marshall of France) to treat with
him obout this Affair. The Duke was then at his house of Plassac in Xaintonge
(since famous for his disgraces) making private Leavies, by the assistance of
his Friends; to whom he had given instructions to make sure of their own
people, without nevertheless telling them what they were to be employed about,
till his further order. Toiras had here in Commission to tell him: That the
Duke de Luines, absolutely relying upon his friendship since their late
reconciliation, could not give credit to some reports he had heard to the
contrary; that since that time he had not ^ail'd the least in any of the good
Offices the Duke had required at his hands; that all his Commands, Pensions,
and Assignments of Offices, had been in part already paid, and should suddenly
be fully discharged: That for the future he should be maintained in all their
functions, and privileges more advantageously, than hitherto he had ever been:
That if yet all this fair dealing was too little to satisfy him, let him but
say what he would have, and that Monsieur de Luines would endeavor to procure
it for him: That in the mean time he only conjured him to separate himself from
the Queen Mothers Interest, with whom he had now no reasonable pretense to
engage: That he had already served her so well, and so worthily acquitted
himself of all he had undertaken in her behalf, as thereby to acquire the
esteem, and commendation of even his greatest enemies: That therefore he ought
not to expose a reputation, wherein he had no rival, to the hazard of being
overthrown, and blemished by some sinister disgrace: That all things had been
performed, had been promised the Queen in the Treaty of Angoulesme; but that
nothing could satisfy some ambitious spirits about her, who doubtless
possessed her, she was not well used, if not permitted to rule in Chief. The
Duke having given Toiras audience for two days together, without declaring
himself, and having entertained him by intervals with showing him some Garden
Instruments, an employment wherein he said he intended to pass away the
remainder of his life, he at last drew him aside, where he told him: That he
was too brave a Gentleman to be otherwise dealt withal, than with a free, and
open heart: That in truth he had some reason in his own particular (whatever
might be said to the contrary) to complain of not having received, both as to
his own, and his friends concerns, that satisfaction, whereof they had been so
amply assured; instancing in some things, and amongst others the refusal of a
Cardinals Hat for the Archbishop of Tholouze his Son: but that he called God to
witness) his own Interest should never tempt him into Arms: That he very well
knew the mischiefs, and disorders attended a Civil War, which he had ever had
in great horror; but that the Queen Mother having done him the honor to
command his assistance in her removal from Blois, and having further honored
him by making use of his person, and those of his friends for the recovery of
her Dignity, the violation of those things had been granted to her, must
necessarily reflect as much upon him, if not more, than upon her Majesty her
self: That notwithstanding he demanded nothing in his own behalf, let them only
contrive how to satisfy the Queen, and that being done, he promised Mounsieur
de Luines to be his friend, and Servant as much, and as inviolably as any
person in the world. But in vain.
With this frank declaration he dismissed ^oiras, not however without
entertaining a very good opinion of his person, and parts, which he discovered
under a very profound silence* and reservation; I never, to my remembrance,
having observed any man to speak so little as this Gentleman.

After his departure, The Queen Mothers second War.
the Duke having intelligence, that the rest who were engaged in the Queens
party were already in Arms, he followed their example, and brought his Troops
also into the Field: but all their Forces being now on foot there was no little
debate in the Queens Council, how they should dispose of her Majesty's person.
The Duke of Mayenne, who had a very good Army in Guienne, moved with great
fervency, that she might retire her self into his Government, where he had
gathered together above eighteen hundred effective men: but the Duke of
Espernon understanding his design was to be Master of the Queens person, the
better at her expense, and the Lords of her Party to make his own conditions,
would by no means allow of that proposition; neither had there been no
jealousy in the case, could he have approved that counsel; he considered that
the Queen Mothers absence, and departure from Angers in so critical a juncture,
would be interpreted a flight, which would very much discredit her Affairs, and
by which occasion, besides the loss of reputation (wherein commonly consists
the event of War) she would infallibly lose all the Provinces betwixt the
Rivers of Loire, and Garonne, which were now wholly at her devotion, and might
be disputed a great while. For which reasons he concluded it much better, and
more advantageous to the Queens Service, to unite those Forces he had, with
those of the Duke of Mayenne, and to march them away to Angers to join with the
Queen, who being re-inforc'd with five and twenty thousand men at least, that
they were able to make up betwixt them, would be in a capacity to reduce the
Duke de Luines to reason; which ought to be the true intent of their Arms, and
not the particular Interests of particular men; who, as they had only taken
them up in her name, were to use them only for her Service.

Doubtless had this latter advice been received, the King's Army would have
found enough to do: But the Bishop of Lucon, who had no mind to have persons of
the Duke's condition, and capacity, so near the Queen, for fear of falling from
the place he had in her confidence, and esteem, could by no means consent
either that she should depart from Angers, or that the Duke of Espernon should
go thither to her. The knowledge he had of the Duke's free and unbiased
humor, made him apprehend, he should be by him sometimes contradicted in his
opinions, and by that means be no more absolute Master of the Queens Counsels:
so that dexterously spinning out the time, without coming to any positive
resolution, the Duke grew weary of these delays, and unwilling to let his
Forces unprofitably moulder away in Xaintonge, and Angoumois (Countries that
yet smarted with the last years War) he departed thence to quarter them more
commodiously in Limousin, where better provision was to be made both for Horse
and Man.

Whilst in the Queen Mothers Council they consumed the time in debates, without
resolving what to do, the King, on the other side by the Prince of Conde's
advice, The Q^eens affairs have ill succe^s.
put his deliberations into prompt execution. The Duke de Luines very well
informed of the Queen Mothers discontents, after the interview at ^ours, and
satisfied, that, after the offense he had there given her, he was no more to
expect her favor, resolved to secure himself under this Prince's Protection;
wherein he thought he was so much the more safe from the Queens revenge, by how
much the Prince had himself reason to complain of the ill usage he had received
under her administration; during whose Regency, Conchini had clapped him up in
prison; from whence Luines, presently after the King's coming to Paris, got him
released: An obligation, which, as it was great in it self, was soon after
repaid with as grateful a return. The Prince had found by his own experience,
what an influence the Royal name has upon all parts of the Kingdom, very well
remembering how easy it had been for his Majesty to have suppressed him, when
he retired from Court to Soissons, whither had the King followed him in person,
with no more than the Regiment of his Guards only, he had infallibly reduced
him to a necessity, either of submitting to his mercy, or of leaving the
Kingdom: out of which observation he advised the King, suddenly to mount to
Horse, and to go in person to Caen, which was the nearest of the revolted
Cities; wherein what the Prince had so judiciously foreseen, as happily
succeeded, Caen surrendering almost without any resistance, Prudent, who
commanded there for the Grand Prior Vandosme, delivering it up almost so soon
as summoned into his Majesty's hands.

This little success having frighted all the other places of Normandy, that
made any countenance of revolt, into their Duty, his Majesty immediately
departed thence, to advance toward Angers; when being met by some Troops upon
the way, and by them his Regiments of the French and Swisse Guards being
re-inforc'd, he caused le Pont de Ce, to be assaulted in his own presence;
where almost in a moment, and after a very light dispute, all the Queens Forces
ran away, leaving the pass to the Enemy: by which disaster those who were about
the Queens person saw the error they had committed, in not calling the Duke of
Espernon to her succor; it being not to be doubted, but that had she had a
Captain of his experience and valor, to command upon that occasion, he^
interests would have been much better defended.

The Queen, after this blow being in the fright may be imagined, was fit to
reject no overtures of Peace. She had indeed before this engagement made some
demands, and proposed some conditions; but after this baffle her Army had
received, she was now to submit to what law the Conqueror would impose upon
her: The Queen accepts a Peace without condi^ion.
Wherein all those who had engaged in her Party were abandoned to the King's
mercy; but as for her self, she was permitted to come to Court. And that was as
much as the Bishop of Lucon desired, which gave some occasion to say, that he
held intelligence, and had contracted with the enemy before he came, that he
had opposed the uniting of her Forces, and diverted such as were capable of
command from coming to serve her, as being beforehand assured to obtain the
sole condition he aimed at; which being granted, he cared not to leave the rest
of her Majesty's Servants to shift for themselves: but this I shall not take
upon me to affirm, though it was the common discourse at that time.

The Duke had notice by a Gentleman, the Queen Mother purposely dispatched away
to him, of her Reconciliation with the King; who finding him at St. Clau a
Frontier of Limousin, to which place he was advanced with his Forces, he
presently thereupon, without staying a more express Order from Court, or so
much as thinking of any Capitulation for himself, dismissed all his Troops;
insomuch that the Currier who afterward brought him an express from the King,
The Duke of Espernon la^s down his Arms.
to lay down his Arms, found that, out of an entire confidence in his Majesty's
Royal Bounty, he had already prevented his command, and put himself into a
posture of absolute dependence upon his Grace, and Favor.

Neither did the Duke think this act of his own particular obedience enough,
And the Marquis de la Valette, by the command of the Duke his Father.
unless he further commanded the Marquis de la Valette his Son (who had never
stirred from Metz) to do the same. Upon the breaking out of this second War, as
in the first, he had been there invested with a very considerable Army; neither
had they failed, as before, to stir up the Inhabitants (whose inclinations
commonly change with the fortune of those that command them) to mutiny against
him. Of which practice the Marquis having intelligence on all hands, that the
people had a design upon his person, and that despising his weakness, (who to
spare their purses, and to win their affections, had forbore to quarter any
Soldiers upon them) they talked loud of opening their Gates, and letting the
King's Army into the City; he was constrained by the truth, and importance of
this advice, to deal with some Captains of the old Regiments of that very Army
that came against him: In the old body of which Army there were very few
Officers who were not the Duke his Fathers Creatures, and who stood not obliged
to him for their Fortune, and Commands; whereof some fifteen or twenty deserted
the Royal Arms, to go serve him in this extremity of danger; some sending him
in Squadrons by their Sergeants, and others bringing over their whole
Companies: so that by an act of honorable gratitude (the example whereof is
not nevertheless to be altogether approved) they brought him over in one night
above fifteen hundred men of the best Soldiers in the Army. With this relief
(seeing the Town upon the point of a total Revolt) he attempted, by disarming
the Inhabitants, to secure his own Fortune, which he accordingly performed, and
that without any notable violence; for having disposed his men into the most
advantageous Posts of the City, he made Proclamation that at the beat of Drum,
upon a penalty imposed, every one should bring their Arms into the Bishops
Palace; After having preserved Metz by disarming the Inhabitants.
which order being given, he himself accompanied with some five and twenty or
thirty Gentlemen, mounted on horseback to be ready in such places, where he had
information, some bustle was like to be; a precaution that was not altogether
necessary, the people being so daunted at his resolution, as with a stupid
silence, and sheepish tameness, with a submission greater now, than their
insolence had been before, quietly giving up their Arms; by which means they
remained incapable of executing any mischief, at least if (as it was evident
enough) they yet retained a will to do it.

Yet would not the Duke of Espernon make any other advantage of this success,
The Duke of Mayenne refuses to accept the Peace, and endeavors to engage the
Duke, of Espernon in his discontents.
than thereby the better to manifest to the King his submission, and the
confidence he reposed in his Royal Goodness; resigning himself up wholly into
his hands: but the Duke of Mayenne would not do so, who on the contrary fearing
lest the Duke de Luines, whom he had highly provoked, having him at his mercy,
should take some notable revenge of the injuries, he had done him, could not so
soon resolve to lay down his Arms. He could much rather have been content to
have possessed the Duke with the same apprehensions, and to have engaged him
with him in some violent extreme, thereby to procure their own conditions: to
which purpose he also sent to sound his inclination, and to represent to him
their common danger, if they did not provide for the security of their lives,
and fortunes, before they parted with their Swords out of their hands: but the
Duke sent him word again, Who refuses to stir.
That his resolution was already taken, and that as he had taken up arms for no
particular interest of his own, so he had laid them down so soon as he knew the
Queen was satisfied: That he hoped his Majesty's Clemency would easily extend
it self to all his Subjects, who should not obstinately persist in their
disobedience: That therefore he could give Monsieur de Mayenne no other advice,
than that he had taken himself; which, though it should not succeed well with
him, he had rather be ill used whilst he could justify himself innocent, than
after having committed a fault that would render him criminal beyond all
excuse. By which answer the Duke of Mayenne seeing he had set up his rest in
this determination, and finding himself too weak alone to wrestle with the
King's Name and Power, he was in the end fain to submit, and to return to his
Duty: wherein nevertheless his Majesty, who knew after what manner both the
one, and the other proceeded, as highly commended the Duke of Espernon, as he
blamed the Duke of Mayenne.

One would have said that this great disorder in the Queen Mothers Affairs,
wherein so many persons, and those of so eminent condition were engaged, only
happened to set a greater value, and luster upon the Duke of Espernon's conduct.
In the first War, alone, and unassisted by any, he so managed the few Forces he
had, as without giving ground to his adversaries, he ever kept himself in a
posture to resist them, and so as in the end to obtain reasonable Conditions,
not only for the Queen, but also for himself, and his friends, without ever
submitting to his enemies discretion; whereas in this there was no reservation
for any, insomuch that of all the great men who were engaged in this last
business, there was not one who lay not open, and exposed to the utmost
severity of the King's justice, had he been pleased to have proceeded against
them. It Is true notwithstanding that his Majesty in his Clemency pardoned every
one; but it was merely an effect of his own goodness, without any obligation
upon him, either by writing, or the least promise at all.

The King assured of the Duke of Espernon's obedience, and finding by his late
signal advantages, how much his own presence had contributed to the success of
his own Affairs, taking his measures from thence, what he might promise to
himself by the same method in other occurrences, he resolved for the future to
appear in his own Person upon all occasions of importance, the better thereby
to establish his Royal Authority in all parts of his Kingdom. The King goes
into Guienne and Bearne.
The Affairs of Bearne therefore being of such a nature, as that his presence
seemed to be very necessary there, he determined to move that way, and even to
go over into it, if occasion should be. In order whereunto being advanced from
P^ictou, as far as Xaintonge, he was pleased to permit that the Duke of
Espernon should come to him to make his Apology for what had passed upon the
borders of his own Government. His Majesty therefore was no sooner come to
Chizay, but that the Duke de Be^legarde (who was very well at Court, and
exceedingly solicitous of the Duke his Kinsmans Interest) came to see the Duke
at Aunay, to assure him he might be very kindly received by the King. The Duke
had never so much as desired any such security, so confident he had been in the
King's bounty, and his own deportment; nevertheless confirmed in the hope of so
gracious a reception, from so good a hand, they departed together from the
Duke's Lodgings, The Duke of Espernon presents himself to the King, and asks
his pardon.
to go directly to the King's: Where the Duke was no sooner seen to enter, but
all the Court flocked to the novelty; so that I have heard the Duke say, that
seeing the crowd there was to observe his reception, and to hear what he would
say for his excuse, he strained his voice much louder than he used to do, to
satisfy the curiosity of the standers by; telling the King in few words: That
he never thought it a disservice to his Majesty to serve the Queen his Mother;
but that since he had been so unhappy, as to have incurred his Majesty's
displeasure, he most humbly begged his Pardon; protesting that the Grace he
should be pleased to grant him upon this occasion, should be the last of this
nature he would ever ask of him, so long as he had life, there being no
pretense, nor consideration whatsoever, that should ever have the power to
separate him from any interest, wherein he should see his Majesty's name, and
person engaged. A promise that he from that time forward inviolably observed,
as we shall hereafter see. The Duke was kneeled down when he first began to
speak, but the King raising him at the first word, and embracing him at the end
of this short speech; his Majesty replied: That he was confident he would be as
good as his word, And is very well received.
receiving him with great demonstrations of favor, and esteem: When after
having entertained him some time, his Majesty dismissed him that he might go
visit the Duke de Luines; betwixt whom at their meeting there passed great
civilities on both sides, with many assurances of reciprocal affection. And
that very day the Duke executed his command of Colonel in the King's Lodgings,
receiving orders from the King's own mouth to carry them to the Regiment of
Guards. The next day his Majesty commanded him to go prepare his entry into St.
Iean d' Angely, a City in his Government, but held by those of the Religion,
and into which he had never till now been received; so that he saw himself at
the same time, not only restored to his old Commands, but also by a particular
favor from his Majesty, authorized in places, where, as yet he had never been.

The Duke was surpised at so extraordinary, and so unexpected favors but much
more when he understood it was in part, through Rucellay's good Offices, that
he received them; who though they had not parted very kindly (as you may have
observed) could not nevertheless forbear upon all occasions to magnify the
Duke's generosity and virtue, and to manifest the desire he had to be
reconciled to his good opinion. Rucellay had great interest at Court, the Duke
de Luines reposed ^ great confidence in him, and was the rather inclined to
credit all the good things he said of the Duke, by how much his testimony (upon
the terms they then stood) was no ways to be suspected. The Duke anticipated by
so many good Offices, was as careful to let Rucellay know how exceeding kindly
he took them at his hands; so that from a violent feud, their hot spirits being
reunited in a very particular friendship, the Duke received very great
assistance from Rucellay, in an Affair wherein he was very highly concerned.
And that was the re-establishment of those Captains, who had forfeited their
Commands by putting themselves into Metz with the Marquis de la Valette. The
Court could not suffer an act of that dangerous example to escape unpunished;
and on the contrary the Duke pressed an oblivion of that Affair with greater
fervency than he had ever done any concern of his own; wherein I have often
heard him acknowledge his obligation to Rucellay, by whose solicitation he at
last obtained his desire: Courbon, Reals, Verdelin, Boussonniere, and some
others of very great merit were restored to their Commands, though it was but
to deprive the Duke the sooner of so many worthy friends; who were scarce
reestablished in their Commands, when willing to make amends for the fault
they had committed by some notable testimony of their fidelity, and valor upon
the first occasion should present it self, they unfortunately perished in that
brave design, leaving the Duke infinitely afflicted, that he could not oblige
them, but to their ruin.

From Xaintonge the King passed over into Guienne, wherein though his Majesty
had no resolution of proceeding so far as Bearne; yet was it necessary he
should advance to Bordeaux, to dissolve the powerful Faction was formed in that
Province in favor of the Duke of Mayenne, which had sufficiently discovered it
self in the great Leavies, and Provisions of War, The Duke receives a promise
of his Majesty's coming to his house at Cadillas.
that had there been made. In this Voyage the Duke had hopes of seeing his
Majesty at his house of Cadillac, and indeed the Duke of Luines had promised
him he should; a favor he ought so much the more to covet, as it would
manifest to all the world his perfect reconciliation with the King his Master:
So that he whom every one the year before concluded utterly lost in the Queen
Mothers Affairs, seeing him now restored to a greater degree of reputation, and
favor, than perhaps he had ever been, could not but admire his Conduct, and
attribute as much to his Prudence, as his Fortune; which, it should seem, had
only strewn those difficulties in his way, that they might by him be the more
gloriously overcome.

His Majesty con^nuing his way through Guienne, took occasion to call at Blaye;
from whence he removed Lussan, Vicount de Aubeterre, to recompense him with the
staff of a Marshall of France; placing Brantes (since Duke of Luxembourg in
the right of his Wife) in his stead. Whilst these things were in doing, the
Duke of Espernon (who attended his Majesty in this Voyage) took the opportunity
to go prepare his house for his reception; Where he is ma^nificently
entertain'^.
wherein he ordered all things so admirably well, and with such magnificence,
that his Majesty could hardly have been better entertained in any part of the
Kingdom. The noble Furniture, wherewith this house did abound, was now all
brought out: The Kings Apartment hung round with Hangings embossed all over
with Gold, as also ten Chambers more were furnished with the same, to which the
Beds of Cloth of Gold and Embroidery were richly suited; neither was the
delicacy, rarity, or plenty of provisions inferior to this outward Pomp. All
the Favorites Ministers, and others of the greatest quality at Court, were
commodiously lodged in this stately House, and the Provisionary Officers there
found what was not elsewhere to be seen in the Kingdom; which was a vast series
of Offices under ground, so large, and so well fitted with lights, that they
were astonished at so prodigious an extent of Accommodations; which are indeed,
if not the chiefest ornament, at least the greatest convenience of a Building.

After his Majesty had ftaid two days at Cadillac, The King departs from
Cadillac to go into Bearne.
where his whole Court had been magnificently treated, he parted thence to
continue his Journey toward Bearne. He was made to believe, that the Council
of this little Country would think fit to submit to his Royal pleasure,
without obliging him to perform that Voyage; to quicken which resolution his
Majesty had passed the River of Garonne, which, though when on the other side
he was advanced no more than a League only beyond Cadillac, he thought
nevertheless he had done a great deal in passing so great a River with an Army,
and all the equipage of his Court* The Ministers, who had a great aversion to
this ugly journey, would have been very glad, that Affairs might have been
concluded there without going any further: but in the end how averse soever
they were to it, they must undergo the trouble. The King went thither, where
his presence produced the same effect it had done in other places; he overran
all this little Province, seizing as he passed of Navarrens, And reduces that
Province to their obedience.
the strongest place in it, as he did also of Ortez, and Olleron, principal
Cities of that Country; he subverted all their ancient customs, restored the
Bishop, and other Ecclesiastics to their Estates, and Dignities; took away the
administration of the Affairs of the Country from those of the Reformed
Religion, and reestablished his own Authority: but he left the Government of
the Province in the hands of the Marquis de la Force since Marshall of France;
who, impatient to see his Authority cut so short by these alterations, could
hardly forbear till the King was got back to Paris, from reducing things again
to the same posture they were in before. He was very confident that his
Majesty, who had already tried the ill ways of Bearne, would never be advised
by his Ministers to undertake a second Journey into that Country, for the
resettlement of his Affairs. He knew that the Hugonot Faction were ready to
find his Majesty enough to do nearer home, and did not believe, that without
his immediate presence they could compel him to any thing he had not a mind to
in his own Government, where his Authority was established not only by a long
habitude he had there contracted; but much more by a passionate concurrence of
the whole Body, and of all the Orders of the Province, who agreed with him in
the same Religion. He therefore labored all Winter to drive out the Garrisons
of Ortez, Which nevertheless continue^ but a short space.
and Olleron; so that excepting Navarrens, that was kept by the Marquis de
Poianne, whom the King had left Governor there, he overthrew whatever his
Majesty had done, shuffling all things again into their former confusion.

The Duke of Espernon passed away the same Winter in Guienne, and the greatest
part thereof in the County of Esparre, which he had purchased from the Heirs of
the late Marshall de M^tignon, a Territory in truth of great beauty, and vast
extent; though the Revenue was but small, by reason the Estate was not well
understood: to remedy which the Duke caused it to be surveyed in his own
presence, a good husbandry, that was not unprofitable to him, though this
Domestic advantage was not the only satisfaction he received in that Country.

In the beginning of the ensuing year he there received news of the promotion
of the Archbishop of Tholouze his Son to the Dignity of a Cardinal: Anno 1621.
For as the refusal of this favor had caused the former breach betwixt him,
The Archbishop of Tholouz^, made Cardinal.
and the Duke de Luines, so did the Favorite conceive that the surest tie by
which he could bind the Duke to his friendship, would be to procure him that
Addition; wherein he was nothing deceived, it being impossible he could any way
oblige him more. The Duke looked upon this, as the supreme height, and
accomplishment of all the prosperities he had left to desire; he had already by
his Merit, and Services, united a considerable number of the greatest Honors,
and bravest Commands of the Kingdom in his own person, which he had moreover
procured in survivance for his Posterity: so that nothing remained to render
him fully satisfied with his Fortune, save only to obtain one of the chiefest
Dignities of the Church for him he had designed to that profession.

Yet was not this the sole testimony of favor, The Duke's expedition into
Bear^^.
the Duke received by this reconciliation with the Court Mignion; who being at
a loss for some person of great Quality, and Reputation to reduce Bearne (which
the Marquis de la Force had excited to new Commotions) to their Duty, and
Obedience, and casting his eye upon the Duke of Espernon, as a disinterested
person, and capable of the greatest undertaking, he proposed him to the King
for this employment; who well approving of his choice, the charge of this
expedition (wherein his Majesty seemed more than ordinarily concerned) was
forthwith committed to his care.

Neither, The Duke receives his Commission.
if his Majesty conferred herein a signal honor upon the Duke, can it be
denied, but that he made as fortunate a choice for himself, and for the
advantage of his Affairs. The Duke received his Order at Cadillac by la
Saludie, which was only in paper, without any assignation either of men, or
money, wherewithal to begin the work, but a great clutter of Commissions, and
dispatches only; so that the whole weight of the King's design leaned
absolutely upon his Interest and Wisdom; which it was happy were so
considerable, things had not else succeeded as they did: but the Duke had so
great a desire to confirm the King in the good opinion he had already
entertained of his Loyal Intentions, that there was nothing he would not
attempt, to let his Majesty see, he was neither unworthy of this present
Favor, nor unmindful of his former Grace, and Goodness.

Having therefore wisely considered, that diligence must strike the greatest
stroke in this Affair, and that should he give the Marquis de la Force leisure
to gather together the Forces of the Hugonot Faction, who were already
preparing to join in their common defense, he should engage himself in a long,
and difficult War; he departed from Cadillac six days after he had received the
King's Command. The Duke begins his Journey.
The first day (accompanied only with the Servants of his own Family) he went
to lie at Langon, another of his own Demeasnes, from whence he proceeded
without stay as far as Mont de Marsan, where he had appointed the Rendezvous
for those he had invited to serve his Majesty upon this occasion. He had before
he departed from his own house writ to diverse persons in Guienne, and in his
own Governments of Xaintonge, and Angoumois to join with him; of which so few
failed to come in, that at the Rendezvous, a handsomer, nor a more numerous
body of Gentlemen Volunteers to follow a Subject, and serving out of his own
Government, has hardly been seen: A great number of Gentlemen come in to follow
the Duke of Esp^rnon in this expedition.
Insomuch that I have heard the Quarter Masters say they had in their
Muster-Roll at least fourteen hundred Gentlemen: by which it may be guessed,
what a number of Attendants so many Masters must necessarily bring in with
them. But that which is most remarkable herein, is, that most of these were of
Guienne, where the Duke had nothing to do, and lived only in the quality of a
private person; and that though the Duke of Mayenne (who could not without an
eye of Envy see so many Forces drawn out of his Government to serve under any
other than himself) did (it may be imagined) all he could to dissuade people
from going in; the conflux was nevertheless so great, that it seemed the
Province had sent all the brave Gentlemen it could make to attend the Duke in
this expedition.

And these were indeed almost all the Forces he had; neither had he so many
Foot, as Gentlemen in his Army: It Is true that Camp-Master Vignoles, who
commanded some Troops in Guienne, had orders to bring them over to him; and
that himself (as has been said) had Commissions in his hands, for the raising
new Leavies; but his diligence supplied the place of a good Army, by which he
also effected more, than he could have done with greater preparations: all the
other Forces he made use of, being only ten Companies of the Regiment of
Picardy, that he found Quartered about Ortez: so that it is no less to be
wondered at he should undertake so hard a task, with so small means to effect
it, than that he did so gloriously bring about his design.

The Marquis de la Force no sooner had intelligence that the Duke was coming
against him, The Ma^quis de la Force sends to ^^vert the Duke ^^om com^ing into
Bearne.
but that (surpised to have an Enemy of his experience to deal withal, and
much more at the diligence wherewith he saw him hasten to execute his
Commission, by which he also saw his designs would be overthrown) he sent the
Baron of Arros, To entreat him not to be too precipitous in the execution of
the King's Commands, and to remonstrate to him, that he was ready to do
whatever his Majesty should please to appoint: That he had already sent a
dispatch to the King to that effect, and that he hoped the Court would be so
satisfied with his submissions, as to spare him the trouble of a tedious
Journey, his friends a great deal of inconvenience, and the people the
disturbance, and oppression a War must of necessity bring upon them; adding
withal the ancient friendship, and alliance betwixt them: To which the Duke
(who was already advanced far on his way) returned answer: That having
undertaken that Voyage upon no other account than his Majesty's command, he
should be very ready to return upon the first orders he should receive: That
except what concerned the interest of his Majesty's Service, he was Monsieur de
la Force's Friend, and Servant: That he had not sought that employment against
him, and that he should be exceeding glad to hear his Majesty was satisfied
with his submissions: But that till then he should not delay a minute the
execution of the Orders he had received; no consideration either of his own,
his friends, or any other person under the Sun, being of force to divert him in
the least from his Duty.

This first Embassy having therefore taken no effect, it was soon seconded by
another, of which one Charles the principal Minister of Bearne was the Bearer.
This person, in the quality of a Deputy from the Country, was sent to
represent to him the sterility of the Country, the poverty of the Inhabitants,
and difficulty of the ways, and the resolution of the people to make a smart
resistance, should they (who were at present in as good a disposition as could
be desired) be urged to the last extremes: but the Duke having flatly told him,
that the end of his expedition was to cause the King to be obeyed, and to
chastise all those that should rebel against him: He was sent back very much
astonished at so brisk a reply.

The Marquis de la Force that perhaps expected no better a success from his
deputations (having been well enough acquainted with the Duke of Espernon, to
know he was not a man easy to be imposed upon) would therefore make what
preparation he could to oppose him: but he found so general a fear, and
astonishment among the people, that he evidently saw it was to hazard his own
ruin, should he expect the Duke's coming into his Government. The sudden
terror of the Bearnois.
The Bearnois had no sooner heard the Duke's name, but that they gave
themselves for lost; their haughty, and declared insolence, with which they had
a few days before overthrown the King's Order, and trodden his Authority under
foot, and their high Vaunts, that they would defend their Religion, and their
Countries liberty to the last man, were converted into a Panick terror; so that
on a sudden whole Cities were left desolate, men of the best quality among
them, with their Wives, and Families, seeking their safety in their flight, out
of a just apprehension of all the punishments an offended Prince might
reasonably inflict upon a mutinous, and disobedient people.

In this general consternation of the Bearnois the Duke drew near to Ortez, the
first City in Rebellion he met upon his way; the Castle whereof was of it self
very strong, and had of late been moreover fortified, and furnished with all
necessaries of War, As also of the Soldiery.
which also shut up the pass of the whole Country, and was of so advantageous
a situation, as was very easy to be defended: but those within, what
countenance soever they had before put on of a resolute defense, no sooner
heard the Duke had sent for Cannon from Navarrens to force them, but they
presently surrendered without staying till they could be brought up.

This success was of no little importance to the Duke, who, had he met with
much opposition in this first enterprise, having but ten Foot Companies
wherewith to form a Siege, no Officers to serve his Artillery, little
Ammunition, no Victual, Money, or any other means to subsist four days in a
place; had been in great danger of being stopped from making any further
progress into the Country. All which difficulties though he had beforehand
very well considered, and foreseen, he would notwithstanding try the
experiment, knowing very well, that in matters of War, all was not always to be
expected from an enemy, he either could, or should do. And from this success he
took his measures of what he might promise to himself in reducing the other
Garrisons; nothing doubting from that time forwards, but he should bring all
his other enterprises to an honorable and successful issue.

As the business of Ortez had given the Duke very good hopes of his expedition,
so it totally overthrew those of the Marquis de la Force, who no sooner had
intelligence of the surrender of this place, but that he made haste to be gone,
that he might not be hemmed in with the Duke's Forces; whilst the Duke on the
other side, to make his advantage of the astonishment the Marquis his flight
must of necessity leave the whole Country in, advanced with all diligence from
Ortez to Olleron, where some fortifications had lately been made, which were
also at his appearing deserted, without the least show of opposition. An
unfortunate fellow, a Soldier, and a Provencal, had been the main director in
this work, where he suffered himself to be surpised; so that the Duke, who was
obliged to make some example, was not sorry this wretch should expiate for all
the rest, as accordingly he did, being condemned by a Council of War, and
hanged at his own Barricado, where the poor fellow at his death lamented the
ill fortune he had to be born a Provencal; declaring he was sacrificed to the
Duke's antiquated hatred to those of his Country, and that his Bitth was his
greatest Crime, though it was nevertheless altogether untrue.

After this there being neither judgment to be passed, nor execution to be
done, The Duke quiets Bearne in a very short time.
the Duke went to Nay, to Salies, to Sauveterre, and lastly to Pau; where the
fear of his severity, that had before frighted every one from his habitation,
being converted into an absolute confidence in his Clemency, and Goodness,
every one returned to his own home. The Cities, which at his coming had been
almost totally deserted, were on a sudden re inhabited; insomuch that from that
time forward all the Duke had to do, was only to receive the tenders, and
protestations of their obedience, and to set down some Rules for their Civil
Regiment; which was ordered with so much Justice, and Wisdom, or so fortunately
at least, the equality of all things was so entirely preserved, and he took
such care to reconcile the Interests of Religion (wherein the incompatibility
had been so great before, and had with so much heat fomented their divisions)
that both parties were satisfied with the equal shares he divided betwixt them
in the public administration; since which time there has been no revolt, nor
commotion in that Province, it having ever since continued in peace and
obedience, under the Justice of the Duke's Discipline, which is there
inviolately observed to this day.

And all this was performed in less than three weeks time, his Journey thither,
his stay there, and his return thence, being in all not two months expedition;
neither did it cost the King twelve thousand Livers, And at very little expense.
I having seen the Account of the Army, which did not in all arise to that
little sum. It Is true withal that the Duke reckoned nothing upon his own
account, contenting himself with causing some Officers to be paid, that at his
instance had served upon this occasion. So that, by the influence of his own
name only, he so settled this Province in his Majesty's obedience, that it is
at this time, however the most remote, perhaps the most quiet, and obedient
Member of his Kingdom.

If the Duke was careful to keep his own hands clean, in what concerned the
King's Interest, he was no less solicitous to keep others from embezzeling the
Marquis de la Force's Goods; who had fled from Pau in so great haste, that he
had left his Wardrobe, Cabinets, A generous act of the Duke of Espern^n.
and Papers at random; of all which the Duke took care to have an inventory
taken, leaving them safe, sealed up in the custody of a person in whom he knew
the Marquis reposed an entire trust: Which being done, he returned laden with
glory, and applause; but nothing enriched, either with the King's Money, or the
Estates of the people, not so much as of any of those his Majesty had declared
to be his enemies, and consequently were lawful prey.

His Majesty thought the Duke to be most busy in the Affairs of Bearne, when
he received news, The Duke of Espernon returns out of Bearne to the Siege of
St. Ie^n de Angely.
that he had already done his work, and was about to return. Neither could the
Duke, knowing his Majesty was already grappled with those of the Religion, and
had laid Siege to St. Iean d' Angely, take any rest, till he had traveled from
the remotest part of the Kingdom, to expose his life for his Service, in those
occasions wherein he saw his Majesty's Person, and Honor so far engaged: The
Leaguer had been near a month set down, when the Duke arrived, and the King's
Forces were so much cooled in their first ardour, that in all appearance the
enterprise was not over-suddenly to be effected; when the Duke's arrival very
much changed the face of Affairs: Nor do I add this to attribute any thing to
him, that is not justly his due; he has so much honor besides, I do not need
to forge so small an addition to his Fame: neither on the other side, the thing
being perfectly true, ought he to be deprived of any particle of his right.

The Duke having at his arrival received from the King the applause due to his
conduct in this expedition of Bearne, and a Declaration from his own mouth of
his Majesty's high satisfaction, whereof he had before received very favorable
testimonies in the several dispatches had been sent him: He humbly entreated
his Majesty, that he might for the future have the honor to serve in his own
Army, and attending upon his own Person; and that he would further be pleased,
wherein his Majesty should vouchsafe to employ his Service, that he might have
the privilege to receive his Commands immediately from his own mouth: a favor
that he easily obtained. Now the reason why the Duke made this request, was,
because a little before the Kings departure from Paris, The King's great favor
and justice to the Duke of Espernon, at his return from his expedition of
Bearne.
the Duke de Luines (as Favorite, not being satisfied with his Fortune, unless
he raised it above all the other great men of the Kingdom) had made suit to be
honored with the Dignity of Constable of France: to arrive at which degree
(which he might well foresee would create him much envy) having had occasion to
make use of the Duke de l' Esdiguieres, he would manifest his Gratitude for the
good Offices he had received at his hands upon that occasion, by dividing with
him the Employments of this brave Command; wherein reserving to himself the
honor and emoluments of the place: The Duke de l' Esdiguieres, under the Title
of Marshall General de Camp, executed all the Functions, and trouble of it.
The Duke of Espernon therefore, finding at his coming to this Siege so many
Commanders in Chief, represented to his Majesty: That since he had first had
the honor to be in Armies, he had never been commanded by any but the Kings
his Masters, nor had ever received Orders, but from them: That therefore iin
the age he now was, he should be very froward, and refractory, to lose that
advantage, and to be subjected to the Marshall de l' Esdiguieres, whose worth,
though he had in high honor and esteem, he believed nevertheless, that the
Marshall himself would not pretend to be above him: That he was both an older
General, an older Officer of the Crown, and of much longer standing, than the
other, in all the Dignities to which they had both been advanced; and that
therefore he assured himself his Majesty would not deprive him of a preeminence
due to his age, whereunto the Kings his Predecessors had raised him, and
wherein they had so long maintained him, which was the only thing he had to
desire of his Majesty, that he might live satisfied in his Service. Neither did
the King ^tick franckly to gratify him in his request, which was also allowed
to be so reasonable by all, that even those whose interest it had been to
dispute it, cheerfully acquiesc'd in his design.

After this the Duke going to view the Leaguer, he especially staid at that
Post, where the Marquis de la Valette his Son (who had one of the approaches
committed to his Conduct) commanded in Chief, and where not being able to
contain himself within the discretion of a Superficial Survey, the present
danger calling up his wonted Valor, and the frost of old Age, not being of
force to freeze his natural heat, he had no sooner spied in the Trenches one of
the eldest Captains of the Regiment of Guards, but that calling him to him, he
made him mount with him upon the Parapet, at open view of the Enemy, to
consider the strength, and situation of the place with the order of the Siege.
Those who were with him, were not a little troubled to see him without any
necessity expose himself to so manifest a peril; neither did they fail (though
they from the Town sufficiently showed him that, by the numerous Musket Shot
they made at him) to represent to him several times the danger he was in: but
he, taking no notice of them that pressed him in vain to retire, continued
still his discourse with the Captain, showing him here and there what he
observed to be well, or ill disposed in the order of the Leaguer, with as much
indifferency, as he had been in the securest place in the world: a piece of
bravery, it is said, the old Soldier could have been well content to have been
excused from; it being, as he conceived, very much out of season: when the Duke
having told him in the end, that it was fit they should let the young people
see, their white Beards were not to be frighted away with noise, he came down
at last, to the astonishment of all in the Trenches, who saw the action, that
he could carry it with that unconcernedness, and strange security, in so
desperate a place.

The Duke, having thus taken a view of the Town, The Duke of Espernon applye^
himself to the S^ege.
gave himself instructions for their further proceeding in their Works; which
the Marquis his Son executed with so extraordinary diligence, that they had
soon made their approaches to the very graff of the City, and had nothing left
to do, but to open their Trench. We were in those times very raw in Sieges, and
the way of opening a Trench was so new, that very few knew which way to go
about that kind of Service; wherein the Duke highly manifested his courage and
experience, and to such a degree, that all the rest, who had hitherto had the
ordering of the Siege, seemed only Spectators of his conduct, all the other
works either totally ceasing, or being but negligently carried on, and his only
going forward; as indeed it was on that part that the Town was taken.

Having therefore set a time for the opening the Trench, which was St. John's
Eve, the Duke went that morning very early to the Trenches; and having the
night before prepared all things ready for his design, and amongst other things
given order to the O^ficers of the Artillery, to play their Cannon by break of
day to beat down the defenses of the City, he was by the noise of this Battery
called up from his Quarters. The Enemy on the other side, having intelligence
of what was intended against them, had prepared to make a resolute resistance;
so that though the Cannon, which, from two Batteries raised upon the very edge
of the Graffe, had in two hours time by near upon five hundred shot made great
ruins in the Walls, yet had they not prevailed so far, but there were still
two Flanckers remaining, which cut the Duke off a great many very worthy men,
as well of his own Domestic Servants, The Marquis de la Valette, receives a
Musket Shot before St. Iean d^* A^gely.
as others his very particular Friends The Marquis de la Valette (who shared
with his Father in the glory of this action) was at the opening this Trench
wounded by a Musket Shot which broke his ankle bone all in pieces: Carbonnie
Captain of the Guard to the late Duke de Biron, a man of great Valor, and a
particular Servant of the Duke's by a Musket Shot in the head was there slain:
Brignemont the Gentleman of the Duke's Horse, and Brother to the Count de
Maille, received another in his thigh, of which he died a few hours after; as
also many others were either slain outright, or dangerously wounded: which
happened by an inconvenience for which there was no remedy, which was, that the
Graffe of the City being exceeding deep, the Trench could not be carried on so
low, but that they were necessitated to leap from a great height into it; by
which means most of those, who had thrown themselves into that danger, received
this disadvantage, before the Ditch could be filled up with Bavins: but how
great soever the danger was, the Duke never stirred from the mouth of the
Trench, but stood open, and exposed, and in his Doublet only, till he had seen
the Quarter made, which by l' Encheres, and le Roc two Aides de Camp, was at
last brought to perfection; the last of which was slain in the attempt, the
other came more happily off, though it was only soon after in a very handsome
action, to meet the same misfortune. The day after, the Duke having renewed his
Batteries, and by them made the two Flanckers useless, which rendered that Post
very unsafe; the besieged fell into so great a fear, that seeing our men
already lodged at the foot of their Walls, and that the Miners were about to
sap, St. Iean de Angely surrendered.
they sued to be admitted to Capitulation, attributing by common consent the
whole honor of the Siege to the Duke of Espernon, as indeed by his conduct it
was evidently two months advanced.

For the rest, as the Duke had most contributed to the reducing this place, or
because it was a member of his Government, or that his Authority was more
absolute with the Soldier than any of the rest, or out of deference to his
Command as Colonel, or out of the respect his age, and merit had acquired him
above all others: upon some, or all these considerations it was so ordered,
that he himself was the first man that entered into the Town. And happy it was
for that poor City he did so; for some French and Swisse Foot, having got over
the ruins of the Breach (whilst those within were intent about letting such as
were appointed to enter into the Gates) were already upon the spoil, and
principally busy about plundering the Ministers house, The Duke of Esp^rnon
preserves the Town of St. Iean de Angely from being sacked by the Soldier.
which the Duke having notice of, he ran himself immediately to the place,
where he caused all that had been taken away to be restored, drove away the
rest from the other houses, and set all things in order; a care in him whereof
I was a witness, and without which the King had had the dishonor to have seen
his faith violated before his own eyes: but the Duke by this action made it
plain, that if he knew how to conquer, he knew as well how to provide for the
safety of those he had overcome.

All the Commotions of those of the Religion having taken birth from the
Rochellers obstinacy to continue the Assembly they had called together in their
City, in defiance of the King's express Command, The Duke of Espernon's
employment before R^ch^^le.
and that they still continued to uphold to the prejudice of his Royal
Authority; his Majesty's Council conceived it more than a little concerned his
reputation, to make this mutinous people feel the smart, their contumacy, and
disobedience had so highly deserved. The ill example of this City had so
corrupted the other parts of the Kingdom, and had begot so many disturbances to
the public peace, as had necessitated his Majesty in his own person to run up
and down to so many several places to suppress them, that in the beginning he
could never be at leisure to sit down before Rochelle, the living source of all
those mischiefs; as he did some years after, and that with a success posterity
will hereafter look upon, as a prodigy of Fortune, and Conduct. But for an
undertaking of that difficulty, and importance, it was necessary his Majesty
should make choice of some Subject of great Valor, and approved Fidelity, and
such a one as could no way be suspected to have intelligence, either with the
Rochellers themselves, or any others of their party: qualities that appeared so
eminent in the person of the Duke of Espernon, as that they seemed to be in him
united to no other end, than to point him out for this Employment. To which may
be added, that as being Governor of the Country of Aulnis, where Rochelle
stood, as also of the bordering Provinces of Xaintonge, and Angoumois; he could
for a need upon the single account of his own Interest, and Authority, draw so
great Forces from those places to his assistance, that his Majesty should not
in the least be necessitated to slacken the vigor and progress of his other
Victories, for any accident that could happen on that side.

Upon these considerations his Majesty resolved to confer upon him the Command
of the Army before Rochelle, The Duke receives the command of the Army at
Cognac.
the dispatches whereof were Signed at Cognac the 4th of ^uly, and at the end
of the same month, the Duke presented himself before Rochelle; so diligent he
was in the execution of his Charge. He had only four thousand Foot, and six
hundred Horse, wherewithal to block up this great City, whereof the Regiment of
Estissac (which soon after fell to the Count de Bury) of the old, but one of
the least of the old Regiments, was one; the others were all new raised men,
and commanded by le Chevalier de la Valette, Chasteliers, Barlot, Castelbayart,
and Saint Geme. The Horse were indeed exceeding sprightly, and good, and those
composed of the Company of the Queens Gens d' Arms, commanded by the Baron de
Chantal. of that of the Camp Master to the Light Horse, commanded by Viantais,
of the Company of the Duke's Gens-d' Arms, and some other very good Troops. He
had for Mareschaux de Camp, d' Auriac Cousin to the Duke de l' Esdiguieres, a
Gentleman of great valor and experience, Biron Brother to the late Marshall
of France, Sauve^oeuf, and le Mass, Lieutenant to the Company of Gens-d' Arms.

The Duke finding he should stand in great need of an Intendant de Justice to
ease him in part of the trouble, He obtains of the King Monsieur d' A^try now
Chancellor of France, for Int^ndant de Justice in this expedition.
and care of his command, he cast his eye upon Monsieur de Autry, Nephew to
President Seguier his very intimate friend, for that purpose, whom he
recommended to the King, pa^sionately beseeching his Majesty to invest him with
that Employment: a person that we have since seen raised to the supreme Dignity
of Chancellor of France; an Office that he does at this day discharge with so
unblemished a repute, as is nothing inferior to the greatest men of those who
have preceded him in that charge; though at this time he had been but lately
admitted into the Council in the quality of Master of Requests. He had not long
continued with the Duke, before he gave as favorable a Character of his worth,
and merit, as could possibly belong to a man of his condition, judging him
thence forward worthy, and capable of all the great preferments a man of his
Robe, and Profession, could reasonably expect, or pretend unto.

So soon as the Troops appointed for this Service could be drawn together, the
Duke appointed the Rendezvous to be about Surgeres, a house belonging to the
Baron de Montendre, which he took up for his own Quarter, and, without giving
the Enemy further respite, brought them two days after before the City, to try
if the Rochellers, who had had time enough to prepare themselves, would be so
brave, as to receive him in the Field; though they contented themselves with
bestowing upon him some Volleys of their great shot only (which did no body any
hurt at all) without once offering to stir out of their Walls. At his return
from this little piece of bravery, the Duke came to take up his Quarters in two
great Buroughs, a quarter of a League distant from one another, The Duke of
Espernon takes up his Quarters before Rochelle.
whereof that he made choice of for his own Post was called la Iarrie, and the
other Croix-Chapeau, where he disposed the rest of his Army (as eldest
Camp-Master) under the command of d' Auriac. The distance of the Quarters from
the City was a League, or thereabouts, far enough to discover the Enemy a great
way, should he attempt to disturb him, and not so far neither as to leave him
too much liberty of the Field.

Having thus settled his Quarters, he began to plant Garrisons upon all the
Avenues of the City, as well to keep the Enemy in, as also to cut off from them
all Commerce with the adjacent Country: In such places as he found either
Castles, or Churches he lodged them there, making shift elsewhere with Mills,
and private houses. Which Garrisons in some places consisted of an hundred, in
others of fifty men: but scarce any above an hundred. To these he gave
particular instructions to take especial notice of all things within the
observation of their own Quarter; to stop all such as would either offer to go
into, or come out of the City; and to hinder the Enemy from gathering in their
Harvests of Corn and Wine. The Foot being thus ordered, he caused the third
part of the Cavalry to mount every day to Horse to scour the Field, even to the
very Gates of Rochelle: So that should any thing by chance pass by the Foot, it
was almost impossible to escape the Horse: by which means those few Forces
being carefully provided for, and so advantageously quartered, did in a few
months so incommodate the Rochellers, that they found themselves absolutely
deprived of all manner of Relief by Land; insomuch that had any Shipping at the
same time been employed to block up the Channel, they could not, without all
doubt, long have wrestled with those necessities they must have apparently
fallen into: but this was a Victory too glorious to be reserved for any other
than the King himself.

Of all these little Garrisons (which (though they had drawn no lines of
Communication) made shift nevertheless to make up the Circumvallation of the
City) there was never any one forced by the Enemy: it is very true that they had
attempted upon some of them, both by day, and by night: but the Duke having
ever been seasonably alarmed, always came in time enough to relieve his own
men, and to make the Enemy with loss to retire: Losses that were at last so
frequent, and considerable, as that it is most certain they lost in several
engagements, betwixt twelve, and fifteen hundred men: Whereof some of those
Skirmishes had been so brisk, as that therein sometimes two, sometimes three
hundred men were left dead upon the place; besides a great number of Citizens,
and Officers of note taken Prisoners, whose Ransomes were very considerable.

The Duke every week duly twice, sometimes thrice mounted on horseback in his
own person to visit his Quarters; which could not be done, without coming very
near the Town: and this commendation is due to the Rochellers, that they never
saw the Duke's Horse approach their City, without sallying out to Skirmish: but
it is also as true, that they never returned with the least advantage.

They were sometimes so bold, as to attempt upon the Duke's own Quarters; but
they were no more fortunate in assaulting, than when they were themselves
assaulted. I shall not undertake a Narrative of all the several actions that
passed in the beginning of this Siege, Several actions before Rochelle, betwixt
the Duke of Espernon, and the besieged.
though very remarkable in themselves; forasmuch as they did not determine the
business: There was one great engagement at la Moulinette, another at la Font,
another at Tadon, and so many others that the Duke, and the Marquis de la
Valette his Son (who always made one upon all occasions) ran very often very
great hazard of their lives. The first whereof had the brims of his Hat bored
through with a Musket Shot in one Encounter, and the truncheon he carried in
his hand broke all to pieces with another Musket Shot in another; the Marquis
had one of his Stirrop^leathers carried away, and his Horse killed under him
with such another shot: but the Enemy having in these Skirmishes lost a great
number of their best men, and many of their Citizens (a loss at which they were
more concerned, than for the Gentlemen of the best quality of their party) they
at la^t resolved to make no more Sallies, contenting themselves for the future,
with defending the circuit of their own Walls, and preserving their City from
the practices and intelligence the Duke maintained with some of the
Inhabitants; which was gone so far, that those he had dealt withal, were upon
the point to deliver him up one of the Gates of the City; when upon several
conjectures, the Magistrates having found out the truth at last, they exposed
the parties (whom they called Traitors) to the violence of the people, by whom
they were all torn to pieces.

After the Rocbellers had taken a resolution no more to hazard their Forces in
the Field, some active spirits in the City impatient of lying idle, and
immured, laid several designs to go further off to make trial of their Valor:
amongst whom la Noue was one of the first, and most eager, though not the most
fortunate in the execution of his design. This Gentleman upon the intelligence
he had received, that the Count de la Rochefoucaust was parted from his
Government of Poictou, on purpose to come visit the Duke at la Iarrie, had laid
himself in ambush in the Forest of Benon to surprise him; but the Duke
advertised of his March by the Country people (who (to preserve their Houses
from firing, and themselves from punishment) never failed diligently to inform
of whatever they could discover of the Enemies designs) sending out his Company
of Gens-d' Arms, took la Noue in his own Ambuscado; where, after he had made
all the resistance could be expected from a very gallant man, he was at last
constrained to give way to his ill fortune, and to yield. He was therefore
brought prisoner to the Duke, who for sometime entertained him in his Camp with
all imaginable civility; giving him leave moreover upon his parole to go see
his Mother in Poicto^: of which the King being informed, his Majesty gave the
Duke to understand he was infinitely dissatisfied with that favorable
proceeding toward a man, by whom he had been so often, and so highly offended;
commanding withal that he should forthwith send him to the Prison belonging to
the Parliament of Bordeaux, that he might there be brought to his Trial. La
Noue in the mean time had surrendered his person to the Duke to disingage his
word; whom the Duke (who could now no longer allow him the liberty of his Camp)
sent away by two of his Guard to the Castle of Angoulesme. La Noue in this
condition, and advertised of the express and reiterated Orders the King had
sent to the Duke, to use him no longer as a prisoner of War, but as a Criminal,
and a Rebel, began to apprehend he should at last be delivered up into the
hands of Justice indeed: and consequently thence forward began to think of
making his escape; as in the end, either through the negligence, or connivance
of his Keepers he did; by that means delivering the Duke from the perplexity he
was in, either of offending the King by insisting too long against his
Majesty's pleasure for this Gentleman's preservation, or of giving his consent
and assistance to the ruin of a man of his condition, which he could very
hardly have ever persuaded himself to do.

Whilst the Duke lay before this place, The first propositions that were made
to the Duke for the blocking up the Harbor of R^chelle.
he had several propositions made to him, about the shutting up of the Haven;
for such of his Majesty's Vessels as were commanded to lie in the mouth of this
Channel, finding they were not able to hinder the en^rance into it to any that
had a mind to go in; some other way was to be tried to deprive the besieged of
the benefit of this Pass. Pompeo Targone therefore, an Italian Engineer of
great repute, and that had long served in the King of Spain's Armies in
^landers, was sent to view the disposition of the place, and to consider of the
means by which the Port was to be rendered useless: In order whereunto having
long considered the nature of the Channel, he propounded at last a Machine,
which was an Estacade, or kind of floating Fort; though the Duke could never
relish that proposition, always disputing it must be some solid body that could
block up the mouth of this Harbor, and demonstrating withal which way it was
to be done: The very same in truth they were at last fain to resolve upon,
after having made a vain and fruitless trial of all the rest. I have yet by me
a Copy of what he afterward writ to the Duke of Angoulesme upon this very
subject, when that Duke commanded before the place: So that I may confidently
say, the Duke of Espernon, what by his own proper Forces (as in his first
expedition before Rochelle) what by his conduct of the King's (as upon this
occasion) and what by his advice (as we shall hereafter see) did no little
contribute to the glorious reducement of this place.

The Duke did yet another thing before he quitted his Command, which was not a
little conducing to this great success. The Isle of Maran was of so great
importance to the execution of this Enterprise, that it has ever been thought,
whilst the Rochellers should have it at their dispose, a thing almost
impossible to take that City, The surprizal of the Isle of Maron by the Duke of
Espernon.
by reason of the communication this Island gave them with Poictou, from whence
they might at great ease, and without any impediment at all, supply themselves
at any time, with all sorts of Relief. The Baron de Chandolan, a man of great
quality, and merit, who at this time showed himself very affectionate to the
King's Service, was Governor of this Isle, but he was notwithstanding of the
Rochellers Religion: so that the fidelity of a man, who having Religion for his
pretense might, whenever he pleased, and without any blemish to his reputation,
separate himself from his Majesty's interest, was not in reason altogether to
be relied upon; and the Duke also feared lest he might be persuaded into a
thing he might do with great security, and almost without reproach. He
therefore took up a resolution to possess himself of this Isle, to prevent any
inconvenience for the time to come; and having received his Majesty's command
to do it by the best means he could contrive, he rose from his Quarters one of
the coldest nights in Winter; a time when all the Ditches of the Island were
frozen up, and which the Duke therefore chose, as it rendered his access more
easy for the execution of his design. He therefore commanded some Foot
Companies to steal over silently, and by single Files, who that very night
possessed themselves of all the Avenues; and in the morning, having caused the
Ice to be broken, that he might himself pass over with his Horse, he made
himself Master of the Island without the least opposition: an action that
nevertheless he undertook with great reluctance, so great an affection and
esteem he had for the Governor: but his Duty ever carried it with him above
all considerations. The Chevalier de Valette was therefore established in this
Isle, and very opportunely; for had not the Duke taken this course, and that
the Rochellers who had a design to seize it, had once got footing there, great
force, and vast expense must have been employed to remove them: but the Duke by
this foresight saved the King that charge, and labor.

Certainly never was War carried on at greater convenience for the Soldier,
than in this Country, which by its situation, and vicinity to the Provinces of
Poictou, Xaintonge, and Angoumois, lay so exceeding conveniently for the
bringing in of all sorts of Provision, and other necessaries, that they were
scarce to be had in greater abundance, or at cheaper rates in the best Cities
of the Kingdom, than they were in the Camp continually to be sold; as also the
people came in with their commodities with as great confidence, and security,
as to the public and ordinary Markets: and they might do so, the least
violence to any Higler, Sutler, or other Provisionary Person, being a crime so
capital, as never escaped unpunished. By which we may judge how much the
continuation of our civil dissentions has impaired the flourishing condition
the Kingdom was then in, and how much the constitution of War by being grown
older, is altered from what it used to be in those better times.

Whilst the Duke thus bravely acquitted himself of his Command before Rochelle,
his Majesty had also with extraordinary vigor prosecuted his designs in
Guienne; where he had compelled most of the places possessed by those of the
Religion in that Province to submit to his Authority and Power. Of which he had
reduced Bergerac, Saint Foy, Puimirol, Tournon, Monflanquin, The King's
exploits in Guienne.
with several others; besieged, and taken Clerac, and at last laid Siege to
Montauban, though herein he had not been so successful, as in his other
enterprises: so that the year ending with this variety of Events, his Majesty
was constrained to return to Paris, to let the stormy quarter blow over, that
he might in a more favorable season recommence the interrupted progress of his
Arms.

In his Majesty's return to Paris, a little paltry place situated upon the
banks of the River Garonne, called Monhurt, had the impudence to stand out
against the Royal Army; an insolence which though it received its due reward,
proved notwithstanding fatal to the Duke de Luines, The death of the Duke de
Luines.
who by a burning Fever there ended his days: by whose decease both the place
he possessed in the King's favor, as also the Office of Constable of France
became void: The Duke of Mayenne had likewise a few days before left a vacancy
in the principal Government of the Kingdom, which was that of Guienne, by a
Musket Shot he received in his head before Montauban; by the fall of which two
great Ministers the King (as we shall hereafter see) had means to recompense
the Services of the Duke of Espernon, and the Marshall de l' Esdiguieres, two
of the eldest, and best deserving Servants of his Crown.

The Winter was no sooner a little abated of its fury, but that those of the
Religion, more elevated with the raising of the Siege of Montaubon, than they
had been dejected with the loss of so many other places, as the King had taken
from them, took the field to give his Majesty a new, and greater provocation
than before. Of these Soubize was the first that fell in his Majesty's way, who
having fortified himself in the Isle of Ree, and some other Islands of Poictou,
thought the difficulty of their access would protect him from the Royal Power:
but he soon found that all places are firm Land to Kings; when his Majesty
overcoming all difficulties, that opposed his way, passed over the Marshes, and
his own Fortifications within them, to fall upon him; where he gave him so
notable a defeat, that he could not of a long time after recover that blow, nor
put himself again into any tolerable posture of War.

So soon as the Duke of Espernon had intelligence of the King's motion toward
those Provinces, Anno 1622.
where he had the honor to command, The Duke of Espernon goes to the King at
Poictiers.
he designed a Journey to his Majesty, to give him an account of those
discoveries he had made whilst he lay before Rochelle, that were of greatest
importance to his design: a desire he had no sooner acquainted his Majesty
withal, but that he gave him leave to come to him to Poictiers; where he
accordingly arrived in the beginning of the year 1622. He could not possibly
desire a more favorable reception, than his Majesty was here pleased to give
him, who openly declared himself infinitely satisfied with his Service: neither
indeed could it by any one have been performed with greater fidelity, or to
better effect: so that the King being resolutely bent to punish the Rochellers
disobedience, had a great desire, that the Duke should still pursue the Siege,
as he had begun: But the Count de Soissons a young Prince of great courage and
expectation, having been prompted by his friends to ask some employment, he was
not handsomely to be denied any thing almost he could demand, every thing he
would pretend to seeming justly due to his Birth, and merit. Amongst all the
Commands of the Kingdom, that the Duke had before Rochelle was, without all
dispute, the most honorable; and the Duke had notice given him a few days
after his return to his Camp, of the importunate suit the Count de Soissons
made to have the Command of the Army under his charge conferred upon him; an
intelligence that perhaps the informer presumed would have been very unwelcome
to him: but if the Duke knew how to stand upon his punctilio, and to hold his
own amongst his equals, he also better understood than any man of the Kingdom,
what deference was due to the Princes of the Blood. He was therefore no sooner
advertised of the Count's desire, but that he was himself the first man to
second it; representing to his Majesty in his dispatches how much it stood him
upon to favor the inclinations of this young Prince, that he might the sooner
be made capable of performing those Services his Majesty was one day to expect
from his Valor and Conduct. He also renewed the same instances by word of
mouth, when his Majesty came a few days after out of Poictou into Xaintonge;
though when all was done he himself would never be prevailed upon to serve any
more in this Army under this new General. Monsieur d' Herbaut Secretary of
State, his old and particular friend, was commanded by the King to speak to him
about it, who represented to him: That his Majesty's intention herein, was not
in the least to diminish his Authority in the Army, nor to cut him off in the
least from the exercise of his Command: That if they took from him the vanity
of a Title only, they added much more to his effectual power: That the Army
being augmented by one half (as it was to be) there was no honorable exploit
he might not be able to perform by such an addition of Forces, since with so
few, as he had hitherto commanded, he had, to so glorious a pitch, advanced his
Majesty's designs: That his Majesty intended all things should be ordered by
his wisdom, and that this Prince's youth might be governed by his experience;
to the end that under ^o excellent a Discipline, he might betimes be trained up
to the profession of Arms. The Count also either of his own accord, or by the
King's order sent him the same complement at the same time; but the Duke
persisting never to have dependence upon other than Kings (from whom he said,
and from no other, all things by men of his condition, were to be expected) he
humbly besought his Majesty to excuse him from this employment, entreating
Monsieur d' Herbaut to tell the King from him: That he did not think himself
Soldier enough to instruct this young Prince so well, as he ought to be; but
that he likewise thought himself too old to begin to learn of any whomsoever.

After the Duke had sent the King this answer by Monsieur d' Herbaut, and that
he knew it had been well received, he went himself the same day to his Majesty,
where he told him: That he could never enough commend the good resolution his
Majesty had taken in the Count's favor: That he did with all his heart resign
into his Majesty's hands those Forces he had done him the honor to entrust him
withal, without diminution of number, and some increase of Reputation: That of
all the other Services he had heretofore performed for his Majesty, and the
Kings his Predecessors, in the long course of his life, he had ever expected
his reward from their bounty, without importuning them with his demands: but
that he should not do so here, being resolved to take upon him the boldness to
make one request; which as it would neither incommodate his Majesty's Affairs,
nor impair his treasure, he hoped would not be denied, and that was only, that
his Majesty would give him leave to serve about his own person in the simple
condition of a Volunteer: That his Governments of Xaintonge, and Angoumois,
being secure, whilst an Army should lie before Rochelle, his presence would be
altogether unnecessary there; and that therefore he humbly begged he might
partake of those dangers, to which his Majesty was about to expose his own
person; and that though he was now grown old, he found he had nevertheless
strength, and vigor enough remaining to dye in some glorious day, with a Pike
in his hand, at his Majesty's stirrup. Which being said, his Majesty embracing
him in his arms, returned this answer: That he did very freely grant him that
recompense, and that if he had many Servants on whom to bestow the like, and
who knew so well how to make use of it, he should think himself a much greater
Prince than he was: That notwithstanding he did not receive him in the quality
of a Volunteer, as he desired, but that he might assure himself he would ever
afford him such a place in his Armies, as that therewith he himself should be
very well content. And accordingly his Majesty having a desing upon Royan, he
dismissed the Duke with part of his Forces to begin the Siege.

In this sort the Duke quitted his employment at the Siege of Rochelle, The
Duke of Espernon sent to lay Sie^e to R^yan.
after having lain before it eight months complete: during which time the Army
had received five Musters, and yet complained of being ill used; though I
believe now adays they would be very well content to be so paid. The Duke being
approached near Royan, mounted on Horseback to view the place. This Royan was a
little City built upon a very high Rock by the Seaside, inaccessible on that
side toward the Water; the height whereof breaking off the impetuosity of the
Winds, at the foot of the precipice afforded a very secure Harbor to so many
Vessels as it could contain. This Harbor was defended by an ancient Castle
raised upon the eminence of the Rock, and in the midst of it a little way was
levelled, that lead to the Harbor by one of the Gates of the City. On that
side toward the Land the situation was more even; but there also so well
fortified, that in the opinion of all who viewed it either before, or after the
Siege, it was one of the most tenable places, for its circuit in France. To
which it had moreover this advantage, that it was almost without danger to be
defended; forasmuch as after their outworks should be taken (which could not
be till after a long Siege) the convenience of the Sea, and the vicinity of
Rochelle, rendered their retreat at any time so easy, and so secure, that it
was to be defended to the last extreme. The Baron de Saint Surin, a Hugonot,
and a Gentleman of great quality, and valor, though very young, had in the
beginning of these commotions surpised this place from la Chesnaye, one of the
King's Domestics of the same Religion; but infinitely zealous for his
Majesty's Service: neither was he ignorant of the advantages of the place; he
knew what reputation he might gain amongst those of his own party, and what
recompense from the King himself, after a long and obstinate resistance: but la
Mote Saint Surin his Brother, the Count de Marennes his Brother-in-law, and
Navailles his Cousin, having been taken prisoners at the Isle of Rhee, and the
King threatening to deal with them after another manner than with ordinary
prisoners of War, gave Saint Surin to understand, that upon his determination
depended the safety of his Allies. The Duke of Espernon, who had instructions
from the King to manage this Affair with Saint Surin, had to the King's menaces
added so many advantageous propositions for the Governor in his own
particular, as had altogether brought the business to that pass, that Saint
Surin, who had a great respect for the Duke, of whom he was also very much
esteemed, and entirely beloved, touched with a tenderness toward his friends,
and moreover very ill satisfied with the ill usage men of his condition
received from those of their own party (who were eternally exposed to the
capricious humor of the most abject rabble of Rochelle) had made him an
absolute promise to surrender the place. The day was set, the hour concluded,
and all things prepared for the execution, the King's Forces were advanced
toward the Town to receive it, and the Duke's Guards appointed to guard the
Gates of the City; when Saint Surin, more confident of his Garrison, than he
ought to have been, made no difficulty to go out of the place to settle some
Articles with the Duke he had not thought on before. ' ^ is true he had left
his Lieutenant, whom he had made firm to his own resolution, in the Castle; a
Fort that rendered him absolutely Master of the City, having a back Gate by
which the King's Forces might at any time be introduced, notwithstanding any
endeavor of the City to hinder his design: but Favas, Saint Ravy, Moulines,
and some other Gentlemen of Command, upon the rumor was spread at Rochelle of
this Treaty, ran thither in all diligence; where finding the Governor gone
out, and his Lieutenant called l' Arnaudiere, being so senseless as to come
open the draw Bridge of the Castle to talk with them in too great security,
Saint Ravy, assisted by one Poyanne, gave him a Pistol-shot in the head, by
which he was laid dead upon the place; which being done, they forthwi^h cried
to Arms, when the City immediately revolting from Saint Surin, his own
Garrison followed the same example; whereupon on a sudden such a noise was
heard within, as sounded nothing of the expected surrender.

The Duke in his approach to Royan had taken up his Quarters in a house called
Saint Pierre de Royan, which was within Cannon shot of the City and before
which was a little Green, which overlooking the City, had drawn thither a great
number of persons to behold, as from a Scaffold, the surrender of this place.
The Duke himself was there, where Monsieur d' Autry had been long discoursing
with him, and they were still walking together; when this cloud of people
having invited those within to level all the Iron, and Brass Pieces they had at
that eminence, there was heard on a sudden, one shot overtaking another, a
Volley of eighteen pieces of Ordnance, which all played into this little place.
And certainly after an example like this all Cannon-shot are to be despised,
when had they shot with a design to do no harm, they could hardly have been so
exact in their aim, as to miss so great a crowd of people, yet was not any one
touched; so that excepting the fear, that made some of the over-timorous lay
themselves flat upon the ground, it proved matter of laughter to all the rest.
The Duke was still talking, whilst the Cannon played from the City, with the
same indifferency, as if there had been no noise at all; neither did he once
break off his discourse, though the Bullets flew very thick about his ears: but
the tumult being over, conceiving these to be no Volleys of Triumph, and that
it was necessary, before the Enemy could have time to look about them, to take
all possible advantage of this confusion; he caused his men to betake
themselves to their Arms, himself immediately going down into the Suburbs;
which though very well Barricado'd, was nevertheless by reason of their
disorder ^o weakly guarded, that he carried it at the first assault, with
little or no resistance: a thing that in many days, and without the loss of a
great many good men, had he slipped this opportunity, he could not have done.
Saint Surin surpised at so unexpected an alteration, and not being able almost
to believe his own eyes, went down to demand the cause of this confusion; where
all the answer he could get, was to bid him begone, his Soldiers yet retaining
so much respect for his person, as not to shoot at him, though they would not
receive him; and then it was that he saw the error his youth, and want of
experience, had made him to commit. He therefore returned back to the Duke to
justify himself, who more compa^sionate of his disgrace, than troubled at his
own disappointment, received, and comforted him with great civility, and
friendship; entertaining him in his own Quarters, and giving him opportunity by
the Services he performed during this Siege, to wipe off the imputation of his
ill conduct, and to give the world high proofs of his bravery, and valor. His
good qualities after the War was over, and no more to do at home, carried him
to seek his destiny in Holland, and by that means depriving France of one of
the most accomplished Gentlemen to all purposes, and in all qualifications
commendable in a man of his condition, of his time. As to this business, the
Duke having undertaken his interests, against the ill offices of many who were
emulous of his desert, not only prevailed with the King to accept his excuses,
but as a recompense for the Passion he had observed in him to his Majesty's
Service, moreover procured the enlargement of his friends; ordering it so, that
his Piety was not rendered fruitless by his misfortune, and that what would have
been punished in the person of another, was rewarded in him.

The Suburbs of Royan being thus taken, they were now to proceed regularly in
their approaches for the taking of the Town, wherein though the Duke had made
choice of that part, where it was with greatest difficulty to be assaulted; yet
did he ply his business so well, that a Mine was brought up under the Bastion
he had undertaken. The King's Army in the mean time advanced to favor the
Siege, when his Majesty coming after to view the Trenches, resolved at last
upon an assault. The order therefore being given, and all things prepared for
the design, the Marquis de la Valette put himself in the head of his men,
seconded by the Guards of the Duke his Father, where he engaged himself so far
in the danger, that he was buried up to the middle in a Counter-Mine sprung by
the besieged, and where he had run a great hazard of his life, had not Montigny
the Gentleman of his Horse, a tall, and very strong man, helped to disingage
him. The Guards that followed avoided the danger of the Mine, but they found
nevertheless so smart an opposition at a work the besieged had cast up within
the Bastion, that of five and forty, whereof that Company consisted, two only
escaped without wounds. Fourteen were there slain outright, all the rest being
hurt more or less; but the three Officers, Marsillac, la Roche, and Larcan,
Brother to the Baron of Esclignac, who lead them on to the assault, were all so
desperately wounded, that there was small hope of their recovery. The Baron de
Mat^a, who had accompanied the Duke in this occasion, was slain upon the
Bastion by a great shot, as also several Gentlemen of the Duke's household; but
the rest, resolute to overcome all difficulties, lodged themselves at last in
the Bastion. The Marshall de Vitry who was present at this assault, Royan
taken, to the Duke of Espernon's great honor.
and who in this, as in all other occasions signalized himself with
extraordinary valor, gave them the glory of this performance, principally the
Chevalier de la Valette, who did wonders in his own person, from the beginning
to the end of the action. Thus by the Duke's admirable conduct, and the valor
of his followers this Siege was brought to an end in fewer weeks, than months
would have been allowed him, had he carried it on with less prudence, or
resolution. In this, as it often falls out upon other occasions of this nature,
so strange Wounds Strange Wounds.
were observed, as, their cures defeating all the rules of Art, passed for
miraculous. One of the Soldiers of the Duke's Guards called Faure received a
Cannon-shot in his Belly, which passed quite through, leaving an orifice bigger
than a Hat Crown; so that the Surgeons could not imagine, though it were
possible the Bowels should remain unoffended that nature could have supplied so
wide a breach, which notwithstanding she did; and to that perfection, that the
party found himself, as well as before. Another of the same condition called
Ramee, and of the same place (they being both Natives of St. Iean de Angely)
received a Musket Shot, which entering at his mouth, came out of the nape of
his neck, who was also perfectly cured: which two extravagant wounds being
reported to the King, his Majesty took them both into his own particular
dependence, saying those were men that could not die, though they afterward
both ended their days in his Service.

This place being reduced to the King's obedience, The march of the Kings Army
into Guienne, and their progress there.
there remained nothing more in Xaintonge worthy his Majesty's Arms, so that he
was at liberty to advance with all his Forces into Guienne. The Prince of Conde
had been sent thither before with the Vant-guard of the Army; where at his
Majesty's arrival he found Monravet taken by the Duke d' Elboeuf, and Themeins,
after a long and obstinate resistance, surrendered to the same Duke. Saint Foy
also, Clerac, le Mont de Marsan, with several other considerable places, were
reduced to his obedience, by the Marquis de la Force, de Lusignan, and de
Castelnau de Chalosse, who had taken them in; so that his Majesty finding
little to do in Guienne, passed speedily thence into Languedoc. Negrepolisse, a
little paltry ^own upon his way, was so impudent as to stand a Siege; but it
was soon taken by assault; and St. Antonin having after a Siege surrendered to
mercy, their temerity having put the King upon making some examples, the
neighboring places thought it convenient to fly to his Majesty's Clemency, to
evade the trial of his victorious Arms.

Whilst the King was taken up with these little exploits, the Duke of Espernon
had taken opportunity to look into his own Domestic Affairs, the better to fit
himself to follow, and serve his Majesty in his main expedition; which he had
so dispatched, as to come before the King to Tholouze; who arriving there a few
days after, the Army moved toward the higher Languedoc by the way of
Ca^cassonne, Beziers, Narbonne, and other good Cities; and the seven and
twentieth of August the whole Court arrived at la Verune, a little Town in
Languedoc: where the Duke received the honor of a Patent for Governor, and
his Majesty's Lieutenant General in Guienne, and for the particular Governments
of Chasteau, Trompette, as also of the City, and Citadel of Bergerac, with the
City and Castle of Nerac, in lieu of his Governments of Angoumois, Xaintonge,
Aulins, and Limousin.

From the time of their being together at Tholouze, the Prince of Conde having
converted the animosities he had conceived against the Duke, during the Regency
of the Queen Mother into a particular esteem; he was the first man that thought
of this Command in the Duke's favor: and though he had himself been Governor
of that Province, yet thinking it no prejudice to his Birth and Dignity, to be
succeeded by a man of his Merit, he first proposed him to the King. His Majesty
understood as well as any the importance of this Command, and having a little
before experimented in the person of the Duke of Mayenne, what a Governor of
Guienne could do, when debauched from his Duty, had been at great debate with
himself, upon whom to confer the honor of this great Employment. At the first
mention notwithstanding of the Duke of Espernon, he very favorably gave his
consent, and the constant testimonies he had always received of the Duke's
fidelity seeming to be security for him for the time to come, he gave the
Prince order to speak to him about it, and to let him know he had thoughts of
conferring upon him the honor of that command.

But all we who were of the Duke's Family, can witness there was not the same
facility in the Duke to receive this favor, there had been in his Majesty to
confer it: Not that he wanted ambition, ^or that his spirit did not prompt him
with great confidence in himself to aspire to the highest employments: but this
ambition also was not blind, and if on the one side he considered how great an
honor it would be to succeed the late King Henry the great of happy memory,
who had maintained himself in this Government, till he came to the Crown with
other first Princes of the Blood, and to have his Authority raised to that
height in his own native Country: he wisely weighed on the other side, that
amongst so many advantages he should meet with much trouble, and many
difficulties to balance the luster of that Dignity, with many occurrences that
he foresaw would be very cross and untoward. His present condition 'twas true
was not so shining, but it was also more calm; and his Authority was so
established in his own Governments, that there was none who was not acquainted
with his Justice, and who from the Infancy of his Administration, had not paid
so inviolate a respect to his person, that the reverence those Countries had
for him, seemed to be a natural quality in the people committed to his charge.
The Gentry and Populacy were equally obedient to him, and he lived amongst them
as free from trouble, as envy: whereas in Guienne, where his Government would
be shut up betwixt two Parliaments, he conceived that in the administration of
his charge it would be almost impossible to avoid many disputes, with the
members of the one or the other Body. Whilst he had only had to do with them in
the quality of a friend, he had found them exceedingly obliging, and all the
Gentry of the Province had ever paid him a very great respect: but he very much
doubted whether in such a degree of Authority he could preserve the friendship,
and affection of so many persons of quality as would be subjected to him. These
reasons made him long deliberate upon this Affair, and he was often tempted to
refuse it: but he was so importuned by his friends, and particularly by the
Duke of Guise, who came to wait upon the King in Languedoc, that he at last
resolved to embrace his Majesty's gracious offer: though I heard him say then,
and he has often confirmed it since, that he would never have been persuaded to
do it, had he not been before divested of the Citadel of Xaintes; assuring us,
that could he have kept that in the condition he had once put it, he would not
have exchanged those Governments he was already seized of, for any the best in
France.

Having therefore long deliberated before he could resolve, The Duke of
Espernon receives his Patent for the Government of Guienne.
he at last went to receive from the King's own hand his Patent for Governor
of Guienne, dated from the Camp of la Verune the 27. of August 1622. the news
whereof was no sooner spread abroad, but that all Guienne was as much
over-joyed at their good Fortune, to be governed by a Lord of their own
Country, and one that had already laid so many obligations upon it (there
being few Families of the Gentry, that had not been enriched by his bounty) as
the Provinces that saw themselves deprived of him, were afflicted, and
disconsolate at his loss. A privation the miseries they afterward endured made
them very sensible of a long time after; though they have at last found a
remedy in the person of the Marquis de Montauzier, the present Governor there;
who by his generous, and prudent administration, after having procured them all
the ease and comfort, the condition of the time will permit has either so
confirmed them in, or so reduced them to their obedience to the King, as has
secured them from many inconveniences, into which, by the ill example of their
Neighbors, they would otherwise have been seduced.

The Duke de l' Esdiguieres was at the same time promoted to the Office of
Constable of France: A comparison betwixt the Dukes of Espernon and l'
Esdiguieres, with some reflections upon the different ways of their advancement.
and since Fortune seems to have made choice of these two Lords (the most
eminent of their time) to manifest what she can do, when disposed to favor men
of extraordinary merit, it will not perhaps be altogether impertinent to
consider the several ways by which she raised them to that infinite pitch of
Honor. They were indeed very different both in the one and the others
promotion: In the advancement of the Duke de l' Esdiguieres, she was observed
to proceed with order, leading him through all the degrees of his profession,
and from the quality of a private Soldier, raising him step by step, in
revolution of time to the Dignity of Constable of France. He had never been
preferred from a less command to a greater, without having first been concluded
worthy of it; wherein Envy (which has seldom been known to be reconciled to
Virtue) never appeared his adversary; insomuch that he ever possessed all the
advantages of the one, without once proving the malignity of the other, and by
a favor particular to him alone, was so constantly fortunate, that his
happiness was never traversed with the least disturbance. He never undertook
any thing, how dangerous soever, where Fortune did not still smooth his way,
and level all difficulties before him, to favor his success, even beyond his
own expectation: and no less solicitous of his person, than partial to his
Affairs, was ever so ready to defend him from the least mischance, that
whatever he acquired of Greatness, Wealth, or Honor, scarce cost him so much
as one drop of blood. It is in truth very much to rise by so honorable, and so
easy a gradation, to such a place of greatness: but yet methinks it must
appear more strange, as it is more rarely found, to see a young man at twenty
years old raised to the highest pitch, to which Fortune, and Favor, when
combined, could possibly advance him: That a man envied of every one, justled
by all parties, abandoned by his own Benefactor, and persecuted by a mighty
King his Successor, should keep himself still upright, against all those
violent assaults. We have seen him wounded in several Engagements, blown up by
Mines, and swallowed in Precipices; notwithstanding all which he overcame all
difficulties by a vigorous resistance, triumphing at last over Envy it self: so
that if the one obtained from the world a favorable opinion by his Conduct,
the other forced it by his Vigor; constraining all France to confess, that
those Offices, and Honors which at first had prevented his desert, fell at
last very much short of his Virtue. Insomuch that if we find the one worthy of
Esteem, the other is no less worthy of Admiration; if the one was promoted by
ordinary means, the other rose to all his Advancements by extraordinary ways;
if the one leisurely, and by degrees arrived at greatness, there was a kind of
impetuosity in the promotion of the other; and yet his foot never slipped back:
and if the one supported his Fortune erected upon sure Foundations, the other
(which is very strange) even without any foundation at all, has raised his to
that prodigious height, as to carry it almost out of sight.

The Duke of Espernon, The Duke resolves to attend the King's person in his
expeditions.
though he had merited well enough from the Crown, to expect an acknowledgement
like this wherewith the King thought fit to gratify his desert, did yet
receive it rather as a new obligation for new, and greater Services, than as a
recompense for what he had already done; and conceiving that those he should
perform in his Majesty's own view, would best manifest his Gratitude; he
deferred till a fitter season, the taking possession of his new Government,
that he might not loss such opportunities, as the War was likely to offer him
whilst he should continue about the person of the King. He therefore attended
his Majesty to Narbonne, where some overtures being set on foot by the
Constable de l' Esdiguieres, and the Duke de Rohan in order to an
Accommodation: he thought he might conveniently make use of the interval of
this Treaty, for the accomplishment of a vow he he had formerly made to our
Lady of Monserrat.

The Duke's design was to go this Journey Incognito, to avoid the trouble of
many complements he was sure would be put upon him, if he should travel in his
ordinary State, in all places through which he was to pass; and to that end had
reduced his Train to a very small number, setting forwards almost so soon as he
had taken leave of the King, that he might prevent any rumor of his motion: but
he soon found it was far easier for him to reduce his attendance, than to
obscure his reputation, which had already so far got the start of his
preparation, and had so filled the neighboring Kingdoms with the reverence of
his name, The Duke of Espernon takes a Journey into Catalognia.
that he was no sooner entered into the King of Spain's Dominions, but he was
received in all places with infinite respect, and extraordinary honors. He was
in this Voyage accompanied by the Marquis de Varennes (made Governor of
Aiguemortes at his return) the Vicount de Fontrailles, the Count de Maille, the
Sieur de la Iliere Governor of Loches, six Gentlemen of his household, as many
of his Guards, and a necessary number of Officers; yet could he not, with all
his care to contract his Equipage, order it so, that he had not above fifty
persons in his Train: so troublesome a thing is Greatness. He lay the first
night at la Palm, a private house belonging to one of the Gentlemen who went
along with him, and the next day passed close by the Castles of Laucate, and de
Salses, two little Fortresses which at that time divided the Kingdoms of
France, and Spain; by the distance of which from our Frontiers as they now
stand, it may be seen how far our Conquests have extended the limits of our own
Kingdom. Two days after he came to Perpignan.

Here it was that the Duke first perceived how fruitless all his caution to
conceal his person had been, The Duke's reception in all the Cities through
which he passed.
he finding at his arrival there the Garrison already drawn out to receive him;
and the Governor so soon as he was alighted coming to his Lodging to kiss
hands, and to offer him admittance into the Citadel; though the Duke making no
other advantage of his Complement, than in such a case he ought to do, after
having returned his thanks in the most civil terms so obliging an invitation
required, would still remain in the Town. He parted thence the next morning
before day, it being necessary to avoid the excessive heats of the Country,
and the season, to end his Journey by six of the clock in the morning, and to
repose himself the rest of the day. And here he was likewise constrained,
either for fear of wanting forage for Horse, or with less difficulty to pass
the Mountains and Rocks, to leave his Horses, and to mount upon Mules. The
Gates were set open for him at the appointed hour, and two Troops of the
Garrison Horse were found ready to convoy him two Leagues from the City: he was
moreover saluted by all the Artillery at his departure. A complement so loud,
as the adjacent Country being thereby given to understand, that so unusual an
honor was not paid to a person of ordinary condition, he found at Stelrie, at
Girone, at la Roque, and the other places through which he passed, that the
Spanish pride hindered not their gravity from paying all due honor, and respect
to Virtue.

He came at last to Barcelona, where the Duke de Alcala Viceroy of Catalognia,
so soon as he heard of his arrival, came in person to visit him, excusing
himself in that he had not had timely notice of his coming, that he might have
come out to meet him, and to receive him without the City, as he said, he had
order from the King his Master to do. Being returned home, it was not long
before he sent the Duke his Coach of Ceremony, drawn by six great and very
beautiful Gennets, for him to go abroad, and take the Air. A sight at which
the Duke (who had ever been, and who continued to his death a great lover of
the Horses of Spain) was almost impatient, that so noble Creatures should be
subdued to so mean a use: nevertheless (so great is the contagion of example,
especially where the glory of emulation seems to be concerned) that he was
afterward himself the first who showed such another set of Horses in France;
he being a few years after, very often observed in the Course at Paris in a very
rich Coach, drawn by six dapple-Gray Spanish Horses; to which I could add that
it was in the company of Ladies too, and that at the age of threescore and ten,
he was content to be seen playing the young man, upon the greatest Theater of
Europe. He staid two whole days at Barcelona, during which time he viewed at
leisure the greatness, and beauty of the City. The Viceroy invited him to his
Palace, where he had assembled the best company of men to wait upon him, and
the finest women in the Town to entertain him, which was a very extraordinary
favor. This civility was moreover attended with a Ball, a Comedy, and a noble
Banquet: and from hence the Viceroy carried him to the Course, which extends it
self in very great length upon the Seashore, and where we could not but wonder
at the delicacy of that people, the Ghing of all the Galleys in the Harbor
being drawn out every night to water this Course, which is above two thousand
paces long. We at first thought it an extraordinary thing, done only in favor
of the Duke: but we were soon dispossessed of that error, when we understood
that the Inhabitants, to defend themselves from the dust, and to qualify the
excessive ardours of the Sun, had imposed this new task as an addition to the
other intolerable labors of their miserable slaves.

From Barcelona the Duke went at last to Monserrat, where he continued three
days entire at his Devotion, not without admiring the excellent Economy
observed in this Abbey, where there are ordinarily above two thousand five
hundred persons provided for every day; for which all the provisions so much as
wood, and water must be fetched a great way off upon Mules, the Rock being so
dry, and unfruitful, as neither to afford the one, nor the other of these, much
less the other necessa^ies of life. The Duke presented the Abbey with many very
rich, and noble Ornaments, adding to his Presents an Alms of five hundred
Crowns of Gold, for three thousand Masses, and so returned into France. The
Religious Governors of this Abbey never take any money for their Hospitality,
which they in Charity bestow upon all Pilgrims indifferently of what condition
soever for three days together: but they also never refuse how much soever any
one is disposed to give for Masses.

During the Duke's abode in this place, those of his followers who were
nimblest of Foot, had the curiosity to climb the top of the Mountain to see the
Hermitages, which, being thirteen in number, are situated upon the most
inaccessible precipices of the Rock, and inhabited by so many devout persons,
who subsist upon almost no other nourishment than Herbs, and Fruit. Though we
met with great difficulty, and danger in this attempt, and had very much ado to
satisfy our desires; we saw nevertheless, that one of the most unwieldy, and
unready footed Animals, that is to say, a Mule went twice a week the same way,
alone, and without being guided, to carry these good people their allowance,
and could with great security set his four feet in very narrow paths, where we
had much ado to dispose of our two; so great a privilege has Custom: but what
we thought the most strange of all, was, to see Birds of all sorts, and of
those kinds which with us are the most wild, and untractable, so familiar with
these Holy men, as to peck meat out of their mouths, and suffer themselves to
be handled, living in as great security with them, as amongst us those of more
docile natures, which we have reclaimed, and made tame with the greatest
diligence, and art.

At his return from this Voyage, The Duke of Espernon returns out of Catalognia
the Duke found the Treaty absolutely broken off, and the King ready to sit
down before Unel; an Enterprise wherein his Majesty was pleased to make use of
the Duke's person, and particular Servants, as he did afterward at the Siege
of Somnieres, at both which Leaguers the Duke lost many Gentlemen of great
Valor and Desert. Of which number P^igeolet a Captain in the Regiment of
Guards, and who had but lately quitted a Lieutenancy in the Regiment of
Piedmont, for this preferment, was one, as also Courbon, l' Enchere, Brouls,
and some other Officers of name who depended upon him.

These two places having given but a very little stop to the progress of the
Royal Arms, The Siege of Montpelli^r.
and his Majesty still pursuing the Chase of Victory, he resolved to lay Siege
to Montpellier; a design of so high a nature, as required the condition of the
place should be exactly* and maturely considered, before they ought to come to
a determinate resolution. It had in one year been fortified to a miracle, even
in the opinion of those who were best read in Forti^ication; which if it had
not been, the defects of the place would notwithstanding have been sufficiently
recompensed in the Valor of the Governor, that had been very considerable in
an open Village. It was the Sieur de Calonges of whom I speak, a Gentleman
equally to be esteemed for his wit, and bravery; qualities that made him looked
upon so long, as he lived, for an extraordinary person in his own Province,
whither he at last retired himself, as full of honor, as empty of ambition, to
end his days, after having performed many signal Services for his Prince, by
dying to expiate the glorious fault he committed against his Majesty in his
gallant behavior at this Siege. The Duke of Espernon having long been
acquainted with this Gentleman's virtues, who had formerly out of his own
affection tied himself to his Service, and even in his disgraces paid him a
respect at Court above all other great men of the Kingdom, gave such a
Character of him to the King, as proved too true in the revolution of this
Siege.

The Constable de l' Esdiguieres, by the prerogative of his place, having the
principal command of the Army, would (with good Title) go to view the place,
and the Duke, who disputed nothing with him, but who also received no more
orders from him now he was Constable, than when he was only Marshall General
de Camp, was also commanded by the King to do the same. The Constable went out
first, accompanied with a strong party of Horse, as the Duke also was with some
Gentlemen: but he forgot not to take his Guards along, who proved very
serviceable to him, and also to the Constable in this occasion.

The Duke of Espernon had not advanced far in order to his discovery, before he
was fired upon by some Musketeers of the City planted in the hedges, in which
Volley the Count de Maille who was talking with him, received a Musket Shot in
the face, which put him in great danger of his life: some others were also
hurt, and the mischief would have been greater, had not the Duke commanded la
Roche the Lieutenant of his Guard with his Companies, to alight, and beat the
Enemy from their Post; which he having without much difficulty performed, and
the Duke conceiving that Monsieur de l' Esdiguieres would meet with the same
entertainment, he dispatched away la Roche to do the same Service for him, if
occasion should require. Neither could he have arrived in a better time, for
the Constable having taken no Foot with him (as the Duke had very well
observed) the Horse that attended him, at the rattle of the Musqu^t-shot, began
to face about, the craggy, and difficult passes not permitting them to come up
to charge the Enemy, who in great security fired very thick upon them; insomuch
that the Constable, abandoned by his men, would perhaps have been himself
obliged shamefully to retire, had not the Duke's Guards come opportunely in to
clear his way. But meeting, after this little brush with no further opposition,
he soon after joined himself with the Duke near Pont Iuvenel, where they both
alighted, and where after the Duke had a little rallied him about his disorder,
they continued a great while in consultation to consider a Plot of the place
presented before them, and went afterward together to the King's Quarter to
make their report.

Immediately upon their return, the King called a Council of War, to resolve
upon the manner of carrying on the Siege, where the Duke did not only propose,
but did moreover with many powerful Arguments maintain, that they were
especially to possess themselves of the Hill Saint Denis; an eminence near the
City, from whence the inside of all their Fortifications were so easily
discovered, A prudent counsel of the Duke of Espernon, which, not being
followed, cost the lives of a great many very brave men.
that it was impossible (that post being well secured, and furnished with good
Artillery) for the Enemy, either to go from the Town, to the defense of their
outworks, or to remain secure within. But this prudent advice, that being
followed had in^allibly made the King, within fifteen days, master of the
place, and saved the lives of as many persons of Quality, and Valor, as ever
his Majesty lost in any one Enterprise of this kind, wa^ contradicted by
Chabans, the same that has been mentioned be^or^ in the Queen Mothers Affair.
This man had, during the time of the Duke de Luines his favor, obtained some
employment at Court, where, being a man of sense, and very well read in the
busine^s of the ^ime, he had raised himself very considerable friends to
support him: So that those who were enemies to the Duke (which were ever a very
sufficient number) prompted Chabans to dispute his opinion in the Council, not
considering the King's Service, and Interest, when they came in competition
with the injury, and affront they intended against the Duke; which Chabans so
effectually performed, as to cause a determination quite contrary to what the
Duke had advised, to be resolved upon. A thing I observed the Duke at his
return from the Council very much nettled at, and heard him give Chabans some
very bitter language about it: but the oversight was already committed, and the
more unhappily, by how much it was never to be repaired: of so great importance
it is to husband the opportunities of War, where a moment's neglect draws after
it an irreparable loss.

Immediately upon the breaking up of the Council, they fell to work on all
hands to advance the Siege. The Trenches were opened, when those within soon
perceiving of how great importance the forementioned eminence was to their
common conservation, they there cast up a little Work, and left some Soldiers
to Guard it. Which Guard was no sooner planted there, but that our Commanders
eyes being opened, they saw the error they had committed in not possessing
themselves of that Post whilst it might have been done without any opposition.
They therefore now resolved to fo^ce it, and succeeded in the attempt; for
assaulting it by night, and the besieged not daring to sally out of the Town in
the dark to relieve their men, they suffered it to be taken, the Guards giving
our Soldiers leave to make themselves masters of their Works, almost without
any resistance: But (as it often falls out) the facility of this little Victory
having made our people as negligent to its conservation, as if it never ought
more to be disputed with them, they took no care at all to perfect the Works,
that to their hands had already been begun: Neither was this the sole
oversight was committed in this Affair; for the Duke of Espernon (as true in
his predictions, as unhappy in prevailing with these good counsels his long
experience suggested to him) had advised that a sufficient Guard of Horse
should be planted near to the Fort, to beat back any that should dare to sally
out of the Town, to drive our men from their post. He knew very well that the
enemy had few, or no Horse, and that therefore they durst not without infinite
danger hazard their Foot to come to us, the space between being large enough to
give our Cavalry room to come to charge, and to cut them in pieces before they
could come to the Fort that we kept; and Calonge has since confessed to me,
that had his counsel been followed, he should never have dared to sally out, it
being not to be done without manifest ruin, and that consequently within ten
days he must have been necessitated to a surrender: Another prudent advice of
the Duke of Espernon's rejected.
but this second advice was rejected as well as the first, through the
opposition of some who cared not to overthrow the King's Affairs, provided they
could thereby discredit the Duke's conduct, or traverse his designs.

All these over-sights of ours being taken notice of by Calonges, he would no
longer defer to re-possess himself of what had been taken from him; especially
considering, that he could not otherwise preserve the place; to render
therefore his action more illustrious by the light, and to put a greater infamy
upon our confusion, he sallied out at high noon, at the head of five hundred
Foot, seven and twenty Cuirassiers, fourteen Carabins, and two Trumpets: with
which small party he fell so vigorously upon the Fort, that it was abandoned to
him with little or no resistance. The noise of this sally at so unexpected an
hour, and the place where the action was perform^d (by its height exposed to
the view of the whole Army) soon called all the King's Forces to the relief of
their Friends; insomuch that many Lords of very great quality, and a great
number of Gentlemen, who happened to be at that time in the King's Lodgings,
mounted upon little pad Nags, most of them without Boots, or other Arms than
their Swords, to signalize their Valor in the sight of their Prince, who was
himself spectator of the Action. Of these the Duke of Fronsac, a young Prince
of great expectation was one, the Duke of Montmorency another, the Marquis de
Beuuron, Hocque^ot (Lieutenant of the Gendarmes to the Prince) Cambalet,
Fabregues, with many other Gentlemen of note; of all which not one escaped,
excepting the Duke of Montmorency; and he with two thrusts of a Pike in his
Breast: so that this unfortunate succor serving only to augment our loss, and
to condemn those who had contradicted the Duke's opinion* he received, to his
great grief, a public reparation, which he could have been heartily glad to
have failed of, rather than it should have been purchased at the price of so
much noble Blood, and so notable a disadvantage to the Royal Arms. Le Plessis
Baussonniere, Marshall de Batta^le of the King's Arms, bravely fighting
escaped in this first occasion, though he was therein desperately engaged: but
he was not so fortunate in another that ^ollow'd soon after, at the storming a
Half Moon; where after having given his orders for the assault, and put himself
(as his custom was) in the head of the Assailants, encouraging as well by his
example as his voice those he led on to fight, he lost an eye by a
Musket Shot, which soon after occasioned the loss of his life.

After so much blood spilt, the difficulties of the Siege daily increasing, the
Duke de Rohan was glad to make use of a juncture, wherein his party had some
little advantage, to procure a more favorable Peace; The Peace concluded
before Montpelli^r.
which was accordingly signed before Montpellier the 22 of October, 1622. and
Calonges surrendered up the place into his Majesty's hands; who if he had by his
Courage won himself a great reputation in the Siege, he obtained no less by his
ingenuity in the handsome manner of his submission to the King.

The day after the Peace was concluded, the King made his entry into the City,
when after his Majesty had taken order for the defense of the Town, he took the
way to Paris by Prov^^c^, Avignon, Dauphine, and Lionnois; so that the Duke of
Esp^^^on, who never parted from him in all this Journey, attended his Majesty
into his old Government of Provence. There had formerly been (as you may have
observed) various dispositions toward the Duke in that Country, as well
friends as enemies; but time (which is the sovereign cure of all untoward
passions) had reconciled them all by this time to one sense. All Animosities
were now converted into a general esteem of his Virtue; insomuch that I have
not observed him to have a greater reputation in any Province of the Kingdom,
nor to be any where received with greater respect and applause. All mischiefs
whether public or particular, occasioned by the former War, were buried in
oblivion, and the people, after having seen the King, inquired aloud for the
Duke of Espernon; which his Majesty taking notice of, failed not so often as he
met a crowd upon the way, to show them the Duke they were so inquisitive after,
and when asking them some pleasant questions, about their past disorders, even
their former miseries were at this time turned into delight.

The King at his departure out of Provence, The King returns toward Paris.
passed by Avignon, where his Majesty was visited by the Duke of Savoy. This
Prince seeing almost none of the old Court, save the Duke of Espernon (for whom
he had ever had a very great esteem, though he had been notably disappointed by
him in all his designs upon France, as has been said before) was particularly,
and infinitely civil to him. He came very frequently to his Lodgings, ever
carrying himself with great familiarity, and very obliging fashion, living in
the King of France his Court with as much liberty and freedom, as he had been
all the while in his own. His aspect, which was gracious, open, and full of
Majesty, giving evidences (though under a very moderate stature) of the great
and generous soul he was really master of.

From Auignon his Majesty passed through Dauphine, where arriving about the end
of the year, he there found the Queens, who by his order were thither come to
attend him. And here it was that the Duke of Espernon received a new honor in
the person of the Marquis de la Valette his Son, The King comes to Lions, where
the Marriage is celebrated betwixt the Duke de la Valette, and M^d^moiselle de
Verneuil.
and which he preferred, with good reason, before all the rest he had hitherto
received from his Majesty's bounty. The King had a little before (as you have
heard) honored him with the Government of Guienne, had by his Grace and bounty
established, and confirmed him in all the Offices, and Dignities, he had been
invested withal, as the rewards of his Service: but now for the Crown of all
his Favors, the King would yet honor him with his Alliance, and make him
Father-in-law to Gabrielle a legitimated Daughter of France, one of his own
natural Sisters, being Daughter to Henry the Great, by the Marquise de
Verneuil, and half Sister to Monsieur de Metz. This young Princess exceeding
fair, and as finely bred as any person of her condition in the Kingdom, had
been the ambition of most of the great men of the Court: but the Duke of
Espernon was preferred before all. The Queens had brought her along with them
to Lions, and her inclination, as well as her duty, having tied her
particularly to the Queen, the excellency of her Wit, and Nature, the most
acceptable, the sweetest, and most accomplished of her time, having acquired
her a very good share in this Princess affection, she stood do^btless at that
time possessed of the highest place in her Majesty's favor.

So many advantageous conditions, and so many admirable qualities having
rendered this Lady one of the most considerable matches in France, his Majesty
would yet make her overweight, by giving her himself two hundred thousand
Crowns in Dowry; assigning her the County of Senlis (a Member of his Crown
Lands) to enter upon for payment of part of the sum; to which the Marquise de
Verneuil her Mother added a hundred thousand more. The Ceremony of this
Marriage was performed in the Marquis de Saint-C^aumont's House, the Kings
Lieutenant in the Government of Lionnois; but the Magnificences at the Duke's
own Lodgings, where the Feast was honored with the presence of the King, both
the Queens, and all the great persons of the Court. From such an illustrious
Marriage what could be expected less than what we now see? a Son, and a
Daughter Inheritors of their Mothers Virtue, and good Qualities, as imitators
of the Fathers, and Grandfathers Bravery, and Wisdom; whose youth is in so
great esteem with all the Court, that if the Courage, and Merit of the Son
(which have already been ^ignaliz'd in many honorable occasions) have got him
a reputation throughout all France; the Daughter (who was nothing inferior in
all the qualities becoming her Sex) has obtained an equal share of opinion with
all that knew her: but the world was unworthy to possess her long, and the
Solitude she made choice of amongst the Carmelites has manifested to us, that
nothing but God alone could be the object of so elevated a mind, and so devout
a spirit.

The end of the Second Part.
THE HISTORY OF THE LIFE OF THE Duke of ESPERNON, THE GREAT FAVORITE OF FRANCE.

ENGLISHED BY CHARLES COTTON, Esquire

The Third Part.

Vivos interdum Fortuna, saepe invidia, fatigat: ubi anima Naturae cessit,
demptis obtrectationibus ipsa se Virtus, magis, magisque extollit. Salust. de
Rep. ord. Orat. 2. LONDON, Printed for Henry Brom, MDCLXX.

THE HISTORY Of the LIFE of the Duke of Espernon.
THE THIRD PART.
The Ninth Book.
WE are now entering upon the third, Anno 1623.
and last part of the life of the Duke of Espernon; and if in the preceding two
you have met with great Actions, you will meet no fewer here, though perhaps
not altogether so shining as the first. He had much to do, and no little to
suffer; his Government of a vast extent, and fruitful in Novelty, would never
suffer him to be long at rest; and the hatred of the great Minister Cardinal
Richelieu gave him now occasion as amply to manifest his constancy, as he had
before in more favorable occurrences manifested his other Virtues; as you
shall see in the pursuit of his History.

Soon after the accomplishment of the Marriage of his Son the Marquis de la
Valette, their Majesty's took their way towasds Paris; when the Duke of
Espernon having left the new married couple, together with his Son the Cardinal
de la Valette, to attend the Court, took his leave of the King, to retire into
his own Government. In which Journey it was necessary for him to pass through
Angoumois, The Duke of Espernon, goes ^owards Guienne.
to take order for the transportation of his Furniture, Arms, and Equipage, in
the Castle of Angoulesme; which he had there in so great quantity, as required
no little time, nor no few hands to remove them: though he found it a greater
trouble to part with the Friends and Servants he had in that Country; it being
hardly possible to see in any particular Family, upon the saddest occasion, so
many real tears, as were shed by the people in general at this separation.

From Angoulesme he went to Coignac, and from thence to Xaintes, which was yet
one of the principal Cities of his Government, and where he had too dear a
concern not to give her a visit before his departure. And this was Marguarite
de Foix, Abbess of Xaintes, a Virgin illustrious for her Sanctity, and Virtue,
and in so great a ^epute amongst the Sisters of her Order, tha^ he ^example
serves to this day for a Model to all those who aim at perfection in that way
of devout living.

The Duke, before he departed from this place, would first return an answer to
a Letter he had received a few days before from Marc Antonie de Gourgues, first
President of the Parliament of Bordeaux. The Father of this man had had several
very profitable employments under the Marshall de Matignon, The begi^ning of
the ill intelligence betwixt the Duke, and the first President de Go^rgues.
in the time of his being the King's Lieutenant General in Guienne, which had
enriched him so, as that he had provided very plentifully for his posterity; of
which this Marc Antonie being his eldest Son, he had by the help of the wealth
his Father left him, advanced himself to some public employments, and being a
man of notable wit, and understanding, his parts, together with his fortune,
recommended him so as to be received into the Family of Seguieres, a Daughter
of which he married, Sister to the Chancellor of France now being, who in those
days went by the name of Autry; and in the end through the interest of his
Wives Relations was preferred to the Dignity of first President in his
Country. This Gourgues in the time of his being at Court had made great
professions of particular honor and service to the Duke of Espernon, who also
either out of respect to his Allies, or to himself, had given him reciprocal
testimonies of no ordinary affection: So that this kindness having passed
beforehand betwixt them, the Duke expected that at his coming into his
Government, he should meet with a sincere friend at the head of the most
illustrious Body of the Province, whose mediation in occurrences, that might
happen, would be able to qualify many little discontents, that the jealousy
of Authority usually begets in great Commands: but at the sight of this first
Letter he was of a contrary opinion, Which begets that betwixt the Duke and the
Parliament.
from which those divisions sprung betwixt him and the Parliament, that hardly
ended, but with the Duke's death; though they were begun even before he was
received into his Administration.

The Letter of which I am speaking, after having treated of some Affairs of
little importance, that respected the general concern of the Province, gave the
Duke at last plainly to understand: That a difficulty having been started in
the Parliament about the manner of his reception, they had determined to
moderate the excessive honors had formerly been paid to the Sons of France, or
the first Princes of the Blood, who had been Governors of the Province, in
going to receive them in their Scarlet Robes; a punctilio that though it was
true, it had been waved in deference to the Duke of Mayenne, it had
nevertheless been done merely out of respect to the high favor wherein he was,
when advanced to the Government of Guienne: but that at this time they were
resolved to be more reserved. I never in my life saw the Duke more surpised,
than at this news, who, jealous of his Honor and Dignity to the highest
degree, would rather never have entered Bordeaux, than to suffer the least
diminution of what had been granted to the Duke of Mayenne. He therefore
returned an answer to this Letter, dated the 27. of January 1623. wherein after
having briefly answered what concerned the general Affairs, he insisted with
great vehemence upon the denial of those honors had been paid to his
Predecessor; telling him amongst other things: That if they had never appeared
in their Scarlet Robes, but in honor of the Sons of France, or the Princes of
the Blood, he so well understood the respect due to them, as they were in a
capacity of succeeding to the Crown, as not to desire a new example in his
favor; but that he had not the same consideration for others. The whole Letter
being writ with his own hand, he commanded me to take a Copy of it, from whence
I have taken the very words I present you here.

The Duke, not yet satisfied with delivering his sense of this Affair in
writing, would moreover dispatch away Constantin the Comptroller of his House
to Bordeaux to communicate his resolution to several Members of that
Parliament, who were his particular friends; wherein he succeeded according to
his own desire, and his reception was concluded in the same form his
Predecessors had been received, some of the Company totally disowning all the
first President had writ concerning this business: by which the Duke having
just reason to believe him the Author of this scruple, he conceived he had a
mind to oblige the Society at the price of his Friends Honor: so that being
offended to the last degree, that he should so much as bring a thing into
dispute, thas was his apparent due; he from thenceforward entertained very
sinister impressions of his friendship: neither was it long before he made him
sensible of it.

Whilst these things were in agitation, The Duke arrives in Guienne.
the Duke was still advancing toward Cadillac, where he intended at leisure,
from the Parliaments proceedings to take his measures, what he was to do about
his entry into Bordeaux. He was here visited by all the Nobility of the
Province, by several of the Parliament men in particular, and by an infinite
conflux of Gentry, who came to attend him at his entry, which was concluded to
be upon the last of February 1623. Whilst he here waited in expectation of the
appointed day, he disposed of the Governments of those places committed to his
charge; whereof that of Chasteau-Trompette was given to Plessis, Nerac to the
Count de Maille but Bergerac, which was a command of the greatest profit, and
the most important place, was put into the hands of the Chevalier de la
Valette, the Duke's natural Son, who by his bravery had infinitely gained upon
his love and opinion. The King had besides these places, moreover assigned him
two Regiments in constant pay, viz. That of the said Chevalier de la Valette,
and that of Castelbayart, together with his Company of Gens-d' Arms; so that
his Authority supported by these Forces, was much more considerable, than any
of his Predecessors had ever been.

The Duke, The Duke's reception at Bordea^x.
having thus settled the Governments of these places, would now no longer defer
his entry, but came to Frans, a house belonging to a private Gentleman, about
half a League only distant from the City, and upon the Banks of the River
Garonne; where the Iura^s de Bordeaux are the same with the Sheriff^ in other
C^ties
Iurates of Bordeaux came to receive him in a Boat they had prepared for that
purpose. He was by them conveyed by water to a place called Port du Caillau,
where he was met without the Gate, by all the Companies of the Town, excepting
the Parliament, who in their Scarlet Robes received him at the entry of the
City. I shall not here undertake to describe every circumstance of this
Ceremony, nor the Magnificence, respect, or applause observable in the
solemnity of this reception; it being sufficient to say, that therein nothing
was omitted, or diminished of what had formerly been paid to his illustrious
Predecessors, and that the old affection, both the City, and Province had for
his Person, and Name, produced a greater, and more general joy at his arrival,
than had amongst that great people been observed of many years before.

There was only the Marshall de Themines, A difference betwixt the Duke, and
the Marshall de Themines, the Kings Lieutenant in Guienne.
the King's Lieutenant in the Province, who neither paid him honor, nor
civility, either by Letter, or Visit, a man, who although he had ever till this
time had the Duke's person, and friendship in very high esteem; yet having been
constituted the King's Lieutenant in that Province, sometime before the Duke
was promoted to the Government, he could not without infinite impatience see
himself absolutely deprived of all the functions of his Command. He knew very
well the Duke would be so active on his part, that very little would be left
for him to do; whereas he pretended this Lieutenancy had been conferred upon
him with a promise, that if a Governor should happen to be set over him, it
should be no other than a Prince of the Blood, who should never continue upon
the place, and that consequently, by his absence, would leave him the absolute
command of the Province: and in truth the Mareschals, de Matignon, and d'
Ornano, had formerly enjoyed it after that manner: so that the seeing himself
by this usage defeated of that expectation, was, as he himself declared, the
subject of his discontent.

The Duke was very much surpised at this proceeding; he had, as there was just
cause, ever had the Marshall in very high esteem, and could have been glad he
would by gentle means have been reconciled to his duty, that he might not have
been obliged to make use of those remedies the authority of his Command put
into his hands: which that he might not do, he consented that some who were
friends to them both should treat with him about a better understanding betwixt
them; he being unwilling, what provocation soever he had, to have recourse to
violence: wherein perhaps he was more temperate, than ever in his life before:
but in the end, seeing his patience served only to make the Marshall more
obstinate in his unkindness, laying aside all those considerations that had
hitherto withheld him, he would no longer defer to make him sensible of the
difference betwixt a Governor and a Lieutenant of Guienne. He therefore began
imperiously to cancel and overthrow all his Orders. A Consul of Again, who had
been created so at his recommendation, was displaced by the Duke's command, for
no other reason, but because he had been preferred at his request; such of the
Gentry, or the People, as were known to be affectionate to the Marshall were
certain to obtain little favor with the Governor: if any order was presented
him signed by the Marshall, he would presently issue out another to supersede
the first; whatever carried the name of Themines, was invalid, and whatever he
owned as his act must signify nothing at all. And moreover to let him see he
had the same Authority over him in his own particular Country, he had in other
places; the Duke prepared himself to go to Cahors, whither the Marshall was
retired, and accordingly went. The Mareschal's House stood near this City, he
was moreover invested with the Or chief Jurisdiction.
Seneschalsy of the Country, his chiefest Relations, Friends, and Acquiantance
inhabited there: notwithstanding all which, at the Duke's arrival the Marshall
quitted him the place, and retired to his own house; where seeing himself as it
were shut up, without Reputation, without Authority, and almost without
Friends, he began, though something with the latest, to see the error he had
committed. He then plainly saw himself so overmatch'd, that he could not
contend, but to his ruin; nor longer stand out to other purpose, than thereby
to make the advantages of his Superior more manifestly appear; and then it was
that he rendered himself more facile to his friends persuasions, who had before
been fruitlesly importunate with him, to reconcile himself to his Duty, to
acknowledge the Duke's Authority, and to seek his friendship. He therefore sent
to the Duke to make an Apology for what had passed, and to let him know, that
if he had hitherto failed of paying the respect due to his Quality, and
Command, it had not proceeded from any dislike he had of his person, which he
had in as high reverence, and esteem, as any man living; and that he should
have looked upon it as a very great honor to obey him, had not the sweetness
of some years Authority wherein he had commanded in Chief, and the assurances
had been given him he should do so still, blinded his Judgment from seeing his
duty: That he did therefore beseech him, he might be permitted to come tender
his excuses for what had passed, and to assure him of his obedience for the
time to come. The Duke was very well pleased to find to this Lord, a man full
of years, and honor, in so good a disposition; neither had he begun to justle
him, till after having expected the return of his good humor with the
extremest patience; so that he sent him word he should be infinitely glad to
see him, An Accommodation betwixt the Duke and the Marshall Themines.
and that he might be confident for the future of as civil usage, as he had
hitherto found rough, and perverse dealing in the exercise of his Command.

A day for their interview being agreed upon by their friends, the Duke would
by no means suffer it to be in the Capital City of his Government, being
unwilling to expose the Age, and Person of the Marshall to so public a
satisfaction; but appointed it to be at Saint-Foy, whither he himself
accordingly came, accompanied with many persons of Quality of the Province;
thither the Marshall also came to wait upon him, when coming into the Duke's
Lodgings, he received him without stirring out of his Chamber, for which he
made his being surpised at Play his excuse. It had been concluded that the
Marshall at their meeting should say (as he did) My Lord, I am your very
humble Servant, and am come to give you an assurance that I am so, and that I
shall be proud of any opportunity ^herein I may by a better testimony manifest
it to you, and therein satisfy the King's Command, and my own Duty. To which
the Duke returned for answer in as few words, which had also been set down in
writing: Sir, you oblige me with your Friendship; you and I are both of us in a
capacity of advancing his Majesty's Service in this Province; I shall gladly
concur with you in any thing that may be conducing to it, and embrace any
occasion wherein I may let you see, that I have ever had an esteem for your
Valor, and Merit, and that I am your Servant. This first visit continued but
very little longer, when the Marshall taking his leave, the Duke brought him
only to the top of the ^tairs, without going any further, by which he would let
him see, that he both understood his place, and knew how to keep it.

The Marshall, having after this first complement, continued two days at
Saint-Foy in perfect intelligence with the Duke, at last frankly told him: That
he had used him according to his desert; that he had made ^im know his duty;
and that he took it for a greater honor to be subservient to him, than to any
other person of France. And in truth he afterward continued, both whilst he
staid in the Government, and when he was made Governor of Brittany (which
happened a few years after) to render him so much honor, and respect, and to
give him so many testimonies of friendship, that I do not think the Duke had a
truer friend in the Kingdom: Yet did not all this pass in the order it is here
set down, there having been some years of interval, betwixt their coldness, and
their reconciliation: But I chose rather to record these passages all together,
than to disperse them into several pages of my History; conceiving such a
division would more have entangled the thread of my discourse, than would have
been recompensed by the order, in a more exact observation of the succession of
time.

This Quarrel with the Marshall de Themines was not yet composed, The Duke
co^es to a^ open rup^^re with the first President.
when the Duke (who had never enough to do) resolved to come to an open rupture
with the first President de Gourgues, without dissembling any longer his
resentment of the ill Offices he had received at his hands. I have already
given an account of the Injury, which was the Presidents proposing a diminution
of Honors at the Duke's reception; a thing that, bearing with it a show of
contempt, passed in the Duke's opinion for an irreparable offense. Neither
could he forbear at his first visit, to give him some hints of his displeasure,
nor from manifesting a little reservedness toward him: and (as heated spirits
never want occasion of new offense) his passion making the lightest pretenses,
to pass for reason, and just causes, there soon after fell out new accidents,
which animated the Duke against the first President to the last degree. This
man* subtle and dextrous as the best, very well foreseeing, that without the
concurrence of his Brethren, he should never be able to withstand the power of
the Duke he had so highly provoked, Who engages the company in ^is quarrel.
began betimes to think of interesting his Fraternity in the Quarrel, to the
end that under the protection of the whole Body, he might the better defend his
own particular interest. Neither did he herein fail to use some artifice, which
he managed so, that in putting finister interpretations upon the Duke's best
intentions, he possessed the whole Company with a jealousy, that the Duke
labored to encroach upon the Authority of their Estate: A part wherein all
Societies of men are so sensible, and tender, as that from the least shadows,
the highest divisions are very frequently observed to arise. And here, though
the Duke labored to clear their suspicion, by laying the truth before them;
yet the first impressions were so deep, and the President knew so well how to
manage their mis-apprehension, that it was impossible to dis-unite him from his
Colleagues.

The Duke exasperated, as he had just cause, at the misunderstanding Gourgues
somented betwixt the Parliament and him, would not give him altogether the
advantage of an Aggressor; but speedily sought out all occasions to vex him,
and to assault him both in his Reputation and Fortune. He was therefore by his
order disputed with about some privileges, he pretended to, and usurped (as
was said) to the prejudice of the City of Libourne, near unto which he had a
dwelling house: but he gave him a more sensible blow, by prohibiting the
Postmaster of Bordeaux in his absence any more to carry the Couriers, that
came through the City, to the first Presidents house, though for some time it
had been their custom so to do; pretending that it was without any right at
all, and that consequently he might by his Authority overthrow that custom, as
a new thing, and that depended absolutely upon his Command. It is most certain,
that had matters rested here, the President would have received a notable
affront; his most intimate friends having generally blamed him, for applying
himself much more to Politic, than to Judicial Affairs, and for that by doing
more, than he was concerned to do in the one, he left himself no leisure to
perform what he was obliged to do in the other.

The first President being a crafty man, as has been said, dexterously taking
hold of this occasion, as suddenly remonstrated to the Company: That if in this
Affair, as in the other of Libourne, there had been nothing, but what pointed
at his own private interest, he should not have been concerned in the least;
but that it aimed directly at the honor, and dignity of the whole Body, of
which he was much more tender, than of any concern of his own. That the
dispatch of the Posts did no more respect him in particular, than the other
Officers of Parliament, he having therein only the privilege of priority,
without having any power limited to his person: That in his absence, he who was
next in order in the Company, had the same right to examine the Couriers, to
enquire of their new^, and ^o dismiss them: That therefore since the Injury was
common to them all, and that the Duke made it manifest enough, he endeavored
to destroy the Authority of Parliament, it was necessary they should
unanimously concur with him in the support of their own Dignity and Power: That
if they did not vigorously oppose this first attempt upon them, they would see
themselves insensibly deprived of all their Privileges; and that the Sovereign
Authority, they were invested withal, would in the end be less considerable,
than that of their subalternate Judges: That though in this Affair he was
merely animated by the common interest, he nevertheless freely offered himself
alone, to stand the shock of the Duke's utmost Indignation; wherein though he
should perish, and be crushed under the weight of his Power, he should
nevertheless be proud of so glorious a Fate, as to be sacrificed for the honor
of that Assembly.

It is not to be imagined how strange an impression this Harangue made upon the
minds of this Fraternity, the whole body almost being thereby betrayed into the
Animosity of their head, some few only of the eldest, and most affectionate to
the Duke, endeavored to qualify the heat of this dispute, but in vain; it
being impossible for them to stop the violence of the Torrent: so that the
Duke, who thought he had only one enemy to deal withal, found above an hundred
raised up in mutiny against him. Nay their impatience was such, that they would
not defer a moment the passing of an Act, at that very sitting, in opposition
to the command he had given concerning the Couriers: it is indeed true, that
there was after some propositions of Accommodation tendered: but after this
Thunderclap from the Parliament, the Duke was deaf to all overtures of
agreement, his invincible spirit, that had ever been inflexible in all the
undertakings of his life, suggesting to him, that it would be an eternal
blemish to his honor, should he in the least moderate his first resentment,
for all the great number of enemies that were declared against him.

The beginnings of this Feud were so light, and trivial in themselves, that I
should not have been so particular in the relation of them, had they not
brought on those greater disputes, that since happened betwixt the Duke, and this
Parliament: and this is so unwilling a Record, that I could heartily wish all
that is further to be said of this Affair, might be totally razed out of the
Duke's life, that the memory thereof might for ever be extinct. Neither the
Parliament, nor he got any advantage by it: the public was the greatest loser,
as it will ever fall out in such dissentions.

The Duke of Espernon's mind was not so wholly taken up with these divisions,
The Duke settles his Domestic Affairs.
but that he had a care of the settlement of his own Domestic Affairs, which
the Queen Mothers escape from Blois, the War that succeeded, the several
expeditions he afterterwards undertook for the King's Service, and his
chargeable Journeys whilst he attended the Court, had brought into very great
disorder. He was at this time above seven hundred thousand Livers in debt, that
he had taken up at Paris upon a Rentcharge; which one of his Domestics, that
had been brought up in his Family, undertook to acquit him of, showed him which
way it was to be done, and performed what he had undetaken: and this was the
forementioned Constantin, Comptroller of his House; who as he could by no
better way express his Gratitude to his Benefactor, than by doing him so
important a piece of Service, he, without any visible diminution of the Duke's
ordinary way of living, managed the business so, that his Master in a few years
had the satisfaction of seeing himself disengaged from that prodigious Debt
Which, as I have said, was effected without any other inconvenience than the
retrenchment of some superfluous expenses only (which his distance from the
Court (where he was resolved no more to reside) rendered altogether unnecessary.
So great a blessing is an intelligent, and faithful Servant.

But to establish the order which for the future was to be observed in
reference to this work, the Duke was upon the matter obliged to make a Journey
to Paris, to examine the Accounts of his Agents there; he therefore sent to the
King to entreat his Majesty, whilst the peace of the Kingdom, and the good
condition he had settled his Government in, rendered his presence less necessary
there, to give him leave so to do. His request was easily granted, and he
accordingly departed from Bordeaux in the latter end of November 1623. The Duke
of Esp^rnon goes to Court.
and came to Paris about the end of December following. Some have supposed he
did not so much desire this Journey, for any thing that concerned his Domestic
Affairs, as to see if any benefit was to be made of the Queen Mothers good
inclinations toward him, and to try the grateful return she made him to expect
for the signal Services he had done her in the time of her disgrace. She was of
late years become all in all at Court, and many of her Servants, that had not
so well merited from her, as the Duke had done, had received very great
rewards: but he could not perceive the same dispositions toward him, nor
discover the gratitude she had promised him, when she was in the worst
condition to express it: on the contrary, as if with her Fortune she had
changed her Nature, and as if by being become happy, and powerful, she had been
no more the same Princess the Duke had so well served, when she was under
persecution, and had no power at all: she no more remembered him, she was
obliged to have recompensed, by all sorts of benefit and favor.

The Duke came to Paris so well attended, that of many years before, there had
not been seen any person of his condition enter the City with so numerous a
Train. Arrives at Paris.
Many persons of very eminent quality went out as far as Chastre to meet him,
and his coming was very remarkable by the solitude was observed in the Louvre,
where there scarce remained any, save the King's own Domestic Servants: A
thing his Majesty very well observed, and was nothing displeased at it: but on
the contrary, having that day taken notice of some Gentlemen in the Presence,
who had dependence upon the Duke, he merrily said to them, How comes it to pass
you are not gone out to meet the Duke of Espernon? he will talk with you for this
when he comes. So ready his Majesty was to cause that honor to be paid him
that was justly his due.

He was received at his coming by the King, Anno 1624.
and the Queens, with very great kindness; and falling to his business
presently after his arrival, Mauroy a Councellor of State, and one of his
Agents, a man of great virtue, and very good at business, gave him up his
Accounts exactly just and right; but Valliech his old Secretary having employed
some people under him, who had either been not very careful, or not very
honest, A generous act of the Duke of Espernon.
fell short above fifty thousand Livers, which this good Master franckly
forgave him, his noble nature, it should seem, not being able to con^ent that
even so great a fault as his negligence should ruin the Affairs of his own
Family.

All his Accounts, and the other Affairs that most required his presence at
Paris, were in less than four months dispatched; so that toward the latter end
of April he began to think of his return into Guienne. The Court was then at
Compiegne, whither the Duke went to receive the King's Commands, supposing this
should be the last leave he was to take; and not expecting that his Age, which
was now very far advanced (he being at this time near upon threescore, and ten
years old) would permit him to make another Journey eight years after, as he
did in a mavelous health, and vigor.

Whilst the Duke staid at Compiegne, the King who would have been very glad to
have the misunderstanding betwixt him and the Parliament composed, caused d'
Herbaut, Secretary of State, to treat with him about it: wherein the Duke
expressed himself very willing to an Accommodation, and so far as to consent to
the Act about the Couriers, which was, in his own presence, by the Council
determined in the Parliaments favor: He was moreover satisfied with the Order
the King sent to suspend the Election of the Maire of Libourne (which was
another main thing in dispute) till his return into the Province: But the first
President was not so well disposed to peace; he conceived this Accommodation
would infinitely lessen the Authority he had got amongst his Brethren during
these controversies; and therefore without any regard either to the King's
Command, or the Duke's Order precipitated the Election of the Maire, whom the
Duke found established at his arrival; from whence arose a new, and higher
quarrel than before: So that if in truth the Duke was herein to be condemned
for having in the beginning prosecuted things with too much heat, the President
cannot, in my opinion, be excused, for thus urging them to the last extremes,
without ever yielding to such a reconciliation, as might, being timely applied,
have prevented the ensuing mischiefs.

The Duke having thus settled those of his Domestic Affairs, The Duke goes
from Paris.
that required his presence at Paris, and done his part to provide as well for
the future quiet of his Government, departed first from Compiegne, and soon
after from Paris to return into Guienne. He would in this Journey take Espernon
in his way, that he might touch at Chartres, Cardinal Richelieu created chief
Minister of State.
in order to some Devotions. Whither Cartier, whom he had left at Court, to
solicit his Affairs in the place of Valliech, dispatched an express Courier to
him to let him know that Cardinal Richelieu was since his departure created
prime Minister of State. I was present when the Duke received this news, at
which he was the more surpised, forasmuch as he had discovered nothing of that
design in the time of his being at Court; though he had been very frequent with
the Queen Mother, who had also constrained her self to dissemble a little
forced show of particularity, and confidence in him; by which he evidently saw
he was not upon so good terms with her, as they had a mind to make him believe
he was: he notwithstanding said no more at present but this: That the Cardinal
was indeed a man of great dexterity; but that he would very much change the
face of Affairs, should he long continue at the Helm. Upon the instant he,
according to his custom, sent him a Complement upon his new promotion, which
doubtless was not very acceptable to the Cardinal, there being scarce any space
left at the top of the Letter, and nothing more than, Your very humble Servant,
subscribed at the bottom; a style that he continued a great while, and perhaps
too long for the interest of his Affairs, though it was indeed no other than
what he ever used to all other Cardinals.

After having dispatched this Complement, he continued his Journey toward
Guienne; where he arrived in the beginning of July, and where the first thing
he did after his arrival was to commit the pretended Maire of Libourne to
prison, he having been advanced to that Magistracy in contempt of the King's
Order. The first President had herein his hearts desire; New differences
betwixt the Duke of Espernon, and the Parliament of Bordeaux.
neither did he fail to make use of this occasion, to interest the whole Body
in the affront, which he said was the greatest violence imaginable upon their
Authority; a high Complaint whereof was immediately sent away to the Council.
The King though very much dissatisfied with the first President, would not
nevertheless absolutely countenance the Duke in the Justice he had executed in
his own behalf; but writ to him to set the Prisoner at liberty, though that
Letter could not prevail, the Duke pretending to believe that this Command had
been procured either at the importunity of some of the interested party, or
negligently granted, as many times a Letter under the Privy Seal was not hard
to obtain. But the Cardinal become now (as has been said) all powerful in
Affairs, having undertaken to establish his Majesty's absolute Authority (which
was in effect the establishment of his own^ upon the contempt of this order,
caused a positive sentence to be passed in the Council, bearing date the 12th.
of August, wherein it was ordered: That the Prisoner should immediately be
enlarged. The Card^nal Richelieu opposite to the Duke.
By which magisterial proceeding, it was then believed, as it was very likely,
that the Cardinal would exercise this severity toward the Duke, that his will
might no more be disputed; not doubting but that after an example like this all
the other great men of the Kingdom would acquiesce in his Commands. This Arrest
was directed to the Chief Justice d' Autry, to cause it to be put into speedy
execution, without so much as forbearing to hear any Reasons the Duke could
represent to justify the demur he had given to his Majesty's first Order.

His Sons who were at Court, and le Plessis (whom he had sent thither not long
before upon several accounts) used their utmost endeavor, that the sending
away of this Arrest, so highly prejudicial to the Duke's Honor, might be some
time deferred; they were vehemently importunate with the Queen Mother, and the
Cardinal to that purpose; but all to no effect, the Queen in so light, though
nevertheless so sensible an Affair, totally abandoning the Duke's Interest, who
had so passionately embraced hers in so important occasions, and the Cardinal
being obstinate in his resolution, all the favor they could obtain in this
business, was from d' Autry himself, who was persuaded not to produce the
Order: but it was upon condition the Duke should enlarge the Prisoner, as he
immediately did, and that too the Court would have him understand to be a
special Grace. After this manner then they began to reward the Duke's, and his
Sons Services, they gave them things of no moment, for the highest obligations,
and most current pay: they were continually used at this rate, and it is not to
be believed what prejudice these inconsiderable things were to the Duke's more
important Affairs, nor what encouragement it gave little people frequently to
offend him. It had therefore been to have been wished, either that he could
have supported these affronts in his Administration, with a better temper, or
totally have retired himself out of their way: but his great spirit that had
never encountered any difficulty it had not overcome, was impatient to be
resisted by men, who as they were single incapable of contesting with him,
being embodied, would neither relent, nor obey.

The Cardinal, stung no doubt, with the Conscience of having in so trivial a
thing, disobliged a man, who had formerly been serviceable to him in so many
important occasions, would make himself Mediator betwixt the Duke and the
Parliament, and consequently dispatched away Guron to Bordeaux for that end;
with Instructions that jointly with d' Autry, he should labor an Accommodation
betwixt them. By Guron the Cardinal writ to the Duke, that his Journey was
absolutely upon his account, and in his favor, offering withal his Service in
this, and in all other occasions: but these Complements were accompanied with
no marks of honor and respect, the Cardinal (doubtless nettled, at the little
Ceremony the Duke had observed with him in his congratulatory Letter at his
promotion to the Ministry) leaving by his example, but a very little space
above the first line, and concluding his Letter with only Your affectionate
Servant. Before Guron's arrival the difference had been already composed by the
mediation of d' Autry: but the Duke touched to the quick at the ill usage he
had received from Court, was not to be appeased with so light a satisfaction;
and I have ever thought that the injury he apprehended upon this occasion, was
perhaps the first, if not the only motive, that totally alienated his heart
from the Cardinal's Interests, which (as you may have observed) he once had in
as high consideration as his own.

The Peace that had been concluded before Montpellier, Anno 1625.
in the year 1622. had hitherto continued the Affairs of the Kingdom in some
repose, and though those of the Reformed Religion expressed great dispositions
to a new Commotion, there was as yet no manifest breach; so that men rather
lived in expectation of fresh Alarms, than in any disorder of open War: When
Soubize, by an attempt he made upon the King's Shipping at Blavet, began first
to break the Ice. A new War.
All the rest of the Party broke into Arms at the same time, and the Duke of
Rohan, who had long been known to be the head of that Faction, infecting all
parts of the Kingdom which were affectionate to his cause, with his
discontents, stirred them into Insurrection, without ever moving from Sevenues,
and without meeting the least contradiction* A promptitude in his Partisans so
much the more to be wondered at, as he commanded a sort of people, whose
obedience was only voluntary, and from which every one conceived himself to be
dispensed by all, both Divine, and Humane Laws.

Montauban was one of the Cities not only of Guienne, The Revolt of Montauban.
but also of the whole Kingdom, that engaged the deepest in this Revolt, the
Inhabitants whereof by having had a Siege raised from before their Walls, and
by having baffled a Royal Army, even when animated by the presence of the King
himself, being elevated to such a degree of Vanity, as to think themselves
invincible, and their City a place not to be taken. A presumption that it was
nevertheless very necessary should be corrected, and the people by some
exemplary Punishment made sensible of their Crimes. It should seem that the
Duke of Espernon was by his Destiny called into Guienne only for this end; he
had formerly subdued the pride of Rochelle: neither did the King doubt but that
he would be as successful at Montauban, and that his Virtue (which had ever
been fatal to the Capital Cities of those of the Religion) assisted by his
powerful Arms, would also cause his Authority to be acknowledged and obeyed
here, as it had done in other places.

He sent order therefore to the Duke to take Arms, and to wast the Country all
about Montauban; in order whereunto (though the King in his own judgment
thought it an Enterprise of great difficulty) he notwithstanding allowed him no
more than 3000. men, in three new raised Regiments, to wit, that of St. Croix,
d' Ornano, Foncaude, and Maille, wherewithal to effect it. He received a
Command withal to make some Leavies; his own Company of Gens-d' Arms, and four
more of Light Horse were also drawn into the Field for this Expedition. With
these Forces he departed from his House Cadillac, The Duke's Forces.
to advance to Moissac, a little Town about four Leagues distant from
Montauban, the appointed Rendezvous for the Volunteer-Troops, and Gentry; of
the latter whereof, the number was so great, that there was an appearance of
above six hundred Gentlemen.

It was said that there had hardly been seen so great a conflux of Gentry,
under any Governor, as frequently attended this, he having never any occasion
to mount to Horse, for his Majesty's Service, that there was not more
complaints of unkindness taken, that they had not been summoned to their Duty,
than excuses made because they did not come.

It will perhaps seem strange, that the Duke's humor inclined rather to
austerity than sweetness should acquire him so many lovers, and friends; for
certainly he was served out of affection, it being impossible that fear could
ever have drawn after him so many free, and voluntary persons. Such as have
before me reflected upon this observation, have conceived that this universal
love was derived from his Justice, of all others the most popular virtue (as in
truth the Duke was a man of most unblemished equity) or that it might proceed
from the infinite number of Employments, Offices, and Benefits he had,
dispersed throughout the whole Province of Guienne; wherein there were very few
Families of any note, that stood not highly obliged, either immediately to him,
or to his Interest for some signal favor. To which they have moreover added
the generous disposition he had to do all good offices for his Friends, who
although he was not apt to be familiar, was nevertheless very civil, constant
in his friendships, and always the same; insomuch that one good word from his
mouth, or one gracious undissembled look, prevailed more upon those who
received those petty favors, than the larger promises, and more winning
behavior of some others, who in two days would no more know the very man, to
whom they had so lately before vowed the Friendship of their whole lives.

The Duke came to Moissac in June, and removed thence toward Montauban in the
beginning of July, with a Commission equally extending as well into Languedoc,
as Guienne, by reason that City, which is situated upon the Confines of both
those Provinces, has a great part of its Territory lying in Languedoc. He took
up his Quarters at Montleigh, and Castelsarrazin, from whence, as occasion
served, The Country about Montauban laid waste.
advancing with his Forces still nearer the City, he executed the King's
Command wherever he went with so much vigor, and severity, that the footsteps
of this expedition were to be seen a long time after.

Yet was not this performed without great resistance, those of Montauban had
had early intelligence of the preparations against them; neither had they
neglected any thing that might conduce to the defense of their fruits, or to
the support of the Reputation they had acquired in the preceding War. Besides
the great number of warlike Inhabitants, they had within their City, they were
moreover reinforced with a strong Garrison without, commanded by Montbrun, a
Gentleman of great Quality in Dauphine, and a man of very great Valor, sent
thither for that purpose by the Duke of Rohan; to which they had also called in
several of their Neighbors to their assistance; so that the Duke never
approached their Walls (which notwithstanding he did almost every day) but that
there followed very smart Engagements, with great loss of men on the Enemies
side: In some whereof there were left sometimes 200. sometimes more dead upon
the place; wherein certainly the numerous Gentry, that attended the Duke in
this expedition, were of infinite great use; for the place being environed
almost on all sides with Plains of very large extent, Those of the Religion
make a vigorous resistance.
and the Enemy having many more, and much better Foot, than the Duke, had not
those brave Troops of Horse continually repelled them, it had been to be
feared, that Victory would not always have been so partial to the Royal side.

The Duke perhaps never exposed his person more, than in these frequent
Engagements; the precincts of the City were so great, that they required above
a months time totally to destroy their fruits, of all which time few days
passed, as has been said, without an Encounter, and in all those Encounters the
Duke was ever in person, at the head of his Troops, encouraging his men, not so
much by his voice, as by his example.

How great soever the faults of those of Montauban might be, it was not
nevertheless without great reluctance, that the Duke executed his Majesty's
Order upon the fruits of the Country with so great severity, and certainly he
must have had a very obdurate heart, that would not have been touched with
compassion at the sight of so many lamentable objects, as were every where to
be seen. I remember that from Pickqueros (a place famous for having been the
King's Quarter during the Siege of Montauban, and from whence the whole Plain
betwixt the Rivers Tarn, and Vairan lay open to the view) so soon as the
obscurity of the night gave color to the Fire that had been kindled by day;
one might see a thousand Fires at once: the Corn, Fruit Trees, Vines, and
Houses were the Aliments that nourished this Flame: a sadder sight I never saw;
neither can I imagine that the horrors of War can be represented in a more
dreadful form. Yet was not this severity altogether unprofitable, even to those
upon whom it was inflicted; I having heard several of them since confess, that
nothing so much disposed them to the acceptance of Peace, as this austere
usage; and they were indeed the first that embraced it, and who served for a
leading example to the other rebellious Cities of their Party to do the same.

While the Duke was thus taken up at Montauban, Soubiz^ endeavo^rs to divert
the Duke.
Soubize thinking either to divert him from his Enterprise, or to make use of
his absence, and the great number of Gentry, who were gone along with him, for
the effecting some notable exploit in the lower Gascony, was landed with three
thousand five hundred Foot, and some few Horse in the Country of M^doc. This
little Country, which is almost all the Duke's, environs a great part of the
Metropolis of Bordeaux, extending it self to the very Gates of the City; many
of the richest Inhabitants whereof having possessions there, and Soubize having
a design to draw from the City a large Contribution, he threatened the Citizens
to destroy their Houses and Fruits in the Country (of which he thought himself
without contradiction the absolute Master) if they did not speedily ransom
them with a very considerable Sum. As he himself pressed the City on the one
side, he had of another caused Verger Malagnet a Gentleman of his party, to
come ashore at a little point of Land, in the River of Bordeaux, that divides
the Rivers of Garonne, and Dordongne, called Bec-Dambez, hoping by that means
to cut off the Commerce of those two Rivers from the City, and by streightning
it both by Land, and by Water, the sooner to persuade the Inhabitants to give
him his demand.

This design (which was not ill projected, if it had been as well executed)
alarmed both the Parliament, and the people to such a degree, that a greater
confusion was hardly any where to be seen: they knew not which way to turn them
for their defense; and though they had but too many Forces within themselves to
defend their City from the threatened mischief, yet had they no mind to examine
their own strength, that they might not be obliged to put them to the Test* In
this extremity the first President (though upon no very good terms with the
Duke, notwithstanding the late Accommodation) made no difficulty to have
recourse to him, to implore his Assistance, for this time laying aside all
Animosities, and Aversions: but it was only to assume them again, when the Duke
had delivered him from this fear, as will hereafter appear.

At the first intelligence the Duke received of Soubize his landing in Medoc,
though he could not himself leave the work he had begun, without infinite
prejudice to the King's Service; yet would he not omit his care to the
preservation of the principal City in his Government. He therefore in all haste
dispatched away le Plessis to Bordeaux, to advise with the Parliament what
course was to be taken, for the relief of the City, and Country, against
Soubize his attempts; giving him order withal to draw out part of the Garrison
of Bergerac, and to raise new Forces within his own Territories, to serve
himself withal upon this occasion; writing moreover to his Friends and Servants
in the Country to join with him, and to Toiras who lay in the Isle of Re;
entreating him to advance with all the men he could conveniently draw out of
the Regiment of Champagne, of which he had the Command. Instructions that were
so well observed by le Plessis, and he so well seconded by the Parliament and
Iuratts (who were very ready to concur in an Affair that so much concerned
their common safety) that all things were in a short time put into a very good
Posture: By which means the Duke, without suffering himself to be diverted from
the employment he had before Montauban, not only frustrated the Enemies design,
but also extracted thence the opportunity of obtaining the honor of a second
Victory. Soubize being shamefully repulsed, his Forces routed, the few that
escaped the Victors hands, and with much ado, recovered their Ships, leaving
their Dead, Arms, Artillery, and Baggage, as infallible testimonies of a total
Defeat.

The War was carried on in all places, so much to the disadvanvantage of the
Hugonot Party, that the principal Heads, and best Cities of their party
apprehending a continuation of those evils they had already suffered, thought
fit to sue to the King for Peace. Which was accordingly granted them; but upon
conditions far different from those they were used to insist upon in former
times; Rochelle if self not being in this Treaty able to obtain, that they
might be freed from the slavery of Fort-Louis: but on the contrary, The Peace
concluded.
for an augmentation of their grief constrained by the Articles to admit of a
Chief Justice set over them by the King, obliged to slight all their new
Fortifications, to receive his Majesty with all due honor, and respect, so often
as he should please to honor them with his Presence, and to keep no more Ships
of War in their Haven. The Rochellers would never have submitted to these hard
Conditions, had not the other Cities of their party, and above all the rest
Montauban positively declared they would no more expose themselves to those
Miseries they had suffered in the burning up of their Country: so that if we
will consider the Duke's conduct throughout the whole business, we shall find
it more than a little conducing to the general Peace the King granted upon
conditions so disadvantageous to his Hugonot Subjects.

But this Peace, Anno 1626.
to the acceleration of which the Duke had so highly contributed, begot a new
War betwixt the Parliament and him; and upon this following account. The King's
Declaration in favor of the Hugonots, was by his Majesty sent to the Duke to
cause it to be published, with express order nevertheless not to do it till
after those of Montauban had accepted the Grace in all due forms of Submission;
which were the very words of the Dispatch, A new breach betwixt the Duke and
the Parliament of Bordeaux.
dated the 18. of February, 1626. But the first President having received a
Copy of the same Declaration, without ever acquainting the Duke, who was come
no further than Cadillac, caused the Peace to be openly proclaimed, and that
with so much precipitation, that he would not forbear so long as till he could
hear from Montauban, to know whether they had there accepted the Peace or no.
This impatience the Duke could not but interpret purposely put on to affront
him; it is true, that, had no unkindness passed betwixt him and the President
before, the business was of it self so light, that it might well enough have
passed without any great notice taken: but the preceding Differences giving him
to understand, that it must needs be done out of design, he not only complained
of it to those Friends he had in the Parliament, but moreover writ about it to
Court, and gave the President plainly to understand, that he would no more
suffer such Contempts.

This proceeding of the first President's was by no means approved at Court; it
was there looked upon as an occasion of noise and bustle, maliciously and
unseasonably sought, and for which he received a little rebuke: but this spirit
not much delighted with rest, having met with another that was never tired out
either in War, or Business; it was almost necessary that successive differences
should continually arise betwixt them. This at the last proceeded so far, Which
grows to a very great height.
that the public Peace was therein no little concerned: the Parliament passed
many Acts, and the Duke as many Ordinances to contradict those Acts. From Acts,
and Ordinances they proceeded to Invectives, and from words to some untoward
effects. Some of the Presidents Servants were ill used, and himself threatened;
whereupon the Palace was shut up, and a cessation of Justice decreed. The
Duke's Friends and Servants feared to fall into the Parliaments hands, and
those who were affectionate to the Parliament, were not well used by the
Governor; many Decrees by reason of the dissension betwixt the two parties
remained unexecuted, for not being justified by Power, which gives life to
Justice. Such as were the most moderate, and best disposed of the Company,
could not without great grief behold these confusions; but those were not the
prevailing part: so that things being every day more and more exasperated, it
was infinitely to be feared they would in the end shoot up to the last extreme,
though they were already grown to a sufficient height.

The King informed of this strange confusion, dispatched away Leon Brulart Leon
Br^lart sent to Bordeaux, to labor an Accommodat^on.
(one of the Council of State, and a man who, having manifested his prudence in
many great employments, had acquired himself a great reputation both within,
and without the Kingdom) to oppose his Royal Authority to the Torrent of these
disorders. This man arrived at Bordeaux, in the month of June, and labored
with great sincerity, and diligence betwixt the parties till September
following; but all in vain: Wherein he does not s^^ceed.
his dexterity that had unravelled many great intricacies, and overcome the
greatest difficulties in his former employments, could not be so successful
here, the Animosities were too great, and the parties too stiff to admit of any
Reconciliation; yet did he well enough discover that the greatest aversions to
it were not in the Duke, as he satisfied the Court at his return; to which both
parties at last were forced to appeal, and to submit unto a severe, and
definitive Determination, after they had rejected all rational, and moderate
ways.

This Quarrel was on both sides carried on with extraordinary heat, the first
President himself was deputed by the Parliament to maintain their cause before
the Council; to whom President du Bernett, a man of great esteem, and approved
wisdom (and then thought very worthy, one day to possess the first place in
that Company, as he afterward did) was also joined. The Duke also on his part
dispatched away first le Plessis, and after him Magnac his Kinsman; a Gentleman
of great Courage, of an excellent Wit, and very great Learning. All these
Deputies were several times heard in open Council, The business is referred to
the Council, who make an Award prejudicial to both parties.
where after having long, and with great reverence poured out themselves in
eloquent Orations, a Regulation ensued, at which both parties were equally
displeased. And then it was that all the world plainly saw, and chiefly those
who were immediately concerned, that they were not sorry at Court at the
continuation of these dissentions; and that the design being already laid to
diminish all the Authorities of the Kingdom, to unite them in one single
person, they were glad to see them insensibly put their own hands to their own
destruction.

These little disorders were not yet fully composed, A disorder at Court.
when another of much greater importance began to disclose it self at Court,
which occasioned the death of Chalais, and the imprisonment of the Duke, and
the Grand Prior of Vandosme. They would also have involved the Duke de la
Valette, who at this time retired to Metz, in this Affair; and to that end
tempted him by la Louviere, the Confident of Chalais, to receive the Duke of
Orleans into that City: but they had to do with a man so well fortified in his
Duty to his Prince, that all la Louviere could obtain of the Duke was only a
civil repulse in these terms: That the place was none of his: That he was only
a substitute to the Duke his Father: That he was therefore to apply himself to
him, and that for his part he should do whatever his Father would please to
command him. He could not have served the King more faithfully, than by
retaining this respect to the Duke his Father, whose principles he knew to be
perfectly Loyal, and himself inseparably tied to his Majesty's Service; yet was
not the Court satisfied with this proceeding: but the Duke, who had also been
tampered withal from the same part, through the Negotiation of the Abbot d'
Aubazine, by the candor of his deportment, so clearly justified their common
intentions, that both the one and the other had all the satisfaction they could
themselves desire. Yet was this satisfaction in words only, and the Duke was
notwithstanding very ill used in several occasions; of which ill usage he could
not forbear highly to complain: neither in his complaints were the Queen
Mother, as powerful as she was, nor the Cardinal himself excepted: The hard
measure he received under their Administration being so much the more sensible
to him, by how much he had infinite reasons (as may be gathered out of the
former passages) to expect they should have been altogether partial to his
Interests: but though his great and advantageous services had been so lately
performed, the memory of them was notwithstanding totally worn out, and the
Cardinal was already exasperated, though by occasions of so little moment, as
scarce ought to have been taken notice of: Neither doubtless would they have
been, had he been in another condition: but as great Authorities are usually
very tender, in the great height of State, and Power he then stood, they
carried, in his opinion the quality of most high injuries, which thenceforward
disposed his heart to those strange Animosities, which we shall see in time
break out.

After the death of Chalais, The Marriage betwixt the Monsi^ur and the Dutch^ss
of Montp^nsi^r.
and the removal of such of the Monsieur's Creatures, as were suspected by
their evil Counsels to debauch his good Nature, and to alienate the affection
he had to the King, and the prosperity of the Kingdom; it was no hard matter to
dispose him to a Marriage with Mademoiselle Marie de Bourbon, Duchess of
Montpensier. This match had been thought worthy of him by Henry the Great his
Father, and the Duke of Espernon, who had the honor to be great Uncle to this
Princess, prepossessed with the hopes of so great a Fortune for his Niece, and
so great an honor both to himself, and his whole Family, had made no
difficulty to expose himself to the hatred of the late Count de Soissons, in
refusing him (as you may have observed before) this Lady in Marriage for Lewis
his Son. And truly what rubs soever had happened in the way of this Match, the
Duke notwithstanding never lost the hope, nor the ambition to see it one day
brought to effect. It is not therefore to be doubted, but that the
accomplishment of a thing by him so ardently coveted, must be highly pleasing
to him. The first news he heard of the consummation of these Nuptials was by a
Gentleman dispatched away purposely to him by Madame, the day after her
Marriage, wherein the high Dignity, to which she was arrived, nothing hindered
her from paying the Duke the respect that decency, and proximity exacted from
her; she writ to him therefore with her own hand, and the express words of the
Letter were these. Uncle,
I doubt not but you will receive as much joy, and satisfaction, (...) Letter
to the Duke of Espernon^^ ^er great U^cle.
as any person, at the happy accomplishment of my Marriage; the news whereof I
would no longer delay to send you, assuring my self you will look upon it as a
very great Honor, and good Fortune, to one who is so near and dear unto you. I
think my self the more happy therein, as I hope to be in a better capacity of
letting you see the great esteem I have ever had of your friendship, which I
desire to preserve by manifesting how much I am, Uncle,

Your very good Niece, Marie.
From Nantes the 7th. of August, 1626.



There was a strange and sudden alteration in Madames style, before her
Marriage it had used to be Monsieur my Uncle, and her Letters always ended with
Your most humble, and most affectionate Servant: but one sole night had so
raised her above her former condition (though very illustrious before) that
there was now very little difference betwixt her style, and that used by the
Queen, and Queen Mother; neither was the Duke, it may be supposed, displeased
to be so used, and the advancement of so near a Relation, being in part his
own; that which seemed a little to lessen him in this new way of writing, he
conceived to be amply recompensed in the honor of this Alliance. The Duchess
of Guise also accompanied this Letter of Madame her Daughter with another from
her self; wherein she made an excuse for not having written to the Duke before
the Marriage, as it had been her Duty to do: Telling him they had met with so
many difficulties in the business, that she could never believe it would take
effect, till she saw it absolutely done, which uncertainty had occasioned that
neglect. The King presently after did him the same honor, as also the two
Queens, the Monsieur himself, with the rest of his new, and illustrious Allies:
but before he received the honor of these last Complements, the Duke had sent
the Count de Maille to Court to prevent them, and with all humble respect to
let them know, how infinitely satisfied he was, to see his Family, by his
Majesty's Royal Bounty, raised to such an eminent degree of honor, as it was
by this Marriage.

The Peace of the Kingdom, Anno 1627.
the success of the Marriage of Madame, and the news of the Duchess de la
Vallette's being great with child, happening almost at the same time, had
altogether so overcharged the Duke of Espernon with an excess of joy, that it
must of necessity overflow: He would therefore communicate part of his own
satisfaction to the public; and as all his Passions would ever break out after
an extraordinary manner, so this of so excessive a joy, gave him a new occasion
of showing the world the largeness of his heart. The Duke appo^nts a Tilting at
Borde^ux.
He therefore designed a Tilting at Bordeaux, wherein instead of the vain,
unprofitable, and fabulous representations that are usually exhibited upon such
occasions, he would make the people with delight, and in security to see the
various faces of War, and in the midst of peace would divert himself with the
exercises of his own profession. To this entertainment he invited all the
persons of Quality of both Sexes in the Province; and the Duke de la Val^tte
came purposely from Metz, to supply the Duke his Father's place in all these
noble exercises, wherein he acquitted himself so well, that he was not the
least Ornament of that great Solemnity. As the expense of this Festival was
exceeding great, the Assembly continuing for above fifteen days together; so
Fortune would seem to contribute something to this profusion: but she did only
seem to do it, when after having presented the Duke with Millions, and brought
them almost to his own door, she rather chose to bury them in the Sea, than to
make good what she had so fairly promised. It is of the wrack of the Carricks
that I am about to speak, which happened at this time; and having had a Relation
of so remarkable an accident from the Master's Mate, of that of those two great
Vessels, The Shipwreck of the Portugal Carricks.
which perished upon the Coast of Medoc, I ought not, I conceive to pass by so
memorable a misfortune* and of which I am able to give so true an account.

After the Conquest the King of Spain had made of the Kingdom of Portugal, the
same Custom the Portugals had formerly paid to their natural Princes, for the
Liberty of their East India Trade, devolved of course to the King of Spain: but
with this condition nevertheless, that the Portugals should not be obliged to
unlade their Merchandise in any other part of the Catholic King's Dominions,
than that of Lisbon only, for a Mark of the ancient Right those of their Nation
had ever had to that Traffic with the Indies. This privilege was the loss of
those two Carricks; they had set sail from Goa the fourth of March, 1626 laden
with Merchandise of very great price, as Diamonds, and other Stones;
Amber-gris, Besoar, Spices, Drugs, Silks, and other rarities both of the
Indies, and the Kingdom of China, to the value of above two Millions and a half
of Gold at least in either bottom. They had been manned out with above four
hundred and fifty, what Mariners, and Soldiers, besides several Gentlemen, and
other persons of condition, that either by the curiosity of Travail, or thirst
of Gain, had been tempted into those remote parts of the world. All these
together made up above six hundred persons, and one might indeed more properly
have called these prodigious Hulks (which were each of them of two thousand
Tun) floating Cities, rather than Ships built for Navigation; they having in
them all sorts of Artizans, established Markets, Victuallers, and almost all
sorts, and conditions of men, with the same policy, and civil Regiment, that is
usually observed in the greatest, and most populous Cities. These two great
Vessels that seemed to be Sovereigns of the Sea, and that despising any thing
of a Storm, feared nothing but Quick sands, Fire, and Rocks, after a prosperous
Voyage, were surpised in the Road of Lisbon with foul weather, and driven back
to Coruna a very good Port, upon the Coast of Galicia in Spain. Where the storm
continuing very long, the Captains of the Carricks were by those of the Town
importuned to unlade their Goods in that Harbor, and no more to expose so
great Riches acquired with so much peril, and pains, to the dangers of the Sea:
but they were deaf to that motion, and on the contrary highly insisting upon
their privilege, the King of Spain at last gave way to their obstinacy;
commanding only the Admiral of the Portugal Navy, Don Manuel de Menezes, with
six of the best Gallions of his Squadron to put to Sea, and to Convoy them safe
to Lisbon, though this precaution only served to augment his loss. The Gallions
came up to the Carricks, to which the Admiral gave express order, not to stir
thence till a calmer season. But what good Counsel can prevent Mischance? the
Carricks contrary to all order and advice, upon the first little Truce of the
Tempest (which, as it often falls out at Sea, only retired to return with
greater fury) weighed Anchor, and put out to Sea: but they had no sooner
committed their Carricks to the mercy of the winds, but that they found
themselves engaged in the greatest stress of weather, that perhaps has at any
time been seen; and after a Tempest of two and twenty days, without any
intermission, they came at last to suffer Shipwreck, one at Cap-Breton, near to
Bayonne, and the other two days after upon the Coast of Medoc; in which exigent
of Fortune the Gallions were so faithful to them, as to bear them company in
ruin: so that three attending either Carrick, the loss was equal in both
places.

The Duke received the first news of this accident from the Common Bruit, and
that not till three days after it had happened; and indeed the rains that had
fallen, during this tempestuous weather, had so overflowed the ways, that
although this Coast be no more than ten or twelve Leagues distant from Bordeaux
only, it had been impossible sooner to have passed: but it is likewise true,
that the Inhabitants of the Country, a barbarous and inhumane people (as
generally Sea-borderers are) and inured to the spoil of Wracks, were not over
hasty to acquaint the Duke's Officers with this, that they might not be
disturbed whilst busy ravening after Booty. At last, and whilst preparing for
the approaching solemnity, he heard of this misfortune, and that a great number
of Spaniards, who delivered themselves for men of Quality, preserved out of a
greater number that perished, were upon their way coming to implore his
assistance; and accordingly the next day this miserable company, consisting of
two hundred, or thereabouts, were seen to enter the City, in the lamentable
plight may be imagined of men, that had been exposed to the fury of a Wrack.
The Duke took care to lodge them in the City, furnished them with Victuals,
took order for Clothes for them, and relieved them with money; when being by
some of them informed of the great Riches that was in the Carrick he mounted to
Horse to hinder the Pillage, and Disorder, which had already continued five or
six days together without intermission; it was nevertheless impossible for him
to get to the shore, the ways were so impassible; so that he was constrained
to return back, to begin his Triumph.

The Solemnity was begun, with a Skirmish of sixscore Cuirassieres, divided
into two Troops, and armed Cap-a-pie; the next day they ran the Ring in the
same Equipage they fought: after which they ran disarmed with Vizors, and
afterward ran at Tilt, for five or six days together, doing all the Exercises
that are to be performed on Horseback.

The Horse Exercises being gone through, they must now come to a representation
of Foot Service, that the angry trade of War might be set forth in all its
Forms. In a spacious place therefore, at one of the Extremities of the City,
the Duke caused two regular Forts to be built, and fortified according to all
the Maxims of Art. These Forts were manned with armed Soldiers to defend them,
they were battered with Cannon, assaulted, and in the end taken, so much to the
delight of the beholders, as made it appear, there can be no so dreadful
Original, from whence pleasant Copies are not to be taken.

The Combat of the Forts was followed by a noble Masque, and a Ball, and those
by a Combat at Barriers, which concluded the Solemnity; the last Act of which
was set out with infinite Expense, and very great Art. There were in it seven
Entries, and all those ushered in with great Machines, contrived by the
principles of the several parties, who were all persons of eminent Quality. I
shall not however undertake a description of all the remarkable passages
therein, there having been then a collection taken of them that made up a
Volume of it self, and I having no need to swell this with unnecessary
relations.

It was no little addition to the Duke's particular joy, The Duke de Cand^le
the Duke of Espernon's eldest Son comes to the Solemnity.
and to the general satisfaction of the whole Assembly, to find it honored
with the presence of the Duke de Candale, the Duke's eldest Son. It had now
been ten years complete, that their common misfortune had caused a separation
betwixt them; wherein though the Father had high causes of Discontent, yet had
the gallant behavior of the Son been such, and had so far prevailed upon his
natural affection, that at this time without all doubt he had an equal share
with his Brothers in the Duke's Favor. Neither indeed could the Heroic Son
have better spent these years of his disgrace, who seeing he could not
honorably live in his own Country, whilst out-lawed in his Fathers Favor,
went to exercise his profession of Arms in Holland, at that time the most
conspicuous Theater of War in all Europe: He had not there long continued,
before by his brave deportment he so far won the opinion of Count Maurice
Prince of Orange (acknowledged by all the world to be one of the greatest
Captains of his time) that he doubtless possessed the highest place in his
confidence, and esteem. A short Truce being concluded in that Country, he went
from thence to Venice, where he commanded some of the Venetian Militia in the
Valtoline; and in process of time, having gained the favorable opinion of that
Serene Republic, he was at last honored with one of their principal Commands,
and made General of all their Landforces; an Employment wherein he served upon
so many brave occasions, as would deserve a particular History; when at last
more ardently desired, than well used by France his native Country, he came to
end his days in his own Princes Service, and in the Command of one of his
chiefest Armies. The Duke his Father, when sometimes speaking of him, would
say, that he could hardly wish his Son had never done amiss, since he had done
so glorious a Penance for his faults, and by so many Heroic Actions expiated
the afflictions he had brought upon him.

The arrival of this long absent Son, was not yet the utmost bound of the
Duke's satisfaction; he received another at the same time, that touched his
heart with a more sensible joy, than any thing that has been mentioned before:
and doubtless it would have been greater now, than it was then, had God been
pleased to have prolonged his life till these days, that he might have seen the
fruits of the just expectation he had conceived at the Birth of as hopeful an
Heir, as he could possibly have wished. I have already told you, that the news
of his Daughter-in-law the Duchess de la Valette's being great with child, was
one of the occasions that caused this Public rejoicing, and that Assembly was
scarce broke up, when he received by a Courier, dispatched away for that
purpose certain news of her being brought to bed of a Son: The Birth of the
Duke of Candale, the Duke of Espernon's G^andchild.
a Blessing he had more zealously begged of Almighty God, than any other thing
in this world; and that he had the most reason to desire, that he might see his
succession continued in a hopeful Heir: But as this was the richest Present,
this young Princess could possibly make him, so it was (God knows) the last;
she ten days only surviving the Birth, who being delivered upon the fourteenth
of April, and dying the four and twentieth after, left her noble Husband a
Widower, and all France her mourners.

The Duke received this sad news as he was upon his return from Medoc, to which
place the Wrack of the Carrick had obliged him to make a second Journey, and
where, now that the season gave him leave to come nearer to the Sea, we saw a
most incredible thing; which was the Relics of this mighty Vessel, several
pieces whereof were to be seen, for above a quarter of a League together, along
the shore, and in so great number, that whoever had seen those floating Spoils,
would rather have judged them the ruins of some demolished City, than the
remains of one single Ship. The Duke with much ado recovered twelve great brass
Pieces, that were buried in the Sands, which were also all that could be saved,
of an hundred and eight, or ten, that were aboard, either the Carrick, or the
Gallions that Convoyed her. Upon his return from this short Journey, the Duke
received intelligence of the Death of the Duchess de la Valette, The death of
the D^tchess de la Va^ette.
at which, though his Affliction seemed to be so great, that nothing could be
more, it was nevertheless exceeded by that of the Husband; who having staid
behind at Bordeaux, during this Journey into Medoc, knew nothing of his
misfortune, till the return of the Duke his Father: but then all the comfort
they were capable of, was, their mutual Affliction, wherein, as a more just
occasion of sorrow could not possibly arrive, so could it not possibly be
expressed with more, or with more unfeigned tears.

Upon this sad occasion both the Father, and the Son received many Complements
of Consolation from the whole Court, the King, the Queens, the Monsieur, and
Madame, with all the other Princes, and Princesses; and almost all of any
eminent condition at Court, manifested their interest in this dire misfortune.
But they had scarce wiped off the tears for this first disaster, when it was
succeeded by another of almost equal concern; for I remember that the Gentleman
sent by the Monsieur, and Madame upon this consolatory Envoy, (...)
was scarce departed from B^rdeaux, when they received the intelligence at
once, of the happy delivery of Madame, and the deplorable accident of her
death: an occasion by which they were obliged (to their great grief) to make a
quick return of the Monsi^ur's Complement, and to recommence a new shower of
tears, even before the first storm was overblown.

In this variety of good, and evil events but (as it usually falls out in the
course of humane life) such as had more in them of evil than good, the Duke saw
himself necessitated to engage in a Dispute with the Cardinal, and upon this
occasion. The rumor that had been spread abroad of the infinite Riches the
shipwrack'd Carrick carried in her, had allured the Cardinal, to put in that
title to the spoil, New occa^^ons of misunderstanding betwixt the Duke, and
Cardinal Richeli^u about the wrack of the C^rrick.
which he pretended his Office of Superintendent of the Navies (with which he
had also confounded that of Admiral) gave him to all the wracks that should
happen upon the Coasts of France. Wherein doubting nevertheless that the
ordinary Officers he had established at Bordeaux, as in all other parts and
Havens of the Kingdom, would not be sufficient to justify his Claim against
the Duke of Espernon, who was upon the place, and whom he knew to be a man,
that would not easily be baffled out of his Right; he caused a Commission to be
directed to one Fortia a young Master of Requests, The Cardinals pretensions.
that under the Authority of the Royal Name he might with greater facility
obtain his own desires. This business was at first debated with great civility
and moderation, and the Duke was very willing to satisfy the Commissioner of
his Right, and Title, The Duke's Title.
by showing him Evidences of above three hundred years standing, by which his
Ancestors had ever been maintained in their Title to all the Wracks that happened
upon the Coast of Medoc, exclusively not only to the Officers of the Admiralty,
but even to the King himself: by whose predecessors it had been formerly
demis'd in free gift to the Lords of Candale for ever. After which he moreover
delivered him Copies of those Evidences, clearing to him by several Authentic
Writings and Records, his ancient, and lawful Right; which he desired him to
prefer to the Council, together with his Reasons, and the equity of his cause.
But this was not the thing was desired at Court, and Fortia was blamed for
having taken cognizance of the Duke's Title, and for having received Copies of
his Deeds, as if he had a mind to bring a business to the issue of a Suit, and
Trial, wherein they intended that Authority should stand for Law. Fortia
therefore having received this check, would for the future endeavor by
violence to repair, what he had by moderation, and respect to Equity
overthrown; and to that end began to talk to the Duke in other terms, than he
had used at first; wherein meeting with a Spirit that was not to be frighted
with the menaces of the Court, the heat of their disputes grew at last to an
open Quarrel betwixt them. Whereupon the Commissary, either unwilling, or not
daring to have any more to do with the Duke, desired to be recalled, as he was;
and it is not to be doubted at his return to the Cardinal failed not to lay all
the evil success of his own ill carriage at the Duke's door, by whose ill
offices the former discontents were not likely to be any thing qualified, much
less appeased.

The Duke had in the mean time dispatched away le Plessis to the King, to
beseech his Majesty that he would please to send to the Parliament of Paris, to
do him right in his lawful claim; giving him moreover instructions to go to the
Cardinal, and in his name to conjure him to sue forth his Title, by such of his
own Council as he should himself think fit; The Duke offers ^o (...) to a
reference, which is refused by the Cardinal.
and that he for his part would willingly stand to their award: but the Duke's
case was too clear for the Cardinal to submit his to reference. He had already
seen his Title, which was such as he knew nothing but the Sovereign Authority
could supersede, and that made him deaf to any thing of Arbitration. He chose
therefore rather to continue his pretense under the protection of the Royal
Name, and to that purpose procured Monsieur Servient, another Master of
Requests, to be put into Commission to prosecute his Title in Fortia's stead; a
man that by his dexterity and handsome carriage prevailed so far upon the
Duke's inclination, and esteem, that he obtained that from him, and in a very
few days, which the other had been constrained to give over, as a hopeless
thing, and impossible to be effected.

The Duke in fine condescended so far, Monsieur Servient employed in the
business, who reconc^les the difference.
as to consent that all the Goods saved from the Wrack, should be deposited in
the hands of two sufficient Citizens; of which Goods there were seven or eight
thousand little rough Diamonds, valued generally at forty or fifty Sous, a
penny, the Sous de Paris, or Sol Marque is penny ^arthing English.
Sous a piece, some pieces of Amber-gris, (or rather black Amber, for it was of
that color, and nothing near so good as ours) several Bezoar Stones, and some
other Merchandise, of no great value; and this was all that was recovered of
the rich lading of this prodigious Carrick, the rest being either buried in the
Sea, or pilfred away by the Country people, though all put together was but a
very small part of this mighty loss. Servient therefore by a gentle, and
insensible violence, having (as has been said) won upon the Duke's inflexible
temper, obtained all the satisfaction he could desire, and in exactly observing
his Commission, acquired the Duke withal for his friend, performing therein
what is only reserved for men of extraordinary Conduct, which was to reconcile
so opposite Interests, and yet to disoblige neither party.

The differences, thus moderated by the prudence of Servient, were soon totally
hushed up by the noise of a War with England, which at this time unexpectedly
broke out. The Duke of (...) my A^thour cal^'d the Duke de (...)
Buckingham, Favorite to Charles King of Great Britain, as (by an
extraordinary privilege of Fortune) he had been before to King James his
Father, was (as it was said) highly pressed by some of the House of Lords, of
the Parliament of England to give an account of the Treasure, that (as they
pretended) had been imbezzeld during the Reign of the late King: upon which
occasion, the Severity natural to that Nation in such Inquisitions, making him
justly to apprehend the issue of an Enquiry; wherein perhaps it had been
impossible for any man living to have satisfied their Judgments, or their
Malice; he chose rather to withdraw himself from the inconvenience of such a
Trial, and to put himself into a posture of standing upon his own Guard, than
to run the hazard of a Sentence that he could not expect should be favorable
to him, from men that were envious of his Favor and Fortune: and this has been
said to have been one motive to this Invasion. Another, and which was no less
prevalent with the Duke (as some have delivered, who pretended to be very privy
to his thoughts) was the jealousy he had of the Cardinal's greatness, of whom
he had been so ill satisfied in a late Embassy into this Kingdom, Our English
Authors, that as they must needs be better informed of the motives of this War,
are likely better to inform us, give a far different account. Vide Bakers
Chronicle.
as thenceforward to conceive either so mortal a hatred to his Person, or at
least so high an emulation of his Power, as it is believed by many prompted him
to undertake this War with France; from whence it may be judged, how light the
causes commonly are, that bring on the ruin of Nations, and the desolation of
Kingdoms. But the better to persuade the English to approve of this expedition
(it being no easy matter to raise money there for any preparation of this kind
without the consent of the people) his pretense was to succor the Rochellers,
that were infinitely oppressed, and the Protestant Party, which he said, since
the last Peace, was very much weakened in France.

Having with this pretext palliated either his Animosity, The English* land in
the Isle of Re.
or his Ambition, with a Fleet consisting of a hundred and fifty Sail, upon
which he had Shipped Six thousand our Historians say.
ten thousand men, he presented himself before the Isle of Re in July 1627.
This Enterprise, which in all probability was likely to be favored with an
Insurrection of those of the Reformed Religion at home (who were not depressed
to that degree, but that they were yet very considerable) put the whole Court
into a very great Alarm: wherein the Cardinal, who very well understood this
affront, to be particularly directed against him, looked upon it as his own
immediate concern: neither did he fail on his part of his utmost endeavor to
frustrate his Adversaries Design, and to maintain himself in the advantages of
his Princes Favor. The Cardinals Orders to oppose the English.
He sent dispatches therefore to all parts of the Kingdom, for the raising of
new Forces, and caused a Commission to be issued out to the Duke of Angoulesme,
to call together such as were already on foot, with them to go to the defense
of Fort-Louis, built before Rochelle, upon which it was likely the English
would make their first attempt, and therein also to endeavor to curb Rochelle
it self, which yet retained a mutinous disposition, under a dissembled show of
Obedience, and Duty.

Le Plessis happened in this juncture of time to be at Court, whither (as has
been said) he had been before dispatched by the Duke his Master to solicit his
Interest about the Wrack of the Carrick. This Gentleman was so generally
esteemed by all both for his Valor, and his Experience in matters of War, and
principally by the Cardinal (who had been a witness of his behavior throughout
the Queen Mother's Affairs, and had in those times contracted a strict League
of Friendship with him) that he immediately applied himself to him in this
urgent necessity; neither did he herein forget any promises that might induce
him, or omit any endearments that might oblige him to render the Duke his
Master favorable to his designs, and himself to accept of an Employment, upon
this important occasion: Le Plessis the Duke of Espernon's Domestic Servant,
has the command of a Regiment ^on^err'd upon him, upon this occasion.
Assuring him withal, that no more mention should be made of the Carrick, or of
any other cross Affair he had been perplexed withal, and had now depending at
Court. Upon this assurance Le Plessis departed from Court, provided with ten
Commissions for the raising of a Regiment in his own name, and with all the
civil Language, and fair Promises could be desired for the Duke his Master,
whose assistance was exceedingly considerable, by reason of the short cut by
Sea, betwixt Bordeaux, and Rochelle.

Le Plessis arrived in Guienne in the beginning of August, where he first gave
the Duke an account of his own Affairs, and afterward acquainted him with the
Commission he had received for himself; who was so assisting to him in the
raising of his Regiment, that it was one of the first that was ready for this
Service. The Duke no sooner saw Le Plessis Companies complete, but that he fell
to making ready the Succors were required of him for the Fort of the Isle of
Re, already besieged by the English Forces, though I must confess it was
(contrary to his custom in other occasions) exceeding slowly: not that he did
not heartily desire to see Rochelle reduced to the King's Obedience, but he
could have been glad that the Cardinal, whom he had no reason to love, might
have had no share in the honor of this great Enterprise; as if he had then
foreseen that the addition of Reputation, and Greatness, he must infallibly
derive from that success, would one day prove fatal to him. Yet in this
distraction of thoughts he fail^d not nevertheless to prefer his Duty before
all other respects, that regarded either his own Passion, or Interest; and in
effect the great Succors that were drawn together upon Olome Sands, and by
which the Isle was preserved, consisted principally of those Forces he sent
away from Bordeaux.

Yet was not this the only thing wherein the Duke was highly serviceable upon
this important occasion, Anno 1628.
his instructions contributing as much at least to the taking of Rochelle, as
any other means whatsoever: for it was he, without all contradiction that gave
the first advice for the bringing up a Cawsey to block up the Harbor, and who
rejected all the propositions of Pompeo Targone, as frivolous, and of no use;
and indeed the success of those floating Forts, and Bridges contrived by this
Italian Engineer, proving such, as the Duke had prophesied it would be, they
were fain when all was done to follow his advice. A Copy of which advice I here
present you, as it was written by his own hand to the Duke of Angoulesme,
before the Cardinal came before Rochelle; the Duke rather choosing (it should
seem) to communicate his opinion to this Prince, than to any other of the
Commanders of the King's Army, as he had his person in much greater esteem. SIR,
I should have been glad of an occasion wherein by some signal Service, The
Duke of Espernon's Letter of advice to the Duke of Angoulesme.
rather than by fruitless, and ill couched words to have manifefested my
Affection to you: But since my good Fortune will not so far gratify my
ambition, I must content my self with what I have, and make it the business of
these lines to give you an assurance of the great obligation you have conferred
upon me in sending Captain Marsillac with the Relation of the Relief my Lord
the Duke of Orleans has happily put into the Fort St. Martin. I doubt not, Sir,
but your Wisdom has contributed much to this great performance; the success
whereof makes me believe, that at his Majesty's arrival, the glory of chasing
the English shamefully out of his Kingdom, is assured, and consequently that of
reducing Rochelle to the last necessity of absolutely submitting to his
obedience; for the design of blocking it upon the Land-side by Forts, and
Redoubts, with lines of communication, is an infallible course: it is indeed
somewhat a tedious way, but in a year or two at most the place must inevitably
fall into the King's hands, without loss of men, and less expense of money: but
the Port must of necessity be shut up, which is not to be done, but by some
solid materials; and whosoever will undertake to do it by a floating Bridge,
will find himself mistaken, at least my opinion tells me so; for the
impetuosity of the Winds, and the force of the Tides, will break whatever swims
above water, there being no stability in floating bodies to resist them.
Several other reasons might be given, which would be too long for a Letter; and
besides it would be a great presumption in me to think my opinion ought to have
any place amongst so many great, and prudent persons, as you are in the King's
Army, etc.

From Cadillac the 4th. of October 1628.

The Duke of Angoulesme signified to him, how much he approved of his opinion,
by the answer he sent him the 21. of the same month, in these terms. My Lord,
The new assurances you are pleased to give me of your affection together with
your prudent advice, The Duke of Angoulesme's answer.
have given me an equal satisfaction, and desire, to pursue the course you
conceive most conducing to the happy issue of the Enterprise in hand. I do
assure you, I am absolutely of your opinion, and I think my self very fortunate
in it: but the diversity of Judgments amongst us, producing variety of
counsels, I fear may be ruinous to a design; the beginning whereof might
otherwise promise a successful event, etc.


And elsewhere he writes him word: That he submits to his advice, as to a thing
that ought to stand for a Law, and a Rule; as well out of respect to the great
Wisdom upon which all his opinions were grounded, as to the perfect knowledge
he had of all things, that might prejudice, or advance the design of Rochelle.
And in truth from the year 1621. that he had been employed before this place,
he had meditated nothing more, than how to reduce it into his Majesty's
obedience. So that I have seen in his hands at one time thirty several designs
for the shutting up of the Port. Pompeo Targone (as has been said) came thither
at that time to view the place, and the Duke called in several other Engineers
to advise about it: but in the end concluded upon the Cawsey, as the only thing
that could possibly block up the Channel.

The sitting down before Rochelle soon stirred the whole Hugonot party into
Commotion; The Commotion of the whole Hugonot* Pa^ty.
and although most of the other Cities of their Faction, utterly disclaimed
having any hand in the English Invasion, and seemed to condemn Soubize for
having called them in: yet was there not one of them nevertheless that in the
conclusion did not join with them, or that refused to be involved in the ruin
of that Rebellious City. It was impossible the root of this Faction could be so
violently shaken, and the incorporate branches remain insensible of the motion:
so that the extremest members thereof, foreseeing a certain, and general ruin
in the fall of Rochelle (which was, as it were, the body where the soul of
their Interest did inhabit) they no sooner saw it threatened by these mighty
preparations: but that the common safety made them concur in the common
defense, and break into open Arms in all parts of the Kingdom. In Languedoc,
the Sevennes, and Guienne they were excited by the instigation of the Duke of
Rohan: Montauban followed the example of the rest, And of Montauban.
and what Protestations soever the Inhabitants of that City had made to the
Duke of Espernon, that they would continue firm in their duty, their destiny
notwithstanding overruled all those temperate resolutions, and the hour was
now come, that the King's Victories must (in spite of their own endeavors to
oppose it) establish them in a happier degree of Peace, and Safety, than till
this time they had ever enjoyed, even in the greatest prosperity of their
Affairs.

It was no fault of the Duke of Espernon's, that they did not obtain this
benefit better cheap, and by better ways, and that they were not at once both
happy, and innocent: he often by Letters put them in mind of their duty, and of
the promises they had so faithfully made him, to continue firm therein, and,
for a final testimony of the zeal he had to their preservation, sent to them
one of the most powerful instruments he could possibly make choice of for so
good a work. And this was Morin, a Councellor in the Chamber de l' Edict, and
Chamber Me-partie is all one, it being (as has been said elsewhere) a Court
erected in favor of those of the Religion, consisting the one half of
Catholics, and the other of those of their own party. The Prince of Conde made
the Lieutenant General in Guienne, and some other adjoining Province^.
Chamber de l' Edict of Guienne, a man of admirable Wit, and great Eloquence,
to persuade them to their own good, had they been capable to understand it; and
one the Duke conceived the more proper for this employment, as being one of
their own persuasion, who had born Arms amongst them with great Reputation and
Valor, and who having upon very good considerations reconciled himself to this
Duty, was the more fit to persuade them to do a thing, wherein he had himself
been a leading example.

So soon as these, and the rest of their Party had declared, the King seeing
the War kindled in almost all the Provinces of his Kingdom, sent away the
Prince of Conde into Languedoc, in the quality of Lieutenant General of his
Armies, not only in Languedoc, and Guienne, but likewise in some other
adjoining Provinces; to whom he also delivered two Commissions of Lieutenant
Generals under him, for the Dukes of Montmorency, and Espernon. The latter of
these had no sooner intelligence of the Prince's arrival at Tholouze, but that
he immediately posted thither to pay him the respect due to a Prince of the
Blood, and from his own mouth to receive his Majesty's Commands. He was there
received by the Prince with all the tenderness, and manifestation of entire
confidence he could possibly expect, or desire: but how kindly soever he took
this entertainment, he could not nevertheless force his complacency so far as
to accept of the Commission the Prince had to give him of Lieutenant General
under his Command. He at first defended himself from it by several very civil,
and respective excuses; telling him, amongst other things: That being his most
humble Servant (and he was effectually so) no condition whatever could more
subject him to his Commands, than the respect he had for his Quality and Person
had already done, and that for any thing else, the power he had as Governor of
Guienne, giving him of it self sufficient Authority to cause him to be obeyed
in whatever he should please to command within that Province, he did not stand
in need of any further Commission for that end. But at last (the Prince
unwilling to understand his excuses, and still pressing him to receive it) the
Duke with his usual liberty franckly told him: That from his youth till that
time he had ever been honored with such Commands immediately under the King's
his Masters, without having ever accepted that quality under any other than
themselves; and that he did therefore beseech him he would please to permit him
in this last Act of his Life, to retain a privilege he had for so many years,
and under so many glorious Masters enjoyed. After so candid a Declaration, the
Prince would no more importune him; neither did he discover the least offense,
or unkindness, at the Duke's refusal; which he had the more reason to be
satisfied withal, as he very well knew he had formerly rejected the same
Employment under the Count de Soissons.

The Duke had no sooner taken leave of the Prince, but that he returned back in
all diligence toward Bordeaux, to take order for the raising of such Forces,
as he was to set on foot. He had at present no more, than the same Regiments of
Foot, and the same Troops of Horse, that had served before in the like
occasion, and those the Marquis de Monferrat (whom he had lately made
Lieutenant of his own Company of Gens d'-Armes) had order to draw into the
field: but these small Forces were scarce ready when the Duke received
intelligence that a little Town called Caussade, near to Montauban, had had the
confidence to declare for the Hugonot Party. Upon this news the just
apprehension he had, lest the other Cities of his Government, that were
inclined this way, should follow this ill example; and lest in the end, instead
of Montauban alone, he should find thirty good Cities opposed against him, made
him hasten that way to chastize these first Rebels: but he was hardly there
arrived, when he understood both by several Letters from the Prince, and by
other pressing intelligence from the Court it self, that the Duke of Rohan had
gathered together a considerable body of an Army in Sevennes, where he was
still rallying so many other Forces of his Party, that of them he doubted not
to make up such an Army, The Duke of Espernon opposes himself to the Duke of
Rohan, who was moving with an Army to the relief of Rochelle.
as would be able by some notable attempt to divert the King from the
Enterprise of Rochelle. It was therefore necessary for him to strive with all
his endeavor to obstruct his passage, wherein consisted the main concern of
the whole Affair, and accordingly he went about it, though not without great
reluctance, that he should approach so near to Caussade, and not stay to
besiege it: but on the other side he durst not do it, lest whilst he should be
taken up with an Enterprise of so little importance, the Duke of Rohan might
take that opportunity to execute his design. I heard many of his Servants
murmur, that he was not more eager of this Siege, and he himself knew very
well, that the Prince had writ something unhandsomely of him to the Court about
it: but he was nothing moved at all that noise, and having good reason for what
he did, nothing had power to alter his determination.

Whilst he was thus vigilant about Montauban to obstruct the Duke of Rohan's
passage, the Prince of Conde, who had made a very considerable progress in
Languedoc, by the taking of Pamieres, Realmont, and several other places,
resolved to pursue his Victories into Guienne. There was a little corner in the
lower Rouergue, and bordering upon the Sevennes, that had never yet felt the
power of the Royal Arms; it was therefore agreed upon betwixt the Prince and
the Duke of Espernon, that the Army should advance that way, their design
herein being, either to disunite this little Country from the Duke of Rohan's
Interests, or at least by this Enterprise to divert him from the design he had
of moving toward Rochelle; it being very unlikely he should think of that,
whilst the Cities of his party should be so dangerously engaged in the most
advantageous Post he had upon any occasion to retire himself unto.

The Prince of Conde who was very punctual in all his designs, The Prince of
Conde lays Siege to St. Afrique.
at the appointed day, which was in the latter end of May, presented himself in
sight of Vabres, an Episcopal Sea, and almost the only Catholic City of all
that Country; to whom the Duke also the next day joined himself with his
Forces. Their design was suddenly to clap down before Saint Afrique, a Town
very considerable in those parts, and exceedingly well fortified: but the
success of this Enterprise did by no means answer their expectation, they being
after a very brisk assault, vigorously sustained by those within, constrained
to raise the Siege; after which the Prince's Forces being very much decreased
in the preceding Service, With ill success.
and infinitely dejected with this repulse, as the Duke's also were, it was
necessary to dispose them into several Garrisons to refresh them.

It seemed as if this baffle at Saint Afrique had happened for no other end, but
to justify the Duke about the business of Caussade, wherein the miscarriage of
the one caused his wisdom to be highly magnified for not having attempted the
other; whereas before both the Court, and the whole Kingdom talked a little
odly of his proceeding; so ready is ill natured mankind to censure the bravest
Spirits upon the least shadow of occasion, though after having performed in the
sight of all the world innumerable actions that ought the least of them to
defend the Author's name from Calumny, upon any accident of Fortune. The King
lay at this time before Rochelle, and le Plessis, who had served in the Isle of
Re at the defeat of the English with mavelous reputation, continued to serve
with his Regiment at this Siege; where being upon the great Scene of Affairs,
and hearing what was said of the Duke his Master, he failed not to let him know
what censure the world passed upon him concerning the business of Caussade, and
how he had been represented to the King: insomuch that the Duke finding it
necessary to give his Majesty an account of what had passed upon this occasion,
he dispatched away Monsieur Fabert, The Duke sent Monsieur Fabert to Court.
who was then in his entertainment, to Court, to that effect. This Monsieur
Fabert was a Gentleman of whose education the Duke had had so particular a
care, that he had ever been either under his own eye, or with the Duke de la
Valette his Son; and having observed in him, in a very green youth, great
courage, and understanding, and an extraordinary assiduity, and application to
matters of his profession; and thence conceiving the hopes of those rare fruits
we now see, had ever honored him (which was not ordinary with him to young
people) with great demonstrations of particular favor and esteem.

Fabert being arrived at Court, presently acquainted the King with the occasion
of his coming, presenting with all his Letters of Credence to the Cardinal,
wherein he acquitted himself so well, that his Majesty remained highly
satisfied with the Duke's Conduct; and as touching the Cardinal, le Plessis,
who had an old established familiarity with him, writ to the Duke in a Letter
dated from Perigny the 24th. of September, 1628. in these terms: Before the
arrival of Monsieur Fabert, there were various discourses of your proceeding at
Caussade; wherein, though some were prompted by their malice, yet even the most
moderate, and who spoke neither out of Envy, nor Disaffection, could not
absolutely acquit your Reputation: but since his coming, all men unanimously
applaud your Wisdom; insomuch that Cardinal Richelieu himself, who before in
obscure language would sometimes give me private touches of reproach (to which
I could return no other answer, than to entreat he would suspend his Judgment,
till you writ to Court) has confessed to me since, that had you engaged in that
Siege, Monsieur de Rohan had doubtless passed by, as he had promised the
Rochellers; and that you had been so long in possession of well doing, that it
was henceforward impossible for you to do amiss.

After the raising of the Siege of Saint Afrique, they were now to think of a
second devastation of Montauban, and to make the innocent Country suffer for
the Crimes of that rebellious City: to effect which, the Duke had only two
Regiments remaining of three that he had raised; the third which was that of
Saint Croix d' Ornano, having by the Prince been taken into the Body of his own
Army: yet did he not for all this refuse to undertake this difficult
Enterprise, which nevertheless I do verily believe he could never have been
able to execute, without the assistance of a great number of gallant Gentlemen
Volunteers, to whose Valor (as has been already said) he stood obliged for
most of the Services he performed for the King in that Province.

The business was therefore performed with very good success, not that the
Enemy did not make a stout Opposition, and did not daily engage the Duke's
small Forces: but it was ever to their own loss. Whilst matters went thus
prosperously on, the continual toil wherewith the Duke had been exercised
during this whole Campaign, had so overcome his spirits, that the fell
dangerously sick at Castelsarrazin; The Duke of Espernon falls ^^ck.
where, how importunate soever his Physician was with him to retire from the
ill air of that Country, corrupted no doubt by the excessive heats, and the
length of the War, which had there continued for almost five years together
without intermission, he was notwithstanding obstinate to continue in his Camp,
and would by no persuasions be drawn to forsake his Army. Neither, though his
indisposition confined him to his bed, could it hinder his indefatigable mind
from still working upon his business: he would have his people to bring him an
hourly account of all that passed, and his Genius inspiring his followers with
the same good Fortune had ever attended him in all his designs, he (even in the
most violent height of his distemper) gave himself Orders, the execution
whereof made him ever victorious. But after having long strugled with his
Disease, he must at last give way to its violence; and his strength by the
agitation of his mind visibly impairing, made his Physician begin to apprehend
a more dangerous issue of his distemper, than was at first suspected. They were
therefore constrained whether he would or no to force him from his Camp, and to
carry him aboard a Boat, in which he was conveyed upon the River Garonne, and
the next day brought to his own House Cadillac; where he was scarcely arrived,
The Duke recovers.
but that the change of air produced a manifest alteration in his health, which
in a few days was succeeded by a perfect recovery.

The waste having been made about Montauban, it was still necessary to leave
some Forces thereabouts, to hinder the excursions of those of the City; which
Forces, though very few, were notwithstanding so conveniently disposed, that
the Enemy could never make any advantage of their own numbers. The Marquis de
Monferrant (who together with the Lieutenancy of the Duke's Gens d'-Armes, had
at his recommendation moreover obtained the Office of Marshall de Camp) was
left to command them; an employment wherein he so well discharged himself, as
besides the honor he deserved for having with so few men bridled the License
of so populous a City, he further acquired that of having kept those men in so
admirable a Discipline, that there was never the least complaint made of any
disorder, or the least insolence committed by any of his party.

Whilst in Languedoc, and Guienne the King's Forces were taken up with these
petty Enterprises, his Majesty in his own person continued to streighten
Rochelle both by Sea and Land; carrying on the Siege with so much vigor, and
conduct, that after having made the besieged suffer extremities, far beyond
what we read of with horror in the most senseless obstinacies of other desperate
Cities; he at last reduced them to a necessity of submitting to his Royal
Mercy. In which Surrender, Rochelle surrendered to the King.
though the wilful blindness wherewith the Rochellers had been so long
possessed, had kept them from looking into their own miserable condition, till
they had consumed not only all provisions fit for the use of man; but also all
that the extremest hunger could compel the uncleanest creatures to convert to
food: they yet found they had not exhausted the King's Royal goodness, who had
enough left to pardon the miserable remains of those wretched people, the
length, and sufferings of the Siege had yet left alive, preserving so those
that had tried, and had not been able to effect their own destruction, and
exercising his Clemency, upon such as had no compassion of themselves. To
conclude he made himself Master of Rochelle, that is to say, absolute King of
France, which, till this City was reduced, he could not properly have been said
to be.

This glorious year was concluded by this happy Victory, Anno 1629.
a success by which all the occasions of those civil discords, which the
difference of Religions had hitherto almost continually fomented, were so
totally rooted up, as gave us for the future leisure to prosecute our Foreign
designs; wherein we have since been so fortunate, as by the success of our Arms
to be secured of a firm, and last repose for the time to come, if we can
continue this good union, and intelligence amongst our selves; the breach
whereof can alone encourage our Neighbors to attempt upon our Peace.

The King being yet before Rochelle, and the Town upon the point of Surrender,
his resolution was absolutely bent upon reducing the remaining Cities of the
Hugonot Party to the same obedience; in order whereunto his Majesty sent a
Letter to the Duke of Espernon, to acquaint him with so much of his design as
concerned the Province where he had the honor to Command; a Dispatch that was
sent away by Servient, who was to be both the Bearer of this Missive, and the
Interpreter of his Majesty's further Intentions. The Employment this Gentleman
had been upon into that Country the preceding year, about the business of the
Carrick, and the dexterity, and prudence he had discovered in the management of
that Affair, had made him by the King thought worthy of, and sufficient for the
Office of Intendant de la Justice, and Police in Guienne, with which he was at
this time invested: but that being such a Commission as is hardly to be
executed in Provinces, that have Parliaments of their own, without intrenching
upon, or at least, giving offense unto their Authority, soon begot a feud
betwixt the Parliament of Bordeaux and him; which grew at last to such a
height, that Servient was fain to prefer a complaint to the Council of some
affronts he had received from that Assembly; whereupon he had granted him a
Sentence of Prohibition, together with a Citation of personal appearance
against the first President de Gourgues, and some other Members of that Court.
They must therefore of necessity appear, and accordingly the first President
came in at the appointed time; where presenting himself before the King, to
justify the proceeding that had occasioned this Citation, his reception was a
little severe. The King, dissatisfied with him, as was said, upon other
accounts, commanded him to speak kneeling; which the President making some
difficulty to do, as an unusual form* the King, rising from his seat, pulled
him by the Robe to compel him to it. It Is said, that even in this very act, and
the confusion the face of an incensed Prince might reasonably have put any man
into, the President immediately recollecting himself, spoke of the violence was
offered to him, with an Efficacy, and Eloquence that astonished all that heard
him, and that was so powerful, as to extract some gentle and satisfactory
expressions even from the King himself: but this was also the last lightning of
his Wit, and he seemed to have mustred all his Forces for this one piece of
Service, ending his Life almost as soon as his Oration; who though of a
contemptible stature, and an infirm constitution, but of a strange vivacity,
and courage, was so wounded with the sense of the King's severity, that he was
never after to be comforted; but retiring, already ^ick, The death of (...)
Chief President de Gourgues.
out of his Majesty's presence, dyed a very few days after. He had this
obligation to the Duke of Espernons unkindness, that it discovered in him a
great many excellent qualities, that would otherwise have been buried in his
Ashes; for had he in truth had nothing more to do, than merely to have
exercised the ordinary functions of his place, he would even in that capacity
have met with concurrences enough to have disputed that honor with him: but
having had opportunity to manifest his courage in so mighty, and dangerous a
dispute, his Eloquence in so many Illustrious Assemblies, and his Zeal for the
dignity, and honor of his Fraternity, in so many notable, and important
occasions, has left behind him so fair a memory, that he does at this day pass,
in the opinions of all that knew him, for one of the greatest men that ever
presided in that Court.

If the King's success in the reducing of Rochelle gave a high reputation to
the Royal Arms, the quick dispatch of that Siege was of no less utility to his
other Affairs; for every one imagining this Victory would have cost as many
years, as he was months about it, that opinion was so generally received, and
concluded for so infallible a truth by all the neighboring Princes, that there
was hardly one, who had not proposed to himself some advantage, or other from
this long diversion; either to the prejudice of his Majesty's Reputation, or to
that of his Affairs. The King of Spain therefore, the King of England, the
Dukes of Savoy, and Lorain, entered into a powerful League, that every one might
make his benefit of this Civil War: Wherein Spain and Savoy doubted not,
without any resistance, to possess themselves of the Territories of the Duke of
Mantua, an Ally, and a Vassal to this Crown: The design of the English was not
only to relieve and reestablish the remains of the Reformed Religion in France;
but also to revenge themselves for the losses they had sustained in the
business of the Isle of Re, and the Duke of Lorain (an ambitious, and offended
Prince) proposed to himself, and that without much difficulty, the usurpation
of the three Bishoprics of Metz, Toul, and Verdun, which, as they were
naturally members of it, would bring an equal addition of benefit, and honor
to his own Dukedom.

The last of the forementioned Princes not daring to begin the quarrel, staid
expecting when the other Confederates should break the Ice, in the mean time
concealing his designs under a dissembled show of Friendship; and the King of
England, not well recovered of the late Blow, had no mind to declare without
the concurrence of the Duke of Lorain: so that whilst these two Princes sat
still in mutual expectation, which should lead the Field, the King of Spain,
and the Duke of Savoy, falling smartly to work, Spain and Savoy invade Mantua.
had by Arms so far advanced their designs, that they had already possessed
themselves of most of the Duke of Mantua's Cities, and excepting Casal, and
Mantua it self, were masters of the whole Duchy.

The King, justly incensed at so great an injury offered to him in the person
of his Ally, might reasonably enough have revenged himself by the same way, by
which he had been offended; but retaining, it should seem, a greater respect
for the Duke of Savoy, than he had done for him, he dispatched an Ambassador
to him to complain That without denouncing of War, and to the violation of
their former Treaties, he had taken Arms against a Prince, whom as an Ally he
was obliged in honor to protect; advising him in the conclusion, either to
restore things to the condition wherein he had found them, or to prepare
himself to withstand the utmost power of his Arms, which he was resolved to
employ for the vindication of his own Honor, and the protection of his
Friends, and Allies.

If the Duke of Savoy (a Prince truly great in all things) had not yet been
more ambitious, than he was great, it had been no hard matter for him to have
found out such a remedy, as might easily have prevented the ensuing War; but
being big with the hope of taking Monferrat, he was not to be persuaded to give
over an Enterprise, which he thought as good as certain to him. He could not
imagine that the King's Army tired out, as it was, with the incommodities of a
tedious Siege, could be in any condition of coming to trouble his designs;
neither did he believe that the King himself, who had been exposed to the same
inconveniences his Army had suffered, could be so soon able in his own person
to undertake so troublesome a Journey* which being presupposed, nothing could
have power to hinder his Affairs; so that endeavoring to hold his Majesty in
hand, without giving his Ambassador any positive answer, or absolutely
engaging his word, he still continued his Usurpation.

The King impatient of this injury to his own person, and more of the injustice
done to the Duke of Mantua, with a Resolution as generous in it self, as the
execution proved glorious to his Name, concluded the following February, to
cross the Alps, and through all the difficulties of Snow, and Ice, to force
his way to the defense of his Honor, The King goes into Italy.
which in Italy was so highly engaged. An Expedition that the Duke of Savoy
finding he could not with all his dexterity prevent, he resolved by Arms to
guard the Entry into his own Dukedom: and to that end he caused the passage of
Suze (a pass nature her self had made inaccessible (if any thing could be so to
Valor) to be strangely fortified: The Duke de la Valette forces le pas de Suze.
but this strong Post the King made no difficulty to assault, in which Service
the Duke de la Valette Colonel of the Foot, putting himself in the head of the
Forlorn Hope, drawn out of the Regiment of Guards, first mounted the Enemies
Works, and showing himself as much Superior to his Followers in bravery, as he
was in Command, in a few hours overcame all difficulties, both of Mountains,
and men that opposed his way.

The Duke of Savoy after this defeat, not knowing what to oppose against the
King's victorious Arms, since his best Forces, when fortified in a Post of so
great advantage, had not been able to withstand them, began to see his danger,
and to perceive he had no way left but by an Accommodation to defend himself
from manifest and apparent ruin; which made him sue to the King for Peace, and
obtained it upon condition, the Duke should favor the passage of his Army to
the relief of the Duke of Mantua so unjustly invaded: An Accommodation with
Savoy being thus concluded, the Spaniard, who despaired of being able to make
good his ground in the open Field, against an Army that had with so great
facility forced the Duke of Savoy's people in their own Trenches, thought fit
to accept of the same conditions; and accordingly not only rose from before
Casal, but moreover restored all the places they had already taken in the Duke
of Mantua's Dominions, wisely choosing rather to give way to the King's
Fortune, than to run the hazard of a Battle, the event whereof they feared
would be fatal to them: though this discretion only served to defer for a time
the Victories heaven had destined for us over that insolent, and implacable
Nation.

Doubtless had the King pleased to have made use of this occasion, and the
power he had to effect any design he would have undertaken, he might at this
time with great facility have given the Spanish Forces such a blow, that they
would not of many years after have been in any condition to have braved him
again in Italy: but his Majesty, contenting himself with having rescued his
Ally from the oppression of those two mighty Enemies, would not in his own
person seem to violate that Equity and Justice he had traveled so far to
defend.

If the Foreign Princes had taken a wrong measure in the belief they had
entertained of the length of the Siege of Rochelle, the Duke of Rohan was no
less mistaken in the Expedition of Italy; wherein he doubted not his Majesty
would meet with so many great, and tedious difficulties, that he hoped himself
(who was the soul of his whole Party) might in the mean time, and in the
interval of the King's absence, infuse so much vigor into his declining cause,
as that they would be in a condition for some time at least, to defend
themselves.

He had therefore taken Arms in the Sevennes, The Duke of (...) takes Arms
whilst the King is in Italy.
and with the assistance of the Cities of Montauban, Nismes, Millaut, Castres,
Privas, Vsetz, and some others, had got such a body of an Army together, as
therewith he hoped to maintain himself in that little angle of the Kingdom, and
either presently to obtain some advantageous conditions, or to expect a more
favorable time for the reestablishment of his depressed party. In the mean
time he treated secretly with Spain, from whence he had also obtained a promise
of some supply of money: but the King, who had intelligence of his practice,
returning with the same celerity out of Italy into France, in the most violent
heats of Summer, with which he had passed out of France into Italy in the
greatest extremity of Winter, presented himself before Privas (one of the Rebel
Cities) in June, which also at his first coming he carried by assault: after
which Aletz, another of the same principles, surrendered without any resistance.
The Duke of Rohan, observing what a t^rror the taking of these two places had
infused into his whole Faction; and knowing on the other side that a Peace with
Italy, and England was already concluded, began to apprehend at last he should
be totally deserted by all his Confederates, and Friends, and left alone to
bear the shock of his Majesty's victorious Arms; which made him in time
seriously to apply himself to his mercy, to avoid the severe effects of his
Justice.

One of the most powerful motives that induced him to sue for this Peace, was
doubtless the blocking up of Monta^ban, and the waste that, now the third time
by express order from the King, was made round about that City. The Duke of
Rohan had placed his latest refuge in the strength of this place, and had ever
hoped, whilst it could maintain it self in a condition to sustain a tedious
Siege, that resistance would infallibly put him into a capacity of obtaining
very good Conditions: but the King, who had foreseen this design, writ to the
Prince of Conde to join himself with the Duke of Espernon (to whom he also writ
at the same time to the same effect) to deprive Montauban, by destroying their
Fruits, of all possibility of subsistence, and therein the Duke of Rohan of the
assistance he promised to himself from thence in the last extremity of his
declining Affairs.

The Prince would himself be the bearer of this Dispatch, dated from Suze the
27th. of April, and accordingly arrived at Bordeaux in the latter end of May;
where betwixt him, and the Duke, all things were soon concluded on for the
execution of his Majesty's Commands: an Enterprise, that although the Duke had
neither competent Forces, nor other means wherewithal to perform it, that no
order had been sent either for money to raise men, to furnish ammunitions of
War, or to buy provisions for the support of the Army; his affection to the
Service notwithstanding supplying all other defects, he soon put himself into a
condition to second the Princes desires; wherein he was indeed necessitated
almost alone to undertake the business, how difficult soever he knew it to be:
For the Prince being obliged by his Command to have an especial eye to the
higher Languedoc, his presence was there very requisite, and almost continually
required: but the Duke failed not, for any other consideration, according to
his custom, to acquit himself very exactly of his share of the work.

Whilst the Duke was in the heat of this execution, the Peace was concluded
with the Duke of Rohan in July, which all the other Cities of his Faction
likewise accepted, excepting Montauban which for some days stood out; not that
they did not desire it equally with the rest, they had suffered too much, and
were reduced to too necessitous a condition to oppose their own quiet: but the
Duke (whatsoever those of Montauban could pretend) to wit, That having suffered
so much by his Arms they could not consent to allow him the honor of having
subdued them) very well understood that all those excuses were suggested to
them by the Cardinal, who ambitious to have the honor of totally suppressing
that party attributed to himself, did especially desire, that this City (which
after the surrender of Rochelle was become the Metropolis of the Faction)
should be delivered up into his hands. He had therefore acquainted the
principal of the Inhabitants, that it was from him alone they were to expect
whatever advantages they could propose to themselves from this Accommodation,
and that it would therefore concern them to reserve themselves entirely for
him, to be the more worthy of his protection, from whence they might derive a
greater support, than from all other powers upon earth.

The Duke nettled at this usage, and unable in the interests of Honor to give
place to any whomsoever, retired himself to his House Cadillac, with a
resolution seeing the Cardinal would by his Authority ravish from him an
honor, he had by his Services so highly de^erv'd, not to pay him so much as
the civility of a Visit in his Government, into which he was now coming, to
take possession of Montauban, The Cardinal come; to Mont^ub^n.
as if he had been the man had reduced it: But the Cardinal, whose design it
was (as has been said) to engross to himself the whole reputation of this War,
thought nothing would so much illustrate his Triumph, as to receive a Visit
from the Duke of Espernon in one of the principal Cities of his own Government,
and conceiving such a Complement would pass in the opinion of all the world for
an absolute testimony of an entire submission, he was infinitely desirous to
have him won to that complacency; which being he could not handsomely try to do
directly from himself, he caused him to be very highly importuned to that
purpose, by some of the Duke's own peculiar friends, who were at that time
about his person. These Gentlemen therefore, and amongst others particularly
Marshall Bassompierre represented to the Duke, that all this time an enterview
betwixt the Cardinal and him was highly necessary to the good of his own
Affairs, without which he could not possibly avoid giving a mortal Affront to a
man become absolute at Court by the ruin of a Faction, which alone had
hitherto served for an allay to the excess of his power. An advice that was so
well seconded by le Plessis, who of all others had the greatest sway with the
Duke, and fortified with so many powerful Arguments, that at last he resolved
upon this Visit. Yet do I very well remember with how great reluctance it was,
and with how strange a violence upon his own humor, and haughty spirit, that
he suffered himself to be overrul'd in this particular, and how unwillingly he
set out toward Montauban.

Though the Cardinal was very much pressed by his own Interests to go in all
diligence after the King, who had taken the way to Paris immediately upon the
conclusion of the Treaty, it is notwithstanding most certain, that he waited
two whole days together the Duke's coming to Montauban; where when he came, he
received him with extraordinary kindness, and respect, and though many things
had passed upon leveral occasions that might reasonably enough beget ill blood
betwixt them, The Duke gives the Cardinal a vis^^ at Montau^an (...), and is
very well received by him.
the Cardinal by an excess of freedom, and civility, gave manifest testimonies,
that he retained no memory of any former unkindness: but on the contrary
protested, that he would value the Duke's friendship preferrably to any other
persons in the Kingdom, which was his own expression; and upon an intimation
the Duke gave him, that he had occasion to make a Journey to Court, promised
him, that so soon as he should see the King, he would procure him leave so to
do; a thing, which with all the importunities he could make, the Duke had
before not been able to obtain: Neither did the Cardinal limit his offers here,
he assuring him moreover, that he would serve him in all things, and if he
would give him leave, supply the place of a fourth Son to him, wherein he would
contend with the other three, which should pay him the greatest honor, which
were the express terms of his Complement.

The next day after his arrival, the Cardinal treated him in his own Lodgings,
where he gave him the chief place of honor at the Table, notwithstanding the
Duke of Montmorency was there present, omitting no civility that might beget a
strict League of Friendship betwixt them: so that it is most certain, could the
Duke have bowed a little, and discretly have husbanded these good dispositions,
he might have improved them infinitely much to his own advantage: but according
to his custom, either as if he hd repented the having done too much; or as if
he had a mind to blot out what any one could lay to his charge for having
condescended too low in this visit, by retaining a kind of a grum reservednes
in the rest of his Actions, he overthrew in a moment all the good his friends
expected he should reap from this complacency: insomuch that I have often heard
le Plessis wish he had never advised him to it.

After they were risen from the Table, the Duke being withdrawn to a Window in
the Room where they had dined to entertain the Duke of Montpensier in private;
the Cardinal, who had the Archbishop of Bordeaux in very high consideration,
came to present him to the Duke to reconcile him to him. This Pr^late had
applied himself particularly to the Cardinal's Service, and by a great
complacency in all things, having adapted himself to his humor, and by that
means got into a high degree of favor with him, had entreated the Cardinal by
his Interest to put him upon good terms with the Duke; there having since the
Archbishop's advancement to that Dignity (which fell to him by the death of the
Cardinal de Sourdis his Brother) some differences happened betwixt the Duke, and
him, that had begot a little distance betwixt them. I was present at this
Dinner (led thither by my curiosity as some others were) and (if it may be
called one) consequently at this Reconciliation: When the Cardinal, who had
already prepared the Duke for the busienss, and thought he had conquered his
animosity, coming to him to the Window, where he stood, said to him these
words, The Duke of Espernon gives Cardinal Richelieu new cause of oftense.
My Lord, I here present you the Archbishop of Bordeaux, who is resolved to be
your Servant; and I therefore entreat you to be his friend upon my account: to
which the Duke scornfully turning that way, coldly replied, My Lord the
Archbishop and I know one another very well: After which, and a salute as cold
as his complement, he turned again without more Ceremony toward the Duke of
Montpensier, and followed on his discourse. The Duke of Espernon had no friend,
nor Servant there, that could not heartily have wished this action had passed
after a more obliging fashion: but that was all could be got from him. It is
not to be doubted but that this indifferency highly disobliged the Cardinal,
Which is nevertheless dissembled by the Card^nal.
who found by that he had not yet acquired so great an Empire over the Duke's
haughty spirit, as by his great civilities he hoped he had gained upon him: he
nevertheless retired into his Chamber without taking any more notice at all,
and conquering his own passion, chose rather to attribute that odd carriage to
the Duke's imperious humor (which he had practiced so long, as to be well
enough acquainted with it) than to lose the earnest he had already given
toward the purchase of his friendship. He continued therefore to use him with
the same respect he had hitherto done, and was yet so highly civil to him, that
the next day when he departed from Montauban to go toward the Court,
accompanied with the Duke of Montpensier, Marshall Bassompierre, and several
other persons fo very great quality, that followed his Litter on Horseback; he
was so highly respective to the Duke, that he would not offer to go into it, so
long as the Duke staid with him, which was nevertheless half a League at least
from the City, but entertained him all the way on Horseback, though so soon as
he took his leave he went into his Litter, without retaining the same respect
to any of the rest.

I cannot, before I proced any further, omit an observation I made at the
Entertainment, of which we are now speaking, and of which the several
misfortunes of the most eminent persons there have often put me in mind. There
was scarce any body at the Cardinal's Table, excepting the Dukes of
Montmorency, and Espernon, the Marshall Bassompierre, and Marillac; three of
which were the Cardinal's most intimate friends, and he would needs rank the
fourth in that degree: from whence, if we consider what advantage, he amongst
them all, that was the best used in succession of time, reaped from his
friendship; we shall understand upon how tickle, and dangerous a point, all
Court-favour depends.

The Duke of Espernon was no sooner resolved upon a Journey to Court. The Duke
acquaints the Prince of Conde with his resolution of going to Court.
but that he would in the first place acquaint the Prince of Conde with his
purpose, and therein consult his advice; the respect he bore to this Prince,
and the confidence he reposed in his Friendship being such, as would not permit
him to settle the least resolution, without making him privy to his design:
wherein there was nothing of dissimulation, for he was effectually the Princes
Servant, and to such a degree, that it must have been a service of a very foul
nature, he would not cheerfully have undertaken for him. He therefore
dispatched away his Secretary to him, to acquaint him with his determination,
and thereupon to beg his advice. The Prince was at this time at Rabastens in A
Country in Langu^d^^.
Albigeois, where after the Secretary had delivered what was given him in
charge from the Duke his Master, the Prince with great civility returned this
answer: That he concerned himself very much in all the Duke's interests: That
in another time, and during the favor of the Luines, he might have been
capable of giving him such advice, as he durst have answered would have been
serviceable to him, they having been men of so candid dispositions, as that
their intentions might have been perfectly discovered; but that at present he
was so totally in the dark, as to any understanding in the designs of those who
were now at the Helm: That he durst not adventure to give the Duke any counsel,
lest something might happen as prejudicial to his advice, as contrary to his
desire; only he had very good intelligence that the Guard des Sceaux had been
very busy, and inquisitive in making a collection of what Warrant^ the Duke
had issued out, for the subsistence of such Forces as had served in his
Government: That indeed he could not tell to what end he had done it; but he
could not imagine it would be to any good intent, and that therefore the Duke
might, if he pleased, consider of it. With which uncertain answer the Secretary
was dismissed. The Duke, who was very secure of his own innocence (and it is to
be wished he had been as cautious, and moderate to his own good, as he was
perfectly honest to the King) did not, for all this caution, desist from still
earnestly soliciting his leave, which in the end, after the Cardinal's arrival
at Court, he obtained, by a very favorable dispatch from the King himself to
that effect.

The Duke no sooner received this permission, but that he made all the haste he
could to Court, The Duke of Espernon arrives at Court, and is very well
received.
to avoid the inconvenience of a Winter Journey; which he did by coming to
Paris before All Saints. At his arrival (as at other times) he was welcomed
with a great number of persons of Quality, who came out to meet him, and to
attend him to the Louvre; where he first alighted, and where he was by his
Majesty much better received, than he expected, by reason of several ill
offices he knew had been done him to the King. It was indeed chiefly to
justify himself from those aspersions, that he had been so passionately
importunate for leave to come to Court; and he had expressed so much in his
Letters, which was perhaps the thing that made his permission so hard to
obtain; Princes being commonly no better disposed to admit of excuses, than
they are to make them. From the Louvre he went to wait upon the Cardinal, to
whom he stood obliged, not only for his leave to come, but also for his
Majesty's gracious reception now he was come, and was by him also received
after a most infinitely obliging manner, the Cardinal still improving his
civilities, and again making him a new tender of his service upon all
occasions, as indeed from that time forward he began to distinguish him by his
respect, from all other great persons of the Kingdom.

Already either the multiplicity of business with which the Cardinal was
continually taken up, Anno 1630.
or the design he had to render his person more venerable, and more
authoritative, by communicating it to few, had put him upon that stately way of
living, that he was very rarely to be seen: insomuch that the Dukes, and Peers
of France, the Officers of the Crown, the blue Garters, and whoever of the
highest quality of the Kingdom, made no difficulty to wait below in the Hall,
amongst a promiscuous crowd of Clients, and Suitors, the hours of his leisure,
whether they came only to visit, or to speak with him about their Affairs: nay
and were glad to go sometimes twice, sometimes more, before they could get
access to his person: Extraordinary civilities of the Cardinal to the Duke of
Espernon.
But the Cardinal, who was well enough acquainted with the Duke's temper to
know, that such a repulse would not need to fright him for ever coming again to
see him, entreated him beforehand, never to give himself the trouble of coming
to see him, without first giving him notice, that he might always be at liberty
to receive him: a rule the Duke on his part so well observed, that he never
came, but all the Gates were opened to him; his Coach admitted into the Court,
and himself to all the freedom he could desire; when oftentimes persons of very
great condition could hardly be admitted at the Wicket.

It has however been believed that all these extraordinary civilities began at
Montauban, and continued to this time, were not altogether without design. Some
have thought that the Cardinal, who evidently perceived that the Queen Mother
(who had suffered her self to be wrought upon by some ill offices had been done
him in his absence) to be grown cold in her affection to him, would have been
glad to have made the Duke his friend. He was powerful in himself, and much
more in his Sons; so that being secured of their friendship (which the whole
Court knew to be faithful and inviolate where they once took) he thought he
could receive no so violent an assault of Fortune, he should not be able,
whilst backed with so powerful a Family to withstand. There was great
probability in this conjecture, and the Duke himself (as clear-sighted as any)
was perhaps of the same opinion; but if on the one side the Cardinal courted
the Duke's friendship for this reason, the Duke on the other side would by no
means go directly opposite to the Queen Mothers inclinations. He had ever
honored her, though he had not always been well used by her; and, having ever
imputed to the Cardinal himself the greatest part of those unkindnesses he had
received from this Princess, was more dissatisfied with him, than the Queen
Mother for the ill returns of his Service. But another reason which made him so
reserved in the acceptance of this precipitous friendship, was the imperious
superiority the Cardinal pretended to over all the other great men of the
Kingdom; which the Duke could never allow him over himself to the degree that
he desired, as still retaining a memory how much he had known him inferious to
him. All these considerations together rendered him less complacent, than could
have been wished for the prosperity of his own Affairs: I shall not
nevertheless herein take upon me to censure the Duke's conduct, nor attempt to
pass so liberal a judgment upon a person I am, for so many respects, obliged to
honor; though the event made it plain, that had he carried things otherwise,
he had done better. In short the Duke was so much the more reserved to the
Cardinal, than he expected he should be, that the ardour of his sudden
affection cooling by degrees every day more and more, degenerated at last into
a perfect hatred, and from thence to persecution, as we shall hereafter, in due
order of time, and the occurrences of Affairs, make more evidently to appear.

All things that had hitherto passed betwixt the Duke, and the Cardinal were
well enough understood; and this good intelligence continued till the Cardinals
departure for Italy, the Duke being (as has been said) ever treated by him with
extraordinary kindness, and respect far different from what he showed to all
other persons of the same condition; yet could not the Duke (whose humor was
impatient of any thing that touched him) sometimes forbear lashing out into
very free expressions (giving the Cardinal thereby very often to understand,
that he was not to expect any mean, or submiss toleration from him) of which I
shall here present you one example. The Cardinal either presuming upon the
authority of his favor with the King, or the affection he pretended to have
for the Duke, took one day the libetry to give him some advice concerning his
deportment; whereupon falling into discourse of his severe humor, and giving
him counsel to correct it, he did it merrily in the Duke's own broad Gascon
accent (from which, how long a habitude soever he had had at Court, he could
never totally wean himself) which interweaving with some very civil
expressions, he seriously desired him in the end not to take it ill, if he had
made a little bold with him in imitating his own way of speaking: to which this
untractable spirit (highly offended at a raillery something too familiar for
his humor) briskly replied: A smart r^ply of the Duke of Espernon to the
Cardina^.
Why should I take that ill from you, which I suffer from Marais, who every day
acts me in your presence? This Marais was one of the Grooms of the Chamber to
the King, a pleasant fellow, and a Buffoon, that had a mavelous faculty of
imitation, who by his faces, and tricks would make folks laugh; and when acting
before the King, and the Cardinal, would make a bold with the Duke of Espernon,
as other people. It cannot be imagined, but that without all doubt this
comparison must needs displease the Cardinal; neither were the Duke's Servants,
and Friends, to whom he related this passage at his coming home, much better
satisfied with it: but the words were already out of his mouth, and were no
more to be recalled. Every one apprehended this liberty would draw upon him the
hatred of him that was all powerful at Court; yet did nothing at present
appear: so that if the Cardinal was really distasted at it, he nevertheless
deferred his revenge till a fitter season.

And indeed he had at this time something else to do, New stirs at Court,
occasioned by the discontents of the Queen Mother, and the Monsi^^r.
than to stand upon a particular Quarrel with the Duke of Espernon, so many
other Affairs of very high concern falling upon him at once, and at the same
instant, that perhaps in his life he never had so hard a Game to play. The
Queen Mother had long been very much dissatisfied with his proceeding; and her
ill will, grown now to a greater degree than ever, she could no longer forbear
to profess an open, and implacable hatred against him. She could not endure
that a man who was her Creature, and raised by her bounty, should get the start
of her in the confidence of the King her Son, wherein by all the reasons in the
world she ought to be preferred, The Queen Mother professes an open hatred to
the Cardinal.
and that made her directly oppose all his Counsels, which how well soever they
succeeded, she still found matter enough to render them suspected to the King,
and to discredit them by sinister interpretations. So great a power as this
hitherto entire, and fortified by all the considerations of duty, and nature,
was not easily to be baffled by a Servant, and who had no other support, than
the affection of his Master, of it self mutable and uncertain; so that the
Cardinal seeing himself assaulted by so passionate, and so powerful an Enemy,
might reasonably enough apprehend being crushed to nothing under the weight of
her Authority, and Power: but as mischiefs seldom come alone, several Foreign
troubles also concurred with this disorder at home: The Duke of Savoy was grown
by this time sensible of the dishonorable peace he had concluded at Suze: to
which the loss of Montferrat stuck mainly in his stomach: The War with Sav^y.
He had reckoned himself sure of the conquest of this place, and indeed had not
the King interposed, that Country had by this time been wholly in his
possession: He had therefore more firmly than ever confederated himself with
the House of Austria, to the end they might jointly invade the Duke of Mantua;
the rumor of which preparation was already spread abroad, and they were
already in Arms; in which condition this desolate Prince had no body to fly to
for protection, save only the King of France. His interests, that could not
without infamy be abandoned, put the Cardinals Affairs into very great danger;
who, as on the one side he very well knew that Court divisions, which are the
issue of ease, and rest, are ordinarily smothered in employment, and of all
other in that of War: So he also saw that this War being to be undertaken by
his Counsels, to which the Queen Mother was directly opposite, he should become
responsible for the event, and that the least disafter that should happen would
infallibly be laid at his door. Yet, as if all these difficulties had been too
few to perplex him, another of no less importance fell out at the same time,
which was the discontent of the Monsieur, The Monsi^ur discontented.
and his sudden retirement from Court; to which also another succeeded, and
that was the Duke of Lorain's taking Arms, The Duke of Lor^in takes Arms*
to join with the Emperor; who having a design to possess us with some
jealousy of our Frontier of Lorain (thereby to give the Confederate Princes
more leisure to make a Progress in Italy) seemed to threaten Metz, by advancing
that way with his Army, and fortifying all the places upon that Frontier.

In this conflux of untoward accidents, the Cardinal, The Cardinal^ dexterity
in compo^ing these Affairs.
though he could work nothing upon the implacable spirit of the Queen Mother,
he found means nevertheless to appease the Monsieur, and to bring him back to
Court, by obtaining for him from the King, whatever he could either for
himself, or in the behalf of his friends, demand or desire. He sent moreover
into Lorain to sound the Duke's intentions, who for this time dissembling his
designs, protested he had taken Arms for no other end, than to serve the King,
by opposing the Emperors designs; who, he said, could attempt nothing upon his
Country, that must not infallibly redound to the prejudice of France. So that
by this means the Cardinal having either composed, diverted, or at least
deferred part of those mischiefs that most immediately pressed upon him, he
would himself undertake the expedition of Italy; whilst the King should totally
reclaim the Monsieur his Brother, and satisfy all his discontents, by the
performance of those things that had been promised to him.

The Cardinal was no sooner arrived in Savoy, The Cardinals expedition into
Italy.
but that he sent to feel the pulse of that Duke, whom finding still constant
to his old State Maxims (which was by fair words, and large promises to amuse
such, as were likely to hinder his designs, whilst he in the mean time was
still intent upon his business) he fell so briskly to work, that having taken
from him Pignerol, and some other strong places, the Savoyard was at last
constrained to return again to his first Treaty.

The King awaked by this good success of his Arms, and unwilling the glory they
seemed to assure should derive to a Servant, resolved upon a Journey into Italy
to command his Army in his own person; neither though the Cardinal was
ambitious to the height, was he at this time sorry, he should come to eclipse
his honor, since he must leave Paris to do it, where he knew all ill offices
were perpetually done him. The interest of his conservation therefore prevailed
here with the Cardinal over his insatiate thirst of Glory: but the Queen Mother
stiffly opposed this Voyage, by representing to the King the interests of his
health, and safety; to which she forgot not to add the Cardinals inordinate
ambition, The King resolves upon a Voyage into Italy.
who she said cared not to expose both the one, and the other for his own
particular vanity. But all these remonstrances proved in the end too weak to
prevail; so that the appetite of Honor prevailing above all other
considerations, and his Majesty being not to be staid at home: the Queen Mother
to give the Cardinal less time to reestablish himself with the King (who had
after much importunityconsented at last to his banishment) was resolved to
follow the King her Son to Lions, to try if she could, whilst he was in this
good disposition, obtain the effects of his promise.

The King then in April set forwards from Paris toward Italy, the glorious
success of which second Expedition, making up one of the most illustrious parts
of General History, it ought not to be contracted within the narrow bounds of a
particular Life; wherein the Duke of Espernon having also had no share, I
should not have waded so far as I have done into these secret Affairs of Court,
had they not at last proceeded to involve him further therein, than he had
himself intended to engage.

Before the King's departure from Paris, the Duke especially solicitous of his
Service within the Precincts of his own Government, entreated his Majesty to
appoint him an Intendant de la Justice; he having at his coming out of Guienne
left there neither Lieutenant, nor Intendant in his absence to look after his
Majesty's Affairs in that Province: a request that the King being very willing
to grant, as it principally concerned himself, he gave the Duke liberty to
choose whom he should think fit out of his Council. The Employment, being one
of the greatest honor, was covered by several persons of very great desert;
but the Duke preferring above all those who made suit for it, one of the
Council, that perhaps least dreamed of any such thing, entreated Monsieur de
Verthamont Master of Requests to accept it. This person of approved honesty,
and equal capacity, had, in several Employments of very great importance, given
very good proofs both of the one, and the other: but these qualities how
eminent soever, were yet accompanied with another that served no less to
recommend him to the Duke's Election; and that was the great friendship betwixt
him and Monsieur d' Autry, at that time President Seguier, and since Guard des
Sceaux, and Chancellor of France; with whose good conduct in the same
Commission, the Duke had been so highly satisfied, that he desired nothing
more, than one that would imitate his Virtue to succeed him: and he hoped to
find in this Gentleman, what he had already proved in his Predecessor; neither
was he deceived in his Judgment, he found his expectation answered to the full.
And for ten years together that Verthamont served the King in the Duke's
Government, he gave the Duke so many testimonies of his integrity, and virtue,
and in return received from the Duke so high, and so just applause, that I dare
be bold to affirm, there was never observed the least dissent, or contrariety
betwixt them.

The end of the Ninth Book.
THE HISTORY Of the LIFE of the Duke of Espernon.
The Tenth Book.
AT the same time that Verthamont departed for Guienne, the Duke of Espernon
was preparing to go to Metz, there to expose his person for the defense of so
important a place. A Journey to which he was continually pressed by the
constant intelligence he received from thence, that the Emperors Forces every
day increased, that he was fortifying Moyenvic, a very considerable place near
that City; Upon the bruit that the Imperialists designed an attempt upon Metz,
the Duke of Espernon puts himself in^o the place*
and that the Duke of Lorain (notwithstanding all his fair pretenses) was
certainly confederated with the House of Austria, to the prejudice of the
Kingdom of France. The Duke de la Valette his Son had, by his Majesty's
Command, been sent away befoe, upon the first jealousy the Court had conceived
of the Emperors, and the Duke of Lorains designs: but the Duke, prudently
considering, that a Frontier of so great importance could not be too carefully
provided for, went with some of his friends to put himself into it, having
moreover engaged several other persons of condition (who had staid behind at
Paris after the King's departure) if occasion were, to come, and join
themselves with him, for the defense of the place: So that had it ever come to
a Siege, the respect that several worthy men bore to the Duke's person would,
without all doubt, have invited a great many persons of great quality, and
approved valor, to serve in so honorable an occasion. But there happened to be
no need of any such thing; and perhaps the presence of the Duke, and the
prudent care he, together with the Duke his Son, took for the preservation of
that City, made the Emperor alter his design, by putting him out of all hopes
to effect it.

The Duke arrived at Metz the first of May, The Duke of Espernon comes to Metz.
where he was received with manifestations of an universal joy in the people,
becoming their gratitude, and his own desert. In his way thither he had called
to see the Marshall de Marillac, who as he was at this time (at least in
outward appearance) in greatest repute with the Cardinal, so had he the
principal charge of the Affairs of that Country committed to his care; wherein
doubtles^ this unfortunate Gentleman labored to his own ruin, and to the
Sentence of Death that not long after passed upon him: He visits the Mar^schal
de Marillac.
for the Duke found him busy fortifying the Citadel of Verdun, preparing
provisions, and other necessaries for the Army of Champagne, and performing
several other Services, which after passed for Crimes, that were judged worthy
of no less than Death. The Duke was by him received with all sorts of honor,
and noble entertainment; to which the Marshall soon after added a visit at
Metz, where they consulted long together of what was best to be done for the
King's Service upon that Frontier, continuing ever after in a more strict
correspondence than before.

The Duke was no sooner arrived at Metz, The Duke's orders for the defense of
Me^z.
but that he forthwith fell to work about the repair of the old Fortifications
of the City, and to the designing of new; he sent moreover to solicit the Duke
of Orleans (left Regent during the King's absence) for a supply of some
Ammunitions of War: but he had first sent a dispatch to the King to acquaint
him with his motion toward the Frontier: with which his Majesty in his answer
of the 23. of May declared himself to be highly satisfied; sending him word,
That his being in those parts, would secure his fears for what concerned the
safety of the whole Frontier of Lorain; exhorting him to continue his
vigilance, and care for the conservation of so importanct a place; assuring him
withal of his good will, and affection, and of the esteem he had of his person,
justly grounded upon his merit, and old Services for the Crown. Which were in
part the express words of that Dispatch.

In the mean time the rumor daily increasing that Wallest^in was advancing with
his Army to waste the Country about Metz, and afterward to block it up by
Forts, and the Duke conceiving that the King would be so taken up in Savoy,
that he could not come to relieve him, should he chance to be reduced to any
great straight; he saw it was necessary for him to make use of his own Credit,
Money, and Friends, therewithal to serve his Majesty upon this occasion. He
writ therefore to the Cardinal de la Valette his Son, who was then with the
King, to tell his Majesty, the Queen Mother, and the Cardinal, That foreseeing
how hard a thing it would be for his Majesty in the heat of his Enterprises, to
provide for the necessities of the place, and Frontier, where he had the honor
to serve him, he franckly offered, The Duke offers the King to raise an Army
upon his own interest.
if his Majesty would give him leave, upon his own credit, to raise and arm ten
thousand Foot, and five hundred Horse for the defense of the City of Metz, and
the Messine Country. An offer that the King, with high commendation^ of his
worth, as freely accepted, writing him a very obliging Letter thereupon; and
the Cardinal in his dispatch dated from St. Iean de Morienne the 25th. of July,
expressing himself thus: Which is accepted.
As concerning the offer you have made the King, to advance money for the
Levies you desire to set on foot, his Majesty looks upon it with such an eye of
acknowledgement, as the quality of so generous an offer does justly deserve;
knowing, as he does, the zeal you have to the success of his Affairs, and the
power you have, as heretofore, to serve him for the time to come,

The Duke to add effects to this promise, departed from Metz about the end of
July, to return to Paris, there to raise money for his Leavies, and to provide
himself of such men of Command, as were willing to take employments upon this
occasion; but the threats of the Imperialists by little, and little, vanishing
at last to nothing, they satisfied themselves with having fortified Moyenvic,
which was soon after taken, and demolished by the King's Army: and the Duke of
Lorain, not daring at this time wholly to discover his evil intention, staid to
expect a fitter season, which also was not far off, wherein to do it; as he
afterward did, but with very ill success, as will in its due place appear.

The Duke being thus returned to Paris, The Duke of Espernon returns to Paris.
delivered of those apprehensions he had been possessed withal concerning Metz,
and satisfied with his present conditon, sat still, calmly expecting, without
any disquiet in his own particular concerns, the issue of the great Contests at
this time on foot in the Court at Lions; where, it was said, the Queen Mothers
animosity against the Cardinal was increased to such a degree, that in the
greatest height of the King's sickness, which at this time was exceeding
violent, she omitted no opportunity of incensing his Majesty against him, The
King falls sick at Lions.
as the sole author of his Disease; wherein her importunities were so great, as
at last to obtain a solemn promise from the King, that so soon as the War of
Italy was at an end, he would give her the satisfaction she desired, by
removing this great Minister from the Administration of Affairs.

Though the peril the Cardinal was now in, was very great, and that the Duke
had continual intelligence of all that passed at Court, yet did he
notwithstanding still continue toward him the same civility, and respect; he
writ to him very often, and in truth so long as that great cloud of disgrace
hung over his head, the Duke would have been really sorry, that it should have
broke upon him: though he had by his dexterity no sooner cleared the sky of
Favor, but that the Duke, who could not brook his excess of Authority, and
Power, converted all his former complacency into testimonies of hatred; that
failed very little, as we shall hereafter see, of rebounding back upon himself,
to his own ruin. Which till it shall more plainly appear, I shall only say
this by the way, that the Duke had doubtless a very great esteem for the
Cardinal, never speaking of him, so much as in private, but with a Character of
Honor, and respect; so that, had he not expected from his friends an over
servile, and submiss regard, I do verily believe the Duke's friendship would
have been constant, and inviolate to him: but a civility that went very far
with the haughty humor of the one, appearing nothing to the excessive ambition
of the other, the Cardinal enduring no equal, and the Duke hardly admitting of
any superior; it was impossible so to compose things betwixt two so aspiring
spirits, but that they would at last break out into an open feud.

Whilst the Court at Lions was agitated with this Tempest of Division, of which
we are now speaking, the Duke of Espernon in the greatest calm, and serenity of
repose, enjoyed at Paris the honor, and applause, that his well known, and
long continued virtue, had acquired to his person, and name; insomuch that, as
his Coach passed through the streets, we had continually the pleasure of seeing
the people flock together in crowds from all parts of the City to gaze upon
him; considering with admiration so vigorous a health in so great an extremity
of age, pursuing him with acclamations wherever he went; and the old hatred,
that the former Factions had stirred up against him, being now converted into
love, and esteem, gave us to understand, that envy is not always the
concomitant of Virtue; but that there is a certain pitch, to which the one,
being once arrived, is got clear out of sight of the other, which of a mean and
earthy composition cannot shoot its darts so far as to reach the Station, where
Supreme Virtue is enthroned.

In this great, and undisturbed leisure, that the Duke enjoyed at Paris, he who
was himself a great lover of Building, could find no better entertainment
wherewithal to divert himself, than by going abroad to see the Houses, in and
about the City, which were then erecting, with the magnificence that we now
admire in our proud and stately Structures. Amongst others, going one day in
very good company to the Hostel de Luxembourg, that the Queen Mother was then
finishing, they entered the Gallery, where she had caused the manner of her
escape from Blois (as the most remarkable passage of her life) to be painted in
Story. One of the most apparent evidences the Duke could possibly receive, that
that service of his was no more regarded, was, that he, who had been the sole
Author of the whole Action, was no where represented in that painting, though
so much as the very Footmen that opened the Boots of her Coach had not been
omitted. He had heard before of this injustice that had been done him; but
though it had touched him very near, had never manifested the least discontent:
neither do I believe he would have said any thing upon this occasion, if the
company who were with him, had not provoked him to it: But every one asking him
questions of a thing whereof they knew he was able to give them the best
account, at last some one freer than the rest, asked him how it came to pass
that he was only left out of the story? to which the Duke modestly replied: A
sudden answer of the Duke of Espersion to a very nice q^est on.
That he did not know who had done him that wrong; but that whoever they were
that intended to disoblige him in it, had doubtless therein more offended the
Queen, than him: That he was very certain (however excluded the story) that no
one could condemn him for having any ways failed in the action, or in any thing
he had undertaken for the Queen upon that occasion, his carriage of that
business being too generally known for that; neither did he believe they would
much magnify her, for having denied him so poor an acknowledgement.

If the Duke was very well pleased to see himself in such a degree of
reputation and esteem, A Famine in G^ienne.
upon one of the most conspicuous Theaters of Europe; he was no less afflicted
at the ill news he daily received from his Government, where their Corn Harvest
had proved this year so thin, that thereupon a great, and deplorable Famine
ensued throughout the whole Province of Guienne. Neither did the Duke fail in
this exigent to try all possible ways to relieve them; for after having given
order for the distribution of all the Grain that could be gathered in his own.
Territories, he moreover dealt with some Merchants of Paris, who undertook,
that provided they might have Commission from the King, out of Picardy, and
Britanny, to make sufficient provision wherewithal to supply that Province.
They had no sooner made this proposition to the Duke, but that he immediately
dispatched away an express Courrier to the King to obtain that leave, which was
accordingly granted; upon the return of which dispatch those, who had so
largely promised, did indeed perform something; but nothing near what they had
made the Duke expect: so that nothing could so divert the Judgment Almighty God
was pleased to inflict upon this delicate part of France; but that in less than
six months space above forty thousand persons miserably died for want of bread;
a number that had in all probability yet been much greater, had the Duke's care
to their preservation been less, by which the evil was at least moderated,
though it could not be totally overcome.

In the mean time the King's health was so miraculously restored at Lions, that
his Majesty resolved to return back to Paris; during which Voyage it is said the
Cardinal employed all manner of industry, and offered all sorts of submission
to the Queen Mother to reconcile himself to her favor; but all in vain, she
was still so implacably bent against him, that the Peace of Italy being already
concluded, and consequently the time come wherein the King had promised her to
remove the Cardinal, they were no sooner arrived at Paris, but that pursuing
this Affair with the same vehemence she had begun, and so as if she had already
foreseen all those evils she justly had to fear, she was importunately instant
with the King for the accomplishment of his Royal Word. What repugnancy soever
the King might have to deprive himself of a Servant he had found very useful to
him in the management of his Affairs, yet the respect to a Mother, and the
obligation of Nature had so prevailing a power over his own interest, and
delight, that the Order was at last signed for the Cardinal's removal; when the
King to avoid either the Ceremony, Cardinal Rich^lieu in disgrace.
or Complaints of a Favorites farewell, returned upon that, and no other
account to Versaille, from whence he was come but a few days before. Doubtless
had the Queen Mother gone along with the King this little Journey, she had made
her self absolute Mistress of Affairs, and there had been an end of the
Cardinal: But she thinking the work already done, though she had but begun it
(a common oversight) and out of that belief stopping short in the heat of her
persecution, gave the Cardinal by that means leisure to reestablish himself
with the King, and totally to subvert the power, that had been employed to his
ruin.

Yet was it not by his own prudence, and conduct, that he was thus suddenly
restored, who on the contrary had set up his ^est, and was content to submit to
his Fortune by withdrawing himself from Court; a resolution wherein he had been
so precipitous, that he went the very evening of his disgrace to lie at
Pointoise, from thence to continue his journey to Havre de Grace, the place he
had made choice of for his retirement. His equipage was already prepared,
already he was by the most of his friends (the first, and most ordinary effect
of disgrace) slighted, and forsaken, and nothing but solitude remained in his
House; when the Cardinal de la Valette, Cardinal Richeli^u restores himself
with the King, by the advice of the Cardinal de la Valette.
prompted by a design more generous in it self, than advantageous to, or
perhaps expedient for the concerns of his own Family, rousing up the subdued
spirit of his dejected Friend, made him by force of Arguments recollect
himself, and see his error. He remonstrated to him, as it is sufficiently known
to all the Kingdom (though so long as the Cardinal lived no one durft record
it) That he could not assume a more dangerous resolution, than to think of
retiring himself: That such as had once raised their fortunes to that height to
which his was now arrived, had no steps left them by which again to descend:
That he had no way to maintain himself in the height he then was, but by
aspiring higher, that therein the way before him was honorable and secure; but
that there was nothing but precip^ce behind him, which upon the least motion of
retiring would give him such a fall, that he would never be able to rise again:
That he deceived himself, if he thought his adversaries would satisfy
themselves with what they had already done; it being plain that they must still
apprehend the recovery of his power, which would be so much the more formidable
to them, as he had been by them more justly provoked: That he was therefore to
go boldly to the King, whilst the memory of his Services was yet recent, and
whilst his enemies (blinded with their good success) had left a passage open to
him, through which he might at great ease, and with great safety, travel to the
ruin of their designs: That he would himself accompany him to run his share of
the danger (if any could be) in the execution of what he did advise; and that
having made him a promise of his friendship, he would preserve it inviolate to
him in the one, and the other Fortune. What might not a friend have reasonably
expected in acknowledgement of so prudent, and so generous a counsel, and that
was crowned with so favorable a success? we shall nevertheless in a short time
see a sad return of that seasonable kindness.

Cardinal Richelieu fortified by this advice, The two Cardinals go together to
the King to Versaille, where whilst the Queen Mother remains at Paris they
overthrow all her designs.
instead of taking his way toward Havre de Grace, went directly to Versaille,
where addressing himself to the King, and being better acquainted than any with
all the little Labyrinths of his Majesty's humor, he soon, by the charms of
his Eloquence, overthrew whatever his Enemies thought they had established by
more powerful ways. In the mean time the Queen Mother, dreaming of nothing less
than so sudden a change, already reigned in Paris, behaving her self to all
that came near her person like one who was now got to be the Sovereign
Arbitress of all Affairs; no more caring either to improve, or retain her
Interest with persons whose Service she conceived for the future unnecessary to
the support of her Power. The Duke of Espernon happened (to his good Fortune) to
be one of these, he had the day preceding the Thunderclap against the
Cardinal, and of a long time before, received all kind of civil respect from
this Queen; but after his dismission presenting himself before her as he used
to do, she had so little regard for him, as before his face to hold discourse
an hour together with people of far inferior quality, without so much as
vouchsafing him one word. A neglect which if it was resented by the Duke (as it
was to the last degree) it was notwithstanding of no little advantage to him:
for the Cardinal, who knew how solicitous the Queen Mother had been to win him
to her party before his disgrace, who was not ignorant of the strong connection
he had with the House of Guise, and above all of the great intimacy that was
betwixt the Princess of Conty and him; and who had been moreover informed that
the night preceding his disfavour, he had been long in secret Conference with
the Marshall de Bassompierre one of his most passionate enemies, had from all
these knowledges conceived a violent presumption, that the Duke must of
necessity be deeply engaged in his enemies interests, and designs. But the
Queen's indifferency did in part justify him from that suspicion, An
alteration in Affairs at Court.
though some have believed that that alone would not have been sufficient
absolutely to have cleared him from the Cardinal's jealousy, nor to have
secured him from imprisonment at least, if the late merits of the Cardinal his
Son had not rescued him from that danger. It was in truth very necessary some
body else should have that care of him, he being so far from contributing in
the least to his own preservation, that on the contrary after the face of
Affairs was wholly changed, that the Queen Mother was fallen as well from her
hopes, All people address themse^ves to the Cardinal.
as her credit with the King, that the Princess of Conty was confined to her
own House, that the Guard des Sceaux Marillac was under the same restraint,
that Marshall Bassompierre was clapped up Prisoner in the Bast^le, and that an
Order was granted out to call the Marshall Marill^c from the command of an
Army to undergo an infamous Execution: In fine after the fatal day called la
journee des Dupes had produced so many dire effects, that not only all the men
of Quality, but almost all of any name at Court, went to visit the Cardinal, to
dispossess him of the opinion, that they might have been any way inimical to
him: Except the Duke of Espernon.
the Duke of Espernon was perhaps the only man that would not go to see him,
nor once offer to justify himself from the jealousy he might reasonably
enough conceive of his disaffection, and that purposely the more to manifest it
to him. He went it is true to Versaille, where he saw the King, and had the
honor to talk with him; but he would never be prevailed upon to go into the
Cardinal's Chamber, though very near the King's, to pay him the least civility,
or respect. I saw le Plessis the same night infinitely afflicted at this
carriage; this Gentleman who was very discreet, well versed in Affairs, and
much more passionate for his Masters interests, than for any thing that
concerned himself, had importuned him to give the Cardinal a Visit; but
according to his custom, the more he represented to him the danger of not doing
it, the more obstinate he was not to do it, his haughty, and undaunted spirit,
rather choosing to transgress the Maxims of Policy, and Prudence* than those of
Bravery and Honor. It is indeed true that he went two days after to see him,
where the Cardinal knowing every tittle of what had passed) it may be imagined
how he was received; though the Duke, without being concerned at his cold
entertainment, said to those who spoke to him of it: That he had done as he
ought to do; that every one did not understand the distinction that ought to be
made betwixt the Master and the Servant; that those were respects so different
in themselves, as they ought not to be slightly confounded; and that he was old
enough to carry the authority of Example.

Of all the means that can be proposed for the establishment of a prodigious
power, Anno 1631.
there is none so certain as attempts that are vainly made to suppress it; it
appearing that whatever is imperfect in the one, does ever give increase to the
other; neither can there be any so imprudent, or so dangerous a resolution, as
to offend a great Minister by halves; since by making him sensible of the power
he has to revenge himself, you give him at the same time a pretense to do it
with some color of Justice. It fell out so in the violent, but fruitless
endeavors the Cardinal's Enemies made use of to work his ruin; by which being
made to understand the interest he had in the King's bosom, and employing that
interest under the sole pretense of retorting the injuries he had visibly
received, he found his Majesty so much the more inclined to take his part, as
he saw there was a kind of equity in the case: wherein he would not do his
business by halves, as his enemies had done; but vigorously pressing them, who
either had already fallen foul upon him, or who had yet the power to do it; he
put himself by that means into a condition of living not only in security, The
Cardinal falls foul upon his enemies.
but also in repose for the time to come, by removing all such as were likely,
either to molest his Peace, or to trouble his Affairs.

As the Monsieur was the person whose power of all others (after having
publicly declared himself his Enemy in his own House) the Cardinal had most
cause to fear; no^ sparing the Monsieur,
so was he the first he took occasion to fright from Court, by causing him to
be possessed, that his person was not there very secure: the Queen Mother nor
the Queen Mother.
also was by the same device persuaded to depart from Compeigne to retire into
Flanders: So that these two being removed out of the way, and all the Queens
adherents being either clapped up in prison, or confined to their own Houses,
nothing remained that could bring any obstacle to his designs, or stop the
swing of his Fortune, that now sailed with all her Canvas a trip in the full
Tide of Favor.

The Duke of Espernon was yet at Court in the midst of this Tempest, who
judging by the example of the wrack of these great Fortunes, what power the
Cardinal would have over him, unless he did wholly submit himself to his
pleasure, he chose rather calmly, and without disorder, to retire into his own
Government, than to preserve himself by submitting to so unhandsome, and so
dishonorable a compliance.

He departed then from Paris in June 1631. to return into his Government of
Guienne, The Duke of Espernon retires into his Government of Guienne, which he
finds in a most deplorable condition.
where being arrived he found that miserable Province in the most desolate
condition that can possibly be imagined: the Famine had there been succeeded by
a Plague; and if by his Wisdom, and good conduct, he had not delivered them
from the third Judgment, which was that of the Sword, by keeping those
Regiments quiet, that, after the Peace was concluded, had been sent thither to
be refreshed, there had been an end of that pleasant part of France: but his
good Discipline in restraining the license of the unruly Soldiers, that were
quartered in the Country; the good order he took for bringing in the relief of
Corn; and the care he had, that he Magistrates, and Officers of Health,
performed their duty in endeavoring to stop the progress of the Contagion in
the City, were to so good effect; that without all doubt, both Bordeaux, and
the whole Province stand eternally obliged to his vigilance and care.

After having taken the best order he could for the preservation of the Capital
City, he departed thence with a resolution to continue some time at his house
Cadillac; but he could not make so long a stay there, as he intended. This
little place being in a manner necessitated by its situation so near to
Bordeaux, and lying upon the same River, to have continual intercourse, and
Commerce with the principal City, had thence caught the Infection, which, for
ten or twelve days that the Duke made his abode there, made miserable havoc
among them; yet was it only upon the Inhabitants of the Town, as if it had had
a respect to his Family: insomuch that although he never refused to admit any
of the people into his house, that he went himself frequently to visit the sick
in their Cabins, and that so numerous a Train as his, could not long continue
in so little a place, without having some communication with infected persons;
yet was there (which was a kind of Miracle) a continual health throughout his
whole Family. At last at the importunity of his Domestics, who were much more
solicitous of him, than he was of himself, he resolved to leave the lower, and
infected, to go seek out a better air, in the higher, and more healthful
Gascony. The Duke goes into the higher Gascony.


He went therefore first to Nerac, where he met intelligence of a Rebellion
newly broken out at Saint-Afrique. This City, elevated to a strange degree of
presumption, by having a Siege raised from before it, of which we have already
spoken in the year 1628. received order at this time to quarter seven Foot
Companies belonging to the Regiment of Phalsbourg, the same that has since long
served by the name of the Regiment of Chamblay: upon the receipt of which
Order, the Inhabitants had betaken themselves to open Arms, shut up their
Gates, and denied entrance to those Companies. Neither was this all, they
proceeded from words to some untoward effects, some Soldiers were killed from
the Walls of the City; neither did these seditious people fail of their
endeavors to engage Millant, and some other neighboring Cities of their
Religion, in the same Revolt: but the Duke having upon the first notice of this
disorder presently transferred himself to Montauban, with a resolution to
proceed further if occasion should require, by his presence, prevented further
mischief, which otherwise might have grown up to something of greater
importance. The Inhabitants of Saint-Afrique, seeing themselves left alone, The
Duke of Espernon stops the progress of a new Rebellion by dismanteling several
strong Cities of the Hugonot party.
abandoned by all their old Confederates, and Friends, and moreover besieged by
old Soldiers that had lodged themselves under their Walls, resolved in the end
to open their Gates to the Garrison, as they accordingly did; giving the Duke
thereby an opportunity, he would by no means let slip, of tying them for ever
fast to their duty. Making a right use therefore of the astonishment, and
consternation they were then in, he commanded the Inhabitants to be disarmed,
and the Walls of their City to be demolished, according to the Articles of the
last Peace granted to those of the Reformed Religion. Verthamont Intendant de
la Justice took upon him the charge of seeing it performed, who, together with
his Office of Intendant, was moreover qualified with a Commission for the
dismantling of several Cities of that Province, which had engaged with the Duke
of Rohan in the late Commotion. So that the Walls of Millant, one of the
strongest Holds of that Party, were soon seen levelled with the ground, as also
those of Saint-Afrique, of Pont de Camares, of Saint-Rome, Tarn, and several
other places. Wherein so good order was taken, that there was no more fear this
little Country, one of the hardest to be reclaimed in the whole Kingdom, and
that had been likewise one of that last, that had returned to its obedience,
should for the future commit any more offenses, or be guilty of any new
Commotion.

The Inhabitants of Montauban cannot in this part of my story, without great
injustice, be denied the due praise of behaving themselves exceedingly well
upon this occasion; The Inhabitants of Montauban behave themselves very well
upon this occasion.
who no sooner heard the Duke designed to come into their Country, but that
they dispatched away some of the chiefest amongst them, to beseech him, that he
would honor their City with his presence. An invitation wherein some scruple
might reasonably have been made, and would the Duke have been governed by the
advice of many of his Servants, he had not perhaps so easily given up himself
to the discretion of a people, that it had not been in his power sometimes to
useso kindly as he desired. To this consideration the present juncture of
Affairs, rendered their complement much more suspected, Saint-Afrique (a Town of
the Hugonot Party) was already revolted, and had solicited all the other Cities
of the same Religion to concur with them in the maintenance (as they called it)
of that little Liberty, they had left remaining; but the Duke by his generosity
overcoming all these jealousies (sufficient of themthemselves to have made a
loss daring man lose the opportunity of performing that Service for the King,
he then did him) accepted their invitation, and went confidently to Montauban;
where, if those of the Town had really any evil intention (which did
nevertheless no ways appear) having by his presence dissolved that ill humor,
he thereby rendered the mutinous designs of Saint-Afrique so inconsiderable,
that they fell at last upon the heads of them, who had been the contrivers of
the mischief.

The Duke at first had intended to have continued for some time at Montauban,
believing that the Commotion of Rouergue would not so soon have been appeased;
but having by his prudent care composed things sooner than he expected, he in a
few days found himself at liberty to go as far as the Frontier to the Baths at
Banieres. The Duke goes to the Baths of Banieres.
This Country, abounding with Gentry equally to any other of the Kingdom, had
been the Nursery from whence Monsieur de la Valette his Father, the Admiral his
Brother, and himself had continually drawn out most of the brave men with which
they had so gloriously served their Kings, and maintained their own Fortunes;
as it was also out of them, that he had constantly chosen most of his Officers
for Foot Commands. The acknowledgment therefore of his former favors, being by
no better way to be expressed, than by the great conflux of those he had
obliged, they came to wait upon him in so great numbers, and so handsomely
attended, that he could hardly have been better accompanied in any other part
of his Government. They here passed away the time, as people usually do in the
Bathing season, in all sorts of innocent Recreations, to which the good Company
there had invited the Ladies, as well as the Gentlemen of the Country: when
the Duke, after having bestowed more of his time upon his friends, than to the
consultation of his own health (which at so great an age continued in a
mavelous vigor) would return back toward the lower Gascony, to see the
miserable condition of that part of the Province, still groaning under the same
heavy judgments, wherewith at his first coming from Court he had found it
afflicted.

Whilst the Duke was preparing for his return, he received news of the Grace
his second Son had received from the King, who had lately conferred upon him
the honor of Duke, and Peer; The Marquis de la Valette takes his Oath for Duke
and Peer of France.
he had long before received his Patent for that Dignity, which has made me so
often in the preceding discourse, give him that Title; but he had neither taken
his Oath, nor assumed his place in Parliament till this time. The Territory of
Ville-Bois settled upon him by the Duke his Father at his Marriage, was also
honored with the Title of a Duchy, by that means leaving its former
denomination, to take that of its Lord, and Owner. That which rendered this new
Dignity more remarkable was, that Cardinal Richelieu (at this time advanced to
the greatest height a Subject can be capable of) would at the same Session be
installed in the same degree of honor; so that they were both received
together in Parliament, and both their Letters Patents the same day verified,
and confirmed.

The Duke, though at present ill enough dealt withal at Court, and inwardly not
over-well satisfied with former passages, could not however, but acknowledge
this for a favor; so that, once in his life accommodating himself to the time,
he writ a Letter of Complement to the Cardinal: to which he soon after returned
an answer obliging enough; wherein, after he had replied to the Duke's civility
concerning his Sons promotion, he proceeded to acquaint him that the Cardinal
his youngest Son had been lately created Governor of Anjou. The Card^nal de la
Val^tte made Governor of Anjou.
A news at which the Duke was highly pleased: but as joy seldom arrives without
some mixture of bitterness; this was soon followed by one of the most just, and
most sensible afflictions that could almost arrive, which was the Death of le
Plessis his beloved, and faithful Servant. This Gentleman, equally wise, and
valiant, dextrous, and faithful, and who had all these qualities eminent in
him, to a very conspicuous degree had been so happy, that the Services which
had been acceptable to the Father, were no less pleasing to his Sons; insomuch
that not one of them but was passionate for his advancement, and ambitious to
contribute something to his Fortune; a thing he himself so little considered,
that had he not met with Masters liberal in their own Natures, his deserts had
been the worst rewarded of any man's of his time: but such was the
acknowledgment they all paid to his merit, that the Cardinal de la Valette was
no sooner provided of the Government of Anjou, but that he cast his eye upon le
Plessis, to bestow upon him one of the best and principal Commands of that
Province, which was that of the Castle of Angers. He had already that of
Chasteau Trompette of Bordeaux; neither would the Duke consent to be totally
deprived of his Service, all that he could condescend unto to satisfy his Son,
being to share with him in this good Servant, and to give way that he should
serve at the Castle of Angers, still keeping the command of Chasteau Trompette.
Le Plessis having therefore taken his leave of the Duke at Condom to go to take
possession of his new Government staid by the way to keep his Christmas at
Bordeaux, with an intention after the Holy days were passed, to continue his
Journey to Angers: but his Devotion making him commit a violence upon his
health, at this time something impaired, by an indisposition that began to grow
upon him, his Disease increased to such a degree at midnight Mass, that the
conclusion of his Prayers was almost the end of his Life. He went out of the
Church seized with a Catarre, The death of le Plessis Baussonniere the Duke's
principal Servant.
by which his breathing being stopped, and all sense and memory taken away, he
was in a few hours totally suffocated. He could not certainly by a more
Christian, nor a more easy death have finished a very excellent life: but the
Duke of Espernon could not of a long time after be comforted for his loss;
neither indeed could a greater almost have befallen him, he having scarce any
other Servant left, that was allowed the liberty to tell his Master, what he
conceived was best for the good of his Service: the Duke, who would never
slacken the severe hand he ever held over all his Servants, not enduring that
any of them should presume to advise him: this only by the prerogative of his
Age, and approved Fidelity, was dispensed from that Law; a dispensation that he
notwithstanding ever made use of with so great modesty, as to make it appear it
was rather a Privilege granted by the Master's bounty, than any Empire usurped
by the Servant over his Masters affections.

The life of the Duke of Espernon, Anno 1632.
and his particular actions, have so great a connection with the public
interest, that his story is no where to be long continued without putting the
writer upon a necessity of interweaving something of the general concerns of
the Kingdom; which obliges me in this place to resume the gross of Affairs, and
with the year to enter into transactions of very great importance, wherein the
Duke had so eminent a share that his greatest enemies, and such as were most
emulous of his glory, cannot but do him that right as to confess that he struck
the greatest stroke in the success of the Royal Arms.

The Queen Mother and the Monsieur Troubles arise upon the retirement of the
Queen Mother, and the Monsieur.
being retired out of the Kingdom, it was not likely, but that two so great
persons, being open, and professed enemies to the Cardinal (whom they had
publicly declared to be the Author of their discontents) would do their utmost
endeavors to make him feel the effects of their indignation: but it appearing
that the King was in a manner obliged in honor to protect his Minister, and
that he was not consequently to be assaulted without offending his Majesty
himself, they were to expect a great, and vigorous opposition, to whatever
attempts they should make upon the Cardinal's Fortune. These two discontented
Princes therefore, well foreseeing this difficulty, willingly accepted the
offers made them by the Emperor, the King of Spain, and the Duke of Lorain, to
take Arms in their favor: but as it was impossible these separate Forces
should unite, and move at the same time, whereas those of the King embodied,
and acting by one sole authority, The Emperor, the King of Spain, and the Duke
of Lorain, engage in their quarrel.
could in a moment produce the effects of all their power: it was no hard
matter for the Cardinal to frustrate the attempts of all these Foreign Princes,
and to repel even upon them themselves, who were most active to destroy him,
the designs they had projected for his ruin.

If the Cardinal's wisdom was of great use to him (as questionless it was) upon
this occasion, it must likewise be confessed that Fortune did no little
contribute to his safety, who from the extremities of the North, raised him up
a Prince, one of the most eminent, and great in all qualities both Military,
and Civil, that latter ages have produced, and that was the great Gustavus
Adolphus King of Sweden. This Prince (in truth inconsiderable enough, had not
his single Person, and Valor in themselves, been worth the greatest Armies)
undertook to invade Germany, and to assault the Emperor in the heart of his
own Dominions; notwithstanding that this mighty Prince, who had already subdued
all the powers that were opposite to him, possessed that Empire (composed of
many Kingdoms) in a greater degree of Sovereignty, than any of his
Predecessors, who had swayed that Scepter for many Ages before him, had ever
done.

These difficulties, sufficient to have discouraged, and withheld the mightiest
powers served only for Spurs to the ambition of this generous, and magnanimous
Prince. He entered then into Germany, where at his coming he proclaimed liberty
to all the Princes, and People; a great allurement indeed, but his large
promises without some advantageous effects were not of force to draw many
Partisans over to his side. He sought therefore with great eagerness an
occasion wherein to make trial of his Arms, which he knew was the only way to
win himself Reputation, and Friends; and the Emperor, who had no less Interest
to stop the impetuosity of an Invader who came to brave him in the heart of his
own Empire, opposed to this Torrent (and that under the command of the best,
and most fortunate Leaders he had) his Army hitherto victorious over all the
Forces they had met in the Field: but the glory of all those Victories served
only to render that of the King of Sweden more illustrious, which he obtained
over these Conquerours at the Battle of Lipsick; by which great, and famous
action, having rendered his name (till then almost unknown) formidable
throughout the whole Empire, he ran from one extremity thereof to the other,
almost without any resistance, at least without meeting any impediment that
could stop his way.

The Cardinal (as he had good reason) rendered himself very facile, and
favorable to this Prince, who seemed to be come out of his Rocks, and Deserts
for no other end save only to defend his quarrel. He assisted him therefore in
the beginning with some few men, and a little money; which though not very
considerable, the Swede nevertheless gave so important a diversion to the House
of Austria, that having their hands more than full of their own Affairs, they
were far from being in any capacity of traversing their Neighbors designs. If
the Emperor had enough to do at home, the King of Spain had no less need of
all his Forces at the Siege of Mastrick; and the Duke of Lorain deprived of the
support of these two great Princes, under whose shadow, and protection he had
taken Arms, being of himself unable to withstand the King's Power, was
necessitated (as he had done some time before) to fly to his Majesty's mercy.
By the Treaty of Vic, concluded in the beginning of the year, he had d^liver'd
Marsal to the King by way of caution for the performance of his word; and for
this second of Liverdune, he moreover assigned to him Stenay, Iamets, and
Clairmont; upon which good security his Majesty having granted him peace, he
was constrained to observe it, though it was only not long after to break it:
from whence ensued the loss of his whole Dukedom.

The Monsieur seeing himself thus defeated of all hopes of any Foreign
assistance, his Servants assayed to procure that for him at home, they saw was
not elsewhere to be expected; to which end Letters from the Queen Mother, and
himself were presented to the Parliament of Paris, to try if by that
application they could interest that Assembly in their grievances, and inveagle
the Parisians into a good opinion of their cause: but all in vain; they
practiced moreover several discontented persons, whose assistance consisting
only of a very few men, was also of no great effect; the remains of the Hugonot
party were likewise tampered withal; but besides that they were reduced to such
a low condition, that they had greater need of some Potent Prince to protect
them, than that they were in any capacity to repair the fortune of a great
Prince declined; there was so good order taken to hold them in, in all parts of
the Kingdom, that not a man amongst them durst once offer to stir. The Cardinal
having from the beginning of the year foreseen, that the discontents of the
Queen Mother, and the Monsieur exasperated, and fomented by strangers, would
infallibly bring a War upon the Kingdom, had omitted no manner of precaution
that might serve to frustrate their designs: he had caused the Kings standing
Regiments both of Horse and Foot to be reinforced, had put sufficient Garrisons
into all the important Cities, had by very severe prohibitions forestalled all
such as were likely to engage with the Enemy; and those of the Religion, though
already upon the matter subdu^d, being yet in some sor^, even in their
impotency to be suspected, he had taken a particular care to make sure of them
upon this occasion.

What difficulties soever the punctual execution of these Orders had strewn in
the way of the Monsieur's designs, and notwithstanding that he saw himself
abandoned by his Foreign friends, sufficiently taken up with their own
particular Affairs, he thought nevertheless that the sole interest of the Duke
of Montmorency, who was absolutely at his Devotion, would of it self enable him
to execute his revenge for the injuries he had received. The Monsieur enters
the Kingdom.
Upon which assurance he entered the Kingdom in June, accompanied only with two
thousand Horse, picked up of several Nations, and two thousand Foot, or
thereabouts, taking his way through Burgundy, without making any discovery into
what part of France he intended to retire: and then it was that the King's
Orders, and dispatches were redoubled, and sent with great diligence into all
parts of the Kingdom, to which it was probable those Forces would direct their
March. They seemed principally to threaten either Languedoc, or Guienne; the
Governors of which two Provinces having no great reason to be very well
satisfied with the Court, the Cardinal did not well know what to think of them,
nor what to promise to himself from their Fidelity in so critical a time. Of
these the Duke of Montmorency, the more reason the Court had to be jealous of
his behavior, the more industrious he was (as guilty men usually are) to wipe
off all shadow of suspicion they might justly conceive; insomuch that it is said
he dispatched post after post to the King to give him assurance of his Loyalty;
a thing that afterward proved one of the most dangerous circumstances of his
offense. The Duke of Espernon did not promise so much, and performed much more,
he only sending the Sieur de Camp^ls, Gentleman of his Horse, to assure the
King of his Fidelity, and was so punctual in the performance of his word, that
he failed not in the least Article of his duty.

After the Duke of Montmorency had kept the Court sufficiently in suspense of
what he resolved to do, he at last declared himself by taking open arms in
favor of the Monsieur; The Duke of Montmor^ncy declare^ in favor of the
Monsieur.
who was now come into Languedoc, where he caused several Cities he had made
firm for his purpose, to revolt, and moreover debauched many Gentlemen of very
eminent quality, whom either the respect, and affection to his person, or the
hope of change had allured over to his Party.

If the Monsieur's designs, before the Duke of Montmorency declared in his
Quarrel, had amused the whole Court, their astonishment was infinitely
augmented, after he had betaken himself to Arms, who having immediately
thereupon published several causes of his discontent, many at that time allowed
them to be very just, though no one could approve the course he took to
manifest his resentment. The news of his defection surpised the Duke of
Espernon at Again, it surpised him indeed, who expected nothing less than to
see himself engaged in a party contrary to the dearest friend he had in the
world; The Duke of Espernon a^v^nces towar^s Languedoc.
though that friendship, as all his other friendships had ever done, must here
give place to his duty. Upon the first Orders therefore he received from the
King, after the Monsieur's entry into the Kingdom, he immediately departed from
Cadillac, to advance into the center of the Province, which was Again, to the
end that from that prospect, he might observe what parts of his Government
stood most in need of his presence.

There was no dispute (the Duke of Montmorency having declared) but that he
must of necessity advance toward Languedoc, to secure Montauban, that being
the nearest City of importance to the revolted Province: but the difficulty
was, how to do it so, that Montauban might not rather secure him, who had only
his own Guards about his person, with ten Companies of the Regiment of
P^alsbourg, that remained of twenty he had had in Guienne, the rest being a few
days before sent away to join with the Marshall de Schomberg. The Marshall
arriving in Languedoc, had sent to borrow these Forces of the Duke of Espernon,
perhaps out of a design, rather to weaken him (of whose resolutions they were
yet uncertain) than to strengthen himself; which though the Duke could at that
time very ill have spared, who was to go to expose himself in a place, where he
had great reason to suspect his own safety, yet would he not refuse the
Marshall upon his first demand; by that freedom sufficiently manifesting with
what integrity and candor he proceeded in the Kings Interest.

This proceeding, The Court in (...) of the D^^e of Esp^rnon's resolutions.
how franck and generous soever, could not nevertheless so satisfy the Court,
that they were not yet in great anxiety, and suspense, what his resolution
might be: the hereditary friendship, and strict alliance, betwixt the House of
Montmorency, and him, were sufficiently known; neither were they ignorant that
the tender, and passionate affection he had for the person of this Duke, was
equal to that he had for his own Children* they knew moreover that two days
before the Duke had declared, the Marchioness of Montferrant of the House of
Montmorency, widow to the Baron de Montaut the Duke's Cousin German, and now
Wife to one of the most intimate friends he had in the Province, had parted
from the Duchess of Montmorency, to return into Guienne to her Husband who was
then with the Duke of Espernon: so that this Lady, a woman capable of the
greatest Affairs, above what is usual in persons of her Sex, there were few who
did not conclude, she had been purposely sent by the Duke her Kinsman to labor
an intelligence with the Duke his ally; though in truth there was no such
thing. In fine, the good or ill success of Affairs depending without all doubt
absolutely upon him, the Court had all the reason in the world to be in some
fear of what his determination would be. All the Gentry of his Government were
wavering, those of the Reformed Religion who had been constrained to accept of
an incommodious Peace, in all appearance, waited only expecting a fit
opportunity to begin a new War; thereby to obtain more advantageous conditions,
than those that had been imposed upon them; and the people oppressed more than
ordinary by new Taxes, desired nothing more than trouble, and confusion, which
they conceived to be the best, and only remedy for their present calamities.
These evil dispositions were not only in Guienne, but Angoumois also;
Xaintonge, Limousin, and Poictou, panted with the same thirst of Innovation: so
that in all these Provinces (where the Duke had long governed) they yet
retained for him so great a love, and respect, that what resolution soever he
had taken, would without contradiction have been followed by them for the best.
Neither had he needed to have made any great ado, to procure a great deal of
mischief; since by only sitting still, and conniving never so little at those
who were ready for Commotion, he might have wrought matters into such a
confusion, as would infallibly have put the Kingdom into very great disorder;
and then the Marshall de Schomberg, shut up betwixt the Forces of Languedoc,
and Guienne, would have been irrecoverably lost. But this good Frenchman, what
aversion soever he might have to the Cardinal's immeasurable greatness, what
affection soever for the Duke of Montmorency, or what advantage soever he might
reasonably propose to himself from the alteration of Affairs (the face whereof
he might doubtless have changed) he still preferred the Service of his Prince,
and the good of his Country, before any particular Interest of his own, and
remained unshaken in his duty, notwithstanding all the overtures had been made,
and the importunities had been used to debauch him.

The Duke acting with this sincerity and candor, thought it very requisite to
confirm the King in the assurances he had formerly given his Majesty, of his
fidelity, and truth, which he did by sending away the Count de Maille to that
effect: and proceeding from words to actions, after he was arrived at
Montauban, his first care was speedily to dispatch away two Gentlemen
throughout the whole Province, to summon in to him all the persons of quality,
whom he had most reason to suspect. There were very few who did not promptly
obey this Summons, which being delivered them by men of Repute, they could not
make any excuse, that they had not received his Commands; and it was no hard
matter for the Duke when he had them so near his person, to keep them there,
and so narrowly to watch them, that they were not conveniently to be practiced;
by which means, besides this advantage, which was none of the most
inconsiderable, he from this way of proceeding, derived another of exceeding
great moment, which was insensibly, and as it were almost without design, to
fortify himself in a City, where he was very weak, and the disposition whereof
was as yet very uncertain.

It is not to be believed how great an effect these prudent precautions
produced to the security of Affairs, nor how much several persons were
disabus'd thereby, who otherwise might have suffered themselves to have been
deceived by false impressions of the Duke, and such as were utterly contrary to
his intention: but his fidelity was so legible throughout the whole order of
his conduct, and he gave so little hopes to those who were seditiously
affected, of being to be tempted to embrace any disloyal motion, that in so
great a disposition to evil, and in so favorable an occasion to do it, there
was not one man of quality of Guienne, excepting Saint Croix d' Ornano, who was
one of the Monsieur's Domestic Servants, that went out of the Province to join
with him; the Duke's good Example, and Exhortations, so containing all the rest
within the bounds of their Duty, that the King had a very good issue of an
Affair, his Majesty himself thought would not so easily have determined. It was
after all these important services, that it was justly said of the Duke of
Espernon, that In doing nothing ^e had done all; for in effect, without
stirring from the place, without arming any other than his own Guards, without
having spilt one drop of blood, or spent six pence of the King's money, he
procured his Majesty, without danger, or expense, a Victory that settled the
whole Kingdom in repose.

The King, informed by the Duke's dispatches of the good order he had taken in
his Government, by very gracious Letters (which the Count de Maille brought
back at his return) signified to him how highly he was satisfied with his
conduct; The King writes very graciously, and the Cardinal very kindly to the
Duke of Espernon in acknowledgment of his good Service.
wherein, amongst other things, his Majesty acquainted him with his intention
to leave Paris, and to take the way of Lions, there to command his Army in his
own person (a thing the Council would never consent unto, till they were secure
of the Duke's intentions) and the Cardinal, in his Letters bearing the same
date with the King's, writ to him in these express terms: I shall content my
self with giving you this assurance, that nothing can possibly be added to the
infinite satisfaction his Majesty has received in the Zeal you have manifested
to the good of his Service in the present occasion; and that I shall with great
diligence seek all opportunities that may contribute to the desire I have to
let you see, that no one is more really than my self, Your, etc. To these
during the King's Expedition, he received several other Dispatches, of the same
obliging style, which I forbear to copy here, that I may not importune my
Reader,

But how great soever the Duke's Merits and Services were, and how large soever
the promises, that had been made him, the memory of those Services was
notwithstanding so short lived, that even before the storm was well over, they
sought an occasion to quarrel with him, thinking it, belike, better cheap to
cavil at some little passages, (which ought rather to be imputed to his humor,
than his intention) than to stand obliged to him for this Service.

I should never have done should I undertake to relate all the particularities
(though remarkable enough in themselves) or should I so much as insist upon the
more eminently considerable passages that happened upon this occasion, which
makes me omit many things, that perhaps would not be altogether unpleasant, The
Engagement of Castelnaudary, wherein the Caunt de Moret was slain, and the Duke
of Montmorency taken prisoner; from which disaster the ruin of the Monsieur's
party ensues.
to come to the main business of all, which is the defeat of of the Duke of
Montmorency, and his being taken prisoner.

It Is well enough known after what manner this unfortunate Lord precipitously,
and almost alone, engaged himself against a whole Army; a rashness by which he
became the principal instrument of his enemies Victory: insomuch that had he
combined with them against himself, he could not more blindly, and wilfully
have run upon his own destruction. He compelled the Marshall de Scomberg to
fight against his intention, and to overcome him against his will; he had not,
it is true full fifty men slain in this Engagement, which will yet appear a
great number, considering that he had not above an hundred, that charged with
him upon this occasion. The Count de Moret, a young Prince of great merit, and
much greater expectation, was so unfortunate as to lose his life without the
Trenches that separated the Monsieur's Army from that of the Marshall; some
other persons of quality ran also the same Fortune: but although this loss was
small in respect to the number of men, the taking of the Duke of Montmorency
made it nevertheless so highly considerable, that every one concluded the ruin
of the whole party infallible. For the Monsieur having upon him reposed his
whole confidence for the command of the Army, the Cities and Forces of
Languedoc being wholly tied to his person, and interest, and all things
absolutely depending upon him; he was no sooner taken, but that the Cities
revolted, and the Army disbanded: so that in a few days the Monsieur saw
himself so totally deserted, that what attempt soever he had a desire to make
to rescue the Duke of Montmorency out of the enemies hands, and yet to dispute
the Victory, he had so few left wherewith to execute his desire, and those few
so dejected with the late misfortune, that he was reduced to a necessity of
relying upon the faith of a Treaty for the preservation of a Servant, who
contrary to his order had lost himself.

The Duke of Espernon advertised of this accident, by a dispatch from the
Marshall de Scomberg, dated the second of September, which was the next day
after the fight, was afflicted beyond expression at the Duke of Montmorency's
misfortune. He gave him at the first for lost, and being very well acquainted
with the severe Maxims of that time, together with the implacable hatred the
great Minister had conceived against him, did forthwith conclude, that this
first Offense would also be the last he was ever likely to commit.

Yet not to fail upon this event in any of his respects, he wrote to the King
to signify to his Majesty the joy he conceived for the prosperity of his Arms;
he sent likewise the same Complement to the Marshall de Scomberg, and to the
Marquis de Breze, who had behaved himself very gallantly upon this occasion:
but he also manifested to the Duke of Montmorency, his great grief for his
misfortune. It was by a Gentleman dispatched on purpose to that end (and before
the liberty of receiving his friends addresses, was taken from him) that he
sent to assure this Duke of whatever without reservation, The Duke of Espernon
sends a Complement to the Duke of Montmorency in Prison.
he could expect from the passion, he had ever had, and was obliged ever to
have for his Service. He did not write to him, but he writ to the Marshall de
Scomberg, to entreat he would permit him to pay his friend in so great an
extremity, what their mutual Affection exacted from his duty: a request in the
granting whereof, the Marshall was so exceeding civil, as to cause the Duke's
Gentleman (which was Naugas the Lieutenant of his Guards) to be forthwith
conducted to the Duke of Montmorency's Chamber. Naugas had there full liberty
to deliver all he had in charge from the Duke his Master; whereupon this
unfortunate Lord, who had ever honored the Duke, as if he had been his Father,
touched with the sense of this seasonable manifestation of a Friendship, which
he knew to be unfeigned, would needs upon the instant return an acknowledgment
of the timely kindness, by a word in writing under his own hand, though very
much weakened with ten great wounds, and roul'd up with Lints and Plasters.
Wherein he briefly told him according to his ordinary way of writing, That he
acknowledged himself infintely obliged for the favor he had done him: That he
would not however in return offer him his Not otherwise to be rendered without
spoiling the sense.
good Graces, which, at this time were none of the best (intimating thereby his
wounded face) but that, if it should please God to restore him to his health,
he would employ that, with his life in his Service. To which he added by word
of mouth, several passionate expressions of the Affection he bore to the Duke;
not then dreaming without doubt that he should so soon be deprived of all means
whereby to make it appear. All which, being brought back by Naugas, only served
to augment the Duke's Affliction, who was the more compassionate of his friends
condition, by how much he himself was ignorant of his own misfortune, and
insensible of his danger.

The news of this defeat having met the King at Lions, who with new Forces was
following his other Armies, his Majesty no more doubted, but that all the
Monsieur's Party would suddenly dissolve, as in a few days it did; so that
having nothing more to do, save only to settle what had been discomposed by the
late Commotion, he moved with so great deliberation toward Tholouze, The Duke
advances to Tholouze.
that he arrived not there till the 22. of the month following. The Duke of
Espernon in the mean time, seeing there was now nothing that could oblige him
to make any longer stay either at Montauban, or upon the Frontier of Languedoc,
went to the waters of Encausse, a journey he rather undertook to divert
himself, whilst he waited in expectation of the King's coming, The Duke of
Montmorency brought to Tholouze, and his Trial begun.
than for any great business he had there in order to his health.

The King being (as has been said) arrived at Tholouze the 22. of October,
there was present order given for the bringing thither of the Duke of
Montmorency, who accordingly arriving there, was, as soon as brought, committed
into the custody of two Judges of the Parliament: a proceeding by which his
Relations and Friends, being given to understand, that they aimed directly at
his life, there was not one of them who was not ready to serve him, with the
hazard of his own; but yet not one of them durst be so bold, as to speak for
him to the King. His Majesty seemed to have bolted the door against all manner
of intercession, by denying his pardon to the Monsieur, who had not (as it was
said) signed the Articles of the Treaty upon any other account, save only to
preserve him. The Princess of Conde was moreover forbidden to enter into
Tholouze, by that means being rendered incapable of paying so beloved, and so
noble a Brother any other duty than that of her fruitless sighs, and tears. In
this general consternation, whilst the Cardinal de la Valette, was using his
utmost interest, and endeavor with Cardinal Richelieu, the Duke of Espernon
was no less importunate with the King, he being the only man that had the
courage to speak directly in the behalf of the Duke of Montmorency, and to be
the Orator of his other Friends, wherein if his success was not such, as he did
heartily desire; yet ought he not in this place to be denied the testimony of
his virtuous endeavor for the preservation of so precious a life.

He addressed himself therefore boldly to the King, The Duke of Espernon
intercedes for the Duke of Montmorency.
when being kneeled down, with greater submission to prefer his most humble
Suit, the King was pleased to raise him up, and to give him leave to say: That
he did not throw himself at his Majesty's feet to justify the Duke of
Montmorency in the least, nor by excuses to extenuate the greatness of his
offense: That he did acknowledge him to be guilty, his Crime being too high,
and manifest to admit of any excuse; but that if it were less, it would be less
worthy of his Majesty's mercy: That that Virtue truly Royal, never appeared in
so great luster, as when employed upon great Subjects, and after great
Offenses: That his Majesty would hardly meet with another occasion, wherein it
would be so conspicuously eminent, as in this, all Europe having at this time
their eyes fixed upon him, to observe what he would please to determine of so
illustrious a Head: That he was the bolder to sue to his Majesty for this
pardon, by how much having in his own person, and upon almost the like
occasion, received the same Grace from his Majesty's bounty, he flattered
himself to be so happy as that his Majesty had never repented himself of that
favor: That he was not the only person amongst his Servants, who stood obliged
to his Clemency for the same benefit, but that Monsieur, the Cardinal de
Richelieu was equally concerned: That they had both of them engaged in the
Queen Mothers interest in a time when his Majesty's Royal Name was opposed
against them, though they had therein no other intention, than to do him
service; and that if in that juncture his Majesty had left them to the severity
of Law and Justice, he had deprived himself of the great services of the one,
and the gratitude of the other: That the youth of Monsieur de Montmorency
deserved no less to be excused, than their good intentions: That his person
being in his Majesty's power, he would be secured from doing any thing to the
preujudice of his Service; but that his preservation might serve eternally to
his glory: That he did humbly beseech his Majesty to consider, that the great
name of Montmorency was now only surviving in his single person: That the merit
of his Ancestors (who by a long succession extended their race almost to the
first foundation of the French Monarchy) pleaded so highly for his Pardon, that
one rash Act ought not to forfeit so brave a Gentleman to the severity of his
Majesty's Justice. That if he should be so fortunate as to obtain a second life
for his friend, he would with all his heart become his Security, that for the
future it should never be employed, but in his Majesty's Service, and that his
Blood should serve for no other use, than to wash away the Stain, and for ever
to obliterate the memory of his Offense.

The King with great patience, and without once offering to interrupt him, gave
the Duke free liberty to continue his discourse to the end, seeming moreover to
hearken to him with some kind of hopeful attention: but that favorable
audience was also the only fruit of his address; for his Majesty having from
the beginning of the Duke's Speech fixed his eyes upon the ground, never lifted
them from thence so much as once to look upon the Duke who was speaking to him;
neither when he had concluded did he answer him one word: by which silence the
Duke perceiving the ruin of his friend to be absolutely decreed, he spoke
again, and said, The Duke of Espernon not being able to prevail with the King
in the behalf of he Duke of M^ntmorency begs leave to retire, and obtains it.
Sir, since I am so unhappy as not to hope to obtain your Majesty's Pardon for
Monsieur de Montmorency, I humbly beg leave that I may retire: When though the
King had been dumb to the first, he found words to make answer to this last
request, by telling him, Yes, you have free leave; neither do I intend my self
to stay long in this City. Whereupon the Duke afflicted to the last degree,
that he had been able to obtain nothing more (though indeed he had not expected
much better success) presently withdrew himself to go wait upon the Princess of
Conde in the Suburbs of Tholouze (to which place she was retired) there to
condole with her their common misfortune. He found at his coming thither that
Cardinal Richelieu was but newly parted thence, whose visit, by giving her no
satisfaction, having put her into the last despair, the Duke's happened to be
exceeding seasonable for the composing of her mind agitated with so violent a
Passion.

Though the Duke from that very day prepared himself for his departure, yet had
he time enough before he went, totally to reject a proposition made to him on
the Cardinal's behalf, presently after the King's arrival at Tholouze. He had
caused the Duke to be treated withal to quit the Government of Metz in his
favor; offering him in exchange the survivancy of that of Guienne, for the
Duke de la Valette his Son, who was already seized of that of Metz in reverson.
Bullion, newly created Sur-Intendant des Finances, was chosen by the Cardinal,
as a person most acceptable to the Duke to make to him this Overture: a
proposition at which the Duke, having served the King so well as he had done in
the last occasion, was not a little surpised; and the rather because his
Services having been of great ^^portance to the Cardinal's Fortune (which was
much more struck at in the late Rebellion, than any thing that concerned either
the King or the Kingdom) he had reason, besides the satisfaction the King had
been pleased to manifest of his performance, to expect also a very grateful
return from the Cardinal himself. It was the belief of many at that time, that
the Cardinal's design was, to accommodate himself with the Bishopric of Metz,
together with five or six great Abbeys in that City of above an hundred
thousand Livers a year Revenue, besides the Bishopric which was worth twice as
much, and to add thereunto the Government of the City, and Country, with those
of the Cities and Cittadels of I houl and Verdun; Cordinal Richeli^u's
amoitio^s de^^gns.
to the end that by providing for himself so certain, and secure a retreat, he
might in time be armed against all disgrace; to which others have added an
opinion, that he had a project to reunite all the Provinces that had formerly
been members of the Kingdom of Austratia in his own person, to hold them in the
quality of a Sovereign Prince, whereof Lorain, and Alsatia, which were in his
Majesty's possession, together with the three forenamed Bishoprics of Metz,
Toul, and Verdun, made up the greatest part; it had been a matter of no great
difficulty for the Cardinal to have possessed himself of this Estate, by any
title he would have desired of the King: So that, if he ever had this thought,
it is not to be wondered at, if he was sensibly offended that the Duke refused
to treat and to comply with him in a thing, he had set his heart upon for the
establishment of his Fortune.

However it was, it is concluded by all, that this Affair made the Cardinal
take up a resolution absolutely to break with the Duke of Espernon, whom he saw
to be too stiff to stoop to his Authority, and looked upon as the only person
of the Kingdom, who had either the power, or the spirit to mate his greatness.
Wherein nevertheless though the Duke appeared to be very averse, yet did he not
absolutely reject the Cardinal's proposal; but conceiving he did not offer
enough, demanded moreover a Mareschal's Staff for the Duke de Candale his
eldest Son. This was a Dignity that could not indeed be denied to his merit,
though it had never been laid in the balance against the Government of Metz:
but if the Duke had a kindness for this Son, the Cardinal had no less aversion,
who (it was said) having been wounded to the quick with some smart touches of
the Duke de Candale's Wit (as pleasant a one indeed as any of his time, but
withal as tart, as pleasant) he could by no means forget it, but would rather
choose to leave a thing of so great importance to the establishment of his
Fortune imperfect, than to be instrumental to the advancement of a person by
whom he conceived himself so highly offended. Having therefore broke off with
the Duke upon these terms, it is to be presumed, he only for the future waited
an occasion, or at least a pretense wherewithal to color his revenge. Wherein
though the Duke's haughty humor was likely enough to furnish him with as good
as he could desire, it appeared nevertheless that fortune (who will ever have a
hand in all humane Affairs) seconding the Cardinal's passion, produced him one
much sooner, than he expected. It was in truth, at this time, contrary to the
Duke's intention, who, although he would not discover a weakness in
condescending below his own Dignity, had no desire notwithstanding to provoke
the Cardinal's Almighty power, by insisting upon any thing he might
irreproachably do.

After that, by the death of the Duke of Montmorency, the King thought he had
absolutely appeased the storm in Languedoc, his Majesty thought of nothing
more, than by the nearest way, and with a very slender train, of returning back
to Paris. The Queen, who was attended by the Council, and all the Court, two
days after the King's departure, began her Journey toward Bordeaux, at greater
convenience to send away her equipage down the River Garonne, where being
arrived, her Majesty was pleased to honor the Duke of Espernon so far, as to
cross the River, to go see him in his House Cadillac. The Queen goes to
Cadill^c.
The Virtue, Generosity, and other excellent qualities this Queen was Mistress
of, had acquired the Duke absolutely to her Service; who also in return,
received infinite testimonies of her love and esteem; so that it is not to be
doubted, but he was overjoyed to have so favorable an Opportunity, wherein to
manifest, in some measure, his Gratitude for her Grace, and Favor. Nothing
therefore was spared to that end, and the Duke, having a few days preceded her
Majesty's coming, had made so plentiful provision of all things, and she was
received at his House after so splendid a manner, that as on the one side it
was impossible for him fully to satisfy his Duty, and Affection; so could he
on the other very hardly have done more, than he did, or have added any thing
to the Splendor, and Magnificence of this Entertainment.

The Duke's ill Fortune would have it that Cardinal Richelieu came this Journey
with the Queen; who since he had fortified Brouage to such a degree, that it is
at this day reputed one of the strongest places in France, had never been
there, and would now therefore for all the money he had laid out upon it (which
was a vast Sum) give himself the satisfaction of taking a view of his Work.
The Duke was not sorry for this Resolution; but on the contrary, no public
unkindness having hitherto happened betwixt them, The Cardinal comes to Cadill^^,
where he takes new offense at the Duke of Espernon.
he invited the Cardinal to his House, hoping the good Entertainment he
intended him there, might thaw the former Coldness: but it fell out quite
otherwise, and two untoward Accidents that happened in this Journey making the
discontents, which had so long been hatching in the Cardinal's Bosom, to
disclose themselves, occasioned soon after the first Disorder the Duke had ever
received in his Fortune. Of these Accidents the first was this.

The Queen being to pass the River betwixt Cadillac, and Bordeaux, to come to
the House, the Duke had prepared Coaches ready to receive her Majesty, at her
landing; giving order withal to some of his Servants to reserve one for the
Cardinal, that he might have no cause to complain of any want of respect
toward him: an Order nevertheless so ill observed, that the Queen first
landing, and the Coaches designed for her Train proving too few to contain them
all, they also made bold with that, which was intended for the Cardinal. The
C^rdinal's first complaint.
At the Queens coming ashore, the Duke, having paid her the respect that was
most justly due, by attending her Majesty to her apartment, that first duty
performed, went back in all haste to receive the Cardinal upon the River,
himself taking a Coach along with him for that purpose; but for all his
diligence he came too late, meeting the Cardinal already advanced a pretty way
toward the House on Foot; where, though the Duke made him all imaginable
Excuses for the fault had been committed contrary to his Order; they were not
nevertheless of force to dispossess him of the distaste he had taken, that he
had not been so well used as he ought to be: so that though he received them
with some show of satisfaction, his actions nevertheless sufficiently
manifested his discontent, he being not to be persuaded to make use of the
Coach the Duke had brought him; and although already seized with the beginning
of a distemper, of which a few days after at Bordeaux, he had like to have
died, he was nevertheless obstinate to finish the remaining part of his way on
foot, though with great trouble and inconvenience, till he came to the Lodgings
that were made ready for him.

This was the first cross accident the Duke met with upon this occasion, and in
this every impartial Judge must of necessity acquit him. The second happened soon
after at Bordeaux, wherein, though it be true, that there was something more of
the Duke's haughty humor, yet was his intention nevertheless infinitely wide
of the sinister interpretations were put upon it. The Queen, having staid two
whole days at Cadillac, caused her self to be conveyed thence back to Bordeaux,
in order to the continuation of her Journey, where at the same time the
Cardinal also arrived: but his Disease was by this time so much increased, that
finding himself then in excessive pain, within a very few days they began to
despair of his life; and in truth without the assistance of a Surgeon of
Bordeaux, he had then infallibly died of a suppression of Urine. The Cardinal's
second complaint.
Whilst he lay in this extremity, the Queen resolved upon leaving Bordeaux, to
advance toward Paris, by taking Rochelle nevertheless in her way; a place she
would by all means take this opportunity to see, as an eternal Monument of the
Kings Victory. The Duke very well understanding what respect was due to his
Queen, and Mistress, whilst her Majesty staid in the City, had caused his
Guards to lay aside their Liveries, and Muskets; divesting himself moreover of
all other Marks, and Functions of a Governor in her presence: but so soon as
she was gone, and that he had had the honor to attend her to her Boat, he did
not conceive himself obliged to retain the same respect for the Cardinal. He
therefore immediately after the Queens departure commanded his Guards again to
put on their Cassocks, and to take their Arms; and very well attended,
presented himself at the Cardinals Lodgings, who continued yet very ill, though
something better than before. Upon this occasion, that was interpreted for a
premeditated Violence, which was only intended for a Civility, and Respect; and
those of the Cardinals Servants, who saw him come to the House so accompanied,
ran to alarm their ster, by telling him that the Duke of Espernon was coming to
attempt something upon his person. Whereupon followed a Hubub throughout the
whole Family, every one was aghast, and betook themselves confusedly to their
Arms. In the mean time the Duke enters the House, where not knowing what to
think of the general Disorder, and astonishment he observed in every face he
met, he went on to the Cardinal's Chamber door, followed by very few (having
forbidden his Guards to set so much as one foot upon the stairs) where after
having inquired of the Cardinals health, and having been answered, he was
exceeding ill, and in such a condition that he entreated to be excused, he
could not see him, he returned back in the same posture he came, there being
neither more nor less in this Affair.

This is indeed the naked truth of the Story: but it was not so represented to
the Cardinal; those who were about him on the contrary to insinuate into his
Favor, and to make him believe they had done him a notable piece of Service,
assuring him that without their extraordinary care, and the good posture they
had put themselves into to oppose the Duke, he had infallibly been lost. The
Cardinal's animosity against the Duke of Espernon, fomented by the Archbishop
of Bordeaux.
The Duke was afterward informed, and had it from very good hands, that the
Archbishop of Bordeaux was one of those who possessed the Cardinal with this
belief; so that the Duke, and he not having been (as you may have observed)
very good friends before, an Office like this could not but incense him anew,
and the more justly, by how much his Honor was therein so highly concerned. He
was impatient to think they should represent him for a man that would harbor
violent Designs against the person of a Cardinal, and a Priest; which certainly
was the thing that most contributed to the great Disputes, that happened betwixt
them the ensuing year; of which you will have a sudden account, and such a one
as will take up a great part of this last Volume.

The Duke who neither then, nor of some time after, knew any thing of the ill
impressions the Cardinal had been possessed withal, continued to use him at the
same rate he had begun; his Guards attended him wherever he moved; he never
went abroad but extraordinarily well accompanied, and many Gentlemen of the
Country, who had come in to him upon the Queens arrival, still continuing about
his person: The day that the Cardinal departed for Brouage, the Duke, thinking
thereby to pay him a greater Civility, and respect, followed by his Guards, and
Friends, conducted him to his Boat. By which new Complement he so revived his
former Apprehension, that some have since said, the Cardinal had a mind to make
the world believe, he had avoided a very eminent danger, by escaping out of the
Duke of Espernon's hands. The Duke could never persuade himself that the
Cardinal could have any such apprehension, he being a man of too great judgment
not to see, that had he had any design upon his person, nothing could have
hindered him from the execution of that design. He had been, without dispute,
the strongest in the Cardinal's Lodgings, when he took the first alarm, and
during the whole time of his stay at Bordeaux, the favor of the people being
nothing inclined to him, his Domestics alone had not been able to have made
any resistance against those of the Duke, especially fortified, as he was, by
such a number of his Friends of the Province. It is therefore evident, that the
Duke never had any intention to hurt him, forasmuch as he did not do it: but he
had nevertheless an opinion, (and that opinion was grounded upon great
probabilities) that the Cardina'ls ambitious spirit was offended to the last
degree, that he had not paid the same respect to his Person, he had done to
that of the Queen; and that, being he could not handsomely publish the true
cause of his discontent, he had palliated it with this pretense, to have the
more plausible color of revenging himself upon the Duke, as upon an enemy, who
had plotted against his life.

The Cardinal was no sooner got to Brouage, The Cardinal arrives at Brouage.
but that (whether it was the change of Air, or the joy to see himself in a
place of safety that produced this good effect) his health began visibly to
improve; when the Duke of Espernon, ignorant as yet of the ill impressions he
had been possessed withal, concerning his former Visits, dispatched a Gentleman
to him to enquire of his amendment. It was by the return of this Envoy, that he
was acquainted with all the former story, of which the Cardinal de la Valette
his Son, who had never departed from Cardinal Richelieu, during the whole time
of his sickness, gave him a full account. This suspicion so lightly grounded,
and so much contrary to his intention, did much more offend, than any way
incline the Duke to offer anything in^his own justification: And although he
very well foresaw that a jealousy of this nature, whether feigned, or true,
threatened him with some great, and sudden mischief; it was nevertheless so far
from rendering him more flexible, or more complacent, that he chose rather to
expose himself to the worst effects of the Cardinal's unresisted power, than to
recede in the least from his ordinary way of living.

This Journey of the Cardinal's to Bordeaux, Anno 1633.
and the morosity of his distemper there, was not fatal to the Duke alone; the
disgrace of the Guard des Sceaux, de Chast^au-Neuf, The disgrace of
Chasteau-Neuf Guard des Sceaux.
being (as has been said) resolved upon at the same time; the reasons of which
disgrace are to this day a secret, though the thing it self was soon enough
publicly known: for the Cardinal had no sooner seen the King, but that
Chasteau-Neuf had Orders sent him to retire to Ruffee in Angoumois, who being
upon his way in Obedience to that command, a second Order overtook him, by
which he was carried away Prisoner to the Castle of Angoulesme. The Duke of
Espernon, who stood highly obliged to this Gentleman's friendship, for several
acts of Favor in his Affairs, and who had moreover his Virtue, and Integrity
in very great esteem, was very much afflicted at his misfortune; yet did he
even from the accident it self derive such a consolation, as served very much
to sweeten his discontent. And that was the choice the King had made of
President Seguier, President Seguier made Guard des Sceaux.
on him to confer the Seal; one that was the Duke's intimate and very faithful
Friend, and of whom from his first Employments, he had made so advantageous a
judgment, that he conceived there was no advancement how high soever in his
Profession, to which he might not justly pretend, if his Virtues once came to
be sufficiently known. But if the Duke began the year, with so great an
occasion of joy, Fortune, who never suffers the Affairs of this world to
continue long in the same posture, did also not long defer to poison his
content, by one of the rudest Assaults he had met withal in the whole course of
his life; and since the Archbishop of Bordeaux was the Instrument by which she
wrought this disgrace, it will not be impertinent to give a brief account of
that which kindled their first Divisions, and the ensuing causes, that
occasioned this last Disorder.

This Prelate, Brother to the Cardinal de Sourdis, had immediately upon the
death of his elder Brother succeeded him in the Archbishopric of Bordeaux, but
not in the good intelligence had been betwixt the Duke of Espernon, The
difference betwixt the Duke of Espernon and the Archbishop of Bordeaux.
and him; not that the Duke had not this man's merit, which was very great, in
high consideration also, he had Wit, Courage, Dexterity, and many other good
qualities, which had formerly acquired his esteem: but the intimacy he had with
Cardinal Richelieu, rendered his friendship so suspected to him, that he could
not confide in a person, he saw engaged in so strict a League with another he
did not love. As for the Cardinal de Sourdis, who had no such connection, the
Duke had ever lived with him in so perfect an Intelligence, as has rarely been
observed, betwixt two persons of so eminent condition, to have been maintained
so inviolate, and sincere: Yet was it not without the admiration of all that
knew their Humors; they were both in the one, and the other haughty, and
fierce, there was much of fire and ambition, in both their natures; and little
would have served to have kindled a fewd betwixt them: but perhaps knowing one
another to be so Subject to Heat, they would not interfere, foreseeing that
whoever should begin, would doubtless in his adversary meet with a vigorous
Opposition. This Cardinal had formerly had great Disputes both with the
Parliament, and the Governors of the Province, which Disputes had begot him
much trouble; so that his more mature, and more temperate Age, having cooled
the violent Ardours of his more ungoverned, and inconsiderate Youth, he began
to relish the convenience of Peace, choosing rather to busy himself about the
well ordering of his Diocese (which he did equally with any Prelate of the
Church, about laying Foundations of Monasteries, Hospitals, and other Actions
of great Luster, and Example, than to spend his Spirits, and consume his time
in fruitless and unprofitable Quarrels. The Duke also on the other side, who
had his share of Contention with the Parliament, found himself sufficiently
perplexed with them, without drawing new inconveniences upon him* by forcing a
man of the Cardinal's condition to his Adversaries side; so that as to any
thing else, these two Lords observing a great Correspondency in their
Complements, Visits, and all other Punctilio's of mutual respect, this former
consideration served not a little to the continuance of this good Intelligence
betwixt them. In fine, whether it were their Interests, or the sole respect of
their common Virtue, that begot this friendship they had for one another, it
could hardly have been greater: but after the death of this Cardinal, his
Brother having (as has been said) been promoted to that See, the Duke did not
pay him the same Honor, he had done his elder Brother; who on the other side
impatient of that distinction, joined himself with the Parliament, at this time
high in contest with the Duke, and supporting the interests of that Assembly,
with the Credit he had with the Cardinal (which was very great) procured some
determinations in their favor, concerning the things so highly controverted
betwixt the Duke, and them. In acknowledgment of these Obligations, the
Parliament augmented in his Person the Honors that had usually been paid to
his Predecessors, and the Duke on the contrary cut off some of those he had
formerly paid even to him himself; an usage which the Archbishop publicly
resenting, obliged the Duke (who never engaged in a quarrel, but to push it
home) to be more obstinately bent, not to give him the least satisfaction in
any of his complaints: So that he still persisted, not only to use him, as he
had begun: but to this abatement of Ceremony, added moreover some disobliging
effects. All this had preceded the Accommodation made at Cardinal Richelieu's
being at Montauban; but this Reconciliation having satisfied neither the
interested persons, nor him who had interposed to reconcile them, they rather
remained in a disposition to do one another a Spite upon the first occasion
that should present it self, than to live in the good Intelligence could have
been wished for their common repose. Since that time the Duke had been
advertised, that it was principally the Archbishop of Bordeaux, who had
exasperated the Cardinal against him, and who had rendered his Visit at Bordeaux
(when he went to see him, attended by his Guards) suspected to him. A thing
that had offended him to the last degree, and he had publicly complained of
that proceeding (for his Passions were never concealed) which was also reported
to the Archbishop who was at this time obliged to come into his Diocese to make
some Residence there.

He departed therefore from Court, and took the way of Guienne. Some have
believed that it was by the express Order of Cardinal Richelieu, that he
undertook this Journey, who having upon the late distastes he had taken at the
Duke, summoned all his old animosities to his remembrance, had sent the
Archbishop of Bordeaux, whom he knew the Duke did not love to brave him, his
spirit being the better known to him, as he had made trial of it, upon other
occasions, and found it bold, and capable of the highest resolutions. I shall
not however take upon me here to interpose my judgment in any of these
Transactions; I shall only report things true, and as they were, without
disguise, hatred, or envy, any of which it would certainly very much mis-become
me to retain after the Duke's death, whose desire it was they might be buried
with him, that being one of the most express commands he gave his Family at the
last hour of his Life.

The Archbishop being upon his way toward Bordeaux, turned a little out of the
ordinary Road to go into a Territory belonging to his Bishopric, called
Monravel; where being arrived, he was informed, that one of the Duke's Guards
had been assisting in the execution of some Acts of Justice, wherein he was
himself immediately conce^n'd, and which would otherwise perhaps have met with
some opposition. He would therefore take this occasion to send a Gentleman to
the Duke, to return his thanks for so opportune a kindness: who having found
the Duke at Berdeaux, The Archbishop of Bordeaux sends to complement the Duke
of Espernon.
told him from the Archbishop his Master, That he took the assistance one of
his Guards had given some of his people to the support of his interests, and in
the time of his absence for a singular favor, and obligation; and that he had
therefore commanded him to come kiss his hands, and to return him his hearty
thanks. Some have drawn a consequence from this way of proceeding, that the
Archbishop did not come with any design to offend the Duke, it being unlikely,
that had he had any such intention, he would have sent to him to have sought
his friendship, by the acknowledgment of an obligation received. others (and
perhaps too critically) have believed, that it was only artifice to make the
Duke appear more in fault, and that the Archbishop, knowing the Duke's humor
had made no difficulty in making this dissembled Application, to the end, that
it being rejected, as he expected it should be, the Duke might be more
universally condemned, even when being provoked, he should break out into just
and necessary resentments.

Whatever the design of this Complement might be, it was very ill received, and
so ill, that if the Archbishop had therein any clandestine end, to extract from
it some new cause of offense, he could hardly better have succeeded. The Duke
made answer to the Gentleman who came from the Archbishop, That thanks were
neither necessary, nor due to a person, who had no design to oblige: That if
any thing by his orders had been performed to his Masters advantage, it had
been done upon no other account than the mere consideration of Justice, without
any respect to his Friendship: and so dismissed him. The Duke observing all his
people surpised at so slight, and so crude an answer, to satisfy them in some
measure, told them, That they ought not to wonder if he had made a rude return
to the Archbishop's Complement: That it was without doubt no other than a
feigned Civility in Monsieur de Bordeaux, who he very well knew did not love
him, to seek an advantage against him: That he would be glad under a color of
seeming Courtesy, to lay a weakness at his door, and to make the world
believe, that he had first sought his Friendship: That had the Bishop sent to
him by the way of a simple How do you only, he should have received his Visit
with the respect due to a man of his condition; but having added terms of
thanks, which presupposed a favor received, he would not the world should
believe, that he had made the first application to a man he did not take to be
his Friend.

The Archbishop might very well judge by this first repulse, that he should
have a very hard game to play with the Duke of Espernon, which made him hover
very near a month about Bordeaux, before he could resolve to enter the City. It
is most certain, that in the mean time he sent to Court to acquaint the
Cardinal with what had passed betwixt the Duke and him, and to receive
Instructions from him, how he was to behave himself, if matters should grow to
a greater height betwixt them. To which the Cardinals answer was (as it was a
few days after Published) that he assured him of a powerful Protection, and
such a one as he had promised him before his departure; whereupon the
Archbishop made no difficulty to engage in the Affair, to such a height, as
even to be himself the Aggressor, as at the first dash, by giving the Duke very
sensible, and very public Affronts, he manifestly appeared to be.

The first was, when upon his arrival at the City, he did not find the Jurats
(that is the Magistrates) upon the River, ready to receive him at his Landing;
which he pretended to be a Ceremony due to his Place, and Dignity, as having
formerly been paid him: but the Jurats, who declared to have sometimes done it
only upon Courtesy, and without any intention to draw it into Example, would
by no means consent, that what had been performed merely in the nature of a
Civility, should become a Right. This therefore he would interpret for a
heinous offense, not only from the Jurats, but also from the Duke, who he
believed (with some reason) to have been the cause, that Honor had been denied
him. So that without longer dissembling his Discontent, the Jurats having
deputed two of their Corporation to Harangue him so soon as he should be
alighted at his own Palace, he answered them in these very words.

Gentlemen, I have reason at my arrival to be satisfied with the people of
Bordeaux, who have behaved themselves civilly toward me; and I look upon it as
a continuation of the good affection, they have formerly had for the late
Cardinal de Sourdis my Brother: but I have reason to be dissatisfied with the
Magistrates of your City, and cannot but believe, that if those, who put the
words you have delivered me into your mouths, had given you leave to pay me the
respect you ought to have done, you would have done it after the accustomed
manner, and in the usual place: but by having made your selves slaves to your
Offices, and by having forfeited your Liberties in so doing, you have committed
this neglect. I must needs think this proceeding would have been against the
sense of the People, might they have been allowed the freedom of their Voices,
and consequently can take nothing ill from them: and as to your particular, I
shall also pardon you; forasmuch as I know what you have done, was by the
Instigation of others, and not upon your own account.

The Duke of Espernon was too evidently glanced at in this Discourse, to be
insensible of the Injury was done him, and consequently sought nothing more
than an occasion wherein to manifest his Resentment. It was nevertheless
contrary to the advice of all the Friends and Servants he had about him, that
he took up that Resolution; there being none of them who did not very well
foresee, that having to do with a man of the Archbishops condition, and upheld
as he was, by the most powerful Protection of the Kingdom, he must of necessity
put his Affairs into very great disorder.

I would omit nothing of what passed upon this occasion, this being the first
occurrence whereby the Duke's Fortune was really wounded; the others that had
passed before had only rippled up the skin, and hitherto he had bravely
overcome all the difficulties had been opposed against him. Since therefore the
Scene is now to be changed, and that a new prospect of his Affairs will be
presented to your view, it should not methinks be impertinent to repeat every
Circumstance, that contributed to this Alteration: but on the other side I
must, in being so particular, descend to such little things, as I fear will
importune my Reader. I shall however do the best I can to avoid that
inconvenience, by touching at every thing; but with so much brevity, as shall
be no durable penance, even to those who are least delighted with such recitals.

The Duke, nettled to the quick with the Archbishops Speech to the Jurats,
began rather by trifling Peccadillo's, than by downright Injury to manifest his
resentment: for it must needs be confessed, that never man was more ingenious
than he, to offend such as he did not love; so that he set all Engines on work,
little Affronts, as well as high Abuses, and spared nothing that might any way
contribute to his Revenge. Having therefore found the Archbishop so sensible of
this first Assault, he persisted to wound him deeper by new and more legible
Offenses. He had in propriety, as Lord of the Manor of Puipaulin, the Royalty
of the Clie of Bordeaux (which is the Fish-Market there) so as that he might
lawfully forbid the entrance thereinto to any, he had no mind to admit: He
therefore commanded the Archbishops Officers one Fish-day to be excluded, to
the end they might be necessitated to take their Fish without the Bar, with the
rest of the people. These men refused to receive it after that manner, and
otherwise they could not have it; neither was the Duke content with doing this
alone; but, knowing it would be brought in from other places, caused his Guards
moreover to watch all the avenues to hinder it; by whom some were turned back,
who would have done the Archbishop that Service, and in the end some of his own
Domestics very roughtly handled.

Upon this occasion it was, that the clandestine Animosities, they had hitherto
in some measure smothered in their Bosoms, flamed out to an open Feud betwixt
them; and from this beginning all the Disorders we shall hereafter see ensue,
took their rise and being. The Archbishop by Public Declarations complained of
the Violence had been offered to him by a sort of men set on purposely to do
it, describing them by the name of the Russet Cassocks, which was the Duke's
Livery; demanding of the Magistrate protection, and assistance to oppose them,
and protesting to Retire with his Clergy, if they would not provide for his
Safety. Whilst the Archbishop was thus busy to vindicate himself by Forms of
Law, the Duke, conceiving it very unbecoming the Authority he had in the
Province, to proceed by the same ways, would try to do his business by other
means: He therefore commanded the Lieutenant of his Guards, the next day after
the Archbishop had exhibited this injurious Bill, against his Guards, to go
with all his Soldiers to present himself before him, and to ask of him, If
amongst all those he knew any one man who was likely to commit an unhandsome
action? The Lieutenant did as he was commanded, and waited near to the
Archbishop Palace his return from the City; when seeing him come in his Coach,
he presented himself to speak to him: It was about Dinner time, when the
Archbishop seeing so many Soldiers attending the Lieutenant, and not imagining
they could come after that manner for any civil end, he commanded his Coachman
to drive on. The Lieutenant was still earnest with him, and (with his Hat
nevertheless in his hand) beseeches the Archbishop he would be pleased to hear
him; assuring him withal he had nothing to say, that could any way offend him:
but all was in vain, the Coachman was still called to to drive on; when the
Lieutenant fearing to lose the opportunity of executing what he had in charge
(and having on the other side not much studied the Siquis suadente Diabolo, etc.
Canon, wherein so many persons by this Contest have since been made perfect)
called in the end to one of his Companions to lay hold of the Reins, and to
stop the Horses: which being accordingly done, the Archbishop came immediately
out of his Coach, crying out there was violence offered to his person, and so
retired himself into his house.

The Duke, informed by the Lieutenant of his Guards how all things had passed,
perceived by the manner of it, that the Archbishop had been put into a terrible
fright; which was the only thing he had intended, and so turned the whole
business into Mirth, and Laughter. But the Archbishop did not so; but having on
the contrary the afternoon of that very same day, being the 29th. of October,
summoned in all the Orders, and Societies of Ecclesiastics in the City, he
there exposed before them the open Violence he pretended had been offered to
him, rendering the action as foul as he could possibly make it, and omitting
nothing he thought would conduce to the interessing the whole Body of the
Clergy in his Quarrel. Wherein he succeeded so well, that at the very instant
most of the Assistants, fired by his Eloquence, concluded upon an
Excommunication; some notwithstanding there were, more moderate than the rest,
who a little allaying the fury of this first Sentence, persuaded them in the
end to resolve upon a Deputation to the Duke, to complain to him of the ill
usage their Prelate had received since his arrival, and therein chiefly of the
in^olence committed by the Lieutenant of his Guards, and to demand his Justice.

This Complaint was preferred to the Duke the 30th. of October, at which he was
a little surpised; and now better considering what this Affair, by the
interest all the Ecclesiastics would take in it, might produce; would, it was
conceived, have been glad that things might have continued in the same posture
they then were, without running on into greater extremes; neither would he upon
the sudden return any precise Ans^er. He therefore told the Canon, who had
been deputed to him in the behalf of the whole Clergy: That the Speech he had
made to him consisted of several Heads of great importance: That he was old,
and his memory so ill, that it would be hard for him to remember all he had
said: That he therefore desired he might have it in writing, and that then he
would consider of it, and return his Answer in writing also. The Duke thought
that during this respit he desired, the Archbishop would suspend the
Publication of his Censures, and that in the mean time, what had passed might
by the mediation of Friends, in some amicable Treaty be hushed, and taken up:
but he did not in his Adversary meet with a spirit so flexible to an
Accommodation, who on the contrary was so obstinately deaf to all overtures of
Agreement, that upon All Saints day he thundered out his Excommunication against
the Lieutenant of the Guards, and all those who accompanied him, at the The
Prosnes are the Publilications of the Feasts, and Fasts of the Church, Banes of
M^tr^mony, Excommunications, etc.
Prosnes of all the Parish Churches of the City. Neither did he therein spare
the person of the Duke himself, of whom in his Act he spoke in these terms: And
although the Authors of this attempt be comprised in the same censures;
nevertheless, The Archb^shop pronounces a Sentence of Excommun^cation against
the Lieuten^nt of the Duke of Espernon's G^ard, and tac^tly against the Duke
himself.
considering ^ow many persons are obliged to frequent them for the Service of
the King, and the good of the Province, we would not; neither will we make the
same Declaration, and Denuntiation against them: but reposing our trust in the
mercy of Almighty God, who strikes the most obdurate hearts, and thence draws
tears of saving Repentance, we have appointed, and ordained, and do hereby
appoint, and ordain, Prayers of forty hours upon Sunday the 6th. of November in
the Church of St. Michael of this City, to implore the assistance of the Divine
Goodness for the Conversion of Sinners, etc. Given at Bordeaux this Monday the
last of October 1633. Here you have the first Action that passed betwixt these
two great persons, which could not possibly have been pushed on by either side
with greater heat, or violence, there being not a day, nay hardly a minute lost
betwixt them; but all things hurried on with that vehemence, and precipitation,
that whoever had observed the impetuosity wherewith these two Enemies ran
against one another, might very well have foreseen, that the shock at their
meeting, must of necessity bear one of them to the ground.

This business made a mighty noise at Court, whither the Archbishop had writ in
great diligence, and where the Cardinal interested himself in his cause, as it
had been his own Affair: but, although he was from that time forward resolved
to push things to the last extreme, and from this Quarrel to derive an occasion
wherein to revenge himself of the Duke, for all his former discontents; he had
nevertheless the Duke, and the Cardinal de la Valette, the Duke of Espernon's
Sons in so high consideration, that he surrendered all his Animosity to the
respect he had to them. He would therefore take a moderate course to compose
this Disorder by an Accommodation; Cardinal Richeli^u endeavour^ an Accommod^t
on betwixt them,
the agitation whereof was committed to Villemontee, one of the Council of
State, and Intendant de la Justice in Poictou, Xaintonge, and Angoumois, a man
of great esteem with the Cardinal, and the whole Council. This Gentleman
therefore departed with this Commission, to transfer himself in all haste to
Bordeaux; but notwithstanding all the diligence he could use, the Animo^ity
betwixt these two haughty Spirits was so great, as had, before he could arrive
there, B^t in vain.
shuffled matters into so strange a confusion, that it was utterly impossible
to find out any way to compose them.

The Duke of Espernon exasperated to the last degree, that the little respit he
had so modestly desired, should be denied him, and to find that the Archbishop
would not a little bend by his example; from that time forward excluded all
thoughts of Reconciliation, and for the future only meditated how no settle his
Conscience in repose, by paying the respect, and submission that was due to the
Church. To this end therefore he called an Assembly of several Learned Divines
in his own House, to consult about the Excommunication had been pronounced
against the Lieutenant of his Guards, and implicitly against himself. In this
Debate there were very few who did not conclude it altogether groundless; of
particular Opinions therefore they drew up a Public Act, which being
subscribed by all the Doctors, to the number of more than thirty, was published
throughout the City, to the end, they said, that all Scandal and Scruple might
be taken away, which the Archbishops Excommunication might have raised, and
begot in the minds of the people.

But that which was designed for so good an end, produced, as we shall see, a
very different effect. Amongst the Doctors, the Duke had Assembled, there were
several Religious, and other Ecclesiastics, who were under the Archbishops
Jurisdiction; this Prelate therefore being strangely incensed, to be abandoned
by his own Party, in a Cause wherein the Church was so highly concerned, and
impatient to have the Lie given him, by those very men, by whose advice (or the
greatest part of them at least) he had Published his Censures, would once more
call them together; his design therein being either to make them retract from
what they had subscribed to in the Duke's favor, or to punish them for having
submitted themselves to a Secular Power. He therefore cited them to appear
before him, by the publication of an Ordinance, bearing date the 10th. day of
November 1633.

The Doctors, surpised at this citation, were very much afraid of their
Metropolitan's Indignation, and some severe Chastisement, that would be
inflicted on them. This apprehension made them fly to the Duke's Protection,
who, to secure them, the same day issued out another Ordinance, wherein he
prohibited all sorts of persons, of what quality, condition, or profession
soever, to meet in an extraordinary Assembly, either in the Archbishops Palace,
or elsewhere, without his especial License; excepting nevertheless the
Religious, and Ecclesiastics immediately belonging to the Archbishop's
Congregation, and whose Councils he customarily made use of, for the better
ordering the Discipline of his Diocese. The Doctors, not yet believing
themselves sufficiently secured by this Edict, entreated the Duke that he would
moreover place the Archers of the Watch of the City upon all the Avenues, and
Gates of the Archbishops Palace, to hinder such as would pretend to obey the
Bishops Summons. A request the Duke as readily granted, conceiving himself so
far obliged in honor to protect them, that whatsoever could be represented to
him, to hinder that determination, the consequences whereof, were in all
probability like to be exceedingly untoward, it was notwithstanding, impossible
to divert him.

The Archbishop had no sooner notice, that the Captain of the Watch, with his
Archers, had planted himself at his Gates; but that immediately putting on his
Pontifical Robes, and causing himself to be followed by some Ecclesiastics,
together with what people he had about him, he went on foot out of the House,
crying out in the Streets as he passed along, To me my people, there is no more
Liberty for the Church. In this posture he went to several Religious Houses of
the City, gathering after him a great number of people (who ran from all parts
to the Novelty) as he went along, and in the end returned back toward his own
Palace, without effecting any thing more, or being able to raise any Commotion
in the City.

Whilst all these things were in doing, the Duke was at the Capuchins, in one
of the remotest parts of the City, where having news brought him by two
Presidents of the Parliament of what had passed, and of the danger there was,
lest the Archbishop should stir up any Mutiny to the prejudice of the common
Safety; he was at last by them entreated to interpose his Authority, and
Wisdom, for the conservation of the Public Peace. In the heat therefore this
sudden intelligence had put him into, the Duke speedily mounted his Coach,
commanding they should drive that way he heard the Archbishop was gone. He had
in company with him the Count de Maille, and the Commendator de la Justice,
both of them men of very eminent Virtue, and in whom he had a particular
confidence: but in this sudden passion their Counsels could by no means
prevail. The Duke made his Coachman still drive on, and through all, till he
came near the Archbishops Palace, whither he heard he was upon his return, and
where he overtook him. The Bishop thus overtaken, still continued on his pace,
when the Duke having staid him by the Arm, and demanded of him by what
Authority he stirred up this Commotion in his Government, he was by the
Archbishop interrupted, who cried out aloud, Strike Tyrant, thy blows will be
to me Flowers, and Roses, thou art Excommunicated. In the heat of this bustle,
the Duke catching him by the hand, lifted it up twice, or thrice, and set it
against his Breast: but in the end, the Archbishop still provoking him with
injurious Language, and with his Hat on, the Duke with a Cane he had in his
hand, touched the Brim of his Hat, and thrust it off his head to the ground,
telling him at the same time, he did not know the respect he ought him; but if
the Reverence to his Profession did not restrain him, he would make him know
it. Something worse might perhaps have passed, had not the Count de Maille, and
the Commendator de la Justice interposed, who stepping in betwixt them, put an
end to this untoward bustle, very much unbecoming both the one, and the other.

After this action had thus passed, the Duke returned to his own House, and
although he very well knew no good issue could attend it, manifested
notwithstanding no show of apprehension, or repentance, discoursing of it with
his Friends (who were more in suspense than he himself appeared to be, of what
would be the event) as of a thing of an indifferent nature, and a just
resentment of an Affair wherein his Honor was concerned. The Archbishop was no
sooner disengaged from the Duke, but that he fortwith repaired to his Church,
where he pronounced his Sentence of Excommunication, The Sentence of
Excommunication pronounced against the Duke of Espernon.
both against him, and all those who had been in company with him, prohibiting
Divine Service in all the Churches of the City, and also in that of Cadillac,
by a public Act, I shall forbear to Copy in this place, that I may not
importune my Reader.

This first Spiritual Thunderbolt having been darted by the Archbishop, he had
moreover recourse to the Temporal Authority, very well foreseeing, that if that
did not justify the Blow he had already levelled at the Duke, it would be no
very hard matter for him to evade it, and to frustrate any mortal effect by
very pertinent, and powerful Reasons. He sent away a dispatch therefore to
Court, wherein he gave Cardinal Richelieu an account of the Violence had been
offered to him; at which the Cardinal was so highly incensed that nothing now
had power to appease him. He therefore talked no more of attempting an
Accommodation, Villemontee's Commission (who had been sent away upon their
first difference to that purpose) was at an end, even before he could arrive at
the place; so that nothing now was thought of, save how by the Kings Authority
to enquire into the Riots contained in the Archbishops Complaint: and his
Majesty as Protector, and eldest Son of the Church, was counseled by the
Cardinal (particularly concerned in the Affair, by the interest of his
profession, which he would render inviolable) to make a signal example of his
Piety and Justice, in the Person of the Duke of Espernon.

It is believed, that if the Duke had taken the same course, the Archbishop
did, and had sent to Court in time to give his Reasons for what he had done, he
had infinitely discredited his Adversaries Cause; but it was for some days
impossible to prevail with him to do it. He still carried on the business with
the same indifferency, saying to such as urged him to that course (with a
generosity something out of season at this time) That he was not to give an
account of his Actions to any, but the King himself, which he was ready to do
whenever his Majesty should please to call him to it: That he very willingly
gave the start to such, as were diffident either of themselves, or their Cause;
and that he had done nothing, but what he ought to do, for the maintenance of
the King's Authority entrusted with him. So that carrying himself at the same
careless rate, it is not to be imagined how much he fortified his Enemies side
by his own negligence, nor how many advantages he gave him, which he would
otherwise perhaps never have obtained, had not he himself contributed to them.

In the end notwithstanding for fashions sake, he dispatched away one of the
Soldiers of his Guards to Court, but it was not of four days after the bustle;
and then he did it after such a manner, as made it appear it was rather out of
complacency to his Friends, who were importunate with him to that effect, than
out of any respect to his own Interests. His Sons, who before this Courriers
arrival knew not what to oppose to the Archbishops Complaints, The Court (...)
with the Archbishop.
had now something to say in their Fathers behalf: but it was impossible for
them to alter the Resolutions already taken, or to suspend the blow the King
(who had his hand already up) was ready to discharge upon him.

Whilst Affairs were debated with this heat at Court, they were carried on with
no less violence at Bordeaux. And the Parl^ament o^ Bordeaux also, who draw
(...) In^orma^^^n against him*
The Parliament there had taken cognizance of the Quarrel, and though the Duke
had several very good Friends in that Assembly, yet the number of those who
were not so prevailing, and the news that came every day from Court, to the
Duke's disadvantage, having given men's minds very ill impressions of the
success of his Affairs; the Company could not be dissuaded from sending a
Deputation to the Archbishop, to let him know how highly they interested
themselves in his Offense, and to make him a tender of all the good Offices,
they were capable to do him upon this occasion. After which, from Offers, going
on to Effects, they began to fall to fall to work, about drawing up an
Information against the Duke, and notwithstanding he made several Protestations
to appeal from the Parliament, as a Court prohibited in all his Causes, nothing
could stop the Torrent of their proceeding; but they would perfect what they
had begun, as they did, and so exactly for the Court Palate, that they would
hear talk of no other Information.

Villemontee, who had heard nothing before his departure of this last business,
was gone, according to his Orders to Accommodate the first, and was by this
time arrived at Bordeaux. The Duke of Espernon knew him not, on the contrary he
had been rendered suspected to him, by having been represented for a great
Creature of the Cardinals, and that was consequently like to be very partial to
the Archbishops side; but the Duke, having at their first Conference, found him
much more swayed by his Duty, than all other Respects, he made no difficulty to
repose his entire Confidence in this man's Virtue, and to give him a full
account of the whole action, to the end that he might draw up his answer in due
Form of Law, The Duke Signs his Answer, wherein he gives a true Relation of ^he
whole business.
The Duke was so generous, as herein to cause every thing that had passed to be
laid open at length, and without disguise; to which he would moreover add his
Seal to confirm it; and although it was often represented to him, by very
unde^standing men, that so ingenious a Confession was not necessary, in an
occasion wherein he saw his Adversaries prosecute with so much heat, and that
in this case, his single Confession would more prejudice his Cause, than the
Depositions of all the Witnesses could be produced against him; yet those
Remonstrances were not of force to dissuade him, he sma^tly replying: That he
had not done an action to disavow it, and that whatever the issue might be, it
would be much more supportable to him, than the shame of being reduced to the
necessity of disowning any Act of his life. It was in truth upon this single
confession of the Duke's, after the Parliaments Information had been
sufficiently canvas'd, that the Cardinal pronounced the Excommunication to be
valid, and right; and that the King was obliged both in Equity, and Honor, to
repair the Injury committed by one of his Officers of that condition, against
the Person, and Dignity of a Prelate, and the whole Church.

The first reparation was a command the Duke received in a Dispatch from the
King, to depart out of his Government, and to retire to his House of Plassac,
which was in these words. Cousin,
Having seen a Declaration of several Riots, whereof the Archbishop, and the
Clergy of Bordeaux highly complain to Us; We have thereupon thought fit to send
you this Letter, The Duke receives a Command from the King to depart out of his
Government.
which will be delivered you by the Sieur de Varennes, one of our Gentlemen in
ordinary, to tell you, We desire that immediately upon sight hereof you retire
to your House of Plassac, and there remain till our further Pleasure. We do
also send to the Archbishop, to signify to him, that it is our desire he come
to us, to the end we may be fully informed of the truth of what has passed;
purposing in the mean time to send one of our Council, to our said City of
Bordeaux, to enquire into, and to bring Us thence a perfect Account of the
business. The rest we refer to the said Sieur de Varennes to communicate to
you, whom you are in all things to believe; praying God Cousin, etc.

At St. Germain en Lay this 18th. of November 1633. Signed Lovis, And below
Philipeaux.




The Duke of Espernon's Friends at Court, being informed of the severe contents
of this Dispatch, were not a little in doubt after what manner he would receive
it. They feared his great Spirit, full of those generous Maxims, which had for
so many years, and in so many froward occurrences supported his Reputation, and
Fortune, would with great difficulty submit to Laws, so different from what
they had been in former times. Amongst these the Cardinal de la Valette (a man
as well read in the Court, as any whatever of his time) upon this occasion laid
aside the complacency of a Son, to assume the austerity of a faithful Adviser,
and writ to him to this effect, That he did beseech him to look upon this
Affair, as one of the greatest Difficulty and Importance he had met withal in
the whole course of his life: That to avoid any inconveniences might befall him,
he must immediately submit to the King's Pleasure, and Command, and refer the
business wholly, and without reservation to the Cardinal, which was the only
way to put a good end to this Dispute. Monsieur de Seguier Guard des Sceaux,
the Duke's intimate friend, and a man that appeared more for his Interest, than
the condition of the time seemed conveniently to permit, did the same, writing
him word, That a prompt and absolute Obedience was the only way whereby a
cause, his Enemies Favor rendered generally disapproved, might be brought to a
successful issue; but that without that, it was utterly impossible for his
Friends, and Servants, to do him those Offices were necessary for the bringing
of matters to any tolerable conclusion. All the Duke's other Friends having
confirmed the same thing, he evidently saw, that he must of necessity obey; yet
was it not withour an incredible violence upon his own Humor, and great
Spirit. He had at other times resisted the greatest powers of the State, when
armed against him with the King's Authority, and Forces, whereas now he saw
himself reduced to submit to four lines of Paper; they made him indeed to
depart out of his Government: And though it be true, that in these latter
Times, the Royal Authority was raised to a more illustrious height, than
formerly it had ever been; yet I do not know that any one has observed a
greater example of his Power, than upon this occasion. All France acknowledged
the Duke, for the eminent qualities he was master of, to be a man of the
greatest Reputation of his Age; he was possessed of the greatest, and most
important Governments of the Kingdom, powerful in Riches, Commands, Places,
Servants, and much more in his Children. His three Sons had all of them great
Offices, and great Employments, and yet with all these advantages he was not
able to resist four words; and then it was, that he plainly saw a Subject had
no way to support himself in his Fortune, and Reputation, but by Obedience; and
that the Power of a King, managed as it ought to be, can meet no difficulties,
nor impediments, it cannot easily master, and overcome. He had seen a time,
when by making a show of Resolution, or Discontent, men had sometimes obtained
part of what they desired, or at least defended themselves from what they had
not a mind to do. Under the Reign of Henry the III, the diversity of Factions,
which then divided the State, had so weakened the Authority of the Sovereign,
that he durst scarce pretend to more than a voluntary Submission from his
People: And Henry the Great his Successor, by an excess of Bounty and good
Nature, had continued to do, what the other had been constrained to by
inevitable Necessity. This Mighty Prince was of so noble a Disposition, that he
would destroy none; so that, excepting the Marshall de Biron, who would have
no compassion of himself, almost all the great men of the Kingdom, were either
actually Rebels, or highly Disobedient, without ever feeling either the Sword,
or so much as the Hand of Justice. The Regency of Queen Mary de Medici, was
equally moderate, and gentle, and the Tempests that arose in her time, being
appeased with money, men did not only offend securely, but made moreover a
profit of their Crimes. The Mareschald' Encre tried to change those milder into
rougher Maxims; but he lost himself in the practice of this premature severity.
In the Ministry of the Duke de Luines, there was no more of violence, than in
the preceding Reigns: the good success notwithstanding the Royal Arms, always
had in all Enterprises, during the time of his favor, made it plain, that
there was nothing his Majesty could not with great facility effect in his own
Kingdom. He had with great ease suppressed the Queen Mothers Insurrection; he had
invaded the Party of the Religion with very great success, wherein having found
their weakness by their disunion amongst themselves, he was by that discovery
encouraged to undertake their total ruin; and the Cardinal entering into the
Ministry in so favorable a juncture of Affairs, pressed the declining Faction
so home, that in a very short time he removed all Obstacles, which could any
ways oppose the Royal Authority, or impede the establishment of his own. The
Party of the Religion was totally suppressed, the House of Austria infinitely
weakened; all the other Princes who were ill affected to the Crown, reduced to
a necessity of complying with whatsoever was imposed upon them; and those of
the Nobility who were so bold, as to oppose the King's will, had been so
roughly handled, that not a man durst any more expose himself to the punishment
they all knew would inevitably follow the least forfeiture of their Duty. It
had been but of very late years, that this new form of Government had been
introduced into the Kingdom, and the Duke was grown old in the practice of
other Maxims: It is not then to be doubted, but that it must needs be with
great repugnancy, and unwillingness, that he could Accommodate himself to a
thing so unusual and severe; he did notwithstanding do it, and without delaying
time, or spending any more than was requisite for the making of some few
Visits, and taking leave of his Friends, he departed out of his Government,
suspended from his Functions, Excommunicated from the Church, and reduced to
the conversation of his own Domestics only. Though in a condition so different
from what it had formerly been, and so contrary to his ordinary way of living,
he could not but be very much afflicted, he nevertheless so well concealed his
grief, that he was not observed to be either more melancholy, or dejected, than
at other times; and he had so great a command over his own passions, as not to
utter so much as one word unbecoming either his courage, or his piety, ever
retaining in all things the devout Reverence due to the Holy Church.

So often as any one writ him word from Paris, that his Friends could have wished
he had retained a greater moderation, and respect toward the person of a
Prelate, he would still maintain, That in repelling an injury done to the Royal
Power, he had done no more than it was his Duty to do: That the King himself
might prostitute his Authority as he pleased; but that as for him who was
obliged in his Majesty's Right to maintain all the Privileges of his Command;
he neither could, nor ought to have done otherwise, than he did, and that he
would ever do it, though he was thereby certain to forfeit, not only his
Offices, and his Estate, but also his Life.

So soon as the Duke was arriv'^ at Plassac,, The Du^e comes to Plassac, where
he observes his Excommunication.
he began to observe his Excommunication, though he wanted not the advice of
several very Learned Divines, who maintained it to be invalid, and unjust;
wherein his submission appeared to all so much the more to be commended, in
that he was willing to undergo the punishment of an Offense, he was not
convinced he had committed. Thus banished to a Country House, where his only
consolation should have been to have conversed with his God, even there also
the doors of his Church were bolted against him; so that he assisted no more at
Masses as he had formerly ever done; And submits to the Church.
he moreover deprived himself of the participation of all the Sacraments: but
he omitted nothing withal that might any ways serve to manifest his respect to
the Holy Church, and her Ministers. He made all the Protestations that could be
prevailing to the vindication of the integrity of his Obedience, and to that
purpose sent away an express dispatch to Cardinal Bichi, the Pope's Nuntio in
France; he sent also to Poictiers, where he knew the Archbishop of Bordeaux had
called together an Assembly of Prelates, to make the same Declarations; but it
was all in vain: and it was decreed he should undergo all, and all the severest
Forms of Penance, before he should receive his Absolution.

But as the Spiritual Authority was not armed against him alone, and that it
was not that (though he had it in the highest reverence) he had the greatest
reason to apprehend; it was also necessary for him to employ his principal
care, and endeavor, to divert the Fury of the Royal Power, which was already
displayed against him. The Duke sends a D^spatch to the King.
To that effect therefore he dispatched away the Count de Maille to the King,
with instructions especially to solicit, that the Commissioners his Majesty
had made him hope for in his Dispatch, might be sent away, that by the return
of their Report, his Majesty might be fully informed of the truth of his
Actions: but after the Information of the Parliament of Bordeaux, which was
altogether favorable to the Archbishop, the Court had no ear left open, either
to his Prayers, or Complaints; and the Cardinal having solemnly espoused the
Quarrel, and made it his own, was so far from permitting the Duke's Friends to
dispute his Will with their best Arguments, and Reasons, that he would not so
much as endure any one should dare to propose them.

How great soever the Cardinal's passion was herein, or how great soever his
Credit with the King, they were not however such as could hinder the Duke, and
the Cardinal de la Valette from paying (with equal Generosity, and good Nature)
the respect which by all sorts of Obligation, they so justly owed to the Duke
their Father. The first of which had no sooner notice of the Dispute his Father
had with the Archbishop, but that he departed from Metz, to come first to
Court, there to observe the disposition of things, and from thence to go to
Plassac, either to comfort the Duke his Father in his Affliction; or to give
him his best advice in his Affairs. As for the Cardinal his Brother, what
dependence soever he had at Court, he very often exposed all that Interest, to
perform his Duty, and so far as to engage sometimes in so hot Disputes with the
Cardinal Richelieu, that it was often believed, they would never again be so
fully reconciled, that there would not still remain a Core in the bosom of the
one or the other.

So soon as the Archbishop had got his Information perfected, The Archbishop of
Bordeaux goes to Paris.
and so well to his liking, that he conceived his proofs could admit of no
Dispute, he departed from Bordeaux to go to Paris. Plassac the place to which
the Duke was retired, was in truth in his way, but not so, that he might not
without any inconvenience have balk'd it; and all the world believed he would
have been so civil to the Dukes Disgrace as to have done it: he did not
nevertheless, but on the contrary, passed along by the Park Wall after so
braving a manner, that he made the noise of his Equipage rattle against the
very Walls of the Duke's House. And then indeed it was, that the Duke felt
himself most sensibly wounded, and that this Bravado had like to have
transported him to something that might have made the Archbishop's Cause better
than it was, by offering to him some signal Violence. I was my self a witness
how much ado he had to forbear; but his Friends and Servants representing to
him the importance of the Action he was about, he in the end gave way to their
Reason, though I do believe with the greatest violence he committed upon
himself, and his great Spirit, throughout the whole progress of this
troublesome Affair.

The Archbishop was no sooner arrived at Court, Anno 1634.
but that all the Prelates, who were then in Paris, assembled after an unusual
manner, to deliberate amongst themselves what was best to be done in the bebalf
of their Brother; which Convocation the Duke of Espernon had no sooner notice
of; but continuing to do, as he had formerly done, he sent to them his
Protestations of an absolute submission to the Holy Church. The Duke de la
Valette therefore, who was returned back to Court, demanded Audience in the
Assembly, in the name of the Duke his Father; which being granted, he there
laid down his Reasons before them, with so much efficacy, and elocution, that
of five and twenty Prelates who were there present, thirteen were of opinion to
take upon them the quality of Judges, under the good pleasure of the Pope, and
the King, the Duke having absolutely submitted himself to their Determination:
but this resolution was not for the gust of the Court; by this way the business
would have been too soon decided, and it was resolved the Duke should pay much
dearer for his re-establishment in his Offices and Commands. The next day
therefore what had been agreed upon the day before, was totally overthrown, and
Messieurs the Prelates would by no means accept the high degree of Judges, the
Duke had so submissively offered, but would humble themselves to the qualities
of simple Parties only. They assembled then again at the Archbishop of Bordeaux
his Palace, and from thence sent a Deputation to the King, wherein the
Archbishop of Arles was to speak for the rest. All that (they say) was
observable in the Bishop's Oration, was only an excessive vehemence; in the
heat whereof he made use of all the odious terms he could invent, to allure his
Majesty's Indignation, and to possess him with the highest sense of the Duke's
Misdemeanour. Upon which occasion it was that Caspian Bishop of Nantes, one of
the greatest, and most virtuous Prelates of his time, cried out, That if it
were possible for the Devil to submit himself to God Almighty, to such a degree
as the Duke did, he would infallibly obtain pardon for all his Offenses; and
that notwithstanding the Church denied this Pardon to a Christian, who had ever
served God and his Church. But neither this true Remonstrance, nor any other
whatsoever that could be offered in the Duke's behalf, could produce any good
effect to the composing of this Affair.

He had very good intelligence of all the Severity was practiced to his
prejudice; for although the greatest Powers were declared against him, he had
notwithstanding friends in the Assembly, that were swayed by no other
consideration, save only the pure interest of Piety and Justice. Of this number
were the Archbishops of Sens, and of Tholouze, the Bishop of Nantes; before
mentioned, that of Man's, of Beauvais, and some others. These Prelates
acknowledged by the whole Kingdom for men of great Merit, and Example, no
sooner had intelligence of what the rest of their Order were contriving against
the Duke, but that they came in all haste to Paris, to do him all the good
Offices, the condition of the time would permit: but there was an over ruling
power, that rendered all their endeavors fruitless; so that after having long
sustained the Torrent of Authority, that opposed their Reason, they were
constrained at last to give way to force, that ever gives the Law to the best
Arguments.

Upon the Complaints of the Clergy preferred to the King, by the mouth of the
Archbishop of Arles, his Majesty commanded that the Informations of the
Parliament of Bordeaux should be put into the hands of Lauzon, Master of
Requests, to make his Report. Villemontee, who was also at the same time at
Court, was likewise ordered to give in his Answer; after which, and that the
Depositions of the Witnesses, had been sufficiently canvas'd, the Cardinal, who
was present at the Council, was of opinion, That upon the Duke's single
Confession contained in his Answer, A Sentence against the Duke of Espernon.
he ought to be reputed Excommunicate, and as so, that the King ought to
declare him lapsed from all his Offices, and Dignities, till by virtue of his
Absolution he should be reunited to the Church.

Though the King's Sentences were by the Duke himself obeyed with all manner of
submission; his Friends, and Servants nevertheless did not forbear, even in the
face of the Court, with many powerful Arguments to move for his Quietus est; of
which Arguments there were enough of themselves, to make an entire Volumn: but I
have nothing to do to transcribe them here, both in regard they were of no
advantage to the Duke at that time, and that his intention remains sufficiently
justified, by his Respect, and Submissions to the Church. The Cardinal de la
Valette failed not however to urge, and dispute those Reasons, as he had ever
done; but not having been able to prevail, that the Clergy might themselves be
Judges of his Father's Cause; nor that the King would please to take off the
punishment he had imposed upon him, till after he should be absolved; The Duke
was constrained to apply himself to the Court of Rome, first to obtain the
repose of his Conscience, and after his Restoration to his Offices, and
Commands.

His Secretary was therefore dismissed from Plassac to go to Rome, The Duke
sends a Dispatch to Rome to procure his Absolution.
furnished with several Dispatches directed to several of the principal persons
of that Court. The Duke's name, famous in all parts of Europe, was with his
Holiness in very great esteem; he had had the honor to be acquainted with him
in the time of his Nuntiature in France, and he was then reputed no ill
Catholic. His Holiness therefore very graciously received his Submissions,
and, contrary to the c^stom of that Court, where delays are very usual (chiefly
when the Authority of the Apostolic See in any Debate of Consequence, is
concerned) cutting off a great many of the tedious Forms, caused the
Expeditions necessary for the Duke's satisfaction to be dispatched, and sent
them away to Cardinal Bichi, his Nuntio in France. So that, had the Resolutions
of the Court of Rome at that time had less dependence upon those of France, the
Duke had from thence obtained a speedy, and full satisfaction. But so many rubs
were on this side the Alps laid in the way, that four whole months were
lapsed, before the Duke could receive his Absolution, which when it came, was
no other neither than, Ad Reincidentiam, a term used by those who treat of such
matters, when it is not a plenary Absolution.

Who is it that, reading the progress of this Dispute, but must admire that a
little Complement ill received, and a few words ill interpreted, should grow to
be one of the most important Affairs of two of the greatest Courts of Europe? I
was very unwilling to have been so tedious in being so particular: but others
having related it so as they knew would please the Great Ones of that time, who
were no Friends to the Duke, I thought my self obliged to render here an
account of things as they truly passed: which if it will not here absolutely
excuse the Duke for being in his sudden passion too violently transported
against an Ecclesiastical Person, it will at least serve to manifest the
respect he bore to the Church, and to a Dignity he ever had in the highest
Reverence, and Esteem.

From this time forward the Duke's Affairs began to appear with a much better
face at Court, The Duke's Affairs begin to discover a better face.
his Sons having by their diligence, and discretion so moderated Cardinal
Richelieu's heat, that nothing remained to do, save only how to contrive a
durable Reconciliation, and from this breach (as it often falls out) to derive
an occasion of inseparably uniting their two Families The Cardinal
notwithstanding would first have his Will: he had (as has been said) in the
Year 1632. desired that the Duke would demise his Government of Metz in his
favor; wherein, having not met with that complacency he expected, he must now
be satisfied. Neither would promises serve the turn, the laying down the
Government of this place must also precede the Absolution, the Cardinal being
by no means to be persuaded to consent, that the Duke should be allowed to be a
Christian to God, and his Church, whilst he continued a Rebel to him. Yet was
it not nevertheless at this time to make any private advantage of this
Demission, he had altered that design; and the possession of Metz seeming to be
superfluous, in the assurance he had of the King's Favor, which he thought he
had absolutely acquired by the necessity of his Service, the sole end, he could
in all appearance propose to himself herein, was, to let the world see, that no
one was thenceforward to contend with him, and by an example of this nature to
establish his Authority over all the other great men of the Kingdom. The place
however only changed the hand without going out of the Family, it being
transferred to the Cardinal de la Valette; An Alliance with the (...).
as the Duke his Brother was made choice of by a Marriage wholly to piece up,
what the late Disorders had disunited. And then it was that they began in good
earnest to treat about a plenary Absolution, of the satisfactions were to be
made to the Church, and other things that were of course to precede the Duke's
Restoration to his Offices, and Commands.

But before I proceed to the conclusion of this Affair, it will not I conceive
be impertinent, to give an account of two passages, which will render the
Duke's constancy, and generosity highly considerable, even in the greatest
cloud of his Disgrace; the first whereof was this. In the time that the Court
Persecutions were most violent against the Duke, many of his Enemies, both of
the Parliament of Bordeaux, and other parts of the Province, out of a vanity of
Generosity, would needs offer themselves to be reconciled to him, believing
that in such a time of affliction he would be more flexible to an
Accommodation, and that seeing how many Enemies he had to deal withal, he would
be glad to leslen their number; at least they doubted not but he would receive
into his Favor, and good Opinion, those who in so malignant a Juncture should,
out of the sole respect to his Person, and Virtue, offer their Service to him:
but he on the contrary apprehending, that to appear facile to Reconciliations
in a time of disgrace, would be interpreted weakness, and want of Spirit, sent
them word, That he could not deny his Friendship to such as should desire it of
him, in a time when he should be in a capacity to oblige them; but that he
would never reconcile himself to receive any good Offices from any, who had not
been his Friends. And he remained so constant to this resolution, that he was
never to be persuaded to alter it, what prudent considerations soever could be
laid before him to that effect.

The other thing was a Proposition made to him by a Letter from Paris, writ by
an unknown hand, Sealed with an unknown Seal, and without Superscription. In
this Letter there was propounded to him an infallible way to cut off Cardinal
Richelieu, his worst, and implacable Enemy, and bent to his ruin (which were
the express terms of the Letter.) He who was the Author of this design
delivered himself to be a Gentleman of Lorain, and an Engineer; who for this
piece of Service would demand no more, but six hundred Pistols only, three
hundred in hand, and the rest when he had done his business. The Duke had the
very thought of so great a wickedness in the greatest horror, and detestation;
and what cause soever of unkindness, or offense he might have against the
Cardinal, he had his person notwithstanding in very great esteem; which had it
been less, or that his Animosity had been greater, it is most certain, that he
would never have chosen so base a way to his Revenge. He therefore burnt the
Letter without speaking a word of it to any, save one of his Domestics only,
though the Proposition was thrice repeated. The Servant the Duke was pleased to
entrust with this secret, observing with what obstinacy the Villain persever'd
in his damnable resolution, did very rightly judge, that it was not to the Duke
alone he would discover his treacherous intent, well foreseeing he would say as
much to all the great men of the Kingdom, that he thought to be discontented,
and that in the end he would be trap'd, as it fell out. That if then he should
accuse the Duke to have hearkened three times to his Proposition, without
making any discovery of it, his silence in such a case might pass, in the
Cardinal's Opinion, for a tacit consent. He was therefore of advice that the
Duke should acquaint the Cardinal with it; but it was impossible to persuade
him to that resolution, whilst he was in disgrace. He always professed that he
would never consent to the death of an Enemy by so infamous a way: but that
withal he would not give him that advantage, to persuade himself that he had
invented this Artifice (he not being able to produce the Author) by that
pitiful way to seek his Favor. The business then rested in this posture, till
after the Duke's return to Bordeaux, that he was restored to his Government;
when the same person, persisting in the same wicked design, and importuning the
Duke to accept his offer, without securely sleeping (which were his own words)
under the dissembled show of a counterfeit Reconciliation, he then yielded to
the advice of the Duke de la Valette his Son, who was now with him, and at his
persuasion resolved in the end to send his Letters to the Cardinal de la
Valette, to communicate them to Cardinal Richelieu. And they could not have
been sent in a better time, for the same proposals that had been made to the
Duke, having also been tendered to the Duchess of Lorain, she had discovered
them to the Cardinal, who, being alarmed with the conformity of these
Intelligences, set spies upon the actious of him that proposed them. He was
therefore Arrested upon the marks he had given of himself in his Letters;
neither was there any thing, how daring soever, that might not be expected from
the temerity of this man. He was known to have been formerly a Servant to the
Duke de la Valette, and for one of the most resolute fellows of his time; of
which at his being taken he gave notable proof, having killed two men of seven
that came to apprehend him, and dangerously wounded two more; but in the end,
gored with Wounds, he was taken, and had life enough left to end his days upon
a Gibbet.

Some of these things having happened before the overtures of Agreement, we are
now to continue the thread of our Discourse, where it was broke off before. The
Alliance concluded with the Duke de la Valette.
The Cardinal de la Valette therefore pursued the conclusion of this Treaty
with great vigor, and so as that he had concluded the Marriage of the Duke de
la Valette his Brother, with the eldest Daughter of the Marquis de
Pont-Chasteau, a match that was to be the main tie of this Accommodation. This
Lady, who was Niece to the Cardinal, and one of the best Families in Britany,
equally considerable, both for the rare Endowments of her Person, and the
advantages of her Condition, was sought after by all the great men of the
Court; but the Cardinal her Uncle, having long had a design to engage the Duke,
and his, in the Interests of his own Fortune, and Greatness, preferred the Duke
de la Valette above all other persons that pretended to her.

So soon as this Affair, which put an end to all the rest with Honor, and cut
off all difficulties whatever, was agreed upon, the Duke de la Valette, who had
been sent for to Court to conclude it, returned back again to the Duke his
Father, to ask his consent. The Duke gave it him it is true, but that also was
all: and although this Match had been made for no other end, than merely to
disingage him from those troubles wherewith he was involved, he would
notwithstanding grant no more, than his complacency only, nothing more being to
be obtained of his severe, and untractable humor, but a generous denial. He
said, That he had esteem enough for the person, who was to enter into his
Alliance, to gratify her with a good share of his Estate, which in due time he
would also do; but that he had much rather continue in the posture he then was
all the days of his life, than that it should be said he had redeemed himself
by his money, or by Bribes been restored to his Command.

What offense soever the Cardinal took at this disobliging carriage of the
Duke, he proceeded notwithstanding to the accomplishment of the intended Match;
which being done, he dispatched away the Abbot de Coursan, one of the
Ecclesiastics in his dependence, with Orders from the King to end all
Differences. Wherein the Archbishop had order to give the Duke his Absolution,
as the Duke also had his, about what he was to observe in the receiving of it.
The Duke's Absol^tion res^lved upon.
The Cardinal had a desire that the Ceremony might have been performed in the
Chapel of his Castle of Coutras, that his House might have been rendered famous
by so memorable an action: but the Archbishop would never consent to have it
done there; on the contrary obstinately insisting, that he would have it at the
Gates of the Parish Church of that place, and in the face of all the people;
wherein although Caspian at that time Bishop of Nantes, and de Espruet* now
Bishop of Saint Papoul, who were the Mediators of the Duke's Interests with the
Archbishop, endeavored all they could to conquer this resolution, it was all
in vain. The Duke, who, for a nicity like that, would not defer the
accomplishment of an Affair, which through so many difficulties had been
brought on to the pass it then was, conquering his own humor, submitted in the
end to all the Archbishop could desire. But it was withal an odd beginning of a
Reconciliation, the two Parties before they parted from the place, being
perhaps more dissatisfied with one another, than they had been before.

The day for the Absolution being appointed, the Duke of Espernon, attended by
the Duke de la Valette, and several persons of quality, went to Coutras; where
being come, the Archbishop, who was already there, accompained with his
Ecclesiastics, went first to the Church, where the Duke following after, and
presenting himself before him, kneeled down upon a Velvet Cushion, laid ready
for that purpose. In this posture, and in the presence of five Counselors of
the Parliament of Bordeaux, who were, by the King's Order to be assisting at
this Ceremony, the Archbishop pronounced his Absolution in these words.

Et Ego Autboritate Ecclesiae, The Absolution.
and ^a qua fungor, absolvo te vinculo Excommunicationis, quam incurristi; quia
immunitatem Ecclefiae meae Metropolitanae perfregisti; manum armatam militum,
ut me currumque meum in via sisterent, misisti; Statione disposita Palatium
nostrum vallasti; Iurisdictionem Ecclesiasticam violasti, eamque tibi
arrogasti; Nos, Clerumque nostrum insignibus, and indignis contumeliis
affecisti: In nomine Patris, and Filij, etc.

Though the Duke was no great Latinist, he had nevertheless so much, as to
understand many words of this Absolution, by which he observed, they were not
according to the ordinary style of the Church; so that (as he afterward said)
he was once going to interrupt the Archbishop, as he was speaking: but being
unwilling to do any thing that might either look like an Irreverence to the
Church, or retard the satisfaction he hoped for, both as to his Conscience and
Affairs after the business was done, he permitted him to proceed, choosing
rather to pass for an indifferent Clerk, than to play the Doctor out of time,
and to his own prejudice The Absolution being passed, there were mutual Visits
to be paid, wherein the Duke in Obedience to the King's Order, began first, and
went to give the Archbishop thanks for his Absolution; a civility that was soon
returned by the Archbishop: but with so much coldness on both sides, that it
was easy to judge this Reconciliation was likely to beget no very good
intelligence betwixt them. In plain truth the Duke could not digest the
Severities the Archbishop had made him undergo, which he interpreting to be
done out of a premeditared design to provoke him to something that might either
hinder, or de^er his Absolution, he was much more sensible of those public
Manifestations of his ill will, than of any obligation for the invol^ntary
Grace he had imparted to him.

There ensued therefore, and that immediately upon the Absolution, high
complaints on both sides; of which upon the instant great Relations were made,
and whereof those of the Duke were justified by the testimony of the Abbot de
Coursan, who, by seeing how hardly he had been dealt withal, was become
altogether of his Party: But whilst these Remonstrances were upon their way to
Court, the Duke, to divert himself, took a turn into his Territories of
Angoumois, beginning now to make use of that liberty, which, by his
Reconciliation to the Church, was once more his own. At his return from this
little Journey, by an express Courrier from Court, he received his Majesty's
Orders to return into Guienne: neither could they have been couched in more
obliging terms, there being therein not one syllable of any thing that had
passed; and the King's Letter, without speaking of any re-establishment, which
would have presupposed a former Suspension, containing only these words. Cousin,
Having considered how much your presence may be necessary in my Province of
Guienne* that you may have an eye to such Occurrences as may happen there, I
have thought fit to write you this Letter, to let you know, that I desire, and
shall be well pleased that you go thi^her, to the end you may there continue
the Functions that belong to the Authority of your Command, as you have
formerly done; and to take care that all things be continued in the good
condition they ought to be* for the safety, and conservation of the said
Province in my Obedience. Wherein being assured you will acquit your self, with
your accustomed vigilance, and care, and resting secure in the absolute
confidence, I have ever reposed in your Fidelity, and good Affection, I shall
say no more, but only assure you of my Affection.

Praying God, etc.
From Saint Germain en Lay this first of October, 1634.

With this there were other Dispatches sent, directed, both to the first
President d' Agnesseau, that he might acquaint the Assembly with his Majesty's
intention, and also to the Jurats of the City; which the Duke having sent away
some days before his departure from Plassac, The Duke of Espern^^ returns into
Guienne.
he himself followed soon after, and returned into his Government, more
honored, and esteemed, for having so handsomely disengaged himself from this
troublesome Affair, than if it had never been. Men (as it usually happens) soon
forgot all the Disgraces he had undergone, to consider how great his Credit
must necessarily be; who of all the Great Persons of the Kingdom, whose
Fortunes had been so rudely assaulted, alone kept himself upright, and entire,
in spite of all his Enemies, or all they could contrive against him. All
those, who had been unkind to him, sued to be reconciled to his Favor; and the
Duke de la Valette, who would by no means leave him, till all things were
absolutely settled to his own desire, became their Mediator; by that means
re-establishing matters in so good a posture, that for the future there was
more repose to be expected for the Duke his Father, than he had ever yet
enjoyed, since he had first taken possession of the Government of Guienne.

The End of the Tenth Book.
THE HISTORY Of the LIFE of the Duke of Espernon.
The Eleventh Book.
IT was not fortunate to the Duke alone, Anno 1635.
but as much at least to the Province, and the whole Kingdom, that he was at
this time restored to his Command; the first whereof, without his Valor, and
Wisdom, had been in manifest danger, and the other embroiled in no contemptible
disorders: but by his Prudence and generous Conduct, he brought them both so
brave, and so reasonable a relief, that what we are now about to deliver, makes
up no small part of the principal Actions of his Life.

He was no sooner arrived in Guienne, The Seditions of Guienne, their birth and
progres^^
but that several Complaints were presented to him, of the Insolence some
Officers who Farmed the Crown Revenues of that Province exercised over the
King's Subjects. The people were no longer able to support their Exactions, and
their Poverty, which is ordinarily accompanied with despair, had so stirred
them up, that they were ready to rush into Arms* and to shuffle all things into
confusion. The Duke could have been glad, the Court would have ordered some
moderation in these Impositions to have prevented those mischiefs, which are
usually the issue of general Discontent, and the certain effects of popular
fury; and to that end had made so many several Remonstrances to the Council,
and urged them so home, that what he did for a good, that as much respected the
King's Service, as the Public Interest, was in the end so misinterpreted, as
to turn to his own disgrace: Seeing therefore he could by his Prayers, and
Importunities, prevail nothing with the Court, he was necessitated to make use
of the Authority he had in the Province, to prevent a total Revolt, to which
the generality of men were too visibly inclined. Wherein his conduct was guided
by so admirable discretion, that what by convincing such by Reason, as were
capable of it, by feeding such by Hopes, as would be satisfied with them, and
threatening Punishment to those, who would be satisfied with neither, he for a
long time continued all things in a pretty quiet condition.

He practiced these gentle and easy Remedies, during the course of a very
troublesome Disease he had fallen into presently after his return from Plassac.
His abode, and solitude in his House, together with the hard measure he had
received, had not lighted upon a heart insensible of wrong; nor had committed
no ordinary violence upon his generous spirit: and although, by a wonderful
Victory over his own Passions, he had suppressed his discontent from breaking
out to the discovery of those about him; it is notwithstanding to be believed,
that the more he smothered his fire, the more it must of necessity burn him
within, and discompose his natural Constitution. The Duke of (...) falls (...).
He suffered therefore by the heat of Urine so intolerable, and so
unintermitted pains, as scarce gave him any truce of repose; in which
Distemper, that which was most remarkable was, the Remedies they made use of
for his Recovery; ^or of eighteen days together, that his Infirmity continued,
he drank nothing but cold water, and of that so prodigious a quantity, that I
do not think any stomach in the world, but his, could have digested so much
crudity: He was moreover very often put into cold Baths; so that all the art,
and industry of his Physicians was wholly employed to qualify the ebullient
Blood of a young man of fourscore and four years old.

He was scarcely delivered of his pain, when he was forced to attend the
Affairs of his Government with greater diligence, and care than at any time
before. The King, from the beginning of the year having taken a resolution to
fall out with Spain, would not however engage in that War, before he had well,
and particularly examined the condition and strength of his Kingdom; to be
therefore well informed of the State of Guienne, the greatest, and best of all
his other Provinces, he writ to the Duke in March, to send him a true account
of what number of men he could for time of need draw out of his Government, and
how many men of Command he might rely upon to bear Office in his Armies: to
which the Duke returned Answer, that, although within eight months time above
eighteen thousand men had been sent out of the Province, as by the Muster Rolls
annexed to his Dispatch, his Majesty might perceive; there might yet be a very
great number raised, provided the Affections of the People were discreetly
managed by some good usage; that his Majesty would also find a great many
Gentlemen of Quality, An account of the Forces o^ Gu^enne.
and capable of Command, (of which he sent a List of above sixscore) but that
the greatest part of them were so necessitous, that (to his great grief) he
durst not promise to himself from their inability, all that his Majesty might
expect from their good will: by which Abstract let any one judge of the Forces
of the Kingdom, and what a King of France may propose to himself, having the
Love, and Affection of his Subjects.

The Duke, who knew by a long experience, what strange effects the good will of
the people was able to produce, never ceased importuning the King to husband
it, by granting some redress to their Oppressions; which though he always did,
after the most humble, and respective manner could be imagined, it
notwithstanding wrought no effect, but to his own prejudice: insomuch that,
without receiving any Answer to his real Remonstrances, he was often pressed by
very severe dispatches, to be assisting in the execution of several Edicts.

Amongst all those that were set forth at this time, The Exc^se noon the
Victuallers begets a Sedition in Bordeaux.
the lightest, and most inconsiderable was, that of the Excise upon the
Victuallers; it brought in very little profit to the King, and was no burden
to the gross of the people; none but the Victuallers themselves were concerned
in it: this sort of men nevertheless, having not much to save, did so much the
less care to hazard the losing of all. Some therefore of the most Seditious
amongst them having upon the fourteenth of May put themselves in the Head of an
unruly Rabble, gathered together at the first of all a Body of betwixt four and
five hundred men. Some persons of note endeavored to oppose this first
Disorder; but these being too few to extinguish the flame, served only to make
it mount to a greater, and more formidable height. The first effects of the
Pop^lar (...).
Desaigues a particular Servant of the Duke's, and of one of the best Families
in the City, bore the first brunt of the peoples fury; he had attempted by
threats to have brought them to a sense of their Duty; but these Bruits
incapable of Reason, were so exasperated at the very name of Punishment, that
they ran immediately to Arms, when having forced ^ Hostel de Ville, whither
Desaigues had retired himself, they there in the first place Massacred him;
neither was he the only man that tasted of their violence, an Archer belonging
to the Pr^vost de Hostel, an Offi^er belonging to the King's Household, that
set* rates upon Victualler^; the same I suppose with one of our Officers of the
Greencloth. A Clerk of the Market.
Prevost de l' Hostel, that the Partners had substituted, for the gathering in
of this Impost, with five, or six other persons concerned in the same
Employment, had the same measure. The Jurats at the first rumor of this
Tumult, had caused the Captains of the City to take Arms for the defense of l'
Hostel de Ville, which the people threatened to assault, who accordingly did
indeed put themselves into some posture of defense: but being presently
besieged, and hemmed in on all sides, by the multitude, soon capitulated, and
retired. This first success having by the easiness thereof, increased the
insolence of these rascally people, they in a moment overran the whole City;
so that in less than two hours time, they had got together betwixt four, and
five thousand people.

So soon as the Parliament saw the Sedition increase to such a formidable
height, they endeavored to stop the progress of it, by issuing out an Act for
the suppression of the Edict: but the Mutineers believing (as it was true) that
nothing, but the sole terror which had possessed all the Orders of the City,
had procured this Arrest in their favor, raising their Impudence higher, upon
the presumption of this Fear, would not so much as suffer it to be Published;
and the Multitude was seen to hurry up and down the Streets after that
audacious and threatening manner, as very much affrighted all the well disposed
Inhabitants of the City.

At the beginning of this uproar the Duke was at Cadillac in a course of
Physic, for the confirmation of his health, which he had not yet perfectly
recovered; where he was very much surpised to see in the close of the evening
a Courrier come in, that the first President d' Agnesseau, had caused to steal
privately out of the City, to bring him the first news of this Insurrection, of
which he writ him a Letter in these terms. My Lord,
I write you this Ticket in haste from the Palace (where I now am with some
other Members of the Parliament, and a Jurat, and from whence I am advised by
my Friends not to stir) to give you notice of the Sedition is raised in the
City, about the establishment the Sieur de la Forest Archer to the Grand
Prevost was about to make of an Excise upon the Victuallers. To stop the
torrent of which Disorder, though the Parliament have granted out an Arrest of
Suspension, it is notwithstanding so violent, that way will do no good. So that
we are here in very great danger, which makes me send you this express
Messenger, humbly to beseech you with all possible speed to interpose his
Majesty's Authority, and your own to appease this tumult. A favor that I in my
own particular have some reason to hope for from you, being as I am,

My Lord, etc.
Bordeaux, May 14. 1635. at three of the Clock in the afternoon.



The Duke had no sooner received this Dispatch, but that he ordered Letters to
be sent forthwith to some Gentlemen thereabouts, whilst himself took order for
the raising some men amongst his own Tenants to accompany him the next day to
the City. In the mean time he dispatched away la Roche the Captain of his
Guards the same night to the first President, to assure him of the speedy
relief he was preparing for him, and to inform himself more particularly of the
state of the City.

Whilst he was busy about this preparation, he had news brought, that the
Rebels drunk with Wine, and tired with the work of the day, were in the evening
retired every man to his own house, with a resolution to be quiet, provided no
notice might be taken of what was passed. Had things remained in this
condition, their offense, though very great, might have had some color of
excuse: but these people at their awaking, puffed up with the success of their
last days temerity, The Progress of the Sedition.
broke out again the next morning into new, and greater Fury than before. In
which heat they drew up a List of above four hundred of the best Families of
the City, under the Title of Gabellers: In which List many of the principal
Members of the Parliament were comprised, and the rest were all Citizens of the
best quality; all which the night following they intended to Massacre, and to
rifle their Houses.

The Duke had present notice of this design. The Officers of Parliament, The
Parliament sends to the Duke to quicken his haste.
astonished at the extreme danger they saw themselves exposed unto, had
dispatched to him in all haste Lacheze, and Boucaut, two young Counselors whom
they knew to be acceptable to him, to beseech him to make haste to the City.
These Gentlemen gave him an account of the condition the Town, and the infinite
peril all good men were in; declaring withal that their Lives, and Fortunes
depended upon his Presence, and Protection. These two Deputies found the Duke
just ready to set out, as they came; he therefore took them into his Coach, and
his House being but five Leagues distant from the City, arrived there the same
day, which was the 16th. in very good time.

The Authority and Power, The Duke's presence appeases the tumult.
that the esteem of an extraordinary Virtue exercises over the minds of men, is
hardly any where more remarkable, than upon this occasion; there being not one,
even of the most Seditious, who did not manifest shame, and repentance for his
past offenses. They were no more the same men, who had determined to cut
throats, and to plunder the richest houses the ensuing night; insomuch that
even the very Incendiaaries themselves came, mixed with the honestest Burgers
of the Town, to meet, and receive their Governor, a great way without the
Gates of the City, with Acclamations that sounded nothing but Obedience, and
Submission.

With this general applause, the Duke went to alight at the Host^l de Ville,
which was in his way, and which he found in a miserable plight, the Gates b^^nt
down, the Inscriptions defaced, the Windows broken, the Prisons set open, and
all things as in the desolation of a City taken and sacked by a Foreign Enemy.

After having taken the best order he could for the securing the Hostel de
Ville, he retired himself to his own House; and thus far all things looked
well: but afterward his design being to proceed about the late tumult, rather
by moderate, and gentle, than by severe and exemplary ways, (the first being at
this time the safest, and best, if they could succeed) the Mutineers began to
gather heart from their impunity, and to believe they were feared. Nothing
therefore being so sweet, and tempting, as Dominion, and Power, to those who
are not acquainted with it, these men would by no means so soon lay down, that
which they had so rebelliously taken up, and which they thought with their
great numbers, they could so easily maintain. They began then to assemble
themselves anew, giving out terrible threats of what strange things they would
do; by which the Duke judging they would from high words, doubtless proceed to
some mischievous effects; he sent the Court an account of all the evil
dispositions he had observed, not only in the spirits of the Inhabitants of the
City, but also of the whole Province; desiring withal the assistance of such
Forces, as might be sufficient to remedy the evil he saw was already as good as
concluded. But all his Remonstrances were neglected, they thought he only made
this his pretense to Arm, and fortify himself in his own Government; and the
design of the Court being to keep him weak, and disarmed, they rather chose to
expose the Province to the danger of popular Sedition, than to enable him with
Honor to maintain the King's Authority, and Interest.

The Duke seeing himself thus naked, and alone, did very well judge he should
not in this posture be able to suppress the Faction; so that their insolence
daily more and more increased, till in the end either stirred up with the fear
of being made examples, prompted on with the avarice of booty, The people run
into open Arm^.
or allured with the sole appetite of ill doing, without danger of punishment
(which to abject minds is no small temptation) they betook themselves openly to
Arms; and after many insolent Discourses, and several Tickets scattered up and
down the Streets, to excite the people to Sedition, they cantoned, and
fortified themselves in one part of the City, whereof they possessed themselves
of the half, and, by making great Barricado's upon all the Avenues, made
themselves absolute Masters of it. Within this Precinct there were five Gates,
several Churches, with some Towers, and Fortifications which were joined to the
City; all which they had carefully provided for, and were therein so well
accommodated, that it seemed to them impossible they should be forced, having
many more men than were necessary to defend their Works.

This disorder happened the 15th. of June, it began about ten of the Clock in the
morning, and the Duke had notice of it presently after Dinner; upon which
Intelligence judging that a Sedition of this high nature, and premeditated as
this was, was not to be tolerated without manifest danger both of the City, and
the whole Province, and a very great diminution both of the King's Authority,
and his own; he forthwith commanded those Gentlemen he had about him to mount
to Horse, and la Roche the Captain of his Guards to put himself in the head of
his Companies on Foot; The Duke a^most alone goes out against them.
with which inconsiderable number himself, without further deliberation, went
out about one in the afternoon, to execute one of the boldest actions he ever
undertook in his whole life.

Neither would he herein so much as consider his own weakness, or the temerity,
and number of those he was to encounter, that the disproportion of their Forces
might not divert him from his design. He had not with him above two and twenty
Horse, and six and twenty of his Guards on Foot, whereas no less than the one
half of the City were already in Arms against him, and little better to be
expected from the rest. For the greater part of the Inhabitants looked upon
these Mutineers, as the Champions of their Liberty; so that those of the better
sort, and some few honest Citizens excepted, the rest were prepossessed with so
strange a blindness, that there were very few, who did not at least contribute
their wishes to the prosperity of so Lewd a Cause. In fine, had not his
promptitude and courage (and that beyond all probality) procured him the
success of this Action, there had been an end of the City of Bordeaux, and the
whole Province of Guienne; and an invading Enemy could not have wrought a
greater desolation, than had been justly to be feared from the wild Fury of a
people, puffed up with the success of the least Victory they could have
obtained. He therefore indeed hazarded a great deal to prevent so dire a
mischief, and to preserve the whole: but there was also a necessity upon him,
that he should do so; neither would the evil have been less, if he had rendered
his Authority contemptible by his Toleration: of two extremes he therefore made
choice of that, wherein, 'twas true, there was more danger; but that gave him
withal opportunity, either suddenly to suppress the Commotion, or to end his
Life with Honor in the Service of his Prince and Country.

So soon as the Duke was on Horseback, the first place he went to was the
Lodgings of the Premier President, to secure his person from danger; which he
did, by prevailing with him to retire himself to his House, and from thence
advanced toward the Barricado's. The Hostel de Ville was comprehended in the
Circuit, the Mutineers had possessed themselves of; but they were not Masters
of the place: he would therefore, before he advanced any further, make some
stay there to encourage the Guards, he had before there placed in Garrison, in
their Duty. As he was upon his March thither, at the entry into the Market
place, he found all the Chains up, and several of the Inhabitants in Arms,
resolute to defend the pass. Whereupon la Roche by the Duke's Order, commanded
them to make way, and retire; when perceiving them in suspense what to do,
whether to obey, or stand upon their defense, la Roche wisely taking advantage
of their irresolution, leapt upon the Barricado, disarmed those who were more
advanced, and forced the rest to retire, without any other violence to any.

Though the little respect these first opposers manifested for the Age and
venerable Person of their Governor, gave him very well to understand he was to
expect no better from the rest, he desisted not nevertheless to go on. He
alighted therefore at the Hostel de Ville, where, after he had taken the best
Order he could, for the security of the place, and put it into a condition to
send him some assistance if occasion were, he commanded la Roche to assault a
Barricado that was made at the entry of the Street called la Rue Saint Michel.
Those who defended this pass were too many to keep any good order; they indeed
made show of great resolution, and received the Guards with several Musket
shot, but confusedly made, and at random: but how irregularly soever, before
any shot was fired against them, they wounded one of the Duke's Guards to
death, The Duke, though stoutly opposed, forces the first B^rricade.
with a Musket Bullet in his Breast. The Duke had expressly commanded his
people not to shoot till the last extremity, and as much as was possible to
spare the Blood of the people, whose blindness he much more lamented, than he
was with their temerity and insolence offended: but after this first Volly, his
Guards having discharged theirs almost at the Muzzle of the Musket, it was soon
seen how much Valor can prevail over Numbers, and what Experience, and
Discipline can do against Brutality, and Disorder, They shot so right, and to
so good effect, that few gave fire, who did not carry his man; insomuch that
nine were killed outright at this first Volle^, and twelve more wounded that
were in little bett^r condition; so brisk a Charge having a little startled
those who were foremost, la Roche with his Companions fell presently to work
upon the Barricado to break it down, where they yet met with some opposition,
and where a Gentleman called la Serre, who would fight on foot with the Duke's
Guards, amongst whom he had long born Arms, in mounting the Barricado, was by a
thrust with a Halbert run quite through the shoulder, as some others were also
more slightly wounded: And breaks through with his Horse.
but in the end, the Duke who seconded his Guards, himself on Horseback at the
head of his Troop, breaking in at the passage they had opened for him, forced
the Defendants to retire.

Yet was it not nevertheless to retreat very far, the squandered party soon
recovering the other Barricades that were along the same street, and that
called la Rue de Faures, leading toward the Port de la Grave. There were three
strong Barricado's in this Quarter, which were all so obstinately defended,
that at every one there were men slain on both sides. The Duke forces t^ree
other (...), wherein several of his men are slain, and wounded.
The Duke there lost a young Gentleman of the House of Montagne, whom he had
bred up a Page, and whom but a few days before he had made to take a Cassock in
his Guards, which unfortunate Youth came to fall dead at his feet: Another of
the same condition called le Pouy received his Deaths wound by a Musket shot
that broke his shoulder, five or six more were also wounded, what with Muskets
and Pikes; and the Duke had moreover a Gentleman shot behind him on Horseback;
all which opposition notwithstanding, every thing must give way to the valor
of this little Party; and la Roche, seeing his Master engaged in so manifest a
danger of his life, so bravely exposed both his own, and his fellows for his
preservation, that nothing was able to withstand them.

The five first Barricado's being forced, The Duke goes into another quarter of
the City, which was also in mutiny, and Barricado'd.
and taken, the Duke was informed, that in that part of the Town toward St.
Croix, there were several others, some perfected, and others only begun: upon
which intelligence he thought it very requisite to make use of the astonishment
his first successes might possibly have imprinted in the minds of the people,
and to go immediately to this second occasion. He met in truth with less
resistance at these, than the former, there was notwithstanding something every
where to do, and he had also here some men wounded: but it is not to be
believed what infinite hazards he ran that day in his own person; for being on
Horseback at the head of his Troop, and very remarkable by his gray Beard, and
Head, he seemed to be the mark at which all the Musket Shot, Pistols, and
Stones were directed. Neither was he only to apprehend those that were shot at
him from the Barricado's, his greatest danger being from the Windows, and so
much the more, by reason the Streets being exceeding narrow, took from him all
possibility of avoiding the shot, that was poured perpendicular upon him. Even
the women put him into no small danger, one of which failed but little of
braining him with a Flower-pot, which came so near as to fall upon his Horses
Crupper; and a man through a Casement, with his Musket couched at his Cheek,
was about to let fly at him, at no more than ten paces distance, had he not
been prevented by one of the Duke's Guard called Caudere, who espied, and
killed him. The Duke's danger.
A greater resolution, than this day appeared in the people, has hardly at any
time been observed; which was such, that even when the Duke's followers had
made themselves Masters of the Barricades, they had much ado to make them
retire; and when either they had taken their Arms from them, or that themselves
in despair had thrown them away, they cried out, and entreated, rather to be
dispatched than permitted to live to see the Gabelle imposed upon them: So hard
a thing is it to cure the minds of the people, when prepossessed with false
impressions.

They could not nevertheless either by their obstinacy, or the ill will they
had so violently manifested to the Duke's person, provoke him to consent to
more Blood, or greater Slaughter, than what had inevitably passed in the heat
of the action: he continually calling out to save the lives of the people; The
Duke's Clemency.
neither was there above five and twenty, or thirty persons killed upon the
place, and some few wounded: one of which did a thing worthy a better Cause,
and a more conspicuous Theater. A Cooper that had put himself in the head of a
crew of Rakels of his own profession, of which there are very many in this
City, having at the defense of a Barricade received a Musket shot that broke
his Arm, being a strong lusty fellow, without being daunted at the shattered
limb, that hu^^ down only by a little piece of skin, he went to the next
Chirurgion's; where having caused it to be totally cut off, and a Plaster to be
applied to it, he returned immediately to another Barricade, which he again
defended with great bravery, and resolution, till in the end being taken, and
presented to the Duke, with an account of his action, he commanded him to be
carried back to his own house, and that care should be taken for his cure: but
his life was not to be saved; for this unluchy fellow, by his obstinacy
opposing the Grace the Duke had showed him, a new Sedition a few days after
arising (for this was not the last) he start out of his Bed at the first noise
of it, to put himself again in the head of his Comrades; which second agitation
having put him into a continued Fever, he died a few days after.

The Duke having scoured this great quarter of the City, and forced above three
thousand persons to lay down their Arms, who had taken them up in this
Commotion, carrying off with him his dead, and wounded, returned back to the
Hostel de Ville, to give his men a little breath, who were almost tired out,
and spent with the heat, and continuation of the Fight: But it was only to take
a very short repose; for he was scarce alighted from his Horse, when he was
advertised, that near to the Port de Saint Iulien, which is one of the
principal Gates of the City, eight or nine hundred men were entrenched, within
five great Barricades, that shut up all the Avenues, The Duke prepares to go to
a new occasion, which he effects without fighting.
by which there was any way to come to them. These Mutineers had a design to
make themselves Masters of this Gate, which had been no hard matter for them to
do, by that means to have let in the Country people thereabouts to their
assistance; which they from without the Walls mainly cried out for, that they
might share in the Plunder of the City, which they had already swallowed in
their imagination, and looked upon it as a certain, and infallible Prey. The
Duke was a little surpised to find he was to enter into new engagements,
before he was well clear of the former: he knew very well that the small number
of men he had left, would be too few to undertake this second Enterprise; yet
would he not leave an action imperfect, which unless it was carried on to an
absolute, and total Victory, he must of necessity lose the fruits of what he
had already performed with so much Bravery and success. He resolved therefore
to draw fifty men out of the Garrison of Chasteau-Trompette, all that could
possibly be spared from thence, and some small Fieldpieces to force those
Entrenchments with less danger, than he had done the other Barricado's before.
He had no sooner made his preparation, and was ready to go against these
people, when either a pannick terror, or the consideration of their Duty, or
the Respect to their Governors person, whom they saw so freely to expose
himself for the public Safety, touched the hearts of some honest Burgers of
that part of the City; who had, it should seem, so much credit with the
Seditious, as to make them capable of Reason, and sensible of their Duty, so
far as to prevail with them, without staying to be compelled unto it, to send
the Duke a Protestation that they would return to their Obedience; which they
accordingly did, at the same time falling to work to open their Barricado's: So
that the Duke, presently advancing to see what condition they were in, caused
them to be totally beaten down in his own presence.

Whilst on this side of the Town the Duke went on at this prosperous rate,
there was new work cutting out for him in the other part of the City, had he
been less successful here: For although that Quarter called du Chapeau Rouge,
The whole City upon the point to run into Sedition,
was inhabited with a great many persons of very good quality, who were
heartily concerned at these disorders; there were also very many who had been
so prepossessed with false opinions, that they were much more inclined to join
with the Seditious, than any ways to help to suppress them. These were
doubtless the greater party, and these had been put into Arms under the
Captains of the City, if occasion had been to have gone to the Duke's succor:
but by good fortune he stood in no need of so dangerous a Relief; it being
almost certain that they would have turned to the other side, and, had never so
little misfortune befallen him, their Captains would have had very much ado to
have withheld them; But are withheld by the Duke's success.
but his success prevented their evil purpose: So that seeing him return
Victorious with so few Forces, their Fury was turned into admiration; and they
for that time satisfied themselves with muttering some discontent at their
Companions defeat, without farther manifesting their malevolent designs by any
considerable effects.

Though this Action, that had had so violent a beginning, and so miraculous a
conclusion, had made the Duke's generosity, and good conduct admired by all; it
had nevertheless withal made the people sensible of his weakness, by the few
that came into his defense, in a time of so great, and manifest danger. The
Seditious therefore taking from thence a ^^uer measure of their own Forces, and
comparing their numbers with his, doubted not, should they come to a second
Trial, to do their work with greater facility: So that prepossessed with the
hope of their cursed advantages, they highly, and publicly threatened what they
would do; and doubtless, had not the sole respect to the Duke's person
withheld them, they had again betaken themselves to Arms, and he would have
been in very great danger to have perished by the hands of the people, and to
have suffered the most unfortunate death could possibly have arrived to any
person of his condition.

Pressed therefore by the hourly intelligence he received of the evil
disposition that still continued in the minds of the people, The Duke (...)the
King an Account of the lat^ Insurrection.
he resolved to dispatch away Magnas in all speed to Court, to let the King
understand the estate of the City, and Province, and to beseech his Majesty to
provide for the present ^vils, and against those that were reasonably to be
feared for the time to come. In this Dispatch he, above all things, was
importunate that the Duke de la Valette his Son might be sent away to him, that
he might be assisted by a second self in occasions where the whole burden of
Affairs were to depend upon his Fidelity, and care. In the mean time he writ to
some Gentlemen of the Country to come speedily in to him, and moreover gave
order for the raising some Forces in such of his own Territories, as lay
nearest to the City. He had from thence often drawn out to the number of above
two thousand good men, by which he had been exceedingly well served upon
several important occasions: but at this time (which will appear very strange,
and at which I observed him to be more aftonish'd, than at any thing that had
happened during the whole disorder) he could not get so much as one man: so great
was either their terror, or their correspondence with the Mutineers. There came
in indeed some Gentlemen, but with much ado, and with very great danger,
occasioned by the new disorder, The whole Province of Guienne. except
Montauban, break into Sedition.
which we shall now see; for Magnas was no sooner departed from him, but that
most of the most considerable Cities of the Province, by the example of their
Metropolis revolted; insomuch that there was scarce any, save Montauban only,
that contained it self within the limits of its Duty, the rest breaking out
into open Arms, and committing every where all the barbarous acts of an
inhumane fury. Amongst all these horrid Riots, those which were committed at
Again were the most extreme. A Sovere^gn Court wherein all ca^^es that concern
the Aid^, or Ta^les, that is T^x^s, or (...) are ^ear'd, and determ^n'd*
La Cour des Aides was at this time established in this City; and it was upon
the Officers of this Court, that they exercised the most notable violence, all
that the people could meet withal being miserably burnt, or Massacred (for in
popular furies we seldom read of ordinary executions) the Eleus, A^sessors, or
Collector^ of the Kings S^bsidies. President du Bernet opposes the Sedition of
Again. And Monsieur de Vert^mont that of Perigueux.
Eleus were handled after the same manner, many honest Burgers were by their
Enemies put into the number of Gabellers, and had the same measure: So that had
not President du Bernet (who was President of the Chamber de l' Edict, that had
its seat in the same City) opposed this Torrent of popular fury, with greater
vigor than was to be expected from a man of his profession, it is certainly
believed, that not one man of condition would have been left alive, in the
whole City. Neither had the disorder been less at Perigueux, had it not been
for the presence of Vertamont, Intendant de la Justice; for the Duke knowing
the humor of this people, inclined to License, had entreated Vertamont to go
thither, under color of some Commission of his Intendancy; where he was
scarcely arrived, when the people rose in Commotion, as in other places,
falling upon some Officers of the Election, and other innocent persons, to make
a horrid Massacre: And then it was, that Vertamont, abandoning the care of his
own person, encouraged the Magistrates boldly to oppose the popular Fury, and
putting himself in the head of them, made no difficulty to re^cue some poor
people, who were going to be sacrificed to their barbarous cruelty, out of the
hands of the insolent rabble: So that with an extraordinary fortune, the effect
of his generous resolution, he contained this City in its Obedience, giving in
himself at the same time, a great Example of Justice, and Moderation in so
dangerous an occurrence.

Though the Duke had enough to do in the City of Bordeaux, The Duke sends his
Orders into all parts of the Province,
yet did he not fail however, even in the midst of these confusions, with
incredible diligence, and care, to disperse his Orders throughout all parts of
the Province; in the remotest parts whereof, the report being spread, that all
things continued quiet at Bordeaux by the respect to the Dukes Authority, and
Person; Which a little calms the Sedition.
the other Cities that had taken Arms by the example of this, quieted
themselves also by the same consideration; by which means the License of the
people was kept within some moderate bounds; a moderation nevertheless that
hung by so slender a thread, that upon the least occasion worse, and more
dangerous Commotions were to be expected. The Duke had no Forces, neither was
any to be hoped for out of any part of the Province; and it was a matter of
extraordinary difficulty to send him any from any other place; so that he was
constrained in so great an exigency, to have recourse to other means, and to
cause some of the promoters of this Sedition to be treated withal, for the
bringing about of that, which he saw no other possible way to effect: Wherein
he also succeeded so well, that these people allured by promises of Indemnity,
and some hopes of reward, gave themselves up absolutely to his dispose; so that
it was by this politic way of proceeding he in the end totally secured both
the City of Bordeaux, and the whole Province of Guienne. The disorder had
continued so long, and with so much noise, that there was few of the
Incendiaries, who were not in every quarter particularly known, of which there
were very many who had formerly born Arms in the King's Regiments of Foot; and
who, being grown weary of that profession, were returned again to their old
Trades. These men wrought upon by the Duke's Exhortations, and the greatest
part of them moreover touched with the sense of the moderation he had exercised
toward them, notwithstanding the greatness of their offenses, promised him,
that nothing should pass amongst the people, of which he should not have
continual notice; and they were as good as their words, giving him by their
constant intelligence, means and opportunity to prevent those evils, which
otherwise would infallibly have given the last blow to the public Peace.

The Commotions of the City were no sooner in some measure appeased, but that
the madness diffused it self into the Villages of the adjacent Country. The
Boor^ M^tiny.
These people having in the time of one of the forementioned Mutinies, taken
occasion to rifle some Houses of the City, were returned with their Booty to
their own homes; by whose ill example, their Neighbors were so excited to
Rapine, that in a moment all the Boors threw away the instruments of their
labor, and betook themselves to Arms. In this posture they robbed the Country
houses, they assembled themselves in great numbers in all the Suburbs of
Bordeaux, and would attempt to make their way into the City it self; where they
were so much desired by the basest of the people, that they did their
endeavors also to let them in. The greatest appearance of them was in the
Suburb de Saint Surin, to which place the Duke's house was near enough for him
to hear their clamours, and hideous yells, and from his Chamber Window that
looked into the Fields to see the Fire they had kindled in several houses, of
which the greatest part were miserably consumed. The Duke of Esperno^^ goes on^
against them,
At the sight of these barbarous Riots, it was impossible to detain him; but,
although he was at last fallen into an almost unintermitted indisposition, he
got out of his bed, mounted to Horse by night, and with forty or fifty
Gentlemen, his Guards, and some of the Town Companies, went out toward these
Mutineers. They had fortified themselves in several places of the Suburb, had
Barricado'd the Church, and made a countenance of resolution to defend
themselves; nevertheless at the Duke's arrival, they almost all disbanded, and
ran away, none saving those in the Church making any resistance, who also at
the first Volley was discharged upon them, fled after their fellows; when the
Cavalry putting themselves in pursuit of those who had recovered the Fields,
And disperses them.
some forty or fifty of them were miserably slain. It is not to be imagined how
strangely the Duke was afflicted at the death of these wretched people: This
little evil nevertheless conduced very much to a far greater good; for the
report of this Execution dispersing it self in a moment, throughout the whole
Province, the other Country people who sat, expecting the good, or evil
success of their fellows, made themselves, for this year, wise by the example
of their misfortune; and without engaging in the folly of the greater Cities,
were content to sit spectators of their Tumults, and Disorders. There were
indeed hardly any more after this action; for the Duke de la Valette coming
presently after to the Duke his Father, they bent their joint endeavors to the
healing of some secret discontents that yet remained in the minds of the
people; when having, by gentle and obliging ways, made them sensible of their
late miscarriages, and of their Duty, and Obedience for the time to come, From
whence a calm ensues.
they soon after, by the King's Order, published an Act of Oblivion for all
things that were passed; a Grace his Majesty had been pleased to grant to their
intercession, and at their humble request.

Who could have imagined that so many brave Actions of the Duke's (whether
considered in the dangers to which he was so often obliged to expose his
Person; The Duke ^soers'd after all his brave Service.
the great conduct wherewith they were carried on, or the utility that derived
from them to the public repose) that those Actions I say ought to have served
for a pretense to the blackest, and most hateful calumny, that could possibly
have been invented to the prejudice of his Honor? It was nevertheless the
fruit, and reward of his brave Service, after which no man certainly is ever
again to repine at Detraction, or complain of Envy. Briet, a Counselor in the
Parliament of Bordeaux, openly professed himself to be no friend to the Duke,
and secretly nourished in his bosom an implacable hatred, both to his Person
and Name; instigated therefore with this accursed passion, he writ to the
Archbishop of Bordeaux (who was no better inclined to the Duke) that it was to
be proved, the Duke himself had been the Author of all these Commotions; that
it was he who had so long fomented them, and that he would again revive them
whenever he thought it convenient so to do, for the promoting of his own
Authority in the Province, and to get himself a Reputation at Court. He had not
always writ after this manner, but on the contrary, after the action of the
Barricades, the 15 of June, compelled to it by the virtue of Truth, which will
dart her Rays through the darkest Clouds of Malevolence and Envy, he had writ
to Monsieur de la Vrilliere, Secretary of State, with whom he had a particular
Familiarity and Correspondence, a Letter that was sent to the Duke, containing
these words. SIR,
If you be curious to know what passed here upon Friday last, I send you this
short, and true Account of it, as I could inform my self from the best hands.
This Action of our Governor was very great, and performed with great Bravery,
Judgment, and Fortune: had any sinister Action befallen him, we had all been
lost, and for my part I cannot but highly esteem him. I have nothing more at
present, but that, etc.

From Bordeaux the 18th. of June 1635.

But if he had in the beginning so highly applauded this Action, he had with no
less malignity censured the sequel of it, and the sinister interpretation he
put upon the Duke's good intentions, wrought so much the greater effect, by how
much they fell upon a spirit disposed of old, and of it self to convert to ill,
what god soever could come from the Duke's side. The Archbishop therefore with
open Arms embraced this new occasion of doing him a new mischief; he spoke of
it to Cardinal Richelieu, of whom he easily obtained order to write to Briet,
as he also did, that he might promise both impunity, and reward to such as
should prove the Duke of Espernon to be the Author of these Disorders. The
Archbishop's Letters to Briet, which were intercepted, spoke in these terms,
and in others far more odious than these. Briet having received this Order,
caused the Host of the Petit More, the first, and one of the chiefest
Ringleaders, that had appeared in this Sedition, to be tempered withal, causing
him to be often spoken to, and tempted by one of his own Domestics, who was
very familiar with him: but the Fellow, what promises soever they could make
him, The honesty of one of the Mutineers.
would never be corrupted into so foul a practice; and the Duke's good Fortune
would have it, that there was honesty enough in this man to secure him from
those dangers, wherein persons of a much more eminent condition would otherwise
have involved him.

The Duke as yet knew nothing of the Mischief that was brewing against him; but
on the contrary, relying upon the merit of his Services, and the acknowledgment
the King had made him hope for in all his dispatches, he had never lived at
greater ease in his Government, than he thought he might expect to do for the
time to come. In his Majesty's Dispatch of the last of June, he writ to the
Duke these words. Cousin,
I understand by your Letters of the 17th. and nineteenth instant, and by the
Relation annexed unto them, besides the Account I received from the Sieur de
Magnas, the Disorders that have happened in my City of Bordeaux; whose ill
example has also produced the like Insurrections in several other Cities, and
places of my Province of Guienne: which I conceive to be of so high importance,
that, had not powerful and speedy Remedies been seasonably applied, worse and
more dangerous Consequences were yet to be feared; as it had doubtless fallen
out in my said City of Bordeaux, if by your wonted Bravery, and Wisdom, you had
not opposed the Torrent of that Mutinous People. And as all the Accounts have
been given me of that business, as well by the Principal Officers of my said
City, as other my Servants agree in this, That your Valor, together with your
Zeal and Affection to my Service, have been equally eminent upon this occasion;
so can I not omit to assure you, that I am so highly satisfied with your
behavior, that no opportunity shall ever present it self, wherein I may
manifest my sense of your good Service in this Affair, by the effects of my
Favor and Affect on, but you shall find me very ready to embrace it: which the
Sieur de Magnas shall the more expressly confirm to you on my behalf, etc.


The Duke's other performances upon this occasion received from his Majesty the
same Approbation, and Applause, and in all appearance he ought to rest very well
satisfied with the Acknowledgment his Majesty was pleased to profess; when on a
sudden, and without dreaming in the least of any such matter, he saw himself
reduced to the necessity of a Justification. He did not however do it after the
submiss and abject manner of a guilty man; but on the contrary, confident in
the security of a good Conscience, he had no sooner notice of the aspersion had
been cast upon him; but that he sent away immediately to the King, to demand
his Majesty's Justice, and writ to the Cardinal himself, complaining, that some
persons had made use of his name to suborn false Witnesses, to the prejudice of
him, and his Honor. The King granted him his desire, permitting him to
prosecute his satisfaction on in the Parliament of Paris; and the Cardinal,
after having utterly denied the giving of any Order to the prejudice of the
Duke's Interests, or that he ever doubted of his Candor, and the sincerity of
his intentions, writ him an answer in these words. My Lord,
I have received the Letter you was pleased to send me, Cardinal Richelieu's
civil Letter to the Duke of Espernon.
and conferred with Mounsieur de Magnas, about the occasion of his Journey; in
answer whereunto I have nothing to return, but this, that neither the King, nor
any of his Servants, have ever doubted in the least of the sincerity of your
affection to his Service, or of your passion to the prosperity of his Affairs;
or that you had in the late business of Guienne, any other, than the same
desires with his Majesty, and his Council; for which I shall ever very
willingly be your Caution. If any persons have reported otherwise, they must
have done it merely out of design to vex you, and not that they could
themselves believe it; it being not to be imagined, that any one can be so
senseless, who knowing what has happened at Bordeaux, and how you have behaved
your self in those disorders, can possibly doubt, that you did not upon that
occasion contribute all that in you lay, or that could be expected from your
Vigilance, and Valor to the security of the Province. I do therefore conjure
you to set your heart at rest, for any thing of that kind; and to believe that
neither the King, nor any of his Servants, who have the honor to be about him,
can possibly either upon this, or any other occasion, entertain the least
thought to your prejudice. His Majesty has caused the Sieur de Briet to be sent
unto to come speedily hither, etc.




The Cardinal could not in truth have writ to the Duke after a more obliging
manner, or have carried himself more civilly to him, than he did at the
beginning of this Affair; permitting Justice to be executed upon the fellow
Briet had employed to corrupt the Petit More, who by Sentence of Parliament was
condemned to make the Duke honorable satisfaction, and with a Torch in his
hand, and a Halter about his Neck in his Shirt, to be Carted through the City
of Bordeaux, The Duke receives some satisfaction.
and to serve ten years in the Galleys, which was accordingly executed upon
him: but when it came to the business of Briet himself, who had reason to
apprehend the issue of his cause, since he who had only been the Instrument of
the Mischief, whereof he had been the Contriver, had been so roughly handled,
the Cardinal interposed his Interest with the Parliament in his behalf; who
having once appeared in his favor, his Power had so great an Ascendant over
all other Powers, how great soever in the Kingdom, that it was impossible upon
this occasion to obtain Justice contrary to his will and pleasure; so that the
Duke notwithstanding all the Importunities he could after use, could never
obtain from Briet the least Reparation. But not full.


If the Duke was wounded to have this Justice denied him, in so public and so
sensible a wrong, he was no less afflicted at the Order he soon after received,
to permit that Briet might come, and execute the Functions of his Office in
Parliament, in all security and freedom: He had expected at least that he
should be detained at Paris, and that his Majesty would have had that
complacency to his just indignation, as to have removed so hateful an object
from his sight. But he saw very plainly, that the Cardinal was the Author of
this Command: He knew also very well, how dangerous a thing it was, either to
contradict, or provoke him. But how great soever his Credit might be, the
violent effects whereof he had already felt, he would notwithstanding never
submit to his will, nor lay down the Animosity he had justly taken up against a
person from whom he had received so irreparable an Offense.

Whilst the Duke was perplexed with these troublesome Affairs, The Cardinal de
la Valette sent at the head of a great Army into Germany.
both in his own Government, and at Court, the Cardinal de la Valette his Son
had been employed in the conduct of the greatest Army his Majesty had at that
time on foot; the Command whereof was equally divided betwixt Duke Veimar and
him. And if the Jealousy of our Confederates (who had obliged our two Generals
to enter a good way into Germany to their Succor) had not bounded their
Conquests, it is most certain they had made a very considerable progress into
this mighty Empire. But those who had implored their assistance, choosing
rather to be left weak, as they were, than to see the French Name raised to a
greater height of Glory, and Reputation, by the Victories they would infallibly
have obtained over those of their own Nation, it was impossible to persuade
them to join their Forces with ours. By which tergiversation, if (as they did)
they deprived our Generals of the advantages they might reasonably expect, it
was also to make them acquire the honor of so brave a Retreat, as might justly
be ranked with the most famous Victories. Our Army, being advanced a great way
into Germany, had all the Forces of the Emperor poured upon them; in which
condition they had not only the Rhine, but several other Rivers also, and
difficult passes to go over, A brave Retreat of the Cardinal de la Valette.
and break through, before they could return into their own Country. Which
notwithstanding they did, with their Swords in their hands; neither the
incommodities of the ways, nor the interposition of the Enemy, being able to
stop them: so that they fought eight days together almost without intermission,
leaving the ways, by which they made their retreat, much more remarkable by the
blood of their Enemies, than by that of their own Soldiers.

Though the mouths of all men were full of the praise of this Action, that the
Court appeared to be infinitely satisfied with it, and that the Duke himself
from all parts received congratulatory applauses of so great an exploit in the
person of his Son; The Duke dissatisfied that the Cardinal de la Valette his
Son should follow the profession of Arms.
he had notwithstanding much rather this Son, advanced into the Church by his
Learning, Birth, and Fortune to so eminent a degree of Dignity, and Reputation,
should wholly have applied himself to her Service, than that he should expose
so dear a Life to so dangerous a Profession. He ever apprehended it would be
fatal to him, and therefore had done all he could to dissuade him from it,
employing to that end the endeavors of several his most intimate Friends and
Servants: but all in vain, either the humor of the Time, the inclination of
his Son, the necessity of his Destiny, or all together still prevailing with
him, above the fears or foresight of so affectionate a Father.

The Duke arrived now at an extreme old Age, worn out, The Duke of Espernon
falls dangerously sick.
and spent with the labors he had undergone during these Commotions, and the
Vexations that had succeeded, was again in the beginning of Winter seized by a
very troublesome, and very violent Disease. This season, for several years, had
never passed over, without producing strange alterations in his health;
insomuch that he would often say, he perceived in the end it would do his
business, and that he could not long defend himself against two Winters at
once, that of Age, and that of the Season; as it indeed fell out. At this time
every one despaired of his Life, and the report of his Death, that was spread
in all parts, followed a few days after with the certain news of his Recovery;
having astonished all the world, that now scarce passed any longer for
raillery, which had so pleasantly been said, That he had outlived the Age of
dying. In truth all Foreign Parts, having for the space of threescore and eight,
or threescore and ten years been continually full of the great Name of
Espernon, finding him still in their Gazetts, one while taking Towns, another
in the head of Armies; now Triumphing, and again in Disgrace: but ever in some
great and illustrious Occasion; Strangers conceived of him, that this must be
the Grandchild of that Duke of Espernon, who had been the Favorite of Henry
the III. of France, and could not persuade themselves that the lives of two men
could furnish this History with so many important Actions.

The Duke, whilst he was yet sick, Anno 1636.
and even in the worst of his Sickness, had an inckling of some designs the
Spaniard had upon several Frontiers of this Kingdom, and particularly upon
those of his own Government; of which to be better assured, he was careful to
send thither such persons, The Spaniard m^kes preparation to invade Guienne.
as were capable of discovery, and as he durst trust, to bring him true
intelligence of what passed amongst our Neighbors abroad. By these Spies he
understood that all the Frontiers of Arragon, Biscay, Guipuscoa, and other
finitimous Provinces of Spain, had order to make Preparation of Arms, and were
to set out a certain number of Soldiers by an appointed day: That to these
Provincial Forces they would moreover add several standing Regiments, and of
both together to make up a considerable Body. Of all which the Duke was so
precisely informed, that he did not only know the number of men, but even the
names of all the Captains who were to Command them. Neither did he fail to send
the King an Account of the Intelligence he had received: The Co^rt neglects the
Duke's Intelligence,
but our great Ministers were so taken up with other nearer, and more immediate
Affairs, that they were not much concerned at a danger two hundred Leagues from
Paris. They therefore contented themselves with writing to the duke, that he
should cause Bayonne (the place that was principally threatened) to be fortified
at the Charge of the Inhabitants; and as to the rest, that he was by his
Wisdom, and Interest, to provide for all things within the Precincts of his
Command. These Orders so general, and of so vast a Latitude, had formerly been
the fullest Commissions the Romans were wont to give their Generals in the
greatest necessities of Public Danger: but they were in our times the
narrowest, and the most limited that could possibly be granted, who had the
King's Interest committed to their Trust. There were, already others
established by Law, which no one without being Criminal was to exceed, and
those were, That no one should make Leavies, either of Men, or Money, without
Order by Letters Patents from the Council: That no one should mount Artillery,
or take necessary Arms out of the Arsenals, without special Order so to do. So
that all the Power of the Kingdom, residing in the persons of the Prime
Ministers, no Governor could make use of his own, without incurring the danger
of Censure. The Duke knowing, that in the evil disposition the Court then was
as toward him, this was only a device to make him run into some error, that
might draw the King's Indignation upon him, wisely feared to be involved in
those Calamities, under which, for Causes light enough in themselves, he had
seen men of great Quality, and Merit to perish, was not easy to be trap'd that
way. He therefore again writ to the King for more precise Orders in occurrences
that might happen, and in those dangers he had humbly represented to him; and
in the end, with much importunity, And provides very slenderly ^or the defense
of the Frontiers.
obtained Order to send an Engineer to Bayonne, to see it fortified as far as
forty thousand Livers would extend; the one half whereof was to be raised out
of his Majesty's Revenue, and the other upon the Inhabitants of the place. The
Duke, seeing he could obtain no more, did as he was commanded, and began some
Fortifications, which the want of money caused to be left imperfect, and by
that means the Town left in a weaker condition, than if nothing had been done
at all.

This Affair, which at this time was the only one of moment in the Province,
being put into this forwardness, the Duke conceived he had now leisure to look
a little after the recovery of his own health; which that he might do at better
convenience, and greater vacancy, from the perpetual distraction of the Affairs
of the Province, he humbly entreated the King to give him leave for a few days
to retire himself to Plassac, to the end he might at greater liberty make use
of those remedies, that were proper for his Disease. The King without any
difficulty, and in very favorable terms, granted his so just request:
whereupon he accordingly in the beginning of May came to his House of Plassac,
but it was to make a very short stay, he being scarcely there arrived, but that
he received Order to return speedily into Guienne, to look after the Affairs,
that very much required his Presence there. The great Preparations that were
every where making by the Enemies of France, to invade it, obliging him to
provide also for his defense; as he did, and that so well, as in the end turned
all their designs to their own confusion. There never perhaps in this Kingdom
had been more to do for the great men of it, than at this time; and as the
Government of Guienne by its vast extent, made up one of the most important,
and considerable Members of the State; so did it consequently produce for its
Governor, so many, and so various Affairs, that it is to be wondered at, a man
of so extreme an Age could undergo so many, and so continual labors.

The first thing the Duke did after his return into the Province (which was in
the latter end of May) was to execute an Express Commission had been directed
to him from the King, for the enrolling the A Statute of Augmentation.
Edict de Cr^e, newly passed by his Majesty, for the addition of one President,
and twelve Counselors to the Parliament of Bordeaux. This Affair could not
pass without encountering several Difficulties, all the other Parliaments of
France were charged with the same Augmentations proportionably to the extent of
their several Jurisdictions; this being therefore a common interest amongst so
many men of condition, it begat also a great correspondency amonst them to
oppose it. The King having foreseen, and expected all these obstacles from the
Parliament of Bordeaux, thought fit to invest the Duke with as much Authority,
as he could himself desire to overcome them; wherein his Majesty, and those of
his Council doubted not, but that he would with great alacrity put all his
Orders into severe Execution: they knew very well that there had been perpetual
feuds betwixt him, and that Assembly, and, as it usually falls out, designed to
make their own advantage of those Divisions: but the Duke taking a quite
contrary course in this Affair, than what they had expected at Court, satisfied
himself with only giving the Parliament to understand what, should it come to
the push, he had power to do, in case the King should not be obeyed; exhorting
them withal by their Wisdoms to prevent, what he for his part would avoid, as
far as was consistent with his Duty; and remonstrating to them, that in a
concern of this kind, they should not find him any ways to act by his own
particular passion; neither would he either use, or abuse the King's Name to
satisfy his own Resentments. This discreet, and moderate way of proceeding,
having in time wrought upon some spirits, that a more violent course might
perhaps have provoked into more untoward resolutions, succeeded so well, that
by this means he procured a very considerable assistance to the advancement of
his Majesty's Affairs; and that even with the good will, and free consent of
the Company, whose interests in return he husbanded, upon this occasion, with
the same tenderness, and care, as if they had effectually been his own.

At the same time that these Affairs were in agitation in Guienne, the Enemy,
who had been long preparing for some notable Enterprise, was now ready on all
sides to invade the Kingdom; to provide therefore for the necessary expense in
so critical an occasion (all ordinary, and extraordinary ways besides having
been found to fall short) the King was constrained to lock up his Treasure from
all other Expenses, which did not directly respect the War: so that all the
great men of the Kingdom saw themselves excluded from all possibility of
extracting from thence their Entertainments, Pensions, or other Assignments of
right belonging, and annexed unto their several Offices, and Commands. To
supply which defect, part of these expenses were thrown upon the people; they
began at least to impose upon them the Entertainments of the Governors of
Provinces to be Leavied upon them, by Commissions of the Taxes, or Imposts.
Taille. Bullion, Sur-Intendant of the Finances, who professed a particular
Friendship to the Duke of Espernon, and pretended to be very solicitous of his
Interests, offered him one of these Impositions for the payment of his Salary;
advising him moreover, that out of this stock he should pay himself ^everal
Arrears that were due to him: but the Duke rejected the proposition, with a
generosity never enough to be commended; sending him word, That having for
above threescore years served the Kings of France, A rare example of the Duke's
love to the people.
without ever touching penny of the Assignations they had pleased to think him*
worthy of, excepting what came immediately out of the Exchequer, he would not
begin toward his latter end, to extract a subsistence out of the poor and
miserable people, he saw every day perish before his eyes for want of Bread:
That being placed in his Government to serve the King, and to govern his
People, it was from the Master he served, and not from those he commanded, that
he was to expect his Reward: That he had much rather be reduced to the bare
Revenue of his own Estate, than to see his Name in the Excise Office, or his
Table furnished out at the price of the Poor. Such as solicited his business
for him at Court, to render him more facile to their persuasions, represented
to him the example of all the other great men of the Kingdom, as well Princes
as others, who they said received now not one farthing any other way: But all
would not prevail; he returning answer, That he did not take upon him to
condemn any one for so doing, but that he did not nevertheless conceive himself
obliged to follow the Examples of any whomsoever; and that he had much rather
undergo the imputation of Singularity, in doing a thing he thought to be just,
than to do the contrary in imitation of all the world besides. And indeed he
continued to the last so constant in this noble, and generous Resolution, that
he never after received one penny of any of his Assignments, not so much as of
those that were due for the year before: So that at his Death he had near upon
seven years Arrears due to him, amounting to above five hundred thousand
Livers: By which it may be judged how much his strongest inclinations (for I
cannot deny but that he was exceedingly close handed in very many things) gave
place to Interests, wherein his Honor was concerned,

If in this particular he was so solicitous of easing the King's Subjects that
were under his Government, even to the prejudice of his own Interests; he was
no less careful to keep them within the just limits of their Obedience, and
Duty. The gathering in of the Tailles was at this time a matter of so great
difficulty, that in several neighboring Provinces, as in Poictou, Xaintonge,
and in Angoumois, the people were in manifest Rebellion. The Duke determinately
opposed himself against this ill example, and would never tolerate the least
Disobedience to his Majesty's Royal Pleasure; a strictness that being for their
licencious Constitutions, or at least in their Opinions too severe, made the
people no less murmur at him, for being too rough, than he was censured at
Court for being too indulgent: But he was no more moved with Complaints of the
one, than the Jealousy of the other; and his own satisfaction being his only
Object, he did not much regard any other, than what he found in his own
Conscience.

Though the Duke's mind was taken up with so many Affairs of great difficulty,
and trouble, he had yet so much room left there, as to allow something to his
own particular resentments, which would ever upon occasion crowd in for a place
with the Public Concerns. The Duke for all the injuries he had received of
Briet, would take no other revenge, but only to put him into a fright.
The impunity of Briet, and the liberty had been granted to him again to
execute his Office in the Parliament of Bordeaux, before his face, and as it
were in defiance of him, was insupportable to such a spirit, as that he was
possessed withal; so that, what command soever the King had been pleased to lay
upon him, to permit him so to do, it was impossible for him to pay his Majesty
that cheerful Obedience in this, he did in all other occasions. To which
indigestive humor of his, his Animosity (but too just in it self) being every
day exasperated more, and more by new Provocations; he, in the end, was no
longer able so to conquer his passion; but that his patience, being wounded to
the last degree, must of necessity overflow all bounds of moderation, and
proceed to some effects of Revenge; so disproportionate nevertheless to the
Injuries he had received, that if on the one side he was frugal of his own
Conscience in sparing the Blood of an Enemy, he was not however excused from
the blame of undertaking, and that with great bustle and noise, a thing of
little, or no moment, and that notwithstanding had like to have turned very
much to his own prejudice. After therefore the Duke had rejected the proposal
of one of his own Soldiers, who offered to stab Briet, and to do it after such
a manner, that he could never be suspected for the Murder; he commanded four
of his Foot^ men to kill his Coach-Horses in the open Street. This Command was
executed one day, that Briet was returning out of the City to his own House;
when his Coachman being assaulted by these four Footmen, they first pulled
him out of his Coachbox, and afterward thrust their Swords into the Flancks of
the Horses; whereupon the poor Beasts enraged with the smart of their Wounds,
ran away full speed, hurrying the Coach, and their Master in it three or four
hundred paces along the Streets, till at last, at one and the same instant,
upon the pavement they fell down, and died. Briet, who had at first been
terribly frighted with the sight of the Swords, was not much less afraid of his
Horses precipitous Career, which was also all the harm he received; the Coach
stopped, and overturned at the death of the Horses, giving him time to come out,
half dead with Fear, and to retire to his own House. The Parliament of Bordeaux
interest themselves in the affront offered to Bri^t.
The Relation of this business was immediately carried to the Duke, which
shadow of Revenge was to him matter of entertainment, and laughter for an hour
after: But the Parliament took it after a quite contrary manner, who offended
to the height at the Injury done to one of their Robe, the next day assembled
their several Chambers, to enquire into the Fact: There was none of them who
were not very well satisfied with the Justice of the Duke's resentment, and who
would not have approved of his Revenge, had it proceeded a great deal further:
but there was also hardly any one of them, who did not interest himself in the
offense offered after so public a manner to the Dignity, and Honor of the
Assembly. Without doubt the business would have gone very ill with the Duke,
had matters continued upon these terms, and those of the Parliament after
having declared themselves Parties, remaining still Judges, would neither have
spared the Duke's Footmen, nor any other could have been proved concerned in
the Action; they had already prepossessed the Cardinal, by representing to him,
that neither the King's Aut^ority, nor that of his Eminency, had been
sufficient to protect an Officer in the Execution of his Duty, in the most
honorable Body of the Province: but besides that the Cardinal (ever very ill
satisfied with the Duke, who on his part also did not much study to please him)
was of himself sufficiently disposed to do him a mischief, had not the
occurrences of the time involved the Court in the greatest disorder, wherein
perhaps it had ever been.

The Enemy, after having long threatened the Kingdom, was in the end with a
powerful Army entered into Picardy; and at their first coming had carried la
Capelle, and le Catelet, assaulted Corbie, which they also took, and alarmed
Paris it self to such a degree, as is sufficiently known to all. They were
likewise entered into Burgundy, and were preparing for the like attempt upon
Languedoc: and Guienne was not to be spared; neither was it a little while
after: So that the great Minister, wholly taken up with concerns of so high
importance, had no leisure to look after the Duke's Affairs; neither did he
think it convenient to nettle him, in a time when his services were so
necessary to the Kingdom; and the Chancellor who still retained his old
affection to the Duke's Interests, seeing himself absolute Master of this
business, concealing it from the Parliaments knowledge, referred it to the
ordinary Justice, where being animated with very little passion, it soon fell
of it self.

At this time of all others the Greatness of the Duke of Espernon seems
especially to appear, The great Employments of the Duke of Espernon's Family.
by the important Employments, and Commands wherewith his whole Family were
invested. The Duke de Candale his eldest Son was Generalissimo to the Armies of
the Republic of Venice, an Ally to this Crown. The Duke de la Valette his
second Son, was in the Army of Picardy, wherein though he had not in truth the
Principal Command (the Count de Soissons being General there) yet had he the
honor to be chosen out by the King, to infuse life, and vigor into that Army,
the Soldiers whereof, by some ill successes had befallen them, being
exceedingly dejected, which were the express terms wherewith his Majesty
allured him to that Service. The Cardinal de la Valette was also employed
against Galas in Burgundy, into which Province the Enemy being entered with a
formidable Army, had already made some Conquests before his arrival there.
Mirebeau had been taken, Saint Iean de Laonne was besieged, and the best Cities
of the Country were highly threatened; the fear there was exceeding great, and
the danger had been no less, if the Cardinal de la Valette, by opposing himself
to their designs, had not stopped the progress of their Arms. He fought them
with advantage in five or six several Engagements, and without ever being able
to tempt them to a Battle with all the provocation he could use, forced them in
the end to retire, with the ruin, and dissolution of their whole Army, that
unprofitably mouldred away to nothing. As for the Father, his business lay in
Guienne, a Province, that as it made up a principal part of the Kingdom, of how
great utility must the Service necessarily be, that preserved it from disorder
in so critical a time? A thing nevertheless fortunately effected, by his Wisdom
so moderating the discontents of the people, as to keep them in so dangerous a
Juncture of Affairs, from lashing into those extremes, whereinto by their
former behavior, it might reasonably be apprehended, should they find an
opportunity of this nature, they would precipitously run.

This was indeed one of the most important, The (...) Guienne.
but not the only Service he did the King upon this occasion. The Spanish
Council having (as has been said) determined to invade the Kingdom in several
places at once, principally hasted to enter into Guienne; to come to which
Province, they were to pass through the Country of Labourt (which is that of
Biscaye) and by the way highly threatened the City of Bayonne. They knew very
well the Duke of Espernon had no Forces to send into that Country; neither had
he had them, durst he indeed have done it, without the consent of the
Inhabitants; lest, being a choleric, and impatient people, as they naturally
are, any thing he should do of that kind, out of care to preserve them, should
put them upon desperate resolutions, and make them wilfully lose themselves.
They had before they came so despised the Enemies Forces, that they would not
endure any one should think of contributing to their preservation; a security
that did nor a little afflict the Duke, who had been of old acquainted with the
humor of this people, and knew them to be as timorous, and dejected when any
danger was near at hand, as they were stout and haughty, when it was remote,
and out of the prospect of their fear. Not daring therefore to rely upon the
valor, and Fidelity of such a people in an Affair of so high importance, and
moreover importuned by the intelligence he received from all parts, that the
Enemy was ready to enter the Country, he departed from Bordeaux the 6th. of
October, arrived the tenth at Nerac, and the sixteenth a^ Bayonne; with a
diligence so much above the strength of a man of his Age, that at his arrival
there he was surpised with a sharp, The Duke of Espernon falls ^ick at Bayonne.
and a dolorous distemper, so violent a Fever accompanying his pain, that for
some days his Friends, and Servants knew not, what to hope would be the issue
of his Disease. Though the Duke had with him no other Forces, save only his
Company of Gens d' Arms, his Guards, and an hundred or sixscore Gentlemen
Volunteers, he notwithstanding stuck not, boldly to expose his Person, for the
security of that Frontier, in the preservation whereof consisted the safety of
the whole Country.

He was scarcely there arrived, when the people came running in crowds with
news that the Enemy was upon the point to enter; who also on their part
followed the intelligence so close, that there was scarce any interval betwixt
the report of their coming, and their being come. The Spanish Army enters into
Biscay.
The Duke, though exceedingly ill, would by no means, that in an Affair of this
Consequence they should conceal any thing from his knowledge; neither did he
upon the first intimation fail to take order for all things with as much
diligence, and care, as if he had been in the greatest vigor of health:
wherein his instructions were also such, as had they been duly executed, and
observed, the Enemy would have met with greater difficulties than they did; and
their Entry into this little Country, though open on all sides, would have cost
them, both more time, and more blood, then they laid out upon this occasion.
But what he had ordered with so much prudence, and foresight, was very ill
obeyed; and the people of the Country no sooner saw the Enemy appear, than they
fled before them, none of their Leaders being able to prevail with them to
stand, or so much as once to face about in any place of what advantage soever.

The Duke sometime before he advanced toward this Frontier, foreseeing what
work and trouble the invasion of a Foreign Army was likely to create him, had
entreated the King to send the Duke de la Valette his Son, who also had the
Government of Guienne settled upon him in reversion, to his assistance; who
accordingly came to him to Bayonne, The Duke de la Valette comes to his Father
to Bayonne.
the same day the Enemy entered the Country, and who having, as he passed by
Bordeaux, heard of the Sickness of the Duke his Father, was by that ill news
obliged to take Post, and was but newly alighted when intelligence was brought,
that the Enemy was entering, and that thereupon had followed a great confusion
amongst our own people. The Duke at this news was not a little distracted,
betwixt two contrary Passions, by which he was at one, and the same time
assaulted, either of paying the assistance to which he was in Nature, and Duty
bound, to a good and languishing Father, or of pursuing what his Honor, and
Bravery exacted from him, for the Service of his Prince, and Master: But that
debate betwixt his Piety, and Honor was soon determined by the Father himself;
and the mutual tenderness they had for one another was soon overcome, by the
Affection they both had to their common duty. It was in the close of the
Evening when the Duke de la Valette arrived at Bayonne, and the night was no
sooner passed, when mounting on Horseback with some persons of on Condition,
who had there waited in expectation of his coming, he went out to discover the
Countenance of the Enemy: but neither his Presence, Exhortations, nor Example
could work any effect upon the common people; whose Spirits had by the first
days fright been so strangely subdued, that it was impossible to raise them the
next, to any tolerable degree of resolution: so that in this general
Consternation, all he could possibly do was to retreat without disorder, which
also was not to be done without a very great deal of danger. The Duke de la
Valette engaged his Person so far to make good this Retreat, and to preserve
the little Honor he had to manage in this Encounter, that he very often ran a
very great hazard of his life, and certainly exposed himself more, than he was
any way obliged to do, when being in the end retired (himself always the last
man) he commanded la Roche Captain of the Duke his Fathers Guards, and also of
his own, to make good the Bridge (which separates the Bourg of Siboure, from
that of Saint Iean de Luz) against the Enemy that followed very close in his
Rear. This Order was not to be executed without infinite danger, but the Duke
de la Valette well enough knew, that he, to whom it was given, would not belly
his former Actions; neither did la Roche deceive his expectation, who with
forty Musketeers only which he had under his Command, stopped the torrent of a
Victorious Army, and after having killed two hundred of their men upon the
place, amongst whom were eight or ten of their best Officers, and having by
that means given our Foot time to put themselves into a place of safety, after
he had sufficiently manifested his own Conduct, with the Valor and Dexterity
of his Soldiers, he drew up the Drawbridge that lay over the middle of the
River, and with very little loss retired to the Duke de la Valette's Troop, who
staid to make good his Retreat.

After this manner the Spanish Forces possessed themselves of the Country of
Labourt, The Spaniards make themselves Masters of the Country of Labourt* and
take the Fort of Soc^a without resistance.
and our men were no sooner retired on this side Saint Iean de Luz, but that
the Enemy seized it, and the same day presented themselves before Socoa. This
Socoa was a little point of Land, jetting out into the Sea, convenient, and
proper enough for Fortification; but those of the Country would never consent
to have it fortified. Which notwithstanding the place of it self was of so
advantageous a situation, that they had ventured to put into it two hundred
Soldiers; who having had leisure to cast up some Works, made a countenance
before the arrival of the Spanish Army, there bravely to defend themselves: but
their Resolution was of no long continuance, the fear of the people soon
infected the Soldier; and some Gentlemen who upon other occasions had given
testimony of their Valor, having been appointed to command them, were so
unhappy as not to preserve the same Reputation here. So that to be short,
contrary to the opinion of the two Dukes, the Father, and the Son, and of all
the men of Command about them, the place was delivered up without the least
resistance, and the Enemy at the same instant there fortified themselves.

It is not to be believed what a terror the entry of the Spaniards, and the
taking of Socoa, A panick fear in the City of Bayonne.
it being but three Leagues distant from their City, struck into the
Inhabitants of Bayonne; and, as all the Passions of the Populacy are extreme,
they in a moment converted the absolute assurance, wherewith they had hitherto
flattered themselves into a most infamous, and immoderate Fear; insomuch that
had not the Duke been present in the City, it had doubtless been in very great
danger to be lost: wherein nevertheless, if the Kingdom of France stood highly
indebted to him for working by by his presence so good an effect; they stood
little less obliged to the Spanish Gravity, and Circumspection, whose
deliberate way of proceeding made them run into an error, usually committed by
such, as persuade themselves their Enemies are provided against all sorts of
Accidents. For his cautious Enemy, forbearing out of this belief to present
themselves before Bayonne, unfurnished of all things necessary for its defense,
gave the Duke time by that means to make the Inhabitants reassume their former
courage; and that to such a degree, as from the despair of being able to defend
themselves, being grown to a confidence of doing it with honor, and advantage,
they were soon in a condition to repel any thing the Enemy could attempt
against them. The Duke seeing them in this good disposition, They are
encouraged by the Duke of Espernon.
caused a Review to be made of all such as were able to bear Arms, which upon
examination were found to be nine hundred only; and which notwithstanding he so
encouraged, what by the consideration of their Duty, and their own Interest (an
Argument as prevalent at least as any whatever in the minds of men) that they
all unanimously swore to him, to live and dye in the defense of their City.
Such as were not capable of bearing Arms, were employed at the Fortifications
which were yet imperfect; a labor wherein the more delicate Sex would no more
be spared than the men; by which means the work was followed on all hands with
so unwearied a Diligence, that what remained to be done, was perfected in fewer
days, than months would have been required before the Enemies approach. This
being thus provided for, they proceeded in the next place to examine what Grain
was in the City; of which search Vertamont, Intendant de la Justice had the
charge committed to his care: The order taken by the Duke of Espernon for the
conservation of the p^ace.
and in this they found the greatest defect, which was such, that in three days
the place must infallibly have been lost, had the Enemy presently clapped down
before it; for there was very little Corn to be found, and no Flower at all,
all the Mills were without the City, and the nearest of them a League distant.
This defect was therefore of all things to be supplied, which alone renders all
sorts of Provision, how great soever the Store, altogether useless: that
therefore in a few days was accordingly done; and being the City, which is
divided from the rest of the Kingdom by the Doux, a great and deep River, was
not to be relieved but on that side: The Duke was especially solicitous to
secure the wodden Bridge that affords the City communication with the Suburb du
St. Esprit, and from thence with the rest of France, by the County of Lannes.
To that end therefore he caused two good Forts to be traced out in his own
presence upon two Eminences that commanded that Bridge; and made the Work to be
so diligently followed, that they were in a few days put into a condition of
defense. They also by his order hastened the Leavies for some Recruits that
were raising in Guienne, that they might be put into those two Forts, by which
means they were sufficiently manned. He moreover put three months Provision into
the City, gave order for the perfecting of the Fortifications, wholly reassur'd
the Inhabitants, and put the place into so good a condition, that nothing for
the future, but by a regular Siege, was to be effected against it. After having
thus provided for the safety of this City, he prepared himself to go take order
for the defense of the other Cities, that were upon this Frontier, which were
also in no little danger; yet was it not before he had further supplied the
necessities of the Inhabitants of Bayonne, who complaining to him that their
Corporation was reduced to so great poverty, that it would be impossible for
them to provide against a thousand little Accidents that might happen to them,
moved at their entreaties, he left with them all the money he had left of the
Expense of his House, arising to four and twenty thousand Livers, which was
owing to him at his Death, and was the only money he ever lent upon Security,
and at Interest in the whole time of his Life.

The Spaniards knew nothing of the ill condition of this place, A remarkable
oversight in the Spaniard.
till after it was fortified, and supplied in such manner, as you have heard;
and then the^ saw the error they had committed, but it was then too late. They
declared however, to the Duke's Glory, and in their own Vindication, That they
did not repent them of their wary manner of proceeding; but that if it were to
do again, they should do the same, and that they could never think a place ill
Fortified, that had a Duke of Espernon to defend it. The Duke, what testimonies
soever they so highly, and publicly gave, of the esteem they had of his
Virtue, was not notwithstanding so to be charmed with the Harmony of their
Praises: but that being informed the Enemy, despairing for the future of being
able to effect any thing upon Bayonne by force, was determined to pass the
River Doux, to fall upon Dacqs, by that means to cut off all Relief that could
be put into Bayonne; The Duke of Espernon goes from Bayonne to Dacqs.
to the end, that of it self, and without the expense of a Siege, it might fall
into their hands; he departed thence with the Duke de la Valette his Son, his
faithful Companion in all the cares and troubles of this Expedition, to take
order for the defense of this little place, which they also in six days that
they made their abode there, what by their Vivacity, and good Conduct, and
partly at their own expense, put into so good a posture of safety, And from
thence sends a Dispatch to the King.
that it was out of all danger of Surprise. Having thus provided for the
security of the most Important Places, they dispatched away a Gentleman to the
King, to give his Majesty an Account of what they had done for his Service, and
to receive his Commands, what they were to do for the time to come.

From Dacqs they went to Mont de Marsan, where they yet made some stay, as well
in reference to the securing that place, as also to be better satisfied
concerning an intimation had been given them, that the Spanish Army was
resolved to pass the River in order to some notable Attempt. To this end
Captain la Roche was sent to discover nearer hand the depth of the Enemies
Designs; who soon perceived by the Works they had begun at Socoa, that they had
no thoughts of making any further progress into the Country that Winter. Having
therefore at his return given his Masters this assurance, upon his Report,
which they found afterward to be very true, they continued on their way
toward Bordeaux. The Spaniards on the other side applying themselves to their
Fortifications, labored more successfully, than they imagined, to the Glory
which was reserved for the Duke de la Valette in their Defeat the ensuing year;
and having in the mean time lost all hopes of advancing further into the
Country by force of Arms, fell to Caballs, and practices to seduce the
Inhabitants of Labourt over to their side. They promised them Peace, freedom,
Security, and all other advantages they could desire, if they would cohabit
with them; they offered Protection to all such as would continue Neuters in
their own Houses: but they threatened no little punishments to those, who should
retire into France. All which Artifice nevertheless prevailed nothing with the
Biscains, there being not so much as any one Family, that did not prefer a
voluntary Exile, before any Benefit, or Immunity that could derive from the
bounty of invading Neighbors: An exemplary Fidelity in the Inhabitants of
Biscay.
So that if they were in the beginning condemned by some, for having manifested
too little heat at the Enemies first coming in, every one in the end applauded
their Fidelity, who would rather choose to abandon their Country, and Fortunes,
than to enjoy them in the greatest quiet, and security, under the usurpation of
a Foreign and invasive Power.

As it was evident enough both by the number of the Enemy, Anno 1637.
and the good condition wherein they had had the leisure to fortify
themselves, that it was impossible to attempt any thing against them, but by
means proportionable to the greatness of their Forces; the Duke sat still at
Bordeaux in expectation of Orders from Court for their future proceeding. But
they waited not long, Haumont, which was the Gentleman they had dispatched
thither, returning to Bordeaux almost as soon as they, furnished with several
very favorable Dispatches; wherein after the King had highly magnified the
Duke of Espernon's Conduct, who by so little means had preserved that Frontier,
his Majesty proceeded to let him know, he infinitely desired the Enemy might be
disobliged from the places they had already possessed; promising in order
thereunto Men, Provisions, Ammunition, a Train of Artillery, and what was
necessary to the execution of so great a design: All this notwithstanding
remained in terms of a bare promise only, without ever coming to the least
effect; nay, there was not so much money to be had, as would serve for the
raising of two Regiments of Foot, and four Troops of Horse; though the Duke had
not so much as one Soldier in the Province: a Sum, which though it amounted
not to above fifty thousand Livers, yet the Exchequers of the several
Provinces, and the King's other Bancks being totally exhausted, there was a
necessity for the Duke to advance it, The Duke of Espernon raises Forces with
his own money.
out of his own private Stock, which he also was willing to do; and though it
went something hard with him, had much rather in this urgency of his Majesty's
Affairs, lay out the money of his own private Revenue (for of two years he had
not touched one penny of the King's) than that the Country the Enemy had invaded
should be left unto them, which also was not to be preserved, but by the
opposition of some considerable Forces.

While the Frontier of Bayonne found work enough for the two Dukes, the Royal
Arms were employed for the recovery of Corbie; that being almost the only place
of importance, the Enemy had made a Conquest of, with all their long, and
mighty preparation. In the beginning of this Siege, there was scarce any who
did not believe the Fortune of the Cardinal depended upon the event of that
Enterprise, and that, should the King happen to be baffled before it, his
Majesty weary of maintaining the Quarrels of his Minister (for such were all
the Wars of Europe at that time time reputed) at so vast an expense of
Treasure, and with so much disquiet to his Kingdom, would infallibly sacrifice
him to the Animosities of Strangers, and the Discontents of the Great Ones of
his own people, who equally desired his Ruin: But the success of this Leaguer,
more speedy, and fortunate than was to be expected, having reconciled the
Cardinal to the Kings opinion, and astonished all those who had prophesied an
alteration in his Fortune, every one was struck with admiration at a prosperity
so beyond all example, insomuch that even those who had most thirsted after his
Ruin, were the first to congratulate him for the good success. It Is said that
of those there were some, who, that they might with greater Elegancy shroud
themselves from any jealousy the Cardinal might entertain against them, made
no difficulty to prostitute their own Fidelity, and Honor, in discovering the
Secrets either of their Masters, or Friends, to him who was their common Enemy.
It was by that sort of people (as is believed) that the Cardinal had
intelligence of a Plot, wherein the Monsieur, and the Count de Soissons had
conspired against him, with whom the Duke de la Valette was also delivered to
him for one, who had a great hand in this Affair; The first cause of the Duke
de la Va^ette's Disgrace.
and it is most certain that from thence the Cardinal laid the design to
persecute his Families and his own particular Fortune to the last extreme; so
that from that time forward, there was neither bound, nor moderation in the
implacable Hatred he conceived against him upon this very account. How far the
Duke de la Valette's Resentments might transport him toward the Cardinal, I
cannot tell; but I am well enough informed in the ill usage he received from
him, as well in the person of the Duke his Father, as his own, to be bold to
say, that h^ had all the r^ason in the world to be offended to a very high
degree: but this Affair having been (as has been said) either the occ^sion, or
at least the pretense of all the great Persecutions of this Family, it will not
perhaps be impertinent to take things from the beginning, that they may be the
better understood.

The Duke de la Valette being (as we have observed) entered into the Alliance of
Cardinal Richelieu, The manner of the Duke de la Valett's Conduct after he
entered into Cardinal Richelieu's A^liance.
had examples enough of several persons of very great Quality before his eyes,
to make him stoop to extraordinary Applications, and respects toward him: but
nothing could ever induce him to bend below the terms of decency, and his own
condition; so that he only paid him what respect was due, and nothing more: a
way of living that by no means satisfied the Cardinal, who would exact from all
conditions of men, a Reverence without all reserve. A vanity of his, that
although the Duke de la Valette was very perfect in, yet did not that knowledge
make him alter his resolution, choosing rather to live with him in a less
degree of Favor, than to beg Offices and Employments at the price of his own
Honor. Many secret discontents arising from this first cause, it must of
necessity follow, Discontents arise betwixt them.
that these two Spirits having been so long dissatisfied with one another, and
so equally disposed to a final Rupture, would at one time or another produce
their ordinary effect. An occasion presented it self at the Enemies entering
into Picardy, and about the taking of la Capelle. The Baron du Bec was
Governor of this place, which this Gentleman very well known to, and entirely
beloved by the Duke de la Valette, had surrendered sooner, than the Cardinal
could have wished, for want (as he pretended) of Provision. The Cardinal, who
by an example of high severity, would oblige the Governors of other places to
hold out to the last extremities; or perhaps by that means to justify himself
to the King, from any censure he might undergo, as Prime Minister of State, in
not having sufficiently provided for the necessities of so important a place,
caused an Honorable Council immediately to be Assembled. This Council
consisted of all the Officers of the Crown, who were then to be found in Paris,
together with some Counselors of State, whose business it must be to condemn
the Baron du Bec, as convict of Cowardice, and Treachery, to a privation of his
Life and Honor. The Duke de la Valette was amongst the rest summoned to this
Assembly, wherein as he saw he was not called to it to deliver his free
Opinion, that the Gentleman was beforehand marked out for Ruin, and that
Sentence of Death must consequently ensue; so did he endeavor with all the art
he had to decline having any thing to do in that business: but it was
altogether in vain. The Cardinal would admit of no excuses, but after having
sent three times to his House to seek him, Chavigni, Secretary of State, went
the fourth time to tell him plainly, he must either satisfy, or absolutely
break with the Cardinal. This express, and positive Declaration prevailed in
the end with the Duke de la Valette to go to the Council; but it was not
nevertheless to comply in the least with the animosities of others. The Baron
du Bec's Affair was laid open in the Presence of the King, and the Cardinal,
and the greater part of the Judges concluded the Crimes laid to his charge,
sufficient to condemn the party accused: but the Duke de la Valette did not
think himself obliged to be of that opinion, and consequently could not consent
to his Condemnation. If the Cardinal had manifested something of vehemence, in
importuning the Duke to come to the Council, he expressed yet a far greater
indignation to find him of a judgment so far dissenting from his own, insomuch
that at his coming out of the Council, taking the Duke de la Valette aside, he
could not contain himself from breaking into very unhandsome Language,
proceeding to so bitter, and so injurious expressions, that the Duke was not
able to forbear giving a very smart Reply, the Reverence due to the place where
they then were permitting him at that time to do no more; though such as were
acquainted with his temper, will easily judge, that he would omit no occasion of
manifesting a higher resentment. In the heat of this Discontent he received the
Command of which I have already spoken, to go join himself with the Count dc
Soissons in Picardy; and then the Cardinal could find some expressions of
Civility, and Complement, to smooth him withal, at his departure; but an
Offense being much harder to be repaired, than committed, the Wound the Duke
carried along with him in his Bosom, was not to be closed by so slender a
Remedy. It was presently after this that the Cardinal was informed, the Duke de
la Valette had hearkened to the Propositions had been made to him by the Count
d^ Soissons, for the Revenge of their common Injuries, and that the Monsieur
was also consenting with them.

At the time the Cardinal received this intimation, the Duke de la Valette, The
Monsieur, and the Count de Soissons retire from Court,
to his good Fortune, was as far off as Bayonne; but the Monsieur, and the
Count de Soissons, being both at Paris, escaped but a very few hours of being
both Arrested, having nevertheless time enough to withdraw themselves, they
departed suddenly from Paris: when, though they scarce knew which way to fly
for refuge from the power of their Enemy; yet hoping that either the danger the
Duke de la Valette ran equally with them; or that the Generosity of the Duke of
Espernon (who on the other side was himself not very well satisfied with the
Court) might induce him to receive them into Guienne: And send to the Duke of
Espernon to engage him in their Quarrel.
they dispatched away thither first the Count de Bourdeille, and after him the
Count de Montresor his Brother; of which both the one and the other had
instructions to address themselves to the Duke de la Valette, that by his
persuasions the Father might be rendered more favorable to their desires: But
this Duke, who had much rather be alone exposed to the Cardinal's whole stock
of hatred, than to disquiet the old Age of the Duke his Father, by interessing
him in his Quarrels, freely told them, That the Monsieur, and the Count were to
expect nothing from his Mediation in this Affair: That he was indeed resolved
to follow his Fathers Resolutions; but that he would never prompt him to any
thing that might trouble his repose. Montresor, who came last, and who would
not depart without a positive resolution, finding no hopes of concurrence in
the Duke de la Valette, desired to talk in private with the Duke of Espernon.
He was accordingly admitted into his Chamber, at ten of the Clock at night,
after all his Servants were retired, where he represented to him, The immediate
danger wherein two great Princes of the Blood were at this time engaged by the
violence of Cardinal Richelieu, their, and his particular Enemy: That in
securing their lives he might also establish his own Fortune, and that of his
Family: That he knew very well how great was the number of discontented
persons, how violent the despair of the people, and how intolerable the
oppression of all the several Orders of the Kingdom: That all these favorable
dispositions wanted only some considerable heads, to work their common safety
by the ruin of the Cardinals Affairs: That there was not a person in the
Kingdom, who would not be ready speedily to join with these Princes, seeing
their good intention for the Redress of the Public, should their cause be
supported by his prudent Conduct: That this Act would crown all the other
actions of his life, for ever establish the Fortune of his own Family, and
render obliged to him for their Lives, and Honor, two Princes, the one the
Son, and Brother of the King his Master's, his own Nephew, and Friend; and the
other so passionately enamored of his Virtue, that he would with all his heart
lay aside his condition, to obey his Orders in the conduct of those things they
were to pursue for their common safety. All these Reasons, how plausible soever
in themselves, and how handsomely soever laid before him, were not yet of force
to shake a man so firm, and so confirmed in his Duty, as the Duke of Espernon;
who, although he very well knew, and that it was no hard matter for him to judge
by the Example of these Princes, and of most of the great men of the Kingdom,
that the Cardinal would not long hold his hand from striking at his Fortune,
which was the only one almost that remained unshaken, would nevertheless rather
choose to lie exposed to this danger, than to secure himself, by being the
promoter of a Civil War. Who exe^ses himse^^.
He therefore answered Montresor, That he was the Monsieur's most humble
Servant, that he was the Count's also: That they did a great deal of Honor in
reposing so great a confidence in him, as to communicate so much of their
Interests, and Designs: That they could not do it to one that was a more
faithful Servant both to the King, and to them, or more passionate for their
good: That the greatest testimony he could possibly give them of that passion,
was, humbly to beseech, and (if he durst be so bold) to advise them, to have
speedy recourse to his Majesty's Bounty, and Royal Favor: That for what
concerned himself, he was very sensible of all the ill usage he received from
Court; but that he did by no means impute it to the King: That seeing also he
could not do himself right, without offending him, he rather chose still to
support the oppression under which he now suffered, than to revenge himself of
his particular Enemies, by troubling the Peace of the Kingdom, and by adding
the mischief of a Civil War to those miseries wherewith the poor people were
already afflicted: That he did most humbly conjure these Princes by the name,
and quality they bore, and by the Interest they had in the Good of the Kingdom,
to do the same, and to surrender all their Animosities, and Discontents to the
Public, leaving to Heaven, which was just, the Revenge of their Wrongs: That
as to the rest, they might assure themselves the Secret they had been pleased
to entrust him withal, should be faithfully lock^d up in his heart, and that he
would suffer all sorts of Extremities, rather than revel it. Montresor being
able to obtain nothing more of the Duke, returned with this answer back to the
Monsieur his Master; who either prevailed upon by the Duke's advice, or obeying
the natural affection he had to the good of the Kingdom, very readily embraced
the first overtures of Accommodation that were from the Court presented to him:
But the Count de Soissons, not thinking it convenient to trust the Cardinal,
what faithful, and sincere reconciliation soever could be promised to him,
retired himself to Sedan, from whence he never more returned.

As there is no secret that time does not in the end discover, the advice the
Duke had given the Monsieur, upon the Propositions he had sent him, was not
long concealed from the knowledge of the Court. I am certain the discovery was
neither made by the Duke, nor by any of his, the Fidelity, and Secrecy he
observed toward these Princes, giving on the contrary the Chancellor Seguier
occasion to complain of him. This true Friend of his having understood his
Prudent, and Loyal Conduct, in this so important Affair, writ to him, after
other things, in these terms, Give me leave to assure you that the King is
infinitely satisfied with your Behavior: I was ever confident, and have ever
said, that the Princes solicitations would never prevail with you, who can
entertain no overture, nor embrace no Proposition inconsistent with your
Masters Service. I have learned this excellent Maxim from your self, and your
Actions have ever been so pure from any blemish of that kind, that your
Fidelity, which will stand for a President to succeeding Ages, was never in any
possibility of being suspected; and did you stand in need of any one to
undertake for you in this case, I should offer my self to be the man. I hope
the Answer you sent this great Prince will make him see his own good, and
consider that of the Kingdom: We here expect his Resolution, which we doubt not
but will be very good; forasmuch as all things he has desired of his Majesty's
Bounty are granted to him, etc. The Duke, who little expected such a Complement
as this, and that had not given the Monsieur this counsel with any intent to
obtain thereby a thanks from the King, returned the Chancellor a very civil
Answer; but sent him word withal, That if he had observed him in those times
wherein they had served the King together wholly intent upon his Majesty's
Interests, he was so far from having lost any thing of that Zeal, and
Affection, that on the contrary those years which had passed over his head, had
only served to confirm him in his Duty; but that he was infinitely surpised to
hear the Court should be informed that he should have used any Arguments to the
Monsieur concerning the present Affairs, of force to make him consider what he
did owe to the Service of the King, the good of the Kingdom, or his own
preservation: That he could assure him since his Highness depa^ted last from
Court he had not seen him, nor any one employed by him; neither had he
directly, or indirectly heard from him at all: That the discourse therefore
which had done him this good Office with the King, must be something he might
perhaps have said in public without other design, than the vanity he had upon
all occasions to manifest his passion to his Majesty's Service, and to exhort
all men to continue firm in that Duty, etc. The Chancellor was by no means
satisfied with this Answer, it seeming to him that the Duke was therein more
reserved, than became their old acquaintance, or the entire confidence he might
safely repose in his Friendship: but the Duke, who would by no means do the
Monsieur the least ill office, or fail in his Fidelity to him, chose rather to
give his friend this little discontent, which he also knew would soon be
forgot, than to fail in his Faith, which would be an eternal blemish to him,
and so great a forfeit to Honor, as he could never have forgiven himself, as
it had been impossible for him ever to repair.

Although the Cardinal prepossessed with the ill Offices had been done by the
Duke de le Valette had conceived that high distaste against him, he usually
manifested in such cases; he nevertheless made shift to smother it upon this
occasion. The Cardinal dissembles his dissatisfaction with the Dukes of
Espernon, and de la Valette.
He had at this time great use both of the Father, and the Son, in the Affairs
of Guienne, upon their shoulders (he being sufficiently taken up with troubles
nearer home) to lay the burden of the care of that Province; so that he
treated with them in terms of greater confidence, than ever, writing to the
Duke of Espernon after this manner, My Lord,
You will find by the King's Dispaches, that his Majesty is unmindful of
nothing he conceives necessary for the driving his Enemies out of your
Government, and does assure himself you will upon this occasion give him a
testimony of your Valor and Experience, equally advantageous to the Reputation
of his Majesty's Arms, and your own particular Glory. This Action will crown
all the rest of your Life, which makes me confident you will undertake it, with
the ardour both the King himself has reason to expect from your zeal to his
Service, and amongst other his Majesty's most passionate Servants, one who
honors you at the rate I do, who am, etc.




The like Complement was also sent to the Duke de la Valette, And puts them
jointly in Commission for the Affairs of Guienne.
which is a little too long to be inserted here, and wherein his Majesty sent a
List, or form of a gallant Army, wherein were to be three Cnmpanies of Gens-d'
Arms, twelve Troops of Light Horse, seven Regiments of Foot consisting of
twenty Companies each, and three of ten, with Equipage for the Artillery, and
other things necessary for the execution of a great Design. Had any part of
these large promises been performed, the two Governors would have needed
little persuasion to undertake the Enemy in what posture soever they had been:
but the whole Winter almost being lapsed in vain expectation, the Duke de la
Valette conceiving, that, if he did not do something of himself, the Enemy
might be so established upon the Frontier, that it would be afterward a matter
of extraordinary difficulty to dislodge him, advanced with the sole Regiments
of Guienne, and of Mun, composed of the Duke his Father's Servants, and his
own, and raised at their own charge. He found upon the place their Company of
Gens-d' Arms, and two Troops of Light Horse, with which small Forces he
undertook to oppose the progress of an Enemy three times as strong as himself
in number of men; he forced them from some posts of Advantage they had
fortified in the Country; and so straightened their Quarters, and constrained them
to lie so close in their Trenches, that he thenceforwards made them begin to
feel necessities, which in succession of time gave him a Victory beyond all
humane hope or expectation.

Whilst he was taken up with this Employment, which of it self was but too
great for the small means he had wherewith to effect so great a Design; the
Discontents that had so long lain hatching in the minds of the people, produced
at this time the Mischief had so long been feared, and soreseen, and on a
sudden closed one of the most formidable Revolts, that ever perhaps appeared in
the Kingdom. This disorder began first in Perigort, from whence it suddenly
crept into Quercy, and thence in a moment diffused it self into Agenois, and
Bourdelois; A formidab^e Rebel on breaks out in several Provinces of France.
nay, even the Provinces of Angoumois, Xaintonge, and Poictou also, which but a
little before had been quieted by the Wisdom of Villemontee Intendant de la
Justice in that Country, being not yet well settled in their Obedience, stirred
up by the ill example of their Neighbors, ran into new, and more dangerous
Commotions, than before: so that these joining in the common mischief with the
rest before mentioned, the Contagion spread it self almost as far as the River
Loire. That which rendered the Sedition of Guienne the more considerable was,
that those who ran into Arms were not unhandy Peasants, but old Soldiers of
the most Warlike Provinces of the Kingdom, who having long followed the
Profession of Arms, and not being able so soon to reduce themselves to their
former condition, would in the disorders of popular Insurrection seek out that
license, the sweets whereof they had sometime tasted, when their Riots had been
in some measure justified by their Arms. Most Commotions of this nature have
been observed to proceed by certain degrees, and the forming of the design has
usually been discovered, before the clap of Thunder has been heard; they
commonly advance step by step, and proceed from one gradation to another, to
their determinate end: but this at its very birth appeared in that excessive
and formidable height, that like great Conflagrations which have long been
smothering before they have broken out, it cast out flames in a moment, which
were hardly possibly to be extinguished. The number of the Rebels,
The first Intelligence the Duke of Espernon received of this accident, was,
that there were already above thirty thousand men in Arms, and it was true:
amongst whom many Gentlemen of good Quality were so indiscreet as to engage;
who though none of them was able to govern so unruly, and so confused a rabble,
they nevertheless made choice of a Gentleman a Borderer of Perguex, called la
Mothe-la-Forest to be their General, enforcing him to accept of that unhappy
Command. This poor Gentleman finding himself the first day oppressed with so
great a burden, after having in vain tty'd all ways to disingage himself, was
fain in the end to undertake to Head them; wherein the most prudent thing he
did, was to reduce this great multitude to regular number, by choosing out of
the best Soldiers, and such as were best Armed, ten thousand good men, and
dismissing the rest home to their own houses with order to be ready to March
upon the first Summons. And their progress.
This crew of Rakehells, made indeed in a few days a very considerable
progress; but it was without any manner of opposition; the people generally
having so great a kindness for the Rebellion, that there was scarce a City in
the Province, which they might not conclude to be their own. They were received
into Bergerac, and had possessed themselves of the Stone Bridge which is upon
the River Dordogne; they were moreover so confident as to fall upon Saint Foy,
and had not the Duke fortified the honest Inhabitants, against the license of
the baser sort of people, by sending first Codere a Soldier of his Guards, a
brave, and understanding fellow, and after him one of his Gentlemen called
Friget, with an hundred and fifty Foot, raised amongst his own Vassals, the
place had infallibly been lost. It was a Town of no little importance at this
time; for beside the advantage of its situation, all the Arms the Marshall de
St. Luc, the King's Lieutenant of the Province, and particular Governor of
this place, had formerly taken away from Brouage when he left that Government,
were in the Citadel, as also some pieces of Cannon, which would have supplied
the Rebels with such a convenience, as would have encouraged, and enabled them
to attempt the best Cities of the Province.

The Duke of Espernon having in this extremity no more, than three very weak
Regiments, which had been lately reformed, and that by little and little, were
drawing together in the Province, to go toward the Frontier, the Service to
which they were designed; writ to St. Torse Aid de Camp, who commanded them,
to draw them out against the Mutineers: but that Gentleman, more discreet, and
circumspect, than the Duke could have wished upon so urgent an occasion, chose
rather betimes to abandon his Quarters to the Rebels, than to do them the
honor to dispute them by any the least opposition.

The Duke after this seeing no means left to suppress this dangerous Faction,
which every day increased to a more formidable height, and startled with the
news he received from all parts, that some of the best Cities were ready to
revolt, and only expected the approach of the Rebels to receive them; writ in
all haste to the Duke de la Valette to come speedily to the Relief of the
Province with some of those Forces he had with him upon the Frontier, since
those in the Lower Gascony were not able to make head against the mischief
already grown too great to be withstood. The Duke at this Summons, without
deliberating upon the Duke his Father's Command, immediately put himself upon
his March; but yet so that the Foreign Enemy still continued shut up within
their Trenches by the Marquis de Poganne Marshall de Camp, with whom during
his absence he left the Command of the Army, whilst himself came to do the
King, the Kingdom, and particularly the Province, one of the most important
Services, could possibly be desired in so dangerous a time.

Being come to Cadillac, where his Father expected him sick (for he was at last
constrained to faint under the Burden (...) Affairs, and the affliction
wherewith these untoward occurrences had overcome his Spirits) and having from
him received such Instructions, as he was at that time in a condition to give,
he early the next morning took Horse to go in all haste to Marmanda. The Duke
his Father had already there caused some Troops to be gathered together under
the Command of the Marquis de Monferrant Marshall de Camp, and Lieutenant of
his own Company of Gens-d' Arms; where the Duke was no sooner arrived, but he
understood that at la Sauvetat, a little Town about four Leagues off, there was
a considerable Body of the Rebels, who had there fortified themselves, and made
show of a resolute Defense; an information that made him immediately March his
Forces that way to go to assault them. All the strength he had with him were no
more than two thousand five hundred Foot; but the Enemy were very many more,
which notwithstanding he made no difficulty himself to go view the place. At
the first sight he apprehended the danger of assaulting them without Cannon,
fortified as they were on every side either with Walls, or strong Barricado's;
and many of the Officers about him were of opinion, he should stay for some
Fieldpieces, he had ordered to follow after: but having considered, that to
dally with these kind of people only, were to give them greater encouragement,
and to augment their Insolence; he gave order upon the instant to go on to the
Assault. I have heard several who were present at, and had a share in this
Action, say, that the Assault was as vigorously given, and as obstinately
sustaind, as any they had ever seen, though they had been in many very
memorable occasions, and that they should eternally lament, that what was there
on both sides performed, had not been done against the Enemies of the Crown;
since doubtless whatever they had undertaken must have succeeded to their
immortal Glory. The Duke's men fired no further off than at the Muzzle of the
Musket, and the other party did the same; The Rebels suppressed by the Duke de
la Valette.
so that on either side a great many men, with some Officers of the Duke's
Regiments were slain: and the slaughter had questionless been much greater, had
the besieged been furnished with Pikes, to their Fire Arms; but being destitute
of that sort of Defense, they were constrained, after they had discharged their
Muskets, to abandon their Barricado's, and to retire. Madaillan who commanded
the Rebels gave the first example of a cowardly, and shameful flight, whom they
pursued as far as Quercy, to which place he fled for refuge: but having escaped
the hands of the pursuers, he saved himself out of the Kingdom, from whence he
returned not but to execute one of the most detesta^^e Villainies against the
Duke of Espernon that could ever have entered into the imagination of an
accursed Villain. The fatal and unhappy circumstances whereof, we shall soon
present before you, wherein this wicked, and abominable wretch will appear to
be both the instrument, and the cause of the Duke's approaching Death, and
Ruin.

The forcing of this place was presently followed by the Surrender of Bergerac;
the Mutineers had there made a countenance of defending themselves: but the
example of their Accomplices being taken by Assault, rendered them more facile to
the persuasions of their General, who was otherwise averse to War, than as he
was compelled to it by the unbridled Fury of some of the more violent Spirits,
who as they prompted their fellows to greater mischief, would also urge him on
to the greatest extremes. These two places being thus reduced to their
Obedience, secured all the other Cities of the Province; so that although some
few of the people continued still on foot, they were rather thought fit to be
undertaken by the ordinary Des Prevosts.
Officers of Justice, than worth the pains, or notice of men of Arms.

The report of this Defeat soon spread it self into Angoumois, Xaintonge, and
Poictou, whither the Duke de Valette also sent some few Forces, of those which
were now supernumerary after this success, and where the people, through fear
of punishment, remained in a posture of Obedience; by that means delivering the
Court of one of the greatest, and most troublesome apprehensions wherewith the
minds of the great Ministers could possibly be possessed.

This Victory was by the Marquis de Duras judged of importance enough to
deserve the pains of a Journey to Court, to carry news of it to the King; who
as he had by his own Valor contributed very much to the good success, the Duke
of Espernon, who had him in very great esteem, was also very willing that he
should give his Majesty an account of the Action. Being therefore there
arrived, The Court (...) the news of the (...) de (...) Valett's Victory, very
coldly.
he omitted nothing that might any ways recommend the merit of the Service: but
he did not find the Court disposed to receive things that came from the Duke's
at so favorable a rate, as in themselves they did justly deserve; they looking
upon all that had been performed as good as nothing, and imposing upon them the
assault of the Forts the Spaniard had erected upon the Frontier upon pain of
his Majesty's Indignation, which was the first recompense of their Service.

Already the Duke de la Valette had taken the way to his ordinary Post, and was
arrived at his Quarters, which he had ^ortified opposite to the Spanish
Trenches; when the Duke his Father received his Dispatches from Court, wherein
he had order, and express power to serve himself with the King's money, and
strength of the Province; and moreover to lay what Impositions they should
together think fit upon the people, for the execution of his Majesty's Designs.
The Duke of Espernon very well judged what was to be expected from these kind
of Leavies, he knew with what difficulties, and delays the King's own Revenue
was gathered in: He was also not ignorant of the little kindness they had for
him at Court: He knew very well that his Obedience herein might be converted to
a Crime, all Leavies of money being expressly forbidden, excepting such Taxes
as should be imposed by the King himself: all which being duly considered by
him, made him resolve to write to his Majesty, That both himself, The Duke of
Espernon refuses to (...) money by Impositions upon the people.
and his Son were very ready franckly to expose their Lives for the execution
of his Majesty's Commands, provided something of what was necessary might be
added to their Endeavors, that they might attempt to execute his Orders with
some possibility of success: but that he should ever impose a Tax upon his
Majesty's Subjects, he most humbly begged to be dispensed from any such
Employment, and that his Majesty would be pleased, since hitherto he had kept
his hands clean from any thing of that kind, he might still preserve his
Reputation without exposing it to the Clamor of his miserable Subjects, whose
Necessities were to him already too well known. These last words wrought the
most dangerous effect imaginable against him, the Court persuading themselves
that he affected Popularity, and sought this way to ingratiate himself with the
people, to the end that he might by their assistance be able to maintain
himself in his Government, and was in effect the principal Cause, if not the
only Motive, that caused him to be removed from thence the ensuing year,

Whilst the Duke of Espernon was engaged in these troublesome Disputes with the
Court, the Duke de la Valette continued the War with the Enemy, after the same
manner he had begun, keeping them close mewed up in their Trenches, without
permitting them to receive any relief from the Country, or so much as to taste
of the Air of the Field, where they never presented themselves without some
notable disadvantage. This way of making War having continued for two whole
months together, had reduced the Spaniard to Necessities were no longer to be
endured; they were necessitated to have all their Provisions out of their own
Country, and those to be brought to them by Sea, with infinite hazard, and
inconvenience, and at an intolerable expense. The Duke de la Valette was very
well informed of the ill condition to which they were reduced, their
Necessities had bred an infinite number of Diseases in their Camp, and the
number of six thousand men which they were at first, was diminished to that
degree, that not above half of them were left alive. In this condition he
prepared to make some attempt upon them, and to that end caused those Forces,
which by reason of the late Commotions, he had been obliged to leave in the
Lower Gascony, to advance toward the Frontier; not doubting but at this time to
effect that, which they would have had him some time before have attempted with
almost certain, and apparent ruin: but the Enemy informed of his resolution,
by a shameful, and precipitous flight (which was the highest acknowledgment of
their weakness he could possibly desire) prevented his design. They embarked
therefore all their Artillery, their Equipage, and their Sick by night; the
Port of Socoa (which they were Masters of) affording them convenience so to do,
by the same way, and with so little noise drawing off the rest of their Forces,
that their design was not discovered, till they were all aboard. The Duke de la
Valette was no sooner informed of their flight, The Duke de la Valette defeats
the Spanish Army without Fighting.
but that he drew up to the Fort, which was surrendered to him without
resistance: But it is not to be imagined how many several Objects of Misery
were to be seen in their Camp; nor to what extremities, by his long
perseverance, they had been reduced. They then quitted him their Forts, giving
him thereby the most absolute, and most happy Victory could possibly be
desired; so that he had the good fortune almost without men (at least with
Forces not half so great as the Enemies) without money (having never touched a
penny of the King's) almost without Victuals (having had none save what by the
industry, and providence of Vertamont Intendant de la Justice had been conveyed
to the Frontier) and without the loss of any one man of note, to ruin an
entire Army of an invading Enemy, to make them spend ten months time in vain,
to consume Provisions sufficient for the plentiful subsistence of the greatest
Army, and to leave three thousand of their men behind them, for a testimony of
their Defeat. Yet how great, and of what utility soever this Victory might be,
to the Kingdoms Honor, and Safety, the Court was notwithstanding dissatisfied
with the success; who seeing he had done more, than any one durst propose to
himself, and outstrip'd the hopes, and expectation of those who were emulous of
his Virtue, and would have been glad some disaster had befallen him, were by no
means satisfied with this performance; as if he had not done enough in doing so
much with so little means, and with so great safety, and reputation to his own
Person, and Name. Had he been at this time in a state of Favor, what
recompense might he not reasonably have expected for two Services of so high
importance, and both performed in one Campaign? Which though he failed of
through the ill Offices of some, that blinded by Animosity could not discern
his Merit; yet such as will make a right Judgment of things, must maugre the
ingratitude, and injustice of the Age, set a right Value upon them. Which
nevertheless is but coldly received at Court.
I know very well (without mentioning the Defeat of the Spanish Army, which
speaks sufficiently for it self) that the other exploit has been highly
magnified by disinterested persons, that had at that time the principal Command
of Poictou, and Xaintonge; who have declared that all the Provinces on this
side the River Loire, had run an extreme danger, had the general disorder, to
which the people were apparently, and absolutely inclined, not been suppressed
by the vigor and celerity, wherewith the Duke acted upon this occasion.

If the King's Affairs had the good success you have heard, under the Conduct
of the Duke de la Valette in Guienne, they succeeded no less fortunately upon
the Frontier of Picardy, The Duke de Candale, and the Cardinal de la Valette
command the Army in Picardy.
under the command of the Duke de Candale, and the Cardinal de la Valette his
Brothers. These two Generals jointly commanded the King's Army in those parts,
and so well, that they had in a short time retaken the Castle of Cambresis,
Maugbeuge, and Lendrecies in the end. That which was most remarkable in the
Siege of this last place, was, that they employed fewer days to take it, than
the Emperor Charles the Fifth had formerly squandered away months to go
without it; who after a six months Leaguer, had been constrained ingloriously
to quit the Siege: And all these things were done in the very face of the
Cardinal Infanta, who having been baffled in two signal Engagements, durst no
more make trial of our Generals Arms. The Duke of Espernon victorious in two
extremities of the Kingdom, by the Valor of his three Sons, and hoping that
the utility of these important Services for the Crown, would at least secure
the repose of his old Age, thought of nothing more, than by a gentle hand to
compose the Affairs of his own Government, and so to order all things by his
Moderation, and Justice, that the people committed to his Charge, might enjoy
the sweets of Peace, even in the greatest tumults of War. To this end therefore
he with great generosity, and constancy, rejected the offer that was made to
him, of the Command of a great Army wherewithal to invade the Enemies Country,
proposing to himself a greater glory in maintaining that little part of the
Kingdom entrusted to his care, in security, and peace, than in all the Pomp
that was laid before his eyes to allure him. How great a happiness had it been
if he could have effected this good design, and by that means have spun out the
remainder of his exceeding old Age in the calms of Vacancy, and repose? neither
was the fault his, that he did not bring this virtuous intention to the desired
end: but some ambitious, and interested Spirits, having infatuated the Court
with propositions of vain and imaginary Conquests, prevailed so far with the
great Minister, that it was determinately resolved, the Scene of the War should
be transferred into Spain, and that by the Siege of Fontarabie it should be
begun. The Enterprise was of no small difficulty, as it has since been proved;
which the Cardinal also was very perfect in, as having long before caused the
place to be considered by the Duke de la Valette himself, who had then diverted
him from that design: upon this occasion however he would no more remember the
reasons by which he had sometimes suffered himself to be overruled; but having
premeditated to engage both the Father, and the Son in an Enterprise, wherein
he resolved they should both perish, he sent them positive word, that they must
either absolutely undertake this War, and advance so much money, as was
necessary to begin it, or that the King would send the Prince of Conde to
command his Arms in Guienne. The Duke of Espernon, accustomed of old to the ill
usage of the Court, was nothing surpised with these Threats; but on the
contrary what was laid before him in the nature of a Penalty, being conformable
to his own desire, he gave the Court to understand, that he should ever esteem
it a great Honor, to have this Prince a Judge of his Actions; and that he
should be very glad the King would please to give him a Command in his
Government. He wanted not Servants about him, to dissuade him from sending such
a Message, and to represent to him the danger of inviting a greater person than
himself into a place where his Authority was absolute, and where he had no
rival to dispute it with him; laying before him withal many more examples of
such as had repented the having submitted their Power to a Superior, than of
such as in so doing had found their expectation answered by the event: But the
Duke was so confident in the Affection the Prince of Conde had manifested to
him in these latter times, that he could not possibly entertain the least
distrust, and moreover seeing it was absolutely determined, that the Province
of Guienne should bear the burden of the War with Spain, he had much rather
the Expenses of the War should be stated by a great Prince, who by his Quality
was priviledg'd from all Forms, than that he by imposing them should be
constrained to submit to the severity of an Inquisition, and be brought by his
Enemies to an Account. But that which most of all confirmed him in this
Resolution, was the advantage that would thereby accrue to the Duke de la
Valette his Son, who having nothing to do in Military Affairs, but to execute
the Prince's Orders only, would by that means be nothing accountable for any
event of the War; and as to any thing else, he was very well assured, that what
Employment soever should be conferred upon him, he would ever so behave
himself, as to deserve no other, than the greatest honor and applause.

Upon these prudent Considerations it was that the Duke resolved to write to
the Prince of Conde, to entreat he would please to accept the Command that was
offered him in Guienne, assuring him (as it was very true) that nothing could
be a greater satisfaction to him, than to have the Honor to kiss his Hands in
a place where he might have opportunity to give him some testimonies of the
passionate affection he had for his Service. Neither was he satisfied with
sending him this Complement from himself alone, he would moreover make the Duke
de la Valette do the same; so that the Prince, who before would never consent
to take upon him any Employment in the Duke's Governments made thenceforward no
difficulty to accept it: However, things not succeeding according to the Duke's
desire, men took hence an occasion to censure his Discretion, and to condemn
his Conduct, (as it usually falls out) because he proved unhappy in the end.

The End of the Eleventh Book.
THE HISTORY Of the LIFE of the Duke of Espernon.
The TWelfth Book.
THE Prince of Conde had no sooner accepted the Employment, Ann^ 1638.
but that a very ample Commission was forthwith drawn up for him, by virtue
whereof he was to Command, not only in Guienne, but also in Languedoc, Navarre,
Bearne, and Foix. His Letters Patents were dispatched at St. Germains en Lay
the Tenth of March; a Copy of which the Prince took care to send to the Duke of
Espernon the one and twentieth, by the Sieur Bonneau his Secreary, together
with a Letter that contained these words. Monsieur,
It is with great reluctance, that by his Majesty's Order I must go to Command
his Forces in your Government, knowing as I do, that to have his Majesty's
Service there well performed, there had been no need of any other person than
your self, and Monsieur de la Valette your Son; notwithstanding such being his
Royal Pleasure I must of necessity obey. Of my Commission I have here sent you
a Copy, assuring you withal, that in the exercise of it, I shall take all
occasions to manifest to you my entire affection; and that I will be so long as
I live,

Monsieur, Your Affectionate Cousin, and Humble Servant Henry of Bourbon.




To this Letter the Duke returned a very civil Answer, The Duke asks leave to
retire himself to Plassac.
but, before he received it, had sent to desire leave to retire himself to his
House Plassac; of which Request though the pretense was to enter into a course
of Physic for the recovery of his Health; yet the true reason was, that he
might be out of the way of having any Disputes with the Prince about the
Affairs of his Government, which he could not, without great grief, have seen
afflicted with those miseries wherewith it was threatened; nor perhaps without
expressing such a dislike of that harsh way of proceeding, as might have given
him Offense. A thing which all the Friends and Servants he had at Court having
foreseen, they had advised him to this course; his Sons, who were best
acquainted with his tickle, and impatient humor, were of this advice: but
there is great appearance that the first thoughts of retiring were inspired by
the Prince himself, who having in other Employments, where the Duke and he had
served together, had trial enough of his difficult humor, would no more be
subject to those contrarieties he had formerly endured, and had therefore
doubtless prompted him with that resolution. The Duke's Request therefore being
so conformable to the Princes desires, and to the sense of the Court, it was no
hard matter for him to obtain that in the quality of a favor, which had
doubtless been enjoined him as a punishment, had he not by speaking first
prevented a Command from the King to the same effect; for it had been from that
time forward (as it has been evident since) been resolved upon to withdraw him
from his Government, and to suspend him from all the Functions of his Command.
Nevertheless having lighted so pat upon the humor of the great Ministers, by
the advice of his Friends, he was very civilly treated in his Majesty's Answer,
which was couched in these terms. Cousin,
Having found by your Letter of the eigteenth instant, and moreover understood
by the mouth of the Sieur de Lavrilliere the Secretaire de Commandemens, ou
d'Estat, The four Principal Secretaries, who in the Court of France sign
Letters Patents, and Dispatches of State.
Secretary of my Dispatches, Anno 1637.
that in order to your Health, by the change of Air, and the use of some
Remedies have been prescribed you by your Physicians, you desire, for some
time, to retire your self to your House of Plassac: I send you this to let you
know, that any thing which may either concern your health, or satisfaction
being very pleasing to me, I do willingly grant you the liberty you desire, to
go to your said House; assuring my self, that even from thence you will have a
vigilant eye to whatsoever may concern the good of my Service within the
precincts of your Government. In the mean time I shall pray to God, Cousin, to
have you in his Holy Protection.

From St. Germains en Lay the 28th. day of March 1638.

The Duke very well satisfied with this answer, began to make himself ready to
begin his Journey, so soon as the Prince should be arrived in Guienne; where,
whilst he waited in expectation of his coming, he passed away the time with the
Duke de Candale his eldest Son, entertaining him with greater familiarity, and
freedom, than till that time he had ever done; whose complacency, and fine
Behavior made at this time so great an impression upon the Duke his Father,
that certainly this Son had never been so dear to him, as when he was upon the
point to lose him; in so much that his present joy was no little disposition to
augment the approaching grief soon after occasioned by his unexpected Death.

The Duke de la Valette had in the interim of these Dispatches from the King,
The Duke de la Valette is constrained to make a journey to Court,
and the Prince of Conde been obliged to make a Journey to Court, to which he
had been engaged contrary both to his Majesty's express Order, and also his own
resolution. He knew very well the ill Offices had been done him to the Cardinal
since the business of Corbie, glanced at in the preceding Discourse, he was
moreover very well acquainted with the implacable nature of the person, who
conceived himself so highly offended by him, to which his power was no less
known to him, than his malice; considerations that altogether had made him
positively determine not to put himself into his hands, that he might not add
to the number of those who had already tasted the utmost effects of his
Indignation; choosing rather to live in his Government in safety, though in
disgrace, than to expose himself to the almost inevitable dangers he was to
wade through to a faint, and dissembled Reconciliation. But how determinate
soever he had been in that resolution, it was impossible for him to keep it;
for those who had imprudently engaged his Majesty in a War with Spain, as
maliciously made the Cardinal some overtures of Accommodation, as a thing
solicited by the Duke de la Valette himself, who desired nothing less, exposing
him by that means to the greatest hazard he perhaps ever ran in the whole time
of his Life. The Treaty however being thus set on Foot, the Duke seeing himself
reduced to a necessity, But with infinite danger
either of breaking openly with the Cardinal, or of going immediately to him,
chose in truth the most dangerous course; but withal that by which he could at
that time alone secure the Fortune of his Family, and the repose of the Duke
his Father, which he ever preferred before his own particular safety. This last
consideration therefore prevailed with him to undertake this Journey, so that
he went to Court, and had some Conference with the Cardinal; who, because he
would make all the use of him he could before he would destroy him, thinking
fit to spare him at that time, with a dissimulation peculiar to himself,
received him at the greatest rate of kindness, and feeedom could possibly be
put on; protesting an absolute Oblivion of all former discontents, and making
the King to give him the same assurance; which being done, he dismissed him,
much more satisfied that he had escaped the present danger, than any ways
secure of his good intention for the time to come

At his return from this Voyage, The Frince of Conde arrives in Guienne.
he found the Prince of Conde already arrived in Guienne. The Duke his Father
had received him at Bordeaux with all imaginable Honors; wherein, though
doubtless there was a great deal due to his Quality, as being a Prince of the
Blood; yet it is most certain, that in this unusual complacency the Duke had an
equal regard to his Person. His respect proceeded so far, that not content to
pay him all the deference, and submission he was capable of in his own person,
he would moreover extend his civility further, by employing his Authority, and
interest with the Parliament of that City for his full satisfaction. The Prince
would that at their coming to visit him, they should Complement him by the
title of Monseigneur, and the Company insisted upon the contrary, as a term at
that time not in use: but the Duke interposing thereupon, the Interest he had
in the Deputies of that Assembly, prevailed with them so far, that the Ceremony
passed in the end according to the Princes desire.

All these Civilities paid by way of advance, met not however with that
acknowledgement the Duke had reason to expect; he was not ignorant, that
although the Prince used him with respect enough in outward show, he
nevertheless did him underhand all the ill Offices he could; he knew that
scarce any, but such as were his known, and declared Enemies, were admitted to
his presence: That he made himself merry with Stories they reported of his
behavior, and was very attentive to, if not inquisitive after the Informations
of such as were discontented with him: all which notwithstanding, the Duke very
secure in the Conscience of his own Conduct, did not much concern himself at
this unfriendly way of proceeding, but continued to live with the Prince at the
same respective rate, paying him all imaginable Honors; and the inclination he
had for his Service making him slight, or give little credit to those flying
rumors that daily came to his ear, he could not be jealous in the least of an
Affection he had by so many Titles so highly deserved. It is also true that the
Prince on the other side showed him in public the best countenance he could
possibly put on, would do him the honor to dine with him at his House, and to
that purpose invited himself, where the Duke entertained him after his
accustomed manner, and with a splendor natural to him upon such eminent
occasions. To this Entertainment the Prince brought some of his particular
Servants, as the Duke also invited some of his own Friends; so that the Company
consisted of eighteen persons. It has been thought by some, that this was an
appointment purposely contrived by the Prince, and those about him, to make
themselves merry with the good old man, and with an intent to put him upon an
extravagant recital of his old actions, full of Honor, and Glory, to turn
afterward his Gascon humor into Mirth, and Laughter. Neither did they fail to
tempt him to it, by falling into discourse of his Favor, Wars, Mistrisses, and
other things, which vain and ambitious men are commonly well enough pleased
withal, that they may have an occasion to vent their vainglory, by speaking
loud in their own praises; but the wise old Duke deceived their expectation;
answering to all that was propounded with so great modesty, and discretion, and
therein so highly satisfying all the Company, as gave the Prince impressions
much contrary to those wherewith he had perhaps been prepossessed, confirming
him more than ever in the opinion of his virtue, which to him was already well
known, and that to such a degree, that rising from the Table, full of
admiration, at so prudent, and so happy an old Age, I my self heard him say to
some of his Confidents, who perhaps had been brought thither to have their
share of the sport, that certainly (speaking of the Duke) he was the greatest
man in the world.

But how great soever he might be, he was not, it seems, so happy to please him
now, as he had been at other times; and either the Prince had changed his
inclination with the face of Affairs, or if he yet retained a kindness for him,
the strict Orders he had received from Court, would not give him leave to
discover it; so that he grew impatient of his stay at Bordeaux, from whence
also the Duke was resolved not to depart, till some Assignments were first paid
him, lest after his back should be once turned, that money might be converted
to other use.

The delays therefore growing insupportable to the Prince, he resolved to
complain of them to the Court, from whence that he might the more speedily
obtain the thing he desired (which was a positive command for the Duke to
depart the Province) he accompanied his Complaint with a very ill Office, which
though derived from a very light occasion, yet in the evil aspect of the ruling
Planets of that time, the least pretext was but too powerful an argument to
prejudice a man already proscribed for ruin. It was then no hard matter for
the Prince to obtain his desire of the Court, and that in terms of the greatest
severity, it being said that he had Orders for the Duke to depart from Bordeaux
without further delay, and to retire himself to his House Plassac, according to
the leave he had desired, and obtained, with an Injunction moreover not to stir
from thence till his Majesty's further Pleasure.

It should seem that the Prince would retain so much respect for the Duke upon
this occasion, as not to afflict him before his departure with the knowledge of
this severe Command, contenting himself with communicating the Dispatch to some
few only of the Duke's Friends, and Enemies, without delivering it to himself:
but not one of his Friends would take upon him to be the bearer of so unwelcome
news, all of them generally aprehending lest the Duke, after so ill usage, and
so contrary from what he had reason to expect at the Princes hands, might lash
out into some passionate expressions, that would beget ill blood betwixt them.
At last he departed from Bordeaux in May, when not conceiving himself to be so
ill used either by the Prince or the Court, as he really was, before he began
his Journey, he would go to receive his Commands; where after some expressions
of Complement, and Respect, he told him, That he was going to undertake a War,
wherein he would infallibly meet with greater difficulties than had been
represented to him: That it was not likely the King of Spain, whose Power
throughout all Europe was sufficiently known, would suffer one of the best
places of his Dominions to be lost, without attempting to relieve it: That he
did therefore humbly beseech his Highness, if any occasion should happen
wherein he might be serviceable, either to the King, or to himself, he would be
pleased to honor him with his Commands; that in case he would do him that
favor, he would engage within fifteen days after he should receive his
Summons, to bring him a thousand Gentlemen to the Frontier, at the head of whom
he should take it for a great glory to die, thereby to acquire his Highness the
Honor of a signal Victory. The Duke might without all doubt have been a great
deal better than his word, had he been made use of upon this occasion, and have
rendered by that means the Battle of Fontarabie as illustrious, and successful,
as it proved cloudy, and malevolent to the French R^nown.

The Duke was no sooner gone, but that the Prince began to prepare all things
for the War. The Land Army by the exceeding diligence he used was quickly set
on foot: but the Sea Forces were so long in making ready, that the Prince
impatient of their delays, by which he was likely to lose the season, and
opportunity of doing the Service the King expected from him, advanced to the
Frontier, invested the place, and began the Siege. The Enemy alarmed at the
vigor, and Celerity, wherewith the Prince made his Approaches by Land in order
to the taking of the place, having the Sea open to them, two several times
conveyed Relief into the Fortress in the very face of our Land Army, The Royal
Army baffled before Fontarabie.
and at one of those put a Governor into it; a Relief of so infinite
importance, as that it was first the cause of the places preservation, and
afterward of the disaster that befell the Royal Arms.

I shall not trouble my Reader with a long Narrative of the manner of this
Siege, I could on the contrary wish it were in my power to extinguish the
memory of it for ever; not that the Enemy however obtained any so signal
reputation by it, they only making use of a kind of Lethargy, of which our
whole Army was at that time sick; so that although they made shift to kill a
few people, that lay without motion, and consequently incapable of any
resistance; yet had they no other advantage by it, than what their Fortune, and
our mischance combined together put into their hands, even beyond their own
aim, or expectation. And this is all I should have said of this business, had
not some endeavored to have engaged the Duke de la Valett's Honor in the
miscarriage: but his interests being not to be separated from those of the Duke
his Father, and the concern here being the vindication of Truth, and the
defense of both their Honors, from Calumny, and the malice of malevolent men,
I co^ceive I may here be permitted to say (always retaining the respect due to
those who were not very favorable to them) that it is not to be denied, For
which the Duke de la Valette is unj^stly bl^m'd.
but that the Duke de la Valette was the first man, who going over on foot, and
up to the middle in water, at the head of the Army opened the way into the
Enemies Country, beating them from the Trenches they had cast up upon the Banks
of the River, to defend that Pass: That at the Quarter where he commanded in
the Siege, Reasons for his Justification.
he had very much advanced his Approaches, and so as had infallibly reduced the
place to a necessity of being taken on that side, had it not been relieved:
neither is it to be contradicted, but that he gave advice to Fight the Relief
so soon as ever it began to appear. They know moreover very well, that he had
nothing at all to do in the Siege, at the time it was raised, he having
resigned his Post to the Archbishop of Bordeaux, by express Order from the
Prince, and under his own hand; that he was above a League distant from the
Battle, when it was sought, and that being totally ignorant of the disorder,
till he had it from the Runaways, who brought the Alarm into his Quarters; he
thereupon immediately put himself into the head of those men he had with him:
That he rallied as many as he could of those that were squandered, and that
with these, and his own men having staid the pursuit of the Conquerours, he by
that means preserved all those, who had escaped from the Defeat. These truths,
though sufficiently known to all the world, were not nevertheless of force to
hinder his Enemies from laying the whole miscarriage of this business at his
door, and from charging him, who was certainly innocent, with the fault of ten
thousand who were guilty. He was not so much as permitted without a Crime, to
set a manly coun^enance upon this disaster, or to manifest his Courage, and
Assurance upon so dangerous an occasion; even his Valor, and constancy (an
unheard of injustice) were the main things in his Accusation, it being objected
against him that he was glad of the mischance, and was observed to laugh at the
Defeat; because he did not appear dejected, and showed a countenance, void of
fear, and confusion. He was not however so unjust to them, but has ever
commended (as there was just cause) both the Actions, and Intentions of those
who commanded at this Siege, never doubting in the least of their Sincerity,
and passionate desire to serve the King effectually, and well; and ever
believing, that had their Valor been seconded, as it ought to have been, they
would have obtained those advantages over the Enemy, was reasonably to be
expected from their Bravery, and good Conduct: But if the chance of Arms was
contrary to them, if the panick Terror that seized the Soldier, would not
permit them to follow the example of their Leaders; and if his Counsels which
would have procured safety to the Army were not followed, or approved, why
should he be rendered criminal, for not having been able to prevail upon the
humors, or opinions of other men?

Some days before this Disgrace happened, the Duke of Espernon had returned
without Order into his Government, after having continued some months at his
House Plassac, The Duke of Espernon returns without Order from the King inhis
Government of Guienne.
wherein his design in truth was to have passed away his time in repose at his
other House Cadillac, without intermedling at all with the trouble of Affairs:
neither would he so much as go to Bordeaux, to the end that what accident
soever should happen, nothing might reflect upon him; nor that he might any
ways appear responsible for the event of things, which he ever apprehended
would be finister enough; and seeing the Orders had been left in the Province,
deposited in the hands of men of very little Experience, and Authority, and who
had scarce any other argument to recommend them to that trust, save only the
hatred they openly bare to him; he very well judged by the appearance (which
proved also in the end but too certain) that from these Orders ill executed (as
they were like to be) nothing but disaster, and confusion could ensue.

Whilst the Duke lived in apprehension of this mishap, The Duke of Espernon
receive^ news of the B^rth of the Dolphin.
he received the joyfullest news that could possibly arrive, which was, that of
the Birth of Monsegnieur the Dolphin, the same whom we now see reigning, with
so much Glory, and Happiness in the Throne of France, that there is not that
prosperity can fall within the limits of Humane Expectation, we may not
reasonably promise to our selves from so auspicious a beginning. By a Dispatch
from the King, dated the fifth of September (the precise day of this
illustrious Birth) the Duke was to order a public Thanksgiving, and to cause
Bonfires to be made for Joy of this Blessing to his Majesty, and the whole
Kingdom. The Courrier, who had been expressly dispatched away to the Duke,
having found him at Cadillac (willing (without all doubt) to flatter his
credulity) told him, That it was his Majesty's desire he should himself in
person be assisting at the Ceremonies which were to be performed in the City of
Bordeaux, to render the Solemnity the more I^lustrious by his Presence; a
deceit that gave a strange addition of joy to the good old Duke, who could not
in himself but hug and applaud his own foresight, by which he had so seasonably
prevented the King's desire; and in that pleasing error he departed from
Cadillac the 29th. of the same month to go to Bordeaux, where being arrived, he
began the very same Evening by Bonfires, thundering of Cannon, and by infinite
numbers of Lights, set up in all the Windows of the City, to manifest no less
his own, than the public contentment; and for a final testimony of the high
satisfaction he had received by this good news, he rewarded the Courrier with a
Chain of Gold, to the value of 500. Crowns, which he gave him at the time he
dismissed him back with his answer to the King.

But the inundation of this Joy, The Duke receives news of the Defeat of
Fontarabie.
than which nothing could be greater, was (as it commonly falls out) only a
fore^runner of the worst tidings could almost arrive, which was the disaster of
Fontarabie, a private and uncertain murmur of the defeat of our Army arising
even in the height of these public Solemnities, and Acclamations; and as ill
News does for the most part prove too true; so this which for the space of two,
or three hours was a rumor only, passed on a sudden for certain, and met ^o
little contradiction, that the truth of it was no longer to be doubted. The
Duke of Espernon, though infinitely surpised, at this evil success; yet not
believing the Duke de la Valette could be any ways accomptable for the
miscarriage, he was at present no further afflicted at it, than for what
concerned the prejudice he saw must thence of necessity derive to the
prosperity of his Majesty's Affairs, and the reputation of his Arms: but
understanding soon after that their commond Enemies endeavored to lay the
blame of this baffle upon the Duke his Son, he then began prudently to
apprehend, that in the evil dispositions of the Court against them at that
time, such as were emulous of their Virtue, or that had particular animosities
to the person either of the one, or the other, would with great eagerness
embrace this occasion, though infinitely remote, to work their desired ruin.

As if therefore he had at a distance discovered the Cloud that was gathered to
break upon him, The Duke of Espernon returns to Plass^c.
he withdrew himself insensibly from Bordeaux, under color of going to visit
his Territories in Medoc, where he received the first Command by the ordinary
way of the Post to return to Plassac, and from thence not to stir, till his
Majesty's further pleasure; and presently after had another brought him by
Millers one of the Gentlemen in ordinary to the King. This Gentlemen had been
expressly dispatched to the Duke de la Valette, to summon him from the King, to
come render his Majesty an account of his actions; whom he also found very
ready to obey the Order, and to begin his Journey so soon as he should receive
permission so to do, by the return of a Gentleman, he had dispatched away to
his Majesty for that purpose, upon the intimation he had received of the ill
Offices had been done him at Court. As for the Duke of Espernon having
prevented this second Order, by his early retiring, Milleres found him already
at Plassac; from whence he also never after departed till three, or four years
after, that he went to end his days at Loches.

Though it be no part of my design to anticipate the minds of men by
extraordinary accidents, or to forge, and obtrude upon their belief
Predictions, and Prodigies, to render the person of whom I speak more
venerable, and esteemed; I ought not, I conceive, nevertheless to omit such
memorable accidents, as sometimes happened during the progress of this long and
illustrious Life. I shall therefore tell you, A very extraordinary accident by
L^g^^ning.
that when the Duke parted from Bordeaux to go this Journey into Medoc, of
which I was now speaking, he commanded me to stay behind in the City, there to
expect his return. According to which Order I remained in the Town, when
happening one afternoon to be in a House opposite to the Duke's Place of
Puipaulin, about three, or four of the Clock, on a sudden, though the day was
exceeding clear, and bright, there arose so violent a Storm, that after two, or
three Claps of Thunder, a Bolt falling upon the highest Tower of his Lodgings,
first carried away part of the covering, and from thence piercing through the
roof of the main Body of the House, set fire on some Furniture of considerable
value, that were bestowed in the Garret, from whence descending lower into the
Duke's own Chamber, it made a great Breach in the Chimney, and thence piercing
further still into the Chamber underneath the same, wherein his Sons were used
to lie, it left its mark there also in the Transom of a Window, which it brake
in two pieces, and proceeded thence to lose it self in the Foundations of the
Fabric. Who is it that would not have been struck at this ill Omen? I must
confess that at that time I was rather willing to ranek this accident amongst
things of chance, than thence to derive conjectures of any misadventure to
come; considering the Portent (if such it were) threatened him, in whose Honor,
and good Fortune, I was my self so nearly concerned: So that all I made of it
was to run to the Lodging with a Kinsman of mine, who had been spectator with
me of this Tempest, to look if the flash of Lightning we had seen to dart upon
the Tower, had not fired the House; which proved to be no unseasonable
precaution, we finding the Furniture already flaming, so as to threaten the
whole Pile with a total ruin: but we made shift to get it suddenly quenched,
which was also the only fruit of our Care, and all that could be done upon that
occasion.

The Duke was no sooner arrived at his House Plassac, but that he understood by
Haumont, whom he had a few days before dispatched to Court, Passionate
expressions of the Cardinal against the Duke de la Valette.
to what a degree the King had been incensed against the Duke de la Valette his
Son; the Cardinal having declared so highly against him, as to protest in
public, That he would in this case execute the Office of the King's Attorney
General in his prosecution (which were his express words) and that his Majesty
had not forgot the business of Corbie; nor as yet granted him an Indemnity
concerning that Affair. To be short, he appeared so immeasurably animated
against him, that no one doubted of the Duke de la Valett's manifest ruin,
should he in this juncture of Affairs adventure to go to Court. He had
notwithstanding put himself upon his way in order to that Journey, when being
arrived near B^rdeaux, he there received information of the evil dispositions
of the Court toward him, and above all, that the business of Corbie was still
upon Record (for as touching that of Fontarabie, he was not much concerned)
which made him send an express Dispatch to the Duke his Father, to entreat him,
that by some one of his Servants, in whom they might equally confide, he would
send him his opinion concerning his Journey to the King. This Servant
accordingly arrived at Bordeaux the same day that the Duke de la Valette
himself came thither, where he told him from the Duke his Father, That in an
Affair of the importance of that which was now in agitation, he ought not to
expect advice from a Father, who was much more solicitous of his safety than he
himself could be: That herein his tenderness and affection ought to stand
equally suspected to them both: That as he durst not give him counsel to go to
Court, knowing as he did, to what a dangerous degree it was animated against
him; so could he not advise him to depart the Kingdom, perhaps never to see his
face again: That therefore he was himself to clear all those doubts, and
thereupon to form his own determination; wherein if he should resolve upon
withdrawing himself out of France, By which he is diverted from going to Cour^.
he was by no means of opinion that he ought to engage his Safety on this side
so many Rivers, to come to take his leave of him, lest his Enemies might take
that opportunity to attempt something upon his Person: That so short a Visit
would only serve to augment their mutual Affliction: That he was therefore to
have patience, and to reserve himself for better times: And that he might
assure himself of his Affection, which should never be wanting to him, whatever
could possibly arrive.

We are now come to the time of the Duke of Espernon's greatest Disgraces, The
Duke of Espernon's D^sgraces.
which from henceforward also were continual, and unintermitted to the hour of
his Death; and Fortune, who had hitherto made a show of going hand in hand with
Virtue, and Prudence in the conduct of his Life, by a volubility, by so much
the more dangerous and unseasonable, as it was the less suspected, and
unforeseen, now totally forsook his Interests to leave him in the Arms, and to
the protection of his own single Virtue. The first, and the rudest shock his
constancy could possibly receive, was the absence of the Duke de la Valette his
beloved Son; which after he had a few days lamented, H^ is deposed of his
Government.
with the tenderness, and compassion of an excellent, and passionately
affectionate Father, he had news brought him of a rumor, that was already
spread at Bordeaux, that the Prince of Conde was to be made sole Governor of
Guienne, and had already received Orders to dispossess him of
Chasteau-Trompette, therein to place one of the King's Domestic Servants. The
Duke had all his best Furniture, besides other Riches, laid up in this place;
who having not so much as once dreamed of being so suddenly divested of his
Command, had not consequently at his departure out of the Province, removed any
thing from thence: Sudden order was therefore to be taken in an Affair of this
importance, and even the very moments of time to be husbanded, which also were
not many more, than was necessary for the effecting his purpose. Those to whose
fidelity and care he entrusted the management of this business were so
diligent, and so faithful, that in one night, they secured to the value of
above a million of Livers, what in Money, Jewels, and Plate; of which the
Money, and Jewels were carried to Plassac, and there safe delivered into his
own hands, and the Plate was conveyed to Cadillac, and all done with so great
secrecy, that those to whom the Government of the place was a few days after
committed, expected to have found all this Treasure there; which if they had,
it would have been in great danger of being put into the King's hands, as the
Arms, and other of the Duke's own peculiar Goods were, which he could never
again recover, to the hour of his Death.

So soon as they had thus stripped the Duke of his Command, The Duke of Espernon
calumniate^
and wrested those places he held in Guienne out of his hands, their common
Enemies began openly to labor the persecution not only of the Duke de la
Valette, but of the Duke his Father also; wherein the Father being no ways
questionable for the disafter of Fontarabie, as having had nothing at all to do
in that Affair, he was blemished with all the ignominy that malice could
invent, or the tongue of Calumny utter, against a man of Fidelity, and Honor;
and his Son, who by his absence lay exposed to all the mischief was intended
against him, was proceeded against as a Criminal, and a Traitor. In order to
the Duke de la Valett's Trial, Accusers, and Witnesses were found out, some
whereof were frighted by menaces, and others suborned by money (for nothing was
spared upon this occasion) into these excellent Offices; and out of this kind
of Evidence an Information was suddenly drawn up, sufficient to darken, and
overwhelm the clearest, and most unspotted innocence in the world. The
Intercessions, and Services of the Duke de Candale, and the Cardinal de la
Valette, who commanded the Army of Italy were fruitless, and invalid upon this
occasion; nay, they had much ado to prevail for a little Truce, and cessation
from those persecutions, wherewith the Ruling Powers were resolved to disquiet
the old Age of the Duke their Father; and that was granted to them in the
quality of an extraordinary Grace, and Favor, which was hardly to be excused
without shame: With so unjust a return were they rewarded for the expense of
their Fortunes, the hazard of their Lives, and their continual vigilance and
care, with an Army unfurnished of all necessaries of War, to withstand the
greatest power of the most dangerous Enemies to the Crown, and Kingdom.

All these Afflictions, Anno 1639.
how great soever, were yet but the forerunners of those, which by the Divine
Justice, or Bounty were prepared, The Duke of Espernon falls dangerously sick.
wherewith to exercise the Duke's Virtue. They soon shifted from outward
things, to wound him more sensibly in his own person; and whether it were the
unkindness he took at the ill usage he daily suffered, or the infirmities of
his very great Age only, that occasioned his distemper, so it was that he fell
into the most acute, and most dangerous Disease, he had ever before sustained,
during the whole course of his Life. He was for four months together seized
with a defluxion of Rhume, by which all his Members were strangely benumbed,
and that numness accompanied with excessive dolours in all his parts: from
which pain he no sooner began to find some ease the March following, but that
the joy of his Amendment was soon quashed with the sad news of the Death of the
Duke de Candale his eldest Son. The Death of the Duke de Candale.
This Son, become infinitely dear to the Duke his Father since his last Visit,
lay at Cazal with part of the Army he had in charge jointly with the Cardinal
de la Valette his Brother; where the tenth day of March, falling ill of a
Tertian Ague, and that growing to a double Tertian at the third Fit, and
afterward to an unintermitted Fever, it proved in the end mortal the eleventh
day of his Sickness. The Cardinal his Brother immediately upon this accident
dispatched away a Courrier to the Duke their Father to acquaint him with it;
but some days passed over before any one durst tell him the news, for fear left
the grief, which could not but be exceeding great, might cause him to relapse
into his former disposition, from which also he was yet but upon the mending
hand.

At last his Servants apprehending it might by some, or other be indiscreetly
and unseasonably blurted out, they conceived it better with some preparatory
arguments, to sweeten the bitterness of his loss, to make him acquainted with
it, than to detain him still in ignorance of a thing, which could not always,
nor very long be concealed from him. The Duke had kept about him during all the
time of his last Sickness, a Father Capuchin, in whom he reposed a singular
Confidence: This good Father therefore as he was one day talking with him,
having fallen into a Discourse of the inconstancy of Humane Life, and the
necessity of dying, and therein slipped in some mention of the Duke de Candale's
Sickness, the Duke presently understood the rest, and thereupon spared the good
man the pains of any further preparation. When his countenance, wherein before
this part of their Discourse something of cheerfulness had appeared, suddenly
changing into a more severe Gravity (though only so as to compose it to his
constancy) he said, Father, I have ever been disposed to submit my self, and
all my concerns to the good pleasure of God; and I beseech him of his goodness
to give me Fortitude enough to conform my self also to it upon this occasion:
My Son is dead, I am certain of it; and if he died in the fear of God, he is
happier than we, at least out of the reach of those persecutions Fortune is
preparing for us who are left behind. After which they presented him the
Letters that contained the Relation of his Death; by which the Duke being
satisfied, it had been very constant, and Christian, he said again, That he
praised God from the bottom of his heart, that in depriving him of one of his
chiefest comforts, he had yet left him the hope in a short time to see his ^on
in a better Life. He afterward entertained himself some time in pious
Discourse with that Holy Man; after which being again laid in bed, that he yet
quitted not, but by intervals, he was heard in that privacy, a great while to
weep those tears, and vent those sighs, which with extraordinary violence upon
himself he had suppressed whilst there was any witness by: But after having
paid what was due to the impulse of Nature, he summoned his wonted constancy to
encounter this Accident; the bitterness whereof, though he could by no art
banish from his remembrance; yet did he ever keep himself upright from
manifesting his sorrow with the least weakness. There were very few persons of
condition in the Kingdom, who did not signify to him by very civil Messages,
and kind Letters, the part they shared with him in his grief upon this
occasion; amongst whom Cardinal Richelieu himself was one, who made shift to
find out some consolatory Complements for a man he at the same instant
persecuted with the most bloody effects he could possibly inflict upon him, he
at the same time prosecuting the Duke de la Valette to the last extreme: The
Duke de la Valette sentenced to Death, with Confiscarion of Offices, Honors,
and Estate.
For the information that had been drawn up against him, having been laid open
in the presence of his Majesty the 25th. day of May, the greater part of the
Judges had concluded him worthy of Death, the forfeiture of his Offices, and
the confiscation of his Estate; yet were they not all of that opinion,
President Believre, amongst the rest, taking upon him the honest boldness, to
defend the innocence of the accused, and by an Oration no less Judicious, and
Eloquent, than hardy and equitable, acquitting his own Conscience, and
confirming himself in the high esteem already conceived of the great Worth, and
Integrity which for so many happy years have been eminent in his Name, and Race.

It would not become me in this place to enlarge my self upon the words of this
Sentence, it having been pronounced by persons, to whom too great a respect is
due, for any one to dare to complain: neither in truth is it to them, that the
severity of it ought to be imputed: for in criminal matters the Evidence are
the chief Judges, and consequently they at whose doors all that was
extraordinary or severe in his proceeding ought of right to be laid. It has
since appeared by the high and public justification of the party accused, and
that in the face of the most August Tribunal of Justice in all Europe, what has
been thought of the Depositions that were preferred against him, the Parliament
of Paris having restored him to his Honor, Life, Offices, and Estate, which
had been all taken from him by the Arrest of the Council: And he has this
Obligation to his Enemies, not only by their means to have had an occasion
wherein to vindicate his Innocence, and Honor: The Duke de la Valette solemnly
justified.
but moreover to have received the Eulogies for his brave Services, which his
modesty would not have permitted him to have endured, had his Virtue never been
disputed.

But this last good not arriving in time to serve for any consolation to the
Duke of Espernon, and that all his misfortunes succeeded in the neck of one
another, without any the least shadow of Prosperity intervening to sweeten his
Affliction, is not the stability of his mind, and the constancy of his Courage
highly to be commended, The Duke of Espern^n still persecuted by the privation
of a good part of his Estate.
and admired, that could continue so firm in all the shocks of Fortune? A
Fortitude that will discover it self, much better to our observation, if we
separately consider the various occasions he had at this time wherein to
exercise that Heroic Virtue. Disgrace knocked at his Door from the first
arrival of the Prince in Guienne, as you may have already observed, and his
Afflictions began to unveil themselves in the ill usage he at that time
received by Order from the Court, very much contrary to what he had all the
reason in the world to hope for, and expect; they were continued to him by the
Command he received to withdraw himself out of his Government, which seemed to
blast him with some kind of Ignominy and reproach: But what an overplus of
vexation must it needs be, when by the ill success of Fontarabie, he saw all
the miscarriage of that Expedition cast upon his Son? what a grief to see him
prosecuted for a Criminal, and himself at the same time looked upon as a guilty
man? They were both of them divested of their Offices, and Commands, and those
transferred into the hands of their mortal, and most implacable Enemies: So
that the Duke de la Valette was constrained to give way to their Power, and
through infinite dangers to fly for Sanctuary into England, a Kingdom at that
time agitated with Mutinous Factions, and Civil Discords of their own; whilst
the Father in a Country House, exposed to their discretion, saw himself stripped
of all his Employments, and his venerable old Age, so highly reverenced, and
esteemed throughout the whole Kingdom, become an Object of Scorn to such as a
few days before had truckled under his Authority, and trembled at his Name. If
he was touched to the quick by these Afflictions, he was no less sensible of
the privation of all his Privileges, Appointments, Pensions, and other
Emoluments, that were the lawful Perquisits of his several Offices, and
Commands; whereby they cut him off at one blow above fifty thousand Crowns of
yearly Revenne, and by which means he found himself reduced to the bare Revenue
of his own Estate, wherein he also suffered a very considerable diminution.
These Affronts, and injuries were succeeded by long, and painful Diseases, and
those by the death of his eldest Son, together with the Condemnation of the
second, by which Sentence he also was dead in Law. Yet was not this all, and
Almighty God, who upon so great, and illustrious a Subject would please to
manif^st the strength of his Arm, left him nothing entire, upon which He did
not evidently make it appear. There remained to him in all these mishaps one
refuge, that might still afford some stay, and support to his Affairs, and
cherish him with some hope one day to restore them to their primitive
condition: The Cardinal de la Valette his Son, was in a great Employment, he
had formerly obliged Cardinal Richelieu to the highest degree, he was believed
to be in great favor, and consideration with him; he had at least obtained a
promise from him, that the old Age of the Duke his Father should not be
molested; this Son was also ravished from him with the rest, and nothing left
him to which he could in his greatest extremities have any visible recourse. We
have often heard mention of the several afflictions and chastisements wherewith
Almighty God has sometimes been pleased to visit sinful men: The Death of the
Cardinal de la Valette.
but let us consider whether amongst all the examples of his Justice, there be
many more eminent, than these in the case of the duke of Espernon. It had now
been threescore and two years since the Duke first tasted the sweets of Favor,
from which time Fortune, together with his own Virtue had raised him to all the
degrees of Greatness, that render men considerable upon earth: There had scarce
a year passed over his head, which had not added something to his Prosperity,
he had acquired as great Riches, as many Offices, and Titles, as much Respect,
Reputation, and Authority, as any other whoever of his time: but above all, his
Greatness seemed to be established, and secure in the support of his three
Sons; any of which by his merit was sufficient alone to sustain the Burden,
who all three in less than six months space were ravished from him, and himself
reduced to the most deplorable soli^ude was possibly to be seen, or conceived.
He acknowledged the Finger of God to be in all this, he submitted to his
Justice, and was never observed more to reverence his unresisted Power, than
when his hand lay most heavy upon him.

But would it not be too light a preterition, to pass over the Death of the
Cardinal de la Valette with so little Ceremony, and to take no further notice
of it, than by what has been already said? Yes doubtless, and it was of too
great importance to the interests of the Duke his Father, to be slipped over with
so slight a mention. I shall therefore tell you, that this Cardinal, after the
Death of the Duke de Candale his Brother, had alone sustained the King's
declining Affairs in Italy, and with a very inconsiderably Army, had at once
withstood the power of our Enemies, and the infidelity of our Allies: but in
the end, either worn out with the continual toil of so many Affairs, or wounded
with the ill usage he saw his Family daily receive, he fell into a Melancholy,
that put him at last into a desperate Disease. The beginning of this Distemper
was as light, as it had been in that of the Duke de Candale, and the issue of
it as fatal. At the first news the Duke of Espernon received of his
indisposition, though he had an account withal, that it was without any
symptom of danger, he could not nevertheless forbear crying out aloud to those
who were about him, That his Son was a dead man. A saying which, though at
first spoke in passion only, in a few days turned into a Prophecy; the
intelligence, that came in from time to time of his condition, still signified
an increase of his Di^temper, till after having seventeen days strugled with a
Disease, that at the fifth had been concluded mortal, he ended a glorious Life,
by a very constant and Christian Death. The Prince of Ioinville, eldest Son to
the Duke of Guise, exercised at that time his first Arms, under the Discipline
of so dear, and so generous a Kinsman; the Marshall de Turenne had also an
Employment of Mares^hal de Camp in his Army; both which writ the Duke of
Espernon the sad news of his Death, But de Thou, who never parted almost from
his Bedside in all the time of his Sickness, and who had his entire Confidence
in all things, writ a long Relation of it to be presented to the Duke, so soon
as he should be in a condition to endure the reading. Here it was that his
Servants were in the greatest strait: they doubted not, but that this loss,
which apparently gave the last blow to all his hopes, would afflict him to the
last degree; and although Nature, and the Virtues of this Son, should have
taken a less impression upon him, than all the world knew they had done; they
yet feared, his Constancy being exhausted by preceding misfortunes, he had not
a sufficient stock left wherewithal to sustain the assault of this new
affliction. In this perplexity they had recourse to d' Espruets Bishop of Saint
Papoul, a Prelate whom the Duke, as well for his profound Learning as his
exemplary Piety, and Goodness had in great Reverence, and particular Esteem.
The Bishop at the first word very readily put himself into his Coach, and in
all diligence came to Plassac, where presenting himself before the Duke, after
he had some time entertained him with indifferent things, falling at last into
discourse of his Sons Sickness, he told him that all his Friends and Servants
were in great suspense at some uncertain rumors that were spread abroad in the
Country. At that word the Duke was no more in doubt, but that he was dead; yet
would he not upon the instant extract the utmost truth of his unfortunate loss:
but changing his Discourse, entertained the Bishop with Affairs of another
nature, till they were both called to Dinner, as they soon after were. It may
easily be judged what a Dinner this was for the Duke, who could feed on nothing
save his own sad Imaginations; his restlessness all the while he sat at meat,
sufficiently mani^esting the anguish of his Soul: he notwithstanding contained
himself in this violent agitation of mind, and continued at Table so long as
was necessary to satisfy what was due to Decency, and Respect, without
suffering himself to be transported into any action unbecoming his Gravity, and
Wisdom. The Table being taken away, and he having retired himself into his
Chamber sooner, than he ordinarily used to do, he caused his Secretary to be
called in his behalf to write to Messieurs de Ioinville, de Turenne, de Thou,
and de Fontravilles, to recommend to them the care of his Sons health, to whom
all humane help was already fruitless, and vain; writing moreover to him
himself some few lines under his own hand. One of his Gentlemen, who had lately
been sent on the same errand, was now ready to depart with this new Dispatch,
when the Duke, overcome with the violent agitations of his mind, was
constrained to cast himself upon his Bed; where calling his Secretary to him,
he said to him these words: I do not know why you should all dally with me thus
long, nor to what end you should conceal from me the Death of the Cardinal my
Son: is it that you imagine me so weak, I have not fortitude enough to support
the News? Do not you deceive me, as the rest have done, but tell me the naked
truth, which also cannot long be concealed from me. At which words the poor
Gentleman, who for four or five days had had the power to govern his Tongue,
had not now the same command over his Eyes; so that, his Tears having whether
he would or no betrayed him to be the Messenger of the ill news he had hitherto
so faithfully concealed, he proceeded by word of mouth to interpret, what was
before but too legible in his tears, The Duke of Espe^non's constancy.
and told his Master, That what he had prophesied the first hour he heard of
his Sons Sickness, was but too true: That the news of his Death had been
brought four days ago, but that his people, apprehending left so great a blow
of mishap might ruin his health, had addressed themselves to Monsieur de Saint
Papoul, to fortify him with his Consolation, in acquainting him with the fatal
News. At which words he lift up his hands to Heaven, and after a profound Sigh,
cried out aloud, O Lord, since thou have reserved my old Age to survive the
loss of my three Children, be pleased withal to give me strength wherewith to
support the severity of thy Judgments. Hereupon the Bishop of Saint Papoul was
presently called in to him, who, after having highly commended his resignation
of himself, and his Affairs to the Will of God, made him a Learned Discourse
infinitely full of such admirable Arguments, and Examples both Christian, and
Moral, as were proper for his disconsolate condition: And then it was that they
presented him with the relations of the Sickness, and Death of the Cardinal his
Son; wherein was observed so many testimonies of Piety, and Resignation, so
firm a confidence in the Divine Mercy, and so little concern for Humane Life,
that every one concluded him infinitely happy, to have take his leave of it in
so good, and so holy a disposition; and it was also from thence that the Duke
derived his chiefest Consolations. After this he requested some respite from
his Friends wherein to satisfy the resentments of Nature, and in private to
pay some tears to his Affliction. His Curtains were therefore drawn, when his
tears, which he had hitherto with so great violence to his sorrow suppressed,
having now liberty to ^ally out flowed in so great abundance, that those about
him began to fear his immoderate passion might endanger his health: but having
remained two hours in this condition, he himself at last roused up his spirits
so long overcharged with grief, and was heard to say, That Tears were to be
left to women, and that it would be a shame a man could not allay his grief,
but by so poor and effeminate a Remedy: That he would live perhaps to survive
his Enemies: When starting from his Bed, he had so great a power over himself,
as the same day again to appear in public. He entreated the Bishop of Papoul
to bear him company, where he walked with him above two hours on foot,
entertaining him all the while, either with Discourses of Piety, or the state
of his present Fortune, and that with a constancy this good Prelate could never
sufficiently magnify, and admire.

It must nevertheless be confessed, The Duke of Espernon receives many
Consolatory Letters, both from the King, Queen, the Monsieur, Cardinal, and
most of the Eminent persons of the Kingdom.
that amongst all these afflictions which were many, and extreme; the Duke
likewise received very many, and great Consolations, or at least what were
intended for such, there being few persons of any eminent condition in France,
who did not manifest the part they shared with him in his grief. The King did
him the Honor to write very obligingly to him; he received the same Favor
from the Queen, the Monsieur, all the Princes, Cardinal Richelieu; and almost
all who were any ways considerable, either in Birth, or Dignity in the Kingdom,
gave him testimonies, either of their Affection, or Esteem upon this sad
occasion. But if out of all these Complements he did extract any real
Consolation, it was chiefly from the gracious manifestations of the Queens
Royal Favor to him, which took so much the deeper impression upon his mind, by
how much he knew they proceeded from the heart of this excellent Princess. He
had ever made her the object of all his Services; neither was there any he
would not have been very ready to have performed for her, even in this moment
of his greatest Adversity: An inclination, that as it gave him a legitimate
Title to her Grace, and Favor, so was he the man of all the other Great Ones
of the Kingdom, that had the highest place in her Esteem: but the condition of
the time not permitting her to manifest it to that degree her Majesty could
have desired, she did upon this occasion all she had the liberty to do; which
was to send him a very obliging Letter, written with her own hand, of which the
Contents were these. Cousin,
I can here neither fully express, The Queens Letter to the Duke of Espernon.
nor altogether conceal the sorrow I share with you for the loss you have
sustained in the person of my Cousin the Cardinal de la Valette your Son; the
sense whereof being too great to be expressed by words, I shall only entreat
you to believe, that I partake in it equally with any person living: And since
it is from God alone, that you are to hope for a true Consolation, I do from my
heart beseech him of his Divine Goodness to fortify your mind against the
severity of this accident, and to pour his Blessings upon you in the abundance
that is heartily wished by her, whom you know really to be,

Your very good Cousin Anne.
From St. Germains en Lay the 12th of October. 1639.



Cardinal Richelieu also would not upon such an occasion be wanting in the
Ceremony of a Complement; but it signified no more than so, and these were the
words. My Lord,
I can not sufficiently manifest to you the extreme sorrow I sustain for the
Death of Monsieur, The Cardinal's Letter to the Duke of Espernon.
the Cardinal de la Valette, and the affliction wherewith you must of necessity
resent it. So that being my self incapable of receiving any Consolation upon
this sad Accident, I am so much the more unfit to administer it to you. The
manner wherewith I ever lived with him, his Affection toward me, and the
singular Esteem I ever had for him, will without much difficulty persuade you
to believe this truth; which is so certain, that were it possible for a man
with his Blood to redeem such a Friend, I would give a great deal of mine to
retrive him. There is none save God Almighty himself, who can allay your
Griefs, I beseech you therefore to apply your self to him, and to believe that
I am,

My Lord, Your, etc.
From Lions the 19th. of October. 1639.



It was sufficiently known to all France, that if one Friend can oblige
another, the Cardinal de la Valette had obliged that of Richelieu to the
highest degree: which made the Duke of Espernon (importuned by his Friends to
try if he yet retained any memory of that Friendship he in his Letter so highly
professed) in the end to obtain so much of his own haughty humor, as to write
to him this that follows. My Lord,
The Testimonies you have done me the honor to give me in one of your Letters
of the part you share with me in the grief I sustain for the loss of my Son the
Cardinal de la Valette, The Duke of Espernon's Letter to Cardinal Richelieu.
has made me hope you will be no less sensible of the other Afflictions, and
Grievances wherewith I am from all parts assaulted. I shall therefore take the
liberty to represent them to you, and to tell your Lordship, that since the
time I left my Government to retire my self to this place, there is no sort of
Injury, or Outrage with which I have not by my Enemies been unjustly offended:
Who after having dissected me in public by injurious Declarations, have since
published defamatory Libels against me, therewith, as much as in them lies, to
blemish the Honor I have justly acquired in the Service of the Kings my
Masters. Neither have they been satisfied with attempting upon my single
Person, and the Persons of my Sons only; but I have neither Friend, nor
Servant, they do not most violently, and injuriously persecute, as if it were a
Crime to embrace, or own my Interests, and Concerns. I know (my Lord) that
neither the King, nor your self know any thing of this proceeding, and that you
are too just to consent, that after fourscore years passed, of which the
greatest part have been employed in the Service of the Kings my Masters, and
for the good of the Kingdom, I should be so severely used under your
Administration. I have now lost the Cardinal my Son, whilst serving the King in
Italy, his elder Brother but a few months since went before him; which great
losses I have born with patience out of the sole consideration of the Service
they perished in, which has served for some allay to my Affliction. I assure my
self that their Merits, and Services (since I my self am no more in a condition
to serve either his Majesty or you) will (my Lord) at least secure the repose
of an afflicted Father, who daily expects that benefit from his Age, and
Nature, etc.

From Plassac this first of December. 1639.



This Letter with how great reluctance soever the Duke had consented to write
it, though it produced no good effect, the Duke notwithstanding who had
expected no better success, reaped this advantage by it, that he by that means
delivered himself from the importunities of those who otherwise would upon
other occasions have been pressing with him to have been still imploring the
Cardinal's Favor. But after this Repulse nothing of that nature was ever more
to be extorted from him; so that if he afterward writ, it was ever either to
preserve the Decorum of common civility, or upon pure necessity, or to the end
his Friends might not condemn him for having by his own obstinacy pulled upon
himself the mischiefs which had long been preparing against him. Thus therefore
deprived of all humane assistance, since the Cardinal (without whom all the
rest of what Quality soever signified nothing) was opposite to his Interests,
he wholly resigned himself into the hands of God, and would no more make
application to any other but to him alone. He had ever born a great Respect,
and Zeal to Religion; and for above twenty years before his Death, had been
observed to be so constant to his Beads, that not a day passed over his head
wherein he did not spend three whole hours in Devotion. At this time, as the
persecutions of malevolent men grew more violent against him, so did he
redouble his Prayers to Heaven, and has ever believed, that it was from thence
he derived the strength, and fortitude to support all the accidents that befell
him, and the disgraces that were hourly multiplied upon him.

This calm and innocent way of living created either so great an esteem for his
Virtue, Anno 1640.
or so great a compassion for his Adversity in the minds of men, that there was
scarce any who did not manifest some tenderness for a person of his eminent
condition so unjustly oppressed. Insomuch that the Prince of Conde, who had not
been able (so positive his Orders were) to avoid employing his Authority to the
ruin of his Fortune, could not but discover, that he also amongst the rest was
touched with commiseration of his Wrongs, and deplorable condition; so that
whether it were, that he therein glanc^d at some particular advantages to
himself, or that it was merely an act of his Generosity in order to the Duke's
repose, he sent him word as he was upon his Journey to Bordeaux: That he had
compassion on his Misfortune, The Prince of Conde offers his Service to the
Duke of Espernon upon some Conditions.
and Solitude, and if he unluckily had formerly had a hand in the Disgraces had
befallen him, he would much more willingly employ it to his redress: That his
Afflictions how great soever, were not altogether without remedy; but that he
had one Son still surviving, from whom he might yet derive comfort: That
although the Court was highly animated, and incensed against him, he would
notwithstanding do his utmost endeavor, and set it hard to obtain his return
into France; provided he would be content to resign his Governments, in lieu
whereof he would also procure him some reasonable recompense; and that by this
means he might spend the remainder of his days in company, which it self would
render the worst of evils supportable to him. Geneste a Counselor in the
Parliament of Bordeaux, known of long to have been a particular Friend to the
Duke, was made choice of by the Prince to offer this proposal to him; but he
had Instructions withal, not to own he did it by any express Order from the
Prince, unless he should first perceive the Duke very ready to embrace the
motion. The Duke, unable to endure the first overture, would return no answer
at all, thinking by that means to disingage himself from that unpleasing
Treaty: but the Prince, who (as it was said) having cast his eye upon
Languedoc, and openly discovered a desire to be invested in that Government,
had perhaps a design to make that of Guienne the Price of the other. It was
moreover believed he had a mind to translate the Office of Colonel into the
hands of a Favorite, thereby to promote his own pretense: For one, or both of
these reasons therefore he would not be repulsed at the Duke's first tacit
denial: but not long after having left Bordeaux to return to Court, his way
through Xaintonge gave him opportunity, as he passed by to see the Count de
Ionzac, the King's Lieutenant in that Province, and one of the most intimate
Friends the Duke at that time had in the Kingdom. To him therefore he gave
express charge to go to the Duke, and to go through with that Negotiation, he
had not only occasionally committed to Geneste; to which he also required a
precise and positive answer. The Count de Ionzac could do no other, than obey
the Prince in this particular, though he was already very well assured, he
should bring him no satisfactory return from the Duke concerning this Affair.
This Gentleman was without all doubt the depositary of the Duke's most secret
thoughts, and intentions; and I am certain in several very important occasions
had proved exceeding faithful to him: So that, there being scarce any thing
reserved, which he did not freely commit to his Secrecy, and Trust, it is to
be presumed the Duke had not concealed from him this Proposition from the
Prince, together with the fixed and determinate Resolution he had put on as to
that business. He therefore only confirmed to him anew, what he had already
sufficiently assured him of; desiring him withal, since the Prince would have a
positive answer, to tell him on his behalf, That he could have wished, having
ever honored him as he had done, Which are rejected by the Duke.
he had sooner had those considerations for him, he was pleased at present to
profess: That his compassion was now out of season: That he was content alone
to undergo all his misfortunes the remaining part of his life, and that he had
much rather never more see the Duke de la Valette his Son, than to see him
reduced to the condition of a private person: That he would accept no
Recompense for his Offices, and Commands, forasmuch as he was resolved never to
part with them; and that he had enough remaining through the favor and
liberality of the Kings his Masters, to spare those profits, and emoluments he
had formerly received. And to the end that for the time to come he might secure
himself from being any more importuned with such distasteful proposols, he
declared aloud, that should any of his Friends ever entertain him with the like
discourse, he should never take that man for his Friend again: but in case any
over whom he had an Authority should presume once to open his mouth to such a
purpose, he would handle him so as should manifest to all the world how highly
he was offended at the motion.

The Duke soon perceived that the Court was by no means pleased with this
answer, the ill usage he had hitherto received, being after this refusal
evidently doubled upon him; insomuch that he had news brought the Cardinal had
been importuned by the Enemies of his Family, to remove him from Plassac, that
being (as they pretended) too near to Bordeaux, where, by the convenience of so
dangerous a vicinity, he might still maintain a Correspondence there, and set
what practices he pleased on foot, to the prejudice of the Public Peace. New
persecutions for the Duke of Espernon.
Thus even when confined to a Country House, disarmed, and naked, as he then
was, and as it were buried under his own ruins, his sole Name, and Authority
was formidable to his Enemies, even in so low a condition. Such as were most
violent against him, advised to have him shut up in Prison, and the more
moderate sort would only have him confined to some remote places, which they
had already pointed out for him i^ Auverg^e. Yet did all these ill-sounding
rumors at this time produce no evil effects; and it was said the Cardinal
would keep his word, he had given to the Cardinal de la Valette, not to add to
the persecution of the Duke his Father; but if he did not openly do it, and so
as to own his own act, he at least gave the Duke's most implacable Enemies
leave to do what he himself was either ashamed of, or had no mind to own; men
who abusing that liberty committed outrages against him, unworthy both of
their own, and his condition; and such as the Prince, who at this time was no
ways favorable to him, could not himself endure, and therefore did him a noble
right: but I rather choose to omit the recital of it, than to revive the
resentment of things almost, if not altogether, extinguished and forgot, by a
relation that would otherwise perhaps, he pertinent enough to my story.

In this violent persecution, the Duke's Servants humbly advised him to slacken
the stiffness, he had hitherto ever maintained, and especially toward the
Cardinal; in hopes that by a little soothing his vain humor (immeasurably
greedy of Glory) with something above what he had formerly used to do, he might
obtain some satisfaction from him. Whereupon they represented to him the
examples of the Princes of the Blood, who by having a little warped from their
degree, and parted with some small advantages in his consideration, had by so
doing given the other Great Ones of the Kingdom an honorable color, and
pretext to go something less in their Quality also in the Cardinal's Favor:
but these Arguments could by no means prevail upon his invincible Spirit. He
made answer; The Duke of Espernon's noble constancy.
That could he ever deliberate to submit to civilities beyond what he had
usually done, he should however much less do it in the time of his Disgrace,
than at any other: That he ought no more to consider the condition to which
Fortune had now reduced him, than that from which he was fallen: That what at
another time would pass only for Complement, would now be interpreted an act of
Fear: That if he must perish, he had much rather have the injustice of his
Enemies whereof to complain, than to stand obliged to his own weakness for his
preservation: That the example of the Princes of the Blood signified nothing to
him: That their Quality was inseparably annexed to their Birth: That therefore
it could never by any demission of theirs be alienated from them: That what
would be called Prudence in persons of that condition to accommodate themselves
to the time, would be interpreted an inexcusable meanness in him; and that they
should never see him do any thing, either by example or persuasion, that should
in the least prejudice, or reflect upon his Honor.

Before this, and soon after the Death of the Cardinal de la Valette, some
there were who endeavored to persuade him to ask of the King, and the Cardinal
some of the Benefices which were become vacant by his Decease; but he with the
same constancy refused to do that also, telling those who urged him so to do,
That he would not augment the grief of his loss, by the dishonor of a repulse:
That being deprived of the person of his Son, his Estate was to him of very
little consideration; and that if his Enemies had had the pleasure of making
him unhappy, they should never have that of reproaching him, that they had made
him do any mean, or unhandsome thing.

So long before this also, as from the Duke's first arrival at Plassac, some of
his Servants thinking thereby to flatter his thrifty humor, had proposed to
him, in the great diminution of his Revenue, some retrenchment in his Expenses
also: a proposition in truth by the Duke well enough received, considering that
in a private Country House, neither his Table, nor his Stables required the
same Splendor, as when he resided in his Government; so that he moreover gave
way an account should be stated, to see what they could reduce his Expenses to:
but when it came to the push, he rejected all, saying, That he had for above
threescore years together maintained himself in the same Port, and Luster, and
that those who were his persecuters should never have that advantage over him,
as to make him abate in the least of his ordinary way of living, and that
finally in the same Splendour he had lived, he was resolved he would dye.

It Is methinks a very strange thing, and very well worthy our observation, that
amongst all the Alarms were daily given him, in all the adversities he was made
to undergo, and with all the ill news, which either to afflict, or forewarn
him, he hourly received, he never lost (as he himself did profess) so much as
one nights sleep. A thing no one can impute to his insensibility, who was but
too tender that way, and over-sensible of the least touch of Offense. Who is it
then, but must admire the stability, and unshaken constancy of that noble Soul,
which in the fury of all these Tempests (sufficient to disorder the greatest
resolution) remained as calm, and undisturbed, as in the most tranquil estate
of his most prosperous Fortune?

Neither was he content to maintain this serenity, and Stoical contempt of
injuries in his own person: he would moreover that his Servants should be
inspired with the same Courage, and generous Principles, of which I have seen
some incur his disgrace, for having only wept before him. He thought men of
such mean Spirits unworthy of his Dependence, and would above all things that
without disguise, or reservation, they should acquaint him with the true state
of his Affairs, how foul soever it might be; being accustomed to say, That it
was a kind of Consolation to know the worst of things, and to what a degree a
man was unhappy; since Doubts, and Fears, rendering an evil infinite to the
imagination, it was in that incertitude utterly impossible, for any one to take
a true measure, or to form right resolutions, from things that were boundless,
and unlimited: But withal, he whose Office it was to acquaint him with any
thing of that nature, was also to have a care so to compose his countenance,
that he might not therein discover either sorrow, or apprehension. Nay he would
himself oftentimes antedate his own Affliction, by asking such as were obliged
to discourse his Affairs to him, if they had heard no ill news that day?
occasionally comforting those in whom he reposed the greatest confidence, and
appearing himself, in all outward show, the least concerned at the misfortunes
befell him.

In the greatest Confusion of things, and the most violent heat of his
Persecution, he was with nothing so much delighted, as to hear what a fear his
Enemies were in, and how much they apprehended his Power. Unhappy as he was, he
yet retained so much vanity, as to suffer himself to be transported with that
kind of adulation; a frailty, which as it soonest, and with great facility
insinuates it self into the most generous minds, was also the last thing almost
that forsook him.

He was never heard in the greatest height of Adversity to complain of Fortune;
but on the contrary, when some of his Friends have sometimes put him upon that
Discourse, would say, That he should be very ungrateful for the benefits of
Fortune, who had for the space of threescore years been continually favorable
to him, should he murmur, or repine, that she should forsake him for the small
remainder of time he had now to live: That he had rarely observed a whole life
to be fortunate, even of those had been much shorter than his; and that in the
inconstancy, and instability of Humane Affairs, it was no little advantage to
have been reserved for the Trial of Disgrace, till a time when he was hardly
any more capable of tasting the sweets of a more prosperous Fortune.

That which ought yet further to make us admire the Constancy, and Vigor he
ever kept entire in all his Words, and Actions is, that he was neither
withheld by a morose Gravity in the one, nor hurried on by an impetuous Fury
in the other. He very well understood that his way of living was utterly
contrary to the constitution of the time, and in speaking of his own Conduct,
would sometimes confess to his particular Friends, that having often reflected
upon his own Carriage, long before it had pulled upon him those Disgraces which
now lay so heavy upon him; should he have discovered his Sons inclined to
follow the same Maxims, he would have dissuaded them from it: but that having
himself kept up something of a steady humor throughout the past Reigns, he
thought it now unfit to deprave, and give the lie to threescore years of life,
to preserve what yet remained, with imbecility, and shame; and that if he must
fall he would perish altogether.

But though he obstinately maintained this sullen, and wilful humor in matters
wherein he conceived his Honor to be concerned, he wanted not nevertheless
complacency, and respect enough in things that only respected his Duty. This
year therefore having produced the King two brave Conquests, namely, that of
Arras, and that of Turin, he would not, upon this occasion, fail to manifest
the interest, that, as a good Frenchman he pretended to, in the prosperity of
his Majesty's Arms. A Complement that was further directed to the Cardinal, who
doubtless had a very great share in all the successes of his Majesty's Affairs.
The Count de Maille was the Envoy of this Dispatch, by whom this Affair, and
some other of the Duke's concerns, were so discreetly managed, that he brought
back a very favorable Letter from the Cardinal, together with several
expressions by word of mouth of far greater kindness: but the effects were very
different, as we shall see in the revolution of the ensuing year.

But before we take our leaves of this, I must present you with the Relation of
a little Accident, by which it will appear, that even in the height of his
Disgraces, Fortune could not so altogether forget the Duke, but that she must
impart some of her petty Favors to him; which though not sufficient to
compensate his Adversity, she, at least by those trifling Obligations, made it
seem she could not find in her heart totally to abandon a person who had
formerly been so dear unto her. Three remarkable stories of the Duke of
Espernon's good Fortune, whereof this is the first.
A young Fellow the Duke had bred, and brought up from his Infancy to the age
of man, and by whom he had long been attended in his Chamber, so far at last
forgot his Duty, as to design to rob his Master. He was not long before he
executed that design, and with such dexterity, that he purloin'd two thousand
Pistols out of a Trunck in his Chamber, the Duke discovering nothing of his
loss till above six months after. This Companion having thus performed his
Feat, was, with his Masters leave retired into his own Country, upon the
Frontiers of Spain, where he had either imbezzel'd, or laid out a good part of
the money. The Duke no sooner discovered the Theft, but that he as soon guest
who had been the Thief, and named him to those who were then waiting in his
Chamber: but he was at first in some suspense, whether or no he should bustle
in a business, that it would be no easy matter for him to prove. In the end
importuned by some of his Servants, not to tolerate an Action of so ill
example, he sent away a Prevost to take him, wherein he was also so successful,
as to have him forced away from his own Country (the most favorable to Actions
of this nature in France) and brought before him, where he was no sooner come,
but that he confessed his fault, and restored the money he had taken to a A
piece of money to the value of xviii. pence sterling.
Teston.

This Story puts me in mind of two others, The second Story.
which I conceive ought not to be omitted, Being one day in the great Church of
Metz, at Vespers upon a solemn Festival: he whose Office it was to Cense the
Priests, came also to offer it to the Duke, who pulling off his Gloves with
greater respect to receive the Honor was done him, a Diamond of very great
value he wore upon his Finger, dropped out of the Socket, and fell to ground
without his taking any notice of it at all: But the Censor was soon aware of
the accident, and that he might with the more cleanly conveyance gather up the
Diamond, having made a Reverence so low, as with his knees to touch the ground,
he with great dexterity snapt up the Stone without being observed by any, and
retired. The Duke having again put on his Gloves, staid out the remainder of
the Office, which being done, he returned home to his own Lodging. Supper time
being come, and the Duke being to wash before he sat down to Table, going to
pull off his Ring, as he always used to do, when he washed his hands, he
perceived the Stone to be lost: Whereupon without further astonishment, or
deliberation, he gave order to have the man that Cens'd at Vespers brought
before him. He had observed, though without any kind of suspicion, the
extraordinary low Reverence the Fellow had made him, and his quick and ready
apprehension made him now jealous, that so unusal a Complement had not been
paid him without some design. The man being therefore brought before him, he
without more Ceremony, or Examination, positively demanded of him his Diamond,
which the other at first denied: but being commanded the second time to produce
it, and that presently, or he should be presently hanged, the poor man, as if
that word had been of as great validity, as an hundred Witnesses, and so many
Judges, without making any other reply, humbly besought the Duke to let some of
his people go home with him for his Diamond, which he also immediately
restored. In this his own Wisdom was his Friend, and another l^ss circumspect
would also have been less favored by Fortune.

But I shall here present you with a third The third S^ory.
accident of the same nature, which was a pure effect of Chance, and of which
the example may go hand in hand with those mavelous Successes, which are
related for wonderful, even of such as have been the most eminently favored by
Fortune. The Duke many years before all this, going one time to Paris, had
taken Loches in his way, as he ordinarily used to do; when being come to la
Hay in Tourain at the time of year when days are at the longest, he would
after supper go take a walk in the Meadows without the City. The Grass was not
yet cut, but ready for the Scythe, when playing with some of his Followers,
(for he was at this time in that wanton Age) a Pearl in the fashion of a Pear
of two which he always wore in his Ears, fell down into the Grass, without
being at present perceived by him. Those two Pearls were noted for the fairest
of that time, each of them being valued at ten thousand Crowns. The men of the
French Court in those days used to trick themselves with such things as these,
which now even amongst the Ladies are scarcely any more in use. The Duke going
at night to put off his Pendants, before he went to Bed, perceived one of them
to be lost: the night was already shut up, and in the clearest light of day it
had been almost impossible to have found so little a thing, in so great a
clutter of thick, and deep Grass, as in that place covered the face of the
ground. He had nevertheless so great a confidence in his good luck, as to
command one of his Valett's de Chamber to go seek his Pearl, and to bring it to
him; as if he had been in fee with Fortune, and that she had been obliged to
second all his desires. But it so fell out, that she immediately put that into
the hands of the Valette de Chamber, which he despaired ever to find, and he
brought the Pearl presently back to his Master: a thing that rendered all the
Company no less astonished at the confidence the Duke had in his good Fortune,
than at his good Fortune it self.

After these digressions it is now high time for us to pursue our former
Discourse. Anno 1641.
The Count de Maille then being returned from Court in the beginning of Winter,
The Duke of Espernon falls dang^rously sick.
found the Duke fallen sick of a very troublesome Disease. This season for some
years passed had been so inauspicious to him, that he would ordinarily call it
his Enemy; as it proved in the end, and that to such a degree as to deprive him
of his Life. At this time nevertheless it contented it self a second time to
afflict him with another defluxion of Rhume, which having run through all the
parts of his Body with extraordinary torment, left him at last in so great a
weakness, that he lay near six months before he could recover to any
indifferent posture of health. In this tedious, and troublesome Sickness, he
received very great comfort in the company of the Duchess de la Valette his
Daughter-in-law, and the Marquise de la Valette his Grandchild, who forsook
the Court to attend him in his Solitude, and Retirement. Both these arrived at
Plassac sometime before the Dukes Sickness: The Marquis de la Valette, now Duke
de Candale, had been there a good while before, the Duke his Grand father
having resolved himself to take care of his Education, and to form him betimes
to those great Actions; of which his Predecessors had left him so beautiful
Examples. In the sweet Conversation of this innocent Family, did this
Illustrious old man flatter his Grief, and deceive his Afflictions; creating to
himself a kind of fruition out of that Confinement, and Privacy, his Enemies
had for a punishment inflicted on him. Living in this Calm of Repose, which the
Tempests of his Fortune had at last fretted themselves into, and hoping therein
to spin out the remainder of his Life, he was surpised with an unexpected
Command from the King, to leave his House of Plassac, and to remove thence to
Loches. And seeing this Affair (of it self untoward enough) was the fountain
from whence several other afflictions derived themselves, which also in the end
occasioned his Death, it should not methinks be impertinent to give a full
Relation of a Transaction, by which we are now about to conclude his Life.

From the time that the Count de Soissons departed from Court to retire himself
to S^dan (of which we have already spoken) this Prince had rested content with
the enjoyment of his own Estate, The estate of the Affairs of the Kingdom, from
whence the Cardinal took occasion to send the Duke of Espernon to Loches.
and the payment of those Pensions assigned him from the Crown; and (it has
been said) that had those Pensions been continued to him, would have remained
in the same quiet posture wherein he had lived ever since his departure from
Court, choosing rather to languish in Sloth, and out of all Employment, than by
his Ambition to discompose the Peace of his Country. But as if his Enemies had
been disposers of his Destiny, they would never grant him those just, and
reasonable conditions he desired; insomuch that they imposed upon him a
necessity of applying himself to Foreign Princes. These therefore having
supplied him with some Forces, his own Interest having procured him some others
within the Kingdom, and the Duke de Bouillon (who was equally interested with
him in his cause) having armed a great number of his Friends, he of all these
together made up a very considerable Army. These Forces however, how great
soever they were, would notwithstanding have given the Cardinal no very great
Alarm, had he not found withal, that even at home there was so formidable a
Faction formed in this Prince's favor, as that the Kingdom was universally
engaged in his designs: But when he saw that the people openly declared in his
Quarrel, and that the whole Frontier of Champagne, together with the best
Cities of that Province, threatened to revolt in his Favor, that Paris it self
opened her Arms to receive him; and that it was to be feared, if some sudden
course was not taken, that without a blow struck, or the least resistance, he
should see himself reduced to his Mercy, then it was (as has been reported)
that he seriously repented himself he had not been more just to him, and that
he had not rendered himself more facile to his equitable demands: But having
fruitlesly attempted to quiet this storm, by some overtures of Accommodation,
those Propositions being rejected, there was now a necessity of coming to the
decision of Arms. The Cardinal therefore endeavored with all imaginable
expedition to oppose a good Army against him under the Command of the Marshall
de Chastillon; to whom he also gave express Orders at any hand to hazard the
fortune of a Battle, before the evil dispositions of the people could produce
those sinister effects, he had all the reason in the world to apprehend. In
this posture of Affairs, his most redoubted Enemies, being the Great Ones he
had offended, he conceived it in the first place necessary to secure the Duke
of Espernon, not doubting but that a man of his known spirit, and so highly
offended by him, would take hold of the first opportunity to revenge himself of
those insupportable Injuries he had so continually rec^iv'd at his hands. But
over and above this jealousy which the Cardinal had reasonably enough
conceived upon the forementioned accounts, the Duke's ill Fortune would
moreover at this time join with his Enemy to give him some colorable pretense
for this new injury, and injustice. All the Kingdom believed that the Cardinal
de la Valette had before his Decease, obtained of this great Minister an
assurance of repose for his Father the remaining part of his Life; and there
had been no new occasion offered, that could justify the violation of this
promise; so that his private, and solitary way of living sheltring him from all
the Tempests of the busy World, he thought to live quiet, and secure in that
harbor whereinto even by his misfortunes he had been so fortunately thrown. In
this estate a wretched Fellow, utterly unknown to the Duke, or to any of his,
without any the least acquaintance with any of his Family, or any frequentation
in his House, was so malicious, as in his name to go to the Sieur du Bourg,
Governor of the little Fort the Spaniards had possessed themselves of at their
entry into Biscaye, and by me before called Socoa, offering him in the names of
the Dukes of Espernon, and de la Valette (whom he had never seen) a very great
recompense, if he would deliver up that Fort into their hands. Le Bourg easily
imagined that this place being so well known as it was to these two Dukes,
could not be so ardently coveted by them, it being of very little importance;
and consequently did at the very first believe the person that made him this
Proposition, must be some Impostor, who hoped to obtain some recompense for
informing against him, and afterward to run away; but a Rope in the end was
his reward. Though (as I have said) le Bourg well enough understood this Fellow
to be a Counterfeit, A malicious Contrivance against the Duke of Espernon.
he notwithstanding either to render himself more considerable at these two
Dukes Expense, or more exactly to discharge his Duty than upon such an occasion
he was obliged to do, failed not however to give the Court an account of the
Proposition had been made to him, detaining the impostor Prisoner in the mean
time. Whereupon he soon after received Orders to deliver him into the hands of
Lauson Intendant de la Justice in Guienne; by whom though he was condemned to
die, and the Sentence accordingly executed upon him, yet at present they made
use of this Imposture to color a Command to the Duke of Espernon, to depart
from Plassac, and to transfer himself to Loches. Varennes one of the Gentlemen
in Ordinary to the King, was appointed to carry this Order, who the 20th. of
June, about two of the Clock in the afternoon arrived with it at Plassac. The
Duke was at that time a Bed, where he used to take two or three hours repose
every afternoon; by reason whereof Varennes being necessitated to attend his
waking, he asked to speak with the Count de Maille in the mean time; which he
did to anticipate the Duke by some excuses, in that he was so unhappy, as to be
always sent upon unwelcome Commissions (for it was he also who in the business
of the Archbishop of Bordeaux, had been the Bearer of the Order was sent the
Duke to retire out of his Government to Plassac.) The Count de Maille, having
by discoursing with him understood Varenne's Errand, doubted not but that the
Duke must needs infinitely surpised at the Novelty of this Command; wherefore
having consulted with such of the Duke's Servants as were of most consideration
about him, they concluded it most convenient, that he should by his Secretary
be beforehand acquainted with it, to the end he might be prepared to receive it
with less emotion. The business therefore being thus ordered amongst them, was
accordingly executed, and the Duke was no sooner awake, but that the Secretary
coming to his Bedside, told him that a Gentleman from the King was newly
arrived, who had brought him an Order to depart from Plassac, and go away to
Loches. The Duke, who had of old fortified his mind against the worst of
events, and not finding in this that extremity of evils it lay in his Enemies
power to inflict upon him, without being at all moved at the suddenness of the
thing; calmly replied, and is that all? After which words a little composing
himself, he commanded his Secretary to call the Gentleman in. Varennes was
presently brought into his Chamber, who, advancing to the Bedside, presented
him with the King's Letter, which the Duke opening, he found it to contain
these words. Cousin,
I am sorry that by your Sons ill carriage, The King's Letter to the Duke of
Espernon.
together with some Intelligence I have lately received out of Guienne, I am
constrained to tell you, that I desire you will at present leave your abode at
Plassac, where you now are, and come to Loches. Varennes one of my Gentlemen,
by whom you will receive this Dispatch, will inform you more particularly of my
intention herein, in whom you are to repose an entire confidence, and belief.
In the mean time I pray God, Cousin, to have you in his Holy Protection.

From Abbeville this 13th. of June 1641.



This Letter being read, and Varennes offering a new at the same excuses he had
already made to the Count de Maille, the Duke cut him short, by telling him,
that whatever came from the King was infinitely welcome, and that excuses were
not necessary where a man did nothing but what it was his Duty to do; after
which he fell into a pretty long discourse, wherein he manifested so much
judgment, and constancy upon so unpleasing an accident, as made every one
admire that heard him: It was very near word for word in these terms, That
threescore years being now lapsed since he had first had the Honor to serve
the Kings his Masters, and to teach such as their Majesty's had subjected under
his Authority to obey, it would be inexcusable in him, should he in that time
have profited so little himself, as not to know how in his own person to
practice the Precepts he had laid down to others: That he was very ready to pay
the King all the Obedience his Majesty could himself desire: That had he a
sufficient stock of strength, and health to perform that Journey Post, he would
immediately mount to House, by that promptness to show how every Subject ought
to obey his Prince; not that he did not nevertheless understand himself to be
very unkindly used, and looked upon this proceeding as excessively severe to
him who had never failed in the least in his Majesty's Service, and to whom no
one living could impute the least offense to his Duty: That his Enemies made it
their pretense to use him ill, from the ill carriage of his Son; as if a Father
could be any ways responsible for the defaults of his Children, or ought to
suffer for their Offenses. Not that I do (he presently caught himself) in the
least confess those wherewith they have charged my Son the Duke de la Valette;
he is an honest man, and innocent: and had the King been rightly informed of
his Actions, his Majesty might with better reason have commended his Services,
than (as he is pleased to do) to condemn his Conduct. Upon which expression,
excusing himself for that little escape of his resentment, he proceeded to say,
Is it not very hard that my Enemies will expose my old Age to the scorn, and
mockery of the one half of the Kingdom I am to pass through to the place of my
Exile? Why will they not at least give me leave to finish the small remainder
of my days I have to live in the obscurity of this Solitude? After which,
asking him if there was any time limited for his setting out, or if he had
received any Order to continue with him till his departure? and Varennes having
denied both the one, and the other, he continued to say, That since they were
pleased to proceed so favorably with him, he would be no ill Husband of his
time: That he would give order to have his Equipage made ready with the
soonest; but that he had let them hang by to rust, and rot for four years
together, that he had been in that House. In the conclusion of all, Varennes
having entreated an Answer to his Letter, the Duke gave him one in these terms.
SIR,
I have by the Sieur de Varennes received the Command your Majesty has been
pleased to send me to quit my Residence in this place, The Duke of Espernon's
Letter to the King.
and to go to Loches, upon some information your Majesty has received to the
prejudice of the Duke de la Valette my Son. If my said Son continue to follow
my Counsels, and Example, as I am certain he will ever do, he can never commit
any thing that may either offend your Majesty, or that shall be unworthy of his
Birth. For what concerns my self Sir, who for threescore years passed have
never ceased to render the Kings your Royal Predecessors, and your Majesty all
sorts of faithful, and humble Service, and Obedience, I shall continue with all
possible expedition to testify my respect to this new Command. It is true,
Sir, that I am something surpised at it, and that having continued now four
years together in this House, I had set up my rest, and concluded here to end
my days; by which mistake I am at present utterly destitute of Equipage both
for my self, my Daughter-in-law, and my little Children: but I shall with all
possible diligence make my preparation, and though my Health be exceedingly
impaired, both by my great Age, and my late Sickness; which having detained me
four months in Bed, has left me in a very weak condition: I shall
notwithstanding cheerfully expose my little remainder of Life, to this long,
and troublesome Journey, in obedience to your Majesty's good pleasure, and
shall think my self exceeding happy if I may conclude it in manifesting my
Zeal, and Passion, as I have ever done my Obedience, and inviolate Fidelity,
etc.

From Plassac this 20th. of June, 1641.



Neither in this answer, nor in his Discourse to Varennes, had he made any
Reply to that part of the King's Letter, which mentioned the intelligence his
Majesty had received out of Guienne; forasmuch as he was as yet totally
ignorant of the business of Socoa: but having sometime after understood that
his name had been made use of in that Affair, he conceived it very necessary
for him to address himself to the Marshall de Scomberg, to request that he
would penetrate into the bottom of that Imposture, that so he might be able to
inform his Majesty of the truth of the Story. This Marshall had been withdrawn
from his Government of Languedoc, as well as the Duke of Espernon had been out
of that of Guienne: but being it had been done without any visible mark of
Disgrace, and only out of deferenee to the Prince, who was impatient of the
least contradiction from any of the Governors of the Provinces, where he had
any thing to do, The generous proceeding of the Marshall de Scomberg.
he had been dismissed with an honorable Commission into Guienne, to Command
as the Kings Lieutenant in that Province. His carriage there toward the Duke
of Espernon was very different from that of those who had preceded him in that
Employment, he highly, and publicly declaring, that he shared in the feeling
an honest man ought to have of the ill usage had been inflicted upon a man of
that eminent Quality, and who had ever behaved himself without all manner of
reproach: Neither was this the only testimony of his Friendship, he proceeding
from these favorable expressions, to effects of a much more obliging nature.
They had proposed to him the Government of Guienne in recompense of that of
Languedoc (with the privation of which he had also been tacitly threatened) but
all those offers, and menaces could never prevail upon him, he professing that
he had much rather choose to be without any Employment at all, than to be
invested with the spoils of two persons of that eminent condition yet living,
and with whom he was not convinced that any fault could justly be found;
exercising moreover the Commission he had there with so great tenderness and
respect to them, that though he had thereby as ample Authority, as he could
himself desire; he would notwithstanding never come to execute any of his
Functions at Bordeaux, the Capital City of that Province. He would not so much
as come near it, but contented himself to stay at Again, which he made the seat
of his residence till his return into Languedoc: and whereas others, who had
commanded there before him, had carried themselves very rudely to the Duke's
Friends, and Servants there, the Marshall on the contrary took them into his
especial Trust, and Favor, conceiving he could not make a better choice, than
of such men, as had passed the trial of his late Adversity. This noble way af
proceeding had so highly obliged the Duke, that he made no difficul^y to
solicit his Favor, a thing he had never done to any since his persecution; he
writ to him therefore before he departed from Plassac, entreating him to cause
the Impostor by whom* he had been accused to be thoroughly sifted, that he might
be able to satisfy the Court of what could be discovered from his Examination.
The Marshall upon this Letter did the Duke all the good Offices could be
expected from his generous and noble Nature, and writ so favorably to the
Council in his behalf, as from des Noyers Secretary of State to obtain this
answer: a Copy whereof he sent to the Duke.

For what concerns the Fellow that is detained Prisoner at Socoa, I could have
wished that Monsieur du Bourg had better examined the business, before he had
acquainted the King with it, and brought so great an inconvenience upon persons
of that condition: Monsieur de Lauzon, who is at Bayonne, will in two hours
time be able to clear all doubts, observing the Order I have sent him according
to your desire. In effect the business was perfectly cleared, and the Dukes
Innocence sufficiently manifest: but notwithstanding the resolutions that had
been taken against him were nothing altered; neither indeed did he solicit any
thing of that kind, nor would address himself to any other, saving the
Marshall de Scomberg only, his design being only to secure his Reputation, and
not to receive any the least favor from his Enemies.

Yet whatever he had said to Varennes, or whatsoever he had writ to the King
concerning the diligence he would use to put himself upon his way; The Duke of
Espernon's irresolution concerning the Journey of Loches,
he did not for all that make so much haste, that three weeks at least were not
lapsed before he began his Journey. He spun out the preparation of his Equipage
in great length, and although he at first manifested an absolute, and franck
disposition to depart, either the tenderness, and apprehension of his Friends,
or his own doubts, and diffidences, had possessed him with so great a
jealousy, that he could not easily persuade himself to perform a thing he saw
was nevertheless by no means to be avoided. Some, who would seem to be most
solicitous of his Person, and Safety, had often represented to him, That the
Castle of Loches was a Prison of State: That it had already been made use of in
that nature upon very considerable One whereof I find in Davila when the Duke
of Elbeauf was sent thither Prisoner presently after the Death of the Duke of
Guise at Blois.
occasions: That it being situate in the heart of the Kingdom, his Captivity
would be the more severe, by how much there was no possibility of an escape,
and that so soon as he should be come thither, it would be in the power of any
one of the Exempts-des Guardes, to charge the Garrison, and to make himself
Master of the Gate to engage his Liberty for ever. It was no hard matter to
foresee, that all these inconveniences might possibly arrive: but being his
forbearing to go, would inevitably convince him of the highest disobedience,
the discreeter sort of men concluded it the safest for him to try if he could
not avoid the utmost extremes, by an entire confidence in his Majesty's
Justice, and in outward show to perform that with great alacrity, and freedom,
which in effect there was a necessity upon him, he must however do. The Duke
saw clearly enough into the truth of this last advice; yet could he not without
great repugnancy, and unwillingness follow that Counsel; and the natural desire
of the Liberty, he believed ready to be ravished from him (or that at best
depended only upon his Enemies Capricio) possessed him with so great a disquiet
of mind, as failed little of endangering his health by a new relapse. He
nevertheless by his constancy, once more overcame all his resentments, and
mistrusts, and arming himself with a generous resolution, determined in the end
to do, what must either speedily be done, or he must inevitably lose himself
for ever. But forasmuch as he discovered some little beam of hope in the Count
de Soisson's undertaking (whose party was tacitly favored by all the
Malcontents, and with greater reason by him, than all the rest) he observed
such an Order in his departure from Plassac, and throughout the whole progress
of his Journey, as on the one side to avoid the imputation of Disobedience,
should the Count's Affairs meet with any ill success; and on the other to be in
a condition suddenly to return into his Government to favor his Cause, should
there be the least appearance (as there was a great deal) that this Prince could
receive any advantage by his joining with him.

The better then to fit all things for his proposed design, he was near a month
in preparing his Equipage: the most necessary things must by all means be
bought at places a great way off, though they might have been had much nearer
at hand; and when all things were got ready, he was advised to feign some
incommodities in his Health, as the remains of his late Sickness: an advice he
for a few days put in practice, though in the end he must of necessity set out,
and it was the 12th. day of July. He had been sometime in suspense, whether he
should take the Duchess de la Valette and her little Children along with him
this Journey, or no; he could not in the great apprehensions had been infused
into him of the loss of his own Liberty, consent that persons so dear unto him
should bear a part in so great a Disgrace; who as they were in other things the
greatest Consolation he had, so were they in this none of the least causes of
his Affliction: but their Piety soon cut off all deliberation, and they carried
that by the violence of their importunity, which they could not otherwise
obtain of so good a Father, and were at last admitted to the Voyage.

During these delays in the Duke's slender Preparation, the Count de Soissons,
The Count de Soissons makes great preparation for War.
and the Duke de Bouillon, had made so mighty ones wherewith to oppose the
Power of the King, that they were apparently the stronger Party, and in a
condition to bring over the Victory to their own side. The Armies of the one,
and the other party were so near, and both so animated against one another,
that it was hardly possible they should avoid coming immediately to Blows;
every one in his wishes favored the Count's Designs, and all the people, the
Cities, and generally all France opened their Arms to receive him: neither was
the Duke of Espernon ignorant of these good dispositions toward him, with whom
he went along in his Heart, and Judgment; so that hoping much on the one side,
and fearing something nevertheless on the other, he began his Journey. From
Plassac, his first days Journey was to Pons, a League and a half only distant
from his own House, which although a very little one, and that he performed it
in his Litter, he nothwithstanding went to Bed presently after his arrival, and
all the next day rested there. The day following he went to Cognac, to visit
the Count de Ionzac, in which little Town, which had formerly been a member of
his Government of Angoumois, he found a great number of Gentlemen, and Ladies
of very good Quality, whom the compassion of his finister Fortune had assembled
there to pay him their last Visit, as they believed, and as indeed it proved to
be. He could not upon this occasion, so govern his own humor, as to be
persuaded to feign himself indisposed, that being a part he could only play,
when there was none by to see him: but in the great world his Prudence could
never obtain so great an Authority over his haughty Spirit: but that he must
ever make a show of more Health and vigor, than he really had. A thing his
Servants were very much afflicted at, as very much out of season; some of which
having represented to him the example of the Duke of Rhetz, who a long time
preserved his Life, and kept his Offices, by having with great art, and
industry given hopes, that the latter, would soon become vacant by the loss of
the other; he despised that sort of Prudence, telling them that the malignity
of old Age, would soon enough, and to his great grief render him altogether
useless, without that he needed to antedate that unhappy time by artifice, and
dissimulation.

That which I conceive made him so resolute to despise all Counsels that
carried with them any similitude of fear, was the frequent intelligence he
received from a very good hand of the good posture the Count's* Affairs were
in: full of which good news he departed from Cognac to go to Neuvy, a House
belonging to the Baron of Auton his Nephew, where he intended to counterfeit
the sick man, till he should have certain intelligence of the success of the
Count's Arms: but he had no time to make a long dissimulation of it, for two
days after his arrival at this place, the Countess de Brienne passing that way
to go into Angoumois, News brought to the Duke of Espernon of the Death of the
Count de So^ssons, slain at the Battle of Sedan.
came to give him a Visit, and brought him the first news of the winning of the
Battle of Sedan, but withal of the Count's unhappy Death. The truth of this
disaster soon cured the Duke of his pretended Indisposition; he very well knew
that the loss of this Prince did not only take away the fruits of his Victory,
but would moreover infallibly transfer it to the contrary side: And then it was
that he saw how much he stood obliged to his own Wisdom, and how great an error
he had run into, had he yielded more to the tenderness of his Friends, than to
his own ma^urer Counsels; for had this news found him yet at Plassac, with what
probable excuses could he have pallia^ed the Intelligence, he was believed to
maintain with the Count; or what more specious pretense could his Enemies have
desired, to have added to the ill usage they had so long made him undergo? Even
his own delays, and some too free expressions had escaped from him in the
almost certain expectation he had been possessed withal of a hopeful issue, did
not a little afflict him; wherefore the better to conceal all that had passed,
he immediately resolved upon sending away a Gentleman to Court with a Letter
antedated some few days before, to the end it might not be imagined, he had
writ since the Death of the Count; which Letter contained these words. SIR,
I send this Gentleman to acquaint your Majesty with the Obedience I have paid
to the command you was pleased to send me to go to Loches; The Duke of
Esp^rn^n's Letter to the King.
it is now six days since I set out to begin this Journey, which I should also
Sir have done much sooner, would my health have permitted; or could I with less
trouble have procured the Equipages necessary for my departure. From the time
that I have been in a condition to move, I have been in motion, having never
had the least repugnancy to your Majes^ies command: I shall ever have the same
inclimation to obey them, and in the last moments of my Life, make it my glory
to manifest to your Majesty, that I have never swerved from the absolute
Obedience, that was vowed to you from your birth, by

Sir, Your, etc.




And being he conceived it not enough to give the King this account only,
unless at the same time the Cardinal was also satisfied with his Conduct, he
wrote to him in like manner, and almost in the same words he had done to the
King.

Whilst these Letters were posting to Court, he, by very short Journeys was
still advancing toward Loches, where, notwithstanding all the delays he could
make, having the hazard of his Liberty ever present to his imagination, he
thought he should but too soon arrive. With these melancholy thoughts going on
to Poicti^rs, the compassion which the principal Officers, and the people of
that City manifested for his present Adversity, did much augment his Grief, and
suspicion of some future mischief. He there received from all the Orders of the
City the same Honors, and Respect, as if he had still stood in the highest
degree of his Prosperity, and Favor, and every one making the same reflections
upon his present condition, that he himself did; the people ran from all parts
to see so great an example of the Injustice, Vici^^itude, and Extravagancy of
Fortune, which occasioned so great a crow'd even in his own Lodgins, as put him
upon a resolution to go out on foot into the Marketplace of the City, which
was also near to his Inn, to satisfy the curiosity they had to behold him:
but he was thereby in so great danger to be stifled by the multitude, that he
had no way to free himself, but by the favor of his Coach, that he was of
necessity constrained to send for to disingage him. From Poictiers he continued
his way to l^ Tricherie; but he had made so little haste withal, as had given
his Courrier time to go to Court, and to return, whilst he had been advancing,
twelve, or fifteen Leagues of his Journey only; so that he found him still upon
his way, when he brought him this Dispatch from the King. Cousin,
I was very well pleased to find by your Letter, His Majesty's Letter to the
Duke.
that you had put your self upon your way to Loches, so soon as your health
would permit; neither did I doubt, but you would upon this occasion conform
your self unto my desires: and I do moreover assure my self you will ever do
the same, whereby you will oblige me to continue to you the testimonies of my
Affection; upon which assurance I pray God, etc.

From Rhemes the 21. of July, 1641.



That of the Cardinal was couched in these terms. Monsieur,
The King is very well satisfied with your Obedience to his Commands, The
Cardinals Letter to the Duke.
which he also has laid upon you in order to your own particular good; and I
for my part have received a very high contentment in understanding by this
Gentleman the good disposition wherein you now are; a continuation whereof I
heartily wish you, as being, etc.




To add yet something more to the satisfaction the Duke had received by these
two kind Letters, the Gentleman that brought them moreover assured him, that he
had observed at Court no other than Serene, and Auspicious Countenances; and
that there was nothing which for the future threatened any worse usage, than
what he had already received: Insomuch that even his best Friends there, and
those who were most solicitous of him did believe, that had he not already
received a Command to depart from Plassac, they would not now have enjoined him
that trouble, the Cardinal being reassur'd by the Death of the Count de
Soissons: but seeing that Order had been already sent him, they would rather
choose to have it executed, contrary to all reason, than to revoke it with any
kind of Justice. These Dispatches, and this news from Court, being so much
better than the Duke had expected, did a little quiet his mind; so that in the
end he arrived at Loches, with much less apprehension, and far greater
cheerfulness than he had parted from Plassac.

This satisfaction was improved to him by the extraordinary Acclamations
wherewith all the people received him at his arrival there, The Duke of
Esp^rnon (...) at Leches, and is there received with great Honor.
which was upon the third of August, there being no kind of Honors, nor any
evidences of Public Joy omitted at his Reception. All the Persons of Quality,
of which there are a very great number thereabouts, came to visit him: The City
of Tour^s paid him the same Respect, and the Archbishop having given the
example to the rest of the City, the Chapter, and President also sent to
Complement him: besides which Civilities from the Body in general, and the
several Societies, and Fraternities in particular, almost all the Magistrates,
and Officers, at least the most considerable of them, came in their own persons
to wait upon him; insomuch that it seemed, whilst Courted, and Complemented at
this unexpected rate, he was nothing fallen from his former Prosperity, and
Greatness. All these Honors (of which he was as sensible as any) having
revived his Spirits, and consequently quickened, and raised his Wit, and Fancy,
he made himself to be highly admired, by an infinite number of the Curious, who
being continually asking him a thousand Questions concerning the State Secret
of past Transactions, he cleared them of several important Doubts, which few
men living could unriddle; and explained to them many passages in d' Avila's
History, which at this time was so new in France, that it was in the hands of
very few. He had a complacency for all sorts of people, far above what till now
he had ever had, and a gracious and winning sweetness for his own Servants they
had never known before: by which obliging and free fashion, together with the
ancient esteem annexed to his Person, and Virtue, he in an instant won the Love,
and Applause of all the world. In this public and universal Favor, and
Reputation, and in the assurance had been given him from Court, that nothing
^inister was to be apprehended thence, the memory of his ancient Authority
began again to revive in his mind, and that put him upon a desire to exercise
it in this little Government; which that he might the better do, he
particularly informed himself of all the Affairs of the City, and Country about
it, he caused all the Courriers that passed that way to come immediately to
himself, and suffered nothing of Public Business, to be determined without
first giving him an account: so that in a place where it seemed he had nothing
at all to do, he was ingenious enough to find himself employment, and to create
himself some diversion, and delight.

Who is it but must be astonished in this condition of the Duke's, and after so
many, and so great Severities exercised upon him, to see the Cardinal, who was
the Author of all, make no difficulty to address to him, and to request
favors at his hands? In the height of all his Persecutions, they had still
retain^d for him some shadow of his Office of Colonel; and about this time one
of his Officers Aid Major to the Regiment of Guards, called Ocamp, having been
slain at the Siege of Air, Montant his Brother addressed himself to the
Cardinal, by his Intercession to be invested with his Brothers Command. The
Duke would never descend so low toward the Cardinal (though he had met with
several occasions wherein he might with much more reason have done it) not so
much as after the death of the Cardinal his Son, he being (as has been already
said) never to be prevailed upon to ask him any one of his Benefices: but
Cardinal Richelieu, without being moved at the generosity of this Example, writ
this Letter to the Duke. Monsieur,
The Sieur de Montant who is coming to wait upon you, The Cardinals Letter to
the Duke of Esp^rnon.
to make suit for the Office of Aid Major to the Regiment of Guards, formerly
possessed by his Brother, slain at the Siege of Air, having entreated me to
fortify his Request by my Recommendation: I write this to satisfy his desire,
and to tell you, that in my opinion, you cannot make choice of any one that
will either be more acceptable to the Regiment, or that in his own person will
more worthily discharge it. For what concerns my own particular, I shall think
my self highly obliged, if you manifest to him, upon this occasion, that my
Intercession has been useful to him, and that you have a consideration for the
Request of

Monsieur, Your, etc.
From Rethel this 28th. of July, 1641.



There was not any about the Duke, who was not astonished at this Request, and
he himself to that degree, that he had much ado to persuade himself the Letter
was not supposititious, and forged: having nevertheless considered how unlikely
it was, that in so public a thing, any person whatever durst be so bold, as to
counterfeit the Seal of so powerful, and so feared a Minister, he began to
suspect it might be some Artifice to extract from him a denial, from thence to
derive a pertext for the future to dispose of all Offices that should become
vacant in the French Infantry, without having any more recourse to him for his
Consent. Knowing therefore very well, that he, who only entreated, had Power to
take; and that he would doubtless do it, did he not presently grant his
request, he rather quitted to him, than gave him the Command, and thereupon
sent him a Letter, of which this is the Copy. Monsieur,
The Sieur de Montant being come to me with a Letter from you, The Duke's
answer.
wherein you desire of me in his Favor the Office of Aid Major to the
Regiment of Guards, become vacant by the Death of his Brother; I was no less
pleased than amazed to see, that in the Condition I now am, I have any thing
left that may be acceptable to you. This is it has obliged me to dispatch away
this Gentleman, on purpose to bring you a Blank Commission of the Office you
desire, that you may fill it up with any you have a mind to gratify with that
Command, reserving to my self herein nothing, save the sole satisfaction of
letting you see how much I am,

Monsieur, etc.
From Loches this 12th. of August, 1641.



The Cardinal would by no means comprehend the terms of this Letter, though
they were not so obscure, but that the true sense was very easy to be
understood; he accepted the Office however very well, without considering
nevertheless, how few occasions of that kind remained to the Duke, wherein to
oblige his own Servants, and to add yet more to our wonder, returned him thanks
in these words. Monsieur,
The obliging fashion wherewith you have been pleased to gratify me concerning
the Office of Aid Major to the Regiment of Guards, The Cardinal's Return to
the Duke's answer.
for which I writ to you in the behalf of the Sieur de Montant, has given me so
high a sense of the Favor, that I can never sufficiently thank you, nor
express how infinitely kindly I take it. I beseech you to believe that my
gratitude is such, as thereto nothing can be added, no more than to the desire
I have to meet with occasions, wherein by my Services I may manifest to you,
That I am, etc.

From Blerancour this 16th. of August, 1641.

Was it any other than a mere mockery to accompany these smooth words with the
severest usage, wherewith an honest man could possibly be persecuted?

Yet was not all the Favor of that time absolutely contrary to the Duke,
Commotions at Court, stirred up by the Favorite Cinq-Mars.
and his Interests; and if he was by the Cardinal persecuted to the degree we
have already seen, CinqMars Grand Escuyer of France, and the King's true
Favorite, had at least as great an inclination to serve, as the other had
manifested a desire to hurt him. This young Gentleman one of the most
accomplished, and unhappy that Nature ever produced in his time, either jealous
of the Cardinal's Power, or prompted by more virtuous and laudable Motives,
openly labored to overthrow his Credit with the King. He had for his principal
Confidents, de Thou, and Fontrailles, both the one and the other a particular
Friend, and Servant to the Duke of Espernon, by whose good Offices Cinq-Mars
had been wrought into so great a kindness for the Duke, that he often received
very respective Complements from him. I do not believe notwithstanding, that
the Duke had any hand in his Designs, if not so far as they might be conducing
to the Service of the Queen; for in truth he had so wholly devoted himself to
the Service of this Princess (every day threatened with the loss of the King by
his continual Sicknesses) that he was resolved, upon occasion, to expose all
things for her Service, and that of the Princes her Children; a disposition in
him the Queen was very well assured of: Neither did she a little rely upon the
Credit, and Fidelity of so considerable a Servant. As to the other disorders of
the Court, I very well know he did by no means approve them: but on the other
side fearing left Fontrailles, whom he entirely loved, should engage himself
too far in those Factions, he never writ to him, though he did it very often,
without adding in a Postscript under his own hand. Above all things take heed
of the Ba^^ille.
Sur tout gardez vous de la Bastille, an advice he as discreetly followed, and
in good time: But for de Thou, being come to see him at Loches, soon after his
arrival there, I know very well, as having been a Witness to it, that he
exhorted and conjured him by all the Ties betwixt them, to forsake the
frequentations, and engagements he had at Court, and to settle himself to some
moderate condition in the Long Robe, which he had taken upon him. He had
acquired so many rare, and eminent qualities proper for that calling, as might
have rendered him one of the greatest men of the Profession: and besides that,
the Duke was induced to give him these prudent Exhortations, by the
consideration of their Alliance, and the Affection and Esteem he had for his
person, he did moreover herein not a little gratify the desire of his
Relations, and Friends, who, knowing what a Power the Duke had with him, never
ceased importuning him to use his utmost interest, and endeavor to withdraw
him from that unquiet kind of life, Monsieur de Thou involved in the Grand
Es^uyer's ruin
he had for some time lead. But his Destiny carried it above their Prudence*
and Foresight; and he must in the end add to the number of the Illustrious
unhappy of his time. The Duke had not the grief of seeing his deplorable end,
his own Death sometime preceding, as we shall shortly see, and of which this in
my opinion was the cause.

From the time that the Duke of Espernon had been established in the Government
of Guienne, The Calumny of Madaillan against the Duke, the cause of his Death.
he having conceived, that to add greater weight to his Authority, it would not
be inconvenient to inflict some exemplary punishment, upon some notable
Offenders: a Gentleman of that Province, but one the most unworthy of that
Quality of any that ever wore that Character, called Madaillan, fell within the
danger of his Justice. The Duke therefore being solicited, and importuned on a
thousand hands, to cause Justice to be executed upon this man, for an infinite
number of Crimes, whereof he stood Convict, he at last attempted to seize him,
that he might be brought to condign Punishment: but this wretch as Distrustful
and Cunning, as Villainous, and Wicked, still found means to escape the hands of
the Sergeants, who had order from the Duke to apprehend him, Madaillan's
Character.
and lay a long time concealed in the Province. In the end notwithstanding he
was constrained to fly, which he did, and put himself into the Enemies Armies,
not to Fight, for he was never guilty of any handsome Action, but to Plunder
and to Betray; insomuch that in a very little space, he had to his other Crimes
added that of a Fugitive from all Parties. He was in Pay with the Imperialists,
the Swedes, the Spaniards, and the States of Holland; after which famous
Exploits he returned home to his own house, hoping that time had worn out of
the Duke's mind the memory of his former Offenses: but he soon perceived there
was no abiding in the Duke's Government, for men of his known and detected
manners. He there lived therefore in so perpetual fear, as made him to keep a
kind of Garrison in his House; which the Duke having notice of, he resolved to
cause some of his Soldiery to beset the House, and by fine force to take him.
This Deliberation, which could not be executed without some noise, gave
Madaillan leisure to make his escape: he took therefore at this time the way of
Italy, and went to Genoa, where he presented Prince Auria with some counterfeit
Letters from the Duke of Montmorency, under favor of which, he gulled this
Prince of some very considerable Sums of Money. From thence he went to Rome,
where he insinuated himself into the Family of the Count de Brassac,
Ambassador there for the King of France, of whom, by virtue of other
Counterfeit Letters, he was favorably received: But it is not to be believed
how many Cheats, Insolences, and other abominable Crimes he committed under
our Ambassadors Protection; till in the end the Count tired out with the
Complaints he daily received of his lewd Behavior, was upon the point to have
delivered him into the hands of Justice, if he had not fairly ran away. After
this manner Madaillan returns back into France; neither could he possibly have
arrived in a more favorable conjuncture for such men as he, it being precisely
at the time of the great Revolts of Guienne, and wherein he also had the share
that was his due. The King being willing to communicate his Grace at the Duke's
instance toward such as had been guilty of those Disorders, the said Duke had
nevertheless a care, to cause such to be excepted from the general Indemnity,
as were taxed with other heinous and notorious Crimes, conceiving it neither
just, nor of good Example, that by new Crimes men should pretend to Pardon for
the old, and that by great Offenses they should obtain an impunity for others
of less importance. The King maturely weighing these good Reasons of the Duke,
proceeded according to his Advice; by which means Madaillan found himself in
much more danger after the Pardon of the other Delinquents, than at any time
before he had ever been. His Conscience, besides the Crimes already mentioned,
did moreove accuse him of several others, of a horrid, and unheard of nature;
For the incest he had committed with his own Daughter, had in his Process been
proved against him; the Parricide having moreover caused three Children he had
by her to be murdered before his own eyes. He had been Convict of having four
Wives at one, and the same time, and of all the other abominable Actions can be
imagined: what was there then that ought to be suspected from an Enemy armed
with so much wickedness, and so many horrid, and detested Crimes?

This desperate Villain seeing himself, and his Affairs, in so lost and
irrecoverable a condition, and knowing the persecution the Duke of Espernon,
and all his Family suffered under at that time, His Resolution to ruin the
Duke of Espernon.
took a resolution to fall upon him to his final Ruin, and to assault him with
so hateful a Calumny, as that the sole Accusation should of it self, and of
course, put the party accused out of all manner of defense. Big therefore with
this accursed design, he goes to Paris, where not finding the King, he
addresses himself to the Duchess of Eguillon; to whom concealing his Name, as
being too well known, in a studied Discourse of which he was capable enough, he
delivers in great secrecy, That there was a Conspiracy on foot against the
proper Person of the King himself, and also against that of the Cardinal her
Uncle. Neither was he content to make a bare discovery of the pretended
Treason, and proceeded moreover to undertake to justify what he had said by
literal proofs, provided he might have three months Protection granted him in
Guienne, where his Enemies, he said, had invented false Crimes against him, on
purpose to destroy him. His Artifice herein.
It is to be presumed, he did not forget the Duke of Espernon's name, in this
first Accusation, though it was afterward denied at Court, when the business
came to be discovered. The Duchess however, interested as she was in the
Person of the Cardinal, and startled as she ought to be, with the horror of so
prodigious a Treason, writ in all haste to the Court, which was then at Amiens;
from whence without any difficulty at all she obtained the safe Conduct
Madaillan had desired in order to the producing his Proofs. He must needs have
some money also, which was likewise given him, with an Order to take up more in
the Province; so that to the astonishment of all good men, behold this wicked
Villain restored to his Country, and again settled in his own House. He
presents his Letters of safe Conduct to the Parliament, where they were
Recorded, and soon after Assembles all those whom the Relation of their
Offenses could any ways render favorable to him, to his own House. Amongst
this sort of people there were three or four notorious Impostors, to whom with
the rest of his Accomplices he very gravely represented, He proposes his Design
to his Accomplices.
The Obligation they all had to him, for the special care he had taken, both of
their Lives, and Fortunes; telling them that he had now that of the Duke of
Espernon their common Persecutor, absolutely in his power, to dispose of it to
their Benefit, and Advantage: That in order hereunto he had undertaken by his
diligence to prove, the Duke had meditated an Artempt upon the Persons of the
King, and the great Minister: That therefore every one there was to do his
utmost endeavor, that an act of that merit, utility, and importance to them
all might not be left imperfect; especially considering, that thereupon
depended their happiness, Security, Repose, and Advancement. These promises
were far greater than had been any ways necessary to allure such mean, and
abject Minds into his wicked design; so that they immediately, and without
further deliberation, put their hands to the work: The Secretaries Character
was easy enough to be imitated; but they could never Counterfeit the Duke's
Seal, which being very intricate, was exceedingly difficult to be resembled to
any tolerable degree. Madaillan then seeing this way would not take, applies
himself to one Grillety a notorious Ring Leader of the Padders: This Fellow,
after the Defeat, and Dissipation of his Accomplices, had retired himself into a
Forest of Perigort, where with strange Boldness, and Impudence, he committed so
many Robberies, and Murders, as had rendered his name Famous even in the very
Court it self. To this man, as he had done before to the rest, he offers
Indemnity, and Recompense, if he would accuse the Duke of Espernon to have
dealt with him to attempt an Assassinate upon the Persons of the King, and
Cardinal Richelieu. It Is said, that, although nourished in Blood, and
Slaughter, and oppressed with Crimes, for which he could expect no Pardon, this
man nevertheless was not wicked enough to hearken to this Proposition; insomuch
that at the first he absolutely refused to do it, and if afterward the hopes
of Pardon tempted him into that damnable practice, it was not however to
persist in his wickedness to the utmost trial, as we shall hereafter see.

Madaillans practices had alarmed the whole Country, no body doubting but that
the frequent Assemblies of such a crew of Villains, would infallibly produce
some prodigious mischief. The Duke's Servants, of which there were very many in
that Neighborhood, as in all other parts of the Province, did easily judge that
this Consultation was principally intended against him, and were not a little
troubled at it: but they could not at first imagine the wickedness of their
design to be so great, as it really was. Saint Quentin a Servant from Father to
Son, The Duke (...)
very affectionate to the Duke's Family, and who had been bred up from his
younger years with the Duke de la Valette his Son, sent the first intelligence
of this Conspiracy: but it was no other than Conjecture only; the certainty of
it was brought the Duke by Auterive, who came post to him (and I think it was
upon the 8th. day of November) to discover to him the whole contrivance of this
treacherous design. Another Gentleman a Neighbor of his had a Nephew who was a
great Comrade of Madaillan's, and a great Confident of his, from whom he had
learned the whole Affair, of which he was not content to deliver Auterive a
simple Relation by word of mouth only, but would moreover give him the whole
Circumstance of it in writing, that it might by the Duke be the better
believed. The Duke having read, and communicated this Intelligence to some of
his Domestics, was surpised with so great an astonishment, as the like had
never, upon any occasion whatever been observed in him before. He was in Bed,
according to his custom, though it was in the afternoon, when this news came to
him; and doubtless it was convenient for him, that it should find him in that
posture, the better to resist so strange a surprise. His first thought was,
that an Accusation of so black, and odious a nature had not been contrived
without order, and concluded thence, that his Enemies, weary of his long Life,
would at one blow deprive him of that, And dispatches his Secretary to Court,
to justify himself.
his Estate, Offices, and Honor. In this violent agitation of mind, which was
visible enough in his Countenance, he commanded his Secretary immediately to
depart to go with Auterive to the Court. He would ^ound to the bottom what
opinion they there had concerning this Affair; but he desired withal, that the
Truth might be exactly sifted out, that so he might have means to justify his
own Innocence, and to cause the Authors of so damnable a mischief to be
severely punished. The Secretary had order to address himself to Monsieur
Fabert, at that time Captain of the Regiment of Guards, by his means to get
access to Chavigny, the Secretary of State, by him with greater facility to be
admitted to the Cardinal's presence. The business was carried on according to
the Duke's desire; Auterive and the Secretary, without any difficulty, got to
speak with Chavigny, who promised the next day to procure them Audience.

The next day being come, which was the 15th. of November, they were
accordingly admitted into the Cardinal's Presence, where the Secretary having a
Letter of Credence from the Duke his Master, he advanced to present it; which
the Cardinal having received, and read, he told him; That Monsieur d' Espernon
had referred the further explication of what he desired he should be acquainted
withal to him, who was the Bearer; wherefore he desired to know what Service he
desired of him? He had been before sufficiently informed of all by Chavigny,
who was there present: but would nevertheless permit, that he who had delivered
him the Letter, should again report to him the life of the wretched person, who
had so vilely accused his Master. Whereupon the Secretary summarily repeated,
All you have heard before, setting out Madaillan in his own colors, and for
such as he truly was; acquainting the Cardinal moreover of the diligence the
Duke had used to apprehend him, and to bring him to condign Punishment for his
many, and heinous Crimes; making it appear, that from thence proceeded the
malice of this Accuser, and that that was the thing which had prompted him to
invent this hateful Calumny, by which he intended to eclipse the Duke's Honor;
entreating him at last, as the highest Favor his Master could receive at his
hands, to give order that the falsity of this Accusation might be strictly
examined by any person he should think fit to appoint, and not to permit that
the most ancient Officer of the Crown, who had served four Kings without
Reproach, should in the last Act of his Life undergo the most odious of all
Aspersions, without receiving the satisfaction he might reasonably promise to
himself from his Eminences Justice, and his own Innocence.

The Cardinal, after he had hearkened to this Discourse, which was pretty long,
with great Civility, and Patience, the Secretary having done, His Secretary is
favorably received by the Cardinal.
made answer, That it was true, the King being five or six weeks ago at Amiens,
Messieurs, the Ministers who staid behind at Paris, had given him intimation of
a man of the Province of Guienne, who delivered himself to be a Gentleman, and
whom they had found to be a man of understanding, that was purposely come
thither to assure them, that a Conspiracy had been made in Guienne, to attempt
upon the Life of the King, and that he had offered to prove his Accusation by
sufficient evidence in Writing, under the Hands of the Conspirators. You will
very well judge (added the Cardinal) that an Advertisement of this kind, was of
too important a nature to be neglected: but he denied withal that the Duke's
name had ever been mentioned in that Affair; assuring him moreover, that had it
been so much as glanced at in that Information, he should immediately have
concluded the whole thing altogether forged, and false, as he now absolutely
did: That he knew the Duke to be too good a man to entertain so criminal a
thought, and that he would ever answer for him, as for himself: That therefore
he ought not to concern himself about his Justification, and that he had been
very well washed (which was his own expression) but that notwithstanding they
were to consider which way to give him satisfaction, in causing those who had
been the Authors of his Calumny, to be brought to exemplary punishment. After
which he inquired by what means Madaillan might be taken, concluding in the end
that the King should give the Duke power to apprehend him, if possible, even in
Guienne it self; that in the mean time he would give order to have him sent for
to Court, whither in a very short time he had also promised to come; that by
one means or other, it should be a hard matter for him to escape; and, that if
he did once fall into his hands, he would deliver him up into those of Justice,
as he afterward did, and in that was very just to his word.

The King's Dispatch was made ready at this time; but the Secretary could not
however so soon depart, as by this successful beginning he was in hopes he
should have done, Chavigny, who had order to deliver him his Dispatch,
appointing him to stay yet some few days longer. But these few days were spun
out into some few weeks, during which interval he had notice given him by
several of his Friends, that there was an Order granted out to Arrest him, to
make him give an account of those Counterfeit Papers were laid to his charge.
These advertisements, which he received from very good hands, did much more
trouble him for the regard he had to the Duke his Master, than for any thing
that concerned himself; he believed that they would proceed in this Affair by
the way, and in the forms of Justice, which was nothing consonant to what had
been promised him in the beginning. The Duke's Servants, to whom he had
instructions to communicate all things, were also infinitely surpised at the
news: but he forbore not, what danger soever had been represented to him, to
appear as at other times in all places where his business lay-After he had
given all the time was necessary, wherein to clear any doubts that might have
been started concerning this Affair, and weary to see no more than the first
hour he came, he resolved at last, finding he could obtain nothing from
Chavigny, to make his Address immediately to the Cardinal himself, hoping from
him at least to learn the true reasons, why he had been thus long delayed. This
design accordingly took effect, and the Cardinal having espied him amongst a
crowd of other Solicitors, and Suitors that were attending in the Hall, caused
him presently to be called to tell him, That upon the hopes Madaillan had given
him of his coming every day to Town, And an Order granted to apprehend
Madaillan, and his Accomplices.
he had desired he might stay to be a witness of his Confinement: but that
seeing there was no end of his delays, he might now return to his Master, and
assure him, that what he had promised upon this occasion, should be punctually
performed: That it would also be necessary he on his part should employ all the
Friends, and Servants he had in Guienne, to cause the Slanderer to be taken,
and that, the thing being of that importance to his Honor, he did not doubt
but the Duke would herein use endeavors proportionable to the quality of the
Affair. After which he poured out himself in several expressions of very great
Civility concerning the Duke: but they were so* distant from his manner of
proceeding, and so differing from the ill usage he made his Master at the same
time undergo; that giving them no place in his belief, he scarce allowed them a
room in his memory. After this manner the Duke's Secretary departed from Court,
charged with Letters from the King, and the Cardinal, which were couched in
these terms. Cousin,
Having understood by the Sieur Girard, The King's Letter to the Duke of
Espernon.
the intimation you have received, that one Madaillan of Sauvetat had an intent
to accuse you of a design to attempt upon my Person, as also upon that of my
Cousin the Cardinal of Richelieu; I write you this to let you know, It is my
pleasure, that you cause the said Madaillan to be apprehended in any place
where he shall be found; as also the named le Sage, Bois-Martin, Seingoux, and
a certain Scrivener dwelling at la Linde in Perigort, whom, it is said, he
intends to make use of to fortify his Calumny. I doubt not but you will use
all imaginable diligence to cause the forementioned persons to be taken, and to
dispose them into some secure hold until you receive my further Order. In which
assurance I pray God, Cousin, etc.

At St. German en Lay this 10th. of December. 1641.



That of the Cardinal contained these words. Monsieur,
The Sieur Girard will acquaint you with how great facility the King has been
pleased to give way to the clearing the Calumny, The Cardinal's Letter to the
Duke of Espernon.
wherewith you have discovered some malicious people have a design to asperse
you. I can assure you that such a justification is not at all necessary for the
possessing his Majesty, touching the business in agitation, with such
impressions of you, as you would your self desire: but he will be very glad for
your own satisfaction, that so wicked an Imposture be punished according to its
desert. For my own particular I shall ever be very proud to meet occasions
wherein I may manifest how great an esteem* I have for your Person, and how
much I am, etc.

From Ruel this 10th of December. 1641.



The Duke after the departure of his Secretary was fallen into so profound a
Melancholy, accompanied with a lingering Fever, that the reading the favorable
Letters he brought him back at his return, was not of Virtue wholly to cure a
Disease that had already taken too deep root in his mind. He was affected with
grief to that degree, that nothing could content him: but he was nevertheless a
little revived to find that this Affair had not derived it self from the source
he had at first suspected, nor produced those dangerous effects he reasonably
apprehended it would. In this little interval of repose, he dispatched Auterive
in all diligence into Guienne, with the most express Orders he could possibly
tell how to give, to cause Madaillan, and his Accomplices to be apprehended: but
it was labor lost; he went of his own accord to put himself into the
Cardinal's hands, who kept his word with the Duke, committing him the very day
of his arrival to the O^ Prison.
Conciergerie du Palais, from whence he came no more forth, but to suffer the
punishment of his Crimes. But that was not till after the return of the Duke de
la Valette, who with so much passion, and generosity prosecuted this accursed
Villain, the real instrument of the Duke his Father's Death, that in the end he
procured his chastisement by the hand of the Hangman.

After the dismission of Auterive, of which I have now spoken, the Duke made
yet another dispatch, which also was almost the last of his Life, and that was
to Cardinal Richelieu. The Duke of Espernon sends a Letter of thanks to
Cardinal Richelieu.
All his Friends at Court, knowing how civilly the Duke had been used by him in
the business of Madaillan, had jointly given him advice to return him thanks by
some express Messenger; at whose persuasions he writ to him by the Count de
Maille (whom he entreated to undertake that Journey) and these were the words
of the Letter. Monsieur,
After the Favors wherewith you were pleased to oblige me, when my Secretary a
few days since took a journey to wait upon you, I were of all men living the
most ingrate, should I not to the utmost of what I possibly can, manifest to
you the the high sense I have of so great an Obligation. The care of which
Commission, I thought I could not better entrust to any, than to my Cousin
Monsieur de Maille, whom I have entreated to protest to you in my behalf, that
I will preserve the memory, and acknowledgment of that signal Favor to the
last hour of my life. I do beseech you to believe this great truth, which by my
Actions should be justified, and confirmed to you, if the power to serve you
were equal to the will he shall ever retain, who is,

Monsieur, Your most Humble, and most Obedient Servant, etc.




This Complement of Most Obedient, which I have here purposely transcribed, was
none of his usual style, it had now also by inadvertency escaped his Pen, and he
sent an express Courrier after the Count de Maille, to retrive his Letter so
soon as he perceived he had subscribed it after that manner: Instead thereof
sending him another with the ordinary Subscription of Most Humble and most
Affectionate, choosing rather to be thought stiff, and punctillious, than to
go less in the condition he then was, and to descend to an extraordinary
civility, which might rather be interpreted, and imputed to weakness, and want
of courage, than to complacency, and gratitude. His first Letter was indeed
never delivered: but he also never saw it again. His Death preceded the return
of the Count de Maille, who had still kept it in his hands; and the time was
now come, when this long life, which had escaped from so many, and so eminent
dangers, must end by a Disease that was easily enough to be foreseen: but for
which no remedy could possibly be found.

I have already given an account of the dangerous effect, Anno 1642.
the news of Madaillan's Conspiracy produced to the ruin of the Duke's Health.
The Sickness and Death of the Duke of Espernon.
And I shall now tell you that it was a wound which had pierced so deep into
his heart, as no Balsam, neither of the King's, nor Cardinal's civil, and
obliging Letters, of his Friends Consolations, or of the conscience of his own
Innocence, of greater virtue than them both, that could be applied, could
possibly cure. The assurances he had received from Court, that this Calumny had
made no impression to his disadvantage there, nor the hopes he had thence
received of receiving thereupon a full, and honorable satisfaction, could
never so appease the tempest of his mind, that the discontents he had derived
from this accursed cause, was not continually working upon all the unpleasing
Objects his unquiet thoughts could represent to his imagination. He was grown
impatient almost of all kind of Company, the divertisements which had formerly
been most acceptable to him were become nauseous, and offensive, and nothing
was now so pleasing to him as solitude, which till this time he had ever
abhorred. An alteration that he himself was very sensible of, and would often
speak of it to those with whom he was pleased to be the most familiar about
him, as a certain presage of his approaching End: he nevertheless did all he
could to disappoint his ill humor, which he had no way to do but by play
sometimes in his Chamber, seeing he found himself incapable of taking any
pleasure abroad.

Thus spinning out the small remainder of his life in this perpetual trouble of
mind, his strength was every day observed visibly to impair: not long before he
had been seen to tire out young, and vigorous men with walking (for it must
needs be confessed that never man perhaps felt the infirmities of Age so late
as he) whereas now, and on a sudden he appeared so faint, and overworn, that he
could scarce take two turns in his Chamber without reposing himself. It was now
come to that pass, that he must repose for good and all, and the seventh of
January, having in the night been surpised with a grudging of a Ague, he past
it over with great unquietness, and without any rest at all.

The next day notwithstanding he could make a shift to rise to talk with some
of his principal Servants of his Affairs, and to make some Dispatches, as in
the times of his better health: but he found withal so great a thirst upon him,
as he could neither by a Broth, nor two great Glasses of cold water, his
familiar, and best Remedy, quench, and overcome. He went nevertheless to Mass
in a Cabinet adjoining to his own Chamber; but he was not able to stay it out:
insomuch that presently after the Elevation, he was constrained to retire, and
to betake himself to his Bed. And it was for the last time, his Fever
immediately seizing him with so great violence, that it never after left him,
but with his Life.

Within a few hours after he had been laid in Bed, Fabert, whom he had a
passionate desire to see, and had a long time expected, came to see him. He was
by him presented with a great many Letters from several of his Friends: But the
Duke without opening any one of them, contented himself with embracing him
only, and entreating to be excused, that he was not in a condition that day to
entertain him, referred it till the next morning, in hopes by that time to be
in a better posture of Health. At another time his active, and curious Spirit,
that was never tired out with business, would not have referred the discoursing
with a Friend he so dearly loved, till the morrow: but now, as if he had
foreseen what a small share remained to him of Worldly things, he had not so
much as the Curiosity to inform himself of any.

His Fever, which the first day was judged to be Quotidian (a sort of Ague he
used frequently to have, and which also did not a little contribute to the
better support of his Health) continued from the first, to the second, and from
the second, to the third Fit, with so excessive violence, that Motivier his
Physician, a man very excellent in his profession, and who had for many years
been very diligent about his Person, judged him from that time forwards to be
in very great danger, as well by reason of his wonderful great Age, and the
evil dispositions that had preceded his Disease, as from the Disease it self.
He was therefore of opinion that a Father Capuchin should be sent for, to the
end he might in due time prepare him for Confession; the Fathers of that Order
having a particular privilege to administer that Sacrament to him. They were
the more hasty to make this provision for his Conscience, by how much they
perceived him sometimes to fall into Fits of Raving, which gave them an
apprehension, that his distemper increasing, his judgment might be totally
taken from him, which notwithstanding did not so fall out. This good Father
being come to the Duke, under pretense of a mere Visit only, put him insensibly
upon the contempt of worldly things, and the necessity of Death, and came at
last by degrees to touch a little at Confession. The Duke though by this
discourse he presently guessed at the ill opinion they had of him, and that
they began to despair of his Life, yet did he nevertheless make no show of
astonishment, or surprise: but on the contrary submitting, with great serenity,
and calmness to the good Pleasure of Almighty God, The D^ke's good dispo^^tions
to dye.
he told the Holy Father, That he had highly obliged him in putting him in mind
of his Conscience: That he was Old, and Sick: That in a better estate of Health
his end could not be far distant from him; and that being by the Grace of God a
Christian, he intended to dye after a Christian manner. After which few words,
entreating he would give him some time to prepare himself for this Sacrament,
he caused him to retire into another Room. He commanded his Servants also to
leave him alone, and to depart out of his Chamber; which being accordingly
done, after he had two hours recollected himself, he caused the Father to be
again called in, who could never enough commend the Zeal, and Repentance he
observed in this illustrious Penitent. It was about noon that he made his
Confession, and about four of the Clock the same day, he desired the Holy
Eucharist, which he received with so great Piety, and Reverence, as was not a
little edifying to all the Assistants. He at the same time gave charge to his
Almoner to acquaint him when it was time to receive the Extreme Unction, taking
order for all these last Ceremonies, with so manly an indifferency, and so
great a tranquillity of mind, as if he had rather been taking care for some
other in a dying condition, than busy about any thing that immediately
concerned himself. He was never heard at any time either to wish for Life, or
to repine at Death; but performing without trouble and disorder what was to be
done, so well to receive the one, and to part fairly with the other, he, in my
opinion, at this time gave the greatest proof, and example of his Courage, and
Constancy, that he had ever done.

His Disease growing every day more violent than other, he was, the fourth day
of his Sickness, observed to fall into more and more extravagant Ravings, than
at any time before, to which his Chest also began to be so obstructed, that
there was a visible difficulty of Breathing: All which dangerous Accidents, and
mortal Symptoms, in an Age like that of his, making every one conclude his
dissolution to be very near, they talked to him no more of any thing, but God;
a Discourse that he also on his part hearkened to, with great willingness, and
a^^ention. He had at all times had a Crucifix fastened to his Beds-feet, upon
which he now perpetually fixed his eyes, and having caused his Chaplet to be put
about his Arm, because he wanted strength to hold it in his hand, he was
continually lifting it to his mouth to kiss it.

The fifth day of his Sickness was very much worse, than those that had gone
before; and if upon his other days he had had some intervals of repose, the
continuation of his Disease having infected all that remained in him of found,
and incorrupt; he was totally oppressed without any release, or intermission at
all. The extremities of his Disease therefore causing it to be judged
convenient to make use of the extremest Remedies both for Soul and Body; his
Physician resolved upon a Bleeding, and the Ecclesiastics upon the Extreme
Unction, of which the last named preceded the other. About two hours after
midnight, the Duchess de la Valette, the Marquis, and Marquise de la Valette
her Children, got up to be assisting at this Holy Ceremony; to whom the
Servants also being come in, he in the presence of all his Family, with
exceeding Meekness, and profound Reverence received that Sacrament. So soon as
he saw the Priest enter the Chamber, he raised himself up in his Bed, and
having pulled off his Cap, remained uncovered all the time of the
Administration, making his Responces aloud to all the Prayers of the Church,
and to all the Psalms, especially the Miserere, which he repeated by heart,
with a great many Penitent Tears. This Ceremony being over, they left him some
time to his repose, and about ten in the morning the sixth day of his Sickness,
and also that of his Death, his Physician caused him to be let Blood. He found
himself yet capable of this Remedy, and moreover found by it some kind of
present Relief, his Chest was much less obstructed, and his Deliriums had far
longer intervals than before; insomuch that he began to have a better opinion
of himself, telling us (as it was very true) that two years before a Bleeding
had saved his Life, and that he found himself very much relieved by this: but
all these Hopes were no other than feeble Rays, that threatened us with a
sudden, and fatal Eclipse. At three in the Afternoon he appeared so infinitely
changed, that it was judged impossible for him to pass over that day; neither
was he himself insensible of it: and certainly it was an extraordinary mercy he
received in this Extremity, to have his Judgment more perfect, and entire, and
his mind better composed at this, than at any other time during the whole
course of his Sickness.

His last moments he employed in entertaining Fabert, from the day of his
arrival he had never seen him; but having now on a sudden remembered he was in
the house, he caused him immediately to be called, where, after he had embraced
him in his Arms, The Duke's last req^est to the King concerning his Children.
he told him, That he would not now lose time in giving hi^ new assurances of
an Affection, which would henceforward be useless to him: but that he would
conjure him by those testimonies he had sometime received, that he would
preserve his to his declining Family: That he did entreat him to assure the
King he died his Majesty's most humble, and most faithful Servant, and in his
Name humbly to beseech him, to Honor his little Children, whom the Disgrace of
the Duke their Father exposed to infinite Injuries, with his gracious
Protection: That they had the Honor to appertain to his Majesty: That nothing
could be imputed to their Innocence, and that he hoped they would one day by
their Services manifest their Gratitude for his Bounty, and Favor. Though to
render the King more favorable to this Request, and to those Relations he did
recommend thereby, there seemed to be a kind of necessity that he should also
send some Complement to the Cardinal, he did not do it nevertheless; which some
of his people thinking he had through forgetfulness omitted, they made bold to
put him in mind; to whom after a little pause, he returned no other answer, but
that he was his Servant. The same Complement, but with a very great deal of
difference in the tender manner of delivery, he sent to the Chancellor
Monsieur Seguier, who had ever manifested for him a constant, and inviolate
Friendship; as also to several other Persons of Quality at Court. The severity
that had been exercised upon his Family, making him believe that their Enemies
aimed at no less, than their total Ruin, he would enjoin Fabert of all his
Governments, and Commands to ask the Castle of Loches only in favor of the
Marquis de la Valette his Grandchild, and that only, because seeing himself
upon the point to expire, he could have wished, that his Body after his Death,
might have been in the power of no other, than those of his own Blood. A
request so modest, and so inconsiderable in it self, that he doubted not, but
it would be easily granted, and that he might have retriv'd this little piece
from the wrack of his great Fortune: but he was deceived, and the ill nature of
his Enemies was such, that even that was also denied him.

After he had dismissed Fabert, he caused the Duchess de la Valette his
Daughter-in-Law, the Marquis de la Valette, and the Marquise his Sister to come
to his Bedside, to whom after he had in general delivered himself in several
expressions of great Passion, and tenderness, and exhorted them to Unity, and
Mutual Affection; directing his Speech to the Marquis, He in the first place
recommended to him the Service of God, and next that of the King, without ever
alienating himself from it upon any color, or pretense whatever: to honor his
Father, and in what estate soever to pay him all the Duty, and Service of a
good, and Obedient Son; and never to remember the Injuries had been done him;
of which he charged him in express terms to retain no kind of resentment;
assuring them all, that living in that Unity, and good Intelligence with one
another, he had recommended to them, God Almighty would bless them, as he
blessed them with all his heart. After which, proceeding to some consolatory
Admonitions, wherewithal to moderate their Grief, he with great difficulty
lifted up his hand to give them his last Benediction. This Action thus passed,
he turned himself to the other side of the Bed, either to repose himself after
this last effort of his Spirits, and Voice; or to conceal his Tears, which
although by tenderness, and good Nature, rather than want of Courage, extracted
from him; yet would he not be reproached with such a weakness, still retaining
so much vigor, as to maintain decency, and the constancy he had ever
manifested in all his Actions, even in death it self. He was heard indeed to
fetch some profound sighs, and often to repeat the name of his Son de la
Valette, who of all his Children had ever been dearest to him: but that also
was all he yielded to the impulse of nature, in this final Separation.

Having thus paid some Sighs to his Grief, several good, and Learned Divines,
who were assisting about him, again put him upon the Discourse of Piety, and
the forgiveness of his Enemies; to whom he still constantly replied, that he
freely forgave them all, naming withal those from whom he had received the
greatest and most irreparable wrongs: when some of them, more zealous than the
rest, seeing him in so good a disposition, asked him if he did not also forgive
his Servants, who had any way displeased him? To whom he again replied, that
yes, and withal his heart: but there being one of them, who a few days before
he had fallen upon with very severe, and passionate Language, the same person
who had engaged in the former Interrogatories, proceeding (indiscreetly enough)
to ask him, if he did not also ask pardon of those he might have himself
offended? His courage, not totally abated in this last extremity, being a
little inflamed at the proposal of this reciprocal submission, he made answer,
that it was sufficient, he had pardoned those of his people who had offended
him, and that he had never heard, that to dye well a Master was obliged to make
Amend honorable signifies something more, but what cannot be intended by the
Author in this place.
Honorable Satisfaction to his own Domestics. Those who were nearest to him
perceived him to be a little transported at that word: but it was very easy to
pacify, and compose him; and after that nothing was heard from him but ardent
Prayers to God: neither was he observed to do any thing more, than to turn his
eyes toward the Crucifix, and to kiss his Beads. In this condition he lay,
when his strength visibly impairing, but his mind remaining in a great
tranquillity, and calm, they perceived him by little and little to decline, and
faint away, sensibly observing Death to disperse it self over all his Limbs.
His Death.
His Legs first grew stiff, and cold; which cold in a few hours seized of his
other parts, till it came at last to his Heart. Thus the thirteenth day of
January, and the sixth of his Disease, he died environed by three of his
Children, several Divines, and all his Domestic Servants; the last whereof
having with unparalled Care, and Diligence attended him all the time of his
Sickness, continued still the same Services, and Respect, till they brought him
to his Grave. He was entered into the fourscore, and eighth year of his Age, by
which long series of time he had had the advantage of seeing himself the most
Ancient Duke, and Peer of France, the most Ancient Officer of the Crown, the
most Ancient General of an Army, the most Ancient Governor of a Province, the
most Ancient Knight of the Order, the most Ancient Counselor of State, and the
Oldest Man of Condition almost of his Time.

The End of the Twelfth and Last Book of the Life of the Duke of Espernon.
FINIS.
Some Books Printed for Henry Brom, at the Gun, at the West End of St. Paul's.
Mr. Simpson's Division Viol, in three Parts, in Folio.

His Compendium of Music, in five Parts, Octavo.

Bishop Saundersons Five Cases of Conscience, Octavo.

Sir Kenelme Digby's Receipts in Physic and Chyrurgery: Also his Cabinet
opened for making Metheglin, Sydar, Cherry-Wine, with Directions for Cookery,
Preserving, Conserving, and Candying, Octavo.

The Complete Body of the Art Military both for Horse and Foot, with the Art of
Gunnery: By Richard Elton, L. C. and Thomas Rudd, Chief Engineer to King
Charles the First, Folio.

Scarronnides, or Virgil Travestie, a Mock Poem, Octavo.

Mr. A. Bromes Poems, and Songs, Octavo.

Dr. Browns Vulgar Errors, and Urne Burial, Quarto.


