Remarks on Remarks: OR, THE RECTOR of BVRY's SERMON VINDICATED: His CHARGE
Exhibited against the Dissenters for Endeavoring to Corrupt the Word of GOD,
Justified and farther Confirmed.

ALSO The Absurdities and Notorious Falsities of Mr. Owen, and other pretended
Ministers of the Gospel are detected and exposed.

By THOMAS GIPPS, Rector of BURY.

Siquis est, qui dictum in se in clementius existimet esse, sic existimet;
sciat Responsum non dictum esse, quia laesit prius. Terent. Eunuch. Prol.
LONDON, Printed for Ephraim Johnston, Bookseller in Manchester, MDCXCVIII.

ERRATA.
Page 1. Lin. ult. r. attack, p. 4. l. 9. for Acts read Accounts, p. 5. l. 22.
r. Remarker, l. 37. r. Manchester, p. 8. l. 5. r. Remarker's, l. 14. r.
intolerable, p. 14. l. 32. for the r. that, p. 15. l. 13. dele? p. 21. l. 7. r.
(...), l. 23. after (...) add by, p. 27. l. 8. r. (...), p. 30. l. 28. r.
Divisions, p. 40. l. 32. r. subprior, p. 41. l. 36. for noising r. nosing, p.
46. l. 31. r. convivae, p. 52. l. ult. r. Voaligon.

CHAP. I.
IN these Parts of the Nation, for any thing I ever heard or knew, there had
been for some Years a perfect Peace, at least a Cessation of Arms between the
Church of England and the Dissenters, there was no Writing, no Publishing
Invectives, no raising of the old Disputes, nor so much as Preaching against
one another, at least not in any foul and exasperating Manner: Our common
Danger (I verily thought) and our common Interest, like a Charm, had laid the
Devil of Contention, and confined him to his own Place, never to enter in among
us any more, till Peace, Plenty and Security from Foraign Enemies should (as
it is too apt) conjure him up again, and embroil us with new Disorders. But
contrary to all expectation, even when our public Affairs were at a low ebb,
and whilst we were struggling with greater Difficulties, then we could hope of a
sudden to surmount, the Peaceable Men (as they affect to be called) blew the
Trumpet, and when we dreamed of no such Thing, assaulted us in our very Camp.

In the Year 1695. appeared at Manchester, an Author of prodigious Confidence,
who, without any just Provocation, caused to be Printed his Scurrilous Libel
entitled -- Notes upon the Lord Bishop of Salisbury's four last Discourses,
etc. It is incredible how the Dissenters hugged and commended it as one of the
sweetest Morsels they had ever tasted. And though it is ingredients were mostly
Gall and Wormwood, Ezekiel. 3. 3.
Impudence and Slander, yet was it in their Mouths as Honey for sweetness.

By it is Title one would imagine it calculated for the Meridian of Salisbury
Diocese: But 'twas composed at Manchester, there best known, and designed to
expose the Members of the Church of England in those Quarters. We lay at that
time (as I hinted before) in a profound Peace, and had given no Occasion for
such a sudden and surprising Attach. The Notes pretend indeed to be an Answer
to the Bishop's four Discourses, and the Libeller plainly tells the World, that
he was induced to write as he did, because my Lord of Salisbury had (as he
speaks) reflected upon the Dissenters as Separatists; Notes p. 1.
but this will not (I presume) excuse the Authors Rudeness, and the Calumnies,
which he filled that Pamphlet with. It must be confessed, that excellent Prelate
in one of his four Discourses directed his Clergy, how to demean 'emselves
toward Separatists (meaning the Dissenters:) But at the same time he used 'em
with all the Meekness and Charity, that is due unto those, who differ from us.
He gives 'em no hard Words, neither pursued 'em with any offensive Language:
His business there was not to prove the Charge of Schism upon them (that was
taken for granted between him and his Clergy,) but to show how they were to be
brought back into the Fold, and into Unity with the Church: To which purpose He
distinguished between those, who separated through Ignorance or Prepossession,
and others whom worldly Interest, ungovournable Passions, or some Evil
Affections had prevailed with to depart from our Communion. The former (he
said) are to be dealt with, with a great deal of Tenderness and Candor, are to
be pitied rather then insulted over, they are not the Schismatics which St.
Paul calls Carnal: Their Ignorance will happily find the same Mercy at the hand
of God, as we hope our own will in other Cases. But the latter the Carnal
Schismatics, being such, as are gone out from us, not upon any true Principle
of Conscience, but on some carnal worldly Design, were to be handled more
roundly, and their Wounds laid open with more sharpness and severity. After
this manner the good Bishop wrote unto his Clergy, nor can I recollect any
thing said by him, that could Exasperate any sober and conscientious Dissenter:
I am sure the Note-maker pretended nothing else, but the supposing them
Separatists.

Now by Carnal Schismatics, are (I reckon) to be understood all those, who upon
any worldly Account whatever, desert the Churches, and join themselves to the
Separate Assemblies ex. gr. a Person leaves the Parochial Communion, and runs
to the Barns, induced thereto through the restless importunity of his Wise an
Heiress, to secure unto himself and Family her Estate, and to keep Peace at
home. This Man is the Carnal Separatist, St. Paul and the Bishop speak of. His
Religion is vain, it hangs on his Wife's Apronstrings not on his own
Conscience; he abandons the Authority, which God has given him over his Wife,
and truckles to hear as Adam did unto Eve. In a word, he suffers his Wife to
usurp the Dominion to command him, whom she ought to obey, and to prescribe
Rules to him, 1 Cor. 14. 35.
of whom she ought to learn, and to be instructed. Upon the same Principle such
a Man would turn Mohammedan, as Solomon did Idolater. 1 Kings 11. 3. But to
return to the Bishop of Salisbury and the Notes.

I cannot see that the Dissenters had just Cause from any thing spoken in that
Discourse, to treat his Lordship and the whole Body of the Church of England,
in so unmannerly and contemptuous a Manner, as the Note-maker has taken the
liberty to do. It had been proper enough for any one of 'em to have endeavored
to shake off the Imputation of Schism, and to have fastened it upon us,
provided he had used the same Temper of Meekness and Candor as my Lord of
Salisbury has done: No body then would have blamed him. But a Man must be
excused, if, when he wants Arguments to make good his Point, he lashes out into
downright Railing and Billingsgate. For the famous Note-maker has loaded us
with all the spightful Reflections and malicious Imputations and artful
Declamations, which ill Nature, want of good Breeding, or a corrupt Fancy
could furnish a professed Buffoon with. It is not my Intention to confirm this
in Particulars, and to that end to pursue this Libeller through every Paragraph
or Page. It shall suffice to observe that he has impeached us expressly as the
Persons, who have been the Cause of that Deluge of Atheism, Socinianism,
Popery, Lewdness of Manners, ay and of the Schisms too, which have crept into
the Church and Kingdom; Notes P. 4, 8, 9.
and this he has done without any other Occasion or Provocation pretended, than
the Bishop of Salisbury's supposing the Dissenters Separatists in his Letter to
his own Clergy; or (I may rather say) than the too gentle Expressions, which he
in vain bestowed upon these Schismatics, the Foxes and the Firebrands of this
Poor Church and Nation, as he might more truly have styled 'em.

A little after the 'foresaid Libel was come to my Hand, I was presented with
another called a Sermon preached at the Opening of a Separate Chapel by Mr.
Baldwin. This Gentleman being greatly pleased (I was told as much by one that
heard him say it) with the Note-makers admirable Performance, and declaring,
that there were a great many biting Truths in it (that is, that we of the
Church of England are all of us Promoters of Atheism, Socinianism, Popery,
Schism and decay of Morals in this Nation) suffered his said Sermon to peep
abroad, thinking doubtless with himself to reap some of the Honor due to that
mighty Undertaking of trampling underfoot the established Church of Engl^nd. I
have already in another way delivered my Mind of this Sermon of Mr. Baldwins,
and perhaps shall hereafter let the World see how weak and absurd it was. Here
only let it be observed, that he took upon him to revile the Church of England
with Arminianism, and with Popery, and now and then according to his weak Power
(for he had a willing Mind) to give us an impertinent Wipe on some other Acts:
How justly it makes no matter with such Men; it suffices them that they have
some pretense to reproach us, and Confidence enough to load us with Calumnies.

Semper ego Auditor tantum? Nunquamne reponam,
Vexatus toties Rauoi Theseide Cod^i?
Do these Men in good earnest think, after they have first braved us and openly
provoked us with Lies and Slanders, to cast us into a sleep with a dose of
Opium, to stop our Mouths with Maxims, which they are not at all careful
themselves to observe? I mean those of having sincere Affection to the Truth,
Remarks Epist. Dedic.
Deference toward Superiors, and Charity toward Neighbors, especially in a
Conjuncture, whenour Civil as well our Religious Interests do so loudly call
for the Exerciss of 'em? To say nothing here of the Want of Charity, of Truth
and Sincerity in those Notes, has the Author paid due Deference to his
Superiors? If he has, why did he not own his Libel by affixing his Name to it?
At least, why not the Name of the Printer? That we might have gratified our
Curiosity with the knowledge of so celebrated a Writer. The matter is Plain: The
Note-maker has paid such Deference to his Superior my Lord Bishop of
Salisbury, as happily would have cost him dear, if he had not been Incognito.
But this is not the first time, that the Rulers of the People have been evil
spoken of by Authors, who walk the Streets in Masquerade, and wound their
Honor behind the back.

It will perhaps be asked, what is this to the Minister at Oswestry? If an
unknown Person at Manchester has writ a tart Book against the Episcopal Party?

And I also ask what was it to the Minister at Oswestry, if the Rector of Bury
preached a Sermon in Vindication of the Church of England against the
Lancashire Dissenters? But there is no great Mystery in this: The Rector had in
another Treatise discovered the Ministers designed Corruption of St.
Chrysostom, a piece of pious Fraud, which ought never to be forgotten, and
therefore the Minister with the help of his Friends at Manchester, was to give
his Adversary a Diversion on some other Subject, and to patch up his broken
Credit with Remarks on the Rectors Sermon. I said, with the help of his Friends
at Manchester, but I rather believe the Note-maker was Principal in the
Remarks. Mr. Owen is the pretended Author of 'em, and as I suppose signed 'em:
Yet any one, who reads the Minister at Oswestry his other Writings, may easily
discern such a different Air in the Remarks from his other undoubted
Performances, as will force him to conclude, that Mr. Omen is but the reputed
Father of this spurious Offspring.

Or what, if one should guess the Remarks to be the Work of a Club of
Ministers, of which he at Manchester was President pro tempore? This is certain
that the Remarks in their way to London took a Tour to Manchester; there we
heard of 'em long before their Publication, and had some Account of 'em also.
There they received their last finishing Strokes ('it is thought) and there they
were dressed up with all the gaudy Feathers and Embellishments, which the Wit of
the Party could furnish them with. So that if one asked the Remarker his Name,
and he would please to return a fair Answer, he must say, my Name is Logion,
for me are many.

But the great Question is, who is this Note-maker, who from behind the Curtain
like the Heathen Priests delivers his Oracles? What is his Name? Unto whom does
he belong?

It Is no difficult Matter to resolve this Knot: That he is a Dissenter, no one
can doubt, that he is one of that Party in Manchester was once fairly
acknowledged unto me by another, who is in their Interest, and of no small
Reputation among them, who also added, that the Notes were but a Preface to
another Work which the Author intended to set forth, I suppose to the Remarks.
So then this Solomon's Porch is as big as his Temple, his Preface as large as
his Book, and the mighty Work we were put in hopes of, is dwindled into a few
sorry Remarks upon the Rectors Sermon. But we may make yet a clearer Discovery
of the Note-maker, if we will but consider that a Dissenter within the Parish
of Machester frankly owned, that a certain Minister of the Gospel at Manchester
wrote those Notes. We need no more Evidence. Only it deserves to be observed
that the Defense of, etc. (a Book since Published by the Minister at Oswestry)
was sent down not to the Author at Oswestry, but to the Minister at Manchester
to be Revised and Corrected, as if Mr. Owen were not able to rectify the
Mistakes committed in the Printing his own Book. This manifests a Confederacy
and Correspondence between 'em, and from hence it may be fairly gathered, that
the Notes and the Remarks have been done in a great Measure by the same Hand at
Manchester. But especially, when we see 'em so like one another both in their
Features and their Drapery, we cannot suffer our selves any longer to doubt,
but the Remarks were hammered out at the same Forge, or at least polished by
the same skilful Hand, as were the Notes.

But be these Things as they will, I thought it not improper to give the
foresaid brief Account of the Notes on the Bishop of S. four Disconrses, if it
were only to vindicate my self from the common Aspersion, as if I were the
Occasion of the Disturbances that are now among us, whereas I profess and I
hope it is already proved, that the Note-maker has been the Troubler of Israel.
It Is He who first blew up the Coals of Dissension, which before lay as it were
Dead in the Ashes. Do the Dissenters think that our Hands and our Tongues must
be tied, whilst theirs are at liberty and let loose to pursue us in the most
Contemptuous Manner, with all the Bitterness that Malice and Rage can inspire
'em with? Or can they hope to lull us asleep into Patience and Stoical Apathy,
that they may with the greater ease and security torment and oppress us? Shall
they prescribe unto us Charity toward them, whilst they are unmercifully
teasing and exposing us? What a Masterpiece of Religious Hypocrisy is this to
style themselves Ministers of the Gospel (of Peace they wisely leave out) and
chalk out the way wherein we are to walk, but in the mean time transgress it
themselves: To bind heavy Burdens and lay them on our Shoulders and not move
'em with one of their own Fingers? In short there is no color for their
Complaints, that we write and preach Controversies, that we tax our Adversaries
with their Faults, that we set 'em forth with some Zeal and Warmth: It Is
themselves which compel us, though non vident id manticae quod a tergo est, they
cast their own Sins behind their Backs. They have hitherto at most been paid,
but in their own Coin, and received the common Measure of Justice quid pro quo,
with this difference and advantage on our side, they were the Aggressors, and
Nature it self teaches us to stand on our Guard, and to protect our selves,
whether it be by offensive or defensive Weapons.

It must then be confessed, that the two first mentioned Writings, the Notes on
my Lord Bishop of S. four Discourses, and Mr. Baldwin's Sermon at the opening
of a new erected Meeting House drew the Rector into the present Skirmish, which
he was unwilling to decline, least our Cause should suffer by silence, and the
Dissenters vainly imagine they had got any Advantage of us. That Saying of the
Wise Man came into my thoughts -- Answer a Fool according to his own Folly,
Prove. 26. 5.
least he be Wise in his own Conceit. I see no reason then but a Man may be
angry, and rescent the Injuries of an Adversary with some Indignation, the
Apostle permits it, Ephesians. 4. 26. And Solomon teaches that -- To every thing
there is a Season, Eccles. 3. 1, 7, 8.
and a time to every Purpose under the Heaven, among the rest, that there is a
time to Speak, and a time of War. And was it not high time to Speak, when we
were by the Note-maker treated with Scorn and Insolence, and such things were
laid to our Charge, which, if true, would justly render us odious to God and
Man? And unworthy the Protection of the Government. I thought fit therefore to
make use of the Policy of Scipio Africanus, to carry the War into the Enemies
own Country, and to lay unto the Dissenters Charge a Crime, which I believe was
proved upon them better than Atheism or Socinianism was or can be upon us.

Hereat the two Ministers at Oswestry and Manchester grew angry, and have made
Remarks upon my Sermon: It Is what I looked for, and designed, to the end the
World may see, that these Sober and Charitable Men can be intemperately Angry,
when they apprehend themselves touched to the quick, and therefore ought to
give others leave to be sensible of the Injuries first done 'em without any
Provocation. Briefly, I am not surpised at the Remarks, which are fraught with
so much Venom and Rancour. I never expected Mercy at their Hands, who have no
Mercy, no not in the Times of Peace, and when no Occasion is given 'em to break
out into Passion, who in their calmest Mood, when Meekness and Charity seems to
sit on their Brow, and when the whole Face is in appearence o're-spread with
universal Sweetness and Smiles, are even then, as I have learned by Experience,
designing Mischief in their Hearts against their Neighbors, and secretly
undermining 'em. Upon the whole Matter, then the declamatory and popular
Insinuations of the Remarks in his Ep. Dedic of want of sincere Affection to
the Truth, of Deference to Superiors, and of Charity to Neighbors and other
like Strains against false and malicious Accusing our Brethren, with all the
dirty stuff wherewith this fierce Champion of the good old Cause has
bespattered the Rector, recoil into the Note-maker and the Remarker own Faces,
and lie heavy upon the whole Body of the Dissenters and some of the Politic and
intreaguing Trimmers in and about Manchester.

Now in the Reply, I give unto the Remarker I will not make it my professed
Business like a Merry Andrew to mind little else than the making Sport with my
Adversary, as he has done with me, that is the least in my thoughts: I will take
care chiefly to attend unto the Argument it self, and see that firmly
established, not caring much what becomes of the drolling and the scoffing
Part. Although, if now and then, when his intolerable Absurdities and Impieties
require it, I take the freedom to show him his own Face in his own Glass, it is
hoped I may merit Pardon of the Candid Reader.

CHAP. II.
Being a Reply to that Part of the Remarks which Mr. Owen calls the Preface.
THE Remarker here in the Entrance, promises his Reader an Idea of the
Rector's Sermon, but is not as good as his word. He has presented us with
whatever he believed would bear a Dispute, and which he had the least Color to
make a Flourish with among the common People, but he has overlooked, and
neglected the most considerable things advanced against the Exceptions of Mr.
de Laune, which he ought not to have past over, since he understood that
Gentleman's Defense. Instead then of an Idea of the Rector's Sermon, he has
presented the Reader with a Specimen of his own cavilling Humor. This is an
hopeful beginning, when he who is pretending to vindicate others from the
Charge of diminishing from the Word of God, stumbles at the very Threshold, and
makes no difficulty to diminish from the Words of his Neighbors. If Sacrilege
or Robbing of God be a Crime, I am sure Burglary or Stealing from one's Brother
is no Virtue: And if the former is by Law punishable without Benefit of Clergy,
so is the latter also.

Mr. de Laune (as I mentioned in my Sermon) had alleged against our
established Worship, Sermon. p. 3.
That in the Psalms used in the Liturgy are left out the Ancient Hebrew Titles,
which are (says he) Original and Parts of the holy Scripture, having a Tendency
toward the unfolding the Misterys therein contained. Hereunto I replied, That
it were well, if the Dissenters would first prove, that those Hebrew Titles are
Original and essential Parts of the holy Scripture. This Mr. de Laune ought to
have done before he so roundly and peremptorily challenged us with corrupting
the Word of God: But he did not so much as attempt it.

Mr. Owen has now endeavored to supply that defect, though at the same time he
professes he will not enter into this Controversy: Pref. of Remarks p. 1.
But whether he will or no he is got into it before he is aware, and argues that,
The Titles are as Ancient as the Psalms themselves for ought appears to the
contrary, they being in all the Hebrew and Greek Copies, that over I have seen:
That the Jewish Church received 'em as Parts of Scripture, and they are most of
'em translated by the LXX and by Theodotion Symmachus and Aquila, as also by
the Targumist: That they are received in the Christian Church as Canonical
Scripture; Jerome translates them in his Version, and they are in the modern
Versions: That some of 'em are undeniably Canonical, as that of the 18th Psalm
mentioned 2 Samuel 22. Others of them must be prefixed by the Penman, or by a
Person divinely inspired: For they refer to passages of History not mentioned
in the body of the Psalm, etc.. Unto all which I answer.

That the Subscriptions of St. Paul's Epistles, are to be found in all the
Greek Copies I have seen or heard of, save that of Claromont, are always
translated and taken into our modern Versions, and yet the Remarker will not
own them for Canonical Scripture. It does not then hence follow, that the
Hebrew Titles are essential Parts of the Psalms, no more than that the
Subscriptions are Canonical.

That the Jewish Church received the Titles and annexed them to the Psalms I
will not dispute: But that they received them as essential Parts of the Psalms,
is the Question, we receive the Postscripts of St. Paul's Epistles, and the
very English Contents of the Chapters of the Bibles, but we esteem neither
Canonical.

The Subscriptions of St. Paul's Epistles are translated into all or most
Languages, the Italian, Spanish, French, high Dutch, low Dutch, English (and
Scotch I imagine) all Christian Churches receive 'em, yet not as Canonical
Scripture, but Ancient Records affixt unto the Epistles, when and by whom is
not known. The like may with Reason be said of the Titles. It must be confessed,
that the Subscriptions of the Epistles, are not the same in all the ancient M.
SS. nor in the Syriack and Arabic Versions, from whence it is rightly
concluded; that they were not annexed thereunto by any inspired Person: And for
the very same reason I argue, that the Titles of the Psalms are not Canonical
Scripture, there being great variety to be observed in them: If we compare the
Hebrew, the Greek and the Oriental Versions, not two of 'em agreeing one with
another in their Titles.

That the Title of the 18th Psalm is to be found 2 Samuel 22. is very true: But
it does not follow, that an inspired Person affixed it unto the 18th Psalm, as
it now lies in the Collection of Psalms commonly called the Psalter of David.
So that those words, as placed before the 18. Psalm, may in strictness be said
not be to Canonical there, though they be Canonical, 2 Samuel 22. Ex. gr. Mr.
Delaune has accused us for foisting 3 Verses into the 14th. Psalm, and does
therefore certainly imply, that they are not essential parts of that Psalm,
though no body will deny 'em to be Canonical Scripture in other Places. The like
may with as good Reason be said of the Title of the 18th. Psalm.

That the other Titles were prefixed by the Penmen, or by some other Divinely
inspired Person (which is the Question in controversy) is not proved from that
Reason, sc. because the Titles refer to Passages of History not mentioned in
the Body of the Psalms. It Is a great mistake to affirm, that the Titles refer
to Passages in History not mentioned in the Body of the Psalms, as I could
easily show, if it were worth the while. True, there are no particular and very
obvious Expressions in many Psalms, relating to the Historical Passages to
which the Titles refer; but there are general ones, which gave the Collectors
of the Book of Psalms an occasion of affixing those Titles to the Psalms. Ex.
gr. in the 90th. Psalm, though Moses and the Israelites are not mentioned in it,
yet many Verses of that Psalm, and particularly the 9th. and the 10th. Verse,
were thought to allude unto the Condition of the Israelites in the Wilderness,
whose stubbornness God punished by cutting their Live* short of what in the
Course of Nature in those days is supposed to have been the ordinary length of
Man's life. By such general and obscurer Passages in the Body of the Psalms (I
do imagine) observing Men were induced to prefix the Titles. Thus Bishop Pearson
after the same manner has with great Judgment and Curiosity fixed the Time and
the Occasion of all the Treatises and Epistles of St. Cyprian grounding himself
upon sundry Passages, Annals Cyprian.
which he observed in them, and accordingly the time and occasion is affixt
unto the beginning of every Epistle and Treatise in the Oxford Edition.

But to return to Mr. Owen's Reason. The Titles (says he) refer to Passages of
History not mentioned in the Body of the Psalm. This is a good Argument, (if it
were true) that the Titles were not added by the Penmen themselves, nor by any
Divinely inspired Person; and that they are not Canonical, but the Conjectures
of mere Men, which is the Reason also (I suppose) why many Psalms have no
Titles at all, and many none to any purpose at all, some, whose Titles are
grounded on very dark and doubtful Expressions in the Body of the Psalms, and
some in the 70. have Titles, which the Hebrew Text has not. All which variety
arises from the ignorance, or inobservance of those who prefixed the Titles,
which would not have happened, if the Titles had been added by some inspired
Person.

Having refeli'd the Remarkers Arguments brought to prove the Titles to be
essential Parts of the Psalms, I will try what may be said in proof, that they
are not, at least, not of a certainty, essential Parts of the Psalms.

In the first Place, then I argue, that if some, or if any one Title may justly
be questioned, then this renders all the rest suspicious. That of the 90th.
Psalm, A Prayer of Moses the man of God, seems not to have been added by any
Divinely inspired Person. There are plausible Reasons to be given, why Moses
did not compose it. For thus the Psalmist speaks, ver. 10. The days of our
years are threescore years and ten, and if by reason of strength, they be
fourscore, yet is their strength labor and sorrow; for it is soon cut off, and
we fly away. Now the Life of Man in Moses's time was much longer than seventy
or eighty years. Job, who was ('it is thought) contemporary with Moses, lived 140
years, even after his Afflictions, and at length died being old and full of
days, (Chap. 42. 16, 17.) Levi lived 137 years, (Exodus 6. 16.) ^^^^th lived 133
years, ((...) 18.) Amram 137. (ver. 20.) Aaron was 123 years old when he died,
(Numb. 33. 39.) Joshua died being 110 years old (Chap. 24. 29.) Miriam
according to Isaaeson, (see Numb. 20. 1.) was 129 years old. Caleb 85. (Josh.
147. 10.) and was alive, (Judge. 1. 15.) And Jethro, (Heb 11. 24 Exodus 2. 11,
etc. Act. 7. 23. Exodus 7. 7. Chap. 18.) must needs have been an 100 years old
and upwards. Yea, Ehud the Judge an Age or more after Joshua lived to be above
100 years old, having governed the Israelites eighty years, (Judge. 3. 39.) But
above all, this Moses, the Man of God, the supposed Penman of this Psalm, was
eighty years old when he was sent unto Pharaoh (Act. 7. 23, 30.) This must be
before he could Pen the Psalm: He afterward attained unto the 120th. year, and
then died: His Eyes were not dim, nor his natural force abated, Deuteronomy. 34. 7. It
is not then likely that Moses was the Author of this Psalm, because the Body of
the Psalm does not at all agree with the times, wherein that Man of God
flourished, and himself had no occasion of complaining of the shortness and
labor, and sorrow of our days, including himself. It must be confessed, that
this point is bandy'd by Learned Men, and sundry Answers are offered to the
Arguments produced, which I will not trouble the Reader with, only let it be
considered, that several Authors in Mr. Pool's Synopsis deliver their Opinion
very cautiously, Argum. ad Psalm. 90.
Very simile est Mosem hunc Psalmum composuisse, say they. It Is but likely then
at most. I add, Greg. Nyssen reckons this Psalm among those which had no Title
according to the Jews. And Basil says, David wrote it, and adds, that it wants
an Inscription, though he himself gives it one. Of the 91. Psalm likewise he
notes that it had obtained a right Inscription, implying that Inscriptions were
Human Additions.

I Will produce one other Instance. It Is the Title of the 34. Psalm. A Psalm of
David, when he changed his behavior before Abimelech, who drove him away and
he departed. The King of Gath here meant is called Achish, 1 Samuel 21. 10. and
not Abimelech, from whence the Truth of this Title may be doubted. We are told
indeed that Abimelech was a common Name of the Kings of the Philistines, as
Caesar and Augustus were of the Roman Emperors. But I am not satisfied with
this. For I read but of one, at most two Successive Philistine Kings of that
name, Genesis 20. 2. Chap. 26. 8. Kings of Gerar. This was in Abraham and Isaac's
days. But to fancy that the name of Abimelech was continued among the
Philistine Kings unto) the days of David about 800 years is not very likely, we
meeting not with any one King so called in all that interval of time, save one
of the Kings of Israel, Judge. 9. 6. who had no other name besides. Nor is the
Achish King of Gath any where called Abimelech, except in this Title. Now that
which might give occasion unto this mistake in the Title of his Psalm was, that
in the said first of Sam. 21. there it mentior made of Ahimelech the High
Priest of the Israelites, whose Congress with David takes up the nine first
Verses of that Chapter, and may with some appearance of Reason therefore be
said to have occasioned that Error in the Title of putting Ahimelech for Achish.

That the Book of Psalms has received some humane Additions may be argued from
those words racked to the 72. Psalm, at the end, The Prayers of David the Son
of Jess are ended, which is manifestly false, if the Titles of the Psalms are
true, there being very many Prayers of David, which follow in this Book of
Psalms.

If any stress should be laid upon the Distinction between Prayers and Psalms,
I reply that the 142. Psalm is called a Prayer of David; and the Original word
is the same in both, sc. (...) and (...) differing only in number. Besides the
Psalms that follow the 72 are as truly Prayers as they which go before it. Some
body then not inspired has either transposed the Psalms, or else added to them
the foresaid Conclusion of the 72. Psalm, being either misplaced, or thrust
into the Text. It is not then impossible, but the like may have been done at
the beginning of the Psalms by prefixing Titles unto them.

There are Titles added to very many Psalms in the 70 Version, which are not to
be met with in the Hebrew. For Example, Psalm. 137. (...). Jeremy composed this
mournful Song in the name of the Captives at Babylon, as any one will grant,
that considers the Subject matter of the Psalm, and compares it with the state
of the Israelites in Jeremiah's time. I ask then, is this Title Divinely
inspired? And yet Jerome translates it, and comments upon it, as he does upon
other of the Seventy Titles.

Lastly, the Oriental Versions the Syriack and the Arabic and the Chalde^
Paraphrase oft-times want Titles, frequently change 'em, and sometimes add
Titles, when neither the Hebrew nor the Greek lay claim to any at all, which
could never have happened, if they had been Canonical Scripture.

Theodoret seems to believe the Inscriptions Canonical, as being found (so he
says) in the Psalms, when the Seventy Translated 'em into Greek. But Gregory
Nyssen who flourished half a Century before him, observes, That among the
Christians (who used the Seventy Translation) some Psalms have the Inscription
of the Prophet, but not among the Hebrews; that sometimes the first Sentence of
the Psalm, (so I understand him) is put into the Place of the Title both with
the Christians and the Jews after the manner of our Liturgy Translation; that
the Jews rejected the Titles of some Psalms, which the Christians received. He
reckons 12 of this kind, viz. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 8, 32, 42, 70, 73, 90, and 103
Psalms. None of which (it should seem) had at that time among the Jews any
Inscription, though at this day all but the Second have. He no where pleads for
the Divine Authority of the Titles. How could he, when there was such a
disagreement between the Jews and Christians about 'em? He also speaks, as if
some Titles were received by Ecclesiastical Custom: but it is hard to determine
at this time of day, which are by Divine Inspiration, and which by Custom.

From the whole some will be apt to conclude, that the Hebrew Titles are not
essential Parts of the Psalms, but the Conjectures and Additions of uninspired
Persons. I for my share am of that Opinion. All must confess that they are not
Canonical Scripture of a certainty, which was all I insisted on in the Sermon;
and therefore that Mr. Delaune did unworthily, when he positively objected to
the Church of England, that she had left out of the Psalms some Original Parts,
meaning the Titles, when it is not certain, that they are Original.

The Minister at Oswestry here takes fair leave of his Client, and bids him
shift for himself as well as he can, having no more to say in behalf of Mr.
Delaune. Only, whereas I put the question, why the Titles were not all
translated into plain English, if they were so serviceable to the unfolding the
Mysteries contained in the Psalms, he surlily tells me the Bishops (they being
the Translators of the Bible into English) could best resolve the Question.
Pref. p. 2.
I thank him heartily for this, and desire the good People among the
Dissenters, to think of it. Mr. Owen has herein done my Lords the Bishops some
Justice before he was aware in acknowledging, that the Scriptures being in the
English Tongue is owing to their Labors, Learning and Piety. But 'twill be
objected, that they have not Translated all the Titles. True: Neither have the
Dissenters, though they had power and opportunity in the Reign of the Long
Parliament and Oliver; and had more lately Liberty to do it, if twere worth the
while, and a matter of so great moment, as Mr. de Laune has made the World to
believe.

If it might not be thought a digression from my present purpose, I would
observe, that the Mysteries in the Psalms (as far as I am able to judge) are
those, which relate unto Jesus Christ, or those principally; but there is not
one Title in the Hebrew, which is at all useful to the unfolding any of these
Mysteries. For I do profess that after I am told it is a Psalm, a Song, a Song
or Psalm, a Psalm of David, a Prayer of Moses, a Psalm at the Dedication of
David's House, a Psalm for the Sabbath, sent to such or such a chief Musician,
on what Instrument it was to be sung, a Golden Psalm, a Psalm of Instruction,
of Degrees, etc. I am just as wise as I was before, as to the Mysteries
contained in such Psalms. The like I affirm of the rest of the Titles? 'Twas
therefore unfair in Mr. de Laune to bear his ignorant and unobserving Readers
in hand, as if the Titles unfolded the Mysteries of the Psalms.

To the other Questions I there put, the Minister returns but a very sorry and
evasive Answer, thus, They are not worth -- Answering.

However, he might methinks have diverted his Friends in and about Manchester
with a Jest or two. They would have taken it for a solid Answer, and cried him
up as the Jews did Herod, Act. 12. 22. But to the end the impartial Reader may
see, that at least some of my Questions were to the purpose, and ought to have
been replied to, or else Mr. Delaune left in the lurch undefended, and convict
of dealing very dishonestly with us, I will draw one or two of those Questions
into the form of an Argument, and then it will be seen, whether they are worth
Answering, or whether Mr. Owen were able to answer 'em, so as to vindicate Mr.
Delaune, or get any advantage of the Rector.

Setting aside then the Controversy about the Titles (which I will now suppose
are Cononical Scripture of a certainty) yet Mr. Delaune had no Reason to accuse
us of leaving them out of our Liturgy Translation, which we sing or say;
because the Dissenters themselves leave 'em out of their Psalms in Meter, nor
do they sing 'em at their Divine Worship. Mr. Delaune therefore had no room to
complain of us, when the Dissenters were guilty in the same kind. It will be
time enough to quarrel with us, after they shall have amended their own fault.
In the mean while they are so much the more inexcusable, that they have not to
this day reformed, what they seem to be persuaded is amiss. But the Truth is,
were it never so manifest and certain, that the Titles are essential Parts of
the Psalms, yet I believe neither the Church of England, nor Mr. Delaune, nor
his Vindicator, nor any wise Dissenter would think fit to advise the Singing
them, or putting them into Meter at the head of the Singing Psalms. Mr.
Delaune's Exception therefore was nothing but noise and cavil, and
impertinence, which was the thing I designed, and did effectually demonstrate
in my Sermon. Instead then of saying my Questions, Are not worth Answering, the
Remarker should have done me right, and his Client no Injustice by confessing
fairly, that Mr. Delaune impeached the Church of England without cause, and
that himself was not able to justify him. But he must be excused. His business
and his head lies another way, viz. abusing the Rector and Bantering the
ignorant and innocent People of his own Party. He has been so far from
Exercising Charity to his Neighbors, that he has not been just to any side, no
not to himself. In plain terms he has belied himself, and pretended the
contrary to what he could not but know, sc. that those Questions merited an
Answer in the Controversy between Mr. Delaune and me.

2. In the next place Mr. Delaune excepted against the Established Church, That
we read some select Portions of Scripture, commonly called Epistles and
Gospels, and not the entire Chapters, which (says he) is a curtalling and
mangling the Scriptures, which thereby become quite another thing, Sermon. p. 5.
etc.
than the Evangelists intended in the Gospels, or the Apostles in the Epistles,
altogether ruining the Scope and Connection in diverse Places. To this I replied,

That the Dissenters sing some small Portions of Psalms, which with them is not
curtailing or mangling the Psalms: That they read single Chapters, into which
the inspired Penmen did not divide their Writings, as well as not into those
shorter Sections called Epistles and Gospels; that it is as lawful (and perhaps
as edifying) to read these, as whole Chapters, that there is often a Connection
between Chapter and Chapter, which binders not the Dissenters reading them
severally; that this is every whit as much disturbing the Scope of those
Places, as our reading the Epistles and Gospels is: that those Paragraphs of
Scripture have two senses, a Relative, and an Independent sense: that though the
Relative sense cannot be understood without its neighboring Parts, yet it is
not ruined thereby; to omit for a time is not ruining the Scope; nor doing it
the least Injury. That the independent Sense however is still safe; that by the
Rule implied in this Objection, the Dissenters (who are not very fond of
reading any at all) will be obliged to read many Chapters together, happily
whole Books, and to sing the 119. Psalm. at once. And what says the Remarker to
all this?

He suggests that we omit reading some Scriptures (even whole Chapters and
Books as he gathers from our Calendar) which seems to be a diminishing from the
Word of God. Pref. p. 2.


This is nothing to the Defense of Mr. Delaune, but a Digression from the
Argument in hand, which is called (...), and is mere cavil and shuffling. It
betrays the weakness of Mr. Owen's Defense of Mr. Delaune. Our omitting
Chapters and Books will not vindicate Mr. Delaune's unjust Accusation of us
about reading the Epistles and Gospels. As for the rest of my Reply to Mr.
Delaune, the Remarker puts me off with this slight Answer, I leave him and Mr.
Delaune to argue, etc.

But Mr. Delaune is long since dead; where and when we shall meet, God only
knows: I am pretty sure not in this World. Mr. Owen perhaps with the help of
our Lancashire Exorcists will undertake to bring Mr. Delaune back again. Why
not? They who can cast out Devils, it is probable can raise the Dead. One
Miracle is as easily wrought as another; yet still the mischief is, though these
Wonder-workers should conjure him up again, as the Woman of Endor did Samuel, I
am not sure the Rector would have the courage to meet him. In plain terms Mr.
O. has declined the Cause, being as little able to make good the Objection laid
against us, as the Accuser himself was.

3. Mr. Delaune taxed the established Church, That in the Liturgy. Translation
of the Psalms three whole Verses are foisted into the 14th. Psalm, immediately
after the third Verse.

Hereunto I returned, That the inspired Penmen of the New Testament had done
the same, Sermon. p. 7.
1 Cor. 15. 54, 55, v. that is, had put distant Passages of Scripture together,
See 2 Cor. 6. 16, 17, 18. compared with Isa. 52. 11. Jer. 31. 1, 9.
and cited 'em as one single and entire Testimony, That St. Paul had borrowed
these very three objected Verses at least from other Psalms and Books of the
Old Testament, and inserted them with the other Parts of the Psalm into Romans 3.
10. v. etc. The which I suppose is sufficient to justify us.

And what has the Minister replied unto all this? Why just nothing at all: He
has not so much as taken the least notice of it, so as to vindicate Mr.
Delaune's groundless clamor against us, that is out of doors. Ne'rtheless
something he has to say against the Rector, Pref. Rem. p. 2.
which whether it be to the purpose is no matter; 'twill make a noise among his
Party, and that is all. He acquaints us then from Jerome, Pref. ad lib. 16. in
Is. Tom. 2. 395.
That the said three Verses were transcribed out of Romans into Psalm. 14. that
they are not in the LXX. and that none of the Greek Interpreters have commented
upon them. My Answer hereunto is:

1. That this is nothing to the Argument before us. It acquits us from the
charge of Mr. Delaune. It was not the Church of England then which foisted
those three Verses into Psalm. 14. Besides we have the Authority of St. Paul,
and of the Primitive Church to warrant our continuing them in Psalm. 14.

2. As for Jerome I do here protest against him, as unfit to be a Witness in
this Case. He too warmly espoused the Defense of the Hebrew Text against the
LXX, and manifestly betrayed his Partiality. He cared not what in his heat he
said or wrote for the support of his own opinion. Tom. 1. pa. 1343. Par, Edit.
Let any one consult his Hebrew Questions and Traditions on Genesis, and it may
be he will be of my mind. Here arguing for the Hebrew against the LXX, because
forsooth St. Luke (Act. 7. 14.) agreed not with the Hebrew Text, but with the
Septuagint, he gives that holy Evangelist this scurvy Character, Lucae qui
ignotus and vilis and non magnae fidei in nationibus ducebatur.

I Will not English the words, because I will pay some deference to the
Presbyterian Father. This only I say, He who sticks not to revile the inspired
Evangelist after this manner, is unworthy to be believed in any thing he
affirms upon this Point in Controversy, or indeed in any else.

3. I would desire to know when, and by whom, those three Verses were
transcribed out of St. Paul into the 14th. Psalm. 'Twas done before St. Paul
was born for any thing I know.

4. Whereas Jerome affirms (as Mr. Owen tells me) that these Verses are not in
the LXX. Translation, I ask, where then did Jerome find 'em, and how came he to
enter into the Dispute about 'em? Looking into the Place, Jerome (I find)
confesses the Verses are in vulgata Editione quae Graece (...) dicitur and in
toto orb diversa est. I do not well understand him, but it seems the Copies of
the Scripture then in ordinary use, whence Eustochium argued, had these Verses,
and Jerome acknowledges, there was a Greek Edition called the (...), or vulgar,
which had the said Verses in it, though Jerome's had 'em not, if he is to be
credited. But by whom and when these Verses were put into this vulgar Edition
of the Seventy, Jerome says not.

The Vatican Copy Mr. Owen confesses to be one of the best, that has these
three Verses: I dare not then believe that the Seventy Translation in Jerome's
days was without 'em. Be this as it will, it is manifest that the Church of
England added 'em not to Psalm. 14. that St. Paul made no scruple to join
distant Places of Scripture to one another; and how this should become so
heinous a Crime in us to follow those Examples, Mr. Owen is yet in arrear to
account for in behalf of Mr. Delaune.

Mr. Delaune moreover asserted, Sermon. p. 8.
That the three Verses are not in any of the Original Copies, whereas if there
be many, as is implied in those words, the Greek must be one, as I noted, and
there they are* And I further acquaint the Remarker, that they are in the
Arabic and Aethiopick Versions also. Of this the Minister has ne (...) quidem,
not one Syllable. Only because I took occasion hereupon to offer unto
consideration, whether the Greek Copy be not as good as the Hebrew at this day
is, and grounded my self upon the Judgment of the Learned Isaac Vossius, he
endeavors to make his Party believe I designed to Depress the Authority of the
Hebrew Copies. Pref. p. 2.
Surely this Minister never considers what he writes.

If I had affirmed roundly (which I did not) that the Seventy's Version is as
good as the Hebrew, this would not have been any disparagement unto the Hebrew,
though it would be an advancement to the Seventy: Except Mr. Owen thinks that the
Commendation of one Man is the reproach of another. I don't think it any
dispraise unto St. Matthew, if in answer to Jerome's forementioned disparagement
of St. Luke one should affirm that St. Luke's Writings are of as good Credit as
St. Matthew's. In short, though I am inclined to believe the Seventy to be of
Divine Authority, 'twas never in my thoughts to depress the Hebrew. So that it
were sufficient for me to justify the choice of my Text, though it were to be
found in the Hebrew only.

It has (I do believe among them who are as ignorant as himself) past for a
current Piece of Wit, when he thus speaks: If the Seventy be of at good
Authority as the present Hebrew, Pref. p. 2.
it is very uncertain what becomes of the Rector's Text: Thus the Rector by
maintaining one absurdity runs himself into more, and by advancing the Seventy
has lost his Text. But how does this follow? when at the same time the Hebrew
is allowed to be as good as the Seventy. The Rector then had his Liberty to
choose his Text out of which Copy himself pleased. Besides it falls out scurvily
to the shame and confusion of the Remarker, of Mr. Tallents his supravisor, of
all his Fellow-helpers about Oswestry and Manchester, that the Rectors Text is
in the Seventy, yea in the Vatican Exemplar, yea in that very Edition, whereof
Mr. Owen makes mention, and which he has by him. Tell it not at Oswestry,
publish it not at Manchester, that so many Presbyterian Ministers, even when
they are laboring to vindicate 'emselves from the Charge of corrupting the
Word of God, are at the same time Robbing and Diminishing from it. In two
words, the Rector has found his Text, but the Ministers have lost their jest
and their honesty too.

The Rector's Text is not indeed placed in the same order in the Vatican
Seventy, as in the Hebrew, and our English Versions. But one would have thought
the Gentleman at Manchester, who has the liberty of a good Library there, must
have found the Rector's Text rightly placed both in the Frankford Edition of
the Seventy, and in the Complutensian Bible also. But they were so fond of a
Jest that rather than lose it, they would forfeit their Sincerity. I would now
inform 'em, where they may meet with the Rector's Text in the Proverbs,
according to the Vatican Copy it self, but that I believe they knew it well
enough themselves. Instead hereof I desire 'em to read a little forward to the
8th. ver after the Rector's Text, where Agur makes this Prayer, (...), Remove
far from me vanity and lies.

It cannot be denied, the Seventy has been corrupted, and by consequence must
not be allowed as good as the Hebrew Copy, if the Hebrew be perfect and entire
as it came out of the hands of the Penmen, or of some inspired Collector of
the Books and Volumes therein contained. But Isaac Vossius has abundantly
proved the Hebrew Copy corrupted, and I do not care to repeat what another has
with so much Learning and Judgment said before me.

One of Mr. Owen's Reasons against any early Corruption of the Hebrew is drawn
from the Testimony of Philo the Jew mentioned by Eusebius. prepar. Evang. 8. 2.
Pref. p. 2.
that passage of Philo is in Eusebius. prep. Evang. L. 8. C. 6. Page 1628. Here
Philo speaking of the Israelites Obedience to the Law of Moses, acquaints us,
The Israelites reverenced that Man (Moses) so much, that whatsoever seemed good
unto him they all approved of it. So that whether he devised this Form of
Government of his own head, or whether he received it from, Heaven, they
accepted it as no other than from God; and for the space of so many years (I
cannot determine how many, but above two thousand) (...), altered no one word
of what he (Moses) wrote, but suffered though it were a thousand Deaths rather
than be persuaded unto any thing contrary to his Laws and Customs.

It is not to be doubted but the Religious Jews were always very careful to
preserve Moses entire and free from all manner of Corruption, even in the least
Tittle, as the Christians have been to their power in preserving the New
Testament.

But Philo aims not in this place to assert any such thing of the Jews (though
Mr. Owen seems to understand him thus, and for what reason any one may guess,
renders the Passage, Than suffer the Law to be changed in any one Point:) That
which Philo affirms is, that the Jews altered none of Moses's Laws. This will
appear by examining the signification of (...), translated Word by Mr. Owen.
(...) is indeed often rendered Verbum and Vocabulum, but as often Dictum and
Sententia, or an entire Proposition* Hesychius expresses its Conjugate (...), a
Law or Ordinance; and so (...) and (...), are in the New Testament used for
some complex Sentence or Proposition, and are Synonymous with (...) and (...).
Thus the Ten Commandments are called the Ten Words, Exodus 34 24. In the Hebrew,
(...)
(...), the Decalogue, the Ten Commandments, or the Ten Words. So then Philo's
(...), imports that the Religious Jews altered not one single Commandment of
Moses. But it follows not hence that there was no alteration not in any Word or
Point. This might happen (though the Jews did it not wilfully) for any thing
Philo offers to the contrary. It is yet more manifest from the Authors
precedent Discourse, where he speaks of the Laws and Statutes of Moses, and
from what follows in this very Period, where he explains himself thus, Rather
than be persuaded unto any thing contrary to his Laws and the Customs. 'Twas
the Laws of Moses then they were careful of, and not the Words, Syllables or
Letters, according to Philo in this place.

Though the Jews were careful to preserve the Scripture from Corruption; yet
Theodoret grants that before Esdras corrected it, it had been depraved partly
through the negligence of the Jews, partly by the Impiety of the Babylonians
(he means in the Seventy years of the Babylonish Captivity.) It may with much
more reason be thought, that the Scripture was corrupted again (by the same
means) after the Prophets were ceased from among the Jews, and they had been
harrassed by the Greeks and Romans for some hundreds of years.

The Invention of the Masora (as he goes on) has been an effectual means to
preserve the Purity of the Hebrew Copies, Pref. p. 3.
and renders it impossible, that any Corruption should have crept into them,
says Buxtorf.

Doubtless, before Christ's Birth the honest Jews used all their Endeavors to
preserve the Scripture incorrupt, and yet who sees not that there might
notwithstanding many Corruptions steal into the Hebrew Text, and designedly be
thrust into it? 'Twas no hard matter for cunning Rabbis to alter Words and
Letters, and still to keep the just number of 'em. When We is altered into Ye
there still remains the same number of Words and Letters in that 6. Act. 3. v.

I do not affirm, that the Hebrew was corrupted in any material thing till
after the Destruction of Jerusalem. Nevertheless it might have been corrupted
before the Fifth Century, when the Masora is said to be invented. Yea, it is
matter of Fact, that the Jews had corrupted the Hebrew Bible long before that
time, if Mr. Owen will please to give any Credit to St. Justin Martyr, who
flourished above 250 years before Jerome.

I shall have occasion in another Place to prove this by some Testimonies drawn
out of Justin.

To conclude, it is but lately since the Christians received the Hebrew Bible
from the Modern Jews, who may very well be suspected to have made bold with it
in prejudice to the Christian Religion. And whether it be fit we should build
upon the bare Testimony of the Jews only, deserves some consideration. For
therefore it was, that in my Sermon I spoke not of the ancient Hebrew Copies,
but of that which we have at this day from the later Jews. Sermon. p. 9.


In short, Pref. p. 2.
I (says he) will not dispute at this time the Authority of the Septuagint: Nor
will the Rector call into question the Purity of the Hebrew, it is not necessary
to decide the Controversy between Mr. Delaune and me. Whatever becomes of the
Seventy, or the Hebrew, it is false what he put upon us. The Church of England
foisted not those three Verses into Psalm. 14. But if we had first done it, we
are excusable, the Psalm being thus put together by St. Paul, Mr. Delaune then
ought not to have vilify'd us for foisting them into that Psalm. Men who will
take the liberty of misrepresenting others in such nasty Expressions deserve to
be told of their own Faults in more cleanly Language.

4. The Rector observed from Rev. 22. 18, 19. Pref. p. 3. Sermon. page
That the Canon of Scripture is there (for ought we yet know) shut* up. I
expressed my self thus cautiously (for ought we yet know) because the Passage
alleged properly refers unto the Book of the Revelations, though the Learned
sometimes accommodate it unto the whole Scripture. But the Critic at Oswestry
would insinuate, as if the Rector expected more Revelations still, and an
enlargement of the Canon.

And is Mr. Owen certain we shall not have more Divine Revelations before the
end of the World? 12, 13.
I expect 'em as little as he: but it is one thing to suppose it possible, and
another to look for it as probable or promised. God has indeed tied our hands,
Thou shall not add, but he has not tied his own, whatever this Solomon of our
Age deems to the contrary. God we know added to his own Word even after Agur
had warned us, not to add thereunto; and he may (if he please) once more add
unto it, after it is forbidden unto us in St. John; what he will do, is another
Question. I am as well content with what we have already, as the Minister can
be. But as Agur doubtless thought it possible God might add unto his own Word
(as he did afterward) so it is not impossible, but he may yet add thereunto,
for ought I know, or the Remarker himself dares affirm. If he or his Revisor at
Manchester know, that God will send us no more Revelations, than what we have
already received, they might do well to assure the World of it by the Spirit of
Prophecy, and so contradict 'emselves in the same breath.

If any Sort of Men should presume to add unto the Canon of Scripture, I know
none more likely than those, who make such mighty boasts of the Spirit of God.
They have made one pretty good step toward it already. They who dispossess
Daemoniacks, will in good time heal all manner of bodily Diseases, remove
Mountains also, and throw 'em into the Sea. Who then shall make any difficulty
of entertaining their Doctrines, as the Oracles of God?

The Rector laid down this other Rule, Sermon. p. 13
Then we diminish from the Word when we cast away never so little of it. Pref.
p. 3.
Upon which Words the Minister has the following Remark, I leave it to
consideration, whether the Titles be not a little part of the Word of God, and
owned for such in our Authorized Bibles.

That has been considered already; but if they are owned for Parts of the Word
of God in our Authorized Bibles, then we of the Church of England do more
especially own 'em; we cannot then be accused of casting them away. But if to
leave 'em out of the Liturgy Translation be a casting 'em away, then the
leaving 'em out of the Singing Psalms is the same.

These tender-hooft-Creatures, who are convinced that the Titles are part of
the Psalms, and ought to be inserted into every Translation, yet against the
Dictates of their own Conscience prefix 'em not, neither demand 'em to be
prefixed unto the Singing Psalms. Who ever hereafter can believe, that they
have any Conscience at all? Or rather is it not to be suspected, that they have
two Consciences? with the one accusing us, and with the other excusing
themselves for the same thing.

On this head I instanced in the Jews, Sermon. page 13, 14.
whom Justin Martyr disputing with Trypho charged with corrupting and expunging
out of the Scripture several Places, which pointed at the Messiah.

Ay, Rem. p. 3.
says the Minister, with corrupting the Seventy, but not the Original Hebrew,
which he ought to have taken notice of.

And why so, sweet Sir? I demand your Reason. Is it because it is no Fault to
corrupt the Seventy? Or because the Places were entire in the Original Hebrew
Text? This latter cannot be a Reason, because it is not true, that the Places
objected by Justin against the Jews were then entire in the Original Hebrew.
For the Jews doubtless would have vindicated themselves, and not have suffered
that Scandal to pass so smoothly and unanswered. They would have let Justin
know, that their Hebrew Bibles were entire in all the Places by him alleged,
or else that they never belonged unto the Scripture.

It must be confessed then the Hebrew Copy was corrupted in St. Justin Martyr's
days, the several Passages by him mentioned to be thrust out of Scripture,
being then (and still are) wanting in the Hebrew Text as well as in the
Seventy. For instance, that Father produces Psalm. 96. 10. (...), Say among the
Heathen the Lord has reigned. But Justin tells Trypho, that (...) had been
struck out by the Jews, and that the place originally ran thus, The Lord has
reigned from the Wood, or Cross. But if they had been in the Hebrew, can any
one think Trypho so dull as not to have told Justin as much? Nor are these
words from the Cross found in the Hebrew or Seventy at this day. The reason of
the Jews Knavery herein is obvious, viz. because those words from the Wood were
an illustrious Prediction of the manner of Christ's Death, and by consequence a
plain Testimony of his being the Messiah, the brightness of which Evidence they
were not able to behold* and therefore razed out the words. In short, the Cross
of Christ was to them a stumbling block in the Prophecy as well as in the
accomplishment.

Lastly, the Hebrew Copy in Jerome's days wanted the same words, From the Wood
He took no notice at all of 'em either in his Version, or in his Commentaries.

In Mr. Pool's Synopsis I find many Arguments against Justin, charging the
foresaid Corruption upon the Jews; but they are of no weight, if it be
considered, that Faminius Nobilius in his Scholia on this Place writes thus,
Apud Sanctum August* and in Psalterio veteri and Romano sequitur a ligno; eoquo
modo affertur a Sancto Cyprian. Just. Mart. Tertulliano, Sancto Leone Papa and
in hymno Ecclesiastico, Regnavit a ligno Deus. Besides this most ancient Father
and Martyr, and the most Learned too of all others in and before his time has
produced a great many Examples of the like kind, See Just. page 297, 298, 332,
348. and alibi Edit. Paris.
and not a few whole Periods or smaller Sections entirely expunged, which the
Jews then living and disputing with him were not able to deny, or any ways
palliate. So that all the pretended Care of the Jews notwithstanding, the
Hebrew Copy had been corrupted early in the Second Century, and according to
Vossius soon after the Destruction of Jerusalem by Vespasian, and remains so
unto this present time.

I must not pass over Vossius's main Argument, but will represent it in very
few words.

He shows, that the Ancient Jews believed their Messiah would come about the
6000 Year from the Creation; and that they expected him about the time when
Jesus was born, those two Periods being coincident. It follows hence,

1. That they believed the World 6000 years old at the Birth of Jesus.

2. That the Ancient Hebrew Copies reckoned 6000 years from Adam to Jesus; else
the Jews could not have been in expectation of the Messiah when Jesus was born,
if their Chronology had then been the same as it is this day.

3. From the whole it must be confessed, that the Modern Hebrew Copies are
corrupted, the World according to them, being at the Birth of Jesus but about
4000 years old. The 2000 years wanting in the present Hebrew are supplied in a
great measure by the Seventy's Copy in the Chronology of the Patriarchs, the
Remainder are made good out of the Intervals of the Judges of Israel, and the
Reigns of the Persian Kings, which the Jews have shortened, and drawn the
Christians into their Error.

Hereunto may be added another Observation near of kind unto the former. St.
Luke, Chap. 4. 35, 36, v. affirms, Sala was the Son of Cainan, Cainan the Son
of Arpbaxad. But Genesis 11. 12, v. Sala is reckoned the immediate Son of
Arphaxad, Genesis 10. 24.
and Cainan quite left out in the Hebrew Copy, whereas the Vatican Seventy
agrees with St. Luke; See Alex. Copy.
which is a Demonstration, that the Jews have corrupted the Hebrew. By this one
Artifice of theirs are lost 130 years.

I expect here the Remarker, 1 Chronicles. 1. c.
or the Note-maker will for the sake of the Hebrew, give the Holy Evangelist
such another Character, as upon the like occasion their Friend Jerome did.

That Corruption of Psalm. 22. 16. v. is known and acknowledged by all. The Jews
read it thus, As a Lion instead of, They pierced my hands and my feet. So the
Evangelist Mark 15. 24. and the Seventy more truly have it; the difference is
but the half of a very small Letter, sc. (...) for (...) (which is less than
that between Y and W) and the Epenthesis of (...), which is common among 'em in
other Cases.

But after all this it was nothing to me or to my Argument in the Sermon,
whether the Jews corrupted the Seventy only, or the Hebrew also, or both. I Will
suppose it was the Seventy only, which is all Mr. O. contends for; yet still my
Bill of Indictment laid against the Jews must be found. For the Scripture is
the Word of God, in whatever Language it is written. They who would excuse the
Jews for Corrupting the Seventy only, and not the Hebrew, in good time will
defend the Corrupting the English Version only, and not the Original Greek. But
if the latter Defense will not bring off the false Cameronian, neither will the
former justify the faithless Jews. I wish then the Jews, the Scotch
Presbyterians, and Mr. O. in the name of his Brethren in England to concert
these Matters among 'emselves for the Good of Christendom.

The Rector briefly noted that the Samaritans and Sadducees rejected all but
the Five Books of Moses; Sermon. p. 14.
and the Minister calls this a Vulgar Error; Pref. p. 4.
let us see on what Grounds.

Mr. Owen pleads, Antiq. l. 18 c. 2.
that whereas Josephus affirms, The Sadducees to have received the Law only*
the Historian in another place explains himself as if he meant, The written Law
in Opposition to the Oral. In proof whereof he sends me back unto the 13th. b.
and 18 Chap. I am there and read (...), etc. But now I will show that the
Pharisees having received from the Fathers many things as legal, which were not
written in the Law of Moses, delivered them unto the People. And for this cause
the Sadducees rejected them alleging, that those things only were to be
accounted Legal which were written (sc. in the Laws of Moses) but that they
ought not to observe the Traditions of the Fathers. I will not insist upon this
that some Learned Men have thought the Prophetical Books of Scripture were by
the Sadducees reckoned among the Oral Traditions of the Fathers; nor will I
deny, (though there be reason to doubt) that Josephus's Passage in his Eighteenth
Book is to be understood in the same Sense as that in the Thirteenth Book, and
that they explain one another. However this be, he speaks only of the
Traditions added unto the Laws of Moses, which the Sadducees rejected; but not
a Syllable concerning the Prophetical Writings, which whether the Sadducees
rejected, or not, remains still to be examined.

Mr. O. assures us it is a Vulgar Error. But Mr. Pool in his Synopsis, informs
me, Isidor. L. 8. Chapter 4.
'twas the constant Opinion of the Fathers, and never contradicted, til
Scaliger and Drusius of late advanced the contrary Opinion. I hope the Minister
will not thrust down the Fathers into the Vulgar Form.

The Sadducees in all Probability would never have denied the Resurrection, if
they had entertained a just esteem of the Prophetical Books: Hence, our Lord,
overlooking all the other more plain and convincing Testimonies in the
Prophetical Writings, singl'd out that of Moses, Mat. 22. 32.
Exodus 3. 6. I am the God of thy Father, the God of Abraham, etc. as the most
proper and effectual Argument, ad Hominem, in proof of the Resurrection, which
the Sadducees on their own Principles could not deny, though they might have
avoided the other.

But the Remarker sends me to the Learned Dr. Lightfoot for further
satisfaction herein, Vol. 2. page 541, 542. I am content to stand to this
Gentleman's Judgment. Dr. Lightfoot then page 541. grants that the Samaritans
might so reject all the Books of the Old Testament, (except the Pentateuch) as
to forbid their being read in the Synagogues. Even this Concession alone were
(I should think) sufficient to my purpose. The Sadducees and Samaritans forbad
the rest of the Scripture to be read in the Public Congregations. If the
Hagiographa, and Prophets were now by a Positive Order forbid to be read in our
Churches, we should have Mr. O (I question not) soon about our Ears as Men,
that put a Slur upon the Word of God, and questioned its Divine Authority.

But Dr. L. further adds, page 542. That it was one Fundamental of the
Sadducees Faith, That no Article in Religion ought to be admitted, which cannot
be made out plainly from the Five Books of Moses. From hence it appears that
they did not believe the other Books of Scripture to be of equal Authority with
the Pentateuch, nor sufficient of themselves to establish any Doctrine of
Faith. Now whereas the Doctor argues and proves out of his Rabbis, that the
Sadducees and Samaritans used and read, and believed all the other Books, as
well as the Pentateuch, and that they were not ignorant of 'em, nor accounted
'em Tales and of no value; and again, that those Books were known to 'em, and
of Authority among 'em. All this I readily grant, for they doubtless highly
esteemed the rest of the Scripture, and ^in^d it in confirmation of any
Doctrine revealed by Moses, as we Christians do the Primitive Fathers, though
uninspir'd. I have been longer on this trivial Subject, than I intended. Only
let the Reader mark how the two Ministers are here Advocating for the
Samaritans and Sadducees, as they before undertook the Protection of the other
Jews. In good time the Dissenters will comprehend these also. Some of the
Quakers and Anabaptists, the Modern Sadducees and Mahometans I mean the
Socinians) and almost all the Nation of Schismatics and Heretics are in their
Interests already: The Samaritans and Jews are happily coming into the
Confederacy.

7. The Rector laid down this Observation also: Sermon. p. 14.
We diminish from the Word, when we lay it aside as not necessary, or not the
Supreme Rule of Faith. Pref. p. 4.
Hereunto Mr. O. answers, This implys, as if there were some other at least
subordinate Rules of Faith. We know no other Rule of Divine Faith, but the Holy
Scripture.

The Man thinks verily he has caught me now. But I am not afraid to say there
are many subordinate Rules of Faith, and do pretend here to teach him them,
because he seems to be ignorant of them. I reckon then that whatsoever confirms
or illustrates any Doctrine is a Subordinate Rule of Faith, for whatsoever does
make manifest is Light, Ephesians. 5. 13. Such are the ancient Creeds, Catechisms,
Decrees of Councils, Testimony of Fathers, Consent of Adversaries, the
Instructions of Parents, the Dictates of Wise and Good Men, the Voice of
Conscience, the Light of Natural Reason, the Preaching of the Word, the
Intimations of Providence, and lastly Universal Tradition; every one of which
when it administers Light to the Divine Truths contained in the Word of God,
are Subordinate Rules of Faith. But of all these Universal Tradition may on
very good Grounds be accounted a Rule. For I ask Mr. Owen, why he believes the
Scripture to be Divinely inspired, but because it is transmitted unto us as such
by Universal Tradition? The Excellency of its Moral Precepts, the high Strains
and noble Flights of Piety, which we meet with there renders it worthy every
good Man's Acceptance; true! but they prove not that 'twas written by
Inspiration. For then Plato and Seneca, St. Ignatius and St. Clemens Romanus,
the Seven Wise Men of Greece, (and Mr. O. may reckon himself the eighth, if he
please) and a thousand other celebrated Authors might lay claim to Inspiration.
The Miracles reported in Scripture to have been wrought by the Authors or
Divine Writers of the Books do not evince 'em to have been written by
Inspiration, until it be first made out that those Writers did work those
Miracles: and this cannot be proved at this time of day, but by Tradition. So
then it is the Universal Testimony of the Church in conjunction with that vein
of intrinsic Goodness and Piety running through all the Holy Scriptures, which
convinces us, that they were delivered by Persons inspired and authorized
thereto by God. Tradition therefore is at least a Subordinate Rule of Faith,
and confirms the Divine Authority of the Books of Scripture. Another perhaps
would affirm it the first and leading Rule. But I give Mr. O. liberty to assign
it which place he pleases. Only I ask, whether this Minister of the Gospel, who
pretends to be a Teacher of others, and a Guide of the Blind, was ever yet able
to give a solid Reason of his own Faith, and of the Hope that is in him. He can
never do it without the help of Tradition.

The Rector added under this Head some things concerning the Sufficiency,
Perspicuity and Supreme Authority of the Scripture, which this Critic (being
it seems in a better humor than ordinarily that Generation of Men are) is
pleased out of his great Condescension to declare, Are well Asserted.

But I must confess I like not the Rector one jot the better for this
Commendation, and yet wish I could in any measure return his Complement, and
let him know, that he has said any one thing well and wisely in his Remarks

Master, Mat. 22. 16.
(said those vile and Hypocritical Pharisees and Herodians) we know that thou
art true, and teach the way of God in Truth, etc. when at the same time they
had a design upon Jesus Christ to puzzle and ensnare him with a cramp Question.
So my Adversary here notwithstanding his Commendations has something against
the Rector. Some Men can never be pleased, and the Remarker is one of that
number I perceive.

Tell me (says he) is it lawful to Impose indifferent things? His words are,
Pref. p. 4.
Were this Principle practically acknowledged it would soon heal our breaches,
etc. As who should say, did we once lay aside Unscriptural Terms of Communion,
and thereby Practically acknowledge the Sufficiency, Perspicuity and Supreme
Authority of the Scriptures, all would be well in a trice, an end then would be
put to our Divisions.

Verily if this would do the feat, I would embrace it with both arms: I Would do
any thing for the purchase of so valuable a Blessing.

But how comes this wise Seer to look so far before him, as to assure us of
this good issue? the experiment has been once made already but without success.
Time was when Episcopacy was exploded, and the Unscriptural Terms of Communion
here complained of laid aside; but were our breaches soon healed? It was so far
from that, that they were not healed at all, nor ever will be upon the
Presbyterian and Congregational Principles. Our Division were increased and
multiplied, Schisms and Heresies grew to be as numerous as the Heads of Hydra.
In short, I know no way of healing our Breaches but that every Man should obey
them that have the Rule over 'em in all lawful things, q.d. which are not
forbidden by God. For why should any one presume to scruple or call that
unclean, which the Lord has not made so? They are much more superstitious who
abhor a Surplice, than they who wear it.

I lastly observed, Sermon. p. 20.
that We diminish from the Word when we add any thing to it. I mentioned the
Apocrypha which the Romanists insert into the Canon of Scripture; Pref. p. 4.
and the Minister cavils here at our reading the Apocrypha, and omitting some
confessed parts of Holy Scripture. I might with as good Reason ask him, why do
the Dissenters neglect the Reading of the Word of God to make way for their own
Sermons and Expositions? But this were to be like Mr. Owen to cover one
supposed Fault with another. I answer then,

That this Exception is nothing to my Argument; that it is not a just
Vindication of the Papists; that to read the Apocrypha is not to Canonize it;
to omit reading some parts of Scripture is not to cast 'em out of the Canon;
that in all our public Offices and Assemblies we read something of Holy
Scripture; that the Word of God has not prescribed any certain and constant
quantity to be read; that we read perhaps more Scripture in one Month, than the
Dissenters do in three. That the Story of Bell and the Dragon (wherewith the
Dissenters usually make most sport, and which Mr. O. styles fabulous) is by
many Wise Men believed true. But grant it to be a Fiction or Fable, or in more
civil and modest Terms a Parable, it is however a wise and grave one, able to
instruct and beget in us a sense of God's Providence and Protection of Holy Men
Zeal for his Glory and Hatred of Idolatry. Many think the Book of Job of this
kind a Parable. Our Lord himself spoke many great Truths, and wrapped them up
in Parables or feigned Stories, and thereby made and left stronger Impressions
upon the hearts of his Followers. The Dissenters oft-times in their Sermons
make use of Profane Stories, whose Truth is not supported by Divine Authority.
As for our leaving out some few Books or Chapters, or never reading them in our
Public Congregations, there are many good Reasons for it; particularly for our
omitting the greatest part of Leviticus, and all Solomon's Song. They have been
insisted on too often to be here needlessly repeated.

CHAP. III.
Being an Answer to Mr. Owen's first Chapter.
IN the Sermon against corrupting the Word of God, I took particular Notice of
Acts the 6th. v. 3. where, as it is found in several Impressions of our English
Bibles, We is changed into Ye, that is, the Apostles are turned out of doors,
and the People put into Possession of a Power, to which they can lay no Claim,
I observed that hence a Question might be started, Whether the People or the
Apostles did appoint the Seven unto their Office, and by consequence whether
the People or the Bishops have Authority to appoint Parochial Ministers. But
having set aside this Enquiry, I betook my self unto the Examination of this
various Lection. I first vindicated the Place, and restored it to its right
Reading; then I proceeded to search when the Corruption first stole into the
Text and found it to have happened 1638. This done I made Hue and Cry after the
Authors of it. In the pursuit I laid hold on the Dissenters, as Persons justly
to be suspected, 1. Because when this Alteration first happened Presbytery was
in the Ascendant. 2. The Corruption favors the Dissenters. 3. Is a
Disadvantage to Episcopacy then. 4. I took a Presbyterian in the manner,
supporting the Popular Government upon the Credit of this false Reading, and
thence concluded that Party guilty at least of abetting and countenancing the
Corruption. This Method I think was clear and easy, though Mr. O. has
endeavored with much Artifice to perplex it. I will not concern my self any
farther to justify my way of handling the Argument, the Business now before me
is to consider, how he would extricate his Friends. He begins in this Chapter,
and all that he here offers in Vindication of the Dissenters is, That several
Editions of the Bible abound with such Errors as are destructive of the Sense.
To evince which he has produced a Catalogue of above twenty Errata's in his own
Bible, (several of 'em as bad as that in the Acts, as he says) which it would
be unreasonable to impute unto the Dissenters. Whereunto I reply,

1. That he is so unfortunate, as whilst he is stopping one, and that the first
hole like a Bungler he makes two. Mr. O. thus represents his Amendment of Ephesians.
1. 4. According as he has chosen us -- that she should be holy: It should be
that we should be holy (...). She (says he in this first instance) should be
we; and (says the Rector) (...) should be (...) should be (...).

I am apt to suspect Mr. O. is defective somewhere, else surely he would not
have overlooked these Errata's in that Book of Remarks, which he favored me
with, and corrected with his own Pen. But because at the same time he desired
me to take no advantage of Mistakes in Printing, I Will say no more. Although if he
thought it reasonable on my part, he should have been so fair as to have
remembered the Golden Rule, Quod tibi non vis, etc. But his business is to give
Laws to others, not to observe 'em himself.

2. Though he might justly be suspected in the Account given of these Errata's;
(for he who will make bold with his own LXX, will not be very Scrupulous to
misrepresent his own English Bible) yet I will admit his Observations as to the
Number to be true Nevertheless,

3. Though such Errors reckoned up by Mr. Owen are destructive of the Sense; yet
they do not establish any untruth, nor favor any side in the Controversies now
on foot among us, neither lastly, has the diligent Mr. Owen given us one
Example of the same Error repeated in several Editions. There can then no doubt
be made, but these were accidental and unwilling slips, and the Remarkers
Observations will do him no Service. That Erratum in the 6th. Act has, as he
assures us, been continued in (at fewest) 38 Editions; it establishes a Sense
contrary to the Meaning of the Holy Ghost there, and favors a side in the
Controversy between the Dissenters and us. It is then altogether improbable (I
think) that this Erratum should be thus multiplied by chance only.

4. An Error of the Press deserves not to be taken to task, when no ill use is
made of it; but when it is improved to the advantage of a Cause, and to the
prejudice of the Truth, it is both just and necessary to take notice of it and
to expose them, who make it their own, and a wilful Error too, citing (...) in
support of their own Opinion or Practice.

It may not be improper here to speak of the Places of Scripture, Rem. chapter 4
page 20.
which the Remarker has challenged me with, as having quoted 'em wrong, and not
kept my self precisely to the very Word, and to their Order in the Texts.

1. I have not altered the Sense, neither pretended to promote any private
Opinion or design thereby.

2. This liberty is and ever has been taken by all, who allege the Holy
Scripture in their Writings and Discourses, not scrupulously tying themselves
up unto the very Words. St. Paul himself in that 3. Romans 13, etc. is guilty of
all those minute and trifling Exceptions which the Remarker has laid against
me, as may easily be seen by comparing him with the Places from whence it is
thought by my Adversaries the Apostle took his Testimony.

Mr. Owen Ex. gr. taxes me for putting the Singular instead of the Plural. St.
Paul does so, (...), whose mouth (Plural) but in the Hebrew it is his mouth,
Psalm. 10. 7. and in the Seventy, (...), whose mouth, (Sing.)

I use different words, and of somewhat different significations* So does St.
Paul, Destruction and Misery, etc. ver. 16. In the Hebrew, Wasting and
Destruction, or breaking, Isa. 59. 7.

I observe not the Scripture-order of Words; nor is St. Paul exact in this,
(...): In the Seventy, (...).

I leave out whole Words: the same is true of St. Paul, (...): Their feet are
swift to shed blood, v. 15. In Isa. 59. 7. (...), Their feet run to evil being
ready to shed (innocent) blood, almost the same in the Hebrew. Here also St.
Paul has wholly omitted what is in the Hebrew, Their thoughts are thoughts of
iniquity.

I change Words, even so St. Paul writes, (...), v. 17. for (...), Isa. 59. 8.
They have not known, instead of, They know not, in the Hebrew the Pre^er for
the Present time.

I further note, our Lord himself (or the Evangelists) and the Penmen of the
New Testament have left out Words in their Citations. The Scripture Authentic,
p. 68.
Therefore my Lord Bishop of Cork and Ross confesses, The Sacred Penmen of the
New Testament content themselves with the general sense of the Text not
following that, (the Seventy) or any other Version (not the Hebrew) that we
know of. And again, They used a Liberty, -- Not following ever the expressions
of any other known Translation, or indeed of the Original it self, the Hebrew,
etc. p. 71. For this he cites Jerome also. For instance, I read Exodus 3. 6. I am
the God of thy Father, the God of Abraham, etc. But, the God of thy Father is
left out, Mat. 22. 32. Mark 12. 26. Luke 20. 37. And it is Fathers in the
Plural, Act. 7. 32. One might produce infinite Examples of this kind. Mr.
Baxter also must come in for his share, as will afterward appear. So putid and
ridiculous a Remark is that of the Author, p. 20. Allow Men (says he) a liberty
of a literal variation from the language of the Holy Ghost, the sense and
meaning cannot be long secured. I may well be content to be corrected by Mr.
Owen, who takes upon him to reprove Jesus Christ, St. Paul and the three
Evangelists; yea, and the great Mr. Baxter also.

Having thus fully answered his Argument in this and the fourth Chapter, I must
consider one or two Ref^ections he has here cast upon us. He mentions, the
shameful scandals of some of our Clergy too notorious, etc. If it were fit to
play such a prize, I durst undertake to point out as many Scandalous dissenting
Ministers in Lancashire, as he can Clergymen.

He twits me here also (and often in the Remarks he makes himself sport) with
what I said of my self, Rem. chapter 1. p. 1.
sc. That my diligence and observation had not been a little in searching the
several Editions of the Bible, etc. Now what I proposed to my self was not to
search after all the Corruptions of this kind in the Bible, nor all the
Impressions, wherein this was to be found, much less after all the other less
material and accidental Errors of the Press. I employed my self only to
discover the first faulty Impression, whereinto this Corruption had stolen,
and the Remarker, with all his curiosity and exactness, has not been able to
outdo me. For any thing he knows, I have hit upon the right year, viz. 38. I
have no reason to be ashamed yet of my diligence and observation, though Mr. Owen
may be of his misrepresenting me so often on this score.

Mr. Owen here denies the Dissenters to have been concerned in this Corruption,
and is very angry at the suspicion cast upon 'em for their countenancing or
promoting it. My Answer here is only this, Fecit quisquam quantum voluit. They
who take the Advantage and are willing the Corruption should pass for good
among their Disciples, and (which is the Case of the Cameronian) give it
entertainment are justly taxt with the mischief done, the Receiver being always
as bad as the Thief.

CHAP. IV.
In which a Reply is made to Mr. Owen's Second Chapter.
MY first Argument (which was to bring the Dissenters under a suspicion of
contributing to this Corruption, Sermon. p. 23.
these are my words, though Mr. Owen would have his Reader believe I now
positively charge 'em with it) my first Argument (I say) is taken from the
Circumstance of time. The alteration of the Text into ye happened in the year
1638, Presbytery being then in the Ascendant, and all things in preparation and
tending toward the Subversion of Episcopacy, etc. Mr. Owen Answers,

1. Two Events may happen at the same time, R^m. p. 7.
which have no relation to one another. Right, when there is nothing else to be
alleged for confirming the suspicion grounded on the Circumstance of time,
they may then have no relation to one another. But I ever thought this a good
presumptive Argument in conjunction with others, which is the case before us,
the turbulency of the times, the sway of the Populace, and the Corruption of
this Place all looking the same way, viz. the extirpation and overthrow of
Episcopacy.

2. He asserts that I my self acknowledge the first Error was an unwilling one,
R^m. p. 7.
and cites my Epistle Dedicatory for this. Mr. Owen cannot speak Truth for his
heart. The Remarks are all of a Thread, Lies and Stories, which we shall see he
pursues unto the end. The Rector's words in the Epistle are, When an Error,
which one would have hoped was an unwilling one, is supported with another,
which must be confessed and believed a wilful one, that is, when the Presbyterian
Government, is publicly maintained by a Text of Scripture manifestly
corrupted, etc. The unwilling Error here spoken of is the Presbyterian
Government; but it is the Error in the Text, which is called a wilful one, as
any Man will at first sight discern, but one, whose business it is not only to
justify others in corrupting the Scripture, but who himself perverts his
Adversaries Words. This is his sincere affection to the Truth, and Charity to
his Neighbor. Yea, Mr. O. himself just before (page 6.) had acknowledged that
I called it a wilful Error in my Epistle Dedicatory, behold here what an
ingenuous and sincere Adversary the Rector has to do with. Ay, but p. 27, and
28. the Rector calls it an unfortunate oversight, a mere Error of the Press, an
accidental slip, an unhappy mistake. True: yet unto the two first I have added,
Sermon. p. 27.
I am willing to believe, and as we will suppose it was at first, which it was
not necessary to repeat any more. These words then show that having taken a
Presbyterian (...), in the very fact, and endeavoring to establish his own
Persuasion by this false reading of the Place, I would not any longer insist on
the former circumstantial Proofs of the first corruption, I needed 'em not: The
matter was plain and could not be denied, viz. That the Dissenters at least
have contributed to the Increase and Continuance of this Corruption, Sermon. p.
23.
(p. 23.) and setting it up for Authentic, p. 28. Hereby we see this Remarker
deals with the Sermon, as Mr. O. knows who did with the Holy Scripture, Mat. 4
6. telling our Savior, He (God) shall give his Angels charge concerning thee,
but leaving out a main part of the Text, To keep thee in all thy ways.

3. The Minister objects against the Rector, Rem. p. 7.
that He is grievously out in his Chronological History, for Presbytery was not
in the Ascendant in England Anno 1638, as he suggests.

I would not for any thing be found tripping in this part of my Argument,
especially after I have been taught this grave and edifying Lesson, O. H 's
Family-Altar.
that God is the Author of all Topography and Geography, as well as Genealogy
and Chronology. I will then try whether the Rector can be vindicated, and that
in a very few words too.

The foundation of Mr. Owen's Mistake is the Blunder he has made about the
Signification of these words, Being in the Ascendant, which he understands of
being in full Power and Authority, as if it were the same with having the
Ascendant, as the Phrase is sometimes used now a days.

But the Astronomers See Mr. Leyb. Cursus Math. p. 286.
will inform him, that the Eastern Quadrant of the Heavens is called the
Ascendant; and a Star is said to be in the Ascendant, when having past the Imum
Coeli, and being got into the Ascendant it bends its course up toward the
Medium Coeli, and the Meridian, that is to say, is ascending. Alluding hereunto
I affirmed, that in the Year 1638, Presbytery was in the Ascendant, that is,
was rising, and so it was; that Prodigious and terrible Blazing Star the
Covenant, that very Year began to appear in the British Hemisphere in Scotland,
and soon drew the Eyes (I wish I could not say the Inclinations) of a great
Part of England upon it. I will not abuse my Reader with an elaborate and
tedious Proof of this. It Is notorions, that Presbytery had then its foot in the
Stirrup, though it had not yet got into the Saddle, that is, was in the Ascendant
(or mounting) though it had not yet attained unto the Zenith or Vertical Point.
And that this was my meaning appears from the following words, When all things
were in a preparation and tended to the Subversion of Episcopacy, p. 23.

For I very well knew, and I believe scarce any Body is ignorant, that the Head
of the Noble Earl of Strafford was not yet lopt off by an unpresidented Fiction
in Law called Accumulative Treason, and which was not to be drawn into Example
for the future; that the Innocent A. B. Laud was not yet murdered, no
tolerable Evidence being produced against him; that the University of Cambridge
was not yet purged of the Episcopal Party, nor the Heads of the Colleges
turned out of their Free-holds, imprisoned, and lastly clapped under Deck with
design either to be exposed in some foreign Country, or perhaps to be sunk into
the bottom of the Sea, where they could tell no tales, as the Arrians served
some of the Trinitarians; that the Sacred Blood of the Royal Martyr was not yet
spilt by an Extraordinary Commission and Authority assumed at the instance of
the Rabble and the Red-coats. These among many others were the Pillars and
Supports of the Church; and so long as they flourished, and in some measure
kept up their Heads from sinking into the Descendant, the Presbyterians (it is
true) could not be said to have been in the Ascendant, as the Minister
ignorantly understands that Phrase.

I have repeated these old Stories to show, that it is not probable I could
imagine that Presbytery was so early, that is in 1638, elevated or set up on
the Pinnacle of the Temple, as also to cure some Men (if it may be) of that
scurvy Disease of rubbing on old Sores. They may see we want not Materials to
set them forth, and are able to lay unto their charge far more mischievous and
exorbitant Actions, than they to ours. Whatever A. B. Laud did it was in the
course of Law; but the Presbyterians Proceedings were Arbitrary, Tyrannical,
violent and illegal. Lastly, hereby the younger sort will learn what deference
the Presbyterians have heretofore paid to their Superiors, and what Charity
they had toward their Neighbors, more than other folks, and what all Ranks
and Orders of Men in this Kingdom must expect of 'em hereafter, if they once
more have the Ascendant.

All the Question that remains is, whether Presbytery was that year in the
Ascendant, as these words truly signify, that was on the rising hand in
England.

This cannot be doubted of, nor will be denied by Men of Sense, who know any
thing of the Rise of the Civil War. I will not therefore spend my time, nor
weary the Reader's Patience with the proof of it. Rem. p. 10.
Only I crave leave to consider the view of the state of Cambridge, Which (says
he) was not Presbyterian or Puritan in 1638, when and where the Corruption is
supposed to have first happened. The Sum of the Account which he received from
Mr. Fra. Tallents is, that all the Heads of the Colleges, that is Sixteen
Persons, were for the Church. I Will suppose this; yet it follows not, but that
the University (a great part of it) was then inclining to Presbytery.

Mr. Owen here talks like one, who knows not Cambridge, nor had diligence
enough to inform himself, and the Old Gentleman Mr. Tallents is (I am afraid)
past his Memory and Judgment, I will not say his integrity: I am sure he has
not given a true and exact Information of the University. For besides these
Sixteen Heads of Colleges, there are the Fellows of the several Colleges, the
Scholars of the Houses, Noblemen, Fellow-Commoners, Pensioners, and Sisars or
Servitors, In the last Printed Tables they amounted to 2500, and upwards,
taking in the Colledge-Officers and Servants.
which in all make up the number of 2000 in ordinary (I believe) besides the
said Heads of the Colleges. So that my Gentleman has reckoned without his
Host, and I am obliged to bring him to another Account.

Among these 2000 there might be, and I am sure there was a great number which
favored Presbytery, as will appear from the College of Emanuel. Six Colleges
were not long after furnished with Heads out of Emanual, which got the
nickname about this time of Pure-Emanuel, from the abundance of Puritans in
it. I my self knew very well the 'foresaid Six Heads by Face. They were Masters
of King's, Trinity, St. John's, Jesus, Clare-Hall, and Emmanuel it self. I
think I may add another of Christ's College. I spare their Names. Moreover, in
Trinity College Oxford, there are but Twelve Fellows, Ten of which were turned
out at the Purgation, and their Places all supplied by a like number from
Cambridge. It Is manifest then that a great Part of the University was not well
affected to Episcopacy. Mr. O. might do well to ask Mr. Tallents, whether he
was well affected to Episcopacy in 38 or 40. I might add that the King's and
Parliament's Armies were no sooner in the Field, but the Scholars were up in
the University, and fighting, some for the King, and some for the Parliament,
and that with various Success too.

From the whole then it may be gathered, that it was not impossible, but that
the Corruption of the 6th. of Acts might have been first contrived at Cambridge
in the Year 1638. The Ferments which the whole Nation and the University it
self were then in might give a favorable opportunity and encouragement to the
attempt; It being too frequent, and as it were natural unto most Men to adore
the Rising Sun.

The Minister has labored to prove, Rem. p. 9.
that the Reformation in Scotland was first cast into the Presbyterian
Platform. The contrary hereunto is fully proved in that learned Treatise,
Entitled, The Fundamental Charter of Presbytery examined and disproved, etc.
He means the Article in the Claim of Right, (Apr. 11. 1689.) wherein Prelacy is
asserted to be and to have been a great and insupportable grievance and trouble
unto the (Scotch) Nation, and contrary to the Inclination of the generality of
the People ever since the Reformation (they having reformed from Popery by
Presbyters) etc.

The Author of the foresaid Treatise has at large, and (if the Records to which
he appeals be true, as I think no doubt can be made of 'em) by undeniable
evidence overthrown all those Pretenses for Presbytery mentioned in that
Article. I will offer here a little out of that Book unto the Reader for a
taste, remitting him to the Treatise it self, which (if I am not mistaken) is
worth any Man's perusing: I am sure it gave me infinite Satisfaction. He tells
us then,

That there were many Prelates, who concurred in that Work, (sc. the Reformation
from Propery) as the Bishop of Galloway, and of Argyle, the Abbots of Lundoris,
of Culross, of St. Colmes-Inih, of Coldingham, of St. Mary Isle, of
Aberbrothoick, of Kilwinning, and of Newbottle; the Prior of St. Andrews, and
the Subperior. Fundament. Chart. p. 4. He further shows, that not one Martyr,
Confessor, or any that had an hand in the Reformation in the Year 1560,
declared for Presbytery or against Episcopacy, page 20. not John Knox himself,
page 21. but that Superintendency was erected by Knox, p. 35. that Knox
compiled the first Book of Discipline, Anno 1560. page 36. that in the Year
1559. the Scots being delivered from the French Slavery by the English
Assistance, subscribed to the Religious Worship and Rites of the Church of
England. [This is taken out of Buchanan, p. 714] p. 87, 88, 93. that the Scotch
Protestants used the Liturgy of the Church of England in their Public
Devotions, Anno 1557. p. 95, 96, 101. that in the fifth Head of the first Book
of Discipline established at Perth, Anno 1560, it was appointed that the Council
should nominate Superintendents, p. 113, 114. that the Superintendents had
Districts and Diocesses under them; that there were but ten or twelve designed,
for the whole Kingdom; that they collated or instituted Parish-Ministers, p.
121. that they deposed Parish Ministers, if occasion required; that the
Superintendents were to be admitted, (that is Ordained) not by the
Parish-Ministers, but the Neighboring Superintendents, p. 122. that their
Income was five times as much as that of Parish Ministers, p. 123. that they
were constant Members of General Assemblies; that all inferior Ministers were
bound to pay them Canonical Obedience, p. 125, 126. that they appointed
Diocesan Synods and Fasts, p. 131. that Appeals were made to them from Parish
Judicatures, p 132. that in the second Model at Leith, Jan. 12. 1571-72, it was
agreed the old Polity should revive, p. 185. the old Names and Titles of
Archbishops and Bishops retained, and the old Division of Diocesses take place,
p. 186. that the Reformation continued upon this bottom till 1576, by
consequence, that Prelacy was the Government of the Scotch Church from the
beginning of the Reformation for fifteen years, and not altered then but with
much difficulty and struglings, as it fellows in the Author.

But let it be supposed, That the Reformation of Scotland was first cast into
the Presbyterian Platform, it proves not that Presbytery was the first and most
ancient Government of the Kirk of Scotland, but only that at the time of
Reformation it was agreeable to the Scots Inclination. For I shall in another
Paper hereafter to be published prove, that the Church of Scotland was governed
by Bishops of old time. And therefore I am still of the Opinion, that the
Scotch Kirk put away the Wife of its Youth, I mean Episcopacy, when it reformed
from Popery, and joined it self unto an Harlot (I mean Presbytery.) It Is an odd
way for an Husband to reform his Wife by superinducing and noising her with a
strange Woman.

Ay, Rem. ibid.
but the Rector reflects upon the King, says the Remarker. This is the first
time I ever heard of a Presbyterian having any due regard unto a King's Honor,
and perhaps it will be the last, if the Commonwealth Principle gets a little
more footing amongst us. But let us examine what Truth is in the Accusation.
When the Scotch Parliament had intimated unto the King their Inclination unto
Presbytery, the King tells his Commissioner, that he believes it is so, and
therefore is willing to condescend unto their Petition; it is no Reflection on
the King (I hope) to deride the Scots Reason. The Rector himself verily
believes, that Presbytery is agreeable to the Scotch Parliament's Inclination,
but intends not thereby to reflect on himself. In short, the Scotch Parliaments
Reason for the Act, was their Inclination, but the King's was to please and
comply with them. He has been more kind unto them (I am afraid) than they
mannerly and thankful unto him.

Now whereas the Act affirms also, that the Presbyterian Government is
agreeable unto the Word of God, as well as to their Inclination; it was in my
Opinion very sawcily done of 'em. Had it not been sufficient to acquaint the
King, that Presbytery is agreeble to the Word of God, but they must needs
farther tell his Majesty, it is agreeable to their Inclination, as if they had
said, Sir, it is our mind it should be so, we must have this Point granted us,
or else, etc. Finally this Expression, Agreeable to the Word of God, is of
doubtful construction. It may imply, that in their Judgment no kind of
Church Government being in Scripture expressly established, Presbytery as well as
any other sort is agreeable, that is not contrary to the Word of God. Their
Inclination then determined their Choice, and was made the Reason of it.

Before I dismiss the Vindication of my first Argument, I must look back to an
observation of the Author's, a very wise one I will assure you before hand, and
must not be forgot. You Will find it p. 6. where (I having called the Cameronians
by the name of Circumcellians, Sermon. p. 27.
and very rightly too (as were easy to make out) he notes that the Rector
overlooks a little Rule of Grammar in rendering Circumcelliones, Circumcellians.

Mr. Owen is just as good a Grammarian, as he is an Astronomer. I know no Rule
of Grammar that I have transgrest. The Pedant would (I imagine) have it
rendered Circumcellions; for so we Englishmen are called Saxons, not Saxans.

But my Rule in rendering Latin words into English, is to follow the Custom of
my Country, and those who have gone before me as to words; and 'twas Horace's
long since, who was a better Grammarian than Mr. Owen, or his Reviser at
Manchester. He teaches me to conform my self to the usual way of speaking: --
Si volet usus, De Art Poetica.

Quem penes Arbitrium est and jus and norma loquendi.


I have heard frequently the Circumcelliones called Circumcellians in English.
I read 'em so rendered by Mr. Rogers in his first Propos. on the 12th. Article.
I find the same in Cole's English Dictionary in Octavo. He was a professed Master
of the English Tongue. But perhaps Mr. Owen may find 'em rendered Circumcellions
also. Be it so. It Is then indifferent which way we write 'em, and I hope Mr.
Owen will allow me my liberty in an indifferent thing. Lastly, the Remarker
might have attributed this little mistake to the Transcriber or Printer, if he
had so pleased. I am willing to deal so with him, when I read Cacilius instead
of Caecilius. p. 2.

My second Argument was, That the Corruption in appearance favors the
Dissenters, Ser. p. 24.
and their design against Episcopacy, that (if any) they may be suspected as
willing to have it at least continued and propagated.

The Question then here between Mr. Owen and me is, whether the Corruption
favors the Dissenters, and their Design against Episcopacy. I determine it in
the Affirmative, and prove it by giving an Account of the Church of England's
and the Dissenters Judgment and Practice.

Of the first. After a Person is nominated, chosen or presented unto a Church
or Congregation, the Bishop first ordains him (if he was not in Orders before;
if he was) then the Bishop institutes and appoints him by an Act altogether
distinct from his Ordination, as we believe was the case of the Deacons. But
though the Elders or Pastors among the Dissenters (who answer to our Bishops)
Ordain Persons unto the Ministry, yet the People or Congregation both choose and
appoint 'em, as they please and can best agree among themselves. Does not then
reading the place, ye may appoint, favor the Peoples power of heaping to
themselves their own Teachers.

The Heads of Agreement give me no Satisfaction in this Point. They lay down
this Rule: It Is ordinarily requisite, that every particular Church in the
Choice of its Minister consult the Pastors of Neighboring Congregations. But
what if the Pastors of Neighboring Congregations differ in Judgment from the
People of that particular Church? Why this is an extraordinary case, and then
it must go on the People's side, for so it is implied in that Head. To speak
freely these Heads are mere shams to make the World believe that the united
Brethren were come to some Agreement and Settlement among themselves. But those
loose words Ordinarily requisite, spoil all, and leave the People still to do
what seems good in their own Eyes* They may, if they please, ask the
Approbation of the Neighbor Pastors; and if they obtain it, well and good; but
and if they think (...), they may let it alone, or conclude contrary to their
Advice, when they believe it an extraordinary Case. And who must be Judge of
this but the People? In fine, our National, Provincial and Classical
Presbyterian Government, is fairly given up, and dwindled into Independency,
where the People domineer over their Pastor, and over one another also.

Mr. Owen argues, that the Dissenters had no necessity to corrupt this Place,
the People's Power being just before abundantly asserted in those words, Rem.
p. 11.
Look ye out among you. Here (he says) the People choose the Deacons. I answer
they chose not the seven Persons immediately into the Office designed 'em, but
only nominate, present, and commend 'em to be approved and appointed thereunto
by the Apostles. For if the People's looking out and presenting the Seven unto
the Apostles, was an effectual appointing them over the Business, why is it
afterward added, Whom we (the Apostles) may appoint over this Business, or as
the various Reading has it, (...), Whom we will appoint over this Business. Did
the Apostles appoint, after the People had before appointed 'em unto that
Business?

The Remarker would obviate this by another Device, The People (says he) chose
the Deacons, the Apostles ordained or appointed 'em so chosen, plainly
intimating the Ordaining and Appointing is the same thing.

Here is not the place to dispute this matter, thoroughly: Suppose Ordaining and
Appointing the same thing, then the People's looking out and presenting the
Seven unto the Apostles was not the appointing or establishing them in their
Office. Because the Apostles appointed them afterward. Nor were the Apostles
obliged to accept the People's choice and presentation, for then it had been
impertinent to add, Whom we may (or will) appoint. The Alteration then of the
Text into Ye mightily favors the Power of the Peoples appointing their own
Ministers.

Mr. Owen further objects that I have elsewhere granted, That the choice of the
Persons to be presented unto the Apostles was made by the People. Tentam. nov.
True. And I am of the same Opinion still, being under no necessity to alter it,
that I am sensible of. The Multitude sought out the Seven to be presented unto
the Apostles, and gave this Testimonial of them, as must be supposed, that they
were Men of honest Report, full of the Holy Ghost and of Wisdom. But still the
Apostles appointed them over the Business, and not the People. Whereas if you
read Ye then the People must be confessed to have appointed the Deacons, and
according to Mr. Owen, belike Ordained 'em too.

I might add (what would have been a sufficient Answer unto Mr. Owen's Cavil)
that the Cameronian at least thought the alteration gave some countenance to
the Presbyterians, else why did he alledg it.

But the Minister acquaints me, That the Seven Deacons were no Ministers of the
Word and Sacrament in the Judgment of the Dissenters, and the Westminster
Assembly, only Ministers of Tables, in other words, Overseers of the Poor.

I cannot help these Men's Judgments, if they do not or will not see it, it is
because there is no Light in them. I appeal to the Law and to the Testimony of
the Scripture in this and the eighth Chapters. I will not repeat the Evidence.
I only ask why do they not Ordain their Overseers of the Poor as the Apostles
did by their own confession? I can imagine no other reason, but because it is
against their inclinations, and looks like a Ceremony.

To^ conclude this Argument: The Remarker suggests, as if I were not (according
to my own Principle that is of the People's choosing their own Ministers)
rightly invested with the Rectory of Bury.

I have already accounted for this in the Pref. to Tent. nov. The Remarkers
Business is not to argue soberly, but to cavil. I advise him in the mean time
to examine his own breast, whether he obtained his former Post at Wrexham by
fair honest means: to ask himself the Question, Whether he did not betray and
by a paultry trick supplant Mr. Barnet his Predecessor and step into his Place;
whether he did not discover the Secrets of his inward Friend and Confident, who
disclosed his heart to him, as to a Confessor. I might moreover tell Mr. Owen,
that time was when the Presbyterians decreed it Lawful for a Minister to take a
Presentation from a Patron. This Conclusion was made in the Provincial Meeting
at Preston, July 6. 1647. as I find it Registered in the fifth Meeting of the
second Classis at Bury, July 22. of the same Year.

But the Case it seems is altered; they have now quitted this Principle (I
imagine) unto the Independents, who have requited them with submitting (in
ordinary) unto the laying on of the hands of the Presbytery. A Man cannot tell
where to find these People.

Herod and Pontius Pilate are at length Friends; how long 'twill continue, time
must show. I am told there are some Dissenters, or Nonconformists among 'em
already.

My third Argument was to this purpose, Ser. p. 14.
that the Episcopal Party can not be imagined to have designedly corrupted this
Place, nor to have connived at it since; for that would be to destroy, what
their Church Government seems to be built on.

Hereunto the Minister replies, That this proves nothing against the
Dissenters, who do not charge the Episcopal Party with it. But I return,

If it were designedly done, Rem. p. 11.
or at least, if it were afterward countenanced and propagated with design, as
I shall once more prove by and by, then because Mr. Owen has acquitted us, the
Dissenters must confess Guilty. And if Bishops are (as we contend) properly the
Apostles Successors, if the Deacons (as has been said) were Ministers of the
Word and Sacrament, then I am not absurd nor singular in hinting at an Argument
for Episcopacy from this Text, as others before me have done.

But because this Man of Grammar once more gives us a Cast of his Office, and
quarrels at the word Seems, which (says he) is as much as if I had contradicted
my self, and by saying Seems to be built, had confessed, it was not really built
upon it. I must again show what an unhappy Critic and Puny Grammaticaster he
is. Let him then turn to Act. 15. 28. There he will read, It seemed good to the
Holy Ghost, and unto us; and Chap. 25. 27. It seems unreasonable, etc. Was
this as good as to say, It was not good to the Holy Ghost, etc. or it was not
unreasonable to send a Prisoner to Rome and not signify the Crimes laid to his
Charge? Several other Examples of this kind I could produce out of Scripture,
and human Authors were it worth the while. I only note that Tully in an hundred
places uses videtur, when he intends to affirm. Thus Horace, Tres mihi conviva
prope dissentire videntur
Poscentes vario multum diversa palato.


Dissentire videntur pro dissentiunt, as the following words evince. Lastly,
there is not a more common way of disputing than the Opponents ushering in
their Arguments thus, Videtur quod sic. They do not thereby mean to intimate,
that what they are about to prove true is false. The Remarker then and his
Assistants have made a fearful stumble here and run their -- heads against the
Authority of Scripture and all good Authors. Nay I will confute them out of Mr.
Owen's own mouth, Pref. page 2. Which (says he, meaning our omitting to read
some Books of Scripture) seems to be a Diminishing from the Word of God, i e.
According to Mr. Owen's Criticism, is not diminishing from it; why then does he
retort it upon us as if it were?

My fourth and last Argument was deduced from the Cameronians citing this
corrupt Place in favor of the People's Power of appointing over themselves
their own Teachers and Ministers.

The Minister objects, That the Story concerns not the English Presbyterians,
that he expected I would have instanced in some English Presbyterians; who have
made use of this false Reading, that the Scotch Evidence, is but hearsay, that
it is scarce credible a Cameronian should assert a Doctrine directly contrary to
the Presbyterian Principles, that the Error of one Man ought not to be charged
upon all.

In answer to all this, I say,

1. That for the matter of Fact I think it unquestionable. It Is thus:

The Honorable Colonel Fairfax reported this Fact unto the Reverend Mr. Piggot
Vicar of Rochdale in the hearing of several Persons then present, in particular
of Mr. Rob. Mills a Shopkeeper in Rochdale, and a known Dissenter. After Mr.
P. had satisfied 'em about the true Reading of the place in the Original.

The Company then at Rochdale consulted several English Bibles, which they sent
for from private Houses, and found them corrupted in like manner; whereupon
Col. Fairfax declared, that he thought the Presbyterians had some Knavish
Design. A German Gentleman then in the Company with them pulled a Dutch
Testament of Luther's Translation out of his Pocket, wherein he read We, and
then added, he was certain the Presbyterians in Germany and in Scotland (where
he had lately been) were Knaves, and it was well if they were better in
England. Mr. Owen demanded a particular Account of this Fact; and I have given
it him. These latter Circumstance I would have buried in oblivion, had not my
adversaries importunity forced me to make 'em thus public. It Is Mr. O. they
are beholden to for it.

2. The English Presbyterians are like to bear the Burden of their Brethren in
Scotland. As they deal with us, they should be content to be dealt with
themselves. They have no color of Complaint, when they duly consider what they
have done unto us.

3. I promise him presently an Example of an English Dissenter, who has made
use of this false Reading.

4. I am apt to believe almost any thing even Contradictions of a Cameronian.
But the Comfort is, this is not one. The Cameronian pleaded not against
Ordination by the hands of the Presbyteries (as Mr. Owen like a Sophister
represents the Case); but for the Peoples appointing their own Ministers of
Tables. Therefore he read the Place Ye the People.

5. That it is no unusual thing for the Error of one Man (or a few) to be
imputed to the rest of that Party. Thus (to make use of his own instance)
Haman's Offense was revenged upon many Thousands of the Persons, and Readiness
upon Seven of his Children. And thus the Note-maker fell foul upon the whole
Body of the Episcopal Church for a supposed fault of my L. Bishop of Salisbury.

Ay, Rem. p. 13.
but the Cameronian was an Ignorant Man happily.

I had thought there were no Ignoramus's among the Presbyterians. If a Man will
believe 'em hereabouts, all their Geese are Swans. Every little Mushroom, as
soon as he first pricked up his Ears in the Pulpit, is immediately cried up as
an Angel sent from Heaven, though he sprung out of the Earth as it were, but a
few days before.

CHAP. V.
Being a Reply to Mr. Owen's Third Chapter.
THE Minister goes on and objects, That no Protestant Dissenters have ever
urged the corrupt Reading in favor of a Popular Government of the Church in
their Writings. Rem. p. 14.


It Is a bold Touch this, to be so positive in a Negative. Has he read all their
Writings? I Will give him an Example of one, who though he urged it not in Writing
or in Print, yet alleged it in a Disputation. One Mr. Jolly some while ago
(since dead) at Duckenfeild Hall produced that Text in the 6th. Act as altered
into Ye against the Reverend Mr. Ellison Rector of Ashton-under line; I have
Permission from the said Mr. Ellison to assure the World of this under his Name
and Testimony, and which he will be ready to verify any other way, that shall
be reasonably required of him.

Take another of the like kind: There is a Gentleman now living at Bolton
(ready upon demand to attest the Truth of what I here relate) who heard some
Dissenters in a Dispute about Religion cite Acts 6. as the Cameronian did. But
being told 'twas false Printed, they replied that they Reading it so in
several, and especially the Scotch Bibles, knew not but it was as true as the
other. These Dissenters were not ('it is confessed) Ministers, but doubtless had
been furnished with this Argument grounded on this false Reading by some of
their Leaders, who ought to have dealt with 'em more sincerely. It Is remarkable
here how they more especially appealed to the Scotch Bibles. I believe Mr. Owen
will be wiser, than to give us another Catalogue of the corrupted Editions in
Scotland, though he has in part promised it. I shall be beholden to him, if he will
be pleased to answer my Expectation herein, since I have not my self interest
enough among 'em to procure an Account. I hope by this time Mr. O. is in some
reasonable Measure satisfied.

The Remarker further argues, Rem. p 14.
that Had the Corruption been designed in favor of the Dissenters, it would
have been promoted, when they were uppermost. To fortify this Objection, he
has taken pains to examine the Editions of most years from 1640 to 1696, and
observes, that most of the faulty Editions happened in the Reign of King
Charles the Second, when the Bishops had the Management of the Press, that the
faulty Editions amount to Thirtyeight according to his Collection, almost equal
in number to the other, which were not corrupted. Let us now see what is to be
said unto all this.

1. I cannot tell, whether the Dissenters would have promoted the Corruption
when they were uppermost. I am sure there was no need of doing it after they
had gained their Point by another Method, that of the Sword.

By the way we never heard of altering Religion in England by Dragoons, till
the Presbyterians first obliged this Kingdom with that new Invention in the
late Civil War.

2. Though far the greater number of faulty Editions were set forth in King
Charles the Second's days, when the Dissenters were undermost, yet they may be
supposed to have promoted the Corruption even then. I never yet could learn,
but they found Means at all times to influence the Press in spite of Authority.

3. The Bishops had not in King Charles the Second's Reign the Management of
the Press. That had been a long while in the hands of Men having received it by
Patent to them and to their Assigns, who claim it as their Freehold and
Inheritance; nor can they easily be controlled in their Business. The Lawyers
in Westminster Hall will tell you as much. The Bishops have nothing to do (no
Authority) to Print, License, Order, Overlook, or to Correct the Impressions
of the Bible; but the King's Printers have the sole Power lodged in them; and
for the Errors committed in Printing are answerable to the King, or to the Law
only. 'Twas needful to set the ordinary Reader straight in this matter, because
the Remarker has so often harpt upon it, and entertained us with a great deal
of stuff, which having no Foundation of Truth betrays his Ignorance or Malice
against his Superiors, unto whom he owes more Deference.

4. It Is acknowledged by Mr. Owen, that there have been ^8. Editions faulty in
this Place, besides those in Scotland, and at Oxford of late; and besides Mr.
Clark's and Mr. Baxter's false Prints, and the same repeated in their Form of
Church Government. Who can believe an Erratum to have been thus often repeated
by Chance? Let the Minister give us an instance of any other mistake in
Printing, whereupon depends any Controversy in Religion, so frequently
committed in different Volumes, in so many Presses, by so many Printers, and in
so many distant Places, at Cambridge, Oxford, London and Edinburgh; and it
shall suffice: Till then I desire to be excused, if I continue to believe and
assert the Text to have suffered by design.

Here I must acknowledge my self beholden to the Remarker, who by the great
Pains he has taken in hunting after the corrupted Editions has strengthened my
Argument, and left no Place for his defense of the Dissenters.

To justify my self yet further against the Censures of some Men, who have
believed that the Charge, which I exhibited against the Dissenters in my
Sermon, was not sufficiently made out by such Proof or Circumstances, as might
have been expected in a thing of this nature, I shall here present the Reader
with a Parallel Case, which I find in A B. Laud's Speech in the Star Chamber.
It begins p. 64. The Puritans had in a Label accused the Prelates, That to
justify their Proceedings they (the Bishops) had forged a new Article of
Religion brought from Rome giving them full Power to alter the Doctrine and
Discipline of our Church at a Blow, and had foisted it into the Beginning of
the 20th. Article, Anno 1628. The Clause complained of is, The Church (the
Libeller expounded it the Bishops) has Power to decree Rites and Ceremonies,
and Authority in Controversies, (the Libeller said in Matters) of Faith. This
Clause is a Forgery (said the Libeller) not to be sound in the English or Latin
Articles of Edward the Sixth, or Q. Elizabeth, Ratified by Parliament.

The Archbishops Answer unto this heavy Charge is, That the aforesaid Clause
was by these Men, A. B. L's Sp. p. 67.
or at least by some of their Faction razed out of the Article to weaken the
just Power of the Church to serve their Turns; that the said Clause was in the
English Articles Printed 1612, 1605, 1593, Page 68.
and in the Latin 1563, which was the first or one of the first Copies Printed
but some few Months after the Articles were agreed on. The A. B. further
confirmed this from the Public Records in his own Office under the Hand of a
Public Notary, Page 69.
viz. that the said Clause was in the 20th. Article. What then, and where lies
the Mystery of Iniquity? why he tells us that in the year 1571, Page 70.
there were some, who refused to subscribe; that in the same Year 1571 the
Articles were Printed both in Latin and in English, Page 71.
and that this Clause was left out of both; and that this could not be done,
but by the malicious Cunning of that opposite Faction; and (for some reasons
there given) it was no hard Matter to have the Articles Printed, and this
Clause left out. The Archbishop adds out of the Records, Page 72.
that all the lower House of Convocation subscribed the Articles that very Year
1571, with the said Clause in them; and then concludes, I do here openly charge
upon that pure Sect this foul Corruption of falsifying the Articles of the
Church of England. Let them take it off, as they can.

Let then the Ingenuous Reader determine, whether I had not as good, yea the
same Reasons to impeach the Dissenters for this Corruption of Acts 6. at least
for propagating it; and whether the Archbishop's Charge laid against the
Puritans is not liable to the same or greater Objections than mine against the
Dissenters. But that is admitted as Reason in one Man's Mouth, which will not
pass from another.

But to come nearer to my present Argument. Besides the conjecture of Col. F.
and the Suspicion of the German Gent. before spoken of, which it is natural for
any Man in such Cases to discover, I further add, the Right Reverend Edward
Lord Bishop of Cork and Ross in his Treatise Entitled, Scripture Authentic,
and Faith certain, p. 18. took Notice of this Corruption of Act 6. 3. and
further says, p. 19 It Is not improbable it might be done at first with design,
and particularly of those who would establish the Peoples Power not only in
Electing, but even in Ordaining their own Ministers.

I must now take notice of some things, wherewith the Remarker has imbellish'd
this Chapter of his to give it a more agreeable Relish unto the Reader's Palate.

No Dissenters (says he) have ever urged this corrupt Reading against the
Bishops and Ceremonies. Rem. p. 14.


How came Ceremonies here to be brought in by the head and shoulders, and who
ever thought that Ye had any thing to do with the Ceremonies though we have?
These Men's Brains are so full of Ceremonies, that they fancy they see 'em in
every Book, and in every Controversy. So the Knight imagined he saw a Giant,
and prepared himself for the Combat; but it proved a Windmill; so fearful and
superstitious Men see Spirits or Hobgoblins, where ever they go.

Mr. Owen informs his Readers (the greatest part of whom will doubtless take it
for Truth) that I confidently affirm without the least proof that the Scotch
Bibles are generally faulty in this Passage, Rem. p. 16.
Ser. p. 28.

My Words there are, Having now just Reason to suspect the Scotch Bibles
generally faulty in this Passage. Mr. O. changes 'em into, Confidently affirms
without proof. Whether I have just reason or not to suspect it, is submitted to
the Judgment of the Impartial Reader; why else did the Cameronian send a great
Congregation to their Bibles, where they might find it so? but for Mr. Owen to
make the World believe, that I confidently affirmed it without proof, is an
impudent Slander not to be paralleled (I think) except in the Plea for
Scripture Ordination, and the five Disputations of Church Government and
Worship, of both which more anon.

That Mr. Owen a Minister of the Gospel (as himself says) modest Mr. Owen, who
has an Affection for Truth and Charity for his Neighbors, should in the face
of the World scandalize his Brother, and not blush nor repent of it, nor in a
private way recall and correct it (he knows my Meaning) is extraordinary. Tell
it not in Gath publish it not in Ashkelon.

I beg pardon for gathering a Flower in the Ministers Garden. I am not wont to
make so bold with him. But it is a choice one I perceive, I found it in his Plea
(p. 71.) in his Defense, (p. 72.) and we shall presently meet with it again in
these Remarks, (p. 18.) I was therefore ambitious to have it for once in my
Posie.

It Is no wonder to me that the Minister is so terribly frighted at the motion
of a fire, especially at his own door.

-- Tua Res agitur, Paries cum proximus ardet, Vcaligon. I cannot blame him then
for being concerned. If Forgeries once begin to be sacrificed unto the Flames,
the Plea may happily take fire, and receive its just Reward. But it may be it is
the Light of the Fire which offends him more than the heat. It Is natural for
such as the Minister, whose Talent it is to corrupt Authors, to love darkness
rather than light. Every one that does evil hates the light, neither comes to
the light, least his deeds should be discovered, Joh, 3. 19, 20.

But why should the Note maker be so startled at my Proposal? Time was when he
had not such an aversion unto the burning of Books. Notes on Bishop S. 4. Disc.
p. 2.
This calls to my mind how Lewis the 14th. after he had burnt many Goodly
Cities, with his Bombs, and forced the Confederates unto the same method of
annoying their Enemies, made hideous complaints of that Barbarous way of
fighting, which he would never be sensible of, till it came to his own turn.

Well! but why burn the Holy Bible for one single Corruption? Why? because an
Error which appears in Masquerade, and under the disguise of Scripture being
discovered deserves no pity being of so much the more dangerous Consequence. A
Spy, when he is taken, is always put to death, but an open Enemy is only made a
Prisoner of War.

The Concern which my Adversaries here show, least this Corruption should be
publicly executed, and their willingness to have it live still under the
Protection of the Holy Bible render it impossible for 'em to dissemble its
Parentage any longer. If we will be governed by the Judgment of Solomon, the
Bantling must belong unto them, at whose doors it has been laid. Whose else
should it be? but theirs, who palpably discover an Affection and Tenderness
toward it, and burn their own fingers rather than the Impostor should be flung
into the Fire.

CHAP. VI.
An Answer to Mr. Owen's Fourth Chapter.
THE Minister has undertaken here a Defense of Mr. Baxter, whom the Rector
charged with abusing the Scripture and leaving out the word these, Act. 15. 28.
and being accused of this long since by Dr. Hook, never attempted a Reply or
Vindication of himself.

If Mr. Baxter was capable of being excused in this Matter, yet of all Men
living Mr. Owen ought not at this time of the day to have taken upon him that
Province. He has now himself stood twelve Months and upward publicly indicted
for a like Forgery, and has not yet been able to assoil and clear himself. It
seems unreasonable that one Criminal should plead the Cause of another. Mr. B.
is not likely to be brought off by the Minister; who cannot, or has not as yet,
Luc. Epig. 1.
made any tolerable Defense of himself.

(...)
(...).
It Is impossible that a Man, who manages his own Affairs ill, should do his
Neighbors wisely.

The Minister pleads in behalf of Mr. Baxter, Rem p. 18.
that He was not at leisure nor disposed to take notice of every trifling
Accuser.

And yet the Rector had prevented this Excuse by showing, Sermon. Ep. Ded.
that Mr. Baxter had spare time enough to acquaint the World with the most
trivial and ridiculous passages of his own Life. Cunning Men are never disposed
to answer, when they see it impossible; though there be a sort of Men who will
always be meddling. Rem. p. 19.


The Minister excuses Mr. Baxter from our Lord's silence toward his Accusers
at the time of his Condemnation, Mat. 26. 63.

If Mr. Baxter had not in the whole course of his Life been continually engaged
in Controversies, and then at his death had not left us an Account of his
Performances in the History of himself, which is a perpetual Monument of his
Pride, and intemperate Heat against his Betters and Superiors; but had been
content at last to have died with the meekness of a Lamb (as our Lord did) not
opening his mouth, there had been some color for this comparison. But because
he left behind him his own Life wrote by himself in so haughty and contemptuous
a manner toward his Adversaries, which one may call his dying words, and
designed it for the Press, he cannot, with any Reason, nor in any Measure be
excused from the Silence of Jesus Christ, but will pass henceforth for an
egregious Example of self-sufficiency and a restless Disposition. Being dead he
yet speaks, and even in the Grave is carrying on the Squabbles and
Controversies, which he made a dust with, when alive.

I will not deny, but Mr. Baxter after the Text alleged has (at least in my
own Opinion) explained well enough what necessary things are there meant, and
how they became necessary. And I do allow that no indifferent things ought to
be imposed except when they are casually become in some sort necessary. But
that, which I contend for is, that our Ceremonies and our indifferent things
(at least in our own Judgments) are at this day necessary in the same sense as
some of those are, which the Apostles enjoined, Act. 15. But it is not a proper
place to dispute this Point here. Only Mr. B.'s craft deserves to be observed.
He by omitting the word these leaves an Impression upon the mind of his
Readers, that no indifferent things at all ought to be imposed on any account.
Many were unable, and others take no notice of his Explication following.

The Point which Mr. B. was arguing in the Petition for Peace, was that no
indifferent things might in any wise be imposed upon scrupulous Consciences,
which is manifestly and in the most general and unlimited Sense, the
Proposition is capable of, asserted in that Text, if you leave out the word
these, that is, the two or three things there mentioned.

Mr. B. (says Mr. Owen) when he cites the words of Scripture does it in a
different Character in Italick Letters as in that very Page, 1 Cor. 11. 19. but
Act. 15. 28. is cited in this Authors own Roman Character; and therefore he
intended not to transcribe the very Words.

Well, though there is no great matter in this, yet I have looked into the Page,
and find it quite otherwise. A Man must not trust Mr. Owen further than he sees
him. He Will be sure to deceive you if you do. He is not content to belie his
Adversary only, but he will venture hard in the defense of his Friend also. The
Words of that Text, 1 Cor. 11. 19. are cited by Mr. Baxter not in different
Italick, but in his own Roman Letters, and go before the Quotation. It Is the
following passage of Scripture, 2 Timothy 3. 2, 3. which is put into Italick
Letters, I might lastly show what Liberty Mr. B. takes seven times in this very
place, and some few that follow, in citing Scripture not verbatim, but with
some Variation, which is the heinous Crime laid to my Charge, and so dangerous
to the security of the sense and meaning of the Scripture. But it is hoped I
have sufficiently vindicated my self on that account already, and have got Mr.
Baxter now on my side against the Ministers at Osmestry and Manchester, if his
Assistance were good for any thing.

I am further informed, that Had Mr. B. cited the very words of the Text he
would have rendered them in the second Person thus: It seemed good unto the Holy
Ghost, and to us, etc. O te Bollane cerebri foelicem! What a goodly Remarker's
this! To us in the second Person? Here Mr. Owen has given us another instance
of his mighty skill in Grammar. I ever thought the Pronoun us was of the first
Person. But to make sure I took the Opinion of a little Boy of seven years old;
who confirmed me in it. These People the Remarker and the Note-maker, though they
pretend so much Deference to Superiors, yet (I perceive) have no respect unto
Persons.

But it is pleasant to consider how these Men, who pretend to be skilled in the
Hebrew Grammar and Rabbinical Criticisms, who talk at so confident a Rate of
the Masora, and of the Keri's and Cethib's, are yet to learn the first
Rudiments of all Languages, and know not the very English Accidence. Were not
the Lads too big, l'd advise 'em to go to School again, and learn it a little
better. And yet for all this there is a Mystery in the Mistake. Their
Inclinations are still toward the second Person, as some Bodies else was in
citing Act. 6. 3.

Nor shall Mr. Baxter escape so. For, as it is no small Impiety to misquote the
Scripture, so it is some Iniquity to corrupt good Authors. I am persuaded he,
who makes no Conscience of doing the latter, will make no great Scruple of the
former. Now Mr. Baxter cites and renders that Passage in Jerome's Celebrated
Epistle to Evagrius (Potentia Divitiarum and Paupertatis Humilitis vel
sublimiorem vel inferiorem Episcopum non facit) in the Affirmative; Five Disp.
p. 218.
whereas in all the Editions I have seen or can hear of, it is in the Negative
non facit, and Jerome's Argument requires it should be so. Nor could it be the
slip of Mr. B.'s Amanuensis or Printer, as any one may know, who will look into
the Design of the Author in that Place.

And now my hand's in, it may not be improper here to take the Remarker once
more to Task by demanding a Reasonable Account, why he, having in his Plea
corrupted St. Chrysostom, has not yet satisfied the World in that particular.
He has indeed endeavored it in the Defense of, etc. p. 147. but very poorly,
as I will now make to appear.

His first Excuse is, that it is but a Syllabical Mistake. And he says true,
it is no more; yet it is of such a Nature, that it quite overthrows the sense and
opinion of the Fathers, changing it from a Negative to an Affirmative
Proposition. He might every whit as well have altered that Text, wherewith he
adorns the Title Page of his Remarks, and turned the Negative Precept into a
Positive one, thus, Thou shall bear false witness against thy Neighbor, and
then have argued it is but a Syllabical Mistake. I am apt to think the latter
Syllabical mistake of the Commandment would have suited the Remarks much
better, than the true Reading, I having demonstrated that he has more than once
born false witness against the Rector.

2. He imputes the Error unto the Transcriber, and neglect of correcting it in
the Errata's

This will not pass muster, good Mr. Owen. The matter you were proving will not
bear it, as I told you long since, and you could not gain say it. For though your
Memory be never so good, and mine so bad, yet as you have relieved mine, I Will
rub up yours. You had affirmed in your Plea, Page 19.
(as I observed to you formerly) that Evangelists were extraordinary Church
Officers, such as were not Resident and fixed in one place, but past from one
City or Province to another. You endeavored to make out this first from
Eusebius, who writes, that the Evangelists (...), then you add, with whom
agrees Chrysostom, (...), etc. In English thus (according to Eusebius), Did
pass over into other Countries and Nations: And according to Chrysostom, They
did -- go up and down every where. Now St. Chrysostom says, They did not go up
and down every where. If then you had cited Chrysostom in the Negative (as you
ought) he would not have agreed with Eusebius; and so instead of confirming
your Point by this Father's Testimony, you would have confuted it. Your Design
therefore necessitated you to corrupt that Place in St. Chrysostom, that you
might confirm your Point by a second Testimony. In a word by discharging your
own fault upon the Amanuensis (or Printer) you have covered one piece of foul
play with another.

3. Mr. Owen would vindicate his Innocence by alleging, That he lay under no
Temptation of altering (...) into (...) because He needed neither Eusebius nor
Chrysostom's Testimony to confirm his Opinion. For the Acts and Epistles of
Paul make it evident.

That Is to say Mr. O. wrote a Plea for Scripture Ordination, and in this part
of his Argument, and in this Place produced not a Word of Scripture, but only
two Authorities out of the Fathers, which yet he now pretends he had no need
of; that is, he had no need of the only proofs he produced. For though now in his
Defense he tells us, that it is evinced from Scripture, yet in his Plea he not
so much as intimated any such thing. Def. p. 147
He boasts of his many Hundred Quotations: And had he no need, or did he intend
to make no use of them to what purpose then did he cite 'em? Indeed, indeed,
Friend, this is a very idle and Boyish excuse, and deserves a Rod rather than a
Confutation.

4. I will confess he has in part accounted for his leaving (...), out of
Chrysostom, having at length sound one Edition without it, though it is one of
the worst, and does him as much harm as good, for in aggravates his altering
(...) into (...) That very Edition of Donat Veron. whence he transcribed his
Testimony having this Passage of Chrysostom in the Negative.

Lastly, Def. p. 148
he contends he has Chrysostom on his side without that alteration. This I
shall hereafter examine, at present I submit it to the Judgment of the Learned,
whether this is sufficient to justify him. We sometimes pardon those that
steal for necessity, but certainly punish wanton Offenders.

It being now manifest, that Mr. Owen must have purposely corrupted St.
Chrysostom, and that he has not been able in any tolerable manner to clear
himself from this Charge, I crave leave of the Reader to let him know, what
some Dissenters have frankly owned, which is to the purpose following, That if
Mr. Owen is indeed guilty of the Crime laid against him, He is a Great As for
this broad Expression, it is none of mine, I declare it.
Rogve, they supposing (I believe) at the same time that he would certainly
aequit himself. If he has acquitted himself I am content to bear the reproach;
if not let his Peers see to it, whether they have pronounced a just Sentence
upon him, and will give him his due Title of Honor for the future.

He has no shift, that I can imagine, but fairly to plead Ignorance, and that he
knew not the difference between (...) and (...). But the mischief is, as he
cannot truly (I believe) so neither would he willingly plead Ignorance in so
small a piece of knowledge. He had much rather (I am persuaded) his Honesty
should be called into question, than his Abilities; and would choose to pass for
a Cunning R -- rather, than an innocent Ignoramus.

In short, I would advise him to be sincere for once, to acknowledge what he
cannot deny nor palliare, viz. that he was under a Temptation to corrupt St.
Chrysostom. Let not the Old Diverb affright him; I promise to absolve him,
provided he will do so no more, which is a Penance I fear he will never be
prevailed with to submit unto.

For, as I was the other day dipping in the Remarker's Tutamen Evang. or
Defense of Scripture Ordination, I chopped upon Page 124, 125. and found him thus
arguing, Where does Luke mention Paul's Preaching the Gospel in Illyricum,
which we are sure he did before his imprisonment at Rome, Romans 15. 19. Here is
a gross and designed corruption of Scripture to serve a Cause. It Is in the
Original, (...) (...), and in English, Round about unto Illyricum, as if he had
said as far as Illyricum; but not in Illyricum, as Mr. Owen aimed to prove. I
expect no other defense for this his shameless falsifying the Holy Scripture,
but that it is a Syllabical mistake, that 'twas the Transcriber's Error, that he
was under no Temptation, etc.

There are two things more which I must not pass over without some Reflections
on them before I conclude.

The first is the mighty Character the Minister has bestowed upon Mr. Baxter.
The second is his reproaching me for my natutural or Providential misfortunes.

As to the first, I observe he calls Mr. Baxter, That Great Man, p. 18. It Is a
great Scandal to Religion in my Opinion, when Men keep themselves within no
compass in the commendation of those of their own Party, representing them as
Stars of the first Magnitude in the Firmament of the Church, whereas hundreds
of 'em put together would make but a dim light like that of the Milky-way, or
of an empty Cloud; but much more, when they stretch their Praises beyond all
the Boundaries of Truth and Modesty. I meet with several instances of this kind
in the Life of Mr. N. H. One is that the said N. H. was wonderfully supported
and blessed by God, to such a degree as that he lived creditably and provided
well for his Family under very narrow circumstances; whilst his Adversary Mr.
St. having no charge but great Incomes, was scarce able to sustain himself, and
at length died in debt.

There needs nothing more to discover the malice of this Story than in a few
words to let the world know, that the Widow of the said Mr. St. is in very good
Condition to this day. I wish Mr. N. H.'s Posterity were so. This is all I
think fit to say at present on this occasion, unless I should be bold to exhort
Mr. O. H. to be a little more charitablee to his nearest Relations, who are not
in so prosperous condition.

The Note-maker (as I guess) or who ever he be that set forth the Life of Mr.
P. acquaints the World that They who were present, observed him make his
Ordination Vows and Promises with great Humility of Spirit. And again, After he
had taken his Degrees at Cambridge.

By these last words a Man would imagine that Mr. P. had attained unto the
Degree of Master at least; but I have heard it often affirmed hereabout, that he
never took any Degree at all. Mr. P. indeed before his Ordination produced a
Certificate of his taking the degree of Batchellor in Arts (as the
Class-Register informs me) and was wont always to affirm it upon occasion. But
this does not convince me, and forces me to call his Truth into question. For I
am morally certain that he never took any Degree, if the Public Register of
the University may be trusted. But what will not some Men if it may any ways
contribute to the credit of the Cause, and buoy up the reputation of the Heads
of the Party?

As for his making his Ordination-Vows and Promises with great Humility of
Spirit, I have this to say, that it is spoken at Random, yea and against pretty
good Evidence to the contrary. Is this consistent with the Forgery of the
forementioned Certificate? Besides, how can any one know another Man's Humility
of Spirit? What Man knows the things of a Man, save the Spirit of Man, which
is in him? 1 Cor. 2. 11. And although we may make charitable Conjectures of Men's
inward Dispositions from their outward Deportment; yet in the case of Mr. P.
there was less ground for this, he being naturally and at all times and in all
his Actions of a very staid, grave and demure Behavior. But that which I
insist on is, that Mr. P. just between his Ordination and Examination when the
Classis inquired into his gracious Qualifications, in which ('it is said) he gave
good satisfaction, had married a young Woman without her Parents consent, yea
against their declared mind. Himself therefore at that time stood guilty of the
breach of the Eighth Commandment. He had enticed the Woman unto the breach of
the Fifth, and engaged a young Man by Marrying them to be a partaker in both.
It can hardly enter into me, that Mr. P. was so remarkable at that time for
Humility of Spirit. I intend not hereby to lessen Mr. P. in any thing, wherein
he was justly commendable. I very well know he was afterward and in the main a
good Man, excepting always his being engaged in the Schism. For this I praise
him not, and especially because though the Writer of his Life assures us he
declared upon his Deathbed, that he repented himself not at all of his
Nonconformity (that may be true); yet I have often heard it from very good hands,
that in the year 1662, he would have conformed, had not the Gray Mare been the
better Horse.

The sum is, our Nonconformists commend one another at adventure, without
Reason, above measure, and beyond Truth, which I cannot allow of. Thus the
Remarker styles Mr. Baxter, Great; but, if Truth may be spoken, though he made
himself great and busy, yet he was but a very little Man; however far from
truly deserving that Character.

If to value and commend a Man's self to write the Minutes of his own Life, to
aggrandize his own Name and Performances, publishing in a vain glorious manner,
what pains he had taken, what Difficulties he had strugled with and surmounted,
and yet at the same time to insist on the most trifling and dirty parts of his
Actions, even how well his Physic wrought (therefore I said the Minutes of his
own Life), if such a Man can merit the Title of Great then is it justly given
to Mr. Baxter.

If to raise one's own Reputation upon the Ruin of other Men's, to trample upon
their good Name, to expose their Infirmities, and transmit 'em to Posterity, to
spare neither great nor small, neither Friend nor Foe, neither Stranger nor
Neighbor, no not Father nor Grandfather, so it may contribute something to his
own glory, if such a Man deserves the Title of Great, then is it well bestowed
on Mr. Baxter.

If to speak evil of the Rulers of the People, to be continually declaiming
against Superiors, undermining and overturning Governments, speaking evil of
Dignities, snarling at their Laws, spurning against their Commands, deriding
their Conduct, triumphing over their Misfortunes, and being never at ease, but
when he was embroiling the peace of the Nation; if such a Man may be styled
Great, let Mr. Baxter have the Honor.

If to follow the Camp, and like ravenous Birds hover about Armies, attending
the Events of Battle, and waiting for the Prey: If to have been in the heat of
a Man's Zeal forward to change, Letter to Dr. Hill, in Hyp. Vnvail'd, p. 11.
and ways of Blood, and for that Reason fearful God would not let him have an
hand in the peaceable building of his Church, nor to see it; and yet still
against the admonitions and checks of his own guilty Conscience, to be always
busy in projecting it, making a perpetual noise and eternal wrangling about
Church Government to no purpose. But, I say, if to be forward to promote War
and Bloodshed entitles a Man to be called Great, then may it be allowed Mr.
Baxter, as well as Caesar and Pompey, as Solomon and Lewis XIV.

Some doubtless will look upon this as hard measure and severe, especially when
the Great Man spoken of is gone to his Everlasting Rest. And I readily grant it
is severe enough. But why then did Mr. Baxter take the liberty to rip up the
Faults of the Ancient Fathers, Ecclesiast History.
to fling all the dirt on them, which Malice and Rage, and intemperate Zeal,
and a curious but ill-natured search into their failings and miscarriages could
furnish him with? In short my Apology for this is, Dehinc ut quiescant porro
mon^o; desinan^
Maledicere, malefacta ne noscant sua.


2. Whereas the Remarker and his Reviser, Rem. p. 21.
take the liberty to reflect upon me about my use of Spectacles, I am not
ashamed to own that Age and Distempers have at length driven me unto this very
ordinary shift. I believe they themselves have a tenderness for Life, and would
be glad to number the days of their Pilgrimage as far as I have, and be content
at last to betake 'emselves to their Spectacles. But there is no discretion,
much less Humanity, least of all Piety to reproach any Man for his Natural
Infirmities, how bold soever they make with his Morals. They might have
remembered the Story of the Prophet Elisha, 2 King. 2. 23. And though there is no
great fear of Bears tearing these Scoffers at Divine Providence, yet God has
other Means in his Power to chastise this insolent way of Remarking upon his
just and wise Administrations.

But of all Men living the Reviser at Manchester ought to have expunged this
Witticism. God has not been so liberal to him in the Perfection of these parts,
but the Rector is still able to vye with him, and can perhaps see as far into a
Millstone as he can. In retort then, I Will only present him with a Passage out
of Horace: Heus tu? Horat. l. 1. ^. 3.
Janoras re?
Cum tua pervide^ oculis mala lippus inunctis,
Cur in amicorum vitiis tam cernis acutum?
-- at tibi contra
Evenit, inquirant vitia ut tua rursus and illi.


If it be replied they meant not to meddle with my Natural Infirmities, but
glanced only at my reading my Sermons: Be it so: Even this is to despise me for
my weaknesses. What if I have not a good Memory, or not a voluble Tongue, or
not a sudden Invention, such as may enable me to discharge the Office of
Preaching off hand in so agreeable a manner, as some few can? and as, if at
all, it ought to be done? Or what if all this be an effect of the want of
Self-sufficiency and too great distrust of my self? I had rather be thought
deficient in some of these Qualities, than be admired for those Boon-graces of
Confidence and Impudence. I choose rather by the help of my Eyes with the
advantage of my Spectacles to deliver my Sermons in a set form of words readily
and roundly pronounced (as I wish more would do) than utter Ex tempore a great
deal of rambling incoherent stuff with hums and has, and vain repetitions,
which though they are pretended for the benefit of the Audience, yet are indeed
designed for the Preachers own ease, and to get time to pump for some new
matter, and what to say next. In short, I rather bestow my pains in composing
my own Sermons, as well as I can, that they may smell of the Oil and of the
Lamp according to the poor ability, which God has given me, than serve God and
my Congregation with that which cost me naught, that is to say, than Preach
other Men's Works by heart, as Mr. O. knows who did.

The CLOSE.
IT was once in my thoughts to have sum'd up the whole, that has been said, and
to set it in a plain and shorter view before the Reader; but there is no room
left for such a repetition. I only desire it may be remembered that Mr. Owen and
his Brethren having undertaken the Defense of the Dissenters charged with
countenancing and propagating the Corruption of the Word of God, have at the
same time, as far as in them lay, corrupted it. They have endeavored to cast
out of the Greek Bible a considerable Section together, with the Rector's Text,
and thrown it overboard. Mr. Owen has falsified Romans 15. 19. merely to serve a
turn. They have unfairly misrepresented the Rector every where; but they have
openly with a barefaced and unparalled confidence downright belied him in
that Passage of the Epistle Dedic. and that other of the Sermon. page 28. Whether
these Men ought to be believed in any thing they say or write, is left to the
Judgment of the Candid and Impartial Reader, what is to be thought of the
Party, when the Advocates themselves are thus plainly detected in so many
Forgeries, is not hard to determine, whether my Adversaries will have the Grace
to ask God, the Church, and the Rector pardon for these Scandals, is to be
questioned. They are too far gone and hardened in their Impiety, I am afraid.
Being plunged over head and ears in Debt they will despair of making any
satisfaction. Their Predecessors (as in the Case of the Articles of the Church
of England before spoken of in Archbishops Laud's Speech) began this Trade long
ago, and it has been their continual practice ever since, as we see at this day.

How many slanderous Reports of the Rector have within a few Months been raised
by that Party, is well known, and more still ('it is to be supposed) are upon the
Anvil. The Sin seems like Gehazis Leprosy hereditary, and threatens to cleave
to them and to their Seed after 'em for ever. But the comfort is, that as
Hypocrisy so Lying when discovered tends to the Authors greater shame and
disadvantage.

As for the Principal Matters debated in these Papers, viz. the Corruption of
Act. 6. it is referred to the Judicious Reader whether I had not Reason on my
side, when I taxed the Dissenter with the Design, at least of continuing it. It
favored the Schism, which was then hatching, and it began in a Juncture, when
all hands were at work, and no stone was left unturned to overthrow the purest
and most flourishing Church in the World: It has increased and multiplied since
in so many Impressions of the Bible, that 'twere senseless to believe it a
casual Error: It has been publicly cited in the Pulpit for Authentic and in
private Disputes urged and desended as the true Reading. What would any Man
have more to make good the Charge laid against them, and what better Evidence
can be given? except one had been sometime engaged in their Interests and in
their Counsels, which I thank God I never was, and by his Grace never will be.

I have not made it my business to provoke my Adversaries with all the keen and
tart Reflections, which offered themselves Many, and especially such as seemed
most exasperating I rejected upon second Thoughts, though his paultry Treatment
of me deserved it not at my hands. But I remembered that other saying of the
Wiseman, Prove. 26. 4. my Purpose then hereafter is entirely to lay aside this
way of controverting, and to leave Mr. O. Scolding by himself. For I perceive
by that little I have read of his Tutamen Evang. or Defense, etc. (which I
intend in due time to reply unto and to the Remainder of his Plea, etc.) that
he has there likewise pursued me, as far as his Malice and Rancor (for which I
never gave Occasion) enabled him, though very silily Godwo^, and very flatly in
Comparison with the Remarks, the Reason whereof I have hinted before. Let him
then go on and prosper: I Will give him no further diversion or trouble of this
kind. When the raging fit is over, and Mr. O. is come to himself, he will
perhaps see that his Tutamen is but like a Taylor's Bill, that after his
impertinent Excursions, his froward Reflections on the person of his Adversary,
the fulsom Commendations of himself, and the nauseous Repetition of the same
things over and over again are struck off; there will little remain, but what
may be without the Expense of much Labor easily answered.

FINIS.

