THE Post-boy robbed of his Mail: OR, THE Packet BROKE OPEN.

Consisting of Five Hundred Letters, TO Persons of several Qualities and
Conditions* WITH OBSERVATIONS Upon each LETTER.

Published by a Gentleman concerned in the FROLIC.

Licensed and Entre^, according to Order.

LONDON, Printed for John Dunton, at the Raven in the Poultry, 1692.

THE Epistle Dedicatory TO GEORGE PORTER, Esquire
Much Honored Sir,
SInce the Epidemic Villainy of the Age renders all praise suspected, it ought
to be the Care of those Authors, that are not fond of the Reputation of
Flatterers, to cull out such Patrons, as are not liable to the Censure of the
World, either for their Obscurity, or Opposite Characters to what they receive
from their Pens. This made me think of laying these Letters at your Feet,
almost as soon as it was resolved they should see light; and I am extremely
pleased to reflect I have, in my choice of your Patronage evaded those two
Rocks, that might have split me on the Ill Nature of the Town, since I am
capable of saying nothing on YOU, that can be imputed to Flattery; your Uirtues
being unknown to no Man, that can pretend to have heard, but the least, of the
best Conversations, both for Honor, and Parts; for Captain Porter, is granted
by all all to be the Soul of Conversa^ion.

Mistake me not Sir, I am not setting you up for the Pr^^^, of an Hypocritical
Holiness, with a wide Old-fashioned Coat, the hereditary Lumber of some petty
Broaker's Shop, a long Beard, Stockings hanging about your Legs, a pale meagre
Face, an out of Humor look; and the rest of the Ingredients, that gain the
Reputation of Precise Virtue from the unthinking many* No -- it is far from my
intentions thus to deboch, and pervert your Character. But when I mention your
Uirtues, I take Virtue in its genuine, and primitive Sense, in the Sense the
Old Romans took it in, before 'twas erroneously translated to signify Grimace,
Affectation, Hypocrisy, and Ill Nature; I take it for Generosity, Courage,
Wit, A^ability, and all the other Noble Qualifications that go to the making up
of the complete Character of a Gentleman; and there is none of these but has
received the Denomination of Virtue from the best of the Roman Authors; nor is
there any Man that has the Honor to be acquainted with you Sir, but knows
there can be nothing said of the just Accomplishments of a Gentleman, but what
is your due.

Were I therefore as sure of not offending your Modesty, by a Praise which every
body but your self thinks you deserve, as I am secure from the Censure of the
World in it, Desire would supply my want of Ability, and make me attempt that
which I know upon cooler thoughts I am not able to perform so as to make the
Copy come near the Original; for Praise is nothing but a solemn Repetition of
those Excellencies any one is really endowed with, and as long as we attribute
nothing else, we cannot fall into the Vice of Flattery, which is but a
Transgression of the Bounds of Truth, and giving a Man more than his due.

Praise being therefore nothing else, I can see no reason (excepting the false
Opinion a blind Custom has imposed upon us) why any Man should be displeased to
see a public Relation of those Virtues he justly thinks the Glory of both his
private, and public Actions.

I must confess, I esteem it one of the numerous Tribe of vulgar Errors of the
Age, to think a Man ought not to take pleasure in, and value himself on his
confessed Parts, and Virtues. For it is certain that things are Good, or Evil
only in reference to Pleasure, and Pain, by which the Mind judges of whatsoever
it chooses or avoids. And no Man can make choice of any particular Virtues
without being pleased with them above the rest. And by appla^ding that Choice
as good, by his Practice; he discovers the Value he sets upon, his own
Judgment, without which he could not to have made that Choice, which is a tacit
or implicit Esteem of himself, at least of the best part of him, his Mind, and
its most weighty Operations. To seem therefore to the World not to value
himself, is only a Dissimulation, the Tyranny of a modern Custom imposes on
him. Modern Custom, I say, for Pliny, Cicero, Ovid, Horace, etc. of old,
proclaimed their Opinion of their own worth without a blush, or incurring the
least disesteem of the Age they lived in; it seeming unaccountable to them that
a Man should be either afraid, or ashamed to assert himself Master of those
Virtues, without which he would be a shame to his Generation, and no better
than one of the meanest of the Vulgar. Modest Uirgil himself seems to express
his Sensibility of what he could perform, as well as the praise of Saloninus,
and Pollio in his fourth Ecclogue, Non me carminibus Vincet nec Thracius,
Orpheus
Nec Linus huic matter quamvis, at* huic pater adsit
Orphei Calliopeia, Lino Formosus Apollo.
Pan Deus Arcadia mecum si judice certet,
Pan etiam Arcadia dicat se judice victum.
Uirtue then, with a Noble assurance showed its Face wherever it was, and Uice
crept into Corners; but now the Scene is quite turned, Virtue shall lie behind
the mistaken Veil of Humility, and Modesty, whilst Vice struts about with its
bare-face, and naked Deformity, and yet like the Sister of Calibun is caressed
by the Trincalo's, and Stephano's of the Age.

But I must have a care of touching upon the Age (with which the Character
Petronius gives of his, nicely agrees, Nemo coelum* putat, nemo ju^jurandum
servat, nemo Iovem pluris facit; sed omnes Opertis oculis bona sua computant)
least it should lead me into such a Scene of Villainies, that I should forget
the glorious Subject of your Virtues, and imagine, spite of my knowledge to the
contrary, that there were not any True Honor, or Courage yet in being. And for
this reason methinks I ought to offer a Violence to your Modesty, (if what I
have said be insufficient to satisfy it) that late Posterity, when it reads
the fatal Chain, and perpetual Series of Villainies we have seen transacted (if
there be found any more of so much Honor, and Candor, to convey 'em
impartially to it) may know, that we have not been without some brave Men, who
have preserved their Honor un^ully'd, as the Springs in the Chalcedonian Seas
do their freshness in the midst of those brackish Vasts of Water.

I must at least, Sir, be particular in this; That though all the little double
dealing Tricks of Cornuted Mechanics spread their Contagion among those that
pretend very much to the Name of Gentlemen, you retain that noble Candor, that
Freedom, and Openess, and Generosity, in your Actions, that first dignified
some men with that Title above the rest; that though you know men, yet that, even
that Knowledge, is not of force enough to pervert your steadfast Principles of
Honor, and Generosity, you directing your self not by their Villainies, but by
the Dictates of those Virtues you have proposed as the Model of all your Life;
That Honor is still the same with you, and varies not its Form, or Essence, as
with other men, according as their Interest, or Passions persuade; no, you will
perish with him that has even opposed your Safety, if vicissitudes of things,
and concurring Circumstances engage your Honor in it. Few such Examples, I can
say, has any Age produced, much less Ours. I Will only add, That though like
Alcibiades (who had a good Master in Nature, and Philosophy) you have a true
Relish of Pleasure, and offer at her Shrine, being justly of opinion, that
Grace, and Nature are not at such mortal odds, as some bigoted men would fain
persuade us in Words, not Practice, yet you are not so devoted to it, as at all
to neglect either the more serious, and weighty Affairs of Life, or the Summons
of Honor, whenever that calls. What I have here said, is no more, than what
all know of you; and therefore I need not apprehend any Censure for it. But
should I touch upon all your other Excellencies, I fear I should be thought a
Flatterer, though without deserving it in the least. Besides, you have Virtues
it is not safe in this profligate Age to name.

As for the Book, Sir, I secure under the shelter of your Patronage; I shall
only say, 'twill discover the difference betwixt these Letters, prompted by the
several immediate Occurrences, that occasioned the writing of them, and those
which some Epistle-Writers have published for Examples for the World to Copy
after: Nature, and Easiness appear in the first; and Study, and awkward Pains
in the latter. It Is not to be expected there should be the same Wit, and
Language in every Letter, since the Occasions, and Writers are different: And
they are generally more remarkable for their Import, than Words, and Phrase:
But this, I hope, I may say for the Comments, that you will seldom find an
Observation wholly impertinent, or any of them without something Moral, if not
Witty. It Is true, they cannot be supposed so fine, either in their moral, or
witty part, as the Reflections of Sir Roger, in his incomparable Aesop, those
being the effect of mature, and deliberate Study, but these the Result of
extempore Thoughts.

It Is possible a very critical Reader may find some seeming Contradictions
betwixt our Observations on one Letter, and those of another; but he ought to
consider, that things, as they are differently placed, and dressed, present us
with different Idea's, as one Example may evince. Vandike (if I mistake not) or
some other eminent Painter, had a Daughter, whose Mouth rendered her whole Face
extreme homely, but drawing her Picture, he so placed her Hand, that it covered
her Mouth, by which she made a very beautiful Figure. Thus in one Posture the
same Woman was beautiful, in another really ugly: And so it is with Virtue,
Vice, and all other things, their several Positions, Dresses, and Forms give
'em a several turn, and so present us with several Reflections.

As for the Second Book of this Volume, I shall only observe, that as the
Letters are most of them, if not all, written by Foreigners, so we are not
answerable for them, nor for the Reflections on them neither, since the
performance only of a part of our Company, and they pretty well entered in good
Liquor.

I shall say no more of the Book, but let it take its Chance with the rest of
the World, if it meet but with a favorable Reception from you, Sir, to whom I
dedicate not only that, but my Self too, who am,

SIR, Your humble Servant, C. G.

The Bookseller's Advertisement to the Reader.
Courteous Reader,
HAving for the Benefit and Pleasure of the Public, thought fit to publish
these following Letters, which I had from the Hands of one of the Gentlemen
concerned in the Frolic, I thought proper to advertise these few things.

First, That the Post has too often here in England (as is evident from the
Gazette) been robbed, and it is to be wished with no worse design than these
Gentlemen did it. There have Accidents of this nature happened in other
Countries; as in Italy, as the Letters of Palavicino demonstrate; so that there
can be no doubt of the Truth of the Matter of Fact, or at least of a
Probability of that Truth.

Next, It may be wondered that in all these Ma^^s pretended to be robbed, there
should in such a time of Action be no Letters of News, or any account of the
late I^tr^agues. But I desire these Gentlemen to have patience till they see
the Second Uolume (which if this find that Encouragement from the Ingenious as
is expected, shall be published with all convenient speed) by which they will
find 'twas out of choice, not necessity that they have none in this Volume; But
in the following Volumes, the Company resolve to conceal nothing they
discovered in any of the Pacquets that may afford either Pleasure, Profit, or
Instruction.

Thirdly, If any Lady or Gentleman have any Letters sent them either from their
Lovers or ingenious Friends, a Publication of which with the Observations of
this Company will either satisfy them or gratify the Town if they please to
direct 'em to my Shop, at the Raven in the Poultrey, I Will take care to convey
them to this Club, and engage them to comply with his or her desires. And I
believe there are very few Men or Ladies who in there Lives have not met with
some Intreagues or Occurrences which may contribute to the Diversion of others
as well as themselves, whatever Letters are sent as above directed, the Company
will be very impartial in there Judgments upon them, and those Letters that are
sent in according to this Advertisement shall be marked with an Ast^rism, to
distinguish 'em from those taken from the Post.

Fourthly, In the next Volume will be an Explanation of the Letter in Figures
that is in this, one of the Company having found a Key for it, but too late to
have it inserted, the whole being printed off. In the said Volume will also be
added some Letters of a very surprising nature, and many that discover
abundance of secret Intrigues.

Fifthly, When you find any ini^ial Letters of Names, be not too forward of
saying such a one is meant; for, does not the same Letter stand for many other
Names* as well as that you suspect? Nay, where you see an initial Letter, and
the Surname at length, you cannot positively conclude it to be the person you
suppose 'twas directed to; for, may there not be hundreds both of the same
Christian and Surname, in England, that may show your mistake? But if any one
by winching shows that he is pinched, he must thank himself, and not this Club,
who thought it lay in their power to give more particular Characters of
persons, yet were as tender as could consist with their Design.

Sixthly, If any object these Letters were not really sent to the persons to
whom directed, because there is so few Letters of Business amongst 'em, it is
answered, those were not thought so diverting as others, and therefore this
Club took Copies chiefly of those that they thought were proper to entertain
the Age; but if it were either safe or convenient, they could send such
^eubters to many of the persons that received these Letters by the Post since
they copied them, for all the Letters which they found, which had an honest end
in the speed, they took care to se^d as directe^.

Seventhly, As it must not be imputed to the Company, as a Fault, that there
are several Letters that may seem to the more solid Readers a little too gay
and airy, because 'twas their business to expose Matters as they found them,
and not to model 'em according to their own Rules; so I, for the same reason,
ought to undergo no Censure for* printing them as they came to my H^ads, both
regarding the Truth of Matter of Fact, and the exposing the (secret) Villainies
of Mankind as they were, than to change them to what we desired they should be:
And upon this Condition only was the Copy delivered to me, that I should leave
out none of those Letters that the Company thought fit to publish. This
(Reader) is enough to satisfy every Unprejudiced person; and as for others, he
neither values nor fears their Censures; who subscribes himself

Thy Friend and S^rvant, John Dunton.

THE Packet Broke OPEN, In a LETTER to a Friend.
Volume I.
SIR,
I Know very well that you have often advised me against the Hurry, and
Extravagance of the Town, and I know that your Advice was the result of not
only your Friendship for me, but also of your real Sentiments, that is, of
Reason: Nay, I am extremely sensible how often you have silenced me, when I
have ventured to engage with you on this Subject, and that you proved beyond
Controversy, That the preference ought to be given to a sedate and thoughtful
Life: Yet, when I am absent from you, I know not how it comes to pass* Whether
by my forgetfulness of your Arguments, or my inclinations to converse, and
company, the force and vigor of your Reasons vanish (for The words in which
they were couched, I Am sure I still retain) which makes me flatter my desires,
that it was rather the Awe of him that spoke, than the matter of the Discourse
that perverted (for so ^ow I call it) my Opinion. Backed with these
Considerations, methinks I may own that I am relapsed from those Resolutions
you left me, and that I fancy I have some Difficulties in Dispute, which you
have not yet decided; this makes me begin to imagine, that you are in the wrong
to despise Conversation so much, since without doubt it polishes that imperfect
Model of a fine Gentleman; which Books but begin, and generally leave very
rough, and unfinished. Conversation does not only give us a better taste in
Reading, but also improves our Thoughts to a good Practicable Habit, and our
Words, and Discourse to a greater Elegance than all the stiff and laborious
Trifles of the plodding Academics; and I must tell you, Friend, that you your
self would never have been master of all that fineness of Sense, if you had not
in your Youth been much conversant with the better part of Mankind.

Nay, I must proceed farther, and own, that the lighter Sallys of Youth appear
not so criminal to me, as your nicer Reason represents them; it is true, I have
not forgot what you used to urge against them, viz. That however diverting they
might seem to those engaged in a fond Attachment to 'em, yet that their
apparent Folly rendered them not only ridiculous, but odious to the more
considering part of the World, and that it was impossible they could give real
Satisfaction and Pleasure to a reasonable Man, being commonly the effect of a
hotheaded Rashness, begot by the prevailing Fumes of the Bottle, when Reason
has bid 'em good night, and thought less Accident assumed the direction of all
their Actions. Yet my Friend, you must pardon me, if I tell you, That as Fables
of Cocks and Bulls, etc. seem but an odd sort of Divinity, or Philosophy, to
employ the Thoughts of a man of sense, which yet have always had such a
valuation with the Learned for their Morals, that it has given a Life to Aesop,
almost thrice as long as that of Methusaleh; so ^tho the Extravagances of Witty
Youth may seem but odd Lessons of Wisdom, yet I am sure there is not one
without its excellent Moral, if that be but improved by a judicious Reflection;
by this you will find, I include not the Adventures of every noisy Fop, or Bully,
but of the Youths of true Wit, of which Sir, I can say with some assurance my
conversation is composed, whose worst Extravagancies come not short of the
practical Precepts of your old Friends the Lacedaemonians, in making their
Slaves drunk for the instruction of their Youth, who by that sight could gain
but one half of the Knowledge that was required to make them understand all the
inconveniences of Drunkenness; they saw indeed what a ridiculous Figure the
poor intoxicated Wretches made, but they knew not but that it gave them a
sufficient pleasure to recompense that appearance of Folly which was often put
upon the Noblest of Actions of the Wisest of Men, they might have heard that
the Abderites thought Democritus mad, when he was employed in the search of
Nature in the ^issection of Animals, till Hyppocrates convinced them, by the
Authority of his Word, of the contrary; besides many a man would run the risque
of looking like a Fool, for an hour or two, to enjoy a Pleasure for twice the
time; especially an unexperienced pleasure, which is always magnified by
Imagination. But if they had been permitted to be drunk themselves, the Pain
and Sickness that attended it, would have instructed them, that it was none of
the most desirable of Pleasures; the other punishments that are the
consequences of this Vice, which would have detered them from it, were wanting,
that is, the spending of Estate, which brings the boon Companion to contempt
and Infamy; for the Slaves of Sparta were made drunk at the public Charge.

But not to dwell too much upon the Vindication of the worst of our Crimes, and
which we our selves condemn, and are very seldom guilty of, I will by sending
you a Relation of one of our Frolicks, convince you, that we make a better use
of our extravagances, than you do imagine; and that they proceed from choice,
not accident: For while your Virtuos^ are poring over the unaccountable Secrets
of Dame Nature, we are busy in searching into full as intricate a Subject; The
Humors, and Nature of Men, while they are conversing with Labor and Study,
with the Mineral, Vegetable, and Animal Kingdoms, our pleasure leads us in
chase of the Secrets of the Rational World: Their Studies may have the Face of
more harmless Innocence; but I Am sure, our Delights are more profitable, and
more to the purpose of Living. They are like our Travelers who ramble abroad
to see Foreign Countries, before they know any thing of their own; for your
great Naturalist will seldom arrive to any knowledge in Man, and in
Conversation, and in the Affairs of the World would merit that Name in its
worst sense. Mankind walks in a mist, and cannot be seen at a little distance;
you must keep close to it, or you loose sight on it, at least till you have got
a competent Knowledge to secure your self from the Assaults which are
continually offered to the Innocent, that is, the Ignorant part. No man almost
is what he appears to be; we are all Ianus's and have two or more Faces in all
our Actions, as well as Designs, as you will find by what I send you, which is
part of those Letters which our Club in a frolic made bold to borrow of the
Post. Perhaps you will condemn our Frolic of a fault in prying into the Secrets
of our Neighbor, and in doing them some damage in detaining those Letters from
them, which perhaps required a speedy dispatch, a minute being many times
critical and irreparable; as to the first, my Friend, I must answer you, it is
but a Vulgar Error^that makes that a Crime; for every man ought to live so as
not to be ashamed of his most secret Actions, and deserves to be exposed when
he deserts that Justice or Wisdom which he stickles so much for in the Actions
of others, without regard to them in his own. As to the second, I must inform
you, that what Letters we found of that nature that had an honest End in the
speed they required, we took care to send as directed; the others I now by
common consent make public, to save them the trouble of writing again on the
same subject, if they have not by their impatien^e prevented our Civility.

But before I present you with the Letters, it will not be altogether
undiverting to give you an account of the whole matter in the very manner it
sell out, and like a State Historian give you the Causes as well as the matter
of Fact.

You may remember the Weather was lately very wet, and transformed the Summer
into an excentric Winter, which made very much for the advantage of
H^ckney-Coach-men, and Vi^tners, obliging us to retreat to the Hospitable
Bottle, when the inclemency of the Weather had driven us from all the
Divertisments of the Season. Among others that chose to wash their in-sides
with better Liquor than Heaven washed their outsides, our Club, tho prorogued
till next Winter, made an extraordinary Sessions.

And here it will not be improper to gi^e you some Account of what Number our
Club is composed, the Muses are Nin^, and therefore we have eq^al'd that number
in the Membe^s of our So^iety, adding ^ Tenth to complete the Kingdom of Wit,
having ^^ill one as, President, or Apollo of the rest; but his Dignity, like
the rest of humane Conditions, is (...) short and transitory; for he is every
^ight succeeded by a New ^lection, for our State being jealous of her
Liberties, will allow no longer time, for fear Ambition should creep even into
our ^reasts, and so aiming at Tyranny, disturb our Repose and Tranquillity.
This is the admirable Policy of our Commonwealth, not inferior in my Opinion
to any of the mighty Republics of Old, or the ^esser busy Ones of the fresher
Date. Now have I a strange fancy, that you will not be satisfied unless you know
the Names of our Members too; and therefore I Will save you the labor, and my
self the expense of a Letter upon that Subject. These are they, Mr. Temple, Mr.
Church, Mr. Chapel, Mr. Grave, Mr. Brook, Mr. River, Mr. Fountain, Mr. Summer,
Mr. Winter, and your very humble servant Timothy Weleter. Thus in full House we
met by the same cause and occasion I have mentioned already.

But our Delight being not down right drinking, like some of those walking
Tunus of good Fellows that are never in their Kingdom, but when the Pint
Bumpers are chased about the Table without intermission, as if their Pleasures
consisted in nothing else but to see whose Cask was best hoop'd, or held most;
nor the rambling and impertinent Discourse of senseless Rakehells, and politic
Citts, when they Roar, or Chirp over a Bottle; there was a motion therefore
made concerning some Adventure, which might afford us business during this
sitting, but not yet coming to a Resolution, Mr. Chapel pulls a Letter out of
his Pocket, which he said he had just received by a mistake, as the Contents
discovered; it being sent to another of the same Name, who often frequenting
the same Coffe-house, gave occasion to the deceiving of the Porter. This other
Gentleman to whom the better belonged of right, was known to all our company,
and had in the esteem of the World the Reputation of a man of great severity of
Life, both as to Justice in his Dealings, and Chastity, which indeed his Age
would endeavor to persuade, unless the lewdness of his Mind outlived that of
his Body; but this Letter discovered him to be a Secret Sinner against both. It
was from a Young Girl of a small Fortune, who being committed to his charge by
Will, he had not only cheated her of the greatest part of it, but very
earnestly solicited her to yield her tender budding Beauties to his shrivel'd
Embraces, building his assurance of success on her Necessities, which he had
brought upon her, by depriving her of the means of redress in keeping her to so
small an Allowance, that she co^'d not procure money enough to purchase Friends,
or Justice against him. Her Parents had given her a Virtuous Education in their
lives time, or at least so well instilled good Principles into her, that they
were not easily corrupted by the importunities of this Old Man, whose seeming
Piety had gained the Tutelage of her from her deluded Parents, who it seems
were too simply good to examine farther than the outward appearance, which
sometimes in Religious Pretenders ought to be understood, like Dreams, by
contraries. The Letter I Will defer till we come to the rest, where you shall be
sure to meet with it, only I shall here give you some Reflections we made upon
it, which gave Rise to the Frolic I have mentioned.

As soon as we had perused the Letter three or four times over, that we might
be sure of what we read, Mr. Chapel* could no longer contain, but proposed to
the compan^ to relieve the distressed Damsel, that nothing could better deserve
the thoughts of true Knights of Honor, and Members of Chivalry. Whether he
were serious or no, I will not determine; but Mr. Temple was of another opinion,
assuring him the season of the Weather was not at all proper ^or Feats of Arms,
Rain being a great Enemy to Noble Achievements; for then must the Knight skulk
under a Hedge, for fear of wetting his Armor* or spoiling his Plume. Mr.
Church was of the same opinion, adding, That nothing was more agreeable to the
doing of Justice, than Fair Weather. Mr. Grav^ waving all these Jocular
Reflections, was for considering what use might be made of this Discovery for
the present advantage of the Company, which he backed with this Observation.
That the World being a Masquerade, where borrowed Vizors so disguised every one,
that none knew even his own acquaintance, if not privy to his dress; Letters
were the pulling off the Mask in a corner of the Room, to show one another
their Faces. Very well observed, said Mr. Fountain, for we are apt to write
that in a Letter to a Friend, which we would not have all the World know of,
either our Concerns, or Inclinations. Thus, said Mr. River, we find Cicero,
that in public had extolled Caesar above all the great men before his time,
making him not only the Father, but the Soul of his Coun^ry, without which it
could no longer live, yet in his Epistles to his Friend Atticus, not only rails
at him, but declares that his Royalty (as he enviously phras'd it) would not be
of half a years continuance. We need not go so far as Old Rome for a proof of
this (pursued Mr. Brook) for it is obvious enough to any man that has conversed
in the world, and given himself the trouble of diving into Affairs of this
nature, as my Friend here -- Hold -- (interrupted Mr. Summer) if my
Transgressions must be known, I had better generously declare 'em my self; you
must therefore Gentlemen, know that dining at the Mitre about a Week ago with
some grave Relations, who love to get drunk by Daylight, I had got my load by
four in the Afternoon, that is, as much as I cared to drink, or could carry off
with Honor, and without a Foil; I gave the Old Gentlemen the slip, and leaving
them to Politics, and Usury, steered my course to seek out one of you; going
down St. Martins-lane, there justles me a blundring Fellow in great haste; I
unable then to put up such an Insolence, with my trusty stick laid my Gentleman
over the Pate, who being stunned let fall his ^acquet of Letters; (for you must
know it was the Postman;) a sudden Revenge inspired me; I cap'd hold of as many
as I could, whipped into the next Coach, and made him drive away as if the Devil
were in him, to Jack Brooks Lodging, whom I found in his Study reading of
Voiture of the second Edition, I mean the Gentleman of six Foot high, as he
ingeniously intimates to a glorious Vizor-mask. Prithee Jack, said I, cast
aside this new Paradoxical Dogmatist, and here let us peruse Nature; and having
here in its proper place I informed him of this Adventure, then in comes Ned
Winter, and puts me to the fatigue of repeating it again, which done, we
applied our selves to our business, and upon occular demonstration found five
of the six Letters to be of some of our Acquaintance: But such a Discovery we
made, that it surpised us with several effects of Passion, one laughed, the
another swore, and the third preached. There were she Saints that had the Word
of God in their mouths mornings, and evenings, most religious frequenters of
Pews, and wearers out of Hassocks, found to be backsliding Sisters, and that
they had the Devil in their Tails. There was this protesting Friend, found a
damned Rascal, that sought nothing but his own advantage, with the Wife of him
he hugged in his Arms, only caressing him that he might embrace her.

For my part, Gentlemen (said I) it is not fair, you should only enjoy the
Pleasure your selves, you ought either to produce your Letters for the good of
the Company, or be particular in your Names, and account of the matter. No
'faith (returned Winter) I made the Rogues have that Justice to write a Line of
Advice under each Letter, and sealing 'em up, send 'em by the Penny Post to the
place directed.

I know not (pursued Temple) whether you will approve of my Thought or no; but I
think we cannot have a more agreeable Entertainment, than such another Frolic,
the Posts are now on the Road, let each man to his Horse; and two in a company
go upon the Adventure, and having got our purchase, meet all at the Bull-head,
and divert our selves with the Scene of Hypocrisy uncas'd.

Gentlemen, for my part (said Winter) I am not extremely fond of the Pillory,
Gallows, or a swinging Fine: Nor do I think the pleasure this Adventure may
afford us, will recompense the hazard we run to obtain it, especially since we
are not used to the Pad. I am of your side, (pursued Grave) for tho I should
not be much displeased with the perusal of them, yet I am not for giving more
for pleasure than it is worth, or for laughing for an hour, at the expense of an
Age of Sorrow.

But these two Opposers were fain to acquiesce in the Judgment of the Company;
and tho^ perhaps I might incline to the Opinion of the few, yet having a great
Veneration for the Clergy, I chose to imitate them in siding with the strongest
side. Things being thus concluded in the Affirmative, we immediately adjourned,
and in the order abovementioned, took Horse, performed our work, and met at
the place appointed: River and my self were the first that entered, and had not
tossed off our sober Pint, but Brook and Winter came in all over-bespattered
with dirt. Thus by degrees we found our Company complete, though Summer and
Temple, and Church and Chapel stayed some time after the rest. We gave order
for our Horses to be immediately rubbed down, and clothed, and thought it would
be safer to retreat to our several Lodgings, and new dress, before we proceeded
to our Examination, or an account of our Adventure, all the Pacquets being
conveyed to my Chamber, and there to be put into a great Box or two, that we
might convey 'em ^p the Water to Summer's Country House, where with the greater
liberty and security we might peruse them, and make our several Remarks.

By that time we were all ready, his Barge was waiting for us, and in it, with
our purchase we rowed for Putney against Tide, which however turned for us by
that time we got to Chelsey. And now we began to have time to run over each his
several Fortune. But the greatest part of us met with nothing worth taking
notice of, having done our work as decently, as if we had served a long
Apprentiship to the Road. But poor Winter and Brook having a little awkardly
performed, and left the Post-boy his Horse, were ^ain to make more speed than
they desired, and so through thick and thin were most neatly bedabl'd. And
Temple and Summer, not contenting themselves with the Mail that was coming in,
resolved to wait for that which was outward-bound, and had like to have spoiled
all for their Works of Supererogation; for the first Post-boy being according
to Art dismounted aside of Illford in Essex, in the Forest, they left him to
take care of himself, whose Horse was gone on his Errand before him toward
London. After this they be thought them, that every day was P^st downward on
that Road, and therefore resolved, flushed with good success, to venture to
Chadwel, and there wait the coming of the other Post; but having stayed a good
while there to no purpo^^, they boldly set forward on the Road for London; they
had not rode half a mile but they met the other Boy with two Gentlemen*
however, they ventured on them, and whilst Summer removed the Mail, T^mp^e
secured the Sparks; but one of them whilst he was busy with the other, got by
him, and made full speed back to Illford, which made them immediately strike
over into the Forest, and away crossing into Epping Road, as fast as their
Horses could bear them; but not being very perfect in the way, were opposed in
their Passage with a pretty large Ditch, which was not so deep as muddy;
Temple's Horse jumpt clear over, but Summer's Rising False came a little short,
and so tumbled into the Ditch: This scurvy Adventure, cost them above a quarter
of an hour to disengage him, and his Horse, from these ill circumstances, which
they could not very well afford at that time, not doubting but by this time the
Country were in pursuit of them. On which account being now mounted again, and
on firm ground, they redoubled their speed, and spite of two or three other
little Accidents, they got safe to the rest of us.

Chapel and Church who had taken the Kentish Road, met with no disturbance,
but came cleverly off with their Prize by a very remarkable Accident, the two
Post-Boys meeting, just as they came up to them, they did their business at
once, and so brought away both the Mails, though by riding further out of Town
than the rest, they made it something the longer before they returned to the
place of Rendezvous.

Having laughed, and run over our several Adventures, we got safe to Putney, by
twelve a Clock at night: And then being all tired enough with the Fatigue of
the day, we retired to our Beds. And get^ing up next morning very early, we
retreated into the Summer House in the middle of the Garden, and there
enclosing our selves with some Bottles of good Wine to give us a Whet betwixt
whiles; we began to open our several Pacquets, and according to Agreement, for
our better diversion, we mixed them all together on the large Stone Table there.


But before I proceed to the perusal of these, I Will give that I promised you at
the beginning of my Letter, which Mr. Chapel received by a mistake of Name: It
was superscrib'd to Mr. Chapel, to be left for him at -- s Coffee-house.

Mr. Chapel,
I Received yours yesterday by your man Ra^ph, in which I am extremely troubled
to find that you still persist in your Resolution of my undoing. But assure
your self it is not all your Threats shall make me yield to your brutish
Desires, and I question not but God will so far vindicate my Innocence and
punish your Hyppocrisy, as to raise me some Friend to rescue me from your
hands. But if you can entertain such an Opinion of my Virtue, to think I would
part with it on the terms you propose, can you imagine I would make so wretched
a choice, as to sacrifice it to the Arms of an Old Man, when Nature has given
me a Face not the most contemp^ible, and one that need not despair of more
agreeable Conquests. Pray now consult your Glass, if you forget your Age, and
there you will see what wondrous Charms there are to win a fair Ladies ^eart. For
shame, for shame, Mr. Chapel give over such vain Thoughts, and now you are
just dropping into your Grave, think not of adding to the Villainies of your
Life, by betraying that trust my poor mistaken Parents so entirely reposed in
you, as not only to wrong her of the small Fortune they left her, but also,
endeavor to rob her of her Honor. It Is not your keeping me to such hard meat
will do; for I have now a prospect of Relief, and of bringing you to your just
punishment. Your Knaveries to me have made me enquire into those things, I else
should never have thought of, which the more I do, the more I find your Guilt
increased; and the more hopes I have of satisfaction for the Injuries you have
done me. But it is not yet too late to do me Justice; restore me my Fortune,
and I promise to forget all that is past, who shall then with some color
subscribe my self, but not till then,

Your obliged Servant, M. CHALYCANE.


The poor Girl (cried Church,) writes a good sensible Letter to him, but on my
Conscience 'twoud have no more effect upon him than the last Sermon of Death
and ^udgment had. However (persu'd Grave) let us all add a little wholesome
Admonition, and it may have a bett^r Operation with him to find his Roguery
discovered, than a hundred such (...) from* her, (...) beli^ves has neither the
Power to do what she threatens, nor the ^ill to discover it to ^ third person,
that right assist her. For my part, up (...) viewing the (...), I knew it, and
therefore des^^^^ the ma^agement of that Affair my self, ass^ring them, I would
t^ke c^re to give him his just reward, if ^e persisted in his Villainy. Upon
which Chapel delivered me the Letter, and after was as good as my word, made
the Old Fornicator cry ^eccavi, and m^ke an entire restitu^ion, had the thanks
of the Lady; and I am afraid, she in return had too great a share of my heart.

But now I Will proceed to my Business in Order; we took the Letters out of the
general heap, and read 'em: In the first was,

LETTER I.
From an Atheist or Modern Wit, Laughing at all Religion. With this
superscription. To Mr. Johnson, to be left at the Post House at Chelmsford.
Dear Tom,
I Supt last night at ^ocketts with Frank, who tells me thou art grown a mere
Bigot, and is afraid he shall see thee receive the Holy Dab, and put on the
black Robe; I must confess thou have a very Canonical Face, and have been lewd
enough to commence Parson; I think thou art too honest for that Trade, which I
look upon to be the most impudent c^eat of all. Other Trades would deceive us
in things we pretend not to understand, every one in his own way, he has served
so many years to; but the Pulpit Pad would rob one of one's Reason, and impose
upon us in that which every one of common Sense is as good a Judge of, as
himself. Prithee Tom, leave off the grimaces of Devotion, I know thy Phiz so
well, that I Am sure thee must make so horrible a Figure, that it must put the
Ecclesiastical Lady of thy Parish into the twitters, and make the Parson, by
sympathy with his dear Spouse, forget his Text, and loose his serious ^ace in a
loud laughter, till the Congregation mistake the Church for a Bartlemew Booth,
and the Parson for a Jack Pudding; therefore if thou have not a mind to be
Endited as the beau^ feu of the Parish, return to good Christian drinking; a
Bottle, and a Balmy Harlot, take my word ^or't will never make thee loose the
way to Heaven, for a Man is never on higher Ropes, than when elevated with the
juice of the Grape, and the Embraces of a pretty smooth Darling obedient Wench.
I always thought thee had too much reason to be bubbl'd out of the certain
Sweets of this Life, for the uncertain airy, visionary whims of the next*
Nature should be the best guide, it was once so I am sure, according to these
devotes, and that directs us to pleasure, and self preservation; I know not why
that should be of less Authority with us than with the Patriarchs of old; Noah
was not condemned for d^inking, nor Judah for Whoring, nor can I understand,
that this improvement of our Nature, by obligeing us to ^e what we are not
made, has at all increased the number of the Pious, it has only added to the
Kindom of Hypocrisy. How can thee with patience hear the Parson declaim with
a thundering Voice on a Sunday morning against Drunkenness, when he has scarce
recovered the Saturday Nights Debo^h of half a dozen Bottles for his share; or
against Usury and Oppression, when he has squabl'd with his poor Parishioner
the under Ale-Draper of the Village, for the Tithe Pigg, nay and tenth Egg too:
Against Whoring, and incontinency, when he came seeking from his Amorous
Spouse, or perchance from his Neighbors Wife, that hears all he says against
Adultery, as if it were an Alegory; to me there seems no greater Argument of
the Imposture of Religion, than to see those that te^ch it us, use God on the
Sundays with so familar a C^mpellation, when they have acted against all his
Precepts the whole Week about; for if they believed any thing of him, certainly
they never durst presume to banter him so in the face of a full Assembly, the
greatest part of which perhaps knows their Life and Conversation. Pox, you know
I hate such a long Letter, but I hate mo^e to loose the acquai^tance of an
honest fellow that knows the relish of Vice; as well as any Man alive. I^ll
tell thee one or two things, which I hope will engage thy Curiosity to come to
To^n -- there is latel^ a Prize of French Wine taken, which I know where to
carry thee to the drinking of, and next -- Mrs. Britain has got a s^t of new
Face^, Plump, Beautiful, and fresh as a Rose in June, as soon as the Sun has
ki^s'd the Dew from it, therefore if thou intendest to h^ve thy share of
either, take Post, leave thy ill shaped gravity behind thee, and a^^ume the old
Jovial Humor, and then fly to thy Friend and

Humble Servant, R. Wilson.


We all confessed there was something glitt^ring, and taking in this Letter,
that it was writ with a free air, and some Sparkles of a good Genius, but said
Mr. Grave, I am of opinion that Wit consists no more in rediculing the Clergy,
and laughing at Religion; thus Religion does in a starched Face, a forced Gogle
at Church, a Tone through the Nose, and perpetual ^^^zing of every Company with
the Mysteries of Faith, or a Map of the Kindom of the Devil. Methinks, (persued
Mr. Winter) if he had been a Man of true Reason that had writ it, he would not
have inclined to the weaker side, even according to the stress of his own
Argument; for all his Letter seems to aim at the establishing the uncertainty
of Religious affairs, but takes it for granted, there is a greater certainty in
the course he Follows, though without Proof, therefore for all he has said what
he prefers is fully as uncertain as the other, and Reason obliges her followers
in things equally uncertain to lean to the safer side, now it is agreed even by
them, that if this which Religion commands and teaches, should be true, they
^re in none of the most pleasant conditions; if not, they can only say, 't^s an
Error of less fatal consequence, and that is, the loss of such Pleasures, which
have generally a pain, Repentance and Punishment that attends them. An Atheist,
I mean such as pass for such (said Fountain) is so far from being a Man of
Sense, that he is a mere Idiot, for either he believes a God, or he does not,
if he do, he must be something more than foolish to imagine that God has no
Worship, and if he have a Worship, it may be that which he Ridicules for all
that he knows, and therefore not to be ridiculed by him, without the highest
madness in the World, for if running against the Mouth of a Cannon when it is
let off, merit that Name, much more does that of giving fire to the wrath of
God, which must be pointed against his own Bosom with greater certainty of
Death, and less probability of Escape than the other.

But if he believe there is no God, he is still more out of his Wits, for by
what means does he imagine this World he loves and enjoys, came to be made? If
by another Being, that must be God, if from it self it must be Eternal, which
is impossible; for that which is subject to change, will in time decay, and
that which has Generation must have Corruption: If by chance, What is this
chance? Is it a Spirit, a body, or nothing but an empty Word, or Notion? If it
be a Spirit, it must have the Attributes of a D^ity, and consequently the
Worship. If a Body, they would do well to show us the place of its ^bode, and
its dimensions, which (...) capable of working such a g^^at Work; i^ nothing,
out of nothing, nothing is made, and by nothing, nothing can be made; but it
would be endless to run through all that might be said on this Subject,
especially since I am convinced, there is no Man living that does not really
believe a Deity, Theodorus one of the first that set u^ for an (...), convinced
us at his death, he had only endeavored not to believe one, and the same may
be said of (...) others of that Principle, they will once betray themselves to
have been the most fo^^ish of Hypocrites, in pretending to be greater Devotes
to the Devil than they really were.

Nay (said River) he is not a Man of Honor, for he turns the Sword that is
presented him on the breast of him that gave it, and that only for the benefit
received; we call him a Rascal that speaks ill of his Bene^actor behind his
Back, but he is something more that shall affront him to his face, and that
without any cause.

More than that (pursued Brook) he is a Coward too, and the most foolish of
Cowards, who' knows he dare not justify his Actions, and yet shall when he
thinks himself secure, abuse the Being he trembles at the thought of. I know
not (said Summer) but I confess, I think it more Wit, and Reason not to be
saw^y with Divinity, since it is worse than jesting with edge Tools. The Wit
indeed, (pursued Mr. Church) is like that of a Lampooner of Kings, or the
ingenuity of a Clipper, and Coiner, Pillory and Death are all their Rewards; I
love not an unprofitable danger, nor do I believe in other Matters, Courage
consists in Picking of Quarrels, or being in every ^roil, to convince the Town,
I Am so great a Coxcomb, I care not a fig for my Life, though I know not the
Consequence of my Death, that is in plain English, that I am an inconsidering
thoughtless Animal. Nay it is a greater madness (continued Mr. Temple) for here
the best Swords Man will make little advantage of his Art, since he fences with
an Almighty, whose word is death and Life. His F^ncing might preserve him (said
Mr. Chapel) in his causeless Rancounters, but -- a Clap of Thunder will drown
all his Bullying Oaths, and crush him in a moment. For my part (concluded I) I
am of opinion if th^se sort of Prophan^sses are indications of Wit, every ^ool
may be so at the expense of God Almighty, and I think this Letter like the rest
of the Discourses of this Nature, is beholding to a little pert jingle of
Words, flashy, and positive Assertions, with a ramb^ing kind of Mirth to make
the insipidness, and sterility of the Reason pass; in this Letter he seems to
aim at Self Preservation, and yet takes the sure Path to destruction, in Body,
Soul, and Estate.

LETTER II.
From a surely Misanthrope, who speaks ill of all Mankind, and of every thing,
'twas directed thus, To Mr. Hawks at Mr. Smith's House near Rye, Kent.
DICK,
I Writ to thee last Post to get all things in order against my coming down,
that I might have some ease at home, who have met with none here in this damned
Town, which is so thwack'd with Follies, that it is enough to make one out of
love with Mankind* I cannot stir along the Streets but I meet with a hundred
things that give me a great deal of disturbance; here one recommends this Book
to me to read, though the Sott never read farther then the Title Page, praising
it upon trust, because a Block-head of his own acquaintance is the Author;
another will needs have me divert my self with that Play, though he never
understood the difference betwixt Ben. Johnson and Fiecknoe; a third to appear
a Scholar, prefers this System of Philosophy to my study, though the Ignorant
Booby never read one syllable of ^ogie. I meet with one, and he pulls his Hat
off to me to the ground, though I never saw ^im but once in a Coffee-house, and
then he only (...) me what it was a Clock, another Cries he is (...) humble
Servant, when I Am sure the Rogue (...) not lend me six pence; a third would
needs borrow a Guinea of me, as if I had been his Friend, or he mine: One asks
me to go to this Tavern, and swears there is incomparable Wine, though he knows my
Palate no more than my Religion; another would hawl me to that Farce though he
knows no^ whether I have mirth enough to endure a good Comedy; a third would
drag me into this Bawdy House, (though one cannot lodge out of one in London) and
vows there is the prettyest Rogue in the World, when she is a damned rotten
pockify'd ^ho^e, with a Tauney face daubed over thicker with Paint than her
skeleton Care^^ss with Flesh, with a flat African Nose, a Wide Mouth, a Piggs
Eye, and a stinking Breath. This old gouty Fellow will needs have me to this
Church, because such a Doctor holds forth without consulting my Opinion, or the
pre^ent state of my Devotion, which, for all that he knows, is not enough to
keep me awake till prayer's done, and from S^oring in the face and to the
Scandal of the whole Congregation. Thus I Am plagued if I stir out, and at my
Lodging I have nothing to do but to Eat, Sleep, and Read, the first I want
Stomach to, because I want my Country Recreation to divert me and to prepare my
Appetite; the second the rattling, and perpetual hurry of the Town deny me; and
the third is almost as bad, for I Am obliged to read nothing but Latin, so that
if I were to stay here long, I should forget my Mother Tongue, in which there
is nothing writ now, but Farces, Mercuries, Iournals, Observators, and Gazets,
except the Plain dealer, and that Play I don^t like because Manly's such a Fool
to believe any Man his Friend; for I trust no man, nor believe any one, but
such as I know will sin against their Interest, to lie, or betray me; I make
none my Friends but such as thee, who have a dependence on me, and who lose
their lively-hoods by being Fools and Rascals; being thus therefore Fatigued
abroad, and tired at home, I Am resolved for the Country by the next Week.
Deliver the enclosed to Mrs. Widall, with all the privacy you can;

Your kind Master, J. SMITH.


The Enclosed.
Madam,
I Met your Husband in Town yesterday, with whom I drank two Bottles of Wine,
and made him drunk; in his Liquor he was wondrous kind (as indeed he is always
to me) and told me, he intended to stay this month here; this has made me
resolve to hasten my Journey to you, that we may all that while enjoy an
uninterrupted course of Love, and Joys, which you can best give, and I receive;
who am Madam, your humble Servant,

I. SMITH.


I find, (said Temple,) tho he be so severe upon the Men, he has a
Fellow-feeling for the Fair Sex; ^y for one of the Country (said Winter) for
you find he abhors a Town-Whore: that is because it is a simple sin here (pursued
Chapel) and he is for dealing in Adultery; his Neighbors Wife has more Charms
in her awkard Garb, and her thousand Impertinenc^es, merely for that cause,
than a young Wellbred, and well dressed For^icatress here in Town. He sets up I
find, for a hater of the Follies of the World (continued Grave) like a great
many others, and discovers himself guilty of the greatest; first of ignorance
of himself, else he might find so much of Fool within, not to be so severe on
the rest of the World, which is f^lly as Ridiculous as the Boy in the Fable,
that laughed at the decrepidness of Old Age, without considering himself must
come to the same, if he lived to be old; it is but a mark of unaccountable
Ill Nature, to condemn those Fooleries, whose generality gives one reason to
imagine that there is something of necessity in them. The wisest Men of this
World abound with Follies enough, he therefore that is learned in himself, will
have but little reason to laugh at another. Besides this Gentleman has the
least reason to dislike the rest of the World of any Man; because he is so
plentifully furnished himself. First, he ought not to condemn any one for want
of sincerity, since he cajoles the Man he abuses, which is the basest of
Treacheries, which Ovid in the first Book of his Art of Love, condemns in this
Dis^ick.

Tuta frequensque via est per Amici fallere nomen.
Tuta frequensque licet sit via, Crimen habet.
A Friend by specious Friendship to betray,
Is both a safe, and Common way;
Let it be safe, and common still for me,
I no're will thrive by Treachery.
Nay, it discovers less wit in cheating one that con^ides in us, than in
overreaching an Enemy, as is well observed in this Dis^ick.

Fallere difficile est Inimic^m, Amicus amicu^^
Fat^ere non Magno, Cyrne, labor potest.
It Is a Difficult thing to deceive an Enemy, but for a Friend to deceive a
Friend is no such mighty matter. Next, he has no great share of Morality in
injuring his Neighbor in the most irreparable way in which he wrongs those
that are not born, by palming a spurious Issue of his own upon the Estate, and
Family of another. Nor is his Wisdom very great, to trust a Servant in an
Intrigue he would have secret, who upon leaving him, with disgust may discover
all; thus instead of avoiding that common abuse of a Friend, he makes his
Servant his Master. Thus when we set up for singularity instead of flying from
common Follies, we add only greater to the Number we had before; Old Acasto in
the Orphan said very well of these Sparks, avoid the Man that is singular, his
Brains unsound, his Spleen o're-weighs his Wit. Thou have made it evident (said
Church) honest Grave, how easy it is to find fault, when thou have already
discovered so many in this Man, that sets up I suppose for a Pattern to the
rest of the World, for so he ought to be that can relish nothing but himself;
or rather (replied Brook) how open does he lie to Censure that gives himself
the liberty of censuring all others. Nay, he lays himself the more open
(continued River) by making all mankind his Enemies, as he has declared himself
theirs, who else perhaps had let his Follies pass in the heap. A great many
that I know (said Fountain) believe it a great demonstration of Wit to find
fault; and I remember, reading a Book writ by one that professes himself a
severe Critic on others, I found not a few Absurdities in his performance, but
the Bookseller instructed by Interest, and zealous for his property, condemned
me of Ignorance in finding fault with that, which was approved by Mr. such a
one, whom nothing could please, taking that for an infallible sign of the
goodness of his Copy, which I took for just the contrary, for those that are so
difficult to be pleased, commonly admire the most silly trifles of all, as most
agreeable to their own Genius, as has appeared, whenever they have ventured to
give the World a view of their Performances. This dislike of every one else
(concluded I) discovers a great deal of vanity, and self-esteem, which is the
height of folly, according to that Maxim of Seneca, he that thinks himself at
the top of the Hill of Wisdom, is indeed in the Abyss of Folly, and he that is
the wisest, knows how little cause any man has to value himself upon his own
particular Qualifications. And whereas this Gentleman admires the Plain-dealer
so much, because he imitates his Character so ill, I profess, I more admire the
good affable Humor of the Author of it, who, tho he has so much Wit, never
calls any man's performances dull.

LETTER III.
From a mighty affecter of Similes to his Mistress, 'Twas directed to Mrs. Mary
Reding at my Lady -- s House near St. James's, London.
Thou more Charming than Fame,
YOu may as soon think to make a Spaniel not sawn upon you by kicking him, a
Bully not truckle to you by thrashing him, or a Fool not caress you for
exposing him, as me not to admire you for scorning me, and admiring you, adore
you, and adoring you, love you, as much beyond measure, as a Giants Coat is for
a Pigmy; a large Benefice for an ignorant Blockhead; a good round Pension for
an Informer; a general Applause for a damned dull Farce; a Judges Robe for a
Knavish Pettifogger; a Title of Honor for an A^satian spunger; or a Generals
Commission for a Page that was scarce ever a mile from his Ladies back-stairs.
For I can no more refrain loving you with more ardor than a Quaker holds forth;
or a Shopkeeper puts off his worst Wares for his best, or a Parson preaches
against the sin he would Monopolize, than a Green Sickness Girl Chalk and
Otmeal; a damned Jilt a free-bleeding Cully; a Usurer a young Heir apparent; or
the Clergy Plurali^ies. Nor would I have you conjecture, by my Faith, that I
shall prove a lazy Lover, for assure your self I Will be as gamesome as a
Sparrow; as Amorous as an Indian Bore (and that without the help of
Cantharides, or an old letcher in a flogging Bawdy House. I Will be as playfull
as a Kiten, or my Ladies young Lap-dog, or pretty Misses in the Nursery, or --
or -- or -- or -- By my faith, now I think on it, I Will tell you a story. You
must know that it was once the custom among the Matrons of Antiquity, as often
as they spied a Candle in a Chimny Corner, to say, God give us light
everlasting, among the rest there happened a venerable old Gentlewoman of a
certain Village to come into her Neighbors House, and spying a brave roasting
fire, Nose high (the No^turnal elu^ubrations of the good man of the House) that
she might not be thought to ^all short of the exemplar piety of the rest of her
Acquaintance, cried out, God send us fire everlasting. Now, that I may save you
the labor of guessing, I Will tell you the meaning of it my self, therefore thou
must know thou more charming than a Simile, more diverting than a Hecatomb of
pretty Stories, and sweeter than my own style. You must know, I say, thou Lilly
of the Valleys, (and oh that I was in the Valley of thy Lillies, but thereby
hangs a Tale) you must understand, I say once more my Phillis, my Amarillis, my
Dido, my Andro^ache, my Cleopatra, you must know, I say finally, and understand
and conceive, that I wish we may have fire Everlasting, I mean the fire of
Love. But to conclude where I would have no end, I subscribe my self thy very
Faithful humble Servant, Richard Maise.

We were all pleased with the extravagance of the humor (though none of us knew
at what the Letter aimed. This is the product of some unfledged Student (said
I) of the Universities, or Inns of Court, or some raw callow Citt (said River)
who not content with being a proficient in his Trade, sets up for a singularity
of Wit. I rather think (pursued Chapel) it is some young Author, who is more in
love with himself than his Mistress, and therefore thinks the highest
complement he can make her, is to tell her, she^s sweeter than his own Style.
Let him be what he will I am sure (said Grave) he is a Coxcomb, if he could pen
that Letter with any Opinion of a serious performance, and if he have no more
judgment in his works, he is but a meet simile Monger at best, and his Wit lies
in a Habit, and Jingle, without any design. Oh (said Fountain) there are
abundance of our modern Authors, who labor with Mr. Bays's Distemper of
forgetting the Plott or design of what they write. And yet (said Temple) their
idle productions shall ^ell among the best! But with the same ^ate (pursued
Church) with some of the French Scriblers mentioned by Boileau, who, though they
were mightily admired and bought up at first, yet they have lived to see
themselves, and their Works forgot. This Letter (said Brook) shows that the
force of Affectation draws a Veil before the Judgment, which else would govern
Fancy according to Sense, and Reason. True (said Summer) Similes indeed, as Mr.
Dryden observes, are the products of a Luxuriant Fancy, but this Author seems
like Weeds, to be wholly overrun with it. This is the more pardouable
Affectation (concluded Winter) because the shorter, but some will continue the
extravagance to the extent of a Volume, without any satisfaction to the mind of
the Reader, who can never be content with a mere laughter at folly ^or so long
a time.


LETTER IV.
From a young Son of the Muses at the University, with Verses of his own
Production, according to the Method laid down in a Book, entitled, Letters and
Poems, am^^ous and gallant, 'twas thus directed. To the Ingenious Author of the
Gentleman's Iournal, to be left for him at the Latin Coffee-House in Ave Mary
Lane, London, with great care and speed.
Most Ingenious Sir,
Among the great number of your Admirers of both Sexes, and Universities, which
urely are the most able Judges of Wit, as Mr. Langbain very well observes, I
have the extreme vanity to boast my self the greatest. You present us every
Month with so much variety of Wit, that as the design was admirable, so the
performance appears not at all to come short of it. Not that I think my
judgment in your favor will make you vain, for a Man of so much sense can
never be infected with so signal an oversight. though without Arrogance, I can
say my opinion is not despised by the most topping Wits, not only of our
College, but also of the whole University; the trifles I have attempted, have
pleased here much beyond their desert, which makes me presume to offer some of
the best of my endeavors to you, and shall be extravagantly proud, if they
receive so favorable a judgment from you, as to be admitted into your Journal.
My modesty has made me defer sending them till now, but some particular reasons
prevailing over that Virtue (which indeed is my fault) I have, after a severe
perusal sent them to you, and though I cannot see any great Errors in them, yet
since it is possible I may be thought too fond, and indulgent a Father of my own
Offspring, I entirely submit it to your Judgment, and Correction, which I have
some hopes will do me justice; I have therefore enclosed in this Letter, two
Riddles, (which sort of Enigmatick writing as it pleases the witty part of this
Age, so I admire it above all but Love Verses) and a copy of love Verses which
I have composed according to the Rules and Examples of that extraordinary
Author, commended so much by an unknown hand in one of your Journals. And I
must be bold to testify the good effects of his Precepts in me; for often
reading Waller and Cowley, and still attempting an imitation of them, I proved
continually successless; I Am sure I was really in Love, and yet I could not
think as they did, which made me conclude (especially when I had seen this
incomparable Book, which I think the finest thing that has been published in
our Language, as a great Judge and Critic observed at the Booksellers Shop)
that these thoughts could not be really the effects of Love, since the same
cause must have the same effect; and if I durst say it without the imputation
of vanity. I should think this discovery made by this Author, was in the very
some manne^; this I should not presume to say, if I had not found an extreme
Sympathy betwixt our Judgments; I have taken care to avoid similes, conceits,
and shining (...), which I did with the more ease, because they are not
obtained without difficulty. Ill begin with my Riddles, which according to the
Nature of the thing, I have couched in a familiar phrase, though I leave it to
your improvement, who am your most

Humble Servant, J. B.
Coll. Magd. Oxon. June, 1692.

The RIDDLE.
RIddle my Riddle, my ree,
And tell me what my Riddle shall be;
Long white and slender,
Tickles Maids where they are tender;
Lies where Hair grows,
And has long slit under the Nose.
Second RIDLE.
COme up, come over, come under,
I Will make thee believe I Will kill thee;
I Will put that that is thine
Into mine,
And make thy Tail waggle behind thee.
I Will inform you what these two Riddles mean; for though they seem a little
Roguish, the first is only a Bodkin, and the second the Milking of a Cow.

An ELEGY on the Power of a Fiddle, to his Mistress,
In imitation of the fourth Copy of Verses in a Book called, Letters, and
Poems, Amarous and Gallant.
WHile those bright Eyes what e're they please can wh^^dle,
Nothing should make them twinkle but a Fiddle;
What Youth so bold the Conquest e're to think of?
Though to your Health he durst whole Gallons drink off.
What Wealth so great to purchase such soft Bubbies?
Sices are dirt, Georges themselves but Boobys.
To none but Fiddle, that Privilege Oh grant,
Which can return your Love, with a Corant:
Riches and Titles after Life cannot tarry,
Nay, even in Life alone, cannot make you merry.
Fiddle can give you Mirth, it is Sorrows salve too,
And after Death can play you to the Grave too;
Embalmed with Fiddle within your Amber Tombstone,
You Will last immortal Mummy till a day of Doom's come.
Fiddlers (like Conju^ers in a Lapland Cell,
Restrained by nothing but their mighty Will.)
Can here make Ladies frisk, there dance a Iigg,
And as they please, make each a whirly Gigg.
In vain sage Rats, in that same German Villag^,
Skulk into holes with Bread, and Cheese, their Pillage.
If fell Crowdero with his treacherous Fiddle,
Can make them all like Fools dance into the middle,
Of murdering Pond, and punish those that did Ill.
I thought good to add this beyond what the ingenious Author I imitate, has
said; for he only in a kind of Innuendo threatens her, to make her pass for a
Whore, as Virgil did Dido, if she yielded not to him; but I know Plain Dealing
in love was most natural, and therefore have spoke it out in plain English what
she has to trust to, if she slights my Love: Besides, I know most of the Young
Gentlewomen about Oxford, had rather be Lampoon'd than killed; so that I drew
my Argument ^ fortiore, and have, I hope, outdone my Original.
Oh have a care th^n, for her, that me contemns,
I vow, and swear, I Will Fiddle into the Theams.
But do not think I love you less for this,
For ah! me! ah me! ah me! I long to Kiss,
You behind rather then not at all, but ah that I (could your Phiz.
The last line but one, Sir, I think is a Masterpiece of Love; for nothing can
be more passionate than Ah me! it is a Sigh fetched from the bottom of the
heart, which being repeated, still doubles the force of it: And then the last
line is a great indication of an humble Eover, that would be content with any
favor, and it is always after a Rant in Love, necessary and natural that you
fall into a Calm; and when you have huff'd you must beg a Favor, as this
ingenious Author does, whom I have chose for my Pattern. I would not imitate
the rest of this Copy of Verses of this incomparable Author, because methinks
he has deviated from the Rules he prescribes, in concluding with such a long
Simile, which shows, he had not much love, that could exemplify so much on the
Sun, and Sun beams. But I can easily pardon that oversight in him, since it is a
common Fault of great Critics never to come up to the incomparable Rules they
set down, as if like Kings they were Laws made for us, not themselves. If this
please you, you may assure your self of more, and also of the Name of him, that
till then desires to remain

Your unknown Servant.


Sure (said Grave) the Author of the Gentleman's Iournal would not have been
bribed by all these strained Compliments to insert such stuff as this? No, no,
(returned Temple) he has more sense than to return the Civility, which
self-interest dictates, at the expense of his Reputation. He Is used to these
Complements from the Universities, and Inns of Court, so that this would have
been no more than what he receives every day, and of very little influence with
him. This Spark would have one believe he has a great deal of Modesty, though his
Vanity appears in every line; the whole being a praise of himself; for he gives
not those sugar words to the Gentleman he writes to, but to bribe him to a
return. One thing I must remark, for judging of the unnaturalness of Cowley and
Wallers thoughts by what he found in himself when in love, he concludes them in
the wrong, because his thoughts reached not up to theirs; for says he, The same
cause will have the same effect, in which he ^s much mistaken: For if the
Matter be changed, the effect may prove quite contrary; for beating with a
Hammer, will form Metal into curious Figures, but break Stone or Glass all to
pieces. I know not what you may think, Gentlemen, (interrupted Chapel) but I
am of Opinion, this Letter is only a Banter, and writ with a design to Satyrize
those young Fops of the University, whose Letters on such accounts, he must
needs, have seen; and upon this new sort of Wit, called Aenigma's, which is in
plain English a Riddle, the diversion of Schoolboys, and Greensickness-Girls,
in a Chimny-corner, in the Winter-nights in a Country-Village; so we improve in
the Kingdom of Wit, and Learning, that we shall, I believe, next come to
Capping of Verses in Print, or some (...) Dutch invention. This Elegy is an
excellent Burlesque upon that: Author, who has set up for a Reformer of our
Modern Love Poem^, as you may observe, if you will compare 'em. I have the Book
in my Pocket, it being forced upon me yesterday by a Friend of the Booksellers:
I Will read the Original, do you (Church) read the Copy.

ELEGY
The Power of Verse to his Mistress.
WHile those bright eyes subdue what e're you will,
And as you please can either save or kill;
What Youth so bold the Conquest to design?
What Wealth so great to purchase It ought (said Chapel) to have been a heart
like thine, else it seems there might be wealth great enough to purchase her
heart, being but one, tho not enough to purchase more of the same value.
hearts like thine?
None but the Muse that privilege can claim,
And what you give in love return in Fame.
Riches and Titles with your Life must end;
Nay, cannot even in Life your Fame defend:
Verse can give form; can fading Beauty save,
And after death redeem 'em from the Grave?
Embalmed in Verse, though distant times they come,
Of all the sweet meats in the World (interrupted Summer) I hate preserved
Bees, in his Preface (for I have read his Books) he is against for fetched
Similes, and here he has got one, that agrees in nothing with the thing he
applies it to, first they are embalmed like Bees, then preserved like 'em in an
Amber Tomb. I never knew of any Bees preserved in a Tomb, unless in this new
modeled Poetry, A Hive and a Tomb be all one. I think the Oxonian has extremely
mended this, Embalmed with Fiddle within your Amber Tombstone,
You Will last immortal Mummy till day of Doom's come.

Preserved like Bees, within an Amber Tomb.
Prither Summer (replied Chapel) don't interrupt us, for as soon as we have
done, you shall be free to make your Observations.

Poets like Monarchs on an Eastern throne,
Restrained by nothing but their will alone.
Here can cry up, and there as boldly blame,
And as they please, give Infamy or fame.
Nay, there ( interrupted Fountain) the Argument be brings, destroys the proof
he brings it for, since it is evident by his Verse, that Dido's Virtue lives
even to our time, for about two thousand six hundred and twelve years, in
spite of Virgils Endeavors to sacrifice her Reputation to the Honor of his
Hero, and his Mistress might well answer she had little cause to fear his
Poetry, if the Prince of Poets could do no more toward the defaming of a Woman.
Nay, (said Winter) if one must needs threaten ones Mistress, I think the
Oxonian much more in the right ^n't, his Example being less to be excepted
against, for though some Authors will have it, that this was a Piper, yet they
differ, others affirming him to have been a Fiddler. Nay then (said Chapel) we
have done (for all this while Chapel read the Authors Lines, and Church read
the Oxonians) and therefore I Will clap up my Original piece of Poetry. And I Will
lay aside (said Church) my University Comment. How different (said I) is this
Argument handled by Ovid in his third Book of his Art of Love, from whence he
seems to have borrowed the hint, Ovid in his de Tristibus, and de Ponto, has
more on the same Subject, tho he professes such a value for the Ancients in his
Act of Love. It begins, Garmina qui facimus mittamus Carmina tantum,
Hic Chorus ante Alios aptus amare sumus.

In vain the Tyrian Queen resigns her life,
For the bright Glory of a spotless Wife.
Here ignorant Ovid uses no threats, nor Examples that may intimate that Poets
are Liars (a strong Argument that the fair ought to love them) he only tells
how many have got a name by loving of Poets.

Nos ^acimus placitae late praeconia formae,
Nomen habet Nemesis; Cynthia nomen ^abet,
Vesper, and Eoae novere Lycorida terrae
Et multi quae sit nostra Corinna rogant.
That is in honest Prose, we celebrate the fair, and spread their fame, witness
Nemesis, Cynthia, Lycoris, and Corinna. Ovid stops not here but ^rges another
Argument, why the Sex should rather love a Poet, than an other.

Add quod insidiae sacris a vatibus absunt, etc.
That is, Add that the sacred Poets are free from base Designs, etc. and thence
proceeds to prove, that they are best qualifyed for Lovers, whose desires are
not divided like other Men's betwixt Ambition and Covetousness: He urges too as
a proof of this the Constancy of a Man of Sense, or Poet (which this Author in
one of his Letters condemns.)

Sed facile haeremus Validoque perurimur igne,
Et nimium certa scimus amare fide.
That is, we are soon wounded with a beauteous Face, and our Flames are more
violent, and lasting, than those of other Men; and after this he passes to the
other forces of Verse; but here we have a great many Verses, and little to the
purpose.

LETTER V.
From a Gentleman of the University to his Friend in Town, to know whether he
ought according to the Rules of Honor, fight a Man for a certain Affront
received. It was directed thus, -- To Mr. River, to be left at the Widows
Coffee-house without Temple Bar, deliver with care and speed, London.
HOw, to me (said River, and would have snatched away the Letter) hold there,
sweet Sir, (said Temple, putting him by) none of us must not be exempt from the
Law we have imposed upon the rest of the Nation, all that is here is public
prize, and all secrets must out. Gad, for all that I know; I may have two or
three here my self, so that I oblige you to no other Rule than what I Will submit
to. I Will not be the only exception (said River, and smiled) to so general a
Rule.

Dear RIVER, Chr. Oxon, June, 1692.
OUr mutual Friendship makes me trouble thee with the least Accidents of my
Life, else methinks I should wrong you in robbing you of the share you
challenge in all I do or suffer; this has made me acquaint you with an
Adventure I met with to'ther day at my Uncles, where I found a certain Man of
the Blade of London, with whom falling into dispute about King Charles the
First, being pretty well versed in Rushworth's Collections, he presumed to tell
me, I was Impertinent; I resented the Affront then, but the Company appeased
me, and indeed I thought my Uncles House no proper place to quarrel with his
Acquaintance in: I therefore deferred it till I met him at Oxford, whither I
understood he designed in a few days. I desire you therefore (who, I know, are
perfectly skilled in all the points of Honor, and in every thing that is the
Duty of a Gentleman) to send me your Opinion, whether I ought to fight him, or
let it die: I know you would not have me engage in a ridiculous Quarrel, nor
suffer any thing that may injure my Reputation. You have the Authority of a
Father, or what is more, of a Friend over me: I therefore desire your immediate
Answer; who am

Your real faithful Friend, C. RICHARDSON.


Had I received this in private, I should have communicated it to you (said
River) for it is from a pretty ingenuous Youth I value, and esteem, as he indeed
deserves, and whom I desire should have as tender a value as he ought for his
Reputation without a ridiculous Niceness, and (as he says) I would have him
avoid the Extremes of Cowardice, and Bullying. But I Will first have your
opinions before I write an Answer. To me (said Temple) upon a serious
Reflection, the whole business seems very ridiculous to put ones self upon an
equal (nay, perhaps a much greater) hazard with the man, that has injured me;
whereas in reason, I ought to punish his Offense with hazard to him alone, that
was guilty, else I only add an Injury to my self, to that I have received from
another; and in this I think the Spaniard, and Italian more rational, for a
rascally Offense (and such is every designed Affront, as much below a man of
honor to give as to take) ought to be punished by a Rascal, not a Gentleman,
that pretends to any thing above a Hang man. For this Custom, and Notion of
Honor sets up a private Tribunal of Life and Death in every man's Bosom, who,
when he is satisfied of another Offense, as he has been the judge, will be the
Executioner, and that, as if fond of Ignominy, with the risque of his own Life.
But how can that (said I) be the Arbitration of Courage (for so is Tilting
esteemed) where a Coward that is perfect in his Sword, shall, ten to one, kill
the stoutest Hero; or an arbitration of the Justice of a Cause, where the
decision lies upon the skill of the parties Engaged; and where the Injured may
fall, and the Injurer triumph in a second Offense of a far higher nature than
the first, and that with the consent of the party wronged. If your Friend (said
Winter) be not expert at his Weapon (a College improving a man in Books, not
Swords) it is not courage, but madness, though he received the Affront, to venture
a Tilt with him, whose Trade it has been; that being to run upon certain Death
without any prospect of Advantage, contributing more to his enemies than his
own satisfaction. In such a case (said Chapel) I think a man had better
imitate a Doctor of Physic of my Acquaintance, who meeting one that had a
Pique against him on the Back-stairs at White Hall, with a great deal of
patience let him give him the Lie; a Lord that followed him, asked him why he
took the Lie: No, my Lord, said he, he would indeed have fastened it upon me,
but I would not take it. The Doctor (said Summer) was in the right on it, I
think, being better skilled doubtless, in Recipes, than Ters and Quart; for a
man in those Circumstances may with as much Honor (if Honor be not repugnant
to Reason, and common Sense) refuse the Combat, as avoid engaging with half a
dozen men at a time, the odds in this being greater. If I have a right Notion
of Honor (said Church) it consists as much in not offering, as not suffering a
base Action: But drawing upon a naked man is the meanest and basest of Actions,
and to draw on him that is not skilled in a Sword, which then can be no defense
to him, is to draw upon one unarmed. Nay, more than that, (said Brook) a man of
Honor ought not only to be free from Villainy, but also from the suspicion of
it, which he can never be, if he takes those measures for the satisfaction of
his Honor, by which in reality, he may deserve rather the name of a Bravo,
than that of a Hero, for engaging with a man less skilled than my self, is not
a jot better than assassinating him, which I take to be the Office of a Coward,
and a Ruffian, not of a man of Honor, and Courage: And yet this is unavoidable
in Duelling; so that I think it is far from being a proper Umpire of Honor or
Courage. Come, come (said Fountain) you may talk as you please of the Reason of
the thing, but I Am sure custom will over-weigh all your Reasons, and decide the
business against you. It Is true, faith (said Grave) Custom, that senseless
Refuge of non-plus'd Fools, will carry it, and the men of Reason must either be
born down the Tide of that, or be pissed on by ^e'ry Jackan^pes; but if there
were but half so many men o^ sense as there are Fools, there would be no such
wretched Plea; for the most irrational of our Actions, for as Knaves have the
greatest share of managing, if not making Laws, so have Fools in forming
Customs. But methinks now Tilting is become the Practice of Players, and Citts
upon their scandalous Quarrels; it is time for Gentlemen to leave it off, as the
Ladies formerly left of Mants, because every Chambermaid got into them.

But as for your Friend River, I think the first occasion being over, and the
cause of Quarrelling so trifling, his skill in fencing (I suppose) not
extraordinary, he maye'n drown the memory of it in the Ocean of Aristotle, or
the World of Descartes, or the Morals of Plutarch, or Seneca; let him give
himself to thinking whilst he may, and he will meet with occasions enough to show
his courage, when he comes to share in the thoughtless Broils of this Town.
Upon the whole, Gentlemen, (concluded River) I find my Friend must keep his
Dudgeon still in its Case; and I agree with you, tho I have known one Dear
Caressing, Drinking Friend cut another throat, upon as slight a matter.

LETTER VI.
From an Author to his Friend that had condemned some of his performances, it
was directed to Mr. Roberts at the Sign of the three Tobacco-pipes in Drury
Lane.
Dear Jack, Tunbridge, June 1692.
I Must confess I wondered at your late strangeness, in not coming to see me,
when I wa^ nearer the Town, but I could nor think it the consequence of your
guilt, as I am now apt to believe it was, being informed that you are very free
in your Censures of my last Play. I can scarce imagine you can betray your
Folly so much as to condemn that, which I am sure merits your praise: I think
without vanity, I may say so, since the Town by the success of my attempts that
way, has allowed my judgment in writing: My Reputation is too well settled for
the malice of my Enemies to destroy, I know some are not a little disquieted at
the same I have got, but I value not their Efforts. I would have you keep me
your Friend, as I yet am, tho

Injured, W. M.


This is but a concise product of Vanity, (said Chapel) the epidemic distemper
of Authors, most of whose happiness consists in having a good esteem of their
own performances, from the Laureat to Penny Chronicler. I know the hand and the
Author too (pursued Fountain) and can assure you, his Discourse always agrees
with this Letter, especially since some success he has met with in a Dialogue
of his Writing, has nothing but Affectation and Vanity. I must say this (said
Winter) in his Vindication (for his hand and style must discover him to all
this company I Am sure) that his Vanity is excusable, since he meets with so
many Flatterers, that it is hard for him to think he has not a great deal of
desert. True (said Church) the modestest man in the World cannot be so good
proof against Self-esteem, as not to entertain a favorable Opinion of himself,
when the World applauds his performance. Nay, I know a Gentleman (said Temple)
that pretends to, and has I beli^ve, as much modesty as any Author, who tho he
will never speak in commendation of himself, shall yet with no little ardour
and disturbance undertake a Defense of what he writes, if any one in his
company chance to cavil at it. Vanity (said Brook) is so general a failing,
that I am of opinion, it is essential to our nature; every man being infected
with it as well as Authors, only some have the advantage of hiding it better
than others. I confess (said I) we seem even in our condemnation of this
Author, to discover our selves tainted with the same we accuse in him, and that
without the Temptation of the deference the Town, shows to his Parts. We
discover no more (pursued Summer) than the Conversation of the World does
tolerate, which always makes bold with the absent; the Follies of all men,
except those of the present company, afford wonder, and laughter, but those are
placed too nigh to be distinguished. They that can only see their own Defects
(said River) I fancy not unlike the pur-blind, that can only read when the Book
almost touches the Eye. I Am very confident (concluded Grave) we show no great
Arrogance, or Self-esteem in venturing to censure what is obvious to common
sense, as the intolerable vanity of this Letter is, the overlooking such gross
Follies, in my opinion, gives a greater proof of our ignorance, than good
Nature, or Wisdom.

LETTER VII.
From a Country Fellow, giving an account of London to his Cousin in the
Country. It was directed to Thomas Styles at Master Tomson's House near Taunton
in Somersetshire.
Cousin TOM, Land. June, 1692.
HOping you are all well, as cham at this present Writing, thanks be to God;
these are to let you know, that cham got zafe to London Zitty, where the Volk
up and down every day, thicker than at Taunton Vair, every door is a Zhop, zo
that one would strange that they could live by one another, and yet they all go
viner than the Justices Zon, and their Wiles and Daughters, than the Daughters
of the last Mayor of Wells, the Streets are all hung as thick as e're they can
thwack with Zigns, the worst ov'e 'em viner than Master Kilderins at the George
a Horseback. Then there is zuch a din night and day, that the Noise John Tabour
the Drummer of the Train'd-Bonds made, when he beat a point of War last
Whitzund-ale at Gonmer- Zoules's, was nothing to it. You may zooner hear zoftly
Dick the Miller make love to Joan Black Ar^ just by the binn, Voor all the
Clapper, than hear one another speak here; tho we stoud close together; nay, by
all the vlesh o've of my Bones, if Zimon the Cleark of our Parish were to give
out a Zalm in one of the groet Streets here, with as tearing a voice as he does
on a Zunday at Evening Prayer, after he has dined at the Parsons on good Beef
and Pudding, and Turkies, and Chickens, and such special Vare, with a bouncing
Grace-cup of humming Stout, at a little distance you would zwear he did but wisper.
Chave vound my Londlords house at last, with much ado, but they zaid when Cha
was come thither, that he was gone to the Change; Chad a mind to zee that zame
place, zoo che went with my Londlords mon, who zhew'd me the woy, 'twas a
hugeous vine place indeed, with a Steeple higher than any in Zummerzet-shire;
but O Zoes, when Chad entered it, the men stood thicker than they do at the
choozing Knights of the Zheer; and there was zuch a buz, that if all the Bees
in our Garden, nay, in all our Parish zhoud zwarm at a time they could not make
zuch a humming, we justl'd about zo from one to another, that in the throng
Chad like to a bin lost; therevore Che got my Londlords mon to zhow the way
back to his Masters House, after my Londlord came home, Che paid him zome Rent,
and you may tell Zicily Chave put off her two Brass half Crowns, and twice as
many ov'e my own. These Londoners think themzelves woundy cunning, but chave
chouc'd half a duzzen o've them vor all they gurn like your Masters Mare, when
the worson Jade has a mind to play zome plaguey trick, to zee my Dress and Talk.
My Londlord made me raize my Rent, or a would not zeal a new Lease; but Cha
done him as good a turn, vor Chave got twice as good in lieu of the Rent,
because Chad wit to do it, in that he did not understond, and zo we were both
pleaz'd, he in squeezing me, and che in overreaching him. He zent his mon to
zhew me the Town, and the virst place we came into was a Coffee-house where
volk give a penny for a spoonful of whot Broth, like the Liquer in a Tanning
Vat; but then vor that penny, you zitt down among Gentlevolk, cheek by Joul:
There were a groe^ many wise men in that Coffee-house, where che was, and che
took 'em vor Magistrates, they talked zo o've Kings and Princes, and governing
o've the Nation; but my Londlords mon told me, they were nothing but
Zhop-keepers; ^^d Tradesmen; one zaid he is a Turner, another a Joiner, the
third a Carpenter, and ^o named half a score zuch Trades as we have (...) the
Country: Odds zoes, che zaid, zure they have zome other way of teaching their
Trades than we have, vor a great many ^'^e zuch with us could zcarce zay Boh to
a Gouse; vrom thence we went to the Play, which is indeed a groet deal better
than a (...), or any zuch thing; but there was (...) a chattering about one
that che could (...) hear what they zaid that were upon the (...), zo that che
wished chad my Eighteen-^^nce again: vor che did not think the Zight (...) the
money: Chave zeen a great many (...) Zights: but upon the whole, cham of the
(...), thou had better keep whaure thee (...), vor cham zure, thee cout not
lie, zwear, (...) steal, and gadsbodikins, unless thou can do twon ov'e 'em,
thee may even blow thy Nails here. Cham thy loving Uncle,

OBADIAH WHEATSHEAR.


Winter happened to read this, but could make nothing of it. But Chapel being
of that Country, gave it a more natural Air on a secon^ perusal, which
furnished us with a great deal (...) and after that was over, I know (...)
(said Temple) what has engaged your laughte^ Gentlemen, if it be the good grace
of (...) in his mimicking the Boo^s of his Coun^^y; I agree with you, but if it
be the fa^cy'd Folly of the Writer, I am much of another Opi^ion; for the
oddness of the (...) not so sel^-^idi^^lous as custom (...): Nay, the truth
on it is (pursued (...)) were his Language a little refined, (...) Fello^ might
pass for a Wit here in Tow^ he is so well stored with Similes. No (...)
(returned Church) he would pass but for a (...) here; for his Similes are
natural, and to (...) p^^pose, whe^^^s the (...) using them (...) for
illustr^tion, but mere Tr^ppings, (...) mind their impertinence. Nature is as
(...) without doubt (said I) of her gift of (...) to the Peasants, as to the
loftyer part (...) Mankind, only they want the artificial Ad^^^tages of
Education, and Conversation. There'^ nothing more evident from History, the
great^est Auth^modoulet or chief Minister of State (...) Persia, was a
Shepherd, and the Emperor (...) a Labourer. We grant it endless (interrupted
Fountain) to run through Histor^ for all the proofs that affords of this, sin^^
every day we may observe in the Yeomanrys of the most barbarous Corners of the
Nation good Natural Parts, which for want of a more generous Knowledge, are
directed by the general Instinct of Self-Interest. Thus far the Writer of this
Letter (said Summer) is arrived, as you will find by his Brass Half Crowns, etc.
And to say truth, I never knew it, but the Country Grey-Coat was in bargain, in
Affairs they understood, too hard for the Cit^. True (continued Grave) but they
may thank their self-opinion, and their fancy, that because the Clown is
ignorant, he must be silly, and honest. For my part (pursued River) I cannot
think ignorance the mother of Honesty any more than of Devotion, yet the
Country by the fine Idea's the Poets have given of it carries the Bell of
Innocence and Integrity from the Town. But (answered Chapel) Cowly one of the
greatest Admirers of it, was at last convinced of his Error, when he found how
every one of them cheated, and abused him in his Hay, and such other things he
was not so well skilled in. All that I shall observe (concluded Brook) is, that
like the rest of mankind, his appearance, and reality, are not very well
acquainted, having the Face of Simplicity, but the Heart of a Knave.

LETTER VIII.
From a Lover to a Lady who had fled from his Addresses into the Country, it
was directed to Madam Price in Medstone in Kent, with care deliver.
Madam, London, June the 1692.
YOu need not have fled from me, since your command had been sufficient to have
delivered you from the sight of so great a Wretch as I am, and damned me to a
perpetual absence, tho you had continued in Town. It Is true, I live but by
seeing you, but it is worse than death, to see you at the expense of your ease,
and satisfaction. The vain appearance of hope, which I flattered my self you
once gave me, presented me with such an Idea of coming happiness, that I could
not relish any thing of the other delights and Pleasures of life. Then, dear
Madam, what must be the Torture I now endure, by being convinced of the loss of
all those transporting Joys in your Indignation? But alas you neither will,
nor can be sensible of this, unless you loved to that degree as does your

Unhappy Slave, C. Smithson.


Alas poor Damon (said Temple) there is too much submission, and respect in
this Letter to prevail if thy Mistress be of the common mould of her Sex. And
too much sense too (pursued Church) for most Women love their like, and hate a
Man that can ^ither write English, or spell. True (said Brook) that makes so
many senseless Irish Men, and other Foreigners prevail, tho the refuse of their
own Country. What Man of sense then (pursued I) would do^e on such a trifle as
that Sex, which tho it damned Mankind for the sake of tasting of the Tree of
Knowledge of Good and Evil, can yet no better disti^guish betwixt them. For my
part (answered Winter) I am of Opinion that we are pretty equal with them, for
our Love ending in our own satisfaction, we as little consult the merit of the
Party beloved (...) they do. Prithee Love's but a specious name, (replied
^iver) a Chymera we build up, and no more in nature than the Monster in the
Tempests, both Cubs of the Poets Brain. True (said Summer) and we carry on the
humor or character of it in our Billet deux, and addresses only to gain our
ends. I Am of opinion (answered Fountain) that this Letter is the result of his
real Sentiments, and that he is some raw young Spark newly come from the
University, full of the Poetical Notions of the Ioys of Lov^. And has never
found (interrupted Chapel) by experience how much the Practice falls short of
the Theory, and fr^ition of Expectation. Which makes it evident (concluded
Grave) that the Soul is capable of framing greater Ioys, in the imagination,
than any Nature has been capable of providing for the Body.

LETTER IX.
From a Whore to a young Spark that was forsaking her, on pretense of living
soberly, with one enclosed to the same, written to him by a grave Philosopher
which he lost in a Bawdy House. It was thus directed, to Mr. Tims, to be left
for him at the Post House in Colchester in Essex, with care.
(...) Mr. Littlelet, Land. June 1692.
I Hope, though I have not heard of you, that your cruel Resolution of leaving me
for ever continues not still, whatever motive you may p^e^end, I Am sure it must
want the quality of good, since it persuades you to an ingratitude, in
forsaking her that loves thee above all thy Sex. Your, scruples of Conscience
might have been salv'd without dese^ting her you have sworn constancy to, for
if the guilt of our Passion was no longer to be digested by you, the sin of our
Embraces might have been taken away by Marriage, my Dear, Dear, Dear Dicky, you
know I love you so, I should (...) the faithfullest Wife in the World. But I
suspect the Hypocrite that is the persuader of the breach of your vows to me,
who, as the enclosed will discover, chooses the Evil in a much worse degree,
than he would draw you from. 'Twas given me by Mrs. Martha, who says it was
dropped at Silences, being directed to you, I send it with this short Comment,
viz. that the Resolution formed by the influence of Hyprocrisie, and tending to
ingratitude, can never be less criminal, than the Passion, by it you forsake
with her who is

'till death your Faithful E. Johnson.


This is a good sensible Wench (said Chapel) those of her Character being
generally as ill furnished with Wit, and Language, as with integrity. I Am
therefore of opinion (pursued Temple) that this L^tter is not of the Whores
Inditing, but of some Male Friend, who has an equal loss in the ^ully, for your
kept Miss has always 'her secret drain, for her affections as well as money,
whilst the kind Keeper is pleased with the Fools Paradise of her forced
Embraces, and a well acted dissimulation is all he purchases with the ruin of
his Purse, a^^ R^putation. There is nothing (added Grave) that is desirable in
a Woman, which is not perverted by keeping. Her Youth and Beauty are employed
to get new Adorers, being secure of her old her Wit to manage her Intrigues,
and Cully, She Is ^ither blind her self (said Church) or supposes her sweet dear
to be so, when she betrays the standard of her Faith to him, by the
correspondence she keeps with Silence the Bawd. Which in my mind (continued
River) was a very i^prudent memento, when she designed to cajole (...) Cully
into Matrimony; which by the way (a^ded Brook) is the last Card a Whore play^
being a sure sign that her Charms grow ineffect^al by the commonness of her
Face. And (...) (pursued Summer) there is such a kind (...) in the Keepers,
that if the Whore do but motion it, they seldom have the Power to deny her. As
kind and good Natured as they are to then Iilting Mistresses, (answered
Fountain) I have observed, they have seldom much wit, more rare^ any honor,
and scarce ever any generosity to any one else. No Faith, (said Fountain) thos^
sparks have seldom so large a stock of Sense, as would be necessary to set up
Mountebank or Fortuneteller. For my part, (said I) I look upon the humor of
keeping, to be a punishment due to, and proper for the vicious Inclinations,
and sordid Principles, they are generally guilty off. True (concluded Winter)
for the Fool, and the Knave are equally punished in it by Diseases, and
Poverty. But let us see with what powerful Reasons the Philosopher furnishes his
Friend against what he cannot resist himself.

LETTER X.
This was directed as the other.
Dear Friend,
YOU tell me you find your fits of fondness return so often, and with that
violence, that you fear 'twill be past the power of all my Philosophy, to make
an absolute cure upon you, I confess indeed, as there is no greater help to a
Medicinal Operation, than a good Faith in the Prescriber, so the contrary often
obstructs the Skill of the Physician, yet I persuade my self, my endeavors
will not be entirely ^ruitless, since you are so sensible of your Error, as to
desire a Reformation.

Methinks a generous Indignation should break so hated a Chain, since it is so
preposterous and base, to make the Sovereign of the mind, Reason, the Slave to
every motion of the most inconsiderable part of our Body. I know you a great
stickler for Liberty, and Property, but you ought first to pull down the
domestic Tyranny before you set up for a Patriot; free your Soul from that
senseless dotage on so unclean an Animal as a Woman, and raise it to
contemplation. The Order, and Courses of the Heavenly Bodies, the Economy, and
Wonders of Nature, afford a far more generous and satisfactory pleasure to the
Mind.

Certainty is the Essence of happiness, but the Love of a Whore is more
uncertain, than the Feast of Damocles, for you are not only ignorant how soon
you may lose the Blessing, but you are not so much as sure you at all possess
it, and are not deluded with a shadow, instead of a reality like the Antifeasts
of the Romans; it is to your money she Sacrifices the enjoyment of her Person,
which cannot purchase her real Affection. But suppose, which I can never grant,
you were possessed of the Love, as well as Person of a Whore, how can you
imagine to secure them? When all her acquaintance is with such, whose
Interests, and Employment it is to alienate her Affections, and persuade her to
prostitution.

Fair words are no proof of fidelity, and she that protests the most to your
Face, as soon (...) your back is turned, shall laugh at you in the Arms of
another, for a cred^lous Coxcomb. It Is true as you are a slave to her, so is
she to your Money, but what Man of sense would buy that satisfaction, at the
Price of being known to be a Fool.

But perhaps you Fancy you may debauch so secretly, that you may avoid the
Scandal. It must be then in a Cabalistical* Way with some Aerial Demon; for
it is impossible with a Woman, her own vanity and antipathy to Secrecy shall
soon divulge your Disgrace.

Forsake therefore the false Hypocritical Sex, which if you give your self to
hard Study, you will not very much require. Poets by the usual Hyperboles of
their Art; have to an extravagance beyond reality, magnified the pleasures of
Love; you must not therefore read them, for they will not extinguish but add
Fuel to that fire, which finds but too much Matter within us. Philosophy both
Natural, and Moral, will afford you more substantial satisfaction, which if you
stick close to, will banish all these Chymera's, which now disturb your repose,
and make you laugh with your Friend at the Fool that next falls into your
Jilting Sylvii's Snare.

I am yours to command, THEO. PHIL.


This Leter (said Winter) shows us, That the cunning Jade had some reason to
wheedle her Cully, since it informed her his Love for her was still alive, and
struggling in his Bosom, and in short, only wanted her Letter to gain the field;
for if we once admit a Parley in such a case, it is only to yield upon the first
appearance of Recruits on the enemies side. Nay (pursued Chapel) her Letter
convinces she is no Novice in her Trade, but understands the Art of Wheedling as
well as any of them. But could one imagine (interrupted Temple) this man so
well read in the Folly, and who can so well advise, should not be able to save
his own stake. So much easier it is to be wise in the Theory, than the Practice.
I know the man (pursued Summer) and he has the reputation of a Cinic, and Woman
hater, which makes me apt to think this some sham upon him. That Is not at all
likely (returned Grave) for how should a Whore forge his Hand so well as to
deceive him, who doubtless is well acquainted with it, without a ^amiliarity
with him; which still gains the point. The World may more easily be deceived,
than this proof, (continued Fountain) For that Judges by appearances, and
therefore most commonly erroneously. But he (added Church) that builds his Wit,
Honesty, or Courage, on the opinion of the World, may really be a Fool, Knave
or Coward, True (said Brook) for it is not the opinion of the World that can
make that Lady a Whore, because she has a free Conversation, or that Whore an
honest Woman, because she borrows the face of one to enjoy the pleasure of Sin
without the Infamy. Nor can the opinion of the World make this man Rich because
he makes a splendid Figure, at the expense of his Credit, and other men's
Purses: nor that Usurer poor, because all the Clothes on his back are not worth
a Guinny: Right (pursued I) nor can the opinion of the World make this man a
Coward, because he is not for flinging away his life as often, as any of his
company wants either sense or manners: Nor that Bully a man of Courage, because
he will Damn and Tilt on every word that is misunderstood. The first may be brave
in the Field in his Countries Cause, in the visible face of Death and
Destruction, whilst the other skulks behind a hedge for fear of a Cannon Ball,
or stays at home to gain the Reputation of a Stout Man, upon easier terms,
since his skill in his weapon affords him a greater security, than in the proof
of his Body against a Bullet. To come a little nearer our purpose (concluded
Riv^r) the opinion of the World cannot make this man a Philosopher or Lover of
Wisdom, who has only the Language, but not the Life of one; or at least I can
say this, that Philosophers are like Physicians, Giants for relief of others,
but Pigmies in their own distress. And so much for the Philosopher: And now
let us call a New Cause.

LETTER XI.
From one that designed to supplan^ his Relation, to his Friend and Confident:
-- 'Twas directed thus* To Mr. Jawl at his Chambers i^ Clifford's-Inn, London;
with care and speed.
Dear DICK, Surry, June, 1692.
MY Nephew designs for Town very suddenly; he seems to stagger in his
resolutions, as if he suspected my intentions. The writings I hope, are ready,
and drawn as I directed, unless he seals, part with never a a Farthing; get
what you can of him, that you may be the easier to thy faithful Friend,

OB. SWEEPSTAKES.


A short and pithy piece of Villainy, this (said Brook) nature, and honesty,
made truckle to Interest, without much formality. It Is the sum of the general
practice (answered Chapel) Money being Health, Beauty, Courage, Virtue, and
every thing else, nothing being a Crime that fills the Purse, and nothing a
Virtue that emp^ies it. Yet even Villainy is alleviated, (replied River) by
circumstances; for to break the Laws of just and right, for a trivial matter,
is unpardonable, and discovers a love ev^n of the guilt, but a mighty prospect
of advantage, might be supposed to make us only forget it. True pursued Temple)
we hear Caesar with pleasure rather than anger, repeating the Verse of
E^ripides, which was to this sense: If Right may be violated, it may for Empire,
But in all things else be a lover of Virtue.


For at that time the Roman Empire presented a Noble Motive to his Ambition;
but to see such contendings for it, when torn to pieces by the inundations of
Barbarians in the time of Valentinian, raises our indignation when we read 'em.
Right (added Church) for whatever the Ancient might deserve, I Am sure those
wretched Remains of the Majesty of Rome could not merit so many Treasons, and
Murders, to purchase them. Less still (said Fountain) does such a trifle, as a
poor Country Estate deserve Damnation, both here, and hereafter. And this
Estate (pursued Winter) perhaps is not above forty or fifty pound a year, which
costs so many Bribes, Lies, Forgeries, and Perjuries. It Is not the Quantity,
but the Quality (said I) that allures us; we naturally covet what is not our
due; the Fool is pleased to be called a Wit, the Knave affects the Title of an
honest Fellow, the Upstart is fond of Deference and Respect, the Coward fain
would be feared, and the Ugly loved, the precise would be thought Saints, and
the ignorant Learned. But it is strange, (returned Grave) that sordid interest
should have so Universal a Charm as to engage most men to forget those Bonds of
Nature, which the irrational Animals are most obedient to. But since it is not
so strange as true (concluded Summer) every man should stand on his guard, never
trust a Relation, or any other any farther than reason, and his own apparent
interest allow.

LETTER XII.
From a Married Man to a Young Lady, to persuade her to yield her self up to
his Embraces. -- 'Twas directed under a false Cover, To Mr. Fisted an
Apothecary, at his House in -- near Dowgate, London. The Enclosed to the fair
hands of the Charming Mistress Diana Easyt. These.
Charming CYNTHIA, Exeter, June, 1692.
I Never thought Absence a cure for a true Passion, but I have found it adds to
the violence of my Wishes, and sooner should all business be neglected, and all
things else the inferior Concerns of my Life forgot, than the least of that
Flame suppressed, which has so desirable a cause. I sigh, and languish each
moment for you; and the busy Fools I deal with, take an ill omen, from these
dubious Symptoms, fancying them the effect of some losses in Trade, which
weakens my Credit with them, and makes them very cautious in their Bar^ains,
never reflecting that even in this Age, a man may be in love to distraction
with one so beautiful as you. Ah! my adorable Cynthia! How long will you suffer
me to be thus wretched, when you have it in your power to make me the happiest
man alive? You sometimes flatter me with hope, but still your Actions bid me
Despair; for if you loved, how could you be so cautious? Because my mistaken
Friends married me to one I was born to hate, must that deprive me of her I was
created and destined to love, with an immortal and inviolable Faith? You tell
me indeed; you pity me from your Soul, and that you wish Fortune had left any
way to my Happiness, without trampling on your Honor. Ah Cynthia! let not
empty words and senseless custom betray you to Ingratitude; Honor and
Gratitude are inseparable, and it is a vulgar Error to think you can in^^re the
first, by complying with the sacred Dictates of the latter. But to secure your
Reputation in the Eye of the World, that always mis-judging Censurer, that
shall equally be my care, since our mutual happiness depends on it. Secrecy
will enhance our Joys, which are still the greatest when they are stole from
the view of the world: Ambition indeed loves Noise, and Spectators, but the
Philosopher's Love is never more gay and taking, than in sweet retreat. Ah! too
charming Cynthia, why do you confess the sincerity and violence of my Passion
Merits a return, unless you would indulge that thought till it had mastered
that prejudice against my happiness, begot by hated, nay a heathenish Custom?
for this confinement to one Wise, my Cynthia is grounded, not on the Law of
God, or Reason, but Old Ro^^, which with other Idolatrous Superstitions crept
into those Christians, which lived under the awe of that Empire, those of
Ethipia, and Africa, to this day preserve their Christian Liberty of Plurality
of Wives, which indeed is more agreeable to Reason. Try, my lovely Charmer, how
much stronger the Bonds of Love are, than (...) of Wedlock, the first are too
strong to (...) dissolved by Ages, the last too weak to hold a day or hour. But
Oh! I am too much in Love to study Arguments, to remove thy trifling Doubts; my
Love makes all things evident to me, and if you could but love, you would have
no more Scruples. I have writ to thee, my dear Cynthia, every post, and will
continue to do so, till I return to London, which will be in ten days at
farthest, when I hope to find thee more indulgent to my Love. Ah! give a loose
to that sweet compassion, thy soft, and ^^^der Nature abounds with, for thou
art an ^^gel within as well as without, which will ^^en permit me to breath out
my languishing Soul into thy beauteous Bosom, who am your faithful Love,

W. L. R.


How powerful is the Corruption of Humane Nature (said Grave) which can
pervert^ Reason, its only Guide, and make it plead so much against its duty! Or
rather (returned Chapel) what a Proteus and Cameleo^ is Reason that thanges
it is Shape, and Color, almost in every man? True (continued Brook) for there
(...) no (...), but the Actor of it will set out a thousand Reasons in its
justifications, if suc^^essful: Nor is there any Folly (pursued Temple) that
may not have as many produced to advance it into the Class of Wisdom. There Is
no Impiety (added Summer) that Reason will not sanctify, and no Opinion it will
not render absurd; and the contrary, as Interest and Power persuades, and
indeed the last Reason of Kings, is the general Guide and Director of Reason,
that is force and success. The Passion confess (said Church) that prevails,
ranges all the Forces of Reason on it is side, so that Reason seems rather the
Mercenary Servant of the Passions, than their Guide. Here is another proof
(interrupted Winter) of the truth of what you all seem to assert; it is a Letter
from an Old Man to a young married Lady, to persuade her to love him. He
questions not her Age, I hope (pursued River) that is none of the best
Arguments to prevail with a young Lurman, I Am sure. That you shall see
(answered Fountain) upon the perusal of the Letter, for you know, Cicero says,
There Is nothing so ridiculous and absurd, but may be rendered probable by
Argument or Reason. But words (concluded I) are but very inefficacious Proofs;
here your remote Arguments of Witnesses, Trial, etc. are more home in this
point, than those drawn from the Topics.

LETTER XIII.
'Twas directed to Madam Justed, at her House in Bishopsgate-street, near the
Sign of --, London.
Dear Madam, Salisbury, June 1692.
I Got safe to Salisbury, where I have been drunk already with drinking nothing
but your Health: Adad, I wish thy naughty Husband, who, I hear, is going for
Holland, may be drowned in a Bowl of Punch, or dismembered at Snicker-snee, for
I am desperately in love with thee, as I have often told thee; Oh those pretty,
black, languishing, dying Eyes! by my Faith, you little chit, you are in the
wrong to despise me for my old Age, for an old man can be silent, when a young
Coxcomb will be prating of your Favors in every Coffeehouse, and Tavern. You
may play the wag with an old man with safety, but a young one will, ten to one,
give you an ugly Disease for all your kindness: A young man will pick your
Husband's Pocket, but I Will rather drain my own. Lewdness and Interest provoke
the Address of a young fellow, but an old man never has any motive but Love;
young fellows are fickle, old men constant; beside, a young ^^llow would rob
thee of thy very Clothes, when I would give thee better. All these ways a young
Rogue may damage thee, and thy Husband, but I (...) do it no way: So that
there is no cause, my de^^^clous, little, pretty, spicy, soft, melting Rogue
you, why you should deny me. I Will not stir from hence, till I hear from you,
and if it be with any crumbs of Comforts, I Will take Coach immediately for
London, and defer my Country Voyage till the next Age, for by my Knighthood. I
love thee most infinitely, who am, you little chit you,

Your faithful Lover, G. Colts.


This is a pleasanter Lover (said River) than the former, and he minces not the
matter a jot faith. He has enumerated a goodly company of Arguments (pursued
Fountain) to raise his Merit: But none so powerful (replied I) as the Promise
of his Purse. Right, (continued Temple) that is so eloquent an Argument, that
it seldom fails with the Fair. You might have said, (answered Church) which
never fails, the whole Sex are Danaes they will all spread their Laps for the
Golden Shower. Nay faith, (said Brook) they are no more guilty of that than our
selves, who can ill resist where that persuades. His Gold is young, and witty,
(pursued Summer) and then no matter for the Impotence, and Impertinence of his
person. Interest Indeed (said Chapel) is the general Bond of Love and
Friendship; take away the prospect of Advantage and Amity soon grows cold. But
how prepostero^^ (said Grave) is Man, that at an Age, when Deat^^ and
Rottenness has laid one hand-upon him, (...) Thoughts can be employed upon the
Dalliances of (...) as if he could, in the Embraces of Youth, secure himself
against the Arrest of Death, which is a Credit^^ from whom no place can plead a
Privilege, or (...) If it be a Defect in our Nature, (concluded Winte^) it is
as much beyond remedy as Crookedness, wh^^^ though we may bolster up, to hide
it from the Eyes of others, it will still remain; besides these preposterous
Pashions carry their own Punishment, Shame, and Ridicule.

LETTER XIV.
From a Pluralist to his Patron; being a flattering Insinuation to gain the
Advouson of a Third Living in his Gift, who had bestowed Two on him before.
'Twas directed to T. Prince Esquire to be left for him at the Christian
Coffee-house near Covent Garden, London:
Honored Patron,
^ Have, with all the earnestness of a zealous Grati^^^tude, recommended you in
my Prayers to the Most High, as indeed the great abundance of your Favor
bestowed upon me, obliges me, that He ^ould vouchsafe you his Protection on the
Road, and in the City, from the visible, and invisible Ene^^^^; that lie
perpetually in wait for those, that ^^^pect it not; but Heaven has a peculiar
care of ^^ose, who like you, have been nursing Fathers of (...) Church, and
will protect their Innocence from (...) contagious Corruptions of the Town,
which (...) you cannot be in such eminent danger of, (...) have laid so good a
Foundation of Wisdom, as the Fear of the Lord, as those who have not minded
their Creator in the days of their Youth, as you, Pious Sir, have done; there
will perpetual Blessing go with all your Actions, who have been so indulgent a
Patron to me, the most unworthy of the Sons, and Ministers of the Church. And
here, Sir, I cannot but take notice of what a rare Example of Christian Piety
you are, in this profligate Age, when the very company of a Clergyman is almost
a Scandal, you have espoused our cause. Whilst other Youths are spending their
Estates in the pursuit of Harlots, and the false Enticements of Sin, you take a
delight in Goodness, and make the Clergy your Mistress, you being charitable,
meek, and humble. --

-- Nay, prithee pass over the panegyrical part (interrupted Temple) and come
to the Question, and Demand; for we know it is a common Method to praise those
we ask a Favor of, though perhaps they deserve that no more than we do the
other. True, (continued River) the Praises of a Clergyman like those of a
Poet, are generally a Bribe for their own advantage; therefore supposing all
the formal things (...) can say so inspired, proceed to the business: Nay,
(...) Truth on it is, ( replied Winter, who had read i^) here is a great deal to
come of the same stamp, a (...) sheet of a Paper, in a small Hand, and close
writ, (...) on all sides, scarce enough being left blank for (...)
Superscription and Sealing. -- Well, after a (...) running over, he came at
last to the Subject of (...) Letter, which was couched in a very little (...)
and then Winter read on.

-- I had not touched upon all these admi^able Virtues you are embellished with
in this place, but only to encourage my self to present my humble Request to
you, which is this. I am informed, that Dr. Goodman is very ill, and that his
Recovery is despaired of; the Benefice is in your Worships Gift, and, dear Sir,
you know what a Family I have to maintain, what charge I have been at for
Books, since the last Living you were pleased to bestow upon me, which has
disabled my Charity, and Hospitality; and you know how apt these People are to
disrespect the Character of the Clergy, If their Authority, and Reverence be
not upheld by that means. But I need not repeat what I have often urged to you,
and what I only now touch upon, to refresh your Memory, and therefore I hope
you will be pleased to give me your Promise for it, or, at least, not to forget
your most obliged Chaplain, and Servant,

Not. Gold.


To say nothing of his ill-phras'd Encomium, ( said ^happel) his Request is
worded from the Book (...), A Defense of Pluralities. That Author ( said ^^ook)
is not of St. Paul's mind, That the Clergy (...) to be content with Food and
Raiment; which Opinion of St. Paul, be maintains, is not calculated for this
Age, when men take to the Ministry of the (...), for the sake of Mammon, and
not of Christ; which is the drift of most of his Conclusory Ar^^ments. He seems
to make the Ministry indeed (con^^nued Fountain) a mere Temporal Calling, which
^one would take to, that could get Preferment of ^reater advantage, and
interest. The truth is (said I) ^^^ce they are of opinion that Humility and
Sanctity, which gained Authority, and Veneration to the Apostles and primitive
Fathers, will at all avail them, it is fit they have Pluralities, and Riches to
keep them from the Contempt of the People. This Author (pursued Church) having
made a mere political Affair of the Business, and Duties of the Clergy, it is no
wonder he is not of the opinion of the Third, and Fourth Councils of Carthage,
where 'twas decreed the Bishops themselves should have a plain, and mean
Furniture of their Tables, and gain themselves Authority by their Faith and
Integrity; nor of the mind of the Council of Chalcedon held under the Emperor
Martian, which decreed, no Priests should have two Benefices. There are two
great Oversights methinks in that Author, (said Summer) one where he says, That
because there are a greater number of Inhabitants in a London-Parish, than in
four, or five in the Country, that therefore a Country Incumbent might have
more Benefices than one: Whereas he should have shown, that the Cases were
alike, which are very different, these Numbers being together, and near the
Church, where the Minister is present to teach 'em all together, but those in
the Country so divided, that it cannot be, so I don't think one quarter in the
year sufficient to apply himself to their Instruction. And next he should have
shew'd^ that Five hundred Souls were not enough to employ the time of one man,
to conduct them well to Heaven. The other Oversight is, That he will not allow
Sixscor^ pound a year enough to furnish Books to a Minister, to qualify him
sufficiently for his Office, when there is scarce an Hundred Curates in England,
that have (...) so much for maintaining their Families, and all; and yet he
says, great part of them ar^-better qualified that the Incumbents. Well
Gentlemen (concluded Grave) I must profes^, my value is such for learned men,
that I think the Author of that Book has maintained a good Cause with excellent
Wit, and Reason, the Authority of which, all you have said has not at all shook
with (...), and therefore let us adjourn our Discourse to the ^^xt Cause.

LETTER XV.
From a young Lady to her She-Friend, disclosing her whole Breast, as to
Marriage, Clothes, and Characters of such and such pretty Gentlemen, who have
discovered some tender Affection for her. Directed to Madam Isabella Bright at
Maidston in Kent.
My Dear, Land. June 1962.
I Have been so fatigued with the impertinent Ad-Addresses of the Men, that I
could not find time to write to thee, my Love, last Post. I wonder whether thee
art of the same mind thee were ^hen thee wrote thy last Letter, my Dear, such a
^^ghty Friend to Marriage. It Is true, I would ^^rry my self, but not yet, it is
time enough when I come to be a stale Maid here, to retire into the ^ountry,
and there take up with some grave Coun^^y Justice, where I may rule the Family,
and the (...) too. I shall grow weary of the Town, I fan^y, in five or six
years time, but as yet the Gaie^y, (...) Gallantries of Love are, my Dear, very
taking. You counsel me against the danger of losing my Reputation by those
Freedoms I grant, but you are mistaken, my Love, for the only way to lose that,
is to be too sollicitous about it: Scandals in the Country are pieces of
innocent Divertisement here, and one may as well pretend to live without Fine
Clothes, as without an Intrigue; I have half a score on my hands at this time,
and I love 'em all alike, keep 'em in suspense, and da^ly, and play with them,
give one a favorable Look, and another a Smile, a third my Hand to kiss; but
then to keep them at their due distance, the next time I see them, I frown on
the first, rail at the next, and wonder at the Sawciness of the third, if he
presume to attempt the same Freedom again. Ah, my Dear, ^ou know not how
pleasant a sight it is to see this Beau cringe, and screw his Body into an
hundred forms, in hopes to appear amiable to you; that Spark look with a
languishing dying Air, In hopes to make you sigh by simpathy; that Wit cracking
his Brain to write taking Billet Deux to you, or Anagrams on your Name, beside
Elegies after the new mode of Sir Courtly Voiture; but Wits are the most
dangerous company a Woman can keep, they are commonly vainglorious, and bragg
of more than they obtain. That that vexes me most, my Mother is so covetous,
she will let me have (...) Clothes but twice a year, so that I am plagued to
turn and twine them, that I may not be known by them: Fine clothes have a
wonderful charm with the Men, and one had as good ^e ugly as ill dressed. But,
my Dear, I Will give you a Catalogue of my ^overs. I have a young Doctor of
Physic that make honorable Addresses to me for Matrimony, but ^ think not
that an equal Ma^ch, unless I could po^^son him as easily as he can me. On the
same pretense I have a young Counselor of the Temple, furnished with more Law,
than Sense, and would, I believe, make a good Cuckold, but I Am not disposed
that way as yet; besides, he may have Quirks enough in Law to chouse me out of
my Jointure. I have also a young Doctor of Divinity, that seems to have a
months mind to me, and tells me, he thinks me fairer, than a new System, or a
good Benefice; but I had rather have the whole Bible Apocryphal, than that he
should explain the Text, so as to make me a spiritual Madam. I have a young
Merchant too, new set up for himself, finer than a Covent Garden Beau, and more
demure than your Chamber maid; he courts me not by Billet Deux, but Bills of
Exchange, and Custom-house; but I have no mind to venture my self on Bottom-
aree. So much for my Matrimonial Pretenders. I have of another sort, who are
all for Love, and abominate the Pagan Confinement of Wedlock, as a device of
the Priests to get Money, and destroy the freeborn Joys of Love. Among these,
is a young Lord, newly arrived to his Honor, and Estate, and wants another
Qualification, of keeping a Mistress with greater Grandeur, than ever he will
his Wise: I receive his Lordship with the Air of Quality, seem pleased with his
No-Jest, and blush at his Addresses, but never give him any encouragement of a
favorable reception, on so scandalous a motion; but he is obstinate, and, to
say Truth, he is not better ^^ock'd with Estate, and Folly, than with Beauty;
^e's very handsome, dresses well, dances with an ^dmirable Grace, and I should
like his company at (...) Ball, in a Box in the Playhouse, in the Mall, or Hide
Park, if it were not for fear of being ta^en for his Miss, for he really makes
a good figure. But after all, my Dear, my Lord is really my Aversion, he is not
at all fit for an Intrigue. Next, I have a Beau of Tom Vrwin's Coffeehouse, a
man of War, he swears much, fights little, prays less, and is an
irreconcilable Enemy to Sense, and Matrimony: I never admit him, unless when I
have no other company; he is a very nauseous Fop. Next I have a Courtier, fully
as finical, but he is monstrously in love, and protests, if 'twere not for the
Scandal, he loves me so much, he could marry me; he is damned a thousand fathom,
if there be any one of the Maids of Honor comparable to me. Among the rest, I
have an ingenious younger Brother to a certain Knight of your acquaintance,
that dresses neatly, but free from Foppery, that has a genteel Air, but not
affected; with a Face that is handsome, and yet manly, a Voice soft, and melting,
and a Tongue that would deceive a Vestal Virgin, that was sure to dye for
yielding. This man, I must confess, my Dear, has such an ascendant over me,
that I wish he were not so wild; and I fear I have heard him, say too much for
my satisfaction, and content; but I endeavor to divert these Thoughts, by my
own natural gaiety, and the abundance of Noise and Fool^ I am daily conversant
with. My Paper will not hold no more, my Dear, so I am thy loving Bedfellow,

A. Langly.


This Lady has Wit enough (says Temple) to make me wish to be one of her Fools
too. 'Tis^ pity (answered Church) so much Wit should be lost in so much
coquetry as she expresses of her self. Pride, and Vanity makes^ her affect
Addresses, and Company (said Summer) brings her to a volubility, and pertness
in Discourse, and that passes down for Wit in a Woman. The truth^ ^^'t is
(p^rsued Chapel) she is one of the Femal^^ Atheists, whose Wit lies most in
Ridicule of the sev^rer Virtues, great Church-goers, but little Prayers. Her
Devotion (added Brook) is an inviting Glance, in return of a Bow from some of
her Church-admirers, and all she minds there, is the Song of Solomon, which she
^^rverts to a carnal sense. The Town, and Conversation ( pur^^'d Winter)
corrupts the noblest Pieces of Nature. But she is like to pay for it, I find
(said Fountain) for she seems to be in Love, and then all these Freaks turn
into Prostitution, and perpetual Iilting. True (said I) for when once a Woman
of Wit's debauched, she is a perfect Messalina. And whatever Woman of Wit (added
River) gives her self these liberties, seldom fails of losing her Honor.
Right, (concluded Grave) like Flies they buz about the gaudy Light, till they
burn themselves in the flame they have imprudently dallied with.

LETTER XVI.
From a conceited Fellow that affects to write fine Language, though he makes his
Letter perfect Nonsense. 'Twas directed thus to the super-ingenious Hands of
Mr. Absalom Rash at his Shop at the Sign of Lion Gradant, near Fleet-Ditch,
London.
Obscenical Sir, Scarborough, June 1692
I Could not recognize upon any Substance since I was so Malheureus in your
transcendent Conver^^tion, which the Philosophy of the Cymerians mo^^ (...)
demonstrated, though I must confess, ^ (...) those Ecclarisments, and doubtful
Disputations have no small Antiquity, yet the extraordinary Regre^ that
Humidity, and Preter-natural turn of your Wit superseded them, makes me desire
a fresh Excrement from you to nourish my Intellectuals, which received the
Veracity of the Negotiation, but to deny the grand Touer of the Punctuation of
the Meridian of my Understanding. I shall therefore desire you to obliterate
the Forgetfulness of the Transcript of a fresh Advice from the Exotic Regions
of learning within the Sphere of Activity of the Sedentary and Peripateric
Universities, and the Inoculations of transcendent Posteriors of the City Wits,
those will be royal, and despotle Disvertisements here in this rural, and
contignous abode. I am,

Sir, your Supercillious humble Servant, Jehoiachim Balderdash.


If the Spark it is sent to (said Chapel) understand him no better than I, he
might even have saved the charge of Postage. Oh, (said Brook) it is with these
Coxco^bs as with Women, they shall understand one another Nonsense readier,
than true Sense; as if (pursued Fountain) there were another Language of
Correspondence established by Nature among Fools, and that intelligible, than
among the rest of Mankind; there is (said Grave) a desire of being thought
wiser than ones Neighbor, runs through the whole Race of Adam; and Fools being
unable to attain it in reality (pursued Church) are pleased with what they
think so. Right (continued Summer) and if they can say or write any thing
that is not intelligible, they think themselves elevated above their Brother
bruits the Mob. Now I dare swear (said River) this Letter is from some Tailor,
that by his plentiful Cuts, and Snips has got enough to make the Figure of a
Gentleman in a Country Village: And (assumed I) would seign make Cabbage of all
the fine Words he meets with; but (pursued Winter) if he could have disposed
the Purloinings of his Native Occupation no better, they would but have made
Fools Coats at best, patched part colored Dresses. This Disease of Affectation
of fine speaking (concluded Temple) is very Epidemic, as if People were ashamed
to be thought what they are, and yet will not take pains to be, what they desire
to be thought.

LETTER XVII.
From Jone to Ralph, accusing him of Infidelity and breach of Promise, in
staying so long in London. 'Twas directed for Ralph Saddler, at the Angel-Inn
behind Clement's Church, London.
Dear Ralph,
I Wish yea would be as good as your promise in bringing me the Vine Coifs and
Ribond vor my Hat with yea, vor yea have not come home azzoon as yea zaid, yea
have vorgot how ov^ yea told me yea loved me, yea have got Zome other
Zweet-heart in thick Town of London, but I could be even with yea if I were Zo
minded, vor Brisk George of the Talbot suitors me now, and would rather than
his Life have me, he would vain have kissed me the other day, I zaid no thee
shatten'd Chil zaid he, shatten'd zaid I, but he vorc'd one vrom me, and then I
zaid what art the better vort now, vor my minds sake, zaid he, but Chil not
come near him no more. Good zose I had forgot a gorget, O living heart, now
Ralph if you don't buy me a Gorget I Will nere abide yea, but make have home if
thou lovst me, vor I think I shall be torn to pieces.

Joan Sweeting.


Here Is the Mercenary, and cunning of the Six (said Grave) in a russet
Wastcoat, and steeple Hat. I believe (pursued Summer) Vices like the Parts, and
Members of our Bodies, are spread through the whole Kind. Right (continued
Chapel) and like them are only improved by difference of use, and breeding.
Joan here has the wheedle of her designing Sex (said Fountain) though in a
Home-bred-dress. Nature (said River) adapts the Dress to the Capacity of him
that is to be gulled. From whence it is apparent (said Temple) that the
universal Principle Self-interest actuates the whole-World. (...) me (said
Church) Self-interest of private Men seems as rational and justifiable, as of
States. Right, (said I) because every Man is a little World. By this (answered
Brook.) You would place us naturally in the State of War, like Mr. Hobbs. I
know not that (concluded Winter) but the general Practice of the World, without
exception, shows us we are in the State of Rapine, in Love, Religion, Law, and
Government.

LETTER XVIII.
From an Apprentice, complaining to his Mother of the Hardships he meets with
in his Apprenticeship. 'Twas directed to Mrs. Tedder, at her House in
Fothringham in Kent, with Care and Speed.
Dear Mother, London, June, 1092.
I Am very much dissatisfied with my Master, he never gives me any time to go
abroad to recreate myself, all the Week I must be in the Shop, and on Sundays,
I must be at Church, and from thence home again to read in the Bible, or some
other Book, I am fobb'd off with any thing; there is never a Prentice in the
Street but goes better dressed than I, and has more liberty. I dine with the
Maids, and that not till the Victuals are cold, and then I must tend one of my
Master's Brats all the while, if I commit the least oversight I am thrash'd
without mercy; in short, it is a Hell upon Earth, and if you don't take care to
have me turned over, I Am resolved to run away to Sea, or any whether. Pray,
dear Mother, send me a little Money, for my Master takes away all my vails. I am,

Your Dutiful Son, Jonathan Tomsons.


This youn^ster, (said I) is sick of the Mother; for which (answered Brook) the
Gallows is generally the Cure; the Observation (pursued Grave) is too true, for
the Indulgence of the Parent, makes all the Methods of honest living uneasy to
the Child; so that he only learns to spend (continued Winter) in his
Prenticeship, and to steal when he comes for himself. No wonder (said Church)
we seldom observe the Golden mean in our Lives, when our Parents are so unequal
in our Education. True (added Summer) for the exteams of severity, and fondness
prescribe blind measures to them. Of the two (said Temple) Severity is the less
dangerous. I am of the same mind (said Fountain) as well as your Friend Horace,
who is for using Youth to Labor, and Hardship. That indeed (said Chapel) is
the Mother of Virtues, whilst ease enervates the Soul, and Body too. It renders
all Conditions uneasy (concluded Brook) and makes this Lad like too many of
his Station complain of that regularity of Life, they ought to be kept to; that
Virtue with their Years might grow habitual, for a Habit in Virtue, or Vice is
more durable than Precepts of right, or wrong.

LETTER XIX.
From a barren Woman to a Doctor, to desire his Advice what to do to Conceive.
'Twas directed to Dr. Chapter -- at his Lodgings in Old --, near Charing Cross,
London.
This was enclosed in another to Mrs. Bush, with Orders to give the Doctor his
Fees.

Honored Dr.
BY my Cousin I have sent you a Fee; I desire your Advice what Method to take,
that I may bear a Child to my Husband, who seems much dissatisfied that I am
Barren, and that I fear alienates his Heart from me, he having a good Estate,
and no kindness for him that will next inherit it, if he die issueless; I am
apt to think it is his fault though having had the same Fate with a forme^ Wife,
though he is as Promising a Man as one shall see. I am therefore resolved to try
all means possible to gratify him, and my self too in having a dear Babe, and
being a Mother. Your Skill in these Affairs has made me address my self to you.
who am Sir,

Your unknown Servant, E. B.


Alas! poor Lady (said Brook) the Skill of the Doctor is often nonplus'd in
this Case: The truth out is (said River) her case is something desperate, and
her Fee as good as thrown away. Ladies that have tried Remedies for this (said
I) have generally found the change of Bed-fellows more beneficial than the Bath
or Wells. This Lady (answered Summer) seems to be, much of that opinion.
Handsomely hinting (added Temple) that the defect lies in her Husband; and by
cons^quence (said Fountain) that she hoped she might improve under an ab^er
Husbandman. She has furnished herself (said Chapel) with a good Plea for
Cuckolding her Husband, that is the consulting his desire, to wrong the next
Heir of the Estate. If a Woman (said Winter) have a mind to a thing she will soon
^^ad a Reason to justify it, as well as a oppertunity to effect it. But
supposing the best (sa^d Church) all that I can observe is, that she has a
wondrous mind to be a Mother, because she is not so. It Is our Nature (concluded
Grave) to slight the present, and covet the absent Blessing; and so in a
perp^tual Circle.

LETTER XX.
From a younger Brother to his Mistress in Town, that had sent him word she was
with Child by him, to advise her to lay it to another. 'Twas directed to Mrs.
Sarah Ruthland, a Semptress, at the Sign of the... in the Strand, London. With
Care and Speed.
Dear Flesh and Blood,
YOu send me word you are afraid you are with Child, you foolish Chit, could
you not play with more discretion, but since it is so, if you love me or your
self provide for the worst, you know, or might know, all my subsistence is upon
an old Aunt, that is so plaguily Religious, that she would cashier me quite if
she should know me guilty of this little Venial slip, her allowance is short
enough already, as you know to your cost. Therefore admit of the Addresses of
the old Hypocrite, that has made such Broad-sides to you, by that means you will
provide both for the Child, and its Mother too. Be not over squemish, what,
though he has not been able to get a Child since the days of our Forefathers,
he is rich, and has a mind to be nibling defer his Appetite no longer, but take
my advice, who am thy ever faithful Loving,

R. Robinson.


Here Is good Husbandry in whoring (said Temple) Ay, and good Contrivance too
(replied Chapel) his Mistress finds him Linen doubtless, and he you see
(pursued Summer) supplies her with a good Father to a Child of his own
begetting. How Prudence and Gratitude (said Brook) march hand in hand! It Is a
common practice (said Fountain) for Ladies of her Station to have two Fathers
to their Offspring, a natural, and adopted. Inverting the Roman custom (said
I) for, here the Child adops the Father. The holy Fornicacor (said River) in
the mean while is like to pay sa^ce for the Back-s^iding. It Is sit Hypocrisy
(said Church) should purchase the Vanity it gains in the Esteem of the World,
at the expense of its private Idol Mammon. They are such intimate Friends
(pursued Winter) that methinks they should rejoice to support one another, on^y
the Friendship of Iniquity is not very cordial. Thus every Vic^ and Folly
(concluded Grave) has a train of secret Punishments, linck'd fast to it.

LETTER XXI.
From a Jealous Wife, to her Husband in Town. 'Twas directed to Mr. Smith, to
be left for him at the Sun Coffee-house in the Strand, London. With Care.
Mr. Smith,
I Wonder what detains you in London thus long, I Am very sure the business you
went about might have been finished in one quarter of the time; but I suppose
you delay your return, to be the longer out of my hated company with your
Harlots. Well, well, Mr. Smith, you must pretend no more to the name of a
Gentleman, when you came a wooing to me, you swore a thousand Oaths 'twas for
love of my Person, and not my Money, but you have not only broke all them, but
your Marriage Vow too. I received a hypocritical Letter from you the other day,
but I found it sealed with another Body's Seal. In short, Mr Smith, either
reform, or I protest I Will not live with you, and if you return not quickly,
I Will come to Town, and rout you out of your holes. What, though I am a little
older than you, I am amiable enough in other Eyes, and if I were so minded, I
could revenge my self in another way, but I scorn the thought on it, and only
wish you could be as constant, and virtuous as my self, who am your faithful,
though injured Wife,

Mar. Smith.


This Gentleman (said Winter) is Wiv'd, or I Am mistaken. He had his choice
(answered Brook) you find by this Letter. True (said I) Money, and Age. It Is fit
therefore (pursued River) he have his punishment for perverting the end of
Matrimony; that is (added Summer) a scold, and jealous. She that is jealous
(said Fountain) must be a scold. But (said Chapel) I cannot understand why one
of our Poets calls Jealousy the Ia^ndice of the Soul, that Distemper holding
no Analogy with it; that renders the Body heavy, weak, and drousie. Right, but
Jealousy (pursued Temple) makes the mind active, stirring, and perpetually in
motion. He scarce deserves pity (said Church) since he could expect no other
when he married, and he that sees a Danger, and will not avoid it deserves to
perish in it; and truly (concluded Grave) the speady way to ruin, is such a
Wife, who affords no ease at home, but condems her Husband torments there, or
the Fate of the Jews abroad, rambling. But here is another has a mind to
venture into the Noose. Here Is Love in abundance, whatever there is of Wit.

LETTER XXII.
From a Dwarf, to a tall Lady, with whom he was in Love. 'Twas directed to
Madam Carew, at Mr. Barral's, in the Pall Mall, London.
Madam, Oxford, June 1692.
IT IS not Absence, which your Cruelty has commanded, that can efface that
lovely Image your Eyes have formed in my faithful Bosom. I have, it is true, but
to no purpose, retired to Oxford, to see if Books, and learned men would bring
me any Relief, but I find Philosophy is of no power to root out a Passion that
is once admitted, whatever it may to defend us from an Invasion. I tell you,
Madam, Love in my Breast is with greater difficulty removed, than Foreign Aids
out of the distressed Kingdom they are called in to assist; Love has subdued me
all, and I am entirely a Slave. Despise not my Stature, Madam, for though my Body
be dwarsish. my Soul is greater than that of the six-foot-high Lover; it
actuates this little World with more free Agility, and my Perceptions, and
Operations of Mind are less confined, and clogged; there is a ^earer
correspondence betwixt my Heart, the Seat of Life, and Love, and the other
subservient parts of my Body. In short, I can imagine no advantage the big men
have over me, unless it be the damming up the nobler part of Man, the Soul,
with a greater quantity of heavy and lumpish Clay, which renders its Passions,
and Virtues less perfect, Wit, Courage, and Love being all more languid in them
than us. Big men are very often Cowards, and very seldom witty, and ingenious.
I confine these Observations, Madam, to the Men, since the composition, and
matter of a Woman is of a finer, and more delicate Mould, nearer akin to the
Essence of her Soul; and I venerate that quality in your self, Madam, it
rendering you more like to Heaven, since I lift up my longing Eyes to both, though
my Prayers soar no higher than your self, the glorious Image of the bright
Empyreal; besides, the difference of your Stature would demonstrate your
Authority, and Rule over me; for I desire to be eternally your Slave. Oh that
your Compassion, and Justice would let me sacrifice my person on the fair Altar
of your lovely Bosom, as I have already my Heart on those of your Eyes. If Love
be Merit, none deserves you more; and sure whatever we may the other, the
heaven of Woman is gained by Merit. Your Rigor makes me bold, and vain, it
forces me to boast, that as I deserve you better than any man, so that none
shall bear you from me, whilst there is a Soul within the despised Body of your
Faithful Slave,

Rob. Petite.


The little Gentleman (said Chapel) seems to be extremely in Love, though his
descant upon tall men, methinks, is not so proper a Topic to a Lady that lies
under the same circumstance, left she should turn it to her self. But he has
taken care of that (answered Temple) by a handsome applying the Defect in Man to
a Perfection in Woman. The truth on it is, (said Summer) his little Body seems
to be well filled with Spirit. And by his Indignation one would think (pursued
Brook) that he had the character Statius gives of Tydeus, in hismind, Major in
exiguo regnabat corpore virtus; that is, The greater Soul the lesser Body
filled. I can never blame that Assurance he expresses, (said I) since it is not
the effect of Vanity, but Necessity; for a Woman that slights a Lover for his
Modesty, is generally won by the contrary quality. Right (continued Winter) and
a man that is too sensible of his own Defects, will never gain the Lady he
pretends to. He may well pretend (said Grave) to merit her, when the depraved
Appetite of Woman is such, that she will not ^ilk the variety and extravagance
of her Pleasure, if an Hobgoblin were the Object, had (...) but some imperfect
shape of Man, or the most deformed disguise of Body, to hide the Terror of the
Spirit. You have always a good word for the fair Sex, (said Church) but I cannot
think your Reflection just, since without doubt it reaches not all that soft
Comfort of Mankind. That Is granted (answered Fountain) but still the merits of
Form, or Fancy prevails with the Sex, more than those of Wit, and Parts. But
(concluded River) we laboring under the same Error, cannot condemn them without
including our selves. However, I wish the Merits of the Mind of this little
Gentleman may prevail, though I confess, a little Husband seems to have been
taken out of the side of a tall Wife, and not she out of his.

LETTER XXIII.
From a young Lady, that had been betrayed by Love to the Embraces of a young
Gallant, who had got her with Child, to whom she sends this Letter, to desire
him to save her Honor, and by some means help her to something that may cause
Abortion. 'Twas directed to Mr. Richards, at his Chamber in the -- Temple,
London.
My dear False one, ^omfret, 1692.
WHY did you betray me by so many Vow^, and Sighs, to believe you loved me? O^,
why did you pursue my Ruin because I loved you? ^s Mankind so strange a
Creature that we cannot love him without Ruin, nor hate him without the
imputation of Hypocrisy, and Cruelty? Sure you have bewitched me, to make me
still love him that I perceive has not only u^done me, but contemns me for what
he treacherously betrayed my easy Heart to grant! Ah, if you have no Love*
show some Regard to my Misfortune, of which your self are Author, and send me
some Medicine to procure Abortion, that so, at least by adding a fresh Crime to
my former, I may secure my Reputation, tho I have lost my Innocence. Your own
Safety is concerned in this, as well as my Happiness, for you may be sure my
Brother will never forgive the Injurer of the Honor of his Family. I can no
more at present for crying, to find what a condition my fond Credulity has
brought me to, I am, false man, cruel, unkind, dear man, thy unhappy

E. R.


Well, did Periander say (cried Grave) that Consideration was all in all? True
(continued Winter) for that would redeem Mankind from all its Follies, if he
weighed but the inconveniences of all his actions. This poor Lady (said
Church) indeed, perhaps, would have saved her self a lasting trouble by that
means. She is one of the million of daily Examples (said River) of the
forsaken, believing Sex. Consideration (said Brook) would have told her, that
Man generally seeks that with earnestness which he quits with ease, when once
obtained. And that (pursued I) in Ambition as well as Love: Thus Dioclesian,
that waded through Blood to Empire, when he was in the securest enjoyment of
it, forsook it. So violent (said Summer) and inconsiderate are all our
Passions, and so changeable our Desires However equal the Folly, and Crime may
be, (said Temple) in the wanton Dalliances of Love, I Am sure the Woman goes
away with the Shame, as well as Pain. It Is pity (said Fountain) that there is
that Ignominy attends the propagation of our kind, that those whom Heaven has
made fruitful, should be obliged to desire its Curse Barrenness, for that
Blessing, as this Lady does. As for her, (concluded Chapel) I find by the
Letter her Honor may be salv'd, and her Child saved, since there is a violent
Brother in the case, who commonly ^^kes the inconstant man pay his Liberty for
his Frolic.

LETTER XXIV.
From a Lady, who consents to a Debauch, upon condition that her Husband agreed
to it. 'Twas directed to Mr. Wealby, at his House near Brumly in Kent.
SIR, London, June 1692.
YOU have so importuned me with Letters, and Addresses, that in my own defense
I must send you an Answer, in which is my final Resolve: I am not so cruel to
neglect his Sufferings, which I have caused, or to slight a man that I have
reason to think values me; I shall therefore do any thing to satisfy your
Passion, that I can do without prejudice to my Husband, but if he consent,
there can be no Injury done him. Perhaps this Proposal is not so extravagant as
it may seem, for Money is his God, and his Love too: So that if I am worth the
purchasing, I dare say, he will scarce overvalue me. This Sir, I hope, will free
me from your Addresses, or else satisfy your Desires, which I wish with all my
Heart, who am

Yours to command, Bab. Rock.


This is one of the oddest sort of conditional Consents to a Debauch (said
Temple) I ever met with in my life. Nay, if she will yield (said Winter) to her
Lover, with the consent of her Husband, he has cause enough to believe she
will not long resist without it. For my part (said Chapel) I rather take it for a
Banter, than her real meaning. The truth on it is (answered Summer) it is not
very reasonable to think the Husband will ever consent to his own cuckoldom.
Oh! you're under a great mistake (replied Fountain) for there is many a man will
put his Horns in his Pocket, if they are but Silver-gilt. Nay, the Air of the
Letter (continued Church) seems to intimate the Husband's consent already
obtained. Right (pursued Brook) on the condition aforesaid money will do all
things. The City of London (said I) has not been barren of Examples of this
nature, to my knowledge. In short, (said River) the Letter is so
cunningly-worded, that she comes off with credit if the Gallant be stingy, and
gains her point if the Money be forthcoming. Nay, where Vice is to be managed
with dexterity (concluded Grave) commend me to a Woman, especially when she has
either Pleasure, or Profit in it.

LETTER XXV.
From a poor Sine-Cure to a young Heir newly come to his Estate, who had a
Benefice in his Gift; for a little present Relief, and also for a Benefice.
Directed to Th. Ch..., Esquire to be left at Will's Coffee-house in Bow-street near
Covent Garden.
Honored Sir, Stafford, 1692.
I Would send you the Benediction of the Church, if I thought you would value
it from the hands of a poor Sine Cure, as much as I shall the Blessing I desire
from you. However, the Honor I had to be so intimate with you at the
University, gives me the assurance of my Coat, to beg the favor of you to
bestow something of your Bounty on me, for it is my fortune to be at present
Journyman-Curate to your Parson, who saves the expense of his Journey out of the
Allowance he gives me, and therefore by the by, Sir, I hope you will give me the
Advouson, that if the old Gentleman be gathered up to his Fathers, at the Bath,
whither he is gone for the cure of his Body, not Mind, I may officiate with the
greater zeal, when the Advantage flows into my own Purse. The Scripture says,
That he that takes to the Altar, must live by the Altar. Truly, I wish your
Worship would put me into a capacity of complying with this Precept; for if
there were no better Altars than mine in the Nation, the Clergy might dwindle
down to crape Gowns, and Small Beer, and be as out at Heels as

Your humble Servant, Josiah Wittis.


A witty fellow this (said Temple) but none of the most pious. One would think
his Poverty, and Affliction (continued Fountain) should have taken away his
jocose humor. No, no, a man that is-that way ^nclin'd (answered River) if he
were dying, would have his Jest like Sir Thomas Moor, on his Beard. What, (said
Chapel) when he took his Beard, when he was laying down his Head on the Block,
and told the Executioner his warrant was to cut off his Head, and not his
Beard? If he would have his Jest, (pursued Brook) he might have learnt in the
School of Affection to be a little more devout. Oh, that is a vulgar Error
(returned Summer) to think that Devotion springs from Poverty, with any more
Certainty than Repentance from a Deathbed Sickness. No, no, (continued Church)
Affliction seldom meliorates our Lives, and most men under them are like Boys
only hardn'd by Severity. And contrive rather to increase their crimes (added
Winter) to ease their Necessities, than by a better, and more regular life. Too
many of the Clergy (said I) make a Jest of Religion, both in their practice,
and words. There is this to be said for the excuse of this man (concluded
Grave) because his Necessity obliges him to take that method in writing, which
may please the lewd Humor of his Patron.

LETTER XXVI.
From a Citizen to one in the Country, who had his Bastard to maintain. 'Twas
directed to Mrs. Gosted at her House near Rumfo^d in Essex.
Dear Mrs. Gosted,
HAve a little patience, I protest, as soon as I can get a little Money, without
my Wifes knowing it, I Will send it you: I have sent you Twenty shillings by the
Rumford Coachman, I would not have it known for the World: I hope the Child is
well, you need not fear your Money, I Will omit no opportunity of getting it up,
and that with all the speed I can: Come, come, 'twas a delicious slip of
Nature, and if Grace be wanting, and such a tempting Creature opportune, come,
there is none, tho more precise than my self, but would do the same. Therefore,
good Mistress Gosted, have a care of my little Bantling, it may chance to be my
Heir if I outlive my Wife, for it is a finer Boy than any she has had by me.
Dear Mistress Gosted, I have sent you a dozen of Gloves for a present. I am

Yours to command, Dan. Rab.


Here Is a Hen-peckt Slave (said Temple) has ventured upon Adultery. Tho he
cannot purlion (added Chapel) enough from his Lady-wife to pay for the keeping
of his Bastard. How epidemic, and powerful is Lust (said Grave) against which
no station almost can secure us. The Divine steals time (pursued Winter) from
the Apocalypse, to reveal his frailty to a whore. The Lawyer (continued Church)
that cheats in his Study, is bubbl'd in a Bawdy House. The Philosopher (added
Fountain) retires from the disquisition of the Mineral Kingdoms, to find out
the way of a young man with a maid. Which is a difficult search (said River) if
we believe Solomon. The very busy trading Citt (assumed I) can find his
leisure hours from Oppression, for this Peccadillo. The Poor, (said Summer) and
the Rich fall within the Observation. And the Tyrants of their Familys
(concluded Brook) as well as the obedient Husbands, of this Spark's Kidney.

LETTER XXVII.
From a Lawyer to his Knight of the Post, about a Cause he was to swear in,
with Instructions in the case. This Letter was wrote in Characters, but the
company at last deciphered it thus:
'Twas directed to Major Bince, to be left for him at the Hand Coffeehouse in
White-Fryers.
Dear Major, Wil^shire, June 169^
BE sure you be not out of the way by the first day of the next Term, for then
the Cause comes on; I have told you what you are to swear, be sure you remember
all the Circumstances, and Directions I gave you, use your self to assert it in
the mean time in company, and by their Objections you may find how to
strengthen your Evidence on the day of Trial. If you, and your Creature do the
Work effectually, I Will add ^ten Guineas to what we have agreed for; if we
baff^le the Plaintiff this bout, I know his Abilities so well, that he can
never be able to bring it about again, and when I have him at my mercy, never
fear, I Will secure him from ever attempting it. I have sent a Token to you by my
man Dick, who left Croom a fortnight since, so I suppose you have received it.
Let me (...) from you, if you want my Advice in any thing of the matter, who am
your faithful Friend,

W. H.


Here Is a pure piece of Knavery, (cried out Rivers) the Law that is ordained
for the security of our Property, is managed by the Sons of Belial to the ruin
of Hundreds. It Is as dangerous (said I) to venture to engage with a Lawyer in a
Suit of Law, as with a Fencing-master in a Duel; Death, and Rain's the
consequence. The Fable of the Dog, and the Sheep (pursued Brook) is his
parallel, the Vultures, Kites, and Wolves, all give in evidence against the
defenseless Sheep. So that our Estates are upon a ^cklish point (said Church)
for if there can be no Law against a Knavish Lawyer, they will be our own no
longer, than till they can get a Finger in them. True (continued Fountain) he
that has the power, and the will to do an Injury, will easily find an occasion.
This Spark is perfect in his Trade (said Chapel) for he has give^ him the
Receipt of a Liar, to tell his Story so often over, that at last he asserts it
as if he really believed it himself. In short, (said Grave) the whole Affair is
a Iuggle, and he that pretends to get by the Law, must be none but a Lawyer;
for let the Plaintiff, and Defendant have never so good a Cause, the Counsels
run away with the Bone from both. Their numero^s Volumes of Interpretation of
Statutes, and Precedents, etc. (said Temple) have only served to confound the
whole, and make it as doubtful as the true Religion. As the old man that
consulted three Lawyers on a point in Law, found it (pursued Summer) you have
earned your Fees, said he, for you have increased my Ignorance, and I am
farther to seek now, than I was at first. But methinks (concluded Winter) ^
Lawyer that is a Knave, and prophanes the Sanctuary of the wronged, deserves
Death and Torments without Mercy, and is far more injurious to the
Commonw^alth, than a whole Band of Robbers.

LETTER XXVI^I.
From a Lady in the Country to another in London; giving an account of a Dream
she had. 'Twas directed to Madam Lock, at her House in Charle's-street,
Westminster.
Dear Madam,
I Was extremely surpised to hear the News of your Daughters Marriage to Mr.
Softstead, for the very night before I had this Dream, methought I was walking
out into the Meadow just above my Cousin Iohnson's House, all alone, and of a
sudden I heard a great deal of Music, but could see no body, though methought I
heard a great many Men and Women. After that methought my dead Husband was
alive, and brought me home a whole Cargo of Diamonds, Rubies, and precious
Stones, I was so over joy'd at the Treasure, that I awaked, and your Son
arrived here, and told me his Sister was to be Married that very day; but
having Company here I could not come, but I hope my Dream may presage her
Wealth, and Content, my Drea^s are always om^nous. Little Betty is very bad of
an Ague, this Kentish Air does not agree with her, and I begin to be weary of
the Country; and wish for your good Company, whom am,

Your humble Servant, Ruth Fall.


Now cannot I for my Life (said Summer) find what Analogy this Dream has to the
Wedding. Full as much (answered Temple) as most Dreams have that pass for
Omens. Right (pursued Fountain) for what likeness has a Tree to Empire, yet the
Dream of Astyages, was so enterpreted to him. I am of Opinion (said Chapel)
that most of those Prognostic Dreams we find in History were made after the
Event like the Prophecies of these latter days. I Am not of your Opinion
(answered River) for it is certain that Dreams of old were the Informations of
Heaven, for when Saul came to the Witch of Endor, he complained that God
neither spoke to him by Dreams, nor, etc. Fancy the Queen of Dreams (said I)
rules most of the World more, than reality when awake, so that I know not
whether they may not be as material a part of our Lives as that which is
transacted when awake. Job seems to have as great a concern (pursued Winter)
for it, and puts it in balance with the other, Cap. 7. Verse. 17. I Am sure (said
Grave) there is so great a shar^ of our Lives spent in sleep, that we must
desire it should be as sedate, and quiet as may be. Nay (pursued Brook) the
Visionary Bliss, and Happiness, and Treasure of Dreams, for that reason, are as
desirab^e then, as the real ones when waking. Nay, the truth on it is (concluded
Church) if there be so great an uncertainty in our Knowledge of our being
asleep or awake, that it was worth the Disquisition of so great a Philosopher
as Des Carts, with so solemn a face of Seriosity, I know not whether there be
so material a Distinction betwixt our Dreams, and being awake, as the
generality of the World imagines.

LETTER XXIX.
This Letter the Company could not Decypher, but I ^ope by that time the next
Volume is printed we may find it out. 'Twas directed to Mrs. Fox, near Bow in
Essex.
716 16 208 5 12 21 20 8, 6 17 20, 4 16 22 21, 2 11 5 14, 19 16 12 21, 24, 7 22
11 11 14, 11 19, 5 20 125 7, 24 12 21, 13 2, 14 11 8 21. 8 11 22 17 20 ^6 20
87, 10 11 20 137, 720 12 21, 6 17 20, 4 17* 11 14 20, 23 11 3, 2 248 19 51 14
14 2, 6 20 24 14 21, 510, -- 16, 24 13, 2 11 58, 14 11 5 16 12 18 7 16 76 20 8*
13 ^4 82, 19 11 3.


LETTER XXX.
From a Prisoner almost starved, to his cruel Creditor. 'Twas directed to
Alderman Stage, at his House near Dover in Kent.
SIR, Wood-street-Counter, 1692.
I Know not but this may be the last time I shall be able to trouble you; I
have had nothing but the Common Basket to live upon this half Year, and we are
so numerous that that is not sufficient to find us subsistence. You know I
never was extravagant, and that you are my only Creditor that confine me to
this hated place, if I were at liberty, I would with all my heart give all that
I can earn, more than what will keep me alive, toward the satisfaction of your
self, for the rest will stay till you are discharged, my Death can do you no
good, but my Life, and Liberty may. I desire your speedy Answer, for else it
may come too late, Sickness and Imprisonment will soon make an end of me, and
then you will lose all your Money. I am

Your unfortunate Debtor, James Truehest.


This is one of the most barbarous Customs (said Church) in the World, and
which scarce any other Nation is guilty of, to permit such as are not able to
pay to be kept in Prison. It Is foolish, and preposterous (said Temple) as well
as barbarous, for instead of the Creditors getting the Debt, it only makes sure
that he shall never have it. How much better is the Custom of France (said
River) where the Debtor's Goods, and Books are feiz'd upon, and two parts
divided among his Creditors, and a third left him to begin again. A Debtor here
in England (said Brook) is in a worse Condition than a Felon, who by burning in
the Hand may come off with Life and Liberty, or at worst, after a time to
prepare himself by Death, freed from a Goal Right (pursued Fountain) but a
Debtor is for his life confined to a loathsome Prison, and the Tyranny of
pro^^igate Rascals, that will f^eece the poor Unfortunates of even that
wretched Remainder that is left them. We punish Poverty (said Grave) as if
'twere a Crime, and honor Wealth as if 'twere Virtue And if a Prince by an Act
of Indulgence (said I) attempt the relief of the most necessitous, their very
necessity shall be the only cause they shall not have the benefit of it. True
(added ^happel) for the Fees of the merciless Goalers must be got though hundreds
of the wretches cannot rais^ the tenth part of 'em. And then these Acts are
generally perverted; (said Summer) for the Men of the Law, who have the
Regulation of 'em ^are 'em monstrously to gratify the spightful Creditors.
Malice, Revenge, Cruelty and Pride (concluded Winter) dispose our Actions in
this as well as other Affairs of the World. We are made up of various Nations,
which I think makes us delight in such cruelty to one another.

LETTER XXXI.
From a Superstitious old Gentleman to a Clergyman, about disposing of some
Estate to a Pious use. 'Twas directed to Dr. B --, at his House in
Watling-stree^, London.
Reverend Dr. Epsom, June* 1692.
SInce I left London I find my self worse, and these Epsom-waters are of no
effect, the time of the Lord is coming I find, and if it be his blessed Will to
take me away, his will be done, only I desire that you would dispose of the two
thousand Pounds I ordered my Goldsmith to pay you if I die, to some Pious u^e.
That as I have received plentifully from the Lord I may return it in some
measure to him in good Deeds. I commend my self to your good Prayers, and those
of all your Congregation. I would not have my undutiful Daughter Betty, that
married without my Consent have one Farthing of it, if she want it she may
thank herself, it is fit she be punished for her Disobedience. Pray send me your
wholesome Admonitions, that it may wean my thoughts from this World, and
prepare me for a better. I have always been an honourer of the Clergy, a lover
of my King and Country, and therefore I hope the Lord will have Mercy on my
Soul, which I commend to your Prayers, whom am Sir,

Your faithful humble Servant, J. Grevil.


To read the beginning of this Letter (said Grave) one would think this Man is
in perfect Peace with the World, who is so ready, and willing to appear before
the dreadful Tribunal of God, and yet we find before be reaches half way this
short Letter, his Rancour breaks out against his own Child, for so trivial a
Fault too (continued Temple) as the following her own Inclinations, which
doubtless he had indulged till then himself. For all his Piety (said I) he can
die in hatred and anger against his own Child; yet blaspheme God (pursued
River) with a boast of his Innocence; but you find he reckons not his Duty to
his Children any part of his Justification, thinking the perfection of
Christian Life consists in honoring the Clergy, the King, and Country, without
regard to any private Duties. Oh! for all the breach of those, (answered
Summer) like others of his City Tribe, he will (...) by giving largely to God,
who had given largely to him; as if it were not giving to God (said Fou^tain)
to relieve the necessities of his own Flesh and Blood. No, no, the force of
Bigottry, and Superstition (replied Winter) have prevailed on the contrary. The
Clergy, like Father Dominic in the Spanish Friar concluding that they that are
so charitably* (...) can have no private Transgressions to be redress^d.
Bigottry (said Chapel) is a Devotion formed by the Passions of Mankind, and is
Hood-winked by Fancy, beyond the light of Religion to direct, and in matters of
this nature it is very like Hypocrisy, setting up public Monuments of Man's
Righteous^ess, at the expense of his private Obligations. Well may our silly
City be guilty of this (said Brook) when I find so wise a Man as Xenophon under
the same Dilemma, giving the greatest part of what he had got in his Asiatic
Expedition to Megnbyzus, Priest of Diana, to make an Image of that Goddess; and
afterward, in his retirement at S^illuns, by the Advice of the Oracle, and the
Priest laid it out in a Purch^se of Land to be consecrated to that Goddess. I
know not (concluded Church) we talk against Bigottry in Religion, but we
discover it in all our Actions, and every motion of our Understanding, not to
the Dictates of the Clergy only, but to the Opinion ^f others, for if some
reputed Wit either condemn or praise any thing, his Judgment makes it run the
same fate where e're it goes. I plead not for Bigotry by this, but only show
that it is a Vice in o^r Nature* and therefore easier found fault with than
mended.

LETTER XXXII.
From a Usurer to his Son* to take care of getting in the Interest of his
Moneys* etc. 'Twas directed to Mr. Wely the younger, next door to the Sign of
the Cock in Sice-lane, London.
DIC, From Epping-Forest, June 1692
I Charge you on my Blessing to lay out no Money on Clothes, you have had that
Suit but a Year, and ^alf, and I can make a Suit serve me ten Year^, go to Mr.
Pendal, at Greys-Inn, Mr. Gamell, at his Lodging in the Strand, and to Mr. Port
in Sobo-Square, and tell 'em if I have not forbearance paid down immediately
I Will take the For^eiture of my Mortgages. I charge you hearken no more to the
Shams of the Lace-man, but arrest him immediately, and bring an Execution on
his Body and Goods, for I have a Judgment; I shall lose Two hundred Pounds
before it has got me twice its value else. Be quick in your dispatch, and make
haste into the Country, for the Town is chargeable now you cannot di^e at home.
Good Dick, make haste to;

Your poor Old Father, R. Gold.


This Man (said Church) is another of the City Tribe. True (pursued Temple) and
Gold is his God, as well as Name. Fool (answered Grave) is his true Name, for
he is not so much a Philosopher as the Dungil-Cock in Aesop, who would not give
himself the needless trouble of preserving, that he could make ^o use of. But
Man (said Winter) pursues what he should avoid, and avoids what he should
pursue. Right (assumed I) none else would for a wretched Debauch, and a Bottle
bring himself into the Clutches of these Misers, their Statutes (added River)
their Banks, and Warrants. Man (said Church) is certainly a very stupid kind of
Animal, that all the Examples of Follies punished in the Forefathers, should
not correct the Posterity to more Sense. True (continued Fountain) but like
People on a full carrier on the Ice, all slide directly into the same bole they
saw their Companion sink into just before them. So many ^^ttring Beaux (said
Summer) being reduced too greazy Alsatian Sharpers, one would think should ^ake
the rest better Husbands. No, no (concluded Brook) this Blindness, and Folly is
necessary for the circulation of Estates, as Trade is for that of Money, Nature
turns private Vices to put public Advantages.

LETTER XXXIII.
Of Courtship from a Quaker; directed to Tabitha, the Daughter of William
Goyle, at his House near Chelmsford in Essex.
Tabitha,
I Have told thee that the Spirit moved me to (...) thee to my Bosom, and make
thee turn the Vessel to me, that I might raise up Seed to the Lord, and his
holy one, yea verily when I see (...) my heart does yearn like the Daughters of
Sio^* when they lost their Beloved* Have a care Tabit^^* let not the wicked
Spirit enter thy Tabernacle, and ^o defile the vessel of thy Body, which was
ma^e for the Godly, Ha-a-um -- Ta^itha, Friend William, thy Father according to
the Flesh is full of the Spirit, and when he begot thee he begot a Daughter to
Sion as stately as the City of Jerusalem, and as pleasant as the Mountains of
Gilead, thy Breath as sweet as the Cedars of Olybanum, thy Belly is like the
Downs, where the Lambs of the Lord should skip and frisk, and play. Ah!
Tabitha, my Spirit is mightily troubled within me, and the outward Man cannot
rest till Tabitha receive him in the way of the Godly on her Bosom, which is
softer than the Lillies of the Valleys. The third Day of the Seventh's Month I
will come to see thee. Who am thy Friend,

Eliachim Snush.


Certainly a Quaker in Love (said I) is like a Monkey sick. The Figure I
confess (said Brook) (...) needs be very odd. In their most serious Actions
(said Winter) one would think them mad; what then (interrupted Temple) must
their foolishness be? The truth on it is (said Summer) they never look like Men,
but in their Shops. Why so (interrupted Fountain) because they cheat with a
Face of (...)? No other reason can I perceive (said ^^appel.) They are proud
(said River) in the Ha^^^ of Humility, Professors of Patience in Injuries,
(...) the most violent Revengers of what they (...) so. And preposterous (added
Church) (...) in their Aff^ctation of Humility, in a (...) plain (...) Mant and
Peticoat, condemning the Country (...) in her Bone-lace Coif. In his
Conversation (...) Grave) a Hypocrit^, in Religion a (...) Love most certainly
a Fool.

LETTER XXXIII.
From Mrs. Brittaign to her Correspondant in the Country. It Was directed to Mrs.
Grummet, a Miliner in Canterbury, in Kent.
Mrs. Grummet,
WInter now coming on, the Town will fill (...) from beyond Sea, and the
Nobility out of the County, pray see to send me up some delic^^ fresh Country
Lasses, let them be very pretty, (...) shaped and limbed, no matter how mean, a
(...) Dress, and a little Instructions will make 'em (...), I have had those
off from a Common* in (...) who have raised their Fortunes under me, (...) been
Companions ^or Knights, and Lords, ^ay (...) married some of them too after
they had do^^ (...) good Service; let them be very young, just (...) Man, then
they will be most tractable, and bes^ formed into a gentile Habit and Air.

Your Friend, Brittaign.


Subscribed (said Church) like a Bawd of Quality. As inde^d she is (pursued
Temple) for it cost her no less in Intelligence of this nature all over the
Nation than Four hundred Pounds a Year. At her House (continued River) you need
never want fresh Faces, as long as you have Money, nor fresh Lasses neither
(said Winter) at this rate. But every good thing when it is perverted to a Trade
(said Brook) is soon corrupted, and so is this; for the same Woman shall be
sold to twenty Lords, Knights, and Squires, for a Maid, Each paying (said
Summer) the price of her Virginity? Even so (answered Fountain) Cheats in all
Traffic you know Summer. Nay, to say truth on it, (said Chapel) this Lady by
the assistance of the Indian Women can help a Man to Beauty, and Quality; nor
is any Man's Wife safe (said I) that is handsome, so many shapes do her Agents
take to insinuate ^^to their Companies, and delude 'em into Opportunities, and
as Almahide says, opportunity half of our Sex are undone by thee. Bawds I think
(concluded Grave) deserve Death more than any Animal beside, they are the
Corruption of Families, and rob a Man not ^nly of his Wives, and Daughters
Affections, but Virtue, Honor, and Reputation.

LETTER XXXIV.
From a City Wife to her Prentice, enviting him to Epsom upon his Master's
absence. 'Twas directed to Mr. Young, to be left at the Hand, and Pen in
Billeter-Lane, London.
My dear Boy,
YOur Master designs next Week for the West, and therefore I expect you once a
Week at farthest with me; you need not let any know whether you go, come out of
Town on Saturday Evenings, so that you may get to Epsom by night. I Will remove
my Lodging to the place I was at last Year, do not fail, and there we'll enjoy
one another without Interruption.

A. M.


Here is a Lady (said I) that can be lewd without the expense of a Bawd. One of
the City-strain (pursued River) that had rather embrace her smooth young
Prentice, than the Old doting Alderman. I know not (said Grave) but the Women
will always have some pretenc^ for their Lewdness. Right (said Winter) if her
Husband be old he is impotent, and morose. If young (continued Chapel) he is
wild, and spends all his Stock abroad, and so to the end of the Chapter. This
way of taking up with the Prentice (said Fountain) is very frugal, I confess
True, (pursued Brook) and very convenient. And therefore (added Church) very
common. Which is commonly (said Summer) the ease, and ruin of the Prentice.
And (...) (concluded Temple) they cannot resist the Temptation, if the Mistress
be handsome as thy Story may (...) you. There was one of these City Wives
caught i^ this manner by the Husband, who civilly repre^^nding the Prentice,
charged him, it should be so is more, but finding that Admoni^ion of little
force (...) sent for the Parson of the Parish, to preach up (...) ^einousness
of the Offense to him; which made (...) young Sinner in his own Vindication
say, his Mistress envited him to do it; But you should imi^ate Joseph,
(answered the Man of God) who ran (...) his Mistress, and left his Garment in
her hands. (...) was the wonder of that, replied the Prentice, (...) from the
Embraces of an ugly Gypsy, but he (...) have been hanged before he would have
left (...) pretty a Mistress as mine. Which answer con^^^'d the Parson that
'twas in vain to preach Re^^tance to Youth, who pe^ve^ted even the Scripture
(...) ^atter its failings.

LETTER XXXV.
From a young Heir newly come to a great Estate, to one of his Comrades here i^
Town. 'Twas directed to Mr. Snow, to be left for him at Richard's Coffee House,
near Temple Bar.
Dear Jack,
MY old Dad has thought good to quit (...) world in search of a better, though
'twere (...) long while first. It Is a folly to grieve sor't, (...) an
hypocrisy, since he was a morose Gentlem^^ while he lived, and kept his Money
as if 'twere (...) to be touched, but dying left it all to me near Tw^^^ty
thousand Pounds Jack* the shining Dirt I (...) would not keep him alive that
loved it so well, (...) Faith I am resolved not to be so fond of that, (...)
good Wine, an honest Fellow, and an obedie^^ balmy Girl. As soon as the
ceremonious Formal^ties of the Funeral are over, and Affairs settled (...) a
good Posture, I Am for delicious London, where intend to wound the Ladies
tender, in my Gla^^ Chariot, and carouse, and frolic with my Friend^^ whilst
Youth lasts; Old Age, or Death I find wi^^ overtake us in time; it is therefore
good to mak^ sure of the present Joys; the Possession of (...) Friendship is
not the least of them to thy Friend,

Du. Charleton*


Here Is one of the Race of Fools (said Grave) who thinks Happiness consists in
drinking, and who^ing. And so he will think* (pursued Winter) till the Pox, and
Poverty convince him, he is in an as great an Error as his parcimonious Father
was; in li^ing miserable (pursued I) to leave such a Block^^ad an Estate. We
are of such an odd Composure (said Temple) that we cannot persuade our selves to
observe a Moderation in either Plenty, or Want. Right, and most Men are
Ph^^gians (added Church) never wise till it be too late to reap any benefit of
their Wis^^^. It Is the Fate of Misers I think (said Summer) ^^ways to have
Sons, that hate them, and spend that (...) profuseness in Vice, which they got
by Oppression, (...), and Niggardliness. And I Am out in my (...) (added
Fountain) if this ^ovial Spark (...) live to do penance for his undutifulness
to his (...): So goes on the Circle of things (said (...)) Sin begets Sin; and
Sin produces (...); And the son of a Knave (pursued (...)) is commonly rain^d
by Fools, and Knaves. (...) shows Justice in Providence (concluded (...)) to
punish the Offense by the means 'twas (...).

LETTER XXXVI.
From a Father, on the Death of his Son, to his Friend. 'Twas directed to Mr.
Moore, Woollen-Draper, at his House in Wattling-street, London.
Mr. Moore, Abington 1692.
I Write to you upon a more doleful Subject, than the last time, for poor Ned
died yesterday of a Fever: 'Twas the best natured, and most dutiful Child ever
unhappy Father lost, but I hope I shall not long survive him; he was my
delight, and my safeguard, he managed all my Affairs with (...) care, and
faithfulness, that he was the Love and Admiration of all that knew him, he was
temperate, and studious, never loving Idleness, nor any Vice It Is true, he was
too good for this wicked World, and for me his unhappy Father; I had just built
him a pretty Appartment against his Wedding Day, which as I sent you word would
be soon; but alas, he is wedded to his Grave; but my comfort is, a happy
Eternity will celebrate his Nuptials. Dear Sir, send me Fourscore Yards of your
finest black Cloth for Mourning by the first opportunity, to Abington. I can
write no more, my Grief is so great. But I am yours whilst in this Life,

John Summer.


Here Is that, that is rare (said Summer) filial Duty and paternal Love meeting
together. A tender Father (pursued Fountain) and yet a deserving Son. Your
Character of him (said I) is true, for Jack Summer was known to us all. Nature,
that all the world about in other Families (said Temple) seemed to be composed
of preposterous Iarrings, seemed here to discover her primitive Beauty. True,
(pursued River) where the Son enquired not into the Father's Years; nor the
Father (added Chapel) impertinently troubled himself about the Son's Actions.
How agreeable to Reason has he lived, and what a Triumph ^as he gained (said
Grave) whose Memory's embalmed, with the Tears of him that begot him. And whose
Virtue (continued Winter) is confessed the Support of the Life of him that gave
him Life. It Is ^ity such an Example (said River) should be ravished from the
prevacariting World. The Prince of this World (concluded Brook) saw that the
force of one (...) Example would in time reform Mankind, and so banish the
Supports of his Empire's Strife, and D^struction.

LETTER XXXVII.
From a pleasant Gentleman to his Mistress, to satisfy her he loved her;
directed to Madam White, at her House in Abby-street, near Westminster.
Madam,
I Protest I cannot tell what you would have me do, I have swore to you a
thousand times, that I love; if you expect any heroic Madness to confirm it, I
profess I am not ambitious of that Honor; hanging, and drowning and stabbing,
are is my mind no more proofs of Love, than Courage, being opposite to the end
of both, Courage being the supporting of Misery, and the utmost effects of
Fortune, without sinking under them, and the end of Love is to enjoy the Object
beloved; but in the Arms of the living f^ir One, for as for the Elyzian Fields,
it is too Chymerical, and Spiritual a Happiness for a Man of Sense, and Flesh
and Blood to depend on. ^et me therefore, Madam, meet with the Death of a happy
Lover in your white, and (...) Bosom, and then if I be'nt the ara^test Cooing.
Turtle, and most faithful fond-doting Lover in the World, discard me for a
lying perjured Son of a Who^e. G^d sweet Lady, I think my Proposal is (...),
and I hope will work upon your Obstinacy so (...) not again to require any test
of the Sincerity of my Passion, so that at my return you will be ready with
open Arms to receive,

Madam, your faithful humble Servant, C. North.


If this Spark be in Love (said River) the Passion is more Iocund, and gay than
usual. H^'s like some Men (pursued Chapel) who dispatch a great deal of
business playing, and without any concern; whi^st others (assumed Fountain) are
poring perpetually over less. So you fancy (said Temple) that one Man can be
really much in Love, and yet merry, and gay; And that (assumed Summer) when his
Mistress doubts of his Affection? whilst another (pursued Brook) for so it must
be, to ran on the (...), shows all the Marks of Despair in his Face, Actions
and Discourse. For my part (said Church) there is such an Air of Indifference
in his Letter, I think he cannot be possessed with the most violent of Passions.
And Amou^^^ perhaps (said I) a transient gliding Flame, that can be
extinguished in the next Puddle he comes to. The general ^ust (said Grave)
after the whole Sex, for, that a great many of our Beaux take for Love, when
ever desire is roused by a beautiful Object. But I can never yield (concluded
Winter) that a real Passion can admit of those Pleasantries, which this Writer,
as well as the Author of Letters, and Poems, amorous, and galla^t are so very
^ond of.

LETTER XXXVIII.
From a Jew to a Christian, recriminating upon him. 'Twas directed to Mr.
Farby, Tobacconist in Broad-street, London.
SIR, Norwich, June 169^.
I Received your Letter last Week, but the Contents of it being so impertinent,
I once thought to give you no Answer, but least you should take my Silence for
a Confession of my Guilt; I shall, in short, tell you, that you not only accuse
me wrongfully, but also rail without any pretext to Sense, or Reason. First you
are under a neglectful or wilful mistake, in saying I twice charged to you the
same Hogshead of Spanish Tobacco; whereas if you consult but your own Books
you will find I have charged you with no more, than I ought, I having furnished
you with two Hogsheads since I was last cleared; one on the 25 th of May, and
another on the 1 st of this present Month. Then for all your Nonsensical Abuse
of my Religion, it is like the other gross Actions of your Life, the effect of
brutal Instinct without consulting the Faculties of a Man; Else you would have
remembered that I was of the Race of Abraham, whom you Christians confess the
Progenitor of your Messiah, and therefore merited a better Treatment from you,
you might also remember that you Christians confess us to have been once the
pecul^r People of God, and I can see no reason we have not to think our selves
so still, unless we will suppose he can either forget his Promises to Abraham,
or that he can be Changeable, as Man is: Finally if your Religion teach you
better Morals than ours (which I deny even from the Mouth of Jesus, who when he
laid down the chief Precept of his Law of, Do as you would be done by, added,
for this is the Law and the Prophets) the greater Sha^e you are so far ^ehind
us in Practice, who cheat not one another as you do, or cut another Th^oats,
for we know not what. We are not undutiful to our Parents, nor negligent of our
Children to gratify the Pride, and Revenge of our selves, or second Wives; but
if I should run the Parallel, as far as I might, 'twou'd easily be seen who are
the People of God, since you must grant the Tree is known by its Fruit. I shall
return home in a few days, and then shall convince you of the Injury you have
done.

Ephraim Ben Ezra.


The Jew in my mind (said Brook) has recriminated with a great deal of Reason.
We have (said Winter) a sort of sordid Animals among us, who think themselves
very happy, and excellent by being Christians, tho they lead Lives more tewd
and knavish, than the worst of Heathens; And have no more Morals in their
dealings (pursued Church) than the Bannians. It may be doubted indeed (said
Grave) whether these People are animated with any other Soul than that of a
Beast, they are so wholly lead by Sense. They discover so little of thought, I
must confess (added Temple) in their Actions, that one might almost believe it
without Heresy; True (assumed River) for the Soul of Man is a Cogitative
Essence. You wrong 'em (said I) for they are very thoughtful to Circumvent the
Ignorant. So are Dogs (answered Fountain) thoughtful, as their Dreams will
convince; But (interrupted Chapel) their Knaveries are so natural, that there
is no necessity to suppose them capable of a rational Thought any more, than a
Cat that watches, and feigns her self asleep to catch her Mice. For my part
(concluded Summer) I think if Morality be justly observed, there will (...) Man
of what Religion so ever be Damned for controverted doubtful Points.

LETTER XXXIX.
From a Gentleman of some Quality, to a Creditor of his. 'Twas directed to Mr.
Woodford at his House in Maiden Lane, near the Strand, London.
SIR, Wilts, June 1692.
I Am sorry I must still put you off, since you have pressed me with so much
earnestness for your Money; I have retired from Town on purpose to retrench my
Expenses, that I may be able to discharge all my Debts, but as yet I am not
able to spare so much as your Bill amounts to, tho I hope it will not be long
before I shall send to you, to your satisfaction. As for what you desired me to
buy you, I have sent it by the Carrier, but you must pardon me if I refuse to
put it to account, I freely present you with it, who am

Sir, your Friend, and Servant, J. Bowlestre.


The Writer of this Letter (said Chapel) is no less than a Baronet, born to
Two thousand a year: And writes such a servile Letter ( pursued Temple) to a
Tailor, for such is this Woodford. I know him (said Brook) by the experience of
his plagu^ Bills. This shows (said Grave) that by being in debt, one makes
(...) self the Slave of the Creditor. Debt (pursued Winter) makes a Mechanic
familiar, and saucy with Quality. But Quality (answered Church) has a Receipt
of humbling that Saw^iness, by never paying. And yet (pursued ^iver) some of
the Mechanics had rather have the honor of working for Quality, tha^ the Money
of the meaner sort. I knew a Dutch Shoemaker (added Fountain) of that humor,
and for his Work he talked Politics with them at the Coffee-house. Their Pride
(continued Summer) makes way for the others wronging 'em of their due. But
(concluded Winter) their Quality is not much honored is sharping on the Vices
of their Inferiors.

LETTER XL.
From an old Woman in love with a young Man. 'Twas directed to Mr.
Scuthborough, to be (...) for him at Hypolito's in Bridget-street near the
Theater Royal, London.
Dear Mr. Scuthborough, Oxfordshire, June 1692.
YOur repeated Letters to my Daughter, tho she has assured you of her
Pre-engagement, convince me that you are not in^ensible of Love, but I have
often told you of your fruitless Endeavors there, and how much you were her
Aversion; I have also told you, there was another Lady in the World, who would
receive your Address with a more favorable Ear, and said enough, I thought, to
make you understand whom I meant, if my Eyes had not been sufficient to have
betrayed the Secret to you. I am unwilling to think my Age, or Fortune so
contemptible, as to be slighted by you; and therefore I hope this confession of
my Love will be looked upon as a modest assurance in my own Deserts, and not an
overfondness of you; tho ingranting I love you, I grant you worthy of that
Fondness. I hope you are a man of Honor, to make no use of this to my
Prejudice. Remember that Youth is the Seat of Deceit, and fickle Inconstancy,
its wishes, and desires are rambling, no more to be bounded than a Torrent, and
Inundati^n, but Age (I mean Maturity, past which, I presume, you cannot suppose
me) is more fixed, as well as more violent in Love, continues pleased with its
choice, and neither desires nor thinks of any change. If Youth has more of the
sparkling gaudiness of Beauty, it has also the less care, as well as skill to
please. And I think, without vanity, my Face has not lost all its charms, when
my Heart admits of new Fires. In short, pray let us see you here, as soon as
your occasions will permit; I intend for the Town in the Winter, who am

Your humble Servant, Eugenia Allson.


This Letter is writ (said Chapel) with the Soul of a Woman, in which Passion,
and Pride are so mingled, that it discovers not a little Cunning. Cunning (said
Winter) in Folly! Yes, (returned I) there may be a great deal of Cunning used
in compassing that which perhaps may be a Folly. True, (pursued Temple) for
it is no better than Folly, for a woman that is old, to think to divert a
passion from a young Lady to her self. And yet, you see, she aims at it in this
Letter, (interrupted River) with a great deal of Art. Right (continued Summer)
by first presenting him with despair of the desired Object. And then (added
Fountain) presenting with an Object of Interest, which is commonly taking with
a man that is disappointed of his Love. And lastly, (said Church) by proposing
the difference betwixt the two, with the Advantage to the latter. Woman
(concluded Gra^e) is exorbitant, and irregular in her Lusts, and Desires, but
regular, and skilful to gratify them.

LETTER XLI.
From an Irishman to his Creditor. Directed to Mr. Russel a Peruque-maker in
Drurylane, London.
Dear Joy, Tunbridge, June 1692.
BY my Shoulwasion Ee was in hopes before nu indeed to have pleased thee sweet
Faash of thee, be St. Patric, with some Money for the two last Perriwigs, but
be Chreest, and St Patric, Ee was indeed disappointed of me Bills of
Exchange, from me Steward in Ereland, dear Joy, but be me Shoulwasion, Ee
will turn him out of his Plaash indeed when Ee return home. Me good Lady, your
Weef, indeed, can tell you the truth of these, for Ee have showed her a Letter
of it, which came be, me veree good Friend indeed, Teague Mack Allon, that was
Mashor-General, be me Shoul washion, when Ee was Under-Marshal of France, and
be Chreest, me good Friend, he is a very good Paymaster, if thee can but
get him to be thee Customer. Chreest bless thee sweet Faush indeed, commend me
to thee sweet Spouse, she is a very good Woman, be me Shoulwasion, dear Joy.
Thee may direct to me, at a Housh, be Chreest, about the meedle of a Street
in Tunbridge, me Landlord's Daughter, be Chreest, and St. Patric, married the
Miller's Son of a Village within a mile of this place; his great Grandmother
was a Gentlewoman, be me Shoulwasion, and sold Wine at the Wells; and his
Grandfather be the Mothers ^ide was called Honest Dic, and wore Leather-Breeks
indeed; and Ee remember, when Ee was in Ereland, dear Joy. Ee was used to reed
a hunting in Leather-Breeches, and Leather-Boots too. Ee am, be me
Shoulwasion,

Thee veree humble Servant, Teague O Donnel.


Be Chreest, and St. Patric, Ee had forget; the best thing for your cold is
Bonniclabar, and the best thing in the World for the Gout is Bonniclabar, and
indeed, dear Joy, Bonniclabar is good for every thing.

I love not National Reflections (said Temple.) But the dullness (pursued
Winter) of this Nation is so reallly, and literally true, and general, that --
'Twould be a Lie (interrupted Brook) to call them my thing but Fools: Bragging
^ yars (added Chapel) and Cowards. To this you might (said River) have added
superstitious ^igo^s. And yet (continued Summer) ignorance makes 'em not
devout. True (pursued Church) for they live generally by Fornication, and
Adultery; And the Spoils (added Fountain) of believing Tradesmen. Well (said
Grave) I grant you, for the generality of the original Irish, your character
agrees with them, both as Fools, and Cowards; but I must weeds say, those who
have had the advantage of a foreign Education, and of a Gentleman's Birth, w^nt
not Bravery, tho they are seldom (...) with Sense. Ireland indeed (concluded I)
(...) the Fate of ^oetia, a fertile Soil, but barren (...), to which
Subjection, and the Consequences of (...), added. But we have Follies enough of
(...) that render as not much behind them, tho (...) blind our Eyes.

LETTER XLII.
From a Widow to a Lady, who advised her against a Second Marriage. 'Twas
directed to Madam Lo, at her House near Rochester, Kent.
Dear Madam, London, June 1692.
I Received your kind Letter, in which indeed you discover a great deal of Zeal
for my Happiness; I must grant I was once of your mind, tho I have at present
far other Sentiments. I know your Observation to be true, that these second
Matches have very often ill luck, but yet there is no general Rule without an
Exception; and I have known some to this, and seen second Husbands kinder than
the first. Besides, the ill success of these Matches proceeds commonly from the
Indiscretion of the Lady, who understands not to choose well. Fluttering Beaux,
and impudent Rakehells generally take with our Sex, who have no Merit, but
what is due to their own Braggs. But I have made choice of one whose Modesty is
his only fault, which secures me of that, which you urge with a great deal of
ardour, viz. that I should remember how long I have been my own Mistress, and
then consider how pleasant it must be to submit to the Will of another. But the
modest man is seldom an Usurper, and if he claim no more than his due, I shall
never think my Liberty infringed: that is only to be feared from an assuming
conceited Coxcomb, that thinks nothing a Fault but Modesty. You say it is too
great a Blessing to meet with two good Husbands, and that I, having fared so
well at first, should have a care of wrecking my content in a second adventure;
but I must tell you, where the Hal^yon's Sense, and Modesty have built their
Nests, there is no great fear of a Storm. For my part, I never set up for the
superstitious Niceties of the Ephesian Matron, and therefore need not fear a
Punishment like hers, of shame, and infamy: if I continued a Widow thus long,
'twas but to meet with a choice agreeable to my Reason, her violent Resolutions
were not Proof against the Assaults of the most inferior, and commonly the
worst qualified of men; but I was always of opinion, that no Woman ought to
pretend to that, which their after-frailty would discover to be so ill
grounded. My Children are all provided for, by the care of their Father, and I
know no reason why I should not also provide for my self, and gratify my
Desires, when I find my self overcome by a prudent Passion. In return of your
good Advice, I wish you may soon meet with as good a Husband as I am confident
Mr. Hall will prove, Madam, to

Your humble Servant, Elizabeth Moon.


To see the strength of Desire (said Grave) in this Woman, which turns all
Difficultys into Advantages. True, (pursued Winter) and musters all the Reasons
she can, to put a specious gloss upon her Failing. And to represent that a
happy Certainty (added Church) which she desires should be so. I know not,
(said Brook) but she discovers a great deal of Sense, and a generous Temper in
what she writes. And I am sure (pursued Temple) she has taken the best Road to
Happiness, if she place it in Marriage, in choosing a Modest Man: and a Man of
Sense. Very true (added River) for the Gentlem^n of the contrary Kidny think
all Rewards of the highest virtue, their due. And are therefore (continued
Fountain) negligent, and unconcerned for every thing but themselves. But there
is (said Summer) a modest diffidence in Virtue that thinks every thing above
its des^rt. If the Ladys (said I) would follow this method, they would seldom
buy Repentance so dear, as they generally do, by preferring the' forward
Boldness of a Fool to the humble ^odesty of a man of Sense. But (concluded
Chapel) it is hard to distinguish, especially in Sense, Love re^dring all
things as they ought to be in the Object bel^v'd; and there is no Virtue, but a
Hypocrite can frame a Vizzor like it.

LETTER XLIII.
From a Gentleman to his Wives Mother-in-Law, who had been a true Step mother
to her. 'Twas directed to Mrs. Nicholson, in Gracechurch-street, London.
Madam, Essex, June 1692.
FInding that you returned a Denial to my Wives Letter, I thought my self
obliged to let you know, that tho you had not so much Regard to the only
Daughter of your deceased Husband, as to lend her Ten pound till Lady Day, to
deliver her from the greatest Necessities (tho her Father left you a Legacy of
One hundred pounds, a better Husband than Father; besides your Jointure, and
the Housewi^^y Elucubrations of your own Industry, to the t^^e of five times
that sum) yet I am so good a Christian to return you Good for Evil, and
therefore resolve to immortalize your Name, and thus force from your Gratitude
a Present of twice the value she desired only to borrow, for a Dedication I
suddenly design you. I have a Book in the Press of The Folly of Eu^kolds, and
the good-natured Tricks of Stepmothers, and the Delights of Hypocrisy. These
Subjects being so adapted to your several qualifications, I design you as a
Patron of it, and in the Epistle I Will vindicate you, as well as matter of Fact
will bear, from those odious Imputations your Enemies lay on you; for, who that
knows your tender compassionate nature can believe you, coud whip the only
Child you ever had to Death, when 'twas but eighteen months old. This
therefore, as well as the rest that follows, must be a notorious defamation,
viz. That upon your second Husbands death, you wisely conveyed away several
pieces of Plate, which else would have come to his unhappy Orphans. But were
this true, I cant see where the Crime lies, since without doubt you only did it
to keep those precious Relics of the dead man you loved always in your
sight, as a melancholy M^ment^ of Mortality, that you might not forget your
second Love, nor admit the Addresses of a third, else you could never have had
the Heart to have held out against the O^sets of my Wives Father, till he had
engaged to turn all his children out of doors as soon as he married you; and
that, sweet Lady, was the effect of Wisdom, which Love is too great an Enemy
to. But I suppose, 'twill not be worth my while to clear you of the next point,
since it will not be much resented by the World, that you should be so
providential a Lady, as upon my Wives Fathers Death to keep your Room warm with
two pair of Hangings, and would not gratifi^ the prying Executor (tho (...) the
way he was but a Coxcomb for not forcing you to it) to let him see your Chamber,
to convince him that you had nothing there but your due; that you had hid
Pewter under the Faggo^s in the Garret, and a great many more such odious
Calumnies, too long to be repeated here.

Perhaps I may not be able to clear you of all these Imputations, yet I Will
warrant you I Will do you this Kindness, that your Name shall be known from the
Sheriffs, to the Porter, and from my fine Lady Mayoress, to the little the
Oysterwench, in her lawful and virtuous Occupation at the Tavern door. Oh, how
will you be esteemed as a Pattern of the best of Mother-in-laws, so tender, and
loving of your fond Husbands Offspring, that you would not part* with Ten pound to
keep 'em in this wicked World, tho you were sure of your Money again!
Garagantula himself, nor any of the terrible Race of the Hobgoblins, shall be
more revered by children, than your Name: For to show you, that my zeal for the
exaltation of your Honor, and Glory is not confined to the narrow compass of a
Nuneupatory Epistle, I Will bring you acquainted with the Beaux of the Pit, in a
Comedy I Am writing, and with the religious Multitude, in a Ballad just now in
the Mint, to the celebrated Tune of Chevy Chase, by which you may be sure no
County of this spacious Land, nor Village, or Fair, but shall hear the Glories
of your Faith, and Nature, sounded with the vocal Harmony of Male, and Female
Ballad-singers. But that you may have no cause of Offense, I Will use you as we
Authors do our Patrons, take your Silence for Consent, and without (...) ado,
print your name at the front of my Epistle. Madam, you cannot imagine how happy
a thing it is to oblige us Scriblers, for we have a rare Art of immortalizing
our Friends, as well as Enemies, tho in a different manner. Perhaps you will be so
modest now for I know you abound in all sorts of Virtues) as to wish you had
complied with my Wife, and prevented this Honor; but Madam, I am confident a
Lady of your admirable Qualifications cannot but delight to see them exposed to
the World in their proper colors, which must not be pleasant to you alone, but
also to your whole Parish, that must be proud of such a Parishioner. But I have
been so tedious, that I must here conclude, because my Paper will not let me
say any more, unless I have recourse to an Endorsement; I Will leave off
therefore betwixt Necessity, and Desire, and make my Exit like Prince Volcius
in the Rehearsal, with one Boot on, (...) another off; who am,

Your extreamly-oblig'd Son-in-law, R. Illford.


Here Is a true Character (said I) of one of those ^^digious Monsters in Nature,
a Stepmother. True, (...) Brook) all the old Stories revived, and their (...)
Quality, combined in one. Strange preposterous (...) (said Grave) in Man, that
for the sake of (...) thought a fond doting Husband, should merit the (...) of
a Knave, Fool, and Cuckold! Right (...) Winter) and forget all the Bonds of
Nature for (...) that discovers so little value for him, to hate his (...),
True, (said River) and so endeavored to (...) his Name, and Family. A just
Reward (...) Fountain) on him, that could be such a Fool, To clap his Reason
(interrupted Chapel) under his (...). The Gentleman (said Summer) (...)
ingeniously rallied her, without incurring the Law. But all he will get by it,
(answered Church) is but a great^r Certainty of her Hate. Which I think
(concluded Temple) was no great matter, since he was (...) of that before, by
her Denial, and women of (...) Kidny seldom relent, or grow better, the Curse
of Hypocrisy, and Cruely pursuing them to final (...).

LETTER XLIV.
From a Gentleman to his Friend, relating what several great things his Money
had effected for him. 'Twas directed to Mr. Norris Merchant, London.
Dear Sir, Amsterdam, June 16^^
SInce I left you, and England, I have expende^ all that Money I returned over
hither by you and therefore desire you to do me the same (...) again, the other
Thousand pound may (...) to gain my point, if, as intend, I apply it (...) to
that use; what I have spent already, has convine'd me, that Money will do any
thing; as a (...) of which, I here send you a little of my great Experience in
this Affair. Upon my first arrival, (...) brought over some prohibited Goods,
and had the ill fortune to have 'em found out by the Tyde-Waiters, but less
than half the value into their own Pockets, secured them from the public; so
that their Oath, and Trust were not Proof against Gold. Next, coming to quarter
at a Merchants House, to whom I had Letters of Recommendation, I found he had a
Wife, beautiful, young, and chas^, as she was generally thought, but by Gold I
gained admittance to her Bed, where being caught by the Husband, Gold softened
his Indignation, and gave me a more secure, and free access to her: But weary
of that, I posted to some neighboring Courts, upon the Negotiation you wrote
of, and there I found Gold open the Secrets of Princes, debauch the Honor of
Ladies, the Religion of Devotes, and the Integrity of Servants, obliged to
their Masters for their very Life, and Bread. Meeting with some Controversies
in my Dealings, I found always the Judge on my side, as well as the Advocate,
for I opened the justice of my Cause in a Golden shower: Wanting Revenge, and
the Heart to venture my self in a Duel, I for my Gold, found those that made no
more of a Murder, than I do of cutting my Nails. In short, Money has made me
beautiful, tho I am deformed, honest tho a Knave, stout tho a Coward, virtuous
tho an Atheist; and yet I Am as good as the rest of the World, who have no more
of either, than the outside, and he that can best disguise his own Failings, is
the best man; Interest is the God of this World, who will be sacrificed to by
Hypocrisy, for Plain-dealing will never gain its Favor. Fail not therefore to
send me the Money I write for; Money, that purchases Honors, Trusts,
Friendships, Beauty, Love, and Courage; send me this divine Elixir, and assure
your self of the Success of our mutual Profit, and Interest; who am

Yours to command, J. Palson.


It Is a strange thing to me, (said River) whence Gold has this bewitching
Power. It shows (said Grave) the meanness of our Being, that is subject to such
an inanimate Creature; That has (assumed Winter) all its noblest Faculties, its
Virtues, and all its greater, as well as lesser Movements, dependant on dead
Metal. It Is indeed the blind Guide of the World, (said Church) and that Goddess
of humane kind, Fortune. Well observed (pursued Fountain) for if we are
succesless at Court, at Law, in Love, or any other Affair, we cry out, We have
no Fortune. That is, (interrupted Temple) we have no Money. True, (continued
Chapel) for if you want not that, the Designs of Court are unravelled, that
opposed your Rise. The Lawyers Mouth (added I) and the Judges Eyes are opened
to see your Cause plainer, and the cruel Ny^ph proves more easy, and
tractable. The Mystery of Money (concluded Summer) I find is great, its power is
not known to its self, nor the reason of it to Mankind, who is sensible of its
Dominion, but not the Justice, or Cause of it.

LETTER XLV.
From a Black to a fair Woman, with whom he is in Love. 'Twas directed to Mrs.
Mary, at Madam Brent's House in the Pal-Mall, London.
Mrs. Mary, Epsom, June 1692.
I Have been very uneasy since I saw you last, for fear some other should
possess your Heart, before I have prevailed against the Prejudices you have
conceived against my color. If I am black, so is the Night, which delights you
with pleasant (...), and to whose confidence you commit the (...) of your
Actions, and the most transport^ng of your Love; Night is conscious of all your
De^^^es; Night sees you unveil those killing Beauties which you hide by Day. I
will not prefer my color to white, because you are so, else I could tell you,
that the Spouse in the Canticles was black, and the Sun had looked too much
upon her; she was black, and yet beautiful. Add to this, that I can never betray
your Thefts of Love by foolish B^nshes, my color is constant as my Heart,
which is not of so changeable a nature, as the white men. Besides, believe me,
I am of a softer make within, and more sensible of Love, as well as my Body is
without, than the white men; they are too rough (...) for these tender Arms,
too unconstant to possess such Beauties, and too proud to value the Favor. Let
not Prejudice plead against me, and you will find Jett not less amiable than
Ivory. Try me, and you will find my Words, and my Heart agree, make me happy, and
I Will always adore you, who am

Your faithful Slave, George.


How prompt Nature is (said Grave) to what is unlawful! I can see no reason
(answered Chapel) for that exclamation. Nor I (said Brook) since whatever the
cause of our different color be, I Am sure we'^ all of human Race. Right
(pursued Temple) and therefore it is but Fancy, and Custom that make People
think the conjunction of White, and Black un^^tural, or unlawful. If it be
Fancy (said River) it is my Fancy, that Nature has set that visible Bar betw^^
our Embraces. The Woman (replied Winter) for a ^ager, is of another Fancy. The
more (add^^ Church) because it is thought unnatural. Prith^ (assumed ^ountain)
have a more favorable opin^^ of the Sex: Or he never deserves (said I) to have
an^ Favor from it. I Am sure (concluded Summer) I^^ keep at peace with it in
thought, word, and deed, (...) I could find a more re^sonable, and more safe
(...) of War.

LETTER XLVI.
From a young Spark, discovering the Debaucheries of the Town. 'Twas directed
to Mr. Tomlins, at his House near Dover, Kent.
Dear Rogue, London, June 1692.
YOU desire to know how I spend my time, now you have fled from the Arms of a
Friend, to those of a Wife; I will not remark the disadvantage of the change, but
I Will only let you know how I now (...), and that will make you long for the
Joys you (...) voluntarily banished your self from. The Night, whilst you in
conjugal fear are confined to your Spouse's Arms, I am carousing it with half a
dozen Friends, over a brisk Bottle, which has no Deceit, but gives us fresh
Vigor, and elevates our Thoughts above the brutish, drowsy World; some^^mes
perhaps, for variety, we admit a do^il super^^rogatory Harlot, lewd for our
Diversion, not serious Embraces, who for an honest George, and her Do^e of
Liquor, and a little Victuals to her empty Stomach, shall give a present view
of all the Mysteries of the Kingdom of mighty Lust. Having supplied the want of
the S^ns cheering Influence, by no less cheering Wine, all the Night, I retire
to Bed, to sleep away that time the rest of senceless (...) judge up and down,
to circumvent one another. From Bed I retreat to Sylvia's neat Abode, ^here I
revel in her Arms till Play-time, where, if (...) be a dull one, I pursue some
wandering Game in the Pit, or Gallery, with whom I frolic, and play till our
usual time of rendezvous at the (...) Sometimes I Am in pursuit of Maidenheads,
and in all under Fifteen; to this I bow with an awful respect, to gratify her
Pride; to that I swear a hundred foolish, passionate Oaths, to salve her
unseasonable Scruples; a third I gain with Presents; ^ fourth, by rallying to
humor her Caprice, that likes no love but that of Catts scratching, and
fighting: With the silent, and languishing, I (...) like a cooing Turtle; with
the coquet, and buxom I frisk, talk loud, and laugh; and ^o with all gain my
point, and walk at large, wh^lst thou, poor wretch, art confined. These are
some part of the Pleasures I take, whilst you, like a Mi^l-horse, (...) on in
your daily drudging round, to day a Wise* to morrow the same, and so on till
Fate, the kind dissolver of the Cares of a married Life, deliver her, or you,
which I wish thee with all my Heart, who am thy Friend, and Servant,

Ed. Watson.


What a thoughtless Life (said Winter) is (...)? Hurry, and Noise supply the
place (pursued Grave) ^f Thought, and Divertisement. If the Italian Prov^ be
true (said Church) that he is a Fool that is not melancholy once, or twice a day,
this Gentleman (assumed Summer) must be something more True, (pursued River)
for he never intends to think till either his Health, or his Purse deny him any
farther use of this sort of ^ife. And then (added Temple) Thought comes too
late. Or is of small duration (continued Fountain) and little force. The
Pleasures of Youth (said Chapel) are not to be condemned, any more than
avoided, provided they be used with moderation. I agree with you (pursued
Brook) but wh^^ they once transgress the mean, they degenerate into Vice, and
Folly. I Am sure then (concluded I) they are of more general power than their
contraries, Virtue, and Wisdom.

LETTER XLVII.
From a great News-monger, to his Correspondent in Holland. 'Twas directed to
Mynheer Van Schelshate, in the Greatstreet in Amsterdam.
SIR, London, June 1692.
I Received the last News very timely, but you might have had less regard to
the severity of Truth, for if it be any thing near it, it will do full as well,
especially if it be current with the Vogue of the People. It Is true, I can
enlarge upon it my self, and therefore, as to the nicest matter, I should
desire the best account, because I know who to gratify with the one, and who
with the other; but your additional Comment from Report will save me a great
deal of labor, for whatever goes down with you, I Am sure; cannot ^ail here, our
People being fully as desirous of News. As to the business of Dauphine, I wish
it were magnified more than really it is; but as for News against us, that also
sometimes ought to be set off in the most dreadful characters it gives the
better relish to the good News that follows it. I am yours to command,

R. Luist.


These News-mongers (said I) in my opinion, are the most dangerous Vermin of
the State. And ought, I think (pursued Winter) to be used like such. They
spread false News (continued Temple) to serve their own Interest. And live
(added Chapel) like the Devil, by Lies. They gratify Factions (said Summer)
And keep up Animosities (pursued Brook) stir up Fear, and Iealousies,
(continued Fountain) Or hush us too much in Security (added, Church.) The very
Design of them (said River) seems to affront the Government supposing that
da^es not, or cannot publish all, that is fit, and necessary to be known in the
Gazet. In short, (concluded Grave) Man in general is covetous of News, and the
English most voracious; that makes every thing go down, where they hope to find
it.

LETTER XLVIII.
From a Relation that was angry with another, to a Gentleman that interceded
for him. 'Twas directed to Mr. Claypool, at Mr. Buck's near Dowgate, London.
SIR, Suffolk, June 1692.
I Wonder, after so many Denyals, you still urge so ungrateful a Subject, as
the reconciliation with my Cousin, whom you may assure from me, that whatever
Civility I may in any company, for my own sake, show him, I will never have any
thing to do with him more, nor assist him if perishing, let him know what it is
to disoblige a Friend. His Afflictions shall furnish me with Pleasure, for
there is nothing in Nature I hate and abominate more than I do him; nay, and
all such as pretend to espouse his Interest so far, as to speak to me in his
behalf.

Obadiah Alstone.


Anger (said I) is an ill Dissembler. But Hate (pursued Winter) is worse.
Right, (added Temple) Hate is the Opposite to Love, and cannot be concealed;
Words, and Actions will discover it. I have observed (said Grave) that your
greatest pretenders to Godliness, are generally the hardest to be reconciled.
And the easiest offended (added Church.) They are so taken (...) with the Name
of God (pursued Summer) that they forget his Nature, Mercy, and Justice;
Neither if which (continued River) is the measure of their I^dignation. Nay,
(assumed Brook) they forget his Precepts too, of Forgive your Enemies, do good
to them that have done ill to you. They either never say the Lord's Prayer,
(said Temple) or always skip forgive us our Trespasses, etc. Their Passion's
their God, (replied Fountain) and the Gratification of that is their Zeal.
True, (concluded Chapel) that is the only God the Angry, and Envious sacrifice
to using the Face of Religion as a Pimp to their Vices

LETTER XLIX.
From a proud man, to his Friend. 'Twas directed to Mr. Walters, near the Blew
Ball in Airs-street in Picadilly, London.
Honored Sir, York, June 1692.
I Hope I have better deserved from you, than for you to think I keep such
mechanic Company as you write about; a man of my Quality, who h^s had an
Education answerable, ought to be allowed to know his Distances to keep with
all the inferior sort. I look upon a Gentleman to be as good as a Lord, or
indeed better since the King may give Nobility, but not Gentility; Favor may
gain T^tles, but Merit, and Virtue only that of a Gentleman. And as Virtue
gains the Name of a Gentleman, so methinks little mechanic Conversation ought
to loose it. Here abundance of the sordid Gent^^ shall ^it check by ^owl, over
a Glass of Stout, with Farmers. Assure thy self, I know my Quality better, than
to yield in the least Nicety. I advise you to avoid the Bouncing Captain, he is
certainly one of the Vainest, Proudest Men under the Copes of Heaven, fi^ical,
and fantastical to boot, preserve thy Friendship unsullied, for him only that
deserves it.

H. Marshal.


This Gentleman, (said Summer) like old Rome, will suffer none to be Proud but
himself. Right, (said Winter) for the Learned, and Ingenious Cicero himself
glories in the destruction of Carthage, and Corinth, those proud Cities. Though
much inf^rior (added Church) to Rome, in that qualification. The Niceties of
Birth, and Quality, methinks, (said Grave) might be numbered among the Vulgar
Errors. True (said River) there is no more real Excellence due to them, than
there is to a Player, that acts a King on the Stage, but is no better than the
rest within the Scenes: So the Grave, when (...) withdraw after the Farce of
this life, will equal all men. So that it is a Folly (added Fountain) to be
proud of that which lasts but so short a time. But as it is absolutely
necessary (answered Temple) that the other Players should show him that respect
on the Stage, as if ^e were really more excellent than them. So (assumed Brook)
on the Stage of the World it is as necessary for the Order, and Economy of the
Universe, that there should be a difference observed of Quality, and Dignity.
Nay, (pursued Chapel) I Am of opinion, that there is a real distinction here,
as well as above in Heaven. I must confess (concluded I) it seems not
irrational, that there is a difference of Excellence of Souls, but I very much
question that of Quality.

LETTER L.
From a severe Melancholy Philosopher to his jovial Friend. Directed to Mr.
Hook, to be left for him at the Nags-head-Tavern in Newgate street, London.
SIR,
I Received your rallying Letter, but wonder what pleasure you can find in that
Mirth, all your Words, and Actions abound with* Laughing methinks is such an
(...) Quality, that Men of Sense should be ashamed of too great a use of it
left they should be thought to border too much upon the Nature of that Beast. I
can never think (...) a wise Man, that had so ill a Notion of the Affairs of
this World, to think they merited nothing but a foolish Laughter; which was
only to (...) one Folly with another. Heraclitus certainly had a much better
Idea of the desperate condition of humane life, when he gave himself over to
Tears for the daily Miseries 'twas subject to. Christ himself was often seen to
Cry but never to Laugh. What a melancholy Prospect does each part of this World
afford? the Elements, the Seasons of the Year, are subject to strange
vici^^itudes the Affairs of Man much more: The strongest, and best designed
Policies, can scarce produce a few Years public Peace, or Success to any
Nation. We find that the Roman Empire, which was of such strength as to subdue
the greatest, and most formidable Empires of the Earth; is now no more but an
empty Name, less than the Ghost of the departed Power. In the time of Galienus,
when it seemed to feel the greatest Convulsions, Sapores, King of ^ersia having
taken the Emperor Valerianus Prisoner, Bellosu^, who styled himself King of
Kings, writing to Sapores, upon his Victory says; that if he thought the Roman
Empire could be overcome he should rejoice in his Success, firmly believing it
should be eternal, as the rest of this Letter testifies; but we have lived to
see it no more thought of as a Terror, but a Prey to all Nations, so fading is
the Glory of the World. I tell thee Friend thou art a stranger to thought, thou
could not laugh else whilst Death was besieging thy brittle Careass on every
side with the irresistible Artillery of a thousand Accidents. Oh, leave that
lewd thoughtless Town, and come, and join Sorrows with thy Friend, figh out the
remainder of thy days for the many trifling Merriments thou have lost thy self
in. Believe me, this is not only a Duty, but a Pleasure. Sorrow is natural to a
Man, he has a taste of it when he first springs from his Mother's Womb, and is
therefore more agr^eeble to his Constitution; the Soul seems to be at ease when
it is clothed in its Native (...) of Tears and Sadness, and is not weary, as
it is when it has been entertained with Mirth, and Laughter. How can you be so
much pleased in the Tempest of the World, where Sickness, Poverty, Disgrace,
and Death toss thy little Bark with such impetuous Fury? it is ten to one if
one, or all of 'em do not prevail; retire therefore to me, and to this sad
Contemplation; sorrow's our Portion, and our Satisfaction; I wish thee
therefore not like the Friends of this World Joy, but multiplicity of Sorrow,
who am thy real Friend,

D^ Holton.


Here Is a dismal Letter indeed (said Chapel) enough to make a Man fall asleep
to read it. He would have us (pursued Temple) all like the Son of the Emperor
Philip, that succeeded Gordianus, who was never seen to smile. He Is one of our
moder^ Cinics (added Brook) who thinks Wisdom, and Devotion lies in Ill Nature,
and Pale-faces. It Is true (said Summer) it is visible that all Humane things are
subject to change, but for that reason must I vex and cry to no purpose? But
(added River) he obliges us to a Certainty, and Constancy of sorrow whilst
every thing else is upon the swift Whirle of Fate, and alters every moment.
Right (pursued Fountain) the Vicissitude of Things methinks should rather
persuade us to a vicissitude of Temper, and to mix seriousness, and mirth in
our Lives; According to the Advice of Solomon (said Church) and the Practice of
the Italians. He is like the rest of the World, spite of his Philosophy
(pursued Winter) so unreasonable as to censure all, that are not of his mind;
which proceeds (added Grave) from the defect of his Constitution, and
Complexion. True (concluded I) because that enclines him to Melancholy he would
have Nature inverted, that all Contraries might meet in his Humor.

LETTER LI.
From a poor Gentleman to his rich old Friend that is sick. Directed to Mr.
Loid, at his House in Graves-End, in Kent.
Honored Sir, London, June 1662.
WE have once been very intimate Friends, till Fortune was pleased to divide
us, you she mounted up to the topmost spoke of her revolving Wheel (and Death I
find has a mind to save^ you from falling from it) me she cast down to the
bottom, and no wonder therefore, that we could not hear, and converse with one
another at such a distance: But now Death is going to lay you a degree lower,
than Fortune has me; I hope, since you can no longer use the benefits of
Fortune you will part with a small pittance to him, you once professed to Love. I
shall value that more, than your Heir shall all you will leave him. Therefore
since Wealth cannot be conveyed to the next Life, but by Bills of Exchange,
it is best to take the surest way, and send by God (I mean his Friends the Poor)
and not by the Devil leaving more to them, who have too much already. This
Advice will be profitable to both of us, to you hereafter, and to me at
present, who am

Your Friend and Servant, C. G.


The Maxim of Periander (said I) to thy Friends be the same in Prosperity, and
Adversity, is of very little force in our days, whatever it was then. It had
then (answered Grave) the fate of all good Precepts, a great many Admirers but
few Observors. True (pursued Winter) the Example of Tim^^ may prove that. Nay,
I was always of Opinion (said Church) that it was only a vulgar Error, that
Vices were more numerous, now than in days of old. The lo^^er Writers of those
Ages (assumed River) as Catullus, Petronius Arbiter, etc. Evince the truth of
that; nay, that if there be any difference (pursued Fountain) the advantage is
on our side. Our Writer of this Letter (said Temple) would have found Fortune
could (...) divided him from his Friend, in the days of the Philosophers and
Prophets, as well as now. He deserves relief, the (replied Chapel) from him
since he was so civil, as never to ask it of him till he found his Friend could
have no farther use of it himself; but it is ten to one (answered Brook)
whether (...) gains it or no. True (concluded Summer) for they that misuse
their Wealth in their Lives, seldom men^ their Management at their Death,
custom having persuaded them of the Wisdom, Justice, and Generosity of their
Actions, tho contrary to all th^es.

LETTER LII.
From a young Lady, who resolved ever to continue a Maid, with her Reasons for
it. Directed to Mrs. Dorothy Wood, at Mr. Tompsons, near Holbourn bars, London.
Dear Madam, Cheshire, June 1692.
YOU send me word, that you now begin to think of Marriage le^t you should be
looked on as an old Maid; that is the Reason I Will never marry, because I would
be one of those few wi^e (...), that merit that Name, who have never been
polluted with the Embraces of Mankind. I sean the (...) of Virgins will not be
very numerous in the next World, any more than in this. Chastity is so rare a
Gi^t among us, that we think it a greater Scandal, than Prostitution; and the
Daughter of Iephtha deplored not that state more heartily, than the Women of
this Age would in the same Circumstances. I love the Virtue that is not common,
and would be one of the Heroines of my Sex, which I can never be in the vulgar
way of Wife, my Temper is too impatient of control, and I had rather be a
slave to my own will, than to that of another. Besides I have a fancy that
there is a real Preference of a Virgin-state to that of Marriage, if the
Example of Christ may prove it, and the Words of St. Paul: which makes me very
uneasy to hear the Successors of the Apostle, the Clergy, villi^ying that
seraphic Virtue, rendering all that affect it odious under scandalous Names. I
must needs say I am so much a Papist (tho in nothing else) as to think celibacy
more conducing to the Service of God, than a married State: thereis less of
Flesh, and Blood, and less of Interest mingled with the Service of Heaven. The
common Objection is nothing in my mind, that it is better to marry than burn,
since it is certain, it is better that none should be admitted to the Clergy but
such as could live chastely, and have no other Spouse but Christ, and it is hard
if out of so many Millions as compose a Nation, there should not be sound
enough to officiate without Bribe of a Wise* But I digress, tho not much from
the purpose, since I have by it only showed my Value for the State I choose. I
fancy I shall enter Eternity uncorrupted, as the Angels themselves, with any
carnal Impurity: In short it is a noble Amb^tion to emulate the Perfection of
Heaven, and its glorious Inhabitants. Quit thy foolish thoughts of Matrimony my
Dear, and leave the Town that Enemy (...) chaste resolves, and let us lead a
single and plo^s Li^e together, the Envy of our Sex; we have both Youth, and
Beauty, which will show our design the effect of Consideration, not Necessity.
I am, my Dear,

Thy Faithful humble Servant, Phillis Evans.


Her Letter (said Church) shows she has Sense; Ay, and Youth, and Beauty
(pursued Winter) if you believe her. Notwithstanding she would have us think
her Aversion to Marriage grounded on her Love to Chastity (said Summer) yet
Nature breaks out, and discovers the main Cause to be the gratifying her own
Humor, which delights in Freedom from control. I am of Opinion (added Grave)
that few take to any Virtue for the sake of that Virtue, but to please the
Caprice of the most predominate Folly, or Vice. Nay, here is we find (said
Temple) the Affectation of Singularity, which has no little Charm with her.
Right (pursued Brook) for she has not a mind to go to Heaven like the rest of
her Sex. We may rail at Flesh (said Chapel) but the Best of our Actions relish
of it, and our Passions have a great share in our most religious Choices. We
may as well pretend (added I) to live without food, as to live in a Body
without the effects of it. For my part (said Fountain) I am almsot of her
Opinion, that it is more convenient, if not better to have a single, than
married Clergy. So am not I (concluded River) Nature will have vent, and a
black Gown is no proof against Temptation.

LETTER LIII.
From a Poetaster that would foolishly rhyme on every thing to his Friend in
Town. Directed to the Maecenas of the Age, Mr. Thomas Patshal, Prentice to Mr.
-- a Mercer in Paternoster Row, London.
Witty Sir,
BElieve me, th^' I am Poet, I don't ^eign my Affection ^or --

To feign Affection's ^^se,
The (...) that does is it an (...).
(...) I con^ess is the Life of (...),

We feign (...), we feign Adventures,
As City Scriveners do Indentures;
We for the Fair do feign Grimaces,
And for the ugly, a thousand Graces,
Though they have no Noses to their Faces.
But Sir, as I said before, I scorn to feign Affection, I relish your Appetite,
your Judgment, and your Wit Monceur, my Heart,

The Heart is the Seat of Life,
Then why should we give that to our Wife?
No, let a Friend enjoy mine,
Whilst I lay it a soak in good red Wine.
Well, I protest I never think of you but I Am inspired by the Muses from their
sacred Hill,

A Hill that is two horned,
And never will be suborned,
To side with Fools, and Knaves,
They may still blow their Nails
And rub their Tails,
They still will be but slaves.
A Poets born, and not made by art,
Whoever would be a Poet so he is not worth one fart.
But Sir, to stint these Effuviums of the sacred Heliconian Raptures, I must
tell you that I want your charming Conversation, as the Be does the flowery
Meads, Crura Thymo Plena,

The Meads, the flowery Meads all crowned with gaudy Flowers,
The Bees suck Honey, and the Nymphs deck bowers.
Now methinks I wish you, and I were in the sacred Eli^z^an Fields, with the
great Bards of Yore,

How would the Groves, how would the Thickets ring a
Whilst thou, and I did our past Actions singa,
Destructive Chaos would to peace incline^a,
And Europe list'n as well as Greece and China;
All glorious Nature from her wondrous Bed,
Would raise her bright astonished Head
To hear our wondrous Songs, would gaze and stare
Like Country Clown at show of Barth' l'mew-fair.
Well, but I profess my Maecenas, I cannot live no longer without thee, but that
thou know Love is a Tyrant that will separate the dearest Friends; my kind
indulgent Mistress will not part with me till she has certain Advice by the
extraordinary Conveyance of the near approach of her Husband. I made these
following Verses from Horace to her the other day, I designed it for a Serenade,
but she was satisfied with my Intentions; it is part of that Ode o^ Horace,
Extremum Tenaim si biberes Lyce. Ode. 10. lib. 3.

I begin with the second Stanza, because the first was nothing to my purpose,
my Lyce being kind you know. None of the Translations I have met with (from
whom I must confess to you I took the Sense) come near m^ne. But here it is,

Dear Bud, I prithee prick thy Ears up,
And hearken how the Tempest bears up.
Hark! how the Winds break out in clusters;
Hark how old bully Boraas blusters;
Hark how thy rotten Chamber totters,
As if 'twould tumble all to shatters;
The silent Trees may too in one sort
Be said to all to hold sad Consort.
Sad Consort ^ndeed (interrupted Temple) Prithee, no more of this wretched
stuff. Nay, prithee, (answered I) lets have an end of the Letter, for I find
there are not many more Verses, Well, well, proceed (said all.)

My dear Maecenas, if ever I was inspired, 'twas certainly when I wrote these
Verses, Description is the life of Poetry, and he that excels in that must be
the best Poet, and if I may judge of my own, I think it far excels this of
Spencers; which I have seen quoted for an Excellence,

The joyous Birds shrouded in cheerful shade,
Their Notes unto the Voice attemper'd sweet,
The Angelical soft trembling Voices made,
To the Instruments divine Respondence meet;
With the base Murmurs of the Waters fall,
The waters fall with difference discreet:
Now soft, now loud unto the Wind did call
The gentle warbling Winds low answered to all.
He makes the warbling Wind, etc.
Which is absolete as Trunk hose, but to make the silent Trees keep sad
Consort. -- The Trees you know Sir are certain mute Animals, and to make them
keep sad Consort is surprising, and ^ew. I Will tell you what Mr. Watts said, he
said, I had better have made my Trees have kept time to my ^^sical Tempest, I
laughed and told him we were ^ot all born Poets. I told him I improved Horace,
^ho only called it murmured betwixt the beautiful ^uildings. I have no room
left, I would else have ^^nt you the rest of my Serenade in design or posse,

Who am, dear Sir, and sweetest Maecenas, Your most humble Servant, Nicholas
Enas.


Sure (said Church) since the Crispinus of Horace, and the Eumolpus of
Petronius Arbiter there never was such a M^nster? Yes indeed (replied Winter)
most of our modern Authors, especially of this Gentleman's Cl^ss, are eternal
Versi^^ers. True (pursued Brook) from their Mistresses commode to the Shadow of
her Shoe-tye; and from their Friend in In^entures (added River) to their
Patron-master absolute of the Shop, there is nothing ^an escape a Stanza, or
Distich. The Muses as well as other Ladies of Pleasure (continued Chapel)
breed Vermin, and they are your City-wits. This Spark (said Summer) is not the
only that has set up for a Son of Horace's, merely by the help of those
wretched Translations, we are obliged to some of the University for, and turned
him (concluded Grave) in to ridicule when they meant the contrary. But I think
such (...) Inter^^yers in Wit ought to be used more severely than the more
honest Int^^^opers into the East India, and Guinea Companies Properties.

LETTER LIVE.
From a Philosopher, broaching new Notions, that Birds, and Beasts may be more
excellent Creatures than Man. Directed to Mr. Sharp, at his Chambers in the
Inner Temple, London.
Honored Sir, Oxford, June 1692.
I Received yours dated Tuesday last, in which you desire to know my Sentiment
about the Birds, and Beasts. The Motive of your Curiosity you tell me was some
dispute you lately happened into about the Reason of Brutes. Sir, I am not
desirous to set up for the Leader of a new Sect (though this is no new Opinion)
yet for your private Satisfaction, I Will give you my present Opinion, with
liberty though of retracting upon better proof. I desire my Letter may be
private, at least my Name.

I must freely therefore confess that I know not whether that Preference we
commonly give to humane Kind above all other sublunary^ Beings, be really just
or no, because upon a serious Consideration, I cannot see any advantage Man has
above them, for if we conclude the other Creatures made for Man, because he,
when he has the advantage of Power, or Stratagem over them, turns them to his
use; the same will prove that Man was made for the Service of Birds, and
Beasts; if we eat them dead, they do the same by us when they can catch (...)
in the same Condition: If some Beasts are employed for the Service of Man by
Man; most Creatures, beside (nay, and they too) live by the sweat of Man's
brow. They neither plow, sow, reap* nor manure the Earth, but like Lords of the
Soil reap the Benefits of humane Toil; So that it may be a sort of Impiety, or
Rebellion to kill them for^^^^ I know.

Some, I know, urge, that no Creature is framed for Society but Man. Which I
deny, as is obvious to every one that has considered the Kingdom of Bees, the
troops of Birds, especially Ravens, who observe all the effects of
Conversation, Government, and Policy; Cicero and Pliny report, that the Cranes
observe a regular, and successive Order in their flight, which must be the
effect of the Word of Command. I have seen two talk together a little, and
presently one of 'em separate, and pass to the next and so on till at last they
have all given a (...) Raa, and taken their flight to some adjacent Field, or
perhaps farther. The very Sheep under stand their several Tones of Beat, and
move accordingly. It Is true, the Language of most Beasts is not so numerous, as
ours, nor is that of Hebrew so stocked with Words, as the more Westernly
Tongues.

Again, I am more than half of Opinion, that (...) they have the use of Reason,
so they have immortality of Soul: For it seems to me irrational to think God
Almighty could make so many Millions of Beings only for a moment's time, and
after that never to be no more, methinks all the Works (...) an eternal Being
should continue to Eternity, (...) would else insinuate, that the Creation of
those things being the effect of his Power, and Wisdom had not participation
enough of the Power, (...) created them to make 'em Immortal. I Am sure as (...)
Text of Scripture, which says, Who feedest the Ravans, that call upon thee!
Proves not only a Language of Birds, but the highest Work of Reason, Prayer,
and Contemplation, so do these following more than intimate, that there is no
such material difference betwixt us, and our fellow Creatures. Ecclesiastes,
Chap. 3. verse. 18. I said in my Heart concerning the Estate of the Sons of Men
that God might manifest them, and they might see that themselves were Beasts.
Verse. 19. -- For that which befall^th the Sons of Men, befalls Beasts, even
one thing befalls them, as the one dies, so dies the other, yea they have
all one Breath, so that a Man has ^o Pre^eminence above a Beast, for all his
Vanity. Verse. 20. All go to one place, all are of Dust, and (...) return to
Dust again. These are my extempore thoughts of the Matter, but I will now give
my (...) to a more serious Consideration of it, I will only add, that I am apt
to think Pythagoras ha^ing been in Judea, and instructed in the Law might from
this draw his Opinion of the Mitempficasis. I am

SIR, Your humble Servant, C. D.


Our Philosopher (said I) has for got what Philo^^^atus tells of Apollonius
Tyanaeus, and others of Pythagoras, that they understood the Language of the
Birds. The same (answered Church) is reported of some others of the Ancient
Philosophers, whose moral Precepts could not teach their Followers not to lie,
and to love truth better, than the magnifying their Founder by Falsities. I
rather therefore (pursued Temple) approve his Method in sticking only to
Reason, and Experience, letting weaker Tradition shift for its self. But as for
what he proves (said Brook) about the Language of Birds, and Beasts, methink^
he might have spared his labor, for what advantage has Mankind by
Conversation? Right (pursued River) unless Cheats, Rapine, Perjuries, Plagues;
Wars, and Famine, and Desolation the Effects of Society be Benefits? which made
the wisest, and most holy of Mankind (added Fountain) the Philosophers, and
Fathers, withdraw themselves from that to S^litudes, and Deserts. The Birds,
and Beasts (said Winter) keep up to the holy Dictates* and Laws of Nature,
which Man in all things deviates so much from. True (returned Chapel) what
think you the^^ if these are the Progeny of the Golden Age, tra^^ formed to
secure them from the greater Bestialities ^ Humane Race? The Birds indeed (said
Summ^r) might be thought to be that innocent Race, Me^^morphos'd, that they
might soar above that Earth they excelled, and nearer that Heaven they served.
I know not what to make of this your new Syst^^ (concluded Grave) but I Am sure
the Argument fr^^ Reason, which the Philosopher makes use of to pro^^ the
Immortality of Birds, and Beasts will never hold more for them, than for every
Leaf of Grass, or (...) of the Sea, which are equally the Work of an ete^nal
Being.

LETTER LV.
From a little Parson that had seen the Queen, and falls in Love with her, and
desires his Friends Advice what to do in the Case. Directed to Mr. Hockley, a^
Chelmsford, Essex.
I Find that my little Body is capable of great, and nob^e F^res; I was to see
the Queen at Dinner, but I found her the Queen of Beauty, as well as the Queen
of England, and I must own I s^ek'd in a Poison from her Eyes, which I know not
how to find an Antido^e for. The boldness of ^y Passion is grown to that
extravagance, to wish ^ ^ould make her know her new Adorer, thinking love like
its Brother plague infectious, and because I love so much she must love so too;
perhaps you may think me mad, but if I am it is glorious-Raving, and I desire
not to be sober in your humble Sense, let me love a Qu^en, tho my Love cost me
my Life, a Prince would be glad to die her Martyr; my Pen I use in her Cause
with the greater Ardor, and when I preach I turn the Gospel into an Eno^mium
upon her* I desire dear Sir your Advice what I shall do in this case, how to
manage a Love of this nature, to the Satisfaction of, Sir,

Your most humble Servant, Thomas Spicer.


As Pedro says, in the Spanish Friar (said Temple) I think if I never was to
die till my Flesh, and Blood rebel^'d against our Sovereign Lady, that way I
should be free from Tybourn this many a fair Year.

In the midst of our Mi^th, at the Extravagance of this Letter we heard a ver^
great Knocking at the Court-yard-gate, and upon the opening of it, a great
noise in the House, which did not a little surprise us, for fear it had been
some in pursuit of us, having go^ intelligence either from our Ian, whither
they might have dogged us, or from the Watermen, who might have overheard some
of our Discourse in the Boat which made us presently to send Summer out to
(...) what the matter was, and to gain us time to dispo^^ of our Letters into a
more secret part of the Summer house, which we did with all the speed
imaginable shuffling them all into our Box, and placing that among the
Gardiners Tools, and Vtensils under (...) Summer House; after which placing the
Bottle, a^^ Glasses, regularly in the midst of us, we were resolv^^ to expect
our Fate, as Epicure did Death that (...) each Man with his Glass in his hand.
We had not drank above two rounds when Summer sent his Valet to us, to inform
us, that it was my Lord -- come to pay him a Visit; and a little after h^ ga^^
his Lordship the slip, and came to us, to let us kno^ he was afraid he should
not get rid of his Lordship till after dinner, unl^ss Grave came into his
rescu^ with his starched and surly Morals, to which his Honor was a mortal
Foe. Grave therefore by comm^^ consent was deputed for the delivery of Summer,
from the obsession of Quality, and restore us to our pleasant Enquiries; he
obeyed, and we in the mean time fetched up our Cargo, and began to sort 'em
again, seperating those we had read from those we had ^ot; and by that time we
had done that, and taken (...) Glass apiece, Summer and Grave came to us,
having dispatched his Lordship to Dinner to some of his Brother Peers.

We were all desirous to know the Adventure before ^e proceeded; which Summer
gave us in these few words, My Lord, (you know Gentlemen) is one that values
himself so much upon his Quality, and Wit, that he can bear no disrespect to
either, and he esteems it a disrespect to his Quality, if your whole behavi^^^
be not as solemn, and ceremonious, as an Audience ^f an Ambassador, or an
interview of two Princes, and to his Wit, if you oppose the absurdest thing he
says; this being his Honors genius, Grave here, whose Face would persuade one
he were a Surly, or Manly, per^^ates a rough uneasy Temper, contradicts all my
Lord said, scarce aloud him a Bow, never laughed at his Jest, nor admired his
Dress, or Liveries. My Lord grew presently uneasy, and though he at first
pre^^^ded to dine with me, made his excuse, that he was ^^lig'd to dine with my
Lord -- and like Sir ^opling cries Hey, Page, my Coach, wither with a great
deal of Ceremony, I attend him, whilst Grave ^akes a stop at the Parlor door,
and bids his Lordship plainly good buy, his Lordship returned him ^o answer,
but asked me what ill bred Clown I kept Company with? I told him a Country
Cousin that was not yet polished enough for his Lordship's Conversation, and so
with an hundred senseless Bows, and Cringes we parted, my Lord into his Coach,
and I to my Friend Grave here, and having given order for delaying of Dinner
till two or three a Clock. We came, you see Gentlemen, to this honorable
B^nch; let us therefore proceed. Happy ^e the Omen (said Chapel) the first I
light on is the Hand of one of the fair Sex, and (having broken it open) which
is a wonder concise, I Will read it if I can for the ill spelling with an audible
Voice.

LETTER LVI.
From a fair Lady being a Profession of Constancy in Friendship. 'Twas directed
to Mr. Englith, to be left at the Raven in the Poultrey till called for.
Dear Sir, London, June 1692.
I Received a Letter, and Copy of Verses from you, and shall at present answer
you only in your own words, viz. to assure you, distance of Place, change of
Air, or Fortunes, or length of time shall never alter that real respect I have
for you, who am,

Your true, and real Friend, Parmenia.


Here is a great deal in a little (said Grave) a great Miracle of the Sex, both
in Constancy (added Winter) Wit, and Brevity. Pliny (said Temple) says Nature
is ever greatest in her least Productions, and so is Wit, for then it is
improved by Judgment, a rare Qualification in a Woman. Nature (said Summer) is
sometimes as prodigal of her Favors to one, as she is nigardly of them to
another, and here I assure you (said I) she has been lavish; to Youth, giving
the Judgment of Age, to Beauty, the Wit of the Ugly, to a Woman the Constancy,
and Stability of Man. Nay, there (interrupted River) you injure her for the
Constancy of Man extends no farther, than prosperity, as his Friendship reaches
no farther than Words or Self-interest. Right (pursued Church) but ^ers not
only in profession, but reality was not (...) to Times, Places, or any accident
of Fortune (...) (continued Winter) were these Professions made i^ the
Sunshine of a happy State, but when the Man (...) actually under a Cloud. The
only time (added Brook) that words of that nature are meant as they (...)
spoke. May she therefore (concluded Chapel) always meet with Sincerity in her
Friends, Constancy (...) her Lovers, and Success in her Wishes, and Desires.
May she be always beautiful, and young, and witty, is she now is. For sure
nature may work Miracles for such a Miracle in nature.

LETTER LVII.
From a Relation, giving advice to another. 'Twas directed to Mr. Long, at his
Lodgings at the twisted Posts in Sulfolk-street, London.
Cousin, Norfolk, June 1692.
I Am sorry to hear you so much pervert your Father's Indulgence, as to throw
away both your time, and money in pursuit of Women: If you don't reform, some
malicious, or officious Person, or other may chance to acquaint your Father
with it, and you know your Mother-in-Law would be glad of a pretense to
alienate his Affections from you. Take my Advice, who really love you, and wean
your self from ill Company, who love your Money, not you, as you will find too
late, if you still pursue the thoughtless Dictates of Vice, and Youth. I wish
you health of Mind, and Body* that you may know your false Friends from your
true ones, as is your loving Cousin,

Isa. Richards.


Though this Letter (said Winter) show a great deal of reality, yet I dare say
'twill afford much more of disguist than pleasure to him it is sent to. Because
(answered Church) Youth drowned in Wine, and the pursuit of Pleasures hates the
cautious Admonitions of Wisdom. No, no (said Brook) because unasked advice, the
never so good is always suspected of Self-interest. I can see no cause for that
Suspicion here (returned Summer) where the Benefit accrues wholly to him that
is advised. Ah (said I) are you so ignorant in Man, as not to know that the
Prejudices of Passion, and Preengagement, never consider Reason? or at least
(added Grave) forge Reasons out of Air, and Imagination to flatter the Folly
they are bound to. Small indeed is the number of those (said River) who are
capable of giving a disintress'd Advice; and vastly less (pursued Temple) of
those that will take it. Self-esteem (said Fountain) is the cause of the last,
and Self-interest of the first. I am of opinion (concluded Chapel) that our
Passions set things in so false a Light, that we easily misjudge of them, that
are not extremely self-evident, and Advice depending generally on Events is
seldom so.

LETTER LVIII.
Of Entreaty, desiring a Favor of a Friend. Directed to Mr. Goff, at his House
in Duck-Lane, London.
Dear Friend, Plymouth, June 92.
I Am sorry that the first time, you hear from me, must inform you of the
Misfortune of your Friend. We set Sail, on the Monday after I left you, from
Weymouth, and had a good fresh Gale, which bore us over nearer the French
Coasts, th^n we desired; and (...) next day about seven in the Evening a Vessel
made up to us, which upon our making away gave us Chase with all the Sails she
could, and fired two or three Guns at us, and being within shot, brought our
Mainmast by the Board In short, we were took, but the Night coming on, my
Cousin John, and I, and two more of the (...)* crew got the Boat overboard,
and so stole into it, and cutting the Cable, put off to Sea, and plied ou^
little Sail, and Oars with such success, that though they fired at us, we before
day got out of sight, and by next Morning came near a Man of War of our own,
whom we informed of the Privateer, and having had from us as good directions as
we could give, sending us as^oar to Plymouth, went after the (...). I am now in
a strange place, and without Money; I desire therefore you would send me five
Pounds, which I promise to repay you as soon as God enables me; you may
remember when I did you a far greater Kindness, and in less likely
Circumstances of being ever able to return it, which makes me think, I shall
not write in vain to you in this Exigence, whom am,

Your unfortunate Friend, R. Isaacs.


I dare engage (said Chapel) this Man receives not so obliging a Letter in his
distress, as that of the Charming PARMENIA. Pity (replied Grave) is the Vice of
the Nature of that Sex. Prithee Grave (said I) remember thy Mother was a Woman,
and have a little more tenderness for them, and not pervert that which is an
Excellence in the Sex. Right (pursued Temple) for it is the Virtue, not the Vice
of their Nature. But (said Winter) this Man has taken a wrong method to
prevail, in putting him in mind of a greater Favor received formerly. For
(pursued Brook) we t^^e no pleasure in prosperity in a grateful Remembrance of
a past Obligation. Especially (added Church) if we are put in mind of it, by
the ^ecessity of our Benefactor. As if (said Summer) his misfortunes had
cancelled our Duty. It Is true, (said Fountain) we are not pleased to be told of
an Obligation by him that obliged us, because it seems to lessen our Gratitude,
in returning it, by making that a Duty, which we would have thought the effect
of our Generosity. No, no (concluded River) we are only angry at the unpleasant
Memento, because it stares us in the face, and tells us we are Monsters if we
(...), and so leaves us no place for excuse.

LETTER LIX.
A Complement from a fair Lady to a Gentleman, that had sent her some Verses.
'Twas directed to Mr. Abbot, in Cornhill.
SIR,
I Should begin my Letter with those Encom^^^s your Wit justly merits, should I
follow my own Inclinations, and fill this Letter with your Praises, but that
for fear your Modesty would make you look on those Commendations (really due to
your Wit) as Complements. But alas! were that reason removed, I know not where
to begin, nor where to end, for your Verse has this advantage beyond all
others, that it is not only above Flattery, but above Praise. You have by that
discovered your self so great a Critic, that the fear of being too justly
counted a Fool forces me unwillingly, tho sincerely to subscribe my self,

SIR, Your affectionate Friend and Servant, Cleona.


These Letters of Complement (said Grave) are but Essays, to see how a man can
bear an Abuse under a title of Civility. It Is true (added Winter) it is but a
general way of lying, and therefore very natural, and proper for a Woman. But
who (said I) would not be proud of being flattered by the Sister of Parmenia,
for so is this Lady, that wrote this Letter. Right, (pursued Chapel) to be
esteemed worthy the Thought of the fair Cleona, so much, as to make her take
the pains even to abuse one, if her Praise can be called so; Which (added
Brook) like that of Kings, confers Merit where it is not. If Cleona (said
Temple) be the Sister of Parmenia, they are nearer allied in Wit, than Blood.
Right (pursued Fountain) they are so much the same. Beauty, and Wit are seldom
(...), (said River) but in these Sisters inseparable. Nay, that which is more
(added Summer) Nature spreads her Favors through the whole Sisterhood. It Is
pity (concluded Church) such Excellence should stamp so fair a mark on
Complements, where she is so much for Reality her self.

LETTER LX.
From a Friend proffering his Service. 'Twas directed to Mr. K^ash, to be left
for him at Man's Coffee-house near Whitehall, London.
SIR, Darby, June 1692.
HEre is a Discourse, that you have a Design to make your address to Sir
Roger's Daughter; If you have any such Thoughts, I desire you would lay your
Comman^ upon me, who, by my intimacy with him, can make an easy access to her.
My Kindness for you, and the memory of the Obligations I have had to your
Father, makes me take hold of the first opportunity, of desiring thus to
satisfy you of the Gratitude, and Friendship of

SIR, Your humble Servant, J. Green.


I find (said Temple) there is still some Gratitude in the World. Few remember
a past Benefit, (said I) or depend much upon the future, the present Advantage
is the most charming to the major part of Mankind. 'Ti^ rare indeed (said
Winter) we meet with a Return when we desire it. But here (assumed Church) it is
offered before asked. But that which should render it the more acceptable in
Reason, (pursued Brook) will perhaps make it neglected. The singularity of it
(added River) will make one suspect the Sincerity of the Proffer. As it is
Imprudence (said Grave) blindly to follow Advice, without bringing it to the
test of our Reason. So (assumed Summer) it is not Wisdom presently to accept of
a proffered Kindn^ss; Because (pursued Fountain) Self-interest is generally so
predominant, that there are few in their Advice, and Service, have not regard
to it. But perhaps (concluded Chapel) this Gentleman, like Sir Jolly Jumble,
has so particular a delight in bringing Couples together, that he makes his
Gratitude but the Pimp to his Lea^hery of procuring. We generally choosing our
Virtues a^ they agree with our overruling Vices.

LETTER LXI.
To a false Friend. 'Twas directed to Mr. Jones, to be left for him at the Rose
Tavern near Temple^Bar.
SIR, Monmouth, June 1692.
AS I did not expect so much foul-dealing from you, so it the more surpised
me, when I understood how much you had opposed my Interest in the very Affair,
you pretended to negotiate for me; your Obligations, your Oaths, and
Protestations, I find, are soon forgot, which shall learn me for the future to
confide in no man that makes such wondrous Professions, since I have had such a
dear Error in paying for the knowledge of your perfidiousness.

R. Morgan.


This Gentleman's Wisdom, (said Temple) like that of most young men, is bought
at his own expense. Young, or old, (returned Winter) we often, by our
Unskillfulness in Men, cherish a Snake in our Bosom; And pour our Favors on
those (added Church) who on the first opportunity to serve their own separate
Interest, turn the Benefit against the Benefactor. This (said Grave) is too
often the Fate of Princes, who make Favorites rather by Fancy, than the Merits
of the Person. Or (added I) the Dictates of their own Reason. We ought
certainly (said Summer) if we would not repent of our Actions to no purpose,
never to let it be in any man's power to betray our Interest. At least (assumed
Chapel) by our over-confidence in him. Then you would (said Fountain) destroy
all Friendship. No (replied River) the Practice of the World now renders, that
you call Friendship a mee^ Notion, and Theory. Right, (concluded Brook) for
Interest is the Cement of Friendship; and since it is possible that may divide
the dearest, it is Prudence to secure ones self, by a cautious distrust.

LETTER LXII.
From an Author to his Bookseller, haggling for more Copy-mony. 'Twas directed
to Mr. -- at the Golden Ball in Cornhil, London.
SIR, Richmond, June 1692.
YOU were so hard with me, that tho I undertook this first part at your rate,
because I both wanted business, and Money, yet I must needs tell you, that I
cannot go on with the Undertaking, unless you are a little more generous, for
this will scarce find me Bread whilst I am writing it; but I leave it to your
own Reason to think, whether a little more Copy-mony would not turn for your
own advantage; for the greater Encouragement I have, the more Pa^ns I shall
take, and the more cause I shall have to do so. I therefore leave it to your
consideration, who am

Your Friend, and Servant, J. S.


This Author (said I) is not well versed in his Profession, since he thinks to
get any thing from the generosity of a Bookseller. He might as well have left
it (pursued Chapel) to the generosity of an Usurer. Right (added River) a
Bargain is a Bargain with them. And tho Necessity oblige the Author (continued
Winter) to comply with their hard Agreement, yet they will never have regard to
that, tho he live upon a clov^ of Garlic, like a Spanish Don. They make no
distinction (said Brook) betwixt a man of Parts, and Learning, and one that in
spite of Education, and Nature, assumes the Name of Author; And will
(continued Temple) murder a good subject like a Bravo of Sense, for a George.
Apostates (added Church) from the honest Mechanics, to be a plague to M^n of
Sense. Both Authors, and Readers plague (pursued Fountain) and the Bookseller's
Tool. Who had rather st^rveat the foot of Par^assus (said Summer) than get Money
in their natural station. I find (concluded Grave) that all a Man's Study at
School, and at the University, and all the Gifts of Nature besides, only
qualifies him for a Slave to the Booksellers, if Fortune be wanting.

LETTER LXIII.
From an Admirer of Platonic Love. 'Twas directed to Madam Field, to be left at
Mr. Williams's House near Deal in Kent.
Honored Madam, London, June 1692.
IT IS with a great deal of regret I have been thus long kept in this busy
senseless Town, so (...) from the happy conversation of a Lady of your
Perfections; but, Madam, as our Souls, I Am confident, meet when we sleep, and
enjoy each other, so when we wake, methinks we should employ our Thoughts about
each other, when we are not contemplating Virtue, which I envy you, for the
hurry, and noise of this place deprives me of those sedate Thoughts your
agreeable Converse, and the calm of a Country Retreat used to inspire.

The mistaken World condemns your Sex for want of Judgment, and of being
governed by the blind Dictamens of your unruly, and criminal Passions, but I,
that have the honor to know you, dear Lady, find their ill-natured Error, in
fixing the Crime of a few on the whole Sex; but let these Self-esteemers show
me two of the Philosophers regular, as You, in their Affections, and Lives,
except the divine Plato

Ah Madam, how happy are we in so pure, and undefiled a Love, by which Souls
mingle every minute, in the highest extafie of Union, without the impeding help
(if I may use that seeming contradiction) of our Bodies! Immortal must our
Flame be, since the immortal part of us is only interested in it. The cause of
Inconstancy in Common Love, is the Body, which being of so changeable a nature,
it is impossible it should retain any thing long, which has the least dependence
upon it: But the Soul, that is still the same, must still persevere in the
affection it has once made choice of. Wonder not at the Expression, Madam, for
our Loves are the effects of Choice, not Fancy; Virtue, and Wit engage us, but
Beauty, and Vice them, both frail, and fading, as the Joys they bring

But ours, Madam, is the Love of Angels, sacred Sympathy unites our Souls, and
mutual Virtues cement our holy Vows, not only till Death, but even to the next
Life of Glory; for it being a Native of Heaven, it cannot lose its Being by
returning thither, but rather improve it to a greater degree than it could
attain here, opposed by the cloggs of gross material bodies; for, like Fruits
transplanted from a warm to a colder Climate, it is less perfect here, tho it
still retain its form, taste, and other Excellencies of its Heav'^^^ Nature, tho
not in so exalted a degree.

Uninterrupted Joy is the Product of our Passion, (if it merit so gross a Name)
without any mixture of Pa^n; it is like the Vestal Fire, burning without
material Fuel; whereas the other dies, and is soon extinguished, if deprived of
its Fuel Beauty; and the auxiliary Bellows of Strifes, and petty Squabbles, so
small, and so unhappy is their Pleasure, that they cannot arrive at, or relish
it, unless they first, and often taste of Pain. Satiety attends their Success,
and Quarrels serve for Exercise, to gain them a fresh Appetite. 'Twould be
endless to run through all the Advantages we have above them, and impertinent
to you, who are so sensible of them. Nor need I caution you how to preserve the
Empire you have obtained over your Body, since you know the Body is a true
Coward, where it has the mastery, being a Tyrant, but where it is overpowered,
easily kept in serv^le awe. I shall therefore only now subscribe my self,

Madam, Your Admirer, and zealous Lover, A. James.


My Life on it (said Chapel) this is some antiquated Bachelor, whose Sins of
his Youth have made him abominate Matrimony. Or rather (interrupted Brook)
disabled him from Matrimonial Performances; and therefore prudently (pursued
Temple) hides his bodily defect under the Mask of Platonic Love. And she some
super animated Matron (said River) that has been neglected in a carnal way,
even by her own Coachman. Right (assumed Grave) a Woman never forgets the
Flesh, till her Skin's turned into Buckram by Age. Nor then neither (added
Winter) if she can ^ake it subtle, and smooth to some younger Brother by her
Fortune. This Lady therefore (said Summer) must be poor, as well as old, she
would never else take up with empty Alms of Passion, mere words. It Is well
(said I) she can make a Virtue of Necessity, and fly to the Spirit, when she
cannot make use of the Flesh. Platonic Love, (said Church) if we may judge by
the Founder's words, is not without its secret Heaut^^ust of the Flesh; I Am
sure Plato seems to relish the Kiss of Agatho, with all the fire of the most
amorous Debauchee. Right, (concluded Fountain) it is only a demure Bawd to
secret whoring, they being the greatest Friends to the Flesh in a Corner, who
espouse the Spirit so much in the face of the World.

LETTER LXIV.
From one beyond Sea, expressing his desire of returning to his own native
Country. 'Twas directed to Mr. Gregory, at his House in Charles-street,
Westminster, London.
Honored Master, Hague, June 1692.
THE Obligations I have to you, engage me to return my Thanks, as often as I
may without being too chargeable, or too troublesome to you. I am ashamed to
let you know on how ill-deservi^^ a Subject you have placed all your Favors;
for must confess, I had rather be confined to my nati^^ low condition in my own
Country, than have the Place of Preferment you were so generously plea^^ to
obtain for me. The Splendour of the Court when it is here, nor the Civilities of
the Natives, or m^ own Countrymen; nay, scarce the Advantages ^ Interest can
make amends for the loss of old E^gland, the hopes of seeing which, after the
Cam^^pagn is over, keeps me alive. With my Respect^ and Duty to my Mistress,
and your self, I subscrib^ my self,

SIR, Your ever obliged, humble, and faithful Servant, John Robinson


Here Is one (said Grave) eaten up with the Epidemic Distemper of Mankind: The
doting (adde^ Brook) on ones own Country; Which is better (replied Temple) in
my mind, than that Contempt (...) men show for the place of their birth. The
love of one native Country (pursued River^ has such a sw^^ ascendant over us,
that it will not let us forget it (...) the greatest plenty, nor in the
remotest parts of the World. True, (continued Fountain) and we measure the
fullness of our Happiness by the distance, or near^ness it sets us in from
thence. The Pleasures, an Grandeur of old Rome were scarce Bribes enough (sai^^
Church) to win the Captives from a desire of the^ own barren Country. There Is
no greater Proof of thi^ (added Summer) than the Inhabitants of some of the
most Northern parts of Norway, where one would wo^^ (...) any of human race
should endure to live, the inso^^nce of the winds being there so great, that it
blows way the tops of Houses, and Trees up by the Roots, at the People choose
rather to live there in Caves like ^easts, than to seek some more Hospitable
abode. Espe^^ally (said Chapel) since the World is so wide, and ^ much of the
finest Country in the World uninhabited ^ some parts of America. But (pursued
I) this is ^ot so terrible, as to live near the Mountains Vesa^ius, or Aetna;
the very reading of the account Pliny (...) younger gives of the fiery
Inundation, in his twen^^eth Letter of his sixth Book to Cornelius Tacitus,
^ould make a man have a care of coming within some ^agues of it. But this
^ondness of the Country we are ^orn in (concluded Winter) seems to me a piece
of ^igottry, since it goes so far beyond what Reasin re^uires, and since the
whole World is the Country of a ^ise man.

LETTER LXV.
From a Coward to his intimate Friend, to assist him to gain the Reputation of
a man of Courage, by parting him in a Duel be must be engaged in. 'Twas
directed to Mr. -- at Mr. Herd's near Tunbridge-wells in Kent. With care, and
Speed.
Dear NED, London, June 1692.
THE confidence I put in you, when you read this Letter, which is to desire
your immediate return to London, for I happened to be in company last night
with Bully Hack --, some words past betwixt us, about Arabella, 'twas in such
company, that I know I shall be stigmatized for a Coward, if I don't challenge
him; but you know I have often told you, I durst not venture upon a Duel, it is
the fault of my Constitution I think, and therefore I cannot help it, nor am I
ashamed to own it to such a Friend, as I have always found thee to be. I Will
defray the charge of your Journey, and present thee with Ten Guineas more if you
come away immediately, that you may be near the place where we meet, and so
interpose, and save both my Life, and the credit of thy faithful, humble
Servant,

E. Rouse.


This Letter (said Winter) ought immediately to be dispatched, to save the
Reputation of a Coward. Well, it is natural (said Temple) for every one to
endeavor to hide his own Failing, if he be sensible of it. He makes the right
use of his Money (added Brook) to bubble the World out of a Reputation of
Courage he deserves not. At least, for Duelling, (assumed Grave) and thus many
a Spark passes that Test of Courage with little danger. Right, (pursued
Fountain) for there is many a man that will quarrel in the Pit, or in the
Street, where there is a certainty of being parted, that will never venture out
behind Southampton-House. But they sometimes (replied River) meet with a thrust
through the Heart, before their hoped Rescue come. Which shows (said Church)
that it is but a Folly to attempt any thing above our abilities. Right, (added
I) for we generally reap nothing but Contempt, and Misery, or Ridicule, and
Laughter. Let every one therefore (said Chapel) that has not a Resolution to
go through with a Quarrel, affect Peace, and learn to avoid Affronts, and give
none. And then (concluded Summer) he may pass for a stanch Duellist, though he be
none, as a Fool that holds his Tongue, does sometimes for a Philosopher.

LETTER LXVI.
From a Servant, giving an account to his Mistress of all his Master's Failings
in his absence from her. 'Twas directed to Mrs. Smithies, in Canterbury, near
the Market, Kent. With care.
Honored Madam, London, June 1692.
SInce my last, I have not much Variety to send you, my Master keeping on in
the old course, the Evening he spends at the Park, in pursuit of one Whore, or
another; or at the Spring-Garden, after Citizens Wives: All night he spends in
Drinking, at the Tavern. The other day we took a walk into Red-Lion-Fields, and
he ordered me to stay at the end of Kingstreet, or to go home to his Lodgings,
for he should have no occasion for me. I staid till he was gone a little way,
and keeping him in sight, I saw him meet a Woman, and with her turned toward
Maribone; I followed at a distance, till they were housed, whither I also went,
and finding the Room they were in, I peeped through the Keyhole, and there
discovered him very familiar with one of the prettiest young Creatures that
ever my Eyes beheld. I could not blame my Master methought. But just as I was
peeping, the Drawer came up, and caught me, gave me a Box of the Ear, and if I
had not run for it, had discovered me to my Master, by making me his Prisoner,
and as he swore ducknig me in the Horse-pond; but trusting to my heels, I got
safe away, tho my Master since has examined me where I was then, the Drawer
having given him an account of my Livery. I hope Madam, you will remember your
faithful Servant,

Will. Foot.


It Is pity (said Summer) the Master should not be informed of his worthy
Servant. Why (replied Winter) he is trusty to one half of his Master. Yes, yes,
(pursued Grave) to the worst half, the Woman. Nor to her neither (added Church)
Right (assumed Brook) for it is to himself he is only true, betraying his Master
for the advantage he gets by it. Which we find (said River) he will not forget to
claim; as the end of his Letter shows. If he be a Rascal (said Fountain) I Am
sure the woman is a Fool, to purchase a Trouble ^e cannot perhaps redress.
Prithee (pursued Temple) 'twas the Folly of her Grandame Eve, her curiosity of
knowing damned us all. Right, (added Chapel) it is fit therefore that the same
Crime should be inherent in the Sex, for their perpetual Punishment. But
perhaps (concluded I) this Lady may have her End in it, either in a pretense
for the like Extravagance her self, or by that means to make him the more
submissive to her will, when he finds his Failing discovered to her.

LETTER LXVII.
From a great Wagerer. Directed to Mr. Brown, at the Nags-head-Inn near
Cripplegate, London.
Dear SAM, Bristol, June 1692.
I Long to hear how Wagers go about Pignerol, the Descent, the retaking of
Namur, or any other public Affair. I have laid Five hundred pound there will be
a Descent into France, by the English, before August; and I Have laid Fifteen
hundred pound on the contrary, and if you can get me any more on that account,
I Will make it up Two thousand: They are wholly possessed with the Descent here,
and I can easily, I believe, if I Will make it my business, get Wagers enough
here, but I had rather have them in London, because I shall be present there to
demand them. By way of Policy I have received Five pound a piece, from above
Twenty, to make it Ten, if there be no Descent before the time agreed on. I
wish you good Success in your Wagers, who am

Your Friend and Servant, R. Hare.


Though this be a new sort of dealing, (said I) sprung up since our present wars,
yet it is arrived to a perfection of cheating, as well as the old-standing
Trades. You are just in your observation (pursued Chapel) for I think it is
arrived to such a perfection of cheating, it is nothing but a Cheat. True,
(added River) for here is one man of Ability is at the expense of good
Intelligence from the place of Action. Right, (assumed Temple) and by that
taking his measures, he and his Agents disperse themselves to several
Coffee-houses; And there (continued Fountain) according to the Inclinations of
the Company, frame their wagers. That is, (said Church) if the News be
agreeable to the company, they lay small wagers to the contrary of what they
suppose will come to pass; And the fame of these wagers laid by them (said
Brook) shall ^ngage twice as many to lay on the same account. There (added
Summer) they have their secret Agents to take 'em up, and so for the loss of
One hundred get ^en. But (said Winter) if the News be opposite to the
Inclinations of the Company, they lay boldly, never fearing Betts, no body
being easily brought to believe contrary to what he desires. It Is a sure Card,
(concluded Grave) for Desire is most commonly blind, and we lose a Certainty in
pursuit of that we have no probability of, but what Fancy furnishes us with.

LETTER LXVIII.
From one that advises his Friend to Dissimulation in all his Actions. 'Twas
directed to Mr. Johnson, at his Lodging at Mr. Moudy's in Thredneedle-street,
London.
SIR, Rutland, June 1692.
YOU send me Letter on Letter, of complaint of the Perfidiousness of your
Friends, and the Villainy of Men, who still deceive you; and I must tell you,
Sir, you may thank your self for it. You are for Plain-dealing; you love not to
say one thing, and think another; and you reap the Fruit of what you love, that
is Ruin, and Contempt in the end. All that I can do, is only to advise you to
alter your methods, and live as other men do; that is, never be what you seem
to be. If you would injure a man, profess a great deal of Friendship for him,
and so he will not be upon his Guard, and you may strike home. If you would seem
honest, talk much of Religion, but observe but little Morality: And so in all
your actions put on another Face, than what they tend to, and by that means you
may chance to rub through the sharping World. As my Advice is the best Service
I can do you, so is this the best Advice I can give you, who am

Yours to command, S. Grimault.


This Gentleman (said Winter) is learned in Mankind. True, (pursued Church) for
Dissimulation is so general, that it is become necessary. Right, (added Temple)
for he that knows not how to dissemble, knows not how to live. If you cannot
live temperately, (said Summer) sin at least with caution; so that if you are
not free from Vice, you may at least be so from the scandal and punishment of
it. Once failing to dissemble, (said Brook) cost Claudius's Life, as well as
the good Emperor Probus. 'Twould be endless to run through all that History
presents us with (added River) it gave occasion to Nero, to exercise his
Cruelty on his nearest Relations; And (pursued Fountain) to Jugurtha, to
destroy the Son of him that had made him Coheir in the Kingdom of Numidia. It
seems not only necessary (said I) for life, but even to afford a pleasure too;
For we shall observe it practiced very often without any need. Right, (added
Chapel) for why else should this For come a mile out of his way to see me,
only to tell me a Lie, that he loves, and admires me, when before he has turned
his back, he ridicules every word, and action I said, or did in his company,
and so on. Well therefore (concluded Grave) may all the world be said to
perform the part of an Actor, since every body represents another, not himself.

LETTER LXIX.
To a Friend that advised him to overcome a Passion, where he had so little
Hopes; giving an account of the present state of his Love; and his Resolves to
endeavor at a Compliance with his Friend's Wishes. 'Twas directed to Mr. Ed.
James, at his House near Harwich, Essex.
My Friend,
I Received your Letter last night, in which indeed you discover the Zeal of a
Friend, but little Consideration for the Frailties of a Lover. Have thou never
been in Love thy self, that thou should think Advice of any force with those
that are so? I confess, indeed, the Arguments you have used carry enough of
Truth to prevail with my Reason, to banish this fatal Passion from my Heart, if
it was in the power of Reason to do so, but alas, it has taken Reason captive,
and domineers over every Faculty of my Soul; and therefore to little purpose
you tell me, there are three Obstacles that obstruct my Happiness in the
Embraces of the divine BELVIDERA, Marriage, Modesty, and Poverty. You urge,
that being married, I cannot make her my Wife; that being modest, and diffident
in my self, I cannot suppose I can prevail on any other Terms, since it is
Assurance, and Impudence that gain the Sex in that way; and lastly, that being
Poor, I ought never to think of Hope, since no Advantage can be reaped from an
Intrigue with me. Money (you add) may gain the fairest, noblest, most religious
and most chaste of all the Sex, but that Woman seldom commits a Crime without
some prospect of Interest. Ah, my Friend* I wish you had in these enumerated
all the Difficulties, I find I should then have hopes of success: For I might
presume, she being a Lady of incomparable Sense, and Judgment, and no Bigott,
would be persuaded of this Truth, That one Wife was no more than Custom, and
national Law, and not of force enough to make the Embraces of a married man
criminal in the face of Heaven, whose Laws are not subservient to those of Men;
besides a Thousand Arguments more to that purpose. As for my Modesty, I confess
it is a great fault in Love; but BELVIDERA strikes such an Awe into me, that I
love her with such a profound Venera^ion, that I fear it approaches too near
Idolatry: But yet I have often heard the charming Angel condemn the forward
confidence of one that admired her, (for, ah! there is none that sees her, but
must do so, wheree'er she passes the dazzled Throng, stand still, and gaze, as
if she were something more than mortal) and when I have told her, Impudence was
the way to gain the Pair she has, my Friend, she has declared that never should
take with her. Lastly, Poverty would never harm my dear Pretense, for she is not
made of vulgar Mould, her Soul is charming as her Body. BELVIDERA has Wit, my
Friend, but not the flashy noise, tattling Wit of Coquets, which dwells on
Sounds, and Words, no, she has solid Parts, knows Nature, knows Reason, and
builds not her Judgment of things on vulgar Notions, or common Practices, like
the rest of the Sex; her Soul's above the contagion of a mercenary Thought, so
that if a poor Lover had but Merit, she would never oppose the guilt of Fortune
to his Happiness. Had I therefore Merit to plead, I should not despair, but
alas, I have none -- but Love, -- and, ah! that every one that sees her may
plead without a Lie. My Friend, you are mistaken in calling her Yielding a
Crime, (kind Heaven makes her yield, to convince the erring World, that it is
not so, for she can do no ill, and her Example would be the strongest
Argument). Prithee, if thou would leave Bigottry, leave it for good, and all,
and rail not at it in this, or that, and caress it in another thing. It was no
Crime, when natural Religion ruled the World, till State-Politics, and
Priestcraft made it so. Thus you see Love has destroyed all the Difficulties
your Friendship raised. You ask me, whether I have ever told her of my Passion?
I answer, No; -- unless my tell-tale Eyes, or Sighs, have betrayed the Secret;
for when I Have sat wrapped up in contemplation of her, she has asked me what was
the cause of my Melancholy; I d^rst not tell the Truth, my Friend, but ly'd
even to my own Prejudice; and hence arises one of the Difficulties greater,
than you proposed. -- BELVIDERA has declared, she will never confess it, tho she
loved with all the Extremes of Passion; nor dare I discover mine, tho I love to
raving.

I go once, or twice a week, (for I cannot refrain her sight) and steal a
thousand Looks, run ore her wondrous Beauties with my Eye, and judge of those
unseen, by what obliging custom lays open to our view. -- Nay, in my fond
Imagination I commit a pleasing Rape upon her, and ah methinks, my Friend,
methinks I am dying on her Snowy panting Bosom, till from my sacred Dream her
Tongue awakes me. Her Voice is Harmony, fair BELVIDERA, speaks soft as the
melting Sighs of Lovers: But I am lost in the ravishing Thoughts of her, till
my Paper denies me to tell thee the greater Obstacle, which yet remains; and I
am glad, my Friend, I cannot do it, lest if my Love should cast my Honor, thou
should be able to upbraid me, I had once done a thing I should not. But I
will try the common Medicine of unhappy Lovers, Absence; I have not seen her
these many Ages, called a fortnight, and if it is possible, will not above this
fortnight longer. These are my present Thoughts; but oh! I fear the next minute
will condemn my Resolution as a Falseness, and make me forswear all Thoughts of
Cure. I am, my Friend, at least all of me I can call my own,

Thy poor unfortunate Friend, C. G.


Who^ver reads this Letter (said Winter) may easily grant the Writer of it in
love. Then I Will declare him a Fool (replied Grave) that can make so serious ^
matter of such a Trifle, as woman. Ah, you know ^ot BELVIDERA, (said I) else
with all your Cinic nature you would mollify into that Fool you laugh ^t. Right,
(pursued Chapel) for she is Beauty in all its awful Majesty. Features (added
Brook) formed by the considering hand of Providence; And express (pursued
Temple) the affability of her nature, the severity of her Principles, the
Judgment, and Charms of her Mind. It Is with regret indeed (said Fountain) I see
Beauty possessed by a Fool, and Wit by a Knave. Such a form (said Summer) would
Truth, or Wisdom take, if they would make themselves visible to human Eyes. I
know (concluded River) the writer of this Letter thinks her all this, and much
more, loving her to the extravagance of Romance. I know him too, constant by
Nature, secret, humble, and modest, and no Fool. May she not thereby be wedded
so much to mistaken Virtue, as to prefer a national Chastity, unvalu'd in
reality by every one, to the secret Relief of the most faithful, secret, and
loving of Men.

LETTER LXX.
From a Debauchee that had a mind to lead a penitent Life. Directed to Dr. W
--, to be left for him with Mr. T --, Bookseller, at Grays-Inn-Gate, London.
Reverend Dr. Buckingham, June 1692.
I Have followed your Advice, and now begin to find the benefit of it, and to
see that even an inveterate habit in Vice is not such an insuperable
difficulty, but that it may be overcome by Resolution, and Prayer. My
Whoredoms, my Adulteries, my Drunkenness, Swearing, and ^ther Vices, in which
woeful Complication my poor Soul was a long time buried, carry now another
face. Those that once seemed Gallantries, and venial Peccadillo's of Youth,
seem now heinous Sins against the most high God. Such wonderful effects have
your pious Exhortations had upon the greatest of Sinners: I confess indeed,
with shame, and contrition of Heart, that I have fallen back sometimes to my
Vomit; but never without plentiful Repentance after it was over, and firm
Resolutions never to be guilty of the like again, which I hope I shall now
keep, and for which I ardently pray to the Lord both day, and night, and for
which I earnestly desire the Concurrence of your good Prayers too, who am,

Your penitent Child in the Lord, T. B.


I must confess (said Chapel) I am something incredulous of these wondrous
Conversions. From that (said Brook) which nature pleads were not such hei^ous
Crimes, I plead not for Adultery, Drunkenness, nor swearing -- But (interrupted
Temple) for a little delicious Fornication? I must needs say (pursued River) I
cannot conceive how that which was once no ill in its self, should ever be so
afterward. I wish (said Church) he had put his Name at length, that I might
have seen this Miracle of our Age? for so you think (assumed Summer) a
repenting Debauchee? with such an entire flinging off the old Man (answered
Fountain) as this Gentleman ^xpresses. True (pursued Winter) for Naturam
expellas furca licet u^que recurret, Nature will return, though you force it
back, Especially (continued Grave) when backed with such inveterate Custom.
This you find (concluded I) our penitent confesses he found true; but the help
of such a Guide as his will do Miracles; that Doctor is an extraordinary Man,
he preaches Charity, and acts more than he preaches, and I can scarce persuade
my self to think that Man can be guilty of an ill thing, who makes that Virtue
his ^arling.

LETTER LXXI.
Giving an account of the Resolutions, of the Passengers that had like to have
been cast away at Sea. 'Twas directed to Mr. Thomas, at his House in
Eagle-street, near Red-Lion-Square, London.
Dear NED,
AFter a hard Passage we are arrived safe at Harlaem, whence I fear I shall
never be able to get your Cousin Jack to return again for England, not for the
love of the place, but the fear of the Sea. We were so near casting away, that
all prepared themselves for certain Death. The Master and Ships-crew giving us
for gone, the Vessel being leaky, the Tempest strong, and the Pump broke; the
general Resolutions of all to lead better Lives, were very loud, and
extraordinary, but none was so vehement in their Repentance, as Jack, and I
think none sooner forgot his Resolutions when on shore. After we had in
rumminging about found a new Sucker for the Pump, and by the carefulness of the
Seamen, had hopes of Life, but not out of fear of Death we all agreed to go to
Church^, and give thanks to God for our deliverance, as soon as we came on
shore; though instead of the Church the whole Company run to the Tavern to wash
their insides, as the Sea had their out, from whence Jack was soon in pursuit
of a Dutch Bona ro^^, and none remembered their Resolutions, but to laugh at
them, as the effects of Bigotry and Fear. I intend for London again in a Month,
if I dispatch my business with Min here Van Stoopsdare. I am dear Ned,

Thy loving Friend, Sam. Mercy.


This shows (said Grave) how fickle the Converts made by fear are. And how
extreme some Men are (added Winter) in all their Actions. Right (pursued
Church) extravagant in their Vows, and Resolutions when in danger, as well, as
i^ their breach of them when safe. Because they promise Impossibilities
(continued Summer) they perform nothing. The old Proverb has a general Truth
in it (said Temple) when the Devil was sick, etc. Well may we be (said Brook)
unsincere to Men, when (assumed River) we can dissemble with Heaven. Heaven
(said I) is a distant, unknown place, and we soon lose the thoughts of it in
present visible Objects. Right (added Chapel) most Men are for a Bird in the
Hand; and suit their Devotion according to the present Circumstance. There are
(concluded Fountain) a great many of that Man's mind, who had rather trust God
with their Souls, than Man with their Interests.

LETTER LXXII.
From a Lady in the Country to another in Town; about the Fashions. 'Twas
directed to Mrs. Dugdale, at the Sign of the Myrtle-Tree in the inner Walk of
the New Exchange in the Strand, London.
Mrs. Dugdale, Northampton, June 1692.
I Desire you would send me down all the new Fashions, and to let me know
whether they wear all Passes this Summer, and in what manner they dress their
Commodes, for I Am loath to be at the charge of new, if the Fashion don't very
much vary from what it was last Summer, pray send me an account how many Knots
they wear, and in what manner placed, I would not for the World, but you should
be exact in this. Let me know whether they wear Tippets this Summer very much,
and whether Lace, or Feather-tippets; and what Alterations have been made in
the Mantua's that my Tailor may not fob me off with an old Fashion for a new
one; and if you can get any Patterns of Silk, to send me; by all means I would
have you send me some of your best Ribbons of the newest and most gay, that I
may consult which will best agree with my Face. I had almost forgot Shoes and
Fans, pray buy me two Pair of the best Shoes you can get for twelve Shillings a
Pair; I would have you change your Shoemaker, for methinks the last I had were
made by a mere bungler. Dear Mrs Dugdale, be exact in all that is here desired
of you, by

Your Friend to Command, Ephelia Ross.


Here Is one (said Grave) of the true Stamp of Woman kind. More concerned (added
Winter) for the having her Dress Alamod^, than her mind improved with the least
Reason. Thence perhaps (said Church) some Men have thought Women have had no
Souls. Because (assumed Fountain) their whole thoughts, and time are employed
on the Body. How great a part of Mankind (said I) might come under that censure
if that were a sufficient Reason? Right (pursued Summer) for there is not one
in a hundred of us that dedicate any time to the Improvement, or Pleasures of
the Mind. The Beau (added Chapel) is more busify'd with Dress than a Woman.
The Drunkard (continued River) has no other regard to his Mind than the
Elevating his Spirits, as he phrases it, with a chirping Bottle. The Tradesman
(said Temple) the Statesman, the Soldier, nay, and the great part of the
Divines too, are wholly intent on the Exaltation of the Body, for Riches and
Honors terminate there. Well then (concluded Brook) may we allow Women a
little more than ordinary share in this so Epidemic a Distemper, especially
since their care contributes to the satisfaction of some by the setting off
their Beauty.

LETTER LXXIII.
From a vainglorious Man, boasting of some of his good Actions. 'Twas directed
to Mr. Phillips, at Mr. Newme^s in the old Palace-yard, Westminster, London.
SIR, Dor^et, June 1692
I Received your Letter, and you have chosen well when you addressed to me to
speak in your behalf, for I make it my business to do good to Mankind,
especially my Friends. I will therefore speak to the worthy Squire in your
behalf; if he be deaf I Will do something for you my self, for, I set apart so
much of my Estate to good uses every Year; the whole Country knows my way, and I
seldom want those that make use of my generous Temper. I am

SIR, Yours to Command, H. Mould.


The vainglorious Man (said Grave) will never want Flatterers; Nor Spungers
neither (pursued Temple) it is the most pardonable of faults (said Fountain)
what (assumed Church) because it brings advantage to a great many. Right (added
Brook) for a vain glorious Man, will attempt all the good he can for the sake
of his own Reputation. That is (interrupted Winter) if his vain glory lie that
way. True (pursued River) for there are a sort of Men that are penurious in
action, and yet take a great deal of pains not to be thought so. Others (added
I) are only vainglorious of their Wit; which has no benefit (continued
Chapel) to recompense the nauseousness of the Fault. There is a lawful
assuming (concluded Summer) due to merit, in what kind soever; the Great Men
have expressed it in their Writings without fear of censure, as Cicero, Ovid,
Pliny the younger, etc. and I never blame Cicero for pleasing himself so much
in the delivering his Country from Ruin; it shows a noble Soul, that is pleased
in doing great Actions, and I think a Man ought to take pleasure, and discover
it too, in Actions which contribute to the good of the Public; or of others
private Capacities it shows one is sensible he is not born for himself alone.

LETTER LXXIV.
From a Gentleman, giving an account of the Enmity, and Disagreement of Poets,
and Authors with one another. 'Twas directed to Mr. Beedle, at his House near
Brentwood, in Essex.
Dear Brother, London, June 1692.
I Supped last Night with Mr. Chapel, at the blew Posts; and there happened to
be one of the new celebrated Authors in our Company: But certainly whatever his
Writings were, his Conversation was the worst I ever met with; there was no
discourse to be admitted but of Plays, and that of his only, and no other of
his Brother's of Parnassus were permitted to have one good word allowed 'em but
this Self-esteem, and Enmity at the rest I find is not his fault alone, but
generally all theirs who set up for Wits, and Authors. They are so full of
themselves, they are angry all the World are not as much taken up with them. I
sent my Man to Mr. Sawbridge's for one of Sir Roger's Aesops, who is not of
this Humor I assure you, I Will send it to you by the Brentwood-Coach to Morrow.
My Love to my Sister, and all my little Cousins, I am

Your Loving Brother, Nic. Beedle.


Fame is the Mistress (said Winter) of these Scriblers, as they pretend, and
they squabble about her like Bullies for a Whore. And like Bullies (pursued
Summer) rail at one another behind their backs, each thinking (said I) by the
villi^ying another to enhance his own Reputation. I have observed (said Grave)
that in the chase of Fame our young Authors have found a short road to
Reputation, that is to condemn or attaque some great Man of established ^it.
True (added Chapel) for the World is pleased with detraction, and hugs Scandal
closer than Wit, and Merit. And they are secure from him, they abuse (continued
Fountain) since a Man of Sense ought not to turn at every little Cur that barks
at him. Right (assumed River) their happiness generally being to find
themselves worthy to be taken notice of: Nor ought we (said Church) to degrade
our Reason as often as every Fool in our Company does his. You are under a mistake
(said Temple) if you think they disagree for empty Fame, for it is for its
present advantage they hate one another. Right (concluded Brook) for the
Authors of Antiquity had a better Correspondence, when the Roman Wits were so
ready to correct one another Performances; as is evident from the Advice of
Horace in his Art of Poetry. And from Pliny's Epistles, Book 3d. Ep. 15. Book
4. Ep. 14. Ep. 26. Book 5th. Epist. 10. and 11. and 13. and several other
places of his Letters, in which we find both him submitting his Works to the
Correction of others, and Tacitus, and others requiring the same Office of him.
'Twere to be wished for the good of the Public, that this were still observed,
we should not be pestered then with so many impertinent Pamphlets.

LETTER LXXV.
Giving an Account of a Funeral. Direc^^ed to Mr. Dorm, near Sennock Kent.
Loving Cousin, Gracechurch-stree^ June 169^
SR. Peter was buried last Night in St. Gile's in (...) Fields, with no less
Solemnity, than he lay (...) State a Fortnight before. There were the Heral^^
with their Coats of Arms; six Men on Horse-(...) with Flags, and all the Hearse
adorned with Srea^^ers, and Escuteons. I counted an hundred, (...) ten Coaches,
forty with six Horses, and ninetee^ with four, and the rest with two. A great
Doct^^ preached his Funeral Sermon, but I do not (...) know his Name. There is
to be they say a (...) famous Tomb erected over him out of hand. (...) much for
the dead, and now for the living, if tho^^ may be called so that are dead to
you. Two (...) your Tenants in Spittle-fields went off yesterd^^ into the Mint,
and got off most of their Good^ but my Son coming by prevented the rest, which
is something though of small value. My Sister B^^r^ughs is very ill, nor am I
very well, who am ^

SIR, Your Loving Kinsman, Lemuel Kidder.


Of all the Vanities of Mankind, (said Winter) ^^rtainly there is none more
vain than this affectation (...) Pomp, and Splendour, even after death. Right
(ad^^ed Grave) when we are no longer sensible of the (...) the admiration of
the Vulgar brings us. There (...) some excuse (said Church) for our Ambition
whilst (...) live. True, (added Summer) for we may be (...) of a pleasure, to
see our self served, loved, and (...) by our Brother-Mortals. But (pursued
Tem^^e) after the cold hand of Death has damped all those (...) Enjoyments, to
serve up our Carcass with such a ^^^remony to the Worms, is unaccountable. For
my (...) (said I) I shall never be sollicitous what becomes (...) my Body, when
my Soul has left it. Nor I, (pur^^^d Brook) the Survivers will, for their own
sakes, (...) ^are to bury me. Methinks (said Chapel) it is (...) ^illy, to go
with all that Formality to our Goal; (...) we are (added Fountain) only to
rott. This (...), (concluded River) as it is the last, so it is of a (...) with
the rest of the Glories of Mankind, a (...) amusement.

LETTER LXXVI.
^^om a young Student, about an Apparition. Directed to Mr. Molins, to be left
for him at Jonathan's Coffee-house near the Royal Exchange, London.
Honored Sir, Cambridg, June 1692.
Here was a strange thing happened last night in our College, which was this: A
very sober (...) man sitting late up to study, about One a Clock saw his Candle
burn blew, and in a minute went out. At the same time he heard a Noise at his
Door, like the snarling of three or four Dogs; presently after the Door burst
open of its own accord, and there came in with Flambeaux in their Hands, three,
or four Boys in a green Livery; after them followed a Huntsman with his Horn,
and his Pack of Hounds, and after them a Gentleman on Horseback, who seemed to
pass over his Study, out of the Window, as he supposes, for he sunk qui^e down
out of his Chair for fear; but he was not come to himself again above two
minutes, when thinking to run into the next Chamber, he was stopped at the Door
by a lusty Fellow, that had Horns, and Hair much like the Description we have
of the Furies; struggling to get from him, he beat hard against the Door, which
roused two of his next Neighbors, who calling to him, and he answering but very
faintly, they both came out to him, and found him in a Swoon, but saw nothing;
being brought to himself, he gave ^em this account, and afterward I had the
same from his own Mouth. What to think of it I know not, whether it be the
effect of his own melancholy Imagination, or a real Apparition, but there are
four of us are resolved to sit up with him to night, and then you may expect a
better account of the matter, from him who is

SIR, Your humble Servant, and obliged Nephew, R. Molins.


These Apparitions (said Chapel) are wholly unaccountable things to me. And to
me too (added Fountain.) That the Dead, or the Devil (said Temple) should have
nothing to do, but to play Jac Pudding Tricks, is something strange. And that
(added Brook) only to fright Fools, and old Women, without any advantage to
either the Living, or the Dead. Right, (pursued Summer) for the state of the
Dead being either eternally happy, or eternally miserable, what Ease, or
advance of Glory can it be to them, to ^^form some Slip of theirs in Mortality?
But if Oppression (continued Church) Cheats, and the like, were suffici^nt to
make the Dead walk, to make Restitution, why does not all the Knaves that dye
so, return, and put an end to their Villainies? That indeed (said River) would
save many a Lawsuit; And ^ake many an honest Family happy, (said Winter) which
else are fain to save themselves from starving, by the Charity of others, or
their own Industry, though not b^rn nor bred to labor. I must confess (said I)
that the Proofs Mr. Glanvil brings, being from the confession of old doting
Women, and ignorant Laplanders, seem not very convincing, yet when I hear a
learned Roman assuring us of Matter of Fact, it al^ost persuades me to believe
it, tho like him I am to seek the Cause, and Reason of it; I mean Pliny the
younger, who in his Epistle to Sura gives an account of 2, or 3 Apparitions.
Tho even so learned a man as the Philosopher he mentions, might be deceived,
since I was acq^ainted with a Doctor of Divinity, who tho in his ^^turnal
Studies he had seen something in the shape of a Woman come, and draw open his
Curtains, and stare upon him, and shutting them again, retire, yet would (...)
believe, but that it was the effect of Fancy only. But the account that Pliny
gives of the Apparitions he mentions (concluded Grave) is so very
circumstantial, that it could not be the effect of melancholy Thoughts, formed
out of our Fear. To omit therefore the business of Curtius Rufus, which might
be a boast of his own, like the Egerla of Numa, I Will proceed to the two more
remarkable.

There was (says he) in Athens a noble, and spacious House, which was haunted,
for in the dead of Night there was the noise of Iron, and if you hearkened a
little, you might perceive it to be the rattling of Chains, first at a
distance, but approaching nearer, and nearer; after which appeared an old man,
worn out with Grief, and Sadness, with a long Beard hanging down, and Hair all
staring, his Legs, and Arms were bound with Chains, which he shook: This made
the House be deserted. But the Philosopher Athenodorus coming to Athens, and
seeing a Bill on the Door, demands the Rent, which being very small, gave him
some suspicion, and there he inquired into the ma^ter, and had it all related
to him, which made him the more earnest to take the House. As soon as Evening
came, he ordered his Bed to be made in the fore part of the House, and his
Books, and Pen, and Ink, and Candle to be placed there, and sends the rest of
his Family to their Rest in the inner part, and taking his Pen in his Hand, he
set himself to write with all the Intention imaginable, lest the Account he had
heard should, by the help of Fear, form those Images in his Mind, if not
employed. The noise first began at a distance, then approached nearer; the
rattling of Chains was heard, but he kept still to his writing, but the noise
approaching by degrees, and now seeming within the Chamber, he turned about,
and saw the Spectre he had heard described; it seemed to beckon him, but he
making a sign with his Hand, bid him stay a little, and then returns to his
Writing, but the Spectre upon that came and shook his Chains over his Head,
upon which he looked back once more and observing it beckon again, he took up
his Light, and followed it; it went slowly before him, as if oppressed by
Chains, but in the Garden it suddenly disappeared: Athenodorus with some Herbs,
and Grass, marked the place; next day, having informed the Magistrates of it,
desires them to order that place to be dug, where was found the Bones of a Man
in Chains, his Flesh being eat off by the Worms; which being taken up, and
buried according to custom, the House was never troubled afterward.

This is something long, but (...) so extraordinary a Subject, 'twill not be
amiss to add what happened even in the same Pliny' s own House. He had a
Freeman called Marcus, a man, as he says, not unlearned, with whom his younger
Brother lay, in the same Bed, he thought he saw somebody sitting on the Bed,
and cutting off his Hair close to the Head. At daybreak he was found to be
shaved, and the Hairs all lay down about him. A little time after, a Boy
sleeping in a Dormitory, among a great many other, saw two in white enter the
Window, and cut off all his Hair, which was found in the same manner the next
morning.

Here were evident Proofs of the Matter of Fact; but now to the next.

LETTER LXXVII.
From a Gentleman, to a Fop that desired to know how he should salute, and
complement his Mistress. 'Twas directed to Mr. Tipping, to be left at Sarah's
Coffee-house near Queen Street in Cheapside, London.
Poor Lover, Leicester, June 1692.
I AM sorry I should just go out of Town as you arrived thither on the account
of Matrimony, and Courtship. You tell me you want me, to instruct you how you
should complement, and entertain your Mistress, when you wait on her; but I can
give you choice Instructions, at this distance, in the matter, which if you
follow, you will gain the Reputation with the Lady, of a very accomplished
Spark; it is the newest Mode of Wooing. You must be sure to carry a piece of
Crape in your Pocket, to wipe the Dust from your Shoes before you approach her,
and to have your Comb ready to adjust your Wig. If you sit, be sure place your
self where you may look in the Glass, and be very-diligent in giving the
genteel turn to the Curles of your Perruque, or the Ribbons of your
Cravat-string, and seem not to take much notice of your Mistress; admire your
own Dress, your own Person, and Parts; for to tell her she is pretty, is to make
her proud, and so stand off the longer. If you don't sit, and indeed Motion is
more natural for a Lover, so it be but graceful, you must be continually upon
the trip, often visiting the Glass, asking your Mistress how she likes this
Ribbon, that Cut of the Sleeve, this Stocking, that Cravat, and which she
thinks becomes you best. This will give her occasion to praise your Shape, your
Leg, your Face, or some, or all the parts about you; then strike in, and tell
her they are all at her service, that you are wondrously smitten with her, and
so the Suit is over. I wish you good Success, which you cannot fail of, if you
observe the Directions of,

SIR, Your Friend, and Servant, R. Arnold.


A pretty Method (said Winter) to win a fair Lady; And yet this Method (replied
Grave) shall win more fair Ladies than Senc^, and Reason. Right, (pursued
Church) this they call an airy modish Beau. An accomplished Gentleman (added
Brook) learned i^ Dress, and Mien. They hate the whining Lover, (said Summer)
except in a Play or Romance. They will have (added Temple) this airy way, as
they call it, more natural, Because (assumed Fountain) more ^ensless; Which is
(continued River) doing Business without any regard to it, or minding quite
another thing. I know not (said I) but we are equal with them there too. Right
(concluded Chapel) for a noisy Coquet shall gain a Train of Admirers, with her
ugly Face, when a modest charming sensible Lady shall scarce have enough to
keep her from l^ading Apes in Hell.

LETTER LXXVIII.
From a Husband to his Wife, against absence. 'Twas directed to Mrs. Orkney, at
Mr. Lovel's House near Tunbridge in Kent.
Dear Love, London, June 1692.
I Never was more dissatisfied with business, than when it hindered me from
going with thee to Tunbridge, especially since you went thither ill; for now I
desire to be with thee, that I may see how you gather Strength, and what
advantage you reap from the Waters. You send me word you are troubled at my
absence, and that for me you cares my Books, and put them in my place in the
Bed; thy desire of me is very pleasing to me, as well, as the satisfaction thou
take in any thing that is mine. On the other side, I often read over thy
Letters, as if but just received, but that fires me the more with a longing for
thy company, which cannot but afford a great deal of Delight, when your very
Letters yield so much Sweetness, and Content. Write therefore often to me, tho
thy Letters give me a Pleasure that is mingled with a great deal of Pain, both
for thy Absence, and Health. It Is incredible how I long to see thee, which
proceeds chiefly from my Love, and next from our seldom being separate; and
therefore I desire the time of our present separation may be as short as
possible, who am

Thy faithful loving Husband, S. Orkney.


Sure this must be Honey-moon (said Winter) with this Couple, that they express
such a mutual Fondness. It may be not (answered Grave) for Expressions of
Kindness in absence is often the Cover of other designs, which each has a mind
to conceal. Ay, ay, (added Summer) the Mysteries of Matrimony are not easily
dived into. If it be possible (said Temple) to have Plain-dealing, and
Sincerity among Mankind, and this be so, it is no unhappy state. Right, (added
River) for that which baulks our Happiness, is want of Confidence in one
another. The Interest of married People being the same, (pursued Church)
methinks it should not be impossible to find that there. I am of opinion (said
Brook) that Interest is not the only Hinge on which the Affairs of the World
turn. Right (added Chapel) for we have Passions that will often be gratified
to the prejudice of our Interest. And these seldom concurring (pursued
Fountain) it is no wonder Wedlock wants so often mutual confidence, without
which it cannot be a happy state, as you affirm. This Letter seems to carry the
Air (concluded I) of Sincerity, though it is the most difficult thing in the
World, to distinguish betwixt Reality, and Dissim^lation.

LETTER LXXIX.
In answer to a Letter of Praise. Directed to Mr. Brook, to be left at Nando's
Coffe-house near Temple Bar in Fleet Street, London.
How, for me (said Brook)! and would have got it away. Hold there, (said I)
your Vote passed but now for a free Communication, without Reserve, and are you
already for transgressing your Act, like a Parliament Man drinking French Wine
in a Taver^, when he had voted it down in the House? Prithee (returned Summer)
we are never willing to stand to the Law we prescribe another. But (said
Chapel) it is more than arrogant for a Parliament Man not to be content to
break the Law established by common consent, in a Tavern; but to bring his
Ponta^ into the very House of Commons, and drink it about there, among his
Brethren. Right, (pursued River) and therefore let him be Fi^'d that presumes
to enfringe our Decree for the future, for I was obliged to lead the way to
you. Agreed, (said all) proceed therefore? Upon which I read it out to them, but
Brook stood close by me, ready to snatch it away, if it had been what he
suspected, a Letter from a fair Lady.

Honored Sir, Oxford, June 1692
IN your Letter I received last from you, discovered how much you deserved
Praise, whilst you praised me, by your Wit being able to make so worthless a
Subject seem fine, even to him that has the most despicable Opinion of it, that
is my self. But this effect your undeserved Praise will have, th^^ I shall
endeavor to merit it, and turn your Complement into a Reality, that so I may
be able to repay your Bribe. I shall only in the mean time subscribe my self
what I am, without Reserve,

SIR, Your obliged humble Servant, R. Codrington.


What, my Friend Brook, are you in for a Complementer, (said Winter) who was
but now so free in your Censure of it? Prithee (returned Brook) we are all
guilty of the Faults we condemn here of other men. Right, (said Chapel) Grave
here, who has so many good words for the Sex, keeps a pretty Girl is a corner;
And yet (added Temple) can rail at Hypocrisy. And Summer (pursued I) can
censure the fondness of the Married; And yet (continued River) never suspect his
own. Prithee (answered Grave) who doubts it, but we have all our Vices, but we
see 'e^ not in our selves, as we do in another. Right, (added Summer) they have
private Beauties near, which are hid in Deformities afar off, like some sorts
of Painting. Re't as 'twill (said Fountain) it is not civil, to tell us when we
like not the squinting of another, that we are guilty of the same. In short,
(concluded Church) this I Will say in vindication of Brook, He could scarce say
any thing in praise of this Gentleman, which he deserves not.

LETTER LXXX.
From a Chemist that had ruined himself by it, to a Gentleman, to persuade him
to Chemistry. 'Twas directed to Mr. Raw near. --
Honored Sir,
I Would not have you discouraged from your Inclinations to the noble Art of
Chemistry, by the Persuasions of the Ignorant; certainly I that have spent so
fair an Estate in the search of Nature by Fire, should know what can be done in
this Art. It Is demonstrable, even to a very mean Understanding, that the great
Hermetic Work may be performed; nay, it may be made out, that not one half of
the Gold that is used in Europe, and transported thence to the East Indies, was
ever dug out of the Mines, or taken up in the Rivers in Africa, or America.
It Is true, a Philosopher should not be fond of Wealth, and that makes me not
affect Pomp, and Splendour, I could else convince the World, that I had not
spent all my time to no purpose. Be not therefore discouraged, and remember,
that the Operations in this kind are tedious, yet that the Treasure that
attends them more than answers the expense of Time, and Money. I am

Your Friend, and Servant, R. Simmons.


This has been a Cheat of so many Ages (said Chapel) That one would think
(assumed Summer) it should be worn threadbare by this time. Oh, (said Grave) it
has such a Support, that it is no Wonder at all. True, (pursued Church) as long
as we are possessed with insatiable Desire after Riches, We shall (added Winter)
grasp at every appearance of so large a Gain. The wonder of this is, (said I)
that all these Pretenders are poor when they have such a Treasure in their
power. Oh (answered River) they would have you think that their Poverty is the
effect of choice. Right (added Temple) as more agreeable to the life of a
Philosopher. But yet (said Brook) the end of their Philosophy being the gaining
this Art, and the use of the Art contradictory to the end of the Philosopher,
it hangs not well together. Nay, farther, (concluded Fountain) they pretend
none but a Philosopher can obtain it, which is only, we shall never have it
till we care not for it, and ought not to use it; and yet they persuade others
to the prosecution, by the hopes of Gain, which I can imagine to be nothing but
the Excellence of Poverty, or the Art of being content with a little when a
great deal cannot satisfy.

LETTER LXXXI.
From one that had stolen a Marriage, giving an account of Hony-moon, etc.
Directed to Mr. Arnway jun. at the sign of the Golden Serpent in Tuly-street,
Southwark.
Dear Sam, Bristol, June 1692.
YOU used to laugh at the extravagance of my Passion, but now I can laugh too,
being possessed of dear Clemene, whom you thought I could never obtain. She
came out of her Father's House to me, with her trusty Maid, after Ten at night,
when all the orderly Family was a-bed, and by the help of a Canonical man, we
were joined at an uncanonical hour. We revel'd in each others Arms most part of
the night, before day she left me bles^ with the sweetest Joys in Nature, and
returned to her own Bed: And thus by stealth she comes each night to her
longing Arms, more beautiful, gay, and loving by Enjoyment. I wanton in my
Happiness all night, and borrow of the day for Rest. Two months are already
past in these lawful Thefts of Love, and now she begins to find her self with
Child, she is infinitely fonder than ever. Her Father will therefore suddenly be
acquainted with it by some common Friends to both, and that with success I
hope; at least, it will not be in his power to hinder me from being one of the
happiest men alive in a Wife; which Blessing, I confess, I deserved not, having
so often condemned, and ridiculed a married life, but to atone, by imparting
the Pleasures of it, I Will make a thousand Converts of such as thee, dear Sam. I
am in have, it being now near Ten,

Thy fortunate Friend, Jo. Man.


A happy Man, (said Grave) content with his pre^^t Fortune; And yet perhaps,
before the revolving year comes about, (pursued Winter) he may sing another
Tune. True, (added Church) for now it bears so much the Face of Whoring, that
it makes him pleased with it, as if 'twould always be so. They had (...) yet
(said Fountain) known the Contradictions of (...) another Humors. Nor had he
yet (added Temple) known the insipidness of one Object continually day, and
night to dwell on. We are all violent in the first Transports (said Summer) of
a new-married life; But after a little time Satiety comes on, (added Chapel)
and then you find no relish of your best pleasures; No Novelty (pursued Brook)
in her (...), no new Charms in her Face, all familiar, and (...). But it
discovers want of Judgment (said I) to (...) changeable in our Affections; And
(concluded River) to imagine the absent Pleasure greater, than the present.

LETTER LXXII.
From an Hermaphrodite to a Female Lover. 'Twas directed to Mrs. Kates, at her
Lodging at the white Posts in Panton-street near Leicester-fields, London.
My lovely Amoret,
CErtainly Jealousy is the Child of Love, for I Am sure I love thee with all
the extravagance in Nature, and yet I Am afraid, lest in my absence some
deluding man should alienate thy dear Affections; but have a care, my Amoret,
for that Sex is false, and entirely composed of Ingratitude; Men seek nothing
at the expense of a thousand Perjuries, and the ruin of the fair ones, they
swear they love, (...) a minute's satisfaction to their Curiosity, not Lust, or
Love; they only aim at the vanity of b^agging they have lain with this, or that
Lady, without any farther regard to them. Believe me, my Amoret, to whom Nature
has given a share in both Sexes, for I can best judge of their faults: that
part of me that is divine Woman, softens, and improves the other, which would
else engage me in a thousand Villainies; but I have the Love, and Fondness of a
Woman, and the Vigor of a Man, by which I bring thee the pleasure of Love, and
Enjoyment, without any hazard to thy Reputation, tho an hundred should see me
in bed with thee, but the co^^agion of a man's Embrace brings certain Ruin, and
Pain to her that yields. You have a Happiness in me that is not common; Nature
has made us scarce like all extraordinary Beings, intended only for a Blessing,
for such of her Darlings as thee art, my Dear, my Amoret, my Angel, my Goddess,
for so thou wilt be, till polluted by the infamous touch of Man; which I Will cease
to fear, lest that Fear should make me cease to be happy, as to subscribe my
self thy faithful, loving, doting

More.


I cannot conceive (said Chapel) the nature of these ^mphibious Creatures: Nor
before now (pursued Temple) (...) I believe there were any such. They are not
the effect of Nature (answered Winter) but Accident. Right (added Grave) for
they are not born so, according to the account Montaigu gives us. True,
(pursued Church) for I never heard of any of them, that were so much men, as to
get a Child. I must confess my Ignorance in the matter (said I) but if I may
believe those that have better Skill, they are distinctly Man, and Woman. All
that I can say of the business (said Fountain) is, That if all are like this,
it is an Animal of a very amorous nature. It ought (answered Brook) since it has
both Sexes, to have the Lust of ^^th. True, (added Summer) and therefore Nature
has furnished it with the means of satisfying both. It Is the Emblem of the
Hypocritical World, (concluded River) the visible appearance of Woman deceives
the Eye, and makes one imagine the Petticoat hides no more than it does for the
rest of that Sex; which renders its dalliances indeed very secure, and
unsuspected.

LETTER LXXXIII.
From a Lady, to know the meaning of a Prophecy she had found in old Parchment.
Directed to Dr. Wet -- n of Chri -- near Foster-lane, London.
Reverend Sir,
RAking out a secret hole in my House the other day, I found an old Worm-eaten
tattered piece of Parchment, which upon my Son's perusal proved to be a
Catalogue of Prophecies, but none of them legible but this, -- The number 8 is
wondrous in all its parts, and wondrous Events shall happen when it is doubled,
Changes of Kingdoms, Ruins of Families, Power broken, and Woes, and Desolations
shall reign, but Pea^e, and Plenty ^ollow, when the Wolf's caught in the Co^k's
Ginn, and the Lion trembles (...) more at the neighboring Cock's Crow. I
desire, Sir, your Judgment of this, which will oblige

Your humble Servant, E. Wausel.


Now by my Soul (said Grave) I could never attribute the silencing of Oracles
to the Excellence of our Religion; because (assumed Summer) in the place of
that of Delphos, and two, or three more, every Nation is now filled with them.
Every Almanac-maker (said Winter) with his Prognostics, usurps the Office of
the Devil of Delphos: Nay, and every zealous Enthusiast (pursued I) sets (...)
the Ravings of his distempered Brain for Prophecies: And all the old Matrons,
and ignorant Plebeians have more Faith in 'em (said Church) than in the Word of
God. Ay, and have a greater Veneration for 'em (added Brook) than for the
Bible. Particularly those of Nostradamus (pursued Fountain) which have the
Honor to be placed in the Studies of some that ought to have more wit. They
are (continued River) the plague of a Commonwealth. They put the People in mind
(said Chapel) of Novelties; And tho they have no other ground (concluded
Temple) but fancy set them a madding after them.

LETTER LXXXIV.
From a Baud to a Iustice's Clerk. Directed to Mr. Thomas Jacques, to be left
at the Barber's-Shop at Epsom, Surrey.
Mr. Thomas, St. Gile's, June 1692.
I Wonder how it comes to pass, that because I gave you not my Quarteridge just
at the time, I had my House disturbed last Night by a Warrant from your Master,
where an impudent Queen of a Wife, found her Husband a Bed with an honest Girl,
who is sent to Bride-well upon it, and I my self was feign to make an escape
with the loss of all my Houshold-Goods; and for all't I know of my honest
livelihood. You Will get nothing by it I Am sure, for there'll never come a
civiller Person in my place. But if you would secure me better, ^ don't know
but I may make Friends among my good Customers to furnish me up another House
within your Preci^ct; I hope your self will contribute to setting up old Mother

Forby.


Here Is another Mystery of Iniquity (said Winter) revealed; the near Relation
(continued Chapel) betwixt the Breakers and the Preservers of the (...). It Is
a Policy (said Temple) our Justices of (...) Peace, or their Clerks learn of
the Venetians; that is (added Brook) to squeeze out Subsidies out of the
dealers in F^rnication. I^ this (replied Fountain) they do their Duty still, in
keeping the King's (...) People in security in their several Occupations. (...)
(continued Church) for the careful Bawd need (...) fear disturbing as long as
the Justice denies his Warrant. But you find (said Summer): the unfaithful
(...) upon the first default of payment leaves her to (...) Mercy of the
Multitude: That is (replied Grave) because the Bawd was poor; Else (added
River) her Castle had not been demolished. It Is with (...) (concluded I) as
Seneca observes of Thieves, the little Robbers of private Men are hanged,
whilst the Robbers of the Public live in Purple. So had (...) Bawd been a
dealer in greater Matters she had thrived by her Sin, and not been ruined.

LETTER LXXXV.
To the Maid that was to manage the Intrigue with the Mistress. Directed to
Mrs. Bridget Dod, to be left at Mr. Dod's, a Ioyner in Thieving-Lane, near
Westminster-Abby, London.
Pretty Mrs. Bridget, Cornwall, June 1692.
I Have directed this Letter to your Brothers, in whom you say, you can
confide. Be careful of my Affair, and you shall find me faithful to my Promise.
Five hundred Pounds, Mrs. Bridget, will marry thee to a substantial Country
Gentleman; nay, what is more I Will engage to get thee a good Husband into the
Bargain, if thou will but first provide me a Wife. Mind exactly my Directions,
to time your speaking to thy Mistress and mine of me, and Love. Take her in a
Morning, when she has all the remembrance of pleasing Dreams, with their
Impressions on her, before illhumour, and moroseness are awake; or else when
she is newly got to Bed, her severer Thoughts being long since gone to rest,
tired out with the hard Duty of the Day. Watch her softest hours, when her
Soul's in Tune to join with the Harmony of Love: After her Mind has been
employed in Romances, Plays, and Novels, then naught but sweet ideas fill her
Soul, and Love cannot be denied admittance, those having so well prepared its
way. Send me exact Advice of what Progre^s you make. I Will be in Town, as soon
as I have dispatched my business here. When I return you must so contrive it,
that I may once more have a private Interview with her; but so as if it were
not designed by you, the last was extremely well ordered: But we'll better
consult of that when I see you; in the mea^time, dear Mrs. Bridget, be not
forgetful of

Thy humble Servant, P. Wexford.


The Spark (said Summer) is learned in Womankind; and gives not better rules
(continued Temple) to steal upon the Affections of the Mistress, (...) he takes
(added Brook) to win the Maid to his Interest. A good Portion (said Grave) and
a (...) Husband; with the Appendix (assumed Chapel) (...) Gentility too is
enough (pursued Winter) to make (...) waiting Maid in Christendom sell a
hundred ^^stresses. Nay almost (said Fountain) her own Soul* if she ha^ any.
Though this Gentleman (said Church) seem to deserve her for his Ingenuity. He
seems ^^deed very well qualified (pursued River) for a happy married Man, that
is so well skilled in the Nature of Woman, that he cannot be at a loss to manage
it to his own content. That is (concluded I) if he know himself as well.

LETTER LXXXVI.
From a poor Scholar, in answer to one that invited him to London, complaining
of the small Regard that is had to Learning there. 'Twas directed to Mr.
Jackson, to be left for him at Man's Coffee-house, near White Hall, London.
Honored Sir, Cambridge, June 1692.
YOU press me in your Letter, to forsake this sacred retreat of Learning, and
come to London again. I confess your Conversation, is a mighty (...), to draw
me to that hive of Noise, and Nonsense, Ignorance, and Villainy. But your
command (for so is your request to me) I should not be proof against, had I not
too fresh an Experience of the servile Condition a Man of my little
Circumstances must be in there; whereas my small Fellowship affords me ease and
content here in conversing with Men of Learning, Wit, and Honesty; who for many
a year have not forsook this blessed abode of the Muses, for all the Baits of
Interest, and Preferment, but content, sat down with ^^envy'd Arts and
Sciences, whilst the rest of the mad World were scrambling for Riches, and
Dominion. It Is true they are not very learned in the Practice of the World, nor
desire to be so; having no other insight into Man, but what their Books afford
them; and chiefly for that reason I covet their Company, that I might forget
what I know of Humane mane kind, and return to the first Innocent, though false
Idea I had of it, before I was made sensible of my Error at so dear a rate as
Experience. The practical Knowledge of Man may be curlous indeed; but I Am sure
it is a filthy curiosity, that obliges us perpetually to pore in Excrement, and
corruption with little, or no advantage. For what am I the better for knowing
that a Fool in a gay Coat shall be set at the upper end of the Master's Table,
whilst a Man of Sense shall be put off with a scrap at the lower end of the
Servants? Or that a bold tatling Ignorant shall pass among the greatest part
for a Scholar, whilst a modest Scholar shall be censured for a Dunce? Or what
advantage have I, by knowing that this young Spark, that owes the little
Embelleshments of his Mind, which (...) has to my care, and industry at the
University^ shall be ashamed to be seen in my Company, because I Have not a
daubed laced Coat, or Wastcoat, for fear of scandal to his Fops, and Beaux's,
that now pervert with ease what I with such pains had been so long establishing.

I cannot sit spunging at a Tavern with a pa^^ of Knights and Squires, and for
my Club (...) obliged to laugh at, and praise their insipid (...), ries, and
think my self honored in their Conversation. Nor can I with a parasitial Face,
creep to this Lord's Table till I Am affronted by the very Footmen. In short I
cannot make my self the Jackpudding of the Company, to make a Set of (...) laugh
till their Eyes are liquor'd like their Throats; and because Fortune has made
me poor, fling away the Blessings of Nature and make my self a Fool to save the
Charges of my Club. To conclude Sir, I can do nothing that is taking with the
Town, and therefore I desire you would hold me excused if I keep from it. Who am

SIR, Your very humble Servant, J. Bowls.


This Spark (said Grave) has Judgment, as well as Wit, contenting himself with
his present Condition, rather than hazard a certainty, for an uncertainty. Nay
(pursued Winter) a Man of Wit, and Learning pursues a certainty of Poverty in
the World, whilst he puts in for the prize of Fortune with Fools, and K^aves.
True (added Church) for Learning like Honesty is very much extolled but very
poor. Villa^^, and Ignorance (continued Summer) gain Wealth, and Honesty, and
Learning starve. But if Fools and Knaves (said Brook) have a momentary Reign,
the Man of Sense triumphs over them to after Ages. I like his Expression (said
Temple) of Scrambling for Riches, and Dominion, for in the World Men like Sir
Bartholomew Coake in Barth^l^mew-Fair, scramble for the gilded Ginger bread,
and Apples Fortune throws among 'em, without regard to the Order, and Decency
of their Habit, Quality, Age, or Station. Here a judge casts off his formal
Gravity to sooth a great Court Lady to make (...) Interest for^ the great
Seals. Right (pursued River) and there a precise Doctor throws aside his
sanctified Grimaces, to flatter a supple Favorite for a Bishopric. And that
ancient Lord (added Chapel) lets fall his paternal Coronet, whilst he is
scrambling for the Prize with an up-start petty Fogger. But the medly of
Mankind (said Fountain) is endless; and the Dance in the Rehearsal gives the
best Idea of it of any thing I Have seen, and therefore by the Critics leave, I
think that Dunce better Writ than an hundred of their ineffectual Precepts. The
Anatomy therefore of Man (concluded I) both as to Mind, and Body is a filthy
Curiosity, as he observes, where one must besmeer ones self with Blood to trace
the intricate Menaders of each Nerve, and Motion, and all the private Kingdom
of Veins, and Arteries; by which the Mind as well as Body moves, and subsists.

LETTER LXXXVII.
From an old Maid. Directed to Mr. Nicholls, at the Sign of the Sugar Loaf, in
Tower-street, London.
Dear Mr. Nicholls, Stains, June 1692.
I Wonder you should question my Love to you, when I have given you so many
marks of my Sincerity; I say not this to show you that I am very fond of you,
for I need not have lived a Maid to these years, if I had been so forward to be
married; the Men have been wooing me this dozen Years to it. Dear Mr. Nicholls,
don't fail coming to Stains next Saturday; that you and I may go to Church
together on Sunday. You may believe me, I wish we were never to be asunder
more: But nothing should have gained this Confession from me, but your repeated
assurances of honorable Love to her, who is without reserve,

SIR, Yours to Command, Rebecca Bond.


This poor Lady (said Chapel) is in a great fear of leading Apes in Hell.
Right (pursued Brook) she takes a great deal of pains to keep this only hopes
of her Salvation; and (added Temple) to convince him of what perhaps he sees
too plainly already, viz. the reality of her Love; or doting (said Winter) nay
if you seem in the least (said Church) to doubt the Love of an old Maid, tho
but by way of course she will be giving you a thousand nauseous for^d assurances
of it. Till (added Fountain) she is more intolerable, than two or three Irish
men making Love to a Coffee-woman, with a damned perpetual noise (pursued
Summer) of singing out of Tune, and a curss'd voice, till the besieged Damse^
(continued River) is forced to give 'em a Glass of cool Tea, or Vsque^a^ to
stop their mouths. Quisque suos patimur Manes (said I) we have each our several
Faults. And Men as well as Women (concluded Grave) are most fond of Pleasure,
and Riches, when they are past the right use of 'em.

LETTER LXXXVIII.
From a Doctor of Trinity College, Cambridge, to a Gentleman, to persuade him
to neglect the vulgar Sollicitudes of a busy Life, to raise to himself a Name
hereafter. 'Twas directed to Mr. Bens, to be left for him at Child'^
Coffee-house in St. Paul's-Church-yard, London.
Honored Sir, Cambridge, June 1692.
I Want to know how you spend your time, Whether the Diversions, and Business
of the Town still monopolize your Thoughts? Prithee bid ad^eu to the hurry of
the thoughtless part of Mankind, that live here only to scrape together a
little shining Dirt, with a great deal of trouble, and often injustice, to
furnish their Children with Supplies to their (...), and Profusion. It Is below
a Man me (...) to live only for the day of the short of Life. We are immortal
in the Rowls of Eternity, and ought, in my mind, not to let our selves die
here, till the Rowls of Fame are shut up in those of Eternity. Fortune has been
^ind to you in placing you in the happy Mean, tempt her not to destroy the
Happiness she has given you. Nature is content with a little. Leave therefore
the sordid care of Gain to those that will die like the rest of the numerous
Millions, that the World never heard of their being in it, whilst you return to
your Country House here near your Alma Matter, and devote your self to your
Studies, where you may form some great thing, which will be always your own.
Your Estate and Moneys, though ne'^e so much, by the K^averies of some, inspight
of the Security of the Law, after your Death, may fall into as many hands, as
the Conquest of Alexander, with a worse fate, for none will so much as remember
that they once were yours, but the Products of your Learning will be yours for
ever. I know the Ability of your Genius, I should not else endeavor to drive
you from the common road; try only to have as good an Opinion of your own
Parts, as every body else has and that will soon prevail with you to comply with
the Desires of him, who is

Your Friend, and humble Servant, R. Nalson.


I am of this Gentleman's mind (said Church) that the chase of Honors, and
Riches are not worth the time of a Man of Sense. Thus far (answered Grave) he is
in the right, for the perfection of Happiness is Certainty; But the Glories of
Honors, and Riches (assumed Winter) are supported by such brittle B^^tresses,
that the Arbitrary Whim of a Prince, or the the more giddy Humor (added River)
of the Mob casts it down. It Is true (said I) we pursue Happiness before we
consider where to find it; Mistaking its seat (assumed Temple) to be in
Dignities, and Wealth, because (added Summer) they are dazzling; and (continued
Fountain) under their false Glory conceal their Troubles and Vexations. Whereas
(said Chapel) in Study we find present content, and (concluded Brook) same
hereafter, when the Memory of wealth, and Honor is forgot.

LETTER LXXXIX.
Of Consolation to one that grieved very much for the Death of his Wife. 'Twas
directed to Mr. Monson in Bloomsbury-Square, London.
Dear Cousin, Newcastle, June 1692.
I Received your melancholy Letter, and confess you have had a great loss in
losing a good Wife, that being so rare a Jewel in this Age: You say you have
lived with her these nine and thirty Years, without any falling out, she always
paying you that deference, and respect due to a Husband, and that her you love,
and indulgence due to a Wife; but methinks it ought to be a great comfort to
you, that you possessed such a Treasure as this so many Years, when so many
Accidents, and Distempers threatens our Lives every moment. Unhappy I confess
are the Joys of Love if they could he extinguished by the Death of either, but
the Memory of the deceased is a Balm for that Sore, and keeps her Image still a
live. Besides you have Children the more lively Pictures of her; he fond of
them, and be not such a devote to grief, for what cannot be recovered, as to
neglect your Duty to your self, and your own Offspring. It Is to no purpose to
use many Arguments, Grief being the best cure to it self. But I would not have
you ever forget her, that you may still remember your Children she bore you. I
only desire you to be moderate in your grief, who am

Your loving Kinsman, Jer. Pool.


For my part (said Church) I look upon this to be but a piece of Ceremony, for
I cannot think any Man so fond a Husband as to extend his Love beyond the Grave.
At least (added River) to that degree as really to want these auxiliary
Consolations. I have known some (said Chapel) to my cost, that have appeared
as much concerned for their Wifes; who have yet married within a Year or two,
and forgot them so much (added Temple) as to turn her Children out of door, to
make room for new Wifes. But there is a great deal (said Grave) owing to the
length of time they have lived together. True (assumed Summer) for we are
troubled at the loss of a domestic Dog we have had any time; much more
(pursued Brook) at the Death of one we had so long caressed in our bosom.
Besides (continued I) it presents us with a near prospect of Mortality. Right
(continued Fountain) to have death make so near an Approach to us, is cause
enough of Melancholy. But that is a Melancholy (concluded Winter) that they soon
forget in the Arms of another young Spouse.

LETTER XC.
From a Gentleman, justifying his much praising his Friends. 'Twas directed to
Mr. Chapel, at his Lodgings at Mr. Best's in Bow-street, near Covent Garden,
London.
To me (said Chapel) starting: Well, well, read it out, it is from some poor
dying loving Creature, I ^arrant. No, no, (said River) it is from some male
Friend. I assure you, have but a little patience, and you will be satisfied in
(...) P^int.

My Friend, Worcester, June 1692.
YOU send me word that some in your Company were condemning me for magnifying
all the Gentlemen of my a quaintance, with whom I have the Happiness of any
Intimacy. I Will never deny the Accusation I glory in. For what Crime can be more
pardonable, than that of generous kindness for the Men I profess to value. But
do these Gentlemen that condemn me pretend to know my Friends better than my
self? But if they do, ler '^m not envy me my happy Error; if they are not so
deserving as I declare them yet I Am happy in thinking them so. Let them
therefore bestow their ill natured Remarks somewhere else, for there are enough
who think it a point of Judgment to carp and ridicule their Friends, they shall
never persuade me that I can love mine too much, who am

Thy Friend and Servant, Wall. Kalesby.


He Is eternally praising all his intimates (said Chapel) and it is enough to be
of his acquaintance to be a Man of Honor, Wit, and Courage, and all the
dispersed Merits of Mankind. It Is the effects of a generous Nature (replied I)
and I wish he never have a cause to alter his Mind. He says very true (said
Temple) that Ill Nature is plentiful enough in the World in censuring all it
keeps company with True (pursued Winter) he is looked upon as an Ass that cannot
find more Faults, than Virtues in his absent Friend. He errs (said Church) of
the honest, tho most dangerous side. I rather attribute it (returned River) to
his Youth, than Virtue. True (assumed Summer) for most young Men, that are
ignorant of the Town, and the general Rogueries of Mankind, are guilty of an
over confidence in all that profess a kindness for them. Till to their cost
(con^^nu'd Fountain) Age better instructs them. Age ^ay instruct them (answered
Grave) not to be over confident in any Man, but can never justify their
abusing particulars without a particular cause, which (concluded Brook) if it
be sufficient for abuse, is sufficient to break off Friendship; for it is
unaccount^^le that we should affect the Conversation of (...) ^e contemn, or
hate.

LETTER XCI.
From a young Lady to her Gallant, to whom she had yielded, and who was still
constant. 'Twas directed to Mr. Polly, to be left for him at Sander'^
Coffee-house, near the Dog Tavern in Drury Lane, London.
Dear Sylvio,
THOUGH my Mother has obliged me to go into the Country with her, yet I will
avoid hated absence, by keeping thy dear Image, my lovely Boy^ always in my
sight; for I can find no Crime (...) what we have done to make me afraid to
think o^t with all the (...) of Joy we met with in our first (...), we were
both young, and both (...) with equ^l (...); Where was then the fault if (...)
followed the dear instinct of Passion, and satisfy each others Longing? It had
been a Si^ against Nature, and Reason, as well as Love, to have kept our selves
in pain for the mere Niceties, the hypocritical World stands upon in Words,
though not in Deeds; it is enough we are cautious in our Joys, and keep them to
our selves. My happiness in thy Constancy my Sylvio, convinces me I have done
nothing but my Duty; which makes me think my self the happiest of all my Sex,
as long as I can subscribe my self thy Love, and Constant

Eptaelia.


Here Is a pretty, constant, innocent Tit (said Chapel) one (assumed B^ook)
that has not lost her Innocence with her Maidenbead. What says our morose Grave
(said Temple) to this pretty Rogue? ^y, ay (pursued Summer) does she come
within the Crimes of the Sex? if not within their Crimes, Yet (answered Grave)
yet she may in good time Gentlemen; for she is already (added Winter) got within
the Verge of the greatest of their Follies Love. Which degenerating into Lust
(pursued Church) leads her into their Crimes with ease, and speed. I Am sure
it is pity (said Fountain) she should ever be less happy, because she has so
much wit (assumed I) to plead so well for her Love. Her wit (concluded River)
is that which will pervert her Constancy, and certainly destroys her Happiness.

LETTER XCII.
Of Recommendation. Directed to Captain Nasbey, to be left for him at Tom
Urwin's Coffee-house in Russel, near Covent-(...), London.
Honored Captain, Portsmouth, June 1692.
I Have a particular Kindness for my Cousin Tom, beside the Obligation of
Nature, and shall do all that I can for him my self, but I think I can in
nothing contribute more to his good, than by recommending him to your charge,
when you set Sail; I question not but he will so behave himself, so as to merit
your Esteem if I had not sent this to engage you before hand, by the interest I
have in you. I know him of a grateful, and generous Nature, and will always
remember a Favor received. In short, there is nothing you can oblige me more
in than in a kind Reception of him. I am

SIR, Your Friend and Servant, G. Rooksby.


This Gentleman (said I) is a Miracle -- Tr^^ (assumed Summer) a Relation, and
a Friend. A Recommendation indeed (said Temple) is as hard to be got from
Relations, as Money. It Is a greater test of Love (answered Grave.) Right
(pursued Winter) for by this you venture your Interest in (...) you esteem, and
that can oblige you; and in your Money (added Church) you hazard but a little
solitary Cash, without any Appendix of worser consequences, if a Recommendation
be such a test of Love (said Brook) the accepting of it is as great. True
(continued Fountain) for he runs a double hazard having two to please in one.
Let us dispatch this (said Chapel) that we may not hinder a good Office They
are so few (concluded River) it is pity it should be with any Obstacle, from
parties unconcerned.

LETTER XCIII.
From a French Dancing master, to one of his Scholars. Directed to Mr.
Croftsman, at his Chambers in the Temple.
Ma deer Monsieur Croftsman, Epsom, June 1692.
ME vowed no have you neglect a your dancing v^^stt me be in de Country, vor
me hava left one of de vary rare Artists in de ^noble Mystery, who vil make
you de vary perfect accomplished Gautlehomma begar ofe all de Englis Nation.
Here be de one, two, tree of devary curious Dammoisels begar. Pray dear Mestre
Croftsman give prettee Mestress I^nny one, two, tree kisses foor me, and begar
ive you vill ven me coma to Town again, me vill give her one, two, tree
hundred kisses vor you, and one tousand someting else begar ive she will letta
me. Me be Monsieur begar in a vary great deal ove have, and me therefoore
subscribe me selve,

Your humble Esclage and Vassal, Jacque de Baordeaux.


Sure (said Grave) we are the Bubles of the World; And that (added Winter) is
the S^um of all Nations, as if an Englishman could not have a grac^eful
Motion, without a French Dancing Master? for my part (said Church) I could
never understand the use of Dancing, or at least (assumed Brook) how it can be
so necessary a Qualification of a Gentleman. 'Twas among the Romans (said
Temple) the business of Players, and that (added Fountain) it is a f^r more
excellent Nature. Right pursued River) for in the time of Nero, a Dancer
represented so many things by mere silent motion, and that in measure, that an
Asian King there present begged him of the Emperor, to be his Enterpreter, to
the several Nations he ruled, or had to do with, so naturally he represented
every thing, that he seemed to have found out an universal Language without
speaking, dancing int^lligible Words to all Nations: But our dancing (said
Chapel) consists only in a Caper, and a few insignificative turns of the Feet
or Body. And then (pursued Summer) Plu^arch mentions the Samian Dancers by way
of Contempt, and as the most infamous of Whores. I must confess (concluded I) I
think C^stom is the (...) Plea for the (...) of (...) present Dancing.

LETTER XCIV.
To a Friend in Town, who had promised to come, and eat some of his Country
fare at a certain time. 'Twas directed to Mr. Mathews, at his Lodgings at the
Star and Garter in York buildings, in the Strand, London.
Dear NED, Surrey, June 1692.
YOu promised to come to dinner to me last Tuesday, accordingly I prepared some
Country fare, Beef, ^^d Pudding, Sallades, and what else unsophisticated Nature
yields, without the corruption of your French Cooks. You are like to pay your
shot, for staying away, unless you redeem your Transgression by coming next
Tuesday; you have a Horse, so that nothing but the Will was wanting. But
perhaps you were engaged at Lockets, the Blew Posts, or Pontacs, with more
exquisite Dishes. True, you might have a more modish Entertainment, but never a
more hearty. Therefore put not me off with Excuses, unless you intend to excuse
me from writing myself what I am,

Your Friend and Servant, S. Willis.


Here Is a Feast (said Grave) in my mind better than all, that of Trimalicon in
Pe^^onlus Arbiter. Gluttony (said Temple) is the most unmanly of Vices. True
(pursued Brook) to live only, or chiefly to Eat, is the Life of a Hog. It clogs
the Understanding (said Winter) and hinders the Operation of the Faculties of
the Mind. In which (added Church) we chiefly differ from mere Bruits. So that
we sin against our noblest part (continued River) by being devotes to Eating.
He therefore (said I) that wished himself the Neck of a Crane, for the
prolongation of the pleasure of taste, merited to be turned into a Beast, for
his brutal as well as ignorant Wish. Nature's best satisfied (said Summer) with
a little, but is oppressed with a great deal. And generates Distempers (pursued
Chapel) and so puts an end to the infamous Pleasure, and Life too. Thus as
well as other faults (concluded Fountain) it b^gets its own punishments.

LETTER XCV.
Advising his Friend to turn Quack. 'Twas directed to Mr. Stones, to be left
for him at the Pye-Coffeehouse, in Parker's Lane in Drury Lane, London.
IM sorry to hear of thy poor condition, and have to my ability complied with
your desire, and sent you a Guinea by the Coachman. You have a pregnant Wit,
and have been bred a Scholar, methinks you might find some way of living,
without these Necessities you complain of: How many ^^ockheads set up for
Physicians, and Divines? (...) turn Quack in one, or the other capacity. Though
the first I think more proper to thy Genius, (...) well as more gainful, there
being more Foo's ^^an Devotees, and every Fool will take more care of his Body
than Soul, and bleed freelier to the Doctor, than the Parson. It Is but getting
two, or three Books of Physic, to furnish thee with. Terms and half a dozen old
Wives Receipts, to ^ell at thy (...) price, and also some easy Tract of
Astrology, that may instruct you in the Art of bantering the ordulous, and
those that are mad for Futurity, (...) ambiguous words, and hard Terms above
their C^pacity of Understanding; any Scratches will (...) for a Scheme, and the
Names of the Plane^s, which you may learn from an Almanac, get you (...)
reputation of a profound Artist. Let your (...) be worded ^illyer than
Saffolds, or his Succes^^, and all the Fools in Town will come by sympathy to
thee, and so we shall have thee dye as Alderman. This Advice I look upon a
hundred times more worth than the Guinea I send you. The Event will show how
much I am thy re^^ Friend,

S. Gilman.


Good wholesome Advice this (said Chapel) Right (assumed Brook, and smiled) for
he is to deal (...) Health of the People. A Quack (said Temple) may be thought
of the same Class with Sin, for he has the same wages, Death. But (answered
Fountain) (...) Death, that is the wages of Sin, a man cannot live by as the
Person observed True, (assumed Summe^) but Death, the wages of a Quack, brings
in a very good Livelihood. These Quacks (said Grave) (...) the Pest, and Shame
of the Commonwealth, who (...) five pound can purchase a License to kill, and
(...) the People. They are rather (replied I) the (...) of the Commonwealth,
clear^ng it of (...) Distempers, for they destroy none but Fools. But (...)
Winter) they are but ineffectual Purgations (...) for they leave a great deal
of the Disease behind. (...) (replied River) is because Fools are of such a
spreading quality, that they have diff^^^d themselves thro^^ the whole Body
politic, and therefore incurable. Besides, (concluded Church) if they made a
(...) they must poison themselves too, after they (...) lost the Trade of the
whole Tribe. But I am of (...), Physic being of so uncertain, and (...) nature,
that the most learned seldom (...) the Disease, (...).

LETTER XCVI.
From a Gentleman in Town, to his Friend in the Country, complaining of the
Spungers that thrust themselves into his Gompany. 'Twas directed to Mr. Alford
near Futhringham in Kent.
Dear Sir, London, June 1692.
NOT the Knaveries, nor Lewdness of the Town, you have so much urged against my
(...) stay here, has given me this Resolution of (...) into the Country, but
the intolerable (...) of Spungers, which like the Locusts of ^^ypt, are blown
on me by I know not what wind. (...) Vermin will soon eat up my Estate, if
grea^^ than it is; and whilst I feed them with substan^^^ Meat, and Drink, they
feed me with empty (...), or nauseous Jests. I believe, sometimes ^^^y think,
because I have an Estate, I ought to (...) them that have none, but they are
mistaken, (...) not yet arrived to that Christian Perfection of (...) all, and
giving it to the Poor, or if I were ^ ^^^uld never choose Sots, Buffoons, and
Bullies, the partakers of that Distribution. In short, since (...) there is no
Remedy to keep free from these (...), that stick so close to Quality, and men
of (...), but by being as impudent as them, (which (...) be) or leaving the
place where they grow, (...) resolved to marry, and retire to a good peaceable,
able, quiet, Country Life. I know you will be pleased with my Resolution, whatever
is the cause of (...), and that was the reason I gave you this Trouble, who am,

Sir, your Servant, Wanly.


Spunging is such a slavish low thing, (said Temple) that a man of any spirit
can never be guilty of it. Right (pursued River) to sneak to every Fool for a
little Meat, and Drink, to cringe to every menial Servant, of those he spunges
on, rather than endeavor to get a generous, and unprecarious Living by his own
Industry, since Nature is not so veracious, as to require more than a man is
able to provide. I had rather (said Chapel) dine at a Three-penny Ordinary, at
my own expense, than at a Lord's Table Spungers indeed (said Brook) are a lazy
sl^thful Generati^^, and yet, like the Devil, they are continually rovi^g about
to seek whom they may devour. Impudence i^ their chief Qualification, (pursued
Church) and (...) that is not hardened to all Affronts in Nature, will never
live by it. True (added Fountain) he must be the patient Subject of all the
I^sts of the Company. Yet (said Winter) they shall drink as much, eat as much
and call in as much at a Tavern, as any in the Company, but for paying, they
are ^our humble Servant. They like Vermin (said Gr^ve) suck the Venom of
S^ciety, and live upon the Superst^ities of Conversatio^. They must (pursued I)
flatter Fools, and Knaves, and study Jests to tickle the Conceit of this Esquire
and th^^ overgrown Alderman. True, (concluded Summer^) but indifferent ones
will serve; for one of these (...) (for such many of this Class pass for) (...)
to a Lord's to Dinner, having labored his Brai^ hard ^ll the way for a Jest,
to pay for his Treat, he seemed s^mething dull. How now Tom? (says the Lord)
what is the matter with you? I Am like a Door (re^^^ed the Wit.) Like a Door
(quoth the Lord) pray explain. Why I Am off the Hinges (returned the ^it.) The
Lord laughed till his sides cracked, the Wit (...), and got a good Dinner, and
a Flask of good Cl^ret in his Gutts; and the damned Jest has plagued (...) Town
ever since. And to say truth, he is a Door off the ^inges still, and ever will
be, as well as all of this (...).

LETTER XCVII.
From a Country Parson to his Friend in London; that desired him to write an
Elegy, for nothing, upon the Death of one of his Relations, that died, and left
him a good Estate. 'Twas directed thus, To Monsieur Boleau, Bookseller, at his
House in the Pall Mall, London.
Monsieur,
WITH all the Humility, and Submission imaginable, as becomes a poor Country
Parson, toward a London Gentleman, of the newest edition. I congratulate the
occasion of your Gentility, not being at all surpised, that the largeness of
your Mind bears such proportion to that of your Estate. But is it possible you
should honor your poor quo^da^ Drudge, and Author with not only demanding an
Elegy from him on your late, kind, deceased Relation, but even to accept it
gratis too? Well, it had been incredible in any but a Soul so surprizingly
great as yours. Send it? Yes, with all the Passion, the Ferment, the Eagerness,
the Salt, the Flame, the Fire of my Soul, I Will send it, -- it shall come, yea,
even now, (unless Dinner abruptly talk) before my Pen dare lift it self from
the Paper; and I shall therein endeavor, pedetentim, to follow those curious
hints you give me in your last for my direction. -- Have-at it then this very
minute.

NO, Muse! in vain is all Apology;
(...) must, you shall produce an Elegy:
Don't hang an^ A --, I tell the donnet,
Nor simp'ring cry I cannot, I wonnot.
It Is Boleau calls, a man of Quality,
Famed for Great Soul, and Liberality,
Who late, deny it he that can,
By a strange chance turned Gentleman.
Fortune, no more we'll blame thy blindness,
Since thou have shown him so much kindness:
Thou, and that blessed, that lovely Creature,
That Miracle of Art, and Nature,
Who last of the long-winded dozen, A (...) number, (...) it'^ no matter for
bei^^ very exact.

Died to oblige so kind a Cozen,
For which he vows in deathless Verse
(Which nothing costs) t'adorn her Hearse.
Ah! who, alas, without Anxiety.
Can think o'th fall of so much Piety?
Beauteous as Bolean's self, or Sary,
As my Emi^ia, wise, and wary;
Grave, and resolved, and action slow of,
As is the Great young man you know of.
And what among 'em all is the best, lie
Full as good-natured as -- Jack Wheatly.
Judge if her worth were not uncommon;
But Man is mortal, so is Woman.
Ah! had not Death with Gall mixed Honey,
And tried to bribe our Grief with Money,
^rought cheerful Gold to gild sad Sable,
(...) had been intol -- Here sigh, and take breath.
intolerable;
But it is that wise consideration
Claps a Curb-Bridle on our Passion,
And makes us with some patience bear
This Gain, and Loss, -- this heavy Cross,
Of Five good hundred pounds a year.
Vouz avez, Monsieur Boleau,


May Not you clearly see by this what an awe your ^ew Gentility strikes one
with, for I cannot for my Life tower above doggrel, when I think of you.
However, I Will try to forget the Gent. Boleau, and ^emember one honest Smugle, a
poor trudging Worm, of a Bookseller, my Acquaintance, and see that I can do for
him.

An Elegy upon the Death of Mrs. Susannah Boleau.
HAS powerful Beauty then forgot her Charms?
Have Piety, and Innocence no Arms?
Is Heaven unjust? Are all the Stars unkind?
Or is Death grown, as well as Fortune, blind;
That nothing excellent must long remain,
But all our Vows, and all our Prayers in vain?
This, lovely Virgin! by thy Loss we know,
And little less, with Grief, than Marble grow.
Thy Piety, while here, was so refined,
We hardly thought thee less than perfect Mind:
And yet thy outward form so made for Love,
We wonder why the Soul would thence remove.
Thee all who knew deplore. Thee all lament,
But most Tom Boleau's Mind to Grief is bent;
With real Grief does his own Ga^n co^dole;
Heavy ^t sits upon his mighty Soul:
Take all the Dross, he cries, that Fortune gave,
And Heaven, so you will restore her from^the Grave.
Then thinks he sees again her much-loved Face,
And starting, runs from her desired Embrace.
O give me Rest, he cries, then on the Bed,
Distract with Cares, he leans his aching Head.
But even in Dreams her lovely Face appears,
He wakes, and finds his Cheeks all drowned wit^ Tear^
What shall he do, his eating Griefs to shun?
Shall he to Deaths cold Arms for Succour^run?
But lazy Death does its kind Aid deny;
Nor, ah! must he have so much Ease, to dye.
Yet he will not live, but like sad Biblis stand,
And deluge with his Tears his native Land.
While Sighs* like Earthquakes, heave his troubled Breast,
Till down he sinks to find eternal Rest.
This is an elymosinary Essay (said I) of an Author, for his Bookseller.
There Is Humor in the first (pursued Grave) and the Sadness of Elegy in the
last. There Is enough of all Conscience (added Brook) for Love. Right,
(continued Chapel) Money might have made the Poet enlarge. That inspires the
Author (said Winter) in his double Capacity, as Poet as well as Priest: So
indeed (added Summer) his Letter declares him. I fear the Bookseller (said
Temple) was more beholden to Death, than to his she-Rela^ion. He would not else
(added River) have grudged the paying for her Elegy. Oh, had he paid his Author
(said Fountain) for it, the Joy of the Reward had deprived him of the
melancholy, and sorrowful Thoughts his Subject required. Booksellers Pay
(concluded Church) is never so prodigal, as to raise an Author above a doleful
Ditty.

LETTER XCVIII.
From a Lover to his Mistress, in absence. 'Twas directed to Madam Winton, at
Mr. Glassrock's in St. Mary-Ax, London.
Oh my Dear,
IT IS now almost four days since I saw thy Face, tho not so many nights; for no
sooner has sweet Sleep hushed my projecting Soul to peaceful Slumbers, but thy
lovely Image presents its self to the Embraces of my Fancy, as a superabundant
Reward of all my anxious waking hours.

But, oh! it is not Ideas alone, and empty sh^dows of a distant bliss, can
satisfy my longings, who have so violent a Passion for the Real Substance.

But why, alas, should I seek, or desire to involve thy sweet Content, and
Tranquillity in my Misfortunes? Why should I hinder what I cannot make, that is
your Happiness? It Is true, Reason, and Justice require that I should rather
perish, than see you any more. But Love comes in, and disdains their tyrannous
Impositions, and will have me perish at your Feet, and I hope without violence.
I send thee ten thousand Kisses. Adieu,

Poor Charles.


Absence in Love (said Temple) is like the death of (...) Body, the Object of
Love being, ^ like the Soul, ravished from the Lover. I Am not of your mind
(replied Grave) Absence attones for the thousand Impertine^^^s the presence of
her I love betrays me to. And that which is more conducing to our satisfaction
(pursued Winter) it gives a greater relish to our Ioys when we meet. It keeps
those Pleasures alive (continued Church) which fruition, and continual presence
would destroy. For as the incomparable Mr. Dryden says, All Objects lose by too
familiar view, certainly (said Chapel) Absence to him that truly loves must be
the greatest of Torments, as Love is the most violent of Passions. As it is
excellently described by old Chaucer (pursued I) in his Knights Tale: His
Sheep, his Meat, his Drink is him bereft,
That lean he waxes, and dry, as a Shaft;
His Eyes hollow, and grisly to behold;
His New pale, and Ashen to unfold.
And solitary he was, ever alone,
And waking all the night, makin ^moan


Here indeed (said Brook) are all the effects of a desperate ^^ssion, natural,
and beautiful, though dreft in so anti^^ated a phrase. Spencer (pursued Summer)
is of your mind Chapel, when he says, Naught under Heaven so strongly does
al'ure
The Sense of Man, and all his Mind possess,
As Beautys loveliest Bait, that does procu^e
Great Warriou^s Rest, their Rigor to suppress,
And mighty Hands forget their Manliness.
These Poets (said River) drew their Picture from Nature; since it is evident
Love triumphs over our other passions, Ambition it self being forced to submit,
when once Love opposes it. Our modern Volture (concluded Fountain) views Nature
then through another Glass, for he makes it the meanest, and most indifferent
of passions, (and by consequence Absence no great pain) urging, that Pastorals,
because the lowest of Verse, are the fittest for the expression of Love.

LETTER XCIX.
From a Robber to his Comrade, that had wronged him of part of his Share. 'Twas
directed to Mr. N --, to be left for him at the C. Ta --, etc.
NED,
I Have been informed you have played the Villain, in sinking some of our last
Prizes, and wronged both me, and your other Brothers, of our Due, and Share. If
you clear not your self of this, you deserve to be shot the next time you
attempt the Road, for a man without any Principles of Honor, or Justice.

R. D.


That men (said Grave) who live by the breach of the Laws of Nations, and
Nature, should expect any secure Tie of Justice betwixt each other! O yes,
(returned River) for the Bonds of Vice are stronger than those of Virtue.
Necessity (pursued Chapel) forces them to an observation of them to each
other, since else they could not subsist. Besides (said Brook) the Laws of
Right are as much transgressed by Armies as by private Robbers. That was the
Opinion indeed (replied Temple) of the Pyrate that was brought before Alexander
the Great. But I believe (pursued Summer) that the Laws of Morality were not
made for the regulation of public, but only private affairs, if at least we may
judge by the practice of the World. True, (continued Church) for the Teachers
of those ^aws, the Clergy, have in all Ages justified the greatest ^reaches of
them when successful. By that (said Winter) you would make the Sword the only
Arbiter of Right betwixt Nation, and Nation. They would ^ake it no more
(replied Fountain) than it is, for the success of that gives Equity to the
Cause; The Victor ^eing never in the wrong, (concluded I) and the Vanquished
never in the right.

LETTER C.
From one Friend to another, in answer to a Letter that upbraided him with a
Service done, in bayling him for Debt, which he had not discharged. 'Twas
directed to Mr. Roley, to be left for him at the Jamaica Coffeehouse in
Cornhil, London.
SIR,
YOU tell me you found what you expected; but I answer, that I have found what
I did not expect; and I know not what you call Civily putting me in mind, for I
always took them for Dunns; they were not indeed noisy, and might therefore be
termed civil Dunns: But your hectoring Letter roused me to say what I did; nor
am I ashamed of the Testimony you can bring, but can, and will justify it
before any equitable Judge; for all men know that doing a Kindness one minute,
and cutting ones Throat the next, is not very cordial, and any one that knows
the least in the Laws of Morality, knows, that such Proceedings abundantly
cancel the highest Obligations. You accuse me of want of Justice, in not giving
you a Counter-Security; you might have had it when you would, it was your fault
in not asking, for I was always ready to give you all reasonable satisfaction.
If I could get the Money to morrow, I would pay it. You say these things always
end in Quarrels; if so, it is because the obliger thinks much of what he has
done, and requires Impossibilities. But, Sir, what need all this heat? If I
could do this, I would, but it is not in my power; had you been troubled for
this Money, nay, paid it, you could do no more than you have. I can say no more,
but that if you can make any reasonable Proposition for your satisfaction, and
theirs, I will make it my utmost endeavors to comply with it; but I can do no
more than I can, if you write till Doomsday, and I Will do what I Am able, if you
write never a word. If you persist to desire any more, I think I Am the injured
Friend not you. I can say no more, having said enough to satisfy any
reasonable man, especially one that styles himself a Friend, as I do also,

Your Friend, and Servant, God^. Carvel.


From Suretiship, (said Summer) good Lord desiver us. Right, (pursued Church)
for if thou art Surety for any one, take care to pay the Debt. You would then
(said I) destroy the greatest Act of Friendship, who have condemned the World
for neglecting the Offices of a Friend, and of deserting the dearest Friend in
distress. Nay, to advance that Maxim, (continued Temple) were to destroy the
chief hinge of Trade, Credit. True, (assumed River) for that supplies the place
of a great many millions of Money. The very yearly Revenue of England having
been esteemed fourscore millions, to pay which there is not, as has been
computed, above eleven millions of Cash, all the rest turning upon Credit,
which must be wanted before such a small Sum can circulate to so many Offices.
If my Friend (said Chapel) wanted Money, I Would give him what I could possibly
spare, but I Would neither lend him Money, nor be bound for him. True, (assumed
Brook) for though you are a Friend when you lend, or are bound, yet when the
day of Payment comes, and you e^pect a Return on his side, you are an Enemy; as
may appear from this Letter. We always (said Grave) prize a Favor more before
we obtain it, than after we have received the benefit of it. On the other hand
(replied Winter) there are a great many men, who overvalue their Services, and
think, because they did a Friend a Kindness once in distress, that his whole
Life, and all his Endeavors, are not sufficient to make a tolerable return,
especially in this case, as this Letter expresses, if the Friend obliged be not
in ^ capacity to take off his Security, he is more invetera^e than the
Creditor. Which shows, (concluded Fountain) that ^e did not that kindness by
the Dictates of Friendship, since upon his Friend's greater Distress, he is
unwilling to run the least hazard for him.

LETTER CI.
From a Gentleman who, confessing the inconstancy of his Temper, desires to
know how he may attain a stability of his Wishes. 'Twas directed to Dr. M --
ly, to be left for him at the King's-head-Tavern in Kings-street near
Guildhall, London.
Honored Doctor,
YOU know it is not long since I left the Town, with all the earnest longing in
the World for the Country, and yet I find my self quite tired with this irksom
Retirement already. I want my Bottle, and (...) Friend, and all the pleasing
Thoughts of ^^nocence, and peaceful Quiet of a Country Life, that engaged me to
seek it, seem now but ignorant Bruta^^ty, and a dead, and unactive Sloth.
Prithee, dear Doctor, prescribe me some Medicine for this ^^easie Distemper of
the Mind, for I know you as well skilled in that, as in the Body. Has
Philosophy to cure for this troublesome Inconstancy of my Temper? Is there no
way of making me happy in Stability, and rendering that a Pleasure to me to
morrow, which I thought so yesterday? I have some hopes there may, because I
can persevere in my esteem of you, and hope I shall always be able to write my
self

Your real Friend, and humble Servant, T. Kemish.


This Distemper (said Grave) is of a larger extent, than this Gentleman. Right,
(assumed Winter) for few men are able to distinguish betwixt a real Good, and a
real Ill. Which is the cause of this Inconstancy, (continued River) for they
pursue that for a real Good, which when obtained, they find a real Ill. Or,
at^least (added Church) far short of the extravagant Idea they had framed of
it. The cause of this (said I) is that Cloud of Ignorance that blinds the Eye
of our Mind, Reason, that it cannot distinguish better. Alas, (replied Summer)
we seldom consult our Reason is what we either hope, or fear, for did we
consult* Reason in our Desires, we should never be inconstant. This makes us
(pursued Temple) solicit Heaven, with our V^ws, and Prayers for our certain
Ruin, instead of a Blessing. And mock God (added Fountain) very often with
Thanksgivings for our successful Villainies. Thus (continued Chapel) we hunt
after Wealth, to ^ncrease our own Sollicitudes, Fears, and Guilt. And damn our
selves both here, and hereafter (concluded Brook) by Ambition, Lust, and (...)
to Rogues, and Whores.

LETTER CII.
To a Member of the Athenian Society. Directed to Mr. S --, to be left for him
at Smith's Coffeehouse in the Stocks^market, London.
Dear Sir,
YOU have been so long versed in answering Questions, that now sure none can
come amiss to you: I therefore desire you to answer me, For what reason your
Society is silenced, since you have so often, and with such supererogatory Zeal
defended the present establishment? It Is a Mystery to the World, and in
answering it, you will gratify all your Friends, nay, and all your Enemies too. I
hear you are retired into the Country, to your beloved Algebra; it is a knotty
Study, and requires indeed such a Head as yours, but I question whether my
Query is not a degree beyond the most difficult of them. Kissing goes by
Favor, and I Have seen an ugly Fellow embraced by a pretty Lady, whom he
slighted, when a proper, handsome, young man, with Lantinus his Parts, was dying
for love for her, without regard to his Merit, Passion, or Services. My humble
Service to your Lady, and tell her I long to hear she is with Child, for
certainly when a Muse is pregnant, she must bring forth no less than an
Orpbeus. I am,

Dear Sir, Your affectionate Friend, and Servant, C. Richardson.


It had been much indeed, (said Grave) if in our search here we had not met
with some Enquiries to this Society. -- True, (pursued Winter) ^ut --

Just here Madam Summer, entered, and would permit us to go no farther,
assuring us that Dinner cooled on the Table. We could not controvert a fair
Ladys Will, especially in her own House; we therefore placing our things in due
order, retired to Dinner, not at all dissatisfied at the time we had thus spent.

THE PACKET broke Open.
BOOK II.
IT was so late before we went to Dinner, that before we had half dined, a
whole Company of Summer's Acquaintance came and surpised us, and as soon as
the Cloth and Lady was removed, engaged in drinking. I found there would be hot
work; and therefore I whispered Grave, and River to steal away, which in the
hurry of Company we easily did, and unperceived of any but Chapel, who
unwilling to drink followed after, whether we had retired, viz. To the
Summer House, to proceed in our Enquiries, for I confess my Impatience of
diversion from it. Being Seated, the first we light'd on was;

LETTER I.
From a Bawd that desires a Habitation for the Exercise of her Profession.
'Twas directed to Madam -- at her House in St. Peter's-street in Rome.
Madam,
SO Copious is the Information which you give me of the great Liberty which the
Vicious enjoy at Rome, that I have a great desire to remove thither.
Particularly I understand what privileges Lust is allowed under the Purple
Habit, as being honored with the Protection of a Nephew of his Holinesses. I
have recanted my erroneous Conceit that was infused into me by those that
aggravated in my Ears their daily Practice of most execrable Uncleanness, and
their Contempt of Women in Comparison of Baby-fac'd Boys. But conformable to
what you have suggested to me, I know the Falsehood of this Calumny, and find
that they give a hearty Entertainment to all manner of Debauchery. The Women
also have their dispatches, and to speak the Truth to a Man that understands
^rap, a double Card plays best at my Lady's Hole. And it is a great Advantage to
falsify a Card; now that Men are so singularly desirous to be pleased with
Delusions and Appearances. What greater pleasure can there be to a Man that
loves to enjoy a brutish Sin, then that he can be sure to make a Change of the
Hand, and when he has a Woman in his Arms to be able to turn her into a Male,
as his Sensuality inspires him. Peace be to Venice, where delicacy of Appetite,
with less Scandal, practices this form of Satisfaction. By which means, neither
are Women deprived of their Advantages, nor Men of their Pleasures. In short, I
am singularly pleased to understand that there is a free stage at Rome for all
manner of Lasciviousness; which makes me resolve to breath the Air of that City
in my Old age. I hope to set up for a Baud, and live well by my Trade: For
where the Climate disposes Men to Lasciviousness, there is the less Trouble in
our Calling. I hope in a short time to obtain the Favor of all the Cardinals,
in regard I shall be sure to have always at hand whatever they shall desire. I
hope to add to the List of Harlots, those few that preserve their Honesty to
stuff Tenis-balls: And I should wish to die, when I failed in my undertaking to
make the chastest of Matrons melt in the Obdurac^. Pray se^k me out a good
Habitation in a convenient Post, and you shall find me always ready to serve
you to the utmost of my Power.

She has mistaken her place, quoth Chapel, while she designs to set up for a
Baud in Rome, where the Traffic of Lewdness has no need of any Brookers. She
may be serviceable, replied River, if not to the Grandees of the Purple Robe,
yet to the poor Friars and Priests; of which the Rabble are Tyrannized over by
their Superiors, or hindered from taking their ^ull swinges. Hence it is,
replied Grave, that they are forced to exercise by themselves, and to carry
their Affairs very privately too, for fear of the Pain and ^^ril that may come
thereof. Pish, -- concluded I* there is no such need of so much Caution; for all
sorts of other Vi^^s he^d so in common together with the Sin of Whoring, that
every one i^ there a good Merchant for himself, and knows how to procure his
own Advantages in view of all the World.


LETTER II.
From a Jesuit who confesses the Errors of his own Order. 'Twas directed to
Father P -- 's, at his Lodgings in Abble-ville.
Certainly this Letter, said Grave, will contain the Interests of some Princes,
discovered by this good Father in the Antichamber of some great Personag^. And
why not in their own Cabinets? replied River, It seems you have but little
Experience of the Manners of these sort of Cattle, especially of their usual
Qualities, of rather coveting the Privacy with Princes, then Familiarity with
Christ. They stick close to that Saying, Non erubesco Evangelium; and to that
other, L^tera non Erubesc^^, while not only as People in Holy Orders, but
Pretenders to Learning, with Br^ken Foreheads, they thrust themselves into all
Places.

Most dear Brother in Christ,
I Am informed by your last Letter, that there is no Body that offers to
relieve our Tottering Congregation, unless the Almighty Hand of God afford us
Aid. Where the Conflagration overspread it self, whole Deluges of Tears become
least prevalent, and the Threatening Shipwreck can hardly be repaid with the
pleasure of the Harbor. Behold Neb^chadnizzar's miserable Statue, whose golden
Head in the Emulation of Superior Man, denoted Celestial Original. Nor were
the Progresses of our Virtue less set forth in Silver Purity, then in the
Strength of Brass and Iron. But at length our sublimity declining to the Feet,
meets with the frail and brittle Substance; and that becomes the occasion of
our Ruin, from which we expected our Establishment. Behold our Passions and
Affections, which wallowing in the Mud of worldly Affairs, not placed in Heaven
as they ought to be, bring forth those Plants, which being eradicated together
with our Virtue, our whole Felicity is never quite levelled with the Ground.
Our over-greedy Desire of Gain, which makes us so sedulous to creep into the
Courts of Princes, demonstrates an insatiable Appetite, no way resembling the
Poverty of Christ. Now it appears, that we are the Superiors of great Men, not
the Se^vants of Christ. And hence it is, that we depress our selves, the higher
we endeavor to soar. Our extraordinory Diligence dazles the World in Rearing
magnificent Structures, whose marble Beauty, and glittering Splendour of Riches,
exalt the Trophies of prostrate Humility to Heaven. Woe be to us, who glorying
in our magnificient Piles confine Virtue within narrow Limits: So much the more
poor in Spirit, by how much the more we delate our worldly Pomp. We envy
secular Persons their Honors, usurp their Estates, and rumi^ating still
greater Advantages, we decay more and more every day. In vain is that
Hypocrisy, which with a (...) Neck, down cast Eyes, and a set Countenance,
always muttering Scraps of Prayers, still shows our Hands fast grasping Crowns,
while our works abolish Holiness, but advance Affections quite contrary to
Virtue. Hence it is, my dear Brother; that we are become contemptible in
general, not by Apostolic Will, but by compulsion of our own Vices. This is not
the way of the Saints; nor did they who left us our Precepts, leave us these
Footsteps to follow. And how can we expect a Society to last for many Ages, if
wandering from the Truth before one Age be at an end, we hasten to the Brinks of
Precipices? In Spain where we were first brought forth, took root and blossomed
first, our Vigor is dried up, and all our Glories wasted in the Womb whence we
first derived our first Original, threaten us with the Sepulcher, where we must
lie wrapped up in the Shrouds of Oblivion. The Dominican Order is there preferred
before ours, and deservedly we who contemn all other Religious Societies, are
by all our selves despised. In France we have restored our Fortune not
recovered it. I^ Germany, if we do not go backward, it is certain we make no
Progresses forward: And those same pious Frauds are all to no purpose, with
which our audacious Brethren abused the Favor of the Emperor deceased. In
Italy, banished out of the V^netian State. In other parts ejected, rejected,
and of little Esteem, but that we enjoy the Benefi^s of our Contempt. And even
here in England are we despised. What remains, but only that we set up the
Trophies of our Glories in the Indies, and among Chinese, where they flourish
in those Deserts, that wither in the Gardens of Europe? Yet there they also
^ade and lose the Pomp of their ancient Verdure. In the midst of a Flood of
Tears I soretell our Funeral Obsequi^s: For what can we expect but Death at
hand, when the whole Body is in such a languishing Condition, before the
Expiration of one Age. Heaven avert those wickednesses which call down the
Judgments of Heaven upon us, and repel those Calamities, that the
Thunder-showers which are justly to be feared, may be in Mercy removed.

Look ye, quoth Chapel, Hert's the Conf^ssion of the good Father, who with an
extraordinary Sincerity has laid open the common Faults of his Order. He would
have done ill, replied Grave, not to have made a true Confession, who teaches
others to be exact. As if, replied River, they did not by their Precepts daily
exhort others to Piety and Godliness, and live as virtuously and piously
themselves! Some do not believe otherwise. Certainly, replied I, these good
Fathers can never be said to live otherwise then well, who are no less
luxarious in their eating and drinking, then Princes; and in other particulars
enjoy all the Pleasures and Delights of Cardinals. I understand ye, said Grave,
but we have enough of 'em for this time.


LETTER III.
Against the Nuns. 'Twas directed to Mr. Gebe^, at his House in Finch-Lane
London.
Dear Friend, Rome, Iun^ 24.
AT our last parting, I remained beso^^ed with the Love of that Nun, with whom
you are well acquainted. I was quite entangl'd in Complements, but at length I
threw off my Shackl^^ with so much difficulty, that I may well affirm this odd
Affection to be a sort of Bird-lime. It Is a kind of slimy Defilement that
(...), intr^gues, and with every the least Sparkle kindles a Flame not to be
extinguished. Let him that (...) describe the Windings and Turnings of the most
Artificial Labyrinths, wherein at every step you meet unwarily with some
Spring or Net, he must of necessity acknowledge the Mazes more intricate,
wherein the Affections are entangled, if once you set your Foot within those
Iron Gate^. Consider the Condition and Quality of that Love, which must be
imprisoned as soon as born; and let him hope that can, for fortunate Progresses
in it, while he can only boast the first beginnings of it in a Prison. Those
Grates resemble very nere the Enclosure of a Cage, wherein however there is
much of Folly which locks up the Freedom of the Heart, to be made the Companion
of an indiscreet Beast, whose only Entertainment it is both to delight and
rorment fond Lovers. Whilst these Nuns are shut up in Holy Places, there seems
to be in 'em a Soul of Virtue, but we must believe 'em to be dead Carcasses, so
that in associating with 'em, we feel the most cruel Torments that the most
spiteful Fury of the most barbarous Tyrants ever could invent. I assure ye, my
dear Friend, that whoever would put the Hang-men under Cupid's Discipline,
should assign 'em the Cloisters of the Nuns for their Schools, where with a
particular Sedulity is professed the Exquisiteness of despising and betraying
him that falls into the Nets of their Allurements. The Multitude of Lovers
admitted by the Greediness of those Harlots, is by them procured so much the
more impudently, by how much their Pleasures, or rather Delusions are more
common at the same time to several. By changing Place they (...) Passions and
Discourses with one, and from him still (...) to others, use the same Replies,
and make the Scene it self of their usual Fictions ^^alterable. With all, they
are prodigal of all the Delights which the Nature of the Place will permit 'em,
making it their Glory to entice fond Men, who esteem it the Height of Pleasure
to have the Privilege of feeling a hand of theirs, to get a Kiss, which is
stolen for the most part through the Grates, or but to see the Coat Card, upon
which the Lover would willingly venture his whole Fortune: Not considering the
quickness of the Change leaves him no other Consolation, then the ^^crease of
his Desire. If she carries on the Correspondence by affording him the
Operations of her hands, conformable to the show which is made, the Fingers of
the beloved Lady operating no less eff^^tually upon the Do^ard, those are the
most bewitching Charms of this Amor, and the most ^morous Artifices with which
he composes his Delights. Here all the most sweet Enjoyments terminate, and
Opportunity begins to authorize the most refined of Frauds. All this while
those Fruits, the Taste of which is so highly valued in Conceit, are terminated
in the presence of a Lover, or perhaps already sold to the Affection of
another. The Intention dishonours the Deed; and therefore he must be a great
Fool, who believes her designed for himself, and repays her at great Expenses
in the ready Coin of Affection and Treatments. The Customs of the Histri^'s are
again renewed, whose Representations consisted in Shows and Gestures; while in
these Amors every Lover seems to erect a Scene of what is most pleasing to
himself, and to act with his hands according to his own H^mour. The Comedies
are lovely to the sight, but the Acts are defective, because there is no
getting into the Theater, and the Eyes are only satisfied with Appearances.
They are Violences too cruel, that necessitate a Man to think of nothing but
extenuating and destroying himself, and to wish himself so spiritualized, that
he might shoot through the Grates to enjoy the beloved Object that so
co^strainingly ravishes him to her Embraces. In these Fooleries, I must
confess, I have often ensnared my self, when I placed my Paradise in these
Contentments. I thought the days too short that were consumed in adoring one of
these Fatal Sister^^, who cut the Thread of amorous Death though they have not
the Spindle in their hands. I was always fixed to those Grates, that I might
suck in the Air of her Breath; and to approach the Flames that wantoned in her
Cheeks*, I was ambitious to accustom my self to the (...) Prison: I wished at
least I could have been able to have devou^'d the Iron which imprisoning my
Goddess, forbid me the Enjoyment of her. Having my Sun so near me, yet deprived
of the Opportunity of embracing her, I suffered the Rigor of a Winter Season,
and sometimes the amorous Serpent would make a vigorous effort, to thrust
himself into the Den of her soft ^ips, denoting his desire to get shelter in
another (...) for his Tail. I have obtained some satisfaction in Appearance,
with offer of better, when a more favorable opportunity gave us the Liberty to
laugh at the Impediments of a close Confinement. There was a necessity also for
me to comply with her Avarice, extremely greedy after Presents: So that while
she plied me with Gifts of no value, I was forced to correspond with others of
great price. I affirm, there is more of Interest in these Amors, than Charges
in the Lusts of Harlots, while repeating their Presents, they make exchanges
with great Advantages of Usury. Besides that, a man can no more dispose of
himself, than of his Money; which being ravished from him by their Delusions, is
presently consecrated to a Deity, that never thinks her self sufficiently
gratified. By means of their studied Alurements, they deceive so covertly, that
it is so much the more difficult to avoid their Snares, because their Nets are
so much the more accurately spread. In this their Retirement, as they supply
their own Unchastity with artificial Instruments of Glass, and Tongues of
Lap-doggs, so with Thoughts no less busily employed, they study among
themselves variety of Forms, and Manners, which way to abuse their Admirers:
But let all Trouble, and Expense give way to the necessity of standing all day
in the Stocks, only to serve their Curiosity, and help to pass away their Time.
Their Discourse is all about the Quarrels, Emulations, and envy reigning in the
Cloisters; or else concerning the amorous Shiverings that benumb the poor
Creature who stands fastened to the Grates, like a Statue. If the^^ Slave ^e
missing but a moment, then nothing but Chidings, and severe Repremands; so that
there (...) a necessity of remaining steadfast in the Fetters (...) the Chain
which bind him to their Dalliances, an^ the more entangle him in their Wiles.
Upon (...) slight absence you are sure to be plied (...) Messengers, and
Billet-douxt's, which are all (...) of Exchange, to beg something; or else they
(...) with their vain Impertinences, and idle (...) of their dissembled
Affection. But I (...) thrown off the Yoke at length, aware of my extravagant,
that both delighted me, betray^^ me, and tyrannized over me with her Char^^^
and Alurements, sollacing her self at the same (...) with three, or four more
perhaps as pleasing coax'd as my self. These Women given up to (...) most
licentious Debaucheries, either solace themselves with an intimate
(...)-Friend, or else mak^ Sport alone in their particular Cells; and havi^^
thus allayed their present Itch, and staid their S^ma^chs with a relishing bit,
away they trip to the^ Lovers, whom with their dissembled Dalliances the cause
to swallow their Morsels, the hardness (...) which they can but ill digest. In
a word, the whol^ consists in Fictions; or if they do not seign, th^^ remains
nothing for the Men, but compendi^^ Torments, while there is a necessity of
endur^^^ the Stings of an Appetite that cannot be sati^^^^ There is nothing to
be got more, but two or (...) Tastes of her Hand, which are no nourishing (...)
to satisfy the cravings of Desire, while men are ke^^ from dressing their Meat
in the amorous Furna^^ it self. There can be no Stamp of amorous Co^placency,
without the compression of Embraces, a^^ impression upon the Lips; so that the
touches ^^^demn'd the Hand have only I know what kind of superfici^^ ^^pearance
of Pleasure. Heavens defend us from (...) encumbrance of these Amors, which as
it is (...) in Women, and strongly infused into (...) Imagination, that always
will be framing re^^aches against the Female Sex, is punctually ^^rning of the
Nuns. This may also serve for a (...) to your self, whose Infelicity I would
^^^llingly prevent by the example of my own, mis^^u^e^, as being willing you
should meet with (...) Content you can wish for, at my expenses, which I desire
may be your good hap, and so I ^^nclude, remaining, etc.

If the Nuns (quoth Chapel) were instituted in ^^tation of the Vestal Virgins,
it cannot be gainsaid ^ight to keep the Lamp full, and to entice ye to the
(...) either with their Fingers, or with any thing (...). The Light never to be
extinguished, (quoth (...)) which was preserved by them, seems appropriated
(...) these Nuns, in their unsatiable desires, that are (...) to be quenched.
They ought then to be buried (...), (replied I) like the fornicating Vestals,
and (...) little enough to take away the stench, with which (...) foul
Incontinencies nauseate the present Age. ^nhappy is the Earth (quoth Grave)
wherever they ^^uld be enforced to reside; so that if they should be (...)
under ground, their insatiable Voraciousness ^ould devour whatever could spring
or bo^rge up from (...).

They would have proceeded in the due Reproaches and Reproofs of ^omen, who in
a Profession of Holiness, contaminate the Order and the Place, when Chapel
signified, that the Impertinencies of the Fathers were more to be blamed, who
by main sorce buried these Virgins in Cloisters: Whence it comes to pass, that
they, being coopt up and enflamed with the fire of youthful Lust, lay those
Contrivances, at the scandal of which both past and present Ages stand aghast,
and which strangely destroy the Reputation both of Families and Nunneries.
While they were blaming therefore these sort of Violences, from which though
sometimes a good effect may proceed, (...) rarely becomes durable, they ceased
to reprove the Women, who usually corrupting apparent Goodness, through want of
discretion, most imp^dently turn the worst of Creatures. Upon this they forbore
any farther to aggravate this Misfortune, deplorable in the most glorious of
Cities, where such a Cloister of Nuns is more to be abhorred than the ancient
Brothel houses and comm^^ Stews among the ancient Romans.

For the three foregoing Letters of this Second Book, marked LETTER I, II, III.
read LETTER CIII, CIV, CV.


LETTER CVI.
Against the Vices of the French Court. 'Twas directed to Mr. Richard
Bordfield, (...) the Three Blackbirds in Fanchurch-street.
Kind Sir,
IT IS necessary to have a Friend, to whom^ man may disclose his own Passion,
for (...) asswaging of his Sorrows, so much the more (...), by how much the
more they lie coopt up in the Breast. Which enforces me to trouble your Worship
with this Letter, to evaporate the Hu^ors of this Wound, wherein my pa^ns are
met, by making a relation of 'em to him who will at least be so favorable to
me, as to have some fellow-feeling of my Sufferings. I am at the French Court,
and that's sufficient to let you understand the Hell that entertains me, and the
Devils that torment me. I am within those narrow Enclosures, where the most
doleful Vexations triumph, protected by the Authority of great persons, who
there support 'em to the cost of those unfortunate Persons that serve 'em. Good
God! when I reflect upon my being in a place where Gold hanging down from the
magnificent Ceilings, threatens death with the Fall of it, I well perceive
after what manner more splendid Grandeurs are the Landmarks of miserable
Precipices. That Splendour, of which another fond, believes he has found a Sun,
is a Lamp that terrifies, denoting the nearness of approaching Thunder. In
short, all that, which otherwise contributes to the pomp of an extraordinary
Felicity, being enchanted within the circle of Figured Majesty, is transformed
into the essential cause of all Misfortunes. Unhappy he who is misled into the
Society of Men, who are enforced by Necessity to employ themselves in
Wickedness, imbrew'd with every other the most malignant Qualities, to corrupt
all People that live near them! It may be said, that he enters into a School of
Frauds and Treachery, which they the rather learn, because they see 'em in part
more lamentably practiced upon their own Fortunes. Perfidious Obligation! which
too severely tyrannizes over a rational mind, compelled to act against
Humanity, unless it would be worse used by Brutes! A Truth too much to be
deplored, yet which a multitude of Examples preserves from being condemned for
a Falsehood, while persons sublime in Virtue, or in Merit, are seen ready to
starve, and evil entreated at this Court, where Beasts are crammed with
plentiful Tables, and environed with numerous Attendants. Buffoons, Flatterers,
and other vicious Persons, worse than Beasts, are treated after such a manner,
that their Prosperity is envied; whereas otherwise their Torments might
occasion Terrou^. How deservedly is this Court resembled to a (...) and craggy
Mountain, to the top of which there is no ascending, but by narrow windings and
by-ways, while private Villainies are the only Path which leads men to the
desired station of Great men's ^^vour. Both the crooked Turnings of various
Cha^ces and Revolutions of Fortune, made smooth and level by Adulation, Men
make it their business (...) to comply with another Will, more especially if
they find they must be forced to lay aside their pitiful Cringes and sordid
Condescentions, which are easily avoided by those that see themselves tra^pled
under foot by too much contempt. Sometimes the necessity of screwing a man's
self into the Affection of a private person, who being a gre^^ Prince's
Favurite, with a disdainful loftiness stands so stiffly upright, that you may
sooner reach the Sky with your Fingers, (...) obtain a courte^^^ glance from
his disdainful Worship; and indeed, unless you will condescend to lick their
Feet, it is impossible to avoid the being trampled under (...) by the most
sordid here. A Courtier may think his Exaltation may resemble the ascent of
(...) which is easily blown away, but on the other side accompanied with the
necessary consequence of Fire, which burns and consumes. How many hardships
must a poor Creature undergo, who ^^solves to attempt the raising of his
Fortunes, by (...) Parasice, Fiddler, Lame, and sometimes Baboon, or Mongrel
Curr? He must of necessity stand like a Statue all the day long, in an
Antichamber, or move in the Train like an Ox under the Yoke, which draggs the
Chariot, where the Pride of the Grandee sits complemented on every side: He
must be the Butt of the Affronts of him that ^eeps him down, or of the
Buffooneries of him that pretends to make his Lord merry, with the Scoffs and
Frumps which he puts upon him. In short, the life of a Courtier in France
requires a Soul without rational Spirits, a Heart deprived of Sense, or at
least feigning to have no feeling of the Stings of malicious Revilers and
taunting Scu^rility of Bus^oons, and of the slaughter which envious Mallgners
make of the Reputation of Men, if it step there. If a man's applying himself to
such an Exercise did not deserve to be blamed, yet his constancy in abiding
insensible, would merit great applause, while he is afflicted in so many parts.
Nevertheless, this Truth is necessarlly made out in him, who from his Birth has
been designed the Trophy of so cruel a Destiny; or else from his first entrance
into the Net, discovers the Penalty ordained of an impossibility that the Fault
of his Inadver^^ncy should escape. He that withdraws from this Court, gives us
occasion to believe some fault committed, the fear of which quite crushes him;
or a diffidence in some great Parsonage, by whom he does not think his Services
sufficiently rewarded; concei^s the one abhorred by a noble and generous Soul;
the other prejudicial, by reason of the Rigor of him who will not have his
fraudulent dealings condemned. This is the Chain, with which the wisest men
being fettered, make the practice of Living contradict the Theory of
Instruction: So that they remain hanging by the Threads of hopes, in such a
condition, till those Threads are twisted at length by the various turns of
Chance into a Rope, with which being strangled at last, they perish miserably.
Such an end of my Service do I also expect, despairing of a better Destiny,
since many years of care and ^arking in this French Court, have acquired me no
more than the opportunity of admonishing others to beware of those Mischiefs
which I my self could not avoid. May Heaven deliver all men from such a
condition, which the Pains and Torments that attend it render such as only
could be outdone by the exchange of a perpetual Hell. Compassionate my
condition, dear Friend, and forgive the tediousness of these my overlong
Complaints of this my last Misfortune, but greater perhaps than the rest, which
is proper to Courts, not to have any person in whom a man may entrust the
Secrets of his Breast; nor with whom to exhale the Grief that gnaws his Bowels,
when it cannot be sent to be exposed by the Tongue. Be mindful of our
Friendship, though you are not in a condition to taste the fruits of it, while I
am so miserable to be an Enemy to my self.

This is Music for us (quoth Chapel) according to which every one may make his
own descant upon the Book of his Life. 'Twill be a Cromatic piece (replied I)
composed of mournful Notes, such as are used for Elegies and Funerals. I think
(quoth River) the Similitude of Music so proper, to express our Condition, that
we cannot make use of a better comparison; for as Music makes a man wast his
Breath to please others, so Courtiers consume and wast their Lives and Spirits
to please the Grandees that are their Superiors. Add to this (replied Chapel)
the necessary imitation of Music in rising Note by Note; for as a man is forced
to feign with his Voice, when he comes to the shrill Treble, so Fawning and
Dissimulation are the highest strains with which a Courtier can advance his
Fortunes. But you must have a care of leaving out the Flatts and Sharps (quoth
River) which make but bad Music in a Prince's Ears. You ^ay as well (quoth
Grave) leave out the Ascents of Fourths, Fifths, and Sixths, seeing many men
are advanced in France without Merit, or any observance of Order, merely
according to the pleasure of the reigning Prince, who is often aptest to favor
the least deserving. More remarkable (quoth Chapel) are the descents of the
Octave, that with a deep resoundi^g tone may seem to resemble the Terrors of
the miserable, thrown headlong of a sudden, from a towering Sublimity without
any fault by them committed. All (...) well (quoth River) with the comparison
hitherto, since there are no Rests nor sighing Pauses wanting in this Music, to
him that sings within Book, and ^^eps before his Eyes the evi^ Entreatments of
the French Grandees, and those common Miseries that take up a spacious Field in
the Courts of the French King.


LETTER CVII.
Giving an account of an amorous Intrigue at Luca. 'Twas directed to Mr.
Filsted, at his House in Drury Lane.
SIR, Luca, June 1692.
I Have changed my station, but not my condition of Servitude, which remains
constant in the desire I have to obey your Commands. I fell in love at Luca,
where I resided for some time, as you well know, with a married Woman, who
corresponded with my Amors, and gratified the Applications of my Affection
with the Reward of Enjoyment. Her Husband was a poor-spirited Fellow, which
gave us the more leisure to make him a Cuckold. One day he observed his Wife
walking at her Country House in my Clothes, which sometimes in a fantastic
humor she would put on; he conjectured that I had let her know where I laid my
Clothes, and that I had given admission to the person that wore my Habit; and
thence he began to conceive in his mind the Spoils that I had won by triumphing
over his Honor: Hornmad therefore, to be thought what he could not be denied
to be, he departed for Rome, though with a C^u^tenance not yet free from those
Blushes due to so much Infamy, nor yet having the Courage to race out his
Infamy with his Sword. This gave me the liberty to pursue my Pleasures with a
full career, and like a River in its Channel, I met with no Banks that opposed
my rapid course into the deep Ocean of my Delights. But Fortune betrayed me in
the sight of my Felicities, while a Brother of my Mistress began to take upon
him to uphold the Reputation of his Family. However, being a Native of the same
Country with the Husband, he had not a Resolution sufficient for an honorable
Revenge. He accused me therefore to the Secretaries, with a Protestation never
to forsake his own Interests, and therefore desired 'em to take some course to
repair his Brothers Honor, for fear he should be necessitated to commit some
extravagant Act. To please him therefore, I had orders to unkennel, and depart
Luca. Upon which I went to the Ladies Country House, where in pursuance of my
public chastisement, I many times made choice of a voluntary Death, but as
frequently rose again, according to the custom of Lovers, and confined my self
a Prisoner to her Bosom, that I might the more patiently pay my subjection to
the cruel Sentence. And now I enjoy my self in this place, where the Honor of
your Injunctions is the greatest Felicity I can wish my self.

The Lucchesi Gentlemen (said Chapel) are prudent, and courageous; but their
Prudence makes them take the safest way to facilitate their Revenge. An
Accident of the same nature (quoth River) happened to my self, while I enjoyed
a Widow that was my Neighbor, once at Luca, at what time the Catchpoles of the
City were sent by her Parents to remove me out of the City, but I forced 'em to
keep a looff off, and made Horns at 'em with my Fingers. Alas a day! (replied
I) such a place as that has but few Heads, and consequently few Hearts, and
therefore for their own preservation it behooves them to be careful of their
Lives. There is a necessity they should have good Head-pieces, for the
Government (quoth Grave) which require a weighty Judgment, and well-pois'd
Resolutions, and therefore they never refuse the ponderosity of a good pair of
Horns. Let us not trouble our selves with these Gentlemen, (replied I) for they
now stand excommunicated, and quite out of His Holiness's Favor: Besides that,
the public Reputation which they have acquired by the management of this
Affair, is sufficient to bury any other private Ignominy that can disgrace
their City.


LETTER CVIII.
From a conceited Scrivener. -- 'Twas directed to my L -- S -- in Sohoe-Square.
Most Illustrious and Excellent Sir,
AS when the Sun is not seen, it is an Argument that he is hid by the Clouds, or
else it is concluded to be Night, since he is a Planet which is the Fountain of
Light; a Luminary, where all Splendours originally lie concealed, a Biere that
continually carries obscurity, not half dead, but quite extinct, which can
never be robbed of his wonted Value, nor ever defraud the Heaven of his Glory,
that issues from his Sphere with a swift, ^ut pompous march; who then beholding
himself in the spacious Mirror of the Sea, and fancing himself to be a new
Narcissus, while he falls enamored with his own Reflection, seems to dig his
own Grave in the Waves; from whence to the universal damage of the Universe,
languishing upon a Scaffold of Darkness, he would be seen to bewall his own
Funeral; so your Lordship may assure your self in some measure, that although I
do not frequently present my self to your Honor, with demonstrations of my
Servitude, it does not therefore follow, that the obsequious Devotion of my
Affections is decayed; And with this assurance, obliging your Lordship that I
may not be deprived of your Favor, I conclude and kiss your hands.

Cursed be he (quoth Chapel) that taught this Coxcomb the way to write. He
seems to me like an Ass in a Elbow Chair, with his from thence's and from
hence's, reforming the impertinent Inditings of Cieco de Adria, or the writings
of Zuectu. Sure (replied River) he should have learnt from some modern SPARK,
who professes himself to be some Noble Man's Iester. I rather think (said I)
that he has patched together a Rhapsody of Bombast, robbed from some Old
Academy of Compliments, on purpose to compound a Mishmash of Extravagancies:
and perhaps may be one of those who having a high Conceit of his Parts,
believes himself as learned as a Master of Art if he can but scrible over a
piece of Paper. I was wont to say (cried Grave) of these same Sir John
Lack-Latins, who have only the Gowns of Doctors, that they are Men in so many
Bags, out of which there is nothing can come forth but that which is in it.
What says the Proverb therefore most applicable to these sort of People; have a
care of Buying a Pig in a Poke; that is, beware of being gulled by the outward
shows of these Popdoodles and Pretenders to Learning.

At this they all laughed, while Chapel recalled the Curiosity of the Company
to listen to a Letter that was written to a Lady, which at first dash seemed to
be endited by a Person, that had been scorned by his Mistress. If the
Gentleman, said they, don't write like a Milk-sop; there may be wit in it --
Read on.


LETTER CIX.
From a morose Gentleman, exposing the Frailties of Women. 'Twas directed to
Mr. Flaquet, at the White Horse, in Little Minories.
Ungrateful,
THE Reproaches which I left behind instead of Complements at my last parting,
are not sufficient: For a just Anger is not so easily to be appeased. My
Tongue, the Harbinger of my wronged Affections that denounce the Resentments of
my perplexed Heart, must now display it self against thee. I was unquiet in my
self, that my Revenge would not permit me also the use of my hands. But in
regard it is an unbecoming baseness to strike or hurt a Woman, I thought it
necessary to comply with my self, and wound thee only with my Pen. If thou art
capable of such a Wound, as being all composed of Rags of Infamy, and the
shattered Relics of Reproaches and Shame. I know thou laugh'st at my deserved
Wrath: as being a Woman that never grieves, but when she weeps drops of Blood;
whose usual Tears are the Distillations of Fraud, and the Entertainments of
Dissimulation. Nevertheless, I shall rejoice to publish the Occasion, which
having rendered thy Sex abominable to me, has enforced me to proclaim a
Palinode of Reproaches, such as thou would see in the ensuing Lines, were
thou not as mad, as thou art void of Reason. From thy Ingratitude, the utmost
Limit of wicked Habits, I have understood, that Woman has nothing of Humane
about her but her Countenance, to lie though she never speaks, and to let us find
by experience that nothing but Fraud and Deceit is to be expected from one
whose face is deceit itself. She has this in common with Man, that she is of
the same kind, with all appropriating to herself all manner of Bestiality that
can be said to be in a living Creature. But as to that which differences Man
from other Creatures, she has not a jot of Reason, for that without Wit or
Sense she acts like a Beast, that never could pretend to Reason. In short she
has no agreement with Man, but only in the Declining of Hic and Haec; to show
that you Women are only joined with us, to debase our Grandeur, and interrupt
our Felicity.

Then again, if we look upon Sphynx's, Panthers, Tigers, and other Savage
Monsters, one Woman is sufficient to show us all those cruel Beasts, and the
most bestial Natures living all at once in one Body. In thy Sex there is to be
found no other prevailing Power but that of the Will, and that too so overrul'd
by Passions, that it may be affi^m'd as an Infallible Maxim, that Woman is
altogether void of Judgment. Hence, how unbridl'd in their Lust! How irregular
in their Fury! there is no Medium, by Virtue of which we may infer a Conclusion
of their being Humane. Or if their mute Appearances, their tender Dalliances,
their glozing manners may give us to believe they have pilfer'd from us some
seeming Signs of Humanity, their Allurements ravished from the Siren, their
frauds which they practice in imitation of other Beasts; furnish 'em with
Tricks and Wiles to accomplish their Treacheries. The Pourcontrel, that changes
itself into the Color of a Rock, the more easily to ensnare his Prey, is not
so witty as a Woman, that under the Appearance of humane Shape lays her Ginns
and Traps to catch poor credulous Man.

And what is the reason that Lovers, in their actions, are necessitated to
circumscribe their own Being within certain Limits which denote a Privation of
the Understanding? Whence comes it to pass that they live without Law, because
they are without reason* Deserving nevertheless, the more to be pardoned their
Miscarriages, as being mad and void of understanding. Certainly from no other
cause, but for that they have the Hearts of their beloved Mistresses, by the
force of an amorous Translation, fixed in their own Breasts. And how indeed can
it be, that having Hearts no way concerned with intellectual Life, they should
live performing acts of Reason? Miserable is that Man, who having a Woman to be
his Soul, makes his own Substance obnoxious to the Qualities of Bestiality, and
the Effects of Folly. It Is to be believed that she who is always practicing
from her Birth her natural Property of applying her self to Evil, would be sure
to take the worst of the two Urns that were placed by the Throne of Jove, and
empty it all into her Bosom. Whence coming to vary the Dependence of the
Intellect and Will according to the many Changes of Obstinacy, while the Woman
swayed by her own disorderly Customs betakes her self to the worse, of
necessity, the Man must approve that only which is contrary to reason.

The Seeds of Prudence which are sowed in humane Minds, when they are scattered
in Woman, are invested with a contrary Nature so corrupted, that they produce
Fruits quite different from the Original. But if the truly wise Person sits
enthroned upon a Apiece Stone, to show the Reward of unshaken Constancy,
which is the immovable Basis of Eternity due to his Merit; the Female Sex can
have no Seat among such Glories as these, a Sex so ^ickle and inconstant, that
Fortune, which causes such Convulsions in the World, is clad in Female habit,
to denote the Resemblance between that Sex and her.

But the granting in Women that Understanding, which makes it not to be denied,
but that they have a Soul individual from our Species, obliges us to believe
according to the Doctrine of Pythagoras, that the Understanding is our Genius,
so that Woman may be called the Evil Genius, in opposition to the Good Genius.
And if the Title of Evil Genius be appropriated to Devils, ordained to disturb
our Felicity, and direct us to precipices, the same may well be appropriated to
Women, by whose Misguidance all Men running headlong, behold their Glory and
their Grandeur scattered in the deep Abysses, where they miserably fall. And
that I may not suffer my Discourse to totter upon a weak Foundation, tell me,
when it was otherwise known, but that Women were a Moving-Hell, but too stable
a Jurisdiction of Miseries and Misfortunes to continue the Pains and Torments
of Men.

In their Youth, if they are amiable, they torment us; if they are deformed,
they annoy us; if they love, they tyrannize; if they do not love, they kill us.
If they live at a distance, they pinch up and strengthen our desires; if
Neighbors, they make us sensible of many Sorrows. That which renders 'em
acceptable, makes 'em proud: If they have not where-withal to make 'em proud,
they prove contemptible. When they are fair, they are cruel; when ugly,
lascivious: Whence it comes to pass, that he who courts 'em, languishes: He
that desires 'em, weeps, plagued with the Importunity of their Persecutions. If
they are not inhumane, yet they are both haughty and covetous; and if they do
not suck your Veins, they drain your Purses: And though they hate to be seen
themselves, like Carcasses lying at your feet, they glory to have Men their
prostrate Suppliants.

In their Old age, with a greater prejudice to Reason, they proportion the
Perverseness of their Humors to the swift Progressions of Time, which hastens
on restraining in the Wrinkles of their Faces, those alluring Garnishments,
which persuaded the unwary that they were the Theat^rs of our Felicity, and the
Fertile Field of our Content. As they grow farther in years, either increasing
the Infamies of their Profession, or else defaming more and more the Infamy of
their own desires, they show the Deformity of their Faces, only wrumpl'd up
within their narrow Furrows, to reinforce and strengthen the wicked Qualities
of their aged Wantonness. Being made the Embassadres^es of amorous Intreague,
they presently display the Profoundness of their Judgments, which being matur'd
by time, gave them that honorable Employment in the Kingdom of Debauchery.
They discover by what inveterated Customs they came to purchase the Silver of
their hoary Locks, to spend it in the Tribute of Dishonesty, as before they
scattered profusely the Gold of their Amber Curles. Then for their juggling
Tricks, their Illusions and Superstitions, being become Cabinet Ministers in
the Kingdom of the Devils, they make appear that extraordinary Merit, which
readily advances them as they grow in years to the particular Favor of such a
Prince as governs those Dominions.

When together with their youthful Years they have lost those Beauties that
give 'em Authority to rend and tear the Hearts of Men, they become adherents to
the Furies, that they may be enabled with greater force to procure the
Detriment to others. And true it is, that those Circe's, Medea's, Med^sa's and
Megera's, if they were not Women, were the true Images of those Resemblances
which Women wear about 'em. This the Prudence of the Ancient Romans well knew;
who seeing a Woman appear in the public Piazza's before the Tribunals, were
affrighted as at the sight of some ominous Prodigy, and presently had recourse
to the Oracle for the Remedy against so great a Terror. For that Women, being
the worst of Creatures, beyond all the unhappy Auguries of Crows portend no
other to Men but Misery and Disaster.

I have always commended the Comparison of a Woman with a Vine: Which is only
to be valu^d for its Fertility, not having any other privilege in the World,
but only to be reserved for the Flames; From hence it is, that a Woman while
she lives, is so given to weep; perhaps, out of those Waters preparing Deluges
to extinguish those Ardors, which she knows how to merit. And all this while,
this aptness of your Sex to weep, is only to find a Ford of Dissimulation,
where the Hardness of others may Shipwreck, or else to bring themselves to the
Haven of their Desires. And I believe in Allusion to this Similitude it was,
that the Romans punished their Citizens with Rods of Vine-Twigs, following
perchance the Documents of Heaven, which to Men, the Citizens of this World, is
never represented in the Act of Punishment with more cruel Scourges, then those
of these living Vines; there being no greater torment to us than our being
joined to a Woman. Nor can she be denied to be a Vine, while clasping and
embracing us, as the Vine does Neighbouring-Trees, she becomes all Nets and
Ropes, which only serve to bind and hamper Mankind. And therefore being a
Fellow-sufferer in these Chains, she is enforced by necessity to procure her
self a Support, that she may not remain deprived of all value and esteem.
Unfortunate Women, who if they were not sustained by Man, would have no support
of their own weakness, but would every moment be stumbling like blind People,
into a thousand Precipices. This the Tartarian Women understood, who looked upon
the most precious Ornament which they could wear upon their Heads, to be a
Dressing in the Shape of a Man's Foot, to signify that a Woman being without
Brains and void of Wit, has no greater thing to glory in, then her Subjection
to Man. With the Ensigns and Marks of this Subjection, as if they had been
trampled under feet, they honored the most noble Part of themselves; not such
Fools as others, that trick up their empty Sculls with the Treasures of a
robbed Sepulcher, laid out in Commodes and Top-knots; or else load 'em with
Chains of Pearl; all sparkling with Diamonds and Rubies.

But notwithstanding all this, Ungrateful and Tyrannesses as they are, if they
cannot obtain the Government over Man by any other means, they ^ound a haughty
Command upon the Empire of Flee^ing Beauty, to subdue him under the Yoke of
their indiscreet Commands. Fickle and Inconstant, they drag at the Tails of
their imperious Wills those Hearts which by some malignant Influence are
obliged to be subject to their despiteful Rigor. It Is not easy to set bounds
to those Reproaches which Female wickedness deserves, so much the more wicked,
by how much more, being veiled under Flattering lies, and hypocritical
Sincerity they betray the most Faithful Affections. From your Conversation
Madam, I have learnt to confess what a scarcity there is of Accusations,
Chidings, Reproaches, Brandings and ^pbraiding in the greatest Plenty that a
just Provocation can invent, when a Woman is to be condemned. But I shall
enlarge my self no farther, not that I have sufficiently satisfied my Anger,
but because I am u^willing to keep my thoughts any longer in that Tumult and
Hubbub, with which the Remembrance of thy Treacheries disturbs and ruins all
my Quiet. I have set down the Reasons why thy Sex ought to be abhorred, that
thou may be assured of my real Intentions to hate thee. Since with that peace
in thy Mind, which thy Ingratitude has left me; and may the pains be perpetual
with which my Torments, though but short, are able to upbraid thee.

At length (said Chapel) we are come to the end of this long Bill of your
Orator humbly complaining shows, full of as many Truths, as there are
Accusations against the Women. All Men (said River) accuse the Women, but I
meet with no body that condemns 'em: they may be all well enough included in
the Parable of the Adultress in the Gospel. The Reason's at hand (quoth I) for
the Women have an easy way to bribe the Men, so that like corrupt Judges they
are willingly persuaded to salsifie the Sentence.

These Men (replied Grave) are like Cats, that hide their Excrements in the
Coals. They that are the greatest Lovers of Women, hide the Miscarriages of
their Amors under the Semb^ance of Wrath. Hence it comes to pass (replied
Chapel) that some great Men in Italy, that boast of more Authority and Wisdom
then others, to avoid the being obliged to a rigorous Repentance for the same
Error, place their Affections upon the other Sex. Go too (quoth River) let us
not enter Rome, that is, not into a Discourse of Arsey Versey Love.

At the ^ame instant he cast his Eyes upon a Letter directed to Sir William --
in San Marino.


LETTER CX.
Every one believe^ their Curiosity would receive here that Satisfaction which
was expected. So they read on -- To the Illustrious --
Here Is a Mistake at the beginning (quoth Chapel) he should have wrote to the
Right Worshipful -- What then (replied River) you believe this Republic to be
as proud as the Republic of Geno^a? -- These plain Gentlemen, that are more
concerned in Good Husband^y, then in Ambition, and are more desirous of Rain,
then Serenity. Never deride these Gentlemen (quoth I) who in their Badges equal
the Roman Dictators: the one had Axes carried before 'em, and these carry Axes
themselves to cut their Wood and lop their Trees as occasion offers. And don't
you remember (replied Grave) certain Kings of Babylon that carried a Plough at
the top of their Scepters: So that every one of these Gentlemen ought to be a
King; for you may see 'em holding Plough-tails every day in the Field I cannot
forget, in advancement of their Grandeur (replied Chapel) that some of the
Ancient Emperors rose from the Spade to the Scepter, from Agriculture to
Sovereign Command. And therefore all the Ministers of this Republic ought to be
acknowledged for Emperors, seeing it is a usual thing among them to go from the
Plough to the Council Chamger. They would have enlarged their Iokes upon this
Republic of Farmers, but finding it a Letter that required great have they fall
to reading of it in the following Words;

Illustrious Sir,
I Understand by a Friend of yours, that you are about to provide your self
with a Pacing-Mare for the Recreation of your Youth. I therefore thought it a
Debt of Friendship to write you some Instructions concerning this matter,
approved by Experience, and dictated by Affection always desirous to assist
you. I suppose that this desire arises in you from the Seemliness of your Legs
which inclines ye to ride in Boots, and walk armed with good sharp Spurs. If
you have not a Leg so handsomely shaped, lay aside those thoughts, for that
otherwise your riding will be but a shame or a trouble to ye. You must never be
tired, and to run leaping into the Saddle is an evident Countersign that you
have learnt the Tricks of a good Horseman.

To make use of a young Col^, resembles the more graceful Exercise of a young
Fantastic, and has some signs of Grandeur, as being in imitation of several
Persons of great worth. But the danger of being thrown, and least the Horse
should get the mastery of ye, as being untamable, and highmetal'd, will not
suffer me to persuade ye to take that course; perpetual restlesness, continual
neighing, lofty prancing, and an high Trot, I number among those Qualities in
riding that pay a greater tribute to Ambition than Pleasure.

Choose a Race Nagg, of which you may make use after several manners to all your
Content. A good ordinary Pace is much to be valued for that, if at any time,
for the change of motion you desire a wracking pace, it is easily brought about.
Have a care that your Horse be not one of those that are wont to run away with
their Riders, in regard that by riding such sort of Beasts a man hazards the
breaking of his Neck: You must never make use of him in a Tilt-yard, nor to run
at the Ring, in regard that the prolonging a Journey of Pleasure is to make
happy, by the privation of Inconvenience, those Delights, which never by their
good will would be at their Journeys end.

The Qualities of a good Courser I shall not recommend to you, as not being so
well skilled, because it would require a large description; and therefore you
ought to have no other aim, but only to choose a good Crupper, and a Horse that
ambles neatly, which makes it a Pleasure to ride. Let him not be so fat, and
fleshy, as that you should be afraid to gallop, for fear of seeing him weep
Tears of Sweat; nor let him be so lean, as to look as if his Skin were buried
in a Charnel-House: Let him be well proportioned, and nimble, far from such a
sloathfulness, that you must be forced to call Archimedes to Life, to give him
motion, nor so nimble neither, as if he seemed to fly in the Air upon the Wings
of Crows.

Be sure you never make choice of a Pacer that has been in the Service of any
great Person; for, besides that, their keeping will be more expensive, you may
sometimes meet in 'em the Property of Beucephalus, who would be bestrid by no
body but Alexander the Great. Some Coursers, as if they had sucked in the
Ambition of the persons that rid 'em, together with their high-metal'd
fierceness, love a lofty Behavior, when others are about to back 'em. At
least, I have this Prejudice against 'em, that being accustomed to little
labor, they will be denying to give that satisfaction to the desires of the
present Enjoyer, which is required from them that are to be truly serviceable
to their Wills.

Bear in mind the intention of making the best advantage of your Desires upon
all Accidents, in whatsoever manner, or at whatever time the whimsie takes ye,
to render 'em more delectable, and agreeable to your humor. Then, that you may
have her ready for all Services, remember that she be young, yet not of such an
age, that for want of being well managed, she shall refuse to hold the Bridle
in her Mouth; I call that a Disturbance rather than a Pleasure, to be
constrained to manage a high-me^al'd Jade, that knows no Government of Bitt,
and to be forced to back an untamed Col^ upon the plough'd Lands, when the
desire of Riding requires the practical part it self, at that very instant, and
the Fruits of that labor.

It Is also to be considered, and well to be observed, what Faults she has,
which tho it be difficult to do, yet Knowledge and Experience acquires an
aptitude to correct those Faults, or to escape the Damage. These sort of Cattle
are strangely apprehensive of the Mistakes of an ignorant Rider, and generally
trayl after 'em an inclination prone to the worst. Be sure therefore never to
lend your Beast to any body living, for fear of exposing your self to this
hazard, and for fear of being defrauded of your pleasure, by reason that your
own Beast being over ridden by another, becomes unfit for your Service. Never
trust the Farriers, and such other sneaking Rascals, who are but the Brokers in
sort of Horse-matches, and for that robbing for themselves, and mistaking to
your loss, are the main points of their juggling Deceits. Never be fond of the
^olour, for outward appearances are delusive; in outward Beauty always
corrupts the Fortune of such Practices, not considering that your Beast ought
to be serviceable to every thing but the Eyes. A Body well shaped, with all the
signs of strength, with assurance of youth, must be the aim of your choice,
without expecting manifold ways to be deluded in other superfluous Qualities:
Much less would I have you to be affected with a rich Saddle, or a gilded Curb,
for these Ornaments are oft-times designed to put an high price upon a Hackney
J^de, and to make you swallow a bitter Pill under a golden Cover.

Observe that she be free from all Windgalls, and (...), and all other
Distempers, which the more (...) they lie, the more dangerous they are; and
these are usually most frequent where appearances otherwise beautiful allure
the Sight. In short, this is a business to be wisely and warily considered, for
when you ride, you may commit your self into the power of a Beast, that may
bury ye in a Ditch, or throw ye into some Quagmire, whence you shall ^ever be
able to get out again. Remember also to moderate your riding, in regard too much
riding (...) a man, and brings those Diseases and In^^mities upon him, that
deprive him of the choicest (...) of his substance. Though the Beast being
vigorous and bold, will carry ye as often as ye please, (...) abstain, and
consider that your Judgment ought (...) be superior to the Genius of an Animal.

Let a good Switch serve you instead of a (...) of Command, in regard that
Spurrs in the A^t (...) Riding are Toys for sight, and not to gall. Let (...)
be your care to accustom her to understand (...) Commands, to the end she may
exactly (...) them Nor is she to make no distinction (...) your Jurisdiction,
and the Authority of the (...) to whom though she is to be in submission, yet is
(...) no claim to her Obedience. Through the (...) of observing this Document,
it comes to pass, (...) some of these Creatures being at the will and (...) of
the Servant, will kick and winch at the (...) Lastly, be sure to keep your
Beast mild and (...) there lying the center of that Liberty of (...) you are to
make your advantage to your (...) Upon every motion of your Hand, whenever
(...) ride, make her know how to turn, gallop, stop, ^^vance, and retire
without bounding or (...) carrying her Head low; let her also walk (...) were
blindfold. And thus you must teach (...) observe your Commands, of which the
Bridle (...) be your Interpreter.

Dear Friend, if ever you intend to lay out (...) Money well, you must observe
these Instructi^^^ For my part, I desire only that the sincerity of (...)
Affections may find that Credit with you which deserves. However, I expect that
your (...) will give 'em that reception which is their (...) and so most
affectionately I kiss your Hands.

He shows himself (quoth Chapel) to have ^xperience in Horsemanship, and
therefore of (...) must have applied himself very young to the (...) No
question (replied River) but he entered the tilting place very young, and so
might have an opportunity to learn those Qualities which he describes, as far
as the Masters of the Art required it from him. In my Opinion (replied Grave)
he is short in one thing, That he does not teach the manner of Riding, by
teaching the necessity of keeping the Bitt firm in the Mouth of the Beast which
he rides, the time when to (...) him give a spring forward, to try his Metal,
the proportion and distance which he ought to observe in carrying his Legs,
neither so close as to make him cut, nor so wide as to render his Going
unsightly. He also should have taught his Scholar, when he met with a
capricious Horse, how to make him carry his Tail and his Head, bend his Crest,
and raise his Crup^^^. No more, no more, (said I) for the Lecture by (...) by
will enlarge it self beyond the Doctrine of the letter.

But another Letter, accompanied with a little Box wrapped up in a Cloth, set
'em all a tiptoe. They thought at first they had been Jewels, but that
suspicion was soon removed by the slightness of the Boxes being put up, but the
Paper undeceived 'em, and showed 'em the substance of the Letter; which was as
follows.


LETTER CXI.
In defense of Cuckolds. 'Twas directed (...) Mr. Remford, at his House in
(...) This deliver with speed.
Honored Sir,
YOur being in such a heat against the (...) well-meaning Gentleman that makes
his (...) common, affords me an occasion to stand up (...) his defense. I know
I shall be laughed at, and ^^^haps acquire to my self a Title of The (...)
Advocate; however, this will be my honor, (...) I shall have Clients generally
over all the (...) and be in a post wherein I may be able to (...) my Friends.
Besides that, contrary to the (...) of other Advocates, to flea their Clients,
I (...) have the advantage of giving 'em Horns to (...) Skins. And, to say
Truth, I know not by (...) Law this Dishonor is enacted, only grounded (...)
on the Humor of the Vulgar, and an (...) proper to Lovers, that are jealous to
the (...) which they possess. Love, being always afraid (...) losing the
pleasing Object, has opposed this Pretense, as a Rampler against whoever
pretends (...) usurp it, or at least to communicate it: Now is (...) person,
remarkable for his Learning, or his (...) to be subjected to the will of a
young (...) Boy, or is he to second the Fears of a disarmed (...) Permit that
poorness of Spirit to young (...) ^ho being tyrannized over by this Passion,
make a ^oman their Idol, and that they may have her in^^parable, so as to
adhere to no body else, chain (...) up with these Fetters of Honor. And let
'em (...) use of that lie, to prove retiredness necessary (...) a Woman, that
she may not assume to her self (...) lawless Pride, to refuse both Bridle and
Yoke, (...) may be reduced by the terror of Disgrace, with^^ the Hands of due
subjection.

Moreover, he is a noble and courageous Person, ^ho knows how to incline a
Woman to his Will, ^ho falls in love with a Woman, but not so (...) as to break
his Neck for her, and omits (...) vain Ceremonies, which oblige him to (...)
his Reputation in a frail Woman, which the (...) knock breaks presently to
pieces. Every time (...) upon the Truth of this, I cannot but (...) the Folly
of him that set up this for a Law, (...) laugh at the Simplicity of him who put
it first (...) execution.

And where was it ever taught, that the Goods of (...) Mind had any dependence
upon the corporeal (...), whereas the contrary should rather be true? (...) it
self, as a Virtue, has no relation to the (...) of the Members, though there be
a (...) of their being both together. Shall only (...) then be conjoined with
the Body, and with (...) Body, as is that of a Worm, and to the (...) of a Gem
so precious as that, in the (...) and Dirt of a filthy Morasse.

Your Goats, from whose natural Properties the Title of Cuckolds was translated
to married men, (...) suffer their Wives to be freely enjoyed by others, as
those Creatures leave their Females at (...) to copulate with others of
different kinds; and received this Precept from a tameness of Nature, which is
practiced in the Simplicity of Lambs.

Incapable of anger* they deny it to be a true incentive to Wrath, for them to
see another usurp that which is common and which being u^urp'd, (...) far from
being lost. Shall it be judged a Dishonor to imitate a Mildness celebrated by
all Authors, and to be like a Creature taken universally for the Symbol of
Perfection. And why did Nature privilege that Creature, by granting that
Virtue only to the Blood of a Goat; but because she would reward the best
disposition of Creatures with a singular Faculty, to make him superior to the
most precious of her Works?

If any object, that there is a great difference in the comparison, by reason
of the Ties of Matrimony, between Man and Woman, whereas there are no such
things among Beasts, the points of Dishonor are then reduced to breach of
Faith, and the prejudice of interchangeable Obligation: But i^ that hold true,
'twill be a Dishonor also (...) Adulterer's part, who lies with a Woman, in
(...) of the conjugal Duty; and then this sort of ^^proach would be universal
in the World, especially among Rioto^s men, seeing there are very few (...)
observe their Words, or maintain the reality (...) their Promises.

Upon this consideration the divine Law-giv^^ made the Crime equal, as well in
reference to (...) Man as the Woman, the Crime being alike, so long as the
transgression of a Duty which is equal is (...) same. Men perhaps in this
particular imitate your Grandees, who deny submission to the Law, de^^ing to be
subject to this Law of Dishonor, as su^^riour to Women, by whom it was
enacted. W^men therefore, as they condemn this Opinion, (...) relation to
Princes, so they reject it in the partic^lar of married men. Hence it follows,
that not being under any Obligation, they show the Law to be vain, in regard
that partial or particular Laws never oblige in common Interests. Thus the
Lawyers determine it, by whom a Woman is acquitted, though married, that merely
for Love surrenders her Body to another. An evident consequence, which removes
those rigorous Impositions of Scandal from married men, who permit that
liberty, since no (...) can be absolved, to the prejudice of the Party
^nterested. And therefore I would not have you be so rigorous in condemning
your Friend, very ^^dicious in not contending always to keep the Key^ of his
Wives Lock, for fear her Reputation should (...) a gadding. Nor would a man be
willing always to be breaking his Brains to chain up the free will of his Wife,
which, as some Opinions hold, has a free dispensation from above. By my Faith,
I should always choose to converse with Gentlemen of this humor, and should
profess my self to be their humble Servant. He that has any Sense, is (...)
this opinion; and he that will live without di^^bance, confirms the same by
Experience, imi^^^ing those great men, who are the Exemplars of (...) and happy
Life. He that cannot bring his (...) to conform to this opinion, let him
forbear ^^rylng: Nor let him be a Slave to the Humor of the blind Vulgar,
which when they undertake to b^ your Guides, lead ye into Precipices. If you
(...) not satisfied with my Reasons, excuse the ^^akness of my Wit, and the
misfortune of a (...), which cannot be made public, because (...) men are so
blind, as not to see it. Excuse my (...), in presuming to contradict ye, and
when (...) acknowledge this Boldness to be an Effect of ^y Confidence, assure
your self, that as I preserve (...) Memory of your Favor to confide in it, so
it is my Care to maintain my Obligations. In conformity to which, being
desirous to serve ye, I shall attend your farther Commands.

This man's Doctrine (said Chapel) has many Disciples, as being practiced
chiefly in the most remarkable Cities. Much good may't do him (replied I) who
has a Head that is able to bear the weight of his Horns, without complaining.

So they left this Subject, as being too hard, and difficult to be argued, and
took a new Field, wherein to expatiate with more Delight.


LETTER CXII.
From a Lady that disswades her Friend from the Love of Men. 'Twas directed to
Madam Emet, at her House in Chelsea: This deliver with Care, and Speed.
Dear Madam,
YOur Confidence in entrusting me with your amorous Intrigues, with such a
Gentleman, invites me by way of a friendly Revenge, to confide in you, that we
may be at liberty to reprove your Affections. Good God! -- What yearnings of
Compassion have accompanied the certainty of this your Misfortune. The Impulses
of my Friendship hurried me to forbode ye any other condition, though
miserable, than that of a Lover. A Woman bewitched to a Man, is a voluntary
Prisoner in (...) a kind of Hell, whom the Tyranny of Torments (...) and rend
with so much the more despightful torture, by how much the Heart of a Woman is
most soft and tender. Our Dalliances avail not to bend the hardened haughtiness
of an indiscreet Pride. Our enticing Alurements are despised by Petrified
Hearts, and impenetrable to the Impres^ons of amorous Passion. With Souls of
Adamant they correspond with our Lives, encount'ring our Affections with
peevish and wayward Scorn. And have you admitted the Frauds of an amorous
Appearance of an assiduous Courtship, or an affectionate Assignation, which
however he avoids? Silly Belief, to which we bow our Understandings! as if our
Desires were made pliable by our natural Tenderness* Unhappy she, that subjects
her mind to an humble Salute, to a simpering Lip, opens her Heart to a Glance
that represents Dissemble-adoration, and authorizes petty Favors to oblige
her^ Miserable we, in whom the Pleasures we afford are only beloved! those
Delights which Nature has deposited in us, to the end we might not be more
shamefully contemned by these ungrateful Wretche^, who love, who serve, who
idolize, but at the very moment that their fleeting Pleasures terminate, put an
end to the ostentation of their Affection, and have no other Aim, but the hopes
of Enjoyment, at the instant that they begin to enjoy. Shall a Woman then
submit her self to amorous Cares, torment her self to meet the Genius of a Man,
grant him the Empire of a celestial Beauty, when at the very point of knitting
the Knot of all Contentments, it comes to be unloos'd, and all her Pleasures
are precipitated, when you would think 'em consolidated by Embraces.

If she entertains a man as a Lover, she embra^^^ a Tyrant; if she receives him
as a Husband, he becomes an individual Hangman. The Miscarriages with which
they refuse not to give entrance to the satisfaction of their Desires, carry a
Trumpet before 'em, which sounding a Retreat to our Reputation, serves only to
publish our Ignominy. They ascribe to themselves, as a Glory, wicked Imps as
they are, to have triumphed over us with their Fictions. They openly vaunt, to
have set up their Standards in our Fields, and to have ravished from us the
Ensigns of our Honor. And not content to (...) it with these Trophies, they
proclaim themselves happy in the opportunities of humbling the Majesty of our
Deserts, uncharacterized with particular marks of Divinities which they call
haughty superbness: They think to register an Act worthy* the Memorials of
Eternity, when breaking both their Oaths and Promises, they betray us; or when
laying aside all Humanity, they use us worse than B^utes. They call Inconstancy
a Virtue; the change of Affections they dignifie with the Title of Prudence,
and preach it up for a Resolution proceeding from great Judgment, to treat us
with all manner of Scorn and Contempt. He is boasted to be a man of great
Wisdom, who knows how to tyrannize over us with the rigor of his Commands; and
he is cried up for a man of great Honor, who for one fault, and that many
times imagined only, resolves to murder us.

Can there be any Lady so simple to resign her self to the Indiscretion of a
man, who by the perverseness of such Maxims, gives us but too clearly to
understand how corrupt his Sentiments are? And you, dear Friend, will you
destroy your own Heart, to make a Sacrifice of it to a man that shall feign a
superlative love of your Person, till he comes to enjoy ye? Undeceive your
self, dear Friend, by reflecting upon those Epithetes with which those Imps are
wont to abuse the Dignity of our Sex. Consider that they are only a
reassumption of those Attributes, which punctually describe their own Customs.
Consider whether it be convenient to c^ress a Tiger, to look upon a Basilisk,
and love a Harpye. Lay aside that amorous Heart, observing by the Rule of these
considerations, how much it behooves us to be perfect Rocks, that we may be
proof against the painful bitings of those wild Beasts. Avoid their Snares by
the flight of Liberty, considering the nature of those Nets, wherein when once
we are taken, we fall into a fellow-suffering of all Miseries. Let these
Persuasions, dear Friend, suffice, to raise within ye those Thoughts by which
the Customs of Men will be represented to your mind, ready to court, obsequious
in their veneration, affectionate in wantonizing and dalliance, but so much the
more impious to betray us. I should take it for a singular good Fortune, if
your mind, being infertiliz'd with such good Documents as these, should bring
forth a Resolution never to save, by which you would reap the advantage of
escaping those Torments that must attend the continuance of these Amors.
Heaven (...) you this Felicity, and me the Favor of being (...) way assistant
to your content.

Would to Heaven (said River) that her Desires might be fulfilled, that there
might not be a loving Woman to be found, by which means Mankind no longer would
be subject to those Precipices into which they hurry our Reputations. I don't
applaud your Wishes (replied I) since Man would be deprived of one of the chief
Contents which he enjoys, in causing a Lady that loves him to languish.

Chapel, who was in Love himself, was not pleased with these Discoures, and
therefore interrupted their prattle, by opening another Letter, which they
found written to this purpose.


LETTER CXIII.
Relating the Qu^lities of the Venetian Curtesans. (...) directed to Mr.
Biscol, at the Horse-shoe, in Wood-street, London.
Honored Sir,
I Was lately at Venice, where the Curiosity of many delights detained me. I
shall (...) relate the Particulars of a City so much exalted by public Fame,
and celebrated with so many singular Titles over all the World. The great
Plenty of Enjoyments entangles every Heart; so that you must of necessity
unloosen your l'urstrings, to wid'n the streightness of these T^amels. I was a
Novice in the Knowledge of these Delights, but soon grew old, adhering to the
Experience of him that in a few days accustoms himself to a well-grounded
Practice. And this is a Point of great Felicity, that your Amors are begun and
ended at the same time without any long Cares, embitter'd with the Hardships of
a tedious Servitude. The great number of Curtesans is the reason that Women, as
they deserve, are treated like Beasts, while among many, she is only made
choice of that most pleases. It Is a Content not a little to be valued, that a
Man may find of a sudden, when his Appetite serves, a Bank to stop the Fury of
his Desires. The Price has its bounds; a Condition which greatly facilitates
the putting forward the Key of the Work. There are Wares of all Prizes, and
every one may proportion his expenses as he pleases himself; then only
greatest, when a Man lays out for a piece of Cloth, that is a like on both
sides, and may be turned every way without any prejudice to the Nap. The
Graces, the Dalliances, the Caresses of these Women are not imitated in any
other place. They are Mistresses of the true Art of framing amorous
Sweetnesses, having all the Rules of Motion, as well straight as oblique,
enough to make their Lovers believe themselves in Heaven, where Motion
occasions the delightful Harmony of the Spheres. They suffer no part of their
Bodies to lie idle, roiling all their principal Members to multiply Pleasures.
You never meet here with the least Hair of the Beard, it being their care to
take away all roughness that may offend the Delicacy of such a Pleasure. And
their curiosity is admirable in cleansing the Streets, to the end they may not
be ^oul'd and worn out by frequent Concourse. In a word, he that loves sport,
let him study to advantage his desires where his lascivious Itch may transport
him, and never complain of his want of Satisfaction, which exceeds as much as
can be desired.

On the other ^ide, you must be well informed of the Frauds, Treacheries,
Diseases, which in great abundance overload with continual Vexation those that
suffer themselves to be too far hampered in their Intreagues. The Pestilence is
Health in respect of their Blains and Bubo's, which they present as the Tokens
of their Love, and for Fairings to those that enjoy 'em. They have a Custom to
^aint; and let that suffice to inform ye what delusive appearances they are
when they willingly transform themselves into Pictures. Take notice also how
like rotten Sepulchers within side they whiten and varnish over the outside, to
make themselves appear like Mausoleums; to the end that being betrayed by the
outward appearance, you may not behold the Terror of that Horridness within.

There is no voraciousness comparable to their ravenous Avarice; and they pick
your Bones with such a Softness of Caresses, that fools, after they have
nothing left 'em but their Bones, resign their Marrow to 'em also. They have
the true Touchstone to know at first sight a credulous Gull, or a Giddy-headed
Fool; and they lose no opportunity to get the Coxcombs into the Cage, whom
become the sport of any that will riot at their cost. Presently they empty
their Chests, pull down the Hangings, hide their Money, bury their fine
Clothes, to introduce the Face of a Counterfeit Poverty, on purpose to move
Widgions to Compassion. This is the Custom of the fairest or most fantastical,
who knowing their power to bind a Man, believe they can make a good prize of
him when they have him in their Nets Others quite of another humor, make a
general Sack of the Jews Trippery, to cloth themselves and furnish their
Houses, for which they pay the Interest of greater Miseries. By that means they
set a value upon the defect of those Talents, which make a Woman to be
esteemed, in hopes to exact a greater price, upon the Advantages of their
Gaudery. Nor do they fa^l to make use of Liberality by way of Traffic for
greater gain, casting a golden Hook to catch a more considerable Prey; though
many times they are deceived like the Countryman who let his Spade fall in the
Water, that so it might be turned into Gold. Then, let the Tribute of Praise be
given to them that deserve it; since it cannot be denied, but that there is an
excess of graceful Manners, genteel Carriage, and noble Converse, in such as
maintain a principal Post in this Science. They have those Qualities which may
be desirable in a Lady of far greater worth, and a fit March for a Prince.
Their Pride is Majestic, but not Superior, their genteel Demeanor ravishes, and
obliges to give, tho many times they have no intention to receive. In short,
Love may be said to have been born at Venice, strengthened by the Multitude of
most beautiful Venus's that nourish him in that City. For my part I know not
where a Man can better fix his Scepter to take possession of pleasing
Contentments. He may extend the Dominion of his amorous Joys, for that the
Vassalage of Love is there very great; where, though not in many yet in one
successively, good Qualities may be enjoyed in heaps, such as may give our
Appetites sufficient cause of Triumph. Excuse the Vehemence of my Affection
which has permitted my Pen perhaps to take too long a flight. This Information
may serve you to make choice of any pleasure, when you resolve to visit that
delicious Paradise, where the Darts of Love make a Nest of Tenderness, but
never pierce the Breast to (...) it. A Hand full of Gold, is a remedy for every
wound, with which those Celestial Beauties can afflict the Heart. If you want
any other Advertisements to direct ye to your pleasures, as I am covetous of
your Felicity, I shall not fail in my Duty to serve ye, in Conformity to which
I most earnestly wait for the Opportunity.

The Inditer of this Letter (said Grave) has not practiced the Delights of
Rome: For then he would have retracted the high Encomiums which he gives to the
Enjoyments of Venice. His simplicity (said River) will not admit into the Roll
of true Delights, those unbeseeming Pleasures, which are there made use of. In
good Faith (replied Chapel) they play with the same Cards in both Cities, though
the Game be more honorable in Rome; by reason of the Quality of the Persons
that play at it. This is a Subject (said I) worn too threadbare, and too
obnoxious to the vulgar Proverb, the more you rake in a Dunghill, -- and so
saying he broke open the following Letter.


LETTER CXIV.
Of Impertinences to the Purpose. 'Twas directed to Mr. Kaford, Merchant, in
London.
Honored Sir, Padua, June 92.
A Sna^l coming Post the other day from the King of Transylvania, gave an
Occasion for several Discourses. He brought along with him a great Pormanteau
full of Shadows and Chimera's, a present, usually sent to him, who having an
empty Scull, builds Castles of imaginary Grandeur in the Air. He had a Box full
of smoaky Thoughts, which drew tears from the Eyes of him that held his Nose
over 'em. And this was said to be part of the Mind of some Grandee, who was
always forming of Engines, to the prejudice of those that lived nere him. He
had in a Girdle certain Drams, which were those, for want of which to make good
weight, the Goldsmiths and Pothecaries accomplish their Thieveries. The Courier
said, there was a great Chest of Ounces and Pounds, in reference to other
Merchants; but that it was left behind, through the great Concourse of those
who were ambitious to usurp the greatest part. No otherwise, as he informed us,
it had befallen a great Load of Violences, Rapines and Cruelty put in practice
by Tyrannic Princes; Wares which he had put off in his Journey, being
importuned on ever side by Tyrants or their Ministers. He reserved to himself a
bag of Cucumbers for the principal Cities of Italy, where are a great number of
ignorant Dunces that are extremely delighted with their ra^^e, and therefore
have 'em served to their Tables for Salates. There, he also expected to be a
great gainer by certain Pills made of Wind, as there are many who from Ambition
seek both their Nourishment and Physic, pu^t up with nothing else but the
pleasing Gales of Pride and Ostentation. He had a good Trade among some of our
People for salted Eagles, very delightful to those that exercise their Taloons
in ravishing Gammeds. Of no less advantage to him was a Bag of Wolves Teeth
pickled in Vinegar, good against the Corruptions of our Age, being of great use
to soften the Cruelty of those that with a spightful Voraciousness devour all
before 'em. He was also very sorry that he had not kept some invisible Horns
for our Countries, excusing himself through the necessity that constrained him
to leave 'em in Germany. He had not as yet untied a Bundle of Voices that were
bound up very hard with Sin and Cords, which were the Bowels of some that under
distress and oppression, suffer themselves to be disbowell'd rather then break
out into loud Complaints of their Torments; as being plagued by great
Personages, and therefore choosing to die in silence. He had some Yards of
Linen Cloth made of the Fibers of Parrots Tongues, which was to make
Collar-Bands for some that with the Ostentation of their Prittle-prattle appear
Fortunate; especially in Courts, where Parasites, Comedians, Musicians and
others of the same Canaglia, meet with most lucky Hits. He had likewise a piece
of Cloth both sides alike, that was wov'n with the Hair of a Bufalo's Nostrils;
It was to make Habits of great value for Flatterers, to wear either side
outermost, and to be always serviceable to the Humor of the Prince. Above all,
he was in hopes to vend a great number of Basilisks Kye-brows, since he was
sure all the Ladies would buy 'em up to make Vails for their own Eyes. In like
manner he thought some Ribs of Grasshoppers would be acceptable to many, whose
Brains are full of those skipping Animals, to cause a Spring in their own
Meadows. Four Teeth of a Flea, were reserved for a malicious Inhabitant
somewhere, who delighted to bite undiscovered. They would have had 'em to have
been kept in this City, where there was no want of Persons of the same Humor.
But he excused his refusal, for that they were sent to a particular Person,
affirming that he could have sold 'em in several places, and could hardly
preserve 'em from the greedy Clutches of the Grandees, whose Custom it is
privately to suck the Blood of others. He was very sorry he had not made a good
Provision of Eels Marrow, for some that have a Humor to fetch Water out of
Stones, and to extract Substance out of nothing. I would not have exceeded the
Bounds of Conciseness necessary in a Letter, but I was willing to give your
Worship a punctual Account of what the Snail brought with him. Upon your
arrival in this place, which will be suddenly, when you go to the common
Post Office you will be better informed of the Wonders I have related. In some
little Boxes of most accurate Frauds, superfine Knaveries, cloak'd Treacheries,
painted Fictions, wicked Hypocrisies, vilanous Customs, he has bundles of great
value which he intends to open in this City, where such Gallantries are in
great Esteem. I wish you may not be intoxicated with certain Capriccio's and
cursed Plagues so neatly interwoven, that their Attractiveness render's 'em
desirable. Those are the Grandeurs of Col^s, and the Beauties of Women, in
which while we outwardly put our trust the hazard of our Sins and Estates, we
plunge our selves into Misfortunes, and procure our own Deaths. Nor be
enamored of some little Stations, built in the Air, at the request of him that
with a haughty Ostentation vaunts himself in a high Post. Since both the
Habitation and the Inhabitant, will unexpectedly become the Sport of the Wind,
and the Game will end in an utter downfall. Your prudence has no need of farther
warning; and I am obliged at length to put an end to this Discourse.

The greatest Extravagance that I find in this Letter (said Grave) is that the
Writer made choice of a Snail for the Post, at a time, when the wisest Men set
their Extravagancies a flying as swift as Pigeons. In regard he was to make
manifest certain Truths, though under disguise (replied the Marquess) he could
not will make use of any other Courier then a Snail, for that Truth can walk no
other then a slow pace in the World, being persecuted as it is by the Grandees.
For this reason (replied Chapel) it behooved the Inditer of this Letter to fain
himself a Fool, that not being fit that others should discover the Truth; and
for Men of Judgment, they lie under an Obligation to conceal it, for fear of
precipitating themselves into the Indignation of Tyrant Princes. In conformity
to this, it is convenient that all honest Men should in imitation of Snails,
walk under a good Shield, and have a hole to retire into, and preserve
themselves from those rubs with which they frequently m^et, notwithstanding the
slowness of their pace through the Maturity of their Wisdom. By Virtue of this
Comparison, merrily (said River) twould be as convenient that all Men should
have Horns. 'Twould be no great Burden (said I) to carry such a small
Proportion; but what said the Philosophers, Every like is not to run upon four
Feet: Which agrees so much the more directly with my Comparison; because a
Snail neither runs; and is so far from having four (...) that it has none at
all. It Is fit (said Chapel) that a Letter of Impertinences should conclude
with an Impertinence: And therefore having paid the Gentleman his Debt, let
(...) proceed to some new Matter: And so saying he opened the following Letter.


LETTER CXV.
Being an amorous Letter of a Lady. 'Twas directed to Mr. Parmed, at his House
in Queen Street.
My dear Heart,
I Am confounded when I consider the Sinister Fame, which has acquired to our
Sex the Frauds of many Women, who with their Treacheries discredit the
Sincerity of others. I am afraid, that by comparing me with other Women, you
judge me a Dissembler in my Affection toward ye, which denies me the Felicity
of that mutual Exchange from your self which the Ardor of my Love requires.
Good God! Preserve me Heaven, from so great Misfortune. I will sooner not only
to be a Woman, but to be at all then prejudice my desire of being beloved. If I
cannot separate from the Degree of Woman the Imagination of Frauds and
Treachery, I will deprive my self Life, for ever to abandon those Conditions,
by which being made an unfortunate Lover, I shall become more miserable then
the Damned. Beware, my only Joy, of giving way to Ingratitude or Cruelty, under
pretense of such a Belief, otherwise unjust, while in the Purity of a faithful
Mind common Failings may easily be discovered to be quite abolished. Your
Countenance may convince you, that Treacheries are far remote from her that
adores ye* to sacrilegious, when they shall offend the Divinity of that fair
Person, for whose sake that Woman must be without a Soul, that presumes to live
and yet despise you. By how much the less frequent, by so much the more
valuable is the Love of a Woman, proportionable to the Objects that enhaunce
the Price, for want of Number. Whoever loves, can never fancy a Beauty which
cannot be beloved. I deem you unapt to conceive the Vehemence of my Passions,
which by laboring in the Contemplation of your Countenance, turn about my Soul
to admire the Perfection of all substantial Beings. Assure your self this Love
cannot be Female, that is to say inconstant, which has for the Basis of it a
Firmament of Stars; such as are your Celestial Beauties. The Affection cannot
be corrupted or consumed, which has for the Seat of it, the Heaven of your
Face, and for the Sphere wherein it moves, the Light of your Virtue. Resolve
then not to make me despair of my Contentments, while you have reason to hope
for all the Satisfaction you can desire for employing the Ornaments of your
Mind in loving me. To which I would oblige ye under the pretense of a Debt,
with which the Fervency of my Soul engages ye to a mutual Correspondence, while
it destroys itself in adoring ye. But I know a divine Object cannot be obliged,
nor the greatness of your Merit be bound but with a Duty of Charity agreeable
to my Torments. From that it is, that I beg the Cure of my Wounds, which as
they were inflicted by the Rays of your Beauty, so must they be healed by the
Excess of your Generosity.

This Letter (said Chapel) requires an Authentic Testimony to confirm the
Truth of what the Lady writes. Otherwise it is hard to believe so much Love in
a Woman. As if the Vice of an unbridl'd Passion (replied River) were not usual
in a Woman, as well as any other Failing that is proper to the Sex. Whoever
condemns Love (replied I) gives us marks of more irregular Affections; those
idle Notes, wherewith our Minds compose the restlesness of our various Thoughts
and Wills, not better concerting in any other sort of Harmony. I understand ye
(said Grave) smiling, and I am well aware, that while you call Love Harmony,
you have an Eye upon the Spheres, whose Harmony in Heaven is the most perfect
of any other upon Earth.

But Chapel interrupted their Discourse, by opening and reading the following
Letter.


LETTER CXVI.
Of a Mother that gives Documents to her Daughter. 'Twas directed to Mrs. T --
at the Crown Coffee-house, near the Blew-Cross in Venice.
Dear Daughter, London, June 1692.
^ Have endured your absence, since you departed from (...) this City in the
Company of the Gentleman your ^ervant, with a Reinforcement of lucky Hope, from
^hence I promised my self a great Advancement of ^our Fortunes. I assured my
self, that the place where ^ou are, is a very good place to vend those Wares
which you have to put off. The great number of ^raders of your Sex, avails not
now to bring down ^he price of the Commodity, but by the multitude (...)
Examples to teach the best Rules, which (...) well observed, you can never go
amiss. And therefore I cannot but wonder to hear the Affairs (...) your Shop go
ill, knowing you, upon other oc^asions to be a Woman of Judgment, so well-bred,
and so well-condition'd, that I could not fear but (...) all your Employments
would meet with good ^ortune. I also looked upon it as a farther good (...),
that you were come of a hopeful Stock, (...) whence your two Sisters, and I
your Mother (...) descended, have acquired great Reputation (...) Applause for
deserving in our Profession; (...) whence I could never suspect that your
pro^esses would in the least degenerate. I fear me these Prejudices arise from
your not observing the Precepts of the Art, which ought to be so much the more
accurately taken notice of, in regard the Conditions of this Trade are
variously regulated by several others. The Wares which you sell are always the
same, and therefore it behooves ye to be Industrious to supply the want of that
Variety, which is the only attractive of humane Content. The Methods also which
you are to make use of (...) your advantage, are likewise still the same
without any alteration: And therefore it is a difficult thing to satisfy all
People; while various humors covet, some more, some less. Let it be your care
not to be so reserved, that others may have reason to complain of their
Bargaining with you, nor so prodigal as to traffic to your loss. A moderate
Post will be more successful for you, it not being convenient for you to be
defective in that rigorous strictness, with which you would have encountered a
Man upon your first setting up. The making good measure is no Precept for your
Trade; wherein the more pinching you are, the more you will increase your
Gains. Be sure to lay open always two Bundles; the one of which being publicly
laid upon the Stall, may serve for ordinary Persons that have but little Money
to spend. The other you are not to produce, but after many Entreaties, which
assuring you of a covetous and imperuous desire, may secure you your own price.
To great Persons who know the value of the Ware, and have where-withal to pay,
present your Bundle freely; for (...) the profit will be greater, and the Risco
less. To vulgar People, or such as have no Judgment, and know not the Price of
such Counterband Goods, offer such Cloth as uses to lie upon the Stall for
show. However let both the one and the other be well kept, so that whoever
Trafficks with you may not be offended with the sight of nothing but Moths and
Worms. And therefore you must always keep your Shop clean and neat, not so much
as suffering a Spider's Web in the Room to accuse ye of Slut^ corners. Let no
Fools or Simpletons escape ye, if you find they have Money in their Pockets, for
they are easily drawn in, and coax'd with good words, so that you may squeeze
'em at your pleasure. Use 'em tenderly, and have a particular piece of
Dalliance for them, being a sort of Fish, that deserve a golden Hook. Banish
all your Swashbucklers in fine Clothes, who carrying all they have about 'em in
spruce Habit, a lascivious Countenance, and a lofty Behavior, display their
whole Riches at once, within their Plumes of Feathers are upon the Wing
together with their Brains; and their Purses so light, that they may ride upon
the Wind. They are very expensive in Prittle-prattle, that dissolves into Air,
but affords nourishment to those that hear it. That Is no Coin for you,
Daughter, who are not to be so foolish in keeping your Fist close, as if ye had
lit upon a good Prey, when you have nothing in your hand. There follows also
another prejudice, that they taking up so much room in your Shop, hinder others
that would be more profitable, and perhaps would be trading with you in
private. Only you may endure such a piece of impertinent Opportunity in a
Person of Quality who though he spends nothing, yet brings Reputation to your
Shop. Many Widgeons run to the Net, when they find Persons of Quality fallen
into the same Snares. When you meet such Persons, cry up your good Fortune, for
Ambition joined with Lasciviousness is a greater provocative to Expense. As to
what remains, dismiss every body with a cheerful Countenance at their go^^g out
of your Shop, after they have bought your Commodity: making choice of them only
whom you know you can fleece. You are obliged to kind and curteou^ Expressions,
but always the Rules of Interest are to be preferred. Humble your self
according to the humor of all your Customers, with amorous and winning
Behavior, but not so as to fall with a slight push. Let your Friendship
persist, as they say, Vsque adaras. This Altar is to be your Bed; to which when
you come to conclude your Bargain, then laying aside all Courtesy, stand upon
the Rigor of your Contract. Let no body stir out of your Shop till he has paid
his Money. For that your Trade will not permit ye to trust. You may do well to
keep some body in your Shop to carry on your Trade in your absence, that so you
may not lose that sort of Pride, which is in some measure requisite to keep up
your Calling, by stooping to some abject forms of dealing that betray the
Poverty of the Shopkeeper. To which purpose you may keep a brisk Journey-woman,
the sight of whose Looks, will be as good as a Hook to catch several
Chance-customers. But let her not Trade upon her own account by no means: For
that were the way to break in such a City as this. Every one would be offering
her his Stock to trade withal, so that in a short time she would be able to set
up for herself, and get away all your Custom. I remember no more at present
that I can add to help forward the good Success of your Trade. The Experience
of the Country, and Knowledge of those that trade are two Points from whence
you may draw Instructions to carry on your own Trade, by treading the Steps of
common Custom. In your Shop are bought and sold delightful Commodities; and the
variety of Pleasures varies also the Price. The Hook ought to be thrown with
much Artifice, and though it sometim^s returns back empty, you are not therefore
to drown your self by running violently to catch the Fish that does not swallow
the Bate willingly. Have a care of holding the Angling-Rod too long in your
Hand, for fear of being pulled to the bottom by some Fish, much stronger than
your self, through the Power of Love. Avoid this Rock, the only cause of
Shipwreck to those that scowre the Seas of Lasciviousness to find the Heaven of
Gain. Be sure to hold the Helm strait, but-like good Pilots, put it behind your
Shoulders, valuing it no otherwise then as a thing which you may easily turn
between the Legs, having your Mind fixed upon other Objects, but more
especially upon the Compass of the Purse that guides ye to the Light of the
Gold, and the North-Star of Interest; that so you may make a fortunate Voyage.
If in conformity to my Counsels and Desires you advance your Fortunes, I am
resolved to come and comfort my decrepit Years with the fight of your Grandeur.
In the mean while Heaven shower down upon you those favorable Influences that
may prosper all your Endeavors.

Most excellent Education of a Mother! (said Chapel.) It Is the Privilege of
our Age (replied the Count) that wickedness is ingrafted into the Children by
the Parents themselves. However it was superfluous to send such Instructions to
Venice (replied River) where there are not wanting Masters of Vice. You imagine
there a multitude of Masters (said I) knowing that it is one of the Pastimes of
the Grandees, to keep Boys; and almost all of them teach Abomination. It Is very
true (replied Chapel) since the number of the Jesuits Colleges increase the
number of the Schools, and such sort of Masters are very common. If you enter
under the Discipline of those Masters, you must be towering among such high
Notions, as if you were always turning about the Spheres. Certainly you ought
to fear least your Post should be prepossest; for those ascents are envied to
all others but themselves, though wrongfully, in regard the Spheres are in
Common, and for public Benefit. If ye are soaring so high remember the Fall of
Icarus; for the Wax will be melted by the Fire, if not by the Sun, and so your
downfall will be miserable. Heavens be praised (replied River) that Remorce of
Conscience leads ye to Repentance, at least out of fear of deserved Punishment.

While they were thus discoursing, Here cried Grave, here is a Love-Letter,
having already broken the Seal and discovered the Secrets of the Paper, which
he held in his hand. Thereupon they all prepared to listen with a willing
Attention, while he read on as follows,


LETTER CXVII.
Being an amorous Letter to a Lady. 'Twas directed to Madam Reddridge, at her
House in Clerkenwell-green.
Most dear Mistress,
OH Heavens! what torments have I endured since your Presence no longer gave
Life to the Contents of my Heart. Did you but know, my dearest, what troubles
perplex my Soul, which lives only by you, and with an Obligation still to beg
Life from that Image, of which my jealous Affections permit me no Consolation,
but in beholding it. Did you believe the Excess of those Sorrows, which I feel
through the Loss of my Enjoyments, the real body of true delights being
transformed into Shadows formed by the Imagination, I assure my self you would
compassionate if not love me. Ah dearest, how far different do I find the Being
soothed by your Fondnesses, to be miniardiz'd by your Lips, to be caressed by
your Embraces, and imparadiz'd in your Bosom, from seigning to my self the vain
Chimera's of a favorable Glance from your absent Eyes, or a flattering Smile
from your far distant Lips. And my torment is so much the more in seeking to
please my self with your Effigies which I carry in my Breast, in regard that
being all this while ravished with such lovely Appearances only, and under a
necessity to comply with those Violences, I run to clasp a shadow and embrace
nothing. Good God! Presently I cry, why cannot I with a rapid Flight conveigh
my self in a moment to my beloved Helena! Might I at least but have the Fortune
of Icaru^, or leave to put on Wings, which carrying me to your self, although
they melted then, I could not fall; when fixed in the Heaven of your Bosom.
Then, in my amorous Enthusia^ms I might have one of those white Hands to cool
my Ardors with that lovely Snow. There would I deposite my kisses, I would
unbend the Joints, and there lodge my Contents, which tho confined within the
hollow of her hand, would enlarge my Felicity to the complete Satisfaction of
my Desires. Behold my Condition, enforced to confine within so small a part
those Enjoyments, that had a free Field in the full extent of your Body. What a
disadvantagious Passage of my Pleasures is this, from being seen every day in
the C^^dle of the Bed between the Swathing-bands of the Sheets, nourished with
the Milk of your Lilly white Skin, at present so hunger-starved, that they
would take it for a singular Favor to li^k but one of your hands. Dearest
Helena! a Name which as it was always accompanied with extraordinary Beauties,
so it carries intolerable Flames about it. Could the Times of Paris but have
coasted the Possession of you; Venus would have fixed upon no other Helena but
your self, as a present suitable to a Deity covetous of bestowing Beauties,
supposing she had not been prepossessed by the Ravishment of Jupiter.

In some measure is my Heart concerned to Counterpoise with its Ardors the
Constagrations of a Kingdom sacrificed to that Gracian Beauty, since no less
tributes are due to the Countenances of the Helena's. Willingly I consume my
self, my dearest: For certainly my Ashes will come to life again under the Rays
of you, my all chearing Sun. I most solicit my return to see you again, and
(...) my self in that same Bosom, where between two most lovely Tea^s, the
Rivers of Sweetness are (...), then, the most swiftly running, when the hard
^ank appears to stop them. I will then repeat the reading of my wonted
pleasures in that Book, the leaves of which by turning backward and forward,
and by reading the Characters over and over again, I could never yet discover
any thing else but happiness. But no longer my beloved will I entertain my self
with these imaginary Chimera's, which cause me to languish, not being
accompanied with the Reality of Effects. Nor can I any longer hold my Pen,
which desires to be held by a hand where near the Purity of your Snowy
whiteness it might better be able to express the Sincerity of my Affection, I
must therefore follow the Impulses of my Pen, of a sudden quite besides my
self, as being entranced in the Contemplation of your Beauty, which makes me
conclude with a thousand Kisses and Embraces.

Heaven knows (said Chapel) what Pen this Man had between his Fingers when he
wrote this Letter. (...) my Opinion he seems to be one of those unwary
Youngsters, that give themselves up as a Prey to the Wiles of Curtesans. And
who would not be diluded by their Frauds (replied River) when they flatter a
Man with a Face that breaths Divinity in the Beauty of it, when they show ye a
Paradise in their Graces, (...) when ye approach 'em turn about their backs:
(...) Aff^^tation that greatly tyrannizes over Lovers, (...) with all, more
strongly ravishes. It Is no wonder, (said I) that their Artifices make use of
that same (...) about; for the force of Magic is princip^^^^ restrained with
the Compass of Circles; and therefore they make these Circles before those whom
they desire to inchant, that may the more easily prevail by (...) own proper
Violences. For the performance of Enchantments (replied Grave) two things are
requisite, the Wand and the Globe; therefore to complete (...) Enchantment of
Love, when a Man holds forth (...) Wand and the Globe, of necessity the Women
(...) comply. How ready is the Tongue (replied Chapel) where the Appetite is
prone. And so saying, without giving time for the Company to make any return he
fell a reading the ensuing Letter.


LETTER CXVIII.
Being a Letter in Burlesque. 'Twas directed to Mr. Paford, at the Three
Pigeons in Thames Street.
Dear Friend,
CRab-fish shall have no longer to do with the Moon. Snails have got Teeth, and
Tortoises Wings. All Beasts have laid aside their Brains, and Men have lost
'em. An Ass but the other day cat up the Brains of a great Doctor already
purrify'd; so that when he came to dispute de Casi^^^ Infirmorum, he tumbled
heels over-head ad Sepul^^ra Mortuorum. Your worship may creep upon all ^our to
the Heels of Atlas, to the end that if it should happen, that he should sink
under the Weight of the World, you may thrust your Nose ^n his Tail, as was
done to Morgante in the Third of the Odysses. You will do well to take with you
a great Horn, and if you cannot tell where to get one, go to the Houses in
Germany, and you may have as many as you please. I give you this Advice because
there is a Proclamation sometime since published, forbidding all Cuckolds to
pass the Stygian Lake in Charon's Boat, but over a Bridge of Horns. Hence it is
that the poor old Ferry-man has lain idle a long time, and is like to be
starved to Death, for want of his Fees, while every one brings his own Horn.
The Other day with an Astrolobe, I looked for your Worships Nativity, which lies
in the Quadrature of a Cucumber, in the Sex^ile of the two Twins, that always
go in the Shade. Guard your self from the Horse-flies, and never tire your self
to become a Prey to the Gnats, because the Nets are not good, and Tantalus, who
ought to mend 'em, lies rolling and tumbling up and down to get a Snap at the
Apples. The Dragon's-Tail is unfortunate to your Worship, and therefore be sure
to sow in a Circle, when Hartichokes begin to beard. I desire your Worship to
make your Advantage of these few Advertisements, and that you may find the
expected Effects, affording you an opportunity to command any farther
Demonstrations of my Service, which you shall think fit to require.

This would be a rare Astrologer (said Chapel) if he had but good luck in his
Predictions of Extravagancies. Methinks (said River) he speaks truth in some
Particulars already, whereas your Astrologers never tell any other then lies. I
am apt to believe (replied I) this Man has spent all the best of his Talent in
the Composition of this Letter. By your dwelling upon this subject (said Grave)
there seems to be a Sympathy between you and these Extravagants. Let Us see the
next.


LETTER CXIX.
Containing Instructions how to drive a good Trade. 'Twas directed to Mr.
Soper, at his House in Brumly, Kent.
Honored Sir,
I Deem it a Debt of mine to impart to your Worship every thing that concerns
my Preferment, assuring my self that it will be very acceptable news to your
Worship to hear of the fortunate Progresses of your Servant. The Wife of a
certain rich Merchant in this City, having buried her Husband some Months
since, sent to me the other day some of her Friends to treat with me about
joining my Stock with hers. She is not willing to marry again, but desires only
that our Interests may go hand in hand. I accepted of the Offer, considering
the advantageous Conditions that were proposed. I surrendered to her all my
Stock, with a Covenant however that it was only barely lent, and that I might
call it in again at my pleasure, without any loss or diminution: On the other
side she allowed me the use of her Warehouse, of which I was to keep the Keys
my self; nevertheless with Condition that I was to lock it and unlock it,
whenever she required me. In the business and trouble of Trade we have both an
equal share, and they that best manage it, enjoy the Fruits of their Labor
without being obliged to complain that either took pains in vain. She keeps the
Money in the Shop, that is paid to and fro in driving the Trade, very careful
in keeping it and giving me my proportion from time to time. There arose a
difference between us, because I pretended by my Contracts to the keeping the
Key of a Press, that stood behind the Shop, and where lay the Wares of greatest
value. Hitherto she has refused to comply with me. Nevertheless I hope that in
time and by fair means and good words I shall obtain the good Fortune which I
so earnestly thirst after. I assure you, Sir, I never tasted so much Felicity
as now I enjoy, being raised from my low Condition to the unexpected Possession
of so fair a Shop, and no less wealthy; since Widows, after the Death of their
Husbands, growing more reserved in their Expenses, and abstaining from their
wonted Feasting and Jollity, lay up Money apace; and therefore well fare the
Man that is so lucky as to share in their frugality.

I protest that I never penetrated the Rules of driving a good Trade, before I
came to practice with this Partner of mine. I have learnt the way of true
Commerce, which must be carried on with strict Covenants at first, to procure
the advantage to your self. Ceremonies are convenient at the beginning, with
some limits of Civility which I know not how to express. Then again the
Merchandise requires, that when the Contract is in a good Posture, that the
Trade be pusht forward with all the Sedulity imaginable, never minding whither
the other Party complain or no, as not being content with the Bargain. Let the
Trader have always good Witnesses, to the end there may be no failure in the
Covenants. It behooves him always to know the Disposition of the Person with
whom he Trades, and whither she be slow or vigorous, he must be conformable.
For then the Business is likely to have a good Issue, when it comes to be
concluded by both Parties at the same time. Otherwise their Interests languish,
when the one growing cool, refuses to encourage the Resolutions of the other,
with the Fomentations of reciprocal Heat. There is no need of trading by dumb
Signs, nor to exceed in idle Twittle-twattle. Both Words and Deeds are required
in this sort of Commerce; and indeed it is a great Point gained to be able to
make use of the Lips and the Tongue. The Advantage of a Trader, chiefly
consists in not being contented with a small gain, by stopping and dealing only
in one particular Commodity. Let him always be turning and winding, and winding
and turning his Stock, for that great profit arises by keeping his Cash in such
perpetual Motion. I have chiefly learnt, that it is the part of a good Trader,
not to be squeamish or nice in any manner of way, for the defiling a Man's
Hands is no detriment, when the gain that comes of it is worth the while. Let
him that will trade lay aside all Scruples; since they frequently become
Bankrupt, that make not the best of their Opportunities. Sometimes it would not
be amiss to make his Correspondent in Trade a little drunk; for that in point
of Trade a Man is to turn and transform himself into every shape: And then a
little Wine turns to a great profit, if you can get the Party to Seal new
Covenants at the same time. When the Contract is made let the Knot of
Co-partnership be maintained entire and firm. As to what remains, there is a
way to preserve your Friendship for Profit, by Dissimulation, Caresses and
several other laudable Artifices and Deceits. Above all things let a Trader
beware, that he never leave in any other Trade except his own, any more then
the Money which is usually expended in the Management of such Affairs. These
Documents I have learnt from this Woman, who has sworn to me, that she will
never admit any Trader to enter her Shop, who trades after any other manner:
For which reason they stoop their heads under the door it self, and the more
Money they offer the more she refuses to sell 'em her Wares, prosessing to
prize the true Rules of Commerce, above the Dictates of a greedy Avarice.
Others must of necessity count their gains upon their Fingers; for that not
knowing how to trade, they are excluded out of her Shop. I am endeavoring to
meet her Genius, that I may be able to deliver my self as well from the one as
the other inconvenience, that I may be Master of the Shop at my own pleasure.
If this same change of my Condition may empowre me to serve your Worship, I
shall acknowledge a greater Obligation to that good Fortune which enables me:
And so concluding most affectionately I kiss your hands.

In good faith, (said Chapel) this same Spark, by his trading with women, may
chance at length to be stripped to his Skin: I know he shall have Wares in
exchange, but not much to his satisfaction. You say very true, (replied River)
for Women's Shops are a sort of Traps, into which he that enters, comes out
again with little advantage. They are so wide (replied I) that there is a way
for a man to come off without a wound, if he make a good defense. Oh, (said
Grave) there is that Fire and Fury within, so that there is no 'scaping some
scurvy Impression or other. You understand the Trade I see, (replied Chapel)
and therefore of necessity you must have more than once have been a dealer in
this sort of Merchandice. But no more of this, lest we have the Women and their
Merchants about our Ears. Upon which they fell a reading the following Epistle.


LETTER CXX
Containing Instructions for the bringing up of young Boys. 'Twas directed to
Mr. Whitchurch, at his House in Clements-Lane.
Reverend Sir,
I Understand by your last, the Resolution you have taken to apply your self to
the education of young Boys, and by endoctrinating 'em, and maintaining 'em at
their own charges, to get Victuals, and satisfy your Appetite without scandal.
I approve your design, as being proper for a man that (...) already settled,
and not being obliged to wander up and down, acquires applause, by supporting
himself in his own House by his Industry. Add to this the Necessities of your
Brother, who as you write (...) word, lies in a manner Bedrid, in a languishing
and infirm condition; or if he rise, it is with an Appetite that must be fed
with choice and particular Viands, no way satisfied with ordinary Diet. These
young Boys that you will have in your House, with the Money they will offer ye
to your content, will afford ye the means to satisfy his Desires, as Brotherly
Affection commands, especially considering his condition. Nay, perhaps by their
diligent Service, and the Pastime of their Sports, they will raise him from his
Bed, and restore him to a good state of Health. Now, because I know (...)
whether you are duly prepared for this Employment, I thought it the Duty of my
Affection to lay ye down some Instructions drawn from the Foundations of
Experience, that you may not miscarry in the Road of your Employment.

In the first place, be sure not to take Children that have hardly digested
their Mothers Milk, as the Saying is; for though they seem more fit to suck
from the Breasts of your sound Documents every thing that is good and proper
for their Learning, yet their want of Capacity will not bend and bow with that
readiness, as a universal conformity to every thing requires. They are more for
knavish Tricks, than any thing of solidity, so that you would receive into your
House a Garboile of Noise, a Confusion of Bawling, rather than the (...)
Entertainments of Repose. And in regard you are to feed 'em, it behooves ye to
make choice of 'em at those Years that they may have good Teeth to chew a piece
of Sinew-flesh, and gnaw a Bone, otherwise being obliged to feed commonly with
Capons, Jellies, and such other Delicacies, they will be rather a Loss than any
Advantage to your Purse. If it should happen sometimes, that you must be forced
to put their Meat i'their^ Mouths, make you best of this Simplicity of theirs,
and never trouble your self to teach them better, to the end they may learn the
particulars of all good manners.

Let 'em be of good Age, that they may be able to dress and undress themselves,
that you may not be forced to keep a Servant to wait upon every one. Let 'em be
at Years of Discretion, that they may know how to eat their Bread and their
Meat asunder. And as for your part, be not wanting in your Duty; take notice,
in the first place, not to look any one in the Face, but to keep always behind
their Backs, taking care at the same instant that they may receive your
Commands. Order it so, that first of all they may feel with their Hands the
point of the Doctrine which you desire to teach 'em, that they may not be
scared with the first Proposal of a difficult Subject, hard to be understood;
nor obstinately persist on a resolution to make 'em understand all of a sudden
whatever you propound, otherwise you will expose 'em to a necessity of weeping
and whining, as if they were quite undone. Let 'em not therefore accustom
themselves to cry, and take on at the first sight of the Rod or Cudgel, for
this same over-timerousness is a Fault that will never suffer ye to attain your
ends. Practice Mildness and Discretion with him that has not a Capacity
answerable to the Talent which you expend, insinuating at leisure, and by
degrees, what one would think they would never be able to learn. Allow 'em Play
and Pastime, that in the greater heat of study they may be allured themselves
with some Delight; by which means they will comply more ardently with your
Desires, and will learn from Custom to run and embrace your Doctrine. Practice
in public the same usage with all: Let your Partiality toward some be
private, whom you shall find to be more genteel in their Manners, and more
tractable to your Satisfaction. Exercise all in general, or at least the better
part, in regard that by fixing always behind one, it will be a great trouble
and vexation to him, and little profit to your self. Endeavor to make 'em
lively and courageous, to the end they may not receive what you imprint into
'em, like Statues. Let 'em be of a brisk airy Temper, that by managing 'em with
a tenderness, which is very delightful, they may be willing to repeat to their
Companions the Lessons which you teach 'em. Your Brother also, by rewarding the
Kindnesses which they do him, always coaxing and flattering 'em, may be very
useful in taming 'em by gentle means, if you perhaps out of your magisterial
Authority, should be forced to practice Rigor. In this Profession it behooves
you to be judicious and discreet; for (...) loses his labor, who knows not the
right methods of doing his Business. You will find (...) convenient not to
gorge your Appetite, le^t running sometimes with too much greediness to the
Cupboard, you expose your self to the liazard of being choked. These Meats are
hurtful to those To^^^ that suffer 'em to go cross-waies down their Throats,
whence they receive a greater Punishment than Pleasure. I know, that you being
habitua^^^ in this Art, will learn not to mistake the (...). It Is therefore
sufficient for me to have recalled (...) your mind what our Friendship has
suggested (...) me, as necessary for your good Progress: For (...) advancement
of which, I desire to cooperate (...) you upon all occasions, wherein I desire
you (...) employ me, as your most ready Servant, and (...) I kiss your Hands.

This Gentleman (said Chapel) is an excell^^ Sheph^rd for these little Lambs,
and if he would (...) set up a Chair in Rome, it is my opinion, he might rival
it with the best of the Profession. They (...) there (replied River) the way to
keep Sheep, and not Lambs, as a Doctrine more necessary for the g^vernment of
Souls. You mean, (replied Grave) Th^^ teach the way how to fleece 'em. Forbear
(said I) you will grate too hard upon some of our side by and by. And so
saying, he proposed another Letter to this purpose.


LETTER CXXI.
Containing several Accidents which happened to a young man in Rome. 'Twas
directed to Mr. Dungaven, at the Rose in Budg-row, London.
Honored Sir,
IN good faith, my Dear Signior Francisco, I am got out of a very intricate
Labyrinth, although I am no Theseus, befriended by an Ariadne, that (...) it in
her power to bind or loosen my Liberty with a Thread. It Is a long time since
you received any Testimonies of our Friendship, in any Lett^rs of mine. By this
you will understand the occ^sion of my omission, being made partaker of the
S^ccesses of my Fortunes.

(...) withdrew my self, a Fugitive from the Domi^^^n of my Father, some months
since, being provoked to this Resolution by a fantastic humor of Youth, which
refused to endure the Bridle of Pa^er^al Authority. A Thought thus born without
the Midwife of Judgment, could not but prove a misshapen Birth, accompanied
with very few good Events. I departed well provided with Money, as I thought,
not only for my Necessities, but to give me Wings to second the flight of my
capri^^ous Fancy; I took the Road for Rome, as having heard several times, that
that same City was fortunate for Fools, and for him that never thinks to do
well. Being thus enrolled under these Ensigns, I conceited my self in the
Capitol, where I imagined that I saw my self already triumphant. Having also
understood, that every thing went there in a perpetual Round, I had sucked in
particular hopes, that I should there find the Wheel of my Fortune. Nor was I
deceived in one point, but sinister Interpretation falsified the ^und and
conjecture of these Imaginations.

Away went I to Florence, where being come* I understood that Beardless Youths,
comely and handsome Striplings to see to, are a sort of wild Game, in very
great esteem; but after which, there is no peculiar Hunting set apart, because
every one is at liberty to provide his own Wild-fowl, otherwise there would
follow great Disorders, by prohibiting those greater Delights, which the
Influences of Heaven make 'em covetous of seeking after. I was no sooner
beheld, but many suchlike Huntsmen, or rather Fowlers, began to level their
Arms at me, and showed, that their Pieces were ready to fetch me from the
Bough. Some were very observent to see where I stopped, with a resolut^on to
take up my rest. They thought perhaps to catch me by surprise, not believing me
to be as yet so wary, as to sleep with my Eyes open, like a Hare. They fl^ck'd
in shoals to the (...) where I had taken up my Lodging, which put me in mind of
the crowding of the Sodomites to Lot's House, when he entertained the Angels
under the appearances of delicate Young men: They ran after me like Dogs after
a Bone, but I resolved not to stir out of my Lodging, for fear of falling into
their ^lu^ches: At length an old shagged Curr, much used ^to this sort of Game,
came into my Chamber, to in^^ite me in the name of his Lord, whom he called his
Patron; he told me, That his Master being a great Honourer of Nobility, of
which my Countenance and Pre^ence seemed to boast, and the ^^aceful Behavior
of a genteel Appearance was resolved to serve me, so long as I staid in the
City. I retaliated these expressions of a Gentility, that offered so much
Kindness with Returns of affected Thanks, protesting probable Excuses for the
refusing so much Honor, the more to be valued, by how much the less deserved.
On the other side be continued his Importunities, resolved to fetter me in a
compliance with the person that sent him, but I was as obstinate altogether, in
denying to correspond with his Indiscretion, so that he departed with his Tail
between his Legs, being fairly given to understand, that he must find some
other Nest for his Master to lay his Eggs in than mine. Heaven had no sooner
delivered me from this Impertinent, but I was assailed by a Pretender, that
(...) in person to prey upon me, believing his Servant not well grounded in the
Curiosities that belonged to the Science. He spent a great deal of time in many
Ceremonies, wriggling himself in by virtue of these, to feel my Hand, to
squeeze it, and to give me fair notice of what he would be at. After several
Enquiries to fish out my Quality, my Country, and several other Particulars,
upon which he enlarged his Discourse, to increase his familiarity, he
endeavored to get me home to his House, assuring me of all the kind
Entertainment I could expect. In a word, he pusht forward his Complements, and
his Protestations, as far as they would go, but I repulsed him with a majestic
^^igor, which gave him to understand, that Sentiments of Reputation had spoiled
his Market, and hindered his subduing me to his will. In short, I left him with
a Wen upon his Nose, to be clipped off by other Sizzars than mine. I then
found, that the Oh -- Oh's -- so frequently repeated by the Inhabitants of this
City, in their Discourse, is a Tribute which, in speaking, they offer to the
itch of their Genius. I departed the next day, before Aurora got out of her
Bed, and yet there were some too nimble for me, who with their impertinent
Embraces, and Huggs of Concup^sce^^e, made way to feel my Hands, and fastening
me in their Gripes, endeavored to fix me the mark of their looser Imaginations.

I continued my Journey without any other considerable Accident that befell me,
but only the want of Money; and now I began to repent of my unadvised
Resolution, which it was too late how^ver to recant, whatever Inconveniences I
endured. I was two days Journey from Rome, unprovided to go on, and in a worse
condition to return. One Evening, as I lay quite over-burthen'd with the
thoughts of this my deplorable condition, through which I found my self
necessitated to pawn my self in the House where I was, a Company of strowling
Mendicants arrived there, to take up a Lodging, for such I found 'em afterward
to be, and thought my self a thousand times beholden to Fortune for meeting
with 'em. Some of these compassionating my Sorrows, which appeared in my
outward Behavior, presently dived into the cause of my Grievances, and offered
to ease me of my Pains; I discovered to 'em the bottom of my Adversity, making
the same use of my Tongue as Dogs do, to ^ick all their Sores whole: They
entertained me civilly, assuring me Plenty of all things, provided I would run
the same Fortune with them. Do you guess, Sir, now whether this Offer of Bread
were to be refused by one that was like to starve: I subscribed to any
Condition which my Necessity demanded: Besides that, the Pleasures of a
luxurious Life, such as that Canaille leads, was sufficient to entice me
forward. So I leagued my self to them, and in their company got to Rome, still
more and more contented that I had happened into the Society of a jolly sort of
People, who lived a happy and a merry Life, though their Profession were
ignominous. I was introduced the first Evening into their Convocation-house,
where the Miracles of the Lame that were cured, the Blind that recovered their
Sight, maimed Limbs that were set straight, were so numerous that they amazed
me. When every one had offered me a part of his Gain, there was a new Scene,
while laying aside their palled Countenances, and stripping off their Rags,
they made up a whole Act of a Comedy, divided into Periods of Music and
Dancing, and the Epilogue of a delicious Supper.

They proposed to me several Employments to make me an idle Minister of their
Profession; and finding I was not cut out for Stealing, and as little given to
Lying, besides that, I was but little skilled in their canting Gibbrish, they
set me to an Exercise, whererin a dumb man might have been persuaded to promote
their Interests. For my first initiation therefore, I was to be one of those
who counterfeiting themselves lame, were to pick the Pockets of the
compassionate. Early in the morning the Elders of the Society adorned me with
the Ensigns of their Calling, honoring me with a Habit, which was a tattered
Standard, in ostentation of their Trophies, then bending my right Arm, they
bound it to my Shoulders, and with I know not what mishmash of Paste, which
they made themselves, they laid such a Plaster upon my Elbow, as made People
believe the rest of my Arm had been newly wounded; and after they had bedaub'd
my left Leg after the same manner, they made it look like a Pedestal of Sores
and Ulcers; afterward with Swaths and ragged Clouts they made up a Figu^e,
where Beggary was compassionated, if the Disease it se^f were not pitied; and
lastly, perfuming my Cheeks with Brimstone Smoke, they made me look as if I had
escaped out of a Sepulcher; you would have thought, at least, that Death had
pursued me, as a Prey that had fled from his clutches, while I looked more like
one that lay expiring, than like a living Creature. Lastly, my Hair towz'd, and
staring as if it had never been combed time out of mind, they turned under a
nasty Linen Bag, as black as a piece of smoked Bacon. And thus they dressed me
up in the shape of Horror, a Spectacle rather to fright Folks, than move their
Pity. After all this, I had my Post assigned me at the Door of a Church,
whither I went, but failed the Expectations of my Companions, while I met with
an Accident that drew me into utter despair: The Blushes of my Shame, to see my
self become so desp^cable out of a Humor, surpassed the Artifices of my
counterfeit paleness, so that there was something of Gentility to be discovered
through the dreadful disguise of my Cheeks: In my Countenance also there was
something of a lively air and a juvenile briskness in my Eyes, which accused
the Falsehood of those resemblances of Mortality: Presently a great man, as he
went to hear Mass with a numerous Train at his Heels, cast an Eye upon me, and
by and by, as it were in contemplation of my Miseries, fixing his Looks more
seriously upon me, surveyed all the parts of my Countenance, where his Appetite
found the desirable Conditions which his Satisfaction sought for; which done,
with half a glance and a smile, he marked me out to one of his Attendants, one,
without question, who understood the nature of those Delights, which his Master
used to put in practice; and with that, with a majestic seriousness on his
Face, as if it had been an effect of his Compassion and Charity, he gave order
to have me carried to his own Palace, commanding his Servants to be very
careful of me, and seeming extremely desirous to restore me to my Health. I saw
my self now caught in a Trap, where I could not avoid the surprise of an Act of
Charity, that came too quick upon me. The Commands of the Grandee were
performed, who designed me to digest a hardness that lay upon his Stomach,
which was not to be concocted without a fomentation of young Flesh. I was laid
upon soft Feathers, the more to assure me, that the Master would not have
disdained the softness of the same Bed. I knew not how to brazen out these
Dangers, but by heightning Pains with Lamentations that would have brought the
Damned about me, while I made People believe my Torments were worse than
theirs. Every time they touched me, though never so slightly, I cried out, Oh
my Arm! Oh my Leg! -- as if I had been stark wild. By that means I was in hopes
of getting off, by being troublesome, to the end the impertinence of my Cries
and Exclamations might have delivered me from that Entanglement. And I was in a
fair way to have enjoyed the good Success of my Designs, for that the Servants,
quite tired out with my bellowing and yawling, endeavored to have been rid of
me, saying, that I was a Disturbance to the Family, and an Annoyance to all the
House.

But the Affection of the Grand^e prevented this good luck of mine, who at his
return honored me with a Visit in his own person. He reinforced his Commands,
which were to redouble their diligence, in supplying whatever I wanted. And he
had a fresh Argument to invite him to be more amorously fond of me, while the
opportunity of my being naked in Bed, presented to him, in some parts of my
Body, such a whiteness, as made him conj^cture he should have a good Meal, when
he came to feast at the Table of his Desires. There came two Chyrurgions to
view my Sores, and apply conve^ent Remedies. Then was the chief point of all my
Distresses, which I knew would reduce me to a necessity of discovering the
Fraud that confined me within his Nets. I made a hideous outcry therefore, to
prevent the unbinding of my Leg, and with a stout resistance withstood their
obstinacy, while they preaching over me, how much it would conduce to my cure
persuaded me to endure the pain. I begged that I might be carried to the
Hospital, where my Infirmity being attributed to Nature or Chance, I might have
got off upon less-troublesom Conditions. I affirmed, that my Sores not being
accustomed to lenitive Medicaments, would but grow angry, and be the more
festered by unwonted Applications. On the other side, the Chvrurgions
aff^ighted at the sh^ilness of my loud Yellings, laid aside all thoughts of
unbinding that intricate Bundle that wrapped up all my ^^es. But then they began
to consult the cutting off the whole affected part, which by the symptoms that
I made appear, must of necessity be putrefied, which was a certain preludium of
approaching death, if by Amputation they did not prevent the putr^fied Member
from communicating the Infection to the rest of the Body. They deferred till
the next day the putting this Consultation in execution, perhaps to give me
time to alter my resolution, which they thought the terror of such a blow would
hasten. I had no mind to consider, nor resolve upon any thing, being in a
straight of excessive confusion, which made me sometimes incline to imita^e the
Spartan, that rather chose to suffer the loss of his Thigh, than discover his
stealing the Fox. In like manner my Courage persuaded me to endure the Torture
threatened me* rather than detect the Frauds of my new Profession.

But at length Fortune sent me Relief, after these Fooleries of hers had
afforded her sufficient Pastime. My Companions had understood what had befallen
me, with no good Omen to themselves, as being afraid le^t the halting of my
Lies should have hastened the downfall of their Calling: Thereupon having taken
their final Resolution, they sent to the House where I was, a person who
^eigning to be my Brother, should rescue me from the Jaws of him that detained
me, that he might have a bit to swallow at the request of his greedy Appetite:
He went with the state and train of a Cavaliero, and in a garb that showed him
to be newly come to Town. He spoke with the Master of the House, and gave him
an account of my flight, and the infamous Crew with which I had leagued my
self, that is to say, as far as he could understand, with a Herd of strowling
Mendicants, who had dressed him up in that habit of Sickness and Infirmity, to
delude the Affections of devout Compassion. He gave him to understand the
nobility of my Birth, adding withal great importunities to have me back along
with him, to rechear my Father, who had been almost overwhelmed with Sorrow
ever since my flight. The Grandee was all in an amaze, and with courteous
Replys conducted the Knight to the Lodging where I lay tormented even to
despair: At the sight of him I took Heart-a-grace, yet soon relapsed again, to
^ear my self upbraided with the In^amy of my new Profession, as one that had so
basely degenerated from my Ancestors. Lay aside (said he) these Fictions that
counterfeit Infirmity, you having no reason to complain of any other Distemper
than want of Wit. At these Rebukes of a person who condemned an Act, of which
himself had been one of the main Co^trivers, and Promoters, I stood amazed; but
at last upon his naming my Brother, and intimating his design to carry me back
to my Father, I smoked the Cheat; therefore to comp^y with what he said, and
blushing not a little to discover my Miscarriage, I endeavored to walk along
the Room; I recovered my Arm, let loose my Leg, and dishevelled my confused
Locks, entangling so much the more the Affections of the Grandee, who repented
he had not bestowed his Charity sooner upon me, as lame as I was, that he might
have boasted the satisfaction of his Desires; for when I came to discover my
self, lovely as I was, in a full vivacity of Youth, disguised under false
appearances, he felt the stings of an extraordinary compunction, for having
neglected an opportunity so happily offered to taste upon my Table the Pleasures
which he so earnestly thirsted after. He endeavored to have detained me, but
my feigned Brother was importunate for my departure the same day, urging it for
a main Argument, that he would not prolong my Father's Sorrows. On the other
side, the Ch^at of Demonstrations of Affection prevailing obtained me one
advantage more, which was the change of a noble Suit of Clothes for my Tatters,
which the Grandee presented me, under pretense, that it was not fit for me to
appear before my Father in Rags, and Money in both Pockets, to carry me home.
And thus the poor silly Gull was merely trapann'd, as indeed he truly deserved,
since his self-ended Charity tended merely to the satisfaction of his own
forbidden Pleasures. Being thus got loose from the Grandee, I slipped my
company, and hastened out of Rome with all the have I could, and am now at home
once more under my Father's Wings. I hope you will not be offended with the
prolixity of this relation, since you may boast to have recovered a Servant, of
whose continued Affection you may be now secure. Knowing then where I am, it is
but sending your Commands to him that takes it for his greater Honor to be
employed in your Service.

And what think ye (said Chapel) of these great Acts of Charity which are used
at Rome, and by means of which the Grandees certainly make great ostentation of
their Charity? When such opportunities as these present themselves (replied
River) prodigal beyond measure, they scatter their Estates, leaving the
Virt^^so, and other persons of great worth in misery, and ready to starve. Let
us referr it to the Ecclesiastics, (said I) to discourse of Acts of Charity,
as properly belonging to their Function. What Observations then shall we make
upon this long Letter (replied Grave)? Would you ^ave us enter upon the Cheats
of the strowling Beggars? By no means (replied Chapel) in regard they cannot
be ill handled, without a fling at some he ought to rev^rence. Enough of this,
(replied Chapel) we make nothing of talking out of our Spheres.

And so having another Letter ready in his Hand, he read on as follows.


LETTER CXXII.
From a Thief in Paris. 'Twas directed to Thomas Rivert, to be left for him at
the Post House in Harwich, till call^ for.
Dear Brother,
THis is no longer any Country for us. The Thieves, who in Paris have too many
Rivals, and Spriggs of our Profession, sprout forth there in great abundance,
that it behooves us to stand upon our defense, for fear of being robbed our
selves, rather than to be watching opportunities to despoll others. We must
observe the common Precept, to give way to our Superiors, or else we must
certainly depart, since we are much inferior in this Art to the French
Citizens themselves; Experienced Locusts of the Country, that cease not to
devour Foreigners in those Fields, where formerly I know not whither the
Spring or we were most merry, and rejoiced most at our Purchases. I assure ye,
I cannot keep this Post assigned me by my Companions, for that the Besiegers
multiply, and being more ready at Surprises than my self, frustrate all my
Designs. I am resolved to depart, being afraid they will rob me of my Halter,
which however I shall willingly resign among 'em, to the end I may freely leave
'em that Reward, which they so earnestly labor to gain, by the multiplication
of their Thefts. I shall endeavor to find ye out when I return for England,
that we may consult together, as we were wont to do, where to meet with better
Fortune.

Those French Citizens are to be excused for their Robberies (said Chapel) if
it be true, that there is no fault to be ascribed to natural Qualities or
Passi^ns. Add to this (replied River) that the Subjects of a Prince who
despoils them, are necessitated to exercise themselves in robbing others, to
repair their Losses, or at least to preserve themselves from sinking under
their burdens. I have observed (replied I) that in the Cities under the
Dominion of this French King, the Profession of Thieves flourishes in great
reputation, and the exercise of Rapines; so that he may well boast that his
Vassals are as good as himself. They have before 'em (said Grave) the Examples
of their Lord, or at least of his Ministers; so that they would be much to be
blamed, if they did not conform as Subjects to the grand Exemplar of their
Sovereign.

Grave had no sooner pronounced those words, but our Comrades (viz. Summer,
Temple, Church, Fountain, and Winter, whom we had left behind us in the House,
carousing it with Summer's Friends) return to us again, and asking us what
Entertainment we had met with in their absence, we answered 'em with a short
account of how many we had read, declaring to 'em withal, That we had been
highly pleased with the variety of Humors, multitude of Follies, and diversity
of Fancies and Capricio's which had come to our knowledge in so many and
different Letters.

These words were hardly out of our Mouths, when Chapel falling out into a fit
of Laughter, raised the curiosity of the Company. He had already opened a
Letter, to see the Secrets that were contained in it. I laugh, said he, at the
novelty of the Titles which this Fool has invented. Upon which the whole
Company viewing the Paper, they found a Most Illustrious Sir, in the
Fron^ispiece of a piece of Simplicity.


LETTER CXXIII.
Of amorous Accidents. 'Twas directed to the most illustrious Knight Sir Henry
-- at his House near Abbots-Aston in Bucks. Humbly present.
Most Illustrious Sir,
LET all the celebrated Labors of Hercules give way to the Undertaking, by
means whereof I have put a good end to the Amors of a Lady, to which your
Worship was privy, as being the person from whom I cannot conceal the Secrets
of my Heart. I might now call to mind the vehemence of my Passion, by which
being tormented, you and I together bemoa^'d my Pai^s, to assuage the bitter
Sorrows that oppress me. Those wanton T^icks of the young Boy, that sporting
wounds, conti^ued some time after your departure; and your Frie^dship, together
with the possession of my Goddess, in the enjoyment of your Conversation, drew
me into greater Snares: For in counterpoise of my Desires, there was the
jealous and watchful Eye of her Husband, which pulled down my hopes on the one
side, as much as the Scale wherein the Contents of Love had all their weight,
ascended on the other. I could not assure my self of the Correspondence of my
Beloved, because I had no convenience to seek it, nor ground to hope it. She
was, I know not whether so cautious or so chaste, that the familiarity between
us left no sign of Fertility that could give to our content; which gave me to
understand, that only Stratagem could afford me that opportunity I wanted.

The Summer Season being an Incentive to mature my Thoughts to make common the
Harvest of my Contents with the Crop which the most vile enjoy; I took the
advantage of the morning Breezes, to facilitate my Passage to a happy
Opportunity; I invited both the Husband and the Wife both together, to a
Country House of mine, not far distant from the City, to entertain 'em with the
Delights of the Place; there it was that I had woven my Net to catch this
Ven^s, and bind my self close to her, without fearing the disturbance of any
malicious Vulcan: Of one large Room I made two, with no other Partition than
only that of Tap^stery Hangings, which also extended their O^namen^ into the
remaining part; in the space of four spa^^s above the Ground, I joined together
two Tables pargetted like the Wall, to remove all suspicion from the jealous
circums^ection of the Husband: Con^iguous to the counterfeit Partition were two
Beds, one of each side, with no other ^nterval but that of the Ornament which
concealed the Fraud; in the one I designed the Guests should lie, the other,
which was not perceived, I made the Post of my Ambushment, where I was to lie
in wait to fulfill the satisfaction of my desires. After Supper, during which I
had administered a Somniferous Drink, which assured me I should not be molested
by the vigilance of my Rival, they retired to the Entertainments of that night,
which I was to employ in my Pleasures. Silently I conveyed my self to my own
Post, not with any thoughts of taking rest: I listened to all their Discourse,
which made me but so much the more eager after the forbidden Fruit, while she
wanting the Fidelity of her Chastity, and he discovering the Jealousy of his
Affection, my mind suggested to me so much the greater Glory from my
Enterprise, to triumph over both. The Potion began to work its effects, though
but slowly upon the Husband, so that preventing his Wife in undressing himself,
he also fell asleep before her. Then lifting up the Curtain of the Tapestry, I
entered upon the Stage where I desired no Spectators. I put my self in the
middle between the Husband and the Wife, and deemed it an Undertaking
singularly Glorious to enjoy a Lady in the same Bed with her Husband, in
derision of the jealous Watchfulness of the one, and in scorn of the professed
Chastity of the other.

The next Morning I went a Hunting with the Husband, whom I had ordered to be
waked betimes; and when I returned I tried my Fortune again in the City,
laughing at the Jealousy of her Husband, which was such that I could not
promise my self to succeed in my undertaking by any other then delusive means.
One day discoursing with him, and protesting to be the most cordial Servant he
had in the World, I gave him a most devilish false Testimony of my faithful
Friendship, by discovering to him a Design, as I pretended, of some Gentlemen
to enter his House by Night, and violently to ravish from his Bosom his dear^y
beloved Wife, so much the more enamored of her Beauty, by how much they saw
him so chary of her. The next night said I to this, is appointed for the
Execution of this Design; which put the good Man into such a Confusion of Mind,
that he stood still as if he had been Thunder-strock. Nor could ye blame him;
for indeed, 'twas no less then the loss of a Treasure that was his very Heart
which made him lead a careful Life, for fear least any other should share in
his Happiness.

To me therefore as his Oracle, he betakes himself, and begs me that I would be
the propitious Numen, who as I had made known the threatening Mischief, would
also prevent the danger. I ordered him exact secrecy, so that no body in the
House, no not his Wife should know of the Business. But least the Lady might
have any suspicion I ordered him to undress himself as he was wont to do, and
go to Bed to her, but after she was asleep, to slip out of the Bed, and to come
where I would stay for him, with a remedy proper to prevent the danger. Now you
must know there are two Doors to the House, one to the Street, the other at a
good distance from it leading into a Garden encompassed with a Wall. Thither in
the Dusk of the Evening I conveyed certain Fellows well armed, with one part
of which I set the Husband there to watch, remaining with the rest to secure
the Street door, so that we might he certain to secure both Entrances; and they
that were assigned to the Garden Post, had orders not to stir till. I gave 'em
the Sign. All things being disposed according to agreement, the happy Hour for
me approached, at what time the ^ady being become the Prey of Sheep, the good
Man came down without his Doublet, but laden with Arms to counterpoize the
Weight of his Fear. He obeyed my Orders by repairing to the place appointed,
with a promise not to budge till I came to relieve him.

No sooner was he gone to his ^'ost, bu^ away went I, with a dark Lanthorn in
my hand, entered the Chamber, and so passed into the Bed, where his Lady was,
and robbed him of all that could enrich me with content, not caring whither
Fidelity were injured, or Frie^dship violated. In the height of Enjoyments,
transported beyond my self, I let slip an Ay me, an expressive Note of
extraordinary pleasure, that discovered my Thievery The Lady was soon sensible
of the difference of my Voice, which I concealed before, either by my silence,
or falsifying the Tone of it in short Accents. Which now being let loose to
their natural Tone discovered that I was not her Husband; at first she began to
cry out, as if she had been betrayed, making a heavy Stir, according to the
Custom of her Sex, not able to satisfy their Anger or Revenge by force.

I leapt out of the Bed, and putting my self full in the Light, I offered my
Life to atone her fury. I held the Lanthorn in one hand, and my Dagger in the
other, with the point turned upon my breast, showing my resolution to strike*
if she refused me her Compassion. For certain, said I, this Dagger shall pierce
my Heart, if my Death will be a greater satisfaction to ye than my Love. Then
Lady, make use of your Prudence, and make it no^ your glory to publish your
Failings in your Revenge of my Affection. The House is full of my own
Soldiers, from whose fury you must expect the Slaughter of all that oppose my
escape, which I value not however, as being content to fall a Victim to your
Divinity, if you think your self injured by him that adores you.

So saying, I made as if I would give my self the fatal Stab, when she
stretching forth her hand. Hold, said she, dear Friend; since it behooves me not
to carry it to height of Cruelty, the Dissimulation of that Anger which we
Women pretend against those that enjoy us by stea^^h.

The Lady by means of these so kind and winning Tendernesses being become more
dear to me then before, I embraced her with an excess of Kindness; and to
satisfy her Curiosity I related to her the whole manner of my contrivance, and
gave her an account of the Stratagem that I had practiced at my Country House.

Our further Discourses were interrupted by a Noise occasioned by the Motion of
armed Men. For that certain Persons coming to the little Door in the Garden,
supposed to be Thieves, put the Guard in an uproar. And this gave credit to all
my Fictims, while the Husband thought them, to have been the Thieves that were
come to rob him of his Perian Wealth. And I forsook my Beatitude, to hasten to
his assistance, of which there was no need, for that the Thieves being frighted
at the noise of People stirring, ran away of themselves. Thus ended the Comedy,
with this Advantage for me, that being become the Good Man's Confident, my
Conversation was free from all suspicion. On the other side the prudent Wife
found out a thousand Excuses for opportunities to make me happy in her Company.
This was the Issue of my Amors, of which I willing to give your Worship an
Account, to gratify that common Itch of Lovers, who are never so well pleased
with their Thieveries, as when they are publicly known. Ascribe to my Passion
the Tediousness of the Letter, and in exchange of Kindness, honor me with a
proportionable share of your Commands, which you will find obeyed with all
imaginable Compliance.

Behold (said Fountain) the end of Friendship in our Age, wherein our most
familiar Acquaintance are they alone, that chiefly betray our Reputation. I
o^serve (said Chapel) that the Heart is the Symbol of true Friendship, in
regard those Creatures mutually assist each other in their swimming over the
River; whereby is expressed the necessary Condition of true Friends, which
oblig^s 'em to reciprocal Assistance of each other in the greatest Dangers.

But as Co^ly well observes, There Is fewer Friends on Earth than Kings; and so
saying he read the following Letter.


LETTER CXXIV.
Upon the Custom of paying Harlots. 'Twas directed to Mr. Ralf Banford, -- at
his House in Uxbridge. With Care and Speed.
Honored Sir,
I Cannot but enlarge upon a Custom which is chiefly observed among the great
Men of this World. This is the Custom, I know not by whom Introduced, of paying
Harlots, so much to the prejudice of Man, and the Superiority of the Masculine
Sex, constrained to pay for that, which Woman as his Inferior is obliged to
give him freely as a Debt due to his Contentments. For to what end was Woman
made, if not to be subservient to our Pleasures? Shall he then suffer a Monster
to live in the World under his own shape, that shall render Manhood
contemptible, and his chiefest Glories despicable, by acting contrary to Reason
and Judgment? Shall he endure the Insolences of his Slave, to the forming of
whom while he gave a Rib, he bound her with a Chain of Bondage, as being bought
with his own Flesh? Shall he bend under so great a Misfortune as to have
enlivened In^elicity, a living Tyranny, and Hell in Epitom, all combined
together in a walking Frame? And when he thinks to enjoy those Pleasures in the
use of her for which alone she was born, must he be forced to pay through the
Nose for 'em? Must a Man be forced to humble himself with a paltry Serv^l^ty,
even to Adoration, to be subject to Mult^plicity of Cares, to weary his Mind in
the Government of his Passions, and turmoil his Body with amorous Fatigues, and
instead of a Reward for all this, shall he forced to purchase his Refreshments?
Good God! how blind is this World, and how bewitched are unhappy Mortals, who
are fai^ to buy their own Mis^ries, and the worst of Curses which they incur in
common by conversing with Harlots, wasting the choicest of their Substance, and
consuming their Wealth! This was certainly an A^^ifice of the Devil, the deadly
Enemy of the Contentments of our Sex, among which those of our Lasciviousness
being the most desirable, he would embitter 'em with the Expense of that which
is to us more necessary and grateful. Can Men in reason envy the Condition of
Brutes, and desire that Authority which advances the Masculine Sex above the
Female in every individual Creature, that whenever his Appetite excites him,
has the Gratification of it without bargaining to pay for his Pleasures. A poor
Lover shall be worst used than a Dog, and if he have no Money shall be deprived
of those Pleasures that are not refused to a Beast. Ac^u^s^d Custom, in
Conformity to which the amorous Dance is regulated and governed by the Chinking
of the more precious Metals, while there is a Tribute laid upon those
Pleasures that Nature so freely and abundantly affords us! And what afflictions
does not a Lover suffer, yet not able to satisfy his Desires through the
Covetousness of his Goddess, whose common Exercise it is, to tear his very Skin
from his Flesh? There is a Decree of one of the Popes, which prefixes for the
Payment of a Harlot no more then will Suffice her for one days Victuals.

If this Law were observed, these devouring Wolves would not exact such
Treasures for a thing in it self both vile and abominable, and rather imagined
for Delight, then really found to be So. Or at least, as in well regulated
Cities, where whatever is sold, there is hut so much gain in the Price, so
there should be no more then such a gain allowed in the Price of Harlots Flesh,
which being the worst of all Flesh, would be very cheap if it were valued to
its worth. Otherwise to suffer their Indiscretion to run at Random, is to
multiply the Number of Whores, since every covetous Woman, though naturally not
prone to Dishonesty, would turn Whore for Gain's sake; so that we should see
all the Women running a drift in the Sea of Lasciviousness, nor would there be
a chaste Matron left in any of the Cities of Europe. I wish I might not say of
the World. These dissolute Baggages live in all manner of Luxury, splendid in
their Furniture, their C^o^^hs and their Tables, insomuch that Vice being made
a (...) Commodity, will make use of its attractive Violences to ravish the
Inclinations of every Woman prone enough to follow it of themselves. Kind
Heaven afford convenient Remedies to these disorders for the Benefit of the
Masculine Sex and the Relive of poor lovers.

This Fool (said Summer) never considers* that Men, were they not restrained
with the Curb of Payment, would run with so much fury to satia^^ their
Appetites even to the bursting of their Belli^s, as we say, that they woold
kill themselves with lying Scotfree at Rack and Manger. Besides (said River)
that some Princes would loose a part of their Revenues, as having a
considerable Tribute out of the Games of the Harlots. I know of no Princes
(replied I) who have any such Tribute unless it be the Grand Duke of Florence,
and the Pope, into whom the Sharpness of the Climate infused that fine-sp^^
Piece of Policy to lay a Tax upon the Brothel-houses. I remember (said Winter)
I have many times traded with Brook in the Streights; at which the whole
Company laughed; and to the end there might be (...) farther reply, they
presently fell a reading the following Letter.


LETTER CXXV.
From an Advocate to his Friend. 'Twas directed to Mr. Sliford, at his House in
Canterbury.
SIR,
I Have unplum'd the Bird: I send it your Lordship, together with another of my
own, though of mother sort, to the end you may pull off the Skin. The Suit so
tediously by me prolonged as it was possible, to the end I might squeeze it as
long as there was any thing coming, is now at last sent back by the Gentleman
you know of to yonder place. I consign the Handling of it to you, as well for
the sake of our ancient Friendship, as also, to the end that lighting upon an
Advocate more discreet then I, he may have no Cause to complain of my
Extortions. Be mindful also of my Interests, and when you have flead off the
Skin, send it me back again if possible, that I may try my Wits to pick the
Bones of it: And so concluding, I must affectionately kiss your hands.

See (said Summer) how some of these Beasts of Advocates use their Clients,
like Tennis-balls, sending 'em from Post to Pillar, and tossing them backward
and forward, till they are quite out of breath.

Rather (said River) till they see their very Skins hang in Rags about their
Bodies. And therefore 'twas well said of one, that suits were the Hell of this
World; since there cannot be found more spiteful Devils then some Advocates,
who with a monstrous Cruelty squeeze their Clients till they press out the
Blood. In short (said I) He that made Mercury the God of Sciences, and the God
of Thieves both together, had an eye only upon those Men, whose knowledge only
serves 'em to ravish and steal. This is an evident Truth (replied Grave) and
therefore needs no other Comments. And so a new Letter was opened to be read.


LETTER CXXVI.
Containing an Information of Parnassus against the modern men of Learning.
'Twas directed to Sir Tho. -- at his House in Wendover.
SIR,
YOur Worship repeats your Importunities, that I would send you some News. I
have no way to comply with your Desires, in regard the hurry of the Wars
prevent me there of a speedy conveyance: Nor would they afford me an
opportunity, but only to accumulate a company of Lies, which every body forges,
according to their own Fanci^s. I shall therefore only tell ye of an Accident,
of which Par^assus was not many days ago the Theater; there has been brought
out of that Country Esculapius, Physician to Apollo's Majesty; he came into
this City to cure a Spaniard, who from a very mean Extraction, being raised to
Preferment, though (...) not the greatest importance, was troubled with a
^^^eightness of his Breast, not being able to breath (...) the swelling of his
Ambition, augmented by the ^ind of his new Honors.

This Esculapius gave us an account in what man^^r Apollo was pleased to divert
himself with the (...) of a sumptuous Banquet, upon the late (...) of certain
Princes at his Court; having several times heard of the Excellency of the
modern learned (...), who are the Cooks of Parnassus, he was (...) to ascertain
himself of the Truth upon this opportunity, whereupon he set forth an Order,
That every one, with his particular Viands, should (...), out the Messes for
this Table: Every one will^^gly embraced the occasion, to make known his (...)
Virtue, wherein every one presumed, though the (...) Scribler, a glorious
Advantage above the (...) but his Majesty resolved to see the Prepara^^^^^
before the Invitation, that he might not be (...) at by such great Personages.
He thought (...) himself, that there were many Fools, who am^^tiously thrust
themselves into the Roll of Virtu^s^; that he imagined there would some unlucky
Ex^^vagance happen, if, as he foresaw it was likely to (...) out, he did not
provide against the Inconve^^ence.

To this purpose he was conducted by his Cham^^lain into a spacious Hall, where
upon several Ta^^^ the Dishes were set in order, that were to be (...) up at
this splendid Feast. At the first sight (...) Basins of Radishes offered
themselves, when of sudden Apollo smiling, I know, said he, whose Dish (...)
is; that though I understood not the quality the Food, this would demonstrate
to me the ^^sture wherein he who has presented it with his (...) Pride, would
have the rest proceed. I won^^^, added he, that the Spaniards always bringing
this for the last course, it should be numbered (...) among the Provocatives to
Appetite.

Your Majesty is to understand, replied the Assistant, that this is their Food,
which serves for all Beginnings of their Feasts. There are other Places
presented by the same Nation, which are to be served up at the changes of every
course. These are the Spanish Books, many in number, but few that have any
substance; they carry like Radishes a great Periwig of Leaves, in a surplusage
of ill-composed words, but underneath appears nothing but the Head of a
Winter-Radish without any Brains. Or (...) any one has any thing of a
sharpness, that bites, (...) so unfavoury, as not to be eaten without Salt.
(...) 'em be set upon a Muck-hill, said Apollo, and (...) upon a Table which is
to be crowned with so many Princes.

There followed in order, not to give disgust i^ point of precedence, an Olla
podrida of Books that come from Spain, worthy of great esteem, but the
confusion of Learning and prittle prattle, buries th^^ good Substance in
undistinguishable (...) many times creates a na^feating before you (...) 'em.
It Is good Food, cried Apollo, but not (...) appear upon a Table of Delicacies.

To these succeeded certain French Soops, very delicate indeed, but overcharged
with the (...) of Vain words, out of which you fished some Sopp^^ of ordinary
Conceits, but you were not suffered (...) fish in the main Sea, to pyrate any
thing of (...) Nevertheless they were not rejected by Apollo, being such things
as would please some men's, Appetites. And some there were, who having the (...)
of diving to the bottom, would fish up somethin^ that pleased their Tastes,
which others never (...) any notice of.

At a little Table apart behind these, stood a High German, who had dish'd up a
great number of several sorts of Pottage, upon which Apollo, in a kind of chase
cried out, Surely this fellow thinks we are in a Convent of Franciscans. With
submission to your Majesty, said the Assistant, this is a Nation that knows not
how to make any thing that is good, and therefore their sole profession is to
be drunk. Let him herd with the Scullions in the Kitchen, replied his Majesty,
he will make a Cook good enough for them.

So saying, he passed on to view a great Table ^^^ll of several Pies, at what
time the Assistant taking notice, that he wondered at the number; These (said
he) are Romances of the learned Italians; which under the Covert of simple
Paste included the solid Substance of hidden wisdom in fabulous Dress; and this
sort of Writing has acquired so ^reat a Reputation, that it is now the business
of every Tuscan Writer. Apollo, curious to penetrate into the nature of these
Pies, and to measure their Encomiums and Condemnations by the Rule of Reason,
caused some to be cut up, but more especially one, which outwardly made a show,
but received the principal Credit which it h^d from the Person that presented
it, and assigning it for a singular Dainty, exalted it above all the rest; his
Majesty thought to have found some most delicate Ingredient, not knowing the
Person to be no less vainglorious than ignorant; but the Meat within it was
only Beef, which felt so hard at first, that it might have been easily taken
for a piece of an old Bull. The Arrogance of the Person provoked Apollo to that
degree, that he caused the Pie, Pye-plate and all, to be thrown away, and the
Cook to be punished, for his Presumption. Here is another piece of Beef of the
same sort, quoth the Assistant. Let 'em both, replied his Majesty, be given to
the Hoggs.

His Majesty was curious to see the Intrails of another, which showing
withoutside the Head, Tail, and Wings of a Partridge, made him believe that the
Fowl within was a precious Bit; but he was much deceived, for the inside
contained no more than Fish. How! cried Apollo, what means this fellow, to
promise us a Bird, and give us Fish? These, said the Assistant, are a sort of
people that promise in their Romances Historical Truth, and good Sense, to vant
themselves men of great wit. But after all, are discovered to be full of Fables
and Parabolical Mishmashes, wherein if there be any one particular Truth, it
changes both its Substance and its Nature.

There was another which made a great show, but with several Lidds one above
another, of Episodis and fiddle-faddles, so that there was hardly any coming to
see what was in it: But at last they made a shift to cut it up, and found it so
full of Abstrus^ Conceits, that Apollo ordered it to be made up into Pellets,
to feed his Ostridges.

Apollo, by this time cloyed with so many Pyes the goodness of which lay all in
a Crust, slightly (...) over the rest, when there was one that presented self
to his view, of a more curious form than the rest, neatly garnished and set
out, and having all the sig^^ of good seasoning and exactness of Cookery.
Presently he ordered it to be cut up, and found it (...) within with Marrow,
and I know not what sort (...) Brains. These are delicate Morsels indeed, said
his Majesty, but which are buried in a very great Coff^^, considering the
smallness of the quantity. However, I cannot admire, that having put all the
Brains withinside, he knew not how to make use of '^^ without. In short, of all
that were upon this T^ble, he made choice for his own of no other tha^ some few
small Ielly-pyes, wherein the variety Sawces, in a small compass, concluded in
a good savor.

From hence he went to visit the Preparations of the Butchers Meat, where he
found little satisfaction, for the boiled Meats were altogether insipid, and so
black, as if they had been in Mourning for the deceased Merits of the persons
that cooked 'em. They were so homely and slovenly ordered, as if they had been
dressed for Beggarr, all the Products of Ignorance, not fit for the Grandees of
Parnassus. Among the rest there was a stately Capon, or at least one that had
been such, but so cooked, that Apollo shrug'd up his Shoulders, to see the
simplicity of the Cook. This, said the Assistant, is a Book of Histories, which
according to the Rules of a new Reformer, are obliged to make a show of such a
perfect na^edness, that you are allowed no Salt for fear they should lose their
unsavoriness. Away with these P^^ants, said his Majesty, publishers of new
Reformations, they must not think to introduce such Disorders to the public
detriment, because they know not how to season their own Writings as they
should do. Is it seemly, that dry unsavory Meat, fit only for Broommen and
Chair-mtnders, should be brought to the Tables of great Personages and towering
Wits?

After this there was a Duck, I will not say bur^ed, but rather engulph'd,
under a Mountain of Onions, and certainly he stood in need of his natural Qua,
Qua, to let ye know where he was, otherwise it had been impossible to find him,
though he lay before their Noses. Such are the Writings of those that multiply
Digressions and Repetitions, and frequently use obscure Sentences, by which
means they build up a heap of Confusions rather than Periods: So that whatever
is good in 'em, being utterly buried, they lose that Merit which otherwise they
might boast of.

Nor did the Roast-meat please Apollo any better, of which the greatest part
was blood-raw, and the reason of it was, because they had laid down too much at
a time; and moreover, by reason of the disproportion of the Joints: So that
some were parched up to that degree, that a Hatchet would not enter 'em. There
were several Sawces prepared for these Dishes, two sorts of which would have
been very well approved, if the stink of the Steam had not rendered it nauseous
at a distance, and that the other at first sight had not appeared too full of
Salt, so that his Majesty was constrained to say, That surely that same fellow
had the Palate of a Cuckold, and had seasoned it to his Appetite; he can have
no Salt in his Brains that has put it all in his Sawcepan.

While he was continuing his visitation, he saw a great steam, which rising
from a Platter, hindered him from seeing what was in it. Never trouble your
self, an't please your Majesty, said the Assistant, to satisfy your Curiosity,
for this Dish is the Composition of a good Wit, but so full of Ambition, that
no body can endure to see him, not so much as in his Works. So that with the
Steam of that Pride he darken^ those Lusters which otherwise would be able to
display his Merit; his Majesty therefore would have this Dish exterminated from
his Table, abhorring such a Pride that made a man stand in his own light.

At the same time there was presented to Apollo a certain Cook, who by his
being in his Drawers, and by his sweating, showed himself to have been hard at
work. He had once been happy in making some Fritters, which got him great
Applause. 'Twas thought tho, that he had stolen 'em from some body else, because
he never could produce the like in other Works of his of the same nature. When
his Majesty beheld him low of stature, deformed in his Face, and only rich in
Ambition, Surely, said he, this is some Bum^-bailiff, no learned man. Your
Majesty is not much out of the way, quoth the Assistant, for he is a public
Spy. He brought a Pie along with him, just ready to go to the Oven, for that
having heard but late of Apollo's Commands, he he had not time to bake it, but
only to make it up. He farther told his Majesty, that he came to show it his
Majesty, that he might be assured of one substantial Dish. Then he began a
Series of Encomiums, which begot a greater Scorn of his Presumption than
Admirations of his Parts. But the Pie being opened was found full of Trash,
that smelt very rank withal, as being a Composition consisting of the Accidents
of ancient History, disembowell'd, with a small Addition of his own, but
nothing good. ^e had the Honor to be well kicked, besides that he was
commanded to throw his Pie into the Fire.

From thence he went and took a slight View of the preparations of Fruit, which
were all the Offering^ of the Potts. But they had not the good fate ^o please
him any more then the rest, either because the Vanity of Poetry is all
comprehended in Trifles of little moment, or because the usual Poverty
attending Poetry would not permit 'em to be at more expenees, or else because
that the Poets of our time are not so excellent as to appear with Offers of
value, Thistles, F^nnel, Tansey, and other such like Herbs, which are least
pleasing to the (...), resemble the Works of the Poets, the Substance of which
is easily dissolved into little or nothing. Some Sparagus and H^rtichokes,
might be ^ccompted the greatest Daint^es in that Course, and were the Presents
of some few that were singular (...) the Profession.

Just as Apollo was going away, after he had made choice of his Dishes,
appeared blind Britti with a little Cup, given him by an Apothecary in Venice
for a Copy of Verses made upon a Whore of his; he excused his long stay, and
laid the fault of it upon his not being able to get a guide sooner. He told
Apollo that having heard of the Proclamation that had Summoned all the Poets to
their Duty, he came also to bring his Mite, as being enrolled in the Number.
His Majesty not without a S^rdonit Smile, severely rebuked his rashness for
daring to enrol himself among the Learned. Blind Britti replied, that he was
persuaded to it, by seeing so many Princes Honor with their Favors, under the
Title of Virtuosi's, so many Musicians, Comedians, Buffoons, and such like
Rascallians, to whom he thought himself nothing inferior. To which he added,
that many crowded themselves into the Number of Virtuosi, who could not build
any foundation of Merit, but only upon some pieces of waste Paper, stuffed with
what they had fil^h'd out of other Books, whereas in his Conceit he was a Poet
of himself, and not by Virtue of Flourishes robbed from other Men. Apollo could
not deny this to be true, but he refused to countenance his boldness, and
caused him to expelled Pa^nass^s. And so he returned to meet his royal Guests.

Esculapius added no more, believing it sufficient that he had given a full
Account of the Ma^^^ which the Virtuoso's of our Age had given of themselves. I
hope your Lordship will excuse me if I have been too tedious, and look upon it
as Penance which your own Importunity has occasioned, by repearing your earnest
Sollic^tations for News, etc.

The Invention of this Information of Parnassus, (said Chapel) is ancient, yet
not ill accomodated to the Learned, who in the Entertainments of great Men, are
looked upon as a kind of Cooks, who for the reward of a long toiling Service,
are fed with Smoke. You may add (said Fountain) that these nimble Wits, like
Cooks, delights to be among the Pots and the Pipkins, and to be thrusting their
Noses into the most delicate Sauces. While they were thus discoursing I stopped
their Mouths by reading the e^suing Letter.


LETTER CXXVIII.
From a blunt Fellow, who desires the Favor to be made a Hangman. 'Twas
directed to George Farmer, Esquire at his House in Stepney; With Care and Speed.
Worthy Sir,
I Know that my Family has always acknowledged all the Avancement it has
enjoyed to have been founded upon the Favors received from your self. And
therefore, that the Obligations of my Posterity may continue in the same
Channel, I have determined to address my self to your Worship upon this lucky
Opportunity that presents it self for the the other Advancement of my Fortunes.
By a Gentleman of my acquaintance, I understand that the Employment of public
Hangman is like to be vacant by the Death of the present Incumbent, who I hear
lies very sick. I desire to succeed in that Important Preferment: Nor could I
promise my self the hopes of obtaining my desires by the Solicitations of any
other Person then your Worship, whose Power and Authority I know to be more
then sufficient to Honor me with this Promotion, and the wonted Effects of
whose Generosity are still the same as ever. I shall expect this Honor as
great as it is, as one that will be always most ready to exchange Favor for
Favor, with this reserve, that it be within the reach of my Ability; and so
with reverence concluding, I kiss your Hands.

Had he written (said Church) with this reserve, that it be within the Verge of
my Profession, it had been a genteel Promise to hang his Friend upon the first
Opportunity. What a happy Conclusion is this! (quoth they, laughing altogether)
for they were now at last to discover the Trafficquing of such a noble
Ambition. Never wonder at it (said I) for such Dignities as these, find many
Competitors in every Country. Some years ago I was in Milan, when a Vacancy of
this nature fell, I understood that there were presented to the Senate no less
then eighteen Petitions of Pretenders to the Place.


LETTER CXXIX.
Sent with the Picture of a Lady. -- 'Twas directed to Mr. Wansfort, Merchant,
in Bristol. This deliver with Care and Speed.
Honored Sir,
I Send you the Picture of the Lady, who gained that Authority over ye, as to
be the absolute Mistress of your Affections, while you staid in London: Thus
you see the performance of your Commands which you laid upon me at your
departure. I know not whither you will be so faithfully served by the Limner,
as I have endeavored to serve you my self. The Art deserves to be excused if
it mistook in drawing into a small Compass a Face, wherein Nature her self had
epitomized all Perfection. Those Beauties cannot be contained in a small piece
of Brass, for which the whole Compass of the Sun's Sphere is too narrow. That
Heaven can never be described without a necessity of adding the Motto of Heaven
it self, Pulchriora Latent; since no Pencil can express that Beauty by which
the possibility of any greater Beauty is quite extinguished. In Pictures the
Shadows give Life to the Colors, but how can Shadows here appear in the Face
of the Sun. There can be no proper Air provided for this Likeness, for that
being Angelical, it enjoys no other Sun, but that of Paradise. Let your Worship
but consider the transcendent Value of her Heart, and your Will she could not
be drawn more artfully, since a divine Object ill suits with the Workmanship of
a terrestrial Hand. Pity the Painter, who could not outdo himself, muchless
surpass Nature and Heaven. Accept of my good Will in soliciting the fi^lshing
of the Piece, and gratifying your Desires, I shall ever approve my self to be

Your hearty humble Servant, Jonathan Holligood.


While this was reading Temple, who was the youngest in the Company, and
consequently the most inclined to Love, curious, or rather desirous to behold
this Celebrated Portraiture, in great have untied the Bundle, and had lit upon,
and opened the Box by that time they had done reading the Letter; and there was
a necessity for him to impart to the Company a sight of the Picture, of which
he was almost become Jealous, and sain would have appropriated to himself.
Their Encomiums were the Hyperboles of Lovers, since all other Expressions were
below the Commendations which the Face deserved. They were also short, in
regard the Lady who in the Picture seemed alive, and actually to speak
commanded the rest to hold their Tongues. And therefore they stood all like
stupid Admirers, I know not whither out of a deluded Belief, that she was
alive, and therefore thinking themselves obliged to a modest Reverence and a
reverent Silence; or whither b^sied in a Tacit Devotion, to thank that good
Fortune which had granted 'em the Favor to behold hold a Beauty so
transcendant, that though in Painting only deserved no l^ss then the Adoration of
all Eyes. All the Company stood as immovable, as if they had been stro^k with
Thunder, more especially Church and Winter, who was older then the rest,
staring and gaping with Amazement upon the Picture, till they had star'd so
long that they could not see to read any more; which as it was one reason why
the Company broke up, so there was a second, because they were weary, and the
late Hour of the Night called them to Bed. -- And now I think it is proper to
give you a breathing time, and reserve our farther Account till the next
Opportunity, by these you will find as I told you, that our Extravagancies are
not without their Morals. I am

Dear SIR, Your very humble Servant, C. G.


The End of the First Volume.
THE CONTENTS OF THE Several LETTERS, etc. Comprehended in this First Uolume.
1. THE End proposed in robbing the Post, From page 1. to p. 6 2. An account of
the persons Names concerned in this Frolic, p. 6 They take Horse, and pursue
their Design, p. 11 A Relation of their several Adventures, p. 12, 13, 14 They
convey all the Pacquets up the water to Summer's Country House (one of the
Gentlemen concerned with 'em) that with the greater security they might peruse
'em, and make their several Remarks, p. 12 They retreat into the Summer House,
in the middle of the Garden, and there enclosing themselves, begin to open
their several Pacquets, according to agreement; and for their better diversion,
mix 'em all together on a large Stone-Table, p. 14
The Letters they met with were as follows:
A Letter delivered to Mr. Chapel, (one of the persons concerned in this
Frolic) by a Mistake, as the Contents discovered, it being sent to another of
the same Name, who often frequenting the same Coffee-house, gave occasion to
the deceiving of the Porter, p. 14 Let. I. From an Atheist, or modern Wit;
laughing at all Religion, p. 17 Let. II. From a surly Fellow, who speaks ill of
all Mankind, and of every thing; with a Letter enclosed to Mrs. Widal, whom he
attempts secretly to debauch, p. 23, 25 Let. III. From a mighty affecter of
Similes to his Mistress, p. 29 Let. IV. From a young Son of the Muses at the
University, with Verses of his own Production. Directed to the Ingenious Author
of the Gentleman's Journal, p. 32 Let. V. From a Gentleman of the University to
his Friend in Town, to know whether he ought, according (...) Rules of Honor,
fight a man (...) ^ffront received, p. 43 Let. VI. From (...) to his Friend,
that had condemn'^ (...) of his Performances, p. 48 Let. VII. From a Country
Fellow, giving an account of London, to his Cousin in the West Country. p. 51
Let. VIII. From a Lover to a Lady, who had fled from his Addresses into the
Country, p. 56 Let. IX. From a Whore to a young Spark that was forsaking her,
on pretense of living soberly, p. 58 Let. X. Being one enclosed to the
aforesaid person, written to him by a grave Philosopher which he dropped in a
Bawdy House, p. 61 Let. XI. From one that designed to supplant his Relation to
his Friend and Confident, p. 66 Let. XII. From a married man to a young Lady,
to persuade her to yield her self up to his Embraces; directed under a false
Cover. p. 69 Let. XIII. Containing an old man's Addresses to a young Lady, in
her Husband's absence, p. 73 Let. XIV. From a Pluralist to his Patron, being a
flattering Insinuation to gain the Advouson of a third Living in his Gift, p.
75 Let. XV. From a young Lady to her she-Friend, disclosing her whole Breast as
to Marriage, Clothes, and Characters of several pretty Gentlemen, who had
discovered some tender affection for her, p. 79 Let. XVI. From a conceited
Fellow, that affects fine Language, p. 83 Let. XVII. From Joan to Ralph,
accusing him of Perfidiousness and breach of Promise in staying so long from
her, p. 85 Let. XVIII. From an Apprentice, complaining to his Mother of the
Hardship he meets with in his Apprentiship, p. 87 Let. XIX. From a barren Woman
to a Dr. to desire his Advice, what to do to conceive. This was enclosed in
another, to Mrs. Bush, with Orders to give the Dr. his Fee, p. 89 Let. XX. From
a younger Brother to his Mistress in Town, that had sent him word she was with
Child by him, to advise her to lay it to another, p. 91 Let. XXI. From a
jealous Wife to her Husband, p. 93 Let. XXII. From a Dwarf to a tall Lady, with
whom he was in Love, p. 95 Let. XXIII. From a young Lady that had been betrayed
by Love, to the Embraces of a young Gallant, who had got her with Child,
desiring him to send her something that may cause Abortion, p. 98 Let. XXIV.
From a Lady who consents to a Debauch, on condition that her Hasband agree to
it, p. 100 Let. XXV. From a poor Sine-cure to a young Heir newly come to his
Estate, for a little present Relief, and also for a Benefice, p. 102 Let. XXVI.
From a Citizen to one in the Country, who had his Bastard to maintain, p. 104
Let. XXVII. From a Lawyer to his Knight of the Post, about a Cause he was to
swear in; with Instructions in the case. This Letter was writ in Characters,
but the Company at last deciphered it, p. 106 Let. XXVIII. From a Lady in the
Country to another in London, giving an account of a Dream she had, p. 108 Let.
XXIX. This Letter the Company could not decipher, but I hope, by that time the
next Volume is printed, we may find it out. 'Twas directed to Mrs. Fox, near
Bow in Essex. p. 110 Let. XXX. From a Prisoner almost starved to his cruel
Creditor, p. 111 Let. XXXI. From a superstitious old Gentleman, about disposing
of some Estate to a pious use, p. 113 Let. XXXII. From an Usurer to his Son, to
take care of getting in the Interest of his Moneys, etc. p. 116 Let. XXXIII. A
Courtship from a Quaker. Directed to Tabitha, the Daughter of William Goyl, at
his House near Chelmsford in Essex, p. 118 Let. XXXIV. From Mrs. Brittaign, to
her Correspondent in the Country, p. 120 Let. XXXV. From a City Wife to her
Prentice, inviting him to Epsom in his Master's absence, p. 122 Let. XXXVI.
From a young Heir newly come to a great Estate, to one of his Comrades here in
Town, p. 124 Let. XXXVII. From a Father, on the death of his Son, to a Friend,
p. 126 Let. XXXVIII. From a pleasant Gentleman to his Mistress, to satisfy her
he loved her, p. 127 Let. XXXIX. From a Jew to a Christian, recriminating upon
him, p. 129 Let. XL. From a Gentleman of Quality to a Creditor of his, p. 132
Let. XLI. From an old Woman in love with a young man, p. 133 Let. XLII. From an
Irishman to his Creditor, p. 135 Let. XLIII. From a Widow to a Lady, who
advised her against a second Marriage, p. 138 Let. XLIV. From a Gentleman to
his Wifes Mother-in-Law, who had been a true Stepmother to her, p. 140 Let.
XLV. From a Gentleman to his Friend, relating what great things his Money had
effected for him, p. 144 Let. XLVI. From a Black to a fair Woman, with whom he
is in Love, p. 147 Let. XLVII. From a young Spark, discovering the Debaucheries
of the Town, p. 149 Let. XLVIII. From a great News-monger to his Correspondent
in Holland, p. 151 Let. XLIX. From a Relation that was angry with another, to a
Gentleman that interceded for him, p. 152 Let. L. From a proud man to his
Friend, p. 154 Let. LI. From a severe melancholy Philosopher, to his jovial
Friend, p. 156 Let. LII. From a poor Gentleman to his rich old Friend that is
sick, p. 159 Let. LIII. From a young Lady, who resolved ever to continue a
Maid, with her Reasons for it, p. 161 Let. LIVE. From a Poetaster that would
foolishly rhyme on every thing, to his Friend in Town. Directed to the Maecenas
of the Age, Mr. Tho. Patshal, p. 164 Let. LV. From a Philosopher broaching new
Notions, That Birds and Beasts may be more excellent Creatures than Man, p. 169
Let. LVI. From a little Parson that had seen the Queen, and falls in love with
her, and desires his Friend's Advice, what to do in the case, p. 173 Let. LVII.
From a fair Lady, being a profession of Constancy in Friendship. 'Twas directed
to Mr. Jugleth, to be left at the Raven in the Poultry till called for, p. 176
Let. LVIII. From a Relation, giving Advice to another, p. 178 Let. LIX. Of
Entreaty, desiring a Favor of a Friend, p. 180 Let. LX. A Complement from a
fair Lady to a Gentleman that had sent her some Verses, p. 182 Let. LXI. From a
Friend proffering his Service. p. 184 Let. LXII. To a falfe Friend, p. 185 Let.
LXIII. From an Author to his Bookseller, haggling for more Copy-money, p. 187
Let. LXIV. From an Admirer of Platonic Love, p. 188 Let. LXV. From one beyond
Sea, expressing his desire of returning to his own native Country, p. 191 Let.
LXVI. From a Coward to his intimate Friend, of assist him to gain the
Reputation of a Man of Courage, by parting him in a Duel he must be engaged in,
p. 194 Let. LXVII. From a Servant, giving an account to his Mistress of all his
Master's Failings in his absence from her, p. 196 Let. LXVIII. From a great
Wagerer. Directed to Mr. Brown, at the Nags-Head-Inn near Cripple-gate, London,
p. 198 Let. LXIX. From one that advised his Friend to Dissimulation in all his
actions., p. 200 Let. LXX. To a Friend that advised him to overcome a Passion
where he had so little Hopes, giving an account of the present state of his
Love, and his Resolves to endeavor at a compliance with his Friends Wishes, p.
202 Let. LXXI. From a Debauchee, that had a mind to lead a penitent life, p.
206 Let. LXXII. Giving an account of the Resolutions of the Passengers that had
like to have been cast away at Sea, p. 208 Let. LXXIII. From a Lady in the
Country, to another in Town, about the Fashions, p. 210 Let. LXXIV. From a
vainglorious Man boasting of some of his good Actions p. 212 Let. LXXV. From a
Gentleman, giving an account of the Enmity and Disagreement of Poets and
Authors with one another. p. 214 Let. LXXVI. Giving an Account of a Funeral. p.
216 Let. LXXVII. From a young Student, about an Apparition. p. 217 Let.
LXXVIII. From a Gentleman to a Fop that desired* to know how he should Salute
and Complement his Mistress. p. 222 Let. LXXIX. From a Husband to his Wife
against absence. p. 224 Let. LXXX. In answer to a Letter of Praise. Directed to
Mr. Brook, one of the Gentlemen concerned in robbing the Post. p. 226 Let.
LXXXI. From a Chemist that had ruined himself by it, to a Gentleman, to
persuade him to Chemistry. p. 228 Let. LXXXII. From one that had stolen a
Marriage, giving an Account of Honey-moon, etc. p. 230 Let. LXXXIII. From an
Hermophrodite to a Female Lover. p. 232 Let. LXXXIV. From a Lady, to know the
meaning of a Prophecy she had found in a Parchment. p. 234 Let. LXXXV. From a
Bawd to a Iustice's Clerk. p. 235 Let. LXXXVI. To a Maid that was to manage an
Intreague with the Mistress. p. 237 Let. LXXXVII. From a poor Scholar, in
answer to one that invited him to London, complaining of the small regard
that is had to Learning there. p. 239 Let. LXXXVIII. From an old Maid. Directed
to Mr. Nicols, at the Sign of the Sugar Loaf in Tower-street, London. p. 242
Let. LXXXIX. From a Doctor of Trinity-Colledge, Cambridge, to a Gentleman, to
persuade him to neglect the vulgar Sollicitudes to a busy Life, to raise to
himself a Name hereafter. p. 244 Let. XC. Of Consolation to one that grieved
very much for the Death of his Wife. p. 246 Let. XCI. From a Gentleman,
justifying his much praising his Friends. 'Twas directed to Mr. Chapel,
another of the Gentlemen concerned in robbing of the Post. p. 248 Let. XCII.
From a young Lady to her Gallant, to whom she had yielded, and who was still
Constant. p. 250 Let. XCIII. Of Recommendation. Directed to Captain Na^eby, to
be left for him at Tom Urwin's Coffee-house in Russel Street, near
Covent Garden, London. p. 251 Let. XCIV. From a French Dancing Master to one of
his Scholars. Directed to Mr. Croftsman, to be left at his Chamber in the
Temple. p. 253 Let. XCV. To a Friend in Town, who had promised to come and eat
some of his Country Fare at a certain time. p. 255 Let. XCVI. Advising his
Friend to turn Quack. 'Twas directed to Mr. Stone's, to be left for him at the
Pie Coffee-house in Drury Lane, London. p. 257 Let. XCVII. From a Gentleman in
Town to his Friend in the Country, complaining of the Spungers that thrust
themselves into his Company. p. 259 Let. XCVIII. From a Country Parson to his
Friend in London, that desired him to write an Elegy for Nothing, upon the
Death of one of his Relations, that died and left him a good Estate. p. 261
Let. XCIX. From a Lover to his Mistress, in absence. 'Twas directed to Madam
Winton, at Mr. Glassrock's in St. Mary Ax, London. p. 266 Let. C. From a Robber
to his Comrade that had wronged him of part of his Share. 'Twas directed to Mr.
N -- to be left for him at the C. TA -- etc. p. 270 Let. CI. From one Friend to
another in Answer to a Letter that upbraided him with a Service done in Bailing
him for Debt, which he had not discharged. p. 270 Let. CII. From a Gentleman,
who confessing the Unconstancy of his Temper, desires to know how he may attain
a Stability of his Wishes. p. 273 Let. CIII. To a Member of the Athenian
Society. Directed to Mr. S -- to be left for him at Smith's Coffee-house in the
Stocks-Market, London. p. 275 The whole Company concerned in the Frolic.
Retire to Dinner. p. 276
BOOK II.
AFter Dinner was ended some of the Company steal away to the Summer House, to
proceed in their Enquiries, being impatient of Diversion from it, leaving
behind 'em the rest of their Comrades, carousing of it with some of Summer's
Acquaintance that came to visit him. p. 277 Let. CIII. From a Bawd that desires
a Habitation for the Exercise of her Profession. This was the first Letter they
lighted on after they were reseated. p. 278 Let. CIV. From a Jesuit, who
confesses the Errors of his own Order. 'Twas directed to Father P -- 's, at his
Lodgings in Abbleville. 280 Let. CV. Against the Nuns. 'Twas direected to Mr.
Geber, at his House in Finch Lane, London. 284 Let. CVI. Against the Vices of
the French Court. p. 290 Let. CVII. Giving an Account of an amorous Intreague
at Luca. p. 296 Let. CIX. From a Conceited Scrivener. 'Twas directed to my L --
S -- in Sohoe-Square. 299 Let. CX. From a morose Gentleman, exposing the
Frailties of Women. p. 301 Let. CXI. Containing Instructions for the Choice of
a Mistress. p. 309 Let. CXII. In Defense of Cuckolds. 'Twas directed to Mr.
Remford, at his House in Dover. With Speed. p. 316 Let. CXIII. From a Lady that
disswades her Friend from the Love of Men. 'Twas directed to Madam Emet, at her
House in Chelsea. p. 321 Let. CXIV. Relating the Qualities of the Venetian
Curtesans. p. 325 Let. CXV. Of Impertinencies to the purpose. 'Twas directed to
Mr. Kaford, Merchant, in London. p. 329 Let. CXVI. Being an amorous Letter of a
Lady. 'Twas directed to Mr. Parmed, at his House in Queen Street. p. 334 Let.
CXVII. Of a Mother that gives Documents to her Daughter. 'Twas directed to Mrs.
T -- at the Crown Coffee-house near the Blew Cross in Venice. p. 337 Let.
CXVIII. Being an amorous Letter to a Lady. 'Twas directed to Madam Reddridge,
at her House in Clerken-well-green. p. 343 Let. CXIX. Being a Letter in
Burlesque* 'Twas directed to Mr. Paford, at (...) Three Pigeons in
Thames Street. p. 34^ Let. CXX. Containing Instructions how to drive a good
Trade. p. 348 Let. CXXI. Containing Instructions for the bringing up young
Boys. 'Twas directed to Mr. Whitchurch, at his House in Clement's- Lane. p. 353
Let. CXXII. Containing several Accidents which happened to a young Man in Rome.
p. 357 Let. CXXIII. From a Thief in Paris. 'Twas directed to Thomas Rybert, to
be left for him at the Post House in Harwich, till called for. 368 Temple,
Church, Fountain and Winter, etc. having parted with Summer's Friends return to
their old Comrades in the Garden. p. 369 Let. CXXIV. Of amorous Accidents.
'Twas directed to the most Illustrious Knight Sir Henry -- at his House near
Abbots Action, in Bucks. p. 371 Let. CXXV. Upon the Custom of paying Harlots.
'Twas directed to Mr. Ralfe Banford, at his House in Uxbridge. 377 Let. CXXVI.
From an Advocate to his Friend. 'Twas directed to Mr. Sliford, at his House in
Canterbury. p. 381 Let. CXXVII. Containing an Information of Parnassus against
the modern Men of Learning. 'Twas directed to Sir Tho. -- at his House in
Wendover. 382 Let. CXXVIII. From a blunt Fellow, who desires the Favor to be
made a Hangman. 'Twas directed to George Farmer, Esquire at his House in Stepney.
392 Let. CXXIX. Sent with the Picture of a Lady. 'Twas directed to Mr.
Wansfort, Merchant, in Bristol. p. 384 The whole Company break up, and reserve
there farther Account till the next Opportunity. p. 386
A^. Bring me (...) ready, as I ordered it. ^ O, I am charmed (...) have found
the Man to please me now: one that can, and dares maintain the noble rapture of
a lawless Love: I own my self a Libertine, a mortal Foe to that dull thing
called Virtue, that mere disease of ^ickly Nature. Pleasure's the end of life,
and while I Am Mistress of my self, and Fortune, I will enjoy it to the height.
Speak freely then, (not that I love like other Women the nauseous pleasure of a
little flattery) but answer me like a Man that scorns a lie: Does my face
invite you, Sir? May I from what you see of me, propose a pleasure to my self
in pleasing you?

BOOKS printed for John Dunton at the Raven in the Poultrey.
THE young Student's Library; containing Extracts and Abridgments of the most
valuable Books printed in England, and in the foreign Journals, from the year
1665. to this time. To which is added a new Essay upon all sorts of Learning,
and a Discourse concerning the Antiquity, divine Original and Authority of the
Points, Vo^els and Accents that are placed to the Hebrew Bible. By the ATHENIAN
SOCIETY. Also an EMBLEM of the said Society, and a large ALPHABETICAL TABLE,
comprehending the Contents of this Volume, and of all the Athenian Mercuries
and Supplements, etc. Printed in the year 1691, for John Dunton at the Raven in
the Poultry, of whom is to be had the entire Set of Athenian Gazetts, and
Supplements to 'em, for the year 1691. (or single Mercuries to this time.)

A Scheme of Enquiries, proposed to all Ingenious Gentlemen, and other
inquisitive persons, containing Instructions in order to form a Body of the
Natural, Artificial, and Civil History of England and Wales, Scotland and
Ireland, with the foreign Plantations thereunto belonging. By the Athenian
Society; given gratis by their Bookseller.

An O^e to the Athenian Society.

The History of the Athenian Society; by a Gentleman who got secret
Intelligence of their whole Proceedings. To which is prefixed several Poems,
written by Mr. T^te, Mr. Mott^^^^x, Mr. Richardson, and others.

The Visions of the Soul before it comes into the Body. In several Dialogues,
wherein the Nature, Conceptions, Doctrines, and Correspondencies of unbodied
Spirits are distinctly treated of, and many things wholly new are advanced.
Written by a Member of the Athenian Society.

A Mourning-Ring in memory of your departed Friend; containing The House of
Weeping, the Sickman's Passing Bell, or suitable Meditations upon the several
Steps of a Fit of Sickness. The Pilgrim's Guide. Deathbed Thoughts; the fatal
Moment; the Treatment of the Dead, in order to their burial; the Funeral
Solemnity; A Conference between the Mourners, wherein the greatest difficulties
relating to Death and a future state, are judiciously discussed: An account of
the Death and last Sayings of several eminent persons: Observations on the
Bills of Mortality: Advice to those that are diseased either in Body or Mind:
The Wishes of a person giving up the Ghost: The Death-watch, wherein there is
an exact Enquiry what stress is to be laid upon those things which are commonly
said to be Presages of Death: The Author's Tears, or Meditations on his own
Sickness, Death, and Funeral, wherein a sick person, or Christian Mourner may
find something very applicable to his own case, from the Author's own
Observations: The danger of a Deathbed Repentance: The History of those that
have dyed suddenly, wherein are many surprising Instances not commonly known. A
Treatise of the four last things, composed chiefly of the Author's own
Experiences, during his late illness. A Walk among the Tombs, or a Discourse of
Funeral Monuments. Of the several Customs of Burials, from Adam to this time.
Of Epitaphs and other Funeral Honors. The second Edition. Recommended as
proper to be given at Funerals.

The Complete Library: Or News for the Ingenious; Containing an Historical
Account of the Choicest Books newly printed in England, and in Foreign
Iournals; As also the State of Learning in the World, to be published Monthly,
this for August. Printed for John Dunton at the Raven in the Poultry, of whom
is to be had, The Complete Library for May, June, July, being the three since
that were published. The Complete Library for September is now in the Press.
This Work is a Continuation of the young Student's Library, and renders that
Undertaking perfect.

Flores Intellectuales, in Two Parts.

Religio Bibliopolae in Imitation of Dr. Brown's Religio Medici. With a
Supplement to it, by Benj. Bridgwater, Gent.

The Vanity and Impiety of Judicial Astrology; whereby Men undertake to ^oretel
future Contingencies, especially the pa^ticular Fates of Mankind. By the
Knowledge of the Stars.

The Character of a Williamite; Written by a Divine of the Church of England.

The Abdicated Prince: Or. The Adventures of four Years. The Second Edition.
Price 1 s.

The Bloody Duke: Or, The Adventures for a Crown. Price 1 s.

The Late Revolution: Or, The Happy Change Written by a Person of Quality.
Price 1 s.

The Royal Voyage: Or, The Irish Expedition Price 1 s.

A Treatise of Fo^nication occasioned by the late Birth of several
Illegitimates in the Parish of C -- To which is added a Penitentiary Sermon
preached before the Guilty Persons in the public Congregration, upon John 8.
11. -- Go and sin no more.

The Wonders of (...) Grace: Or, A complete (...) of all the remarkable
Pen^tents that have been Executed (...) Tybourn, and elsewhere, for these (...)
thirty years; Containing Atherton's Life (...) Death, who was executed for B --
ry. (...) Life and Death. Bottler's Life and (...) Buttler's Life and Death.
Charles (...) Life and Death. Clark, her Life and (...), her Life and Death.
Foulk's (...) and Death. Hobry, her Life and Death. Helland's Life and Death. K
-- 's Life and Death. Marketman's Life and Death. Morgan's Pe^i^ent (...).
Parker's Life and Death. Savage's Life (...) Death. S -- 's Life and Death.
Stern'^ Life and Death. To which is added, a Sermon preached in the Hearing of
a Condemned Malefactor immediately before his Execution.

(...) Double (...); a Poem, describing both Invasions.

The Divine Captai^ Uncharacterized, by Edm^nd Hick^ringil, Rector of the Rectory
of all Saints in (...).


