A RELATION of an Unfortunate VOYAGE to the Kingdom of BENGALA.

DESCRIBING The deplorable condition, and dismal accidents, attending those
therein concerned. How that after the loss of their Ship, they were forced to
abide in a Desert, and Barren Island; to eat Leaves, Toads, Serpents, etc. and
reduced to that extremity, as to digg open Graves, to feed on Human Bodies. As
also, the manner of their deliverance out of that place; and what befell them
afterward, in the Service of the great Mogol. Together with choice
Observations, touching that Monarch's Government, Laws, Customs, and Armies;
and especially his late War against the Kings of Azo, and Assam, with several
other remarkable particulars.

By Mr. Glanius.

LONDON, Printed for Henry Bonwick at the Red-Lyon in St. Paul's Churchyard,
1682.

VOYAGE to BENGALA


LONDON Printed for Henry Bonwick at the Red Lion in St. Paul's Church yard 1682

PREFACE.
ALthough this following Narrative discovers no State, or Love intrigues, (the
main entertainment of the times) Yet will it gratify our curiosity, with a
Relation of such Accidents, which (being new and singular, though Tragical and
Serious) cannot but produce in us several delightful, as well as profitable
Reflections. To see a Ship tossed, and threatened every Moment, by the merciless
Waves, (says Lucretius) is a spectacle, which those that stand safe at shore,
cannot hut behold with pleasure, as well as compassion. Non quia vexari (says
he) quemquam est jucunda voluptas: Sed, quibus ipse malis careas, quia cernere
suav' est. In short, (for I would not (...)e more impertinent than (...)there
folks, though something must be said (it seems) by way of Preface) he Book will
answer (I (...)open) the Title, and Rea(...)er's expectation; being (...)n
extract from the Ori(...)inal Copy, Printed at Amsterdam, in 1681. And this is
all I know, need say of it.

A RELATION of an unfortunate Voyage To the KINGDOM OF Bengala.
WE parted from Batavia, with the Vessels named Wesop, Brouwers-haven, and
Nieuwen-hove, the 3d. of September, in the year One thousand six hundred sixty
one; and set Sail toward Ongueli, in the Kingdom of Bengala. Our Vessel
(called Ter Schelling) carried about 8 pieces of Cannon, and four score and
five men; our freight consisting chiefly of pieces of Silver-Coin, and
Copper Plates.

On the 23d. our Masters Mate, whose name was Hillebrant, going down into the
Hold, to fetch thence some Ropes he needed; saw or thought he beheld, through
the Port-holes, Persons swimming, pale and spent, and some, that were dead,
floating on the Sea. At his coming up he appeared troubled; and when his
heaviness was somewhat alleviated, he told us the cause of it. Whether his
vision were real, or a pure effect of his melancholy humor, yet several
persons looked upon it as a bad Omen, and began to expect the worst. As for his
part, from that very moment he still continued sad and pensive, whereas before
no man was of a more gay and jolly humor. Such was his seriousness, that he
could not endure to hear any idle discourses, nor refrain from exhorting us to
fervent prayer, for the averting the dangers threatening us. There wanted not
some who derided his visions, and made a sport of them; wherefore he often
besought God to give these Libertins a sight of what he had seen, or something
like it; as a means to check their licentiousness and reduce them to sobriety.

On the 8th. of October we were in sight of the Coast of Bengala, but knew it
not. In this uncertainty we steered toward it, and cast Anchor within two
leagues off the shore, where our Master Jacob Janz-Stroom (born at Amsterdam)
sent out the Longboat, and dispatched the Pilot to the Inhabitants, with Seven
or Eight Seamen and the Steward, who had some skill in the Language of that
Country, to enquire into the Nature, and Name of that Coast we saw. We knew
that of Bengala was full of rocks and dangerous shelves, whereon several
Vessels had been cast away, but had not that necessary knowledge whereabouts
they lay, without which we could not avoid them: Three days past since our men
went on shore, and we in continual expectation of their return. But at length
suspected, they were detained captive, or destroyed by some other misfortune;
whereupon we weighed Anchor, and sought a Port where we might inquire farther
after them. After a long search, we descryed 3 small Barks that made toward
us, from the Land side. At which we rejoiced, hoping by their means to hear
news of those we sought, and that they would help us out of this perplexity.
These Barks stopped about a stones cast from our Ship, (as it were,) to consult,
whether they had best come on board her, being a Man of War: After about a
quarter of an hours deliberation, their Commander, whom they called Orangkai,
drew near with his Bark, and made signs to us, that the other two were laden
with Fowl, and Fish, and several fruits of their Country.

We gave him to understand, in the best manner we could, that he had no reason
to fear; and our signs encouraged him. As soon as he was on board our Ship, he
caused the other Barks to come up, and unlade their provisions, which came to
us very seasonably: Our Master led him into his Cabin, where he entertained
him with all imaginable kindness. As they began to discourse about the Country,
(having first made enquiries for our people) our Vessel touched upon a shelf,
which put all our Men in an Alarm. The course we took to clear our selves could
not be without noise, whereat Orangkai was frighted, and believed 'twas a
signal to betray him. In this imagination he thought of nothing but how to
escape, which he did, so dexterously, that none of us were aware of it, till he
had gotten a great distance from us. He ever and anon stopped his course, and we
expected his return, but when we saw he forgot to take the money with him,
which we paid him, we no longer doubted but his fear was excessive; in effect
he did not return; and when our Vessel was on float, we found our selves as far
advanced as we were before. In this extremity, the greatest part of our Ship
were of opinion to expect here our Men, which we did for 8 days together, but
to no purpose; wherefore having cleared our selves off this place, we hoisted
Sail in search of the Ships that set out with us.

After a tedious search, we ran upon a long shole, whence getting clear, we
fell upon another, more dangerous than the former. This obliged us to let down
our Boat into the Sea, as well to sound the depth of the Water, as to
understand the nature and quality of the place. We could find nothing far and
near, but shallows and flats; and every where so little Water, that we knew not
which way to pass. Then we gave our selves for lost, and were all in a maze,
except the Seamen, who in the greatest danger ran to their bottles, and drank
one another healths. In the mean time, we cast Anchor behind and before, and
the Sea growing rough, and Wind high, we could not hinder our Vessel from
having a great breach made in it, and sinking, had we not cut down our
Boltsplit. As to the Boat it was swallowed up in the Sand, and one Man that was
in it saved, by the assistance we gave him.

Thus were we without our Small-boat, or Shalope, out of sight of Land, and in
an unknown Sea. These misfortunes were great, and sufficient to o'rewhelm us,
but these were not all, for a while after we found our selves in a worse
condition. Whilst we were Studying to remedy our present miseries, a fierce
blast of Wind snapt both our Cables. We immediately threw out two others, which
could not hinder the Vessel from striking against a Sandy hill, wherefore we
cut them with Hatchets, leaving our Anchors in the Sea. And as to the Sails,
besides that the Wind carried away our Foretop, we were forced to clear the
Vessel of Water, and let them all down. Moreover the Wind so swelled the Waves,
that the Ship let in Water through the Port-holes, and we expected every moment
when she would dash against a Rock. Great was our fear, but not general; for
whilst the greatest part were confessing their sins, and imploring God's
pardon, before whom they were now going to appear; the Seamen were making
merry, and singing with their full Cups in their hands; that though the Sea
were rough and terrible, yet would they hinder it from possessing that part,
into which they pow'red down their liquor. Thus did these wretches defy all
danger, and outbrave Death it self, which they called the Scarecrow of vulgar
Souls, and the scorn of those that knew it in it self. Whilst they were
drinking on one hand, and we praying on the other, a sudden blast of Wind drove
our Ship from between the sholes, and set it on float again: We began to be in
hopes, when, immediately, the Water sprang in from all sides: Whereupon we fell
to work with our Pumps, but to little purpose, the Water coming in so fast upon
us; yet perhaps had all our Men (who were to the number of 70) used their
utmost endeavors, they might have been successful, but most of 'em were so
weak, that they could scarcely stand.

This misfortune was attended by another, to complete our misery; for none of
us knew what course to Steer; nor the Master, or Pilots what to determine.
After several contests, they were found to be of contrary judgments; these were
for going on one side, and the Master another, and his opinion was followed. We
went not far before we found which was the best, for that of the Seamen would
have carried us far from the Coast. Although we were well enough satisfied in
that particular, yet had we several other perplexities to encounter with, for
the Water still gained upon us, and we had been a great while out of the sight
of Land, and in the want of provision. Moreover we were all so overcome with
sleep, and weariness, that we were not able to stand. In this condition were
we, when he that was upon the Watch cried out, Land, Land, and that 'twas near
us. This good news put us all in heart again; and made us fall to work afresh:
But this hope did not last long, for 3 or 4 hours after we had the Tide against
us, which hindered us from advancing, so that at night we were forced to cast
Anchor at 3 Leagues distance from Land, about 4 fathom deep. This last
misfortune completed our sorrow, for we could Pump no longer; and the Water
apparently still gained upon us: Yet did the most able among us (seeing
themselves ready to perish in sight of Land) use their utmost endeavors, and
encouraged one another, resolving to cut the Cable the next Morning, to advance
with the Flood, as near as we could to Shore. But scarcely had we spent 6
hours, in this undertaking; when we perceived, that of one Bucket of Water,
half of it was Sand, with which we had ballasted our Ship, which broke all our
measures.

Since this unhappy accident, we thought of nothing, but yielding up our selves
to the Divine Providence; and all means failing us, some gave way to sleep,
others resisted it, being not able to resolve upon shutting their eyes against
that light, which they were now upon the point of ever losing; and some again
whom hunger more terrified than either sleep or death, so earnestly demanded
meat; that the Master ordered, every Man his share of strong Waters, and smoakt
Beef. The Steward obeyed with much difficulty; but seeing himself sorced to it,
distributed such a small quantity of both, that 'twould have made a Man apt to
think, we had still a long Voyage to make.

In the mean time these watchings and fatigues had so exhausted our Men's
spirits, that several became frantic, and showed such extravagancies, as would
have forced laughter at another time. The Cook ran up the scuttles and came
down again in a great heat, occasioned by the pains he had taken, in fishing
for Duckers; with which he vaunted he would make a Ragoo, that should quicken
the dead. Others could not comprehend the danger we were in, and forgetting
what had passed, were continually talking of the profits and advantages they
would make of this Voyage. As soon as we left Pumping, we saw our Main-yard,
and that before, which we let down, were full of Duckers, which were easily
taken.

Several of those that had the right use of their Senses, caused a parcel of
Beans to be dressed (called Kitseri) which were found lying at the bottom of a
Sea-man's Chest, that lay asleep; we eat them with a great deal of pleasure,
although deemed this would be our last Repast. A while after there entered so
much Water through the Port-hole of the Cooks Cabin, where the violence of the
Waves had made a breach, that we were forced to make holes in the Deck, to let
the Water run down into the Hold; which we stopped with much difficulty, with
plates of Lead wrapped about with Tow. After this, the lustiest amongst us were
forced to repose themselves, not being able to resist the desire of sleeping:
As for my own part (who had hitherto made a shift to bear up) I laid me down on
a Chest, that was fastened to the Deck, not giving my self the liberty of an
easier Couch, in a time, wherein I believed I was so near to Death.

Scarcely had I rested thereon an hour, but the screeks of those that first
perceived the Vessel to incline on one side, awakened us, and showed us the
danger we were in: Then it was that our confusions increased, and every Man
endeavored to withdraw out of the press, to seek alone some means to save
himself. It was observed that 3 of our Seamen were wanting, whom we supposed
to be drowned at the bottom of the Hold, where they had laid themselves down to
rest.

We were 2 hours in this condition, most of us half dead, and hopeless, when
the Vessel raised it self up again. This change so surprised us, that we could
scarcely believe it; but when we were well assured of it, our hearts returned,
and sorrow gave place to joy. Several ran to their Chests putting on their best
Clothes, and demanded Strong-water, which was not refused them, and had
immediately a pleasant effect upon 'em: Others dealt out their melancholy
thoughts, imagining themselves great personages, and talked only of Millions.
These whimseys were tolerable, in comparison of the Sea-mens excesses, who
continued in their outbravings of Death, and its Consequences. Some of them
that had taken such pains to dress themselves, went along with the Sailors into
the great Cabin; whence ever and anon coming out with their Caps on one side
their Heads, and their Glasses in their Hands, they invited the rest to imitate
them in Singing Bawdy Songs, and Dancing. There were some that seemed more
solid, yet were clearly for drinking, to make themselves (as they said) less
sensible of the fears Men feel in such extremities. These kept some measure,
but others more brutish, glutted themselves like Swine, till they lost wholly
their reason.

In the mean time Death drew still nearer us, and our only remedy, was to make
a Machine wherein to save our selves, when the Vessel sunk. The Carpenter
offered to make one, and with the assistance of some others took down the
Sail-yards, Masts, and other necessaries; with which he made immediately a kind
of Vessel, that might hold 40 Men: We were more in number, but the Libertins
scoft at our pre-caution, and would not assist us, so that for want of help we
could not make it larger nor stronger: So great was the hard heartedness of
several of our Men that they would not so much as lend us the Knifes or
Hatchets we needed. The Cooks Mate was one of 'em: This Man named William
Ysbrants had good store by him, and so far was he from parting with them, that
he withheld others from doing it, by his persuasions, saying he knew a shorter
and better way to save them that would be ruled by him. In fine, maugre this
hard hearted Wretch, and the Sea-mens gang, who continued on their Riot, we
finished our Float-boat, which we fastened to the Vessel, till we made Oars to
guide it. When every thing was ready, each Man that was willing to go in it had
given him 10 pieces of current Money in the Kingdom of Bengala, for his relief
when at shore. Before we went off we must drink a parting Cup, of which most
drank so deep, that they made themselves drunk. I designed to have been one of
those that left the Vessel, but a friend hindered me, he told me I must not
leave him, for he looked upon that Machine to be extreme dangerous, especially
considering the condition of those Persons that took upon 'em to guide it,
being most of 'em drunk, and ready to quarrel; the Machine lying, moreover,
level with the Water, and over laden. So I staid in the Vessel with the Master,
and some others, whose number was far inferior to those that left us. Scarcely
were they gotten a stones cast, but several of them repented they forsook us,
and swam back again, so that upon their return we found we were 32 Men;
according to which reckoning there must be about some 40 in the Machine, where
they endeavored to use the Sail of the Shalope; but besides that it was too
heavy, the Wind ceased about half an hour after, so that they advanced very
little.

When we lost sight of them, we besought God to preserve 'em; to the end, that
according to their promise, the inhabitants might come out to help us. Then the
Master of the Vessel, caused a Sack of Dutch Biscuit to be brought him, and a
small quantity of smoaked Beef, which we soon devoured. In the mean while we
spyed our people again a great way off, but this was but for a moment, for we
never could set sight on 'em afterward; which made us suspect their Machine
failed them, and was sunk by some unexpected disaster, which was very probable,
seeing we could not hear the least news of them. The strong conjectures we had
of their loss, dispossessing us of our hope (for we laid great stress on the
good offices they promised to render us, when at land) put us upon resolves to
make another Boat; which, when finished, could not hold above 10 or 12 Men.
Therefore were we forced to take other measures, and began to cut down the
Scuttles of the Mainmast, which had been already cut, and stripped from its
tackle. We afterward wanted the Sail-yard, but it being far in the Water,
entangled with its Ropes and Sail, we could not get it out thence, believing it
to be a thing impossible; at length, my friend before mentioned, (whose name
was William Bastians) caused a Rope to be fast'ned about his middle, and so was
let down into the Sea, to cut all these entanglements which hindered us from
finishing our undertaking. In the mean while, the Night and Waves equally
incommodated us, the first by its obscurity, and the others by their violence:
Thus were we every moment ready to perish.

Whilst the greatest part were busied in cutting down the Foremast, which was
the only one that stood; six of our Men plotted together, to slip away
privately in our Machine, without caring what might become of their Companions;
they were just ready to execute their treacherous design, having already cut
the 2 Ropes by which it was fastened, and began to put off from the Ship; when
the Mast, which we cut, fell down into the Sea before it, and by its fall
discovered, and forced 'em back. Had not this happened, without doubt we had
perished that Night, for the foul weather increased, the Waves became
boisterous, and the Vessel unable to resist them. We hastened then to
accommodate to our Boat, the Mast we had felled, which rendered it fit to carry
20 Men, and we were in all 32. About midnight the Tide being half spent, we
would willingly staid its return, and embarkt our selves by Day light, but the
danger was too pressing to use delays.

We then began to prepare for our departure out of the Vessel, taking along
with us but a small quantity of Provision, 2 Compasses, 2 Cutlasses, a Sword, a
Poleax, some Oars made in haste, a Lanthorn, and Candles for the night.

Thus sorrily furnished, did we forsake the Vessel, and put our selves into the
Boat, where each of us, with his Oar in his hand, made toward the shore. It Is
impossible to express what we underwent; but it may be easily imagined, that
being in the Water up to the middle, in a cold Season, and dark Night, we could
not be much at ease. As soon as the day appeared, we had the Tide against us,
and being not able to resist it, were carried by it so far, that we lost sight
of Land. An hour after we descryed it, and used our utmost endeavors to reach
it; but the Currants which were swift made all attempts fruitless. This mishap
was attended by another; the greatest part of us fell into deliriums, and in
this condition became exceeding troublesome to the rest: Some of 'em would
needs go to their Chests, to take thence the Linen they wanted. Others were
searching for the Kitchen, to warm themselves. But he that gave us most
trouble, was my friend William Bastians, who supposing, as well as the rest,
that he was still on Board the Ship; demanded where we carried him; and rowing
a quite contrary course to the rest, cried out; Pray let me alone, I Will carry
you where we should be, I see Hellevoutslus Castle; courage, we are at it. A
coxcomb, cried another, he sees a Castle, ay, we are at it as much as I am at
Rome. It Is a Church, says the Carpenter, a stately Fabric indeed, how it
glistens against the Sun! What ails these Fools, cried another, to take the
Mast of a Ship for a Church, and a Castle? These poor wretches have lost their
senses. I laughed some time at their extravagancies, and within a while (as I
was told) fell into the same condition. O grievous, said I, they are making
merry at the Bear, yonder, and I may not be with 'em: I will make one amongst
'em. The Master who sat nearest withheld me; but I fiercely flung away from
him, and ran into the water. Whence I was quickly taken up, but neither the
cold, nor apprehension of the danger I escaped, could make me come to my self:
Yet I felt I was extreme cold, and would had the Master pull off his Clothes to
accommodate me with 'em; thus continuing, I took a Barrel for the Kitchen, and
sat my self down by it to dry and warm me. This imaginary fire did me, perhaps,
as much good as if it had been real; for methoughts I felt it mighty
comfortable, so that I fell asleep, and at waking returned to my right senses.

In the mean time the Tide carried us so far, that we lost all hope; we
earnestly besought God to put an end to our miseries by death, or show us how
to avoid them. Some time after we thought we saw Land, and Cows feeding;
believing it to be an effect of our Prayers, we continued them, saying one to
another, that seeing what we had already done, procured us the sight of Land,
without doubt the continuation of our Prayers would bring us to it: It is
impossible to express the joy this Vision gave us, for 'twas no better; being
only a sandy Bank cast up by the violence of the Sea. This sad mistake struck
us all in amaze, especially considering, moreover, that our Machine which began
to sink, could not carry us far. The most resolute amongst us, seeing the
danger increasing, determined for the lightning of the Boat, to push in the
Night, as many as they could of their Companions into the Sea. Heaven would not
suffer 'em to execute their cruel design; for the Carpenter bethought himself
we had to a considerable weight in Money, which might serve us instead of an
Anchor, or Counter-poise; that would be necessary in two respects. For besides
that, the Machine would not by this means be oppressed with it; this
Counter-poise would stand us in good stead in a contrary Tide. His advice was
taken, and every Man freely parted with his Money, which was put into a pair of
close-kneed-breeches, tied with a Cord; and then into another pair, which we
tied fast; and so into a 3d. which we let down to the bottom, fastened to a
Rope, when minded to stop. We made another packet of this Money, which we used
instead of a Plummet, to find on what side the Tides cast us. Both one and the
other of these were so useful to us, that in a short time we found our selves
so near Land, as not to fear any more the losing it.

About 2 in the Afternoon, we took up our Anchor, to give every Man his own
again, which they took without counting, so greatly were they possessed with
joy to see themselves out of danger: So that some who contributed most, were
content with least; and those that gave least, found themselves greatest
sharers. So greatly indifferent were we in this matter, that a considerable sum
remained without any Owner, which was distributed to those that had none, being
certain that of all the several Coyns we brought, there were not one but would
pass in the Kingdom of Bengala. After this distribution there was found a Sack
in a Barrel, full of Biscuit, which no body regarded, and had been left behind,
had not the Master taken charge of it.

We came at length so near the shore, that we thought we saw Fishermen
stretching out their Nets to dry 'em. Coming nearer, we spyed other persons,
that seemed to wear the same habits as we, whom we supposed to be those that
left us. They had all the same Clothes, Hats, and Caps, except some that wore
Canvass, taken out of a Sail; and others that were only in their Drawers. Thus
did they appear to us through our Spying-Glass, and every one that made use of
it, believed they saw very distinctly with it, what they saw but imperfectly
without it. The Tide carried us not to that side, neither brought us so soon to
shore, as we desired. This slowness made us still fear, and there was one so
impatient as to throw himself in the Water, to try whether he could not swim to
Land, but his heart failed him, and he was glad to return. In the mean time we
called to mind, that the inhabitants of Bengala, had a deadly antipathy against
Swines flesh, some of which we kept still by us; whereupon 'twas agreed to
throw it into the Sea. But that which most troubled us, was to see 'em rashly
cast overboard a Barrel of Biscuit which might stood us in good stead, being
distributed amongst us, who were almost dead with hunger. Several opposed the
doing it, but were answered, we should have better food at Land.

So we came to shore, and left our Machine at the disposal of the Sea. As soon
as ever we were Landed, our Master, and 10 or 12 more, that were the best able
amongst us, ran immediately upon the discovery, the rest slowly following
after; entreating 'em to hasten, and find 'em a convenient place to dry
themselves, being equally pressed with cold and hunger. In our march we
entertained one another with Relations of our particular sufferings, and
happiness in being thus delivered from them. We went on thus, discoursing with
as much freedom and security, as if we had already seen the inhabitants,
striving to outvy one another in our kind reception: Some said that those we
saw when on the Sea, whether Dutchmen or Moors, could not be far from us.
Others alleged that those Moors being out a Fishing for their Masters, had met
our people, and carried 'em to their Huts; and that we might find them in a
thicket directly before us. Talking thus, we went on jocundly to this Grove,
where we doubted not but the Inhabitants would receive us, to our content: But
our opinion was ill grounded, for being come to it, we found neither Man nor
Beast; nor any Path, or Track to guide us; or the least sign it were ever
inhabited. Some that were most tired relying on the refreshments they expected
to meet here, could not believe what they saw; and calling out as loud as they
were able, imagined they must be answered, but were deceived; so that we must
continue on our march through a melancholy, thick Wood, and which was,
perhaps, full of wild Beasts. This imagination, together with the present
unexpected disappointment and past fatigues, completed our sorrows: As we went
on, our hearts being ready to burst with grief; and demanding of one another,
what could befallen our Master, and those that accompanied him, we found them
lying in a profound sleep; and the need we had to do the same, made us
willingly imitate them.

At our waking, all our discourse was about the Moors, and Dutchmen, which we
imagined we saw near the shore; whom, not finding in that place, we no longer
doubted, but this Vision was an illusion. The day being far spent, we resolved
to pass over the night in the same place we lay; spending some time in
providing Wood, of which we made 3 Piles in form of a Triangle, which we set on
fire with the Candle we brought with us in the Lanthorn. We placed a Sentinel
near each fire, to assure us against the surprises of the wild Beasts, and by
this means warmed our selves in greater tranquillity.

The nights were so cold, and we so ill Clothed, that we could not rest; and
when we could, our Chaplin was so full of ravings, that he would have put us
all into disorder; whatsoever we could do to pacify him, he kept still in a
rage; furiously demanding what meant this change at Batavia, and how it came to
pass we were thus used; at some he threw his Slippers, at others his Hat, and
threatened to extirpate these Slaves from off the face of the Earth, that thus
served him.

Thus did we sorrowfully pass over the Night, and at break of Day began to
think of discamping, to find a more commodious retreat. One of the last that
waked was our Surgeon, who starting up in a maze, cried out, we had robbed
him, and that he would have us before a Justice of Peace. The noise he made,
disturbed our poor Chaplain; who supposing him to have been some Slave, that
made resistance, cried out, Murder, Help, Help, these Slaves have taken Arms.
The Surgeon that knew not he was distracted (for he had slept very quietly)
believed what he said, and was for putting himself in a posture of defense,
till we showed him the others folly. Well, says he, though he be a fool, yet I
am not one; for it is too true, that of 6 Bags of Money I had, I have been
robbed of 3 this Night. We thought him at first in the same case as the other,
but at length found him otherwise; and whether his loss were real or imaginary,
he still continued to demand satisfaction, but had little notice taken of him,
for we were for changing our ground, and moving forward, leaving the poor
Chaplain, in a distracted condition behind us, for no body would take charge of
him.

We drew near then to the shore, in hopes of finding either the Fishermen, or
other People, for our redress. The first object we met, was a great Tortoise
without a head; and immediately after a Buffle stretched out on the ground,
whose head was half rotten, and full of maggots. Several Animals, which the
inhabitants called Leganes, were about this Creature, which smelt so strong,
that we could not endure to come near it. But some days after we had not the
same aversion, nor were so delicate, for hunger so sorely pressed us, that the
stink could not hinder us from gnawing it to the very bones.

About a quarter of a League from that place, we found our selves near a River;
on the other side of which, we spyed 8 Moors, whom we took for Bengaloises. We
immediately endeavored to pass over it, but found it too deep for us. An hour
after, it appeared to us more Fordable, and we passed over it, in effect, with
as much joy as if certain of a happy success. When we had gotten on the other
side, these Moors ran to meet us, casting themselves down at our feet, and
kissed them; and thus remained a long time, lifting up their eyes to Heaven,
and pronouncing some words, whereby we supposed they designed to declare their
innocence, and the injustice done 'em. These People being 8 in number; to wit 4
Men, 2 Women, and 2 Children, seemed to us much afflicted, but we could not
understand them; and all that we could comprehend, in feeing a certain kind of
Boat on float which had brought them thither, was that they were some poor
Slaves, whom their Masters cruelty had obliged to run away.

These people then being not the persons we wanted, we passed over again the
River; where having made a good fire, we went in search of the Tortoise we saw,
whom we roasted in his shell: Each of us took our part of him (which could not
be great, for we were Thirty of us) and greedily devoured it. And being still
pressed with hunger, we regretted the Provisions that were thrown over Board,
saying one to another, we were justly punished for our foolish prodigality.
These lamentations were followed by a pensive silence, and in fine, by prayers,
which ended, we betook our selves (as well as we could) to rest.

The next Morning before we took our march, our Master gave each of us a slice
of Cheese, from one that weighed about 3 pound, which he brought from the Ship;
and by the Chirurgions order, who was also our Physician, we drank thereupon a
Cup of Water half salt, and found our selves in good plight.

After about 5 or 6 hours march, we came at the Lands end, which gave us to
understand that this place was an Island, and distant from main Land about 8 or
9 Leagues. These conjectures extremely dismayed us; and we began to prepare our
selves for the worst, expecting to dye with hunger in that barren and desert
place. We could see nothing but Trees, some of which were dry and withered, and
others green, laden only with leaves; a sad and bitter nourishment, yet with
which we were forced to be contented.

We stood upon this point, till we came to a determination, and agreed, that
'twas our surest course to return to the place where we past over the first
Night. And in our way came to the place where we had eaten the Tortoise, in
hopes to find those aforementioned Leganes. For fear of making 'em wild, 2 of
our Men, armed with a Hatchet and Cutlass, marched before, and we followed 'em
at a distance. They returned soon after with one of these Animals, which we
carried to the place we intended. Having left our Chaplain here, we searched
about, and called him, but could neither see nor hear him.

We sought afterward a commodious place wherein to fix, during our stay in
this Island, and judged it were better to settle near the Shore, than the Wood,
where we could not expect any succor from the Sea; our only hope of getting
out of this dolesom place, consisting in our expectation of some Vessels
passing by.

We gathered Wood, which having lighted, we cut the Legane with his skin, into
as many pieces as we were Men. Every one took his share, and dressed it as best
liked him; those that were most hungry, scarcely at all, least the fire should
diminish it, and the others very little, for the same reason, it being small
enough already; this Animal not exceeding the bigness of a Cat. The flesh of it
is very unsavory and unpleasant, but our extreme hunger gave it a good relish,
and likewise the Water, notwithstanding its brinyness. Half an hour after we
took our Bibles (having 2 with us) and the Pilot read Prayers, which ended, we
reposed our selves round the fire by turns, for we could not all of us be at it
together.

The next Morning we began the day, with our requests to Almighty God, to
compassionate, and deliver us from our miseries, which seemed already greater
then we could bear; then every one went his way. The Surgeon bethought
himself, as he walked along to taste the Leaves of the Trees: Which having done,
and finding 'em good, all the rest followed his example. We chewed 'em, at
first, a great while, before we swallowed 'em; but at length found 'em so
delicate, that we never tasted bread in our lives, that relisht half so well.

Although thief Leaves seemed most delicious meats, yet were we not so much in
love with 'em, but could willingly left them for others; and had the Boars,
Staggs, and Buffles, that haunted the Woods, and came down and bathed
themselves in the Marshes, been willing to be taken, (for we had no Guns to
shoot 'em) I do not doubt but we could have well dispensed with them, but these
Animals had good legs, and ran too fast for us. One day marching along the
shore, we spied 2 great Serpents, that put us in amaze. We moved from 'em, but
being extreme hungry, and judging a good repast might be made of them, we
gathered round about 'em, with each of us a stick in our hands, and soon
conquered 'em: We cut off their Heads and Tails, and having flead, and washed
them, gave each Man his share, which we greedily devoured; and yet none of us
were thereby incommodated.

At the end of each repast, we were as much troubled for more; and went in
small companies, some on one side, and some on the other; whence for the most
part returning empty, we fell upon the Leaves, which we could eat well enough,
but they contained little nourishment. We went, my friend and I, several times
to the Sea side, to see whether the Sea had not cast up something on the shore,
that might stand us in some stead, but all in vain: And one day amongst the
rest, being more than ordinary hungry, we all met together, bemoaning our
selves in a more piteous manner, then can be expressed. We were a little
comforted at the fight of some Beans, which certain of our Company found. Never
was any thing eaten with a better appetite, nor found to be of a better taste:
Whereupon our hearts returned again, and having smoakt a Pipe or 2 of the
Leaves of Trees, instead of Tobacco, we exhorted one another to repose our
selves under the Divine Providence. The joy, for having made so good a meal,
endured not long, for an hour after we had eaten them, we felt such pangs, as
made us believe they were mortal. Our greatest pain was to fetch breath, for we
seemed every moment at the point of death. Having lain in this condition near 3
hours, we breathed more freely, and began to get up, but were so weak, that we
could scarcely stand. From that time our strength wholly failed us, and whether
'twas an effect of those Beans, or the little nourishment we received since so
long a time, we were not able to carry sticks to make a fire. This mishap was
attended by a disgust to the Leaves which we heretofore found so good, but now
could eat no longer of 'em, so great was our aversation to 'em, because when we
had eaten them, we felt in our mouths a strong stink, like unto that of Buggs,
which became insupportable to us. Instead of these Leaves, I tried often to eat
Grass, but found that worse, it being impossible for me to swallow it.

Our strength every day decaying, and seeing no likelihood of getting out of
this dolesom place, we consulted together touching the making of some kind of
Boat, wherein to transport our selves elsewhere; whereupon we cut down several
small Trees that grew along the Water side, from which we took off the Peel,
which served to fasten the several parts of it. This Boat could not contain
above 5 Men, and every person pretended to be of that number, for although the
order ran, that they should return with all possible haste, to help the rest
with what provision they could find, yet this was an advantage to them, who
before they returned would be sure to refresh themselves first. To adjust this
difference, we all agreed to refer our selves to the Master, who chose whom he
thought best, and counseled them to Coast along the Isle, till they came to
the point where we were; and then suffering themselves to be guided by the
Tide, it would carry them toward 2 Islands, above which they might find firm
Land, which he judged to be not above 8 or 9 Leagues distant from the point we
stood upon. Besides these instructions, he gave them a Compass to Steer by: And
having taken some Leaves along with them for their sustenance, they parted the
13th. day after our arrival in this Island, with solemn protestations, that if
Heaven prospered their design, they would not fail to return with necessaries
for the delivering us out of this Desert. They had each of 'em an Oar, but
neither Anchor, or any thing else to stop their Boat in a contrary Tide; Yet
they parted bigg with hope of an happy success, which we wished 'em in
beseeching 'em to make a speedy return.

As soon as they left us, we betook our selves to the Woods, where searching
for food in vain, we were constrained to content our selves with the Leaves of
Trees, which we could scarcely swallow without something else to allay their
bitterness. Thus were we pinched with hunger, when we believed we could not do
better, than to seek the Corpse of our Chaplain, whom we infallibly suspected to
be dead, and were troubled we could not find it; for having eaten 2 Serpents
without hurt, we supposed humane flesh could not much harm us.

The desire of eating something more solid than the Leaves of Trees, continuing
to press us, 'twas proposed to kill one of the Boys that were with us; but
Heavens so ordered it, that this was not long insisted on, which happened well
for all the rest, for had once a beginning been made, it is certain 'twould been
continued, and we should either by secret fraud, or open violence fallen upon
one another. Although the design was rejected by the most part, yet did we
mistrust one another, and from that time slept in fear, every Man dreading the
rest conspired against him, and appointed the time of his rest for that of
cutting his Throat.

About Evening we understood, that 2 of our Company, who followed by Land,
those that parted in the Morning by Water, had overtaken 'em at Night, at the
Islands point, where they begged so earnestly to be taken along with 'em, that
they could not deny them, having first fast'ned to their Boat some Trees.

In the mean time one of our companions came and informed us, that he saw a
Serpent of a prodigious size; that he dared not attack him alone, but 'twere no
hard matter for all of us to conquer him. Each of us immediately then hastened
joyfully to the place with his stick in his hand. Where by the way we killed a
Legane, that fell off a Tree at our feet, and overjoyed we had wherewithal to
mix with our Leaves, we kept on our course. But by mishap the Serpent was gone;
and we had the vexation of searching him a great while in vain, This being a
sore disappointment, we needed some happy adventure to make us amends, and
desired no better, than to meet with the Corpse of our Chaplain. We sought it
with the same earnestness as we did the Serpent, but all our endeavors proving
fruitless; we divided the Legane amongst us, the portions of which were so
small that had it not been for the Leaves we eat with it, 'twere impossible for
us to sleep that Night. A long time were we, after this repast without finding
any thing; being exceeding faint and weak, when the Carpenter brought to us his
Cap full of Snails. These little insects had neither Horns nor Shells, and we
took 'em for Snails, for want of a more proper name to give 'em. But without
troubling our selves much about their name, or quality, we caused the Carpenter
to bring us to the place where he found 'em, and took all that remained. At our
return, laying 'em down upon the ground, they appeared to us to be of a Bluish
color; which made us believe they were venomous Creatures, and that 'twas
dangerous eating them. This was the opinion of some; but the greatest part,
argued on the contrary, alleging that several Beasts past for venomous, that
were so only in opinion: Witness, the Serpents we had eaten, whose venom is
said to be sharp and dangerous, and yet did them no harm. That, having made
this experiment with success, they might with as much reason try another; and
supposing 'em to be venomous, yet the fire would clarify them.

This reasoning prevailed, whereupon we agreed, all of us to eat of 'em, and
made a great fire to roast them, putting 'em under the Cindars; and when they
were ready, eat 'em, and found 'em good; and to complete our Banquet, drank
Salt Water, and then began to think of reposing our selves. An hour or two
after, the Carpenter found himself ill, and fell immediately into Fits. As soon
as we saw him in this condition, we imagined 'twould not be long before we fell
into the same extremity, and in the mean time consulted together, touching the
several sorts of Counter-poisons we ever heard mentioned: But all to no
purpose, seeing we wanted them, as well as other necessaries, wherefore we
prepared our selves for the patient suffering whatsoever might befall us.

Half an hour after, we became affected in the same manner as the Carpenter.
For two hours we felt most sharp pains in our Bowels, accompanied with
shortness of breath, with which we were so oppressed, that all hope of recovery
forsook us. Yet by degrees our pangs ceased, but our weakness continued; and as
soon as we were able to go, hunger pinching us, as before, we were forced to
glut our selves with Leaves. Ever since we used them, we were never free from
the gripes in our Bowels; suffering such dolorous pangs, that there are no
torments, we would not willingly chosen before them. Having done all we could
to comfort us, we committed our selves to the Divine Providence, to which we
recommended our selves without ceasing.

Our misery every day increasing, and strength diminishing, we consulted
together touching the means of our deliverance. After every Man had
communicated his thoughts, it plainly appeared to us all, that unless we made a
Machine, wherein to transport our selves to the other side, we must undoubtedly
perish. All were agreed, that this was the only remedy left us; especially
since we no longer expected the return of our companions. Those that observed
them, assured us, they were carried off from the Coast by the force of the
Tide, and so perished with hunger before they could come to Land. And upon this
opinion was grounded the design of making another Boat; but the undertaking was
difficult, and upon consultation of our strength, we found our selves unable to
do it. Therefore we were forced to yield to necessity, and be still patient for
a time, seeing the remedy proposed was none of the safest.

Every Man having given his opinion, our Master showed us, that Fires in the
Night were seen a great way off, and therefore judged it not amiss to make such
a one on the shore, as may be beheld 10 or 12 Leagues distance. We chose for
this purpose a convenient place, surrounded with dry Trees, whereon we heapt
others, and set them on fire; which according to our computation might be seen
at the forementioned distance. We continued 'em for about 4 days, at the end of
which, our hopes in that matter failed us; or rather strength, to carry on so
laborious a work. The Master of our Ship, who was of a very strong and sound
constitution, heard our complaints, but took no notice of them; for measuring
our strength by his, he made us still continue to bring Wood, with extreme toil
and pain. To encourage us, he alleged several examples of those, whose
endeavors proved successful in the like accidents, exhorting us to persist in
our undertakings; forasmuch as there was no other remedy left us. We took
courage then afresh, continually supplying the Fire with Wood; but at length
became tired, and ceased our work, seeing it had not the effect we expected.

From that time, nothing was heard but wailings and lamentations amongst us;
our faintness was general, several of us being not able to walk without help.
My friend was of this number, being so weak and dejected, that he could neither
speak nor hold up his Head. So strict was our friendship, that I endured at the
same time, both my own, and his afflictions, in beholding a true friend thus
languishing for want of relief. In those intervals of the abatement of his
Fits, I sat by him, and although could not do any thing to ease him, yet told
him all I knew to comfort him, and he acknowledged to me afterward, that my
discourses strengthened him.

Entertaining one another, one day for some hours, touching the miserable
condition we labored under, since so long a time; he briskly rose up, telling
me, he would go upon the search, whence he hoped not to return empty. His hope
was not in vain, for he brought along with him a Toad, of an Immense size,
which we boiled in a Pot, which the aforementioned Negroes gave us. When 'twas
dressed, he invited me to it, I thankt him, but told him, that what we suffered
by eating the Beans, discouraged me from venturing upon this; yet when I saw
these reflections would not prevail with him to abstain, I determined to bear
him company; so we eat it together with Leaves. We past over One hour in fear;
but in fine, found no more hu^t by the Toad, than the Serpents we eat, which
extremely pleased us, considering we might find more of 'em.

The next morning it came in the Carpenter's head to go in quest of our
Chaplain's Corse; and sought so narrowly, that he found in a bush one of the
defunct's shoes, which he struck down with his Hat; and showing us it, cried
out, Courage my Lads, I am much mistaken if he be far hence, by what I have
already found. At this news we all ran like so many Blood hounds, prying in
every corner for half a mile round; but to as little purpose as heretofore;
after near two or three hours search, we returned so full of melancholy, and
sorrow, that we were ready to burst.

The miseries and vexations we suffered, made us so waspish, and fretful, that
we could scarcely desist a minute from quarreling with one another; the rest
earnestly wishing our jarrs might proceed to blows, and death it self, that
they might feed on him that was slain. But by good hap, it never came to that.
Being one day very attentive, at one of these kind of quarrels, the Surgeon
came and told us, he found the Leaves of Trees, of far better taste than those
we had hitherto eaten. They were good raw; but being roasted under the ashes,
wrapped up in little Balls, became far better. When we tasted them, we desired
him to show us the Tree whereon they grew: To which he replied God forbid,
saying, should I show it you (there being no more of that kind as I know of)
you would not leave one Leaf on it. We were not very importunate with him,
intending to watch him so narrowly, that we would find out his treasure in
spite of his Teeth. But we were deceived, for he was too cunning for us, and
notwithstanding all our diligence, kept his Tree to himself.

We betook our selves then to our common remedy, which was patience. My friend,
and I, were exhorting one another to it, in walking on the shore; which we held
out so long, that we came to the place where the Buffle lay; which we found
dead the first day after our arrival in the Island. The stink of that Carcass
was so strong, that we stepped a little back to get from it, but our hunger being
stronger, we asked one another where we ran, and whether 'twere not foolishly
done of Men in our condition. Let us return, said I, to my friend, and make up
to this Carrion, and learn to vanquish our selves in all things. I pretended to
have no aversion for it, when in truth, 'twas quite otherwise. Hunger drew me
toward this Buffle, being willing to try whether in seeing it, I dared venture
on it. Whereupon we returned, and looking on the Carcass; what think you of it,
said I, smiling? the scent is very strong, but do you believe the taste to be
so bad? As for my part, continued I, I am apt to think that had it passed over
the Fire, 'twould do us no hurt. At first, he thought I was not in earnest, but
discoursing further of it, he used so many arguments to dissuade me from it,
that I became obliged to talk no more of it. We left then this place, and in
seeking more wholesome Food, came up to the Isles point. Our pains were
fruitless, for we could find nothing to satisfy us; and for want of more
sollid meat, we entertained one another with consolatory discourses.

Having spent all our arguments, we felt our selves as feeble, and ill disposed
to suffer hunger, as before. So that we gave over this cold exercise, and
betook our selves to the search afresh, but being overtaken by the Night, we
returned fasting to our Company, who were busied in making one of those great
Fires we spoke of. It was in this project the Master of our Ship placed all his
hopes, this being the only sign that could give notice we were there. Therefore
did he bestow indefatigable pains in it, he alone carrying more Wood at a time
than four others. He was so strong, and kept up so well his flesh, that it
could scarcely be perceived he had fasted as well as we. When the Fire was as
big as we would have it, each Man made his Supper on the Leaves of Trees he
gathered; and having said our prayers, endeavored to sleep better than we had
eaten.

The next Morning 2 of our Company brought us a small Legane, which they found
half dead. Without informing our selves whence proceeded its distemper, 'twas
delivered to the Master, for they that took it, durst do no otherwise: Having
made an order, that whatsoever was found should be equally divided. Hitherto
this rule had been well enough observed; but in this occasion 'twas begun to be
broken: Those that took the Animal, alleging the smallness of it, ought to be
considered, which being divided into twenty four portions, each of 'em would be
no bigger than a Nut: That so small a matter could only sharpen the Appetite,
which was already but too violent, and therefore 'twere better to divide it
into sive or six parts, for so many particular persons, whom they then named,
to whom they were distributed. Amongst these 6 Favorites the Surgeon was
one, who being afraid of the ill consequences of this injustice, gave half of
his portion to those that most needed it. Who being excessively hungry, and
vexed at the wrong done 'em, first calmly complained, and afterward fell all
to reproaching the Master; who, provided he was well dealt with himself,
mattered not what became of the rest: That having been the first promoter of
that Law; he ought to blush in being one of the first that broke it. To quiet
'em, he caused the skin to be thrown amongst 'em, which they earnestly begged.
Yet was this done contrary to their minds that had eaten the flesh. He, who had
the charge of dividing it, was going fairly about it, when those that were most
sharp fell upon him, and took it away by force. Others that no less needed it,
considering this violence fell upon these last, and being the strongest,
carried away the greatest pieces. For the better preserving of their booty,
they rusht into the midst of the Wood, where they eat it in quiet. Those that
took least heed, and relied most on their own strength, saw themselves soon
assaulted by others, who snatched from them what they had. They began to grow
hot, and their quarrelsom words had been attended with blows, had not those
that snatched a small piece of this skin soon devoured it.

When we saw nothing could be more expected hence, every Man betook himself
elsewhere; and one of the best amongst us at the search, found the remains of
two Serpents, whom we eat soon after our arrival in this place. The entrails of
those Animals were become blew, and clammy, and so corrupted, that a Man could
not look upon them without horror. The least of these circumstances disgusted
at first the most hunger starved amongst us: But this disgust did not hold
long; for beholding one of the company eating thereof without hurt, or using
any other precaution, than the laying them a while on the coals; we ran to see
whether he that came from making so good a repast, had taken all; and found an
infinite number of Maggots that covered what we sought for. We dispersed these
Squadrons, and found their pasture was blew like Azure. Some said this color
was a mark of deadly poison, and therefore would choose rather to dye with
hunger than to eat of it. Another replied they argued like Fools, that knew
not, that Poison has no particular color. That that which they saw was an
impression of the Air, which wrought different effects, according to the Nature
of those subjects it met with. But to say no more, continued he, how can Poison
which is mortal in it felf, give life to so many Animals, who have no other
nourishment than what you see. Be ruled by me, says he, eat of it, and I Will
answer for what shall happen. Whereupon he falls upon these wretched relics
with such eagerness, as made us fear he would leave none behind him. We found
his reasons so good, or rather hunger made us think 'em such, that we shared
with him this heap of Ordure, and carried it to the place where we lay. Some of
those that had seen with horror, what the first had eaten; seeing us return
laden with the same provision, demanded whether we left none behind us, and
without expecting our answer, ran to the place to ascertain themselves. In the
mean time we broyled this filth, which we found excellent, and eat it with such
an Appetite, that those who before could not behold it, but with an extreme
aversion, were exceedingly troubled they had not a share with us.

There was one amongst those on whom our good hap made impression; who
forgetting that he was broyling on the Coals, a small piece of the skin of a
Legane, ran to search for some of our Ragoo. He went not far before he
bethought himself, and returned, entreating one of the Company to take charge
of it; then betook himself again in haste, to search whether he might not find
still some remains; but returned empty handed, because those that came
immediately after us, took all with 'em. This disappointment was attended by
another, that rendered him fully disconsolate: For the Friend with whom he
entrusted his morsel, gave way to the temptation, and devoured it. He to whom
it belonged, demanded it at his return; and when 'twas answered him, the Coals
had consumed it, he became so enraged, that it lackt little, but he had beat
out the others Brains.

This disturbance being over, every Man went his way upon the search, to find
something to eat with his Leaves of Trees, which could hardly be digested of
themselves. As for my own part, when I saw my self alone, I got down into the
Marshes, where by good hap, I found little Snails, with which I filled my Cap,
Pockets, and Shirt-sleeves. My Companions spying me laden with this precious
booty, demanded, where I got it: I satisfied them, and they flew to the place;
whilst my Friend, and I, roasted under the Cindars, part of these little
Animals, which we eat, and found extraordinary good. We sought nothing else,
whilst they lasted; but we were so hungry, that these lasted us not above a day.

The next Morning my Friend, and I, went in search of more, and found some in
another place. We took only our Pockets full, because not only the night
approached, but we were so Faint, that it required a considerable time before
we could join our Company: To whom we no sooner came, but our Master enquired
what we brought. Which showing him, he demanded what we intended to do with
that trash? We were so surprised to hear him speak thus, that we imagined he
had lost his Senses. But he taking no notice of our astonishment; come, come,
said he, my Lads, I have that which is better for you. Whereupon he showed us
certain Fish, which he gave us, bidding us eat 'em without enquiring whence
they came. That Is not to the purpose, replied I, whencesoever they come, they
are welcome; and I intend to make as good a Meal of them, as ever I made in my
life. We ran at the same time to the Trees, and gathered Leaves, which served
us for Bread; and chose the biggest to wrap our Fish in, which we roasted under
the Cindars. It Is needless to say how excellent they thus were; and that
without any other Sauce, than that of a good Stomach, which we never wanted, we
found this Repast the most delicious in all our lives. In the mean time, my
Companion, and I, resolved to find out, whence we came by this Fish; and
thereupon desired the Master to show us how he caught them: Which he did not
refuse, telling us he made a hole on the Seaside, which being filled with
Water, at the return of the Tide he drew out these Fish thence. It Is impossible
to express the joy this news gave us; supposing, because this Invention once
succeeded, the same means would always be attended with the same success: Thus
did we flatter our selves, hoping the future would make amends for what had
past. In effect, we did all we could, but in twenty holes we made, there was
not taken so much as one Fish. This misfortune reduced us again, to our first
distress, for having placed our desires on a more substantial Meat than Leaves,
we could not return unto 'em, but with a most extreme regret.

The small sustenance these yielded, made us seek something else, and that with
such care and diligence, that we found (my Friend, and I) a great Toad, the
sight of which rejoiced us. Hunger is a strange thing; it makes pleasant, and
agreeable, the most horrid Objects: As soon as we saw it, we seized on it,
without the least scruple; and better Husbands now than heretofore, laid it on
the Coals whole, and immediately after devoured it.

This was excellent Meat with us, nor was the eating it attended by any ill
accident, but 'twas so little in quantity, that it tarried but a small time in
our Stomachs. Within a quarter of an hour after, hunger again overtook us; and
finding no other remedy, but that of getting out of this doleful place, we
resolved to gather as many dry Trees as we could, and with them make a Boat,
that might carry us to firm Land. The Master hearing of our design, was not
without difficulty brought to consent to it. He set before us the danger we
exposed our selves to; seeing our Comrades, who tried the same fortune,
miscarried: That we could not expect any better success, seeing they set out
with the same, or greater advantages; whereas, perhaps, in a short time, we
might see some Fisher-boats pass by, that would take us in. These
considerations made us pause a while, yet at length resolved to quit this
wretched place; and the Master left us at our liberty.

As soon as we had his consent, we cut down several Trees, and made of their
Rind small Ropes, which served to tie them together. We had not wrought above
three or four hours on this design, when we began to find the Work to exceed
the strength of four or five Sceletons, (such as we were) who were ready to
sink under the weight of it every Moment; and the rest would not help us,
alleging their weakness to be no less than ours; and that they had given their
service already in vain to others, and being void of all hope, they would
trouble themselves about nothing.

Their refusal did not so greatly discourage us, as to hinder us from
continuing our design, and the more our strength diminished, the more we
hastened in our Work. Yet do I verily believe, we should never been able to
finish it, had not the two youngest, and strongest of the Company joined
themselves to us. Their assistance so greatly forwarded us, that we had almost
ended it, when the Tide came, and made us desist.

In expecting the ebbing of the Sea, we sat all of us smoking Leaves of Trees
about a small fire; and in the interim I called to mind, that our Men often saw
Leganes, hankering after the Buffle, and that if there were any there still, I
might possibly take one of 'em. Whereupon I immediately went and hid my self
behind a Tree, where I long waited in vain; and in the mean time, considered,
that if the Buffle were such a dainty to those Animals, its flesh must not
certainly be so bad for us as we imagined. From these reflections I came to
their effects, and cut out a great piece, in a place which I judged the least
corrupted, and then returned to my Companions.

They wondered to see my provision, and hastily demanded what flesh it was;
whence I had it; and whether there was no more left? And seemed a little
surprised, when I told 'em 'twas the flesh of the Buffle; for notwithstanding
our extremity, no Body had as yet ventured upon it, but when they saw this
flesh, which scented so ill, did not much offend the sight; several ran (after
my example) and took as much as they could. Before they returned, I laid my
portion on the Coals, whence intending to take it up with a stick, I made for
that purpose; I found it all wasted, except a little Glewy matter of no
substance.

This experience made me leave all, to run to our People, whom I advised to
leave the Fat, and cut only the Lean. And at the same time fell all to work,
and cut at least forty pound of it, which was put under dry Trees, being
proper (as we imagined) to make it lose part of its ill scent. We roasted a
piece, and equally distributed it: Which smelt so strong, that some were sick
with the scent of it, yet eat it, and found 'twas not so bad as it smelt.

Our whole Company being not at the Feast, we carried a good part to the place
of Rendevouz, (and kept the rest concealed;) which we presented to the Master,
being about to tell him what it was: You may spare your pains, says he, the
scent shows what it is; pray carry your present elsewhere. As soon as he had
ended these words, I would came near, to tell him, 'twas not so bad as he
imagined; but he told me my Breath stunk so, that he could not suffer me to
approach him, infecting the very Air he breathed, and was already sick with it.
In saying this, he left me, and sought another place for his abode.

Others that were less nice, came and prayed us to give them part. Which we
did, and they eat it; these first Morsels so sharpening their Appetites, that
they were still craving for more. When those that were most eager after it,
devoured their portion, they would have the others: Which they withstanding,
this denial raised such a quarrel, as set us all in an uproar. To appease 'em,
we gave them part of that we kept for our selves, but this served only to
inflame their desires; so that although 'twas Night, they would needs go to the
place where the Carcass lay, to eat their Bellies full. We desired 'em to
consider the Night was dark, and, moreover, 'twas about this time, the
Crocodils, and Kaimans, lay sculking on the shore. They yielded to this reason,
but could not sleep, and we felt the effects of their greedy desires, being
forced to purchase our quiet at the cost of what remained. Having eaten all
that was left, some of 'em betook themselves to rest; whilst others affirmed,
hunger tormented 'em more now than before; there was one especially, cried out,
the Night seemed to him a year; that 'twas impossible for him to rest,
believing (as he said) there was no torment comparable to that of hunger: Yet
had he eaten above three pound of this Carrion; and some hours before Night,
half of a great Fish, which he found lying (knawed) on the shore. The Fish was
so big, that he first intended to make it serve him two Days, but when once
begun upon it, he could not leave, till he made an end of it, and assured us he
could eaten four times as much. With this discourse did this fellow disturb the
rest of the whole company; so that at break of Day we all rose; those that were
most hungry, ran again to the Buffle, and we betook our selves to work on our
Boat.

How bad and corrupt soever the Food was, we eat the day before, yet did it
yield us that strength, we never received from the Leaves. And therefore an
hour after we had been at our work, we left it to broyl some more, which much
added to our strength. We finished our Boat some hours before Night, and having
fetched a walk or two, returned to our Companions, whom we found busied, some in
laying their pieces of Meat in the Air, others in turning it, and some again in
roasting, and eating it with such an Appetite, as would made a Man that knew no
otherwise, believe 'twas some rare dainty.

When the Master understood our Vessel was ready, he showed us (as before) the
greatness of the danger, to which we were exposing our selves, seeing we could
not get to Land without Sails, nor resist the Tides without an Anchor. We
answered, there could not be any thing more dangerous to us, than this Island,
wherein 'twas too probable we must dye with hunger, when our buffle was spent;
that although we had neither Anchor, nor Sail, yet did we find our selves
strong enough to bear up against the Tides, and hoped to meet with some
Bengaloises, that would receive us on Board them.

After some further discourse, he wished us a good Voyage, and gave leave to
take with us a young Man of the Company, that spoke Portugaise. This Language
being much used in the Kingdoms of Bengala and Aracan; we promised our selves
hence a great advantage, and thought only of parting. In the mean time, one of
our Men offered to make a Wooden Anchor, alleging he wanted only for this
design, four crooked pieces of Wood, which he would so fasten together with the
Rinds of young Trees, as should answer our occasions. This, replied I, may be
done, provided we had wherewithal to make it sink to the bottom, but you know
very well, there is not one stone in this Island. It Is no matter, answered he,
for we will fill two or three of our Shirt-sleeves with Sand, and fasten them
to the Anchor; and you will see 'twill do us the same service as one of Iron. This
appeared so probable, that we went immediately, some to peel Trees, and the
rest to seek crooked boughs, by which means, in less than two hours our Anchor
was finished to our content.

Having proceeded thus far, we wanted twenty fathom of ground tackle, and knew
not where to get ten. Whilst we were studying what to do in this matter, we saw
two of our Crew coming toward us, laden with Ivy, and the Rind of young Trees.
They twisted one with the other, and made thereof such a Rope as we wanted.

The next Morning we took our leave of those that were designed to stay behind,
with an intent to return speedily to 'em, if we met with success. They wished us
good luck, and attended us to the Seaside; where, after mutual embraces, we
Embarkt eight of us, and gained the Isles point, which lies directly over
against the Main Land.

There we stood still, and paused a while, having kindled a Fire, and taken our
Repast. We then weighed Anchor, and with much rowing, found our selves far
enough from the Island. The Weather happened to be calm, which gave us
opportunity to make use of a Bagg of Sand, instead of a Plummet. By which
means, having found the Tide against us, we cast Anchor on a Bank, where our
Boat could take no harm. In the mean time, hunger pinching us, we agreed to
eat; but 'twas Decreed before hand, the provisions should be equally divided,
to the end every Man might Husband his share, lest the Voyage should prove
longer than we expected. We began then our Repast, with intentions of being
moderate; but being once entered, 'twas impossible to dissuade most of us from
making an end of all: Wherefore being reduced to feed upon Leaves alone, they
heartily besought God the Rope might break, and by this means return to the
Island, from whence we were not as yet above a Leagues distance.

Their prayers were heard, for there arose a Storm which broke our poor Cable,
and the Waves washed away our provision, which consisted in some few Leaves,
and forced us back to the same place, whence we parted in the Morning.

We committed our Boat to the care of the two youngest in our Company, whilst
the rest went on Shore. We immediately ran to the Fire we left at parting, and
found one of the Negroes Wives (we spoke of) by it. As soon as this Woman saw
us, she threw her self at our Feet; her Body was grievously battered, and
wounded, and we understood by her Signs, that 'twas her own people that had
thus used her. This wretched Creature was nothing but Skin and Bone, whereupon
we judged her condition to be the same as ours. We made signs to her to sit
down, and having warmed our selves, with an intention to repose; within an
hour, hunger tormented us in such a manner, that 'twas impossible to rest. To
complete our misery, one of our Company (maugre the tempest) had saved part of
his meat, which he eat in our sight, without imparting the least morsel of it,
though never so much entreated. We went then in quest of Leaves, but none of us
could swallow 'em, whatsoever Sauce we put them in. The Buffles flesh made us
too dainty, and since we eat of it, the Leaves of Trees became insipid meat.

In the mean time, hunger so extremely prevailed on us, that we became all of
us like Men desperate, staring one upon another, like persons that intended to
devour each other. Others ran to and fro like Madmen, crying out, ever and
anon, they felt the pains of the Damned. Whilst they thus raved, one of the
most distempered amongst us told the rest, he had an inspiration. But before,
says he, I tell you the contents thereof, you must acknowledge it to be one:
And without waiting our answer; admire, continued he, the strange effects of
Providence; God, says he, who pitties our miseries, does so apparently provide
a remedy against 'em, that we can no longer doubt of it; our Sins have all this
while blinded our eyes, and hindered us from finding the remedy he has sent us.
This Man's discourses, whom we respected as Senceless, did so weary us, that we
could not forbear interrupting, and telling him, that he was a Fool, to take
his Whimseys for Divine Revelations. Supposing, replied he, I were so, what
reason have you to believe your selves in a better condition? My Distemper
would be the effect of overmuch fasting, which you have suffered as well as I,
how comes you Brains, then, to be better settled than mine? But to use no more
words, do you see yonder poor Woman? Think you chance has brought her hither?
Jonas his Whale, young Toby's Fish. -- Pray, cried out one, more impatient than
the rest, what have we to do with Jonas and Toby? these are digressions that
are not to our purpose; we are an hungry, can you tell us, how we shall be
satisfied? Have I not told you, replied the other: Do you believe this Woman to
be here only to warm her self? This indeed is her intention, but God has used
this as a means to deliver her into our hands. In good truth, replied one
(called Charles Dobbel;) the more I examine the circumstances of this
Rencounter, the less I doubt this to be an effect of the Divine Providence, for
I believe this Woman came not here of her self; come on, continued he, (in
rising up,) I will be the Fates Executioner; having eaten all manner of
filthiness, let us try whether Human Flesh be not good, and make no scruple,
seeing it is the intention of Heaven, whose Decrees must be obeyed. When I
perceived he was in earnest, I desired him to sit down a while, entreating him
to think a little on the consequences of his enterprise; that these kind of
fancies, were rather the suggestion of the Devil, than Divine Inspirations;
that this Woman was of the same make as we, and if 'twas from a Revelation,
they undertook to eat her, 'twas one of the most wretched, and leanest
Revelations I ever heard of. Pray observe, said I, this Woman is a mere
Sceleton, covered only with skin, which, as you may perceive, has not the Mine
of any delicacy; but supposing 'twere otherwise, think you to stop here? No,
without doubt you will desire still the same meat; and God knows what little
security every Man may promise to himself after this rate. Whereunto I added,
that in two hours time we may come to the Buffle, and perhaps find enough left,
to satisfy us, if not, bad 'em use their pleasure, either in sparing, or
massacring this wretched Woman.

Whereupon, partly for shame, and some remains of detestation for this action,
they told me, they would think no more of it, and endeavor to sleep. At break
of Day they rose, and charged me with my promise. I was so weak, that I could
scarcely stir, it being above three Miles to the place where the Buffle lay. I
prayed 'em then to excuse me, for this once, and go without me, but they would
admit no denial, wherefore I was forced to go along with 'em. The four weakest
lay behind, and promised us, in the mean time, to work a new Cord, for the
Anchor we intended to make in the Room of that we lost.

We had not went a quarter of a Mile, before Charles Dobbel returned, and
charged the four that stayed behind to take care of the Woman, being resolved
at his return to kill her, in case the Buffle were all eaten.

We then hastened to the place where the Buffle lay, and found a great deal of
Flesh still remaining, but so greatly corrupted, that we were scarce able to
come near it. Having sought out the best place, and seen 'twas all alike, we
cut two or three pieces of it, which we laid on the Coals, and devoured half
dressed.

During our repast, came two of our Masters Company; who showed immediately by
their countenances, what was their Errand. This exceedingly troubled us, being
afraid they would take away all with them. Having observed 'em about an hour,
we drew near, and saw nothing remaining but bones; whereupon our eyes ran down
with Tears, saying to one another, we deserved to dye with hunger, for having
staid so long time without hindering them. It Is too late, replied Charles
Dobbel, to expect any Flesh, seeing they have left none, yet still there
remains part of the hide, let us try to get that, either by sair means or foul.
Whereupon he made up to 'em and desired 'em to be contented with what they had,
and leave us the rest. Hah! cried one amongst them (in a deriding tone) these
Gentlemen are very civil in their demands; we have taken the rotten flesh, and
they would have the skin, that is sound, and consequently the best part. Do you
imagine, said he to us, we have taken all this pains for you? It Is true, I do
not desire you should want, but we will serve our selves first, and if we must
perish here in this dolesom confinement, I freely declare, I Will use my utmost
endeavors to dye the last.

This prating fellow's discourse enraged us, especially Charles Dobbel, who
would needs come to blows, but I showed him, passion ought ever to be esteemed a
bad Counselor, and that 'twere better to be angry as late as we could. I told
them, then, that our request was neither unjust, nor ridiculous; that we were
all Companions in the same fortune; and that they ought to consider, we were
going to hazard our lives, as well upon their account, as our own. These
arguments were slighted, and Charles Dobbel, vexed at this proceeding, cried
out to us, come on Comrades, let us fall to work, as well as they, we need not
their leave: Whereupon each of us drew out his Knife, and took away their prey.

They being inferior to us in number, looked upon one another the while, to
encourage (as it were) one another. Demanding of us, whether 'twere just they
should labor all this while for us, in saying which, one of 'em lifted up an
Hatchet, and another a Knife, to strike at us. We, on our parts, put our selves
in a posture of defense; and he that had the Hatchet, having vowed he would cleave
the Scul of them that dared come near him; I told him, if he were wise, he would
hearken to reason, and not be thus transported with passion. What reason,
replied he, can a Man expect from persons that have none? you would have us
give away our right, can we do less than defend our own? But in fine, we came
to an agreement, which was, they should carry away what they had already, and
leave us the rest.

When we had taken out almost all of it without a Knife, (so great was its
corruption) we washed it in several waters, and dressed a great part of it,
keeping the rest for our Companions. Then we began to think of making another
Anchor, to serve instead of that we lost, and for this purpose dispatched two
of our Men, to borrow of the Master his Hatchet. Which he immediately sent us.
And having by the help of it finished our Anchor, we resolved to go all four to
thank him. About half way, one of those that borrowed the Hatchet, told us, he
had seen in going, the Masters Linen, lying a drying under the Trees, and that
both himself, and his Companion (who were half naked) were tempted to take each
of 'em a Shirt, and Wast-coat, but dared not do it without acquainting us. We
scrupled at first the suffering it, but the great need they had, made us shut
our Eyes against all consideration. And because this thievish exploit could not
be carried on in the Day, we therefore tarried till Night, and found them, by
good hap, asleep, when we came at their quarters. Those that needed Linen,
having taken what they wanted, came and told us, there lay near the same place,
a considerable quantity of the flesh, and skin of the Buffle, which we should
do also well to seize on. We were a great while determining the point, because,
that had they taken us in the Fact, we knew not how to excuse our selves, and
they were better Armed, and more in number than we. But hunger mastering these
considerations, we took away part of their provision, and speedily withdrew. I
went not far, before it repented me of this Theft, and was ready to carry back
again that which I had taken, when Charles Dobbel represented to me, that
should they awake, notwithstanding whatsoever we alleged to justify our
selves, they will never believe (seeing us out at so late an hour,) but that we
came with some ill design. I took, then, his advice, and so much the rather,
being inclined thereunto by hunger. Having rested our selves some time, we
continued on our march to our Companions, whom we found on the other side of
the River, where we left them. The Water was, then, so high, that we were
forced to pass over it in swimming with our booty at our backs.

Three of those that expected our coming, had eaten nothing since we left them,
and were so faint, that they were not able to stand. The fourth, who made a
reserve, feasted in their presence, and was so hard hearted to refuse them any
part with him. We could not without a just resentment, hear the complaint of
these hunger-starved wretches; and sharply rebuked him they complained against,
telling him he deserved the same measure, but we were more tenderhearted.

Having equally divided to each one his portion, we judged it meet, to watch by
turns against the surprises of our Enemies, reckoning them to be of that
number, whom we robbed; and for a stronger tie, made a solemn Oath, to assist
one another, in case of Invasion, to the last breath. We demanded afterward,
what became of the Woman we left in their keeping, and were informed, that soon
after our departure, she slipped away so cunningly, that we could never after set
sight on her. We would willingly have found her, fully intending then to eat
her, although so little toothsom.

As soon as 'twas night, we set one upon the watch, whilst the other seven
slept. Scarce had we rested two hours, but our Sentinel spyed a Negro stealing
softly toward him, with a thick Cudgel. As soon as he came within the reach of
his Oar, he broke it on his Head, and the wretch fell down as dead. The
disturbance awakened us; and informed of the matter, we pursued the other
Negroes, who seeing their Companion fall, fled into the thickest of the Wood.
As soon as they perceived we followed 'em, they set out such a cry in flying,
as would have made a Man judge it to be of twenty pursons, although they were
but seven or eight. After a fruitless persuit of them, we returned to the place
where their Companion fell, whom we supposed to lie dead on the place; but our
conjectures deceived us, for this wretch made shift to escape, and that with
such haste, that he left his stick behind him.

We conferred together touching this adventure, and doubted not but the Woman
that warmed her self at our fire, had given them notice of what passed among
us. She had observed that at our parting, we left only four behind, who might
be easily worsted, if set upon in the Night. And without question 'twas upon
this intent they came, but by good hap, instead of four Men, they found eight,
one of which watched for the security of the rest.

As soon as 'twas Day, we made a Rope for our Anchor, like unto the first, and
when ready to depart, we found our Boat was not in case to carry above six Men.
We were forced then to send away two, and the Lot fell upon the youngest, to
whom we promised, for their comfort, to return, as soon as we came to main Land.

In expectation of the Tides being for us, we placed our selves round a little
fire; where, an hour after, we heard such reiterated Screeks, and Cries, as
made our hearts tremble.

Notwithstanding our fear, yet would we answer, and immediately spied the two
young Men returning, we lately dismissed. They were so dismayed, that they quaked
still, in telling us they* found neither the Master, nor any of his Company:
That they not only sought 'em, where they were wont to pass over the Night;
but, moreover, in several other places, and that questionless, some Vessel, in
passing by, had received them on Board. Their unwillingness to tarry in the
Island, made us suspect this to be a device; we questioned 'em, therefore,
apart, and found their answer to be exactly the same. Which made us resolve to
tarry till next Morning, and go our selves to the place, and not leave the
Island, till we were further satisfied.

About midnight the flood favoring our design, we weighed Anchor, to go to the
dry Trees, some of which we wanted, to repair our Boat. And within half an hour
perceived the Tide fiercely carried us toward a great Tree, with extent
Branches; which, maugre all our endeavors, 'twas impossible to avoid; so that
the Boat ran against it with such violence, that some of us fell into the
Water, others were left hanging on the Branches, and I the only person, that
remained untoucht. This shock was so fierce, that each of us believed the rest
were drowned, and I for my part, did not doubt of it; when Charles Dobbel
appeared, calling upon the rest, and was transported with joy, to see me again
upon the Boat: At last we all found out one another. 'Twas extreme cold, and
they were very wet; and therefore endeavored to make a fire to dry themselves.

In this ill accident, we lost our Anchor, and half of the Rope, and wanted
wherewithal to repair this double loss. Neither did we know whether we could
make to the shore, the force of the Streams carrying uf off with such violence.
After trial, we found our conjectures true. Whereupon two of our Men, took the
rest of the Rope, and swam to shore, where they drew the Boat after 'em,
without any trouble.

'Twas Night, and we were ready to starve, both with hunger and cold, and had
neither Food nor Fire. And besides, 'twas near half a League off the place
where we warmed our selves the day before. Yet so far must we go, if we
intended to have Fire, and none of us were willing to go so far. Whilst we were
grieving under this vexation, Charles Dobbel, (who was one of the most lively
and courageous of us all) took with him the two youngest of our Company, and
went in search of what we wanted. In tarrying for them, we entertained one
another with the misfortunes that oppressed us, and the little likelihood of a
deliverance from them, all things continually crossing, and forcing us to tarry
in a Desolate and Barbarous Island, where it seemed Heaven had cast us, to make
us underto the punishments due for our offenses.

From these discourses we fell into a melancholy Fit of silence, and verily
believe we had pined away, had not our Companions returned soon after. The fire
they brought did us as much good, in dispersing the darkness, whose horror
also contributed to afflict us, as in driving away the cold, that was extreme
sharp upon us. These poor people told us at their return, that they trod all
along upon Briars, and Thorns; that they lost their way, and having at length
found the Fire we left, they fell with it into Boggs, and Ditches, full of
Water, which put it out, and forced 'em to fetch more; how that in seeking a
better way back, they happened into a worse, whence they were a long time getting
out. Their Feet ran down with blood, and their Bodies were bruised and
battered; which, together with their other sad circumstances, rendered them so
disconsolate, as it is impossible to express. We comforted 'em the best we
could, and then endeavored to rest.

The next Morning, we sent two of our Company, to the Master's Quarters, and
places thereabouts, to know whether they were certainly gone; and in the mean
time sought wherewithal to make us another Anchor and Cord. Toward Evening,
our people brought us word, they were not to be found in the Island, and that
they could meet only with a piece of stinking Fish; a small piece of the
Buffles skin, and four heads of Garlic in a Pot.

By these Tokens we knew they were gone, and began to hope they would remember
us. In the mean time, our two Deputies told us, they found in their way a
Grave, which one of 'em, moved only by curiosity (as he said) had uncovered;
but the sequel showed he had another design, for as soon as he saw a Corpse
which the Worms were gnawing, he cried out, the condition of these Insects was
better than his; he being ready to perish with hunger, whilst they were
Feasting. Having stood a while considering this object, at last, he says, he
had a great mind to deprive these Animals of their prey, and wanting other
means whereby to avoid Death, he thought no Man could justly blame him for
using this. Which said, he gave way to the temptation, laying hold on the
Carcass, and had cut, and eaten of it, had not his Companion showed him the
enormity of this action. He had much difficulty to dissuade him from it, but at
length prevailed, and both of 'em let down together the Corpse into the Grave,
and hastened from the place, lest hunger should get the better of 'em, and make
'em close with the temptation.

As soon as we had the Pot, we boiled that which was left of the Fish we
mentioned, together with store of minced Leaves. After the repast, we fell to
considering, whether 'twere best tarry in the Island, or venture out again. The
first opinion was grounded on the difficulty we found in resisting the Tide,
which was very high; on the loss of our two Anchors, and the impossibility of
making a fourth, in case we should lose this. 'Twas added, That our Companions
being safely arrived, would take care of us; and questionless, omit no
opportunity, to deliver us out of this place. Those that were for parting,
alleged, that the assistance which the others spoke of, was uncertain; that on
this groundless hope, we should eat that little which remained; and that having
staid in vain, we should be at length, forced to expose our selves to the
danger, which we thought to shun. After a dispute, which lasted near an hour,
'twas agreed to refer our selves to the eldest of the Company; who declared,
that a longer stay in this fatal place, would certainly destroy us, there
needing only three or four Days to make us incapable of mannaging our Boat;
whereupon, he concluded, we must use no longer delays. His opinion was
followed, and the rest of the Day spent in fitting out our Boat; and the next
Morning, (having broken our Fast, on the remains of the skin of the Buffle, and
provided good store of Leaves) we embarkt our selves.

We had made a little Sail of a Shirt, with the help of which, and a gentle
Wind, we got past the false Tides, in less than half an hour. A while after the
Wind ceased, and our Sail becoming useless, we plied our Oars. We had not went
far, before we needed meat; wherefore we cast our Anchor, which stood us in as
much stead as one of Iron. When we judged the Tide could not incommodate us, we
weighed it, and set Sail, and thus were carried from the Island, till we lost
sight of it.

The next Morning, we discovered the two Islands, of which the Master spoke to
us; and profiting by the instructions he gave us, got so far, that we passed by
'em. Six or seven hours after, we believed we saw main Land, and were indeed,
not mistaken, but were at a great distance from it; and as soon as we
discovered it, the Tide turned against us. We cast Anchor, then, with exceeding
great fear, lest its Rope should break, for 'twas on it lay all our hopes; and
during this time, one of the most hungry amongst us, proposed the augmenting
our allowance, seeing we were so near Land. Although the others were as weak as
he, yet were they not of his mind, alleging there needed only one blast of
Wind, to snap the Rope, that held the Anchor, and we were gone again; it being
better to be contented with a small allowance, and patiently expect the success
of our enterprise.

Having no compass; The Sun, and Stars, served us for guide, and by their
means, distinguished, whereabouts we lay. The next Morning, the Wind and Tide
being for us, from Morning to Night, we drew very near the shore, but could not
Land. We were forced, then, to cast Anchor, and pass over another Night, in
great distress, and fear; the currents running very swift.

The next Day we gained early the shore. We left the Boat at Anchor, with
intent to return to it, in case the Country we were in, were not that we looked
sor. Having marched a while, we found two ways, one along the shore, and the
other along the River of Sondiep; which two were opposite. We were so little
acquainted with either of them, that we knew not which to take; and after much
arguing to little purpose, we struck out at all adventure toward the River,
and found our selves in a good way. Hunger, cold, and other pressures, so
greatly weakened us, that we could scarcely go six steps, without resting, so
that we advanced but slowly, and in three hours time, met no living Soul. A
while after we saw Trees, whose Branches seemed to have been lately lopt. About
twenty paces distance from thence, we beheld a Bark, toward which we drew
near; and as soon as those that were in it perceived us, they came toward us.
This facility troubled us, for we could not imagine, beholding 'em coming
without being called, but that they meant us harm.

Our fear increased, when we perceived 'em to be six in number, armed each of
'em with a long knife in his hand. When they were near enough to behold we were
not in a condition or humor to hurt them, we showed 'em our fleshless and
wasted Arms, and some small remains of the skin of the Buffle: Which, though
small in quantity, yet were enough to poison the least delicate amongst them;
and therefore these people (howsoever gross and brutish) drew back six or
seven paces, stopping their Noses, and threatening us with their knives.
Whereupon we comprehended, they suspected us to be treacherous and faithless
persons. And therefore hastened to show them our Leaves of Trees, endeavoring,
to make 'em comprehend by signs, that these had been our Food. They at length
understood us; and moved with compassion, smote their Breasts, with Eyes lift
up to Heaven. Being satisfied of our sincerity, we signified to 'em (as well as
we could) the need we had of them, to bring us to the next Village. They
readily offered us their assistance, provided we paid them. I could not but
ruminate in my mind, upon this occasion; how unkind, and selfish, most Men are;
and how little like their Creator, the Giver of all things. These Barbarians
saw, that we were in a manner naked, being only tied about with some tattered
Rags; mere Anatomys, and Shadows. And, moreover, pitied by 'em, as being
strangers, in a Forlorn condition, and destitute of all succor. Yet without
Money, we plainly perceived, this main Land would be no better to us than the
wretched Island, wherein we so long suffered. We agreed, then, to give them
something, and Deputed the Eldest amongst us to make the bargain. He offered
them a piece, to the value of a Crown, in our Money. The Bengaloises gave us to
understand, they must have ten of 'em; for less than which, they would not
leave their work. We thereupon gave them another, and afterward a third piece;
all which not prevailing with them, our old Man, showed them his empty pockets,
thereby insinuating, they had all. This pretense effected our business, but in
a miserable manner.

When we were on board their Bark, we made signs to 'em to give us something to
eat; they answered, they could not, without Money; we gave them another Crown;
and for this, they gave us, in a cloth, about an handful of Rice, and a Pisang,
as big as a Man's finger. Every one of us stretched forth his hand with such
earnestness, as made our distributer fear his handful of Rice, would occasion
some disorder. He withdrew himself, then, and made eight equal portions. He did
the same with the Pisang, (which is an indifferent good fruit;) and although
this was but a small repast, yet inestimably to be preferred before that filth
we had eaten for a Month together; so that we wished the Bark were full of this
provision; although we could hardly imagine such a quantity would satisfy us.
The Negroes, perceiving we had still Money, took advantage thereby; and ceasing
to row, made signs we had not yet given them enough; and that if we expected to
go forward, they must have more pieces. We gave them, then, another; whereupon
they rowed about some twelve strokes, and then gave over. Whereupon we gave
them a third piece, and they did as before, so that this was still to begin
again; they continuing still to demand, and we to give, so great a desire had
we to come to Land.

In the mean time we saw two other Barks, which came and joined themselves with
us. Their gestures plainly showed, their whole discourse was of us, which
lasted a great space. Within a while they Landed, to consult (as it were, more
conveniently) what to do with us. They counted the Money they received, looking
upon us in such a manner, as made us fear the success of their conference.

Having tarried about an hour in the Bark, two of our Company went out to pray
'em to show them some fresh Water. As soon as the Negroes perceived 'em, one of
them took 'em by the Arms, and made them enter the Bark again. This hard usage
fully persuaded us, they were there only to determine the means, to cut our
Throats, and get our Money; and in this imagination, began to prepare our
selves for Death. Yet not without repinings against Providence, which so
obstinately persecuted us. From the time we believed they formed the design of
Murdering us, we were impatient till they Executed it; for hunger had rendered
the pains of death less affrightful. In fine, having suffered during the space
of two or three hours, what they suffer that expect Men to come and cut their
Throats; the three Barks parted, and our Masters returned, pursued their
course, and for a Crown more gave us a Pot full of fresh Water. Which we drank
with the greater delight, it being a Month since we had tasted any other than
Salt Water. As soon as we had filled our Bellies with Water, our hunger in some
measure abated, and our Stomachs began to let us rest.

In the mean time, the Negroes informed us, that twenty of our Companions were
in the next Village; and for this good news, we gave 'em another Crown.
Whereupon they hastened to bring us where they were, and in entering the
Village, two of them came with us to the Goverour, at whose Feet they laid down
the three Crowns we agreed to give 'em for our passage, having thrice touched
the Earth with their Heads, and Hands, in saying, Salamabeta, (that is to say)
Peace be with you. The Governor gave us a kind reception, making Signs to take
the Money again, that lay at his Feet. But we gave him to understand (as well
as we could) his Men had well earned it, and that we would not deprive them of
their Sallery. In fine, he ordered two or three of his Servants to conduct us
to our Companions; who perceiving us at a distance, came and met us, expressing
their joy to see us. Those we left in the Island, arrived five days before us,
in this Village; and the five that went off first, in their Machine, came some
days before them; under the guidance of certain Fishermen.

As soon as they saw us, they endeavored to out-vy one another in welcoming
us; and perhaps would have done better in not giving persons that fasted so
long, so many sorts, and such great quantities of Meat; for without the Pisang
and Honey, which served us for a Medicine, and Digesture, I believe we should
have bursted. Their operation was so happy, that all these meats did us no
hurt, and that which was most strange, was, that although we eat much, and
often, yet were still as hungry as before.

Two Days after we were here, the Governor thought fitting, to send those that
came first, to the Factory; that so the Company might be informed of the loss
of their Vessel. Advising them, by his Interpreter, to stock themselves well
with provisions; being to Voyage above two hundred Leagues; and, moreover,
travel five Days in a barren Country; and that which they were to come into
afwards, being not much more fruitful, and inhabited. This bad news alarmed
our poor people, who had not, as yet, well refreshed themselves, nor satisfied
their desires after meat; for the more they eat, the more they coveted. Yet
part they must, for the reasons aforementioned. As to our selves, who were
those that came last, having rested four or five Days; I informed my self, by
what adventure our Companions left the unfortunate Island, and was told as
follows. After they had taken their leaves of us, they wilthdrew to their
ordinary place of abode; and it being late, endeavored to rest. The next
Morning, perceiving their provision was stolen, they became exceedingly
troubled. In the midst of their Affliction, they instantly besought God to
deliver them from their misery. Each one, afterward, betaking himself to
Leaves, but with-extream sorrow, to find themselves reduced to such insipid
Food.

Toward the Evening, there were two, who discoursing together, touching their
sad condition, found themselves, insensibly, at the point of the Isle, whence
they discovered Fishermen. As soon as they imagined they were seen, one of 'em
broke off a bough from a Tree, fastening to it a piece of Linen; which he
wavered, to give notice there were persons in the Island. The Fishermen drew
near within a stones cast off the shore. After a quarter of an hours
consultation, they came nearer, and demanded in Portugaise what we were. We
answered 'em in the same Language; and being fully satisfied, they came on
shore. They were all Armed, some with Darts, and Javelins, and others with
Bows, and Arrows; and although they saw well enough, our people were not in a
capacity to molest them, yet they anxiously demanded their Arms. Our Men having
only their Knives, immediately threw them down on the ground, and one of the
Negroes gathered them up. Whereupon they drew nearer us, and required to see
the rest, demanding how many we were in all? Lest our number should affright
them, 'twas answered, we were not above seven, whom they should now see. Those
that guided them, ravished with joy to see themselves upon the point of their
deliverance, could not forbear shouting, and hollowing, at the entrance of the
Wood. Which being heard by their Companions, they imagined some Beast was
wounded, and their assistance required. Whereupon every Man, at this noise,
Armed himself with a good Cudgel, and ran with all speed, toward the place
where the noise was heard. When the Negroes saw 'em coming with such
fierceness, they imagined themselves betrayed, and immediately let fly their
Arrows, yet hurt none of our Men. Who seeing they were attcked by persons, whom
they supposed to be the wretched Slaves, they saw on the other side, two days
after they Landed in the Island; imagined, that hunger drove them to this
extremity, and that taking our Men at a disadvantage, they would have slain
them. In this imagination, they so Animated themselves, that they resolved to
cry quittance with them, when their stock of Arrows were spent. The two that
were near the Negroes, perceiving their Companions mistake, cried out to 'em,
they were deceived, and bad 'em throw away their Cudgels, and come boldly up to
them. To which, they obeyed; and in approaching, demanded by signs of the
Negroes, whether they had any thing to eat; and that they would hasten to give
them something. One of them answered in Dutch, that their wants were apparent,
and should be supplied, but they must first deliver up their Staves, and
Knives, which was done without the least hesitation.

The Negroes now fearing nothing, gave our people a small quantity of Sod Rice,
which was so greedily devoured, that they stood like Men amazed, beholding how
they eat it. In the mean time our Men, being impatient to get out of this
place, demanded of the Negroes whether they would carry 'em thence, which they
consented to, upon consideration of a reward; alleging they were but poor, and
consequently could not afford to do it for nothing. Our Men having Money, soon
agreed about the price, which was four Crowns a Man; and the Fishermen spent
the next Day in repairing their Barks. As to provision, they said they were
stored with Rice, sufficient for themselves, and us; and hoped to take Fish
enough to satisfy the most hungry among us. This discourse extremely rejoiced
our people, who immediately demanded a Hat-full of Rice, which they obtained
for half a Crown. Whilst the Negroes were Fishing, our people boiled the Rice,
they had given them; and before 'twas ready, they brought them Fish likewise,
together with necessaries to dress it. At Night, when 'twas time to rest, the
Master ordered our Men privately to watch, one after another, to prevent the
Negroes from using any treachery toward us; and they on their side, used the
same pre-caution.

Two Days after, they gave us notice to make ready for our departure the Night
following; and as soon as we were embarked, they rowed so lustily, that we soon
came to their Village. Being Landed, they led our people to the Governor, who
gave them a kind Reception, and dispatched two or three Barks, with Provision
toward those that set out on their Boat from the Island. Having given this
order, he made them sit down about him, on a great Matt; and caused the
Fishermen to come before him, and return the Money given for their passage.
But they alleged 'twas not just to defraud these poor Men of their Sallary. As
soon as they were sat down, an Eunuch brought word, that the Governors Women
had a desire to see some of the young Dutchmen, who were sent them. The place
where they entered, is a great space distinguished by several Appartments; in
the midst of which is a Court, through which the Eunuch made them enter. Where
immediately these Women Flockt about 'em, some of them taking 'em by the Nose,
others pinched their Cheeks: Some, again, unbuttoned 'em, to see and touch
their Breasts, others stroakt them over the Face with languishing looks; there
being not one of them, but desired these two young Men might remain with them
for some hours; but the surly Eunuch departed, and made signs to them, to
follow him. Being joined to their Companions, they were led altogether to a
House of Entertainment for strangers. The next Morning, which was Market Day,
the Governor came to 'em, and changed their Money into little Shells, (which is
the Money of that Country) and helped them to buy what they wanted, to prevent
their being cheated.

The rest of the Day was spent, in making merry; and toward Evening, the
Book-keeper looking out at the Door, received a blow with a stone, that much
injured him. Of which, having complained to the Governor, he caused the
offender to be sought, and found him to be one of his Domestics. Having
sharply reprehended him, he caused an Arrow to be run through his Nostrils; and
having a Drum tied behind his Shoulders, was thus led before the Lodging of the
Person hurt; where having been severely whipped, he was condemned to perpetual
banishment. And this was the adventure of the five Men that remained in the
Isle after us: Here follows that of the seven, who made use of a Boat, in the
same manner as we did.

Having no Anchor, for the space of five Days, and as many Nights, they
struggled against the force of the Tides, which cast them upon a Bank of Sand.
This Bank was of great extent, where they imagined, at first, they might find
something for their refreshment; the Provision they took with 'em, being spent.
But after a long search, could find nothing but a small quantity of a Buffles
dung, which they carefully gathered up. They had lived two Days upon the Moss,
which the Floods from the Sea had made, on the Trees it dashed against. And
their Stomachs being thus accustomed to filth, this last appeared very good to
'em, and they only complained they had not enough of it.

This sorry Food lasted them about three Days, at the end of which, they found
themselves so weak; that they could neither Row, nor without difficulty stand
upright. One of the Company reflecting upon the necessity there was of dying,
in this disconsolate place: What think you of it, said he, to the four rest,
that accompanied him, must we all dye with hunger? Is it not just, that some
lose their Lives, for the preservation of the rest? It is true, the Divine Law
enjoins us, to love our. Neighbor, and forbids Murder: But is there any thing
more near to us, than our selves; and does not this precept of Prohibition seem
to insinuate, that every thing is permitted us, in order to the conserving of
that Being, which Nature has given us? We have the example of whatsoever has
Life; the great Fish devour the small; and the least. Insect, flies by a
Natural instinct, the approaches of its Enemy. Death treads upon our Heels;
says he, of all Enemies the most dreadful, and cruel. Why do we not, then, use
against it, the only remedy left us? Kill we therefore, the weakest amongst us,
Nature forces us to it, and I cannot see what you can oppose against my
Argument.

No marvel, replied one of those to whom he directed his discourse, if your
Argument be wrong, being grounded on a false Principle; the Prohibition to
Kill, is so express in the Law, that no reason is sufficient to exempt us from
it. Be it known to you therefore, in short, that if you continue in this
pernicious design, you thereby render your self an Enemy both to God and Man.

This honest Man's discourse (whose name was Adrian Raas) could not prevail
with them, being answered, Necessity knew no Law. The three others, who were
present at this Harangue, resolved with the first, to execute their design.
Adrian Raas, well assured of their intent, went to give notice thereof to the
two Victims. Who, at the news, fell into such Lamentations, that their friend,
moved with compassion, promised to assist them. Whereupon he led 'em to a by
place, where he helped 'em to make two holes, wherein to hide themselves at
Night; which was the time appointed, for this bloody Sacrifice. By which means,
failing of their design, they were forced to take other measures, and did as
follows. Three of the accomplices, considering the trouble they had, to
surprise those whom they intended, cast their Eyes upon one amongst them, a
Corpulent Man, and in whom they believed to find, what they could not meet with
in the two others. He was no Fool, and therefore well perceived their designs
were upon him. From that time he stood upon his guard, and without taking
notice of any thing, flattered, and exhorted 'em to hope the best; saying, he
doubted not, but some Barks would pass by, and then the Tongue of that
Country, which he learnt at Coromandel (where he had been a Soldier) would
stand them in stead. This wheedle took effect; and they thought it behooved 'em
to preserve him, for his ability in that kind. Adrian Raas helped to carry on
the Story, although he knew 'twas false; affirming, a Man of his parts, was
better than a Treasure in a strange Country. One of the most hunger-starved,
seeing nothing done; and all his contrivances rendered ineffectual: Well, said
he, is this the fruit of all our projects? Will no Body dye? Let the rest argue
how they will, I must feed upon some Flesh, or other, before I sleep. To which,
the three others consenting, Adrian Raas showed 'em into what an abominable
enormity they were rushing, through their impatiency; and therefore earnestly
advised them, to weigh the consequences of what they were a going about. We
have thought enough, and tarried but too long already, replied one of the
resolutest of them, and the two we would begin withal, are so little deserving
of their lives, that it is a sin not to kill them. Adrian Raas seeing his
Remonstrances would do no good, proposed to 'em the drawing of Lots; by which
means, that person whom Heaven judged worthy of death, should have it. But his
proposal was rejected, and another expedient being sought after, there were two
that offered to go in quest of Land; whence they promised to send help to the
others, with all possible expedition. This proposal liked us all; and to
facilitate their enterprise, those that remained, gave to the two adventurers
almost all their Money, with which these last parted, and arrived unexpectedly
at a Village of Bengala. They being ignorant of the Country, and being not
able to make themselves understood, could not indicate the place, where their
Companions were. Yet their own particular wants being apparent, they were well
treated for two Days, and then put on Board a Vessel, wherein they Sailed near
three hundred Leagues to be presented to the great Mogol.

Eight days after they were gone, the five wretches that tarried expecting
them, spied Fishermen pass by the place where they were; and coming within
call, they urged him amongst them, who pretended skill in their Language, to
speak to 'em; and he cried out, pai, pai, but those two words signifying
nothing, the Fishermen could not tell what to make of them; whereupon the rest
repented, they had not eaten him. After a thousand reproaches, and invectives
against him, for his abusing them; at length they made a shift by signs to make
'emselves understood; and the Fishermen, in approaching them, required 'em to
lay down their knives, before they came on Board them: Where they had no sooner
been, but they fell immediately to fighting, who should have a dead Fish, which
they saw lying in the Boat, and in this bustle, dropped a Bagg of Money; which
being taken notice of by the Fishermen, they immediately seized upon their
wretched Passengers; and having spoiled them of all, turned them out again, in
the same place where they took them in. These poor people, thus handled,
destitute of all succor, and void of all hope, to get out of this wretched
place, laid themselves down on the Sand, where they impatiently expected death,
to put an end to their miseries. Having lain near four and twenty hours in this
distress, there passed by other Boats; who spying them, drew near of their own
accord, and made signs to 'em, to come on Board. Where immediately they had a
Barrel of Honey set before 'em. They were ravished to find themselves thus
unexpectedly treated, and for fear the Fishermen would not take them along
with 'em, they filled in the Night, their Hats full of it, which they intended
to reserve in store. Yet was their fear needless, for the next Morning they
were carried to Sondiep; where the Master, and those that accompanied him, had
arrived the same day. The Governor of the Town gave them a kind Reception,
liberally provided for them; and after five Days refreshment advised them to go
carry the news of their wrack to the Factory.

As to our selves, who came last, we minded nothing but rest, or rather eating,
for Night and Day we devoured all that came before us.

Having been here about five Days we desired the Governor's permission to go
to Bolwa, where our companions were gone before us. He scrupled at first the
matter, supposing we were not yet able to endure so long a Voyage; but finding
us determined, he caused three Barks to be made ready, one to carry us, and the
two others for our Convoy.

The Night following we arrived at Anam, a poor and despicable place, that
afforded not any thing. Here we sent back our three Barks, and hired another as
far as Bolwa. At two Leagues distance from this Village, our Guides set us on
shore, and made us walk on Foot, the rest of the way. Whilst they went to the
Governor, to give notice of our arrival, we bought Milk and Rice, which we
dressed in a Pot, that was lent us by Moors that spoke Portugaise. It was near
ready, when our guides came and told us, we must come immediately to the
Prince, who sent for us. This news displeased us, for we had a Canine Appetite;
and were not willing to leave to strangers, what we so dearly prized. We took
the Pot, then, and carried it by turns to the Prince's Palace-Gate, where we
Eat what was in it, before we entered. We were afterward led to the place,
where our twenty Companions were, who parted long before us; and within half an
hour, into a great Hall, where our Money was counted; to the end we might be
satisfied, in case we had been Robbed by the way. We were at length brought to
our Lodging, and by the Prince's order, served with an excellent kind of Meat
(called Brensie) seen only on great Men's Tables. It Is made of choice Rice, a
fat Goose, and two Pullets, squeezed together in a Cloth, after about two or
three hours boiling; To the juice of which, there is added several sorts of
spices; especially Nutmegs, Cloves, Saffron, Cinnamon, and Sugar. This was such
a nourishing Food, that in less than three or fours days, we recovered again
our full strength. Yet were not our Stomachs fully satisfied with it; for we
were more for a less juicy meat, such as dry Rice, and boiled Fish.

Five days after we had been here, the States of the Kingdom, whom the Prince
called, met before his Palace; where, as fast as they came, we saw 'em take
their places, and sit down after the manner of the Eastern people. When all the
Members had taken their places, the Prince came out of the Palace, environed
with his Guards; some with Bows and Arrows, others with Sword and Buckler; and
he seated himself in the same manner as the rest. They kept in this posture,
from Morning till Night; and that which they determined, was so little secret,
that an hour after, 'twas the talk of the common people. I desired to know the
reason of it, and was told, that here were no Mysteries of State transacted,
nothing being done but what came to the public notice. And the reason is, that
the Prince's Guard consists wholly of Christians, which are there in great
esteem; and although, perhaps, they are only Christians in name, being Negroes
born; Subjects to the King of Portugal: Yet are they counted such brave
fellows, that they have a particular respect showed them; and therefore the
Grandees of the Court so highly prize their Familiarity, that they relate to
them, whatsoever passes in Council.

The next Morning, the Prince sent us word, that we might go when we pleased,
the Barks being ready. This being our earnest desire, we parted an hour after
and happily Arrived at Decka. The Factory received us very kindly. We related
to 'em our Adventures, and they informed us that the Ship called the Wesop, was
cast away near the Isles of Anaans.

The Governor, caused a Bark to be made ready, to Transport us to Ongueli,
where the Dutch have also a considerable Factory. But an hour before we parted,
he received a Letter from the great Mogols General, in which he enjoined him to
send us to him: This being an express order, we were forced to obey, seeing
this General threatened, in case of refusal, to seize upon all the Dutch in his
Master's Kingdom, and make them Slaves.

We were forced, then, to yield, and in preparing our selves for a longer
Voyage, than the first; were told, that this General, named Nabab, was a person
very fortunate, having never lost a Battle, nor raised his Siege from any
place, before he had carried it away; that he had taken several Cities,
defeated whole Armies, and made several Kingdoms tributary to the great Mogul.
These prosperous successes made us imbark with the better courage in following
our Guides who were ordered to bring us to the Army.

We traveled thirty days together, sometimes by Land, and sometimes by Sea;
passing by several Cities, made desolate; the inhabitants of the Country being
wont, in time of War to leave their Houses, to follow the Army, wheresoever it
marches.

They are a sort of people, that are very just in their dealings, of an Affable
Conversation, contenting themselves with few things; naturally Enemies to
covetousness and ambition, yet quarrelsom and injurious; but in their greatest
heats, never mention the Name of the Devil. As to oaths, they seldom use 'em,
unless in matters of great concernment; and then so strictly observe 'em, that
no consideration in the World can prevail with them, to violate 'em.

On the thirty fifth day, we went on Board one of the Vessels belonging to
Nabab; where we found four Englishmen, some few Portugaises, and two Men of
our Company, whom we already mentioned. From thence we went, and cast Anchor,
near the City of Renguemati; from whence, within a small time we came, and were
entertained in the Army of the great Mogol. The General, whom we saluted in his
Tent, seemed glad to see us, and immediately ordered us a large Cup-full of
Arak, to drink his health. The Cup was so closed, that 'twas a difficult matter
for us to open it, and therefore the General gave it us on purpose, to divert
himself with the humor of it. We took it each of us, one after another, in our
hands, to no purpose; and were ready to give it over, when it came into my
mind, that the Cup being only of Wood might be easily pierced: Whereupon I took
it again, and made a hole in it, with the point of my knife. Being full to the
brim, the Arak sprung out abundantly, and by this means we all drank of it, and
used the liberty Nabab had given us, in saying, We must drink well, and fight
well. This Liquour was so strong, that we soon felt the effects of it, making
us jolly, and confident with the General; who told us that at six Months end,
he would send us to those of our own Nation. He granted us the full enjoyment
of all the booty we could take from the Enemy; and fifty Roupies for every Head
we brought him; and an hundred for each Prisoner. In fine, he told the Master
of our Ship, he would send him to the Factory, to inform them of the loss of
their Vessel; and that he might take our Surgeon with him, and our three
Boys, which were too young to serve in the Army. In the mean time the Arak made
us so bold, that we had like to fallen together by the Ears for Oranges, which
were given us, because all had not a like share, without considering we were in
the General's Tent. He winkt at our rudeness, and commanded his Surgeon to
carry us to his Tent, and drink there more moderately.

The next Morning the General sent us three hundred Roupies, and assigned us
certain Vessels, called Gourapes, one of which carried fourteen Guns, and about
fifty or sixty Men. Each Gourape was attended by four Kosses; which are Boats
with Oars, to tow great Vessels. There were also several great Flat-bottom
Boats, that carried no Mast, yet were well furnished with Guns. The greatest
part of the Officers were Portugaises; and the General had so good an opinion
of the Christians, that if a Moor could speak but a little of that Language, he
commonly preferred him to some considerable Office. There were several other
Vessels, laden only with Provision, and Warlike Ammunition. We saw likewise,
several Barges set forth with Streamers, wherein were the Wives of Persons of
Quality, that followed the Army. The General had five hundred for his share.
These Women were kept by Eunuchs, made so in their tender years, who were in
great credit with their Masters.

As soon as we were ordered to march, we sought the Vessel assigned us, but I
had the unhappiness to lose my self in that vast multitude of people, together
with one of my Companions, and were eight days, before we could know where to
betake our selves. This small mishap gave me the opportunity of an exact
observation of the Army, which consisted of near three hundred thousand Horse,
and five hundred thousand Foot. The General rode in the midst of the Cavalry;
and before him marched several Trumpeters, and Kettle-Drummers, mounted on
Elephants. He was followed by twenty of these Animals, each of them carrying
two small pieces of Cannon, two Gunners, with as many chargers. After these
came three or four thousand Moscovites, all extraordinarily well mounted.

Several thousands of Cammels, laden with the Baggage, were followed by all
sorts of Merchants, Artisans, Curtisans; some mounted on Cammels, others on
Horses. 'Twas told us, that this great Body stood the Mogol, in every day,
above five Millions; the greatest part of which, were paid by the Curtisans,
and Merchants, that followed the Army. Which is no hard matter to believe,
because I knew in that Country, the Cities were destitute of all Trade in time
of War, and therefore the Inhabitants were forced to follow the Army; by which
means, it abounded with all necessaries, except strong drinks, the use of which
was only permitted to the Christians, because the Moors in drinking never so
small a quantity, became cruel, and bloody minded.

After a long march, we entered into Kosbia, a Country lying between the
Kingdoms of Bengala, and Azo, of which the General easily became Master. The
King of Azo imagined the Walls of his Capital City, were proof against our
Cannon; and believed himself secure; but soon found the contrary, for we took
his City by assault, and made him Prisoner. He had an Iron Collar, fastened
about his Neck, whence hung two great Chains, which were fixed also to his Legs,
and in this manner was served by four Pages. A while after the King was taken
Prisoner, the General was showed several Caves made into rocks, wherein was hid
his Treasure, the rest became the Soldiers booty, and we thought all to enrich
our selves, but were mistaken; for besides that; these people wear no other
Clothing, than a piece of Linen, which reaches from their Waste; down to
their Knees; they had so well hid every thing of value, that we could find
nothing but a Pot of Rice, and a Box full of Tow, and some Leaves, which they
chew continually, to cleanse their mouths. We were troubled to find our
expectations thus frustrated, especially considering the smallness of our
Wages, which were not sufficient to maintain us, being no more than ten Crowns
a Month, and Provision was very dear. The reason why we had no more, was,
because we served by constraint, whereas the English and Portugaises that went
volunteers, received monthly twenty five Crowns a Man.

Some days after, the General required our two Carpenters assistance, in the
building him a stately Vessel, from a model he showed them. Which finished, he
promised 'em their liberty. They accepted the proposal, and were sent to Decka,
where they finished their undertaking, to the General's content, who kept his
word with them.

It was demanded of us, at the same time, whether either of us, was willing to
accept the Government of the Castle of Agra, and for our encouragement, there
were several advantageous offers made us; but they could not prevail with us,
especially considering we were to live amongst Moors; and that such an employ,
perhaps, would so fix us in that Country, that we should never get out of it.

The General being a Man of dispatch, immediately after the overthrow of the
King of Azo, hastened toward the Countries belonging to the King of Assam, who
was one of the Mogols chiefest Enemies. 'Twas said, that this King having
notice of his march, derided his discretion, wondering, that with eight hundred
thousand Men only, he should undertake that, which two Millions of Men could
not atchieve. In effect, it seemed to be a rash Enterprise, and that the
Example of so prodigious an Army, which lately perished in the same Parts where
we went, should have deterred our General. But so far was he from being
discouraged by this consideration, that the greatness of the danger served only
to heighten his courage; and lest the Flood, which every six Months overflowed
the greatest part of this Kingdom, should hinder his project, he advanced with
great expedition, and arrived before that time, at the place he intended. As
soon as we were in the Enemies Country, a general consternation seized upon
them; and the fame of Nabab's Fortune, caused infinite numbers of the Enemy's
Subjects to come over to his side, as the surest.

In the mean time, the English, and we, having observed all the signs of an
approaching tempest, carefully viewed, and repaired our Vessels; but all our
pre-cautions could not hinder its sinking: For not being Ballasted, the
Currents overturned it, and that which hastened our loss, was the Sottish, and
Extravagant curiosity of a Mariner, that had the management of it. This Man,
to try experiments, would needs have all the Sails hoisted up, which was no
sooner done, but our Vessel sunk. There were Boats enough to help us, had
custom permitted it; but in like accidents, the Moors help no Body, not their
near Kindred, or intimate Friends, Yet by good hap, there was a lusty
well-shaped Woman, who seeing five Hollanders upon the point of drowning, rowed
up to them, and maugre two Men that withstood her, received them into her Boat.

The River Ganges is of very unequal breadth, being in some places a League, in
others a League and an half wide; so that when the Wind is high, this River
abounds with Waves and Billows, no ways inferior to those of the Sea. There
were lost by this accident four Dutchmen, and twenty four Moors; and I had ran
the same Fate, had not I (after four hours swimming toward the Land) met with
a Vessel, Commanded by Englishmen. As soon as I made my self known to them,
they sent forth above sixty Men to my assistance, who took me into their Boat,
where they gave me what was necessary. In fine, they carried me on Board their
Vessel, where I found one of my Contrymen, on whom the English had showed
the same compassion. The next Morning we thankt our Benefactors, and went to
the Army, where we sought an occasion of admittance to the General.

The loss of his Vessel was but bad news to carry him, yet we could not but
make it known to him, for we knew not where to bestow our selves. As soon as he
heard it, he fell into such a Fit of passion, that we believed we should be
both hanged or worse. At length he commanded us to withdraw, and choose what
Vessel we had a mind to, the Enemy's Fleet being expected every moment.

We were heartily glad we came off so well; four of our Companions went on
board a Gourape; and two others, and my self, chose a Bark, that carried six
pieces of Cannon.

Two days after, our Admiral set Sail, in search of the Enemy, attended by the
whole Fleet. We immediately heard a continual roaring of Guns, whence we
inserred, the Land Army was engaged; but as to our parts, we could not so soon
join the Enemy, being (as it was thought) at a great distance from us. When the
Admiral had set his Fleet in order, the General's Surgeon, who was of our
Nation, and a Lover of his Country, exhorted us to behave our selves,
answerable to the good opinion they had of our Contrymen. Representing to
us, that when we come to engage, the whole Fleet will take notice of the
Christians, and especially of us, who were greatly esteemed by the Moors. That
'twas the Companies interest, we should keep up our Reputation, and that we
might have a great share in the glory of that days actions.

Although the Wind was little favorable to us, yet we followed on our course;
and three or four hours after dashed against a Rock, which struck off our Helm.
At length we recovered it, and having fixed it in its right place, held on our
course. Not long after we discovered the Enemy's Fleet, consisting of six
hundred Sail. Although we were in search of them, yet were greatly surprised to
see those so near us, whom we believed to be farther off. As soon as the Enemy
perceived us, they advanced toward us, and we tarried expecting them, as well
out of necessity, as bravery, the contrary Wind hindering us from retreating.
Whilst they made up toward us, we sat down at Table, which we had no sooner
done, but a dish of Meat that was set thereon, was carried away by a Cannon
Bullet, which did us no other harm, but that of depriving us of our allowance.
Whereupon we betook our selves to our Guns, and from that time, till midnight,
ceased not Firing on our side, and were answered in the same manner by the
Enemy. An hour after the Enemy withdrew; there came another Vessel to our
assistance, which was commanded by a Moorish Prince, called Menorcan, who had
set out thirty Vessels at his own charge, for the service of the great Mogol.
This Prince observing our post to be dangerous, assisted us in such a manner,
that we got the Wind of the Enemy. As soon as we had cast Anchor, he left us,
promising to return the next Morning, with the whole Fleet. He had not gotten
far, before we perceived six Sail making toward us. Five of which, could not
surmount the force of the Currents, but the sixth came so near, as to give us a
broad side. But as soon as a fair opportunity offered, we boarded her, and
quickly became Masters of her. So that we took the first prize on the Enemy.
Having taken out of this Vessel, whatever was of any value, to avoid farther
trouble, we set her on fire. Half an hour after, eight or nine of the Enemy's
Vessels made toward us, and this number daunted us, wherefore we weighed
Anchor, and sheltered our selves under the Dutch and Portugaise Vessels, which
made 'em cease pursuing us. At daybreak we found our Admiral was still a
League off of us. The whole Fleet (of which the Dutch and Portugaise led the
Van) were in good order, and advanced toward the Enemy, as fast as the little
Wind which then blew would permit 'em. As to our parts, the Currents were
against us, wherefore we were forced to be towed by Moors, that went on shore
for that purpose. In the mean time, a Trumpet, accompanied with Ten or Twelve
Horse, coming from the General, who believed, upon a false report, we were
lost, called out to us several times from the shore, Sauwas Hollanders. The
word Sauwas signifies Courage. Being near, they informed us, how greatly the
General was troubled, at the false report of a Moor, who brought him word, that
the Vessels commanded by the English, Dutch, and Portugaise were lost. They
returned then toward their Master; who better informed of the matter, caused
the tongue of the Moor (who brought him that false news) to be cut out, and he
to be whipped with a Whip, which they call Chamboe, every lash of which cuts as
deep as a Razor.

Notwithstanding the force of the Currents, and the great advantages the Enemy
had over us, we got the Wind of them; and from that time, never ceased Firing
upon em; and at length, were seconded by our whole Fleet. When the Enemy saw it
approaching, they set forth such great shouts, as would made a Man think all
was already lost. Yet did they courageously defend themselves, and for three
hours together, the Victory inclined to neither side. From that time their heat
abated, and they began to shift their station, and were so closely plied, that
they left their Vessels, and ran to shore, where finding they were pursued,
they endeavored, but in vain, to possess themselves of a high Bank, for we
followed 'em so close, that we slew almost all of them, being ordered to give
no quarter. We took three hundred of their Vessels, the least of which, carried
seventy Men; and of this whole number, there escaped not above fifty, whom the
King (enraged his orders were no better observed) condemned to suffer the most
grievous punishment.

Those that had still some Life remaining in them, were tied to Stakes, where
the Soldiers put an end to their Lives, with their Arrows. Thus perished this
numerous, and mighty Army; of which, very few escaped, to carry the news of the
loss of the rest. The Admiral having disguised himself, was notwithstanding,
taken Prisoner, and released at the intercession of some of the General's
principal Officers. As to the booty, 'twas not considerable, consisting only in
Powder, Lead, and some pieces of Cannon.

It was discoursed, that the fault of this Admiral was the less excusable,
inasmuch as he had neglected the orders of his Prince; who commanded him to go
with six hundred Sail, to expect us above the City of Goaeti. Which was a very
advantageous post, as well to hinder us from taking in any Provision, as to
block us up in the Country; but he chose rather to be guided by his own fancy,
imagining the shouts of his Fleet would dismay us.

The three hundred Vessels that escaped, unhappily cast Anchor at about a
quarter of a Leagues distance from the General, who advanced up the Country
with all possible expedition. As soon as he knew where they were, he brought
two or three hundred pieces of Cannon, and planted 'em against them, and sunk
the greatest part of them; the rest past over to the other side of the River,
where our Vessels pursued them with success. Some of 'em wheeled about, through by
ways, where the Moors found, and slew them.

The Enemy's Fleet being thus routed, we passed by the Foot of a steep Rock,
where was built a Fortress of difficult access. Yet was it abandoned, but 'twas
to draw us farther into the Country. From thence we came to the City of
Gueragan, whence the King fled; and our Admiral cast Anchor before the City of
Lokwa, situated about six Leagues from thence. Some time after, the General
Commanded the chief of the Fleet, to send him Money, and Provisions for the
Army. Whereupon our Commanders sent him six Boats, two laden with Gold, and
four with Silver, but the six Boats unfortunately fell into the Enemy's hand,
who in the heat of the surprisal, slew the greatest part of the Men. They
reserved some Christians for their pleasure, under whose Arms, they fastened
several wisps of Straw, stuffed with Powder; and when these wisps were consumed,
they fastened others in like manner in their places, till such time as they
expired. The pleasure of these Barbarians, was to hear the screeks of these
poor wretches, who, the louder they cried, the more they rejoiced these cruel
Monsters. Those that escaped into the Woods, came at Night to the Army, which
was in great distress, the Water being already so high, that 'twas impossible
to return back.

The Army lay Encamped in a place full of fruitful Trees, and sowed with
excellent Rice. The Mountains yield Pepper, Agra-wood, Sanders, and Simples,
that are sold for their weight in Gold. As to this metal it is not scarce; and
Elephants are so common, that the country, as fruitful as it is, is not
sufficient to feed them; therefore they are always lean.

We chose in this pleasant Country, a proper place to Entrench our selves, and
cut down, to prevent surprisals, all the Trees round about us. We sent out
scouts every day to observe the Enemy's motions. Those that fell into the hands
of our party, were cruelly scourged, and then had their Heads cut off, which
were hung up in Baskets upon the boughs of Trees. When they were too numerous
to be all made Prisoners, they cut off the Heads of the greatest part, and hung
about the Necks of every one of the rest, two of these Heads, which they were
made to carry into the Camp; where they were cruelly whipped; and when 'twas
judged they were near expiring, they had likewise, their Heads severed from
their Bodies; which were hanged, like the rest, in Panniers, upon the boughs of
Trees. Some had stakes drove through them alive. Others had four double hooks
thrust down their Bellies, which tore their Bowels; and in this condition, were
carried to the places the Enemy frequented; to the end the horror of the
Torment they endured, might move them to forsake the weakest side.

If these punishments were cruel, those of the Enemy were no less, for they
made their Prisoners languish so long in their Torments, as would have moved
the most obdurate to pity. Having made 'em expire by their cruel usage, they
fastened them, standing bolt upright, to stakes, upon flat-bottom Boats, and
sent them thus down the River, either toward the Army, or the Fleet; where
they became such a sad spectacle, that they could not be beheld without dread
and horror.

As to those that rendered themselves, they were received with great expressions
of kindness. There came likewise to our Camp, Ambassadors from the King of the
Antropophages, or Man-eaters; offering the assistance of his Army, against the
King of Assam's Subjects; but the small sincerity of these people being known,
their offers were not accepted, yet were they sent away, with assurances of the
great Mogol's Friendship, provided they assisted not his Enemies.

These people had fierce looks, a rough carriage, and the Mine of persons that
eat others alive. In effect, they fed on Human Flesh, scrupling to Interr their
Dead, whom they designed for a better use. Those that are sick amongst them,
and in a languishing condition, are knocked on the Head, and eaten; and this is
all the charity they have one for another. They possess all things in Common,
carrying what they steal from strangers, to the Common Heap, where they have
all an equal portion. When we told them, their way of living was contrary to
the rest of Mankind, it being unnatural to eat their fellow Creatures; they
replied, Opinion, and Custom, made all these things either good or bad; and
that a Man cannot do ill in following those he found established.

There were in our Army certain Soldiers, whose Maxim was, Never to give back;
and to dye, rather than abandon the Post assigned them. Those that dye thus,
are sure of Salvation; whereas, those that behaved themselves cowardly, and
were slain, were certainly Damned. This opinion renders 'em valiant, which is
not such a Barbarous one as we are apt to imagine, seeing many in the most
civilized Nations have asserted it, extremely meritorious, to dye for one's
Country. The General had honored us, with a high Character of our Valor, so
that the only report of our name, stood him in as much stead as an Army. Those
on the Enemy's side, who fled over to us, had such a great esteem for us, that
they made room for us, wheresoever we went. The Moors showed us the same
respect; but those dreadless fellows I now mentioned, kept their gravity with
us, claiming precedence in all rencounters, which for quietness sake we granted
them.

Next after the Dutch, certain Armenian Horsemen, were in greatest esteem; as
well for that they were Christians, as that they continually kept good Horses,
and observed good order. Our Reputation thus up, the Admiral judged us the most
fitting persons to take charge of the Artillery. For which purpose, he made us
very advantageous proffers; but we liked neither the Country, nor Manners of
its People; and therefore entreated him to pitch upon some others, to whom this
employ would be more agreeable, than to us, who were not so well versed in the
Tongue, as to make our selves obeyed, which reason satisfied him.

Every New Moon is a Festival with the Moors, which day begins with the
discharge of all the great Guns; after which, the Soldiers are paid, and this
payment consists of fifty Roupies, or 25 Crowns, for every Horseman, some have
a hundred paid them, others thirty, twenty, and others again, only ten. The
Foot Soldiers pay is but small, being not above five or six Roupies a Month. As
to the Slaves, who work almost both day and night, they have scarcely any
thing, or that which is given them, is so inconsiderable, that the greatest
part of them dye with hunger. These Slaves are Indians, who eat nothing endued
with lise; and their superstition is such, that how great soever their hunger
may be, they choose rather to dye, than to eat either Fish or Flesh. Their Food
consists chiefly of Rice, and when they are destitute of it (which happens not
seldom) they dye willingly; not doubting but this kind of death, procures them
Eternal Life. These poor Wretches Discourses were continually concerning the
contempt of abundance, and the excellency of want. They could not comprehend,
how those that live in plenty in this World, can be happy in the next; and in
this imagination, take their misery for a mark of their Election.

The Inhabitants of the Country of Assam, are another sort of superstitious
people, who worship a Cow, and consequently never kill any of that kind. Their
Temples are full of the Images of these Creatures, the greatest part made of
Gold and Silver, and some few of Brass.

About three Leagues distance from the place where our Vessel lay, stood a
Temple, which we pillaged, and carried away one of these Golden Cows, which was
divided amongst us. It was no small grief to these poor Pagans, to see their
Divinity thus taken from them, and yet they sold us Cows at a cheap rate, for
we did not pay above two shillings for the best. What sottishness, said I,
within my self, are these people guilty of, to sell their Gods; it is true, we
were forced to promise, we would not kill 'em, but they knew the contrary; and
when we blamed their silly humor, they demanded of us, whether the Christians
had none, and whether their actions answered the Religion they professed.

Our Vessel lying at a great distance from the Army, we knew but one part of
what happened there, and although we understood, they were in ill circumstances,
yet we could never have believed there dyed so many thousands of Men, had not
the River brought them to us. The Water became so infected, by the prodigious
quantity of dead Bodies thrown therein, that several persons perished by that
means; wherefore, at length, we boiled the Water, before we used it.

After three Months stay, the Water having been continually at that height,
that 'twas impossible to come out of our Trenches, the Enemy believed we were
starved, and consequently, that we might be easily defeated. In truth, hunger
pressed us very sorely, and the greatest part of the Army were forced to kill
the Camels, and Elephants, for their sustenance. The Enemy, then, coming down,
almost certain of the Victory; our General commanded, to let them draw near, as
if the whole Army had been dead; and in the mean time, made the Horse to fetch
a round, to hem them in: his stratagem took effect, for as soon as they began
to attack us, they were charged by our Horse, and wholly defeated, leaving near
twenty thousand dead in the place. There were not above ten Men wounded on our
side, and since this skirmish, the Waters fell insensibly, so that we had order
to be ready to give battle.

Whilst we were preparing, our General caused several Wagons to be laden with
provision, and sent them to the King of Assam, charging his Messengers to tell
him, he sent him this present for his supply, in case he wanted it. For as for
his own part, he had more than he needed for his Armies subsistence this six
Months. Our General's drift was to Allarm the King of Assam, who designed at
that time to retire to the Mountains, having lost all hope of being able to
resist. This Prince understood the General's design; and saw well, this was a
kind of Summons, to render himself at discretion; but he knew too well his
Enemy, to expect any favor from him; and therefore chose rather to send him
word, that he loved himself too well to entrust his person with any one, but
was willing to yield to any reasonable terms. This answer discovered the
Enemy's weakness, and the General who was enraged, that he had insulted over
him, within his Trenches, resolved to make him repent it. He told his chief
Officers then his resolutions to give Battle, which they all readily agreed to.
Amongst others, there was one that spoke thus, My Lord, says he, to the
General, when we came into these parts first, we had four Armies, all in good
order, and disposition, whereas now we have not one that deserves that name.
The greatest part of the Soldiers of these four Armies, being either dead, or
in a sick and languishing condition. Why then do we not immediately march up to
the Enemy? Shall we tarry till all our forces are spent? And will it not be
more glorious for our Monarch, and honorable for such a Captain as you, to go
and insult over the Enemy, than to lie languishing here, where a longer stay
cannot but be most shameful. The freedom with which this person spoke, had a
good effect; for the General resolved to follow his advice, in case the King of
Assam refused to accept of the following conditions: To wit, that this Prince
should give the General half of his Kingdom, and the youngest of his Daughters
for his Concubine; two thousand Elephants, some Millions of ready Money, and
his richest Vessels full of excellent roots, with which that Country abounded,
and which are of inestimable value. Although the General's Army was in very
great distress, yet his Enemy accepted these conditions; and this unexpected
Peace came very seasonably, for it is certain that never any Army was in a worse
condition.

As soon as the Waters were sufficiently fallen, we hastened to pack up our
Baggage, being glad to leave this wretched post, for it is certain we were so
tired, that had the Enemy set upon us, we could scarce been able to make
resistance.

As for riches we wanted them not, having found good store in Graves. It being
this peoples custom, to Interr with their Dead, their best Apparel, Money, and
greatest part of their Servants; whom they bury alive, to bear their Masters
company. So far are these poor wretches from bemoaning their condition in this
respect, that they are on the contrary, exceedingly joyous, to follow their
Masters into a Country, where they hope in three days time to become great
Personages, and enjoy certain pleasures, which are not to be had here.

Our General caused several of these Tombs to be opened, wherein were found
vast Treasures, which he carried away with him, but which he enjoyed but a
small time, for he died soon after; and according to the custom of the great
Mogol's Empire, which is, that this Prince becomes Heir to all those that dye
in his Countries, the Acquests of the General, which were to the value of four
Millions, fell to this Monarch. And thus have I given you a Relation of what I
saw in this War against the King of Assam; all which was written by a Physician
of Montpellier, who was then in the service of the great Mogol.

Prince Jemla, or the Emir (for it is thus they called our General) having
signalized himself in several Rencounters, and driven out Sultan Sujah (Brother
to Auren Zeb) from the Kingdom of Bengala, he entreated the Mogol to send him
his Wife and Children, to live with them, in a place he had chosen, remote from
noise, and business, of which his great age rendered him incapable. He imagined
that this Prince (whose Throne he came now from settling, in subduing his
Brethren, who disturbed him in the possession of the Empire) could not well
refuse him his demands. But he was mistaken, for Auren Zeb was of a piercing
judgment, and knew Jemla to be the Soldiers darling, and the Peoples Favorite.
That he was a great Politician, a Wise and Valiant Captain, and the wealthiest
in all the Empire. He was sensible of his ambitious designs, and that he
aspired to set up his Son Mahomet Emirkin, on the Throne of Bengala.

On the other side, he considered, 'twas dangerous to displease such a powerful
Man; so that he not only granted him what he demanded, but created him also
Mir-Vl-Omrag, a dignity belonging only to the second Person in the Empire.
Andas to his Son, he made him Bacchis, or General of the Horse, a place of
great consequence, but which, requires him that possesses, never to stir out of
the Court. No project could be more effectual for the hindering the designs of
Prince Jemlar, for by this means he was parted from his Son, who could not be
separated from his Father under a fairer pretense, than by being tied to the
Court by so splendid an Office. Jemla well perceived Auren-Zeb's design, and
being not able to devise a way presently to avoid it, yielded to necessity,
expecting the change of affairs would furnish him with means, to have that by
force which he could not obtain by subtilty. These two great Men were jealous
of one another, and being in a manner equally powerful, they mutually plied
each other with kindnesses, whilst both secretly endeavored to strengthen
their parties. The year being passed over in Reciprocal dissimulations,
Auren-Zeb plainly perceived the Emir was not a Man to lie still. He judged
then, 'twere better to employ him abroad, than to give him time to trouble his
Government; and therefore proposed to the Emir, the undertaking of that great
expedition of which this latter had sometime heretofore discoursed to him.
Which was, to march against the Raja or King of Assam, whose Country lies
Northward off the Kingdom of Deka, which is near the Gulf of Bengala. It Is
true, the Emir had formerly mentioned it, to Auren-Zeb, who foreseeing the
honor, which would redound to him from his Conquests, objected, at first,
several difficulties, but afterward, thought requisite to embrace the motion,
that he might thereby be rid of the Emir, and keep him employed. Although the
Emir doubted not his design, yet he obeyed without hesitating, and joyfully
prepared himself for an undertaking, by which, he was sure to establish, and
increase his Reputation. He embarked, then, with his Army, on a River, whose
source arises in that same Country, and after about some sixty Leagues Sailing,
arrived at the Castle of Azo, which the Raja of Acham had long since taken from
the King of Bengala. The Emir attackt this place, and took it in fifteen days.

He afterward marched toward Chamdara, lying near the Country of Assam, where
within a Month, he gave Battle to the King of Assam, and worsted him. This
Prince being vanquished, withdrew into his chief City, called Guerguon) where
being followed by the Emir some five days after, he secured himself in the
Mountains of Lassa; and to render his escape more easy, left his treasures
behind him, with which the Emir augmented his: These Mountains being
unaccessible to an Army, the Emir could not follow his Enemy; and whilst he
studied how to surprise him, the Season of Rains came; during which, the whole
Country is overflowed, excepting the Villages, which stand upon Hills. This
Season, which lasted three Months, hindered the Emir's designs, the Waters
keeping him from marching either backwards or forwards. Moreover, the Raja had
carried away all kinds of Provision, and reduced by this means the Emir into a
strange extremity. This Weather, and the incommodiousness of the place, having
near ruined his whole Army. He thought of nothing, then, but how to get away,
and in his retreat, was ever and anon, set upon by his Enemies, who taking
their advantage, enclosed whose Troops, in plains full of Mire, and slew them.
Notwithstanding these difficulties, the Emir returned home in Triumph, laden
with glory and spoils. His design was to return, and finish in the following
year, the Conquest of this Kingdom, which the Castle of Azo (which they had
caused to be well fortified) retained, as it were, in a Bridle, and which was
able to hold out a long time against the Forces of the Raja. But no sooner was
he returned to Bengala, but a Dysentery destroyed the rest of his Army, and
himself also. And by this means Auren-Zeb had nothing to fear; who, as great a
dissembler as he was, could not forbear expressing his joy thereat. He told one
day, the Son of the Deceased, in the presence of his whole Court, that he had
lost a Father, and he for his part, a most dreadful friend.

Having been fifteen Months in the great Mogol's Army, our Consul obtained at
length our discharge; whereupon we parted without Attendants, for all our
Servants were dead. We came in fifteen days to Decka, where we saw the Vessel
our two Carpenters had built for the General. It carried 30 Guns, and they had
order to begin another, far larger. From thence we betook our selves to a House
of Entertainment for Strangers, where we were well accommodated with all things
necessary; from whence we soon took Shipping for Ongueli. Having Sailed about
120 Leagues, along the River, we made some stay at Cazimabahar, a place Famous
for Silks. From thence we went to Ongueli, where the Dutch that Trade to the
Indies, have a considerable Factory. Each of us betook himself to different
Employs, and mine obliged me so strictly in that Company's Service, that I
could not conveniently return to my Native Country, till the Year 1673.

FINIS.
Lately Printed, A Now Digester, or Engine for softning Bones; Containing the
Description of its Make and Use in these particulars, viz. Cookery Voyages at
Sea, Confectionary, making of Drinks, Chemistry, and Dving. With an account of
the Price a good big Engine will cost, and of the profit it will afford.
Published by Order of the Royal Society. By Denis Papin M. D Fellow of the Royal
Society. Sold by Henry Bonwick at the Red-Lyon in St. Paul's Churchyard.


