A Faithful Testimony FOR THE LORD: Wherein is PROCLAIM^D THE Mighty Day of
his Power. ALSO,

An Exhortation of love unto all young Children, with young Men and Maidens,
whose hearts are tender toward the Lord.

By One whom it pleased the Lord to manifest himself unto now in the days of
my youth, and has given me cause never to forget him, whom it pleased to call
me from amongst my Relations, to bear Testimony unto his Name, when I was about
Eleven years of Age.

Who am known to the World by the name of John Gibson.

He that answers to a matter before he hears it, is as if he cast a stone up
into the Air, and it falls upon his own head.

LONDON, Printed in the Year 1663.

To THE READER.
FRiend, whosoever thou art that reads this Testimony or Exhortation, read it
without prejudice in thy heart, and despise it not because of my youth, for the
Lord can manifest himself unto whom he pleases, and make instruments for his
praise of whom he will; and therefore how excellent is his name in all the
earth, who has set his glory above the Heavens, and out of the mouths of babes
and sucklings have thou ordained strength because of thine enemies, that thou
might still the enemy and the avenger, Psalm. 8.12. I thank thee O Father
Lord of heaven and earth, because thou have hid these things from the wise and
prudent, and have revealed them even unto babes, Mat. 11.25. Let no man despise
thee because of thy youth, but be thoa an example of the believers, in word, in
conversation, in charity, in spirit, in faith, in purity, 1 Timothy 4.12 And so
read with understanding, and without prejudice, that thou may receive the
benefit of it, etc.

This is the mighty day of the Lords power, and of his heavenly love and mercy,
unto the Sons and Daughters of men; wherein he has made bare his arm, in the
hearts of his people, and has caused the light of his glory to shine, and the
beauty of his countenance to be lifted up amongst the Sons of Sion, and the
Daughters of Jerusa^em, which causes our souls to rejoice, and our hearts to be
more glad; than they who have had great increase of corn, oil, and wine, etc.

And therefore the day of true rejoicing is come unto all the mourners in Sion,
and true gladness I do proclaim unto all the heavy-hearted in Jerusalem; for
the Lord, the mighty God of Heaven and Earth is risen and arising in his mighty
power, and in his irresistible strength, to break down all the powers of
darkness, and all the strong holds of Satan, wherein he has lodged this many
years, and made war with the Lamb, and oppressed the just in many thousands:
But now is the Lord risen in his mighty power to plead the cause of his
oppressed seed, which has been deeply oppressed both inwardly and outwardly,
by, and in many thousands, and which has been sore weighed, and grievously
laden, and deeply oppressed with the heavy clods of the earth, which the heart
of man has been affected with, and drawn after, which has caused the innocent
seed of life to suffer under an heavy and grievous burden; the remembrance of
which has often broken my heart, and caused me to cry out in the integrity
thereof, and in the bitterness of my Spirit, O Lord, O Lord will thou not
hasten the deliverance of thy seed, and make a speedy work in the earth, and
cut it short in righteousness, for thy names sake, and for thy glory, and for
thy seeds sake which lies in bordage, and in straight captivity both inwardly
and outwardly? and thus have I been constrained to cry often unto the Lord even
in my infancy, and this cry yet remains in my heart: O Lord, O Lord, when will thou remove the Rod of the wicked from off the back of the righteous? O let it
not always lie upon them: This cry has often run through me unto the Lord,
and I have often received an answer from the Lord, and for the seeds sake am I
constrained to publish it.

Thus says the Lord, concerning the seed which is heir of the Kingdom, and of
the promised Land, I can never forget it, for it is as the apple of mine eye,
and its very tender in my sight; though a woman may forget her sucking child,
yet I can never forget that babe which I have begotten though it be yet
unbtought forth, and I will remember all my promises says the Lord, which I
promised unto my servant Abraham in the days of old, and in the years past,
concerning his seed, that in his seed, shall all the Nations of the earth be
blessed, Genesis 1*2.3. Chap. 28.28. And I have remembered (says the Lord) all the
afflictions of my people, and all the sufferings of my innocent ones, and there
shall not one of them be forgotten in the day of account, for they are all
recorded in a book not written with ink nor pen, but with my Spirit, says the
Lord; and I will remove the rod of the wicked from off the backs of the
righteous, in my time, which shall be in season, which time and season shall be
a blessed and a joyful time unto all that fear and obey my name, and wait in
patience to see it accomplished; but it shall be a terrible and a dreadful day
unto all the opposers of me and my people, and this day shall come as a thief
in the night, when men are unaware of it; and my own outstretched arm shall
bring it, and the glory, and the honor of it shall redown unto my name, says
the Lord. And this answer has been often made unto me by the Spirit of the
Lord, which has often refreshed my soul, and caused my heart to be glad and
rejoice, even with joy unspeakable, and has filled my mouth with his heavenly
praises: And therefore, you well-beloved of the Lord, and you chosen of the
mighty God of Jacob, rejoice in the Lord with me, for the fathers love is very
great, and daily extends it self to you, and to all that truly wait upon his
name: How has he filled our cups, and made them to overflow? How has he made,
even that which was barren, to bring forth fruits abundantly, to his own glory,
and to the rejoicing of our souls, and to the exalting of his own name, whose
name must be lifted up, and exalted above every name in the world, and at his
name must every knee be made to bow, and every tongue to confess; for he is
the King of Kings, and the Supreme of Supreams, and the Metropolitan of
Metropolitans, and he must rule over all in his Supreamcy, and in his Kingly
Majesty, and all the Nations in the world must be bowed before him, and all the
proud and lofty must be subdued under his feet.

And therefore I dearly exhort all friends unto whom this may come, as the
exhortation of one of the least of all your Brethren, that you all be stayed
upon the living God, with your hearts and minds and affections always
exercised upon him, that you may all stand immovable in this day of Gods
trial, wherein he will try all flesh as with fire, and his seed, as Gold is
tried in the furnace, and as Silver is tried in the Refiners fire; So will the
Lord try his seed, that when it comes forth, it may be purer than Gold seven
times tried.

And dearly beloved Friends in the Lord, though we have not been unacquainted
with trials, tribulations and afflictions, ever since the day that the Lord
redeemed us out of spiritual Egypt, oh! because of this let none of you get
into a false ease, or into a wrong security, and so think that the storms are
over, and now thou may do what thou will, and walk whither thou would; Oh
dear Friends! take heed of this carelessness, or of this false ease, least the
storm take thee when thou art not ready for it; for in the fear of the Lord I
do declare that the storm is not yet over, there is yet a sharper storm than
has been yet, which must try the weighty seed, that the chaff and all the
dross may be all purged forth, for there is yet a fire to be past through,
before Sion be redeemed, the which redemption must be through great judgment,
and the Lord is hastening it, for it comes suddenly.

And this has the Lord often constrained me to declare among his people, which
is a faithful testimony for his name: And therefore all dear Friends, dwell in
the savoury life of God, and feel his power to carry you on in all your trials,
and know the workings thereof in all your hearts, to be as a Sword, a Fire, and
a Hammer, to cut down, burn up, and hammer down all that is contrary to the
pure will and mind of God in you, and that will stand for ever, and will be a
more sure Prophet unto you than all Prophets or prophecies without, though
though they are serviceable in their places, but we have a more sure word of
prophesy, unto the which you all do well to take heed, as unto a light which
shines in a dark place, until the day dawn, and the day star arise in your
hearts, which will give unto you the knowledge of God in the face of Jesus
Christ, the which knowledge is life eternal unto all that come to know him
aright: And so all dear Friends whom the Lord has called and chosen, and
begotten and brought forth in the life immortal, know him who is invisible, and
let you strength stand in him, and your confidence be in his name, for his name
is a strong ^ower, and the righteous do fly to it, and there they are safe from
all the wrath and malice of all the Kings and Potentates in the world, etc.

And so all dear Friends meet often together in the name of the Lord, for in
that did the Lord manifest himself unto us at the first, and in that does the
Lord manifest himself unto us now, even in our meeting together in his name,
and if any declare any other Doctrine, or any other Gospel then has already
been preached and declared unto you, let them be accursed, whatsoever form or
pretense they come under.

And this is my living Testimony for the Lord. J. G.

Oh you that are young and tender in years, Remember the Lord your Creator now
in the days of your youth, and turn from the vanities of this world, and take
no delight in them, for they must all perish and come to naught, with all the
treasures and delectable things therein; and therefore this is my counsel and
advice unto all that are young and tender in years, who have any true desires
to know peace with God, to return out of all the vanities, pleasures, joys, and
delights in the world, and rather choose to enter into the house of mourning,
than into the house of laughter; for this I know, that thou may find more
peace, joy, and consolation in thy soul in the house of mourning, than in the
house of laughter, for sorrow is better than laughter, and by the sadness of
the countenance the heart is made better, Eccles. 2.3. And this I can truly
say, that true sorrow brings true joy, but as for laughter I count it madness,
and for mirth, what does it? Eccles. 2.2. And therefore thou that art young and
tender in years, who truly breaths after the Lord, let it be thy whole delight
to seek after him, with all thy soul, with all thy heart and strength, for he
will be found of them that seek after him; but if thou forget the Lord now when
thou art young, and seek not after him, the time will come, wherein thou will
be forced to say, O that I had remembered the Lord when I was young, and sought
after him with all my strength! Oh that I had forsaken my father and mother,
sisters and brothers, and turned unto the Lord! Thus will thou be forced to cry
who forgets the Lord now when thou art young, yea, when it will be too late for
thee to repent; though some may object and say, May I not return unto the Lord
and not forsake my near relations which are so dear unto me? Answer, If thou be
worthy of Christ thou must be willing to forsake thy father and mother, and
whatsoever is dear and near unto thee, if thou be worthy of Christ, for it is
said, a man must forsake his father and mother, and cleave unto his wife. But
it is said, a man must forsake his father and mother, sisters and brothers,
wife and children, lands and livings, and whatsoever is dear or near unto him,
and cleave unto Christ, if he be worthy of him, yea, and his very life if it be
required of him, for he that seeks to save his life shall lose it, but he that
loses his life for Christ's sake shall save it, etc.

But some may Object and say, I am young, and if I forsake my father and
mother, or near relations, I know not what would become of me, for I should be
undon, they would deprive me of my inheritance or portion, and I might ruin my
self for the sake of Christ. Answer, They who forsake father and mother,
sisters and brothers, wife and children, lands or livings for Christ's sake,
shall never lose their reward; for all the rewards and inheritances, thrones
and crowns in this world, must return unto the dust from whence they came, but
if thou have assurance of that inheritance and portion which endures for ever,
this will make thy soul rejoice, and thy heart more glad than all the
inheritances or thrones and crowns in this world, if thou could obtain them
all; and if all thy relations according to the flesh should cast thee out and
deny thee, if it be for Christ's sake thou will never be forsaken; I have been
young, but now am old, (said David) and I never saw the righteous forsaken, nor
its seed beg its bread: For they who first seek the Kingdom of God, and the
righteousness thereof, the Lord will add all other things unto them; and so
let none say I am young, and I have time enough yet, I may spend many years in
the joys and delights of this world, and then when I wax old I will seek the
Lord: Oh how do thou know how soon the Lord may smite thee with sickness,
and call thee to an account? or what know thou when thou go to bed,
whether ever thou may^st rise with thy life again, or no? and therefore let
none say, I have a Farm to take, or Oxen to try, or a wife to marry, or a
husband, and when this is done then I will return to the Lord; oh say not so in
thine heart, but now while thou have time, and while the day is light, and
while the Lord calls, seek him, and while he is to be found, for the night is
coming, wherein no man can work, and it hastens on apace.

By One who desires the eternal happiness of all that desires to serve the
Lord. J. G.
Written in London the 7th day of the 8th Month, 1663.

