A SERMON Preached at the FUNERAL Of the Reverend Edward Reynolds, D. D.
Archdeacon of Norfolk, and Rector of Kings-Thorp, near Northampton. By WILLIAM
GIBBS, M. A. Rector of Gayton in Northamptonshire.

LONDON, Printed by John Astwood, for Thomas Cocketil in Amen-Corner, and
Herbert Walwyn in the Poultrey, over against the Stocks-Market. 1699.

TO Mrs. Frances Reynolds, Relict of Dr. REYNOLDS.
MADAM,
WHen your Desires were once and again signified to me, of having this
Discourse published, it became not me to Dispute them, especially in such a
Season, and in such Circumstances to which nothing is to be denied, and
therefore I presently resolved to Comply, though I was not Ignorant at the same
time how hazardous a Proof I must give of my Obedience.

For though Sermons of this kind are not so liable to Censure as others, because
if they be plain and practical, it is all that is expected from them, and
Allowances are generally made for those Deficiencies of Language, Method and
Reading, which would hardly be granted in other Composures: Yet if th^^^ be any
thing of a Character added, That is capable of being assaulted by so many, and
in such various ways, according to the different Apprehensions and Interests
of Men, that nothing renders an Author more obnoxious, or sooner forfeits the
Reputation of the whole.

What Entertainment, MADAM, this is likely to meet with, I am not at all
sollicitons to know, for if what is here said be any ways instrumental to
Moderate that Sorrow you have justly Conceived, for the Loss of so near a
Relation, or may serve to keep up the Memory of so worthy an Example, I have
all my aim; unless* it be the gratifying of a little Ambition which this
Opportunity gives me, in letting the World know, that I was once honored with
the Friendship of the Deceased, and that I am*

MADAM, Your most Obliged and Humble Servant, WILL. GIBBS.

1 THESE. IV. 13. But I would not have you to be Ignorant, Brethren, concerning
them which are asleep, that ye sorrow not even as others which have no Hope.
THese Words are an Introduction to a short Discourse which St. Paul makes
concerning the Certainty of a Resurrection, and the manner thereof, by which he
Endeavors to rectify the Mistakes of some concerning a Future State, and
thereby moderate their Griefs for their Deceased Friends, which it seems were
too often wont to be so excessive and inordinate, as did not at all become
those that had such Hopes.

The Occasion of them this, The Saints at Thessalonica were sorely persecuted
by the Unbelieving Jews, (as is hinted in several places of this Epistle) and
many of them no doubt put to Death; which proving great Discouragements to
those New Converts, St. Paul tells them, that God's Wrath would shortly seize
upon those wicked Enemies of theirs, and then they should be delivered from
those Pressures and Afflictions which at present they lay under: And as for
those of their Fellow Christians, who had already lost their Lives for the sake
of their Religion, Zanch. and Ham.
(for some imagine such are here (...) not be too much solicitous for, or
perplexed about; for if they did believe that Christ dyed and rose again,
(which great Article of Faith they all professed) the same Assurance had they
likewise of their Resurrection at the last. And because the several kinds of
Death to which they were exposed, might a little startle their Belief, and
increase their Sorrows; for they were sometimes committed to the Flames, and
their Ashes scattered up and down in all places, (their Enemies fondly thinking
thereby to quash their Hopes of a Resurrection.) Sometimes they were cast to
the Lions, and other Beasts of Prey, to be devoured by them, and sometimes
their Carcasses thrown into the Sea, for the Fish to feed on; their surviving
Friends, though they might be well enough satisfied of the State of their Souls,
might yet possibly be too solicitous for their Bodies, what should become of
them, whether they that were thus mangled were capable of a restoration: To
Obviate which, the Apostle shows, that such shall be no losers by the Injuries
that have been offered them, for they shall not only be raised as entire as
those that dyed a Natural Death, but as a special Reward of their Martyrdom,
shall have the Privilege to rise before the rest, this be intimates Ver. 16.
When the Lord himself shall descend from Heaven with a shout, and the Voice of
the Archangel, and with the Trump of God, the Dead in Christ, [or those that
dyed for Christ] shall rise first: Nay, even those which are found alive at the
Coming of our Lord, shall not have the start of those Martyred Saints, so as
first to meet their Savior, and receive their Crown, this he assures them ver.
15. For this we say unto you by the Word of the Lord; as much as if he had
said, I do not speak it according to my own Fancy or Private Opinion, but as I
had it by Revelation, That we which are alive, and remain unto the Coming of
our Lord, shall not prevent them which are asleep; i.e. be caught up before
them, to congratulate first our returning Lord, and be rewarded by him; and
having thus evinced the Certainty of a Resurrection, he concludes thus,
Wherefore comfort ye one another with these Words. But though we should grant,
that the Word may be more eminently understood of those that dye for Christ,
and suffer Martyrdom for his sake; yet they seem to require a larger
Interpretation, and to be extended to all that are Christ's, 1 Cor. 15. 23. for
those which are here said to be asleep, are opposed to those which are alive:
And besides, if they were to be restrained to those only that thus suffered,
then the Apostle's Argument for the Consolation of Christians, would only be
serviceable to such, whose Friends were of that Happy and Illustrious Number.
And therefore I shall take the Words in the more General Sense, and then we
have in them these three Parts:

1. St. Paul's Desire to inform the Ignorance, and rectify the
Misapprehensions of the Saints of Thessalonica, concerning the State of the
Dead, of such as had laid down their Lives for the sake of Christ, and indeed
of all that truly believe in him; I would not have you to be ignorant,
Brethren, concerning them which are asleep; it is a Matter of great Importance,
and therefore would not have you lie under any Doubts or Mistakes herein, but
desire you may have as full an Understanding of the thing, as the Gospel
Revelation will afford you,

2. The Design which the Apostle had in clearing up these Notions to them, and
that was to repress those Excessive Griefs and Inordinate Sorrows, which they
had conceived upon the Account of their Departed Friends, for want of a right
Apprehension and steady Belief hereof.

3. We have this Sorrow more particularly described, viz. It was like theirs
who had no Hope; Such who either absolutely denied the Immortality of the Soul,
and the Certainty of a Future State, as the Sadduces among the Jews, and the
Epicureans among the Gentiles: Or, such who had but faint Apprehensions and
doubtful Guesses thereof, as the Generality of the Heathens, who had no other
Direction herein but the Light of Nature. No Wonder to see such vent their
Sorrows in an Extravagant Manner, when all their Hopes were terminated on this
side the Grave, and when once gone, they feared there was to be no more
Remembrance of them or their Friends for ever.

To bring the Words down to our Purpose, I resolve them into these three
Propositions:

1. That there is a certain Measure of Sorrow allowable to a Christian, at the
Death of his Friends.

2. That Excessive or Immoderate Sorrow, be the Loss never so heavy, is much
unbecoming the Christian Temper, and very unsuitable to those Hopes which he
professes to have; I would not have you sorrow like* others that have no Hopes.

3. That a right Understanding, and a due Consideration of what our Religion
offers in such Cases, is the most effectual Method for the suppressing of all
those Inordinate Passions. This I gather from the former part of the Text, I
would not have you to be ignorant concerning them that are asleep; as if he had
said, Had you but right Apprehensions of what the Gospel assures you herein,
you would not be thus sorrowful.

To begin with the First,

1. That there is a certain Measure of Grief and Sorrow allowed to the
Christian, at the Death of his Friend: This is clearly employed in the Words,
for the Apostle by telling them, that they should not sorrow as those that had
no Hope, does at the same time intimate, there must be some Allowance made,
that Christianity did not design to extirpate our Passions, but only to
moderate and correct them, to keep them from those Excesses which would
disparage our Reason, and put the Soul into an Unquiet State. It Is true, there
is no Command in the Gospel for this, because the Practice hereof has no
Inherent Goodness in it, but argues rather the Debility and Weakness of Humane
Nature; however the Lawfulness and Expediency of such a Sorrow, cannot in the
least be doubted, and this will appear,

1. From the Examples of many Pious and Devout Persons, who upon such Occasions
have vented their Griefs, without ever having them changed upon them as Crimes
or Indecencies: We find Jacob renting his Clothes, putting Sackcloath upon his
Loins, mourning bitterly for his Son many days, whom he supposed to have been
slain, and refusing to be comforted, Genesis 37. 34. We read again of Joseph and
his Brethren, making such a Lamentation for their Father Jacob, that the
Canaanites charged the Name of the Place, to be a perpetual Remembrance of
their Sorrow, Genesis 50. 11. David, whose Thoughts seemed mightily to be raised
above the little Concernments of this Life, does not look upon it as any
Derogation to his Piety, to be the chies Mourner at the Death of Saul, and his
Beloved Jonathan; how Pathetical his Grief was, may be seen in that Funeral
Song he composed for that purpose, in 2 Samuel 1st. Chap. Nay, he does indulge
his Passion so far, as to lament the Tragical End of his Rebellious Son
Absalom, in a most unusual strain, O my son Absalom, my son, my son Absalom,
would to God I had dyed for thee; O Absalom my son, my son; and yet we find him
not reproved for it by God or his Prophet, 2 Samuel 18. 33. Nay higher yet, our
Blessed Savior, who never did any thing amiss, bears a part with the Jews in
their mourning for Lazarus; for when he saw Mary, and the rest of the Company,
lamenting the Loss of her Brother, He Likewise groaned in spirit, and was
troubled; but when he approaches nearer to the Grave, his Sorrows found a Vent,
our Dear Lord is then said to have wept, John 11. 35. and whether he did this
out of Affection to his Friend, or upon the account of the Jews Incredulity, or
some other Consideration, as some are apt to think, we are sure the Standers by
took it in the first Sense; for in the Verse after, they say, Behold how he
loved him! What shall I say more? God himself is said to be grieved and
troubled at the Death of his Creatures, and is set forth by the Prophets, most
passionately resenting the Loss of any of them, and when their Iniquities had
forced him to destroy them, how pathetically does he express the Conflicts he
had within; How shall I give thee up, Ephraim? how shall I deliver thee,
Israel? my Heart is turned within me, my Resentings are kindled together, Hosea
11. 8.

2. As the Lawfulness of bewailing the Death of our Friends, is thus to be
justified from Instances, so out of Compliance with our Natural Frailties,
which must necessarily be allowed such Excursions; for being Creatures,
compounded of gross, earthy Bodies, as well as pure immaterial Souls, we shall
unavoidably be sensible of Calamities, Afflictions, Losses, and what greater
than those of a Real Friend; so that Sorrow and Anguish will take hold of us,
as long as we have Humane Passions and Affections to gratify; for our strength
is not the strength of stones, or our flesh of brass, as Job expostulates the
Case. And as Humanity requires it, so Christianity does indulge it; though that
indeed tends much to the raising up our Thoughts to higher Objects, yet it does
not oblige us to a stupid Regardlessness of our Concerns here below, or intend
wholly to divest us of our Passions, such a Temper befiting rather a sullen
Stoic, than a tenderhearted Christian; and therefore we are allowed not only
to be sensible of, but to complain and weep for our Losses, though never to
murmr or repine: Nay, Seneca himself, who was much of the Stoical Humor,
could say, Nobis ignosci potest prolapsis ad lacrymas, si non nimiae
decurrerint; That Tears might be excused, Epi. 63. Inter exempla eorum fui quos
dolor vicit.
if they did not flow down in too great abundance: And he tells us in the same
Epistle, what his own Carriage was at the Death of his Dear Friend Annaeus
Serenus: I, says he, was of the Number of those whom Grief overcame: Nature,
it seems, was there too strong for his Philosophy, though at other times none
outbraves the Misfortunes of Life, or the Terrors of Death at a higher Rate, as
if they had not the least Power to move his Wise Man.

3. Such Sorrows are the proper intimations of our Love to the deceased Person,
they are the last Expressions of Kindness to our Friend, and therefore very
allowable; there being no ways so proper of showing our Value and Esteem for
them. Hence it was a Custom among the Jews, and some part of the Gentile World,
to set apart such a Portion of Time for these Mournful Exercises, in which
'twas accounted dishonorable and inhumane, to set about other Concerns, and
therefore says the wise Son of Sirach, Weep bitterly for the dead, and make
great moan, and use lamentation, as he is worthy, lest thou be evil spoken of,
Eccles. 38. 17. Solomon tells us, there is a Time to Mourn, and a Time to Weep,
as well as for other Actions, and that every thing is beautiful in its season,
therefore none so fit for this as the Loss of our Friends. When God forbad
Ezekiel to Mourn for his dead Wife, and to omit those Expressions of Sorrow
which were then in use, the People were presently amazed at this thing, and
therefore came to him and said, Will thou not tell us what these things are to
us that thou do so? Ezekiel. 24. 29. They concluded God had some further meaning
by this unusual Behavior of his Prophet, as it fell out afterward, or else at
such a time especially he would never have forbore to Cover his Lips, or Eat
the Bread of Men.

4. Sometimes God intends the Death of Friends, as Tokens of his Displeasure,
and therefore our Griefs are not only allowable, but highly requisite too; for
in all the Punishment which he inflicts, his Design is to make us sensible of
the stroke, and to humble us under the weight of the Affliction; if it does not
this, God misses of the End of his Correction, and by such a Security and
Unconcernedness we do heighten his Displeasure: When therefore he takes away
such as are our greatest Stay and Support, the Delight of our Eyes, the Joy of
our Hearts, the Staff of our Age, or such who were Public Blessings to the
Neighborhood where they were, skilful to advise, and ready to assist; then
sure the Almighty calls for Mourning and Lamentation, and expects we should
take Notice of his Hand; therefore the Prophet upbraids the Jews with their
gross Stupidity, that the Righteous should perish, and no Man lay it to Heart;
none moved at it, none troubled for it, when it was designed as a public
Calamity, Isa. 57. 1.

Upon these Accounts it must be Confessed that there is a certain Measure of
Sorrow allowed the Christian, at the Death of his Friends; Humanity requires
it, and Religion does indulge it.

2. The next thing arising from the Words, is, that Excessive or Immoderate
Sorrow, be the Loss in this kind never so heavy, is much unbecoming the
Christian, and very unsuitable to that Belief which he professes; This is
expressed, I would not have you sorrow like those that have no hope; i.e. like
such who either deny the Immortality of the Soul, and scoff at the Resurrection
of the Body, who thought the Grave made an everlasting separation between them
and their Friends, and when the fatal stroke was once given, the Spirit
vanished as the soft air, and there was not possibility of a return, or else
doubted of a Future State: No wonder to see such indulge their Passions to the
utmost; but the Christian who has such great Assurances of a Future Being,
betrays his Weakness, and disparages his Religion, if he suffer his Griefs to
exceed the Bounds of Prudence and Moderation. -- Now by this immoderate Sorrow
I mean, that which is unreasonable, as to the Duration and Continuance, or to
the measures and degrees thereof.

1. That which offends as to the Duration, is, when too great a share of our
Time is laid out this way; when like some fond Persons, we consume Years in
those unprofitable Complaints, and refuse to be comforted, because our Friends
are not. Some Time indeed must be allotted those tender Passions, Custom and
Decency will exact some, and the Worth or Nearness of the Decased will require
more; but to spend our days in Trouble, and our years in Vanity, because that
has happened to thy Friend, which must e're long befall thy self, to whom
'twas as natural to dye as to be born, is not only foolish in it self, but
injurious to thy own Quiet, and displeasing to Heaven. Much more advised was
the Method that David took, who when his sick Child dyed, arose from the Earth,
washed and anointed himself, and changed his Apparel, upon this Consideration,
Wherefore should I now afflict my self, can I bring him back again, I shall go
to him, but he shall not return to me, 2 Samuel 12. 23.

2. As our Sorrows may be faulty as to their Continuance, so may they be as to
the Measures and Degrees thereof, they may soon exceed the Bounds of a
Christian Behavior, and this is when they vent themselves in loud Outcries and
Exclamations, in passionate Expressions, and oblique Reflections upon God's
Administration of things, in publishing our Calamities to all that are near us,
and tiring them with our Complaints: Or, when it is so outrageous, as to drive
us to foolish and indecent Carriages, as was the manner of the Heathens; who
used to make lamentable Howlings for their Dead, to besmear their Faces, to cut
their own Flesh, and sometimes to slay their Beasts, or their Slaves, to
accompany the Ghosts of their Deceased Friends. Or again, when we are so intent
upon our Loss, as wholly to neglect our own Affairs, when in a sullen,
discontented Mood, we regard neither our selves, nor any Concern of Life, and
refuse to partake of any of those Mercies Providence has blessed us with,
because we are crossed in this; as if we could not testify our Affections,
unless we did sacrifice our Health and Enjoyment, our Peace and Comfort, to the
Memory of those who neither regarded what we did, nor received any advantage by
these supererogatory Works of ours: And therefore, St. Jerome deservedly
reproved the Religious Paula, because at the Death of any of her Children, the
greatness of her Sorrow brought her even to the Brink of the Grave; Take no
heaviness to Heart, says the wise Jew, drive it away, and remember the last
end; forget it not, for there is no turning again; thou shall not do him good,
but hurt thy self, Eccle. 38. 20, 21. As if he had said, let the Contemplation
of thy own Mortality make thee to spare thy self, you are shortly to submit to
the same Fate, and therefore reserve some Pity for your self, and be not so
Extravagant in the bemoaning of those, who are either Blessed, and so need it
not, or past a Recovery, and so deserve it not.

Some Losses, it is confessed, may make a deeper Impression than other,
according to the Worth of the Person, the nearness of the Relation, or the need
we had of his Assistance, in such Cases quicker and deeper Resentments may be
allowed; but be it as afflictive as we can imagine, it will not justify the
Christian to exceed the Bounds of Decency, he must not sorrow as those that
have no hope: For,

1. Such Sorrows are useless and unprofitable, and therefore not fit Business
for a Christian to be employed in long, who has Work of far greater Importance
before him, such designs to bring about, that he can spare but little leisure
for Trifles, or afford to consume his Time and Strength in that which is
impertinent, unattainable.

If my Friend was Good and Virtuous, he is already possessed of a far greater
measure of Happiness, than what this World could bestow, and there remains in a
joyful Expectation of a fuller Bliss at the Restitution of his Body: And
therefore, why such Outcries and Direful Complaints, for the Departure of that
Soul which is now Triumphing, glad it has got loose from a vain, troublesome,
wicked World, and you grieve it was a Prisoner here no longer. If such Blessed
Spirits did behold those Scenes of Sorrow, which are usually acted here below,
they would pity our mistaken Zeal; and be ready to bespeak their Mourners, as
our Savior did the Women which followed him to his Crucifixion, Weep not for
me, but for your selves, and your Relations that survive; we are happy, and
have passed those Calamities which you that remain in the Body must still
conflict with. If again, the Person we vent our Sighs and Complaints for, was
vain and useless, lived Vicious and Ungodly, and dyed without giving any
tolerable Hopes of a sincere Repentance; he is gone to his place, neither our
Tears nor our Pennances are of any Efficacy, for the remitting of his
Punishment, or for bringing him back to live over another Life, to correct the
Errors of the former; it costs more to redeem their Souls, so that we must be
forced to let that alone for ever: And indeed those that are such, are unworthy
of our Sorrows, how Intimate or Dear soever they have been before; they cannot
much deserve our Pity, who did not deserve it at the Hands of our Merciful
Father. Thus David is said to be comforted, within a while after the Death of
his Son Amnon, though the circumstances thereof were lamentable enough,
possibly upon the Consideration of his being so Lewd and Dissolute a Person,
and therefore not deserving to be the Subject of any long continued Sorrow; and
we find, it is put down among the Punishments of such, that The memory of the
wicked shall rot; so that in both respects, such inordinate Griefs are useless
and insignificant.

2. They are likewise selfish, and therefore unbecoming a Christian, who is to
be acted by higher Principles: Self-love is usually at the bottom of those
excessive Sorrows, whatever pretenses of Kindness we make to them; for those
violent Passions are seldom exercised, but when our own Interest is concerned,
and therefore such complain not so much that their Friend is gone, as that they
are left, that they are deprived of his Society, and of those Comforts they
received thereby; Or, that they must now despair of those Helps and Assistances
they expected from him; and so it is not properly their Friend's Absence, but
their own Evils and Inconveniences which they deplore; for with such the
Remembrance soonest goes off, when they are supplied with Comforts and
Assistances elsewhere. If, I say, the Cause of such extreme Passions were
searched into, they would usually be found to resolve into this at the last;
whereas true Christian Sorrow has less of Noise and Pomp in it, is more even
and temperate, and arises from other Considerations.

3. Such immoderate Griefs very often proceed from a murmuring and discontented
Spirit, which must never be allowed the Christian, be the Affliction never so
severe; they argue a Repining at the Dispensations of Providence: Hence it is,
that those who give their Passions so much Liberty, seldom forbear venting
themselves in unhandsome Reflections upon the Divine Providence: Or however,
secretly tax it of Injustice or Partiality, in the managing of Affairs here
below.

4. They do manifestly betray a great defect in our Faith, that we are not so
fully convinced of the certainty of a future Being as we ought, that we give
but too slight a Credit to what the Scripture has in such a case proposed as
the chief Support, and therefore we sorrow as those that have no hope; for were
we firmly persuaded of an Immortality afterward, and the immediate Happiness
of those that sleep in Jesus, with how calm and composed a Mind should we bear
the Loss: It is for those to fill the Air with Shrieks and Lamentations, that
used to give their Aeternum Vale to the Ashes of their Friends: But the Pious
Christian, by the help of his Faith, can easily view Eternity on the other side
the Grave; for indeed, he alone partakes of those glorious Hopes, those great
Assurances, which can render him truly Triumphant at such a time: This brings
me to the last Proposition, viz.

Thirdly, That a right Understanding, and due Consideration of what the Gospel
offers in such cases, is the most effectual Method for suppressing all those
inordinate Passions: This St. Paul intimates, by these Words, I would not have
you ignorant, Brethren, concering those that are asleep; as if he had said, Had
you but clear Apprehensions of what the Christian Religion delivers, concerning
the State of your deceased Friends, your Griefs would never be so excessive,
you would never behave your selves in so indecent, so despairing a manner, as
those poor Gentiles do with whom you converse, who have not as yet embraced the
Doctrine of our Savior; for as they are without God, so they are without Hope
in the World. And now what that great Catholicon or universal Remedy is, which
the Gospel proposes as the chief Support, the Apostle delivers in the Verses
after; For if we believe that Jesus died, and rose again, even so them also
which sleep in Jesus shall God bring with him: For the Lord himself shall
descend from Heaven with a shout, with the Voice of the Archangel, and with
the Trump of God, and the dead in Christ shall rise first; then we which are
alive and remain, shall be caught up together with them in the Clouds, to meet
the Lord in the Air, and so shall we ever be with the Lord. This is a brief
Description of the Christian's Hope, the great Foundation upon which all his
Comforts are built, and indeed nothing below this can vanquish the fears of
Death, or scatter all those black and melancholy Thoughts that are apt to
seize us, either at our own or our Friend's approaching Fate. And now the
certainty of this, is to be fetched only from the Gospel; never had the World
so full a Demonstration of these important Truths, 'till our Savior came, and
brought Life and Immortality to light. All besides, might be truly said to be
without hope; for though they might make some imperfect Guesses at a future
State, by the Light of Reason, yet their Notions were so obscure, and their
Opinions about if so various, that they could neither satisfy themselves nor
others about a Matter of so great Concernment: But whatever they might think of
the Soul, yet the Resurrection of the Body was a thing quite beyond their Reach
and Comprehension, and indeed contrary to the Principles of their Philosophy;
the complete Knowledge of this, was purely the Effect of the Gospel
Manifestation, so that the utmost their Fancies could extend to, was but a
partial imperfect Happiness, in respect of what the Christian is assured of.
But alas! the Generality went not so far, the common Cry with them was much
like the Arguings of those Fools in the Book of Wisdom, Chap. 2. Our life is
short and tedious, and in the death of man there is no remedy, neither was
there any man known to have returned from the Grave, for we are born at all
adventure, and we shall be hereafter as though we bad never been, for the
breath in our nostrils is as smoke, and a little spark in the moving of our
heart, which being extinguished, our body shall be turned into ashes, and our
spirit shall vanish as the soft Air: Our time is a very shadow that passes
away, and after our End there is no returning, for it is fast sealed, so that
no man comes again. Thus it was with them, and truly it was little otherwise
with their Grave and Learned Philosophers, though they made such great
Flourishes, and some of them talked loftily about the Joys of the separate
Soul, yet they were so extravagant in their Fancies, and some of them so
inconsistent with themselves, when they had Occasion to discourse on this
Subject, that we may easily imagine they were at a Loss, and not much satisfied
themselves, in that which they taught the common People to believe: Insomuch,
that Socrates, who was as great an Instance of Virtue and Learning, as the
Gentile World could produce, yet toward the latter End of his Life, plainly
confesses his Ignorance in this thing; for when he came to plead his cause
before his Judges, and largely discourses of the Happy State of good Men
hereafter, at last frankly owns, Apol. Socrat. apud Plat.
that he could be content (...) to dye over and over, was he but assured of the
reality of what he had so often asserted; and afterward receiving his
Sentence, concludes his Apology in this doubtful manner, I am now leaving the
World, it is your Lot to live, and mine to dye, but whether of us two shall fare
the better; i.e. (whether there be any Existence on the other side the Grave)
(...), is unknown to all but God alone; so little Confidence had that great Man
even at such a time, when he should have been constant to his former
Reasonings, and magnified his own Philosophy. Hence we may safely affirm of a
great part of them, what the Author of the Book of Wisdom says, that As for the
Mysteries of God, they know them not, neither hoped they for the wages of
Righteousness, nor discerned a Reward for blameless Souls. And now being thus
wavering in their Minds, and unfix'd as to their Resolutions about an
Immortality, what was there left to fortify them against the fears of Dying?
Nature is apt to startle at the thoughts of a Dissolution, even then when it is
assured it serves but as a Passage to that Life which shall never end; but when
it looks upon it as the utmost Period of their Being, as that which crumbles
them into Dust, without any possibility of a return, what Reflections can be
more dismal or amazing: And therefore, to prepare themselves the better for the
fatal stroke, they invented many pretty Apothegms and Paradoxes, furnished
themselves with some Common Topics or Witty Sayings, that so they might have
some Relief against their own or their Friends Departure: But alas! they are
all of them but poor Receipts, in respect of that Sovereign Antidote which the
Gospel prescribes. To instance in some of their choicest;

Sometimes they would say, that Death was the unavoidable Fate of all Mankind,
that there was no resisting the Power of it, they saw that wise Men dyed as
well as Fools, and therefore it was their Prudence not to be concerned at that
which no ways could be avoided.

Again, It was a common Calamity, we every day meet with Remembrances of
Mortality, and should such thoughts discompose us, our Life would be a
continual Vexation.

Sometimes they would use this little Sophistry, That Death cannot hurt us,
because when that is we are not, and when we are that is absent, so is a thing
that does not at all belong to us, and if perhaps there be any pain at the last
Separation of the Soul from the Body, yet afterward we shall not grieve at
what we had endured a little before. Gas. synt. Eth. cap. 21.
This was the great Retreat Epicurus and his Followers betook themselves to.

Sometimes they would argue after this Rate, That we are dead already as to so
much of our Life which is past and gone, for so much as we live, so much we
dye, being dead to the day past, and that which we usually call Death is but
our last Death, and therefore as we did not fear our former Death, why should
we that which is to come.

Another little Hold they had was, That they were admitted into Life upon this
Condition, that they should give place to others as the former Generation did
to them, and therefore a piece of Injustice to be unwilling to go off the Stage
when their Work was done.

Others would Comfort themselves after this manner, That Death was a desirable
thing, seeing there were so many Troubles and Disasters that did attend us, for
it was no more than Solutio omnium Dolorum, The easying and disburthening us of
all our Cares and Fears, the letting us loose from an Infirm Body and a
Tormenting World, and laying us up in that quiet, secure state, wherein we were
before we had a Being. Conso. ad Marciam, Sect. 19.
This is Seneca's last Refuge: For though he sometimes seems to intimate a Belief
of a Future State, yet he is quickly off again, very inconstant as to his
Resolutions in that Point, and makes use of this as the chief Prescription to
allay our Fears and Moderate our Griefs. Some in the last place soared higher,
and would solace themselves with the Thoughts, of the Soul's enjoying by Death
a true Freedom and Liberty, of its being received into pleasant delightful
Mansions, and there partaking for a vast Tract of Time of such Enjoyments as
were more suitable to its Nature: This was the Opinion of the Platonists, but
their Fancies in this kind were so Extravagant, their Notions generally so
Obscure, and their Discourses so Romantic, that it may very well be
questioned, whether they had those great Transports when they were about to
exchange this Prison of the Body, for those Airy Vehicles they so much talked
of.

Nay, such as professed most to own the Incorruptible Nature of the Soul, and
steadfastly to believe a Future State, yet supposed such various Transmigrations
and Shiftings of the Soul from one Body to another, as must needs be an
abatement of its Happiness; because by such alterations, it should soon lose
all Knowledge both of its Friends and it self too.

These were the chief Prescriptions the Moralists made use of, but alas how
slight and feeble are they in respect of that Lively Hope the Christian is
possessed of; with what Courage and Constancy such Notions might inspire them I
know not, but certainly where Persons find themselves made for higher Objects
than what this World presents, and have a Consciousness of their own Eternity,
nothing can effectually compose the tumultuary Rovings of that Mind, but the
Assurances of an Immortality, and of such an Immortality only which the
Christian hopes for: Without this all the Notions of the Philosophers and
Sentences of the Moralists signify little, Death can never be vanquished by
such weak Charms, but would be still too hard for their Principles, too strong
for their Resolutions; they must Sorrow even as those that have no Hope: So
that the best of them passed off the Stage rather in an obstinate,
vainglorious Humor, than in any true Satisfaction or Triumph. But now the
Christian has a far better Provision made him; for besides the Helps and
Considerations he has in common with the Philosophers, which he may serve
himself of when he pleases; his Religion offers him such Supports as are
sufficient to repress all inordinate Passions, and compose our Minds into a
steady Frame.

It assures us of the reality of a Divine Providence in the Managery of things
here below, that whatever Affliction, Loss or Calamity befalls us, was so
Ordered by an overruling Providence: This was a Truth which the Gentile World
either absolutely denied, or however was not so well satisfied in as to make
any true Use of their Adversities, or to be Patient under them. -- But now we
know, that Affliction springs not out of the dust, nor trouble out of the
ground, that nothing falls upon us without the Knowledge and Permission of our
Heavenly Father, who still designs our Welfare by all the severe Methods and
Dispensations he exercises toward us, and therefore the Thoughts of this must
needs render us more Calm and Sedate at such times, than those who can spy out
nothing of Divine Wisdom and Goodness, but look upon all their Crosses as the
Effects either of an ill Chance, or an inevitable Fate.

But more especially does it relieve our. Thoughts, by giving us so great an
Assurance of a happy State hereafter, that not only the Soul, but the Body too,
shall live for ever, that the whole Man shall be perfectly and entirely raised,
and Death at last be swallowed up in Victory; therefore those that were Dead,
are said in my Text only to be asleep; and if we sleep we shall do well, Joh.
11. 12.
as the Disciples said of Lazarus: It is only a resting for a while in our
Dormitories, but we shall as certainly awake in the Morning as ever we lay down
-- And this we are ascertained of:

First, By many full and clear Testimonies in the Scripture, of whose Divine
Authority we have so many undoubted Proofs: Here we are plainly told, that the
Hour is coming, John 5. 28.
in which all that are in the Graves shall bear, and shall come forth, they
that have done good unto the Resurrection of life: Hear it is said, that when
our earthly house of this tabernacle shall be dissolved, 2 Cor. 5. 1.
we have a building of God, an house not made with hands, eternal in the
Heavens: Here it is promised, that this Corruptible must put on Incorruption, 1
Cor. 15. 53.
and this Mortal must put on Immortality: Nay, here in the Context we have a
more particular Description of the Manner thereof, and in what Order it shall
be.

Secondly, But more especially are we secured hereof by the Resurrection of our
Blessed Savior; therefore St. Paul makes use of this Argument, to excite in us
these Hopes, as in the Verse after my Text; For if we believe that Jesus dyed,
and rose again, even so them also which sleep in Jesus will God bring with him:
As if he had said, If once your Faith will carry you so far, as to believe your
Lord's Resurrection, you need never doubt your own, this being a Matter of
Fact, surpasses all the Arguments that could be drawn from any other Topic
whatsoever: For our Savior dying in a Humane Capacity, and being raised again,
does clearly evince, that we who are of the same Nature, are capable of a like
Restoration. This indeed is a sensible Experiment of the possibity of a
Resurrection; but now that which was thus shown to be possible, is made also
certain to us, from the Relation that is between Christ and us, as he is the
Head, and we are his Members, and so shall be made Partakers of the like
Condition with him. So our Apostle elsewhere, 2 Cor. 4. 14. Knowing this, that
he who raised up the Lord Jesus, shall raise us up also by Jesus; of which we
have have an Earnest by the Spirit he has given us. So our Apostle again, Romans
8. 11. If the spirit of him that raised up Jesus from the dead dwell in you, he
that raised up Christ from the dead shall also quicken your mortal bodies, by
the spirit that dwells in you: So that by this Triumphant Action chiefly it
is, that our Lord has brought Life and Immortality to light, brought those
Mysteries to a full View, which before lay hid under Types and Figures, or were
only faintly apprehended by Natural Reason. And to give us a further Assurance
of the thing. He manifested his Power before; Mat. 27. 52.
for at his Death the Graves were opened, and many bodies of Saints which slept
arose, and came out of their Graves after his Resurrection, and appeared to
many; intimating by that Release of some few Prisoners made then, what a
general Jail-delivery there should be when he comes at last in his Glory.

And now upon a Review of all this, shall the Christian sorrow like those that
have no Hope? Shall he not be able to part with a Pious Friend or Relation, but
must he lament him as if lost for ever? How easily rather, may he at such a
time triumph over Death, and cry out, Where is thy Sting? O Grave, where is thy
Victory? Where are all your Trophies? the Body indeed you have seized on, but
that is only a Sacred Depositum, committed to your Trust for a time, you must
make a faithful Restitution of it e're long; the Victory truly is ours, and God
has given it us through our Lord Jesus Christ: By the help of this single
Consideration, how often has Death been triumphed over by the Primitive
Christians, who have been so transported with the thoughts hereof, that they
have been eager to quit this dull Mortality before they were called, and to
press upon those Eternal Mansions, before they had completed their
Probation-ship here below; and yet we have the same Arguments for the truth
hereof as they, and may have as strong Evidences for our Title.

However, if our Faith cannot inspirit our Resolutions so high, yet sure it
will be sufficient to moderate our Grief, to restrain the Inordinacy of our
Passions for our deceased Friends, especially when they are such as sleep in
Jesus, such who are not so much departed from us as gone before us, have the
Privilege to go a little the sooner to take Possession of that Glorious
Inheritance, where they joyfully expect the Consummating of their Bliss, as
well in the Redemption of their Bodies, as in the being restored to those Pious
Friends they parted with here.

That this is the Condition of every true Christian that is fallen asleep, our
Religion will not suffer us to be ignorant of: And that it is now the happy
state of this Reverend Person, whose Obsequies we at this time come to
Celebrate, our Charity easily teaches us to believe, and therefore we are not
to Sorrow as those that have no Hope.

Though indeed, if at any time our Passions might be allowed to exceed the common
Bounds, now it is that Humane Frailty might expect to be Indulged; when one
(who perhaps according to the Compass of the Orb in which he moved, was as
useful to the Community as any besides) has bid adieu to the World, when it
stood in great need of such Exemplary Piety and Conduct.

But when again we Consider, He was one of those of whom we have the greatest
Hopes, Christian Prudence is so to regulate our Deportment, as that our Sorrow
do neither betray the Weakness of our Faith, nor imply too great a Fondness for
our selves.

He was trained up in Religion under the early Instructions of Careful Parents,
and of a Father equally Learned as Pious, the late Lord Bishop of Norwich: Had
the farther Help of an Academical Life in one of the chiefest Colleges of the
University, from whence he was removed to this Place, where he was near forty
Years a Faithful Pastor, that taught out of the Pulpit as well as in it, and
whose Conversation was a Comment upon his Doctrine.

The constant Tenor of his Actions evidently showed, that Piety and a due Fear
of Almighty God was fixed at the bottom; that he had right Notions of Religion,
and an awful Sense of his Duty: In the Management of which, he avoided all
those little Arts and Designs, which many often practice to obtain the Vogue
and Applause of others; for I could never perceive in him any intemperate Zeal,
or studious affectation of Preciseness and Singularity, no Pretensions to a
higher strain of Purity than others; but Goodness in its own Native Dress,
every thing acted without Pomp or Noise, (choosing rather to be a Christian in
earnest, than striving only to seem so) as being no doubt sufficiently
satisfied with the Approbation of that Judge which sees in secret, and the
Testimony of that one Evidence which is above a thousand Witnesses. He had all
along that great Probity and Uprightness, and withal such a sweetness of
Temper, as procured the Esteem and Love of most that knew him, and his
Conversation he so prudently tempered, as rendered it agreeable to all that
deserved it; for he knew how to be Cheerful without being vain and light, and
how to be Serious, and not sullen or morose.

His great Meekness and Condescension added no small Luster to his other
Accomplishments, for here appeared not the least Leaven of Pride to sour his
Conversation, no haughty, disdainful Looks toward Inferiors, no fond
affectation of Distance, or Difficulty of Access, but all along comporting
himself with that unstrain'd Humility, as evidently declared him to be a true
Minister of his, who owned himself to be a Servant to all.

How faithfully he descharged the several Relations he stood in, either as a
Husband, a Parent, or a Friend, is so evident to all that had an Intimacy with
him, that I need only say, scarce greater Instances of Love, Tenderness and
Sincerity are now to be found. It Is confessed, that neither his Temper nor his
Judgment, carried him up to the Heighths and Violences of some Men, but yet he
well understood the Design of Religion, and the Interest of our Church, and
proved I dare say more serviceable to both, than many that pretended stronger
Zeal, or made a louder Noise: He very well knew, a due Regard should be had to
the Passions, Prepossessions and Infirmities of Humane Nature, the
Consideration whereof would still incline every-good Man to use such gentle
Methods, as are most proper to accomodate lighter Differences, and advance the
main Ends of the Gospel. All Persons are naturally conceited of their own
Notions, (especially such as respect Religion) and nothing so soon overcomes
those Prejudices, and unbinds the Charm, as a Candid Representation of their
Mistakes; whereas a furious Opposition (...), creates either a greater Fondness
for, or Obstinacy in them; or e^se only makes such Converts, as at the first
Opportunity will turn our Enemies, and study Revenges for their past
Restraints. However, if it was for nothing else but the Fallibility of Humane
Judgment, and the Mutability of Humane Affairs, a due Exercise of Moderation
would not be absurd or inconvenient, but when it seems to bear so near a
Resemblance to that Wisdom that descends from above, which is not only pure,
but peaceable, gentle, and easy to be entreated, we have no reason to be
ashamed to own the thing, or afraid to defend those that loved it.

But whatever might be the Opinions of Others, I make no Question but You that
were under his Ministerial Charge, to whom he was so long and so well known,
cannot but have a great Value and Esteem for his Memory, and therefore his
Example and his Doctrine ought to be still of force with You; for though he be
dead, yet to you he still speaks: The Unblameableness of his Life, and the
soundness of his Discourses, will but aggravate your Guilt, if you disobey the
one, and forget the other. Endeavor then so to be followers of him as he was
of Christ, that when you are to pass into the other World, you need not be
afraid of meeting with him, nor he ashamed to own You; but there Congratulating
each other's safe Arrival, You may increase the Triumph of your Faithful
Conductor, and procure for him that Aureola, or additional Glory, that belongs
to those who turn many to Righteousness -- For indeed what is our Hope, or Joy,
or Crown of Rejoicing? are not even ye in the Presence of our Lord Jesus Christ
at his coming?

His Deathbed I may say was Easy to him, though his Pains were very acute and
tormenting; for his Mind was quiet and sedate, and that enabled him to bear his
Afflictions with a wonderful Patience and Resignation: There was nothing (as he
professed to me) that discomposed his Spirit, or made him fearful of Dying. And
indeed, this was but the Consequence of his past Actions; for he that (...) so
long (...) that is right, according to the (...) Observation, will find peace
at the last. He had of late so often encountered with the Harbingers of Death,
that he could not be much surprised at the approach of it, and his Conscience
was too clear to be feared at any thing beyond it.

Seeing then we are not ignorant of this Person who is now asleep, we ought
not, even such as were most nearly related to him, or had an Interest in his
Friendship, sorrow like those that have no Hope, but Commit him to the Earth,
in sure and certain Hope of his Resurrection to Eternal Laife and endeavor to
imitate that Justice, Humility, Charity and Patience, and other Christian
Virtues that were remarkable in him; that when we come to put off Mortality, we
may meet with that Rev^^^d of Well-doing, which we have so good Grounds to
believe our Deceased Brother has to his unspeakable Joy already received.

FINIS.

