Astrological PREDICTIONS FOR THE YEAR, 1679.

SHOWING, According to the most Approved of Rules of that Sublime Study, What
Revolutions, or Accidents, are likely to happen in many Parts of the World;
especially, in England, Scotland, and Ireland.

Multi multa sciunt, sed nemo omnia. By J. G. Student in Astrology.

With Allowance.

LONDON, Printed for R. G. 1679.

Astrological Predictions, FOR THE YEAR, 1679.
QVeris a me quantum Operantur Astra? says an eminent Artist) Dico, in nos
nihil astra urgere, sed animos praeclives trahere, etc. -- Desire thou to
Know of me, How far the Stars have an Operation upon Us? I tell thee they do
not compel, but incline; and that so gently, that if we apply our selves to be
governed by our Reason, they have no power over us; but if we resign our selves
to the Conduct of our Corrupt Natures, they work as much in us as in Bruits;
and then we are indeed no better than they.

Which is an Axiom, every Knowing and Ingenious Artist must of necessity own;
Although I know there are some Sir Positives in Astrology as well as in
Play Houses, who, (with great Impudence and greater fraud) pretend they have
the Stars in a String: Can by them discover and Cure Witchcraft, etc. Whereas
indeed those glorious bodies are not to be Subjected to any such base purposes:
for the influences of the Stars are purely natural, and directed by Natural
Beams, or Aspects Geometrical; and do only gently incline, but force or Compel
None; and therefore can neither cause nor Cure Witchcraft: This being
premised, we hope we may without imposing on any man's Credulity, give our
modest observations, on their this years influence, and leave Heaven and time
to produce their Effects. The Remarkable influence which ushers in this year,
much resembles that which happened in the later end of July last, viz, etc. A
Conjunction of Saturn and Mars, in the Terms of Saturn, and Decanate of the Sun
-- whence according to Astrologers, its effects will be Famous, Malicious,
Crafty and Treacherous: But by Sol and Jupiters falling presently after the
Vernal Ingress, into Conjunction, we may expect to hear that the Grandees of
Church, and State, are Vigorously Active for the Good of Both. That a time is
Coming, and we hope not sar distant, wherein both Kings, Princes and
Magistrates shall be voluntarily and unanimously honored, obeyed and loved; and
the Reverend Clergy be had in their Primitive Veneration and Respect, which our
wiser Forefathers knew it Deserved. In the interim, by Saturns Continuance in
Jemini, and Retrograde there, we cannot but expect much unnecessary Censuring,
Murmuring and Disconten^; some discontented heads over fond of their little
Sense, will take upon them more than becomes them, and to be thought wiser than
their Superiors, will be whispering to each other as Politic Secrets, those
things which indeed they nothing understand. Yet ere the first Month expire,
some of them may chance to be overheard, and found to Weep, with the Weather
-- The Conjunction of Mars, and Mercury, from M. Caeli and fourth Angle, lets
loose among us a raging Spirit of Lying, detracting, and Libelling; Which like
the Arrows Shot by the irritated Indian at Jupiter, will revert on their own
heads. Mercury in Med. Cali pushes Magistrates on to the making, and executing
good Laws, for the prevention of disorders.

But yet from the Malevolent Conjunction of Saturn and Mars (if we will believe
Haly, or Johannes Angelus,) we have great reason to fear, that not only Single
persons, but whole Societies, and the Generality of Men, by over-indulging
themselves; by Contemning and despising their Adversaries; By their too great
confidence in their own designs and Con^^ivances; and lastly, by an
unwarrantable Security, and great forgetfullness of following the Presidents,
Actions and Counsels of Antiquity, will bring on themselves those Miseries and
Calamities, which nothing but their early Circumspection, and their earnestly
imploring the Assistance of Almighty providence, can be able to prevent! O the
Frauds, A dulation, Craft, Cunning-Circumvention, Overreaching, Under-mining
and Treachery, which this Conjunction is Naturally prone to promote! It
naturally influences the disclosure of Secrets amongst the nearest Relations;
Council of most private concern will be apt to be laid open: and that
Friendship which before was thought inseparable, may perhaps now suffer a
Dissolution: unless such men as are signified by this Conjunction have their
several Nativities happily qualified by Jupiter, and Mercury, etc. Whereby the
Operation will be much more Moderate.

May the Effects of this Conjunction be to our Enemies; but to England, Jupiter
in Aries brings the happy tidings of Peace and Victory, and great hopes that
many of our welldeserved Soldiers, and Courtiers, will be worthily rewarded
with preferment. --

By the Conjunction of Mars and Venus, which happens about the middle of March,
we may Expect, if there be any Great Lady, Princess, etc. in Urope, who has
Aries for her Horoscope: that she may be about that time rendered very Happy,
Honorable and Illustrious; and that she is very likely shortly to bless the
world with a Prosperous Male-Issue that shall Spring from her Loins, who in
time may render that Nation happy, and its Scepter secure, in which she now
dwells; Mauger all its Enemies hopes to the Contrary.

In June, Gemini is great Dignities of Mercury; And a sign of Eminent Regency
in this Age: From whence, by the Rules of Astrology, we may expect great
Assemblies, Conventions and Synods, to Congregate toward the Western part of
the World about this time, to Debate of Weighty Affairs, both Humane and
Divine. Saiurn in Horoscopo will also occasion Blustering Weather, and
consequently some Shipwracks toward the North-East parts of our Kingdom.

September is likely to prove a Vigorous and Active Month in several respects;
many Contentions are likely to happen about this aerie subtle Mistress called
HONOR, of which many men will, about this time, prove so strangely enamoured,
that they will voluntarily expose their Lives and Fortunes to the usual Dangers
which generally attend on Commendable Actions, rather than part with her
Company.

To conclude, although the Inauspecious Conjunction of Saturn and Mars, seems
to threaten a deprevation on the Moral Virtues, which will run some hazard of
being war^'d against by Subtlety, Hypocrisy, Treachery, etc. -- which will be
chiefly caused by the envious and malifick nature of of Saturn. Yet if we
Credit the knowing Bonatus, fol. 567. we have this for our Comfort, That
Jupiter in the Eleventh, gives them much comfort and assistance from Friends:
Influences Joy, Pleasure, Prosperity, Peace and Delight. Also it enclines men
to a reciprocal, or mutual administration of Civilities; makes them careful of
each others Reputations; faithful in their Trusts; by which means men compass a
Halcyon Serenity, or contentedness of Mind, and happily come to enjoy the
utmost of their temporal wishes. -- To whose Judgment Haly also accords, Fol.
371. Si Jupiter fuerit in unde^ima, etc. When Jupiter is posited in the
eleventh Angle of a Revolution, Men shall have Good Fortune multiplied unto
them, and live freely and prosperously, enjoying Peace and Plenty, etc. nay
(says he) although they despaired of those Blessings, yet during that
Revolution they shall be made happy with them, and shall obtain such things as
they can reasonably hope for, or expect. And to render our condition more
happy, the Thoughts and Actions of Kings, Princes, and Magistrates; will wholly
tend toward the preservation, and of the Rights and Privileges of the People.
And very probable it is, that from this Auspicious position of of benign
Jupiter, some Honorable Acts, or Act of Grace, may be expected from our
Illustrious Caesar, and his grave Sonators, which shall effectually quiet the
discomposed minds, and quell the Disorders which are now too rife among us.
Quicquid ligat Saturnus solvit Jupiter: And this we have the greater Hopes of,
by comparing that of Learned Herm^s, with the Judicious Haly, who says; S^
Luna fuerit in secunda Domo (as here) significat quod populos habebit illo anno
bonum and utilitatem: If the Moon be Posited in the Second House, the People
may that Year expect to Enjoy all the Benefits of Peace and Plenty. And she
being seated in her Proper Mansion, and in a Trine Aspect of Mercury on the
Eleventh, and Jupiter disposing of them, we have great Hopes, that his Noble
Influences will pervert the Malignity of Saturn, and turn his Venom into an
Antidote; at least, as long as this Revolution shall remain.

In fine, Let the Friendly Influences of Indulgent Jupiter attend our Land, and
then its Inhabitants can hardly be Unhappy: He is a great Lover of Peace; and
there are scarcely any, but are Convinced, That nothing can Hurt us, but our
Divisions.

The Stars look like so many Glorious Eyes, with Benevolent Aspects on us:
There is hardly a Frown (unless in that leering Conjunction of Saturn and Mars)
to be found in Heaven's smiling Superficies, which we may properply appropriate
to England. So that, if we be not our own Enemies, by industriously groping for
feigned Fears and Jealousies, where there are really none to be found: If we
would not (by private Surmises, and seditious Whisperings) anticipate
Misfortunes, and with Melancholy Contemplations, render our selves Fictiously
Miserable, before we are so, (or Heaven intends we shall be so indeed.) I say
then, I doubt not, but we might Enjoy all the Blessings of Providence in a
large Proportion: And whilst our Neighbors and Enemies are sharing among
themselves, the Calamitous Retinue of a Bloody War; we might ^it not only
Happily, but Secure our Own at Home; quietly Pruning our own Vines, and
peaceably partaking of all those other Incomparable Blessings, which may be
reasonably expected under a Gracious KING, and Happy Government.

FINIS.

