AN Epistle to Friends; Being a Tender SALUTATION To the FAITHFUL in GOD every
where. ALSO, A LETTER TO CHARLES, KING of England, etc.

By ANNE GILMAN.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1662.

An EPISTLE to FRIENDS, etc.
DEar Friends, to whom this may come do I send greeting. Grace, Mercy and Peace
be multiplied, in and amongst you; who are of the Family of God, and of the
household of the Faithful, in the Eternal God of my Life does my Soul salute
you, who are kept in the Faith, in which there is no shadow of turning: to you
which are made partakers of an endless Life, which is hid with Christ in God,
is my Life drawn; and I am even constrained to let forth my Love unto you,
which know the washing in the blood of the Covenant, and are made partakers of
an everlasting Inheritance, who have the Witness in your selves that you are
his Children; and not only Children, but Heirs, and Joyntheirs with Christ:
For, as we suffer with him, we shall also reign with him; and though in the
world we pass through great Tribulations, yet abiding in Him which overcomes,
here is our Peace and safety known: for he has chosen us to be a People for
his Praise, and his Honor to dwell in; and this is the reason we are called
into the Vineyard, even to know the Work and the Reward thereof: for now is the
day known, wherein the time is to be redeemed, because the days are evil:
Therefore, dear Friends, be not slothful; for the Lord is taking notice of the
standers idle this day: for it is required of every one, according to your
measures as you have received of the Lord, to clear your selves concerning this
wicked Generation: for the Best is let loose out of the bottomlesspit, and his
fury is very great, because he has but a short time to reign; therefore does
he roar after his prey with a devouring voice. Therefore, my Friends, keep upon
your watch; for this is the day wherein he is in subtilty transforming himself
into an Angel of light: But dear Lambs, keep to that which does discover him in
his appearances; for that is the Anchor you are to know, and there you are to
be staid, even in the Power, over Hell and Death, for these are the last
enemies we are to conquer: but blessed be God who is mighty in his appearance,
and has made himself known to be the Captain of our Salvation, and has
displayed the Banner of his Love over us, who in all our Afflictions is
afflicted, and the Angel of his presence is known to support in the time of our
need; and this is the reason that I am constrained to call upon you to keep to
your watch: and if any Lamb among you be suffered to go astray, the Shepherd's
Crook is to be known to catch them to the Fold. Understand what I say, my
Friends, for I write to the Faithful that can read with a single heart; who
have known the Clouds pass over, and the Vail taken away, and the
Partition Wall broken down; even they know what I say, and can feel me in the
endless Life, and in the invisible Fountain of Love; for herein am I united
unto you; And this is the day wherein the Lord is making up his Jewels,
therefore are we made to speak often one to another, and a Book of Remembrance is
to be written thereof: Therefore, dear Friends, think it not strange concerning
the fiery Trials, which are to try you, as though some strange thing happened
unto you: for, as Gold, must you be tried and purified in the fire: and this is
the reason that he is making Vessels fit for his Honor to dwell in; for there
is nothing can stand before him but that which can endure the fire; even fire
within, and fire without. Abide it, dear Friends, and keep close to the Lord;
for there is none can wear the Crown but they that endure to the end: For the
mighty God is arisen in strength, as with an Army, to support all those that
trust in him, and are weak and little in their own eyes, being kept low in his
Fear; for such does he wonderfully uphold. And here is no need of sheltring one
under another, for the Lord is the shelter of those that put their trust in
him, and walk before him with an upright heart: for it is the heart he
requires, which is redeemed out of the form, and kept single to himself. Let
them that read, understand: for this is the Key of David, which shuts, and
no man opens; and opens, and no man shuts; yea, God Almighty it is, who
is the strength of all those that in a pure heart wait upon him, in the
undefiled Life which keeps blameless. And in an unspotted Conscience, the
well-springs of Life are set and known, which run most pleasantly unto all
those that fear the Lord, and walk humbly before him. Wherefore fear not,
little Flock, for it is the Father's will to give you the Kingdom: and this is
the reason that none of you can be plucked out of the Father's hand, because
your Lives are hid with Christ in God; and it is your meat and drink to lie
down in the Will of the Lord. And this in my measure am I made a Witness of.
And this is the reason that the Lord is pleased to unloose my lips, and untye
my tongue, that his living Praises should be sounded forth amongst the Heathen:
for wonderfully has he wrought in and amongst you; therefore is his Name to be
exalted above all the gods of the Heathen: for he is wondeful, and wondrously
does he work, for the scattering of all that is contrary to himself; that
whatsoever is standing in any, that is not of himself, may be brought to
nothing, that his eternal living Truth may be known in every particular. Oh you
Prisoners of hope! for you do I often pray, and am made sensible of the answer of
my Prayers, because you are kept out of the murmuring, and out of the desiring
after Egypts Fleshpots. Oh let the Works of the Lord never be forgotten of
you, who have tasted of his loving kindness; for, of his goodness there is no
end.

Therefore, my Friends, keep to that which gives you the Victory, and keep to
your Dominion, that sin may not reign in your mortal bodies, and here you will
find peace and rest for your souls, as your minds are singly stayed upon the
Lord; and your eyes kept in your head Christ Jesus. Then will there be a
watching over one another in love, and in the spirit of meekness, as becomes
Saints who fear the Lord, and give glory to his Name: Such cannot watch with an
evil eye, but are made to watch against that, because it is for Judgment. So to
the hidden Word in the heart do I commend you, which gives victory over all
that which arises contrary to it self, that noble Warriors you may be over all
Corruptions and diverse Lusts; for you are to triumph over all that which is
contrary to the Lord, and then all things will work together for good: and
nothing it is can separate you from the Love of God, which is made known to you
that abide in his Fear; which Fear is the beginning of Wisdom; and as we abide
herein, we meet together as Children of one birth, and are refreshed in one
banqueting house of his loving kindness: and here is no vain jangling, but all
agree together, and can lie down in the Counsel of the Lord; and as we are kept
to this, there is no place for the Enemy to enter. Oh, dear Friends, did our
Enemies but know what we enjoy, who are gathered into Faithfulness, surely they
would cease Persecution, and own their Condemnation, concerning us; but it is
hid from their eyes, and therefore can we say, Father, forgive them, because
our love runs to our Enemies: For we who have been made partakers of the large
Love of the Lord, desire that all might have part with us in his Fear: But
alas, alas! our lamentation is taken up for them who flight these precious
enjoyments; but to us is he risen with healing under his wings, and therefore
can we thankfully take the Cup of Salvation, and praise the Lord amongst the
Heathen: and this is the large Love of our God, and it is marvelous in our
eyes. O Praises, Praises, Glory and Honor be given to God, who works all our
works in us, and for us.

And here I am your Fellow Laborer in the Vineyard of our Lord. ANNE GILMAN.

A LETTER to CHARLES, KING of ENGLAND, etc.
INcline thine ear (O King) and slight not the precious Warnings of the Lord,
which daily are made known unto thee, by that of God in thy own Conscience; and
large and many have been the Warnings of the Servants of the Lord unto thee,
but they have been cast behind thy back: And now is our God risen in his Mighty
Power, to make Inquisition for innocent Blood; therefore, prepare, prepare, to
meet the Lord, and consider what account thou can give of the Innocent Blood
which cries in the ears of the Lord for vengeance, it is the voice of thy
Brothers righteous blood which thou art to give an account of this day; and
this is required at thy hands by him, who has the hearts of Kings in his
hands, and turns them as the rivers of waters whither he pleases. What have
we done (O King) that such usuage we should receive from thy hands, and by thy
orders, that Soldiers should come into our peaceable Meetings in a warlike
manner, as if some great enemies were to be conquered, amongst the People of
God, whom by scorners are called Quakers, who cannot hold up a weapon against
any? I say, What have we done that we should be haled, many of us, out of our
Meetings, and cast into stinking Prisons on heaps, where, for want of air and
room, many have sealed to this Testimony with their death, before they can deny
to Worship God as they are persuaded in their own Consciences? for, if thou
should prepare, in the room of Prisons, a fiery Furnace, or a Lions den, we
can as contentedly lie down, in the Will of our God, as we can suffer our
bodies to lie in Prison: For the same Law which took hold of the Saints of God
in the days of old, does take hold of us at this day: for we cannot bow to the
imaginations of men concerning the Worship of our God. And before we can own
any man to be our Teacher, we can suffer death: for our Life cannot be taken
away, it is hid with Christ in God; for those that will live godly in Christ
Jesus, must suffer Persecution: And therefore (O King) we are not careful to
answer thee in this matter, for our Confidence is in the Lord, and our Strength
lies in him, who is God Almighty, and does save his People from their sins,
and from the wrath of our Enemies; and he gives us courage and boldness, so
that our lives, or any thing we do enjoy, is not near or dear unto us, for our
Wills are freely given up into the hands of the Lord, that he should do with us
as seems good in his fight; for this I know, that all things shall work
together for good to those that love God, and are called for this purpose to
suffer for his Names sake, who comes through great Tribulations, their Garments
are washed in the Blood of the Lamb. And this is the Reason we cannot Conform
to the Idol shepherds, which preach for Money, and divine for Hire, and seek
their Gain from their Quarters; our Souls abhor such Teachers, for we are
Redeemed from their mouths; and we should know it to be a yoke of bondage, to
turn to them again. And be it known unto thee (O King) that the Lord is risen,
who is the Mighty God of Jacob, in strength, as with an Army, and is scattering
to pieces all the deceitful workers of Iniquity; for though his loving kindness
has been plentifully known amongst his People, yet this will not excuse thee,
when the great God shall render unto every one according to the deeds done in
the body; and though God is pleased to preserve his People in the hollow of his
Hand, and hide them under his Pavillion; because his hand is not shortened, but
his arm is stretched forth still, because to us he is known a Deliverer in the
time of trouble, therefore can we stand still and see his Salvation.

And therefore am I bold to declare, That the Lord is risen for the Redemption
of his People, and is making way for his ransomed Ones to pass over; but
Pharaoh and his Host are to be cast into the Sea of God's wrath: for those that
fear the Lord, are his Promises made known unto, and his Secrets are made known
to those that fear his Name; but to the proud, and haughty, and to those that
forget God, and turn their backs at his Reproof, and will none of his Counsel,
such will our God sweep away with the beesom of destruction; for the worker of
Iniquity will not be able to abide his Presence in that day: Therefore (O King)
consider what thou art doing, for the Lord has long waited upon thee to be
gracious, and many precious Warnings have been handed to thee through the
Servants of the Lord; yet that does not clear me in the sight of my God:
therefore (O King) return, return, and repent, and harden not thy heart, as in
the day of provocation, against that secret witness of God, which reproves thee
secretly when no mortal eye sees. Therefore, if they were to be cast into
utter darkness, who did not visit the Servants of the Lord, and who did not
cloth them, and who did not feed them when they were in Prison; what will
become of those who cast them into Prison, and cause them to go hungry through
their hot Persecution? I say, it were better for a millstone to be hanged about
their necks, and they cast into the midst of the Sea, than that they should
offend one of the little ones that put their trust in the Lord. Therefore (O
King) lay it to heart, for these Warnings are not come forth in vain; for to
that of God in thy Conscience do I defer my Cause, and let it plead for us when
we are out of sight: for if Fire should be for us prepared, the ashes of our
bones would rise as a witness against thee to plead the innocence of our Cause
before thee. Therefore in love to thy Soul are these lines given forth, that a
stop may be put to the Persecution of the Saints; And so whether thou will hear
or forbear, I have cleared my self in the sight of my God concerning thee, etc.

ANNE GILMAN.

THE END.

