A SERMON AGAINST CORRUPTING THE WORD of GOD, Preached at CHRIST CHVRCH IN
MANCHESTER Upon a Public Occasion on the 11th Day of July, 1696.

By Thomas Gipps Rector of BVRY.

Cur non ad Graecam Originem revertentes ea, quae a vitiosis Interpretibus male
reddita, vel a presumtoribus imperitis emendata perversius, vel a librariis
dormitantibus aut addita sunt aut mutata, corrigimus? S. Hieronymus Praefatione
in 4. Evangelia ad Damasum.

LONDON, Printed for Ephraim Johnston- Bookseller in Manchester, 1697.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE WILLIAM Earl of Derby, Lord of Man, and the Isles, etc.
My Lord,
I Have been Persuaded by some Private Friends, that the Publication of the
following Discourse is not at this time of day to be declined. Some People
will, doubtless, be angry, that their foul Play is brought upon the Stage, and
thus openly taxt. For this reason, I am bold to engage Your Lordship in my
Interests, and to shelter my self under Your Great and Honorable Name. Your
Honor will (I hope) the more easily pardon me herein, since Your own Interest
also is not a little concerned. It is not my Disposition to expose any Man's
Mistake, whilst it keeps in doors, and contains its self within any bounds of
Modesty and Privacy. In this case, certainly it is better to mourn for it in
secret, at most to rebuke it in a Corner. But when it is made Notorious; when it
boldly stares us in the Face and is avowed for Truth, when an Error, which one
would have hoped was an unwilling One, is Supported by another, which must be
Confessed and Believed a wilful One: That is, when the Presbyterian Government
(or Congregational, I cannot tell which) is publicly maintained by a Text of
Scripture manifestly Corrupted, surely it is high time then to make the World
Sensible of the Artifice. I had some Years before Discovered the False Reading
here spoken of, but held my peace. At length, wben I found that the Corruption,
like a Gangren, had spread its self into several Editions of the Bible here in
England, and, God knows, how many in Scotland, and there vouch't for Good, I
could not prevail with my self to be silent any longer, and I hope the same
Good Zeal will Inspire Your Honor with a Resolution to Discountenance such
Injuries Offered unto the Holy Word of God. Nor is this the only Instance of
the kind. In the Dissenters Petition for Peace above years since, Acts 15. 18.
v. is thus cited -- To lay upon you no greater burden than necessary things,
that small word these being cunningly left out merely to support their
Proposition, Mr. B -- who drew up the Petition, Champ. Chal. accepted by Dr.
Hook late Vicar of Halifax.
and since has been publicly charged for thus abusing the Scripture, though he
forgot not to Acquaint us with the most trivial, yea ridiculous, Passages of
his Life, yet had not the Ingenuity to confess his Errror, nor yet the Courage
to Paliate it with any Excuse. My Lord, I have now done, after I shall have
made a public Acknowledgment, as I now do, of the many great singular Favors
received from Your Honor through the Course of almost thirty years Service, and
have also farther assured You, that I am as in Duty bound,

Right Honorable, Your Lordships, Most Humble, and Most Obedient Servant, and
Chaplain, THO. GIPPS.

Prove. xxx. 6. v. Add not thou unto his Word lest he reprove thee, and thou be
found a Liar.
THE Argument I am about to treat of is weighty, and not easily comprised in
one single Discourse. It will therefore concern me to husband my time as
thriftily as may be, and chiefly to lay aside all thoughts of further Preface.

The Text is a Negative Precept forbidding all manner of Corrupting the Holy
Scriptures, and that under a double Caution:

1. Lest God reprove thee for it, a terrible Intimation.

2. Lest thou be found a Liar, One of the most detestable Sins in the sight
both of God and Man. That by His Word is meant the Word of God is manifest from
the Verse foregoing -- Every Word of God is pure, v. 5.
Then it follows -- Add not thou unto his Word, i. e. to the Word of God. That
we at this day are to understand hereby the written Word or Scriptures is not
to be questioned, there being now no other Word of God, 1 Cor. 10. 11.
but that which is written for our Instruction, upon whom the ends of the world
are come. When the Prophet Agur says, Add not; He must be supplied thus,
neither diminish from the Word. For so the Parallel places in the Margent do
warrant, Deuteronomy. 4. 2. and 12. 32.
Ye shall not add unto the Word, neither shall ye diminish ought from it. Thou
shall not add thereunto neither diminish from it, said Moses to the Israelites:
For the Holy Spirit does not always express things to the full, but leaves 'em
often times to be made up out of some other places; hinting here but briefly what
elsewhere he more fully sets forth. For which reason therefore I would read the
Text thus, Add not thou unto his Word, neither diminish ought from it. And then
(as I said) the Text is levelled against all manner of Corrupting the Word. One
Eminent Instance of which I shall produce by and by, the chief Reason of my
undertaking this Subject. I will confine my self unto the Precept, in handling
whereof my method shall be.

1. To lay before you Negatively some Cases, which though they may seem to be,
yet are not adding to, nor diminishing from, the Word.

2. I will show positively when we either add or diminish, or both, contrary to
the Precept here given. 1. Negatively, etc. And that in the following eases: It
is not an adding unto the Word, when we explain and fill up any Passage of
Scripture out of some other places -- wherein we find the Truth more fully
expressed. For in this consists the very Office and Duty of a Preacher, and
Explainer of the Scripture. And this I plead for my sufficient Warrant in
taking the liberty of supplying the Text out of other Parallel Places, as you
see I have done. 2. It is not diminishing from the Word, when we omit the
Hebrew Titles of the Psalms; Nor is it adding to the Word when we prefix the
Latin Titles to 'em.

There was of late a Gentleman who in defense of Nonconformists alleged
against the established Worship. Mr. De Laune in Lr. to Dr. Calamy page 43.
That in the Psalms used in the Liturgy are left out the Ancient Hebrew Titles,
which are (says he) Original and Parts of the H. Scripture, having a tendency
toward the unfolding the Mysteries therein contained. And he quarrels at the
Latin Titles prefixed thereunto. But it were well if the Dissenters, whose
Cause he pleads, would first prove that those Hebrew Titles are Original and
Essential Parts of the Holy Scripture, and then if they are so, that they would
give us a Reason why in that very Translation, which they approve and make use
of, those Original Titles are indeed retained, but in the Hebrew Language still
in many Psalms and unintelligible to the People; or why the Translation of 'em
into plain English, is not always placed at the head of the Psalm, but often
cast into the Margent, as if they were something else than Scripture; neither
of which ought to be, if these Titles be part of, and so useful toward, the
unfolding the Sense of the Psalm. And hereupon I ask whether this is not a
sufficient Intimation, that they are not of a Certainty, what they are
confidently affirmed to be, Viz. Original. I would moreover be resolved what
those Mysteries are which those Hebrew Titles do unfold: Whether the Dissenters
read 'em to their Congregations, and if they do, whether the People are one jot
the wiser or understand the Mysteries of the Psalter, ever a whit the better
for 'em. Lastly, I desire to know, why they do not affix 'em, or rather the
Translation of 'em to the front of the Psalms. In Meter and likewise sing 'em:
All which ought to be done, if they are essential Parts of the Psalms
But if they desire to be excused these smaller faults, be it so yet, Aequum
est peccatis veniam poscentes reddere rursus.

Let then the World judge, whether this Author sought not an occasion of
quarrel against us and yet found none, except what involves his own Party in
the same condemnation. As for the Latin Titles they are (any one may know,)
but the first words of every Psalm, and so by consequence undoubted Parts of
Scripture, as edifying too as the Hebrew Titles are. In short, that they are
borrowed from the Romanists, Yea the whole Hebrew Bible.
may be granted and defended too. For so were the Hebrew Titles from the Modern
Jews.

It Is not, I confess, worth while to take Notice of such Stuff as this, and I
am really ashamed of the Digression. But the Peevishness of an Adversary will
sometimes extort a Reply, though it deserves it not; and it may be fit now and
then to let the Contentious see their own Folly and Frowardness.

I conclude then that the leaving out the Hebrew Titles is no diminishing, nor
the affixing the Latin an adding to, the Word of God.

3. It is not diminishing from the Word, when we, intending to feed the flock
of Christ with the sincere Milk of the Word, read some few Verses of a Chap.
omitting the rest for that time. The forementioned Writer excepts against the
reading the Epistles and Gospels, De L. page 44.
telling us, thus. That it is a curtailing or mangling the Scriptures, that
thereby they become quite another thing than the Evangelists intended in the
Gospels, or the Apostles in the Epistles, altogether ruining the Scope and
Connection in diverse places. It is the manner of some Men to accuse stoutly, and
in the general without offering any one Instance to show the Truth of their
objection. For though nothing be proved, yet something will stick, and at this
rate who can hope to be found innocent?

But it might upon second Thoughts have been remembered, That the Dissenters
'emselves oft-times sing but two, sometimes but one Staff of a Psalm, and yet
this is not a curtailing and mangling the Psalms: That the Scriptures were not
divided by the inspired Penmen into Chapters, as well as not into these
shorter Paragraphs or Sections, which we call Epistles and Gospels; that there
is a Connection many times between Chapter and Chapter, and yet the reading of a
single Chapter is not accounted a making the Scripture to become quite another
thing than was intended. Loripedem Rectus deridat, Aethiopem Albus. Surely it
might have been remembered, that there are two sorts of Senses in every small
Section of Scripture.

1. A Relative.

2. A Separate or Independent Sense. The Relative Sense (it is true) cannot be
understood without the Neighboring Parts; but however is not thereby quite
ruined. In saying so the Gentleman o'reshort himself, and by objecting too
much, proved nothing at all against us. For to omit is not to destroy. And if
it be necessary to read as much Scripture at one time, as there is a Connection
between the Parts, then must the Dissenters read many Chapters together,
peradventure whole Books, and sing some of the longest Psalms without
Intermission, which is impossible.

Finally then, if the Dissenters can show any one Epistle or Gospel, wherein
the Relative Sense is altogether ruined, or the separate Sense in any wise
injured, I promise then to subscribe to the Objectors judgment in this and all
others his rash accusations of us. When O Lord, O when shall we find Truth and
Peace and Sincerity upon the Earth? When shall all unnecessary Squabbles cease
from among us Men?

4. It is not adding to the Word, when several Passages tending to the same
purpose, though found in distant places or different Books of Scripture, yet are
cast into one complex Sentence or Sentences, Vbi Supra.
as it were depending one of another. The so often mentioned Gentleman Objects;
That in the Liturgy Translation of the Psalms, three whole verse are foisted
into the 14th Psalm immediately after the 3d v. They run thus Their Throat is
an open Sepulcher, with their Tongues have they deceived thee: Poison of Asps
is under their Lips, etc. Which (says he,) are not in any of the Original
Copies. But hold here I pray. Have not the inspired Penmen of the New
Testament quoted some Texts out of the Old from remote Places and Authors,
twisting 'em together as one entire and complex Passage? Doubtless there are
Examples of this kind to be met with; I will content my self with a single one.
1 Cor. 15. 54, 55.
Then shall be brought to pass the saying that is written, Death is swallowed
up in Victory. O Death, where is thy Sting? O Grave where is thy Victory? And
yet this Saying, being borrowed Part from the Prophet I say, and Part from
Hoseah, Isa. 25. 8.
is by St. Paul cited as one single and entire Testimony of Scripture. Hos. 13.
14.
In like manner, these three Verses are to be found at least scattered up and
down in the Book of Psalms, part in the 5th Ps. 9th v. and part in the 140th
Ps. 2d and 3d Verses. See Is. 59. 7, 8.


If this answers not Expectation, Deuteronomy. 32. 33.
I add further, That St. Paul in the 3d Chap. to the Romans, has subjoined the
3. Objected Verses, immediately to the 3d v. of the 14th Ps. As it is written
(says he,) There is none that does good, no not one: Their throat is an open
Sepulcher and so on to the end of the three objected Verses. Surely St. Paul's
Epistle to the Romans may at least excuse, if not justify, this supposed
Alteration of the Psalms. It is rather to be feared that the Objector himself
had a design upon the Scripture: Whilst he is accusing us for adding thereto,
himself is diminishing from it; and rather than spare us, is calling into
Question the great Apostle of the Gentiles for adding to the Word.

But above all, with what Effrontery could this learned Man and skilled in the
Original Languages (as he pretends,) tell his Readers, that those three Verses
are not in any of the Original Copies? Perhaps his own Party has hitherto
believed him, but if they will give me leave, I Will open their eyes in a very
few words. For (not to take Notice of that absurd saying Original Copies, which
he would or should have said Copies of the Original,) what are we to think of
the Greek? That certainly is to be accounted One of the Originals, if there be
more than One, as himself seems to intimate. And there I read just as I read in
the Liturgy Translation, and as I read in St. Paul. Again I might say with the
learned Vossius, that the Greek Copy, for ought I know, is of as good Authority
as the Hebrew at this day is, and for my Reasons I send you to his History of
the 70 Translation: Only take this along with you, that (as has been already
noted) St. Paul (which also the other holy Writers of the New Testament
generally do in other places) follows the Greek, and not the Hebrew Copy in
citing this 14th Psalm, which is no contemptible Argument for the Authority of
the 70. Translation. Briefly, we have this further Advantage on our side, that
it is more Probable the three controverted Verses might be left out of the
Hebrew Copies, by the carelessness of the Transcribers, than thrust into the
Greek by the Translators. It Is easier (supposing 'em both honest and sincere)
for Transcribers to omit, than Translators to add so much together of their own
head.

5. It Is not adding to, nor diminishing from, nor corrupting the Word, when we
Translate it into Vulgar Tongues. All Christians have done so. Yea the
Romanists 'emselves in former Ages did so, though of late, they have been
contrary minded for fear forsooth of mistaking the Word, or corrupting it.
Anastasius Patr. of Ant. apud Vserii Hist. Dogma. Multarum Gentium linguis
Scriptura Translata docet falsa esse quae addita sunt. Hieron Praefat. ad 4.
Evang.
O Fools and slow of heart! One of the Ancients has affirmed, that the version
of the Scriptures into many Languages, is the best way to preserve 'em
incorrupt. Besides, why do they suffer the Word to be Transcribed or Printed at
all or in any Language? Doubtless the Word of God may be corrupted by
Transcribing or Printing it, as well as by Translating it. Transcribing we know
was, and Printing now a days is the Work often of ignorant and mechanical Men,
who are more liable to mistakes: but Translating is the business of the
Learned. Ay, but St. Jerome confessed himself subject to mistakes in Translating
the Scripture. Very good! and yet he Translated it for the use of the Latin
Christians, and his Translation is for the most part read unto this day. Why
then may not a Learned Priest or Bishop now a days render it into the Italian,
as well as Jerome formerly did into the Latin and Dalmatick? S^e. l. 4. c. 33.
S^z. l. 6. c. 37. phi^est. l. 2. c. 6. apud Vissr. ibid.
As St. Chrysostom into the Armenian, As Ulphilas into the Gothic, Or as the
Ancients did every one into his own Tongue. For it was anciently done into many
different Tongues says Hesychius of Jerusalem: Into 72. says Anastasius of
Antioch: Into innumerable Tongues says St. Chrysostom: Into the Languages of
all Nations of the Earth, that had received the Faith, says Theodoret: Yea into
every Tongue under the Sun says Eusebius. In short even at this day, we have a
Noble Monument of the Judgment and Practice of Antiquity, I mean the Polyglot
Bibles: So that the Catholic Church in the Primitive Times, might have said as
the Jews did, 2d Acts, That they heard and read every one in his own Tongue the
wonderful Works and WORDS of God. But setting aside this, that it should be
lawful and safe to have the Scripture Translated into Latin only, is to me a
strange Paradox. For what Privilege has God bestowed on the Latin more than on
other Tongues? All certainly one as well as the other are capable of Mistakes
and Corruptions. The Hebrew indeed had once the Honor of being the Holy
Language and (as I may say,) the immediate Vehicle of the Divine Will. The
Greek succeeded next into it is Room. The reason of both is obvious. The Word of
God was first directly intended for the Israelites only, therefore first wrote
in their Tongue: Afterward for the whole World, therefore wrote in the most
Vulgar and Common Language the Greek. Yet so as that by degrees it was
Translated into every Language, Is. 11. 9.
to the end, that the Knowledge of the Lord might cover the Earth, as the
Waters cover the Sea.

The Inscription on the Cross was wrote in Latin. True! But 'twas by the
command of Pontius Pilate, that accursed Crucifier of our Lord, in honor of
his own Language, and for the better information of the Romans. His Country Men.
Yet who can say that the Evangelists in their Greek, and inspired Histories,
continued it afterward in the same Latin Tongue? I never yet so much as heard
of any M. S. or Printed Greek Testament with the Latin Inscription retained in
it. Moreover we know that as no Hebrew nor Greek, so no Latin Bible is an
Original; nor indeed is there any such thing as an Original at this day. All
our Bibles, in whatever Language, are either Translations or Transcripts, which
is the same thing to our present purpose, both, as I said, being liable to
mistakes.

Finally, then the Word of God is his Word, be it in what Language it will, and
as much the Word of God in one, as in another, there being (as I have said) no
Original at this day. Briefly, one may add or diminish in Transcribing and
Printing, as well as in Translating: Therefore either both or neither are to be
laid aside.

6. It is not adding to the Word, when a new Prophet arising delivers some
further Messages to the Churches, which are affixt to the Canon of Scripture.
For the Rule in the Text runs thus, Thou shall not add, speaking unto us Men.
Nevertheless God may add to it when ever he pleases, and whatever he thinks
fit. So that all the following Books of Scripture were, notwithstanding my
Text, added to the Canon unto the end of the Revelations, where (for ought we
yet know) the Book is shut up in these Words. For I certify unto every Man,
Rev. 22. 18, 19.
that hears the Words of the Prophecy of this Book; if any Man shall add
unto these things, God shall add unto him the Plagues that are written in this
Book: And if any Man shall take away from the Words of the Book of this
Prophecy, God shall take away his Part out of the Book of Life, and out of the
Holy City, and from the things, which are written in this Book. Which brings me
to the 2. Head; sc. To show positively when we add or diminish ought from the
Word of God. And first of Diminishing.

1. Then we diminish from the Word, when we cast away any, never so little Part
of it. Wonderful was the Care of the Jews herein, and Religious they were to
Superstition (as may be thought) counting the very Letters of the Bible to
preserve it entire. Mat. 5. 18.
Hereunto our Lord alludes -- Till Heaven and Earth pass away not one jott or
tittle shall pass from the Law. Where though he is not speaking of the outward
Letter as I now am, but of the Intrinsic and Mystical Truths, which were to be
fulfilled in Christ, and ever to remain in force: Yet (however) he suits his
Expression unto the Jews Curiosity in keeping the Word from being diminisht in
the least Point.

But yet Interest has a Byas. Dial. cum Tryph.
Instance M. has charged the Jews home with this Practice instancing in several
Passages out of Ez. Neh. the Psalm. Isa. Jer. and Ezekiel. that were expunged,
because they seemed too plainly to point at Jesus Christ. And all the World
knows the Papists, in their Catechism at least, have assumed and exercised a
like expurgatory Power, upon the second Commandment. Much more,

2. Then we diminish from the Word, when we reject whole Books, as the
Sadducees and Samaritans of Old did all but the 5. Books of Moses, and as many
over Subtle and Wickedly Critical Wits among the Christians have done, calling
into Question many entire Books of the New Testament, and some there are who
have endeavored to cashiere 'em all. But,

3. We diminish from the Word, when we lay it aside as not a Necessary, or not
the Supreme Rule of Faith. This is to diminish from it is Authority. Some either
Weak or Hypocritical Christians in Times of Old delivered up their Bibles to
their Persecuters, and for so doing were Branded with that disgraceful Name of
Traditors, Traitors. And yet questionless they had, or might have had, the
usual Excuses at hand, which are current now a days. That they had the Light
within 'em, to guide 'em into all Truth, That they had other Lights without
'em, The Writings of Holy and Learned Men, The assistance of Bishops and
Priests and the infallible Popes, The daily Conversation of the Faithful, and
the Decrees of Councils to direct and instruct 'em: Moreover, that the Truths
and Mysteries of the Gospel (whatever became of of the written Word) might be
transmitted by Oral Tradition unto Posterity; and upon the whole matter, that
there was no necessity of the written Word of God. But these new Pretexts,
notwithstanding the Church, condemned their Treachery: All which shows that in
the Judgment both of the Church, and of the Persecuters too, neither the Light
within, nor the Writings of Holy Men, nor the Decrees of Councils, nor the
Infallibility of the Popes, nor Oral Tradition, nor all of 'em, were sufficient
to uphold the Doctrine of Christianity; and this demonstrates the necessity of
the written Word of God, and that it is the only Necessary and Supreme Rule of
Faith.

There is a pernicions Law among the Romanists, forbidding the People to Read
the Scripture, which is a great Diminution of at least the Honor, the
Sufficiency and Perspicuity of the Word.

It Is pretended that it was found, Council. Trid. Bellarmin. etc.
certissimo Experimento, that ignorant and malicious Men did improve it unto
Errors and Heresies by mistaking or depraving its meaning. But this is a mere
shift to palliate the Injury done to the Word of God, contrary to the sense and
practice of all Antiquity. For our Predecessors in the Faith, I mean, the
Ancient Fathers, this Obj. notwithstanding, were wont constantly to call upon
all the Faithful without distinction to read the Word, telling 'em, It was not
like Plato's Philosophy, or Pythagoras's Cryptical Discipline, calculated for
the Meridian of a few of the Wiser Sort; but fitted and designed for all to
read and to understand, for the Wise and for the Unwise, for Kings of the Earth
and for all People, for Soldiers and for Lawyers, for Monks and for Citizens
of the World, for Priests and Laymen, for Husbandmen and Mariners, Artificers
and Laborers, for Young Men and Maidens, Old Men and Children, and in a word
for all Qualities, Ages, Sexes, Fortunes and Degrees of Men whatever; to be
read in Public and in Private, and at all times, as well at Home as Abroad, in
the Church, and in the Fields, and in the Deserts, and in Journeys, and in a
word in every place.

Shall I, by the way, crave leave to offer you a Demonstration (of my own for
any thing that I know) against our Adversaries certissimum Experimentum, and
that out of the Scripture it self too, because I am now pleading in its behalf.
See then the second Epistle of Peter 1 chap. 19. v. We have also a more sure
word of Prophesy whereunto ye do well to take heed as unto a Light that shines
in a dark place, compared with the 16. v. of the 3 d chap. of the same Epistle,
As also in all his Epistles, our beloved Brother Paul has written speaking in
'em of these things, in which are some things hard to be understood, which they
that are unstable and unlearned wrest, as they do all the other Scriptures unto
their own Destruction. Out of which Passages I argue thus: See 4th Col. 16. and
17. Acts 11. v.
That which Peter the first Pope or Bishop of Rome (and Paul too) commended and
encouraged the People to, (sc. to take heed or to give attendance unto the
reading of the Word, although it was known by most certain Experience, that
some wrested it to Error and Heresy, and to their own Destruction) that ought
not now be denied the People, because forsooth there be at this day also some
among us that wrest it to their own Destruction: That which was not a competent
Reason unto Peter, cannot be a sufficient Warrant unto his Successors, to
deprive the People of the Holy Scriptures: What Peter could not, would not, do,
the Popes at this time of day cannot, should not, presume to do.

But above all, to advance a Supreme Infallible and Independent Authority in
the Church, not Subordinate, yea Superior, to the Scripture, with liberty even
to contradict it, is certainly a diminishing of the Word, that is, its
Sovereignty. The Power of the Word is like God himself, nec parem fert nec
superiorem.

The Scripture is the entire body of the Divine Law, who then shall dare to
Diminish ought from it, or thwart its Definitions? He that touches the apple of
Gods Eye: He claims (as I may say) a share in the Legislative, yea, and makes
himself Superior even to God himself.

It was then an impudent Presumption, crimen laesae Majestatis in the Council
of Constance, to take upon 'em to decree with a non-obstante, that though the
Scripture says, Drink ye all of this, yet the Laity (to whom also they confess
it was spoken) shall not drink thereof. Thus they made the Word of God of none
Effect by their Traditions, teaching for Doctrines the Commandments of Men, and
declared 'emselves above Jesus Christ, that Canon being set above his Word by
their own acknowledgment. And thus the Will and the Wisdom of Men took place of
the Wisdom and Will of God.

What shall we then think of those, who equal, nay prefer, the private Spirit
of the Pope, and others the Light within 'emselves, before the Word of God? St.
Peter and the Believers he wrote to certainly had the Light within, and the
Spirit in as great abundance as any at this time of day can pretend: ^ Ep. 1.
19, 20.
And yet he tells his Flock -- That no Prophesy of Scripture is of any private
Interpretation: no not of E^ter himself.
That we have a more sure Word of Prophesy whereunto we do well to take heed.

Though he had the Spirit and Light within, though he had the Honor and Advantage
of seeing Christ Transfigur'd, and hearing the Voice from Heaven, v. 18.
saying -- This is my beloved Son: Yet for the proof of that very Proposition
himself relies and exhorts the Faithful to rely rather on the Word of Prophesy,
the Scripture, as a more sure Testimony. Surer than what? Why surer than any
private Spirit or private Interpretation, though of the Infallible Peter himself:
Surer than seeing Christ's Transfiguration: Surer than hearing the Voice from
Heaven: Surer than the Light within. So that the Light within and all other
Lights without were Darkness, unless they took heed to that more sure Word the
Light of Gods Word. And yet the private Spirit and Light within, forsooth, or
that Planetary and false Light of Peter's Successors without, must in these
unhappy days of ours give check to the plain Testimony of Scripture, and be
preferred before it; As in the use of the Lords Supper, one Part whereof those
of the Roman Communion are deprived of. The Quakers reject both Sacraments: And
the Lords Prayer many Dissenters despise, and other things might be instanced
in. In short, what amounts all these spiritual Whymseys to? But the setting up
either that more dimn Light at Rome, or the private Light of every Man's own
Breast at home above that more sure Word of Scripture, whereunto we should do
well to take heed. This is just such another piece of folly, as if a Man should
take his Journey in the night time by the dimnLight of the Moon, or by his own
dark-Lanthorne in his hand, refusing the Light of the Sun by Day, which
notwithstanding affords a much clearer Light and safer Conduct to the
Traveller. Lastly,

4. We diminish from the Word even when we presume to add any thing to it. For
this is as it were to tax it with some supposed Defects and Imperfections,
which we, forsooth, would supply.

Now then as for adding to the Word in the first place.

1. We add to it when any thing is tackt unto the Word not belonging to it.
Thus we reckon the Papists to have made bold with the Scripture, thrusting the
Apochryphal Books into the Canon of the Old Testament. But I hasten,

2. We both add to the Word and diminish from it, when we alter it, especially
so as that it carries quite another Sense than what was intended by the Spirit
of God. And now I am at length come to the Point I chiefly aimed to insist on.
It is to be bewailed, that so many various Readings have already been thrust
into the Sacred Text, no body knows certainly when, nor where, nor by whom, nor
on what Occasion, nor upon what Motive and Design. But I will not trouble you
nor my self about this, which is not now to be remedied. I will rather
advertise you of one of a fresher Date, which yet indeed has not, ought not to
have the honor of pretending to a various Lection.

The case in short is this. The Apostles 'emselves had from the beginning
exercised the Offices of Preaching the Word, of Administering the Sacraments and
of Dispensing the Alms gathered at the Lords Supper. But the Church multiplying
and business increasing upon their hands, there happened some Occasion of
Complaint about the unequal distribution of the said Public Alms. Whereupon
the Apostles ordered the multitude, Acts. 6. 3.
To seek out Seven Men of Honest report, and full of the Holy Ghost and
Wisdom, whom We (as some of our English Bibles have it or) whom Ye (as others)
may appoint over this business. And hence a Question may be started, whether
the People or the Apostles did appoint those Seven unto the Offices aforesaid,
and by consequence, whether the People or the Bishops have Authority to appoint
the Parochial Ministers. My business here is not to Argue that Point, but to
Examine into this various Reading, which I shall do in resolving three Enquiries.

1. Which of the two Readings is the true one? The Resolution whereof is very
easy. The Place ought to run thus -- Whom We may appoint over the business. We
the Apostles.
In proof of this (if any should doubt it) I appeal to all the MSS and Printed
Copies of the Greek Testament, I appeal to all the Collections of various
Readings, I appeal to the Bibles into whatever Language Translated, I appeal to
all the English Versions and Impressions till of late, and I appeal to the
History of the whole Fact here laid down, which supposes it of necessity. The
Apostles had had that Business of Distributing the public Alms in their own
hands from the beginning, therefore they (not the People) delegated the Seven
to it: Therefore it is not to be read Ye but We. But then the next Enquiry is,

2. When did this Corruption steal first into the Text? Answer, I will not be
peremptory in this: But so far as my Diligence and Observation (which has not
been a little, and managed with all Care and Faithfulness) is able to carry
me, I must say, that it crept in first in the Year 1638. In that very Year,
there was a Fair Bible in Folio Printed at Cambridge with this Erralum, By Tho.
Buck, and Rog. Daniel Printers to the University: The latter of which was
indeed the mannager of the Press, and in the Interest of that Presbyterian
Party.
and this is the first time I have yet been able to discover the Corruption.

By the way, here I must beg your favorable Construction of this Remark. It is
with the greatest Aversion and infinite Regret, that I am forced upon this
occasion to bewray my own Nest, and to speak out this great Truth to at least
the seeming Dishonor of my own Mother University, from whose Breasts I sucked
in all that little Knowledge I pretend unto. And this too in the Presence and
the Hearing of some of the most Ingenious and Learned Children of her Rival
Sister, who has (for ought I can learn) been somewhat happier in this kind.

But, however, as to the Fact so it came to pass, that while the chief Stewards
of the Family were otherwise employed, and the inferior Servants (I think)
sleeping, the Enemy sowed these Tares, which have been growing ever since until
now. This may suffice to point at the time when this Error first entr'd into
our English Bibles, sc. in the Year 38. But,

Who then brought in this false Reading, or what Party among us at least
encouraged and promoted it since?

It is an Enquiry worthy to be made, and a clear and full discovery would
deserve an Hecatomb. And though I will not promise so much, yet something I have
to offer toward it, which though it amounts not to a direct Proof against any
Persons, yet I think may pass for a good Circumstantial One. To my purpose then,

I will not be so Positive as to Averr, that it was at first industriously
done, yet I must call into Question the Dissenters, as Persons suspected to
have secretly contributed to the Corruption of this Place, at least, to the
Continuance and Increase of it, and that upon the following Accounts.

1. Because the Alteration happened in the Year 38. Presbytery being then in
the Ascendant, I say just in that nick of time, when all things were in
Preparation, and tended to the Subversion of Episcopacy, Scotland having
already made a Conspiracy, and bound 'emselves under a Curse to Extripate it,
and England, even a great part of the Universities 'emselves, running into the
same excess of riot. So that here is a Concurrence of the Circumstance of time,
and a shrewd one too, sufficient to ground a suspicion on.

2. The Corruption in Appearance favors the Dissenters and their Design
against Episcopacy. If then any, they may be suspected for being willing to
have it at least continued and propagated.

3. On the contrary, it cannot, with any Color of Reason, be imagined, that
the Episcopal Party designed to Corrupt this Place, or to Connive at it is
Corruption, except they shall be thought Felones de se, and willingly and
knavishly to destroy what they endeavor zealously to establish. Satan (as our
Lord argues) cannot be thought to cast out Satan, and to throw down his own
Kingdom. Nor will any one of Sense believe, that the Episcopal Party were
willing to have that thrust out of the Scripture, upon which their Church
Government seems to be built; Or to substitute in its room, what in Appearance
overthrows their Polity.

4. That Party ought in all Reason to be Suspected of foul Play herein, who,
admitting they did not at first on set, purpose, contrive the Corruption of
this place, yet now, belike, contribute to the Confirming and Vindicating it,
and under the Color of this new Text of Scripture, assert and support the new
Popular Government of the Church, as some of the Presbyterians do at this day.

For the Proof of which Charge upon 'em, I need only to put you in mind of that
memorable Story, which doubtless ye have many of you heard of, how that a
Cameronian (one of the most rigid Sects of the Scotch Presbyterians) Preaching
some years since concerning the Peoples Power of setting up their own Teachers,
and having confirmed his Point with some Reasons of his own (the Principal
whereof was, I guess, that it was most agreeable to the Inclination of the
Scotch Nation, which is just such another Reason as an Adulterer also might
give for his Wantonness.)

But, I say, having proved his Point as he thought (no matter to us how) at
length bid his Audience not to believe him, but to turn to their Bible, and so
sent them incontinently to the 6. Act. 3. v. where they might find their
Character in these Words -- Whom YE (the Multitude of Believers) may appoint
over this Business. But whether this be a good Character, or has on it the
stamp of Divine Authority, let the World judge by what has been already said.
For a Conclusion then I would crave leave to address,

1. Unto all the Faithful in general; Men, Brethren and Fathers suffer me to
entreat you in a few words, with all diligence, to preserve the Word of God
pure and incorrupt. If once the Fountainhead be poisoned, the Streams will be
so too, and from thenceforth we shall never be able to distinguish between the
Doctrines and Will of God, and the Inventions and Inclinations of Men. The
Adversaries of Christianity, with design to overthrow the whole Frame of our
Religion, have already endeavored to take advantage of those numerous and
various Lections, which in times of darkness and ignorance heretofore stole
into the Greek Testament (as I find it taken notice of in a Learned Preface to
a late Edition) what then will they say, Printed at Oxford Theater Anno 1675.
when they observe the purest Kirk in the World (as is pretended) tempering
with, and refining upon, the Word of God at this time of day? But let not us,
to serve a Cause, or to draw the simple People into our Interests, let not us
(I say) dare to suborn any false Witness whatever, much less out of the Word of
Truth. Let us leave that vile Artifice to our Adversaries on both hands. Truth
needs not such feeble Supports, but is indeed very much disparaged and weakened
thereby. The brightest Truth will receive prejudice when we go about to
establish it by a Lie, much more Points in Controversy, when they are varnished
and washed over with false and fading Colors. It Is our Interest therefore, as
well as our Duty -- To lay aside all Guile and Hypocrisy, and to feed our
Flocks with the sincere Milk of the Word. 1 Pet. 2. 1, 2.
To put away Lying, and to speak every Man Truth with his Neighbor. Ephesians. 4. 25.
Let us take to our selves the Example of St. Paul -- We are not (says he
reflecting upon the Corinthian Schismatics) as many which corrupt the Word of
God: 1 Cor. 2. 17.
But as of Sincerity, but as of God in the sight of God, speak we in Christ.
And once more he says -- We have renounced the hidden things of Dishonesty, c.
4. 2.
not walking in Craftiness, nor handling the Word of God deceitfully; but by
manifestation of the Truth. The Apostle not obscurely hinting in these Words,
that the Separatists at Corinth did so.

2. But above all, and with all Submission, I would beg of those, who are in
Authority and do humbly propose, that some effectual course be taken to make
amends for this at first (I am willing to believe) unfortunate oversight
committed (I am ashamed to repeat where) and to vindicate this Place in the
Acts from the Injury it has suffered these Fifty Years past, and upward. How it
may in some measure be repaired is not hard to tell. I have heard of a whole
Impression of the Bible condemned to be burnt, because the Negative Particle of
a Commandment was casually left out. What then if one of every Edition thus
depraved, or at least one for all, were served after the same manner in
perpetuam rei Memoriam, and to expose the craftiness of those Circumcellians
among us, who to advance their design, do not stick, it seems, to promote it by
Falsehood; and grounding 'emselves upon a mere Error of the Press, as we will
suppose it was at first, deceiving, and being deceived, do lie against the Holy
Ghost, and bring a Scandal upon the Word of God, and our holy Religion.

To Conclude, I may happily seem too Warm and Zealous in this matter.
Doubtless, some will think so. But upon Examination, having found the first
accidental slip repeated since in at least half a dozen Impressions of the
Bible here in England, and having now just Reason to suspect the Scotch Bibles
generally faulty in this Passage; I cannot Imagine, but it has been a good
while underhand countenanced and abetted: For is it Possible to believe, that
One unhappy mistake should be so successful, as to have got into so many
Editions without the helping hand of some wily and undermining Schismatic.

But principally, whereas now it begins to be avowed for good and vendible
Ware, exposed and sold publicly in the Market, can any One continue to believe
it still an Unwilling and Excusable Error? Or rather, is it not fit to be
treated as Counterfeit and for bidden Commodities are? That is, in plain terms
(as I said) cast into the Fire.

Moreover (for any thing I can foresee) it may, if not timely prevented, plead
Prescription, and set up for Authentic, at least, for a various Lection,
whereby the Popular Government of the Church, may, in a few more Years, gain an
Appearance of Divine Authority, and the Scot's Inclination be thought
Apostolical Institution.

All which considered the Warmth I have showed upon this Occasion (if any
before accounted it such) will now, I hope, be allowed Reasonable and not
Unserviceable to the Word and to the Church of God, to this Part of it
especially among us, by Law Divine and Human Established. And long may it be so
to the Glory of God, and to the Edification of the Church in Peace and Love in
Truth and Unity. Amen.

FINIS.

