A SERMON OF THE Nativity of Our Lord. Preached before the King and Queen At
WHITE HALL. 1687.

By Bonaventure Giffard, Doctor of Sorbon, Chaplain in Ordinary, and Preacher
to Their MAJESTY'S.

Published by His Majesty's Command.

LONDON, Printed by Henry Hills, Printer to the King's most Excellent Majesty,
for his Household and Chapel; and are to be sold by Him, at the Ditch-side in
Blackfriars, 1688.

A SERMON OF THE Nativity of Our Lord Preached before the King and Queen.
Gloria in altissimis Deo, and in terra Pax Hominibus bonae voluntatis.

Glory in the Highest to God, and in Earth, Peace to Men of good Will.


These Words were sung by a full Choire of Angels at the Birth of our Savior,
as we find related by St. Luke c. 2. v. 14.

A Stable! A Manger! A little Hay! Some poor Swaddling Bands! A helpless Infant!
Adesolate young Maid! An Ox! An Ass! What great Matter of Glory to God, or
Subject of so much Joy to the Angels? What is there in all this poor Equipage,
that should deserve to call down these Noble Spirits from Heaven, to solemnize
it is Triumphs upon Earth? Oh God! How different are thy Judgments from those of
Men? And by how opposite Ways do thou seek thy Glory, from those which Men
take to establish Theirs? Men place all their Glory in great Riches,
magnificent Houses, brave Apparel, sumptuous Entertainments, numerous
Attendants, and such like Supports of their Vanity and Misery. But all the
Glory God Almighty designs to draw from the great Work of the Worlds
Redemption; behold, he grounds it on the Poverty, Humility, and abjection of
His eternal Son. Hence, as you see, for his Royal Palace, he has provided him
a ruinous Stable; for his Bed of State, a hard Manger; for his Noble and
numerous Attendants, an Ox, an Ass, or at best, some few poor Shepherds. In
fine, Instead of mighty Treasures, and great plenty of all Things, the utmost
extremity of Poverty.

This, Christians, this is the conduct Almighty God has used with his eternal
Son, at his first coming into the World: This is the Method he has taken to
purchase that Glory to himself; to give that Peace and Joy to Men, which the
Angels this day publish to the World in their Christmas Carol, of Gloria in
altissimis Luke 2. 14.
Deo, and in terra Pax Hominibus bonae voluntatis.

Divine Spirit! enlighten my Mind, inspire my Thoughts, help me to apprehend
the design of thy Eternal Wisdom in this astonishing Mystery. I beg this of
Thee, by the Intercession of the Virgin Mother, who this Day brought forth that
heavenly Child, which She conceived by the Operation of thy Virtue, at the same
time that the Angel saluted Her.

Ave Maria, etc.

Glory in the Highest to God, and in Earth peace to Men of good will. The Glory
which Almighty God had in the World before the coming of our Savior, seems to
have been much eclipsed, and reduced to a very small Point; for the Devil, who
no sooner became his Enemy, but also turned his Rival; since he could not
become like to God in Heaven, resolved at least to be adored for God upon
Earth: And thence (as St. Gregory Nazianzen observes,) he has endeavored to
possess that Divinity in the Opinion of Men, which he could not steal from the
uncommunicable Nature of his Maker. Qui Divinitatem in Coelis habere non
potuit, in Terris habere conatus est.

And indeed, if the Worship of Men could increase or lessen the Majesty of God;
if his Glory were to be calculated by the number of his Adorers; one might
thence think (which otherwise to imagine were a Blasphemy,) that Lucifer had got
the upper hand: Since, if we reflect on the sad Condition the whole World was
in, before the Birth of our Savior; we shall find, that this proud and
rebellious Spirit was more worshipped, more glorified by Men, than his Sovereign
Lord and Maker. For if the true God was then worshipped by the Jews; false Gods
were adored by all other Nations. If God had some zealous Prophets to pronounce
his Oracles; the Devil had many Idolatrous Priests to publish his Lies. If God
had an Altar consecrated to his Service in Jerusalem; the Devil had many
Temples dedicated to his Honor throughout the rest of the World. If God was
honored by the Sacrifice of Beasts; the Devil was worshipped by the Slaughter of
Men. So that we are forced to own and lament, that before the coming of the
Messiah, the external Glory of God, (which consists in the Worship of Men,) was
shut up within a narrow compass; confined to one little Corner of the Earth.
Notus in Judaea Deus. Psalm. 75.


But on this Day, God Almighty begins to do himself right; He has sent down his
Eternal Son to vindicate his Honor, to establish his Glory, to subdue his proud
Rival, to dispossess him of the Empire he had gained over the Minds of Men. St.
John, the faithful Interpreter of his Designs, tells us, That it is for this the
Son of God is come into the World, to destroy the Works of the Devil. In hoc
apparuit Filius Dei, ut dissolvat opera Diaboli. 1 John 3. 8.
And the Way he has taken to do this, is as strange in it self, as it has proved
efficacious in the Effect.

The Devil grounded all his Glory on the deluded Imaginations of his Followers.
To make them Idolaters of his false Deity; he first possessed them with an
erroneous Conceit of their own Greatness. To persuade them to offer Incense to
the Statu's they had raised in his Temples, he first taught them to adore the
Idols he had set up in their Minds; Honor, Riches, Pleasure, are the three
great Gods he places on the Altar of their Hearts; to these, he makes them
sacrifice all their Thoughts, all their Affections, their Body, their Soul,
their Eternity, their All. He persuades them, that all their Glory consists in
worldly Greatness, all their Happiness in an affluence of temporal Riches, and
their chief Beatitude in a full enjoyment of sensual Satisfactions.

To destroy this Work of the Devil, to disabuse Men of these false Notions he
had imbued them with, the Son of God is come into the World after the manner in
which our present Solemnity represents him to us; to show us, how little esteem
we ought to make of all the Glory and Greatness of the World; He would become a
Child, He would appear little and abject; to quench in us that ardent Thirst*
we have after Riches; He has reduced himself to the greatest Poverty
imaginable: To take out of our Hearts that inordinate Love of Ease and
Pleasure; He begins his Life all in Sufferings and Mortifications.

It Is thus that Jesus Christ most Successfully establishes the Glory of God,
because it is thus that he most powerfully Triumphs over those Vices which keep
Men Slaves to the Devil: And hence, when the Angels saw him laid thus low in
the Manger; then it was that they begun to sing Glory to God, and Peace to Men.
Glory to God, because Jesus is come to cure our Pride by his Humility; our
Avarice by his Poverty; our Excesses and Intemperances by his Mortifications.
Gloria in altissimis Deo. Peace and Joy to Men of good will; to Men that are
willing to learn of such a Master; to Men that are willing to be instructed by
such an Example; to Men that are willing to be saved by such a Savior. Pax
Hominibus bonae voluntatis. It Is thus the Angels divide their Canticle; and
it is thus I shall divide my present Discourse. The First Part whereof shall
show you, what our Savior did this Day for our Instruction; The Second, what
we must learn from his Example. What Jesus did to be a Savior to Men; what Men
must do to be saved by Jesus. These two Points make the division of my Sermon,
and Subject of your Attention.

The First Part.
If the Union of the eternal God to our human Nature, be astonishing; the
manner of his coming into the World is not a little surprising! For tho an
excess of Goodness might have carried him to this strange Communication of
himself; tho the love of Men might have moved him to become Man; yet methinks,
he might have done it after the most honorable manner; he might have appeared
at the full Stature of a Man, and accomplished with all the Perfections human
Nature is capable of. But to Cloth himself with our Mortality, in its meanest
Dress; to shut himself up for nine Months in the Bowels of a Woman; to come
into the World under the Form of a Child; to have Reason in it is highest
Perfection, and yet to be reduced to the Condition of an Infant; This is what
astonisheth Heaven and Earth; this is the admiration of Angels and Men.

And certainly, Christians, whosoever should reflect well on the Majesty,
Infinity, Immensity, Eternity, and the rest of Gods glorious Attributes, and
then should behold a Child newly brought into the World; questionless, he would
stand amazed, to think that the Majesty of Heaven should Inhabit within such an
inconsiderable piece of Flesh; that so boundless an Ocean should be shut up
within so narrow a Channel, that the eternal God should become a Child. And yet
thus it is, Christians, the great God of Heaven is become a Child; the Ancient
of Days is newly come into the World; the eternally begotten Son of the Divine
Father, behold, he is born an Infant. Parvulus natus est nobis, and Filius datus
Isa. 9. 6.
est nobis.

Whatsoever therefore you have seen; whatsoever you imagine to be the Condition
of other Infants at their Birth; think the same of your great God, for he is
become exactly like them in all things, excepting only Sin. He Is Heb. 4. 15.
born Naked and Needy, like other Infants; Weak and Feeble, like others; He
Weeps and Cry's like others; He Is wrapped in Swaddling Clothes like others; He
Feeds at his Mothers Breast like others, and something below the meanest
Condition of all other Infants; instead of a Cradle, He is laid in a hard
Manger, exposed to the sharp Winds of a Winter Night, the Wants and
Incommodities of a desolate Place. Pannis eum involvit, and reclinavit Luke 2.
7*
in praesepio.

O Blessed Jesus! how does this poor Lodging suit with Thee, who have Heaven
for thy Throne, and the whole Earth for thy Footstool? How does this Manger
agree with Thee, who reposest in the Bosom of thy Divine Father? How do these
Tears become thee, who art the Joy of all the Angels in Heaven, and God of all
Consolation here upon Earth? How does this want of Clothes, this need of a
little Milk fall upon Thee, who featherest the Birds, feedest the Beasts, and
art absolute Lord of the whole Universe?

Ah Christians! let us stop and pause here a while; let our Heart speak by it is
Affections, what our Tongue cannot utter by Expressions; let us behold with a
silent Astonishment, what we cannot discourse but with Admirations and
Exclamations!

The great God of Heaven become a Child! the increated Wisdom and Word of God,
silent and speechless! the King of Glory lodged in a Stable! the Lord of all
things, in Want and Poverty!

Oh Heavens! What think you of this? Or rather, Dear Christians, (since it is
for you He Is born,) what think you of this? Why think you, has the great God of
Heaven thus humbled himself upon Earth? Why did He choose to come into the
World after this strange manner? I say, why did he choose? For we must not
imagine, that these Things happened thus by chance. 'Twas not the Unkindness and
Inhumanity of the hard-hearted Bethlemites that forced him into a Stable. 'twas
not their refusing his Mother a Lodging, that obliged him to lie in a Manger.
Oh no! He that can soften the Hearts of Tigers, could have made his Mother find
a Welcome amongst her own Relations. He that places Kings on the Throne, could
have raised himself a Palace in the Fields of Bethlehem. 'Twas not therefore
any want of Power or Forecast; 'twas not any Necessity, or chance that reduced
him to this Condition. Other Infants indeed, have it not in their Power to
choose the Time, the Place, and manner of their Birth; but this divine Child,
had all these things at his own choice and disposal. And why then did he choose
to be born in the depth of Winter, and obscurity of the Night? Why did he
choose a Stable, a Manger, for his Lodging? Why did he call only poor
Shepherds, to give him the first Welcome into the World? Ah! St. Bernard gives
the true reason, when he tells us, All this was to confound the Pride and
Vanity of the World; to condemn the luxe Ease, and Excesses of Men. Cur
stabulum Christus elegit? Plane ut reprobet Mundi gloriam, ut damnet saeculi
Vanitatem. To instruct us by Example, before he could teach us by Words; to
convince us (says St. Augustine) by his own Choice, what little Esteem we ought
to have of all the Glory, Greatness, Riches, Pomps and Pleasures of this Life;
He contemned them all. Omnia terrena bona contempsit Christus, ut contemnenda
monstraret.

He chose to be poor, that rich Men might not think themselves happy; He would
not be rich, that poor Men might not think themselves miserable. He would want
all that the World most esteems; He would suffer all that the World most
abhors; that we should neither place our Happiness in the one, nor fear any
Adversity from the other. Vt nec in istis quaereretur felicitas, nec in istis
timeretur adversitas.

Christ saw that Men would lose the Glory of Heaven, by their ambitious Desires
of Temporal Greatness; and therefore He made himself so little. Christ saw that
Men would forfeit their eternal Inheritance, by fixing their Hearts so much on
the Goods of the Earth; and therefore He appears so poor and indigent. Christ
saw that Men would lose the Joy's of Paradise, by indulging their Ease and
Pleasures in this Life; and therefore He chose to lie in a Manger. Omnia
terrena bona contempsit Christus, ut contemnenda monstraret.

O my God! it is here I own the greatness both of thy Mercy, and our Misery;
it is from the strangeness of this Remedy, that I come to understand the depth
of our Wounds; Ex St. Bern. Sermon. 3. de Nativitate.
consideratione remedii, periculi mei aestimo quantitatem. Ah Christians! How
dangerous was our Condition? How desperate was our Distemper, that stood in
need of such a Physician? To what a height had our Pride carried us; that it
should be necessary for the great God of Heaven to descend into a Stable to
abate it? How strongly was our Heart fastn'd and wedded to the Riches and
Pleasures of the Earth; that it should be necessary for the King of Glory to
lie in a Manger, to disengage it? Ex consideratione Remedii, periculi mei
aestimo quantitatem.

But, Christians, will all this suffice? Is the Remedy great enough for the
Disease? Has Jesus Christ laid himself low enough for your Example? The great
God of Heaven has made himself the least and lowest of Men: You great Ones of
the Earth, will you thence learn to be Humble? You little Ones, will you leave
to be Envious or Ambitious? The King of Glory has made himself the poorest of
Men: You rich Ones of the World, will you learn not to set such a value on your
Riches? You poor Men, will you learn not to repine for your Poverty, or murmur
against Providence? The Author of all Bliss and Happiness, lies shivering in a
cold and hard Manger: You delicate Christians of this Age, will you learn to
Suffer?

Ah Christians! What can be more convincing, than these practical Arguments of
our divine Savior? What can be more persuasive, than the Rhetoric of this
silent Babe? What can be more powerful than his Example, to disabuse Men of
those false Notions, those wrong Idea's, which Opinion and Custom, the
Principles and Practices of the World have fixed in them?

For, Christians, if our Sovereign Lord and Master came thus into the World; if
He that had it in his power to appear all in Glory and Majesty; if He that
could have abounded with all Plenty and Magnificence; if He, I say, chose the
Poverty and Ignominy of a Stable; what follows then, but that terrible
consequence St. Bernard draws from thence, viz. That either Christ is mistaken,
or the World is in a great Error; either Christ knew not how to make a good
choice, or Men are convinced to make a very bad one: Aut Christus St. Bern.
fallitur, aut Mundus errat. Christ made choice of Poverty, and Men fly it as
the greatest Misery. Christ chose to be in want, and Men seek nothing but
Plenty; Christ chose to appear Little and Abject, and Men strive all they can
to grow Great and Glorious; Christ chose to lie hid in the obscurity of a dark
Night, and Men seek all Means to publish and proclaim themselves to the World:
Christ chose to be born in the depth of Winter, to lodge in a cold Stable, a
hard Manger; and Men seek nothing but the Ease, Commodity, and satisfaction of
their Body. Oh! how contrary is their Choice? How opposite are their Ways? They
are in two Extremes; they cannot both be in the right; therefore, S. Bern.
either Christ is deceived, or Men are under a great mistake. Aut Christus
fallitur, aut Mundus errat.

And what think you, my beloved Brethren? For whom will you pronounce? Is Jesus
Christ in the right? Has the eternal Wisdom of Heaven made a good Choice here
upon Earth? Do you approve of His Choice? Do you approve of His coming into the
World, after that poor manner in which our Solemnity represents Him unto you?
Does his Stable, his Manger, his poor and low Condition please you?

If you approve of his Judgment in making such a Choice, why then do you govern
your selves by such opposite Maxims? If you like his Ways, why are you so
unwilling to tread in his Steps? If you esteem the Poverty and Humility of the
Infant Jesus, why do you so greedily thirst after the Riches and Honors of the
World?

Alas! it is here that we Christians too often imitate the Jews, who had a high
Esteem, a great Veneration for their Messiah, whilst he was at a distance;
whilst they beheld him in their glorious Prophesies; but when he came amongst
them, they would not take notice of him. The longing expectation of so many
Ages, the desired of all Nations, the so much wished for Messiah; when He came
into the World, they would not know Him, because of the low and abject
Condition he appeared in. In Mundo erat, and Mundus eum Joan 1. 10.
non cognovit.

And just thus it goes with us Christians. We Honor, we esteem Jesus Christ at
a distance; but if He come near us, or begin to draw us near to himself; Oh!
then we presently fly from him; we are ashamed of his Company; we find him
troublesome to us. He appears all in Poverty, and we can esteem nothing but
Riches and Plenty; He talks to us of Humiliations and Abjections, and we desire
to be Esteemed and Honored; He speaks of Sufferings and Mortifications, and we
love nothing but our Ease and Pleasure.

Thus you see, we imitate the Jews; we honor Jesus Christ at a distance, but
when he comes near us, we know him not; we esteem the Poverty of our Savior,
so long as it remains with him in the Stable; we admire and bless his
Sufferings, his Mortifications, provided that he keep them close shut up with
himself in the Manger; but if he bring any of his Poverty into our House, into
our Family; if he communicate any share of his Sufferings to us; Oh! then we
are of another mind; then we find a thousand Reasons to disapprove of them; we
have a thousand Pretenses to excuse our selves from admitting of them.

Hence, at the same time that we seem to approve, we really disapprove of
Christ's Choice; we like, and dislike his Ways; we esteem, and condemn his
Judgments. Whilst we only discourse of Things; whilst we speak of Him and his
Proceedings, we are even ravished at this admirable conduct of his Wisdom. That
our God, that our great God should become a Child; that He should be born in a
Stable, lodged in a Manger; that He should come into the World after such a
poor and humble manner. Oh! 'twas the most incomparable Method he could take,
to cure the Wounds of our Soul; 'twas the wisest Choice he could make, to show
himself our Savior.

But when He would apply this Remedy to us; when He would make the same Choice
for us, which we so much approve of in him; Oh! then we are of another
Judgment; then we do not stick to say, (at least by our Actions and Behavior,)
we do not stick to say, Christ is deceived; the eternal Wisdom of Heaven is
mistaken in the Choice he would make for us. Christus fallitur. Titles of
Honor, Places of Respect, Worldly Dignities, Riches and Plenty, are much better
for us; the World knows best how to make a good Choice for us; the World is in
the right; Christ is deceived. Christus fallitur, Mundus non errat.

But, Christians, how then shall Jesus Christ be a Savior to us? How shall he
give Glory to God; or bring that Peace and Joy to Men, which you heard the
Angels publish this Day? Must we desire this Divine Infant to return back again
to Heaven; to take some new Instructions, to resolve on some new Counsels, some
other Methods? Must we desire Him to come to us after another manner, than that
we now behold him in? He thought this the most proper to glorify God, and save
Men. His eternal Father is well pleased with it. He has sent down a multitude
of Angels to express his Satisfaction: These Blessed Spirits no sooner beheld
the Humility and Poverty of his Birth, but they presently sung Glory to God.
And, I must tell you, all that desire to have any share in that Peace and Joy,
they published at the same time to Men, must be of the same Judgment: All that
will be saved by Christ, must conform themselves to the Measures and Methods he
has taken to be their Savior. What He came from Heaven to teach, we must learn
upon Earth: What Jesus did to save us, we must do to be saved by Jesus; which
is what I am to discourse of in my Second Part.

Second Part.
It Is hard to say, whether it be more astonishing, that God should not disdain
to become like Men, or that Men should disdain to become like God? That God
should come down from Heaven to teach Men, or that Men should be unwilling to
learn of such a Master? That He should undertake to be their Physician, or that
they should refuse to make use of his Remedies?

In the First Part of this Discourse, we have seen how God has made himself
Little, Poor, and Abject; to teach us a Lesson of Humility, Poverty, and
Mortification. We have seen also, how this heavenly Physician is come down to
the Bedside (as St. Augustine observes,) of sick Man; and He not only
prescribes him Remedies, but also to make them go down the easier, he first
makes trial of Prior bibit Medicus sanus, ut bibere non dubitaret Aegrotus.

St. Aug. Sermon. 59. de verbis dai.


them himself. Ad sanandum grandem Aegrotum descendit omnipotens Medicus;
Humiliavit se usque ad mortalem carnem, tanquam ad lectum Aegrotantis.

But who is willing to practice the Lessons he teaches? Who is willing to apply
the Remedies he prescribes? Which of you is resolved to make his Humility an
Antidote against your Pride? Which of you is resolved to draw from his Poverty,
a Motive to abate something of that Vanity in your Apparel; that Superfluity in
your Furniture; that Excess in your Table? Let every one (says St. Bernard,)
examine himself, and see what Effect these powerful Remedies have wrought in
him. Cogitet unusquisque quantum in eo operentur tam salutaria Medicamenta.

But, Alas! my dear Brethren, is it not true, what the same Holy Father adds?
Is it not true, that there are some Christians, to whom Christ is not yet born;
who are not willing to be saved after the manner he has taken to be their
Savior; who are not really glad that Christ is come into the World? Sunt
quibus nondum natus est Christus.

The Angels were full of Joy at his Birth; and they made have to communicate
this good News to Men, to carry them the joyful Tidings, that their Savior is
born. Evangelizo Lu^. 2. 10.
vobis gaudium magnum quia natus est vobis Salvator.

But, Christians, are you glad to hear this good News? Is it a Joy to you, to
hear your Savior is born? Certainly, all that are in Misery, must needs be
glad to hear of a Savior: And methinks every one in this Assembly, speaks the
Content of his Heart, by the joyful Air of his Countenance; every one seems
well pleased to hear from the Angel, that our Savior is born. But, Christians,
are you glad (let me once more put the Question to you,) are you glad to have
the Infant Jesus for your Savior? Are you willing to be saved after the Method
he has taken to be your Savior?

I must then tell you plainly, He can no otherwise be a Savior to you, than by
taking out of your Heart that Pride, that Ambition, that Avarice, which have so
long kept possession there: He cannot be your Savior, (once more hear it) but
by taking out of your Heart that love of the World, that love of Honor, that
love of Riches, that love of Pleasure, which has been so long Master of your
Heart. And are you glad to hear of such a Savior? Are you willing, that he
should free you from those pleasing Enemies of your Salvation? Are you willing
that he should tear from your Heart, those so long settled Affections? Are you
willing that Jesus Christ should make a total Change, an entire Conversion, a
thorough Reformation in your Soul? Are you willing that he should settle the
same Judgments, the same Affections, the same Inclinations in you, which this
Day you have seen appear in him? In a word, Are you willing that he should make
you like himself, as he has made himself like you?

They that are not willing he should do this; they that will not permit him to
do this, must look for some other Savior; they must with the Jews, expect the
coming of another Messiah: The Divine Child of Bethlehem, is no Savior for
them; the Infant Jesus is not born for them: Sunt quibus nondum natus est
Christus. He is a Savior, because he is Humble; He is a Savior, because he is
Poor; He is a Savior, because he Suffers. Whosoever will not partake of his
Humility, of his Poverty, of his Mortifications, shall have no share in his
Redemption; He will be no Savior to them. Sunt quibus nondum natus est
Christus.

And what? Must then Rich Men divest themselves of all their Possessions? Must
Noble Men turn their Beds of State into Mangers? Must Kings and Queens leave
their Thrones, and retire into Stables, to partake of this Days great Blessing;
to be saved by a Messiah, who appears all in Poverty and Humility?

No, no Christians. The Divine Child of Bethlehem, whom this Day you see
worshipped by poor Shepherds, twelve Days hence you will see adored by Kings.
It Is not therefore the exterior Marks of Honor or Humility, of Plenty or
Poverty, but the interior disposition of the Heart that he regards; it is
Poverty of Spirit, it is Humility of Heart, that he requires in all those that
will be saved by him. Alas! there are many, who under a poor and abject
Appearance, cover ambitious and covetous Minds; who are still complaining,
repining, and murmuring against Providence; and these Persons, tho they are
poor and abject, yet have no comfort in the Poverty and Humility of the Infant
Jesus. On the contrary, There are others, whom God Almighty has placed in
eminent Stations, who by the disposition of Providence, not by any ambition of
their own Heart, are raised to high Dignities; who possess vast Treasures; but,
as St. Augustine says of them, amidst all the Honors and Pomps of the World,
conserve an humble Heart to God. In superbo cultu cor Humile. Who, whilst they
St. Aug. Epist. 199.
behold their Savior in his Stable, look upon themselves with a holy kind of
Contempt, to see their Condition so different from his: In fine, who often
pronounce in their Heart, what we read of the incomparable Queen Hester; who
when She was at the height of all the Greatness and Glory a most powerful
Monarch could raise her too, yet confidently told Almighty God, that He knew
she was so far from taking any complacence in those Honors, that she rather
submitted to them by Necessity, than affected them by Vanity. Tu scis
necessitatem meam, quod abominer signum Esther 14. 16.
Gloriae meae quod est super caput meum, in diebus ostentationis meae.

To wear rich Apparel, to have a House well furnished, to receive the Respects
and Submissions of Men, may be a decency due to the Rank God Almighty has
placed you in; but to take pride in those Honors, to delight in those fine
Clothes, to busy your Thoughts much about them, to set your Heart upon them,
is a Vanity our Savior condemns, by the Humility and Poverty of his Stable.

To be Great, to be Rich, may be a Blessing of Heaven; but to place ones
Happiness in such things, to thirst vehemently after them, is that great, that
general Crime of the World, which the whole Life and Doctrine of our Savior was
a condemnation of.

Those Persons therefore, whose Minds are always big with ambitious Designs,
who are continually gaping after some new Preferment; whose Hands are open on
all sides to receive Money, who gripe all the Wealth that comes near them. Oh!
these are they who have no share in that Peace, that Joy, which our New born
Savior brought this Day into the World.

How much then are they deceived in their Devotion, who, because they were
present last Night at the Divine Office; because they heard the Three Masses;
because they received the Blessed Sacrament; therefore think they have done all
that is requisite to honor this great Feast? Alas! all this is but the exterior
of this Days Devotion. The true Honor due to this Solemnity, is the disengaging
of our Heart from the love of this World: 'Twas for this, that Christ was born
in a Stable; 'twas for this, that he came down from Heaven, that (as the
Apostle speaks,) he might disengage us from this wicked World; that we might
renounce all Impiety, and worldly Desires.

Whosoever therefore will cherish in his Heart any of those Desires, any of
those Passions which Christ came to free us from, will find no comfort in the
Birth of his Savior. No, no, St. Bernard tells us plainly and truly, The poor
Stable of Bethlehem, will afford no comfort to those that set their Hearts on
Riches; Christ's low and humble Manger, will afford no comfort to those that
aspire at Titles of Honor, high Places of Preferment; His poor Swaddling Bands,
will afford no comfort to those that delight in fine Clothes. Non consolantur
panni ejus ambulantes St. Bern. Sermon* de Nativ.
in stolis, non consolatur praesepe and stabulum, amantes primas Cathedras in
Synagogis.

Those Persons also, that live always out of themselves, that willl be always
abroad, always in Company and Entertainments, neither will they find any
comfort in the Solitude and Silence of the Infant Jesus; they that will be
always in Mirth and Jollity, will find no comfort in the Tears of this weeping
St. Bern. Sermon. 5. de Nativitate.
Babe. Non consolatur Christi Infantia garrulos, non consolantur Christi
lacrymae cachinantes.

No, no, Christians; They that will find comfort in Jesus, must not seek it in
things which he banished far from himself. Riches, Honors, Plays,
Divertisements and great Entertainments, are not to be found in his Stable; and
therefore, who sets his Heart on these things, will never find Content in his
Newborn Savior.

You know well, two Persons can never live easily together; they can never find
Satisfaction in each other; they can never make up a lasting Friendship, unless
they be something alike in their Judgments, in their Humors and Ways. You see
what are the Ways of the Infant Jesus; you see his Humor, his Inclination is to
be in Solitude and Silence. It Is for this, that He chose rather to be born in
the Fields than Town of Bethlehem, that he might be far from the Noise and
Disturbances of this busy World; it is for this, that the public Inns were no
place of abode for him; He chose rather to lie in a Stable, than not to be in
Retirement. Whosoever therefore desires to make up a Friendship with him, must
be of the same Humor; he must sometimes withdraw himself from the Conversation
of Men, and noise of worldly Affairs, if he will enjoy the company of Jesus in
his solitary Stable.

You see also what is his Opinion, what Judgment he makes of Things, what
Spirit predominates in Him: You see, he esteems Poverty, Humility, Lowliness,
Mortification. Whosoever pretends to be his Friend, must be of the same
Opinion, the same Judgment; he must be acted by the same Spirit: For the
Apostle tells us plainly, He that has not this Spirit of Christ, does not
belong to Christ; he cannot be one of his Friends. Si quis non habet Spiritum
Christi, hic non est ejus.

Christians! Do you rightly apprehend this terrible Expression of the Apostle?
Reflect a little on it. Not to belong to Jesus Christ! to have no share in his
Friendship! to have no part in that Peace and Joy, which he brought this Day
into the World! Oh God! what a dismal Sentence is this? Si quis non habet
Spiritum Christi, hic non est ejus.

He that has not his Spirit of Humility, his Spirit of Poverty, his Spirit of
Mortification; he does not belong to Christ. Non est ejus.

Examine therefore well your Hearts; see whether you have this Spirit of Christ,
and that you may not be deceived; (for alas! the Heart of Man, is an Abyss of
Darkness: They that are continually searching into it by their most serious
Considerations, and pious Meditations, have difficulty enough to discover the
secret Springs, and hidden Sourse of that Pride, Avarice and Ambition, which
lie deep rooted in our Nature). Therefore, that you may not be deceived in the
Judgment you make of your Heart, observe how you behave your selves in the
Occasions and Trials your Savior gives you of manifesting his Spirit, of
imitating his Humility and Poverty. When therefore, you see others preferred
before you; when you see them raised to great Honors, and your self neglected
and unregarded: If you repine and murmur at this; when God Almighty takes away
some temporal Advantage from you; when he lessens your Riches by such
Misfortunes as he permits to fall upon you. If you are transported with Trouble
and Disquiet of Mind; it is a terrible sign, that your esteem of his Humility
and Poverty, was only in Fancy and Imagination; it is an evident mark, that your
Heart is strongly tied to the Honors and Riches of this World; it is a
convincing proof, that you are governed by some other Spirit than that of
Christ; that you are guided by other Maxims, than those he preaches from his
Manger.

Propter vos egenus factus est, cum esset dives. 2 Corn. ^.
Alas! Dear Christians, Jesus was rich; and he became thus poor for our sakes,
that he might quench in our Hearts that ardent Thirst we have after Riches. He
was at the height of Honor, Glory and Greatness; and he has made himself thus
Little and Abject, that he might beget in us a contempt of all worldly
Greatness. He was incapable of suffering any thing in his own Nature; and he
has taken ours, that he may suffer in all Kinds; and thereby give us an Example
of Penance and Mortification.

Let us awaken then (dear Christians); Let us awaken out of that Dream, which
the Father of Lies has so long deluded us with: Let us withdraw our Thoughts
from those Impressions, which Custom and Opinion, the Principles and Practice
of the World have imposed upon us: Let us leave the World to think, and speak
according to its Rules and Maxims. But for us that are Christians, let us
govern our selves by the Maxims of Christ; let us hearken to him, who is come
from Heaven to be our Master: And no where does he teach us more efficaciously,
than in the Mystery of this Days Solemnity. The Stable of Bethlehem, is the
proper School of Christians; the Manger, is the Pulpit from which this great
Evangelist first began to preach to the World.

Let us therefore often enter into this School; let us draw near to this
Pulpit; let us hearken to this divine Preacher. He is Silent, but every thing
(as St. Bernard observes,) has a Voice; every thing Preaches: His Stable
preaches, his Manger preaches, his Swadling-Cloaths preach; his Tears preach,
his very St. Bern. Sermon. 5. de Nativitate.
Silence preaches. Clamat Stabulum, clamat praesepe, clamant panni, clamant
lacrymae, ipsa Infantilia membra clamant; and quid clamant? And what is it they
preach? They preach Humility, Poverty, Penance, Mortification, contempt of all
worldly Riches, Pleasures and St. Bern. ibid.
Honors. Clamant Humilitatem, Paupertatem, Poenitentiam, contemptum Opum,
Deliciarum, and commodorum Mundi.

These are the great Lessons Christ preaches from his Manger; these are the
important Instructions, Christians must learn from this divine Master. By this,
we shall join with the Angels in giving Glory to God, and fit our selves for
that Peace, which God is come to give to Men. This Peace is the great Blessing
our Newborn Savior has brought us from Heaven; the greatest Happiness we can
enjoy here upon Earth; and an Earnest of that eternal Peace and Joy, we hope to
find hereafter in Heaven. Which God of his infinite Goodness bestow on your
Sacred Majesty, and all this Pious Assembly.

Amen.
FINIS.

