Tentamen Novum Continuatum. OR, AN ANSWER TO Mr OWEN's Plea and Defense.
WHEREIN Bishop Pearson's Chronology about the time of St. Paul's Constituting
Timothy Bishop of Ephesus, and Titus of Crete, is confirmed; the second Epistle
to Timothy Demonstrated to have been written in the Apostle's latter
Imprisonment at Rome; and all Mr. Owen's Arguments drawn from Antiquity for
Presbyterian Parity and Ordination by Presbyters, are overthrown.Herein is more
particularly proved, THAT The Church of England, ever since the Reformation,
believed the Divine Right of Bishops.

By THOMAS GIPPS, Rector of Bury in Lancashire.

(...). Con. Gang. Can. 5. and 6. LONDON, Printed by Tho. Warren, for Ephraim
Johnson Bookseller in Manchester, 1699.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
THere has been Two Books published by Mr. James Owen Minister of a separate
Congregation at Oswestry, (...) I am under an Obligation and Promise of
Replying unto. The Plea for Scripture Ordination, and the Tutamen Evangelicum
alias Defense of the Plea. And though the time of their Publication might
justly Require me to consider the Plea in the first Place, yet the Nature of
the Argument forces me to Invert that Order, and to begin with the Defense. The
Reason whereof is this. I had set out a small Book Entitled Tentamen Novum, or
a new Essay proving the Divine Right of Episcopacy, the which engaged me to
Answer some few things in the Plea, which concern that part of the Controversy
between the Dissenters, and us of the Established Church, viz. The Scripture
Evidence. Hereupon Mr. O. Printed his Defense, endeavoring (...) (...) to
overthrow my Hypothesis in the Tentamen Novum, and to Vindicate the (...) one
by the Word of God. It is therefore necessary I should first of all Reply (...)
the Defense, that is, clear my Point about the Divine Right of Episcopacy.
(...) also manifest the Inconsistency of the old Hypothesis with the Scripture;
and (...) descend to his numerous Testimonies drawn out of the Ecclesiastical
(...), in behalf of Presbyterian Parity which will be a full and proper Answer
to (...) (...). Accordingly I have cast this Book into two Parts: The first
contains a (...) to the Defense, except a few Testimonies of Antiquity, which
are more (...) reserved to the second Part, wherein I answer his Plea.

In the management of this work the Reader must not expect that I should follow
my Adversary (...) step by step, in all the Sallies he has made into points
nothing at all (...) to the Present Controversy, and involve my self into new
Disputes before the Old one be done with. My purpose is to keep close to the
Game, and not to run after every fresh Hare, Mr. O. is pleased to start. This
would be an edless piece of Work, and swell this Book unto an Intolerable Bulk,
which I design to draw into as narrow Compass as I possibly can, and as the
unreasonable Cavils of my Adversary will permit.

Nor will I trouble my self or my Reader to take notice of all those snarling
and illnatured Reflections which the Defense abounds with, without any Occasion
given by me, that I am sensible of. It Is much better to neglect them, than
weary my self and others with Impertinent and Abusive Railery, which betrays
the weakness of the Writer or his Cause, and hurts no Body, but the man from
whom it proceeds. (...). 15. 18.

Nevertheless it will be necessary to remove some little of the Rubbish of both
kinds out of the way, lest happily the World may be tempted to suspect me as
Ignorant, and my Performances as (...) as my Adversary has all along
represented 'em. But when I have Vindicated my self in a few of the most
material things of that Nature (if there be any such) the Ingenious Reader will
I hope (...) persuaded that I am able, if I were as willing, to discharge my
self of the most trivial matters that are to be met with in the Defense. Only
let it be noted that I intend not to mix these By. Disputes with the main
Argument, which would be perplexed thereby, and become more obscure; but to cast
them into an Appendix by themselves at the end of every Chapter, as a separated
Entertainment unto those, who shall have the Curiosity and Leisure to consult
'em, and which may be easily laid aside by such as have no Mind to trouble
themselves with unnecessary Squabbles.

In my Reply to the Defense and Vindication of my Hypothesis as also to the
Plea, I will not (...) my self with the Opinions of (...) Authors, how Eminent
soever they were or still are in the Church; that is I will not be swayed or
governed by them farther than my own reason conducted by the Word of God shall
convince me, I am sensible that most (if not all) of the former writers engaged
in this Controversy about Episcopal Government, even many of the Episcopal
party as well as the Dissenters for want of duly examining, and understanding
the Time of Paul's beseeching Timothy to abide at Ephesus, have run themselves
into such Labyrinths and Absurdities, that a Man might justly wonder they could
ever sit down quietly and content themselves with their own Sentiments and
Explications. I am verily persuaded there is not one Man in the World, that
will allow himself the freedom of thinking, but would subscribe unto that
Learned Prelate Dr. Pearson's Judgment in this cause, after it is once fully and
fairly represented to him, except only such as are captivated by some powerful
Interest, secret Pride, (...) prejudice, or the Design of upholding a party.
Where these evil Affections Rule and (...), Truth will not be able to prevail
Non suaseris etiam si persuaseris. Of this we (...) had a Notorious Instance of
another kind in the present Age, when Dr. Harvey had (...) and learnedly
Demonstrated the Circulation of the Blood, almost all the Naturalists and (...)
in the World, even those of the first Form with open Mouth decry'd both the
Author (...) (...) Doctrine: And when the truth had by Degrees forced its
(...), and gained Ground upon (...) (...) part of them, then Envy stepped in and
would have snatched the Laurels from the Brow (...) (...) Immortal Philosopher
and Physician. How many of the Ancients were alleged to have (...) the
Circulation of the Blood? And Solomon besure was not ignorant of it, as some
have (...) to prove from the 12th Chap. of his (...). So (...) a thing it is to
bring Men off their old Mumpsimus and reconcile 'em to the Truth, when it
appears in the Shape of (...), or to do Justice unto those who have had the
good hap to find her out. But to return to my business.

Mr. O. in his Plea cited some Hundreds of Authorities in favor of Pres
byterian Parity and Ordination. My design is not (as I said) to meddle with
those, which are adduc'd out of Private and Modern Writers. All that is needful
for me to do, is to consider the Primitive the Councils, especially the General
ones, the Fathers and other Ancient Ecclesiastical Writers, and the practice of
the most Flourishing Catholic Churches of old unto the 5th Century or
thereabouts, and to examine whether my Adversary has (...) any one good
Testimony for himself and Brethren, out of these Monuments of Antiquity. If he
has not (as I hope will be made appear) there is an end of his Plea (I suppose)
especially, when such a Cloud of Witnesses which of necessity fall in our way
as we Travel through the History of those times, will rise up against him
within the Compass of the 4 or 5, first Ages aforesaid.

Before I make an end of this Preface I thought it needful to prepare the
Reader with a short account of my whole Hypothesis, which if kept in Memory as
he goes will be some ease and advantage to him. He must remember then, that all
Authors I know of (except happily the Rhemists who so far as I see spoke but at
Random) writing upon the Present Subject or commenting upon the first Epistle
to Timothy, have asserted or at least taken for granted (till very lately) that
the time of St. Paul's beseeching Timothy to abide at Ephesus, when he went
into Macedonia, is somewhere to be searched for in the Acts of the Apostles,
before St. Paul had the Ephesian Elders Farewell in Acts 20. v. 17. from whence
our Dissenters conclude, that the supreme Government of the Church of Ephesus,
was not in that Epistle committed unto Timothy: For that the Apostle could not
have so wholly overlooked their Bishop in that Farewell Sermon, and applied
himself only to the Elders, to whom he commended the care and oversight of that
Church.

On the other hand I have showed that the first Epistle to Timothy was wrote
long after Paul's said Farewell Sermon, even after his enlargement out of his
former Imprisonment at Rome, and by consequence, that he besought Timothy to
abide at Ephesus, when he went unto Macedonia, at another time, than what has
hitherto been believed and assigned. And so that Objection just now mentioned
quite vanishes.

Thus then my Hypothesis lies. After that Schism at Corinth had been in some
measure though not entirely allayed by St. Paul, he with all have made toward
Jerusalem taking Miletus in his way, where he bad the Ephesian Elders Farewell.
At Jerusalem he was Imprisoned and thence sent to Rome in Bonds. Here he
continued two years and upwards writing Epistles to the several Churches, of
Ephesus, of Philippi, of Coloss, of Judea, and to Philemon. Being at length set
at Liberty, and in his way as he went back Eastward to visit the foresaid
Churches, he laid the Foundation of a Church in Crete, leaving Titus behind to
finish and to govern it. Thence as I suppose he prosecuted his Journey to
Judea, Heb. 13. 23. and thence as it were, back again through Syria to As^a.
Being at Troas (2. Tim. 4. 13.) about to sail unto Macedonia, he besought
Timothy to abide at Ephesus. shortly after, when in Macedonia happily or Greece
or somewhere thereabouts, he wrote this first Epistle to Timothy giving him the
necessary Orders, how he was to behave himself in the Charge lately committed,
to him, and not long after from Nicopolis, that Epistle to Titus upon the same
Subject. Hence forward we hear no more of him in Scripture saving that being
once again got to Rome, he thence wrote his second Epistle to Timothy as is
undeniably evinced in these Papers.

The Corinthian Schism, like the Leprosy, seemed incurable, and spread its self
unto other Churches also, particularly Ephesus, as may be gathered from the
Epistle to the Ephesians, and the first to Timothy: And the like I reckon to
have happened in other places also. Wherefore Paul in his Visitation of the
Eastern Churches before spoken of, his Principal design (I presume) was to
compose the Contentions already risen, and to prevent them for the future. To
which end he committed the Government of the Churches to single Persons, of
Crete to Titus, of Ephesus to Timothy: The like being to be believed of the
Rest of the Apostles, and Churches throughout the World: For how else could
there have been Bishops every ^where, as Ignatius writes to the Ephesians, and
not one Church at that time governed by a Presbytery of Elders only without an
Apostle, or Bishop presiding over them, that we can find in Ecclesiastical
History?

Nor are we to imagine this a perfectly new device taken up by Paul, and the
other Apostles merely upon the Occasion of the Schisms at Corinth and
elsewhere. For as I make account they came to this Resolution among themselves
even at the beginning, viz. to commit the Government of the Churches unto (...)
Persons: Not that they immediately did so as soon as they had made the Decree:
For every Apostle ('it is likely) kept the Government, and Care of the Churches
by him founded in his own Hands, so long as he thought fit and was able to
manage them himself: So that every Church was (...) cast into this Platform,
nor furnished with a Bishop distinct from the Apostles at the same instant; but
'twas done paulatim, as Jerome speaks in his Commentary on Titus. James was
Bishop of Jerusalem, before the Corinthian Schism, Titus of Crete, at that
Church's first Plantation, though Timothy was not so of Ephesus, till many
Years after the Ephesian Church had been formed. But at length because Schisms
began now to increase, and prevail, the Apostles taking the Alarm (...) to put
their former Decree into Execution, and more especially because at this time
believers were multiplied, Churches were increased, business grew on their
Hands, and they forced to be long Absent and unable to inspect all Churches: As
also because the time of their Departure now drew on apace, 'twas therefore
high time, and necessary to provide for the Peace and future Government of the
Church, as they had in the beginning contrived.

Whereas then I have frequently expressed my self as if the Church Government
had been altered from what it was in the Infancy of Christianity, and lest this
should be taken for a rash and dangerous Concession to the Adversaries in
prejudice of Episcopacy, I thus explain my self. 1. This was not a Change of
the first Principle and Rule of Government, but only a bringing it by Degrees
to that Model and Frame, which the Apostles (as I said) first pitched upon, and
afterward, as Occasion required, by degrees brought to perfection. So that with
respect to the Original design and Scheme of Government there was indeed no
change or Innovation at all. But then, 2. If we consider matter of Fact, there
was an Alteration of Government, in as much as the Apostles having left it for
a while unto the Presbyters, to discharge the Ordinary affairs of the Churches
in their Absence, but still reserving to themselves the Power of Ordination,
and other matters of greatest Moment, at length constituted Bishops over them,
pursuant to their Prime Resolution and in Conformity to their own way of
Government, which was Prelatical. In this latter Sense I would always be
understood; and this Change was nothing else but an improvement and completing
the Church Government, as it had been from the beginning projected by
themselves or rather suggested to them by the Holy Ghost.

I must also here take notice of one thing more, which is not sufficiently
explained in its proper place. It being acknowledged that Presbyters were
subject and accountable unto the Apostles, and by (...) (as I argued) not
Supreme Governors of the Churches, Mr. O. retorts that Timothy and Titus, and
all Bishops also in the Apostles Days were so, and by the same consequence not
Supreme Governors. But I answer.

1. It Is true Timothy and Titus (Paul being alive) were subject and accountable
to him, and so not absolutely Supreme Rulers, if we look up toward the
Apostles, but if we look downward to the Presbyters they were Supreme, or which
is the same to my purpose Superior to the Presbyters, who were subject to the
Bishops. 2. Timothy and. Titus were not (in Paul's life time) actually Supreme
Governors, as if they had no Superior; for Paul was over them: True! Yet they
were Supreme intentionally even whilst the Apostle was alive and actually after
his decease. For so they must needs of course be. 3. There is a great
difference between Timothy and Titus subjection, and accountableness unto the
Apostles, and that of the Presbyters. The Presbyters (as I have showed and as
far as we know) did nothing without the express command and special direction
of the Apostles, I mean in the higher and most important business of the
Churches: But Timothy and Titus (and so the rest) had general Rules only
prescribed 'em, and were Ordinarily left to their own Discretionary Power in
the Execution of them, as is evident from the Epistles to Timothy and Titus,
except the Apostle in an extraordinary manner interposed sometimes, as we may
reasonably admit. But there is nec vola nec vestigium, no footsteps in the
whole Scripture of any such general Rules and discretionary Power committed to
the Presbyters as is evinced in T. N. and these Papers.

Jan. 1. 1697/8.
THE CONTENTS.
PART I.
Chap. I. SEveral Cavils against the Church of England considered Page 1 Chap.
II. Id. p. 6 Chap. III. Id. p. 19 Chap. IV. The Old Chronology about the time
of St. Paul' s settling Timothy Ruler of the Church of Ephesus overthrown, the
Pearsonian Hypothesis more firmly established, and the second Epistle to
Timothy demonstrated, to have been written in the Apostles (...) (...) at Rome
p. 29 Chap. V. Sundry Objections are Answered, and particularly it is here
proved, that the Convocation is and ought to be allowed as a just
Representative of the Church of England p. 57 Chap. VI. Being an Answer to Mr.
O's 6th Chap. p. 72
PART II.
Chap. I. OF Clemens Romanus p. 3 Chap. II. Of Ignatius' s Epistles p. 10 Chap.
III. Of Mark and the Church of Alexandria p. 20 Chap. IV. Of the Syriac Version
p. 30 Chap. V. Of the beginning of Christianity in the most remote North-West
parts of Scotland p. 32 Chap. VI. Of some passages in St. Cyprian p. 43 Chap.
VII. Of the Scythian Church p. 47 Chap. VIII. Of the Chorepiscopi p. 50 Chap.
IX. Of the first (...) of Nice. p. 55 Chap. X. Of Aerius p. 69 Chap. XI. Of
Hilary the Deacon p. 70 Chap. XII. Of Jerome p. 74 Chap. XIII. Of the
Carthaginian Councils p. 84 Chap. XIV. Of Paphnutius and Daniel p. 89 Chap. XV.
Of Pope Leo. p. 91 Chap. XVI. Of the Church in the Island Taprobane p. 93 Chap.
XVII. Of Pelagius his Ordination p. 95 Chap. XVIII. Of the Waldenses,
Boiarians, etc. p. 98 Chap. XIX. Of the Church of England at and since the
(...) p. 108
PART I.
CHAP. I. In Answer to Mr. OF s 1st Chap.
THE Rector in his Preface to the T. N. complained of the unfair way which the
Dissenters have taken up in managing Controversies, that is, of their bringing
in other matter, nothing at all belonging to the Point in debate; which is as
when a Lawyer, when he is pleading the Cause of his Client, and setting forth
his Title unto the (...) in Question, should fall foul upon his Clients
Adversary, exposing his Person and upbraiding him with his private, perhaps,
but supposed Faults and Infirmities. I instanced in three things, which are the
common Topics of the Dissenters railing against the Episcopal Clergy, and
which they will be sure to hook in, whatever the Matter in Controversy be. But
if recrimination be but cavilling (as one of their own Authors speaks) much
more (...) Accusing. My Instances were, That the Episcopal Divines are
Arminians, That the Church of England Symbolizes with the (...); That the
Bishops are proud Lords, and Lordly Prelates. And if all this were true, what
does it signify in the Question about Church Government?

Mr. O. In the Contents of his first Chap. at the beginning, Advertises his
Reader, that, The Dissenters are justified in their way of mannaging
Controversies. Indeed he should have edeavour'd it, if he would have answered
to the purpose, and his way of Vindicating the Dissenters, should have been (I
conceive) either to deny the charge laid against'em, or else to justify the
fitness and reasonableness of that way of controverting. But instead of this,
he falls upon the old strain of accusing us (the Rector) of Arminianism, of
Symbolizing with (...), and the Bishops for being Lords, which is nothing to
the Question between him and me here, viz. Whether it be fair to charge ones
Adversary with supposed faults, which have no relation to the Question in hand,
unless he is so vain as to imagine, that his own repeated practice, is a
sufficient justification of the Dissenters managing Controversies.

In giving an Account of the Nature of our Church Government, I observed in
general, That our Episcopal Government is established upon certain Canons and
Laws, made and consented unto by the Convocation, consisting of Bishops and
Presbyters, and by the multitude of Believers; That is, by their
Representatives in Parliament, and that, thus it was in the Council of
Jerusalem, Acts 15. This is plain matter of Fact, and one would have thought
incapable of being cavill'd at; and yet Mr. Owen who is a Master at that knack,
has many things to oppose me in it, and has found many disparities in the
Resemblance. As,

1. He affirms that, The Apostles, etc. (...) Jerusalem enjoined the Def. P.
24. necessary for bearance of (...) few things: but the Convocation has made
canons enjoining the practice of unnecessary things, to create offense.

Ans. These last words are as Malicious, as false, and without ground. How can
Mr O. at this distance tell, or how could the Dissenters of those times know,
that the Design of the Convocation was to (...) offense? Has he, or had they
the gift of (...) Spirits? Or dare they presume to lay claim to one of the
Transcendent Attributes of God; his Omniscience and knowing the Secrets of Men's
Hearts?

The things enjoined by the Apostles (excepting Fornication) were not necessary
before they were enjoined, but only Charitably and Prudentially necessary: And
so our few Ceremonies too were and still are, Charitably and Prudentially
necessary, which was the Reason of their being enjoined at first, and still
continued amongst us.

The Council of Jerusalem did not widen the door of Church Fellowship (as Mr.
O. asserts) but made it straighter, if the matters here spoken of, can be said
to belong unto Church Fellowship. The Gentile Believers had a Natural right to
eat blood, things strangled, and things offered unto Idols, when sold in the
Market: But the Apostles deprived 'em of this Liberty, commanding them to
Symbolize with the Jews in the forbearance of 'em. And I would know a Reason,
why in a few matters of Indifference, Decency and Solemnity, it is not Lawful
for the Church Governors, now to restrain the Liberty of Believers. I say in
some few things out of Charity to many Foreign Protestants, who have
Ceremonies, and to the Primitive Christians, which were not without 'em, even
as the Apostles restrained the Liberty of the Gentile Believers in Charity to
the Jews? And why is it not as Lawful for us to Symbolize with the Primitive
Christians, and our Foreign Brethren-Protestants, as the Apostles with the Jews.

2. Mr. O. goes on, The Council of Jerusalem freed the Christians from the Yoke
of Circumcision.

Ans. But it put on them those three Yokes aforesaid. Besides as the Apostles
freed the Christians from Circumcision, or rather declared them free from it:
for they were never under that bondage: so did the Convocation free us from all
Superstition and Idolatry.

3. The Apostles (he adds) asserted that Christian Liberty, which Jesus Christ
purchased and obliged us to maintain, Gal. 5. 1.

Ans. And yet the Apostles took away the Gentiles Liberty in the things
aforementioned. The Text of Scripture here cited, has a false construction put
upon it. The Liberty there spoken of, is not a Liberty not to do any thing,
which is in its own Nature indifferent, no not a Liberty from all the smaller
Observations of the Law; for then the Apostles could not have enjoined the
forbearance of the three things, nor could Paul have Preached and Urged, the
observation of those Decrees, as he did, Acts 16. 4. But it is the Liberty from
the bondage of Circumcision, which made Men Debtors to the whole Gal. 5. v. 3.
Law, and to every Ceremony thereof.

4. He complains of the number of our Canons, whereas (says Def. p. 25.
he) the Apostles at Jerusalem made none new, and continued but a few which
were obliging before.

Ans. That these three Canons made by the Apostles at Jerusalem, were new to
the Gentile Believers, is out of all question, though Mr. O. affirms the
contrary; not new; as if they had never been known or heard of before; but they
were, I say, new to the Gentile Believers, who were not before obliged to the
observation of them, though Mr. O. says they were. But whereas the Apostles at
Jerusalem continued (made) but a few Canons; it is true: nevertheless at other
times, and at other places, they might have made more than threescore for any
thing we know. The code of the Universal Church, consists of two Hundred and
seven Canons: yet they were made at several See Justellus.
times, and in several Places: Even so, though the Apostles at this time and at
Jerusalem, made but three Canons, yet at other times, and in other places they
might have made more, and did so, as we may Learn from 1 Cor. 7. wherein (I
think) we meet with several Canons, as from those words of St. Paul, The rest
will I set in order when I come, 1 Cor. 11. 14. And again, Hold the Traditions
which ye have been taught, whether by word or our Epistle. 2 These. 2. 15. That
thou should set in order the things that are wanting, Tit. 1. 5.

But 5. The Apostles (says Mr. O.) Annexed no (...) nor Excommunications
against the breaker of their Canons, they only concluded 'em with these gentle
words, from which if you keep your selves, ye shall do well.

Ans. Well! and the Gentile Believers readily obeyed the Apostles Decrees
without more ado, not stubbornly clamouring for (...) Liberty wherewith Christ
had made 'em free. For Christ had made the Gentile Christians free from the
three Canons of the Apostles, as well as from Circumcision. But doing well was
an effectual motive in those days unto Obedience, though not in these
Licentious Times of ours. If the punishment annexed unto Canons be now more
severe than ordinary, it is because some Men are more Stiff and Refractory,
more Disobedient and Unpeaceable than the Gentile Believers were of old.

6. Mr. O. adds, The Canons of Jerusalem were made by the Apostles, Elders and
the whole Church: But ours by the Bishops and Presbyters in Convocation, which
are the true Church of England by representation, by which he thinks to destroy
the parallel, because the Multitude of Believers were not present at the making
our Canons, as they were at the making of those at Jerusalem. To obviate this
Exception, I observed that our Canons were consented unto, or confirmed and
received, by the Multitude of Believers, that is, by their representatives in
Parliament. But Mr. O. having nothing else to cavil at, or wherewith he might
invalidate the Parallel, which is so much to the advantage of our Church, and
fatal to the Dissenters, corrupts my words, and by way of gloss adds, To the
Multitude of Believers, that is (says he) the Church. I say, and say it again,
that the Parliament represents the Multitude of Believers, but I never said,
That is the Church, nor any thing like it. This Invention was hammered out at
Mr. O's own Forge, whence an abundance of the same kind have been uttered. All
the color he has for thus misrepresenting me, is, that I make the Bishops to
answer the Apostles, the Presbyters, the Elders; therefore I must make the
Parliament to answer the whole Church. And so I do: yet this will do Mr. O. no
service. For that expression, The whole Church, in the 15 th of Act. 22. is not
so exact, but will need a little explanation on this Occasion. These words then
the Whole Church cannot be understood strictly: for the whole Church here must
be distinguished from the Apostles and Elders: but surely these also were part
of the whole Church properly speaking. The words then are meant of the
Multitude of Believers (they are called the Multitude, v. 12.) and in
contradistinction to the Apostles and Elders, and therefore I avoided saying,
The whole Church, and chose to express my self thus. The Multitude of
Believers, I am, then I flatter my self pretty safe from Mr. O. and my Diocesan
too, were he (what he is far from being) the most severe and haughty Prelate in
Christendom.

Because it is a common Objection against the Church of England's Constitution,
that Parish Priests have no power of Discipline, I asserted that, They have
power to rebuke and admonish, and to suspend for a while from the Lord's Supper.

And so (says Mr. O.) have private Persons power to rebuke and admonish, Def.
p. 26.
Lev. 19. 17. Col. 3. 16. As if Mr. O. never heard of that common and received
distinction between fraternal, private, or charitable Admonition, and that
which is public and Ministerial, and Authoritative.

Well! but as for our power of suspending, he alleges it is but for fourteen
days, and after that the Sinner is left to the Ordinary.

Ay! Here we have the bottom of the Dissenting Ministers Design out. They would
be all so many little Popes, from whom there lies no appeal. The very Men who
decry Tyranny, are setting up for Arbitrary Government, and will not endure
that in another, which they aspire to themselves. All I shall reply unto him
is, to present him with the judgment of Calvin, and Beza; and I hope Mr. O.
will lend both his Ears unto these two Presbyterian Oracles. The former affirms
-- That to trust Excommunication Calv. Ep. 136.
in the hands of every Parochial Minister, and his particular Congregation, is
contrary to the Apostolic practice: the latter declares what the Discipline at
Geneva was, viz. That the Parochiat Baz. Ep. 29.
Ministers proceed no further than Admonition: but in case of contumacy, they
certify the Presbytery of the City. It is certain the power of excommunication
is in the hands of the Magistrates of that City.

But Mr. O. further objects, That we have no power to Def. p. 27.
judge whom to Baptize, but must Baptize all that are offered, though Children
of Jews, Infidels, Deists, etc.

Ans. This is nothing to the present Question between us, which is whether our
Parish Priests have any Power of Discipline. They may have some power, though not
this. And that they have some power, to wit of Ministerial Admonition, and
Suspension from the Lords Supper, has been already asserted and proved, I
presume, yea, and granted also. This then is a new and impertinent Subject,
thrust in here merely to make a noise and dust with, and to avoid the thorough
discussion of the Point in hand.

2. The Dissenting Ministers, have a greater power than we have, or pretend to,
it is confessed, etc. to refuse whomsoever they please, even the Children of the
most upright Believers. They are responsible to no Law, nor to any Superior
that I know of, in case of refusal, nor to any punishment. Only perhaps the
parties aggrieved will withdraw their Contributions. But upon these terms we
also have a power to Judge whom we will, and whom we will not Baptize: 'tis-but
venturing the loss of our Livings, as they must of their Contributions.

3. Mr. O. Supposes here, what cannot easily be believed ever did, or will
happen, viz. that Jewish; or Gentile, or Theistical Parents, will offer their
Children unto Christian Baptism, or suffer others to bring 'em to that Holy
(...).

4. Perhaps the Children of very wicked Christians are brought to be (...).
These we acknowledge we have not power to refuse: for so we know, that the
Children of wicked Jews were to be admitted unto Circumcision, in the room
whereof our Lord introduced Baptism: and we are persuaded the former is the
Rule and Pattern of the latter.

5. If it should so happen that the Child of a Jew, or Turk, or Infidel, or
Heretic Excommunicated, or Theift, or Atheift should be put into our Hands to
be Baptized, it is confessed we take our selves obliged to Baptize 'em: but it is
with this Proviso, that there be sufficient Susceptors, or Persons who will
undertake to bring 'em up in the Christian Religion. And of the sufficiency of
these Sureties we are the judges, except an Appeal be made from us unto our
Diocesian, who may overruled us if he sees just cause for it.

6. and Lastly, How the Apostles and Presbyters, in the Apostles days managed
themselves in the Point of Infant Baptism; Mr. O. should have done well, first
to have stated it out of the New Testament, before he brought this exception
upon the Stage.

Mr. O. further objects -- That we have no power to forbear giving the (...) a
Notorious Offender, unless we prosecute him in the Bishops Court.

Ans. 1. The Reader may apply the Two first Answers, to the former Objection
unto this, whereby he will see how Frivolous and Impertinent it is.

2. Mr. O. Should have excepted thus, save for fourteen days.

3. It is a most false and wicked saying, that of Mr. O's -- That if he be
absolved in the Court, we must give him the Eucharist, though we know him never
so Impenitent. We cannot know a Man's impenitency except himself declares it,
either by his Words or Actions, and continuing in his Sins. In either case I
can forbear giving him the Lords Supper, and in fourteen days certify as
before. Nay, by Canon 109, I am not to admit him to the Lord's Supper, till he
is reformed, and of this I am the Judge.

I cannot (...) but this method is troublesome, etc. but it is not odious (...)
the Eyes of good Men, nor is it possible to be fruitless, if the Parish Priest
is resolute. The Ordinary cannot relieve the Impenitent Sinner, nor compel the
Priest to admit him. This course is indeed rarely undertaken, and that because
(as I have experienced) if one warn a Wicked Person, one that is scandalously
so, he will besure not to offer himself, left he be turned back and publicly
disgraced in the Face of the Congregation. The method is as I have said
troublesome: but better a mischief than an inconvenience. Better many Sinners be
admited, than one good Man rejected. If the Parish Priest should have it in his
own Power and Breast to abstain, whom he pleased, and for as long time as he
thought fit without Liberty to appeal, his private Revenge, or the influence of
the Parties Enemies, might engage him to deprive a good Man, of the comfort of
that Holy Ordinance. I have an Instance of this kind ready at hand, a late one,
and in my Neighborhood. A Member of the Congregation, had given Evidence in
behalf of a Churchman against a Dissenter. No Body objected against his
Testimony as false, 'Twas thought rather favorable to the Dissenter. At his
return from the Assizes, a Message was brought him by some of the Congregation,
that he was to forbear coming to the Communion, he was also reprimanded by the
Minister, for giving Evidence against a Brother, the Sub-poena being not
actually, though ready be to served upon him, in case he refused to go without
it. This was not Commutation, I acknowledge, which we hear of so often, but it
was base Corruption, and (...) to be punished by the Judge.

Yet Mr. O. goes on, and tells me -- We have no power to call persons to
Repentance openly before the Church.

Ans. As much as Mr. O. has. He or I may call 'em to Public Penance: but it is
at their choice, whether they will obey us. Such Penitents are but like Mr.
Baxter's Christians, mere Volunteers.

Lastly, he urges that, we have no power to judge any Man to be Excommunicated,
nor to absolve 'em.

Ans. Mr. O. is so fond of the Power of judging, that it is a Thousand pities he
was not bred a Lawyer, that so in good time he might have been My Lord Judge:
for I suppose he has no exception against a Temporal Lordship. But it falls out
to his great mortification, that in the Post he is in, though he pretends to be
a Judge, yet he is but a Crier, the Mouth of his Congregation, and ecchos their
Sentence of Excommunication, and that of Absolution also. How can he do less,
since he eats their Bread, wears their Livery, and is their Stipendiary. I
produced him an Example of this kind just now. But that we have power to judge
and absolve, is manifest in Vide Office of Visitation of the Sick.
the case of Dying Persons, confessing their Sins and desiring Absolution.

In a word, we are not ashamed of the name Priest, though we are sensible the
Dissenters, often call us so out of contempt: and we are ashamed of their folly
in upbraiding us with a Title, which the holy Scripture has given us.

CHAP. II. Being an Answer to Mr. OF s 2d Chap.
IN the first Chapter of the Tentamen N. my design was to consider in their
Order, all those Passages of Scripture which seem any way to concern
Ordination, or any other Act of Ecclesiastical Government, excepting what
belongs to the Church of Ephesus in particular; which is Treated of by it self
afterward. Here I take notice of Matthias constituted an Apostle in the place
of Judas, Act. 1. of the Deacons being appointed and ordained unto their
Office, Chap. 6. of Peter and John's laying on of hands upon some of the New
Converts of Samaria, Chap. 8. of Ananias imposing hands upon Saul. Chap. 9. of
Barnabas and Readiness Separation unto the Ministry of the Gentiles. Chap. 13. of
the Ordinations mentioned. Chap. 14. of St. Paul's laying hands on twelve at
Ephesians. Chap. 19. of Timothy's Ordination spoken of, 1 Timothy 4. 14. 2 Timothy 1. 6.
Epis. 21. 6. and not known when nor in what place given him: of the delivering
the Incestuous Person unto Satan. 1 Cor. 5. and of the Council of Jerusalem,
Ast. 15. Now it is all one to me, and to my design in this Chapter, what becomes
of the four first Instances, and of that other in the 19 th of Acts, whether
they were Ordinations or not. If not, let Mr. Prinn look to it, or Mr. O. in
his behalf. As they will do me no good, so they can do me no harm. Though if
they should prove Ordinations, the advantage I made of 'emis of some moment in
the Question before us, they being performed either by Apostles, or Prophets,
no other inferior and ordinary Church Officer joining with 'em, which was what
I levelled at against Mr. Prinn.

But the first uncontroverted Ordination unto the Ministry of the Word and
Sacraments, is that of Barnabas and Saul, Act. 13 th. This Ordination was had
by Prophets and Teachers, who received an express and extraordinary Commission
from God, to separate these two unto the work whereunto (says the Holy Ghost) I
have called them. Seeing then Prophets, as Superior, and extraordinary Species
of Church Officers, influenced by the immediate and express Command of the Holy
Ghost; presided over this work of Separating Barnabas and Saul, it can be no
sufficient warrant nor Precedent unto mere Presbyters, to Ordain by Virtue of
their Ordinary Power and Office. Herein lies the force of my Observation, which
ought to have been fairly answered.

But Mr. O. instead of this falls a cavilling, at my expounding Def. p. 68.
Prophets and Teachers, the same Persons that is, ordinary Ministers (or
Presbyters) endu'd at that time with the Gift of Prophesy, or receiving a
Special Commission from Heaven. Whereas He will needs have 'em distinct Persons
and Officers: Prophets and Teachers in Sensu Diviso.

Ans. I will not here deny but Mr. O's interpretation may be true, yet neither
can I see any thing hinders but mine may be so. For Caiaphas was but an
ordinary (though the supreme) Officer in the Church of the Jews, and yet he
prophesied, and by Consequence pro hac vice was a Prophet. If a Man would have
described him, it had not been improper to have said, he was a Prophet and the
High (...).

Now, how to compromise this small difference between us, I know not. I Will
therefore suppose what Mr. O. takes for granted, (though at the same time I
think the contrary is most evident, Saul and Barnabas, at least being both
Prophets and Teachers;) the Prophets there spoken of, were Persons different
from the Teachers. Yet if it be so, my Argument is not altered, nor ever the
worse: still the Teachers were presided over by the Prophets, and still the
Ordainers acted by Special and extraordinary Commission from Heaven, which
cannot warrant ordinary Presbyters and Teachers, to Ordain by Virtue of their
ordinary Power. If Mr. O. himself, or any Layman, should ordain some Person by
Special Command from God appointed thereunto, no body could with Reason call
his Ordination into Question. But then this could not rationally be drawn into
example, nor justify every private Believer in England, to ordain at his own
Pleasure.

It is not Material, whether the Revelation was immediately given to the
Teachers, or to the Prophets only, and by them unto the Teachers: nevertheless
I think Mr. O. ought not to deny the former. The words run thus -- And they
(the Prophets and Teachers) Ministered unto the Lord and fasted, and the Holy
Ghost said, Separate me Barnabas and Saul, etc. and when they had fasted, and
prayed, and laid their (...) on them, they sent 'em away. They who sent
Barnabas and Saul away, were the same that separated them by imposition of
hands, and they who separated Barnabas and Saul, were the Persons to whom the
Holy Ghost spoke, and they to whom the Holy Ghost spoke, were the Persons, that
Ministered unto the Lord and fasted; and they who Ministered unto the Lord and
fasted, were the Teachers as well as the Prophets. Therefore the Revelation was
communicated immediately to the Teachers, therefore the Teachers were Prophets
also: therefore this is no Precedent unto common Presbyters, to ordain by
virtue of their ordinary power; by consequence my Argument holds good.

Concerning the Ordinations spoken of Act. 14. 23. I noted that Paul and
Barnabas acted not therein, by any Special Revelation, but by their Apostolical
Power, being not assisted therein by any Presbyters; that therefore these
cannot be good Presidents for Presbyterian Ordination.

Mr. O. Replies that, this Instance makes little for me. Def. p. 74.


Ans. It makes thus much for me, that it makes nothing for the Dissenters, nor
against me, which is what I designed by it: though I might say it is a plain
Instance of Ordination, by Church Officers, Superior to Presbyters.

As for Mr. O's reason why Philip did not lay hands on with Peter and John,
viz. because it was no Ordination, but conferring the extraordinary Gift of the
Spirit, which Philip could not do, Mr. O. forgot to take notice of the whole
Argument, but Answers it by halves. I urged, that Philip had the extraordinary
and Miraculous Gift of the Spirit, which was usually conferred by Imposition of
hands. that though he had this Gift, yet he could not give it: that therefore
they who have a Gift, yet may not have power to conferr that Gift; and by
consequence, that those Persons who are ordained to the Ministry of the Word
and Sacraments, it does not follow that they can Ordain, which was the thing to
be proved.

There is nothing that I perceive meriting any Reply until we come to that
piece of Discipline, 1 Cor. 5. where we read of the Incestuous Corinthian
Excommunicated (as I contend) by the Authority and Command of St. Paul.

But Mr. O. insinuates, that the Apostle reproves the Corinthians Def. p. 79.
for not excommunicating the Sinner themselves, 1 Cor. 5. 2.

Ans. This verse proves it not. The expression is in the Passive (...) -- That
the Offender might be taken away. By whom? Why not by the Apostle? He may as
well be thought to chide 'em, for not informing him of the misdemeanour, to the
end, the Offender might be delivered unto Satan by St. Paul himself. The whole
Story as we shall show Countenances this Interpretation.

Ay, but (says the Minister) the Apostle enjoins the Corinthians to avoid
disorderly walkers, v. 13.

Ans. But this is by the Apostles express commandment still. Besides to put
away from among themselves that wicked Person, is not to deliver him to Satan,
or to expel him the Church, but Not to eat with him, v. 11. that is, not to
have any Familiarity with him, in civil Conversation. In this the Apostle does
indeed declare, v. 12. that the Corinthians had power to Judge, with whom they
might be Familiar, and with whom not; But it does not hence follow they had
power to Excommunicate. Now that it was St. Paul who judged and decreed, and
gave theSentence of Excommuncation against the Offender, will appear plainly,
if we read the first part of the 3 d verse, with the 5 th v. (for all the rest
is a Parenthesis) Thus then let us put 'em close together, v. 3. For I verily,
as absent in Body, but present in Spirit, have determined already (then v. 5.)
to deliver such an one unto Satan. For (...) must be governed of (...), and so
the Excommunication most certainly proceeded from the Apostle. It is also
worthy consideration, that the Corinthians did not receive again into their
Communion, this Excommunicated Person, until the Apostle had absolved him, and
then besought them to confirm their Love toward him. 2 C. 28. 10.

In the next place I am accused of altering and perverting the Text. (...)
heavy charge, which ought not to be passed over lightly. The Accusation is,
that v. 4. I have put the Words thus, Of my Spirit, whereas the Translators
leaving out of, render the place thus, My Spirit, not Of my Spirit.

Ans. Since the Grammatical construction will bear it, there is no reason of
accusing me of perverting the Text. Now (...) may be coupled with (...), being
put absolute and into a Parenthesis. Upon this supposition, then, thus the
Words, may be laid -- In the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, and my Spirit (or
of my Spirit) which is the same thing) when ye are gathered together, etc. So
that Mr. O. could not have any just pretense for his Accusation, whatever
becomes of my Interpretation of the Text. This, perhaps he may call into
Question: and my purpose now is to vindicate it.

I cannot reconcile my self unto that Opinion, which Couples (...) with (...),
thus more plainly in English -- When ye and my Spirit are gathered together.
Paul was now at Ephesus, both Body and Spirit. I can form no Idea of his Spirit
assembling with the Corinthians, at so great a distance. True, he tells 'em,
that he is present (with 'em) in Spirit, but Corrects himself immediately
(...), As though I were present. So that the Sense is, St. Paul was present
with 'em, in Heart and Affections, studying their welfare, wishing them well,
and praying that their Souls might be Saved, and their Church Edified, in Peace
and Purity. Or, why not present among 'em by his Authority? As we say, the King
is every where present in his Dominions, by his Influence and Providence. But
that the Spirit of Paul should be gathered, or assembled with the Corinthian
Congregation, is a too harsh and improper Expression, at least in my Fancy and
Opinion, especially, since so Commodious and agreeable Sense may be given of
the Words. Nor let any one suspect me to have advanced this Interpretation to
serve a cause which stands in no need of it. For if it shall still be thought
that (...) are to be coupled, then the latter Words must import the Apostles
Authority, (as I formerly expounded it): And least the Apostle should seem too
assuming, in thus insisting on his own 'Authority, with great caution he adds
-- With the Power of our Lord Jesus Christ. As if he had said, my Authority,
but in Conjunction with, and subordination to the Power of Christ. For so the
Apostle was wont oftimes carefully to prevent mistakes, left he should be
thought to haveUsurpt his Power. Thus he, 2 Cor. 10. 8. speaking of his
Authority, adds, Which the Lord has given us, etc. And Chap. 2. 10. (which
comes nearer to our purpose) when he had granted the Absolution of the
Excommunicated Person, I forgave it (says he) in the Person of Christ.

Upon the whole matter, thus much, at least, may be said of this Instance of
Ecclesiastical Discipline, that St. Paul directed and commanded it, which is
all I need to be concerned for. For then it can be no president for a College
of Presbyters, much less for a particular Minister of one single Congregation,
to Excommunicate, which was the thing I intended to Evince.

I proceed now to the Story of (...)'s Ordination briefly related, 1 Timothy 4.
14. 2 Timothy 1. 6. of which in the first place, I delivered this as my own
settled Opinion, That Timothy underwent two Ordinations, the one for Presbyter,
the other for (...) (or Supreme Ruler) of the Church of (...). One of my
Reasons for this, was, because Paul himself seemed to me to have been twice
Ordained, once Act. 9. 15, (...), 17. and again Chap. 13. the first, unto the
Ordinary Ministry of the Word, the second, unto the Apostle of the Gentiles.
Against this Mr. O. Argues. Def. p. 82.


1. That Paul, was more than an Ordinary Minister of the Word ( Gal. 1. 1.)
meaning before he received that Imposition of hands, Act. 13. that is, from the
time of his Conversion.

Ans. He might as well say, that Paul was an Apostle from his Birth or from his
Mother's Womb, Gal. 1. 15. For then (as we there read) God separated him.
Besides this Testimony of Scripture, Gal. 1. 1. proves not what it is alleged
for; because Paul wrote this Epistle to the Galatians, after he had been
Ordained, ( Acts 13.) then confessedly on all sides, an Apostle.

2. He argues from, 2 Cor. 12. 2. Act. 9. 17. that Paul was honored with
Visions and Revelations, and received extraordinary Gifts of the Holy Ghost.

Ans. Neither will this prove Mr. O's point: for Philip had extraordinary Gifts
of the Spirit, and was Honored with Revelations, Acts 8. Cornelius a Roman
Centurion, not yet a Christian, only a Jewish Proselite, had a Vision, Act. 10.
13. and the Gentiles before they were Baptized, received the Holy Ghost, and
spoke with Tongues, v. 44. 46. why not Paul then, even when he was but a mere
Minister, or Presbyter?

He still pleads, that Paul was more than an Ordinary Presbyter, at Ananias's
laying on of hands upon him, 1 Cor. 15. 8; 9. where (says Mr. O.) Paul reckons
himself one of the Apostles, from the time of his Miraculous Conversion.

Ans. This I deny. Paul does not there reckon himself an Apostle from his
Conversion. He tells the Corinthians that he had seen Christ, which qualified
him for being an Apostle and Witness of Christ's Resurrection, but conferred
not the Gift, or Office. And he tells 'em he was born out of due time, and was;
as it were, a (...) in comparision with the twelve (who were Apostles before
him), and therefore (...) least of the Apostles, which words do not imply, that
he was an actual Apostle, so soon as he was converted, but, that when he wrote
that Epistle, he was then an Apostle, though the least, and the last of 'em.

Mr. O. Yet alleges. Gal. 1. 15, 16; 17. Neither went I (says Paul) up to
Jerusalem, to them which were Apostles before me, which (says the Minister)
implies, he was an Apostle himself at that time.

Ans. At what time? The natural sense is, that at the time of St. Paul's
writing this Epistle to the Galatians, he was then an Apostle, that is
undeniable. But was it not true, and might not Paul appositely say, that the
twelve were Apostles before he was, meaning before he was called by the Holy
Ghost, and Solemnly separated thereunto by the Prophets and Teachers, at (...),
Act. 13. 1, 2, 3?

Moreover, to confirm my Point, I offer to consideration, that if Paul was an
Actual Apostle, in foro Ecclesiae, from his Conversion, why then was he
separated (...), by the Prophets and Teachers, Act. 13. If it be asked what then
is the meaning of that Text, Gal. 1. 1? And was not Paul called to the
Apostleship of the Gentiles by Christ, (...). 9. 15? Ans. I said enough of this
in the (...). Nov. In short, then in Acts 9. Paul is only designed for the
Apostleship, not actually admitted to it. In (...). 13. Paul is actually,
effectually and solemnly (...) into the Apostleship, and there expressly called
thereunto by God. v. 2. Separate me Barnabas and Saul, for the work, whereunto
I have called them, that is, to the Apostleship of the Gentiles. Hereunto Paul
(I conceive) alludes, Gal. 1. 1. and in other places, where he speaks of his
being called to the Apostleship by God.

For the further confirmation, therefore, of my own Opinion, I offer unto
consideration, that there is little recorded of his success in Preaching the
Gospel, from the time of his Conversion, to that of his Separation (which was
about Eleven Years) that his old name of Saul was all that while continued unto
him, and he is never once called Apostle. That after his separation, Act. 13.
all his Labors are Remembered exactly, and his wonderful success recorded, his
name was immediately changed into Paul Act. 13. 9. and the Title of Apostle
given him. Act. 14. 4. 14. Yet I am pressed with that Passage, Act. 22. 18. 21.
where our Lord appeared unto him in the Temple at Jerusalem, saying -- Make
haste, get thee quickly out of Jerusalem, v. 18. for I will send thee far hence
unto the Gentiles: and this was before his Ordination, mentioned, Act. 13.

Ans. But this was long after his Conversion, and therefore shows, that he was
not the Apostle of the Gentiles from the beginning, God having not as yet sent
him. This interview between Jesus Christ and Paul, was at his being at
Jerusalem, spoken of, Act. 9. 26. Gal. 1. 18. as I conceive, and happened (I do
acknowledge) before his Separation, Act. 13. But let us mind the Words -- I
will send thee: The Lord did not then actually send him, but promised that he
would hereafter send him to the Gentiles. And the performance of this promise
Paul doubtless waited for, as the other Apostles did, another promise of the
like Nature, Act. 1. 4. 8. As this latter promise was afterward made good to
the Twelve, on the Day of Pentecost, so was the former unto Paul, Act. 13.

It remains then very probable, that Paul was a Minister of the Word, before he
was an Apostle, that he was twice Ordained, And so was Barnabas also.
first to the ordinary Office of a Presbyter, secondly to the Apostleship of
the Gentiles, which is a good reason therefore to believe Timothy twice
Ordained, first to the Office of a Presbyter, 1 Timothy 4. 14. secondly, to the
Prefecture (or Bishopric) of Ephesus. 2 Timothy 1. 6. So Jerome himself expounds
that, 2 Timothy 1. 6 -- ad Episcopa^um scilicet.

Before I dismiss this, I will for once take notice of a most disingenuous and
deceitful Remark of my Adversaries, when he thus informs his Def. p. 84.
Reader -- The Rector (says he) allows that Timothy was made a Presbyter by
Presbyters, which Mr. O. cannot but know, is false; By Presbyters. (when I say
so) it is manifest, and I often enough declared, that I understood such Presbyters
as Ordained Timothy, but had Special, Divine and Extraordinary Commission from
God thereunto, or else in Conjunction with, and Subordination to some
extraordinary Prophet presiding over them: but not by Virtue of their own
single ordinary Power: That, therefore this Instance cannot be drawn into
Consequence; I observe this for once (as I said) to show what an Adversary I
have to do with, and to give the Reader a Taste of the way of his
Controverting. I have pretermitted, and will pass over some hundreds of this
kind.

In the Explication of (...) I observed, that by Prophecy might be understood
Prophets, the Abstract for the Concrete, as Presbytery is put for Presbyters:
that, if Timothy was Ordained but once, then must he have been Ordained by Paul
(2 Timothy 1. 6.), who also was specially determined thereto by Revelation, and so
acted therein as an Apostle and Prophet, that is, Ordained Timothy by Prophecy,
the Presbyters joining with him: that if there were more Prophets than one
concerned in this Ordination, Silas might have been another, who is styled a
Prophet, Act. 15. 32. he having been Paul's Companion before, Timothy v. 40.
and after also Chap. 16. 25, 17, 15, 18, 5. Lastly, that if nothing of this
will be allowed, then it must be said, that the Presbyters by Special
Revelation, and Prophecy appointed thereunto, Ordained Timothy. And I give Mr.
O. his choice of any of these Expositions: If he accepts the last (as most
likely he will) it is however no precedent or warrant for Ordinary Presbyters,
by Virtue of their Ordinary Power and Office, to Impose hands and Conferr
Orders. Mr. O. in reply to this, (...) not offered one Syllable: but he has
interposed some (as he thinks) witty descants upon the Rector's words and
notions, merely to evade the Argument, and to perplex it; which I account not
worth my particular Notice.

But whereas he thus Paraphrases on my Words, Neglect not the Gift that is in
thee, which was given by Prophets, with the laying on of the Hands of Prophets,
intimating it to be Nonsense, observe me once more, and Remember that the
Rector proposed two ways of Interpreting this Passage in Timothy. First, That
by Prophecy may be meant Prophets in the Concrete, distinct from the
Presbyters, spoken of in the same Period; and then the sense must be, Neglect
not the Gift which was given thee by Prophets, (directed and determined unto
that Action, by some Extraordinary and Express Command of God) with the laying
on of the Hands of the Presbyters, as assistants in the Solemnity. Either this
is sense, or I have none, and being admitted, confirms my Point, That Ordinary
mere Presbyters Ordained not Timothy by their ownsole Power. Secondly, Or else
the Passage may thus be understood, That Prophecy is to be taken in the
Abstract, as it lies in the Text, and the Presbyters were the Persons, unto
whom the Prophecy came, appointing them to Ordain Timothy, who therefore were
Prophets, and not Ordinary Presbyters in that particular Action. On this
supposition the Words must run, Neglect not the Gift, which was given thee by
Prophecy, with the laying on of the Hands of the Presbyters, unto whom the
Prophecy came. And this ought to pass with Mr. O. for sense, if he is Master of
any, and shows, that mere Ordinary Presbyters, did not Ordain Timothy, by
Virtue of their Ordinary Power, but by Special Commission from God. But Mr. O.
confounds these two different Interpretations, putting them together (which
ought to be considered separately) contrary to all Laws of Disputation, and
then pretends to have found out some Absurdity, or Nonsense in the Rector's
Gloss. Moreover, the Gloss is not absurd, even as Mr. O. has laid it. For
supposing that by Prophecy is meant Prophets, and that the Presbyters were
those Prophets, it is proper enough to say, That Timothy was ordained by
Prophets, with the laying on of the Hands of the Prophets, the former Clause
donoting who ordained him, the latter by what Ceremony or Solemnity, it was
performed.

Nor is it a degrading Paul, when we make him a Prophet, which is an order
inferior to Apostle, as Mr. O. weakly enough argues. Its Def. p. 85.
not unusual to give Persons an Inferior Title. St. John and St. Peter Jo. Ep.
1. 2.
are called Presbyters, Saul and David Prophets, Balaam a Prince, 1 Pet. 5. 1.
was a Prophet, so was Daniel, and so was Caiaphas the High Priest, Deuteronomy. 18.
15.
and so was Paul sometimes, who had Visions and Revelations. I say (...). For
sometimes also he spoke and wrote with the Spirit of a Reasonable Man, only,
though at the same time with Apostolical 1 Cor. 7. 6. 12. 25.
Authority. For the Power of an Apostle was permanent and (...), his Character
indelible, though that of a Prophet was not so: See concerning this Jerome's
Comment on Malachy, and his Prooem to Comment, on the Epistle to Philemon.

But Mr. O. questions whether the Apostles were the Heads of Def. 88. 89.
the Presbyteries, in the Churches by them planted, because then the Churches
by them planted must have had two or more Heads.

Ans. If ever any Man loved to Trifle, and Embroil matters with Trivial, and
Senseless Difficulties, the Minister is He. For what if (...) was inferior to
Paul, and (as I may say) a Subaltern Apostle? then the Objection is gone. And
what if several Persons in equal Power, mav make up (not Heads, but) one
Political Head in a Society? Then the Wonder is over. In Dioclesian's Days,
there were several Emperors Socii Imperii. There were lately two Czars in
Moscovy, and two Princes in England. It Is indeed Monstrous, when a Natural Body
has two or more Heads: But that a Political Body or Society, should be governed
by two or more Persons jointly in a Parity, nothing is more Ordinary: Casar
indeed was of another Mind, and his Maxim was, Imperium non capit duos: but
'twas his Pride and Ambition, which Prompted him to say so. For matter of Fact,
and his Successors Practice, has abundantly confuted him. But if Mr. O. will
not allow two or more Governors of a Body Politic, to be called the Head of
that Society, then are the Presbyterian Churches, and the Independent
Congregations, so many Bodies without an Head. And I think, a Body without any
Head, is altogether as Monstrous, as a Body with two or more.

Mr. O. adds, The Presbyters at Jerusalem had many Apostles Def. Ibid.
to govern them, besides Prophets and Evangelists, unto whom they were Subject,
and not to any one in particular.

Ans. 1. All the Twelve Apostles were Instrumental, in planting this Church,
which therefore was Subject to all, for a good while, as to one Head. Secondly,
James afterward was made the Ordinary Resident Church-Governour, as is very
probable. Thirdly, The Elders spoken of, Acts 15. were not those of Jerusalem
only (as I conceive) but such also as came thither from others parts, Judea,
Syria, etc. and were Members of the Council, and on that score, not so much
Subject but Assistants to the Apostles. (...), The Apostles and Elders now
Assembled, intermedled not in the Government of this Church at this time, but
met here (it might have been in any other place, if they had so pleased) to
determine a Question which concerned all Churches, wherein there were any Jewish
Converts, as may be gathered from, Acts 16. 4.

But Paul the Apostle (says the Minister) had Power over Def. p. 90.
all Churches, why is he then made the Governor of Ephesus in particular,
though he planted it?

Ans. Why not? I require a Reason. It was his particular care for the Reason
assigned. A Colonel has Power over the whole Regiment, but 'specially over his
own Troop. Every Apostle had a Transcendent Power over every Presbytery (grant
it,) yet he was the Ordinary Governor of those Churches, which he had formed.
Camerarius Comments upon the Synop. Crit.
2 Cor. 10. 15. thus, Disignat (...), etc. Paul means in this place, that a
District, as it were a Plat of ground, was given him, whereon he might build a
Church. Still the care of all the Churches lay upon the Apostles, as to right
and Power, although for the better Government of them, they divided the (...),
as the (...) of Propagating the Gospel required.

Mr. O. If the Apostle joined the Presbytery with him, in the Ordination of
Timothy, it proves that Presbyters have an Inherent Power of Ordaining.

Ans. True, it may safely be granted, in Conjunction with the Apostle, and with
Bishops, but not without them. The House of Commons has an inherent Power to
make a Vote of Parliament, but not without the Lords; and both Houses have an
inherent Power to make a Law, but not without the King. It Is he that inspires
Life and Breath into it, after the two Houses have formed the Carcass.

Lastly, Mr. O. adds -- The Apostles are Distinguished from the (...). p. 91.
Presbytery, Act. 15. 23.

Ans. This is not appositely observed: for it was a Council not a Presbytery,
though the Presbyters of Jerusalem were in it: happily other Presbyters also,
besides an Apostle (or Apostles) though he be the Head (or Governor) of a
Presbytery, may be aptly distinguished from that Presbytery, whereof he is
Head: and yet at the same time he is a Member of that Presbytery. Jesus Christ
is by St. Paul called the Head of the Body, (the Church) Ephesians. 22. 23. c 4, 15,
16. Col. 1. 18. and so is distinguished from the Body, though we cannot
properly call any thing a Body, except we comprehend the Head also: for a body
is not a Body without the Head; and the Head is a Member of the Body. And yet
St. Paul distinguishes between the Body, that is the Church, and Christ the
Head of it; when at the same time, Christ the Head, must be believed a Member
of his own Body. I expect then Mr. O. will in good time rally npon St. Paul,
and expose his Expression, as he has mine.

Moreover though the Apostles are distinguished from the Elders, yet it follows
not that they are distinguished from the Council (or Presbytery) when the
Members of a Body are distinguished from one another, they are not to be
understood as distinguished from the Body, but from one another only. St. Paul
speaking of the Natural body, 1 Cor. 12. tells us, that though the Members of
that Body are many, yet'tis but one Body: and he distinguishes also the Members
from one another, as the Hands from the Feet, and both from the Eyes, and all
these from the Ears, and the Hand from the rest of the Body, but yet he
affirms, they are all of the Body, and together make up the Body. So St. Luke
reckons the two Principal and Constituent Parts of the Council at Jerusalem,
and distinguishes between the Apostles and the Elders, between the Head and the
lower Members, but not between the Head and the Body, between the Apostles and
Council: for no one can think but the Apostles were a part of the Council, or,
if you please, call it a Presbytery.

I beg the Readers patience, when I say, a Body is not a Body without an Head.
Our late Presbyteries were such Bodies without visible Heads. The Classical
Body moved to the place of meeting, I say moved without an Head. A frightful
Spectacle! When it had sat a few moments without an Head, it then made it self
an Head, a President or Moderator, protempore, who was before but an inferior
Member, but now mounted up for an hour or two, to be the Head. But it may be
asked who was the Head, when this (...) was set up? Herein the Body acted
without an Head. However the Business of the day being over, the Artificial
Head drops off from the Shoulders, and thence (...) is an Hand or a Foot, as
before. So every Member of the Body in its turn, becomes the Head; and the Head
dwindling again into a small Member. The Body then continues for some Days or
Weeks without an Head. And would it not scare one to see a Body once more
without an Head? Hereby Mr. O. may see, it is possible to ridicule the
Presbyteries, if one will take the Liberty to confine Words to their Natural
Signification, when they are used Metaphorically.

As to my Exposition of (...), I am not sensible Mr. O. has advanced any thing
considerable against me. Only, after his usual and Sophistical manner he draws
in what is admitted in one place; and opposes it to what is supposed in
another, which can with no Justice be done. When ex. gr. I explain this
Passage, 1 Timothy 4. 14. supposing that by (...), is meant (...) or (...) in the
concrete. It is a miserable shift to make use of, what I here assert against
what afterward I propose, when I have admitted the phrase to be understood in
the Abstract, and then assert Paul to be at least one, and the Head or
Governor of the Presbytery. I had laid down several ways of Expounding the
Text, and had permited Mr. O. to choose which he pleased, that the Argument
might be brought to a certain head. But instead hereof he jumbles 'em all
(...), contrary to allLaws of Disputation. And whereas I laid this clearly
before the Reader, p. 33. by summing up briefly what had been said, he (...) us
off with calling it a Recapitulation of my long perplexed (...) upon (...)
(...) Def. p. 95.
Text.

Mr. O. has indeed perplexed it: but it has been judged pretty clear by others.
I wish Mr. O. would have furnished us with a better.

Carpere vel noli (...), vel ede (...). But the Minister is better at pulling
down than building up: and indeed it is in a great measure the true Character
of the whole Party.

In the Conclusion of my Discourse upon the General History of the Apostolical
Churches and their Government, I examined that passage of St. Peter, 1 Ephesians. 5.
but do not find my Adversary to have said any thing to that purpose, or which
in the least affects the account I gave of it. Some Cavils are to be met with,
but such, as if any one suspects of Moment, let him but compare 'em with what I
said in the (...). Nov. p. 37. to p. 42. and he will easily discern the shifts
Mr. O. (...) put to, in framing but a Colorable Reply. Among many other
things; I will only in short produce one, and the rather because Mr. O. has
repeated it, I (...) above 20 times, and yet it is nothing but what I granted
more than once. '(...) this,

(...) and Titus (says he) are no where expressly called Def. p. 97.
Bishops (in the Scripture) nor Constituted Diocesan Bishops.

Now I had often enough (...) in T. N. and cautioned against all mistake and
(...) cavil, that (...). and (...). are never called Bishops, only contended
they were the Supreme Rulers of the Churches of (...) and Crete, that is, in
the Language afterward prevailing in the Church, they were Bishops. And yet
for all this we are at every turn told, they are never in Scripture expressly
called Bishops, nor constituted Diocesan Bishops, as if I, or any other ever
asserted it. Nevertheless that which I affirm (and which is sufficient to my
purpose), is that they had express Commission from St. Paul to govern those
Chuches, and the particular Acts of Supreme Power, are expressly committed to
them, which is enough (I think) to prove 'em the Supreme Rulers of those
Churches, and is all I contend for. Besides Mr. O. should Remember, that he
himself acknowledges 'em Evangelists, which where Officers in the Church,
Superior unto Ordinary Presbyters, according to the supposition agreed upon
between him and me: but on the other hand, whether the Presbyter spoken of, 1
Pet. 5. and Act. 20. were (...), that is not to be disputed, but whether they
had the Supreme Power committed to them, is the Question, and is (I hope)
resolved in the Negative, to Satisfaction in the formentioned Pages of T. N.
viz. that it does not appear so from those Expressions -- Feed the Flock of
Christ, taking the oversight thereof: Take heed unto the Flock over which the
Holy Ghost has made you Overseers, to feed the Church of God. For it can not be
denied but that these Exhortations might be properly given to the Rectors and
Vicars of the Church of England, though subject to a Diocesian Bishop. Yea,
might be given to every ordained Presbyter, See Office of Consecrating
Presbyters in the (...).
though but a Curate.

APPENDIX.
MR O. excepts many things against my Instance of the Jews Def. p. 48.
Ecclesiastical Government by an High Priest, inferior Priests and Levites:
concerning whom I noted, That the Fathers, and particularly Clem. Roman. seems
to make this a President for the Government of Christian (...), etc. To the
Authority of Clemens, I added in the Margin Jerome's Epistle to Euag. That which
deserves to be considered is, that he observes the Jewish High Priest to have
been a Type of Jesus Christ, the High Priest of our Profession, and says he, We
follow the Jewish Typical precedent, that is, we acknowledge Jesus Christ to be
our High Priest.

Ans. For all this, the Jewish Economy was a Type of the Christian, at least
the Pathers, though they make not the Jewish High Priest a Type of the
Christian Bishop. Yet they make him a Precedent, or Pattern of him: and Clemens
does so in particular, as also many others, as I shall show in its proper
place, viz. my Answer to his Plea: But why has not Mr. O. after so much pains
taken in Vindicating Clemens from what is imputed to him, endeavored to take
off the force of my other Testimony out of Jerome? There was something in the
wind, that he who undertakes to reply so fully to the Authority of Clemens,
leaves poor Jerome in the lurch, and has not one Syllable to plead in his
behalf. But the (...) of this is plain, 'twas too hard a Knot for the Minister
at (...) to Unty, or so much as to cut. Blundel promised to account for it, but
was not as good as his Word. Walo put us in hopes of it from Salmafius: But he
deceived the World of their expectation: and honest Ludovicus Capella, was
afraid to take the least notice of it. I know nothing that can excuse Mr. O.
and the other Gentlemen (...) a Parting-blow upon this Argument, Mr. O.
entertains us with a piece of Drollery. The Rector (says he) calls the (...)
Ordinary Ministers, and at the same time, says they, were Prophets, that is
extraordinary Ministers. One would think if they were Ordinary Ministers, they
were not extraordinary, If Extraordinary, not Ordinary.

Now the Rector undertakes to reconcile this Contradiction, and to expose Mr.
O. as a mere Trifler. The same Man may be an Ordinary and an Extraordinary
Person, on several Accounts, not Secundum idem. I Will give him one single
Instance, and so (...) this Point. Mr. O. is (as I reckon) but an Ordinary
Minister, and yet I account him an Extraordinary Wrangler.

I had said in T. N. according to my present apprehensions, that Def. p. 77.
James was not the Apostle, but Mr. O. will needs have him the Apostle, that
is, one of the Twelve, for that was my meaning.

Ans, This I am sensible, has of old, and is still, a Controversy among the
Learned: and Bishop Pearson, whom the Minister gets on his side, as ost as he
can, is not very Positive in it, though he (...) that Way. However, I Will comply
with Mr. O. for once, and let James pass for one of the Twelve Apostles: but
then I must accquaint him, that one of the Twelve Apostles, was the fixed and
constant Prefect or Ruler, that is, Bishop of the Church of Jerusalem. We read
of him being at Jerusalem, Act. 12. 17. Gal. 1. 19. Act. 15. 13. Gal. 2. 9, 12.
Act. 21. 18. All which time to his Death, takes up near Thirty Years, as is
computed. It seems then that he was fixed and resident at Jerusalem. Salmasius
thinks that he never was absent from Jerusalem, nor moved a foot once from
thence to his Dying Day. Now that he was Prefect or Eusebius. Hist. l. 2. c. 1.
Bishop there, is proved from Clem. Alexandrinus, from the Council of
Constantinople, from Hegesippus, and from Jerome, besides Theodoret. Hist. l. 5.
c. 9.
a Cloud of Witnesses more (and among them Calvin) that might be adduced in
confirmation of this. Whoever pleases to be so curious, E. Hist. l. 2. c. 23.
may be directed to 'em in the fourth Chapter of the Learned Mr. Burscough's
Treatise of Church Government, from L. 4. c. 22.
whom I have borrowed all this, and several other things in Jer. Cat. Ser.
these Papers.

APPENDIX.
IN this Chapter Mr. O. has moved two Controversies in Philology his
MasterPiece, on which he seems to value himself; the first whereof is, that I
call the Government of the Church by the Apostles an Def. p. 54.
Oligarchy, which he says is a mistake. I had prepared a pretty large and exact
Account of this Word, but have thought good to contract it: and it is in short
this, that though Plato De Repub. Dial. 8.
disparages Oligarchy in comparison with Monarchy, and Aristotle Polit. l. 3.
c. 7, 8.
calls it not Oligarchy (for with him that's the Corruption of the Government)
but Aristocracy: yet that the word. Originally signifies a lawful and honest
kind of Government, and sets forth the true and distinct Nature of it, as is
manifest from its Etymology, which Aristocracy does not; for this word,
according to the Philosopher, denotes any of the Three sorts of Government well
managed: that (...) in Herodotus Thalia or l. 3. c. 80.
commends this form of Government, by the very name of Oligarchy: that Plutarch
In libel. de Mon. Olig. and Them.
speaks of it, under the same name, describing it also by two Words, (...)
(...), and calling its Corruption (...), not (...): that Hesychius Lexic. voce
(...)
reckons up Three kinds of Government, one of which is Oligarchy: and Lastly,
that Aristotle himself confesses Arist. ubi supra.
when a few govern well, and for the Common good, it is a right and just
Government, plainly implying there was no harm in the Word Oligarchy, or in the
Government, though in his time and Country custom had disparaged it.

The next thing he quarrels about is my writing Sanedrin, and that I seem to
make it an Hebrew word.

Ans. The Rector neither makes nor seems to make Sanedrin an Hebrew word: but
if Mr. O, had any good Nature, or Observation in him, he would rather have
concluded that the Rector seems to derive the Word from (...), as himself also
believes. For my writing Sanedrin without the Aspirate h in the middle, might
reasonably have been judged, done, in Conformity to the Greek Language, which
frequently casts away the Aspirat h in the middle of Compound words, the
Conjugates at least of many derived from (...), this especially Synedrium.
Wherefore since Mr. O. will needs have (...) borrowed from the Greeks, it is
more conformable to the Original (...), or to writ it Sanedrin, not Sanhedrin
with the Aspirat. And to speak the very Truth in writing that Word, my thoughts
were ever upon the Greek Noun (...), without (...) into the Orthography.

But when all is said concerning this Word Sanhedrin, I must acknowledge, I
have some scruple, and suspicion about it. It Is very odd in my Thoughts, that
the Name of this great Council, which began with Moses, should descend from the
Greek Tongue, a long while unknown to the Jews: And that it should have no
other Title in the Hebrew Language, that I ever heard of. But (...), or too
much, of this Trivial matter.

CHAP. III. Being an Answer to Mr. OF s 3d Chap.
MR O. in this Chapter, undertakes, first to (...) his Def. p. 99. 100, 101,
102, 103.
own Hypothesis, scil. that Paul at his taking final leave of the Ephesian
Elders ( Act. 20.) appointed them the sole Governors of that Church, in a
Parity, and that this Constitution was, and was intended to be unchangeable. I
will briefly run through his Arguments, and as I go along, make my Answer to
every one of 'em singly.

Mr. O.

The Apostle did not appoint one Presbyter Supreme, P. 99, 100.
to preside over the rest: For Timothy (and Titus) were not Ordinary
Presbyters, but extraordinary Officers, that is, Evangelists: There is no hint
in the Epistles to Tim. and Tit. that they were Ordained to be the Apostles
Successors, in Ephesus, and Crete.

Ans. I shall consider in the following Fifth Chapter, this pretense of their
being extraordinary Officers, and Evangelists, whereby Mr. O. would evade our
Argument, for Timothy's being made the Prefect or Ruler, of Ephesus, in the
Apostles stead, mean while, granting there is no hint in the Epistle to Tim.
that he was Ordained to be the Apostle's Successor in Ephesus (though the
second Epistle 1. 6. is a shrewd Intimation of it, according to Jerome) yet it
follows not hence, that he was not the Apostle's Successor. The Reverend Dr.
Stratford was not Ordained Presbyter, with (...) design to be afterward Bishop
of Chester, and yet for all that, he is Bishop of this See.

Mr. O.

The Apostle did, and it was the proper Season, and his Duty, at his taking
final leave, to settle the Government of that Church: But he then committed it
to the Presbytery, in a Parity, and not to any single Person, Act. 20. 28.

Ans. 1. For any thing to be found in that, Act. 20. 28. St. (...) might have
before this time, appointed a single Person, over the Ephesian Elders, and so
have left it. These words -- Take heed therefore unto your selves, and to all
the Flock, over which the Holy Ghost has made you Overseers, to feed the (...)
of God, might, and may properly enough at this day, be spoken unto Presbyters,
subject to a President (or Bishop) set over them. But

2. If the Supreme Power was here committed to the Elders, however, its not
proved, nor can be, that it was in a Parity: the words might have been spoken
to 'em, divisim, severally, which divests one part of the Dissenters, of their
Presbyteries.

3. However it was, suppose the Government lodged in the Presbytery, St. Paul
might afterward, by Divine Authority, entrust it with a single Person. As to
the matter of fact, whether he did so, is the present controversy; the Issue
whereof will depend on what follows.

Mr. O.

We may with better reason affirm, that Timothy's Def. p. 102.
Power at Ephesus was temporary, than that of the Elders.

Ans. Not so. If Timothy's Supreme Power followed that of the Elders, (as shall
be proved) and if it cannot be proved, that the (...) of Government committed
to Timothy was ever changed, afterward by any subsequent Act of the Apostles,
the Objection vanishes.

Mr. O. Paul gives not the least hint, Act. 20. of any Ruler set; or to be set
over them: That he must needs know what Government God would have settled in the
Church, etc.

Ans. What hint is there to be observed, in the 1st Epistle to lim. concerning
Presbyterian Parity? Or indeed of the Presbyters having the least share in the
Church Government? It was as necessary he should mention the Presbytery in his
first Epistle to Timothy (supposed by Mr. O. written before the farewell Sermon)
as to make mention of their Prelatical Bishop, in his Farewell Sermon. Nor did
the Apostle know beforehand, all the mind and Intentions of God concerning his
Church. He knew not so much as what would befall himself, save, what other
Prophets told him ( v. 23.) and yet still he was left in the dark as to many
things ( v. 22.). I see no reason for believing, Paul must needs know at that
time, God's Intention of altering the Church Government afterward. If so, it is
not to be wondered, he did not acquaint the Presbyters with it. Besides, there is
good reason to think, that Paul, though he knew it, would not acquaint 'em with
it, at that time. Happy he saw they would not then brook, nor endure to hear of
the alteration, and of being subject to any other single Person, except the
Apostle himself: especially when no Occasion was, as yet, given for it. But in
process of time, after some of themselves were risen, and had spoke perverse
things, and turning Schismatics, (...) drawn away Disciples after them. v. 30.
then was the time for changing the Government, and charging Timothy to silence
those that taught false Doctrine, 1 Timothy 1. 3. and then it was, that at least
the Humble, and Peaceable, and Obedient, and Holy Presbyters, would readily
submit to the Change.

Mr. O. Asks, whether there were no Prophecy of Timothy's Def. p. 103.
being the suture (Bishop) Ruler of Ephesus: If there was, why did Paul
suppress it, in Act. 20.

Ans. I have given a reason of this already: But further note, that there was
such a Prophecy, as I believe, 1 Timothy 1. 18. though it might not have been.
given, till after Paul's farewell Sermon. I add, it is very probable also, that
he was Ordained unto it, 2. Epist. 1. 6. So St. Jerome thought, as I have
already observed.

Mr. O. to overthrow the common reason given of the change of Church
Government, asserts, That the establishment of the Presbytery at Ephesus, was
for a remedy against Schism, therefore the Elders were admonished, to Oversee
the Flock, v. 28.

Ans. The Minister here, is not at all fair in his reasoning; for the Remedy,
which the Apostles prescribes against the Wolves, or Interlopers, that would
thrust themselves in among 'em, and against the Vipers, which would arise, out
of their own Bowels, was, to take heed to themselves, and to the Flock, to feed
the Church of God, the other words, over which the Holy Ghost has made you
Overseers, being only a reminding them, by the way, of their Power and Duty.
All Government, of what kind soever it be, it is confessed, is in general a Remedy
against Schism: But these Elders, are not said, to have been Ordained Overseers
by the Apostle, as if that particular Government of Presbyterian Parity, was
especially intended for a Remedy against future Schism. The proper and parcular
Remedy here prescribed, by St. Paul, is, To take heed, etc. and as it follows
v. 31. To watch, etc. without which 'twas impossible to provide Effectually
against a surprise from their Enemies, the Wolves, and the Vipers, there spoken
of. Being Overseers, or Governors of the Church, would not do the Work,
(whether they acted in a Parity or in Subordination to some single Person, was
the same thing as to the Apostles Argument here, and whether it were the one or
the other still) it was their taking heed and watching, must secure 'em against
Schisms and against Heresies. But if afterward this Presbyterian Parity, was by
experience found inconvenient, rather a Nursery, and Occasion of Schism, and
therefore for that very reason, altered into Prelatical form of Government, for
the security of the Church in Peace and Order, as Jerome owns, it is most
proper, to say, that Prelacy was introduced into the Church, as a designed
Remedy against Schism, and not Presbyterian Parity, which was indeed the
Occasion of it, at least, was not sufficient to prevent it.

Mr. O. further argues, that God did not, could not change Def. p. 103.
the first instituted Church Government, because, he foresees all events, and
knows how to prevent Schisms, by apt and effectual Remedies, and with him is no
variableness nor shadow of turning.

Ans. Such general Harangues (though grounded on true Principles, if rightly
understood, and explained) prove nothing. For on the other side, we know that
God oftimes Repents, and takes new measures for the accomplishing his own great
and good designs. God employed Noah, a Preacher of Righteousness, to persuade
the then wicked World to Repentance and Reformation; when this succeeded not,
it repented him that he had made Man, and so he drowned all the World, except
eight Persons. God, who himself in a Peculiar manner, governed Israel;
appointing what Prophets and Rulers should succeed at a vacancy (the Government
of Israel, is hence called a Theocracy) yielded to the importunity of the
People, and gave them a King, Saul to govern them, after the manner of the
Nations. But presently after, it repented God that he had set up Saul to be
King, because he turned back from following God. 1 Samuel 15. 11. Where then is
the absurdity in saying, God upon the Occasion of Schisms, directed the
Apostles to alter the Government among the Christians? Or rather (as Bishop
Pearson De serie and Succes. p. 73.
speaks) to perfect and complete it. For the Apostles, so long as it seemed
good unto 'em, retained in their own hands the Government of all the Churches
by them founded, as appears from, Act. 14. 21, 22, 23. and Chap. 15. 36. but
when the time of their departure drew on, or when business increasing on their
hand, by reason of their many conversions, they were forced, to be absent, or
distant from those Churches a long time, they substituted in their Rooms,
Successors and single Persons to preside over the Churches: Which indeed in
exact speaking was not a Change, but a continuance rather of the former
Government, all the difference being, that whereas the Apostles were Governors
of many Churches, these their Successors were Rules but of one happily, of which
difference I speak afterward.

Mr. O. after he had endeavored to confirm his own Opinion, Def. p. 104.
by such weak Arguments, as we have here mentioned, proceeds in the next place
to attack mine. Many things are here repeated, which have been answered
already, and many things offered, which depend on the proof of the main Point,
and which to make a particular reply unto, here, were superfluous.

Mr. O. The 1 Timothy 1. 3. does not say, that Paul constituted Def. p. 106.
Timothy Bishop of Ephesus, that is Ruler.

Ans. Let the Text with the other Passages of this Epistle, relating unto the
Powers committed unto Timothy speak for it self. I put 'em together in T. N.
and Mr. O. has no other way to evade the force of the Evidence, but pleading
that Timothy, was an Evangelist, and extraordinary Officer, as before is noted.

Mr. O St. John resided long at Ephesus, after Paul's departure thence, he
returned thither after his Release from his Banishment at Paimos, and lived
there, and among the other Asian Churches until Trajan's days: By consequence
St. John was the Supreme Ruler of Ephesus, and not Timothy

Ans. Let us see what the Authors, he quotes, say in this matter, Eusebius. l. 3.
c. 18. writes. That in the Persecution raised by Domitian, John was banished
into the Island Patmos. And out of (...), that he received his Revelation at
the latter end of Domitian' s Reign. No more than this is Sc. Edit. Par.
to be found in that Chapter, of Eusebius. Cited by the Minister: and yet Mr. O.
affirms -- Eusebius. here writes that John returned to Ephesus, after he was
released, etc. There is here not a Syllable of returning, nor of Ephesus, nor
of Released, nor of living at Ephesus, or among the other Asian Churches until
Trajan' s day. This notwithstanding, I do acknowledge that Eusebius. in other
places asserts these things. But this signifies Eus. H. E. l. 3. c. l. 23. l.
5. c. 24.
nothing. Eusebius. says not that John in particular governed Ephesus, but the
Asian Churches (after the manner it may seem of a Metropolitan.) To the same
purpose speaks Jerome, C. S. E. Sub Nerva Principe redit Ephesum (...) usque ad
Trajanum perseverans totas Asiae fundavit rexitque Ecclesias. They affirm not
that John governed these Asian Churches, Immediately after St. Paul's departure
into Macedonia, but in the days of Trajan, and after his release out of Patmos.
Nor do they tell us, who governed Ephesus, and the other Asian Churches, from
the time of Paul's going into Macedonia, 1 Timothy 1. 3. unto the Reign of Nerva,
or Trajan: And therefore Timothy might in that Interval of time
(notwithstanding any thing here produced to the Contrary) have been the Ruler
(or Bishop) of Ephesus. I do further grant that (...), l. 3. c. 3. writes that
John remained among the Asian Christians, or Churches until Trajan: but he says
not that the Apostle remained there, from the time of Paul's last departing
from Ephesus into Macedonia, when he constituted Timothy Ruler (or Bishop)
there. One thing must not be omitted, that whereas Eusebius, and Irenaeus
confess (what is indeed manifest in Scripture) that Paul founded these Asian
Churches, yet Jerome makes John the (...) and Ruler of them. ( Totas Asiae
fundavit and rexit Ecclesias) which how to reconcile may deserve a few words.
That Paul founded the Asians Churches, cannot be denied, and settled their
Government, ought not to be Questioned: That these Asian Churches were to
decay, by the time of John's Banishment into Patmos, is manifest from the
Epistles unto the Seven Churches in the Revelations. That John after his
Release, returning into (...) new formed, regulated and reformed (...)
Churches, is most probable, and therefore is said by Jerome, to have founded and
governed them. Perhaps he removed some of the Angels or Bishops of those
Churches, who had misbehaved themselves, in their Offices, whether for a while
he personally governed 'em all himself, without continuing or placing over them
Bishops: or whether as a Metropolitan having a subordinate Bishop in every
Church under him, cannot with certainty be determined, but it is out of
Question, that he appointed Bishops in them, before he dyed, as appears from
(...) Epistles, and from those remarkable words, in Tertullian, De Praescrip.
adv. Haer. c. 32.
Ordo Episcoporum ad Originem recensus in Joannem stabit Authorem.

Mr. O. that he may shake off the Argument, for Bishops Def. p. 108.
drawn from the Angels in the Revelations Argues.

1. That Angels Minister to the Heirs of Salvation, Heb. 1. 14. which imports a
Ministry not Superiority.

Ans. He abuses the Text: it is Ministering for not to the Heirs of Salvation.
They Minister to God for us. So the King is the Minister of (or to God) Romans
13. 4. for us: Nevertheless he is our Superior, even as the Angels are. Briefly
by this Argument neither Jesus Christ, nor the Apostles, nor Bishops, nor
Presbyters, nor Dissenting Ministers, have any Authority: for all these
Minister for our Salvation, or pretend it.

2. That Angel singular is often taken Collectively for Angels plural, as are
Stars also.

Ans. Mr. O. has not produced one example hereof. If any one is at leisure, to
examine the Text cited by him, he will find this true: For of Mal. 2. 7. I treat
by and by.

3. That the Epistles were directed to all the believers of the Asiatick
Churches (so I understand him) and not to the Angels only.

Ans. Not so: But to the Angles only for the use of the Believers.

4. That it is uncertain whether there is an Hierarchy among the Angels, that
the Pseudo-Dionysius makes them the lowest Order: that therefore they cannot
represent the highest Order in the Church.

Ans. It Is mere jangling to allege the Opinion, of an Author confessedly
spurious. But it is manifest that there is an Angelical Hierarchy from Dan. 10.
13. chapter 12 1. 1 These. 4. 16.
Scripture, and that Angels are the Superior Order may be gathered from, Romans
3. 38. where they reckoned Judge. 9. Col. 1. 16.
in the first place before Principalities and Powers. Lastly, the Superlative
Excellency of Angels, supposing them the lowest Order makes them a fit
Representation of the Highest degree among Men. We may say of the meanest
Angel, He that is least in the Kingdom of Heaven, is greater than the mightyest
Potentate of the Earth. Even Jesus Christ himself is called an Angel, Mal. 3. 1.

5. That the Holy Ghost in the Epistles alludes to the Minister, of the
Synagogue, in Conformity to the Language of the Old Testament, Job. 33. 23.
Hag. 1. 13. Mal. 2. 1, 7. chapter 3. 1.

Ans. In these Texts there is no mention of Synagogues, nor any where else in
the Old Testament. Nor do we meet with Angels of the Synagogue, but Ruler in
the New: nor any where else but in the late Rabbis. Job's Messenger was either
a real Angel, or extraordinary Prophet, Interpreter and one of a Thousand, v.
23. Hagga was a Prophet, so was the Baptist, not Ministers of Synagogues. When
Mr. O. appeals unto Malachy, he is gone from the Synagogue, to the Temple, and
so quitted his Argument. Nor does Priests, Mal. 2. 1. signify all, even the
Secondary Priests in the Temple, but the High Priests only in Succession, who
are therefore, v. 7. expressed in the singular and indefinitely, or if Mr. O.
will have it so, Priests here signfies Collectively, all High Priests. For it
must be confessed, when the Subject of a Proposition is put indefinitely, in the
singular number, and the Predicate belongs to the whole Species, then the
Subject may be taken Collectively, and is equivalent to an Universal
Proposition, as when we say, Man is a rational Creature, we mean all Men are
so. But it will be said that the Predicate, viz. his Lips should keep
knowledge, etc. appertains to the whole Species of Priests, even the Secondary.
I reply,

1. Supposing this, yet still there was an High Priest in the Temple: And
therefore agreeably hereunto, though all the Elders were called Angels
(admitting this) yet there was an Archangel in every Church, unto whom the
Epistles were directed, who was, The Angel (...). For 2 Angel in the Epistles,
is not described by a Specifical, but an individual Character, ex. gr. the
Angel of the Church of Ephesus. If it be said this is a Specifical Character,
because all the Elders were Angels of that Church, I return that cannot be. For
no body ever directed a Letter, thus indefinitely to all, and to every one, or
any one of the same Denomination. The Title may happily belong to many Persons,
for different Reasons, and yet the Letter is intended for some one more
Eminently called so. As if a Letter were directed, To the Speaker of the House
of Commons, though every Member is Speaker, if he pleases, and though of the
Topping and forward Commoners, we usually say, They are Speakers, because they
often Speak to matters in Debate, yet every Footboy will apprehend the Letter
is sent, to a particular determinate Person commonly called, The Speaker.
Wherefore if all the Elders of Ephesus were in some sense Angels, yet The Angel
must mean some single Person, known in Special manner styled Angel, who could
be no other than the Prelatical Ruler of that Church.

A great deal is argued in defense of the Hebrew Reading of Deuteronomy. 32. 8.
against that of the Seventy. But besides what has been elsewhere offered in the
Vindication of the latter, I here add, That Clemens *** Ep. ad Corinth. cont.
Celsum. l. 5. p. 250. Edit. Cant. Comment. in Dan. c. 7. 2.
Romanus *, that Origin *, and Jerome *, himself the fierce Stickler for the
Hebrew, reads the place according to the Seventy. It may then with Reason be
suspected, that the proud conceited Jews, corrupted this Scripture, to magnify
themselves and their Nation, as if God in dividing the Nations, had his Eye
'specially on the Sons of Israel, modelling the World according to the number
of them, that went down with Jacob into Egypt, as the Rabbis imagine.

As for the precise number of Provinces, and their Guardian Angels, though the
Rabbis, and the Hebrew Reading of Deuteronomy. 32. 8. seem to determine them by the
number of Jacob's Children, who went with him into Egypt, yet neither the
Seventy, nor I have adventured so punctually to define it, but have left that
point uncertain and indefinite. It is not known into how many Provinces God
cast the World at first, nor can we tell into how many more he might afterward
multiply, or into how few reduce it: For even the Romans were wont sometimes to
increase, and sometimes to diminish their Provinces. As therefore God might
(for any thing we know) in the beginning, have divided the Nations into Seventy
times seven Provinces, and constituted so many Guardian Angels over them, and
afterward altered the number of both, by adding or diminishing, as he saw good:
So might he have appointed, and varied the Number of Bishops, as the Condition
of the Church required, into sometimes more, and sometimes less.

I will conclude the whole Argument, with two or three Observations, which will
confirm what is before pleaded; That there is an Hierarchy among the Celestial
Spirits, and Angels (as I said according to the current Opinion in former
times) presiding as Guardians over Kingdoms and Provinces, is Witnessed by
Comment. in Zach. 1. 8.
Jerome, who thus delivers himself, Angeli, qui Regnis and Nationibus
praesidebant. That Angels in the Revelations is an Allusion to these Guardian
Angels, is countenanced Dan. 7. 2.
by that noted Passage in Clemens Alexandrinus Strom. l. 6.
(...), etc. The Progressions of Bishops, Presbyters, and Deacons, are (I
think) imitations of the Angelical Glory, and of that Ordination: As also by
that other of Origin Homil. in cap. 3. S. Lucae.
Per singulas Ecclesias, etc. There are two Bishops in every Church, one
visible (the Man Bishop) the other invisible (the Angel Bishop.) I think there
may be found both an Angel and a Man, good Bishops of the Church, and as it
were Partners in the Work. Lastly, Optatus Milevitanus Cont. Parmen. l. 2. p.
44, 45. Ed.
Styles Bishops, Angels, and plainly alludes unto the Apocalyptical Angels. Nor
have I met with that Conceit about the Angel of the Synagogue (the Charan or
Bishop) in the Primitive Fathers, who make Mer. Casaub.
no use of that Notion to explain the Order of Bishops: For indeed it is the
Invention of the later Rabbis. But sometimes (as I have just proved) they
allude unto the Angels, and frequently unto the High Priests in the Temple.

Mr. O. whereas I argued, that the Synagogue-Rulers were subject to the (...)
High Priests, Ch (says he) so are Presbyters to Jesus Christ our High Priest.

Ans. But we are inquiring about subjection unto visible Rulers, and if Mr. O.
will needs have the Synagogue a Pattern of the Christian Congregations, then
the Presbyters must be subject unto some visible Superior, (as were the Rulers
of the Synagogues) which he is obliged to Name. Till then my Observation is of
Moment, but his Reply merely Delusory, and Evasive.

Mr. O. Let the Bishops produce as clear a Charter for their Order, as the
Highpriests did for theirs, and we'll submit.

Ans. First, It is sufficient, I suppose, that the Bishops Charter is a clear
one, as to the Power they Claim and exercise, though not as to the Title of
Bishop. It makes no great matter what becomes of that. Secondly, Let Mr. O.
bring as clear a Proof of Presbyterian Parity, or Independency, or of
Presbyters exercising the Supreme Acts of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, as are
to be produced from the Epistles to Tim. and Tit. in behalf of Prelacy, that
is, for a single Persons presiding over Churches and governing them, and
there is an end of the present Controversy. Thirdly, I ask Mr. (...). between
him and me, whether he does not submit to some Religious usages, for which
there is not so clear a Charter in the New Testament, as there is in the Old,
for some of the Jewish Rites. Whether he has as clear and express Commandments
for Infant Baptism, for the Observation and Divine Institution of the
Lord's Day, for days of Public and general Fasts or Humiliation, for Singing
David's Psalms, in Meter, as the Jews had for Circumcision, for
Saturday-Sabbath, for their Fasting-Days, and for their Singing the Book of
Psalms, in their way? It is not then for want of a clear Charter (as I fear)
that he refuses to submit to Bishops, but for want of a clear Understanding,
and a peaceable and humble mind. He that can sit down with reasonable
Deductions, and be prevailed with, to make no scruple of doing what is thereby
recommended unto him, if he were steady to his own Principle, ought to be
satisfied with the like Reasonable Conclusions, in all other matters of
Religion.

I said in the T. N. that a great deal of the Temple-Worship, being Moral
Religion, it was as much the Pattern of the Christian, as the Synagogue Worship
was. And on that account, the Jewish Priesthood might be the Pattern of the
Christian Hierarchy.

Mr. O. says no, because the Jewish Priesthood was appropriated to the
Ceremonial worship of the Temple, though they performed the moral parts there
also.

Ans. Though the Jewish Priesthood, and the Temple worship, were encumbered with
Ceremonies, yet they might be the Pattern of the Christian Priesthood and
Worship. An embroidered Garment may be the Pattern of a plain one; They may
both be like in shape, and in substance, though not in Ornament, and their
Trimming. Besides, though the Levitical Ceremonies were abolished, yet some
others were substituted by Jesus Christ, in their room, as Baptism, and the
Lord's Supper. But how could the Synagogue (which had no Ceremony at all, only
the Moral parts of Religion performed in it) according to Mr. O's reasoning, be
a pattern of the Christian Churches, which have Ceremonies? There is as much
disagreement between a Synagogue, which has no Ceremonies, only Natural
Religion exercised in it, and a Christian Church which has Ceremonies, besides
the natural Religion, as there is between the Temple which had Levitical
Ceremonies, and the Christian which has not.

Mr. O. argues, that the Legal Priests, and Altar, and Priesthood were changed.

Ans. True, as to the Levitical Ceremonies: But not as to any thing which was
Moral: And Government, I conceive, is a part of Moral Religion: though
therefore a Levitical Ceremonial High Priest was not ordained for the Christian
Church, yet in Imitation of the Jewish Ecclesiastical Government, a Christian
High Priest, might be appointed, the Ceremonies of the Law being laid aside.

Mr. O. The Moral Worship in the Synagogues might be performed by such as were
no Priests.

Ans. And will Mr. O. therefore assert, that any Man may in a Christian Public
Congregation, perform the Moral parts of Worship? This very Observation of Mr.
O's, shows that the Synagogues were not the Pattern of Christian Churches or
Congregations; because I take it for granted, that none among us can perform,
even Moral Worship, in Public, except Deacons, Presbyters, and Bishops. It
rather, therefore, imports that the Temple Worship is the Pattern of the
Christian: Because, as none but the Priests and Levites, could perform the
Moral Worship in the Temple (2 Chronicles. 30. 27. Nehem. 9. 5. Joel 2. 17.) Even so
among us, none can, except Bishops, Priests, and Deacons.

I shall (...) my Answer to Mr. O's Discourses about (...)'s Epistles, to the
Reply, which I intend unto his Plea, Judging that the most proper place. We are
then now to Treat of Titus, and enquire whether he was the Supreme Ruler of the
Church in Crete, by the appointment of Paul. I had affirmed in T. N. and (I
think) proved it. But,

Mr. O. tells us, (...) no where said that Paul made Titus Bishop of Crete.

Ans. It is sufficient to me, that Paul committed to him, the Supreme Governing
Powers over that Church. I (...) not about the word Bishop. On the other side,
I retort, that it is no where said, that Paul ordained or constituted any one
Presbyter in Crete: will it follow that he made none at all.

Mr. O. Titus was left in Crete, but for a Season, perhaps not above half a
Year, Paul charging him to come to him unto Nicopolis, etc. Tit. 3. 12.

Ans. According to my Hypothesis, it might be some Years after Paul's leaving
Crete, that he sent for him unto Nicopolis. The Apostle, as I suppose, left him
at Crete, as he sailed from Italy to Judaea, after his release from his first
Imprisonment at Rome: and long after, as he was returning to Italy, he sent for
him to Nicopolis. If this be once proved (as I promise) then Titus was not left
in Crete for a Season. But according to Mr. O's Hypothesis, I cannot imagine
that Titus could have been left in Crete half a Month, far enough short of half
a Year, and too short a time to set in Order the Tit. 1. 5. 11. 13. 2. 15. 3.
10.
things that were lacking, To ordain Elders in every City, To stop the Mouths
of false Teachers, To rebuke 'em, and that with all Authority: In a Word, To
reject (...), after a second Admonition. This surely was above a Months Work,
or indeed half a Years. It implies a permanent and continued Employment. I
said, according to Mr. O's Hypothesis, Titus had not sufficient time for the
Work whereunto he was appointed. For he attended Paul from Achaia unto
Macedonia, and so into Asia, till they arrived at Jerusalem; of all which I
shall have occasion to treat more punctually in the Fourth Chapter. However it
cannot (I own) be denied, that Paul called Titus from Crete, and, by
consequence, it will be said, he was not the fixed Ruler (or Bishop) there.

Ans. The resident Governors of Churches, in the Apostles days, were not so
tied to their Posts, that they might not, on any account whatever, stir thence.
It is not to be doubted, but that they removed for a while, at the Apostle's
call, and for the furtherance of the Gospel, unto other places, and afterward
returned to their Residence again. I do suppose, Titus went to St. Paul at
Nicopolis, and thence with him unto Rome: That as he returned back unto Crete,
by the Apostle's direction, he took Dalmatia in his way 2 Timothy 4. 10.
to plant the Gospel there, or to confirm the Churches: What became of him
afterward, cannot be known from Scripture, the Divine History of the Church of
Crete reaching no further. But if we will hearken (as in Reason we ought) unto
what is delivered in the Church History, we must acknowledge that Titus
returned into Crete: For there he died and was buried. And I hope Mr. O. who
seems to have a due (...) poem. 27. p. 169.
Regard unto the Fathers, and so frequently quotes 'em, for the support of his
own Opinions, will take notice of this Evidence. Sopbron. and Hierom. in Cat.
Scrip. Eccles.


Mr. O. here tells us, That, the Elders in Crete were chosen by the (...),
before they were ordained by Titus, grounding himself upon, Act. 14. 23. where
(...) is the word used, and is rendered Ordained, but implies choosing.

Ans. Although this is not to the Point here debated, yet, lest I should be
thought to over-slip a Difficulty, I answer, That there is not in the Epistle
to Titus, the least intimation of the Multitudes choosing the Elders, but the
contrary rather, the Qualifications and fitness of the Candidates; unto that
good Office, being left unto the judgment of Titus. Nor does it appear, in Acts
14. 23. that the Multitude chose those Elders, there spoken of. (...) if (...)
in this place signifies Ordaining; then here is not one word of choosing 'em;
but if it signifies choosing, then were the Two Apostles, Paul and Barnabas,
the Electors, as well as the Ordainers. Why not? So God first without the
suffrage of the People, chose the Twelve Apostles ( Act. 10. 41.) where the
same word is used, (...); and then Ordained 'em, Act. 2. by anointing 'em with
the Spirit. Nor is Mr. O. mistaken, when he imagines me Dreaming, that after
Ordination, Titus assigned those Elders some new Powers, which I think is
intimated in the word (...), which does not properly signify to Ordain, but
pre-supposes Ordination, and imports the placing of those Elders in their
particular Stations. And this, I believe, is distinct from their Ordination.

Mr. O. after a tedious Discourse about Evangelists (of which number he reckons
(...) and Titus) having contended Def. p. 121.
that were unfixt Officers of the Church (of which more hereafter) believes it
a degrading them, who had a general Power over all the Churches, to tie 'em to
Residence in one particular Church, making Ordinary Officers of 'em.

Ans. I do not apprehend this to be a degrading them. For whilst they continued
the Companions and Fellow Laborers of the Apostles, and unfixt Officers of the
Church, they cannot properly be said to have had a general power over all
Churches, but were continually at the beck and Command of the Apostles, to
dispatch such Orders, as were from time to time given them. As they had no
certain place of Residence, so neither had they any certain work, but were like
Reformades in an Army, who have nothing to do, but what the General by a
special Order employs 'em in upon sudden Occasions. If it be allowable, magnis
componere parva, to explain the Condition of the unfixt Evangelists, by an
Instance well known in this County Palatine of Lancaster, they were like to our
Itinerant Preachers, founded by Q. Elizabeth of Famous Memory. These have a
Power from the Bishop of the Diocese, to Preach, etc. in any Church, or Chapel
within the said County, as his Lordship shall direct them, or they know is
necessary and convenient to the Service of the Reformation. They have a general
Power to Preach in the Churches in Lancashire. Now if the Bishop fixes them in
some Rectory or Vicarage, no Man will say they are degraded, though the
Exercise of their Ministry is brought into a narrower Compass than before. But
I have spent more Words on this slight Objection, than it deserves.

APPENDIX.
MR O. Whereas I affirmed, that (...) ought properly Tit. 1. 5.
to have been rendered, appoint, or constitute, and settle, or place them,
pre-supposing at the same time their T. N. p. 64.
Ordination, he hence concludes, I give up one of Titus' s main Powers, adding,
if this Text proves not Titus his Ordaining Power, no one in that Epistle does.

Ans. But Mr. O. forgets that himself, as well as the Rector, have all along
taken it for granted, that whatever Powers were committed to (...), were also
given unto Titus, and reciprocally, what to Titus, were committed to Timothy.
Besides, I take it to be out of Controversy, that he, to whom any one Part of
Supreme Power is given, is to be understood as invested with all: Consequently
if Titus was to appoint where every Presbyter was to officiate, he then had the
Power of Ordination also. As in like manner, though Timothy had no express
Commission to reject Heretics after the second Admonition, yet because Titus
had that Power, so had (...) likewise. In short, Titus had Authority to receive
Accusations, and to rebuke openly, as well as Timothy, had 1 Epist. to Tim. 5.
and Timothy to excommunicate the Contumacious, as well as Titus had, Chapter 3. 10.
and both had power to ordain, because one had.

CHAP. IV. Being An Answer to Mr. O's 4th Chap.
THE Question here is, whereas St. Paul gave Timothy those ample Commissions
and Instructions, that we read of in his first Epistle, concerning the
Government of the Ephesian Church, some time after he had besought him to abide
still at Ephesus, when he went into Macedonia, 1 Epist. 1. 3. What was that
precise time of Paul's going into Macedonia, and beseeching Timothy to abide at
Ephesus? In the Tent. Nov. following Bishop Pearson, I resolved this Question
thus, That Paul's Journey, here spoken of, could not be meant of any of those
mentioned in the Acts of the Apostles; that therefore it must be some other,
after his bidding the Elders of Ephesus Farewell: That coming to Jerusalem, he
was there made Prisoner, and thence carried to Rome, where he continued about 2
Years in Bonds: That being at length released, he returned into the Eastern
Parts again, visiting the Churches; and then as he passed out of Asia, into
Macedonia, besought Timothy to abide at Ephesus, as the fixed Ruler, or Bishop
of that Church; And shortly, after dispatched the 1st Epistle to him. That Paul
himself, some while after, went back into Italy, and unto the utmost parts of
the West, Preaching the Gospel, and being at length once more got unto Rome,
was there Imprisoned a second time, when he wrote the second Epistle to Tim. a
little before he was Beheaded. We are now to consider Mr. O's Objections
against all this.

Mr. O. To abide still, does not imply a continued Residence: Def. p. 122.
But may signify a short stay, Act. 17. 14, 15. by Consequence he was not the
fixed Bishop (Ruler) of Ephesus.

Ans. There is a great difference between (...) here, and (...) Act. 17. 14,
15. The former implies a continued stay at Ephesus, the latter only signifies
Silas and Timothy's halting, that is, tarrying behind Paul at Beraea. Besides,
we have no account of Timothy's sudden remove from Ephesus: But we have of
Timothy's leaving Beraea soon after, Act. 18. 5. 1 These. 3. 2. Lastly, the
Orders given unto Timothy, at Ephesus, were many and Important, which also
required time to be executed, which does not appear to have been the Case of
Timothy at Beraea.

Mr. O. Timothy's stay there (at Ephesus) was but short, that is, until the
Apostle came to him, 1 Timothy 3. 14. chapter 4. 13.

Ans. There is no Color of Argument in this. It is not said, he must tarry no
longer there, than till Paul came to him; Nor can that be the meaning; For then
it would follow, that Timothy was to give attendance to Reading, to
Exhortation, and to Doctrine, but till the Apostle came to him: Which (I hope)
Mr. O. will not affirm. Besides, Paul was not certain of his going to Ephesus
shortly; Therefore he adds, 1 Timothy 3. 15 -- If I tarry long, etc. from which
Passages I gather, That Paul, at his first beseeching of Timothy, to abide at
Ephesus, thought his Instructions not full enough, and therefore intended to
see Timothy, shortly at Ephesus, and to furnish him with further Orders, how he
ought to behave himself in the House of God, the Church of Ephesus committed to
him: But because he suspected he might tarry long, he therefore in the mean
while sent him this Epistle: All which shows, that Timothy was designed for the
fixed Ruler of Ephesus. Although the Apostle resolved to visit him there
shortly: Not to remove him thence, but to give him fuller Directions about the
management of the Government of the Church.

Mr. O. He was not fixed as Resident at Ephesus, because, the Apostle afterward
called him to Rome, 2 Timothy 4. 9. 21.

Ans. I will take an Opportunity by and by, to Discourse about Residence, where
the weakness of this Objection will fully appear. In the Interim I Will only
acquaint the Reader, that according to Mr. O's own Hypothesis, it could not be
less than between three and four Years, after the writing of the first Epistle,
that Paul sent for (...) unto Rome, and according unto mine, about six Years.
which is a considerable stay, or Residence in one Place. I say, further that
Paul's sending for Timothy to Rome, is no Argument that Timothy for ever
quitted that Post: That he returned back to Ephesus, must be made appear from
Ecclefiastical History, the Scripture going no further, in the Account of Paul
and Timothy, than that, in the second Epistle Sophronlus, or Jerome Catal. scr.
Witness that he was Martyred at Ephesus, and Photius Cod. 254.
acquaints us, with the time and Occasion, viz. At the detestable Festival
called Col. 1041.
the Catagogium, which Timothy would have had abrogated. Mr. Bur.
Lastly, supposing Timothy never returned back to Ephesus, it is no consequence,
that he was not by Paul constituted resident Bishop (Ruler) of Ephesus, as will
afterward, in these Papers, appear.

Mr. O. Objects against the time assigned (in T. N.) of Paul's Def. p. 124.
going into (...), after his Release from his first Imprisonment at Rome, that
is, after the History of the Acts of the Apostles, wherein no mention is made
of this Voyage, as I assert; against this (I say) Mr. O. Objects, That nothing
can be concluded from Luke's silence in this Point: For it is certain that he
does not mention all the Journies of Paul and Timothy.

Ans. I readily grant that bare silence is no good Proof, without some other
considerations to support it; and I also grant, that Luke mentions not all Paul
and Timothy's Journeys: But I contend that he Omits none of Paul's from the 13
th Chapter unto the end of the Acts of the Apostles, as any impartial Man will
believe, if he carefully reads that part of the History. And for proof of this,
I shall at present content my self with the acknowledgement and. Testimony of
Beza himself, who thus writes particularly as to Paul's Journeys into Macedonia
-- Ter omnino vidit Macedoniam Paulus, ut ex historiae filo apparet. Quamvis
enim non omnia perscripserit Lucas, ita tamen contextam historiam esse apparet,
ut non plures profectiones in Macedoniam possint In Dissertat. de Serie and
Succes. P. 75.
constitui. Paul saw Macedonia, but thrice, as is manifest from the History, as
it is closely laid together by Luke. For though he remembers not all things, and
every little movement of the Apostle, yet his History appears so contrived,
that more Journies of his into Macedonia cannot be assigned or allowed. I do
not indeed believe that St. Luke has set down within the time mentioned, every
Step the Apostle made by the by, unto Towns, and Villages near at hand. While
Paul was at Corinth, it is to me out of Controversy, that he went into the
Neighouring places, Preaching the Gospel, though Luke has not told us so. There
were Christians, and a Church at Cenchrea, Romans 16. 1. where doubtless the
Apostle had taught the Word of God: but Luke omitted this. Nevertheless, it is
senseless to think, the Historian should forget so considerable a Voyage, as
this of Paul's going from Ephesus, unto Macedonia, and leaving Timothy behind
him. But that which I further add, is, That I do not rely barely on St. Luke's
silence, but observe, that in his History, he has left no room for St. Paul's
placing Timothy at Ephesus, at any of those three times, when he went into
Macedonia. And if this be well proved, as has been, and shall be once more,
then another Journey of Paul's into Macedonia must be searched for, and I do
believe may be, and has been found out. In order to make out all this, let us
first examine the Ministers Hypothesis.

Mr. O's Hypothesis is this, That St. Paul at Ephesus, sent Def. p. 124.
Timothy to Macedonia, and Corinth. Act. 19. 21, 22. expecting him back at
Ephesus, 1 Cor. 16. 10, 11. that it is most likely, Timothy went back to Paul,
at Ephesus, where the Apostle left him, when he went into Macedonia, Act. 20.
v. 1. which (as Mr. O. thinks) is the meaning of that, 1 Timothy 1. 3.

My business then is to prove, That this could not be. In order whereunto I
must give here an exact Narrative of Paul from the time of his two Years stay
at Ephesus, unto his bidding the Elders farewell, at Miletus, in his Passage
toward Jerusalem; from whence it will appear plainly, that Paul could not
leave Timothy at Ephesus, at that time, when he went into Macedonia, mentioned,
Act. 20. 1.

Paul having Resided at Ephesus two Years ( Act. 19. 10.) (and perhaps more)
purposed in Spirit to pass (...) Macedonia, to (...), thence to Jerusalem, and
so to Rome ( v. 21.). Some while (...) he departed from Ephesus, news came to
him of the Schism at Corinth, which occasioned his first Epistle to the
Corinthians. That the Apostle sent this Letter from Ephesus, is manifest from 1
Cor. 16. 8, 19. That Timothy carried this Letter, appears from Chapter 4. 17.
Chapter 16. 10. and that Timothy at the same time, had received Orders from the
Apostle, to go into Macedonia, may be seen Act. 19. 22. St. Paul resolving to
(...) at Ephesus, or in Asia, for a Season, that is, till Pentecost, 1 Cor. 16.
8. Now because Paul designed to tarry in Asia but for a Season, that is, till
(...), and because in his Letter to the Corinthians, he promises to come to
them shortly, Chapter 4. 19. it cannot be doubted, but Timothy set forth on this
Journey from Ephesus to Macedonia, and so to (...) in the Spring about Easter,
in the Month of March. Paul's stay therefore at Ephesus, after Timothy's
Departure, was about six Weeks. The Apostle (...) leaving Ephesus at
Whitsontide, came to Troas (2 Cor. 2. 12.) thence unto Macedonia ( chapter 7. 5.)
where the long expected Titus met him, chapter 7. 6. Timothy also came to him in
Macedonia, and joined with him in the second Epistle to the Corinthians ( chapter
1. 1.) Paul and Timothy, having spent some Month, in Macedonia, gathering the
Contributions, and exhorting the Brethren ( Act. 20. 2.) unto Liberality, as I
suppose, set forward for Greece, where they tarried all the three Winter
Months, Act. 20. 2, 3. that is Wintered at Corinth, as the Apostle had
promised, 1 Cor. 16. 6. During his stay here, Paul wrote his Epistle to the
Romans, chapter 15. 25, 26. Timothy being then with him, chapter 16. 21. Early in the
Spring, as the Apostle was about to (...) from (...) to Syria, and so to pass
forward unto Jerusalem, as he had before laid his Journey, he suddenly altered
his Purpose; the Occasion whereof was the Jews lying in Wait for Him. So he
returned into Macedonia, sending Timothy before him, whom nevertheless he
overtook at Troas. Hence Paul and his Company hasted unto Miletus, where the
Apostle calling to him the Elders of Ephesus, bid em Farewell. Act. 20. 3, 5, 6,
15, 17. The Arguments I raise hence against Mr. O's (...) are as follow.

1. Here is not sufficient time for Timothy's Journey from Ephesus to
Macedonia, so to Corinth, and back again to Paul at Ephesus, before the Apostle
departed thence. According to Mr. Berry's Maps, Corinth is distant from
Ephesus, above 500 Near 700.
Italian, or English Miles, if one travel by Troas, and through Macedonia: So
that backward and forward, Timothy must have gone more than a Thousand Miles in
six weeks time, besides crossing the Sea, that is to say, 30 Or 38.
Miles a day, which is incredible, especially if it be considered, that he had
much Business to dispatch, both in (...) and at Corinth: And Mr. O. will not, I
suppose, allow that he traveled on the Lord's-Days.

Against this it will be objected, That Paul looked for Timothy back at
Ephesus, 1 Cor. 16. 11. and that the length of the Journey ought (...) to be
pleaded against so good an Evidence of the Matter of Fact.

Ans. I deny that St. Paul expected Timothy back at Ephesus, but in Macedonia
rather: The Words are -- That he may come unto me, for I look for him. But
whether at Ephesus where he then was, or in Macedonia, where he hoped shortly
to be, is not said. Now Paul had just before advertised the (...), I do pass
through Macedonia, v. 5. and doubtless he had told Timothy as much before: He
departed from Ephesus, Acts 19. Besides when Paul at Ephesus wrote his first
Epistle to the Cor. he at that very time resolved to tarry in Asia but for a
Season. Acts 19. 22. and to go unto Corinth shortly, 1 Ep. 4. 19. It Is then
most probable that Timothy was to meet Paul, in Macedonia, and that the Apostle
expected him there, and there we find 'em together at the writing of the second
Epistle to the Corinthians.

2. There was no occasion for Timothy's going back unto Paul at Ephesus, and
tarrying there after the Apostle was departed unto Macedonia. St. Paul had
himself settled that Church of Ephesus, and left it in good Order. He had
furnished it with Presbyters and able Ministers. There were among them as yet
no Wolves, no Vipers, no false Teachers, who deserved to be brought before
Timothy, and Rebuked openly for their disorderly walking. Thus it was at Paul's
departure, and thus it continued some time after: Even when the Apostle the
next year called together the Elders at Miletus, all was still well among 'em.
The Apostle makes no complaint to the contrary, nor had he any reason for it.
Why then (...) Timothy be put unto such an unreasonable Fatigue, when there was
nothing for him to do, at Ephesus? And yet,

3. (As we read in the first Epistle to Tim.) there was much Business, and more
than he could dispatch, in that little time allowed for his stay there by Mr.
O. There is the more force in this Argument, because the Apostle at his Writing
the first Epistle to Timothy, soon after from Macedonia, hopes to be with him
at Ephesus shortly, (1 Ep. 3. 14.) Was Timothy left at Ephesus, in the
Apostle's room to discharge so many important Matters, as are reckoned up in
that Epistle, and yet the Apostle intend to return unto Ephesus shortly; and
serve him with a Writ of Ease? It is incredible.

4. Paul's hopes of returning shortly, from Macedonia unto Timothy at Ephesus,
1 Timothy 3. 14. according to Mr. O's Hypothesis, are wholly Inconsistent with his
former Purposes of going from Ephesus to Macedonia, so to Achaia, and thence to
Syria by Sea, and so to Jerusalem: For we read that he still continued in that
mind after Winter, Act. 20. 3. which shows plainly that the Apostle after his
leaving Ephesus, neither intended nor hoped to see it any more at this time. He
did not then write his 1st. Epistle to Tim. whilst he was now in Macedonia,
newly come from Ephesus, because he could not then think of returning to
Ephesus shortly, his Journey to Jerusalem being then laid quite another way,
and by Consequence he did not leave nor beseech Timothy to abide at Ephesus, at
this his departure thence into Macedonia.

5. Paul was in great have to gather the Collections in Macedonia and Achaia,
that he might bring them to Jerusalem, by the next Pentecost, if it were
possible, Act. 20. 16. In so great have, that being at Troas in his way to
Macedonia, though a Door was opened unto him, that is, though he had a Prospect
of Converting many Souls unto God, yet he refused to (...); But set forward
immediately unto Macedonia, 2 (...). 2. 12, 13. How then can it be imagined
that he designed or hoped to return shortly unto Timothy at Ephesus, when he
would not tarry a while at Troas, no not though he saw his Preaching would have
effect among those People? and at the same time aimed to pass unto Jerusalem,
through syria by Sea, as before is noted.

6. It Timothy (as Mr. O. Imagines) returned unto Paul at Ephesus, before his
Departure thence for Macedonia, about Pentecost, the Apostle had had no
Occasion of being restless at Troas, 2 Cor. 2. 13. Nor in Macedonia, Chapter 7. 5,
6. because of Titus coming not to him from Corinth. Was St. Paul troubled about
Titus, whether he was Well and in Health? or earnest to know how the
Contributions at Corinth went on? or curious to hear what Effect his First
Chiding Letter had on the Corinthians? Timothy if he had reached Paul at
Ephesus, had certainly satisfied his Curiosity, in all these things. But seeing
he was restless and uneasy, both at Troas and in Macedonia, upon some or all
the foresaid Accounts, after he had left Ephesus, it is certain Timothy came not
to him at Ephesus, and by consequence he left not Timothy at Ephesus, when he
went to Macedonia at that time, nor then besought him to abide there.

7. If Paul left Timothy at Ephesus now, at his departure thence unto
Macedonia, it is Plain, Timothy abode there but a very small while: For he was
presently with Paul in Macedonia again, which is not at all agreeable to the
Business, St. Paul afterward in his Letter committed to Timothy's Charge. The
Case between them stood thus. Paul desired Timothy to abide at Ephesus, hoping
doubtless and designing to be back with him in a little time. But because the
Apostle had not yet given Timothy all the necessary Orders, nor sufficient
Instructions, how he should behave himself in the Administration of the
Ecclesiastical Government at Ephesus, and because he foresaw 1 Timothy 3. 14, 15.
it might however happen to be long ever he came to Timothy there, he therefore
sends unto him this Epistle full of Directions, how he should behave himself in
the House of God, the Church. These things manifestly show that Timothy was
intended to tarry a good while at Ephesus, and till Paul came to him, 1 Epist.
4. 13. although it should happen to be long: And likewise to continue there,
though Paul had come to him shortly. If Paul had been certain of his returning
shortly to Timothy at Ephesus: He had not sent him this Epistle: For so it is
intimated, 1 Timothy 3. 14, 15. These things write I unto thee hoping to come unto
thee shortly: But because they had been needless, or might have been thought
so, if Paul had been certain of his going unto him shortly. He therefore adds
(...) way of excuse; But if I tarry long (as perhaps I may) I therefore write
these things unto th e, that thou may know how thou ought to behave thy
self in the (...), which I have committed unto thee. This is not at all
consistent with Timothy's being suddenly after with Paul in Macedonia, 2 Cor.
1. 1. If so, why should the Apostle talk of coming to him at (...) shortly;
and, if it happened otherwise, write to him concerning his Behavior in the
Government of the Church? But let us descend unto (...). In the first of Tim.
and 5th Chapter, the Apostle instructs him to reward the Elders that Rule well
with double honor, especially if they (...) labored in the Word and Doctrine,
v. 17. to hear Complaints made against Elders and examine Witnesses, v. 19. to
rebuke offending Blders openly, as he found Cause, or to acquit 'em, if the
Accusation was not sufficiently proved against 'em, v. 20. and to Ordain
Elders, as need required, v. 22. All which implies that Timothy was designed to
continue at Ephesus some considerable time: whereas according to Mr. O's
Hypothesis Timothy tarryed not at Ephesus till Paul came to him, but went to
Paul in Macedouia, soon after the receipt of this Epistle, which is incredible,
and (as I said) inconsistent with the Instructions aforesaid contained in the
Epistle.

8 Timothy accordingly did abide at Ephesus a considerable time, as appears
from the Apostles second Epistle, which is very agreeable to my Hypothesis, but
not at all to Mr. O's. Nay but,

Mr. O. will say the second Epistle was sent to Timothy from Rome, in the time
of Paul's first Imprisonment. The Apostle (...) from Miletus to Jerusalem, had
left him there, or thereabouts in Asia; and therefore this second Epistle
proves not that Timothy continued at Ephesus, a good while after Paul left him
there, Paul sending for him to Rome.

Ans. It shall ever I make an end, once more be Demonstrated (under Mr. O's
favor, I say, Demonstrated) that the second Epistle was wrote in Paul's second
Bonds at Rome. Meanwhile Mr. O's Assertion, that Timothy went not with Paul to
Jerusalem, but tarryed behind in Asia, is supported by no probable Circumstance
in Scripture. It must be confessed, that St. Luke no where expressly tells us,
that Timothy accompanied Paul thither. But there is no force in this; because
Luke mentions none of the Apostle's other Companions, who went along with Him,
with the Contributions unto Jerusalem, except Trophimus. Nevertherless it
cannot be doubted but many accompanied him, not only to Jerusalem, but to Rome
also, who nevertheless are omitted by Luke. To say nothing of Luke himself,
Colos. 4. 14. Philem. 24. Tychicus was one, Ephesians. 6. 21. Colos. 4. 7. and Titus
another, who is never once named by St. Luke in the whole Book of the Acts, and
yet doubtless went with Paul from Corinth, and so to Jerusalem, and thence to
Rome: in proof whereof, see 2 Cor. 8. 19. And not that only, but who was also
chosen of the Churches, to travel with us with this Grace or Gift, the
Corinthians Charity: which Words of St. Paul are to be understood of Titus, not
of Luke mentioned in the precedent Verse. The precedent Verse being cast out,
or put into a Parenthesis, thus the 17th and 19th Verses will run -- For indeed
He (Titus) accepted the Exhortation, but being more forward of his own accord
He went in to you, and that only (that is, he did not only accept my
Exhortation, and went willing of himself, but over and above) He was also
Chosen of the Churches to travel with us, with this Grace. For the Apostle is
here professedly writing in the Commendation of Titus, and mentions Luke but by
the bye: and Titus was the Person, who took most Pains in forwarding the
Collections at (...), for which Reason, it is most Rational to believe, he was
Chosen for one to carry them. Nor am I singular in this exposition, Sir Norton
Knatchbul, in the Synopsis, differs but very little (...) me, correcting the
Parenthesis thus -- Misimus cum eo fratrem ( (...) laus, etc.) cum hoc
ministerio sive dono, implying, that both Titus and Luke, were sent with the
Corinthians Liberality unto Jerusalem. I will not take upon me to Vindicate
this Gentleman's Correction of the Text, but he plainly shows, that he thought
Titus went along-with the Contributions to Jerusalem, which is all I contend.
for. There are the same (...) to believe Timothy attended Paul to Jerusalem,
and then to Rome.

1. Because Timathy was employed by St. Paul, to promote the Collections in
Macedonia, as Titus in Achaia (For that was his Errand, I make account when
Paul sent him into Macedonia, Act. 19. 22.) And we ought in Reason to believe
(...) was joined in the Commission, for carrying the Relief unto Jerusalem;
since he had been employed in forwarding and Collecting them. This the rather
(...). 2. We read He was with Paul at Rome in the Apostle's first Imprisonment,
doubtless accompanying Paul thither from Miletus, and Jerusalem, Heb. 13. 2, 3.
Philip. (...). 1. Colof. 1. 1. Now then if Timothy went along with Paul, to
Jerusalem, and to Rome, then he could not continue at Ephesus, or in Asia, a
considerable time, neither was the second Epistle written to him, in the
Apostles first Imprisonment, as Mr. O. supposes.
Having (as I hope) given irrefragable Arguments, that Paul at his going into
Macedonia mentioned, Acts the 20. 1. did not then leave Timothy behind at
Ephesus, beseeching Him to abide there, I will now consider, when it was, that
the Apostle left Titus in Crete to set in order the things that were wanting.
My Opinion is (as I have declared at large in T. N.) that Paul being Released
from his first Imprisonment at Rome, and returning into the East, as he
promised or hinted in several of his Epistles, writ to 'em from Rome, touched
at Crete, and having laid a Foundation of a Christian Church in that Island,
prosecuted his Journey Eastward, leaving Titus behind to perfect it: whom
therefore he afterward furnished with Instructions about the Government of
that Church, in his Epistle to Titus. Instead of this Mr. O. Proposes the
Opinion of Dr. Lightfoot, which is, that when Paul returned from Def. p 126.
Macedonia to Greece, Act. 20. 2. then he left Titus there ( in Crete) Tit. 1.
5. thinking that he should presently, after a little stay in Greece, have (...)
forwards toward Jerusalem. As he was about to Sail into Syria, the Jews laid
wait for him, which made him return through Macedonia, Acts 20. 3. About that
time ( as Dr. Lightfoot conceives) he writ the Epistle to Titus, in which he
calls him to Nicopolis, where (...) intended to Winter, Tit. 3. 12. He had some
thoughts of Wintering in Corinth, 1 Cor. 16. 6. but it seems, (...) his
Resolution, he determined to Winter in Nicopolis a City of Epirus, not very far
distant from Corinth. Titus according to appointment came to him, and was
thence sent by him to Corinth to hasten the Collections for the Saints in
Judea, 2 Cor. 8. 16, 17.

Ans. Before I come to the main Business, I must take notice of several
mistakes and Inconsistences in this Account.

1. That Paul cannot be said to have returned from Macedonia to Greece, whereas
yet in this Peregrination he had not been. For Paul first came from Ephesus
into Macedonia, then went into Greece, Acts 20. 2. He returned indeed afterward
out of Greece into Macedonia again, v. 3. but he did not return out of
Macedonia into Greece. But the meaning is, I presume, (...) must be, as far as
I am able to comprehend him, that Paul when (or as) he went from Macedonia into
Greece left Titus in Crete, Tit. 1. 5. which is absurd, as any one will
confess, that knows the Geographical Situation of these Places.

2. Mr. O. thinks that Paul intended to Winter at Nicopolis: but it is evident,
he intended to Winter at Corinth, 1 Cor. 16. 6. and it is as evident, that he
did Winter there, Act. 20. 3. for he (...) there three Months.

3. Mr. O. says, Paul returned through Macedonia, Act. 20. 3. about the time as
he writ the Epistle to Titus, in which He calls him to Nicopolis. But Paul's
Return through Macedonia, was in the Spring, and He was got to Philippi by
Easter, Act. 20. 6. How then could he about this time write to Titus, and in
his Letter call Titus to him at Nicopolis, where he was determined to Winter,
and yet Winter was already past.

4. Nicopolis (says Mr. O.) a City of Epirus not far distant from Corinth. Only
about 170. Miles: that is nothing with Mr. O. But I have shown that it is
unlikely Paul should at this time determine to Winter at Nicopolis, where He
had never as yet been, and where there was no Christian Church, that we known
of: and it is yet more unlikely that the Apostle's have, whereof we have spoken,
should permit him to go so far directly another way from Jerusalem.

Lastly, says the Minister, Titus came to Paul at Nicopolis, and was thence
sent by the Apostle to Corinth to hasten the Collections. But the mischief is,
Paul wrote the second Epistle to the Corinthians by Titus from Macedonia before
Winter, before the three Months mentioned, Acts 20. 3. and then sent him to
hasten the Collections. Whether Mr. O. has done Dr. Lightfoot right in this
confused Account I am not concerned to examine. He has made this his own
Hypothesis, and (...) I all along ascribe it to him.

Well! letting these things pass, Mr. O's meaning is (I guess) that Paul going
from Macedonia into Greece, visited Crete in his way, and there left Titus.

Ans. I do not yet understand how it can be properly said, that Paul as he went
from Macedonia into Greece visited Crete in his way. Greece is in the way from
Macedonia to Crete, how then did he visit Crete in the way as he went from
Macedonia to Greece? However, sometime hereabouts -- (Mr. O. will say) between
his leaving Macedonia, and settling in Greece, Paul visited Crete, and left
Titus there, which is the thing I now undertake to disprove: but will first as
my Foundation, tell the Story of Iitus, as exactly as I can gather it from
Scripture.

Paul at Ephesus, dispatched Titus away to Corinth about the Collections, as I
conceive, a Year or more before he sent Timothy unto Macedonia; as may be
gathered, from 2 Cor. 8. 6, 10. chap. 9. 2. where the Apostles testifies of the
Corinthians, that they were ready a Year ago. For this Reason it was that Paul
looked and longed for Titus's return, after above a Years absence. But Titus at
last came to Paul in Macedonia, and gave him an Account what effect his first
Epistle had upon the Corinthians, 2 Cor. 7. 6, 7, etc. as also of their
willingness to Contribute toward the Relief of the Poor Saints at Jerusalem,
chap. 8, 10, 11. chap. 9. 2. Hereupon Paul (and T mothy) writ the second
Epistle to the Corinthians, Titus carrying it, 2 Cor. 8. 6, 18. I must add,
here another short account of Paul He left Ephesus soon after Pentecost, and
arrived (let us imagine) in June at Philippi in Macedonia. There he gave much
Exhortation, Acts 20. 2. which implies (as I gather) that he spent much time in
Macedonia: let us suppose he tarried there, till about November. Then He set
forward for Greece where he abode three Months, v. 3. that is till February,
thence he returned early in the Spring into Macedonia, and was got as far back
as Philippi by Easter, v. 6 and so crossed the Sea into Asia, Act. 20. This
premised, my Arguments against Mr. O's Hypothesis are as follow.

1. Here is no time that can be assigned for Paul's sailing unto Crete, and
there Founding a Church. If it be thought, that during the (...) which is
allowed for his stay in Macedonia, he might go to Crete, that cannot be
granted: because Luke would doubtless have taken notice of so considerable an
Enterprise: and besides, I do suppose, Paul was too busy in forwarding the
Collections, and giving much Exhortation, to undertake such a long Voyage:
Lastly, Luke plainly says, that Paul came from Macedonia (not from Crete) into
Greece. If then within the time assigned to his stay in Macedonia, he went to
Crete, he must have returned back again, first into Macedonia, and then have
gone into Greece, which is absurd to suppose. Nor did he sail out of Grecce
into Crete. For then Luke could not have writ, that he abode three Months, in
Greece, one half of which time must at least have been spent in that Voyage to
and again, and in tarrying there.

2. Nor could Titus accompany the Apostle thither at this time. Titus was sent
alone from Macedonia to Corinth: His business at Corinth, was to encourage and
promote the Contributions, as abundantly appears in the second Epistle to the
Corinthians.

3. If Titus went along with Paul unto Jerusalem with the Contributions (as
cannot in reason be denied): how then could he be left in Crete to perfect that
Church, and set in Order the things that were wanting? I Surely this required
more than two or three Months. Paul was two whole Years at least in planting
the Church of Ephesus: but Titus could finish that in Crete (it seems) in as
few Months.

4. The great have Paul was in, and the Multiplicity of business in Macedonia,
and Achaia that lay on his hands, and the Application wherewith he pursued it,
will not suffer us to believe, that at this time he undertook such a great, and
a new Work, that of the Conversion of the Island of Crete. At this time all
other Concernments of the Church were laid aside, and gave place unto that of
forwarding the Collections, and carrying them to Judea.

5. That Passage ( Titus 3. 12.) when I shall send unto thee Artemas or
Tychicus, make have to come unto me at Nicopolis: for I have determined there
to Winter, quite overthrows Mr. O's (O Dr. Lightfoot's) Hypothesis: For Paul at
that time, fixed by Mr. O. neither intended, nor did Winter at Nicopolis but at
(...), as has been proved. Paul as yet had never been so far Westward as
Nicopolis in Epirus, to Preach the Gospel as may be collected, from 2 Cor. 10.
14, 16 -- We are come (says the Apostle) as far as to you in Preaching the
Gospel: but we hope to Preach the Gospel in the Regions beyond you, that is in
Epirus, which as yet it seems he had not done. How then could he intend to
Winter at Nicopolis? which implies that there were Christians there already,
among whom he would Winter: but we know of none as yet in those parts.

6. Paul (as has been noted already) was in so great have to go unto Jerusalem,
that he would not lose any time, no not tarry to Preach the Gospel at Troas,
(...) a Door was open (...) him: how then shall we believe that he made a
Voyage by (...) into Crete, to Plant a Church there, when it does not appear he
had the least encouragment beforehand, to expect any considerable Success, as
he had at Troas?

7. I in general before noted, what great business St. Paul had both in
Macedonia and at (...), which would not dispense with his Absence from them. He
could not at this time take so long a Journey as to Crete, about the Conversion
of that Island, which would require a longer stay than he could dispense with:
particularly, let it be observed, that his work at Corinth was more than
Ordinary, viz. to reduce 'em unto Peace, and Unity, and Order. So he promised,
1 Cor. 11. 34. The rest will I set in order when I come.

Whoever shall duly weigh these things with a (...) mind, will be convinced,
that St. Paul at this time of his going from Ephesus into Macedonia, and (...),
and tarrying there did not, could not beseech (...) to abide at (...), nor yet
sail unto Crete to Plant a Church there leaving Titus to finish it.

Mr. O. Here is no express Proof that Paul ( after his Release) from Def. p.
126.
his Imprisonment at Rome) visited Ephesus.

Ans. The Rector's (...) as laid in T. N. does not require that Paul visited
Ephesus. I took notice of Mr. Bain's Mistake, in saying or supposing that Paul
left Timothy at Ephesus, as if Paul had then been there: but no such thing is
to be found, in 1 Timothy 1. 3. Besides I expressed my Thoughts thus, That Paul
being at (...), going unto Macedonia (as he had signified Philipp. 1. 25, 26.)
then besought Timothy to abide at Ephesus. Not that Paul was, at the time (...)
his beseeching Timothy, at Ephesus, but at Troas: Neither is it necessary to
suppose that Timothy was then at Ephesus: for St. Paul might, by Letter beseech
Timothy to abide at Ephesus, though he had at that present been at Troas with
Paul, or Timothy in some other place. These are unnecessary Repetitions.

Mr. O. Whereas in proof of Paul's return into the East, after his Enlargement
from Prison, I alleged (2 Timothy 4. 20.) Trophimus's being left at (...) sick,
etc. the Minister replies, It is most likely that Def. p 129.
Paul touched at (...), when he returned from Jerusalem in Bonds to Rome: it is
evident he intended to sail by the Coasts of Asia, Act. 27. 2.

Ans. (...) to Sail? Surely Mr. O. forgets himself. Paul was now a Prisoner in
Bonds, How then could the Apostle intend? or determine which way the Ship must
Sail? Our Translation happily, which is not very exact here, betrayed (...) (...)
foul Mistake -- Meaning to Sail, etc. but in the Original, it is (...), being
about to Sail by the Coasts of Asia we (all in the Ship) Lanched. (...) (...)
(...) Paul and his (...); that meant or designed which way they would Sail; but
the Centurion and Master of the Ship, who determined that Point. But for the
Ships Sailing by the Coasts of Asia, the Reason is plain: for thither the Ship
was bound, no further in the way to Rome: and therefore they changed their Ship
at Myra, v. 5. a City of Lycia, part of the Southern Coasts of Asia; and took
another belonging to Alexandria, so Sailing directly into Italy, v. 6. It was
then neither Paul's (...), no nor the Centurions Commands, which brought the
Ship by the Coasts of Asia (...) Myra, but the Merchants Business, which indeed
lay so far in the direct Road unto Italy. For every one knows the Ancient way
of Sailing, before the Compass and Loadstone were (...) they chose (...) Legere
littus to Sail by the Coasts, as much as they safely could, and they were
generally, all what we now call Coasters. For they had no certain way to Steer
directly, from Place to Place, in the open broad Sea, except by the Sun or
Stars, which did not always appear: so that they were wont to keep within sight
of Land, if possible. But I pass this, and further say to Mr. O. that it is a
very absurd Conjecture to think, that Paul in his Voyage touched at (...). As
if Miletus lay in the way from Myra to Italy, or as if the (...) nturion, or
the Master of the Ship would go out of their way, I know not how many days Sail
to accompany Paul in visiting the Churches at and near Miletus, when as Paul
was a Prisoner sent to Rome. The Centurion could never have answered it to his
Superiors. As for the other two Suppositions, that Miletus might be a Town in
Crete, of that name, or the Island Malta, it cannot be denied, that then Paul
might in his Voyage from Judea to Italy, have left Trophimus in one, or in
either of those two places: but what then will become of Paul's having been at
Troas, 2 Timothy 4. 13. and at Corinth, v. 20? If then he touched not at Troas,
and at Corinth in his Passage from Jerusalem to Rome, (as for the foresaid
reasons is clear) there is good ground to believe he visited Miletus in Asia,
Philippi, and other Churches at the time by me assigned. This will further be
disputed by and by.

After all this Mr. O. undertakes directly, to Vindicate the Ancient Def. p.
130.
Chronology, and to prove that the first Epistle to Timothy was written before
Paul's meeting, and taking leave of the Elders of Ephesus, Act. 20.

Ans. If this were substantially proved, yet still it will not follow, that
Timothy was not the Supreme Ruler (Bishop) of Ephesus. For first nothing in
Paul's Farewell-Sermon, proves the Elders to be the Supreme Governors of that
Church, as has already been made out. And as for Paul's taking no notice of
(...) in that Farewell Sermon, I must retort, that neither did Paul mention the
Elders, in the Commission given to Timothy, in the first Epistle, which Mr. O.
supposes written before that farewell Sermon. There are several Epistles to the
Churches, wherein the Presbyters are not mentioned: but it will not thence be
concluded that they had no Presbyters atall: much less ought it to be gathered,
that Timothy was not the Supreme Ruler (Bishop) of Ephesus, because he is not
spoken of in so short a (...)-Speech. But these things have been often enough
spoken of: let us then hear Mr. O's Arguments proving the first of Timothy was
writ before the Farewell-Sermon.

Mr. O. Argues from Paul's excommunicating Alexander the Def. p. 131.
Copper-Smith, 1 (...). 1. 20. who is the Person mentioned, Act. 19. 33. He
adds, that this Excommunication was not long after his Apostasy, and so is
mentioned as a late thing.

Ans. I Will not create Mr. O. any unnecessary trouble: but grant that the same
Person is mentioned in both places. But I must say, it does not appear that
this Alexander was a Christian, at the uproar in Ephesus mentioned, Act 19. The
contrary is most probable. He is called a Jew (not a Christian Believer) v. 34.
If so, then he, who never yet Believed, could not yet be an Apostate and
Consequently could not be Excommunicated. But say he were a Christian-Jew, it
does not appear that he had any hand in raising the Tumult against Paul, or
that he Apostatized from the Faith at that time. That his Excommunication was
not long after his Apostasy I easily admit: but when he Apostatized, I do
desire to be informed, as also where or to what Church he belonged, when he
Apostatized, and was Excommunicated. The most likely was the Ephesian. Let that
be supposed. The Question then is still, when he (...), and was Excommunicated?
But, the Truth is, we are in the Dark both where and when he Apostatized, and
by Consequence know not when Paul Excommunicated him. And therefore nothing can
be drawn hence in proof of the time of the Apostles writing the first Epistle
to Timothy.

Mr. O. Puts the Objection against himself, How came Timothy Def. p. 131.
to leave Ephesus, and (...) with Paul in Macedonia, Act. 20. 4. seeing the
Apostle desired him to stay till he came? 1 Timothy 4. 13.

His Resolution of this Difficulty is out of Dr. Lightfoot, as follows -- Paul
designing to have Sailed for Syria, Acts 20. 3. came near to Timothy, and there
discovering the Danger laid in his way by the Jews (which also might have
involved Timothy) he brought him away back with him, and so both returned again
into Macedonia, and when Winter was over, they set Sail for Asia again.

Ans. I Will venture to call this a senseless Story, though Mr. O. has Fathered
it upon the Learned Dr. Lightfoot, truly or falsely is no matter to me. For,

1. Timothy was not at Ephesus when Paul was about to go for Jerusalem. He was
with Paul in Macedonia, 2 Cor. 1. 1. Act. 20. 4. Except Mr. O. will affirm, as
indeed in the Account He gives of this Matter, he must suppose, that Timothy
went back from Corinth, to Paul at Ephesus, thence following him to Macedonia,
then returned to Ephesus again, and lastly, was thence fetched back by the
Apostle unto Macedonia once more, and Wintered with him in Greece, and then
returned with Paul through Macedonia to Miletus, all which has already been
disproved.

2. It is here employed by Mr. O. that Paul attempted to sail for Syria, and
Judea before Winter, which is inconsistent with Act. 20. 3. and 1 Cor. 16. 6.

3. It is here supposed that Paul designed to sail for Syria from Macedonia;
whereas it is plain, it was from Corinth or Greece, Act. 20. 3. And there (in
Greece) He abode three Months, and when the Jews laid wait for Him, as he was
about to sail into Syria, (...) purposed to return through Macedonia.

4. It is supposed that Paul was actually sailing toward Syria, and was come
near to Timothy at (...), where He discovered the Jews, lying in wait for him.
Whereas He had discovered the Jews Plot in Greece, when He was about to sail or
just before he took Ship, and therefore altered his purpose, and returned it is
not said into Macedonia (though that is true) but through Macedonia into Asia,
v. 4.

5. It Is supposed that Paul designed to take Ship for Syria before Winter, or
before it was over: which cannot be: because He Wintered at Corinth, Act. 20.
3. compared with 1 Cor. 16. 6. or at Nicopolis, as Mr. O. mistakes.

6. It Is supposed the Jews lying in wait came to his knowledge, when he was
near Timothy at Ephesus, and that Timothy (then supposed at Ephesus) might be
involved in the danger: but the wait laid for Paul, by the Jews was designed in
Greece, and there made known unto Paul, which prevented him from going by Sea,
and determined his Journey through Macedonia. There are but two Reasons, that I
can Imagine, why the Jews laid wait for Paul; both which will argue it was in
Greece, and not at or about Ephesus.

1. Because He had in Greece of late Zealously preached the Gospel.

2. Because He had now a considerable quantity of Money to carry thence to
Jerusalem. Now if the Jews Plot was laid against Paul in Greece, and Paul not
know it there, how came He to know it at or near Ephesus? And how could (...)
at Ephesus be involved in the danger, which threatened the Apostle in Greece?
In short, there are so many wild and unaccountable Suppositions in this
conceit, and so contrary to the plain and obvious meaning of the Text, that
nothing but a stiff and resolute adherence to a Cause, could have brought it
into the head of any Man, and engaged others to defend it.

Before I make an end of this, let us take a view of the Ramble, which Mr. O.
has cut out for Timothy this Year. Timothy went from Ephesus, about Easter, to
Macedonia, and so to Corinth: he came back from Corinth to Ephesus again, where
he arrived by Whitsontide: He followed Paul shortly, after into Macedonia,
thence some way or other was got to Ephesus once more. St. Paul fetches him
back unto Maceaonia again, carries him with him unto Corinth, so to Nicopolis,
back to Corinth, thence once more unto Macedonia, and so to Miletus, where he
took up his Quarters of Refreshment, as Mr. O. believes: and indeed (...) high
time, after such a Fatigue which he underwent, in about 14 Months, amounting to
about 4000. Miles.

Mr. O. The first Epistle to Timothy must be written before, Def. p. 132.
because the second Epistle was written in Paul's first Imprisonment, for which
he offers several Reasons, which I am now to examine.

1. Mr. O. Argues hence, because Timothy was a Young Man, at Paul's writing the
second Epistle, the which he proves from the Apostle's Exhortation to him --
Flee Youthful Lusts, 2 Timothy 2. 22.

Ans. Not to trouble my self, or the Reader, about Mr. O's Calculations, I will
admit that Timothy was three or four and forty years Old, when Paul according
to my Hypothesis, in his second Imprisonment, wrote the second Epistle. and
advised him to flee Youthful Lusts. It might not be improper to Caution him, at
that Age, against Youthful Lusts, such as Young Men are chiefly inclined to.
Who is there, that has not known Men of 40. of 50. of 60. Years of Age,
overcome with these Lusts?

Well! but says Mr. O. Timothy was also a (...) man, 1 Timothy 5. 23. and
therefore it is not likely, that Paul should warn a sickly Man above 40. Years
Old, against Youthful Lusts, 2 Timothy 2. 22.

Ans. At Paul's writing the first Epistle, Timothy was Valetudinary. True, but
at his writing the second, he might be recovered and confirmed in his Health:
it does not appear he was still sickly.

Mr. O. For the same Reason ( sc. because he was a Young Man) Paul calls
Timothy Son, 1 Timothy 2. 18. 2 Timothy 2. 1.

Ans. Mr. O. I am persuaded does not believe himself, when he urges this as an
Argument, for Timothy's being a Young Man. Was Onesimus a Young Man, when Paul
called him his Son, Phil. v. 10? Was Mark a Young Man, whom St. Peter calls his
Son, 1 Peter 5. 13? Were all those Believers Young Men, of whom St. John
speaks, 3 Epi. 4.? Or were all the Christians at Corinth Young Men? And yet
Paul calls 'em his Sons, 1 Cor. 4. 14. But, he calls 'em so for a quite
different Reason than is assigned by Mr. O. viz. Because in Christ Jesus he had
begotten them through the Gospel, 1. Cor. 4. 14. And on the same account he
Challenged Onesimus for his Son ( v. 10. Philem.) Whom (...) (...) begotten in
his Bonds.

There are Sundry Reasons, why Men are wont to call others their Sons; which I
will not insift on. One among the rest is, when there is a great difference in
Age: Then the Older will call the Younger Son, though the Younger has past his
Juvenile Years.

But in T. N. I gave another different Reason of Paul's calling Timothy Son,
which I hope will satisfy every Body, but one who will be pleased with nothing,
but his own Phansies.

2. Mr. O. In his next Reason for the Second Epistle to Timothy, being writ in
Paul's first Imprisonment, many things are affirmed, but nothing proved, He
asserts, that that Second Epistle was written Def. p. 133.
before those to the Philippians, Colossians and Philemon, Timothy's Name being
prefixed to them; which therefore supposes, Timothy now got to Rome, according
to Paul's Order, 2 Timothy 4. 9.

Ans. The Proper Answer hereunto is, that Paul's Writing unto Timothy, 2 Timothy
4. 9. to come to him at Rome, agrees every whit as well with Mine as Mr. O's
Hypothesis. The Question then between us, is not to be decided hereby, but by
other Circumstances, which are to be spoken of anon. And to cut off all
unnecessary jangle, the same I reply to his third Argument, taken from Mark's
being with Paul in his first Bonds: The same Circumstances may agree to the
same Persons at different times.

4. Mr. O. Phansies that Paul's sufferings mentioned, 2 Timothy 3. 11. which
happened at Iconium, Lystra and Antioch, Twenty Years before the Apostle's
Second Imprisonment at Rome, imply, that that Second Epistle was written
sooner, than his second Imprisonment: for the Apostle would not ('it is likely)
mention Events so long since past, when there were other later Sufferings of
his, that were much fresher in his Memory.

Ans. First, if there be any force in such kind of weak Reasonings as these,
then I ask, supposing with Mr. O. this second Epistle written in the Apostle's
first Bonds, why, did he not rather mention his latter Sufferings at Jerusalem,
which Timothy (being then in Asia according to Mr. O.) knew little of, and were
the the last that had happened unto the Apostle, except those inconsiderable
ones at Rome? But the plain account of this Passage is, that St. Paul is now
animating Timothy to undergo Afflictions, as became a Minister of Jesus Christ:
To this end the Apostle lays before him, his own Example, v. 10, 11. and
instances in his own Sufferings at Iconium, etc. But 'twas indifferent which of
his Sufferings. He offered unto Timothy's consideration: one as well as
another, a former as well as a latter would set forth Paul's Faith,
Long-suffering, Charity, Patience, and Demonstrate God's Goodness and
Protection of such as endure Persecution for his name's sake: because God had
delivered Paul out of them all. And might not Paul say all this unto Timothy in
his second as well as in his first Imprisonment? If Mr. O. has no better
Arguments than such as these, to prove the second Epistle written in the
Apostle's first Imprisonment, he had better keep 'em to himself: they betray
the want of good Evidence, and the weakness of his Hypothesis, rather than
Establish it.

5. Mr. O. advances another Argument, viz. "from Tychicus Def. p. 134.
being at Rome in Paul's first Bonds carrying thence the Epistles to the
Ephesians and to the Colossians: and (says Mr. O.) that second to Timothy Chapter
4. 12. speaks of Tychicus's Journey to Ephesus: therefore this second Epistle
must be written about the same time, as that to the Ephesians was, sc. in his
(...) Bonds.

Ans. But what absurdity is it to believe, and assert that Tychicus carried
those Epistles to the Ephesians and Colossians, from Paul a Prisoner at Rome
the first time? and then in the Apostles second Bonds, afterward to have once
more been sent to Ephesus, as is expressed 2 Timothy 4. 12. As if Tychicus might not
have been with Paul at Rome in both Imprisonments. These things were noted in
T. N. but the Minister urges 'em afresh without pretending to reply unto the
Solution, I there offered of this small Difficulty.

Here let it be observed how Mr. (...). proves that Tychicus went along with
Paul to Rome in his (...) Bonds, viz. from Acts 20. 4. where he is reckoned
among those that accompanied Paul from Macedonia into Asia, and then carrying
Letters from Rome to the (...) and Colossians: This is plain beyond
Contradiction, Tychicus certainly went with Paul to Rome, at the Apostles first
Imprisonment. Mr. O. has demonstrated it. But is it not every whit as plain
that Timothy also was one of those who accompanied Paul from Macedonia into
Asia, Act. 20. 4. and do we not find that he was with Paul at Rome, Philip 1.
1. Colos. 1. 1. Heb. 13. 23? And does it not then follow according to Mr. O's
own Argument (when the Interest of his Cause is forgot or not concerned) that
Timothy went with Paul to Rome, at his first Imprisonment? If this be a good
proof of Tychicus going along with Paul to Rome, it is as good for Timothy's.
Thus all Mr. O's petty Arguments and Sophisms, for Paul's writing the second
Epistle to Timothy, in his first Bonds are overthrown by himself. Great is
Truth, and sometimes breaks forth, and shines through the thickest Mists of
Prejudice and Prepossession. The Conceit then of Timothy's being left behind
Paul in Asia, invented merely to support a Cause (that of Paul's writing the
second Epistle in his first Bonds) is now out of Doors, and henceforth forever
to be laid aside.

6. Mr. O. The second Epistle was written in his first Bonds, Def. p. 134.
because it mentions his being delivered from his Confinement, which he was not
delivered from in his second Bonds. In the second Epistle 4. 17. He was
delivered out of the Mouth of the Lion, that all the Gentiles might hear the
Gospel, that is, that he might go about, and Preach the Gospel to many Nations.

Ans. Mr. O. has unworthily inverted the Order of the Words, and so drawn 'em
to a wrong sense. Thus the Apostle writes -- The Lord stood with me, and
Strengthened me, that by me, the Preaching might be fully known, and that all
the Gentiles might hear: and I was delivered out of the Mouth of the Lion. The
sense of which Words is plainly this, that Paul by some Special Assistance from
God, so well pleaded his own, and the Cause of the Gospel at the Tribunal of
Caesar (where all the Gentiles, a great number of the Principal Courtiers, and
others being Present) heard him, That he escaped Condemnation at that time: He
was delivered out of the Mouth of the Lion; his deliverance was the Effect of
the good management of this Cause or vindicating the Truth of the Gospel,
before the Roman Gentiles. But as for the Gentiles in other Nations, hearing
the Gospel it was not the effect of his Deliverance at this time as Mr. O. by
misplacing the parts of the Text would have it understood. Besides, when it is
said, I was delivered, it is not said, from his Confinement, as if he had been
immediately set at Liberty (for then he would not have sent for Timothy) but
rather have gone to him according to his Intentions (as is supposed by Mr. O.)
But because he sent for Timothy after the deliverance here spoken of it
follows, that he was still a Prisoner, though he had for once escaped with
Life. Lastly, if this was his Deliverance from his first Imprisonment, then he
could not write to Timothy to come unto him: because Timothy was with him
already, As Mr. O. has elsewhere supposed.
That is before his Enlargement from his first Bonds. Philip. 1. 1. Colos. 1.
1. Heb. 13. 23. Upon the whole Matter this Passage shows the Epistle was writ
not in the Apostle's first, but second Bonds.

7. Mr. O's next proof taken from Luke, is of the same Nature with his 5th
Argument speaking of Tychicus: The same Reply therefore, that I made to the 5th
will serve here, (...) mutandis.

8. Mr. O. Argues from the Apostle's Cloak left at Troas 2 Timothy 4. 13. which
happened (says the Minister) at his going to Jerusalem, just before his being
sent Prisoner to Rome. This Cloak was a Roman Habit, which might have
prejudiced the Jews against him: therefore he left it at Troas: but being
arrived at Rome, he sent for his Cloak, his Roman Habit.

Ans. Though some believe (...) here mentioned, was Paul's Cloak, his Penula, a
Latin word made into Greek, by the Transposition and Alteration of some
Letters: Yet it is but very uncertain whether they are in the right. For why may
not Penula be made out of (...), as well as (...) out of Penula? Whatever it
was, suppose a Roman Habit, which Paul had brought with him from Rome, after
his Enlargement from his first Bonds, according to my Hypothesis, why might he
not leave it at Troas, at that time that he sailed thence into Macedonia? For
soon after he wrote his first Epistle to Timothy (as I contend) wherein he
shows that his Intentions were to return into (...) parts once more, 1 Ep. 3.
14. which was the Reason of his leaving his Cloak there behind him, intending
afterward to call for it, but happily being prevented, and so making forward for
Rome, when there be sent for his Cloak. This is a fair account of this Passage
about the Apostle's Cloak, without straining it to a Sense which no body ever
thought of before, and which has no Foundation in Scripture. But after all this
(...) here rendered Cloak is a word (...), and never to be met with again,
either in Scripture or in the Ancient Classical Greek Authors; And therefore
its signification is very uncertain: it may denote a Cloak, and it may denote
any thing else, an Hat, ex. gr. or a Shirt: it may signify some sort of
Writings, or Cover to carry Writings in, (...) to this last, the best Critics
incline. E. in the Synopsis Criticorum, thinks it was a little Cheft, Box, or
portable Cover to carry Books and papers in, grounding himself on the Syriac
Translation; where it is rendered domus Scriptorum. Dr. Ham. gathers from
Phavorinus that (...) signifies Parchments rolled up, and was the very same,
which the Apostle (...) calls the Parchments, as is implied in the (...) --
Bring with thee the Parchments rolled up, and the Books which I left at Troas,
but especially the former the Parchments; fail not to bring 'em, Others
understand thereby an Hebrew Volume of the Old Testament, deriving it from
(...) that is the Liber or inward Rind of a Tree, on Hesych. (...), Cortex
Arboris.
which the Ancients used to write, from whence they suppose (...) derived.
Lastly, I find (...) in Hesychius expounded (...), the outward Cover of Books
As also (...), a smooth Piece of Wood to write on, Tabula.
. In this uncertainty about the signification of this Word, and the variety of
Opinions concerning it, how is it possible to form any Argumenr thence? Or of
what force can the Reasoning be, which is grounded on it?

See more of this Word in Suicerus Lexic.

9. Mr. O. argues to this purpose, That such as were Def. p. 135.
more severely dealt with, were wont to be bound with two Chains, Act. 12. 6.
But Paul 2 Timothy 1. 16. was bound but with one; that all agree Paul's first
Imprisonment was more favorable than his second: therefore he must have
written this second Epistle in his first Imprisonment (which was most
favorable) because he was then bound but with one Chain, 2 Timothy 1. 16.

Ans. Whether Peter was more severely dealt with than ordinary, cannot be
determined, from Act. 12. 6. except we had an account of some other milder
Treatment of him on some other Occasion. Besides, it may happen that one Chain
may be as long, and as heavy as two other Chains. I have known one Rope as long
as two other Ropes: and a Prisoner may be as roughly handled, and as securely
preserved from escaping with one long Chain, as with two short ones. In the
Apostle's first Imprisonment, which was indeed favorable, although St. Luke
describes his sufferings in the singular, Act. 28. 20. even as St. Paul himself
does, Ephesians. 6. 20. Yet elsewhere we have 'em expressed in the Plural, Philip. 1.
7. Insomuch as in my Bonds, v. 13. my Bonds in Christ. v. 14. By my Bonds, v.
16. To my Bonds. Colos. 4. 18. My Bonds, Philem. 10. My Bonds, and v. 13. In
the Bonds of the Gospel. So that Paul in his first Imprisonment was tied with
many Bonds or Chains: as also he was in his second (as I reckon it) 2 Timothy 2.
9. For which (Gospel) I suffer (...) unto Bonds. The difference then between
his first and second Imprisonment, was not as to the number of his Bonds and
Chains, but other hardships which he endured in his latter Imprisonment. If any
one will consider the difference, between his Imprisonment as it is described in
the Acts; and again, as it is very plainly set forth by several Intimations in
the second Epistle to Timothy, whereof I spoke particularly in the T. N. He
will be forced to confess, that that in the Acts was his first Imprisonment,
and that other referred to, in the second Epistle to Timothy, to have been his
latter Imprisonment, and that the singularity or plurality of his Bonds
mentioned in both, will not decide this Controversy.

Mr. O. Demas was with Paul at Rome, in his first Imprisonment, Colos. 4. 14.
we read nothing of his being there in his second Imprisonment.

Ans. There is a manifest difference between Paul's Imprisonment, described in
the Acts, and in the second Epistle to Timothy, which clearly proves the second
Epistle written in Paul's latter Imprisonment, ex. gr. In the first Demas was
with him, and because there was then little or no Danger, Demas stuck close to
him: but in the latter, when all turned away from him, Demas among the rest
(then also with the Apostle at Rome) forsook him in the Extremity. This account
is very Natural. Is it not possible, Yea probable that Demas was with him in
both Imprisonments? Besides it is an unsufferable Impertinence to urge such kind
of Arguments, as are reconcilable with both sides of the Question; such is
Demas's attendance upon Paul in his Bonds. But whereas he adds, that we read
(...) of Demas being with Paul at Rome in his second Imprisonment, it is so
absurd an Observation upon his Principles, that nothing could have been said
more absurdly. For on his Supposition, that the second Epistle to Timothy, was
written in Paul's first Imprisonment, where should we read in Scripture of
Demas, being with Paul in his second Imprisonment, which on this Hypothesis is
not mentioned any where in Scripture? But because a second Imprisonment is on
all hands acknowledged, any unprejudiced Person will own, that we have the
Circumstances of it plainly enough intimated, in the second Epistle to Timothy,
which cannot agree with his first Imprisonment, as I noted in T. N.

There is a Passage, in this second Epistle to Timothy, which my Adversary
confesses stands in his way: it is this chapter 4. 6. I am now ready to be offered,
and the time of my departure is at hand. I have fought the good fight, I have
finished my Course, I have kept the Faith. Hencefore there is laid up for me a
Crown of Righteousness. Every Parcel of this Period argues, that the Apostle
had no hopes or expectation of being set at Liberty, and escaping the present
Danger. I am now ready to be offered, or (...), I am now offered already, or as
good as actually Sacrificed. When a thing in Futurition is expressed in the
present Tense, it denotes the certainty of the Event. And the time of my
departure is at hand. (...), is very near me, and has been a good while
hovering over my Head. I have fought the good Fight: My work in this World is
at an end, and the Fight is over. I have finished my Course: Nothing more
remains for me to do, but to wait the time of my approaching Death. I have kept
the Faith: I have persevered steadfastly in the Truth now to the very last.
Hencesorth there is laid up for me a Crown, etc. Therefore nothing now remains
but comforting my self with the hopes, and Expectations of the Future Reward.
Hence we gather that this second Epistle was wrote in the Apostle's latter
Imprisonment, which ended in his Martyrdom.

Mr. O. Paul speaks not here of his approaching Martyrdom, but intimates that
being now old and worn with Travels, and hard Labor, and now in Bonds, he
could not last long.

Ans. Paul, it must be confessed, even in his first Imprisonment, styles himself
the Aged, Philem. v. 9. But let us enquire into his Age. At Stephen's
Martyrdom, he was a Young Man (I Will suppose as Mr. O. has of Timothy) about
Twenty Five Years old, Act. 7. 58. and this was in the Thirty Fourth Year of
Christ. In the Sixty Second Year of Christ, he was first Prisoner at Rome. So
that at his writing the second Epistle to Timothy, which Mr. O. will have to be
in his first Imprisonment (as that to Philemon was) the Apostle was but about
Fifty Three or Fifty Four Years old. He was but in his viridi Senectute in his
first, and Green old Age. It was not then his extreme old Age, which put him in
mind of his sudden dissolution now at hand, as it were in the course of Nature.
Neither was it any decay of Health, and Strength occasioned by his Labors, and
the hardships which he had met with. We read not that he ever was Sick or Weak,
or under any disorder as to his bodily Health. That he continued vigorous, and
healthful after his first Imprisonment must be acknowledged, when we remember
that after his Release (as is not denied by Mr. O. himself) he went (...), Unto
the utmost limits of the West, preaching the Gospel, which he could never have
undertaken, had he been wasted with Pains and Travels. Nor did his Bonds in the
first Imprisonment, intimate that his Death was then at hand. For he had all
along great hopes of enlargement, as has been often noted out of his Epistles.
But it was a violent Death he then foresaw, and that he was to be offered up as
a Sacrifice, by the shedding of his Blood (so (...) denotes), to be made a
Martyr or Witness of Jesus Christ. Nothing is more plain than this, if we would
lay aside our Prejudices.

Mr. O. Objects, Philip. 2. 17. (...): and this was certainly in his first
Bonds.

Ans. But who sees not a vast difference? In that to the Philippians, he puts
the Case, If I be offered; I joy and rejoice, and will undergo it Gladly: this
is not an expectation, but a mere supposition of Death or Martyrdom, as is
plain from verse 24 -- But I trust in the Lord, that I also my self shall come
shortly. So that Paul looked not for Death at this time: as he did at the
Writing of the second to Timothy.

Mr. O. Objects, Act. 21. 13. I am ready to die at Jerusalem.

Ans. St. Paul did not here foresee or expect to die at Jerusalem: but (...),
I am ready or prepared and resolved (if it so please God) to lay down my Life
for the sake of Christ.

Mr. O. Objects, 1 Cor. 4. 9. chapter 15. 31. second Epistle 4. 11. The first of
these Passages shows only that God had counted the Apostles worthy to suffer
Death for his names sake, and had appointed them unto it. But as to the time
when, or place where (...) not said: whether at Jerusalem or at Rome, whether
in the first or in the second Imprisonment, whether when the Apostle was Fifty,
or Sixty, or Seventy Years Old, cannot hence be gathered. As for Paul's dying
daily, I suppose none will allow it as pertinently urged. Lastly, when the
Apostle says, we are always delivered unto Death, he has an Eye in General unto
the Hazards they were constantly exposed unto, but not to any particular
designed time of his own Death. But here in 2 Timothy 4. 6. St. Paul speaks
positively in the present Tense, without any Reserve or Limitation (...), I am
now already as it were offered, which is more than the Conditional phrase (...)
if I be offered. Again it is one thing to say, I am at the point to die, and
another, I am prepared for it. It is one thing to be appointed at a distance
unto Death, as all Men are, or unto Martyrdom as the Apostles were, and another
(...) say, I am even now ready to be offered. To Conclude Mr. O's Reasoning
here is very lame and imperfect.

Mr. O. Adduces those other passages following, 2 Timothy 4. 17, 18. I was
delivered, and the Lord shall deliver me, parallel to that, 2 Cor. 1. 10.

Ans. It Is true Paul was this once delivered out of the Mouth of the Lion: but
it does not follow that he shall be again delivered: Yes says Mr. O. it follows
-- And the Lord shall deliver me. It is an Elegancy to apply a former word or
expression unto a different matter. He had said, I was delivered from the
Sentence of Death; and then passes off quite to another thing, and says He --
The Lord shall deliver me, From what? From every evil work, from doing any
thing in the present pressures, and dangers unworthy of a Christian or Apostle
and thereby will preserve me to his everlasting Kingdom.

Mr. O. Paul did not expect to die very suddenly, Def. p. 138.
because he sent for Timothy to come to him before Winter. "2 Timothy 4. 21.


Ans. This is truly observed and very obvious, and therefore we do not affirm
that Paul certainly expected to die, so very suddenly, but that he might send
for (...). It suffices to say, that he expected not to be loosed from these
Bonds, but by Martyrdom at last. That He judged at the writing of this Epistle,
his Death might be deferred for some time, happily till Timothy came. Still Death
(...) hovered over him, and he plainly saw his Enemies, would first or last by
one means or other take away his Life. Nor do we (...) that Paul was now
already under a Sentence of Death; and that for the same reason, because he had
sent for Timothy. We rather affirm that his deliverance, out of the Mouth of
the Lion, was only his escaping the Sentence of Condemnation at that time: That
he was remanded unto Prison, and reserved for another Trial, when ever it
pleased the Emperor to appoint it. Or else to be Sacrificed unto the Fury of
that Bloody Prince, Nero, by a sudden and Arbitrary or extrajudicial Decree, as
I rather believe.

One great Argument with Mr. O. is, that St. Paul at his Farewell committed unto
the Ephesian Elders, the Supreme Government of that Church, as the perpetual
and unalterable Method of Government, Acts. 20.
is because, he knew he should never see there Faces more, Act. 20. 25. Or
rather that, They should never see his Face any more. I offered at a small
Criticism on the Explication of this Passage, but laid no stress on it. The
Minister takes a great deal of Def. p. 139.
pains in (...) this: how well let others judge. I am not concerned, (...)does
my-Argument require me to Justify that Gloss. Only it may be worth the while to
remember that though Paul says, They should not all see his Face any more; Yet
Timothy did according to Mr. O's own Hypothesis, and so did Trophimus the
(...), who went with him to Jerusalem. Besides, it is hard to believe that St.
Paul should so peremptorily affert without exception, that not one of 'em
should see his Face any more. But as I said, I insist not on this. Mr. O. who
busies himself in (...) what I made no account of would have better employed
himself, if he had more solidly replied to what I laid most weight on, that is,
that the Apostle's saying, I know was only Conjectural: Paul thought so; but he
was not absolutely assured of it. But

Mr. O. is of Opinion that this is sufficient to his purpose, that Paul thought
they should see his Face no more. That therefore he was not wanting in his Duty
of settling the Government, but gave his final Orders on that Point,
constituting the Elders, the Governors of that Church, because he had no hopes
of seeing them any more.

Ans. I have had occasion more than once in this Book to acquaint the Reader,
that Paul did not now (so far as we find in Scripture) commit the Supreme
Government unto the Ephesian Elders. That the 28. Verse in the 20 th of Acts
reaches not that sense, as is before made out, and shall be once more before I
conclude this Chapter. Mean while supposing he had delivered the Supreme Power
into their hands, yet the Government might be altered, or perfected afterward
upon occasion by the same Divine Power, which first constituted it. But after
all this,

Mr. O. not content with this Argument of his, urges, That Paul does not use to
express himself to positively -- I know, when he speaks Conjecturally.

Ans. 1. In all Reason the Apostle ought to be his own Interpreter. And he
tells the Ephesian Elders, Acts 20. 22. that he knew not the things that should
be fall him there, (at Jerusalem.) How then could Paul say absolutely, and
without any reserve or condition, that they should see his Face no more? If
Festus had sent Paul to Rome by Land, through Syria, and Asia, through Ephesus,
and Troas, as he might, if he had pleased, and Paul knew not the Contrary, then
the Ephesian Elders must have seen his Face once more.

Ans. 2. I do undertake to produce an Instance of Paul's speaking as
peremptorily or positively, as he does here in the 20 th of Acts, and yet Mr.
O. shall and has confessed it, spoken conjecturally or uncertainly, as of a
future contingent. I send him then to Philip. 1. 25. The Apostle had said, that
he desired to be disolved: but that to abide in the flesh was more necessary
for them -- (...), And having this confidence I know I shall abide and continue
with you all. The Case here is this (that I may accommodate my self to the
ordinary, and less observant Reader) Paul wrote this Epistle from Rome in his
first Imprisonment, he tells the Philippians that he knew he should abide and
continue with them, which implies his return unto the Eastern-Churches, and
particularly into Macedonia, whereof Philippi was a principal City: and yet Mr.
O. all along disputes, and denies the certainty of Paul's going back into the
Eastern parts, though Paul assured the Philippians with an (...), the same word
which he used when he spoke thus to the Ephesian Elders, I know that ye shall
see my Face no more. If then the (...) I know, is but Conjectural in the
Epistle to the Philippians (as Mr. O. must grant) why not in the 20 th of Acts?
Why then does Mr. O. deny Paul returned into the East, after his enlargement
out of Prison, grounding himself on Acts 20. 25. If he was positive in the
Philippians, and in the Acts, Mr. O. has lost one half of his Argument, and
besides is obliged to reconcile Paul in the Acts, with Paul in the Epistle to
the Philippians. But I, who allow both spoken conjecturally, that is, with a
Possibility of failing, am no further concerned than to prove that de facto, he
went back into the East, which (I suppose) is sufficiently demonstrated already.

From what has been said in this Chapter, it is manifest that Mr. O. has in no
tolerable degree vindicated the Old Chronology, which fixed upon the 20 th of
the Acts, as the time of Paul's beseeching Timothy to abide at Ephesus, when
the Apostle was going to Macedonia: neither has he produced any one good
Argument, that the second Epistle to Timothy was wrote in the Apostle's first
Imprisonment at Rome. Once more I observe if he had evinced both these (as is
also noted in T. N.) it would not be a sufficient proof of the Presbyterian
Parity. For I once again repeat it, that I did not avoid that older Opinion,
which allows the second Epistle to Timothy, to have been written in Paul's
first Imprisonment at Rome, consequently, that the first Epistle was written
before the Apostle's taking leave of the Ephesian Elders, and by Consequence,
that he besought Timothy to abide at Ephesus, when He was going to Macedonia,
Acts 20. 1. I did not, I say, lay aside this old Hypothesis, as if Episcopacy
was not defensible on that supposition, but rather to bring the Controversy
into as narrow a compass as might be. I did therefore in the latter end of the
Third Chapter, in T. N. show that though Paul had before the Congress at
Miletus, constituted Timothy the Ruler (Bishop) of Ephesus, yet was he not
obliged to take notice of Timothy in that, his Farewel-Sermon. Because Paul in
his Epistle to the Galatians, and that other to the Ephesians, and that First
and Second Epistle to Timothy, takes no Notice of the Elders, neither does
John, Peter, or Jude in their Epistles, nor lastly, does Ignatius in his
Epistle to the Romans make mention of either Bishop, Presbyter or Deacon: but
shall we thence conclude, that those Churches had none of those Officers in
them? Is it not as reasonable to believe that Timothy the then supposed Ruler
(Bishop) of Ephesus, might be omitted by the Apostle in his Farewel-Sermon, as
the Presbyters in his first Epistle to Timothy, wherein he professedly Treats
of Church Government, and one would think could not have forgot'em, when he was
discoursing on such an Argument. Particularly let it be remembered that Ignatius
himself, whose other Epistles so often, and so fully remember Bishops,
Presbyters and Deacons, in that to the Romans, had not oneSyllable of any
of them; and yet he knew very well that Bishops (as well as Presbyters) were then
established throughout the World, as he Witnesses in that to the Ephesians.
It Is then no Proof that Timothy, was not even at that time the established
Ruler (Bishop) of Ephesus, because the Apostle thought not fit to mention him
in his Farewell Sermon. These things Mr. O. was pleased to pass by unanswered:
and why, let any one judge. I am sure they overthrow the best Argument the
Dissenters have against Bishop Timothy.

Now whether (as Mr. O. pleads) Paul Acts 20. Commits Def. p. 139.
the Government of Ephesus to the Presbyters only, not by a Prudential or
Temporary Constitution, but Divine, by the Power of the Holy Ghost, v. 28.
enough has been said of this already. Nevertheless it may be proper to repeat a
little for the satisfaction of those, who happily have not read the T. N.

I do then acknowledge, that the Ephesian Elders were made Overseers of the
Church by the Holy Ghost, having Power to feed the Flock committed to their
Charge. But this is no Argument against Timothy's Bishopric there, or his
Prelatical Power over them. For it is not inconsistent to say, that Timothy was
appointed their Ruler (Bishop); and at the same time, that the Presbyters were
made Overseers of the Flock under Timothy. We Presbyters of the Church of
England, do believe our ourselves to be Overseers of the Flock, and that by
Divine Authority too; and yet at the same time we acknowledge our Diocesans to
preside over us, by the same Divine Authority. Our Bishops themselves declare
as much in their Atlmonition at the Ordering of Priests, viz. That we are
Messengers, Watchmen and Stewards of the Lord, to teach, premonish, feed, and
provide for the Lord's Family, and to seek for Christ's Sheep, that are
dispersed abroad. And at our Ordination, the first Question is -- Do ye think
in your Hearts, that ye be truly called according to the will of our Lord Jesus
Christ? What is all this less than that spoken to the Ephesian Elders -- Over
which the Holy Ghost has made you Overseers to feed the Church of God?

It follows not then from these words, that St. Paul put into the Presbyters
hands the sole, entire; and supreme Government of that Church. They might even
then be, and be left subject unto Bishop Timothy (for any thing that can be
rightly inferred from thence) as we are to our Diocesan Bishops. If our
Provincial Archbishop, should at his Metropolitical Visitation at the same
rate, exhort as ordinary Presbyters -- To take heed to our selves, and to the
Flock over which the Holy Ghost has made us overseers, to feed the Church of
God, not mentioning our Diocesan Bishops at all, shall it thence be concluded
that Dr. Stratford our Reverend Diocesan is not the Bishop of Chester? These
things I think ought not to have been shuffled off by Mr. O. as unworthy, but
perhaps it may be said more truly above his Answering.

Before I conlude this Chapter, there are two Arguments which the unreasonable
Opposition Mr. O. has made unto my Hypothesis, has suggested to me, proving, I
am bold to say, demonstrating, that the second Epistle to Timothy, was wrote in
St. Paul's Second Imprisonment at Rome. I will lay 'em as briefly, and as
plainly as I can before the Reader, and so make an end.

1. If the second (...) to Timothy, was written in St. Paul's first
Imprisonment (as Mr. O. affirms) it must then have been written either before,
or at the same time, or after the Epistles to the Colossians and (...).

1. Not before the Epistles to the Colossians and Philemon were written, as Mr.
Owen himself acknowledges. Def. page 133. For Paul at the writing of the second
Epistle to Timothy, had sent Tychicus to Ephesus, ( Chap. 4. 12). How then
could Tychicus be the Bearer of the Epistle to the Colossians, if he was
already gone to Ephesus, before the writing of that Epistle to the Colossians?
The second Epistle to Timothy, therefore could not be written before that unto
the Colossians.

2. Not at the same time, as the Epistles to the Colossians and Philemon were
written. For Timothy, who in the second Epistle to (...), was sent for by Paul
to Rome ( Chap. 4. 9.) was even then with Paul at Rome, and joined with him in
the Epistles to the Colossians and Philemon ( Chap. 1. 1.) Therefore the second
Epistle to Timothy, could not (...) written at the same time, as that to the
Colossians was.

3. Not after the Epistle to the Colossians was written. For then Timothy, who
joined in the Epistle to the (...), must have been gone back into Asia before
St Paul, which it is certain he did not, Heb. 13. 23. or else he must have
returned again to Paul at Rome, and once more gone back into Asia with him. In
like manner (...), who carried the Epistle to the Colossians, from Paul and
Timothy, must have returned unto the Apostle at Rome, and thence been sent back
unto Ephesus. 2 Timothy 4. 12. And all this during the Apostle's first
Imprisonment, which is not in the least Probable. It Is such a Wild-Goose-Chase,
as no rational Man can admit. Therefore the second Epistle to Timothy, was not
written after that to the Colossians. If then it was written neither before,
nor at the same time, nor after those to the Colossians, and Philemon, it was
not written at all during the Apostle's first Imprisonment, therefore it must
needs have been written in his Second.

2. The other Argument is grounded upon the Story of Demas, as it is related in
the second Epistle to Timothy, and in the Epistle to the Colossians, and that
other to Philemon, I shall represent it first according to Mr. O's Hypothesis,
and secondly according to my own.

According to Mr. O's Hypothesis, Demas had forsaken 2 Timothy 4. 10.
Paul, loving this present World, and was departed to Thessalonica, before the
Apostle wrote that second Epistle to Timothy. Paul in the same second Epistle,
after Demas had forsaken him, sent for Timothy from Asia unto Rome, (v. 9.).
Timothy being come to Rome, joined with Paul in the Epistles to the Colossians
(Chap. 1. 1.) and to Philemon (v. 1.) and yet Demas was still with Paul at
Rome, even though he had forsaken Paul, and he is by the Apostle and Timothy,
mentioned with Honor in both Epistles, Colos. 4. 14. Philem. 24. after he had
forsaken the Apostle. This is absurd enough.

For here are several Inconsistences, yea, Contradictions in the Story. as it is
laid by Mr. O.

1. Demas had forsaken Paul (2 Timothy 4. (...).) and yet had not forsaken him,
Colos. 4. 14. Philem. 24. 2. Demas had forsaken Paul, and was departed to
Thessalonica, and yet was still with Paul at Rome. 3. Demas was at Thessalonica
and at Rome, at the same time. 4. Demas at once was an Apostate, and yet a
(...) Labourer with Paul, (...) Tim. 4. 10. Philem. 24. Mr. O. may try (if he
please) whether he can surmouut these Difficulties.
But according to my Hypothesis, Demas continued with Paul at Rome, all his
first Imprisonment there being little or no danger: at this time Paul wrote the
Epistles to the Colossians, and that to Philemon, and therein Commends Demas,
there being then no reason to the Contrary. But in the Apostle's second
Imprisonment, when the Christian Religion (and the Apostle in particular) was
more violently persecuted, then the Apostle wrote the second Epistle to
Timothy, and then Demas had deserted Paul, and withdrawn himself into
Macedonia, as indeed all Men then forsook him, 2 Timothy 4. 16. Let the Reader
judge, whether this is not a plain and coherent Account: but Mr. O's confused,
false, and utterly irreconcilable with it self. In a word, here is an end (I
suppose) unto that part of the Controversy, about the time of Paul's writing
the second Epistle to Timothy. It must need be in his second Imprisonment.

And thus Mr. O's main Bulwark, raised for the defense of the Old Chronology
(...); Paul's writing the first Epistle to Timothy, before his leaving Miletus,
Act. 20. is demolished, and levelled with the Ground.

THE APPENDIX.
I Must not deny, as I once before acknowledged, that I borrowed my Hypothesis,
about the time of Paul's beseeching Timothy to abide at Ephesus, from Bishop P.
and that I believed him, to have been the first public Author of it. I am very
sure he cited none. And that passage out of the Rhemists produced by Mr. O.
it is confessed, I was not aware of. And what then? They stumbled upon, and had a
suspicion of something, which they were not able to make out distinctly. But
the Bishop of Chester has done it, with the approbation of the most Learned
Men, except such as are led aside with the (...) of Interest, and have espoused
a cause which will not allow it. And yet I hope I may say without Breach of
modesty, that I did add some further proofs and Confirmations of this
NewChronology; though they (...) absolutely necessary, those of Bishop
Pearson's being sufficient without 'em, as I freely own. Mr O. is not mistaken
when he say, Miracles are grown very Def. p. 123.
common in this last Age. But he has not proved his Proposition by a proper
Argument. He should have alleged those Miracles of this Age, who cast out the
Devil at Surey: and that Miracle of this Age, who undertook the Defense of the
pretended Exorcists, and yet acknowledged the Imposture at the same time. It is
indeed a surprising Lanc. Lev. reb. by N. N.
Miracle that the Devil should be cast out, where he never entered: and much
more, that two Confident Ministers should assume to themselves the Glory of
Dispossessing Dicky, when it is well know that several other good Men prayed for
that unhappy Wretch.

If Mr. O's displeased, that I called Bishop Pearson the Miracle of his time, I
cannot help it: but would be glad he would show me his equal from among the
Dissenters. Of all others, I would advise him not to instance in that great Man
Mr. Baxter, I cannot believe his own Testimony of himself sc. That he and (...)
Amanuensis understood Ninteen Languages. All the World knows Mr. Baxter, did
not understand Latin very well. Happily he understood English: and that is all I
verily believe he was Master off. But this Boast of his, puts me in Mind of a
certain Bishop's Chaplain, Who told his Lord, that they two had been during the
Civil Wars, in all the Prisons in England. The Bishop Modestly replied (being
unwilling to load his Enemies with an untruth) I was never in more than one
(and there indeed he had been near upon twenty Years) Ay but (the Chaplain
answered) I have been in all the rest. Thus perhaps Mr. Baxter, and his
Amanuensis understood Ninteen Languages: Mr. Baxter understood English, and his
Scribe the remaining Eighteen, and here we have two other Miracles of this Age.
A Man of no Learning, making as great a Figure, at least Noise, as any other
even in this Learned Age: And his Amanuensis who understood Eighteen Languages,
much more than Solomon did, as I believe, or any Man will ever do again. But
the greatest Miracle of all is that Mr. Baxter and his Scribe understood
Ninteen Languages, yet no use is made of any of 'em to any purpose, except the
English, in all the Voluminous works of that Great Man.

Mr. O. informs us, that St. Paul had Preached the Gospel Def. p. 124, 125.
in (...) at that time, when being (...) (...) he wrote his Epistle to the
Romans. I will convict him of a great mistake (to say no worse) by laying the
Testimony before the Reader -- (...) Romans 15. 19.
. So that from Jerusalem, and round about unto Illyricum, I have fully (...)
the Gospel of Christ. Not in but unto Illyricum, which spoils the Ministers
Argument in that place. Concerning Paul's Preaching the Gospel in Spain and the
Western parts of Europe, I chanced to express my self thus -- All the (...)
say, (...) (...) went to Spain, and to the remotest parts of the West, etc. And
at this he takes occasion to reproach me in general for my crude and (...)
(...), because I said All, etc.

(...), I must needs own that every Father has not affirmed this. But I have
this (...) (...) (...) (...) self, that it is ordinary to express a Notion thus
Universally, (...) nevertheless there are many restrictions, and exceptions
unto the Universal (...). (...) (...) Mr. O. with some Instances out of
Scripture, Romans 5. 18. By the Righteousness of one, the free Gift came upon all
Men unto Justification of Life. John 12. 32. And I, if I be lifted up from the
Earth, will draw all Men unto me. Titus 2. 11. For the Grace of God that
brings Salvation, (...) appeared unto all Men. Mr. O. I do suppose in the
explanation of these, and many other the like Passages in Scripture, thinks
himself obliged to qualify them with some Limitations. To speak of that only
which was last named. I ask Mr. O. Whether the Grace of God had then (when Paul
wrote to Titus) appeared to all Men? Yea, had it then appeared to one
Thousandth part of Mankind? Or if he will have (...) governed of (...), was it
saving Grace unto all Men without exception? Or to the greatest Number of Men?
Or only, to some few? Let Mr. O. deal with me, as he is forced to deal with the
Holy Scripture, and then an end will soon be put unto this squabble. I did not
then intend to be understood so strictly, as if not one individual Father had
omitted to record that piece of History concerning Paul: No nor that the Major
part of 'em had mentioned it. But that a great many of the best reputed among
'em, who had occasion to speak of this matter have attested it. Some Instances
I will here annex out of the late Learned Bishop of Worcester. Orig. Britan. P.
36, etc.
The first is that of Eusebius, that some (Apostles) passed over the Ocean to
those which are called the British Islands: And as the Bishop argues, of all
others, Paul was most likely, seeing we read of him alone in Scripture,
designing to go Westward into Spain. Romans 15. 28. Theodoret, That St. Paul
brought Salvation to the Islands that lie in the Ocean, Having just before
mentioned Spain. Jerome, That Paul having been in Spain went from one Ocean to
another, imitating the motion of the Sun of Righteousness; of whom it is said,
His going forth, etc. And that Jerome meant our Western Ocean cannot be doubted:
for he elsewhere says, That St. Paul after his Imprisonment Preached the Gospel
in the Western Parts. Clemens Romanus, That St. Paul Preached Righteousness
through the whole World, and in so doing, went to the utmost bounds of the
West. Venantius Fortunatus describes Paul's labors thus.

Transit ad Oceanum, vel qua facit insula Portum
Quasque Britannus-habet terras, quasque ultima (...).
Hereunto I add, an Authority of my own Collection, it is Cyril. l. 2. (...).
Is. Orat. 1.
of Cyril, who writes thus -- No one doubts but that St. Peter, and Paul
himself Preached Jesus Christ unto the Western Parts, which they went unto. I
shall conclude this with the Words of the Learned Mr. Baxter, who Learnedly
expresses himself thus, in that Learned Book of his intitul'd Methodus (...),
and in one of the Ninteen Languages, which he, and his Amanuensis understood,
Et reverd (...) scripta (...) and seipsa, and me (...) (...) bac (...); ego me
(...) (...) non possum justificare.

I proceed now to Mr. O's Challenging me with making Def. p. (...).
Paul to provide the Remedy (of Schism) about 14 Years after the Disease; which
he reckons to be absurd.

Ans. I read of a certain Man, Jo. 5. 5. Which (...) (...) (...) (...) (...)
Tears, and that Jesus Christ knew, that (...) (...) been now a long time in
(...) (...), (...) (...) (...) never been made whole all that while. God's time
for every thing is the best, at least we ought to wait his leisure, and not
prescribe how soon he shall heal our Infirmities, of what kind soever they be.
But let us examine these Fourteen Years, which he Challenges me with. Dr.
Lightfoot perhaps computes the time so as will reach Fourteen Years: but he is
none of my Oracle. I am of Opinion, he has scarce spoken one true word, in
matters relating unto this Controversy, and this happened by the first false
step he made, about the time of Paul's beseeching (...), etc. But I can reduce
these Fourteen Years into Seven, all which time Paul had not an opportunity of
applying the Remedy; and thus I do it. With Bishop Pearson, I reckon the
Corinthian Schism to have happened in the Year of Christ 57. A Year he tarried
in Macedonia and Achaia, about two Years I allow for his stay at Jerusalem, and
Voyage to Rome. He remained two Years a Prisoner there, and two Years may be
allotted for his Return into the East, visiting and settling the Government of
those Churches; in all about Seven, which at least in the Gross agree with
Bishop Pearson's Chronology. But whereas Mr. O. makes me say, the first (...)
to Timothy was writ Anno 69. It is a Palpable Mistake (to say no (...).) He
hereby imputes unto me at least Four or five Years more than I ever reckoned
upon. Well! but how came Paul to defer changing the Government, so long as
Seven or Eight Years? This doubtless Mr. O. will think strange, and not to be
granted.

Ans. The Reason is obvious from the History of Paul. The Corinthian Schism
broke out: Paul endeavored to heal it by Argument, and proceeded no further
with them at that time. He therefore receives their Contributions, hastes to
Judea, is there Imprisoned, sent to Rome, and there held in Durance two Years.
After he returns into the East: by this time the like Schism had burst out at
Ephesus, and happily in other Churches: and now was the time, and the first fair
opportunity he had to alter or perfect the Government, and to place Timothy, in
his stead over the Church of Ephesus, and others over the rest.

Mr. O. All this is confidently affirmed after the Rectors usual Def. p. 126.
way.

Ans. It is so natural to Mr. O. to Challenge me with Confidence, that he
cannot forbear even when I least deserve it. I am therefore obliged for once,
to set the Saddle on the right Horse: for I Will not resemble him to blind
Bayard, as he very rudely does me.

In that Paragraph, to which Mr. O. refers, in the T. N. I gave a Summary of
Paul's Travels in the East, after his Enlargement from his first Imprisonment
at Rome: wherein I am far from confidently affirming, all his particular
movements from place to place, though I guess at them. I over and over, and yet
more than once over again delivered my Opinion with so much Precaution, that no
Man of the least Modesty would have Taxed me with Confidence on that score. If
any one is at leisure to inform himself in the Truth, let him but turn to the
87th page of T. N. and he will presently see what care I took, and what modesty I
used in proposing my own Thoughts, what frequent Interruptions and Parentheses
I all along inserted, varying and repeating them merely, that I might not seem
too positive in such minute Circumstances. Ex. gr. As may reasonably be
supposed. Again, it is likely. And again, This may be allowed. And once more,
very probably. Then I conclude Hitherto we have built upon Conjecture.

Let then any Man of sense Judge, whether Mr. O. deserves not once more to be
Corrected (...) a more than Ordinary sharpness.

CHAP. V. Being an Answer to Mr. O's 5th Chap.
THIS Chapter is entirely spent about Evangelists. In T. N. I supposed with my
Adversary,

1. That they were an Order of Church Officers distinct from Apostles,
Prophets, Pastors, or Teachers. 2. That in degree they were next under
Prophets, and above Pastors or Teachers: I added my own Opinion, 3. That they
were not only Companions of the Apostles, ready to serve in the Work of the
Gospel, wherever and whenever they should be sent upon any special and
Emergent business: but sometimes likewise fixed in some certain places as
Resident Governors of those Churches, in the Room of the absent or dying
Apostles, of which number I reckoned Philip, Timothy and Titus, to have been.
Mr. O. Because Titus was to Ordain Elders in every City, Def. p. 143.
and every City must have a Bishop (as Mr. O. phansies) Titus therefore must
have been the Archbishop of Crete; and because the Power of Ordination was
lodged in him alone, as the Rector contends, it will follow (says he) that
Archbishops only have power to Ordain, and the Diocesan Bishops are excluded.

Ans. There is no necessity that every City must needs have a Bishop. At least
in the Infancy of the Church, and whilst Titus alone presided over it. It was
not so in Crete, nor was there any occasion for it. Admitting that in the next
Age, Christians and Churches multiplying, and all the Apostles dead then, happily
there might be Bishops in many (...), and some Person constituted the
Archbishop of that Island. I say admitting this, it will not hence follow, that
the Power of Ordination was in him solely, and not in the other Bishops also.
An Archbishop is not of a different species from a Bishop, but was appointed,
and agreed unto by the Bishops among themselves for Peace and Orders sake;
although there might be plausible Reasons given out of Scripture it self, for
the Institution of Archbishops. But that is (...) of my concernment. This is
certain among our selves, when a Bishop is made an Archbishop, he receives no
new Ordination, consequently no new Divine Power, more than he had before; that
therefore as to the Office of Ordaining and Governing their Dioceses, a Bishop
and an Archbishop are the same thing, and that the Archbishop cannot supersede
the Episcopal Power, of his Provincial Bishops.

Mr. O. will not allow that Philip was the fixed, and settled Evangelist at
Caesarea.

Ans. Nor am I positive it was so. I gave my Reasons for it out of Scripture,
such as do I confess persuade me to believe it. But the Minister is of another
Mind. I cannot help that, nor do I wonder at it. Where almost is there a Man to
be found, who is willing to renounce his former Sentiments or Errors?

Mr. O. requires it to be proved, that Philip was settled and resided at
Caesarea, and that he was no where else, etc.

Ans. It Is hard Mr. O. should require me to prove a Negative; all I can say is,
I read not of his being any where-else. After an account given of his Labors
in Preaching the Gospel, whilst he was yet but a Deacon, for any thing that
appears, I find him, as it were sitting down at Caesarea. Acts 8. 40. He
preached in all the Cities, till he came to Caesarea, which words seem to
Intimate that there he rested. The next news we hear of him is, that near upon
Twenty Years after we find him still at Caesarea, and then styled an
Evangelist, a Title plainly there distinguished from Deacon ( who was or had
been one of the seven Deacons, but was now it seems an Evangelist): and further
it is said of him, that at (...) he had an House and Family there, and in
Condition to entertain Paul and his Companions many days, Acts 21. 8, 9, 10. I
think that here is a tolerable proof that he dwelt, and was the fixed Evangelist
of Caesarea.

Mr. O. May not an unsettled Officer have a settled Family? Caesarea might be
his Birth place, or he might Marry there, because he had four Daughters there
Prophetesses.

Ans. These are bare Possibilities at most, which cannot countervail those
Circumstances and matters of (...), whereon I build my Conjecture. Herein I
appeal to the Reader. Besides, though it is possible an unsettled Officer, may
have a settled Family: Yet a settled Officer, must have a settled Family (one
would think) if he has (...) at all. Caesarea might be his Birth place. This is
possible: and it might not be, which is most Probable. It Is great odds on my
side. I have all the Cities in Judea (to say nothing of all the other in the
Empire, and elsewhere, where Jews lived) to set against Caesarea. His name
would make one think he was an Hellenist, and born somewhere among the Greeks.
His being chosen a Deacon, in favor of the Grecians, argues something this
way: as also that, at that time his Habitation was at Jerusalem: for why else
should he be chosen a Deacon there? He removed thence merely upon occasion of
the Persecution. After all, imagine he was born at Caesarea, this is no reason
against his being an Evangelist there. Once more, He might Marry there. True,
that is possible: but it is as possible that he Married at Jerusalem, or any
other of the Cities, where he had preached the Word. But Mr. O's Reason why he
might Marry there, is a very pleasant one, sc. because he had Daughters there
Prophetesses: as if he might not have Married in another place, and yet his
Daughters live with him at Caesarea. Children are no evidence, where a Man was
Married. But what if he was Married there? Might he not also have been the
settled Evangelist there? His Marrying at Caesarea could be no hindrance, nor
is an Argument against it. Lastly, it is most absurd to suppose from Acts the 8.
40. That he Married at Caesarea. For 'twas now about 20 Years since he arrived
first at Caesarea. There Mr. O. thinks he might Marry, and so settle his
Family. I deny it. He must in all likelihood have been Married before he ever
came to Caesarea; and that because he had four Daughters Prophetesses. For if
he was there, and then Married, the oldest of these Prophetesses must have been
but Nineteen Years old, and the youngest but Sixteen. It is not credible, that
at this Age they should be Prophetesses. Lastly, the most probable conjecture
is, that he Married before he was converted, or became a Minister of the Word.

Mr. O. He was an Evangelist before he came to Caesarea, which the Minister
confirms by Bishop Pearson's Testimony.

Ans. It is no wonder that Bp. Pearson should be of this Opinion, who esteemed
an Evangelist to be, not a distinct Species of Officer in the Church, but to
denote a bare Preacher of the Gospel. But Mr. O. who believes it otherwise, and
I who have supposed it, must seek for other proofs of Philip's being an
Evangelist before he settled at Samaria.

Mr. O. Philip Preached up and down, by virtue of an Extraordinary call, Act.
8. 6, 7, 26, 39.

Ans. The places cited prove that Philip had extraordinary Gifts, and
Abilities, and sometimes an Extraordinary call unto some certain place to
Preach the Word. But Philip had no extraordinary call unto the office of an
Evangelist that I can meet with, though he had Extraordinary Gifts in Preaching
the Gospel. For any thing I read Philip was yet but a Deacon. It Is then
reasonable to believe that he was afterward appointed the Resident (...) of
Caesarea.

Mr. O. observes very truly, and I freely acknowledge Def. p. 144.
that I have no Testimony at hand, out of the Father's proving Philip to have
been the fixed Evangelist of Caesarea. But whereas the Minister pretends that
this Philip died at Hierapolis, and by consequence was not the fixed Evangelist
of Caesarea, citing for this Eusebius, E. H. l. 3. I am forced again to expose
his unfaithful representing Authors, making 'em write what is not to be found
in them. The Historian in l. 3. c. 31. first speaks of Philip the Apostle --
(...), See L. 5. 24. l. 3. 39.
One of the twelve, who died at Hierapolis. But he affirms it not of Philip the
Deacon, or Evangelist. To the same purpose (...) -- Philippus Apostolus, Catal.
Script.
in Phrygia praedicat Evangelium Domini Jesu. Sepelitur Hierapoli cum (...)
bonorifice. It Is true Eusebius. at the latter end of that Chapter, speaks also of
Philip, the Evangelist and his Daughters (says he) (...), Who lived with their
Father Philip in Caesarea. But not a Syllable of Hierapolis. Nay, here is a
tolerable proof that Eusebius thought Philip lived, and resided in (...). Here
then we have another Instance of Mr. O's false dealing with Authors.

Mr. O. still contends that Timothy and Titus, were not resident (Bishops)
Evangelists, the Apostle calling 'em both Def. p. 144.
away, Tit. 3. 12. To the Apostle Titus came at Nicopolis, and after was sent
by Paul to (...), 2 Timothy 4. 20. and we hear no further of him. It cannot be made
appear that ever he returned more to Crete.

Ans. From Scripture it cannot, because the Holy History Jerome. Catal. Script.
there ends, sc. at Titus going into Dalmatia. But the Ecclesiastical History,
which Mr. O. rightly appeals to in the like cases, tells us, that Titus died in
Crete. What would any Man expect more?

The Question is, whether Eusebius asserts the (...) to have been Resident, or
unfixt Ministers in l. 3. c. 37, 38, 39. Mr. O. maintains this latter Opinion,
(...) testifying -- That they Def. p. 145.
Preached Christ to Infidels, Ordained Pastors, and passed into other Countries
and Nations: That they went far (...) their own Houses, did the work of
Evangelists, and diligently Preached Christ to such as had not yet heard the
Word of Faith, delivered to them the Scriptures of the Holy Gospels, Ordained
other Pastors, and went into other Countries and Nations.

Ans. True, all this Eusebius Witnesses: but it proves not Mr. O's Point. This
many Evangelists did for some time, but were afterward fixed in some certain
place to govern particular Churches, as appears from the Examples, Eusebius
produces, sc. (...), Clemens Romanus, Polycarp and Papias, all which (he
assures us) were the constant residing Bishops of particular Churches ( Eusebius.
l. 3. c. 39.) though they had been sometime before unfixt Evangelists,
attending the Apostles uncertain Orders, as the necessities of Religion
occasionally required. And this is what I insisted on in T. N. that Evangelists
were both fixed and unfixt, according as the Apostles Ordered them, that
therefore fixedness, or unfixedness is not a proper Note, nor distinguishing
Character of an Evangelist; he may be one, or the other, or both at different
times, as is manifest from Eusebius. Though I delivered my self in T. N. to
this effect, Mr. O. takes no notice of it, but urges again the old Argument,
avoiding what I observed out of Eusebius, in proof that his unfixt Evangelists,
became afterward the fixed Bishops of Churches.

It remains then that Evangelists, many of 'em were according to Eusebius, fixed
Ministers, which is all I am concerned for; and by Consequence so might Timothy
and Titus be.

Another Controversy is moved about St. Mark, whether Def. p. 146.
he being an Evangelist was the settled Governor of the Church of Alexandria.

Ans. I do readily grant, that Mark was a great while an unsettled Minister,
waiting on the Apostle Peter, and by him dispatched up and down, upon the
Service of the Church, though afterward he went, or was sent unto Alexandria,
where he planted a Church, and Governed it. Eusebius. H. E. l. 2. c. 24.
After whom Annianus undertook the Administration, and is by Eusebius called
the first Bishop thereof: which implies, that Ib. l. 3. c. 14.
Mark was the Evangelist of it, the Administrator of that Church, having not as
yet perhaps received the Title of Bishop as particularly belonging to him. But

Mr. O. shakes me off by objecting -- I may as well make Peter a Resident
Apostle, because Eusebius says, that Linus succeeded him in the Government of
the Church of Rome.

Ans. Supposing Peter was there, so long as it is reported of him, I must
profess I think he was the Resident Apostle of Rome, for there are Men of
Learning and Observation, who will tell Mr. O. that Peter was the first Bishop
of Rome; that Apostles were wont to have the special care and oversight over
some particular Church or Churches, besides their general Power, which extended
unto all Places. Of Peter, Jerome testifies -- ibique (Romae) viginti quinque
annos Cathedram Sacerdotalem tenuit (Petrus): And I hope this Father is of some
credit, and in esteem with the Minister. They will tell him, that the removing
from place to place, and from one City or Country to another, was not of the
Essence of an Apostle: that they might, if they thought fit, remove, or else
continue and fix. That if an Apostle upon some Emergent Occasion (...) to
another place, this proves not that he was not before his removal, the settled
Minister of the former Church; no more than when a Non-con Minister leaves his
former Congregation, and running into a remote Country adheres to a new one.
Will Mr. O. in this case deny that he was ever the settled Minister of the
former? They will tell him, that an Apostle when he removed, did still hold
(even in his Absence) the Government of the Church which he left, until he
thought fit to fix his Successor, or was by Death prevented taking any further
care of it. There want not Examples of this kind. Thus it is believed, Euodius
succeeded Peter at Antioch, in the Apostles Life time, and Linus at Rome after
his Death. And by the same Reason it is Probable that Annianus succeeded Mark,
though not with the same Title and Character. But

Mr. O. has St. Chrysostom on his side -- Def. p. 148.
(...), etc. Who went not about every where but (only) "Preached the Gospel, as
Priscilla and Aquila, etc. He grants that the Evangelists did not go about
Preaching (...) every where as the Apostles did: but yet they Traveled up and
down into diverse places, as the Apostles appointed them, distinguishing
forsooth, between every where, which belonged to Apostles, and diverse places,
which was proper to Evangelists.

Ans. I don't find that Chrysostom speaks one Word here of Evangelists, as if
they Traveled into diverse places, though not (...) every where, as Mr. O.
Glosses upon the passage. The Instance of Priscilla and Aquila, will not evince
this. For though we read of some removals of these two Persons, yet it was not
in Order to Preach the Gospel, but on some other Account. Their first movement
was from Rome to Corinth (...) being by the Emperors Edict Banished thence.
This then was not moving up and down into diverse places, by the Apostles
Direction, to Preach the Gospel: but in Obedience to the Civil Magistrates, and
for their own security. The other motion was in Company with Paul from Corinth
to Ephesus, where Paul proceeding in his Journey toward Jerusalem, left Aquila
and Priscilla, Act. 18. 19, 21. Whereas then Mr. O. says, that Aquila and
Priscilla, removed from Corinth to Ephesus, doubtless by Paul' s appointment,
as other Evangelists did, I see no such thing in the Text. I rather think it
was because they were all of the same Craft or Trade, Tent-Makers, v. 3. and as
we shall see anon, not such Evangelists as Mr. O. and I am now disputing about.

Mr. O. The Apostles went up and down (...) every where, whither the Spirit
Guided them, and at their own pleasure: but Evangelists not every where at
their own pleasure, but up and down as the Apostles appointed. And this
forsooth, must be Chrysostom's Meaning, that Evangelists did not go up and down
every where as they pleased: but that it is implied they Traveled whithersoever
the Apostles were pleased to direct them.

Ans. There is no Substance at all in this slight Gloss. For the Apostles
themselves strictly speaking, did not go up and down at their own pleasure,
every where, but were under as great restraint, and determination as the
Evangelists were. As the Evangelists were under the Conduct and Command of the
Apostles, so were the Apostles under the Conduct and Determination of the
Spirit, as Mr. O. confesses. The Apostles then traveled not up and down at
their own pleasure, no more than the Evangelists did: and the Evangelists went
up and down (...) and into as many Cities, and Nations as the Apostles did, and
perhaps more.

But to pass over abundance of Trivial Observations made by the Minister, I
will here endeavor to explain the meaning of this dark Passage of St.
Chrysostom, which I suspect Mr. O. either does not, or will not understand, or
has not duly considered. (...). In which Words his meaning is (as I conceive)
that there were a sort of Evangelists, who went not up and down to Preach the
Gospel Publicly, but only taught and instructed some People that came to them,
privately at home, and such were Priscilla and Aquila, so we read of 'em, Acts
18. 26. Aquila and Priscilla, took Apollos unto them, and Expounded unto him
the way of God more perfectly. Unto this passage, I am apt to believe
Chrysostom alludes. For that (...), imports their not going up and down to
preach Publicly, will be easily granted me, I hope: and that (...), signifies
private instructing, may be inferred from (...): In which sense it is taken,
Mat. 18. 15. Tell him his fault between him, and thee alone (...). Chapter 14.
23. When he had sent the Multitude away, he went up into the Mountain apart
((...) privately) to pray: And when the Evening was come, he was there alone
(...); or private by himself: see Luke 9. 18. He was praying alone (...). Thus
Aquila and Priscilla instructed (...) privately, and alone, not in public
Assemblies, or in the Face of the Church; not every where, but in private, and
at home. If this be the Sense of St. Chrysostom, the place nothing belongs to
the Controversy between Mr. O. and me. St. Chrysostom goes on, and having in
the fourth and last Place named Pastors and Teachers, he puts the Question to
himself (...); are Pastors and Teachers less? (...): Yes, he answers they are
less than (...). Less than those, who travel abroad and preach publicly, as
being invested with the Evangelical Office: But not less than Aquila and
Priscilla, who were only private Evangelists. Thus far St. Chrysostom has
informed us of two sorts of Evangelists.

1. The private, who went not up and down to Propagate the Gospel in Public,
but at home only and privately.

2. Such as did travel up and down, and were public Evangelists. Here there
ought to be a full Point. Then he proceeds (...). The meaning whereof is more
fully -- There are Evangelists, who reside, and continue in one place, as
Timothy and Titus. He had spoken before of private Evangelists, viz. Such as
Aquila and Priscilla, and of Public Evangelists, who traveled abroad and
preached the Gospel, and now Thirdly, he mentions another sort of Evangelists,
who were fixed and resided in a certain place as Timothy, and Titus. Which how
far it favors Mr. O's. Opinion I leave to the Judgment of the Reader. If any
one else offers me a better explication of this obscure passage in Chrysostom,
I shall thankfully embrace it. In the mean time, I believe, it makes nothing
for my Adversary, nor does it in the least distress me. Yea, it agrees with my
notion and Eusebius, as I have Expounded him, and I presume agreeably to his
meaning. St. Chrysostom, Lastly, mentions a fourth sort of Evangelists, sc. who
wrote the Gospels, but they come not under the present Subject.

Lastly, Mr. O. pleads that Chrysostom, does not (...) Def. p. 149.
Timothy and Titus, among Evangelists, but among Pastors and Teachers.

Ans. How then is Chrysostom of Mr. O's side, as he boasted before? How will he
thence prove that Evangelists traveled up and down as Timothy and Titus did?
And what becomes of Mr. O's constant affirming, they were Evangelists, and
extraordinary Officers? But if my Exposition holds good, as I hope it will,
then Timothy and Titus, are reckoned among fixed Evangelists, and not among
Pastors and Teachers. Besides, I am not concerned among whom Chrysostom reckons
'em: they were fixed according to Chrysostom, and the sole and the Supreme Power
was committed to 'em by Paul, as is plain in the Epistles. Whatever then their
Title was, they were the settled Rulers of those Churches.

Finally Mr. O. cites Eusebius for saying, It was only reported, that Timothy
was the first Bishop of Ephesus, but that there was no certainty, who succeeded
the Apostles in the Government of the Churches, etc. for which he (...), Eusebius.
H. E. l. 3. c. 4.

Ans. If Eusebius had written to this purpose, the Words however imply that
some single Persons succeeded the Apostles, though it was not known of a
certainty who they were, nor what their Names were. But setting aside this, the
Principal thing here to be remarked, is, that Mr. O. according to his usual
Custom, has misrepresented Eusebius. The Historians Words are as follows. How
many, and who of the true Followers ( of the Apostles) were reckoned sufficient
to feed the Churches founded by N. B.
them it is not easy to say, Those only excepted which any one may gather out
of Paul' s Epistles. For this ( Paul) had innumerable Fellow Laborers and (as
he calls 'em) Fellow Soldiers, very many of whom were by him thought worthy of
immortal Fame, he having in his Epistles given an everlasting Testimony of
them, and Luke also in the Acts reckoning them by their Names. Among these
Timothy ((...)) is reported to have received the Episcopacy of the Ephesian
Diocese, even as Titus also of the Churches in Crete. But Mr. O. craftily
transposes the Historians Words. He begins at the latter end -- It was (says
he) only reported that Timothy was the first Bishop of Ephesus. Then he adds,
from the beginning of this long Period; That there was no certainty who
succeeded the Apostles, etc. As if it were but a Report, and not a certainty,
that Timothy and Titus were Bishops of their respective Churches. Whereas
Eusebius first says, 'twas uncertain how many, and who governed the Churches,
that vast number of (...) planted by the Apostles: only he excepts those
mentioned by name in the Acts, and Paul's Epistles, who certainly ruled the
Churches planted by the Apostles: and among them (says he) it is reported (...):
where is this reported? Why in St. Paul's Epistles, it is Witnessed, that
Timothy received the Bishopric of Ephesns, and Titus of Crete. And I hope the
Testimony drawn from the Historical part of the Apostles Epistles, is not an
uncertain Report.

With the help of that common distinction, between Ordinary and Extraordinary
Church Officers, the Dissenters (...) off, whatever is brought against them out
of Scripture. They will tell you that the Apostles, and the Evangelists were
Extraordinary Officers, and cannot be drawn into Consequence, nor made a
President for Bishops, these being but Ordinary Church Officers. Mr. O. I do
believe, serves himself of this subterfuge, near an hundred times in this
Defense of his, and the Plea. My design then here is to examine this
Distinction, that this short Chapter may rise to some degree of Proportion with
the rest. The Question then is, what is an extraordinary-Officer: And my Answer
is, it is of two kinds.

1. An Extraordinary Officer properly speaking is one, whose very Office is
Extraordinary and Temporary. Such were the Dictators among the Romans, so long
as that People preserved their Liberty. These Dictators were Created upon some
occasion of extreme danger threatening the Commonwealth, which being over,
there was an end of the Officer, and Office both. The Dictator returned back to
the Plough, and the Consuls again reassumed the Administration of the public
Affairs. Of this kind is the High-Steward in England, who is constituted the
chief Manager at the Coronation of the King, or Trial of a Peer. But so soon as
these Solemnities are over, there is an end of the High-Steward. He breaks his
Staff, the Ensign of his Honor and Office, and becomes a private Man, as he
was before. Such I reckon Prophets in the Church to have been, God raising them
up by an extraordinary Commission for the necessary Service of Religion: but it
was not necessary, that a Prophet should have a Successor, or that the Office
of a Prophet should be continued: For in the Jewish Church Prophets ceased, as
well as in the Christian, which every one knows and acknowledges.

2. An Extraordinary Officer is one, whose Office generally speaking, at least
several parts of his Office are Ordinary, necessary and of perpetual use: But
who is endued with many Singular, Personal, and extraordinary qualifications,
and advantages for the Discharge of his Office. Such was Aaron the High Priest
of the Jews. Such were the Seventy taken in by Moses, to bear with him part of
the burden of the Government. Such were the Apostles, and Evangelists, the
Pastors and Teachers (many of them) in the Apostles days as I make account, and
am now about to explain.

The Ordinary necessary, and permanent parts of the Apostolical, and
Evangelistical Offices were Preaching the Word, Administering the Sacraments,
Ordaining Elders and managing the Government, and Discipline of the Church.
With respect hereunto the Apostles, and Evangelists were Ordinary Church
Officers; Though having received from God, many extraordinary personal Gifts
enabling them to discharge their Office more effectually; on which Account they
may be called extraordinary Officers also. For so we are wont to call even
Persons of very Eminent Natural Parts, and mighty Improvements in knowledge,
extraordinary Men: Much more then those, who receive their divine Abilities
immediately from God. But still for all that, their Office was but Ordinary,
and it was necessary, and God appointed that there should be a Succession unto
the Ordinary Apostolical, and Evangelistical Offices, (though he did not
continue the extraordinary Gifts. So it appears from those Words of our Lord --
And lo, I am with you always, to the end of the World. [Matt. 28. 20. This
promise of Christ cannot be thought to belong to the Apostles personally: for
they were mortal, how then could Jesus Christ be with them always, and to the
end of the World? Nor is the Promise to be understood of extraordinary Gifts
and Assistances, such as were given to the Apostles and Evangelists: For we
know that those ceased in the Church, in an Age or two. It remains therefore,
that in the forementioned Passage, Christ promised to be with his Church always
unto the end of the World, in the Ordinary work of the Ministry, Preaching the
Word, Discipling Nations, Administering the Sacrament, exercising Discipline,
and Governing the Church. And from hence it follows, that they in whose hands
is lodged the Power of Preaching the Word, and Administering the Sacraments, of
Ordaining, and Governing the Church at this day, are Successors unto the
Apostles and Evangelists, and invested with the same Powers, that the Apostles
and Evangelists were, though not with such Extraordinary Gifts; and by
Consequence are the same Species of Church Officers. ex. gr. Was not Caiaphas,
as truly the High Priest as Aaron, and the Sanhedrim in the Apostles days, the
same that it was in Moses's? only excepting the Eminent Gifts, which were
bestowed on the one, and not on the other. I conclude then, that the
Apostolical and Evangelistical Offices, were (if we will speak exactly)
Ordinary; though the Apostles and Evangelists Abilities were Extraordinary. And
that the Apostles and Evangelists had, and to this day have, and will, and
ought to have unto the end of the World, Successors in all the Ordinary parts
of their Office.

But it will be Objected, if the Apostolical, or Evangelistical Object. 1.
Office was succeeded to, why was the name of the Office altered? The
discontinuance of the Title seems to argue the discontinuance of the Office.

Ans. 1. It is held not without Reason, that the name Apostle descended at
least upon their next, and immediate Successors, which some call Secondary
Apostles, the Inseriour Ministers being indifferently called Bishops or
Presbyters. But in a little time the Apostles Successor, laid aside that Title
of Apostle, out of modesty contenting themselves with that of Bishop, and the
inferior Ministers with that of Presbyter. To this purpose Theodoret, (...).
Bursc. p. 92.
There is evidence sufficient in the Scripture of these Secondary Apostles,
such perhaps was James the Just, and (...) the Apostle of the Philippians.
Titus, and others are called Apostles, 2 Cor. 8. 23. Therefore it may be
further observed, that the Ancient Fathers (...) 'em indifferently, both
Apostles and Bishops Kal (...). (...).
, as may be seen in Jerome, (...) and Salvian, as Mr. B. informs me. It may not
here be passed over, that in after Ages, the Learned Writers often called the
Apostles themselves by the Name of Bishop Ep. 23. Comment. ad Ephesians.
, as may be seen in in Cyprian and Hilary: and in Eusebius, Peter is reckoned
Hom. 14. in 6.
the Bishop of Rome, in conformity to the Language of their Act. See Quaest.
nov. Test. 14. apud Aug.
own time, when Bishop signified the Supreme Officer of a Church. This
Observation shows clearly that the Apostolical, and the Episcopal Office is the
same in reality. But I answer, c. 4. v. 11.


2. That the changing of the Title of the Office cannot import the ceasing of
the Office. Caesar was Emperor by the Title of Perpetual Dictator, Augustus his
Successor by that of Caesar: and the following Emperors by those of Caesar and
Augustus, (though Caesar at length was appropriated to one (...) Ael. Verus
(...). c. 1.
as yet only designed, and named the Emperor's Successor): whatever were their
Titles, they were all Emperors. But to come nearer home, and to Instance in a
Matter more directly to our purpose. At the Reformation in Scoltand, the
Prelatical Rulers of the Churches were styled Superintendents; yet the Office
of Bishop was not therefore changed, because the Title was. The Superintendents
had the same Power to inspect the Churches in their own Districts, as the
Bishops had. To conclude, the change of the name Apostle into Bishop, is no
prejudice against the Episcopal Power, being the same as the Apostolical was,
and succeeding into its place.

It will again be Objected, that since Ordinary Presbyters are Object. 2.
confessed on all hands, to succeed the Apostles in the Ministry of the Word and
Sacraments, why not then in the other parts of the Apostolical Office, sc. the
Ordaining and Governing Power?

Ans. The Solution of this Difficulty (such as it is) depends upon Matter of
Fact, sc. how God was pleased by the Apostles to determine this Point. This is
not the place to dispute the Question, whether the Apostles conveyed their
whole Power and Office unto every, or to all Presbyters; it has, I am in hopes,
been cleared in the Negative, both in these and my former Papers: but to the
Objection I reply, that when an Office is attended with Variety of Work, it
does not follow of necessity, that he who succeeds in one part of the Office,
must be reckoned to succeed in all. It cannot be doubted, but the Apostles had
it in their Power to divide, and put the several parts of their Office into
several hands: and we have an Instance that they did so. They made seven
Deacons unto whom they committed the care of the poor, and distribution of the
public Alms, which was before in the Apostles themselves. But then no one will
say, that because the Apostles conferred upon these Seven one part of their
Office, that therefore they must be understood to have committed to 'em all the
rest, sc. the Powers of Ordination, of Government, and of Discipline. By parity
of Reason, though Presbyters succeeded the Apostles, and were by them Ordained
unto that part of the Apostolical Office, viz. Ministering in the Word and
Sacraments, it will not follow, that they also received the whole Apostolical
Power, that of Ordination, Government, and Discipline. It Is further Objected,
That the Apostolical Power extended it Object. 3.
self every where, the Evangelistical reached to diverse places and Countries,
but it cannot be pretended that the Episcopal Power, and Jurisdiction is so
large, and as it were unlimited. It Is rather confined unto a certain Compass or
District, as we plainly see; for which reason the Bishops are not the Apostles,
nor the Evangelists Successors.

Ans. It Is no hard matter to get over this small Rub. This unlimited Power of
the Apostles, may be reckoned among their Extraordinary, and personal
Privileges, and so does us no prejudice. The Office may be the same, though the
extent of Power may be more in one than in another. The Bishop of Eugubium, was
as truly a Bishop, as the Pope of Rome. And Ptolemy was as really, and to all
intents and purposes, King of Egypt, as Alexander had been of that, and many
other vast Kingdoms and Provinces: and as he was really a King, so he was
really Alexander's Successor also. For who will say, that William (...), was
not Will. the Conqueror's Successor, because he succeeded him not in the
Dukedom of Normandy, as well as the Kingdom of England? We see by these
Examples, that one may have several Successors, into several parts of their
Jurisdiction. How large soever the Diocese of the Apostles or Evangelists was,
yet the Bishops may be their Successors, unto some parts of their Jurisdiction.
Among the Romans, they who inherited any part of the Decedent's Estate (were
they few, or were they many) were all called Haeredes, and distinguished
according to the Proportion allotted them. Hence we read of Haeredes ex deunce,
ex quadrante, ex semuncia, ex semisse; as well as Haeres ex ass, who inherited
all.

But what if after all this, every Bishops Power extends it self through the
whole World, being not in its own nature limited and fixed to any one single
District? Some have thought so, and upon good ground too. After many other
Reasons, and Evidences of the Universal Power of Bishops given by Mr. B. p. 56.
It seems to (...) a strong Argument for it, that Bishops in Synods have ever
exercised their Power in other Diocesses, as well as in their own. I do not see
by what Authority Bishops in Councils could take upon 'em, to correct the
Miscarriages of particular Bishops within their own Diocesses, to remove the
Heretical, or Schismatical, to restore the unjustly deprived, to confirm the
Customs and Polity of single Churches, except on this one Principle, That every
Bishop is a Bishop of the Church Universal, and has an inherent Power over all
the World, and every where. It Is true, it must at the same time be (...), that
for Peace and Order's sake, and to the end the Churches may be certainly taken
care of, Bishops are limited to some particular Diocese, as to the constant and
Ordinary Administration of Church Affairs; and one Bishop is not suffered to
interlope in another District without necessity: Nevertheless on extraordinary
Occasions, such as Apostasy, Heresy, and Schism, the other Bishops made use of
their general Power, to rectify Disorders even in those Churches, where
Ordinarily they had no Jurisdiction. Every Bishop then is a Bishop every where,
besides the constant care of some particular Church committed unto him.

But it will lastly be Objected -- That Apostles and Evangelists Object. 4.
were not (...), but Itinerant Officers, shifting from place to place, as the
exigences of the Church and Interest of the Gospel required. This the Bishops
do not pretended to, neither can.

Ans. 1. Some of the Apostles were fixed, or at least fixed themselves. Thus
James the Apostle (or at least an Apostle) was the constant residing Prefect or
Bishop of Jerusalem. So was Simeon after him. So was Peter at Rome for 25
years, according to Jerome. So was John in Asia for a long time. So was Timothy
at Ephesus, and Titus in Crete. But

2. Bishops are no otherwise fixed than were the Apostles. I have showed before
that upon necessary occasions they interposed any where. Besides, a Bishop may
in unconverted Nations pass from one City and Country to another, and plant
Churches, as the Apostles did. Thus Frumentius Soc. l. 1. c. 19.
played the Apostle in India, being Ordained Bishop at Soz. l. 2. c. 23.
Alexandria in Egypt, by Athanasius. So did Aidan in Northumberland among the
Angles and Mercians. Histor. Account of the Bishop of St. As. Chapter 5. 6.


3. It is so difficult a matter to define exactly what Residence is, and when a
Man may be said to be fixed: how often, how long, and on what Occasions he may be
allowed to be Absent, and yet at the same time be the settled Minister of a
Church, that I think no Man alive can, with any tolerable certainty prononuce a
Person not to have been the Resident Ruler, or Bishop of a Church, because he
finds him employed in some other place upon some extraordinary Service of the
Church. I make no difficulty to affirm, that when, and as often as any Emergent
necessity requires it, and his Superior Commands him, a fixed Resident Officer
may leave his Flock for some time, and attend the Business, which he is thus
'specially called to: and yet still he is their fixed and settled Minister. If
Paul called Timothy to him at Rome from Ephesus, and Titus from Crete, it will
not follow they were not the fixed and Resident Rulers (Bishops) of those
Churches, which the Apostle had before committed to 'em; no more than that the
British Bishops, who by Order of the Emperor Constantius assisted at the
Council of Ariminum, were not the fixed Resident Bishops of the British
Churches; Or that the Members of the Assembly of Divines, were not the settled
Rectors, Vicars, or Lecturers, of their respective Congregations, though they
were a good while absent from 'em, and sitting at Westminster.

4. One may be the fixed Minister of a Church, and yet afterward remove to
another place and settle there. I suppose my Neighbor Mr. B. had been the fixed
Minister of some Congregation in the West of England, before he settled here
among us. So that if for some important Reasons, Paul had quite removed Timothy
from Ephesus, and Titus from Crete, appointing Tichycus in the Room of the
former, 2 Timothy 4. 12. And Artemas to succeed the latter, Tit. 3. 12. This will
not evince, That Timothy was never the fixed Ruler (Bishop) of Ephesus, or Titus
of Crete. To draw toward a Conclusion all alterable Circumstances, such as
Extraordinary divine Gifts, different Titles, Largeness, or extent of Power
over all or very many Cities and Countries, and unfixedness as to any one City
or Province, or whatever else of this kind may be alleged, make no difference
between the Apostolical, or Evangelistical and the Episcopal Power. It is the
Ordination which conferrs the Office, and the Power, not the fixedness or
unfixedness of the Ordainer. It Is the Power of Ordination given unto Apostles,
Evangelists and Bishops, which enables 'em to Ordain others, not any alterable
Circumstance, which is observed in any of 'em. In a word, that Ordinary
Officers, may succeed Extraordinary Officers (understand Extraordinary in the
second signification before laid down) must needs be confessed by our Adversaries
themselves, I mean the Presbyterians. They affirm, and believe that they
succeed the Apostles in the Office of Ministering in the Word and Sacraments of
Ordaining, Governing, and exercising the Discipline of the Church. With what
Front then can any of 'em deny, that Ordinary Officers (and such at this day
are they at the best) may succeed Extraordinary ones, in the exercise of an
Ordinary Office? Or with what Color can they pretend, that fixed Officers (such
are they themselves now, as they believe) cannot succeed those who were unfixt,
that is the Apostles? So that these Quirks of Extraordinary, and unsettled
Officers are devised merely to disguise the Truth, and gull the simple Part of
Mankind into Schism and Error.

The APPENDIX.
MR. O. thinks he presses very hard upon me, when upon Def. p. 142.
my supposing Evangelists to be a Species of Church Officers distinct from
Pastors, and Teachers, in Ephesians. 4. 11. I must be forced to deny the Diocesan
Bishops, to be the Pastors of their (...) Churches, contrary to the Prayer in
the Ember-Weeks.

Ans. The Good Man has (I fear wilfully) forgot what I discoursed about Pastors
in T. N. to this effect, that in Scripture Pastor is a common Name given to
Superior, and to Inferior Officers in the Church, as Minister also is. Here in
the Epistle to the Ephesians, it can mean none but the Ordinary Teachers:
Pastors and Teachers by the Figure (...), Importing the Ordinary Pres-byters,
for which reason Pastors is twice together left out, 1 Cor. 12. 28, 29. In
after Ages it by degrees came to signify Bishops, at least principally them,
and so (as I reckon) it is taken in this Sense, in the Ember-Weeks Prayer,
Bishops and Pastors, there signifying the same Church Officers. I say perhaps:
for though I will not assuredly affirm, that by Pastors in that Collect, is meant
the Presbyters, who assist at Ordinations, and examine the Candidates for
Orders, and lay on hands with the Bishop: yet the Prayer is capable of that
Sense; The Bishops and Pastors, that is, The Bishops and the Assisting
Presbyters. But Mr. O. adds, If the Rector says, they are both Pastors and
Evangelists, he confounds those Officers, which the Apostle distinguishes.

Ans. If what I said just now be not -- a sufficient Reply hereunto, I add,
that one and the same Person may have distinct Offices, and the distinct Titles
belonging to those Offices. John was an Apostle and an Evangelist. Every
Apostle was a Prophet, was an Evangelist, was a Pastor and Teacher. (...). The
Apostles had all the Ministerial St. Chrysostom. in 4. Cap. ad Ephesians. Sermon. 11.
Powers. And so had Evangelists all the Powers, which their Inferior Officers
had: They were Pastors and Teachers. Nor is this a Confounding the Officers,
because the Proposition is not convertible. Though every Bishop or Evangelist,
is a Pastor also and Teacher; yet every Pastor or Teacher is not an Evangelift,
or a Bishop.

Mr. O. engages me once more to enter the Lists with Def. p. 146.
him in Philology, a part of knowledge he values himself upon, but without
reason, as will now appear, as it has also before. He Corrects me for writing
Mark's Successor at Alexandria, Annianus, which he says, ought to be Anianus,
with a single ( n) at the beginning.

Ans. I have the Paris Edition of Eusebius, the best extant in the World, as
all agree. I in my writing Annianus conformed my self to that Copy, wherein I
find him not once called Anianus. And Valesius a Critic of the first Form,
vindicates himself for writing it with a double Annotat. in Eusebius. p. 37. col.
1. B.
( n) from the Authority of the Mazarine, and Medicean MSS. unto whom (he adds)
Ruffinus and Jerome Subscribe In my Jerome it is Anianus, Cat. Script. Marcus.
. For Annianus is a Latin Word, deduced from Annius, as Valerianus from
Valerius; and many other of the same Nature are obvious, to any who read the
Roman (...). Particularly there was a Poet of good esteem, in the Reign of
Adrian the Emperor, named Titus Annianus, as I observed I also read in Socrates
and Soz. of one Annianus Bishop of Antioch, and of another (if another) who
subscribed the Sardic Council. Athanas. Apol. 2. contra Arian. p. 767.
in Helvicus's Chronology accidentally, when I was looking for another thing.
It Is true, other MSS. write him Anianus, as Mr. O. does, and (...) has
Hananias. But what then? When a Word is differently written, may not one choose
to write it, as he pleases? Happily, if I had chanced to have followed those, who
believe the right name to be Anianus, Mr. O. could have amended it into
Annianus. But I do him too much credit, by supposing he knew any thing of this
different way of writing Annianus.

Mr. O. hopes the Rector will not make a settled Church Def. p. 148.
Officer, a Bishop, of Priscilla a Woman. This I suppose he intends for a
little piece of Wit, or a Jeer.

Ans. Why not a Bishop as well as an Evangelist? And why not a settled
ChurchOfficer, as well or rather than an (...) one? I am sure a (...) and
virtuous Woman, is not very forward to gad abroad: it is her Character that she
Loves home, and not often appears in public. St. Chrysostom makes her an
Evangelist. Let Mr. O. look how well that suits with his professed Opinion of
Evangelists being Extraordinary unfixt Officers. Let Mr. O. acquit St.
Chrysostom, and his own dear self in the first place, and the Rector will be
safe I am confident. But surely Mr. O. knows an Ancient Father (of good credit
with him, though with no body else) I mean Dorothaeus -- who among other of his
Fables makes Priscilla a Bishop. If his Authority be so good, Mr. O. has the
Mystery proved to him.

Mr. O. It is well observed by the late Learned Bishop of Worcester, Def. p.
150.
that the first that called Timothy Bishop of Ephesus, was Leontius Bishop of
Magnesia in the Council of Chalcedon, Four Hundred Years after.

Ans. By the Ministers good leave, I must Question the Truth of what he here
asserts, though he backs it with never so good Authority. Whoever shall tell me
that, The first, who called Timothy Bishop of Ephesus, was Leontius Bishop of
Magnesia, in the Council of Chalcedon, must excuse me if I say, he is grossly
mistaken. Eusebius, who lived, and Flourished above an Hundred Years before
that Council, says, that (...) (which must at least be understood of the
Ecclesiastical History before Eusebius's Time) Eusebius. H. E. l. 3. c. 4.
(...). It is recorded in History, That Timothy first received the Episcopacy
of the Diocese of Ephesus. Jerome calls him Bishop Catal. scr. Eccles.
of Ephesus: and he was 60 Years before the said Council of Chalcedon We find
him acknowledged Bishop of Ephesus, in the Apostolical Constitutions, by
Chrysostom. Hom. 15. in 1 Timothy and by Theodoret Argument. in 1 Timothy and in his
Comment. 1 Timothy 3. 1. all before the Council of Chalcedon.
. Thus much I have adventured to say, before I consult Mr. O's Testimony,
borrowed from the Irenicum. But I am now going to consult the Learned Bishop of
Worcester, and examine whether he was guilty of this Oversight, imputed to him
by the Minister -- Well! I have deliberately, as well as I can, read the (...)
and 303 d pages of the Irenicum, and I find Mr. O. has served that Reverend
Author, as he has done many a good one besides, in downright Terms belying him.
Mr. (...) (so I will make bold to call him, that Book being wrote in his Youth,
and before he had received the Honors which were afterward deservedly bestowed
on him) speaking there of the Succession of Bishops, tells us, That the
Succession at Ephesus is pleaded for with greatest Confidence by Leontius
Bishop of (...), in the Council of Chalcedon. Mr. (...) ('it is confessed)
afterward has these Words -- No wonder then if Leontius makes Timothy Bishop of
Ephesus, and derives the Succession down from him. He does not affirm, that
Leontius first called Timothy Bishop of Ephesus. But that it is no wonder, if he
made Timothy Bishop of Ephesus, and thence proved the Succession of Bishops, by
the Succession of the Ephesian Bishops, down from Timothy. He made Timothy
Bishop of Ephesus; but he was not the first that did so: for many had done it
before him. I will not deny, perhaps this Learned Author at that time
Questioned, whether Timothy was so or no. However he did not assert, that
Leontius was the first that called him Bishop of Ephesus. Mr. O. then, who
seems to value himself, for the Hundreds of his quotations would do well, if he
more Def. p. 147.
carefully examined his Authors, and more sincerely represented their Opinions.
But it is no hard matter for any one (if he will make it his business for some
little time) to Collect an innumerable number of Authorities upon this Subject
of Episcopacy. It Is but taking into his hand, Blondel and (...), Forbes and
Stillingfleet, Saravia and some others, particularly Mr. Baxter (from whom Mr.
O. has borrowed at least two of his Arguments in his Plea, almost verbatim, and
many of the Testimonies, wherewith he has confirmed 'em) and he shall be
thought by Ignorant Readers Helluo Librorum, a Devourer of Books, a Man of
infinite Reading, and intimate acquaintance with the Fathers, and Ancient
Writers, when perhaps he never read one of 'em, no nor so much as consulted the
particular Testimonies, which he cites out of 'em. But it is one thing to dabble
in Authors, and another thoroughly to understand, and truly to represent 'em.

CHAP. VI. Being an Answer to Mr. OF s 6th Chap.
THE Principal Matter whereof may be reduced unto Four Heads.

1. What has already been argued between us in the former Chapters, which I
quite lay aside. 2. What will fall in my way, when I Reply farther unto the
Plea, which I reserve to a more convenient Place, the second part of this Book.
3. What is here de novo started against the Rector, which I make the Subject of
this last Chapter. And, 4. The Cavils, wherewith he has furnished out this last
part of his Defense, which are considered apart in the Appendix.
In Vindicating the Polity of the Church of England, I asserted in T. N. That
the Parish Priests have a share of Power in the Ecclesiastical Government; for
as much as all the Canons, or Laws of the Church are made by them, with their
knowledge and consent in Convocation.

Mr. O. The Acts of Convocation are no Laws, till they be confirmed Def. p. 151.
in Parliameut.

Ans. They are, though not Civil, yet Ecclesiastical Laws, and formerly at east
obliged in Conscience, as the late Bishop of Worcester informs me,
Ecclesiastical Cases p. 336. 372, 373. It Is nothing to me, whether in
Convocation they be made Laws of the Land; I was speaking of the Laws of the
Church. Besides, Mr. O's Charge against us was, that all the Power in the
Church is in the Bishop's Hands. But this Argument of his Excludes not only the
Presbyters, but the Bishops also from having any Power in the Ecclesiastical
Legislative. For it is likewise true that the Decrees of Convocation, though they
were made by the Bishops only, as Mr. O. would insinuate, yet would not be Laws
of the Land till confirmed by Parliament. Thus the Minister by denying or
questioning too much has destroyed the Subject of the Question, the Bishops
also being hereby stripped of their Power, as well as the Presbyters. It Is then
to no purpose for us to dispute whether the Bishops have all the Ecclesiastical
Power in their hands, or whether the Presbyters have some, since according to
Mr. O. neither of 'em have any.

Mr. O. Has every Parish Priest a Power of making Church Laws? Def. p. 152.
If not, etc. He thinks -- they have not, and argues, That if the Parish
Priests make Laws by their Representatives, and shall therefore be thought to
have Power of Discipline, it will follow, that Freeholders have Power of
Government, their Representatives in Parliament, being concerned in the making
Laws.

Ans. The Rector asserts not that Every Parish Priest has a Power of making
Church Laws. It were an unreasonable thing. But every Parish Priest has a share
in the Power of making Ecclesiastical Laws, which he executes by his
Representative in Convocation: and I add, Every Freeholder has a share of
Power in making the Political-Laws. But all this is Trifling. Nothing is more
evident than this, what is done by a Representative is the Act and Deed of the
Persons represented. And nothing is more Ordinary, than to tell discontented
People, when the Laws are executed upon them, that they are of their own
making, that is made by their Representatives.

Mr. O. The Convocation is not a just Representative of the Clergy.

Ans. There are two things only (that I know of) necessary to make a just
Representative.

1. That the Representers be sufficient as to Number. 2. That they be freely
chosen by the Represented. On both accounts I will prove that the Convocation
is a just Representative of the Clergy.
1. One cannot from the reason of the thing gather with any certainty, what
number of Representers is necessary to make a just Representative, and 'twould
be in vain to all edge the private Sentiments of Men, among whom it will happily
be found quot homines tot sententiae, so many Men, so many Minds. The surest
way then to determine this Point is (I think) to compare the Convocation with
the House of Commons, which is the Representative of People. My Argument lies
thus -- If the House of Commons be a just Representative of the People, as to
the number of the Representers, which no Body, I presume, will dare to deny,
then the Convocation is a just Representative of the Clergy. Let us then
compare the number of the Representers and the Represented in the House of
Commons with the number of the Representers, and Represented in the House of
Convocation.

The People of England represented in Parliament, are according to Dr.
Chamberlain's computation in (...) Angliae, between five and six Millions:
Their Representers in the House of Commons about five hundred. The Clergy of
England, are, I reckon, about fifteen Thousand (allowing ten Thousand for the
Parsons, Rectors, and Vicars of so many Parishes, and adding to these the
Masters and Fellows of the Colleges in both Universities, Chaplains,
Lecturers, and Curates, which will in all amount to five Thousand more) as I
will grant, because I will not favor a side; though it may be they will not reach
above one Third part of that Number. The Representers of these fifteen Thousand
in Convocation, are an hundred Sixty and Six, which make up the two lower
Houses of Convocation in both (...). Any Man may hence discern at first sight,
the disproportion between five hundred Members of the House of Commons,
Representing above five Millions of People. And one Hundred Sixty and Six
Members of Convocation representing only fifteen Thousand Clergy. Every
Parliament Man (let us now consider them (...)) represents about ten Thousand
Persons: But every Member of Convocation represents not much above Ninety. The
difference then is as Ninety to ten Thousand. If then the Members of the House
of Commons are in respect of number, a just Representative of the People (as we
all believe) much more are the Members of Convocation, a just Representative of
the Clergy.

Now because the Wisdom and Integrity of Representers is to be regarded also,
as well as their Number, and because their Wisdom and Integrity, cannot be
better judged of, than by considering the freedom of their choice, we are in
the next place to enquire whether the Members of Convocation are not as freely
chosen by the Clergy, as the Members of Parliament are by the People.

Let it then be remembered that a great part of the Nation, have not any Voice
at all in the Election of Members of Parliament: For (we know) a vast number of
Servants, Laborers, Mechanics, Shopkeepers, Merchants, Artists of all sorts.
Scholars, Attorneys, Lawyers, Physicians, Divines (not having Freehold Estates)
Copyholders, Minors also, and single Women have no Voice in the Election of
any Parliament Man: That is (as I reckon) four parts of five of the People are
not at all admitted to choose Parliament Men. But all the Parsons, Rectors and
Vicars, have Suffrages in the Election of Members of Convocation, and these
Electors are two Thirds of the Clergy, viz. Parsons, Rectors and Vicars, being
ten Thousand by my former Calculation. It appears hence, that if the House of
Commons is a just Representative of the People with respect to their Election,
much more is the Convocation a just Representative of the Clergy: four fifths
of the People, as I reckon, being entirely excluded from choosing Members of
Parliament, and but one Third part of the Clergy from choosing Members of
Convocation.

But to evince this, and make it yet more plain, we must go another way to
work, because of the various methods, whereby Persons by Ancient Custom, or
Constitution become Members of Parliament, and of Convocation without any due
Election.

Of the five hundred Members of the House of Commons, one hundred are Knights,
chosen only by Freeholders, who are not happily an eighth part of the People of
England; and the other four hundred are Citizens, Burgesses and Barons of the
Cinque Ports, Elected by an handful of Men, who are not (I believe) a fiftyeth
part of the People of England. And these latter, in respect of the Body of the
Nation, I can scarce admit to be elected; they may more fitly be said to come
in by Privilege. Of the one hundred Sixty and Six Members of Convocation, about
fifty two, or a third part are chosen Proctors, by the Parsons, Vicars and
Rectors, who are two thirds of the Clergy; about an hundred and fourteen, come
in by virtue of their Dignities (as Deans and Archdeacons) or by the Election
of the Chapters only. Let any one then judge whether the lower Houses of
Convocation, are near so much cramped with Members by Privilege, as the House
of Commons is: four parts of the House of Commons, being chosen by not a
fiftieth part of the Pople, and the fifth part of them, by about an eighth part
of the People; But a third part of the Convocation is chosen by two thirds of
the Clergy, and the rest by privilege. If then the House of Commons,
notwithstanding what has been observed, are by all Wise Men looked upon as a
just Representative of the People, with respect unto their choice, as well as
their number, I would know a Reason, why the Convocation is not a just
Representative of the Clergy.

Now least what has been said shall not be thought clear enough, and sufficient
to evince what it is intended for, there being a great uncertainty in such
Calculations, I shall compare the Convocation with the Assembly of Divines at
Westminster, who (if I am not much mistaken) will be found on both the
forementioned Accounts, that is of Number, and of Choice to have been not so
just a Representative of the Clergy, as the Convocation is. This will be
dispatched in a very few Words.

In the Year 1643. the Parliament called that Assembly, consisting of one
hundred twenty and two Persons: Of whom let it be noted,

1. That they fell short of the two Houses of Convocation, forty four in
number, besides, that there were some Scots among'em.

2. That not one of them was chosen by the Clergy, but all Nominated by the
Parliament. Either then let Mr. O. give over taxing the Convocation, as if it
were not a just Representative of the Clergy, or confess the Westminster
Assembly, to have been packed to serve a Turn, contrary to all Law and Justice.
In short, and to retort Mr. O's Reflections, the Assemby of Divines, were all
of 'em (except a few Nominated for a Color) the Parliaments Creatures, chosen
by them alone. The rest, if they had joined in the Westminster Deliberations,
had been mere (...): there were enough to out-vote 'em, besides, those Lords
and Commoners, who were taken into the Assembly, like so many Lay Elders to
Influence their Counsels, and prevent any Decree that might be offered contrary
to that Parliaments Inclinations or Designs.

Mr. O. If the Rector can find no proof in Scripture, that Def. p. 153.
Ordinary Presbyters did suspend at all, how dare they (the Episcopal-Clergy)
do it for a Fortnight? If Presbyters may by Scripture suspend, how dares the
Rector condemn the Dissenting Ministers for suspending?

Ans. We suspend not by virtue of our own sole inherent Power, but in
conjunction with our Diocesan, with his knowledge and consent. There is a great
Difference between an Inherent Power for Presbyters to suspend (a precedent for
which I require out of Scripture) and to suspend for a time, according to the
Constitutions of the Church, and in Subordination to the Bishop, unto whom the
Party Suspended may appeal.

Mr. O. Whereas I affirmed, that the Ordinary Elders had Def. p. 156.
not Supreme Authority in the Churches, at least not after Paul's return from
Italy in the East, the Minister inferrs, that, herein is implied, that Ordinary
Presbyters had the Supreme Authority before that time, and Challenges the
Rector to prove they were ever deprived of it afterward.

Ans. There is no such thing implied by the Rector, but only supposed at most,
to avoid all unnecessary Disputes with his Adversaries. But if it were out of
question, that the Ordinary Elders had once the Supreme Authority, yet the
Apostle committing afterward the Supreme Authority, unto single Persons, ex.
gr. unto Timothy and (...), and making no mention at all of the Ordinary
Presbyters, must be understood to supersede the Power, that was before in the
Presbyters, and to subject them unto those single Persons for the future. But
this is the Point in Controversy throughout these Papers, and needs not here to
be insisted on.

Mr. O. Here the Rector fairly confesses there were no Bishops, Def. p. 157.
when the Epistle to the Ephesians was written in Paul's first Bonds.

Ans. The Rector supposes it only, as is said before, but does not grant it.
Nay, he is quite of another mind. But it suffices to his Hypothesis, that
single Persons were (afterward at least) Constituted Rulers (Bishops) in the
Churches.

Mr. O. (...) could not receive the sole Power of Ordination, because Paul took
in the Presbyters, 1 Timothy 4. 14.

Ans. Here Mr. O. (if I take him right) grants that (...) was Ordained by
(...), taking the (...) into his Assistance. This is as much, as I desire, and
the exact Pattern of our Ordinations. Presbyters therefore did not by their own
sole Power Ordain, but in Conjunction with the Apostle. On the other hand, if
the Revelation concerning Timothy's Ordination, came to the Presbyters, as well
as to St. Paul, they then acted not as Ordinary (...), but as Prophets, and so
cannot warrant Ordinary Presbyters, Ordaining by Virtue of their Ordinary
Power. (...), it no where appears that Paul joined the Presbyters in Commission
with Timothy, it may then be reasonable to conclude, that Timothy received the
sole Power, though it is sufficient for me to say, He had the Supreme.

Mr. O. But Paul joined (...) with him in the Ordinations, Acts. 14. 23.

Ans. Be it so: yet still if Barnabas was an Apostle as well as Paul (as is
manifest from Acts 14. 4, 14. Gal. 29.) And if Barnabas was equal to Paul, as
many believe, and Mr. O. will not deny, then we are but where we were before.
This is nothing to Ordinary Elders Ordaining. That Barnabas was though not equal
to Paul, yet independent on him, may be probably hence gathered that in the
sharp Contest between'em, Barnabas submitted not to Paul but separated from
him, Acts 15. 39. Besides, Barnabas received the same Commission that St. Paul
did, and at the same time, Acts 13. 1, 2. However, admitting Barnabas was but a
Secondary Apostle, which I rather believe, or (...), yet Mr. O. will not (I
hope) deny he was more than an Ordinary Elder, what then is this to Ordinary
Elders Ordaining, by their own sole Power, and inherent Authority? And how will
it hence (...), that because Paul admitted Barnabas, an Apostle, at least a
Secondary Apostle, to join in the Ordinations, ( Acts 14. 23.) that therefore
Timothy joined the Ordinary Presbyters with him? All this notwithstanding, I
give Mr. O. what he cannot prove, sc. That Timothy did not Ordain alone. It Is
enough to my purpose, that he was constitued the Principal Judge and Director
in Ordinations, as in all other Acts of Jurisdiction. Mr. O. The Rector having
argued from (...), that Timothy, Def. p. 162.
was intended the Resident Governor of the Church of (...), the Minister
denies it, upon the Authority of Mat. 15. 32. Mark. 8. 2.

Ans. (...) in these places produced against me is Limited by (...) which makes
a great difference. A Man may be (...) (...), to reside or abide in a place
one, two or three Days, or Months, or Years, and yet we know what it is to
reside, when it is spoken undeterminately. As for those Words -- Till I come, 1 Timothy 4. 13. it is no Limitation of Timothy's Residence at (...), nor does it
imply, that his Authority there must then cease. If it were so, then after Paul
was come to (...), (...) must have left off, Giving attendance unto Reading, to
Exhortation, to (...), which yet I suppose were Duties perpetually incumbent
upon him, let the Apostle be at (...) or not. In a word, St. Paul's going
shortly to Timothy at Ephesus, was not with intent to remove him thence, but to
Instruct him thoroughly, how to behave himself in the House of God, the Church
committed to his Charge, as is before observed and proved. Nevertheless, least
the Apostle should be prevented of his intended Visit, and should tarry long
(as he suspected might happen) he sent him for the present this Epistle
containing the sum of what afterward, when he came to Ephesus, he would more at
large communicate unto him. But these are Repetitions.

Mr. O. to prove that (...) had been furnished with the Def. p. 163.
same Powers at Corinth, Philippi and Thessalonica, as he was afterward at
Ephesus, "Alleges the Rectors granting that unfixt Evangelists "governed the
Churches, and Ordained Elders under the Apostles.

Ans. This Concession proves not that Timothy was furnished with the same
powers in Greece and Macedonia, as at Ephesus. For

1. It does not appear that Timothy was an Evangelist, when sent to Corinth,
etc. This is no where to be found in Scripture. But in St. Paul's second
Epistle to Timothy, which was a great while after he had been sent to (...),
Philippi and Thessalonica; then indeed it is intimated he was an Evangelist, and
not before.

2. It seems Evident unto me, that Timothy was sent unto Greece and Macedonia,
for quite other purposes, than to govern those Churches, and Ordain 'em Elders:
His business at (...) was To Establish and comfort the Christians there,
concerning their Faith (1 These. 3. 2.) And afterward, he went thither again to
hasten their Contributions, as I conceive. His Business to (...), was to carry
the Apostles Letter, concerning the (...) Schisms and Contentions. We read of
no Commission given him to receive Accusations, to reprove Offenders openly, to
examine the Qualification of the Candidates for Holy Orders, or to Ordain
Elders, either at Corinth, (...) or Thessalonica, as He had at Ephesus.

3. Eusebius (on whose Authority the Hypothesis of unfixt Eusebius. E. H. l. 3. c.
37.
Evangelists depends) describes them thus, They went from place to place, among
those who had not yet heard the Word of Faith, Or where no Churches were as yet
established. But Paul had already planted Churches at Corinth, Philippi and
Thessalonica. These then were not places proper for an unfixed Evangelist to be
employed in, and therefore Timothy did not the work of an Evangelist in those
Cities, that is, he had not the same Powers there, as at Ephesus. So that I
still call upon Mr. O. to prove Timothy was furnished with the same Powers in
Greece and Macedonia, as he was after at Ephesus.

4. If Timothy had been furnished with the same Powers, at his going to Greece
and Macedonia, as at Ephesus, why should Paul resolve for (...) (...), there to
instruct (...) in his Office? And because he foresaw, that Journey might
possibly be put off for a longer time, why did he dispatch a Letter to (...),
wherein in the mean while, he gives him the necessary Orders for the better
Ruling of the Church? (...), I suppose was not so forgetful as to need these
Instructions, if he had before been furnished with 'em, when he was sent to
(...), (...) and (...).

Mr. O. A great part of T. N. is to prove, That Presbyters Def. p. 165.
were not Supreme Governors, because the Apostles were above'em: And yet that
Timothy and Titus were Supreme Governors, though the Apostles were above them
also. Either the Elders were Supreme Governors, or Timothy and Titus were not.

Ans. I showed by Induction of Particulars, that the Presbyters were subject
unto the Apostles in every single Act of Government: That either an Apostle or
a Prophet, was constantly at the Helm to guide and direct 'em. The Elders had
not a discretionary Power in any Case, that we read of. But Timothy and Titus
(though they also were subject to St. Paul, whenever he thought fit to
interpose, yet) generally speaking were left unto the Judgment of their own
private Discretion, as appears from the Rules of Government prescribed 'em by
the Apostle. There is a manifest difference between Timothy and Titus, their
subjection to the Apostle, and that of the Ordinary Elders: See the Preface.

Mr. O. Whereas in proof of many Congregations in the Church of Ephesus, I
cited Acts 19. 10. All they which dwelt in Asia heard the Word of the Lord
Jesus. And backed this with Ignatius's calling himself the Bishop of Syria, not
of Antioch only, but of some considerable part of the adjacent Country. The
Minister Replies, This is little to the purpose, and that Men will talk any
thing. But

Ans. Do not these Observations render it highly probable, that the Ephesian
Church was also composed of several Assembles in City and Country? And is not
this a good account why a Bishop, and many Presbyters, and Deacons were
employed in the Church of Ephesus, not serving one Congregation alone in the
City, but others also in the Country round about called Asia? If there had been
but one Congregation at Ephesus, one Bishop, or Presbyter might have sufficed.
The Christians at that time of day were not so wealthy, as to multiply
Church Officers more than needed. This is not (I confess) to Mr. O's Purpose,
but I hope 'twill be thought to mine.

Mr. O. further pleads That the Rector ( understand in Order to prove there
were many Congregations in that Church) May as well say, that the Church of
Jerusalem took in the Parthians, and dwellers in Mesopotamia, Cappadocia, etc.
for all these heard the Word of the Lord Jesus. Acts 2. 9, 11. as well as those
of Asia did.

Ans. That Is the thing which I do affirm. The Parthians, and Dwellers in
Mesopotamia here mentioned, belonged unto the Church of Jerusalem, so many of
'em, as were converted. For the Dwellers in Mesopotamia, v. 9. are said to be
Dwellers at Jerusalem, v. 5. (...) is the word in both places. Now if they
Dwelt at Jerusalem, can it be doubted, whether they belonged to that Church?
The Difficulty is, how the same Persons should be called Dwellers at Jerusalem,
and in Mesopotamia at the same time. To this I answer, Mr. O. is as much
concerned as I am to give an account of the Difficulty. Nevertheless I Will
venture to shoot my Bolt for once, leaving every Man Liberty to judge of it, as
he sees cause.

I am not satisfied with their Opinion, who say that these Dwellers in
Mesopotamia, etc. came up to Jerusalem only for a time, to observe the Feast of
Pentecost. How then could they be called Dwellers at Jerusalem?

Mr. Mede B. 1. Disc. 20th being of this Opinion expounds (...) v. 5. a short
stay, and v. 9th a durable Mansion, supporting his Exposition by Genesis 27. 44. 1
Kings 17. 20. But it is not likely, Luke would use the same Word, in the same
Period, in so different Senses, and so perplex his Reader. I reckon then that
many Jews, who formerly dwelt in Mesopotamia, and were born there, v. 8. had
now shifted their Dwellings, and resided at Jerusalem. They who had before
dwelt in Mesopotamia, did now dwell at Jerusalem, in expectation as some think
of the Messiah, and by consequence the Church of Jerusalem, might take in the
Dwellers in Mesopotamia. And what is said here of the Dwellers in Mesopotamia,
must be applied unto the Medes, and Parthians, and Cappadocians, etc. More
particularly, I thus explain it. There were at Jerusalem, many Schools or
Colleges, for the Education and Instruction of Youth in Religion. These
Colleges were built at the Charge of such Jews as lived in Foreign Countries,
and sent their Youth to Jerusalem to be brought up in the knowledge of their
Law. Their Tutors or Instructors, were probably Natives of the same Countries.
All these being born in Foreign Nations, and therefore called Dwellers in them,
are nevertheless reckoned as at this time Dwellers in Jerusalem, where they now
resided, and so being Converted, might become Members of the new Christian
Church at Jerusalem. But this is a Matter of little moment in the present
Controversy.

Mr. O. If the Power of conferring other Powers, is greater than those other
Powers, then Bishops, who make an Archbishop are greater than he is: and so are
Bishops than Kings who they Crown, as also Recorders or TownClerks, than
Majors, whom they Swear.

Ans. I know very well that my Proposition is liable to several exceptions,
which it is not worth while to trouble the Reader with. Its certain, that when
a free People, Superior to the Candidate, elect themselves a King, they are
become subject to him, not greater than he is: And that because they divest
themselves of the Power, which they put into the hands of another. The Case is
the same, when Bishops make an Archbishop. They subject themselves to him, and
thence-forward, he is their Superior. But this is not the Case before us. He
who is possessed of a Power, and is able also to conferr the same Power upon
another, not diminishing nor destroying his own Power, must needs be greater
than he who receives that Power, but is not able to give it to another. A
Bishop (as my supposition is) having Power to Minister in the Word and
Sacraments, is also enabled to confer this Ministry upon others, that is to
Ordain Presbyters, and yet deprives not himself of it. He still Ministers in
the Word and Sacraments himself. But he is greater than a Presbyter, because
the Presbyter, though he has received the Power of Ministering in the Word and
Sacraments, yet he (...) Ordain another unto that Office, as the Bishop can.
Nothing needs be plainer. But I will illustrate it by a known Instance. There
are twenty four Knights of the Garter, the King is one of them. Every Knight of
the Garter, cannot create a Fellow of the Order, but the Sovereign only. For
which Reason He is called the Sovereign, and is greater than the other
Companions of the Order are, I mean quatenus the Sovereign Knight. And
therefore he is greater than the rest; because he is not only a Knight of the
Garter, but can make one, I need not apply it.

As to Mr. O's other Instances, they are but so many (...) Mistakes. It Is the
Hereditary Title or Election, which makes the King, and not he who is appointed
to manage the public Ceremony, of setting the Crown on the King's Head, and
giving him the Oath. And Mayors, are made by the Election of the FreeMen of the
Corporation, and not by the Town-Clerks or Recorders, who Swear them.

THE APPENDIX.
MR O. whose manner it is to (...) off Arguments which Def. p. 153.
pinch him, by diverting his Reader, with Reflections on some casual
Corruptions, in the Administration of our Church Government, takes Occasion
here to rally upon our Chancellors Commutings, or Dispensing with penace for
Money.

Ans. This is nothing to the Argument before us: this is no Scripture proof,
that Presbyters ever Excommunicated, or suspended. And though I will not take
upon me to defend or palliate any unwarrantable Practice; yet I am of Opinion
that some Corrupt Administrations, are not a sufficient reason for destroying
Governments, either Civil, or Ecclesiastical: for then an end must be put unto
all Government whatever. Nor do I believe one (...)-Administration can excuse
another: I mean Recrimination is no just Defense. Nevertheless against my
Inclination, yea, and my Resolution too, I Will for once walk a little out of my
way, and tell Mr. O. a story, by the bye, to the end he may not be too much
conceited of the Integrity and Innocence of his own Party; but may thence see
the Corruption of Humane Nature, and be convinced that Presbyterians are not so
sweet as some would have 'em thought to be; but when it is in their Power, they
also can be willing to Commute, as well as other People.

The second Presbyterian Class, in the Province of Lancaster (as 'twas called)
began at Bury, March 25. 1647. And continued there by Adjournments till
February 13th. 1650. In which space of time they met often, as they declared,
By virtue of an Ordinance of Parliament, not at all pretending to Divine
Commission, that I find in the Records of that Class, which I have by me. The
Presbyterian Ministers, and Lay Elders, thus meeting were entertained, or
rather entertained themselves, at the House of one John Redfern, an InnKeeper
in the said Town of Bury. I say entertained themselves, for like true Members
of a Church Militant, and as if they had been real Soldiers, for the setting up
the Kingdom of Jesus Church, they lived upon Free Quarter, or at least, run
into their Landlord's Debt, above twenty Pounds. To give 'em their due, they
had some Design to pay him off, and to that end, were devising to raise the
Money out of the Purses of such as were Obnoxious to their Spiritual
Discipline, that is to say, they intended to commute, and Punish the Offenders
Purses, instead of bringing them to the Stool of Repentance. But Oliver it
seems, (...) in their way and forbade the Bans, and so the honest Men adjourned
to fresh Quarters at Bolton. Thus poor John Redfern was wronged, and no
satisfaction could be had by fair means. But being asked why would he not sue
'em, he replied -- No: the Remedy is worse than the Disease, and Justice is not
to be had. Here then we have an Example of, at least, designed Commutation, or
which is worse, of as Errant a piece of Roguery, as can Ordinarily be met with
in History. Here we have a Bevy of Presbyterian Saints of the first Rate.
Painful Preachers, and Zealous Lay Elders gathered together in the fear of God
(so doubtless they were willing it should be believed) to Reform the Country
hereabouts, and yet giving an Example of the most scandalous Knavery, such as a
good Heathen, or Turk would have been ashamed of.

I hope there is no Precedent in the Gospel for this kind of Discipline.

(...) any questions the matter of Fact, as it is here related. I am able to
prove it, when reasonably required thereunto.

Mr. O. The Rector supposes that some in the Church may Des. p. 156.
Rule well, who don't labor in the Word and Doctrine.

Ans. I do so. But then at the same time I suppose 'em Ordained, not LayElders.

Mr. O. When I alleged, Heb. 12. 15. in proof that (...) is not an Artificial
Word, as (...) is, and observed that Believers are there exhorted, To look
diligently, etc. Mr. O. asks, Are all Believers bid (...) to look diligently to
the Flock, as the Pastors of it?

Ans. No. But because it hence appears that the verb (...) is used in a common
sense applicable to any Man, therefore I conclude, that nothing of certainty
can be argued from it, concerning the Power of Government. And I further say,
that as Believers are not directed to play the Bishops, or to look diligently
unto the Flock, as Pastors of it, so neither can it be proved, by this verb
(...) that Elders were to look diligently unto the Flock, as the Supreme
Pastors of it, or as Timothy and Titus, who were Commissioned to do so.

Mr. O. Who so bold as blind Bayard. Def. p. 159.


Ans. Whether Mr. O. exposes the Rector, or his own Wit and good Breeding, by
such a rude and trivial Diverb, I leave to the Reader, to decide, Such a
Clownish expression, shows him to have conversed rather among rude Carters and
Dray-Men, than Men of Polite Learning, or Celebrated Authors that (...) boasts
so much of, and pretends to be so wonderfully (...) in.

Now the occasion of this Elegant and spruce Questionis this. The Rector in T.
N. represented his Hypothesis borrowed from Bishop Pearson, as an Argument,
which no Papist had ever thought on before. But Mr. O. belike has chopped upon
something to that purpose, as he thought in the Rhemish Testament, for which
cause I am here compared to a Blind Tit. It Is confessed (though there is no need
to confess it, as will appear presently) I was not aware of that Passage of the
Rhemists, and I am certain (...) Pearson makes no mention of 'em, or of any
other Author, which drew me into this mistake, if it will prove one at last;
but what if it should? It does not in the least affect me, that Mr. O. is able
to find me once in an Error. I pretend not to be infallible or Omniscient. I
have somewhat a better Proverb to excuse my self with, than Mr. O. had to
revile me. Aliquando bonus dormitat Homerus. The good Old Man Homer himself,
was not only blind, but asleep too sometimes. Nor would I trouble my self to
make more Words on this slight Occasion, were it not that I think my self
obliged to vindicate Bishop Pearson, least any one should surmise, that he was
beholden to the Rhemists for his New Chronology, about the time when Paul
besought Timothy to abide at Ephesus, and yet had not the Ingenuity to
acknowledge it. Let us then in the first place produce the Rhemists Words,
which are as follows.

This Epistle was written, as it seems after Paul's first Rhemish Argument
before the first Epistle to Timothy.
Imprisonment in Rome, when he was dismissed and set at Liberty, and thereupon
it is, that he might say here, I hope to come to thee quickly (1 Timothy 3. 14)
That Is to say at Ephesus, where he had desired him to remain.

Ans. But though the Rhemists here stumbled upon a small part of the Truth,
they offered nothing in Confirmation of it, neither in the Argument, nor in
their Observations upon the Epistle it self. Nor (which is to be noted) did
they in the least make use of their Opinion in proof of Episcopacy: But Bishop
Pearson did both, without being beholden to the Rhemists, for one Syllable
toward the Establishment of this New Chronology.

Moreover the Rhemists, speak only of the Time of Paul's writing this Epistle,
not of his Beseeching Timothy to abide at Ephesus, at his going into Macedonia:
concerning which they have not given the least intimation, but left that part
of the Old Chronology as they found it. Only they seem to think that Paul,
having long before his Imprisonment besought Timothy to abide at Ephesus, did
now, after he was Dismissed and set at Liberty, viz. about the time that he
wrote to the Hebrews, and immediately after his Enlargement, send this Letter
unto Timothy, which is an Hypothesis quite different from that of Bishop
Pearson's, as any one that understands, and remembers what has already been
offered upon the Argument, will readily confess. So that the Learned Prelate
was not in the least beholden unto the Seminary at Rhemes, for the Discovery
and proof of this New Chronology, the Time of Paul' s beseeching Timothy to
abide at Ephesus.

There was then little Occasion for Mr. O's challenging me with Boldness, and
giving me that undeserved Character -- That when I am remotest from Truth I am
then most consident. I leave it to my Adversaries themselves, the Dissenters,
to determine, which of the two is in the point of Time now debated, guilty of
most Confidence. Well, but

Mr. O. Thought of this Argument before the Rector published it.

Ans. Happily so, but the Question is, whether he ever thought of it before
Bishop Pearson brought it to Light. And if he has been so long acquainted with
it, as he would have us think, or has prepared a Dissertation to vindicate the
Old Chronology, as he boasts, I hope 'twill be better put together than his
Defense, and that one time or other, we shall be blessed with a sight of so
Elaborate a piece of Work: in the mean while, I am of Opinion, that if Mr. O.
had been so long acquainted with this New Chronology, and had prepared a
Dissertation to vindicate the Old one, his Defense would have been more tight
and correct, than I find it; His Plea, would have had something in it surely,
relating to this New Chronology. In fine, that Mr. O. thought of the Bishop's
Argument, before the Rector's Book came forth, is not material; but that He
thought of it before the Rector proposed it to him, we have only his own Word
for it, which is not much worth in this case of Self-Testimony; Yea, granting
this also, I have good reason to believe he derived this part of his knowledge
from Bishop Pearson, for a Reason best known to my self.

Mr. O. has wonderfully demonstrated, from 2 Timothy 4. 9. 21. Def. p. 163.
That Paul sent for Timothy to him at Rome, what no Body ever denied; and yet
he has not hereby proved, that Timothy was ever in the Apostle's Company, after
he was besought to abide at Ephesus, It Is not out of doubt to me that Timothy
saw Paul at Rome, though he sent for him. For not to speak of other Obstacles,
Paul might have been Martyred by the Emperor's Special and sudden Command,
before Timothy reached Rome. This is very likely, if we consider the State of
Affairs at Rome about that time, as we read 'em set forth in the Annals of Paul.

What I excepted against in Dr. Whitaker, was not that which Mr. O. pretends to
make Answer to, but that he asserted Equals could receive Accusations as
Timothy did. This the Dr. proved (if Mr Prinn wrongs him not) from a Synod of
Bishops, who received an Accusation against one of their own Number, and then
Censured him for his Fault. Now how far this is from a proof of what it was
alleged for, I showed at large, and Mr. O. who Taxes me for so doing overlooks
it, nor makes any Reply to it. Indeed it is not to be Answered if it (...)
true, as I think none will deny, that one Bishop is not equal, but Inferior and
Subject to a Synod of Bishops. Therefore a Synod's receiving an Accusation
against a Bishop, is no proof of the Doctor's Assertion, but an Instance of the
contrary.

As for Mr. O's own examples out of St. Cyprian, were they never so convincing
(which shall in its place be considered) they will not however Vindicate Dr.
Whitaker, nor are a proper Answer to my Exceptions against him.

The proportion of Dioceses, how large at most they ought to Def. p. 166.
be, is not my business to determine, as I undertake not to define how big a
Parish or Congregation ought to be. I suppose the ultimum quod sic, and the
Limits quos ultra citraque nequit consistere Rectum, are in both uncertain: and
are only to be adjusted prout viri prudentes definiverint, as Superiors shall
think fit to Order, and not by the Caprice and humoursome fancy of every
overweening Opinionanist, and self conceited Reformer.

Mr. O. hears the Rectors Parish has four or five Chapels in it. Def. p. 167.


Ans. The Rectors Parish has neither five nor four Chapels in it. Though the
Ministers Ears be never so long, yet is he mistaken herein. If it had twenty,
it is nothing to the purpose.

Mr. O. Because the Rector affirmed it no more impossible for Def. p. 178.
Timothy (supposed then the Angel of the Chruch of Ephesus, mentioned Rev. 2.)
To leave his first Love, than for Judas to betray his Master, is mightily
disturbed, and to confute it musters up many Commendations given of Timothy in
Scripture.

Ans. In T. N. I declared my Opinion plainly, that Timothy was not that Angel
there spoken of: yet supposing it, 'twas not impossible for Timothy to be
guilty of some Defection. The Commendations alone render it not impossible.
Abstracting from Matter of Fact then, that Judas an Apostle, who had the Power
of Casting out Devils, should turn Apostate, is as strange, as that Timothy
should leave his first Love. Lastly, when it is for his turn, Mr. O. can admit,
that Timothy might be overtaken with Youthful Lusts, but when he wants an
Occasion of Cavilling, then it is monstrous horrid to suppose it possible for
Timothy to be guilty of some Defection from the Truth. If the one was possible,
why not the other? But especially if the (...) spoken of 2 Timothy 2. 22. Signify
the Lusts of the Mind, its proneness to Paradoxes, to New up-start Opinions,
curious Conceits, and Innovations in Religion, of which kind we reckon
Presbytery and Independency, which are but of Yesterday, and the product of
Minds addicted unto Novelties. I do not find Commentators Ordinarily Expounding
the (...), Youthful, i. e. Fleshly Lusts, but to the Sense I have now given
them. In a Word, whoever attentively reads Rev. 2. 2, 3, 6. will find
considerable Commendations of the Angel of Ephesus, perhaps not much Inferior
to those of Timothy in other places of Scripture; And yet this Angel left his
first Love. 'Twas not impossible then, but Timothy might do so likewise.

I have now done with Mr. O's Defense. If I have left any thing of Moment
unanswered; Or if I have failed giving full satisfaction to any Material
Difficulty Objected against me, I do promise either to supply these Defects, or
fairly to confess my self unable. Only I could wish all personal Reflections,
and unnecessary Digressions might be laid aside, that Arguments be plainly
proposed, and (...) as few words as may be, that no trickish and evasive
Answers be made, when we have nothing else to reply. And finally, that we would
not take to task a piece of an Argument, and the weakest part of it too, and
then make the Reader believe we have fully accounted for the Difficulty, when
in Truth we kept our selves all the while at a distance, and never came near
the Merits of the Cause.

THE SECOND PART: Wherein All Mr Owen's Authorities for Presbyterian Parity,
and Ordination by Presbyters are overthrown; and particularly is proved, THAT
The Church of ENGLAND, Ever since the Reformation, HELD The Divine Apostolical
Right of EPISCOPACY.

(...), etc.

One ought to endure to the utmost rather than divide the Church of God: and
dying rather than rend it in pieces, is a no less glorious Martyrdom, and in my
Opinion greater than being a Martyr for not Sacrificing unto Idols. In this
latter Case a Man suffers for his own sake only, in the former for the whole
Church. Dionys. Alexand. apud Eusebius. Eccl. Hist. l. 6. c. 45.

LONDON: Printed in the Year 1699.

THE INTRODUCTION.
HAving spoken of the Government of the Christian Church in General, and as far
as the Holy Scriptures afford us any Light: Having thence shown that mere
Presbyters alone did never exercise any Supreme Act of Jurisdiction of any kind
that can be there discovered, except in Conjunction with, and subordination to
some extraordinary Officers as Apostles or Prophets: Having in particular
traced the manner of Government at Ephesus, unto the Death of St. John the
Apostle; and the Martyrdom of St. Ignatius, and found it cast by St. Paul into
the same Form, as the Church of England is at this Day, viz. consisting of
three distinct Orders of Ministers (the Title only of the Supreme Governors
happily excepted) and so continued after him, as I said unto the time of
Ignatius: And Lastly, having answered all the Objections raised against our
Episcopal Government, by Mr. O. in his Book Entitled A Plea, etc. (So many of
'em, I mean, as seemed to carry any weight in them, and concerned the times,
within the Compass of which I have confined my self hitherto, that is to say,
the Apostolical Age.) After all this, it remains that I consider the Arguments,
which to the same purpose he was drawn from Ecclesiastical History, beginning
where the Scripture ends, and so descending unto these last Ages, before which
time Episcopacy was never brought into Question for Fifteen Hundred Years, save
by one Arch-Heretick Aerius, of whom more hereafter. My Adversary indeed thinks
he has found in Old Authors many Instances, favoring the Presbyterian Identity
and Parity, and Ordination by Presbyters: This is now to be Examined. If my
Answers shall be thought Old, I have this excuse for my self, that the
Objections are old also: and in such a Case it is pardonable if not necessary,
especially when an Adversary demands, and even duns; yea, and reproaches one
for not having already undertaken it. I pretend not then to make new
discoveries never heard of before, in the Controversy now before us, (though
happily some few things not observed before, may be, here offered to the Reader)
but to apply the proper Answers unto the Old Objections, wherewith Mr. O. has
endeavored to embroil and perplex the Truth. I will not tie my self unto his
Method, which is not so well fitted to my design, it being my purpose to Manage
the Dispute only (...) Matters of Fact, which being once cleared from
countenancing the Presbyterian or Congregational Polities, Mr. O's. Syllogisms
will and must fall to the Ground. I will then digest and dispose all his
Authorities, and my Replies to 'em, though not exactly (for the controversy
(...) not on the Niceties of Chronology) yet pretty near to the Order of Time,
to which they belong; I begin with the Epistle of Clemens Romanus unto the
Church of Corinth, which is the best Colorable Argument the Dissenters do or
can bring for themselves.

CHAP. I. Of the Testimony of Clemens Romanus.
THE substance of what Mr. O. argues from this Epistle against Prelatical
Episcopacy, and in favor of Presbyterian Parity is, whereas I affirm in T. N.
Clement seems to make the Jewish High Priest, the Inferior Priests and Levites
a Precedent for the Government of Christian Churches by a Bishop, Presbyters
and Deacons --

That Clement no where says there were those three distinct Def. p. 49. 50, 51.
Officers in the Christian Church; Or that the Jewish Government was a Pattern
of the Christian: That Clement mentions but two Orders, viz. Bishops and
Deacons; That He calls these Bishops Presbyters: That they governed the Church
of Corinth in common; That He mentions no chief Bishop there; That he exhorts
the Corinthians to be subject unto their Elders; That Clement, ought to be
expounded by Scripture, Philip. 1. 1. and 1 Timothy 3. In both which places two
only Orders are to be met with; That Clement does not intend to affirm there
were three kinds of Officers in the Christian Church as in the Mosaical; but
only that both the one, and the other Church, (that is the Mosaical with three
Orders, and the Christian with two) were both established by the same Divine
Authority. Unto all which it is replied;

1. I readily grant Clement no where expressly affirms there were three distinct
Orders in the Christian Church: or that the Highpriests, Priests and Levites
in the Jewish Church, were the Pattern of Bishops, Presbyters and Deacons in
the Christian. Thus much is granted: Nevertheless, what I cited him for may be
true, and is so, sc. That He seems to make the Jewish Government the Pattern of
the Christian, as we are wont to argue from him, comparing the one with the
other. One would think this joined with Jerome's Testimony, cited with it in T.
N. page 1. were sufficient to warrant me thus modestly to (...), that Clement
seems to (...) the Jewish Government a Pattern of the Christian, which others
before me have done: as Dr. H. in his Dissertations, and Dr. (...), Cod. Can.
etc. l. 2. e. 11.

But Mr. Mede deserves particularly to be taken notice of, who has more than
once declared his Judgment in this matter. Let us hear him teaching us that, In
things for which we find no rule given in the B. 2. p. 435.
New Testament, there we are referred, and left to the Analogy of the Old. He
instances in St. Paul arguing, for the maintenance of the Ministers of the
Gospel (1 Cor. 9. 13, 14) in Infant Baptism, in hallowing the first Day of the
Week, in the three Orders, Bishops, Priests and Deacons, asserted by Jerome to
be derived from (...), his Sons, and the Levites; and Lastly, in this Passage
of St. Clement to the same purpose. Once more He Expounds those Words, in
Clemens Romanus to the Corinthians -- We ought to do all Ib. p. 413.
things in Order, as the Lord has commanded, putting the Question to himself
thus, Where has the Lord commanded this? and answering himself thus, In the
Analogy of the Old Testament. Now Clement in the next following parts of his
Epistle, treats in general of the time when the Christian Ministrations were to
be performed, the place where, and the Persons by whom. If then the Analogy of
the Law was a Divine Commission unto the Christians, if the Temple of the Jews,
a Precedent of the Christian Churches, if the Jewish Sabbath, of the Christian
Lord's Day, why not the Levitical three Orders of the Christian (...), Priests
and Deacons? But that which is of most moment is, that many other Fathers
following Clement (as Jerome, Synesius, Cyprian and Firmilianus, of whom I have
spoken elsewhere) did not forget to allude or appeal to the Law of Moses, in
confirmation of the three Orders of Church Officers among the Christians. St.
Cyprian said, He had a Divine Law to punish St. Cyp. Ep. 3. Oxon.
his rebellious Deacon, Quoting Deuteronomy. 17. 12. Numb. 16. 1. Here He thinks
himself invested with the same Authority as Aaron was, and through Aaron to
have received it from God. The like we meet with in several other Epistles. And
indeed the names Sacerdos, Ep. 4. 59. 66. 69. and 73.
Sacerdotium, Altar, Sacrificium, Oblationes, etc. so familiarly used by the
Ancients (and by our Clement himself) to express the Christian Officers, and
Offices, imply as much. It may then with Reason be supposed that Clement
intended the same.

2. As I acknowledge Clement did not totidem verbis assert the Orders, so I
observe that though He expressly mentions two only, yet he affirms no where,
that there were two only kinds of Officers in the Church of (...), and no more.
Or thus, though he mentions two only, yet he denies not expressly, but that
there might be a third.

3. I join issue with Mr. O. that Clement ought to be expounded by the
Scripture; but surely not by the two places only which he has alleged, all the
rest being laid aside. The Epistle then of Clement must be Expounded by the
Whole Scripture, and what Intimations of three Orders are any where therein to
be found. This has been done already, and needs not be drawn in here again, to
lengthen and confound the Argument. Only thus briefly to the two Passages
adduced by Mr. O. Though St. Paul, Philip. 1. 1. mentions Bishops and Deacons
only, and no third Superior Officer in that Church: yet Chap. 2. 25. (...)
calls Epaphroditus (by whom he sent this Epistle) the Apostle of the
Philippians: and though 1 Timothy 3. chapter He names Bishops and Deacons only, and no
third Officer, yet (as I hope has been sufficiently made out) he had
constituted Timothy Ruler of the Church of Ephesus, and particularly of the
Elders there. So that there were at Philippi three Orders, an Apostle, Bishops
(or Presbyters) and Deacons. Likewise at Ephesus, Timothy the Ruler of that
Church, and Bishops (or Presbyters) and Deacons: and the same is to be believed
of the Church of Corinth, when Clement wrote to 'em, if we will suffer our
selves to be guided by Scripture and Reason.

4. That Clement exhorted the Corinthians to be subject unto the Presbyters, is
certain. But so did Ignatius require, that the Churches should be subject to
their Presbyters, though at the same time he urged the Christians, and specially
the Presbyters themselves to be subject to the Bishop. The Flock may be subject
to the Presbyters, and at the same time they and the Presbyters ought to be
subject to the Bishop. Again, that the Presbyters governed the Church in
common, is not questioned, but that they did so without a Bishop, is no where
expressly said. Lastly, that Clement expressly mentions no Chief Bishop at (...),
I own; especially, not by the name Bishop: but still He seems to speak of an
Order of ChurchOfficers, Superior to, and distinct from Presbyters. Page the
Edit. Pat. Jun.
second commending, the peaceable Behavior of the Corinthians, in time (...),
He writes, that they had been (...). Subject to (...) Rulers, and giving
convenient honor unto the Presbyters. And again p. (...). Let us worship the
Lord Jesus Christ, let us reverence our Governors ((...)) Let us honor our
Presbyters. One would think here is sufficient Intimation of an Order of Church
Officers Superior unto Presbyters, and distinct from them.

5. Clement was himself Bishop, or Supreme Ruler of the Church of God at Rome,
being (as it is thought) the same Person that we read of Philip. 4. 3. Now it is
not at all likely, that Clement a Person of unquestionable Piety and Integrity,
being a Prelatical Bishop himself at Rome, should approve or countenance the
Presbyterian Parity at (...); and that those two Apostolical Churches, should
thus widely differ in their Form of Government.

6. It may deserve our Observation, what Clement writes toward the Conclusion
of his Epistle, p. 69. thus -- Whoever among you is Generous and Charitable let
him resolve thus, If the Sedition, Contention, and Schisms are risen on my
account, I Will be gone wherever ye will, and whatever the People require, that
I Will do: only let the Flock of Christ, and the Presbyters set over them, live
in Peace. Methinks the Author in these Words, plainly enough distinguishes
between that Generous Person first spoken of, and a considerable part of the
Presbyters immediately after mentioned separately from him. This Generous
Person was it seems settled in some Post or Office, by one Party of the (...),
or atleast continued in it, against the Mind and Inclination of the Rest. From
hence sprang the Quarrels and Schisms among 'em. Now what Office could this be,
but that of the Prelatical Bishop? He could not be a mere Presbyter, for he is
plainly distinguished from them. And besides, it is not to be imagined that one
common Presbyter, equal with the Rest, should have been the occasion of such a
dangerous Schism, or that his Absence should immediately put an end to it, as
it is here implied. Nor will any one (I believe) say, that He was a Deacon, much
less an Ordinary Believer. He was then (as I conceive) the Prelate of that
Church: but not acceptable to one party of the (...), and on this Occasion the
Peace of the Church was disturbed. Clement not intermeddling among 'em as to
the Merits of the Cause, advises this Generous Person out of Charity, and for
the Peace of the Church, to abdicate and depart from his Office, to the end,
some other succeeding with the Universal Consent of the Corinthians, by this
means a Period might be put unto their Divisions. In further proof of this, I
offer unto Consideration, what I long since wrote in my Clement upon the
Margin, but was not so happy as to refer to the Author whence I had taken that
Note; It Is this, That from the Passage of Clement's Epistle just before set
down at length (...) and others, after him conjecture, that Clement was named
by Peter to be Bishop of Rome, and the Apostles immediate Successor, but
refused it for a like Reason, that he here exhorts the Generous Person at
Corinth, to lay down his We have a like story of Greg. Nazianzen Bishop of Con.
who whilst many were contending about that Bishopric, even when he was legally
possessed of it, openly before all and of his own accord, said -- If I be the
Jonas that raises the Storm, throw me into the Sea, and let these Tempests
cease; I am willing to undergo whatever you have a mind to, to be Banished the
Throne, and to be cast out of the City. Only be careful to Love Truth and
Peace. And so he Voluntarily departed. See St. Chrysostom. Hom. 11. in Ephesians.
Office. Now 'twas very proper for Clement, to urge his own reason and example,
and especially since his Modesty, and Condescension gained him afterward the
Affections of that Church, and at length advanced him unto the Bishopric of
Rome. The like he hints unto this Generous Person, as a Motive to him to
resign, in the next Period. He (says Clement) who shall do thus, shall procure
to himself great Glory in the Lord, and every place (every Church) will receive
him.

The Passage in Epiphanius whereof I speak, is in English as Epiph. Vol. 1. l.
1. Advers.
follows -- Peter and Paul, were both the first Apostles and Bishops of Rome,
then Linus, afterward Cletus, and next him Haeres. To. 2. n. 6. Edit. Paris.
Clement, Contemporary of Peter and Paul. Nor let any one wonder, that others
before Clement received the Episcopacy from the Apostles, seeing Clement was
their Contemporary. Whether He received Ordination to the Episcopacy, and
declined it, (...), Apud Clementem (...), etc.
whilst they ( the Apostles Peter and Paul) survived, for He says in one of his
Epistles, (...). I depart, I am gone, let the People of God abide in Peace,
designing this for others Good and advantage: or whether, etc.

It may perhaps be objected, that Clement ascribes not the Corinthian Schisms
to that one Generous Person only, but to some misunderstandings between the
People, and the Presbyters, some of the latter being not suffered to continue
in the exercise of their Ministry any longer at Corinth. So it is intimated,
page 58. in these Words -- It would be no little Sin in us, to cast off those
(Presbyters or Bishops) who have discharged the Office of their Ministry, (...)
and without blame: for we see that they have removed some (Presbyters) whose
Conversation was laudable, and who exercised their Ministry among you
blamelesly. Brethren, etc.

All that needs be answered hereunto is,

1. Clement manifestly teaches elsewhere, that the Schism arose on the account
of one (or two Persons) p. 62. It Is (says He) a shame, an arrant shame, and
unworthy a Christians Conversation, that the ancient and most firmly
established Church (of Corinth) should raise Sedition against the Presbyters,
(...), for one or two Persons: that there being a Difference among them about
their Bishop (that Generous Person) it must needs follow, that the Presbyters
were involved in the Controversy, and by Consequence, that some of 'em were
deserted, and laid aside by those of the People, who had an aversion to the
Bishop (that Generous Person so often mentioned) as well as to some of the
Presbyters, who stuck close to him. 2. It may reasonably be thought that the
two Persons here spoken of, were the Bishop in Possession, and the other whom
the Corinthians would have advanced into his (...). In short, if (...) if what
on this Head has been offered for the clearing the (...) of the (...) (...),
and the meaning of the Epistle (which to us at this distance is dark enough) be
of any moment, it may then be allowed, that Clement has intimated, that there
was at Corinth a Prelatical Bishop, and that the Reason why he makes no plainer
mention of him, but was forced himself to interpose, in procuring the Peace of
the Church of Corinth, was the Prejudices a great part of the Presbyters, and
People had conceived against their Bishop, who was (...) unable by his own
Authority, to allay the Heats and (...) (...) 'em, and for that cause was
advised by Clement Voluntarily to surrender his Office and depart.

It is not an uncommon thing for Authors to comprehend three Orders of
Church Officers in two Words, or at least to mention two Orders only, when yet
they acknowledge a Third. This Dichotomy is to be met with in the Scripture it
self. The three Officers of the Jewish Church, are frequently expressed by
Priests and (...), wherein (...) High Priest, who without controversy was a
Third, is included. (...) himself in this Epistle takes notice -- That the
Priests and Levites, came out of Abraham's P. 40, 41.
(...); meaning the High Priest also, as I presume will not be denied: For he
also came out of the Loins of Abraham. Clemens Alexand. in his (...), cited by
Mr. O. speaks there only of the two Orders, Presbyters and Deacons, in the
Christian Church, Id. Ct. Strom. and Paedag. cited by Bishop Pearson in his
Vindiciae Ign. Epist.
and yet elsewhere, he reckons up expressly the Bishops also with the other two.
In the former place, (...) Presbyters must comprehend Bishops; at least they
ought not to be excluded, though the Author there omits them. So (...) in his
Apologetick comprehends Bishops, and Presbyters under one common Name Seniores,
yet he (...) distinguishes the Three Orders, in Lib. de Baptismo c. 17. Optatus
Milevit. an Opt. Milev. Ed. Casaub. Land. p. 66.
hundred times over acknowledges the three Orders, yet once he contents
himself, to express 'em in two Words only, Bishops and Deacons. There are (says
he in the place cited) on the Margin) quatuor genera (...), Four Orders of Men
in the Church; but he sums 'em up in three Words, viz. Bishops, Deacons, and
the Faithful. It may deserve observation, that at this time of the Day, and
with Optatus, ordinarily Bishop signified the Prelate of a Church; shall I then
be allowed hence to infer there were either no Presbyters, or no Prelatical
Bishops according to this Fathers Judgment, because forsooth, He here mentions
'em not distinctly? It cannot be fairly Collected hence, as every one (...).
This is manifest that Optatus, in those two Words, Bishops and Deacons, must
understand the three Orders, Bishops, Presbyters and Deacons, else He loses one
of his four Orders of Men in the Church. Besides saying here ( sicut supra
dixi) he refers us backward to p. 16. and p. 51. in both which places he
mentions (...) Bishops, Presbyters and Deacons. Wherefore the Premises
considered, it is reasonable to believe, that Clemens Romanus likewise did, in
the same manner express the three Offices of the (...) Church in two Words,
comprehending the Prelate in Bishops and Deacons. It ought not here to be
forgot, what St. Chrysostom has observed, (...) of old were called Bishops also
and In Ep. ad Philip. chapter 1. 1.
(...): for in deed Presbyters in some things resemble both. They Minister
(like Deacons) unto the Bishop-whilst he Officiates, and are subject unto him
as the other are: But they Minister in the Word and Sacraments, as well as the
Bishop does, and have under him the oversight of some part of the Flock: for
which reason they may not incongruously be called Bishops. But, Blundel (and
his Followers, I remember) to reconcile unto their own Hypothesis, the
different way of the Fathers reckoning up the Ministerial Orders of the
Christian Church, asserts, that sometimes they conform their Language to the
Scripture and Apostolical Age: At other times to their own Customs, and the
Ecclesiastical Constitutions. In the former case they use the Dichotomy
mentioning only Presbyters (or Bishops) and Deacons: in the latter they divide
'em into three Ranks, Bishops, and Priests, and Deacons. But this device will
not do their Work, and must be laid aside, for the following Reasons.

1. St. Cyprian, against whose Testimony for Episopacy this Distinction was
principally levelled and framed, though He often falls into the Dichotomy, yet
asserts, the Divine Right of Bishops. Cum St. Cyp. Ep. 33.
hoc igitur (sicut omnis Actus Ecclesiae per eosdem praepositos gubernetur)
divina lege fundatum sit -- The Government of the Church by Bishops is (says
He) founded upon a Divine Law. That the Praepositi here are meant Bishops is
not to be doubted of, if we look backward unto the foregoing parts of this
Epistle. He begins it thus -- Our Lord, whose precepts we ought to Reverence,
and Observe, establishing the Honor of the Bishop and the Churches affairs,
says, etc. And again he adds -- Hence the Ordination of Bishops and the Affairs
of the Church, pass through the course of (...) and Successions, so that the
Church is established on Bishops, and every Act of the Church is governed, per
eosdem Praepositos, by the same Praepositi, that is, Bishops. If then Bishops
were by Divine Right in the Judgment of Cyprian, he must speak in the Language
of the Apostolical Age, where the Divine Right ends, as well as his own, when
he reckons up the three distinct Orders of Bishops, Presbyters and Deacons. But
of this see more in Mr. Dodwell's 10th Cypr. Dissertation. Nor can these
Praepositi and Episcopi, be understood of Presbyters: for Cyp. (whatever any
may fancy of Praepositi) never calls Presbyters, Bishops; Nor could he
conformably to his own Writings. He professes thus of himself and other Bishops
-- Neq, Tract. Council. Carthag. de Baptis. Haeret. P. 229.
enim quisquam nostrum Episcopum se Episcoporum constituit. None of us makes
himself a Bishop of Bishops. But if the Presbyters were Bishops, then Cyprian
was a Bishop of Bishops.

2. Optatus in the same Breath, in one short Period expresses himself both
ways, as well in the Bipartite, as in the Tripartite Form. Therefore he must
surely be understood to respect one and the same Age in the same Sentence. If
he had therein an Eye unto the Apostolical Age, Blundel's Distinction is of no
Advantage to our Adversaries. Still upon that supposition, there were three
Orders in the Apostles time: If He referred to his own Age, then although He
comprehends 'em in two Words, yet was there three Orders of Ministers in the
Church.

3. Ignatius can with no Color of reason be supposed to look to any other than
the Apostolical Age, wherein he lived a great while, and was Martyred but about
ten Years after the Apostle St. John. His three Orders therefore Bishops,
Presbyters and Deacons, were not, strictly speaking, of Ecclesiastical, but
Apostolical Constitution. By consequence Blundel's device makes nothing for the
Identity of Bishops and Presbyters.

4. It no manner of way relieves our Adversaries, from our Argument grounded on
the Scriptures, which use the Dichotomy, and in it comprehend the three Jewish
Orders, the Highpriests, the second Priests and the Levites. In conformity
whereunto the Fathers, may be thought to have summed up the Christian Ministers
in two Words also.

If it be asked, with what Congruity could the Fathers so often fall into this
Dichotomy, and yet at the same time believe the three Orders to be by
Apostolical Constitution? The Answer is easy. Except the Ruling part, that is to
say, the Administration of the Church Government, and Discipline, otherwise the
Presbyters were and still are among us, as it were equal to Bishops, sc. in the
Ministry of the Word and Sacraments, wherein they Officiate as effectually as
the Bishops themselves: for which Reason they may be accounted the Bishops
Peers, and both not unfitly called by one common name. Even as I before
observed from St. Chrysoftom, Presbyters are comprehended in Deacons, as
agreeing in some things common to both.

8. And in the last place that which I insist, and chiefly rely upon, as a just
Answer unto the Argument grounded on St. Clement's Epistle to the Corinthians
is this, that it is drawn only from a Negative, Clement's not expressly
mentioning the three distinct Orders, which I contend is unconcluding. I have
often enough produced Instances out of Scripture, of the Apostle's not constantly
remembering all the Church Officers in their Epistles, and frequently mentioning
none at all. To keep my self within the Compass of my present Province, the
Ecclesiastical History, Ignatius, whose great Design in all his other Epistles
was to assert, and vindicate the three Orders of Bishops, Presbyters and
Deacons, passes 'em all over in his Epistle to the Romans. But it is no good
Consequence that therefore the Church of Rome, had not in it so much as a
Presbyter or a Deacon. It may farther be considered, that much more an Argument
deduced from an Author's silence can be of no force, when there are other
positive, and express Witnesses attesting the Truth brought into Question. If a
Witness deposes, that John and Richard, were engaged in the Murder of Robert,
this shall not quit Thomas, if another Witness swears he also had an hand in
the Assassination. Clement mentions Bishops (or Presbyters) and Deacons, not so
much as intimating, that there was a Prelate at Corinth (let that now be
supposed:) But his Contemporary Ignatius, has again and again testified that
there were Bishops, Priests and Deacons in several Churches, to which he wrote,
and particularly in his Epistle to the Ephesians, that there were these three
distinct-Officers, throughout the World as far as he knew, and by consequence
at Corinth; Though Clement, for Reasons best known unto himself, thought not
fit to mention the Prelate. Nor can it with Reason be pleaded, that Ignatius
was ignorant of the Government of this Apostolical Church of Corinth, as I
suppose it will be granted. From the whole then I gather that Clement's Silence
is no good proof, that there was no Prelatical Bishop at Corinth, because his
Contemporary is positive there was; which now brings me to the Testimony of
Ignatim in this Controversy.

CHAP. II. Ignatius his Testimony.
Ignatius, Clement's Contemporary, the Disciple and Friend of St. John, the
Apostle, and Martyr of Jesus Christ, has so plainly, so fully, and so often in
his Epistles, given in his Testimony unto the three distinct Orders of
ChurchOfficers, Bishops, Priests and Deacons: and I have so exactly, and at
length cited his Words in T. N. p. 59. 60, 67, 68, 69, 70, 71, 72 and 73. that
one might justly wonder, this Truth should any longer be called into Question,
after so clear Evidence produced. Mr. O. has sundry things to throw in our way,
which I must consider in their Order, and remove, if it be possible.

1. Mr. O. would bring the credit of these Epistles into Def. p. 110.
suspicion, as if it were not agreed among the Learned, whether they are
Genuine, That Daille endeavored to prove 'em Spurious, and La Roque with great
Judgment, replied unto the Learned Bp. of Chester, Dr. Pearson, who had
endeavored to confute Monsieur Daille, in his Vindiciae Epist. S. Ignatii.

Ans. The Genuineness of these Epistles was never questioned by any Learned
Man, that I know of, since Dr. Pearson published his vindication of 'em, save
by Monsieur La Roque, who attempted to support Monsieur Daille but without
success. I never heard he gained any one Proselyte. It Is confessed, I have not
read that French Gentleman's Book, the Reason whereof is, that when Dr. Pearson
was by his Friends dealt with to make a Reply to La Roque, the Wise Man
answered, There was no need of it, that La Roque had advanced nothing of Moment
against his Vindiciae, and that the Authority of St. Ignatius's Epistles
remained still unquestionable. This I remember very well was the common
Discourse among us many Years ago, in the University of Cambridge, and the
Event confirms it: no Body now daring to deny them, not the Dissenters
themselves, though sometimes in general they would have 'em pass for uncertain.
It Is not intended hereby to disparage Monsieur La Roque in the least. His
Misfortune was, that, He undertook the Defense of an ill Cause against a Potent
Adversary, in such a Case the Learned Man in the World, must be forced to
retire with dishonor and disappointment. But for Mr. O. to say that, 'Twas not
agreed among the Learned, etc. when one only Learned Man is to be found that
stands out, is too much (I think) to offer unto the World, as if the Balance
were even, and the Learned equally divided about the Genuineness of Ignatius's
Epistles. I am persuaded Mr. O. himself believes, what Bishop Pearson has
proved 'em to be, though he would (...) that they are yet doubtful: But enough
of this.

2. Mr. O. further contends, There are strong presumptions, Plea, p. 29.
that the Church of Ephesus consisted of no more Members than could Ordinarily
meet in one place, and had but one Altar, at which the Congregation Ordinarily
received the Lord's Supper. Def. ubi (...).
And again, that Ignatius's Bishop was but the Chief Pastor of a Church, which
Ordinarily assembled together for Personal Communion: that the Bishop's Diocese
in Ignatius's time, and long after, exceeded not the Bounds of a Modern Parish.
Finally (up and down in the Defense) that as the Presbyters could do nothing
without the Bishops, so neither could the Bishops without their Presbytery,
which is an Argument of their Parity, and that (as elsewhere he, and generally
all other Dissenters make Ignatius's Bishops) they were but the Moderators in
the Presbyteries, and those not for Life neither but temporary only, as many of
them have affirmed.

Ans. The Presumptions Mr. O. means are those He speaks of in his Plea and
Defense, as I suppose, grounded upon some slight Passages in the Epistles, as
(...), and such like, of which enough has already been said, unless their sense
could be more certainly determined. For He and I may talk and dispute till
Dooms-Days, that thus, or thus those Phrases may or ought to signify, and at
last leave the Matter as we found it, undecided, and every Man to choose what
sense he pleases, as his Interest sways him, or as his Affections and adherence
to a Cause shall Bias him. Letting then these things pass; the Answer which I
make, shall be to lay before the Reader some Reasons, as will I hope evince the
Truth, and prevail with him, to embrace the sense of this Father, which we have
already given, and to believe that Ignatius his Bishops were truly Prelatical
and Diocesan. And,

1. Were it as Mr. O. affirms, yet the Dissenters are Universally departed even
from this Form of Church Government. What one Congregation among 'em has its
Bishops, Presbyters and Deacons, and the Bishop the Supreme Manager without
whom nothing ought to be done? But

2. Whereas he tells us, that Ignatius his Bishop was but the chief Pastor of a
Church, that is the Moderator of the Presbytery, this cannot be, if we will
allow Ignatius to have been a Man of common Sense and Understanding. For what
more absurd and impertinent, could have been written than all along in these
seven Epistles, to distinguish so carefully between the Bishop, and his
Presbyters, and yet all the while the Bishop, was but one of the Presbyters,
set up only to Moderate in their Presbyteries, and debates for Orders sake? Or
how could Ignatius direct, (as Mr. O. pleads) that the Presbyters, should do
nothing without the Bishop, nor the Bishop without the Presbyters, except he
thought the Bishop a distinct Species of Officer from the Presbyters, and the
Presbyters from the Bishop? The Bishop then, and the Presbyter must needs be
two different Orders, in Ignatius's Opinion.

It is objected, that since the Obligation was reciprocal, i. e. the Bishop
could do nothing without the Presbyters, as the Presbyters could not Act
without the Bishop, the Bishop therefore had no pre-eminence above the
Presbyters. I answer,

1. That however the Bishop must be allowed to have been more than an Ordinary
Presbyter, yea at least equal to the whole Presbytery, and to have himself made
a distinct Order from it, (the very Reciprocal Obligation here objected of
necessity implies as much).

2. Not only so, but as the King is the Supreme Monarch of this Nation, and
more than the Lords or Commons, though He can enact no Law without the
Parliament, as the Parliament cannot without him; as the King, I say, makes a
distinct State of the Realm (this I think Mr. O. will grant) so was Ignatius
his Bishop, an Officer different from the Presbyters (if the Father spoke Sense
in his Epistle) and Superior to them.

If it be enquired, wherein could his Supremacy consist? I reply, that after
any Laws and Constitutions were resolved on, between the Bishop and the
Presbytery, or whatever was known to have been ordained by the Apostles, he had
the care and oversight to see 'em executed, and in matters of greatest moment,
he generally was the executor of 'em himself in Person, as the King is in the
Secular Affairs of this Nation. For as the King does nothing, that is, makes no
New Laws without the Parliament, yet he sees to the Execution of 'em after they
are once made, and of all other the ancient Laws of the Realm, and that without
the Parliament: so the Bishop though he did nothing, that is made no New
Constitutions without the Presbytery, yet 'twas he who had the care of their
Execution, and of the more Ancient, and Apostolical Decrees and Traditions. It
must necessarily have been so, if Ignatius his Epistles carry any Sense in them.

But perhaps a positive proof of all this will be demanded from me out of the
Epistles. To this purpose, then observe,

1. What Ignatius writes to the Ephesians -- Whom the Master (Jesus Christ)
sends unto the Administration of his own Household (the Church) we ought so to
receive him as we would receive the Master that sent him. It Is then manifest we
ought to look upon the Bishop, as we ought to look upon the Lord (Jesus
Christ). Here it appears, that Ignatius accounted the Bishop to be (...) the
Administrator of the Church or Household.

2. That though Ignatius exhorts the Churches to be subject to, and obey the
Bishop and the Presbyters also, (And so He does to the Deacons too, in the
Epistles to the Trallians, Philadelphians, and Smyrneans): yet he never thus
prescribes Obedience to the Presbyters, or the Presbyteries only, or without
mentioning the Bishop with and before 'em. But he frequently admonishes the
Church to obey the Bishop without express mention of the Presbyters.

3. That though He advises the Church to be subject unto the Bishop and
Presbytery (and to the Deacons also), yet he never advises them expressly to do
nothing without the Presbyters, or Presbytery. Besides, Mr. O's saying that the
Bishop could do nothing without the Presbyters, is without ground in these
Epistles, it being never said, Do nothing without the Bishop and the
Presbytery, much less simply, Do nothing without the Presbyters.

4. It Is not to be forgotten, what Ignatius takes special notice of in his
Epistle to the Magnesians -- You must not abuse or despise Voss. Edit. p. 31.
the Youth of our Bishop (Demas), but pay him all Reverence, as I know the Holy
Presbyters do, who look on the Ordinance (the Bishop as I take it, or the
Episcopacy) not as a new Device; but as Wise Men they submit unto him in the
Lord, or as the Institution of Jesus Christ. So then the Presbyters were
subject and obedient to the Bishop. But where will it be found, that the Bishop
is admonished or advised to obey the Presbyters?

5. When Ignatius was in Bonds ravished from his People, or Church, H thus
writes to the Romans -- Which (the Church in Syria) in my stead now (...) the
Lord only for its Shepherd. But though the Church of Syria had lost its Bishop,
and was then at present without one, yet surely they had not lost all their
Presbyters. And if the Church of Syria retained yet her Presbyters, as by the
quiet that Church even then had must be thought, they Is. Voss. Ed. P. 45.
might easily have made to themselves a Chief Pastor or Moderator, out of their
remaining Number, and not been destitute of a Shepherd (as Ignatius bewails)
whole loss or absence at present, could only be supplied by the chief Shepherd
and Bishop of their Souls. Here by the way, the conceit of a temporary
Moderator, must be thrown out of Doors. Ignatius was Bishop of, Syria for life:
nor could they have another whilst He was living, though absent in Bonds. This
was the Reason, he so Passionately resented the unhappiness of that Church of
Syria, that they were forced to be without a Bishop, which they needed not to
have been, if another (...) Pastor and Moderator might have been constituted in
his absence and Lifetime, which by the Presbyterian Principles might easily
have been done.

6. Ignatius over and over prescribes, that the Churches should do nothing
without the Bishop, and not only so in these General Terms, (which happily will
be understood of his presiding in Presbyteries, and moderating in their Debates
for Order's sake), but also in particular, that Marriages should not be
Celebrated, the Lord'sSupper should not be administered, nor Baptism given unto.
Believers without him, without his appointment and approbation. This shows that
Ignatius his Bishop, was not only the President in their Synods and
Deliberations, but the Supreme Director of the Execution of the Laws, and Rules
of the Church, without whose leave the (...) could not Marry, nor Administer
the Sacraments. It Is all we desire of the Dissenters, if we might prevail with
'em, that they would not presume to do any thing without the Bishop, and
particularly not to Ordain Presbyters. Lastly, Although he often calls the
Presbytery the Council of God, and College of the Apostles, yet to keep Ep. ad
Magnesad Trall. and alibi.
up the Authority of the Bishop, He then at the same time resembles him unto
God himself, or to the Lord Jesus Christ. If then God the Father was Superior
to the Apostles, and if Jesus Christ must be confessed greater than the Council
of the Apostles, so was the Bishop, than the Presbyters or Presbytery, in the
Opinion of this Father: and according to the Analogy, and Resemblance in this
Author. From the whole it is (I hope) clear to a Demonstration, that Ignatius
his Bishops, were more than what Mr. O. means by chief Pastor: or Moderator in
their Assembles pro tempore. They were Prelatical, and in the nature of their
Office Superior to Presbyters. It remains that we show, they were Diocesan
Bishops, that is, had the oversight of more than one Congregation; for this is
another Objection Mr. O. has raised against our established Diocesan
Episcopacy. For Proof hereof let it be remembered.

1. That if there were not in Ignatius his time, de facto Diocesan Bishops,
they were at least formed and designed for such, when ever the multitude of
Believers should be increased. It has already been observed, that Titus left by
St. Paul in Crete, to Govern that Church, was particularly directed by the
Apostle to Ordain Elders in every City, in all, or as many Cities as should
afterward receive the Faith, or in Order to convert more of 'em. I gather hence
that Titus was intended to be the Ruler of all these Congregations. Let Mr. O.
make him a Bishop, or an Archbishop, it is all one to me; he was constituted to
be Ruler over many Cities and Congregations. Thus at least it was (I conceive)
in these Asiatick Churches to whom Ignatius wrote, as will hence appear, viz.
that every of these Churches was furnished with a Prelatical Bishop, with
Presbyters and Deacons under him. To what purpose else so many Presbyters, and
such distinct kinds of Orders? One or two at most might have sufficed 'em at
present, especially if it be considered, that the Christians at that time were
not in so flourishing a condition, as to be able to maintain so many
Church Officers for one Congregation; nor was there business enough to employ
'em all in the service of that one Congregation. It Is then most rational to
believe, that so many Presbyters and Deacons, were provided at least for
carrying on the Conversion of the Infidels, and multiplying them into several
Congregations. But if every Congregation, must have had or was, intended to
have a Bishop, we should doubtless have read of Bishops, ex. gr. at Ephesus, as
well as Presbyters in the Plural. Let us then suppose what is most reasonable
to admit, that some at least of these Churches had been in Ignatius's time,
multiplied into several Congregations, yet still there was but one Bishop. I do
not remember that ever we read of two Bishops, of any one City in all
Antiquity, excepting when the Christians of that City were harrassed and
disturbed, with Schisms and Divisions. Now who can imagine, that no one City in
the World, even in Ignatius's time, Pliny his contemporary Witnesses, That
Christianity had not only overrun City and Country, but had infected many of
every Sex, Age and Order of Men. Plin. l. 10. E. 97.
ever had more Believers in and near it, than did Assemble for Divine Worship
in one place? Especially in those times of Persecution, when the Christians
skulked, and could not with safety meet in great numbers, nor had Rooms
capacious enough, and therefore cantoned themselves into several Meetings. Let
any one put all these things together, and impartially weigh them, and he will
not easily grant that Paradox, that there was no more than one single
Congregation in any City; nor will he make any scruple to believe that
Ignatius's Bishop, was at least designed to preside over several Presbyters and
Congregations. Lastly, the Negative that there was but one Congregation in any
of 'em has not been proved, neither can by any express Testimony. I conceive it
behooves our Dissenters, to make this out before they can thoroughly justify
their Congregational Churches. But let us now come to particulars, and
therefore.

2. Note, that Ignatius styles himself Bishop of Syria, in his Epistle to the
Romans. Now how large a tract Syria contained, I need not say, neither will I
affirm he was Bishop of all Syria, taken in its utmost Latitude. But seeing he
calls himself, and was Bishop of Syria, 'twas more than of the bare City
Antioch, as any one will confess. His Episcopal Power must have extended unto
some considerable compass of Ground, in the adjacent parts of the Country, else
it had been foolish to have pretended himself, to be the Bishop of Syria, when
he was only Bishop of Antioch, and of one Congregation there. Will any one then
suffer himself to believe (...) was Bishop but of one Congregation only? It
cannot enter into my head so much as to think it possible: because it must be
supposed there were Congregations in Syria as well as at Antioch: in Country as
(...) as City.

3. I reckon also that the Church of Ephesus, consisted of more than one
Congregation, and my Reasons are

1. As I argued in T. N. p. 145. from Act. 19. 10. That the Church of Ephesus
took in all Asia -- All they of Asia heard the Word of the Lord Jesus, from the
mouth of Paul, who then resided at Ephesus, and there Preached the Gospel first
in the Synagogue ( v. 8.) then in the School of Tyrannus ( v. 9.). Asia, I
expounded Asia the Proper: but I would crave leave a little to mend that Gloss,
understanding it only of some of the nearer parts of it, adjoining unto
Ephesus, which belonged unto Asia the Proper. And whereas the Historian
expresses Himself thus largely all Asia, and yet intends (as I suppose only the
Neigbhouring parts of it, we need not much admire at this, since it is so said
to aggrandize and Magnify the success, and Increase of the Gospel. We have an
Instance of this kind of expression in the Chapter before us, Act. 19. 27.
where the mad and superstitious People of Ephesus Glory of their Goddess Diana,
that all Asia, and the World Worshippeth Her: and yet, v. 34. she is called
Diana of the Ephesians: at least she was not Worshipped all the World over
strictly speaking. So I read Jo. 12. 19. Behold the World is gone after him;
and yet only some Numbers of the Jews followed Christ. In short, by all Asia,
is to be understood the Ephesian Asia, or that part which adjoined pretty close
unto Ephesus, whither their secular business often drew the Country People: Their
Curiosity first lead them unto the Synagogue and School of Tyrannus, and so
they became Acquainted with the Word of the Lord Jesus and embraced it, of
these Country Converts we read in this Chapter, v. 31. -- And certain of the
chief of Asia, which were his Friends sent unto him, etc. Nor is it an unusual
thing to call the parts of a Country, near unto the Principal City by the
general Name of the Province, whereof it is but a little Member. Thus (as is
before observed) Ignatius styles Himself Bishop of Syria; not of all Syria,
properly so called, as will I hope be granted me, but of the Country round
about Antioch, which was within the limits of Syria. So then if all they which
dwelt in Asia, in the Adjacent parts of Ephesus, as well as in the City its
self, heard the Word of the Lord Jesus, both Jews and Greeks, v. 10. and this
within the space of those two Years, the Apostle remained at Ephesus, it must
be allowed that the Church of Ephesus was too numerous to be contained within
one Single Congregation; and it is reasonable to believe, that there were some
Congregations in the (...) (especially in Ignatius's time) which the Presbyters
of Ephesus, in Ordinary, attended under the Bishop. If it be doubted whether
these Country Proselytes, or these Country Congregations, were Members of the
Church of Ephesus, some Reasons or Evidences to the contrary must be assigned.
We read no where of any Prelatical Church (which must be confessed, the Form of
Church Government thereabouts in Ignatius's Time) nearer Ephesus, than that at
Magnesia, distant from Ephesus about fourscore Miles. But that the Country
Presbyters and Congregations within the foresaid Tract, did belong unto Ephesus
is most probable hence, that the Scripture all along speaks of the Church of
Ephesus and of Asia, as one and the same Church: Acts 20. 18. Ye know (says He
to the Ephesian Elders) after what manner I have been with you from the first
day, that I came into Asia. Acts 19. 31. Certain of the chief of Asia. 2 Cor.
1. 8. We would not (Brethren) have you ignorant of our trouble, which came to
us in Asia. Acts 20. 16. Paul determined to sail by Ephesus, because He would
not spend the time in Asia. These expressions could never have dropped from the
Holy Penmen, except the Church of Ephesus had extended its self, round about
in the Country of Asia. We read (...) times that when St. Paul speaks of the
Affairs of Corinth, He uses the Word Achaia (whereof Corinth was the Principal
City. Romans 15. 26, 16. 6. (...) Cor. 16. 15. 2 Cor. 9. 2. 1 These. 1. 7.) Which
is an Evidence, that the Church of Corinth comprehended a good part of Achaia.
From the whole I gather there must needs have been several Congregations,
belonging to the Church of Ephesus, even in St. Paul's days, much more in the
days of Ignatius, and if so, then Onesimus was a Diocesan Bishop of Ephesus.

But Secondly. I also pretended to evince by an Heap of Arguments T. N. p. 139.
140, 141.
collected from the Form of Church Government, drawn up by the Assembly of
Divines, and Vindicated by the London Ministers after in their Jus Divinum
Ministerii Anglicani, that in St. Paul's Time, there were several Congregations
in the Church of Ephesus: Mr. O. who tells his Reader somewhere in his Defense,
that He has followed and Answered me Paragraph by Paragraph, has made a shift
to skip over these Proofs: They come too near the Quick. I shall be forced
therefore for that Reason, and the more strongly to Establish my Position to
repeat them once more, and so dismiss the Epistles of Ignatius. The Assembly,
and the London Divines, undertook to evince by Scripture, that even in the Days
of St. Paul, there were several Congregations in the Church of Ephesus, and
argued as follows -- The Number of Prophets and Teachers at Ephesus were many,
Paul continued there two Years and three Months, settled thereabout twelve
Disciples, who Prophesied Act. 19. 1. 6, 7. How should these thirteen Ministers
be employed, if there were not many Congregations? compare also Act. 20. 17,
18, 36, 37. where it is said of the Bishops ( or Presbyters) of Ephesus, that
Paul (...) down and prayed with them all, and they all wept sore. Here is a
good number implied. The gift of Tongues, also was given unto all these twelve
Prophets, Act. 19. 6, 7. To what end, if they had not several Congregations to
speak unto in these several Tongues? The multitude of believers must needs be
great at Ephesus. For first, why should Paul, who had Universal Commission to
plant Churches in all the World, stay about two Years at Ephesus, if no more
had been converted there, than to make up one single Congregation? Act. 19. 8,
10. During this space (secondly) all that dwelt in Asia (usually Meeting at
Ephesus for Worship) heard the Word of the Lord Jesus, both Jews and Greeks.
Act. 19. 10. At the knowledge of Paul's Miracles (thirdly) Fear fell upon all
the Jews and Greeks, dwelling at Ephesus, and the Name of the Lord Jesus was
magnified, Act. 19. 17. Many of the believes (fourthly) came, and confessed and
showed their deeds, v. 18. whereby is intimated, that more did believe than did
thus, (fifthly) Many also of them that used curious Arts, brought their Books
together and burnt them before all Men, and they counted the price of them, and
found it fifty thousand pieces of Silver, (This they would never have done
publicly, if the Major part, or atleast a very great and considerable part of
the City, had not embraced the Faith, that City being so furiously zealous in
their Superstition and Idolatry). So mightily grew the Word of God and
prevailed, Act. 19. 19, 20. Paul testifies (sixthly) that at Ephesus a great
Door, and Effectual was opened unto Him, viz. a most advantageous opportunity
of bringing in a mighty Harvest of Souls to Christ. 1 Cor. 16. 8, 9. Put all
these together, how is it possible to imagine upon any solid (...), that there
were no more than one single Congregation in the Church of Ephesus? These are
the Assemblies, and London Ministers Arguments, which Mr. O. may do well at his
leisure to confute if He can. If He cannot, and as I am apt to suspect will not
endeavor, then my point is gained. For if even in Paul's days, there were many
Congregations in the Church of Ephesus, then much more in the times of
Ignatius, the Christian Religion doubtless getting ground continually in those
parts upon the Gentile Superstition, as is manifest afterward from the
Churches hereabouts planted, and mentioned in the Revelations; to which may be
added Magnesia and Trallis out of Ignatius's Epistles, none of which are to be
found in the story of St. Paul, except Laodicea, that I can remember. Now I
will not contend that, every of the Churches spoken of in Ignatius was (...)
Diocesan, not knowing how early they were planted. But thus much I repeat
again, they were intended to be cast into the same Model as Ephefus was, as
many be gathered from the Bishops, Presbyters and Deacons fixed in them, which
was, as I may say, the Foundation of larger Churches to consist of many
Congregations, after more believers, should by the Grace of God, be added unto
the Churches.

By this time (I am in some Hopes) it is undeniably proved, 1. That the Bishops
of those Churches, to whom Ignatius wrote, were Prelatical, that is, were of a
Distinct species of Church Officers, and Superior to the Presbyters, who were
subject to them. 2. That they were likewise Diocesan, that is, Rulers over
several Congregations, and over the Presbyters and Deacons, who Ordinarily
Ministered in them, from whence it must be concluded that the several Passages,
of whose Sense Mr. O. and I have disputed, must be so expounded as to be made
agreeable to Prelatical and Diocesan Episcopacy. Whether I have done it, is
left to the Judgment of the Reader, if He please to consult the T. N. To speak
only of the (...) one Altar, very briefly, because He alleges the Testimony,
of no less a Man, than the Famous Mr. Mede, for one Numerical Altar, and not a
Specifical one, as I expounded it.

Those Words in Ignatius's Epistle, ad Magnes. (...) are thought to favor one
Numerical Altar, which Mr. O. contends for, of which thus Mr. Mede delivers
Himself -- Here is a B. 2. p. 414.
Temple with an Altar in it: For in these Primitive Times they had but one
Altar in a Church.

Ans. No more have we at this day. Though we have many Churches in a Diocese,
yet every Church has an Altar, and but one: and so it might be at Magnesia, for
any thing that is yet said to the contrary. But

Mr. Mede goes on -- It should seem they had but one Altar to a Church, taking
Church for the Company or Corporation, of the Faithful United under one Bishop,
in the City or place where the Bishop had his See or Residence; as the Jews had
one Temple, and one Altar for the Whole Nation, United under one High Priest.
The Author endeavors to confirm this (as Mr. O. truly says) out of Justin
Martyr, and St. Cyprian.

Ans. But still Mr. O. misrepresents Mr. Mede, as if He were positive herein,
which is not so. For 1. Mr. Mede lays down his position very cautiously -- it
should seem: intimating, it was not very clear from those Words of Ignatius,
(...); for these Words many imply only, that every Temple had but one Altar, as
it is with us, and yet there might be more Temples than one in the Bishop's
Churches, and therefore more Altars. 2. Mr. Mede at the same time, thinks the
Bishop's Churches to have been Diocesan: For though they had not several
Altars, yet they had several Oratories or lesser Temples (says He) as the Jews
had their Synagogues. So that the one Numerical Altar in the Bishop's Church,
does not prove his Church to consist of one Congregation only in this Learned
Gentleman's Opinion; no more than the one Altar in the Temple of the Jews,
proves there were no Synagogues. 3. Mr. Mede to back his Conjecture, grounded
on Ignatius, produces two Testimonies, the one out of Justin, the other out of
Cyprian; and because he is not positive or certain of the Conclusion he draws
from them, it will be no breach of Modesty, if I examine whether Mr. Mede has
well grounded his Conjecture on those two Fathers.

Justin Martyr in his second Apology thus writes -- All that live in Cities or
Countries, ((...) plural) meet togeher ((...)) in one place (so Mr. Mede) to
Celebrate the Holy Eucharist. This Passage does not evince that the Bishop's
Church taken for the whole Company of Believers united under him had but one
Altar, for which I offer the following Reasons, First, Because Justin here
intends not to give the Gentiles an Account of the Polity, and Government of
the Christian Churches; nor how many sort of ChurchOfficers there were among
them, nor how many Congregations under one Bishop, but of the manner of their
Divine Worship, and that not in one single Congregation, but in all; His
meaning is that in all Towns and Countries throughout the World, the Christians
belonging to any one Congregation, or certain district met together, etc. For
all this there might be several Congregations under One Bishop. If I for
example should write to a Foreigner, concerning the manner of our Worship here
in England, not intermedling with the Nature of our Government, might I not,
ought I not to say? All that live in Towns or Countries (or wherever there is
a Congregation) meet together in one place, though at the same time there be
many Churches, and many Congregations, united under one Bishop of the Diocese,
which thus meet together for Divine Worship? Secondly, Whereas Justin mentions
the (...) the President, who Celebrates the Divine Worship in these single
Congregations, there is no necessity of Understanding Him, speaking of the
Bishop only. He may using one common Title for both, speak of the Presbyters,
who preside over the Divine Worship in their particular Congregations. So Mr.
Mede expounds Antistes afterward; not the Bishop only, but the Bishop or
Presbyter, that is, He who Ministers in the Congregation at that time. Thirdly,
Supposing He means the Bishop, He does but instance in, and exemplify the
Christian Worship, by the most Honorable Assembly, sc. that, wherein the
Bishop himself Ordinarily Presided in Person, not excluding others, wherein the
Presbyters Ministered. Fourthly, Justin, because he writes in the Plural Towns
and Countries, and of Christian Worship in General, or indefinitely must here
intend all Christian Assembles in the World: And therefore it may as well hence
be concluded, that there was but one Numerical Congregation or Altar in the
World, as that there was but one in the Bishop's Church. Upon the whole matter,
the Point is no manner of way proved from Justin Martyr.

As for St. Cyprian, who condemns the setting up Altar against Altar, it cannot
thence be gathered, that a Diocesan Bishop had but one Numerical Altar. What
this Father blames, is setting up an Altar against the Bishop's Altar, in
opposition to it, not in Subordination to and Communion with it. It is true
here what our Lord spoke on another occasion, He that is not against the
Bishop, is for him, and He that is not with the Bishop, is against Him. In St.
Cyprian's Time there were several, not Oratories only, but (...) stately, and
magnificent Churches in the same Cities, and within the limits of one Bishop's
Jurisdiction. So Optatus Milevita^us relates -- post Persecuit Ed. Me. Ca.
saub. Land. 1631. l. 1. p. 16.
onem apud Cirtam, quia Basilica necdum sueram restituta in DOmum Urbani Carisi
consederunt, etc. Many TRaditors (afterward turning Donatist Bishops) met the
House of Urbanus (...), after the Persecution (...) Cirta, because the Temples
were not yet restored, etc. Now Cirta was an Episcopal See in Cyprians'ss Time,
and Crescens was Bishop of it Con Cart. Int. Cyp. (...) (...). Har. p. 23 2.
Ed. Ox.
, and the Persecution here spoken of was that of Dioclesian, wherein these
Temples were taken away from the Christians. They must then have been built
before that Emperor's time. It follows hence, that at Cirta the Christians had
several Churches before Dioclesian Reigned, that is not long after Cyprian,
even in the Third Age; therefore there were in the Cyprianic Age, several
Congregat^^^^ ^in in the same City, and Episcopal Church, and consequently
several (...). For no man can think that among these Basilicae these
Magnificent Churches, that one only had an Altar. And so from the whole it may
be gathered, that the erecting Altar against Altar, condemned by Cyprian, was
not the erecting more Numerical Altars, than one in an Episcopal Church, but
erecting them, or any one of them in Opposition to the Bishop. This Father then
does not favor Mr. Mede's Conjecture at all.

The Premises duly considered, I think Igantius's (...) one Altar was rightly
interpreted by me; since it is made so manifest, that his Bishop was both
Prelatical and Diocesan. I need not then trouble my self any further, about the
meaning of the other slight Passages objected (...) me out of that Father,
since they must all some way or other be reconciled with this Hypothesis, and I
hope I was not very wide of the Truth in the Tentamen Novum.

CHAP. III. Of St. Mark the Evangelist, Founder of the Church of Alexandria.
I Having produced the testimony of Eusebius ( Hist. lib. 2. chapter 16, 17.) in
proof of a multitude of Christians at Alexandria, about the time that Philo the
Jew wrote his Treatise, de vita Contemplativa, which was in the Days of
Claudius the Emperor, or beginning of Nero's Reign, near fifty Years after
Christ, Mr. O. excepts against the Testimony as follows -- That this Passage of
Eusebius, overthrows the notion of the Def. p. 18.
Learned Assertors of Episcopacy, that a Diocese is the lowest species of a
Church: that Eusebius speaks of Churches in the plural: that therefore there
must be Bishops of Alexandria, and not one Bishop only: that Mark was an
Evangelist, that is, an extraordinary Officer in that Church: that Annianus,
Mark's Successor was not a Bishop of a Superior Order, but an Honorable
President in their Assemblies, and a Moderator in their Synods, without Power
of Jurisdiction over his Colleagues.

Ans. I am not concerned in the private Opinions of Modern Authors, who assert
a Diocese to be the lowest species of a Church: nor will I trouble my self to
show how they limit their Notion, and explain themselves in that point, nor
whether Mr. O. fairly deduces his consequence from that Passage of Eusebius,
(...) therefore there must be Bishops, not one Bishop only of Alexandria. Let
the Assertors of this Notion see to it, Mr. O's Reasoning, such as it is,
affects not me nor my Hypothesis, it being my firm persuasion, that a single
Congregation as well as Diocese, is even in Scripture called a Church. Only let
it be observed, Mr. O. grants, that there were according to Eusebius, several
Churches or Congregations in Alexandria, but how He will Evince there were
several Bishops there, I am yet to seek. It Is moreover supposed, that Mark was
an Evangelist (or an Extraordinary Officer): And what then, still Annianus an
Ordinary one might succeed him, in the Ordinary Office of Governing a Diocesan
Church. See Part the first, Chapter the fifth. And though Mark was an Evangelist
(an Extraordinary Officer) which Mr. O. must confess, and had Power over all
the Presbyters there, yet (says Mr. O.) Annianus was not a Bishop of a Superior
Order, with Power of Jurisdiction over his Colleagues, but an Honorable
President or Moderator in the Synods. But this is only Mr. O.'s singular
conceit; we are in the present Controversy to be guided by what Eusebius tells
us, that Annianus succeeded Mark, in the Administration of the Eus. E. H. Lib.
2. Chapter 24.
Church of Alexandria. Can any one understand less thereby, than that Annianus
received the same, and all the Power of Jurisdiction, that Mark had? In short,
I cannot discern Mr. O. has advanced any thing against me, or laid his own
sentiments so close together, as to be consistent with themselves. (...) from
the Acts. Fourthly, The Therapeutae composed Hymns of diverse kinds in Meter,
which the Christians did not till afterward in the Days of the Antanini.
Fifthly, The Therapeutae spread themselves throughout the World, and were many
in Egypt, but the Cristians few; Whereunto it may be replied.

First, the Christians expounded the Law Allegorically, as is manifest from the
Epistle to the Hebrews, and some Passages in St. Paul's other Epistles: and
besides, though the Jews did endeavor to improve the Law by some Allegorical
deductions from it, yet they held Primarily unto the Literal sense, and
accordingly observed the Law; whereas the Christians rejected it in the Literal
Sense, and adhered only to the Allegorical. This then proves the Therapeutae to
be Christians, rather than Jews.

Secondly, it must be confessed, that the Christian Religion was then New, and
the Writings of the Apostles and Evangelists of a later date; they could not in
any reason be called Ancient. Nevertheless Philo, here meant the Writings of
the Old Testament, which were out of controversy Ancient, and which the
Christians even the Apostles and Evangelists made frequent use of. They may
properly enough be called the Christians Ancient Authors. Besides, though Philo
(this must be owned) believed the Therapeutae to be a Sect of the Jews, and
because they were conversant in the Writings of the Old Testament, thence
Collected, that they were of the Jewish Religion, yet this is no good
Consequence. It would not pass (I think) if one should say Timothy was no
Christian, but a Jew, because the Apostle says, He knew the Holy Scriptures
(of the Old Testament) which were able to make him wise unto Salvation.
Thirdly, Philo does not affirm the Therapeutae prayed twice a Day only, but
intimates the quite contrary. His Words are, they passed the whole day in
exercising themselves, understand, in Prayers, Praises, and other Offices of
Piety and Devotion. Hence rather it may be gathered that the Therapeutae,
prayed three times a Day, as did the Ancient, and more devout part of the Jews,
Psalm. 55. 17. Dan. 6. 10. Acts. 3. 1. as well as the Christians. Fourthly, It
is no Soc. l. 6. c. 8. and Theod. l. 2. c. 24. Say Ignatius introduced singing
alternately at Antioch.
doubt with me, but the Christians composed Hymns from the beginning, and it is
not unlikely in Meter too, if singing be a good proof of Metrical Praises, Act.
16. 25. Lastly the Christians were spread throughout the World, as the
Therapeutae were: for if (as Ignatius teaches) Bishops were throughout the
World, it follows of necessity that so were the Christians also, in as large a
Sense as the Therapeutae. Upon the whole (...) here is no proof, that I can see
of the Therapeutae being Jews, not Cristians.

On the contrary, that they were Christians may be gathered hence, because
their Religious Exercises, their Lives and Manners, and their Discipline were
conformable to the Christians, even in things peculiar to the Christians. They
divided their Substance among their Friends, as the Christians are said to have
done in the Acts: The Women among them engaged into a State of Celibacy, which
the Jewish Women would not no; they observed Lent, or the Fast about Good
Friday more strictly, than at other times; for indeed otherwise their whole
Life was Abstinence. In a Word, they had three Orders of ChurchOfficers: First,
they that performed (...) (that is Presbyters), Secondly, they that were
employed about the (...) (that is Deacons) and

Thirdly, those that obtained the highest degree of Office amongst them ((...))
that is Bishops. On these and other accounts (which I pass by) Eusebius roundly
affirms -- I judge that Philo' s Words are plainly, and without controversy to
be understood of Christians. Besides, I cannot easily persuade my self, that
Scaliger and Valesius at this distance of time should see further into the
matter, than Eusebius, Jerome and Epiphanius, who flourished much nearer those
Days, whereof Philo wrote. Nor do we ever read of the Therape^^ae, before Philo
brought them to Light, for any thing I have found; and as for Josephus (who
doubtless had read Philo) he takes no Notice at all of them, it is probable,
because they were Christians. So that I conceive them, to be as New as the
Christians, yea Christians, though Philo did not or would not own it, being
desirous (it should seem) to commend his own Nation and Religion, by
representing, the strict Holiness and Devotion of these Therapeu^ae, as of a
Sect of the Jews. Nevertheless, we ought here to Remember what Eusebius, almost
in the beginning of the Seventh Chapter, has expressly delivered of these
Therapeutae, viz. that they were Apostolical Men, (...) of the race of the
Hebrews ( or Jews) and for that Reason in a great measure observed the Jewish
rites, and institutions, as the Jewish Christians at Jerusalem, and in Judea
generally did, even unto the Subversion of the City by Titus. They were then
Christian-Jews, or Jewish-Christians, who both believed in Christ, and yet were
(...) of the Jew, of which kind we meet with many in the Acts of the Apostles.
Whoever will impartially consider what has been said, will (I hope) be induced
to believe they were Christians. I am pretty sure it is the only way to
reconcile the Arguments brought on both sides. The Christians then, (as I
designed to prove) must have been many at Alexandria, and in Egypt, whilst
Mark presided there or soon after: they had many Churches, and Annianus
succeeded Mark in the Government of them, we reading of no other Bishops, then
at or near Alexandria, but Annianus; Mr. O. has not told us of one.

Yet Mr. O. pleads -- Mark was no resident Evangelist at Def. p. 146.
Alexandria, but a Companion of Peter's, and Paul's in their Travels up and
down, with Paul, Acts. 12. 25. chapter 13. 13. 2 Timothy 4. 11. Philemon. 24. Col. 4.
10. with Barnabas, Acts 15. 39. and at Cyprus: with Peter at Babylon, ^ Ep. 5.
13. And since he was thus employed in diverse Countries one after another by
these three Apostles, he could not be the Resident Evangelist at Alexandria.

Ans. First, all this is nothing to the Argument drawn from Annianus his
succeeding Mark, and having the Administration of the Church of Alexandria
committed to him; for he might succeed in the Administration, when the
Evangelist left it, and betook himself to another Work. Secondly, I conceive
there were three several Persons Named Mark, all to be found in the Scriptures
before cited; for it is in no wise probable, that Paul, and Barnabas, and Peter,
should all have the same Person to be their Disciple and Companion, since they
all took a different Course, and Traveled into distant Provinces to propagate
the Gospel. Thirdly, Paul fell out with, and separated from Barnabas, who took
Mark along with him, Paul refusing it, Acts 15. 28. we never read that they
pieced again. It Is not likely then, that the same Mark should accompany Paul
afterward; and yet we read of one Mark with Paul, all along in the Texts
alleged; Nor can it be thought that Paul would receive this Mark again, who
had deserted him, and for that reason been rejected by him. Fourthly, There was
not a right understanding between Peter and Paul, as appears from the Epistles
to the Galatians and Corinthians. It Is not then probable, that the same Mark
attended them both. Fifthly, The several Characters and Descriptions, given
unto Mark in the places adduced by Mr. O. do (...) that there were three of
that Name. First, In Acts 12. 12. Chapter 13. 13. Chapter 15. 37, 39. the Mark in all
these Texts spoken of, is either called John only, or John surnamed Mark: but
he quite forsook Paul, and adhered to Barnabas in the last quoted place, Act.
15. 39. This note of distinction imports, that there were other Marks, besides
this John. For Secondly, I read of Mark the Nephew of Barnabas, or Barnabas's
Sister's Son, Col. 4. 10. He doubtless was the Man, who was Paul's Disciple and
Companion, after his separation from Barnabas, and continued with him to the
end of Paul's Life. Col. 4. 10. Philem. 24. 2 Timothy 4. 11. But lastly there was
a Mark, Peter's Son, and with Peter, when he wrote his first Epistle at
Babylon, 1 Pet. 5. 13. For the several Reasons before alleged, he could be
neither of the two former Marks, and moreover Eusebius constantly Eus. Ec.
Hist. lib. 2. chapter 15. l. 3. chapter 39. l. 5. c. 8.
makes him the Disciple, Interpreter, and Follower of Peter. It Is then
incredible, he should have been the Companion of Paul or of Barnabas. This last
also is the Evangelist, of whom the dispute is betwixt Mr. O. and me, who is
but once mentioned in Scripture, and that at Babylon, which being in Egypt (as
many with reason hold) he might be a Resident Evangelist at Alexandria, though
occasionally with Peter at the writing that Epistle at Babylon. But (...) any
will contend St. Peter's Babylon was Rome, be it so what absurdity is it to
affirm with Eusebius, that Peter sent him from Rome to Alexandria, where he
planted that Church, and departing this life bequeathed the Government of it to
Annianus. Yet once more admitting Mark, after he had formed and regulated that
Church of Alexandria, to have removed unto some other Cities and Countries (for
I am by no means obliged to maintain that he died there, nor does Eusebius
expressly say so, that I know of) it is enough for me to affirm with Eusebius,
that Annianus took the Administration of that Church of Alexandria, E. H. l. c.
24.
after Mark left it. To conclude, if there was but one Mark, who sometimes was
with Peter, at other times with Paul and Barnabas, then with Barnabas alone,
after that with Paul again, and lastly with Peter, yet this hinders not, but at
last he settled at Alexandria. Neither will his occasional removals thence at
the Apostle's call, destroy his Residence, See part the First, Chapter the
Fifth, whither I refer the Reader for Satisfaction: It Is high time now to
consider Mr. O's Plea, on this Argument. I am referred to Page. 126. St. Jerome
is the only Ancient Author, that has any thing of the particular manner of
Church Government established, by Mark (...) Alexandria, and on whose Authority
the Presbyterians very much rely. What he says is -- The Alexandrian
Presbyters, from Mark to Heraclas, E. ad Evag.
and Dionys. called one chosen from among themselves, and placed in a higher
degree, I say, called him Bishop. But he tells us not, who chose him, nor who
Ordained him, so that we are yet at a loss, as to one main part of the
Controversy, for any thing Jerome has discovered to us. Only one would have
expected, that if the Presbyters at any time had Ordained their Bishop, this
Father would not have failed to let us know it, for the Honor of himself, and
those of his own Order. He also informs us in the same Epistle that -- One
Presbyter was set over the rest for a remedy against (...) and this was done
Postea, that is, after John's two last Epistles, those of Paul to Timothy and
Titus, and the first of Peter were written: for Bishop and Presbyter, were all
one till then, as He supposes, and we must be made to believe. But it is very
hard to believe all this upon the credit of Jerome: Nay, Jerome himself did not
believe it, if we may believe him: for he confesses, that Paul made Timothy
Jer. S. E. in Tim.
Bishop of Ephesus. How then comes in this Postea, after he had quoted St.
Paul's first Epistle to Timothy? For if ever (...) was made Bishop of Ephesus
by Paul, 'twas before St. Paul wrote that Epistle. And if so, how comes Jerome
to say, that the devise was formed -- Postea, etc. that is, after the Writing
of that Epistle, that is, after Timothy was made Bishop of Ephesus. All that
can be said, the good Father writes somewhat confusedly, and is inconsistent
with himself. But to let this pass at present. One thing only is very
observable, that if St. Paul constituted Timothy Bishop of Ephesus, if James
was Bishop of Jerusalem, statim (...) Apostolos, and if Mark appointed a Bishop
to be chosen, and set over (...) of the (...) at Alexandria, then this Remedy
against Schism was found out, and established in the Apostle's Days, it being
certain, that Mark died before Peter and Paul, or (...) I might argue to the
same purpose, from another Passage in Jerome, (...). in Comm. sup. mat.
who affirms, that Mark himself was the first Bishop of Alexandria. Therefore
this Remedy against Schism was prescribed in the Apostle's Days, and by the
Apostles also, and therefore Bishops must needs be of Divine Institution, even
in the Opinion of Jerome himself. But still the difficulty remains, who chose
and Ordained the Bishop, after Mark was gone. Here Mr. O. thinks He has caught
us, having found an unquestionable Testimony, that the Presbyters at
Alexandria, both chose their Bishop, and Ordained him, yea, and Ordained one
another: So it is testified by (...) in his Origines (...), set forth by Mr.
Seldom many Years ago. His Words are, Mark appointed Hananias (or Annianus)
first Patriarch (or Bishop) of Alexandria, and Twelve Presbyters his constant
Assistants, to the end, that when the Patriarchship was vacant, they should
choose one of their own Number, should lay hands on his Head, and bless him, and
create him their Patriarch: then after that they should elect some Eminent
Person, and make him (...) in the Room of him, who was made Patriarch, that so
there should be always Twelve (...), etc.

This Mr. O. calls a full proof of Presbyters, choosing and Def. p. 128. 129.
creating their Bishop, and that by Imposition of Hands, and Benediction or
Prayer, also of Presbyters making Presbyters.

Before I give a direct reply, I will try what can he gathered from this
Narrative of Eutychius, in favor of Episcopal Government. First, It Is Natural,
hence to gather that Mark, not so much as dreamed of a Parity between the
Bishop and his Presbyters. His conceit was there should be Twelve Presbyters,
answerable to the Apostles, and a Bishop, (...) them like Christ over his
(...). Secondly, By this Constitution of Mark's at Alexandria, Episcopacy must
be acknowledged, the first Government set up in that Church, and because Mark
was an inspired Evangelist, it was Divine also. Thirdly, Note, that according
to Eutychius, the Presbyters were to choose their Bishop, and not the People,
which the Dissenters will not very well like of, Fourthly, That the Presbyters
Ordained new Presbyters, which will scarce go down with the Dissenting
Congregations now a Days. Fifthly, That excepting accidents the Patriarch or
(as Mr. O.) the Moderator of the Class was chosen for Life, which the
Presbyterians will not allow of. Sixthly, That the Dissenters are every whit,
as much departed from the Observance of St. Mark's model, as they can pretend
we are, yea, and much more too.

Thus much being premised; that which I would reply to (...) his story is, that
he is the first that told it, that he is an Author of no Credit, and that there
are considerable exceptions to be made against him, and his Tale. They are as
follows --

First, He is acknowledged by Seldom himself, to have lived but in the Tenth
Century, about 900 Years after the pretended constitution of St. Mark. He
alleges no Writer or Records known unto us, from whence he received this
account, nor is it known that there were any such. Besides, Jerome who was
several times in Egypt, knew nothing of this, which is very strange, (...)
should 500 Years after, and when their Records had been destroyed by the
Saracens. It must then rest upon the credit of (...) himself alone, and what
that is will appear by and by. In the mean time this Tale of (...) must not
pass, being wrote by one, who lived at so great a distance of time from the
matter of Fact, delivered by Him without any other known Ancienter Author to
support him, besides, He is an Obscure Writer Pop't up into the World to serve
a cause, and therefore cannot Merit belief.

Secondly, (...) differs from many Authors of more Unquestionable Authority
than himself. He differs from Ignatius, who affirms that Presbyters ought to do
nothing without the Bishop, not Baptize, not Marry, not Celebrate the Eucharist
without the Bishop: but according to (...), they Ordained without him. He
differs from Eusebius, so far at least as to relate, what Eusebius knew nothing
of. It is very strange that Eusebius so diligent, and so exact an Historian, so
curious, and inquisitive a Searcher, into the Antiquities of the most Eminent
Churches, from their first Plantation, particularly this of Alexandria, should
not have discovered any thing, of the Presbyters Ordaining their Bishop and one
another: that, he that has acquainted us with the Names of all the Patriarchs
from Mark to Alexander, the precise Order of their Succession, the Year when
every Bishop succeeded, in what Emperor's Reign it was, and sundry, other
remarkable things which happened in that Church, should be wholly silent, and
ignorant of this Constitution, of St. Mark. More over (...) says, that Mark
wrote the Gospel which bears his Name, in the first Year of Nero's Reign: but
Eusebius affirms, it was done in the Days of Claudius, Nero's E. H. lib. 2. chapter
15.
Predecessor. Eutychius tells us, that Mark was slain in the first Year of
Nero, Eusebius not till the Eighth Lib. 2. chapter 24. Preface ad Evang.
at soonest. He differs from St. Jerome too who reports, that all the New
Testament was wrote in Greek, except the Gospel of Matthew; but Eutychius will
have it, that Mark wrote his in the Latin Tongue. Briefly, then he differs from
some Authors (quoted by Seldom himself) in whom he read Page 14:
of three Presbyters, Seven Deacons, and Eleven other (...) Officers, of what
Character is not said; whereas Eutychius mentions Twelve only, and all those
Presbyters: on these accounts, then he is of very little credit.

Thirdly, He relates many things in his Annals (whereof these Origines are a
part) against the Faith of all approved History. He makes the Council of Nice,
to have consisted of 2048. Bishops, which is not credible: He says, Peter was
crucified in the Twenty Second Year after Christ: and he reckons Origin a
Bishop.

Fouthly, Even in these Origines, he is not at one with himself. He writes,
that Mark went unto Barca to preach the Gospel, that then Claudius Caesar died,
and Nero succeeded him: that in the Reign of Nero, Peter the Prince of the
Apostles, wrote the Gospel of Mark, with Mark in the Roman Tongue, and in the
City of Rome, and yet that Mark was slain at Alexandria, in the first Year of
Nero. But if Mark was Martyred at Alexandria, in the first Year of Nero, it
cannot be, that he was at Rome with Peter in Nero's Reign, and joined with him
in Writing the Gospel.

Fifthly, Eutychius's story seems most improbable, and in my Judgment
overthrows its self. For if the Presbyters had the Power, first of choosing, and
then Ordaining one from among themselves to be Patriarch, and after that,
Ordained the new Presbyter also, to what purpose was a Bishop created? was he
to be a Bishop of Clouts, to sit in his Chair and gravely to look on, whilst
the Eleven Presbyters Chose and Ordained the Twelveth, and he have no Hand in
it?

Sixthly, The Origines consists of so many Childish, Ridiculous, and Absurd
Relations, that no wise Man can given any credit to so trifling an Author. That
story of Mark's going to a Shoemaker or Cobbler, to have his Shoe-Latchet
mended; of Hananias pricking his Finger with the Awl, and thereupon growing
Angry: of Mark's (...) him with a Promise to heal his Finger, if He would
belive in Christ: of Hananias believing and being cured; and Lastly, of Mark's
Baptizing him thereupon, and making him Patriarch of Alexandria, is to me
incredible. Another of the like Nature, is that of Alexander's desiring that
the Patriarch of Alexandria, should not be called Papa, whereas it had been
decreed before in the Days of Heracles (I suppose for distinctions sake)
Bishops being styled Fathers, therefore it was judged fit, that the Patriarch
should be Honored with the Title of Grandfather. But-why Alexander should be
so Self-denying, as to refuse an Honorable Title, which several of his
Predecessors had had beforehim, is to me a Mystery. Again, that wonderful
design of Mark (as (...) reports it, to have always the exact Number of Twelve
Presbyters in Alexandria, appears to me not very Solid. Lastly, of the same
stamp is, that request of Peter to be crucified with his Head downward, that he
might not have the Honor to die, in the same manner as Jesus Christ did. I
fancy, that Peter never requested such a thing, or if He did, that Nero never
granted it.

Seventhly, Whereas Eutychius would make us believe, that Mark's Rule about the
Presbyters of Alexandria (not the Neighboring Bishops of Egypt) choosing and
Ordaining the Patriarchs, and Presbyters continued unto the Days of Alexander,
(who must therefore be the last that was Ordained by the Presbyters, about the
Year 310.): Yet St. Cyprian, who flourished above 60 Years before Alexander,
has something that makes me suspect the contrary, and that Mark established no
such Order at Alexandria, St. Cyprians's Words are these -- Propter quod
diligenter de Traditione divina, and Ep. 67. Ox.
Apostolica observatione servandum est, and tenendum, quod apud nos quoque, and
fere per Provincias Universas tenetur, ut ad Ordinationes rite Celebrandas, ad
eam plebem Cui Praepositus Ordinatur, Episcopi ejusdem Provinciae proximi
quique conveniant, and Episcopus delegatur plebe present, etc. This is part of
a Letter, written by the Bishop of Carthage, to the Churches of Leon, Asturica,
and Emerita in Spain: from whence it is manifest, that this was a Divine
Tradition, an Apostolical Practice, that the Bishops of the Province should
Assemble, Choose and Ordain a new Bishop, and that it universally obtained, apud
nos (says the Father) among us in Africa, and almost in all the Provinces in
the World, in the Roman Empire besure. And I take Cyprian to be a much trustier
Author, than Eutychius, or Jerome either.

To support this Testimony of St. Cyprian, I produce the First, of the
Apostolical Canons, which were collected before St. Cyprian, at least a good
while before the Nicene Council (as Dr. Beverigde has shown) Cod. Can. Vind. I.
1. c. 4.
wherein, as is by Seldom pretended, the Custom of Alexandria was altered; but
(...) cannot be, as may be gathered from the first Canon aforesaid, which runs
thus -- (...). If then this Apostolical Canon was in force before the Council
of Nice, then it was not the Nieene Council, which altered the Alexandrian
Custom, as Eutychius and Seldom suppose, it having been a much more Ancient
practice, it seems for the Provincial Bishops, to Ordain Bishops. And so
Eutychius is mistaken in this point also. If ever there was such a Rule
established by Mark at Alexandria, of Presbyters Ordaining Bishops, or
Presbyters, it was changed before Alexander or the Nicene Council, yea, before
St. Cyprian's time.

Eighthly, Whereas Eutychius asserts, there were no Bishops in Egypt till
Demetrius, it is proved to the contrary by that most Learned Prelate Bishop
Pearson, from several good Testimonies, and particularly Vind. Ig. Epis. Part.
1. c. 10.
from the Vetus Vita Marci, and Rabanus Maurus Abbot of Fulda, of both which
Mr. Seldom likewise takes Notice. The former writes thus -- Pentapolim pergit
(Marcus) and Ordinans Episcopos, per Regiones illas, and Clericos; iterum
Alexandriam venit. The latter thus -- Ordinaverat (Marcus) pro se Episcopum
Annianum, (...) quoque long lateque (...) Episcopos. Mr. Seldom to avoid the
force of these Testimonies has invented this Shift, sc. that Mark made these
Bishops in Pentapolis only, and not in Egpyt. If one asked why Mark should make
Bishops in Pentapolis, and not in (...) also, it would be hard for Mr. O. to
give a satisfactory answer to it. Besides it is said, that Mark made Bishops,
per Regiones illas, doubtless the meaning is through all the Countries, that he
traveled between Alexandria and Pentapolis; and surely Egypt was one of them.
And why should one Patriarch or Bishop, suffice for Alexandria and all Egypt,
but not for Pentapolis? Except Mr. O. would be so kind as to furnish us, with
so early an instance, of a vast City and Province, under the Government of one
single Bishop. It cannot then be questioned, but that there were from the
beginning Bishops in the Province of Egypt, as well as one in the City of
Alexandria.

Ninthly, Whereas Eutychius says, that Mark appointed the Twelve Presbyters to
choose their Patriarch, and by Imposition of Hands, and Prayers to Ordain him,
yet Bishop Pearson has produced several Ubi Supra.
good Authorities to the contrary, showing they were not Ordained by the
Presbyters; as first the Apostolical Constitutions attest. Of Abilius who
succeeded Hananias -- (...), and Jerome's Chronicle, we read that Abilius was
chosen ex Presbyteris, and (...) Graecorum Traditionem a Sancto Luca Ordinatus
est, that is, Abilius was chosen out of the Presbyters (or from among them, as
Jerome has it, not by (...)) and according to the Tradition of the Greek Church,
was Ordained by St. Luke. Furthermore (...), who wrote the Lives of the
Alexandrian Patriarchs, informs us, that Cerdon who succeeded Abilius, and
Cerdon's Successors unto Demetrius, were Ordained by the Bishops out of that
Region, that is, Egypt, I suppose. By all which it appears, that there were
Bishops in Egypt before Demetrius, who Ordained the Patriarch, or Bishop of
Alexandria.

Tenthly, It is not like, that (...) had any Authentic Records, belonging to
the Churches of Alexandria and Egypt, the Saracens having destroyed and burnt
'em all, long before Eutychius was born; so that where he wanders from the
Truth, or when he (...), we must conclude, he framed his Annals, and Origines
out of his own Brains, or some uncertain Monkish Traditions and Legends, then
current among them.

To conclude, supposing the Alexandrian Presbyters, by St. Mark's appointment,
did Elect the Patriarch or Bishop, yea, and Ordain him too, yet it must be
confessed, that Bishops) however chosen and Ordained) are as early as he, and
by Divine Right, St. Mark being a Person inspired, and consequently having
Authority from God, at least from the Apostles, to establish the Government of
the Chuches, which he founded, with what Face then could Seldom produce these
Origines, to justify the Presbyterian design in the late Troubles (I do not
now say for altering the way of choosing, and Ordaining them) but for quite
extirpating Episcopacy? Or with what Color of Reason can Mr. O. argue against
Episcopacy, and blame us for not observing the supposed Method of choosing and
Ordaining our Bishops, (...) himself and his Partisans are undermining the
Fabric, which St. Mark is confessed to have built, and levelling it to the very
Foundation? Let our Adversaries first conform themselves to this Rule of St.
Mark, let them in every City choose, and Ordain a Bishop for Life, unto whom
themselves, and all the Faithful in the City and Country adjacent must be
Subject, and unto whose care and conduct, the Administration of the
Ecclesiastical Affairs may chiefly be committed, and when they have done this,
then let them lay before us this special Author Eutychius: It will be time
enough then to consider farther of him: Mean while it seems not fair nor
honest, to bring this Fabulous instance on the Stage against us, which they
themselves will not be guided by.

The (...) is Eutychius, of whom we have been speaking, lived about 900 Years
distance from the (...) by him related, without any intermediate Testimony to
confirm his story: He differs in many things, from several good Authors of much
more credit than himself: He relates things against the Faith of all History;
he contradicts himself, (...) own story (...) its self, he intermixes many
little Foolish and very improbable Remarks, he is contradicted by more Ancient
Writers, yea, and more unquestionable than himself; Jerome, whose design and
Argument needed it, makes no mention of that Constitution of St. Mark, and
lastly, the Dissenters themselves observe it not. By this instance therefore;
(...) they do us harm they do themselves no good, yea, rather hereby they
condemn themselves.

But Lastly, against the Testimony of (...), I lay that of (...). Echellensis
de Orig. Alexand. Ecl. which I borrow from the (...). of Sep. 2d. Ed. p. 320.
Bishop of Worcester. Echellensis tells us out of Severns Alex. Bishop of the
Asmonaeans, and of the Sect of the (...) or (...), that after the Death of the
Patriarch, the Presbyters met together and prayed, and proceeded to Election:
The first Presbyter declared it belonged to them to choose their Bishop, and to
the other Bishops (in Egypt) to consecrate him. To which the Bishops then
present assented, only saying, if he were worthy they would consecrate him,
whom they chose, but not otherwise: So then they had it seems, a Negative Voice
in the Election. And Elmachinus makes this a Constitution of St. Mark in the
first Foundation of that Church, and says it continued to the Nicene Council,
about which time it was ordered, that the Bishop might be chosen from any place
or Church whatever, and this was all the Alteration in the Constitution of the
Alexandrian Church at the Council of Nice, whatever Seldom or Eutycbius say to
the contrary.

CHAP IV. Of the Syriac Translation of the New Testament.
MR. O. argues, that the the Syriac (...), which is so very Ancient, that is
comes nearest in time to the Original, uses not two Words, one for Bishop,
another for Presbyter, as our Translation and the Greek do; but it has only
Kashishaa: The Word in Chaldee, and in Syriac, signifies Presbyters. From
whence we are to conclude, that in the Opinion of the Syriac Translators,
Bishops and Priests (though two Words in the Greek) are nevertheless but one,
and the same Species of Church Officers, and therefore expressed but by one
Word in the Syriac Translation, which properly signifies, (...), or Elders.

First, Supposing all this true, viz. that Bishop and Presbyter in Scripture
denote, one and the same kind of Church Officer, in the Judgment of the Syriac.
Translators, who therefore described them by one Word only in their own
Language: Yet this hinders not but that there was another Order of (...)
Rulers, Superior to Bishops and Presbyters. Thus much (I take it) has been
abundantly proved already in the Tentamen Novum, (...) and Titus, being such
Church Governors, Superior to the Bishops and Presbyters, though not
distinguished by any Special and appropriate Title. So that, if all Mr. O. has
here said, and his Deduction from it were true, 'twill do him no Service, nor
us any disadvantage in the present Cause. But. (...) are commonly invested with
all those Powers, which Inferiors have; but Inferiors cannot pretend to all the
Power, that Superiors have. It Is no wonder therefore to me, if Bishops are
sometimes styled Presbyters, since the Apostles themselves in Scripture, and
Bishops oftentimes in (...) are so called. Therefore.

Thirdly, Mr. O. has not got the least advantage of us, by starting this
Criticism about the Syriac Translation: But rather has lost ground, so far as
these Translator's Authority will go. For because he thought it a good Argument
on his side, that the Syriac Translators of the New Testament (as He imagined)
used not two Words for Bishop and Presbyter, but one only, sc. Kashishaa: it
follows, that because it is found to the contrary, that they used several other
Words, none of which are employed to express Presbyter by, this ought to be
taken as a good proof on our side, that even in the New Testament there is a
distinction, between the Order of a Bishop, and that of a Presbyter, if Mr. O's
own way of reasoning has any force in it.

Finally, if the Syriac Version be so very Ancient as Mr. O. thinks, one might
believe Ignatius to have had an hand in the Translation: For he was a Bishop of
Syria. And who then can imagine the Translators to have so-much as Dreamed of
the Identity of Bishops and Presbyters?

CHAP. V. Concerning the Church Government, in the NorthWest parts of Scotland.
THere is an Argument for the Government of Churches and Ordination by
Presbyters drawn from the Scots, who being converted to Christianity about the
Year 200. (as is thought upon the Authority of Tertullian) had no Bishops among
them, but were Ruled by mere Presbyters only, and that for (...) Centuries
after. The Dissenters argument grounded on this Tradition, is more at large
thus, according as it is urged by Mr. Baxter their Oracle, as I find in the
History called an Account of Church Government, etc. by My late Lord Bishop of
Worcester.

First, Mr. Baxter tells us of a sort of Men called Culdees, that first guided
the Affairs of Religion in Scotland long before the coming of Palladius, and
yet were not Bishops, but Monks and Presbyters.

Secondly, That these Culdees chose some few among themselves to be as
Governors to the Rest, whom Writers called Scotorum Episcopos, Bishops of the
Scots.

Thirdly, That these New found Bishops of the Scots, had only the Name of
Bishops, about which he (Mr. Baxter) will not contend with the Episcopal Party.

By the way, nor will I contend about the Name Bishop, but Mr. Baxter
acknowledges, that they were as (...) to the Rest. And here is the thing which
is more than the Name only of Bishops.

Fourthly, That afterward (...) began a Higher sort of Bishops, but the
Culdees still kept up the greatest part against him.

Fifthly, That Columbanus his Monastery, in the Isle of Hy restored the Culdees
strength; and the Monks out of that Island, were the most prevailing Clergy of
Scotland, who had no proper Episcopal Ordination, but bare Election and
Ordination of Presbyters.

This piece of History is just (...) all over; one would guess 'twas Eutychius
his Mark, who first converted these Northern- Britains, and settled the
Government like unto that at (...). But against all this, I have in the first
place to ask, who in good earnest, converted these Northern- Britains? Mr. O.
thinks it was the Southern- Britains. I will take him at his Word, and then
demand, whether it be not most reasonable to believe that the Northern-
Britains did, with the Faith receive the same Church Government, as the
Southern had, who converted'em: And that the Southern- Britains has Bishops
among them from the beginning, is out of doubt, and confessed by the Elders,
and Messengers of the Congregational Churches, met at the (...), October the
12th 1658. In the Preface of their Declaration; that its true in respect of the
Public, and open Profession of Presbytery or (...), this Nation had been a
stranger to each way, it is possible ever since it had been Christian i. e.
till about 1640.

It is without all doubt to me, that the Southern- Britains, very early
received the Christian Faith, and perhaps in the Apostle's Days, and by St.
Paul too, as My (...) Lord of Worcester has made very probable, Orig. Bri. c. 1.
both from the Testimony of many Fathers, and some considerable Conjectures of
(...) own. But the Question is, whether the Inhabitants of the North, and
North-West parts of Britain beyond Edinburgh, received the Faith before
Columbanus, settled in the Island of Hy or Jona. Our (...) will have it, that
these North People became Christians, at least about the Year of Christ 200.
and from that time (until (...) came among them) were governed by Monks and
Culdees, who were Presbyters only. This Opinion is grounded chiefly on a known
Testimony out of (...), Tertul. adv. (...). c. 7.
who writes that the Faith of Christ had then (...) unto (...) loca Romany
(...), and these places must needsbe the North-West parts of (...) beyond
Edinburgh, which the Romans had (...) subdued. Now Tertullian flourished about
the end of the second Century, or beginning of the Third.

Ans. This Passage of (...) reaches not the point; it cannot be hence deduced
what was the Government of that Church, supposing those Northern parts, were
thus soon converted. (...) might have been (...) up there for any thing we know
or find proved: And it is likely, it was so, if (as Mr. O. (...)) they received
Christianity from the Southern- (...), as I observed before. But let us look
more narrowly into (...) (...), that some parts belonging to the (...), were
then become (...), (...). those who had not yet submitted their (...) unto the
(...) (...). But who (...) were is the Question.

Some think they were the Britains next beyond the Picts Wall. who were not
Conquered by the Romans, and besides were small, and inconsiderable
Conversions, no Church being formed or established among them: For so (...) in
the place cited mentions many other Countries, where happly some few scattered
Christians lived, though no Church was regularly established. Now though this
is sufficient to convince me, that the People of the remote North and
North-West of Scotland (now so called) beyond Edinburgh, were not meant by
(...); yet foreseeing it will not satisfy others, whose Interest and Cause
will not suffer them easily to be persuaded, I will therefore take the Liberty
to offer my own Thoughts unto the Readers Consideration,

My Conjecture then is, that the Loca Britannorum Romany inaccessa referred
unto by (...), were no other than Ireland. Ptolomy reckons the Islands of the
World thus. First, Taprobane the Greatest: The next was ( GREAT) Britain,
otherwise (...) Albion, and the Third, (...) another Island of the Britains
called Ireland. And Pliny says, Albion was named Britany, yet all the
Neighboring Island were called Britannies, and that Ireland of Old time was
inhabited by Britains. Aristotle (or whoever Lib. de mundo C. 3.
was the Author of that Book de mundo) Witnesses, that there were in the Ocean
two the greatest Islands in the World, called (...)'' (...) and (...), Albion
and Ireland. Thus much I have gathered from Mr. Cambden. I shall add Came. Brit.
EngEdit. 1. fol. p. 23. and. (...). see Heyl Cosm.
one of my own Collection from Dionysius de situ Orbis, who speaking of our
Western Ocean says. Dion. de situ Orb. Edit. Land. 1658. Carm. 565. 566.
(...) who then can doubt, but that Ireland was meant by (...)'s Britannorum
loca, as well as any other places of the Britains, since it is well known the
Romans never carried their Arms, nor extended their Conquests, so far as unto
that Island, although they were not ignorant of the place, be sure in
Tertullian's Days, no nor in Augustus's time, when Dionysius the African wrote?
(...) himself in the same Period adds, and Multarum Insularum (...) (...), many
Islands unknown to us, where the Gospel had got footing. But least the unwary
Reader should think these very Words overthrow my Opinion, and that the Island,
Ireland, being unknown to (...), cannot be meant by the Loca (...) (...)
inaccessa, it must be noted that by (...), he intends such Islands with whom
they had no Commerce in Ordinary, nor an exact account of. (...) that they were
wholly ignorant of them cannot be; for then (...) must talk at Random and
Nonsense. How could He say, that Christianity was propagated in these Islands,
if they were altogether (...). There is a passage in Archbishop (...), I must
not (...) over. Brit. (...). (...). p. (...).
Neither did Celestine employ less care about freeing the Britains from the
Pelagian Heresies -- a Bishop being Ordained (...) the Scots; while be studies
to preserve the Roman Island Catholic, (...) also made the Barbarous Island
Christian, the former whereof was Great Britain, the latter Ireland. The
forecited Words are (...)'s which Vitus Basinstochius Id. p. 198.
thus expounds, and thereby illustrates Tertullian. When Prosper said
Britannies, doubtless (...) called the Roman Island, Britain, and the other
Island called Barbarous, he understood to be Ireland, whither the Power of the
Roman (...) it is believed never came. It will be Objected hence, that therefore
because the Pope is here said to have sent a Bishop ( (...) is meant) and by
him made Ireland Christian, Ireland embraced not the Faith till that time,
(...) about 430. by consequence (...) is not to be understood of Ireland. But I
reply, First, That Prosper and (...), must be supposed to speak a (...) de
Rome, as believing none were good Christians, but who depended on the Pope.
Besides, Ireland was Christian long before this, as the story of (...) proves.
But Secondly, It may with Reason (...) supposed, that a great part of Ireland
was yet unconverted. Or Thirdly, The Scots a Foreign People, (...), and
Barbarous had more (...) invaded, and Conquered them, and withal very much
impaired the Christian Religion, (as the (...) once did here in England)
nevertheless, that about the Year 430. the Christian Religion, by the Preaching
of (...), or rather St. Patrick was restored again. If it be demanded of me,
how I prove, that Ireland became Christian before (...), I reply, it is proved
by the same (...), others would prove that the North and North West of the now
Scotland, was so early converted, that is, by (...)'s Testimony; and which
(...) the must likely conjecture, must now be left to the Reader. The sum is,
if (...) may as well speak of Ireland, as of any other place, here is then no
proof of so early a Conversion in the utmost North of Great Britain.

But let us hear what Mr. O. has advanced in this Controversy: For indeed my
business is with him. He begins then and Acquaints us. The Histories of
Scotland tell (...) their Churches were Governed Plea p. 142. 143.
by (...) without Bishops, for above 200 Years, and therefore had (...) (...)
(...) by (...). In confirmation hereof, Mr. O. cites Hector (...), John Major,
and (...) (...), and indeed these are the best and the most Ancient and only
Witnesses, that can be produced in that Cause, except the invisible (...), who
at best was but in the Eleventh Century. But these were the most Errand (...)
of Legends as ever appeared in public, having no Author, no Records before
them, to support what they affirm concerning their Country and its affairs.

Thus much my Lord of St. (...) in his Historical Account has objected against
these, and other such Fabulous Historians: And Mr. O. who has read this
Learned. Bishop, ought not to have urged these (...), unless (...) had taken
off the Bishops Exceptions against them. True, he tells us, Archbishop (...)
(...) (...) with Approbation, (...) (...) E. (...). p. (...). 799. 800. But
when I consult Archbishop (...), I find him indeed citing these Authors, page
800. but not, no not (...) Himself, with Approbation, unless his very citing
them must (...) taken as an Approbation of them, which I must (...) Mr. O. is
his (...). For the said Archbishop in his Preface to that Book (...), the
Reader would object against him, the Obscurity and little Credit of many of his
Authors ingenuously Confesses, that he had gathered together a (...) of all
manner of Authors, good and bad, new and old, to the end (...) (...) Historian
might from thence pick, what seemed to his purpose and probable: But that
otherwise (he (...)) (...) was not so void of sense, (...) to (...) (...) (...)
of Monmouth, or Hector Boethius, or any other of the lower Form, as (...) of
(...) thing of (...) (...). Hence it follows, that Archbishop (...) cites them
not with Approbation, especially not (...), and therefore not (...) (...), who
is the vir gregis, the (...) and Leader, in all the Romantic Stories of the
Antiquity of the Scotch Nation and Church. It is to be observed Hector
Boethius, the last of the three takes upon him to mend the former, Fordon, and
Major, saying (what Mr. O. leaves out) Palladius was the first, that was made
Bishop, by the Pope among the Scots; whereas in former times, Bishops were
taken out of the Culdees and Monks, the People choosing them. Here then the
Witnesses do not agree among themselves: For Fordon says without Bishops, and
Major Presbyters only, but Boethius plainly intimates the Scots had Bishops in
former times, though not of the Roman Stamp, nor thence sent unto the Scots.
Palladius was the first of the Roman Bishops, not the first Bishop. Whoever
chose'em is nothing to our purpose: The Scots had Bishops before Palladius,
according to Boethius, who were picked out of the Monks and Culdees: But he
says, not Ordained by them. It may as well be affirmed, that because our
Bishops at this Day are taken out of the Presbyters, that therefore they are
Ordained by them. Lastly, The said Archbishop Usher, there produces another
Testimony out of John Baly, who Writes -- Palladius was sent among the Scots,
that he might establish the Episcopal Order among them, after the Roman
Fashion, for ( He adds) the Scots had before that time their Bishops, and
(other). Ministers, as it was among the Britains after the Asiatick Manner. But
it pleased not the Romans (the Popes) who affected Ceremonies, and hated the
Asiaticks.

But though the Scots were Anciently the Inhabitans of Ireland, yet says Mr. O.
these Authors call the Ancient Inhabitants of (the now) Scotland, by the Name
they were known in their own days, and to them Palladius is thought to have
been sent.

True! But 'twas their ignorance or worse, nothing being more clear, than that
the Ancient Inhabitants of the now Scotland, were Britains and Picts, not
Scots. This is fully made out in the Historical Account of the
Church Government, etc. as well as by Archbishop Usher's Authorities, to whom I
refer the Reader.

Whereas Bid l. 5. c. 10. relates, how that Columba was the first Teacher of
the Christian Faith, among the Tramontane Picts, to the North, Mr. O. thus
glosses on that Passage -- He was the first Plea p. 144.
Bid knew of, implying there were others before, that Bid knew not of.

Ans. At this rate all Authorities may be eluded: And all the Testimonies
produced by Mr. O. in favor of his Cause, may easily be laid aside. Bid (...)
no other, yet the contrary is true; thus, I may say, Fordon and Major talk of
Presbyters and Monks, among the Scots without Bishops: That is, that they knew
of; but however there were Bishops among them Bid himself gives not the (...)
occasion for this gloss, but is as positive herein, as any Writer can be. And
he is a better Witness in these Matters, than Fordon, Major, and Boethius.
These talk of matter before their time a 1000 Years, without any Authority to
back their Relations: Bid, of things which happened but about 140 Years, only
before his time. For (...) flourished Anno 560. and Bid was born Anno 707. and
flourished 735. In short then Bid might well understand what happened at
(...), and among the Northern Picts, the English Saxons, having so lately
received Christianity from the Bishops, sent hither by Columba, and his
Successors.

Mr. O. goes on to acquaint us, Christianity was much more Ancient in the North
of the now Scotland, and that it is proved by Bishop Cowper.

Ans. Bishop Cowper, labored under the common Disease of easily believing, and
advancing the Antiquity and Honor (as he thought) of his own Nation. He
brought no Testimony of Credit, but that out of Theodoret, which belongs unto
the Southern Britains (for of Tertullian's we have before Treated). But Mr. O.
would be resolved in some Queries.

First, When the Fathers mention Joseph of Arimathea, Plea p. 146.
Simon Zelotes, etc. to have Preached the Gospel in Britain, what reason have
we to exclude North Britain? The zeal of those Apostles and Apostolical Men,
and their Charity would Prompt them, to endeavor the Propagation of the Gospel
throughout Britain; and part of the now Scotland, belonged then to the British
Kings.

Ans. I know no Father that mentions Joseph of Arimathea, and Simon Zelotes,
except happily Dorotheus, who is the Father of a Thousand Lies, or Fordon, Major,
Boethius, Fleming, Balaeus, and See Bellar. de S. E. p. 91.
such other later and Legendary Writers. I can give several good reasons
against the North- Britains being so early converted, and good ones too, as I
think Britain Anciently was divided into very many petty Kingdoms: None of the
Princes received the Faith very early (that we know of) save Lucius perhaps:
The Romans never penetrated into the now Scotland, till a good while after, and
it was by their means in part, that Christianity spread its self. The Picts in
North- Scotland never stoop't to their Yoke, which rendered their Conversion
more difficult. And something (I hope) in this point may be ascribed unto the
Secret Will and Providence of God. Can Mr. O. give me any other Reasons than
such as these, that the Saxons and Angli in Germany, who overrun Britain, were
no sooner converted, though Tertullian reckons the Germans in General, to have
been Christians in his time? Nor were the Apostles themselves, nor the
Apostolical Men always Successful in their endeavors. St. Paul was forbid to
Preach in Asia, Acts, 16. 6. It Is a wretched way of proving a matter of Fact in
Question, from such slender Probabilities. By the like Arguments one might
prove, that all Europe, Asia and Africa, embraced the Gospel a Thousand Years
since, even the most Northern Scythians, the most Eastern Indians and Seres,
and the Africans about the Cape of Good-Hope. In short, though Paul plants, and
Apollos Waters, yet it is God, who gives the Increase. It Is certain the Apostles
themselves did not always take Fish, wherever they cast their Net. Our Lord
foretold them as much, directing them therefore to shake off the dust of their
Feet, as a Testimony against them, that rejected their Doctrine. But enough of
Mr. O's first Query.

Secondly, He asks if the North- Britains received their first Conversion by
Men sent from Rome (as seems from Bid, E. H. l. 3. c. 4) How came they to keep
their Easter, after the Eastern Manner.

Ans. This is accounted for by the Bishop of St. Asaph, and Mr. O. ought to
have acquiess'd, or else refuted Hist. Account p. 66.. 7.
the Bishop, and not thus frivolously repeated the bare Objection about Easter,
without Vindicating it against the Bishop. But he seems to read Books on
purpose to furnish himself with little Objections; not with a disposition to
hearken unto Reason, but to Spin out, and continue disputes, for Ever. Besides,
the North Britain (here so called by Mr. O.) is by Bid in his History
described, to be the most Southern part of the now Scotland, adjoining unto
England, and called Galloway or Annandale, on this side Edinburgh. But what is
this, to the Northern Tramontaene (...), beyond Edinburgh, whither we say the
Romans, neither Gentiles nor Christians, nor the Christian Religion, ever
reached before Columba settled at Hy, who also came thither not from Rome, but
Ireland.

Mr. O. farther pleads these words of Bid. I. 1. chapter 13. That Def. p. 148.
by the Pope Palladius was sent primus Episcopus ad Scotos Creden tes.
therefore the Scots were Christians before Palladius.

Ans. If this Testimony be adduced to any purpose, it is to prove, that the
Tramontane Picts received Palladius, their first Bishop from (...), the Roman
(...), that before that time they believed, and had Presbytery only, but no
Bishops, because Palladius was the first. Now to show the Disingenuity of this
Suggestion, it must be noted very briefly out of the Historical Account, that
by Scots, are here meant the Scots in Ireland, that Bid has not a word of
their form of Government; that some Copies read ad Scotos convertendos, which
would imply, that they were not yet Christians; that primus (in Prosper, whence
Bid is thought to have taken his Narrative) in some Copies is read primitus,
that is, formerly; that Palladius and Patricius, were designed for the Primates
only, or the first Bishops in rank; and finally, that it is true, Palladius was
the first Bishop, sent into Ireland by the Pope; Yet there were Bishops before
that Time, of which Number Archbishop Usher produces Four. De Prim. E. B. p.
800. 801.
This was the first attempt of reducing Ireland to the Obedience of the Pope.
I Will say nothing of Mr. O's confessing Palladius was sent into Ireland. Plea
148.

Mr. O. now promises us an Instance of Presbyters Ordaining Plea 152.
in Scotland: it is that of Segenius a (...), and the Abbot of Hy, who with
other Presbyters Ordained Bishop Aidan and Finan. Bid H. E. l. 3. 5, 15

Ans. But Mr. O. acknowledges that there were Bishops at Hy, and in that
Province from Bid, lib. 3. chapter 4. and the Ulster Annals agree hereunto. What
need we say any more to resolve this difficulty? Some Bishop with the Abbot and
his Presbyters, laying hands on (as our Custom is at this Day) Ordained Aidan,
For to what purpose were these Bishops among them, if not to Ordain? The
Government was in the Abbots Hands: the Presbyters were able to Minister in the
Word and Sacraments: The Bishops bufiness then was certainly to Ordain.

Mr. O. excepts against the Ulster Annals, as not being attested by any Author
of that Age: And yet they agree in most things with Adamnanus, and with (...),
and are a little relied on by Archbishop Usher.

Mr. O. urges (a Bishop being supposed in the Monastery Plea p. 153.
at Hy) He was subject to the Abbot, and thinks he has here sufficiently
replied, to My Lord of St. Asaph's Solution of that difficulty; I do therefore
add thereto.

Ans. Nothing is more certain than that Bishops were wont to be in Monasteries.
I read in Theodoret, of eleven residing in those of Egypt, from their Youth up
to their Extreme Old Age, and when they were Bishops too. Theod. E. H. l. 4.
chapter 22. Now though the Bishops of the Province were subject to the Abbot of Hy,
yet it must remembered also, that the Abbots Jurisdiction extended it self
throughout the Province. No wonder then, if the Provincial Bishops were (...)
to the Abbots: Rule and Order required thus much. If one of our English Bishops
should (...) into a College of Oxford, and readmit himself a Member of the
University, He becomes thereby subject unto the Head of that College, and to
the Chancellor within the Precincts of the University. And that I may not fain
a case, some of our Bishops have held a Prebendary of a Collegiate Church in
Commendam: He is thereby subject to the Dean therein, all matters belonging to
that Church, even as (...) says, the Provincial Bishops were to the Abbots of
Hy, viz. within the Abbot's Jurisdiction. But we know for all this the
Chancellor of Oxford, and the Dean of a Cathedral cannot Ordain. Besides, the
Abbots of Hy, though they retained an External Government over all in the
Province, the Bishops not excepted: Yet as to the Episcopal and Ministerial
Acts of Religion, in that Age belonging to Bishops, the Abbots gave place to
Bishops, as (...) appear from the following story, in My Lord of St. Asaph, It
was it seems Hist. Account p. 101. 102.
the Custom at that time, for the Priests being all equals to break the Lord's
Bread in the (...) together. A certain Bishop being then at Hy, and not
discovering his Character, was by Columba invited to break the Lord's Bread
with him: But Columba at length discerning him to be a Bishop, would have the
Bishop break the Bread alone, as Bishops then used to do: which shows that
notwithstanding the Abbots Temporal Jurisdiction (as I may call it) Columba
acknowledged the Episcopal Order, to be Superior to that of a Presbyter.
Lastly, Bede's inusitato more (for the right understanding whereof, I refer to
the Historical Account) implies, that this H. E. l. 3. c. 4.
was but one singular, and unprecedented example. One Swallow, and such a one
as was never seen before, does not make a Summer. One might then here justly
cry out with (...), Quid mibi profers (...) Ecclesiae consuetudinem? Cum (...)
Turba (...), and the Whole World was Episcopal.

The first person sent into Northumberland, from Hy was one described only, but
without a Name in Bid. Returning back to Ib. lib. 3. c. 5.
Hy without (...), Aidan is appointed and Ordained unto the Episcopacy: in
whose Ordination it is probable his Predecessor, a Bishop was concerned: for he
was then present among them. Mr. O. alleges, he is called only (...) a Priest;
but this is disputing a small point by Halves: for if Aidan was a Bishop so was
his (...): And of Aidan it is said -- Ipsum esse dignum Episcopatu: and then in
the next Chapter, (...) (...) Aidan at his Ordination, (...) Antistes. So then
in Bede's Language Antistes is a Bishop, and the nameless Person we speak of is
called so a little (...): He was therefore a Bishop, if Aidan was. Lastly,
Aidan belike was a Presbyter before he was Ordained Bishop of Northumbria: if
so, to what purpose was he Ordained, if not to a distinct Office? I do suppose
all Mr. (...) Material Objections are accounted for by this time, and his
Proofs of Presbyterian Ordination invalidated. I will conclude this Chapter
with two Observations.

First, It cannot with any reason be imagined, but that there were Bishops in
the Province of Hy, because Columba, the first Abbot thereof came out of
Ireland; there we read of Bishops among whom he was educated, convers't freely
with them, and was Ordained by them. He was Ordained Deacon by Finian Bishop of
Mead, and was an Intimate Friend of Columbanus Bishop of Laghlin, and Ordained
Presbyter by one of them, most probably by Columbanus, from whom also he might
take his Name, as Eusebius Bishop of Caesarea, did that of Pamphilus, Hist.
Account c. 5. After he was Abbot of Hy, he propagated Bishops among the
Northumbrians, from whom our English Saxons derived. On this account it was my
Lord of St. Asaph argued, that the Scotch Ordinations must needs be Episcopal,
meaning those at Hy: which he confirmed by this Consideration, because the
Romans ( Austin the Monk, and his Associates) did not dislike the Orders, that
they found in the British Church, as being Episcopal, though derived from the
Monastery of Hy.

To this Mr. O. excepts, that if by British Bishops be meant the Plea p. 156.
Church of South Britain, it is not to the purpose as we observed before.

Ans. Nothing is more plain than that my Lord Bishop meant the Church of South
Britain. Whatever Mr. O. observed before is not Material, but my Lord Bishop's
Observation is manifestly to the purpose. For if the Romans did not dislike the
Orders of the Church of South Britain, they could not dislike the Orders of Hy,
because the South Britains derived their Orders from Hy, and doubtless were the
same: and the reason they disliked neither was because they were Episcopal, as
were the Romans and all the World beside.

Mr. O. adds, if the Orders (...) at Hy, be intended as not disliked by the
Romans, yet (says he) the Romans were not so ignorant of the Privileges of
Abbots as to dislike their Ordinations, which are allowed by that Church.
Decret. Greg. Abbas, si sit Presbyter, confer potest Ordinem Clericalem.

Ans. Ordo Clericalis may possibly here (...) neither the Episcopal nor
Presbyterial, nor the Diaconal Order, but the Inferior Orders only, such as the
SubDeacons, Acoluthists, Exorcists, Psalmists, Lectors and Door-keepers. But
that the Episcopal Order is not meant, is to me past dispute: For the Romans
never allowed an Abbot Presbyter to Ordain a Bishop that I heard of.

Secondly, If this Privilege was allowed by the Roman Pontifs to the Presbyter,
Abbots. It was allowed to such of them only, who it is likely owned the
Jurisdiction of the Roman See. But not unto those, who refused subjection to
it, as did the Abbots of Hy, Mr. O. knows very Well. This Privilege then,
whatever it was, could not be the reason of the Romans not dislkeing the
foresaid Orders.

Thirdly, The Decretals mentioned were made or put together, by Gregory the
Nineth Pope of Rome, in the Thirteenth Century, about 709 Years after these
Abbots of Hy, almost as many after Austin the Monk, and therefore not
appositely here alleged.

Fourthly, Mr. O. seems here to countenance Presbyterian Orders, by Popish
(...), and Canonsframed in the Dregs of Time, when the Romish Corruptions were
at their Height. But I like them never the better for that. The Romans are more
excusable in this then our Dissenters, 'Twas their Principle, that all
Church Officers derive from, and depend merely upon the Pope's Will. He may
then communicate the Privilege to whom he will, even to a Deacon. But that a
Presbyterian Dissenter should justify his Orders by a Pope's decree is
something extraordinary and Extravagant, as I fancy. But

Secondly, I would observe that Columba a Presbyter himself usurped (or
received from the Prince of the Province of Delried) a Dominion over a great
Province in the North-West of the now Scotland, over the Monks and Culdees (if
any such were), yea even over his Fellow Presbyters themselves: for all or many
of them at least were Presbyters, and lastly, over the Bishop also, if it will
be acknowledged there were such in the Province of Hy. Besides, he yet retained
a Jurisdiction over the Monastery of Dearmuch in Ireland, which himself had
formerly erected, and his Successors over many more Monasteries of lesser Note,
which sprang out of these two, both in (...) and in (...). Now this is a
wonderful piece of Antiquity to justify the Priciples, Bid E. H. l. 3. c. 4.
and Practices of the United Brethren at present amongst us. If it proves
Presbyterian Ordination it destroys Presbyterian Parity, unless Mr. O. will
assert, that the Monks of Hy were equal to the Abbots, and that every Monk was
the Abbot in his Turn, pro Tempore. What Room then has Mr. O. to talk of
Bishops receiving their Power from Kings, ruling over many Churches and
Congregations, exercising Jurisdiction over their Fellow Presbyters (as he
thinks) and that for life too? All this did Columba and his Successors, who are
pretended by Mr. Baxter, to have restored the Culdees (or Presbyters) strength
against the encroachments of Palladius. But all this while the Tyrants only
were changed, not the Tyranny, the name altered not the thing. Instead of
Palladius, the Culdees and Monks were in the Hands of Columba: and in the place
of a Bishop was set up an Archpresbyter. Moreover, I would ask whether in the
supposed Ordinations at Hy by Presbyters, the Monk-Presbyters could or did
Ordain without the Abbot-Presbyters. If not (as I believe all will and must
grant) our United Brethren will find little relief from this rare Instance of
Presbyterian Parity and Ordination.

I should here have concluded this Chapter, but Mr. O. in the midst of this
Controversy, has interwoven an invidious Reflection upon Episcopacy, and
asserted, that the Hierarchy in the Churches of Plea p. 149.
the Roman Empire, had their Platform from the Heathen, who had their Flamens
and Arch-Flamens, and I know not what.

Ans. 1. If the Heathens had Sundry Officers in the Administrations of their
Idolatrous Religion, subordinate to one another, it will not follow the
Christians took it from them? Why not from the Jewish Hierarchy? His beloved
Hilarious Sardus is of this Opinion: or why may it not not be thought a piece of
Natural Religion, wherein the Patriarch, Jews, Gentiles, all agree? But let us
see how he attempts to make good this Reflection of the Christians, deriving
their Hierarchy (...) the Heathen. He grounds it on the Epistle of Julian to
Arsacius, the Gentiles Chief-Priest in Galatia, and after the Citation of a
scrap out of Eusebius, which I do not find in the places directed to, cries
out, Here is a Precedent for Bishops intermedling with state affairs. Whereas
any one may know that will but read, or understand that Epistle (which Mr. O.
never did I preceive) that it is entirely spent about Religious matters, and
directs how Arsacius the Chief Priest should behave himself, in Governing the
affairs of the Gentile Religion. Thus we are wont to be teazed by a sort of
Men, that do not or will not understand what they say; who, so they may cast
dirt upon us, care not how ignorantly and falsely they do it. But to let this
pass. The Question here is, whether the Christians derived their form of Church
Government by Bishops from the Gentiles, or the Gentiles from them. This latter
I undertake to make out. First, From the Ancient Writers of the Primitive
Church, who argue for the Divine Authority of Bishops, as being borrowed from
the Levitical High Priests, Priests and Levites. All the World knows this; I
need not bring forth (...) Testimonies, even Mr. O's so often mentioned Hilary is
one: but of this I have spoke before. Secondly, Although the Druids according
to Caesar, had such a sort of Government among them yet in the East, where
Episcopacy was first established, the Gentiles had no such Government, as
appears from what Eusebius has noted, of Maximinus Lib. 8. c. 14. L. 9. C. 4.
the Heathen Emperor, who observing the way of Church Government among the
Christians, and believing it conduced to the furtherance of their Religion, for
the same reason appointed the same among the Gentiles. He then drew his Pattern
from the Christians. Which is moreover confirmed by Lactantius, to have been
then de morte Pers. c. 36.
newly taken up by the Heathens -- Maximinus novo more Sacerdotes Maximos per
singulas Civitates singulos ex Primoribus fecit -- parumque hoc fuit, nisi
etiam Provinciis ex alticre Dignitatis gradu singulosquasi Pontifices
superponeret -- Maximinus then first ( Novo more) created Chief Priests in
every City, and as if this had been too little, he Ordained as it were
Highpriests over Whole Provinces: It was then a new device among the Gentiles,
first set up by Maxinisnus in conformity to the Christians. Thirdly, The same
is proved out of that very Epistle of Julian, to Arsacius the chief-Priest of
Galatia, though quoted by Mr. O. himself, as if it were on his side. I am
ashamed any Man, that pretends to Religion and Learning, should thus foully
misrepresent Authors, and make as if they had written, what is manifest they
never so much as dreamed of. To show this, I Will first sum up what Sozomen
himself relates concerning this matter, and then give you an abridgment of
Julian's Epistle, that follows in the same Chapter. He says -- The Emperor (
Julian) desiring Sozom. l. 5. c: 16.
that the Gentile Religion should prevail, but observing that it was far
surmounted by the Christian, was exceedingly troubled. When he thought with
himself, that Christianity was chiefly commended by the lives and manners of
those, who professed it, he determined with himself, to (...) the Temples of
the Gentiles with the same Rule and Order, which was in use among the
Christians: also with the same degrees and Prerogatives of Supremacy. And
sundry other things are mentioned, wherein Julian was resolved to imitate the
Christians: He adds in general -- The Emperor endeavored to conform the
Gentile unto the Christian Institutions. Then follows Julian's Letter to
Arsacius, the Chief Priest of Galatia, wherein there is not a Syllable of
State Affairs (as Mr. O. has falsely suggested), not a word that intimates, as
if the Christian derived their Government from the Gentiles. He only admonishes
Arsacius to take care about Sundry, particular things belonging unto Morality,
such as Hospitality to Strangers, care about burying the dead, that the
Flamines should not frequent the Theater, nor Drink in Taverns, nor profess any
Trade. He advises him to build Hospitals for the Poor, and promises to furnish
him with Moneys to do it: He warns him not to pay visits often to Great Men,
but to write to 'em only, and live retiredly: that the Inferior Flamines should
not meet secular Officers, when they entered the Cities in Pomp, (...) they came
to the Temples of the Gods; who when they are entered, are then but private
Persons. In a Word, he Orders Arsacius to endeavor to make the Flamines good
Men, by shaming them unto their Duty or persuading them, or removing them from
the Priestly Ministry: to bestow Honor on them who obeyed, but the the
stubborn and contumacious to expel. First, From the Whole it appears that all
this Policy of Julian was taken from the Christians, whose Rules and Government
he knew very well, having himself once been a Christian, and a Reader in the
Church. True! many Writers of latter Ages have taught, that the Christians
followed the Gentiles in their Church Government. But it is not my business to
account for the dreams and fancies of Schoolmen, and other Authors that follow
them: Although at the same time I am of Opinion, that the Primitive Church
regulated their Parishes, Diocesses and Provinces, according to the Divisions,
which they found ready made to their Hands, by the Civil Magistrate, and
perhaps to the districts formerly appointed by the Druids in these Western
parts, which might occasion those Authors to affirm, that the Episcopal
Government it self, was borrowed from them, which is (we see) a great mistake.
To conclude; seeing we have found the Government of the Gentile Religion (in
the East at least) was taken from the Christian, being before more like unto
the Presbyterian or Congregational, the Reflection may be retorted upon our
Adversaries, and it may with more Truth be said, that they had their Pattern
from the Gentile Priests. If any one desire a more full and Learned account of
this, let him consult the late Bishop of Worcester. Antiq. of Brit. Churches c.
2.


CHAP. VI. Concerning Fortunatianus Bishop of Assurae, Basilides and Martialis
two Spanish Bishops.
MR O. endeavors to prove that Presbyters, and People Def. p. 21.
may receive an accusation against their own Bishop: which is as (...) as to
say, the Bishop is not Superior to his Prebyters, who are his Judges. This he
pretends to evince from the 65 th Epistle of St. Cyprian, which is thus
directed -- Epicteto fratri Edit. Ox.
and plebi. The case was this: Fortunatianus Bishop of Assurae, had Sacrificed
unto Idols in the late time of Persecution, under Decius the Emperor, by
Consequence he had abandoned his Bishopric, and even Christianity its self.
When affairs were afterward somewhat settled, and Peace restored unto the
Church, Fortunatianus claimed his Bishopric again, and it is not unlikely, but
he had some interest among some of the People of Assurae, who were willing to
accept him; for so it was I find, in the following Case of Basilides and
Martialis. Cyprian acquainted herewith, in that Letter exhorts Epictetus, and
the People not to receive him, (...) to acknowledge him any more for their
Bishop. How this story establishes Mr. O's Proposition, I am not able to
discern. For 1st, By this Argument the Bps were subject unto the People, as
well as to their Presbyters, which Mr. O. would do well to consider of. 2 ly,
It does not appear that Fortunatianus, was ever accused or cited to Answer unto
the Charge laid against him: by consequence no Judiciary Sentence was
pronounced upon him. The Fact was Notorious. He had of his own accord abdicated
and turned to the Gentiles. Thirdly, If Fortunatianus was formally cited,
accused and condemned, it follows not that Epictetus the supposed Presbyter,
and the People were his Judges. One may with more reason imagine that the Cause
was brought, if at all, before the the Provincial Bishops and by them decided.
Fourthly, Its not certain that Epictetus was was a mere Presbyter (...) for
ought any one knows or can say to the contrary, Epictetus filled the Episcopal
Chair at Assurae, when Cyprian wrote that Epistle. Fifthly, Supposing Epictetus
was only a Presbyter, yet here is no mention of a formal Process or Judgment
given against Fortunatianus: but only a caution given to that Church, not to
receive him again. For the matter of Fact (I suppose) was plain. The
unfortunate Man had Sacrificed, and thereby abandoned his Bishopric. But Peace
being restored, he will needs intrude into it again, having as is to be
presumed) some Friends at Assurae favoring his pretenses. This is certain the
design of St. Cyprian in this Epistle, was not to advise them, to call
Fortunatianus before them to try, and to condemn or depose him, but only to
warn the Church of Assurae, to think no more of their former Bishop, who had
(...) into Idolatry, and was therefore no Bishop at all. And this was agreeable
to the Rule, which the Churches of Rome and of Africa, and of the Whole World
had formerly made, as the Learned (...) has observed -- That such as had
Sacrificed should be deprived Annal. Cyp. p. 46.
of their Ordination and Sacerdotal Honor, and upon their Repentance should be
admitted unto Lay Communion only. The Observation is taken out of the 67 th
Epistle (of which I am to speak by and by) in these Words -- Jam pridem
nobiscum and cum omnibus omnino Episcopis in toto mundo constitutis, etiam
Collega noster Cornelius Sacerdos pacisicus ac justus, ac martyrio honoratus
decreverit ejusmodi homines ad poenitentiam quidem agendam posse admitti, ab
Ordinatione autem (...) atque sacerdotali honor prohiberi. It is not then to
be denied, but that as the Presbyters and the People of a Diocese (when it is
Notorious that their Bishop has Apostatized, and fallen into Idolatry, and for
some time deserted them, and another is substituted in his place (which was I
presume the Case before us) have a Power by the Law of Reason, and of Scripture
too to refuse him, when he offers to obtrude himself again upon 'em; so more
especially since there is a solemn(...) Ecclesiastical Law provided in the
Case. But I demand of Mr. O. to give me an instance, when ever the Presbyters
and People called their Bishop into Judgment before them, censured and rebuk't,
acquitted or condemned him, either when the Fact was in Question, or the matter
objected against him, was in Controversy about its lawfulness. Until Mr. O.
produces an Instance of one of these kinds, he is far short of proving that
Presbyters, and People may receive an accusation against their Bishop, as
Timothy had Power to do against Elders. For Timothy had Power to receive an
Accusation upon information of Witnesses, and to rebuke the offender
accordingly, and if need were to reject him, Titus 3. 10. We are then safe as
yet, notwithstanding any thing St. Cyprian has written in this Epistle.

The Case of Basilides and Martialis, is much what the same, as that of
Fortunatianus, and is to be found in the 67 th Epistle of St. Cyprian. 'Twas
wrote by St. Cyprian in his own name, and in the Edit. Oxon.
name of 36 other African Bishops to Felix Presbyter, and the People of Leon
and Asturia, also unto Lelius Deacon, and the People of Emerita, all in Spain,
in answer to a Letter of Sabinus, Successor to Basilides, and of another Felix
Successor of Martialis, whom the Bishop calls Coepiscopos Nostros, our fellow
Bishops. What may fairly be Collected from this Epistle follows: As First, It
may from this Epistle be gathered, that Basilides and Martialis, after they had
been proved guilty of Idolatry were deposed from their Bishoprics. Secondly,
That Sabinus and Felix, were substituted in their Rooms. Thirdly, That the
Idolatrous Bishops were deprived, and the new ones Chosen and Ordained, by the
Provincial Bishops in the Presence, and with the Concurrence or consent of the
People: For thus Cyprian speaks -- The People have Power either of choosing good
Bishops or refusing unworthy ones: Again, the People ought to separate from a
Wicked Bishop: that Episcopal Ordinations ought to be Celebrated sub populi
assistentis Conscientia, with the knowledge and assent of the People present,
to the end that by the People the Crimes of bad Men may be detected, the Merits
of good Men may be testified, and so a right and regular Ordination may be
made, which shall have been examined by the judgment and suffrage of all. St.
Cyprian goes on -- That is to be observed, which is held among us in Africa,
and almost in all Provinces, that to the end Ordinations be rightly made, all
the next Bishops of the same Province meet together with the People, for whom
the Bishop is designed; and let the Bishop be chosen in the presence of the
People, which knows and has been acquainted with the Lives and Conversations of
the Candidates. This we understand has been done among you, in the Ordination
of Sabinus our Colleague, how that the Bishopric was given him, and hands laid
on him with the Suffrage of the whole Fraternity, and by the Judgment (or
decree) of the Bishops, who were present at the Meeting, and who had sent their
Letters (of Consent) concerning the Bishop to be chosen. That which I would
deduce from all this is, that because the Power of choosing and Ordaining a
Bishop, was lodged in the Provincial Bishops together with the People of the
Diocese, it must follow that the Power of depriving, consequently of receiving
Accusations against the Bishop, was (...) in the same Provincial Bishops, and
and the People of the Diocese. And if this be so, then Basilides and Martialis
were deposed by the Provincial Bishops, in the presence and with the Consent of
the People, and so Mr. O's inference from this story will not hold, sc: that
the Presbyters and People may receive an accusation against their Bishop,
that is to say in a Judiciary way. Moreover it seems to me very probable by some
passages in this Epistle, that the People's Power in choosing or rejecting their
Bishop consisted only in the Testimony, which they gave to the Provincial
Bishops, concerning the Lives and Conversations of the Bishop propounded by the
Provincial Bishops to succeed. I gather this from those words -- (...) ipsa
(...) (...) vel eligendi dignos sacerdotes, vel indignos recusandi, the which
is more clearly explained in the same Paragraph, where Cyprian adds,
Ordinationes Sacerdotales non nisi sub populi assistentis Conscientia fieri
oportere, ut plebe present, vel detegantur malorum crimina vel bonorum merita
predicentur. Ordinations ought to be with the knowledge of the People, that the
Crimes of bad Men might be discovered, and that the deserts of good Men, might
be made known unto (...) Provincial Bishops, who were indeed the proper
Electors. The same is shortly after again explained -- Episcopus deligatur
Plebe Present, quae singulorum vitam, plenissime novit, and (...). actum de
ejus Conversatione perspexit -- -- Let the Bishop he chosen (by the next Bishop
of the Province) the People being present, who knew the lives of each
(Candidate) and saw every Man's Works and Conversation. So that the Peoples
business seems but to have been only to give testimony for or against the
Candidate for the Bishopric, whilst the Synod of the Provincial Bishops chose
and Ordained him. However this be, it is manifest from the whole -- that the
Presbyters and the People did not (without the Provincial Bishops) by virtue of
their own sole and proper Power hear, or receive Accusations in a Judiciary
way, much less take upon 'em to give Sentence upon their own Bishops, which is
the thing affirmed by Mr. O. without any ground or Reason produced out of these
Epistles.

Whoever will impartially read St. Cyprian, must confess he is entirely Ours.
Among all others, he is the most hearty and Zealous Assertor of Episcopacy,
though he used and exerted his Power with exemplary Humility and Moderation.

The Rector in T. N. observed, that in the Epistles to Timothy and (...), no
share in the Government of these Churches was given to the Presbytery, whereby
is signified at least, that these two were the Supreme or Principal Rulers of
those Churches committed to their Charge. After this the Rector granted,
nevertheless, that the Presbyters were not, ought not to be utterly precluded
from all interest in the Government of the Church, as appears from the Council
of Jerusalem, Acts 15. Hereunto after some Cavils, and charging me with
contradicting my self (I leave that to the Judgment of the Reader) the Minister
gravely admonishes us -- --, that Cyprian did nothing without the Council of
his Presbyters, and without the Consent of the People Epistle 6. Erasm.

Ans. 1. This Passage proves not that the Presbyters were equal unto St.
Cyprian: it may as well be said the People were equal both to the Presbyters
and to St. Cyprian. All that can hence be gathered is, what I intimated and
granted before, that the Presbyters have a subordinate (...) in the Government,
and are as a standing Council to the Bishop: but the Bishop is the Supreme and
Principal. It Is so in our Civil Government, especially when we have a Wise and
Good King. He does nothing of moment without the advice of his Peers, and
Consent of his People in Parliament.

2. It may be questioned, whether St. Cyprian thought himself in strictness
obliged to this, or whether it was his own Voluntary and prudent Resolution,
and Condescension unto his Presbytery and People. The whole passage runs thus
-- Solus rescribere nihil potui, quando a primordio Cypr. Ep. 14. Edit. Oxon.
Episcopatus mei statuerim nihil sine consilio vestro (Presbyterorum) and sine
consensu plebis (...) privata sententia gerere. Wherein is intimated, that he
took this Course not as obliged thereunto by any Law, but by a Rule he had of
his own accord laid down to himself, and so would not without necessity depart
from it. For

3. St. Cyprian did take upon himself sometimes on extraordinary Occasions, to
dispatch some Ecclesiastical Affairs without the Consent of his Presbyters, and
People, (as in the Ordination of Aurelius the Cyp. Ep. 38.
Lector) which notwithstanding were valid.

4. The Council and Consent of the Presbyters, and People Ep. id. and Epis. 41.
were only required, and admitted in Testimony of the Manners, Age, Merits, and
Qualifications of such as were to be Ordained (of which we just now spoke), the
Power of Ordination still remaining (...) the Hands of the Bishop, as may be
seen in the Epistles cited in the Margin.

CHAP. VII. Of the Scythians.
MR O. very positively after Blundel asserts that -- The Power of Ordination
and Government, was in the Hands of Captive Presbyters under the Scythians
beyond Ister, for about 70 Years from the Year 260 to the Year 327.

Now if this were as certainly true as Blundel, and Mr. O. have confidently
reported out of the Historian, it would do them no Service at all: forasmuch as
it is not denied but that Christians in Captivity, and under other necessities
also may govern themselves, and Worship God without Bishops, yea, without
Presbyters and without Deacons; so our Lord has determined in general, God will
have Mercy and not Sacrifice. But not to insist on this; let us see, with what
Artifice these two Gentlemen have misrepresented and corrupted Philostorgius,
on whom they Father the foresaid Story. To this end I will make him speak
English.

Philostorgius says, that Ulphilas one of the Transistrian Philosto. l. 2. chapter
5.
Scythians, who by the Ancients are called Getae, but now Goths, brought over
into the Roman soil a very great multitude of Men, who had been thrust out of
their Native Country for the sake of Religion: that the Nation of the
Scythians, formerly embraced the Christian Faith, on the following Occasion.
When Valerianus and Gallienus, were Emperors, a vast multitude of Scythians
living beyond Ister, Crossed that River into the Roman Empire, and by their
Excursions infested a great part of Europe. After that having sailed over ( the
Hellespont) into Asia, they invaded Galatia and Cappadocia. And having made
very many Captives, among whom were some of the Clergy, they returned into
their own Country with much prey. Wherefore those Captives and Holy Men, thus
mixed with the Barbarians, brought over not a few of them, unto true Piety and
Godliness, and persuaded them, that instead of the Gentile Superstition they
would embrace the Christian Religion. Of the number of those Cap. tives were
the Ancestors of Ulphilas. This Ulphilas, therefore was the Leader of those
Holy Men, who lately came out of Gothia (or Scythia) and was their first Bishop
constituted after this manner. When by the King of the Goths, he was sent
Ambassador with some others, unto the Emperor Constantine, he was Ordained by
Eusebius, and other Bishops with him, Bishop of those, who became Christians in
Gothia, and were now past over the River Danube into the Empire this multitude
of Refugees, the Emperor placed in Maesia, that is, on the Roman side and Bank
of Ister. There is nothing more Material in this story, as it is delivered by
Philostorgius. Upon this passage then, I observe as follows.

First, That Philostorgius was by the Ancients noted for an Impudent, Lying,
and Impious Historian: and therefore his Relations Photius Bibliothec. chapter 40.
p. 26.
not easily to be credited, especially in the matter now before us.
Philostorgius's business was, to advance the Name and reputation of Ulphilas
(being a professed Arian, as well as himself was) and therefore he remembers
that Constantine, called him Moses, and caused him to be Ordained the first
Bishop of the Christian Scythians or Goths. The latter of which, I shall by and
by show is not true, not in the sense Blondel would have it.

Secondly, That Philostorgius in the foresaid Relation, is singular and by
himself, none of the Ecclesiastical Historians before or after him, making any
mention of the things related concerning Ulphilas: and this is enough to bring
him into suspicion, when he commends Ulphilas, as the first Bishop of the Goths
or Scythian Christians.

Thirdly, Not to insist on either of the former Observations, but allowing
Philostorgius, to be a faithful Historian, and taking the matter of Fact as
granted, I farther note, that Philostorgius speaks of Clergymen in General
carried, into Captivity, not mentioning the particular Species. So that among
the Captivated Clergymen, there might be Bishops, and there might not be
Presbyters, for any thing Philostorgius has said, or Mr. O. can tell. It is not
to be gathered from him, that Ulphilas himself was so much as a Presbyter, when
he first went unto Constantine. Jeroms Adversaries therefore might with as much
Truth, and for the Honor of Deacons have hence concluded, that the Power of
Government, and Ordination was in the Hands of Deacons in Scythia, for these 70
Years, as Blundel could make his Inference for Presbyters. The most probable
Conjecture is, that there were some of all sorts, sc. Bishops Priest and
Deacons.

Fourthly, I might demand of Mr. O. to prove that there was any one Presbyter
among those Christian Captives, which happily, he will be put hard to do, but in
the mean while I Will undertake to demonstrate, that there was at least one
Bishop in Scythia, before Ulphilas, viz. Theophilus, who was one of the Nicene
Fathers, and subscribed the Canons of that Council, so Eusebius Witnesses --
also the Bishop of Persis was present at the Synod, Eus. l. 3. Vit. Con. c. 7.
nor was there wanting a Scythian Bishop. Socrates names him -- Theophilus who
being Bishop of the Goths, (...) there present subscribed Soc. l. 2. c. 41.
the Nicene- Council. Theophilus therefore was Bishop of the Goths before the
Nicene Synod, and was present at the Council and subscribed it. Therefore the
power of Ordination, and the Government of the Scythian Church was not in the
Hands of Presbyters among the Christian Goths (or Scythians) for about 70
Years, as Mr. O. and Blondel have affirmed, but in the Hands of Bishops, or of
a Bishop at least. I add, that seeing we find a Bishop among the Goths before
the Nicene Synod, it is but reasonable to think that Bishops, or a Bishop at
first went along with the Captive Christians into Scythia, or that one soon
followed them thither. I will confirm this Con- jecture from that passage in
Sozomen, who informs (...) that -- it Soz. l. 6. c. 21.
was an Ancient Custom (speaking of the Scythians) that one Bishop only govern
the Churches of that Province. Sozomen is now writing of the Church Affairs, in
the Reign of Valentinian and Valens, that is about the Year 370. 43 Years after
Ulphilas had been first Ordained Bishop. Now Ulphilas was not long before this
time alive according to Socrates, and invented the Gothic Letters, (...) the
Reign of Soc. l. 4. c. 33.
Valens. Without all Peradventure, therefore the Goths had Bishops long before
Ulphilas. For if there had been but two in all, that is Ulphilas, and after him
Vetranio, then Bishop, it had been a foolish remark of Sozomen, to tell his
Reader, that it was an Ancient Custom among the Scythian Christians, that one
Bishop only governed their Province, when as this Ancient Custom, forsooth, had
been but of 40 Years continuance from the first, and there had been but Two,
and the former of them dead but about four Years before. For both Ulphilas and
Vetranio were Bishops in the Reign of Valens Soz. l. 6. c. 37. The. li. 4. c.
47.
. The sum is there were Bishops in Scythia, during some part at least of the 70
Years mentioned by Mr. O. and in all likelihood all the while. I defy Mr. O, to
show the contrary out of Philostorgius, or any other Historian extant. There
does remain indeed a small Difficulty to be accounted for, viz. How then comes
it to pass, that Philostorgius calls him the first Bishop of the Goths, if the
Goths had Bishops before him? The answer hereunto is easy and (...).

Fifthly, Theophilus, who was present at the Nicene Synod, was Bishop of the
Goths beyond the Danube (or Ister): for they came not over the River into the
Roman Empire, till after the said Synod. Upon their Arrival or at their
request, Constantine allotted Maesia for 'em to inhabit, that is to say, that
part of the Roman Empire, which lay to the Banks of the Danube, on this side
the River, and named Ulphilas to be Bishop, and he was the first Bishop of the
Cisistrian Scythians within the Roman Empire, and Ordained by Eusebius Bishop
of Caesarea, though Theophilus before him had been Bishop of the Transistrian. So
Socrates, Moreover to this Faith even Ulphilas himself, Bishop Soc. l. 1. chapter
41.
of the Goths then first consented. For before that time, he had embraced the
(...) Faith, following Theophilus Bishop of the Goths, who being present had
subscribed the Nicene Council. So that after all this, it cannot be questioned,
but that the Gothic Christians were long before Ulphilas governed by Bishops,
although Blondel and Mr. O. have so roundly denied it without, yea, against
plain Evidence to the contrary. Upon a farther Search into Blondel, I find him
acknowledging, what I have before spoken of Theophilus Bishop of the (...); but
Mr. O. who pretends to improve Arguments, has left this lamer and more
imperfect then he found it. Let us then see what answer Blundel has framed
against Theophilus the Scythian Bishop: It is as follows.

If we grant Theophilus was Bishop of the Gothic Metropolis before (...), we
will being hereby furnished with a stronger Weapon justify our Cause: For they
who make to themselves a Bishop their Superior, who dare deny them a Power of
Ordaining Presbyters, which are but their equals.

Ans. This Argument is grounded upon a Supposition, which is not to be allowed
of nor can be proved. Blondel takes it here for granted, the Scythian
Presbyters Ordained their Bishops, Theophilus for instance. But one may surmize
several other things with equal probabilty, any of which will overthrow this
wonderful Demonstration. As 1. It may be supposed that a Bishop, or Bishops
were by the Scythians, at their irruption into Galatia and Cappadocia, carried
Captives into Scythia, as was before observed; or 2. That some Bishop might
follow the Captive Christians into that Barbarous Country, being first Ordained
in the Empire. Theophilus (which is a Greek Name) happily was so made and
Ordained their Bishop, or 3. the Scythian Church might send one of their own
Presbyters to be Ordained by the Imperial Bishops, as Ulphilas after was. For
that there was a Correspondence between the Scythian and Imperial Churches is
past doubt, when we consider that Theophilus Bishop of the Scythians, assisted
at the Council of Nice. There is nothing in Philostorgius the only Author of
this Tale, that thwarts any one of thesethree suppositions, or that
Countenances Blondel's surmises of the Scythian Presbyters Ordaining their own
Bishop. That of Ulphilas being the first Bishop, I have already accounted for.

2. If the Scythian Presbyters Ordained a Bishop to preside over them
(supposing this) it hence follows they thought it necessary to have one: and
rather then have none chosen in their necessity, to constitute and Ordain him
themselves contrary to the Ordinary and established Method, of which they could
not be ignorant.

But this is said upon a bare supposition of the Scythian Presbyters Ordaining
their Bishops, which is not proved nor at all probable, as I have showed
before. That which appears above board is, that the Scythians had a Bishop,
which, setting apart mere Conjectures on both sides, is sufficient to my
purpose.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Chorepiscopi.
THE Occasion of their Institution, as I conjecture, was either 1. To promote
and quicken Conversions in the Countries and Villages subject to the City
Bishops: or 2. After believers and Congregations were there multiplied to be as
Suffragans, and Assistants for the better Government of the Churches. And
because it was a Fundamental Law in the Church, that there ought not to be two
Bishops in one Diocese, with plentitude of Power (it being impossible to serve
two Masters) therefore these (...), were entirely under, the Jurisdiction of
the City Bishops, who were indeed the (...). There is not any Monument of
Antiquity, that I am aware of, from whence we may better understand the Nature
of these Chorepiscopi, than the Canon of the Council of Antioch, which I will
therefore transcribe at length into English.

They who reside in Villages and in the Country, or are Can. 10. Ant.
called Chorepiscopi, although Ordained by Bishops, it pleases the Holy Synod
that they know their own Measures, and govern the Churches subjected to them,
and rest content with that care and Administration; that they constitute
Readers Subdeacons and Exorcists, and be satisfied with this Power, not daring
to Ordain a Presbyter or Deacon, without the express consent of the Bishop of
the City, unto which both he (the Chorepiscopus) and the Country belong. But
let the Country Bishop be under the Bishop of the City, to which he is Subject.

Now the main Question is, whether these Chorepiscopi were real Bishops
Superior to and distinguished from Presbyters, and in whom was lodged the
Episcopal Character and Power. The Affirmative is proved by the following
Arguments.

1. I consider, that the Title of Bishop and the Power of Ordaining Presbyters,
was then acknowledged to be in 'em, which I can never be induced to believe,
would have been granted them at that time of Day, if they were mere Presbyters.
They were under the same Bishop as the City Presbyters were; How came they to
have that Honorable Title bestowed on them, which the City Presbyters had not?
Were the Country Presbyters (such the Chorepiscopi were according to Mr. O.)
far more Honorable and better deserving the Title of Bishop then the City
Presbyters were? I can imagine no other reason of this, but because they had
received the true stamp and Character of Bishops, had an inherent habitual
Power to do whatever any Diocesan could, and more than any mere Presbyter was
able to do: Only as yet they were not Diocesan Bishops, having no Independent
Diocesses of their own to Govern, and by consequence were under some
limitations, which Diocesans were not.

2. I remember that by the same Conncil of Antioch, they were Can. 7th
allowed to give Pacifick Letters to the Clergy to go into other Diocesses,
which in those Days the Bishops only could do, and which was one of the
Episcopal Prerogatives.

3. Again the 10th Canon of Antioch decrees, that the Chorepiscopi although
they had received imposition of Hands by Bishops, may not dare to Ordain a
Presbyter or Deacon: the obvious meaning whereof is, that although the
Chorepiscopi were Ordained Bishops; (...), they might not Ordain Presbyters or
Deacons without leave from the Diocesan. If a Chorepiscopus received the real
Character or Power of a Bishop, he might be apt to think and conclude with
himself, that he might Ordain Presbyters and Deacons, as well as the Diocesan
being of the same Order with him. No says the Canon: And the Reason of this
Prohibition is manifest, because at present he acted only as a Comminister and
Assistant in another Diocese, where he might not exert his Episcopal Power
without License from the Diocesan, nor could do it without Breach of the Peace
and Order of the Church: We have something of this kind even among our selves
at this day. A Diocesan Bishop out of his own Diocese, and whilst he abides in
another Man's, cannot Ordain Presbyters and Deacons without (...) from the proper
Bishop: and something of this Nature I find in the 18th Canon of Ancyra, where
a Presbyter being supposed to be Ordained Bishop for another Diocese, but
rejected is permitted to return to his former Post, but still to as be a
Presbyter though retaining his Episcopal Honor and Character: One may then be
a real Bishop, and have the habitual Power and Intrinsic Character of a
Bishop, and yet cannot put forth the Act and Ordain in another Diocese. There
is no reason he should; it would breed Confusion.

4. Chorepiscopi were real Bishops, because they had an equal Right and
Authority, to assist, vote, decree, and confirm Canons at Councils as Diocesan
Bishops had. Diverse of them subscribed the Council of Nice. It must be
confessed that mere Presbyters did so likewise, but it was in the Name and
stead of their Principals, as their very subscriptions show. Thus Vito (or
Victor) and Vincentius Presbyters, and Pope Sylvester's Legates, subscribed the
Nicene Synod, yet added to their common Names, Romanus or Roma missus: So in
the Council of Carthage, Anno 419. two Roman Presbyters and Legates of the Pope
did -- Philippus Presbyter, Legatus Ecclesiae Romanae, Asellus Presbyter,
Legatus Ecclesiae Romanae. But the Chorepiscopi subscribed in their own Names,
without mentioning any Delegation at all, and therefore acted by their own
proper inherent Authority, and by consequence were real Bishops.

Having (I presume) proved, that the Chorepiscopi had the True Episcopal
Character impressed on them, I come to consider Plea p. 141.
what advantage Mr. O. would make of 'em. In the first place from the 10th
Canon of Ant. A. D. 344 (or 341) he lays it down that -- the Chorepiscopi or
Country Bishops Ordained Presbyters, until they were restrained by that Canon.
I agree with Mr. O. so far, that it is very likely, the Chorepiscopi presumed to
Ordain Presbyters in another Bishop's Diocese, until they were prohibted by
this Canon. It was necessary, they should be restrained for the peace and good
Order of the Church, from having an uncontrollable Liberty of Ordaining in
another Bishops Diocese, and without his consent. The rule is highly reasonable
and observed to this Day. However this be, the Canon will do Mr. O. no service,
if the Chorepiscopi were real Bishops, and more than Presbyters, of which I
have already produced sufficient proof. Again Mr. O. gathers, that if these
Chorepiscopi were Bishops, then it appears that Bishops were made not only in
Cities, but in Country villages. This I grant also unto Mr. O. but it nothing
concerns the Matter in Hand. We must Distinguish between Diocesan Bishops,
whose seat and Principal Church was oft-times in Villages, and the
Chorepiscopi, who were not Diocesans, but the Comministri and Vicarii of the
City Bishops. Now how far the Delegated Power of a Chorepiscopus extended, no
one alive can tell at this Day. It Is nothing likely, that it was confined to
one Village only, as Mr. O. contends, though happily his Ordinary Residence, and
particular care might be in some Country-Town, where he discharged the Ordinary
Duty of a Presbyter, and on that score may be accounted as a Country Presbyter
under the City Bishop; such at this day is even a Diocesan Bishop, who is by
Commendam possessed of a Rectory in another Diocese. He can Act there but as a
Presbyter, except he has leave from the proper Bishop. For ought any thing then
that Mr. O. says or pretends to prove, the delegated Power of a Chorepiscopus
reached to more than one or half a dozen Villages.

Well! Mr. O. goes on and tells us, that -- The Country Villages, where the
Chorepiscopi were fixed, were but thinly Peopled with Christians, the Majority
or at least great Numbers of the People being Heathens, by which, ( he adds) we
may guess at the bigness of Primitive Diocesses, which were scarce as large as
our lesser Parishes.

Here are diverse things supposed and asserted, but none proved. 1. It Is
supposed that the Chorepiscopus's Power, was confined to one Village or Country
Parish only; this ought to be made out by Mr. O. 2. It Is asserted, that these
Country Villages were thinly Peopled with Christians, but that is more then Mr.
O. knows; and the contrary is more probable, so. that they abounded with
Christians now in the Reign of Constantius, Son of Constantine, the Great, when
that Council of Antioch was held, and from whence Mr. O. makes the Deduction.
Besides it is likely, that a Chorepiscopus was never made, but where the
Christians were Numerous. In short, how, thin soever particular Villages were
of Christians, yet there being many, very many Villages, all of them having
some Christians, and a Power over them being committed to the Chorepiscopi,
this note of Mr. O's is not very much to the purpose. But however from the
Premises he Collects 4. That we may thence guess at the bigness of Primitive
Diocesses, which were scarce as large as our lesser Parishes. Something of this
Nature might perhaps be conjectured, if all Mr. O. has asserted without proof,
and overlooked without Examination were true. But I ask whether this be not an
intolerable piece of Confidence to intimate at this rate, that these Country
Villages were separate, and independent Diocesses, when as it is manifest from
the very Canon, that they were Appendages of the City Diocese, and 10. Of Ant.
subject to the City Bishop. Here then instead of a small Parish Bishopric, we
have found as large a Diocese, happily as ours are at this Day.

Mr. O. proceeds and affirms, That the Chorepiscopi are an instance of Bishops,
without subject Presbyters; they were but Parish Bishops, under City Bishops.
Say then a Chorepiscopus had the charge of one only single Village or
particular Congregation, specially allotted to him, which at this day, we call
a Parish (admitting this): yet it follows not, that he was a Bishop without
subject Presbyters: probably he had some district of the Diocese committed to
his particular care and inspection. The Canon of Antioch seems to intimate thus
much -- It seemed good to the Synod, that the Chorepiscopi govern the Churches
( in the plural) subject to them, and to content themselves with this care and
solicitude of constituting Readers. But granting they had no subject
Presbyters, but acted Ordinarily as Parish Presbyters: yet they were real
Bishops, and ready upon occasion to discharge the Diocesans Office, when
required, which Prebyters could not. Morever if these Chorepiscopi, were only
Presbyters and Bishops of a small Congregation (as Mr. O. has before concluded)
why was the caution given them against Ordaining Presbyters and Deacons, except
it was for other Parishes or Churches? For surely they did not Ordain
Presbyters and Deacons for themselves. If they did, even so they must have had
Presbyters subject to them. In short, they had doubtless a delegated Power from
the City or Diocesan Bishop, to Ordain Presbyters and Deacons. (...) (...)
where and when ever occasion required.

But in the last place Mr. O. urges, the second Council of Def. p. 142.
(...) (...) (...). Can. 7th which makes the Chorepiscopi, to be one and the
same with (...).

This Council was Provincial and held in Spain, Anno 620. which is therefore,
of no great Authority with me: especially since the Argument it insists on, is
chiefly drawn from the Ecclesiastical Laws of the Roman Church: For so the
Canon concludes -- quoe (...) eis a sede Apostolica prohibita esse noscuntur.
Nevertheless, that I may not be thought to decline any thing said on this
subject, that has the appearance of an Argument against me, I answer, that
although by the first design and institution of the Chorepiscopi, they were
real Bishops (so it was before and after the Councils of Ancyra and Antioch,
for sometime) yet not long afterward an end was put to these Chorepiscopi. So
I read in the Council of Laodicea Can. 57. held Anno 364. There, and then it
was decreed that -- Bishops were not to be made any more in Villages, and in
the Countries (understand within another Diocese) but only (...) in their
steads: which (...) were but Presbyters intrufted with the Administration of
some part of the Episcopal Power. But it is observable what is after added, as
for those (Chorepiscopi) who have been already made, the former Canons of
Ancyra and Antioch must be observed by them, that they do nothing without the
Consent of the City Bishop. Where we see plainly a Supersedeas is given unto
that Order of the Chorepiscopi, for the future. Nor is this alteration to be
wondered at. For the making the Chorepiscopi, or Vicarious Bishops in the
Country, belonging to another Diocese was merely an Ecclesiastical
Constitution, and by the same Power that it was introduced it might again be
annulled. I observe moreover, that the 2d clause above mentioned, which still
reserves to the former Chorepiscopi their Power, which had been committed to
them by the City Bishops, shows that they had received some Character, which a
Council could not deprive them of. For otherwise the Power of the former
Chorepiscopi, might have been Abrogated as well as the Order its self, entirely
dissolved for the future. The occasion of this change made by the Laodicean
Fathers doubtless was, that they had by experience found some inconveniences
and disorders, happening through these Chorepiscopi, who it may be could never
be hindered from Ordaining Presbyters and Deacons, in other Bishops Diocefses
contrary to all Order and good Rule. Therefore an end was put to them, and in
their place were substituted the (...) who I imagaine were like our Archdeacons
at this Day, and were instituted for the Diocesan's ease in matters of less
moment: but upon no account were to have the Episcopal Character impressed on
them with Power to Ordain, no not with the Bishops License. Accordingly the
late Learned Bishop of Worcester observes, That Lanfranc (...) Eccles. Cas. P,
146.
made an Archdeacon with Jurisdiction in his See, that Thomas Archbishop of
York, first divided his Diocese into Archdeaconries, and Remigius Bishop of
Lincoln, his into seven Archdeaconries, says Harry of Huntingdon. One occasion
hereof was the laying aside the Chorepiscopi, as too much assuming unto
themselves.

The sum of what has been said is, that the (...) were at first real Bishops,
but in another Diocese, where they might put forth such Episcopal Acts as were
permitted them within some certain limited district, and even Ordain Presbyters
and Deacons, when expressly delegated thereto by the Diocesan: that they refided
in some Country Villages, where their Ordinary and constant Work was no other
than of Presbyters, and so were looked on as the Diocesans Presbyters, which
can by no means prejudice their Episcopal Character. One may be a Bishop yet
without a Diocese, as one may be a Presbyter without a Title or Parish. The
Council of Laodicea, thought fit to put an end unto this Order, so did the
Romans and Spanish Churches, as also the English. Happily the (...) or
Archdeacons might have the Title of Chorepiscopi, for some while continued to
them being substituted in their room: but this is no proof, that they were
Presbyters at their first Institution, when the real Episcopal Character was
(...) on them, though no Diocese was yet actually allotted them. This is what I
thought needful, and enough to be offered in Answer to the Difficulties started
about the Chorepiscopi.

As for that Epistle to (...) it shall suffice to note that it is one of those,
which are accounted Spurious, as may be Collected from Bellarmin himself, whose
Judgment is -- ejus scripta non extant, exceptis In vit. Dam. l. de Scrip.
paucis Epistolis, (...) (...) suns inter Epistolds S. Hieronymi, aliique in
Hiftorid (...). l. 2. c. 22. l. 5. c. 10. 11. The rest Eccles.
therefore and this in particular are Apocryphal. It was possibly counterfeited
by some, that lived after the Council of Hispalis, there being a very great
Agreement between this Epistle, and that 7th Canon of the Council, as who ever
will read them must confess. We shall not need therefore to be concerned at any
thing brought against us out of this connterfeit Epistle.

CHAP. IX. Of the Council of Nice.
MRO. as if all Antiquity were on his side, omits not to argue even from the
Council of Nice its self, in favor of the Power of Presbyters Ordaining, which
is a discovery so new and surprising, that one would (...) the Whole Chriftian
Church had been blind above these 1300. Years last paft, till he with the help
of Mr. Baxter, has been pleased to open all our Eyes at last and to assure us
-- that the Council of Nice, decreed Def. p. 135.
concerning the Presbyters Ordained by Melitius at (...), as follows -- Hi
autem Qui Dei Gratia, and nostris (lege vestris) precibus adjuti ad (...)
Scbisma deflexisse compersi sunt, sed se intra Catholica and Apostolicae (...)
fines ab erroris Labe vacuos continuerint, Authoritatem (...) tum Ministros
(...). etc, Mr. O. has taken this Passage out of Mr. Baxter, and he out of some
Translator, that did not or would not understand the Historian aright. The
Words are part of a Letter wrote by the Nicene Fathers, to the Church of
Alexandria, wherein they gave an Account to that Church, of what had been
propounded and examined in the Synod, and what had been decreed, and confirmed
therein, as first, That the Impiety Sol. l. 1. c. 9.
of Arrius, and his Accomplices had been brought into Question and condemned,
etc. -- that as for Melitius, it pleased the Synod to deal more gently with him
( than with Arrius) viz. that he should remain in his own City, but that he
should have no Power to Ordain or to propose the names ( of the Candidates to
the holy Function); only he might retain the bare Title of his Honor (that is
of Bishop); that those who had been constituted ((...)) by him being first
confirmed ((...)) by a more solemn and Religious Imposition of the Hands of the
Bishop of Alexandria, might be allowed to join in matters properly belonging to
them, but that until they had obtained their Honor and Ministry again, they
should be second unto all those, who in every Diocese and Church, have been
before proposed under the Authority of our most beloved Colleague Alexander: And
moreover, should have no Power to propound the Names of those who are subject
to Alexander, nor in short to do any thing without the Consent of the Bishop of
the Catholic Church of Alexandria

This is all the Nicene Synod wrote concerning the Melitians or those, who had
been constituted ( and Ordained) by Melitius. Here Is not a Syllable (of
Presbyters or) of Ordaining Ministers; the passage may as well, and is to be
(...) of Bishops, and of Ordaining Bishops. But for the more thorough
understanding it, we must remember that Melitius, whilst Peter was Patriarch of
Alexandria, had been Bishop of Lycus, a City in Egypt subject to the said
Patriarch: -- that during the Persecution under Maximinus, Peter absconding,
Melitius had taken upon him to constitute (or Ordain) Bishops, Soz. l. 1. c. 24.
which belonged unto the Patriarch to do. It Is not indeed doubted, but that he
Ordained Presbyters and Deacons also: nevertheless, his first and Principal
Crime (as I believe) was his Constituting (or Ordaining) Bishops, which was a
manifest invasion of the Patriarch's Right. And that (...) constituted and
Ordained Bishops is proved by Valesius, Annot. in Locum.
out of Epiphanius. Nay, the said Learned Annotator Evinces, that Melitius
constituted (or Ordained) Twenty Eight Bishops, besides Five Presbyters and
Three Deacons, as he gathers from the second Apology, of Athanasius against the
Arrians: from whence he makes no scruple to affirm, that Socrates in this place
speaks chiefly of Bishops, constituted or Ordained by (...), yet so, as that
Presbyters and Deacons also were (...) by him. (...) (says he) if the Nicene
Fathers hid herein decreed nothing against the Melitian (...), they had left
their work very lame and imperfect. Besides, (...) became Schismatical not by
Ordaining Presbyters, but by Ordaining Bishops. Hence Sozomen observes, that
Melitius -- (...) Ubi Supra.
had usurped the Power of Ordaining, which did not all belong unto him. The
Power of Ordaining whom? Why not Bishops? For till by this means he was fallen
into (...), he had certainly (as Bishop) Power to (...) Priests and Deacons,
but not of Ordaining or (...) Bishops without the (...) leave. And this was I
suppose, if not his only fault, yet his (...). Wherefore, when the Nicene
Fathers decreed, that the (...), who had been constituted and Ordained by
(...), might not intermeddle in the constituting (or Ordaining) others, until
themselves had been confirmed (...) by a more Solemn imposition of Hands, they
must thereby mean, that the Melitian Bishops being Ordained Schismatically,
were suspended from Ordaining until they had been confirmed by the Patriarch,
and some of the Egyptian Bishops subject to him. And this is all that the Synod
declared concerning the Melitians. But neither Mr. O. nor Mr. Baxter, for any
thing I can see in the Plea, have taken any Notice of this Passage, (...)
whereof we are amused with something less Pertinent to the matter in Hand, as I
am now about to show. For the Nicene Fathers go on in that Epistle to speak of
the Alexandrians, that is, such as had not withdrawn themselves from Alexander
the Patriarch, nor had ever adhered to Melitius. They thus then farther write
to the Church of Alexandria, concerning these latter and Regular Clergy. (...).
etc. But as for those, who by the Grace of God, and through your Prayers have
been found in no Schism, but have ever stood firm, and unmovable in the
Catholic Church, it pleased the Holy Synod, that they should have Power (...)
to point out, and to give up the Names of (...) as were (...) worthy to be of
the Clergy, and in short, to do all things according to the Ecclesiastical Law
and Constitution: which is the passage misrepresented by Mr. O. and Mr. Baxter,
wherein the Synod confirms to 'em, their Ancient Rights and Privileges. Having
given I hope, an exact account of this latter part of that Epistle, let us now
see whether Mr. Baxter or Mr. O. have done so. To which end I observe, that
here is not one Word of Presbyters, at least not of Presbyters Ordaining, and
(...) of all of Presbyters, who had been Ordained by Melitius, nor lastly
(which was the thing Mr. O. aimed at) of Presbyters Ordaining Ministers. 1.
They speak not of Presbyters, that is, not in particular, and expressly of them
alone, as is manifeft to any one, that has his Eyes in his Head: but only in
General of such as had not been engaged in the Melitian Schism. These surely
must be Bishops, as well as Presbyters or Deacons. The truth is, they include
all the Three Orders, and that's the reason in this whole Epistle, they Name no
one of them expressly, meaning to confirm them all (as well Bishops as
Presbyters, that had stuck close to Alexander) in their Ancient Respective
Powers and (...). 2. Much more they speak not of the Ordaining Power of
Presbyters. Mr. O. at least ought not to say so; for what then will become of
the Authority of Father (...), who asserts, that Alexander or the Nicene
Council first deprived them of it? what did this Synod or Alexander both
deprive 'em of it, and confirm it to them? that cannot be. Either then
Eutychius is out in his story, or Mr. O. is a little mistaken about the Letter
of the Nicene Fathers. Besides, (...) does not (...) to Ordain, but the (...)
as (...) in one Word to put up the Names of the Candidates for Holy Orders, and
Sozomen in his account of this Fact uses that single word (...) to choose,
Socrates expressing it in two Words (as Valesius has observed) Exegetical of
one another; it being usual for Authors to embellish their writings, and give
them a grateful Emphasis by a Variety, and redundancy of Expression. No body at
this diftance of time can tell all the Customs of this Church, and what
Honorary (...) the Presbyters might have at the public (...). However this be
(...) is not to be expounded Ordaining. And yet admitting that it signifies so,
it is not necessary to understand the passage of Presbyters Ordaining; it may as
well be presumed to be intended of Bishops Ordaining, there being no
circumstance that limits the sense unto Presbyters: and as for (...) these
Words are spoken of those, that were to be Ordained, and not of the Ordainers,
and may as well be taken to mean such as were thought worthy to be Bishops, as
those who were (...) worthy to (...) made Presbyters. For in the Ancient
Ecclesiastical Writers, we read of the (...) as well as of the (...). But least
of all. Thirdly do the Nicene Fathers speak here of the Melitian Presbyters,
because the Melitians, had not, according to the Character here given of these
Persons, stood firm and unmovable in the Catholic (...), but had been engaged
in the Melitian Schism. Nor 4. does the Synod speak of Ordaining Ministers, if
by Ministers our Adversaries understand Presbyters (which Title they seem at
this day to affect, and usurp to themselves, though it generally denotes all
the Three Orders.) These four mistakes has Mr. O. committed at the beginning of
his Account of the Nicene Synod. Before I proceed to consider what He farther
advances on this Occasion, I will only Note, that the Patriarchs of Alexandria
had power over the Bishops, and Whole Church of Egypt, with its Appendages long
before the Synod of Nice. That they had then power over these Churches appears
plainly from this Epistle, which in several places speaks of them as Subject to
the Bishop of Alexandria: that the Alexandrian Patriarchs had Power over them
before the Patriarch Alexander is evident from the Melitian Schism, which had
not been a Sinful Schism, if Peter and (...), Alexander's Predecessors had not
had Jurisdiction over them: That this Power of the Patriarchs was very Ancient,
is also manifest from the 6th Canon of the Nicene Council, which begins thus --
Let the Ancient Customs obtain which are in Egypt, Libya and Pentapolis, that
the Bishop of Alexandria have power over all these Provinces: which shows
lastly, the extent of their Power through (...), Libya, and (...), and that it
had been an Ancient Custom, that is, long before Alexander, and the Synod of
Nice, yea, before Peter and Achillas. Thus much being said for the right
understanding of that Letter of the Nicence Fathers, let us now proceed to
examine what Mr. O. has inferred from the last mentioned passage, according to
Mr. Baxter's Lamentable Translation of it.

Mr. O. argues -- If any say the meaning is, that these Presbyters shall Ordain
and govern with Bishops, but not with out them, it is granted. For the decree
refers to the Ecclesiastica Instituta; but this shows, that Ordination
belongs to the Presbyters Office, and consequently is no nullity, though an
irregularity as to the Canons, when it is done by them alone. His meaning is (as
I take him) that Presbyters have an Inherent and Intrinsic power to Ordain,
but that the Nicene Fathers had by their Ecclesiastical Constitution restrained
that power, so that it should not be exerted, but with the Bishops: that when
the Presbyter did Ordain without Bishops, 'twas only an irregularity (...)
breach of the Ecclesiastical Constitution, not a Nullity. But to this I reply.

1. That the Nicence Fathers (as has already been observed) speak not of
Presbyter only, but of all the Three Orders Bishops, Priests and Deacons, who
are hereby every one of them, allowed to do what properly belong to their own
Order, according to the Ancient Custom and Constitution of that Church.

2. That therefore supposing their meaning to be (what Mr. O. would have it)
that Presbyters in particular, according to the Ecclesiastical Constitution,
shall Ordain with the Bishops, and not without them, it will not follow, that
Ordination by Presbyters alone without Bishops is vallid, and only an
irregularity: Because it may with as good Reason be hence concluded, that the
Presbyters power to Ordain with the Bishops belonged to them, but by
Ecclesiastical Constitution only, and not by any inherent Right. There is
nothing in this Letter, that argues any thing for their Intrinisick power to
Ordain. The most that can be said is, that they had an Ancient Right by
Ecclesiastical Constitution, and Custom to Ordain with Bishops, and if so, then
their Ordaining without Bishops was a Nullity, as well as an Irregularity;
because they transgressed that very Law which alone gave them their Power. 3.
It is a great mistake, to think every thing established, or rather reinforced
by Ecclesiastical Constitution, has no better Foundation than that very
Ecclesiastical Constitution or Reinforcement. A Divine and Scriptural Law may,
and has been oftentimes confirmed and renewed by a Synodical Decree, and
subjected to Ecclesiastical Penalties. The Lord's Day, which Mr. O. will not
deny to be Holy by Divine Institution, has been made so by Humane appointment
also, and punishments decreed against those that profaned it. This is manifest
among out selves here in England, and Constantine Ordained the first Day of the
Week for Divine Worship: Shall we say, the Lord's Day was Eus. Hist. Cons.
(...). 4. c. 18.
not Holy and Appropriate to Divine Worship before that Emperor's Constitution?
Of the same Nature, are the 38. 41. 42, 49. 50, 51. etc. Can. Apostol. The
Decree then of the Synod of Nice hinders not, but that it might have been a
Divine Institution, that Presbyters Ordain and Govern, only with and under
Bishops. And if this be so, as I have formerly (it is hoped) made good, then
Presbyters Ordaining without Bishops will prove a Nullity, and contrary to the
Divine and Scripture Rule, as well as an Irregularity or contrary to the
Ecclesiastical Laws. But how does the Ecclesiastical Constitution show, that
Ordination belongs to the Presbyters Office? His meaning (I suppose) is that
the Nicene Synod, could not appoint Presbyters to Ordain with Bishops, except
the Presbyters had a Prior, and an intrinsic power to Ordain. But I ask, why
may not the Synod show thereby, that the Presbyters intrinsic power (what ever
it was) belonged to them only in Conjunction with Bishops? And not separately
from 'em. If a Prince Commands the General of his Army to do nothing of Moment,
without the advice of the Principal Field-Officers, this shows that the
Field-Officers have a Power to Act with the General and under him, but not that
they have a power to Act seperately and without Him: And if the General or
other the Kings Ministers declare this part of the Commission to the
Field-Officers, they may and ought to Act in Conjunction with their General
(for the Commission so appoints); but it would be presumption and Mutiny to Act
without the General, which if they presumed to do their Orders would of them
selves be Null and invalid. Briefly Mr. O. must first prove, that the Nicene
Fathers supposed the Presbyters to have an Intrinsic power to Ordain alone,
before he can make out that their separate Ordinations are irregular only, and
not invalid in themselves.

But Mr. O. again argues that -- If it be said these (Nicene Constitutions)
condemn Schismatical Ordinations ( which he grants, yet answers) that Schism as
such cannot make Ordinations Null, though it implys an Irregularity. Hereunto I
return, that Schism as such does make the Ordination Null. It is Null as to the
Exercise of the Office so conferred, though not as to the habitual Power or
intrinsic Character given. This seems to have been the very Sense of the
Nicene Fathers, in this their Epistle to the Church of Alexandria. The Melitian
Bishops, because they had been Schismatically Ordained, were suspended from the
Exercise of their Office, yet their Character was not declared utterly void and
annulled. There was Room left for their exercising it again upon some certain
Conditions, and the Title of Bishop was still continued unto 'em, which could
not be, if the Character had been entirely lost or Null.

Hitherto belongs the Case of Colluthus and Ischyras, which some Episcopal
Divines have urged against the Validity of Ordination by Presbyters; for, say
they, Ischyras Ordained by Colluthus a Presbyter, is in Athanasius constantly
called and declared no Presbyter, but a mere Laic, and not suffered so much as
to have the Honor and Title of Presbyter, as all others of the Melitian Schism,
Episcopally though Schismatically Ordained were allowed: So the Nicene Fathers
had decreed. The reason why Ischyras was rejected is this, he had been Ordained
by a Presbyter only, viz. Colluthus, Blondel has taken much pains to perplex
this Fact with sundry difficulties, and Objections thrown in our way on purpose
to render it useless unto us in the present Controversy: and Mr. O. also has
made his observations on it. I shall consider them both, and to that end shall
in the first place produce the Principal passages, that occur in Athanasius's
second Apology relating to the said Colluthus and (...). There I read of.

Ischyras, who neither was Ordained by the Church, nor, Apol. 2. Ep. Syn. Alex.
p. 722. apud. Ath.
when Alexander received the Presbyters, Ordained by Melitius, was reckoned
among them ( that's to say in Melitius his (...)): so that he was no Presbyter.
How then or by whom was he created a Presbyter? By Colluthus? For that alone
remains to be pretended. But it is granted on all hands, that Colluthus died
Presbyter, all his Ordinations were void, and all Ordained by him, in the
Schism reduced into the Order of Laics -- But they ( the Eusebians and
Melitians) called a private Fellow Presbyter -- Ischyras was not acknowledged a
Presbyter by Athanasius. Id. p. 135.


Ischyras was not so much as a Presbyter, he never was a Presbyter Ap. 2. Ep.
Syn. Sard. ad Eg. and Afr. p. 764.
of Melitius ( not Ordained by him)

Ischyras was in no wise a Cleric, though the Eusebians, and Apol. 2. p. 781.
Melitians gave it out, that he was a Presbyter.

It Is remarkable, that Ischyras in his submissive Letter, unto P. 782.
Athanasius disowned not his being a Presbyter Ordained by (...), which I note
here by the by.

Ischyras our accuser is no manner of way a Presbyter, because Ap. 2. p. 788.
789.
he is not mentioned in the (...) or Register of those, who had been Ordained
by Melitius.

Ischyras never was a Minister of the Church, but boasted Ap. 2. Ep. Mar.
Presb. and Diac. ad Curiosum. p. 792.
himself to be a Presbvter of Colluthus, though no Body believed him -- so that
He (...) was deposed by the Alexandrian Synod, and numbered among the Laics.

Ischyras a Fellow, that called himself a Presbyter, but was Ap. 2. Epist.
Maret. Presb. and Diac. ad Curiosum. p. 794.
no Presbyter: for he was Ordained by a Catholic Presbyter ( Colluthus), who
himself ((...)) was but an Imaginary or Counterfeit Bishop, and was Commanded
in the General Council (of Alexandria) by Hosius, and the other Bishops to be a
Presbyter, as he had been before: So that by consequence all Ordained by him,
went back into their former place, and Ischyras appeared a Laic.

The Eusebians and Melitians called this Fellow Bishop, who Ap. 2. Ep. Syn.
Hier. p. 802.
was not at all a Presbyter: but they made the Emperor to write unto Colluthus
(for nothing (...) amiss to them) that a Church be provided for Ischyras, and
immediately caused him to be called a Bishop, when he was not so much as a
Presbyter: From all which we think the case as before stated is clear.

But Blondel contends, "That Colluthus was a real Bishop Ordained Apol. pro
sent. Hieronymi. Sect. 3. p. 317. etc.
by Melitius, though Shismatically, which is only a Canonical Irregularity; but
however he was Episcopally Ordained, and a real though Schismatical Bishop:
That if he had outlived this storm raised against him, by the Alexandrian
Synod, he must have been a partaker of the favor granted to such by the Nicene
Fathers, and by consequence would have been a Bishop, though created
Schismatically: and therefore that Ischyras, if at all Ordained by Colluthus,
was Episcopally Ordained, and so could not be deposed for being Ordained by a
Presbyter, but as Schismatically Ordained by a Bishop in Schism. The design of
all which is to wrest out of our Hands this Weapon, and to make it believed,
that the case reaches not Ordination by Presbyters: For Blundel is very
positive, and thus expresses himself -- It is false and frivolous to assert,
that Ischyras was no Presbyter, simply for this one reason, that he was
Ordained by Colluthus a Presbyter: Because Colluthus was a real Bishop, after
what manner created is little to the Point.

In Answer hereunto, and to evince that this is a Clever Instance in Antiquity
against Ordinations by Presbyters, I will reduce the Whole case into three
Questions. 1. Whether Colluthus was ever Ordained Bishop by Melitius. 2.
Whether Ischyras was ever Ordained Presbyter by Colluthus 3. Supposing he was
not, whether Ischyras became a Laic for want of any Ordination, or because
Schismatically Ordained by a Schismatical Bishop, or lastly, because Ordained
by a Presbyter only.

Qu. 1. (...). Whether Colluthus was ever Ordained Bishop by Melitius.

Ans. Never.

For he is all along called Presbyter, never Bishop, nor Schismatical Bishop:
He is described as one, that took upon him the Episcopacy, personated and
pretended to be what he was not, a Bishop. If he had been a real, Epis. ad
Curlosum.
though Schismatically Ordained Bishop, he could not have been said (...) to
have Acted the part of a Bishop, which implys, he was not really one. No body
ever called (...) Bishop, though Schismatical a counterfeit or Fantastical
one, there being a vast difference (...) these two. Lastly, if Colluthus had
been a real Bishop though Schismatical, then Ischyras Ordained by him, ought to
have been partaker of the Nicene Indulgence, as other (...) Schismatics were;
but Ischyras was not in the number of those recieved by Alexander; and Ep. Syn.
therefore Colluthus was not a Real Bishop. Alex. ubi Supra.


Against all this is it will happily be replied, as Blundel has endeavored Ap.
2. p. 789.
to prove, that Melitius in his Breviculum, presented unto Alexander, owned
Colluthus as one of those Bishops which He had Ordained.

Ans. 1. Here lies the Knavery: For it is not Colluthus, but Caluthus, who is
mentioned in the Breviculum. And least this should be thought a mistake in
Writing or in Printing, I undertake to prove beyond all Contradiction, that
they were different Persons however, if not different in Name also. For it is
granted by Blundel, and in its self manifest, that our Colluthus died before
the Synod of Nice broke up, or Alexander returned into Egypt, and demanded of
Melitius this Breviculum. But the Caluthus named in the Breviculum, when
Melitius brought it to Alexander, now returned from Nice into Egypt was then
alive: So it follows in Athanasius, immediately after the Breviculum (...).
These Persons then present, Melitius brought unto Alexander the Bishop. So
that, as the Accusers of Athanasius, pretended he had Killed Arsenius, though
Arsenius was then alive: Even so by a contrary Artifice, Blundel will have our
Colluthus alive: Though he was already Dead, whosoever then were Ordained by
our Colluthus, were Ordained by a mere Presbyter.

Qu. 2. 2. Whether Ischyras was ever Ordained Presbyter by Colluthus.

Ans. That he was no Presbyter is so often affirmed, that we need not trouble
our selves to enquire farther into that matter. However, that he was Ordained
by Colluthus (because Blundel is inclined to believe not) will require a little
proof. And 1. I note that though Athanasius plainly enough denies, he was at
all a Presbyter, yet still with respect to Melitius, Ap. 2. p. 735.
who it is certain did not Ordain him. Ischyras (lays He) is no manner of way a
Presbyter, because he was not mentioned in the Apol. 2. p. 788. 789.
Breviculum, or Register of those whom Meltitus Ordained. This Argument, which
he brings here, shows Ischyras was not Ordained a Presbyter by Melitius: But
it is no proof against Colluthus his Ordaining of him, neither did or could
Athanasius mean so. Thus the Sardick Fathers, He never was a Presbyter of
Melitius. 2. Ischyras Ap. 2. p. 764.
gave out himself, that he was a Presbyter of Colluthus his Ap. 2. p. 792. 794.
Ordainnig: The Arrians and Melitians, called him Presbyter on that account. 3.
Though none but himself, the Eusebians and Ap. 2. p. 732. 781.
Melitians, and a few of his Relations, called Ischyras a Presbyter, yet the
Orthodox affirm, he was Ordained by Colluthus. The Council of Alexandria,
admitting that he had been Ordained by Colluthus conclude, he was no Presbyter,
but deny not that he was Ordained by Collutbus the Presbyter, and for that
reason Ischyras, though Ap. 2. p. 732.
Ordained was indeed no Presbyter. The Mareotic Presbyters and (...), say
plainly -- He was Ordained by the Id. p. 794.
Catholic Presbyter Colluthus, who counterfeited Himself a Bishop, and
moreover add, that all Ordained by Colluthus, and among the rest, Ischyras
became and were mere Laics. It Is evident then, that Ischyras was Ordained by
Colluthus, and yet was not a Presbyter, because Colluthus himself was but a
Presbyter.

4. Supposing Ischyras was not really Ordained by Colluthus, the point will
come to the same Issue: For the Alexandrian Synod not troubling themselves to
enquire into the matter of Fact, but taking it for granted, that he was
Ordained (it was the same thing with them) they pronounced the Sentence against
Him, that he was not a Presbyter, because he was Ap. 2. p. 732. 794.
Ordained by the Catholic Presbyter Colluthus, and so he- appeared a mere Laic.

Qu. 3. 3. Whether Ischycas was declared a mere Laic, either because not
Ordained at all, or because Schismatically Ordained, or else because he was
Ordained by a Presbyter only, viz. Colluthus.

Ans. It having been proved, that Colluthus was no Bishop, that Ischyras was
Ordained by him, at least supposed by the Synod of Alexandria, to have been
Ordained by him, the first part of the Question is at an end, it was not
because he had not been Ordained at all; and then I affirm he became a Laic,
not simply because he was Schismatically Ordained, but because he was Ordained
by a Presbyter, who had no competent power to Ordain at all. For 1. Colluthus
is ever called Presbyter (not once Bishop or Schismatical Bishop that I find)
or barely (...) or Catholic Presbyter, or one that counterfeited himself a
Bishop, as in the Synodical Letter of the Alexandrian Fathers, and by the
Presbyters and Deacons at Mareota. They all then looked upon Ischyras as
Ordained by a Presbyter, and for that reason his Ordination Null. For so 2. It
is expressly recorded, Colluthus died a Prebyter, therefore all his Ordinations
were void, and all Ordained by him in the Schism were reduced into the Order of
Laics, says the Synodical Letter of the Alexandrian Fathers. Ischyras was no
Presbyter, for he was Ordained by the Catholic Presbyter Colluthus; so that by
consequence all Ordained by him went back into their former place, and Ischyras
appeared a Laic, say the Presbyters, and Deacons at Mareota.

But it will be objected, that the Words in the Alexandrian Synod are -- all
Ordained by Colluthus in Schism became Laics, implying by those Words (...)
Schism, that therefore his Ordinations were void, not because Colluthus was a
Presbyter, but because his Ordinations were Schismatical.

Ans. 1. It is very true in Fact, that all Colluthus his Ordinations were
Schismatical, yet this was not the proper and immediate reason of their
Nullity; but only mentioned as a Circumstance which aggravated his Crime, the
True Reaon, being assigned in the former Clause of that Period -- Colluthus
being a Presbyter died, therefore all his Ordinations were void, viz. because
he died a Presbyter, and for the same reason those Ordained by him were mere
Laics.

2. Schism, if it was one reason of the Nullity of Colluthus his Ordinations,
yet it was not the only one: For another was, because Colluthus died a
Presbyter.

3. I do confess the Alexandrian Fathers, prosecuted the Melitians with the
utmost Rigor, declaring all their Ordinations without exception utterly void;
so that such as were Schismatically Ordained, were Universally Commanded to be
what they were before. But the Nicene Fathers came to a better Temper, and in
some Degree confirmed the Schismatical Ordinations, that is, such as were
merely Schismatical: And yet Ischyras was not permitted to taste of this favor?
Why so? Why, because there was another fatal blot in his Escocheon, which could
never be wiped out, viz. He had been Ordained by a Presbyter only.

4. It is a great mistake to think that Schism must needs be understood of the
breach of the Ecclesiastical Laws only. There is Schism in departing from some
Scripture or Divine Rules, which not immediately appertaining to the
Fundamentals and Essence of Religion, denominates the Persons not Apostates or
Heretics, but Erroneous and (...) only. If any of the believers at Antioch,
had presumed to eat Blood contrary to the Apostolical Decree concluded on at
Jerusalem, he had been doubtless a Schismatic. Thus we reckon the Dissenters
Schismatics, as departing from the Divine Apostolical Constitution of
Episcopacy. Colluthus a Presbyter Ordaining Ischyras did it in Schism, true!
but 'twas such a Schism as contravened a Divine Law, and so the Alexandrian
Fathers thought for any thing I see to the contrary, when they condemned his
Schismatical Ordinations as Null in themselves. For surely that which is done
against a Divine Law, (and such is Schismatical Ordination, Schism being a Work
of the Flesh) is in its self Null and of no Effect.

5. We ought to distinguish between the Law its self, and the Censures of the
Church declared against the breach of that Law. The Law may be of Divine
Appointment, though the Censure is merely Ecclesiastical. St. Paul has given us
a Canon, that a Bishop ought not to be a striker: 1 Timothy 3. 3.
But Deposition for this fault is purely Ecclesiastical, not an Apostolical
Penalty. In like manner a Presbyter (as Colluthus) Ordaining without the
Bishop, and for that cause being deposed, the fault was committed against a
Divine Law, though the punishment was Ecclesiastical. 'Twere foolish and absurd
to conclude, that Ordination by a (...) was only a Canonical Irregularity,
because a Synod declares it Null: Or that Ischyras his Ordination was only
irregular and uncanonical not unscriptural, because his Deposition was decreed
by the Alexandrian Synod. As it is not the verdict of the Jury, nor the
Sentence of the Judge, nor the Execution of the Criminal, which properly and in
intrinsic Justice makes him a Murderer, but the Murder its self committed;
so it is not a Synod's Solemn Declaration, which is purely Ecclesiastical, but
the Schism its self or a Violation of some Scripture. Law that makes him a
Schismatic, and subjects him to Ecclesiastical Punishment.

Blundel himself suspecting (as I believe) that the Whole Fabric; which he had
with so much Artifice, and Subtlety here raised in Opposition to us, would not
stand, is therefore content at least to grant that -- Ischyras was for this one
reason accounted a Laic, because he was Ordained by a Presbyter, by Colluthus a
Presbyter: But says it does not hence follow that Bishops alone had power given
them by the Apostles to Ordain, or that Presbyters werenot Originally invested
with that Power: And he adds, that nevertheless, Ordination by Presbyters was
only a Violation of the Ecclesiastical Constitution, which he endeavors to
confirm from numerous Instances of Ecclesiastical Canons, by Virtue whereof
Bishops, Presbyters and Deacons, were sometimes deposed for Canonical
Irregularities.

Ans. This is a sorry shift and unworthy so Learned a Man; for on the other
side, I am able to produce several Canons, and have already produced enough,
the matter of which Canons is grounded on Scripture, though reinforced by
Ecclesiastical Penalties. It will not follow then, that because the
Ecclesiastical Canons forbid Presbyters to Ordain (reserving that Power to
Bishops) upon pain of Deposition or Deprivation, etc. therefore this was not a
Divine Appointment, but Ecclesiastical only. For at this rate Blondel might
pretend the 27th Canon Apostolical, the matter of which is, that a Bishop must
not be a striker, is a mere Ecclesiastical Constitution, which yet we know is
one of St. Paul's Canons, 1 Timothy 3. 3. Though at the same time we must confess
that the Deposition, which is the Penalty annexed is purely Ecclesiastical. The
matter of some Church Canons is often purely Ecclesiastical as well as the
Penalty; but it will not follow that all are so. For as the Prince frequently
causes old Laws to be observed, reinforceing them by Proclamation, so have
Synods done with Ancient Scripture Laws and Rules. In this Case the King makes
not new Laws, nor the Synods new Ecclesiastical Canons. The Primitive
Christians were wont to explain, and propound unto the Church the belief of the
great Fundamental and Essential Articles of Christianity, as that of the
Trinity against the Arrians, and that of Grace against the Pelagians, upon pain
See Cod. Ec. Afr. apud Just.
of Deposition or Excommunication; We must not hence infer that these were only
Canonical not Scripture Truths, because others of their Definitions were so. In
short the Trial of the Subject matter of Church Canons, whether Divine or
purely Ecclesiastial will depend on the Scripture chiefly. Thither we are to
resort for satisfaction, and not fancy whatever has been reinforced by Canon is
merely Canonical. We have it is hoped already thence cleared that point about
Episcopal Ordination: That which properly belongs to us here, is to prove it to
have been the Principle and Practice of the Church in the beginning of the
Fourth Century, when the Alexandrian and Nicene Synods were Assembled, which we
think also is hitherto made good.

But Blondel goes on: Ischyras was deposed by the Alexandrian Apol. p. 326.
Bishops; whence it appears, he was taken for a Presbyter, not a mere Laic: For
else it is absurd to affirm he was deposed. A Man cannot be said to be knocked
down, except he stood on his Feet before.

Ans. This is what we utterly deny, and is indeed a Mere quirk, no better than
fooling. Ischyras and many others were not properly deposed, but only declared
no Presbyters, as being Ordained by a Presbyter, which may reasonably be
gathered from the Expressions used in the foresaid Synodical Epistles.
concerning such as Colluthus had Ordained, (...) and Ischyras (...) denote no
more. And therefore, when the Synod of Jerusalem complained, how the Eusebians
caused Ischyras to be called Bishop, they aggravated the Insolence in these
Words, (...), whereas he was not so Ep. Synod. Hier.
much as a Presbyter, viz. at that very time; that is to say, When (...) was
alive and in some Credit, and when the Eusebians gave him out for a Bishop,
before the Alexandrian Synod was assembled, or had declared him a Laic, even
then he was not so much as a Presbyter. So that he was a mere Laic in the
Nature of the thing, and before the Alexandrian Fathers had so pronounced him.
Nor do I see any impropriety in saying Ischyras (though no Presbyter) was
deposed. For though he was really no Presbyter as being Ordained by a Presbyter
only, yet he took upon him the Office and Title of Presbyter, supported and
upheld himself by Stilts, by Confidence and Hypocrisy: He was believed a
Presbyter by many, and by many countenanced and kept up as such. Now though a
Man lying prostrate on the floor cannot be Knocked down, qui jacet in terra non
habet unde cadat; yet he who stands on Crutches or is held up by others, it is
not absurd to say, He may be Knocked down, which is sufficient to show the
Weakness of Blondel's fancy, And the false Colors put on this Argument.

But Blundel gives it yet a siner Turn thus -- It was usual in that Age (says
he) to reduce real Bishops and Presbyters, transgressing the Canons of the
Church, ad Laicam Communionem: and yet it cannot be denied, but they had been
real Bishops.

Ans. This is very true: But is just such another piece of Sophistry as before,
and reaches not the Merits of the Cause. For 1. this will not evince that ever
(...) was a Presbyter, though some real Presbyters for Crimes proved upon them
were allowed only Lay-Communion. He has not (...) us that they were declared
mere Laics: They were only suspended from performing the Office of Presbyters,
and admitted to Lay-Communion, their Character still (as I may say) lying
dormant in them. If any such Instance were to be found, it cannot thence be
gathered, that Ischyras also was so dealt with. It Is absurd to argue from one
or a few particular Instances, unto all others or to any other single Case,
especially which differs from them. For it is one thing to misdemean ones self
in an Office, another to counterfeit it. The former is deprived from
performing, what he is orherwise rightly qualified for, the latter is not what
he pretends to be. The instance of the former kind is of a pure Ecclesiastical
Punishment, whereas the latter labors under a defect and Error of the first
Concoction which in the Nature of the thing annuls all his following
Ministerial Acts, he having never received the Power, which he pretends to.
Though therefore a Real Presbyter is for his misbehaviour sometimes condemned
to Lay-Communion, yet the suspension taken of, as he once was, so he again
becomes a real Presbyter to all intents and purposes. It Is no good Consequence
hence drawn that a Counterfeit Presbyter (such was Ischyras) who is declared a
mere Laic, must needs have been a Presbyter: Neither will it follow that he,
who has usurped the Seat of a Presbyter, from whence he is thrust down and
deposed, was ever a real Presbyter. For a Man may well enough be said to be
deposed from an Office which he usurps and discharges for a while, but never
had a Right and Title to. A Real King, though deposed was once a real King;
that is undeniable; but one that personates and is called a King, and Acts all
the parts of the Royal Character for a time, must be acknowledged never to have
been a real King. 'Twas Ischyras his Case, He Acted the part of a Presbyter,
and was afterward Kicked off the Stage, shall it hence be concluded He was
once a real Presbyter? Under Blondel's favor I think not. But

Let us see now what Mr. O. (who has a Knack at improving Arguments) (...)
offered about the Case of Ischyras. He acknowledges Colluthus was but a
pretended Bishop, and therefore was Commanded Plea. p. 181.
by the Alexandrian Council to be a Presbyter. I am of this Mind, and it is all
I demand should be grantedme. The Reader of himself will discern hereby, that
he has given up the Whole Cause. But perhaps Mr. O. means, that Colluthus
pretending to be a Bishop, though he was not one, and under that false Color
to Ordain, therefore not his Power of Ordaining as a Presbyter was called in
Question, but his Dissimulation in taking upon him to be what he was not, was
condemned, and so he was publicly declared to be a Presbyter, that is a
pretended Bishop only.

Ans. But I ask then, why was Ischyras laid aside as a mere Laic? Surely, not
because his Ordainer falsely assumed the Character of Bishop, which belonged not
to him. But then (say I) is it not hard my Ordainers Dissimulation (supposing
him otherwise to have the Power) should annul my Orders. But Colluthus his
Ordinations were vacated, not because he pretended to be a Bishop and was not,
but because he was a Presbyter without Power to Ordain.

Well! But Mr. O. tells us, Ischyras's Ordination was declared void as being
not acknowledged by the Authors, Colluthus belike not owning he had Ordained
Ischyras: So that it not appearing, 'twas taken for granted, He was never
Ordained, and so He became a Laic, no Presbyter; not because he was Ordained by
a Presbyter, but for want of any Ordination, that appeared. The meaning of all
which (as I apprehend) is that the instance makes nothing against Ordination by
Presbyters, seeing here was no Ordination at all, Ischyras's Ordainers not
owning, that they had imposed hands on him.

For answer hereunto I referr the Reader to what is above replied unto
something of this kind: The sum whereof is that Ischyras was either really
Ordained by Colluthus the Presbyter, or at least by his Judges taken for such,
which is the same thing.

As for Dr. Field's Argument (his Authority I meddle not with) cited by Mr. O.
in these Words, Presbyters Ordinations were accounted void by the Rigor of the
Canons in use then, because Ordinations sine Titulo were Null, Council. Chalced.
Can. 6. it belongs not to the time we are now speaking of, the Council of
Chalcedon being Held an Hundred and twenty Years after that of Nice: Nor was
the Qualification of a Title required till long after that Council of
Chalcedon, wherein also I meet not with a Syllable of annulling Ordinations for
want of a Title. That 6th Can. makes void Clancular Ordinations not given
visibly in the Face of the Church, the Rule, which required the Candidate to be
offered unto the suffrage of the Clergy, and People in the Churches and
Congregation, being neglected, as Justellus has observed from the Word (...).
The method of Requiring Titles indeed grew up afterward, which the Canonists
in the following Ages gathered from this sixth Canon of Chalcedon, as fancying
some Analogy or Agreement between them in Reason as Calvin See his Lexic. Jurid.
teaches me. However let us take the Argument as it is propounded. Ordinations
by Presbyters were accounted void not in themselves, but by the Rigor of the
Canons in use then: How does this appear? Why, because Ordinations sine Titulo
were null by the sixth Canon of Chalcedon, which is just as if one should
pretend to prove the Lord's Day not Holy by Divine appointment but by the
Ecclesiastical Constitution, because the other Holy Days are not. Is it not
possible the Lord's Day may be Holy by Divine Institution, though Good Friday
is not? Or that Ordinations by Presbyters may be Null in themselves and by
Scripture, though Ordinations sine Titulo be uncanonical only? But, if Mr. O.
intended this only as the Judgment of so Learned a Person as Dr. Field, I let
it pass as such, being no ways obliged to account for the Opinions of private
Doctors.

The Reverend Author of the Naked Truth (if I rightly apprehend Mr. O. for I
lift not to look after the Book its self) intends to prove by the Nicene Canon
( which forbids Bishops to Ordain in one another Diocesses) that the Irregular
Ordinations by Bishops are as Null, as the irregular Ordinations by Presbyters.
Now there is no strength in this Reasoning. I can scarce allow it to be sense.
He ought first to make out, that Presbyters have power to Ordain, and then
indeed the irregular Ordinations of the one would be Null as well as of the
other and both alike: But we deny Presbyters to have Power to Ordain (be sure
That Nicene Canon gives them none) and therefore the Comparison here is foolish
and frivolous. It Is as if one should lay down this grave Maxim -- the Irregular
Sentence of a Judge is as Null, as that of a private Man, whereas a private Man
can give no decretory Sentence at all. I own Bishops in their Ordinations were
under many Canonical Restraints, and some of their irregular Ordinations were
decreed Null, at least so as that the Ordained, were not allowed to exercise
their Function. But to talk of the Irregularities of Ordinations by Presbyters
is to suppose it proved they have Power to Ordain, which is to beg the
Question. I am sure their power is not intimated in the Nicene Canons (as that
of Bishops is) nor in any other that I am yet acquainted with. If a Canon were
any where to be found restraining Ordinations made by Presbyters, and limiting
the manner and circumstances of 'em, 'twere reasonable thence to gather that
Presbyters had Power to Ordain: But the Canonical Restraints laid upon Bishops
will not convince me that Presbyters had that Power. Finally one may by the
same Reasoning conclude that Deacons, yea, that every Ordinary believer had
power to Ordain, as well as Bishops. Thus I proceed in the Argument -- By the
Nicene Canons, Bishops Ordinations in others Diocesses without consent are
forbid, and hence we see, the irregular Ordinations of Bishops are as Null as
the irregular Ordinations of Ordinary believers and Deacons: But this is no
better than beating the Air, out of nothing to gather something. For all this
while neither Deacons nor Believers have power at all to Ordain. Happily Mr. O.
has left the Reverend Authors Argument short: So I dismiss it.

CHAP. X. Of Aerius.
THis was a Turbulent and Heretical Presbyterian the only one to be met with in
all Antiquity. It may not be amiss in few Words to present the Reader with his
Character, as it is transmitted to us by St. Austin and Epiphanius. The former
tells us, that being a Presbyter he is St. Aust. de Haer. 5. 3.
reported to have been troubled, because he could not be Ordained a Bishop;
that he fell into the Arrian Heresy, adding to it some of his own Conceits, as
that stated Fasts ought not to be observed, and that a Presbyter ought no ways
to be distinguished from a Bishop; that the Aerians his followers admitted to
their Communion only the Continent, or such as embraced a Celibate Life, and
who had so far renounced the World, as to account nothing their own: And did
not abstain from Flesh in the appointed times, as Epiphanius writes. This
Epiphanius, among many other Errors, and some of the aforesaid particularly
remembers that he sought to be a Bishop but could not obtain it. He calls it
Ep. Haeres. 56. sive. 77.
(...) an hairbrained and mad Doctrine, sc. that of the Identity of Bishops and
Presbyters. When Epiphanius had reckoned up a great many of his Errors and
Heresies, he proceeds to refute 'em, and in the first place takes him to task
for that about the Identity of Bishops and Presbyters, In short, he sets him
forth as a very Wicked and Impious Fellow.

It is not material in the Dispute, whether Aerius was an Heretic, or is
called so by Epiphanius and St. Austin on the account of his teaching Bishops
and Presbyters to be equal. I am sure St. Austin places this Error of his in
the front and before that of Arrianism: And both condemn him for his Opinion
about Bishops and Presbyters, which is sufficient to my Purpose, For I am not
concerned about private Persons Opinions, such as Bishop Jewel though an
excellent Man, and one of the greatest Ornaments of our Church and of the
Reformation, or others mentioned by Mr. O. Page 114. 123. 124.
-- Whatever their Sentiments were, I shall hereafter show, that it was ever
the public Judgment of the Reformed Church of England, that Bishops were Jure
Divino, and I hope it is no breach of Modesty to confront theirs with the
Churches Authority.

CHAP. XI. Of Hilary the Deacon.
IT is not agreed among the Critics, who was the Author of the Commentaries on
St. Paul's Epistles, which are in the Works of St. Ambrose, Vol. 5. and it is as
uncertain unto whom belong the Quaestiones veter is and novi Testamenti in St.
Austin, Tom. 4. There are some excellent passages found in them, and cited by
Austin in his Tracts against the Pelagians Aust. de not and great. cont. Pel. c.
62.
under the Titles of (...) and Sanctus Hilarious, whence some conclude they
cannot be ascribed to so ill a Man as the Deacon: But that either Hilary Bishop
of Poictiers, or Hilary of It. ad Bonif. 1. 4. p. 916.
Arles must have them. Yet Vossius (...). Pelag. Pars. 1. p. 168.
contends that those Titles of Beatus and Sanctus, were by Custom and in
Civility given to all Clergymen, whether they deserved them or not, as at this
Day, Reverendus and Venerabilis are: That the Commentaries were written when
Damasus was Rector Ecclesiae, Pope of Rome, Comment. in 3. Cap. 1. Ep. ad Tim.
and that Hilary of Poictiers, dying in the second Year of Damasus, was too
Old, to have either time or strength to perform such a Work, whilst that Pope
was living: And lastly, that Hilary of Arles, came too late to write in Damasus
his Pontificate, or to be quoted by St. Austin. And thus the Commentaries and
Questions will fall to the Deacon's share.

Ans. 1. It Is certain to me, Hilary of Poictiers was not the Author of the
Questions and Commentaries, as we now have them: But not for the reason
assigned. Those words (...) body Rector est Damasus are on 1 Timothy 3. from
whence to the end of the Commentaries are but 52 leaves in Folio, which he
might have time and strength to finish in that Popes first Year. The
Commentaries moreover break off abruptly at the 10th Chapter of the Hebrews, and
the work is left unfinished, whence it may be thought that there his Life or
his strength might fail him. But still it is confessed Hilary of Poictiers was
not the Author of them: They are too mean to be Fathered upon so great a Man.
2. The Particular Testimonies spoken of before cannot be attributed unto Hilary
of Arles: For he flourished Twenty Years after Austin. 3. Neither can they
belong to the Deacon a Reason of no credit or Authority, as I shall show.
Wherefore 4. They were cited out of some Work of Hilary of Poictiers not now
extant, which may be confirmed by another Testimony in Austin (not yet observed
by any that I know of) writing still against the Pelagians -- Ecclesiae
Catholicae adversus Haereticos acerrimum Defensorem Aug. cont. Jul. Pelag. L.
l. Vol. 3. Tom. 7. p. 490.
Venerandum quis ignorant Hilarium Episcopum Gallum? Which can be understood of
no other Hilary then the Bishop of Poictiers, as is manifest from what has been
said.

5. Neither (...) nor (...), allowed this Deacon so much as a place in their
Catalogues of Ecclesiastical Writers, being it seems unworthy that Honor.
Bellarmine indeed incidentally mentions him in his Observations on Ambroses's
Works, yet makes no reckoning of him. But Jerome falls foul on him calling him
in derision Orbis Deucalionem, Hier. Dial. Orth. and Lucif. Tom. 1. p. 627.
and adds -- libellos adversus nos de Haereticis rebaptizandis edidit. It cannot
then be thought St. Austin would build upon this Deacons Authority. Thus much I
thought fit to say concerning the Passages of St. Austin borrowed out of
Hilary, supposed by some to be the Deacon, and Author of the Commentaries and
Questions, of which I will now say something considering them in the Lump.

1. I do suppose the same Person or Persons (whosoever they were) wrote these
Commentaries and Questions. Blondel Himself is of this Opinion, and so is
Bellarmine in his Observations on Ambrose's Ap. Sect. 2. chapter 22. p. 59.
Works. 2. I also Judge they were written long after Hilary of Poictiers, yea,
after Jerome and Austin, by some ignorant, idle and knavlsh Fellow, who mixed
truth and falsehood, good and bad together, Collecting some Notions out of the
Fathers, and adding many of his own silly conceits. The Testimonies which I
have spoken of were its likely collected out of Austin: The Discourse, about
the Ambition Quaest. 101.
of the Roman Deacons, exalting themselves above Presbyters was borrowed from
Jerome's Epistle to Evagrius. But to make short Work on it. Let us hear
Erasmus's Censure of the Questions. The Author (says he) repeats many the same
things in several places, propounds the same Questions, and treats of them over
and over again; is not constant in his Opinions: Some scraps out of other Men's
Works are often inserted: He repeats what he had said (...), but in a quite
different style. He is very idle in starting Questions, which he ought not.
There is a perfect confusion in the Work. Sometimes he writes Commentaries,
sometimes Controversy: Sometimes he Preaches, and sometimes disputes very
Foolishly and Merely Prates. He is often Scurrilous and Abusive, and yet has
said many things worthy to be read and known, but gathered out of others. He
cites not his Authors, he cheats the Reader with counterfeit Titles. By the
repetitions and the disorder in his matter he writes of, by his Tumultuous and
Womanish Talkativeness he even kills his Reader. The first part seems to be the
Work of some Greek affecting to speak Latin, etc.

Erasmus is more favorable to the Commentaries, yet confesses the Prefaces are
not St. Ambroses's, but some busy and illiterate Fellow tacked 'em to the
Commentaries. I make account then these Commentaries and Questions are of no
Credit or Authority in any Controversy whatever.

2. The compiler of them has intermixed several things favoring Episcopacy, and
so is Jack OF both-sides. 1. He expounds the Angels (spoken of 1 Cor. 11. 10.)
Bishops grounding himself on the Revelations: And gives the Reason why Women
ought to be covered in the Church because of the Angels, that is, Bishops, quia
Episcopus personam habet Christi and vicarius est Domini, sustains the Person
of Christ and is the Vicar of the Lord. The which must be understood of the
Days of Paul: Else the Explanation is altogether fruitless and impertinent. 2.
He resembles the Deacons to the Levites, Presbyters to the Priests, whereof one
was the High Priest unto whom the Bishop answers see Question 101. 3. He grants
Timothy had the Power ofOrdaining committed to him by Paul in these. Words,
unde Quemadmodum Episcopum ordinet Timotheus, ostendit Paulus. But he no where
expressly allows this to the Presbyters. Many other Observations, if it were
worth while, might be Collected out of this Author tending to the same purpose.

3. He contradicts himself the Holy Scripture, and the most Ancient Writers in
the Church. He affirms that at first all might Preach, Baptize and explain
Scripture, but after, Churches were Established and Distinct Offices were
appointed, and the Church began to be governed another way, so that no Man
should presume to Officiate in Holy things, except he were Ordained. Whereas
nothing is more manifest than that there were at the Council of Jerusalem Acts
15.
, besides, Deacons two Species of Officers at least, Apostles and Elders, to
say nothing of Prophets, of whom also we read, Act. 15, That when St. Paul
wrote his Epistle to the Corinthians, there were set in the Church by God
himself, Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors, Teachers, etc. The same are
to be met with in his Epistle to the Ephesians. In that to the Philippians we
read of their Apostle, of their Bishops (or Presbyters,) and their Deacons.
Timothy and Titus had their Elders and Deacons under them. To omit sundry,
other examples hereof in Scripture, Clemens Romanus tells us, that the Lord
appointed who were to Minister in Divine Offices among the Christians, and
Ignatius needs not here to be brought in for Evidence. But let us consider the
several Instances Mr. O. gives in Confirmation of this Paradox, that there were
no Ministers in the Church at the beginning.

The first is of Philip. But Philip had been Ordained by Imposition of Hands,
and besides was a Person endued with extraordinary and supernatural Gifts, that
is was a Prophet, and of such I readily grant it true, that they were not
strictly and indispensably tied to common Rules of Order, but might do what the
Spirit moved 'em to. But it is remarkable what Hilary himself says of Philip,
Evangelistae Diaconi sunt sicut Philippus. So then here were Ministers thus
Early besides the Apostles. As for Apollos Act. 18. 24. to pass by other
Observations that might be useful, I much question whether, when he preached at
Ephesus, he was yet a Christian, or rather am positive he was none: For he knew
only the Baptism of John, v. 25. unto whom therefore Aquila and Priscilla,
expounded the way of God more perfectly, v. 26. And though after this he still
Preached at Corinth, v. 28. it may be said that by this time he had been
Ordained to it, for any thing appears to the contrary: And we must not think
none were Ordained, but such of whom it is expressly testified in Scripture: We
ought rather to conclude all were Ordained because many were. Of Aquila and
Priscilla, their instructing Apollos, I have showed elsewhere, that it was
private not Ministerial Instruction. In short, I know not one Example of a
Person unordained, and of ordinary Gifts only, that took upon him to Preach in
any Christian Assemblies, much more to administer the Holy Sacraments; nor can
I fancy, when that time was of which Hilary speaks, when every Man that would,
did Administer in the Word and Sacraments.

But the story of Vrigen is urged, who was made Catechist in the School of
Alexandria, and taught the Catechumens in the Rudiments of Christianty, as Dr.
Cave relates it, and what is yet more, Theoctistus Bishop of Cesarea, and
Alexander Bishop of Jerusalem invited him to Preach before them.

As Africa has always been noted for a Country abounding with strange and
Monstrous Creatures; so are we continually pestered with some surprising and
extraordinary fact in the Egyptian Church, as if that differed from all the
World besides. But to this Example of Origin, I first say, that Mr. O. is as
much obliged to reconcile it with the Presbyterian Principles, as I am with the
Episcopal: That Origin, though he instructed the Catechumens at Alexandria in
the principles of Christianty (so do our Schoolmasters though not Ordained:)
Happily once or so he preached at Cesarea before he had been Ordained, (so do our
Fellows of Colleges at the University): Yet this is nothing to the Sacraments,
which he did not presume to Administer; and lastly though Theoctistus and
Alexander of Jerusalem, out of Curiosity desirous to hear the great Origin
Discourse upon some profound point in Christianty invited him into the Pulpit,
yet Demetrius Bishop of Alexandria condemned it, and it became a Scandal and
occasion of offense among them.

Mr. O. speaking of Evangelists would prove them to have Def. p. 145.
been unfixt Officers from this observation out of Hilary, that Evangelists,
that is Deacons (as Hilary thinks) did Preach sine Cathedra, which he expounds
without a fixed Residence.

Ans. This is more absurd then any thing I have met with in my Adversary. Sine
Cathedra, without a fixed Residence? He might as well have rendered it without
fear or Wit. The meaning doubtless is, that whereas Presbyters had their
Stalls, as well as the Bishop, and sat in his Presence, Epiphan. Haer. 56.
seu. 57.
and perhaps according to Hilary Preached out of them, the Deacons always
stood, nor had their Stalls, so that when permitted they Preached sine
Cathedra. Stantibus Diaconis, we often meet with in St. Cyprian; and Hilary
himself took Notice -- that the Questi. 101.
Roman Deacons did not assume the Privilege of sitting in the Church, had (...)
Cathedra, no seat in it. Jerome has also observed the same: Sedent Presbyteri,
stant Diaconi. So that Hilary's meaning was hereby to distinguish the one from
the other, and intimated that Deacons were inferior to Presbyters, being not
suffered to sit or to have a Stall in the Church, as the other had. In short,
no one surely will dare to say, that Deacons were unfixt Officers in the
Church, either in the Apostles or in Hilary's Days.

Mr. O. and before him Blondel, in Order to prove that Apol. 2. 2. c. 21.
Bishops were merely the first Presbyters, and had only precedence, but no
Power or Jurisdiction over the rest, argue from Hilary, that in the beginning
the oldest Presbyter in Years succeeded into the Episcopacy, and so became the
(...), the President of the Presbytery, and that this Apostolical Custom or
(...), continued till it was by experience found, that undeserving or disabled
Old Men were advanced to the prejudice of Ecclesiastical Affairs, and the
dishonor of the Church: 'Twas therefore changed into Election to the end, not
Order, but Merit might take place.

Ans. 1. The Controversy is not about the manner of succeeding into the (...).
The Method is either prescribed in Scripture or not. If it be, let the
Presbyterians show where, and we promise to observe it for the future: If not
it is left to the Church, to Order this Circumstance as shall be thought fit. In
the mean time we may not lay aside Bishops, because we have not a Divine Rule
about their Succession. Many things are appointed in the Word of God, the
particular Circumstances being left at large unto Humane Prudence. We are
commanded to read the Scriptures, but not how much at a time, whether one or
more Sections, whether one or more Chapters, nor in what Order: Shall we
therefore abolish the Command it self, because these Circumstances are not
expressly delivered to us in Scripture? God forbid! Supposing then that there
have been different Customs taken up about the way of Succeeding into the
Episcopacy, this is no prejudice against Episcopacy its self.

2. It is some matter of wonder to me how the Affairs of the Church could be
prejudiced by the Oldest Presbyters, succeeding as of right to the first Chair
or Presidency, if he received thereby no Power or Jurisdiction as our
Adverrsaries pretend.

3. It is false, and nothing can be falser then this conceit of the Oldest
Presbyter succeeding into the Episcopacy. Timothy was a Young Man and promoted
by St. Paul, and that not for his Age, but his Merit: For surely none can
believe he was the Oldest among the Ephesian Elders. What occasion then for the
Apostles Admonition -- let no Man despise thy Youth, if all the Presbyters were
Younger than himself? And Jerome, who affirms that Paul Ordained Timothy Bishop
of Ephesus, his Maxim was, Presbyter aetatis Nomen est, Episcopus Officii: It
had then been more Congruous according to our Adversaries Argument to have
named all of them Bishops, except the President, who should have been called
Presbyter as being the Eldest among them. Afterward Ignatius exhorts the
Magnesians, not to despise Demas their Bishop for his Youth. Lastly, (...)
assures us, that the Presbyters of Alexandria by Mark's Institution, chose
their Patriarch, so that Merit and Election not Age determined the Competition.
By the way they also according to this Author Eutychius Ordained their
Patriarch by Prayer and Imposition of Hands: With what Truth then could Hilary
assert. Episcopi and Presbyteri (...) est Ordinatio?

But I have done this Fictitious Hilary his Questions and Commentaries, too
great an Honor in wasting thus much Paper about Him and Them.

CHAP. XII. Of St. Jerom' s Testimony.
BEfore I examine the Testimonies of this Father alleged by Mr. O. in favor
of the Identity of Bishops and Presbyters, I will lay down my own Hypothesis,
such, I am persuaded, as is agreeable to the Word of God. And I am of Opinion
also will go a great way to reconcile Jerome with himself.

As for my own Opinion I make account with Bp. Pearson, that Lectiones in Act.
Apost.
the Christian Church strictly speaking, began upon the Day of Pentecost, when
the Spirit descended upon the Holy Apostles, and, as I may say, anointed them
unto the Office of Preaching the Gospel, and establishing the Christian Church
throughout the World beginning at Jerusalem. That they were for some small time
the only Ecclesiastical Officers in the Church: That when the Church increased
and believers were multiplied, and by consequence the Apostles unable to manage
the Whole Work by themselves, they took in seven Deacons to their Assistance,
devolving on them entirely one branch of their Power, viz. dispensing the
Public Alms among the Poor, as also admitting them to Preach the Word and
Baptize, when Occasion offered, or necessity required, or their Leisure from
their own proper business would allow: That not very long after (the Church
still increasing more and more, and believers multiplying not only at Jerusalem
but at Samaria, and in other parts of Judea) the Apostles added another sort of
Church Officers, that is Presbyters, Acts. 11. 30. chapter 15. That to these
Presbyters were committed by the Apostles, the Principal Care and Trust of
Ministering in the Word and Sacraments, and in their Absence of Ruling the Flock
in Matters of less Moment, the Apostles still reserving to themselves the
Supreme Power, in the Highest and Important affairs of the Church, which they
discharged either by Messengers or by Letters, or else visiting them, and
lastly that these Presbyters were indifferently called, either Elders or
Bishops, and governed the aforesaid Churches in a Parity among themselves. Of
this Interval of time, I reckon Jerome might speak, when he contends for the
Parity and Identity of Bishops and Presbyters. The Churches then hitherto were
governed Communi Presbyterorum Consilio, by the Colleges of Presbyters, no
other presiding over them in the Apostles Absence. In process of time, when the
Apostles had determined among themselves to disperse, in Order to the Preaching
of the Gospel unto all the World, they resolved, that one being chosen from
among the Presbyters should be set over the rest, unto whom all the care of the
Church should belong, the seeds of Schism might be taken away, and that this
should be established and observed, toto Orb throughout the World. The period
of time, when this Course was Taken by the Apostles, I have spoken of in the
Preface. But Jerome in this Circumstance seems not at one with himself. For
whereas in his Commentaries on the Epistle to Titus, he supposes the Apostles
to have taken up this Resolution after the Corinthian Schism, yet making James
Bishop of De Scr. Ec.
Jerusalem, He must of Necessity suppose it done before or at the Council of
Jerusalem, at which time there was not any Church, or so much as one Christian
at Corinth. By what name or Title the Persons thus chosen out of the
Presbyters, and entrusted with the Supreme Government of Churches were called,
is of little Moment to be enquired into. Nevertheless if Theodoret is to be
Credited (as I know no reason to the contrary) they also were at first styled
Apostles, and it is with reason thought that Epaphroditus is therefore reckoned
or rather declared the Apostle of the Philippians Phil. 2. 25.
. Blondel himself acknowledges there were a Secondary sort of Apostles among
the Churches, Persons of the Highest Rank and most Eminent Gifts. I take these
things in some measure proved sufficiently before, and in what follows, and
most reasonable in themselves to be supposed. Nevertherless if the Adversaries
shall reject them, as it is most likely they will, I shall only say that I am
not much concerned about them, that is, whether it be possible to make Jerome
write consistently with himself. If not, his Testimony in the Controversy
before us, is not worth a Rush, he having contradicted himself, and overthrown
in one place, what he is made to have affirmed in another. The Question then
upon Jerome's Authority is not about the precise time, when this Remedy against
Schism was applied by the Apostles; that is to say, whether before or
immediately after the Corinthian Divisions (let Jerome look to that): But more
generally, whether he believed or ever asserted, or could consistently with
himself assert, that this Provision against Schism was devised and made not
till after the Apostles decease. The Presbyterians are obliged to hold the
Affirmative, or else give up the Cause. My business then is to prove that Jerome
did not believe nor ever asserted, nor could intend to assert, that the Decree
about choosing one from among the Presbyters, and setting him above the rest, to
preside and Govern the affairs of the Church was made after the Apostles days,
by some Ecclesiastical Constitution; but that it was the Ordination and
Appointment of the Apostles themselves: This I pretend to make appear by the
following Observations out of Jerome.

1. These Words of Jerome, toto Orb decretum est, must denote it to have been
an Apostolic Constitution. For an Ecclesiastical Decree obliging all
Christendom to its Observation could never have been made for above 200 Years
after the Apostles decease; and nothing less then an Ecumenical Synod had
competent Power to prescribe this Remedy against Schism. But there never was
any such Universal Council before that of Nice (too late to Father the Decree
in the Judgment even of our Adversaries themselves.) Moreover this Apostles
Canons (as they are commonly called) which are a Collection of the most Ancient
Decrees of the Church, take it for granted, Can. Apos. 1. 2. and others.
that the Government of the Church was lodged in the Hands of Bishops, and only
regulate some Circumstances about their Ordinations and the Methods of their
Government. If Bishops had been merely by Ecclesiastical Constitution, we
should certainly have found them established in these Apostolical Canons. It is
not to be imagined the Collectors of them would have omitted so important a
Decree as this, whereon so many of their other Canons are built as on a
Foundation. Jerome's toto Orb decretum est, must then imply that Episcopacy was
an Apostolical Constitution.

2. The same may be (...) from those Words, Remedium Schismatis and Episcopum
nominabant, in Jerome's Epistle to Evagrius. The Remedy then against Schism,
must be as Ancient as the Presidents, who according to Jerome were called
Bishops. Now they were styled Bishops before Ignatius was Martyred, as
abundantly appears in his Epistles; therefore this Remedy against Schism was
divised in the Apostolic Age, except any one will affirm that Ignatius, and
all the other Followers, Disciples, Fellow Laborers, and Fellow Soldiers of
the Apostles, who gave Testimony to the Gospel of Christ even unto Blood,
prepared this new Remedy against Schism, so soon as the Apostle St. John's Eyes
were Shut; and took upon them to set up a Government in the Church, which the
Apostles were altogether strangers to, as our Adversaries suppose.

3. Jerome. Witnesses over and over again, that Bishops were established in the
Churches, whilst the Apostles lived and flourished. Upon those Words -- Quae
est in to per impositionem manuum mearum, he Jer. com. in 2d. Ep. ad Tim. c. 1.
v. 6.
thus glosses scilicet ad Episcopatum. Upon those other Words -- cum Episcopis
and Diaconis, he thus comments -- hic Episcopos Presbyteros intelligimus, non
enim in una Urbe plures Episcopi esse potuissent, Tom. 4.
intimating that though Bishops and Presbyters were the same in Id. in Philip.
c. 1. v. 1. Tom. 3.
that place, yet there was then an Higher Degree of Bishops, of whom there
could be but one in a City. Now Jerome here must of necessity speak of the
Apostles days, else his Comment had been altogether vain and absurd. For to
expound St. Paul's (...) by an usage, which sprang up in the Church long after,
were senseless. Besides, he thinks Epaphroditus was at that time Bishop of
Philippi, as is plainly employed when he glosses on the other passage in this
Epistle -- Epaphroditum Commilitonem meum -- Commilito propter honorem: Quia
and ipse acceperat in illis Apostolatus Officium. Epaphroditus then was the
Apostle of the Philippians according to Jerome, that is in the Ecclesiastical
Language he was their Bishop. Again whereas Jerome questions Archippus to have
been a Deacon of the Church of Coloss. chapter 4. 17. yet elsewhere, he puts the
question to Himself -- Quid est ministerium Id. Com. ad Phil. 2. Tom. 3.
quod Archippus accepit a Domino? And Answers -- Legimus, and Archippo
Commilitoni Nostro, exquo puto aut Episcopum eum fuisse Colossensis Ecclesiae,
aut si ita non est, etc. hereby though not positively asserting him the Bishop
of Coloss, yet implying plainly by the Disjunctive there were Bishops in those
days. Moreover Jerome in his Catalogue of Ecclesiastical Writers reckons up,
James made Bishop of Jerusalem by the Apostles, and Simeon after him, Timothy
of Ephesus, Titus of Crete by Paul, and Polycarp of Smyrna by John. On the 45
Psalm. he thus speaks -- Constituit Christus in omnibus finibus Mundi Principes
Ecclesiae i. e. Episcopos: And that by Princes he here meant single Supreme
Governors of Churches, appears from his Comment on the 1 st of Titus, where he
has this Observation, that Paul was then forming a Prince of the Church of
Crete. This Institution then being by Jerome attributed unto Christ himself,
must be understood as done at least by the Apostles of Christ. Lastly, Jerome
Notes Com. in 1. Cap. Ep. ad Galatas.
, that all who saw the Lord, and Preached the Gospel were called Apostles,
paulatim vero tempore procedente, others also were Ordained Apostles by them,
whom the Lord had chosen, as Epaphroditus. We can understand no less by
Ordained Apostles here, than those who were set over Churches to Rule them
called afterward Bishops: And the paulatim here being to be understood of the
Apostles time, will let us in to the understanding Jerome's paulatim and his
postquam, in his Commentaries on (...), and that the Decree there spoken of was
put in Execution by the Apostles themselves but by Degrees.

If then Epaphroditus was Bishop of Philippi, Archippus of Coloss, James of
Jerusalem, Timothy of Ephesus, and Titus Bishop and Prince of Crete, Polycarp
of Smyrna, and in a Word, if there were Bishops and Princes appointed by Christ
in all Quarters of the World, and all whilst Paul was alive in the Opinion of
Jerome, then Jerome's toto Orb (...) est, is to be understood of an Apostolical
Constitution.

4. The occasion of setting up one above the (...) to take the care and charge
of the Churches, of necessity implies that the Apostles themselves instituted
Episcopacy. It was according to Jerome the Corinthian Schisiu: And yet more
particularly (because our (...) contend that Jerome only alluded to the
Corinthian Schism, not that that Schism in particular was the occasion of the
Decree: Which is but mere (...) at best:) I farther note the Schism, which gave
occasion to the Decree, was according to Jerome founded on such a Principle and
pretense, as is not to be met with in any other Church than that of Corimh, nor
in any other Age than that of the Apostles. The pretense (as Jerome believed)
was -- posiquam unusquisq, eos quos baptizaverat suos esse putabat non Christi,
etc. alluding to the 1 Cor. 1. 13, 14. 15. If then the toto Orb decretum was
occasioned by the Corinthian Schism, which in Jerome's Judgment sprang from that
false and foolish Principle, that every Minister might challenge to himself all
those Christians, whom he had Baptized, to be Members of his own separate
Congregation, the Remedy against this disease must of necessity be confessed to
have commenced soon after this Corinthian Schism, and by consequence in the
Apostles days.

5. Jerome's instancing in the Church of Alexandria confirms, what I am proving,
viz. that Bishops were appointed in the Apostles Days. Ep. Evag.
A Marco Evangelista usque ad Heraclam Presbyteri unum ex se electum and
excelsiori gradu collocatum, Episcopum nominabant. Here we have a Bishop of
Alexandria name and thing acknowledged by Jerome, from Mark the Evangelist.
Therefore Jerome must have believed the (...) Orb decretum est, happened in the
Apostles days, since many of them survived St. Mark.

6. The Character and Commendation Jerome gives of this Institution of Bishops,
I observed before what he has written on the 45 Psalm. constituit Christus in
omnibus mundi finibus Principes (...). If then it was an Institution of Christ,
it must needs be at least Apostolical, so he calls it; Ut sciamus Traditiones
Apostolicas sumptas de veteri Testamento. The Apostolical Traditions (or
Institutions) were borrowed from the Old Testament. And that Episcopacy and the
three Distinct Orders of Church Officers, Bishops, Presbyters, and Deacons
(...) included, yea, principally meant here by the Apostolical Traditions is
evident from what follows -- Quod Aaron and filii ejus atque Levitae in Templo
fuerunt (...) sibi Episcopi Presbyteri and Diaconi vindicent in Ecclesia
Christiana. Quod Aaron and filios ejus hoc Episcopum and Presbyterum noverimus.
Ep 2. ad Nepot.


7. Jerome not (...) and more than once insinuates that Bishops succeeded the
Apostles. Apostolorum locum tenent Episcopi Jer. Ep. 54.
, Bishops hold the place of the Apostles. Habes pro Apostolis Episcopos filios
Apostolorum, you have instead of the Apostles, Id. in Psalm. 45.
Bishops the Sons of the Apostles, Episcopi and Presbyteri (...) in Exemplum
Apostolos and Apostolicos viros, quorum honorem Id. Ep. 13. ad Palin.
possidentes habere nitantur and Meritum, and let Bishops and Presbyters take
for their Pattern, the Apostles and Apostolical Men, whose honor they possess,
and therefore should endeavor to have their Merit. Non est facile stare loco
Pauli, tenere gradum Petri Id. Ep. 1. ad Heliodor.
. It Is no easy matter to stand in the place of Paul to possess the degree of
Peter. Omnes (so. Episcopi) sive Romae, sive Eugubii, sive Constantinopoli
Rhegii, sive Alexandriae, sive Tanais (I may add from Jerome sive Divites, sive
Pauperes, sive Sublimes, (...) Inferiores) Apostolorum sunt Successores. Id.
Ep. 85. Evag.
All Bishops whatever, are the Apostles Successors. And whereas in this very
Epistle, He is exalting his fellow Presbyters as high as with any color of
Pretense he was able, yet no such thing as this drops from him, sc. that the
Presbyters are the Apostles Successors. -- If then Bishops are the Apostles
Successors, as if Jerome may be Judge, they were, then also the Office of a
Bishop must needs be by Apostolical Institution: For none could appoint
Successors unto the Apostles but the Apostles themselves.

8. The early establishment of Bishops in the very days of the Apostles, or at
least, immediately after them, will force any Ingenious Man to confess
Episcopacy was of Apostolical Institution. This also Jerome has witnessed, Cat.
S. E. Clem.
telling us that Clement, (of whom we read, Phil. 4.) was the 4th (some said
the 2d) Bishop of Rome after Peter: That Ignatius Id. Ignat. in C. S. E.
was the 3d Bishop of (...) after Peter: That Papias, a Disciple of St. John
the Apostle, was Bishop of Hierapolis, and Quadratus, a Disciple of the
Apostles, Bishop of Athens. Id. Pap.
To these add the Asiatick Bishops, of whom we read in Ignatius's Epistles. For
because Jerome believed the Epistles genuine, and approves of the subject Matter
of them, he has hereby given in his Testimony, that there were Bishops in all
those Churches. Is it then possible to imagine Jerome believed that Decree to be
any other than Apostolical, or that Episcopacy received its Date from a mere
Ecclesiastical Canon sometime after? It can never enter into my Head that the
Church Government (which some say was Presbyterian, that is, Administered by a
College of Presbyters acting in a Parity, when the Apostles were living) should
be thus quickly altered by a mere Humane, or Ecclesiastical Decree, upon a
pretense of preventing Schisms; whereas the Apostles themselves did not (as the
Presbyterians believe) think this Reason sufficient to change the
Church Government in their time; that is, it is most improbable and absurd to
say so many Holy Men and Martyrs of Christ, familiar with, and Disciples of the
Apostles, sc. St. Clement, Ignatius, Papias, Quadratus, and an innumerable
Company, (whose Names and whose particular Diocesses are not Transmitted unto
us, says Eusebius) should dare not only to decree, and consent to the
Alteration of Church Government, but themselves to Usurp and Exercise an
Authority over their Equals contrary to the Apostolical Rule and Practice. From
the whole then that has been said, I may reasonably conclude.

1. That Episcopacy, which is by Jerome called The Remedy against Schism, was
Set up and Decreed (...) the Apostles in their own days. 2. That though he
terms it an Ecclesiastical Custom and Constitution, he is to be taken to mean
in opposition to (...) Veritati, our Lord's own Personal Appointment, and not
unto Apostolical Tradition, or Institution. 3. That what I have offered in this
Chapter toward the reconciling Jerome with himself, is most reasonable to be
admitted. And lastly, That the Power and Authority allowed by Jerome unto
Bishops, particularly that of Ordination, and the other of Confirmation,
belonged to them by virtue of the Apostles Commission, and were not Restraints
laid upon the Presbyters by Ecclesiastical Canons, That of Confirmation he
deduces from Scripture in his Dialogue against the Luciferians.

But Mr. O. will, perhaps say, that all this is nothing to him, and to the
Objections he has laid in our way. I am then obliged now to consider in
particular what Observations he has mustred up out of Jerome, and levelled
against Episcopacy in favor of the Presbyterians Claim.

Mr. O. then Pleads, that Jerome has showed the Presbyters of Alexandria (...)
their Bishops for almost 200 Years, and that he P. 126.
would leave nothing out that was Material in Constituting them.

Ans. Jerome has not showed, nor so much as directly asserted that the
Presbyters of Alexandria made their Bishops: But he has omitted several
Circumstances not only Material, but Advantageous to his main Design, if they
had been true. Jerome, both in his Commentaries on Titus, and in his Epistle to
Evagrius, speaks constantly in the Passive Voice, how that one was chosen, and
set over the rest; but by whom he says not. Why not by the Neighboring
Bishops? Why not by the Predecessor as well as by the Presbyters? Jerome has not
expressly told us that the Bishop of Alexandria chosen out of the Presbyters,
received another, and a new Consecration, nor that the Presbyters Ordained him,
all which would have tended much to the Honor of himself, and his
Fellow-Presbyters. True, he expressly says, the Presbyters named him Bishop at
his Instalment, bnt this does not necessarily imply either that they Chose, or
Ordained him. He ought, and doubtless would have spoken out, if either, or both
these things had been true. Whereas then Mr. O. adds, Jerome mentions no other
way of Constituting them but by Presbyters, Page 127.
it is certain he mentions no way at all. This is manifest' beyond all
exception. Jerome has assured us of it, that the Apostles, not the Presbyters,
Made and Ordained Bishops in most parts of the Christian World; at Ephesus, at
Coloss, at Philippi, at Athens, in Crete, at Jerusalem, and if Mark did not so
at Alexandria, it were very strange. However Orbis Major est Urbe. It should
indeed seem by the Allusions wherewith Jerome explains himself, that the
Presbyters chose one of their own Number, and set him over the rest. So (says
he) the Army chooses their General, the Deacons their Archdeacons. Admitting
then this at present, I reply. 1. It Is no where so much as hinted in Jerome,
that the Alexandrian Presbyters Ordained their Patriarchs: But rather the
contrary, that the neighboring Bishops imposed Hands on him. Quid facit
excepta Ordinatione Episcopus quod non faciat Presbyter? In which words he must
have an Eye unto the Custom of the Alexandrian Church, from Mark to Heraclas,
and Dionysius, implying that Bishops, not Presbyters Ordained all that while.

Well! But I have admitted that the Presbyters of Alexandria chose their
Patriarch, and then Mr. O. argues Plea Ibid.
That Jerome makes this an Argument of the Identity of Bishops and Presbyters.

Ans. Whatever may be inferred from Jerome, I am very sure this is no good
Argument for the Identity and Equality of Bishops and Presbyters. For it is
plain that Ordinary Deacons were not the same, nor equal to Archdeacons, nor
the Army to the Emperor, (as I have occasionally observed elsewhere) although
the Deacons chose their Archdeacons, and the Army set up the Emperor.

For to what purpose is an Archdeacon chosen, or a General, if they be but
still equal to the Army, and to the Deacons, if they have no power over them?
There is a memorable Story to our purpose, of the Emperor Valentinian. He had
been chosen Emperor by the Army. The Soz l. 6. c. (...).
Soldiers afterward demanded of him to choose and receive a Partner in the
Government; to which he replied -- It was in your choice (fellow Soldiers)
whether you would choose me Emperor or not; but since you have chosen me, what
you require is in my power, not yours, and ye ought to rest contented as good
Subjects. But to return unto Jerome. I have showed before out of him, that the
Apostles made Bishops; what then is become of this Argument for Parity in all
the Churches of the World, except Alexandria? But if Jerome contradicts himself
past all relief, I cannot help it. Yet again. Why may not one imagine that
Jerome's principal aim being to maintain the Honor of Presbyters above Deacons,
he noted that at Alexandria, the Bishop was chosen not out of the Deacons, but
unum ex se, viz. out of the Presbyters? Ay, but 'twill be replied, that Jerome
in this Epistle designed to prove that Bishops and Presbyters, were at first
the same, and that to other Arguments for their Identity, he subjoyns this
Story of the Church of Alexandria. I reply, not so, if Mr. O. will allow me to
reconcile Jerome with himself. I am not indeed able to account for Jerome, when
he proves the Identity of Bishops and Presbyters, from sundry places of
Scripture, the Epistles of Peter and Paul, and St. John; and yet gives us a
Catalogue of several Bishops in that time. But this I say, Jerome after he had
advanced the Honor of Presbyters above Deacons, in that Epistle to Evagrius,
telling us there was a time when Bishops and Presbyters were the same. He
proceeds to argue from the Church of Alexandria, that there, even to Heraclas
and Dionysius, for 200 Years, the Bishops were chosen out of the Presbyters,
not out of the Deacons, which Observation was not designed to prove the
Presbyterian Identity, nor the Parity, but the Honor given to the Presbyters
above Deacons, because the Patriarch was for a long while chosen out of their
Number only. Lastly, Let what will become of Jerome and his Arguments, this is
sure, and confessed on all Hands, there were always Bishops of Alexandria from
the beginning of their Conversion by Mark. It no manner of way belongs to the
present Controversy how, or by whom chosen and set up. If the Scripture shall
be thought not to have determined this point, I mean what way, and bywhom the
Bishops shall be Constituted, it is then in the Church to determine, but not
utterly to lay them aside.

But Mr. O. goes on P. 128.
We read not of any other Consecration of the Bishops of Alexandria, than the
Presbyters Election, and their placing him in an higher Degree, and naming him
Bishop. No, has Mr. O. forgot, or did he not know till aster he had thus shot
his Bolt, that according to Eutychius, cited this very 128th p. that by the
Institution of Mark, The Presbyters when the Patriarchship was vacant, chose
one of their Number, on whose Head they laid their Hands, and blessed him, and
created him Patriarch. And if this be true, Jerome forgot a very material thing
that would have made for the Honor of Presbyters and their Identity with
Bishops; and Mr. O. forgot another, that of the Presbyters imposing Hands on
their new Patriarch, which I take to be somewhat more than Electing, Placing
and Naming him Bishop. Mr. O. proves Plea Ibid.
there was anciently no other Consecration but Electing, Placing and Naming him
Bishop, from the Testimony of Polydor Virgil, who in his Book de Invent. rerum,
l. 4. c. 6. (...), (says Mr. O.) that anciently in making Bishops there were no
Ceremonies used, etc.

Ans. Mr. O. has a Knack above all other Men to misrepresent Authors: And
though I resolved not to concern my self with late Writers: Yet being Polydor
was in his time a Learned Man, and of no small Reputation in the Roman Church
of Engl. I will with Mr. O. pay some deference to his Testimony and Character.
Let us then hear, what Polydor has delivered in the place cited. He tells, That
Jesus Christ created twelve Pontiffs, whom he called Apostles, also Seventy
Disciples, whom he made ( Sacerdotes) Priests; that from these latter the Order
of Presbyters arose, that the Apostles and Disciples were not admitted into
their Office by any other Rites save only the Election or Institution of
Christ. Which Polydor proves immediately after from the practice of the
Apostles in taking Matthias into their Number, and instituting the Seven
Deacons. Let us run through Polydor's Argument backward, and see what it says.
The Apostles imposed Hands on the Seven Deacons, therefore on Matthias, and by
consequence according to Virgil, so did Christ lay Hands on the Apostles, and
Seventy Disciples. So that this Authority out of Polydor recoils upon himself.
Indeed Mr. O. owns as much: But then thereby he destroys his own propositition,
which is, We know no other Ceremony but Election, etc. But is not Impositiof
Hands a Ceremony, and more than Electing, placing and nominating him Bishop? I
am persuaded it is a Ceremony. Thus Mr. O. confutes himself, when he pretends
to confirm his Opinion.

I cannot pass by one thing, which Polydor very falsely tacks to his Discourse
here concerning the Original of Imposition of Hands, which he derives from our
Lord and his Apostles, but adds, atque hinc olim Edir. Novi. Bat. 1671. p. 336.
factum, etc. hence it came about that (...), (it was an Old Ecclesiastical
Practice) in Consecrating a Bishop, the Presbyters imposed Hands, and for this
cites Cyprian's fourth Epistle to Felix (in the Oxford Ed. the 67. It Is pity
Mr. O. stumbled not upon this Hint of Virgils. In appearance it is better then
any He has produced in his Plea. But the comfort is there is nothing like this
to be found in that Epistle; and this I thought proper to Note to the End, no
new trouble should be created me upon Virgil's Authority.

Mr. O. Jerome says the Custom was changed, from the time of Heraclas and
Dionysius. What Custom? Not the Election of a Bishop by Presbyters and People:
For that continued long after; therefore it must be be the (...) of Bishops
(which afterward was done) by Neighboring Bishops in the way of Consecration,
that is laying on of Hands, as I apprehend Mr. O.

Hence we must learn, that before Heraclas and Dionysius, the Bishops were not
consecrated by Imposition of Hands, but barely elected, etc. that after (...)
and Dionysius the Custom was altered, and then they were Consecrated by
Neighboring Bishops with Imposition of Hands.

Ans. Jerome teaches us no such thing. He is here only falling upon a new
Argument, as I said before, to advance the Honor of Presbyters above Deacons,
sc. that at Alexandria, the Bishops were always chosen ( ex se) out of the
Presbyters, says Eutychius, not out of the Deacons (though the Custom was
afterward changed about the time of Heraclas and Dionysius, or not until
Alexander as (...)): Nevertheless were Bishops from the beginning Consecrated
by laying on of Hands, for any thing Jerome intimates, and which Eutychius has
affirmed, as may also be reasonably presumed and gathered from the practice of
the Apostles recorded in the Epistles to Timothy, yea, and from Jerome himself
in the following Period, excepta Ordinatione, Eutychius his Words are, the
Eleven Presbyters laid their Hands on the Bishop (Elect) and Blessed and
Created him Patriarch. This Rule was made by Mark himself.

Mr. O. after a long Quotation out of Eutychius thus Triumphs, P. 129.
Here is a full proof of Presbyters choosing and creating their Bishop, and that
by Imposition of Hands, and Benediction or Prayer.

Ans. 1. And here is a full proof that Bishops were from the beginning, and
were Created also by Imposition of Hands, which Mr. O. just before denied upon
the Authority of Jerome, and was now to have proved, if he had stuck close to
his Argument. But it must be confessed, Eutychius does assert the Alexandrian
Presbyters chose, and created their own Bishops by Imposition of Hands and
Benediction, Wherefore 2. not to insift any more on the incompetency of
Eutychius his Authority, a late obscure and false Historian, I ask how Mr. O.
will be able to reconcile Jerome with Eutychius, the former affirming (as Mr. O.
understands him) that the Presbyters chose, and set up their Bishops unto
Heraclas and Dionysius (then it seems this Custom ceased) the latter unto
Alexander: That is to say, Eutychius will have this Custom to have continued 90
Years longer then Jerome assigned it. Eutychius says, the Presbyters all that
while Ordained their Patriarchs by imposition of Hands; Jerome no such matter,
but rather the Contrary: They only (as Mr. O. will have it) chose placed and
named him Bishop. We must then dismiss them both as the Evangelist did the
Witnesses against our Lord, their Witness does not agree together. I only add,
that the 6th Canon of the Nicene Council seems to overturn at least Eutychius
his Testimony: Let the Ancient Customs continue, which I understand of all
things established by this Synod, and among the rest that of the Neighboring
Bishops in Egypt, Ordaining the Patriarchs of Alexandria. For if this Synod (as
Eutychius believed) at the motion of Alexander the Patriarch had altered the
Old Custom, with what Face could they have laid down this Rule, Let the Ancient
Customs continue? Or was it Wisdom to exasperate the Alexandrians with a New
decree, when they were already engaged in Schisms and Contentions about the
Melitian Ordinations? To shut up this Chapter, whatever Jerome shall be made to
say concerning the Alexandrian Presbyters, choosing placing and nominating their
Bishop, he no where affirms they Ordained him by imposition of Hands and
Prayer: He acquaints us that the Apostles Ordained Bishops in their Time, not
the College of Presbyters. If afterward the Presbyters of Alexandria chose,
and created their Bishop by Imposition of Hands, it was at best but an
Ecclesiastical Indulgence, for which there is no Rule or Precedent to be found
in Scripture or in the Apostles Days. But I am well satisfied, that in truth
there could be no such Liberty allowed them. Neque (...) aliquid cuiquam
largiri potest Humana (...), ubi intercedit and Legem tribuit divina Cyp. Ep.
67.
proescriptio. This Principle of St. Cyprians (who flourished about 250) shows
also, that in the Days of Heraclas and Dionysius, that is Anno 222 the Bishops
had not yet taken upon them to dispense with any Divine Precept, and therefore
could not have given or decreed unto Bishops, the sole Inherent Power of
Ordination, or restrained the Presbyters, if they had any Title to it from the
Apostles.

CHAP. XIII. Of the Carthaginian Councils.
IT were to be wished that, when Men built an Argument upon the Testimony of an
Author, they would (...) read and weigh him, and be sure to understand him too
before they pretend to bring him forth as a Witness unto the matter in
Controversy: And also that they would let him speak the Whole Truth. But in the
next instance Mr. O. seems to have overlooked both these necessary Precautions,
and has at Adventures produced a Scrap of a Testimony in favor of himself, as
he thinks, but which in the end will prove fatal to his Cause, and will confirm
the World in the Belief, that he is either very rash and ignorant in his own
Quotations, or that he will stick at nothing, so he may seem to support his own
Opinion.

The Fathers ( says He P. 159.
) in the second Council of Carthage, Anno 428 An. 397.
did observe, That until that time some Diocesses never had any Bishops at all,
and thereupon Ordained, they should have none for the future. They would never
have made such a Canon, had they concluded the Government by Bishops to be Jure
Divino.

I agree with Mr. O. in the Deduction he has made, provided the Premises were
true. To make these good, therefore he quotes that Canon aforesaid thus --
placet ut Dioceses, quae (...) Episcopos acceperunt, non habeant. Whoever first
formed this Argument against Episcopacy, has grossly abused his Reader and the
the Council too. Mr. O. perhaps borrowed it of Mr. Baxter or some such kind of
Author, whose Interest and Partiality will not suffer them to let the Reader
see the whole Period, least at the same time he should discern the Truth, and
themselves be found Guilty of Falsification, which I doubt not to make out in a
few Words.

To which end I will take the Liberty to lay the Canon before the Reader in its
own Language. For though the African Fathers used the Latin Tongue, yet all the
Latin Copies among us at this Day were derived from the Greek Version, as
Justellus tells us, which is therefore the most Authentic, and ought to be
accounted of greatest Authority. The said Canon therefore runs thus -- (...).
In English thus -- It was determined that the People in the Diocesses ( not the
Diocesses) having formerly belonged to Bishops, but never having had a proper
Bishop of their own, should not have ( now for the Future) their own proper
Rectors, that is to say Bishops, except by the Consent of that Bishop under
whose Jurisdiction ( at present) they are. From whence it appears 1. That the
People here spoken of were aforetime Subject to Bishops, which Mr. O. has
miserably perverted by saying, that -- till that time the Diocesses never had
any Bishops at all, contrary to the apparent sense of that Canon, which affirms
it, and describes those People thus -- (...) and again (...), that is, the
People here spoken of were even in the possession, and under the Jurisdiction
of Bishops: Ex. gra. To make the matter plainer to Mr. O. The People of
Lancashire cannot be said never to have had any Bishops at all, it being well
known that the Bishop of Chester is their Diocesan. 2. The People mentioned in
the Canon had not (...) a proper Bishop peculiar to themselves. Thus it is
true, that the County of Lancaster never had to this Day a proper Bishop of
their own. 3. The African Fathers did not Peremptorily resolve that those
People should have no Bishop for the future, though Mr. O. has very falsely
affirmed it. But two things they define, either first that they should continue
in subjection to their former Bishop, that is to keep to my Example, that the
County of Lancaster should continue as a Member of the Diocese of Chester: Or
else secondly, that they should be erected into a Distinct Bishopric, and have
their own proper Bishop, provided nevertheless that it be with the Consent of
their former Bishop, or thus in the Example, that the County of Lancaster
should be made a Bishopric by its self, and have a proper Bishop of its own,
provided my Lord of Chester would consent thereunto. There is another Canon, in
the African Can. 98. An. 407.
Code which is more full to my purpose -- It pleased the Synod that the People,
who never had proper Bishops of their own, should not have them, Except it be
so decreed in a full Provincial Synod, and ( particularly) by the Primate, and
with the Consent of that Bishop, unto whose Government that Church ( or the
aforesaid People) formerly belonged. Mr. O. then, (...) he had dealt honestly
and faithfully with the African Fathers and with us, should have cited the
whole Period at length, and not abused them, and endeavored to cozen the
present Age with such Counterfeit Stuff. I have this only farther to remark
upon these Canons of the Carthaginian Councils (and so shall conclude), that
the Occasion of making the former (and of the latter too as is probable) was
the Ambitious and Haughty, and Aspiring, Stubborn and Foolish (for all these
Epithets are there bestowed on them) Disposition of some Presbyters, who
raising their Crests against their own Bishops, and Wheedling the People by
some indirect means, would needs in a Disorderly manner make themselves their
Rectors i. e. Bishops. This immediately follows in the aforesaid Canon as any
one that pleases may see at his Leisure.

To prove that Presbyters have power to impose Hands in Ordination Mr. O.
alleges P. 88.
the 4th Council of Carthage Held Anno (...).
Can. 3. -- Omnes Presbyteri qui Praesentes sunt, Manus suas juxta manum
Episcopi super caput illius (Ordinandi Presbyteri) teneant.

Ans. 1. He has not given us the Canon entire having left out something, which
perhaps will go a great way to the overthrowing his Argument, as will be seen
anon. Thus the Canon runs -- Episcopo eum (sc. Presbyterum) benedicente Omnes,
etc. But it is not unusual for Mr. O. to quote his Authors by Halves, and to
suppress, what seems to make against him. At this rate he may soon get the
Christian World on his side, so many of 'em at least as will not be at the
pains or are unable to examine his Authorities.

2. This Canon, though Caranza and other Authors mention it, is not to be found
in the African Code set forth by Justellus, which makes me suspect, that the
Fathers, who in the Council of Trull, took the African into the Code of the
Universal Church, looked upon it either as Spurious, or rejected it as to the
matter therein decreed. But I will not insist on this.

3. It is most reasonable to interpret one Canon by another. The said Council
decreed. -- Vt Episcopus sine Concilio Can. 22.
Clericorum suorum Clericos non Ordinet. From (...) one would guess that the
Imposition of the Presbyters Hands was designed only (...) a Testimony, that
the Bishop Ordained with the advice and consent of the Presbyters, at least not
without them.

4. If Presbyters laid on Hands as proper Ordainers, how comes it to pass that
in other Councils and Canons of the Church its declared that the Bishop only
Ordains and not the Presbyters? In the 2. Council of Hisp. Can. 6. -- Episcopus
enim sacerdotibus and Ministris solus Honorem dare potest. Can. 7. Nam quamvis
cum Episcopis plurima illis ( Presbyteris) Mysteriorum Communis sit
Dispensatio; quaedam tamen sibi prohibita noverint, sicut Presbyterorum and
Diaconorum Consecratio. But the fifth Canon is remarkable. The Occasion of it
was this. A certain Bishop being Blind, laid on his Hands at the Ordination of
some Presbyters and Deacons with the rest of his Presbyters; and Presbyter
quidam illis contra Ecclesiasticum Ordinem benedictionem dedisse fertur. For
which ('it is added that) the Presbyter deserved to be condemned, but that he was
in the mean time dead. From whence I think it is plain, 1. That Ordination was
not effectually given by Imposition of Hands, but by Benediction the Charge or
Commission (wherein properly consifted the Ordination) which was given to the
Ordained. 2. All the Irregularity here committed was, that the Presbyter
presumed Benedicere, and there with it may be to give the Commission, that is
to Ordain, which if Imposition of Hands was Ordination, had been no
Irregularity at least no Essential defect, as it is declared to be. 3. For if
Imposition of Hands be the Ordination, then there was no Irregularity in these
Ordinations, the Bishop having laid his Hands on the Ordained, as it is
testified in the Canon, as well as that Presbyter, who blessed him. 4. The Orders
thus conferred were declared Null by the Council -- Hi ( Presbyteri and
Diaconi) gradum sacerdotii and Levitici Ordinis quem perverse adepti sunt,
amittant. So that (...) the whole it appears, that in the Judgment of these
Fathers and of the Church at that Time, laying on of Hands was not properly
Ordination, and by (...), though Presbyters impose Hands, yet they do not
Ordain, which (...) overthrows Mr. O's Major Proposition.

But let us see how Mr. O. confirms his Major, He endeavors it by this Medium
-- That which is an Ordaining Act bespeaks P. 89.
an Ordaining Power: But Imposition of Hands is an Ordaining Act. Therefore,
etc. To the Minor I answer by denying Imposition of Hands to be an Ordaining
Act, it is only an outward and Solemn Concomitant of it, as is before Evinced
though Warranted by Holy Scripture. By the Imposition of the Bishops and
Presbyters Hands is signified to the Congregation present, that the Bishop
Ordains the Person with the advice Consent and Council of his Presbyters.

But Mr. O. adds, I should be glad to see one Instance given in the Apostles
days, of Persons laying on of Hands in Ordination, that had no Ordaining Power.

If I should affirm that those mentioned 1 Timothy 4. 14. imposed Hands, but had
no Ordaining Power, I am very sure he cannot disprove me: And if I should demand
one Instance in the Apostles times of mere Presbyters laying on of hands, or
Ordaining without a Bishop; I am sure Mr. O. cannot produce it. But Mr. O.
pleads P. 90.
How then comes the Bishops to urge the Scripture? (1 Timothy 5. 22.) Lay hands
suddenly on no Man, in favor of Timothy's Ordaining Power, and thence to infer
that he was Bishop of Ephesus, since he might lay on Hands, and yet have no
Ordaining Power, nor be Bishop.

This difficulty is easily resolved. If there were no other Argument for
Timothy's Episcopal Power in the Church of Ephesus; but that Text only, it
might thence be fairly inferred, that Timothy was Bishop of Ephesus, and had
the Power of Ordaining, because no other are joined in Commission with him;
nevertheless, though this proved it not, it may be evinced from other pregnant
Passages in those Epistles to Timothy, which I need not repeat.

Nor do we acknowledge Presbyters may perform all the outward Acts of
Ordination: That of Benediction belongs not to them at all.

But (says he) What does the Presbyters imposing of Hands signify, if not an
Ordaining Power? I have told him already, it denotes their Approbation, and
that the Bishop (...) with their Advice and Consent: No, (he replys P. 91.
) they could signify their Approbation some other way without imposition of
Hands, as by saying Amen to the Ordination Prayers. But this is to be wiser
than God and his Apostles, who have (as I often have supposed, though I need
not grant it) recommended this way, which adds an agreeable Solemnity unto the
Action; at least the Church has thought fit to admit the Presbyters to lay on
Hands, and thereby to signify their Approbation (of such as are taken into
their own proper Ministry) in a particular way and different from the Peoples
testifying their Assent. And this is the reason why at the Ordination of a
Deacon, Presbyters were not to impose Hands, sc. Quia non ad Sacerdotium sed ad
Ministerium Consecratur, Con. Carth. 4. Can. 3.
as the African Fathers declared. In short, this Canon (...) with others, which
appropriate the Power of Ordaining Presbyters unto Bishops only, (as is above
observed) seems to me to show, that in the judgment of the Ancients, Presbyters
had no Inherent Original Power of laying on Hands, but that 'twas granted to
them by Ecclesiastical Constitution only. Otherwise, probably they would have
had Power of Imposition of Hands at the Ordination of Deacons also. Briefly,
because in the Prosecution of this Argument Mr. O. appeals to the Scripture so
often for proof of certain things that fell in his way whilst he was managing
this Point; I do once more here desire, what I have often called for, one
single probable proof, or Example from Scripture of bare ordinary Presbyters
Ordaining, or laying on of Hands without some Superior presiding in the Action,

5. And to conclude this Discourse about the Councils of Carthage, I that am
not much concerned about Men's Opinions, nor whether the Presbyters impose
Hands tanquam Ordinantes, or tanquam Approbantes only, am very well content
every one should abound in his own sense, provided there be an Agreement in
Practice, and an occasion be not thereby taken to raise Schisms and Emulations
in the Church. Let this matter be banged in the Schools so long as Critics
shall please, yet seeing there is no color for asserting Presbyters to be
Ordainers without the Bishop, whatever they be with him, I make no difficulty
to affirm that their Ordinations without the Bishop, are without Precedent,
either in Scripture or Antiquity, and by consequence, in themselves Null and
Invalid. A partial Cause can never produce the (...) Effect.

Mr. O. being about to establish the Ordaining Power of the Presbyters,
instances in the 22d Canon of the fourth Council of Carthage, wherein it is
Decreed: That Bishops must not Ordain without their Presbyters, as Presbyters
not without Bishops, that therefore he may as well say Bishops have no Power to
Ordain, because they could not Ordinarily do it without their Presbyters: As we
affirm Presbyters have no Power to Ordain, because they cannot Ordain without
Bishops.

Ans. Let us see the Canon at length Apud Caranz. Conc. Carth. 4.
-- Ut Episcopus sine Concilio Clericorum suorum Clericos non Ordinet, ita ut
etc. It is hence apparent that the Bishop Ordained, and not the Presbyters,
though he was to take along with him the Counsel and Advice of his Prebyters.
Let Mr. O. produce me a Canon to this Effect, Presbyteri sine Concilio Episcopi
sui Clericos non Ordinent, and then it will be time for us to think of a
further Answer unto this Cavil. Mr. O. urges Def. p. 117.
farther the following Canon; Can. 23d.
The Bishop may hear no Man's Cause without the Presence of his Clergy:
Otherwise the Bishop's Sentence shall be void, unless it be confirmed in their
Presence. This we can assent unto without Prejudice to our main Cause. But I
read no where that the Presbyter's Sentence shall be void without the Presence
of the Bishop: The reason is, because the Presbyters gave no Sentence at all.

Mr. O. to confirm his Maxim that Laymen were allowed to Preach, at the
Request of the Clergy cites Def. p. 63. Con. Carth. 4. Can. 98.
the Carthaginian Canon. -- A Layman may not dare to Preach, whilst the Clergy
are present, unless they ask him.

Ans. I have given my Opinion of this Matter before. It affects the Presbyters
as well as the Bishops, and is of as much force against Mr. O. (unless he will
turn Quaker) as against the Rector. But over and above I note this Canon is not
taken into the universal Code, and therefore was rejected in the Council of
Trull.

CHAP. XIV. Of Paphnutius and Daniel.
THE next thing Mr. O. urges in behalf of Presbyters Ordaining is the Story,
which Joannes Cassianus tells of one Paphnutius, a Presbyter Abbot, who made
Daniel his designed Successor, a Deacon first, and then Goaequare sibi etiam
Sacerdotis honor festinavit -- Optansque sibi Successionem Anno 390
dignissimam providere eum Presbyterii honor provexit. He adds, That
Theophilus then Bishop of Alexandria, did not pronounce Page 131.
the Ordination null that we read of, nor any other in that time. Had it been
either irregular, or unusual, doubtless it had been Censured.

Ans. It must not be denied but that this Instance of Presbyters Ordaining
appears the fairest of all others that Mr. O. has mustered up in his Plea.
Nevertheless, what I have to reply, is as follows.

1. It is but a single Instance of a (for ought I know) Humoursome Abbot, who
took upon him to do this contrary to the known and established Order of the
Catholic Church, and particularly, of the Alexandrian, whereof he is supposed
to have been a part: The Desert of Scetis, where he usually resided, adjoining
to the Lake Maria, or Maeris, which borders on Egypt.

2. Whereas it is urged, that Theophilus, Bishop of Alexandria, did not
pronounce this Ordination void and null that we read of, there is no great
matter in this. For it may with as great reason be argued, that Theophilus
would have Censured it, if it had come to his knowledge, there being no
probability that Theophilus would have past by such a Disorder and Affront done
to the Ecclesiastical Constitutions, seeing Peter and Alexander of Alexandria,
his Predecessors, would not bear with the Melitians.

3. It Is wonderful that Mr. O. should Insinuate that it was neither irregular,
nor unusual, which in former Cases he has granted over and over again.

4. Valesius tells me, Annot. in Soc. P. 7. and 112.
that Paphnutius was engaged in the Melitian Schism, as Ephiphanius testisies,
de Haeresi Melitianorum. He also observes, that the Schism was then improved
unto Heresy. It Is no wonder then that an Heretical Schismatic should presume
to break through the Rules and Orders of that Church, from which he divided,
and usurp a Power that nothing belonged to him. And hence also may be drawn the
reason why Theophilus took no notice of what Paphnutius did, he being a
Schismatic, (if not an Heretic) and out of the Communion of the Church; and
what had the Patriarch to do to judge them that were without already? As St.
Paul speaks in somewhat a like Case. But

5. I will not content my self with these Answers, though I 1 Cor. 5. 12.
reckon them sufficient: But add, it is no where affirmed by Cassianus that
Paphnutius Ordained Daniel a Deacon, or Presbyter; but only Cum Daniel multis
junior esset aetate ad Diaconii praelatus est Officium, and then Festinavit
coaequare, made baste to equal Daniel with himself in the Honor of the
Priesthood. And Lastly, desiring to provide a most worthy Successor to himself
whilst he was alive, Provexit promoted him to the Honor of the Presbytership.
The Question is whether these Words signify that Paphnutius Ordained Daniel.
That he did so, can no ways be concluded from this Testimony of Cassianus. For,

1. It has been ordinary to attribute that unto a Person, which indeed he only
commanded, or directed, devised, or procured to be done. Thus Parents are
commonly said to make their Sons Ministers, but Ordain them not themselves.
Thus Patrons among us make and prefer Vicars and Rectors of Churches (and the
King Bishops) though Bishops Ordain and Institute them. Thus Joshua made him
sharp Knives, and Circumcised the Children of Israel. Joshua 5. 3. Now I hope
Mr. O. will not affirm that Joshua himself made the sharp Knives, or
Circumcised all these Israelites with his own hands. But to come yet nearer to
our purpose, I read in St. Cyprian Cyp. Ep. 52.
Novatus Felicissimum nec permittente me nec sciente sua factione and ambitione
Diaconum constituit. The enquiry is, whether Novatus, a Presbyter, imposed
hands and Ordained Felicissimus, a Deacon, and whether St. Cyprian is thus to
be understood. This doubt is to be (...) from another passage of St. Cyprian in
the same (...). Qui ( Novatus) isthic (Carthagine) Diaconum fecerat sc.
Felicissimum, illic (Romae) Episcopum fecit, sc. Novatianum. Novatus made
Felicissimus a Deacon at (...), and Novatianus a Bishop at Rome. But how? Not
Ordaining him himself, but procuring, or encouraging him to be Ordained by
Bishops, as we read in Eusebius Eus. E. H. l. 6. c. 43.
-- Novatianus, a Presbyter of Rome, (by Eus. called Novatus also) having from
some remote parts of Italy invited three Bishops unto Rome, forced them to
Ordain him ( Novatianus) Bishop. This was the Contrivance of the African
Novatus, as we learn from Cyprian. As then Novatus did not Ordain Novatianus,
but three Bishops procured for the purpose; so neither can it be thought he
Ordained Foelicissimus Deacon, but by his Policy and Interest got him to be
Ordained: And yet Cyprian witnesses that he made ( fecit and constituit) the
one a Deacon, and made ( fecit) the other a Bishop. In like manner (...) made
Daniel a Deacon and a Presbyter, that is appointed and commanded him to take
Orders. For being the Abbot, he had the Authority to determine his own Monk
unto the Orders of Deacon and Presbyter. But

It may not be amiss to consider what Blondel has from this Testimony of
Cassianus advanced Apol. 358.
for the establishment of Presbyterian Ordination. He places this fact in the
Year 390. when the Egyptian Church enjoyed a profound Peace, and Theophilus was
Bishop of Alexandria, and the Government of this Church was improved in a
manner into a Secular Dominion. If in these Circumstances ( He argues) a
Presbyter might Ordain Presbyters, how much more before the ancient simplicity
of the Gospel was shackled with Novel Constitutions.

Ans. It is is some prejudice against this Story of Cassianus, that neither
(...), Sozomen, Theodoret, nor any of those Ecclesiastical Historians, though
they mention Paphnutius, should have one Syllable of this Action, nor so much
as mention Daniel. Besides the Egytian Churches were not in so perfect
Tranquillity, as Mr. Blondel imagines, and represents them. The Melitian Schism
still remained among them, and this Paphnutius was one of them, as I have
before observed; so that it is not be wondered at, that Paphnutius presumed to
Ordain, and Theophilus overlooked, and neglected it. For what had he to do with
them that were already out of the Church and Excommunicated, as the Melitians
must needs be supposed. This premised I frame an Argument against Blondel, and
(as I conceit) every whit as good as his. It Is this. If in the most Turbulent
State of the Egyptian Church, when Alexander was Bishop of Alexandria, the
Ordinations of Melitius and Colluthus were declared invalid, it is Morally
impossible that the Ordination of Daniel by Paphnutius, should be approved or
connived at, when Theophilus being Bishop of Alexandria, the Episcopacy was
raised to a higher degree of Grandeur, and the Peace of the Church better
established.

To conclude this Chapter, let it be remembered, what I have already noted out
of Theodoret, how that Bishops were wont to Hist. Eccl. l. 4. c. 22.
reside among the Monks in the Wilderness of Egypt, and that seven of them are
said to have done so from their Youth up, to their extreme Old Age, even when
they were Bishops; and a little Sense will persuade one to believe, that Daniel
was Ordained by a Bishop, Paphnutius the Abbot commanding and directing his
Monk to receive Holy Orders.

CHAP. XV. Of Pope Leo' s Decree.
THE case was this. There were was in the Diocese of Rusticus Bishop of Narbona
(as may be conjectured from Pope Leo's Epistle) some Persons, who toook upon
'em to Ordain, and who are called by that Pope Pseudo Episcopi. Rusticus
complains thereof in a Letter to Leo, which is not extant that I know of. Leo's
Answer is -- There is no reason they should be accounted Bishops, who were
neither chosen by the Clergy, nor desired by the People, nor Consecrated by the
Provincial Bishops at the appointment of the Metropolitan. Whence, when the
Question often arises concerning the Honor ( he means Episcopacy, and the
Power of Ordaining) who can doubt that, what does not appear to have been truly
Conferred, is in no wise to be given by those Pseudo Episcopi. But if any
Clergyman in those Churches, which belong unto their own proper Bishop, have
been Ordained by those Pseudo Episcopi, and the Ordination was performed with
the Consent and appointment of the Presidents ( or proper Bishops) it may be
ratified; provided they remain in those Churches. This Pope Leo flourished
about the Year 442.

Now Mr. O. who alleges, this Decree of Pope Leo against P. 131.
us, is upon the Proof of Presbyters Ordaining, which I do not see is in the
least favored by these Words, except he will (...) these Pseudo Episcopi were
Presbyters only. When Mr. O. shall have proved this, I shall think my self
obliged to return an Answer to it, and not before. In the mean while I observe
Mr. O. leaving his Argument adduces this Passage to throw dirt upon our
Established Bishops, and prove 'em to be uncanonically Ordained, instead of
Confirming his own dear Presbyterian Ordination: But let us see what He says.

Two things are remarkable in the decision of Leo the Great. 1. That our
English Bishops wanting two of the requisites mentioned in the Popes Decree,
sc. The Election of the Clergy, and the demand of the People, their Ordinations
therefore have a Canonical Nullity in them, and our English Bishops would have
been reckoned Pseudo Episcopi in Leo's time. Upon which remark I make the
following Reflections.

1. We are beholden to Mr. O. for making his simple Friends believe that we are
departed from the decrees of the Popes. From henceforth then let them not
reproach our Bishops for Popish.

2. Mr. O. is in the right. Pope Leo perhaps would have called our Bishops
Pseudo Episcopi: I am sure at this Day the Popes do not fail to condemn 'em as
such. 3. The uncanonical Ordination of Bishops among us, will not excuse that
of the Presbyterians, much less justify their Anti-Scriptural Ordinations. No
one can defend himself by Recrimination: But a greater fault can never be
excused by a lesser. 4. We are so far from tying up our selves to the strict
observation of Papal or Provincial Canons, that we think not our selves
absolutely obliged to the Observation of the Decrees of the Ecumenical Synods,
but take Libery to vary from them, when ever necessity or great convenience
invites us to it: Otherwise we endeavor to conform our selves to them, as much
as is possible. 5. I have more than once in the Preface to I. N. and in the
former part of this Treatise (I hope) sufficiently evinced, that our Bishops
want neither the Election of the Clergy, nor the Consent of the People, and
therefore their Ordinations on that score have no Canonical Nullity in them.
But.

2. Mr. O. remarks from the foresaid Decree of Pope Leo, That the consent of
the true Bishops ex post facto made the Ordination of mere Presbyters lawful,
which could not be unless Presbyters had an intrinsic Power of Ordination.
Hereunto I return.

1. Mr. O. ought first to prove that these Pseudo Episcopi were mere
Presbyters. I am otherwise persuaded and think I can evince it out of Leo's
Decree. 2. The consent of the true Bishops was not required ex post facto
(that is the disingenuous and false Gloss of an Adversary) but antecedent to the
Ordination, as appears from these Words, and (si) Ordinatio Clericorum consensu
and judicio Praesidentium facta est, if the Ordination of the Ministers was
made with the Consent and appointment of the Bishops. Let any Man of
understanding judge whether this Consent and appointment of the Provincial
Bishops, was to be Antecedent to the Ordinations or to follow them. 3. Whereas
Mr. O. renders Pseudo Episcopi false Bishops as it were in opposition to true
Bishops (so he renders proprios Episcopos) it is I think a mistake. The proper
Bishops being the Bishops of the Diocesses within the Provinces, and by
consequence the Pseudo Episcopi, such as had no Diocese there, and therefore
could not Ordain regularly without the consent and appointment of the proper
Bishops of the Diocesses: Of which I have spoken before. Upon the Whole matter,
how Mr. O. will be able to infer hence, that Ordination by mere Presbyters can
be lawful, or that they have an intrinsic Power to Ordain, I am yet to learn.
If these Pseudo Episcopi were real Bishops, as they must have been, if their
Ordinations were valid when the proper Bishops consent was first obtained, what
is this to the Advantage of Presbyterian Ordination? (...) who will believe the
Pope of Rome at this time of Day, viz. in the middle of the 5th Century would
decree any thing that might Countenance the Ordinations of mere Presbyters?
This is plain, that though the Pope called 'em Pseudo Episcopi, yet they reckon
themselves real Bishops, and not mere Presbyters: Which is a strong presumption
that in those times, mere Presbyters were not allowed to Ordain. For to what
purpose else should they assume the Title and Character of Bishops? Our
Presbyterians do not think there is any need for them to usurp the Title of
Bishops, and that because they believe themselves to have Power of Ordination,
as Presbyters. All the Difficulty is why Leo calls 'em Pseudo Episcopi, if they
were real Bishops.

Ans. The reason hereof I conceive is, because they had been Ordained Bishops,
but were not possessed of any Diocesses in those Provinces, and yet took upon
them to Act there, which they ought not to have done, it being contrary to the
peace and established Order of the Church, This appears from the first Words of
the Decree. There is no reason they should be accounted Bishops ( that is have
Liberty to Act as Bishops in those Diocesses and Provinces) who were neither
chosen by the Clergy, nor desired by the People, nor Consecrated by the
Provincial Bishops at the appointment of the Metropolitan. From these Words
it is plain that he speaks not of mere Presbyters: For it was never required by
any Ecclesiastical Canon, that mere Presbyters were to be Ordained by the
Provincial Bishops with the Consent of the Metropolitan. This Ecclesiastical
Rule and Constitution concerned Bishops only. So that I reckon the Pope called
them Pseudo Episcopi, not because they were not Ordained Bishops, but because
they acted irregularly in other Bishops Diocesses.

CHAP. XVI. Of the Churches in the Island of Taprobane.
WE are come now to the Year 520. when (says Mr. O.) P. 158.
In the Island of Taprobane, or Or Ceylon.
Zeilan, as it is now called, there was a Church of Christians governed by a
Presbyter and his Deacon, without any Superior Bishop to whom he or his Flock
was Subject. This Island is above 2000 Miles in Compass, a Province big enough
for a Bishop, yet had none in Justin the Emperor's time, which was about the
Year 520. but was under the Jurisdiction of a Presbyter Ordained in Persia, who
in all likelihood Ordained his Successor, and would not be at the trouble of
sending for one to very remote Countries: From hence Mr. O. roundly concludes
-- that Bishops were not thought Essential to Churches, no not in the 6th Age,
and that mere Presbyters have power of Jurisdiction, and consequently of
Ordination. I Will not now contest the Truth of the story; Let us rather suppose
the matter of Fact to be as it is reported by Mr. O. -- But I have these
following things to reply to it, and to the conclusion drawn from it.

1. How does Mr. O. know that this Presbyter and his Deacon, and the flock of
Christians belonging to 'em were without a Superior Bishop, to whom they were
Subject? They might be subject to some Bishop in Persia, for any thing he can
tell or the first Relator says. It Is true, this Presbyter regebat, he did rule
the flock, but it might be under some Bishop; the likelihood hereof is the
greater, because he was Ordained in Persia, and from thence sent to propagate
the Gospel.

2. Whereas Mr. O. thinking to magnify the Power of Presbyters, and to show
what vast Churches have been ruled by them without Bishops, acquaints us that
this Island is (or was) 2000 Miles in Compass, and that it was big enough for a
Bishop, it might not be unseasonable to ask him first, whether he is not
mistaken in the extent of the Island. Heylin makes it but 700 or 800 at most.
Well but I Will not stand with Mr. O. for 1200 or 1300 Miles; Almost two thirds
shall (...) break Squares between him and me, especially since he has so good a
Geographer on his side as N. Lloyd; granting then this. 2. Neither his
Countryman Lloyd, nor Heylin make any mention of Christians in this Island.
The story then may be but a Fable at last. 3. I ask whether there were any more
than one single Congregation of Christians in this Island, or more than one
Presbyter and his Deacon. If not he has the reason why there was no Bishop in
the Island; but that the Presbyter and his Flock were subject unto some Persian
Bishop. If he says there were Christians up and down in the Island (as his
telling us of the large compass of it seems to intimate) and many
Congregations, and yet this Presbyter ruled 'em all, why then we have a real,
though not nominal Bishop, I mean in respect of Jurisdiction. 4. Whereas Mr. O.
makes this Reflection, that this Island in Compass 2000 Miles, was a Province
big enough for a Bishop, he will give me leave (I hope) to retort, that it seems
it was not too big for one Presbyter and his Deacon.

3. Let it be observed, that Mr. O. knows not but this Presbyter had a
Predecessor in that Island: For there is a Tradition that Philip the Evangelist
preached the Gospel in Persia, India and Taprobane. I demand then upon that
supposition, who Ordained his Predecessor? A Bishop in Persia in likelihood;
for so much is reasonably gathered from this Presbyter's being himself Ordained
there; and Bishops were before that time in Persia. Zos. l. 2. c. 9. 14.
If so, there is more Probability that this Presbyters Successor also was
Ordained in Persia, than that the Presbyter himself Ordained him. But these
things are all in the dark, and we know not certainly that this Presbyter had
either a Predecessor or a Successor, and so Mr. O's whole Argument is lost: He
has built upon no Foundation: It tumbles down (...) its own accord. I add, it is
likely this Church in Taprobane increased not much, nor continued long, there
being no Monument of a Christian Church there, but the Monk Cosma's Tale of
this single Presbyter.

4. Since we must contend with likelihoods, I ask whether it be not much more
likely, that this Presbyter being Ordained in Persia, did take care rather,
that his Successor (if he had any) should be there Ordained likewise, than that
himself should presume to Ordain Him. There is not any the least ground to
conjecture, that the Presbyter himself Ordained Him; but there is some to think
that his Successor was Ordained in Persia, viz. because he himself was.

5. Admitting that the Church of Christ in this Island of Taprobane continued
there for some Ages, if it increased not much (which is most likely because we
hear nothing more of it) it might depend upon and remain subject unto some
Persian Bishop, and be under his Guidance and direction, as our Western Islands
are under the Bishop of London. If it flourished and Christians multiplied
considerably there, who can tell but they had Bishops of their own afterward?

The sum of the matter is -- A certain Monk called Cosmas (a Man of no Note
and Reputation that I know of) tells a lame story of a Presbyter (without a
Name, which renders the Tale Suspicious) who in the Year 520, (when all the
World besides was confessedly Episcopal) was Ordained in Persia (where the
Government of the Church was Episcopal) and ruled a Church in Zeilan (no one
knows how Numerous, or how long he ruled it, nor how long it continued a
Church) without a Superior Bishop (says Mr. O. which is more than is testified
by the Relators) and in all likelihood Ordained his own Successor, and would
not be at the Trouble of sending for one to very Remote Countries (all which is
spoken at Random, it being in the story not so much as intimated that he had
any Successor, or that he Ordained him, or that he was unwilling to get a
Successor from a remote Country). And from hence without any Color of pretense
very rashly, and very weakly Mr. O. has gathered that even in the 6th Century,
Bishops were thought Essential, and that mere Presbyters have Power to Ordain.
If this must pass for a tolerable Argument against Episcopal Government, or in
the least favors the Presbyterian, I do renounce all pretense to common Sense.

CHAP. XVII. Of Pelagius his Ordination.
WE have now been a long Journey in search after some Instance of Presbyters
Ordaining, or some Law and Custom that warrants it: We have been in Africa, and
among the Moors in Egypt, and the Desert of Scetis, at Taprobane, which lies to
East India, among the Northern Scythians, in England, and in France, and among
the Picts, and Scots, in the most remote parts of Britain: We have examined the
most famous Councils and their Definitions, of Nice, of Ancyra, Antioch, and
the Carthaginian Synods, and all to as little purpose as they who seek a Needle
in a Bottle of Hay. We are now at length going to visit Limina Apostolorum,
Rome its self the Center of Christendom, and thence to learn what may be found
in the practice of St. Peter, and St. Paul's Successors for Presbyters Power to
Ordain: And surely we will not decline the determination of this Question,
which the Infallible Church has made by her Example. To this purpose therefore
we are put in Mind of the Ordination of Pelagius Bishop of Rome, which happened
about the Year 555 and is remembered by Anastasius, who wrote the lives of the
Popes. Anastasius then De Vit. Pont. P. 140.
relates, as Mr. O. tells me, how that -- Pelagius the first, Bishop of Rome,
was Ordained by John Bishop of Perusia, Bonus Bishop of Florence, and Andreas
Presbyter de Hostia: Whereas by the Canons three Bishops are absolutely
necessary for the Ordination of a Bishop. Before I make a direct Answer to this
and to the Argument, which Mr. O. builds upon the Fact it is requisite, that I
tell the story a little more largely. For some Men have got a Scurvy Trick to
leave out whatever is to their Disadvantage or In validates the Force of their
Argument, it being not the Truth but the Interest of the Cause, which they
labor to support. The story then is thus. Vigilius, the Immediate Predecessor
of Pelagius Plat. Vita ejus.
had been severely Treated at Constantinople, by Justinian or rather Theodora
his Empress; and returning back to Rome, fell Sick, and died. Pelagius was
suspected to have had an Hand in his Death Anasta.
, at least had been his Enemy and a cause (...) Pla. ubi supra.
of his Sufferings, for which Reason the Clergy hated Pelagius, so that he
could not procure three Bishops to consecrate him. He therefore in the place of
the third admitted Andreas the Presbyter of Hostia, and what will not such a
Man as Pelagius do to establish himself in so considerable a Post as the
Bishopric of Rome? But if such as these shall pass for good Precedents, any
Irregularity in the World may at this Rate be Justified.

Thus much being premised, let us see what use Mr. O. makes of this Ordination
of Pelagius. He argues thus -- Either Pelagius was no Canonical Bishop, etc. or
else a Presbyter has Intrinsic Power of Ordination, etc. that is, either
Pelagius was no Canonical Bishop, and then the Succession was interrupted in
the Church of Rome, and Consequently the English Bishops have no Canonical
Succession, Or, etc.

Ans. I reply that though Pelagius was no Canonical Bishop, i. e. not
Canonically Ordained, yet this notwithstanding the English Bishops have true
Canonical Succession. For 1. We need not pretend to derive the Succession of
our Bishops from the Popes of Rome; it is more probable that they are the
Successors of St. Paul or some other Apostolical Men, who first planted the
Gospel here in the Days of the Apostles or soon after: So that we are not
concerned at any Irregularity supposed in the Roman Succession. 2. We had
Bishops here in England, (or Britain) long before Pelagius was Pope of Rome, it
being certain that some British Bishops assisted at the Council of Arles held
in the days of Constantine the Great, and at that of Ariminum called together
by Constantius his Son, above 200 Years before Pelagius: And this Race of
Bishops continued even unto Austin the Monks coming hither. Whatever then
becomes of Pelagius his Consecration, it is no matter to us: His Irregularity
affects not our English Bishops. 3. Supposing (what nevertheless is not true)
that the Heathen Saxons, the Angli and the Danes, quite extirpated Christianity
in this Land, until Austin the Monk coming from Rome, with the Pope's
Commission once more reduced, and brought back the Inhabitants of this Isle
unto the belief of the Gospel, and gave us a new line of Bishops: Yet still the
Irregularity of Pelagius's Consecration will not at all disparage our
Succession of Bishops, as Mr. O. knows very well, if he would not dissemble.
For I ought to believe that he has read the known History of Venerable Bede,
over and over, and thoroughly digested him, because he so often and familiarly
quotes him in the Plea, etc. He may then please to remember that Austin was not
Created Bishop by Pope Gregory, but by Etherius Archbishop of Arles in France
-- Interea vir Domini Augustinus Bed. E. H. l. 1. c. 27.
venit Arelas, and ab Archiepiscopo ejusdem Civitatis Etherio juxta quod jussa
Sti. Patris Gregorii acceperant, Archiepiscopus Genti Anglorum Ordinatus est.
So that from henceforth Mr. O. and the Papists may take notice that the English
Bishops as to the Succession of their Orders, are nothing beholden to the
Bishops of Rome, at least not unto Pelagius; that if Etherius was a Canonical
Bishop (as I must believe till the Contrary is proved) so was Austin a
Canonical Bishop, and so are our English Bishops unto this day, whatever
becomes of Pelagius his Consecration. Without any farther fear of danger
therefore I may Conclude that Pelagius was no Canonical Bishop, that is; was
not Canonically Ordained, and yet we have a true Succession of Canonically
Ordained Bishops in England.

But Mr. O. goes on -- Or else he was a Canonical Bishop, and what then? Why
then it follows, a Presbyter has a Canonical Power to Ordain (for so Andreas
had, if Pelagius was Canonically Ordained) and then by another consequence,
that Presbyters have an Intrinsic Power to Ordain: Because no Ecclesiastical
Laws can give to any Order of Men a Canonical Power to that, which they have
not an Intrinsical Power to do. Supposing this, (for I need not contend the
truth of it) the Answer then to the whole Argument is, (as before) that
Pelagius was not Canonically Ordained.

But now I think on it, what if a Man should affirm that Pelagius was
Canonically Ordained, and yet assert, that a Presbyter has not an Intrinsical
Power to Ordain? The first Apostolical Canon decrees -- Let a Bishop be
Ordained by two or three Bishops. Pelagius's Consecration therefore was
Canonical, being performed by two Bishops according to this Canoh, and
Presbyter Andreas may stand for a Cipher. True, the Nicene and other Synods
afterward said by three Bishops. Nevertheless the Apostolical Canons being
always reckoned as part of the Code of the universal Church, the Nicene (and
all other) Canons ought in conformity to this to be favorably interpreted, I
mean that it did not intend peremptorily to command, but rather prudentially
advised that if it could be, a Bishop should be Consecrated by three Bishops.
It is not improbable but Pelagius's Consecration was upon this very Account
afterward allowed of. For this is manifest, that Pelagius (what ever his
Ordination was) is not reckoned amongst the Schismatical Bishops of Rome, but
was acknowledged, and peaceably submitted to. Mr. O. then is too positive, when
he affirms that -- by the Canons three Bishops are absolutely necessary for the
Ordination of a Bishop. Without all peradventure, fewer might serve in cases of
Necessity, as this happily afterward might be judged. If God himself is pleased
that his own Laws shall submit to those of Necessity, much more the Canons of
the Church shall. Wise Men have so determined, even in this particular case.
Gregory declared that Austin (notwithstanding the Canons) might himself alone
Consecrate Bishops, and quidem in Anglorum Ecclesia, in qua solus tu Episcopus
inveniris, Ordinare Episcopum non aliter nisi sine Episcopis potes Bid E. H.
(...). 1. c. 27. Resp. 8.
. Doubtless, then the meaning of the Canons must be, that in Ordinary, and when
it may be with convenience three Bishops are required to the Consecration of a
Bishop, though even one in the case of Necessity be sufficient. I will not
affirm there was a necessity in the case of Pelagius, (because there was no
necessity he should be Bishop of Rome) yet after his Consecration, the wise
Italians might judge it necessary to overlook the later Canons, and confirm his
Consecration rather than create an Antipope, and a Schism in the Church.
Pelagius then was a Canonical Bishop according to the Apostolical Canon, though
not Canonically Ordained according to the strictness of the Nicene Canon.

But it will be demanded why did not Pelagius content himself with two Bishops,
but took in a Presbyter to assist in the Ordination? The reason is plain,
because Pelagius being a wise Man, (as is to be presumed) though not so good as
were to be wished, would give his Adversaries as little occasion as was
possible to quarrel at his (...). If therefore he could not get three Bishops,
he at least procured two, and a third Person, and so came as near to the Nicene
Canon as he could. He observed the number, though not the exact Qualification
of the Ordainers, and so varied as little from the Rule, as might be. Hereby he
made account to impose upon the ignorant Multitude, who it is likely were the
principal Spectators of the Solemnity of his Ordination: For the Clergy would
not be present to countenance his Ordination, whom they hated.

CHAP. XVIII. Of the Waldenses, the Boyarians, the Lollards, and some other
People, who separated themselves from the Roman Communion.
OF the Waldenses Mr. O. speaks in his Preface, page 1. etc. and in the Plea p.
156, to the effect following. -- That the Vaudois, or Waldenses have had no
other ( Ministers) for near 500 Years past, than Presbyters Ordained by
Presbyters without Bishops; that they maintain all Ministers to be in a state
of Parity; that their Presbyters imposed Hands for Ordination; that the Fratres
Bohemi had their Succession of Ministers from these Waldenses. And for the
truth of all this, he quotes Perrin's History of the Waldenses.

Of what Authority Perrin is, may be hence guessed, that the Synod, which set
him on work, disapproved it, as I am told; or whether Mr. O. has given us an
honest and fair Account of him I know not. I am a Stranger to that Author, nor
can I hereabouts light on him, neither am I very much concerned about any thing
he says; which is so late, sc. according to Mr. O's Computation, near 1200
Years after Christ, and so obscure, that no weight can be laid upon the
Argument drawn from the Practice of these Waldenses; I say obscure. For they
being a poor and illiterate, thin, scattered and harassed People, and almost
always under Persecution, it is Morally impossible they should have an exact
History of themselves transmitted unto these last Ages, especially, considering
that their Enemies the Papists, made it their business to destroy the most
ancient Records of that People, and as Sir S. Morland testifies, Hist. Wall. l.
1. p. 8.
the most that is known of them, is supposed generally to be taken out of their
Adversaries Writings, who will sometimes make bold to load those, who separate
from them, with Calumnies, and fasten on them odd Opinions, merely to expose
and render them the more odious. Lastly, although I do not delight to detract
from their Merits, yet I see no great reason for those excessive Commendations
some think (...) to bestow on them, when I call to mind, that at the time when
the Fratres Bohemi became (...) acquainted with them, they found the Waldenses
taking the Liberty of going to Mass, and joining with the Papists in their
Idolatrous Worship Com. p. 24


Nevertheless, these Exceptions set apart, what I find in such Authors as are
at hand shall here be produced to confront the others cited by Mr. O. to the
end the Reader may judge, whether Mr. O. and his Author Perrin have made a
faithful Report of the Waldensian. Churches, at least, whether it may not truly
be affirmed, that the History of that People is so uncertain, that no Argument
can thence be drawn to countenance the Presbyterian Government, and Ordination
by mere Presbyters.

Sir Sam. Morland in his History of the Waldenses; shows Morland, lib. 1. p. 10.
that Claudius, Archbishop of Turin, was a great Promoter of true Doctrine
against Roman Idolatry in his Diocese, that the Waldenses succeeded this
Archbishop, Id. p. 11.
that the said Archbishop delivered his Doctrine to his Disciples, and these
unto their Successors unto the ninth and tenth Centuries Morl. Introd.
. In the Year 1059. the Waldenses again separated from Rome Allix. History of
the Churches of Piedmont. p. 238.


In the Year 1223. the Albigenses in Bulgaria, Croatia and Dalmatia, had one
Bartholomew, whom they styled their Pope. The Pope's Legate called him Bishop,
Mat. Paris, Antipope, adding, that he drew over to him Bishops, and others,
and that he Ordained Bishops M. Par. 317. Bib. Pat. Tom. 4. pt. 2. p. 752.


In the Year 1254. Reinerius makes mention of their Bishops in Lombardy.

In the Year 1470. the Waldenses in Moravia and Austria, had Bishops Com. H. W.
Pres. ad Rat. Discip. etc.
They asserted that they had Lawfully Ordained Bishops among them, and an
uninterrupted Sucession of that Order, even from the Apostles, although out of
hatred to the Papists, they chose to call them Seniores and Antistites.

In their Responsio Excusatoria Fascic. rerum expetendarum.
Anno 1500. they declare, Nec summum (...) Romanum, nec nostrum, nec quempiam
alium caput esse (...), plainly intimating, that they had Bishops among them,
as well as the Romanists.

Anno 1655. Ledger was Moderator of the Churches of the Valleys, Allin p. 243.
which Office was for Life, with power to call Synods to preside in them, and
to lay on Hands.

Thus much is delivered as Matter of Fact; let us now see what were their
Principles concerning Church Government. Wolfius Lect. p. 380.
says, They held there were but three Degrees of Church Officers sc. Bishops,
Priests, ( Sacerdotes) and Deacons; the same is delivered by Guido. But Aeneas
Sylvius C. 35. p. 14.
-- that a Bishop is not Superior to a Presbyter, either in Dignity, or in
Power, as Alphonsus de Castro also observed Adv. Haer. l. 11. p. 337.
; and most of the Popish Writers charge them with that Opinion. But one of
them, viz. Reinerius does set forth their Doctrine and Practice to the effect
following, -- The Cathari, (or Puritans, meaning the Waldenses) have four
Ecclesiastical Orders, viz. the Bishop, the elder Son, the younger Son, (
something like the Chorepiscopus, or Suffragan Bishop) and the Deacon. The
Office of the Bishop is always tenere Prioratum, to possess the Supremacy in
every thing done, in the Imposition (...) Hands, in Celebrating the
Lord'sSupper, and in beginning the Prayers, as does the elder Son in the
Bishop's absence. The said Orders are created by the Bishop, or by the Sons
with the Bishops (...). When the Bishop is dead, the younger Son Ordains the
elder a Bishop; then the Bishop Ordains the younger Son to be the elder; and
lastly, another younger Son is chosen by ( Prelatis and Subditis) the Ministers
and People, and Ordained. But by another part of these Cathari, near the Sea,
thus, -- The Bishop before his death Ordains the elder Son Bishop, (to succeed
him) and then as before. All the aforesaid Ordinations are made with Imposition
of Hands, and the Honor of Ordaining, and giving the Holy Ghost, is attributed
unto the Bishop, or unto him that is the elder Son, who holdst he Book of the
New Testament Reinerus Bib. Pat. Tom. 4. Part. 2. p. 758.
upon the Head of him on whom the hands are laid. Thus much their Adversaries
said of them, wherein, doubtless, there is a mixture of Truth and I alshood; at
least this miserable People scattered up and down, did somewhat vary in their
Rites, and were never at all times and in all places steady to themselves.

I have mentioned before, how that about the Year 1470. the Waldenses in
Austria and Moravia had Bishops; and from these it was that the Fratres (...)
drew the Succession of their (...) Orders; which History will deserve here to
be more particularly Transcribed. In order whereunto, I must now tell the Story
of the Fratres Bohemi as Comenius, and the History of the Persecut. Bohem, have
made it ready to my Hands, fetching it from the very beginning of Christianity.

The Sclavonian Nations were Converted in the Apostles times. Romans 15. 19. 2
Ep. to Tim. 4. 10. By Sclavonians, Comenius means all the Nations from
Macedonia Northward, even to Com. p. 4.
Russia, Polonia and Germany. Some proof of their early embracing the Gospel,
he fetches from St. Jerome, who was Born P. 5.
at Strydon, a City of (...), or Dalmatia. In the sixth Synod of
Constantinople, in the Year 680. the Lombards and Sclavonians, are acknowledged
to be Christians: About the Year 861. Cyrillus and Methodius, two Grecian
Bishops, made the Id. ibid.
People inhabiting about the Danube, Christians, and then passing into Moravia
and Bohemia, propagated the Faith among them Hist. Bohem. Persec. c 1. p. 1. P.
7.
After this, Comenius mentions Ditmarus Saxo, Bishop of Prague *. The History
of the Bohemian Persecution tells of Waytichius II. Bishop of Prague, in the
Year 907. of Boleslaus Pius, another Bishop of Prague, Anno 965. of Priests C.
4. p. 9.
and Prelates, Anno 1197. who opposed the Usurpations of the C. 5. p. 11. P.
35, 36.
Popes, and of Conrade, Bishop of Prague, who leaving the Romish Errors,
remained Bishop there Anno 1421. About 20 Years before this happened, viz. Anno
1400. the Bohemian Churches separated from the Roman, upon the account that the
Public Prayers were made in the Latin Tongue, that the Clergy were obliged to
Celibacy, that Transubstatiation was made an Article of Faith, and that the
People were deprived of the Cup in the Lord'sSupper. This occasioned the
dispersion of the Bohemians, and their Settlement in Austria, from whence they
sent unto the Greek Church for the Ordination of their Ministers, and had hopes
given them of their obtaining it. They removed after into Silesia. Com. p. 15.
P. 20.


Now it was that Gregory, an Holy Man, was by the Persecutors tortured; but
falling into a Trance, felt no pain, and was believed, dead. Recovering, he
told his Friends of a Vision, wherein, among other things, he saw three Men
standing about a Tree laden with Fruit, and defending it from the Birds P. 21.
; and about the same time the Fratres Bohemi were under some trouble of Mind
how they should for the future be provided with a Succession of rightly
Ordained Ministers. For they considered that (though several of the Roman
Priests came over to them) it was too uncertain to hope for them (...) Rome.
They doubted also, whether the Ordination was valid, when a Presbyter, and not
a Bishop, Ordained a Presbyter, and that if the Question was once moved about
it, whether they should be able to defend such an Ordination, either at Home or
Abroad. At length, after some Years deliberation, viz 1467. and about 6 Years
after the said Vision of Gregory, having Fasted and Prayed for Direction from
God, they resolved upon the following Course. They choose nine of the most
deserving Brethren, and fittest for the Ministry: They wrap up twelve Tickets,
nine whereof were Blanks, and three full ones, having writ on them -- est, that
is to say, as they meant it should signify -- it is the Will of God; but the
Blanks were to denote it was not the Will of God they should have Bishops.
These twelve Tickets being mixed, were delivered to a young Boy, (not knowing
what he did) to be distributed one to every one of those nine Persons. It Is
manifest that the nine Blank Tickets might every one have been given out unto
those nine Persons, from whence it would have been concluded, that what they
were about to do, was not the Will of God. But it so happened that the three
full Tickets were delivered to three of the nine, sc. to Kunwaldius,
Praelausius, and Crenovius. And hence they gathered assuredly, that what they
were designing, was the Will of God, sc. to seek for Episcopal Orders, and the
means of continuing a right Succession of them, and that to that end those
three Persons were to be Ordained Bishops. Accordingly they sent three Persons
unto the Church of the Waldenses, who were at that time planted in the Confines
of Moravia and Austria, acquainting them with what was done, and asking their
Advice. One of these three was Michael Zambergius, so called, because he was
Pastor Zambergensis Com. p. 20.
, his true Name being Michael Bradacius. How it came to pass that he was sent
in the room of one of the other three chosen by lot, is not said It may be
(...) died in the mean time.
. But Zambergius, and the other two, coming to the Waldenses, find one Stephen
their Bishop, who calling to him another Waldensian Bishop, and some Ministers,
they create these three Bishops with imposition of Hands, thereby conferring on
them the Power of Ordaining Ministers Com. p. 23, 24, 25. H. Boh. Per. p. 59,
60.
. (...) three new Ordained Bishops of the Fratres Bohemi were the three which
(...) saw in his (...), Guardians of the Tree, that is, of the Bohemian
Churches. Note that the Waldenses affirmed themselves to have had a lawful and
uninterrupted Succession of Bishops from the Apostles days Com. Pref. ad Rat.
Dis. His. Boh. Pers. ubi supra.
, and derived their Original from the time of (...). This happened I reckon,
about 1420. or 1430. About the Year 1500. my Author witnesses that there were
200 Churches in Bohemia and Moravia.

In the History of the Bohemian Persecution, after their having received
Bishops from the Waldenses, I read of Lucas Pragene, Bishop of the Bohemians P.
79.
, of Sanctuariensis, an Italian Bishop, who for Conscience sake embraced the
Bohemian Communion Anno 1482. P. 81.
and of Philip, Bishop of Sidon, being among them Anno 1493. Afterward in the
Year 1499. the Bohemians sent as far as Armenia for Ordination P. 82.
, their Succession perhaps by some accident failing. Anno 1542. I find Joanes
Augusta, was their Antistes, Com. p. 33, 36.
or Bishop.

The next year after, I meet with a great number of the Bohemians retired into
Prussia, whom their Bishop Mathias Sionius Id. p. 38.
followed soon after.

About 1556. a Synod was held in the middle of Moravia, where were present more
than 200 of the Clergy. Then P. 40.
were fifteen Ministers Ordained, two Bishops, and six Conseniors. The two
Bishops were George Israel for the Polonian Churches, and Johannes Blaboslaus
for the Moravian. At the same time Joannes Nigranus, was Bishop in Bohemia. Id.
ubi supra.


Now it was that the Arrians (afterward called Socinians) disturbed the Peace,
Order and Unity of the (...) Bohemi, asserting that the Pastors ( alias, the
Ministers, or Presbyters) had power to do all things in the Church. And this
Paradox they pretended to advance, left any thing that smelt of Popery should
remain among them, who had renounced that Communion P. 44.
. Therefore they were so true to their Principle, as not only to disallow of
Bishops, (called Seniors, or Superintendants) but to deny even the Godhead of
Jesus Christ, (...) forsooth, the Papists maintained that Doctrine: But for the
same reason they might as well have denied the Being of God himself.

At the same time, in (...) Polonia, the Fratres Bohemi had five Bishops for so
many Diocesses, vix. the Crasovian, the (...), the (...), the Russian, and the
Belsensis Diocese. P. 46.


Anno 1571. Joannes Calephus, was their Bishop in Bohemia, Joannes Laurentius,
in Poland, Stanislaus and Andreas Stephanus, P. 48, 49, 51.
Bishop of the Fratres in Bohemia. And lastly, Johannes Adam Comenius a
Moravian, and another, a Polonian, their Elect Bishops, Annno 1632. Com. Ded.
(...). p. 8, 9.


Comenius after this History, (of which I have given a Summary Account so far
as belongs to the present Argument) has furnished us with another Tractate,
which he styles -- Ratio (...) (...), (...) in Unitate fratrum Bohemorum. The
Pontifical of the Bohemian Brethren, as I may call it, the substance whereof is
as follows. -- He tells us,

That in their Church whereof himself was a Bishop Elect, there were four
Orders of Ministers, sc. the (...), sen Antistites, or the Prepositi
Ministrorum, sometimes called Vigiles, or Speculatores, Superintendentes, or
Superattendentes, that is as he explains himself in our Language Bishops. 2
Conseniores, which he expounds Coepiscopi, or Chorepiscopi, or the Bishops
Fellows. 3. Pastors, who were also Ordinarily called Ministers, the same as
with us are styled Presbyters, Priests or Elders. 4. Deacons called (...)
Administratores, or Adjutores. Among the Bishops there were besides a Praeses,
or Primate, or the first Bishop.

The President's, or Primate's Office, among other things, was to appoint and
call Synods.

The Office of the Bishops, besides other things, was to Ordain all
Ecclesiastical Degrees, as Deacons, Pastors Conseniors and Seniors, (or
Bishops). All other Degrees were obedient and subject to the Bishops.

The Conseniors were Coadjutors to the Seniors, (or Bishops), had power with
the Seniors (or without them, but by their Direction and Command) to be Members
of the Ecclesiastical Senate, and were above the Pastors or Deacons. Their
business was to provide for good Order, to acquaint the Seniors with
Misdemeanors, to admonish the Ministers, to observe the Ecclesiastical Statutes
and Customs, to provide fit Persons for the Ministry, to exercise Discipline
over the Ministers, together with the Bishops, or without them, yet by their
Direction, to examine the Candidates These Conseniors very much resemble our
Arch. (...).
for Holy Orders, and to present them to the Bishops, diligently to observe how
the Pastors discharged themselves in their Office, to reprove their smaller
Offenses, and to acquaint the Bishop with their more Scandalous ones. I do not
find they had power to Ordain, and (...) in his Annotations, says, That in
minoribus negotiis Episcopi vices obirent, as the ancient Chorepiscopi did. If
they be chosen Seniors, they are new Ordained with Imposition of Hands, as
Pastors, or Ministers are.

The Seniors Ordain all Orders. The Seniors are chosen by the Seniors,
Conseniors and Pastors, and are Ordained in a General Assembly with Imposition
of Hands. At the Solemnity is sung that Hymn, -- come Holy Ghost, etc. The
former, or the Ordaining Seniors, offer the new created Bishop their right
Hands in token of Fellowship. The Conseniors theirs in token of Obedience.

The Conseniors being Ordained with Imposition of Hands give their right Hands
to the Seniors, in token of Obedience, to the former Conseniors, in token of
Fellowship. The Ministers offer theirs to the new created Conseniors in token
of Obedience.

Ministers are Ordained by the Seniors, with laying on of Hands of the Seniors,
so many as are present. At the Solemnity they sing that Hymn, -- come Holy
Ghost, etc. The new Ordained Ministers give their right Hands unto the Seniors
and Conseniors in token of Obedience, to the Pastors in token of Fellowship,
and the Deacons offer their Hands to them in token of Observance.

To conclude, it most be confessed, that Comenius says Bishop and Presbyter are
one, (I suppose he means have the same Power and Authority to Minister in the
(...) and (...); and this is out of all doubt); but withal he intimates that a
Bishop is one, who is moreover, an Inspector, or Superintendent, and for this
cites Acts 20. 28. His mind is (I suppose) that St. Paul in the 17th verse,
addressed himself generally to all Presbyters, whether mere Elders, or those
who moreover had the oversight of the rest. But in the 28th (...) he turns his
Speech unto those, especially, who had been made Bishops. And this is but what
the Syriac Version seems to imply, wherein (as has already been noted) verse
the 17th Elders is rendered by Kashishaa, which properly, and only signifies
Elders; but verse the 28th Episkupea is used, which denotes Overseers. However
this be, if any one carefully observes, what has been before related concerning
the Government of the Church of the Bohemians, it is impossible to conceive but
that Bishops (or Seniors) were somewhat more than mere Presbyters. The Division
of Ecclesiastical Officers into three or four Orders, the Power of Ordaining
appropriated to Bishops, the great care they had about getting a right
Succession of Orders (...) Bishops, and many other remarkable passages before
mentioned, render this point uncontestable:

From the whole, I think it follows, that the Waldenses, and the Fratres Bohemi
were governed by Bishops superior to Ministers, or Pastors, long after they
were separated from the Roman Idolatrous Communion; yea that the Waldenses had
Bishops within 150 Years, and less, the Fratres Bohemi within 160. that
therefore Mr. O. is utterly mistaken, who avers that the Waldenses had no other
Ministers than Presbyters for near 500 Years last past, and that Presbyters
Ordained Presbyters without Bishops. The contrary is most certain, if my
Authors have not deceived me. Mr. O. was not insensible of this Matter of Fact,
of the Bohemians deriving their Bishops from the Waldenses, but he shuffles us
off with saying, That the Waldensian Bishops were only Titular Bishops P. 157.
. That is indeed mere Presbyters honored with the bare Title of Bishops. If
Mr. O. had not known that remarkable Story about Zambergius, and two others,
being Ordained Bishops by Stephen and another Waldensian Bishop, he might
possible have been pardonable in some measure for this his rash and groundless
Assertion: But seeing he has thus against Knowledge, and (...) perverted the
(...) Truth, by a gloss of his own making, without any ground, how any one
should excuse him I cannot tell, and whether he will be able to defend himself,
I much question. In the mean while I Will endeavor to demonstrate that what he
has laid down concerning the Waldensian Bishops, as if they were such in Title
only, is a senseless Surmize, altogether false, and no manner of way
reconcilable with the Faith of History. For let us but run over the Story once
more very briefly, and the truth will appear bright as the Sun at Noonday. Let
it be rembered then, that the Bohemians after their Separation from the Church
of Rome, were a good while supplied from thence with Bishops and Presbyters,
who forsaking the Romish Communion joined themselves to that of the Reformed
Bohemians, and by consequence had been Episcopally Ordained. But the Bohemians
considering with themselves that it was a very uncertain thing to depend upon
such a casual way of having rightly Ordained Ministers, and very much doubting,
whether Ordination by Presbyters alone, was good and valid, after much
deliberation among themselves; Solemnly asked (...) of God by Prayer and
Fasting upon that Question, Now, if they believed a Presbyter could validly
Ordain Presbyters, there had been no need for any thing of this kind. Why
should they be deliberating from time to time near Six Years about having
Episcopal Orders, and that in a true Succession? If a Presbyter having the bare
Title of Bishop was sufficient to Ordain, there had been no need to have sent
Zambergius unto the Waldensians: It had been but affirming that Bishop and
Presbyter is all one, and that the one has Power to Ordain, as well as the
other. Why all this Fasting and Praying, and seeking direction from God about a
thing of nothing, a Name and Title? What was this but to abuse themselves and
the World, and to mock God also with Pretenses unto Religion and Tenderness of
Conscience, when 'twas nothing but mere Hypocrisy. Let it be farther
considered, what a device they formed about resolving themselves concerning the
Will of God, whether they should seek for a Right Succession of Bishops for the
continuance of Holy Orders among them. Is it likely they would have used so
much Precaution against any fraud in the delivery of the Lots and in the
Designation of the Persons? And all this only that they might have a true
Succession of the Title of Bishop, when they had the Power before. Zambergius
at least was a Pastor (or Minister or Presbyter) before he was created Bishop
by Stephen. Could not he have Ordained Presbyters as many as there was need of,
and so transmitted the Succession of Holy Orders unto future Generations? I am
persuaded if any one should presume to say that (...) was only a Titular
Apostle but indeed no more than a Disciple, Mr. O. would be ready to rebuke so
(...) a Conceit. Can any one imagine the Apostles would have put the Multitude
upon choosing one into the place of Judas, telling them it was necessary his
Bishopric should be filled by another, and because they chose two that they
should by prayer and (...) of Lotts decide, which of the Competitors should
succeed and be declared Apostle? And after all this Apostle was nothing but a
Word, a Title, was not different from Disciple. The fratres Bohemi were but in
a low and Poor Persecuted Condition. They had no need to have been at the pains
and Charge of Three Persons, and perhaps more taking a long and dangerous and
expensive Journey unto the Waldenses, and all for an empty and unnecessary
Title of Honor, and which they might have as well assumed unto themselves as
the Waldenses had done before'em according to Mr. O.

Well, but perhaps Mr. O. has not so good an Opinion of the Bohemians as he has
of the Waldenses. The Bohemians perhaps were fond of Bishops, and disirous of a
right Succession; and some of the dregs of Roman Superssition yet remained
among them: But the Waldenses were nothing so: Their Titular Bishops were
nothing but Presbyters (...) another Name.

Neither will this do Mr. O's. Work. For the Bohemians declared to the
Waldenses all that had past among them, their Scruples about Presbyterian
Ordination, and a true Succession of Orders, the way they took to know the Mind
of God. The Waldenses approved of all they had done, assured the Bohemians that
the Succession of Bishops among them was from the Apostles: And so Stephen and
his Colleague Ordained Three Bohemians Bishops. Can these Good Men the Waldenses
be excused in all this, if Bishop was but a Word, a. Title (...) no more than
Presbyter? They should rather have told them (as Mr. O. has assured us), that
there is no difference between Bishop and Presbyter, that among them Presbyters
Ordain Presbyters, though under another Title. That the Bohemians were
mistaken, and that it was (...) Rag of Popery still cleaving to 'em, to Advance
an Order of Bishops above Presbyters, unto whom the Power of Ordaining
belonged. The Waldenses ought plainly to have thus undeceived the Bohemians,
and let them know their Error about the Necessity of Bishops. They ought not to
have assured 'em that they had a Succession of Bishops from the Apostles, and
bolstered them up in their Error by creating Bishops. If the Waldenses played
the Bohemians this Trick, I cannot esteem 'em what Mr. O. would have us believe
'em Presbytorian Saints, but as rank Hypocrites as I ever read of. For no Man
can (...) the Waldenses, except by allowing 'em to have been of that
persuasion, that a Presbyter cannot Ordain a Presbyter, and that Orders and the
Succession, of the Power of Ordaining must pass through Bishops not Titular,
but really distinguished from Presbyters and Superior to them: Nor were the
Bishops and Ministers all one, except in Title. How then came the Ministers by
joining Hands at their Ordination, to promise Canonical Obedience unto the
Bishops? Lastly let it be considered, that the whole Rationale of the Bohemian
Hierarchy, was in all probability taken from the Waldenses, from whom their
Episcopacy was derived. Besides, if Stephen was by Title only a Bishop, but
really a Presbyter and no more, how could the Bohemians be able hereby to
defend their Orders and the Succession of them against their Adversaries abroad
(meaning I believe the Papists, when as indeed their Ordinations were merely
Presbyterian, though in Title Episcopal? And what sorry comfort was this to the
Bohemians, that the Three Titular Bishops being returned to their own People
could only Acquaint 'em, that they had indeed been Ordained by two Titular
Bishops, who nevertheless were but Presbyters such as they themselves were
before, and to tell you the truth, we have deliberated long upon this business,
we have prayed and fasted in vain, and God by answering our sign in the
Affirmative has but at last deceived us. We have taken a long and chargeable
Journey to the Waldenses, but have brought no thing back worthy our pains, but
a Word and Empty Title. Thus the whole Action was mere Pageantry, a Scene of
Imposture, and an Intrigue carried on by Hypocrites on both sides: This must be
confessed, if the Waldensian Bishops were merely Titular (as Mr. O. is pleased
to say). On the other Hand the History assures us, that the fratres Bohemi were
exceedingly comforted and encouraged at the return of their Presbyters now
created Bishops and deriving their Orders in an uninterrupted Succession from
the Apostles, as they believed. But at length my Adversary seems to melt a
little and to come half way over to us. He professes thus in his own and
Brethren's Name -- We dislke not that for Orders sake the Exercise of this
Power should be Ordinarily restrained to the Graver Ministers, provided they
assume it not as proper to them by Divine Right, nor clog it with unscriptural
Impositions. From this Conclusion of Mr. O. it follows -- 1. That in Mr. O's
Judgment the Church may restrain the Power of Ordaining, taking the Exercise of
it from some of the Yonnger Fry, and lodging it in the Hands of the Graver
sort. But the mischief is, the Younger sort will presently cry our against the
Usurpation, they will plead, That they are Presbyters as well as others, and
have an Inherent Power to Ordain; that it cannot be taken from them by
Ecclesiastical Constitutions; that they cannot in Conscience part with that
Power and Right, which the Scripture gives them. And in short will turn all Mr.
O's Battering Rams against the Graver Ministers, which he has planted against
our Bishops, and with more Reason too. For St. Paul when he restrained the
Power of Ordination, he had not respect to Age, but to Ability. (...) by was
but a Young Man, when Paul set him over the Church of (...), and I have reason
to think (...) was so too. For he admonishes him to take care that (...) Man
despise him, c. 2. 15. where I suppose it is to be understood that Titus also
was but young. And Demas Bishop of Magnesia, in Ignatius was a Young Man also.
2. If Mr. O. would be pleased to give me leave to suppose St. Paul as Wise as
himself, it is all I ask. I will suppose then, that the said Apostle for Orders
sake did restrain the exercise of the Ordaining Power to some Persons by Him
made Choice of, and for the prevention of Schism did prescribe the same Rule
unto the Churches, which Mr. O. sees some reason for now doubtless then St.
Paul left not the Power of Ordaining promiscuously unto all Presbyters, but
limited it unto a few, I will not say the Graver or Older sort, but the Wiser
and most Holy. If Mr. O. would nourish this Principle, and make such Deductions
from it as it is capable of, he would soon see that Episcopal Ordination is
Apostolical. But I believe his own Party will conn him no Thanks for this
Liberal Concession. Mr. O. adds -- and not clog it with unscriptural
Impositions. If there be any Order in a Church some few things must of
necessity be imposed: But this is what the Dissenters aim at, that every one
may be left at Liberty to say and do what is right in his own Eyes. The
Impositions laid upon the Ordained among us are not such as the Bishops
themselves alone devised, but the Whole Church consented unto, and though they
be not prescribed in Scripture, they are not Antiscriptural nor introduced into
the place of any thing required by the Word of God. In short, did not the
Presbyterians when they were in the Saddle clog their Ordinations with
unscriptural Impositions? I mean that of taking the Covenant. But this is to
carry the Controversy into another Quarter. I shall therefore let it pass.

Of the Lollards.
(...) has, it is (...), fastened that Practice on the Lollards that their
Presbyters after the manner of Bishops did create new Presbyters, and that
every Priest (or Presbyter) has as good a Power to bind and loose, and to
Minister in all other things belonging to the Church as the Pope himself gives
or can give. But to this it may be replied, that it is only the report of an
Adversary, and perhaps may be a Scandal. It may again be answered, that these
Lollards came too late to prescribe unto the Church in any thing by them
practiced. It may yet further be said that, when People grope their way in a
Dark Night, it is no wonder if they now and then stumble. They are to be both
pitied and pardoned. For lastly, it is manifest (if the Testimony of their
Adversaries concerning them be admitted) that the Lollards looked upon even
Presbyters as an Order no ways approved of by God. It was one of their Maxims
-- Presbyteratus non est (...) approbatus a Deo. So that Presbyters as well as
Bishops are by the same Authority utterly (...) the Church. It was another of
their Opinions (...) to (...) ( (...). 566.) that no Day is Holy, not the
Lord's Day (or Sabbath Day as People will call it), but that on every Day Men
may work, eat and drink, etc. If then the Lollards erred thus grossly in these
points, it is no wonder that they were mistaken in that of the Government of
the Church by Bishops. But if their Authority be (...) to establish Presbyters
in the Power of Ordaining, by the same Authority it may be proved the Lord's Day
is not Holy. Yea, rather, (...) the Order of Presbyters be not approved of by
God, it is in vain for Mr O. to equal them unto Bishops, because the Lollards
brought them down as low as the People, and utterly Cancelled their Office, at
least denied it to be of Divine Institution. In short, I think they were a well
meaning, but ignorant People, who had (...) and Knowledge enough to discover
the gross Superstition, Idolatry and Corruptions of the Romish Church; but not
to define the true Doctrine of the Gospel, about Government and Discipline.
Finally note here, that this Instance of the Lollards (who appeared at soonest
about the end of the 14th Century) is by Mr O. brought in proof of this
Proposition, that Ordination by P. 126.
Presbyters was valid in the Primitive Church. Now I don't believe that there
is one other Author extant, that pretends such Familiar Acquaintance with the
Fathers and Councils as Mr. O. does, especially not among the Protestants, that
ever reckoned the Practice of the 14th Century for Primitive. The 4th or 5th
Age are the latest we are wont to appeal to, at least under the Title of the
Primitive Church. But what? all are Fathers with Mr. O. that favor his
Opinion, and the Primitive Church will never have an end, so long as any thing
can be found conformable to the Presbyterian Discipline.

Concerning the Boiarians, or Bavarians, who, as Mr. O. would have us believe,
were once Presbyterians, I will only say thus much in short. I find in their
History written by Jo. Aventinus Edit. Basil. 1580. that from the earliest
times of their embracing Christianity they had Bishops, and long before they
submitted their Necks to the Yoke of the Roman Pontifs. I have made some
Collections and Remarks out of the forementioned Historian; but will not
trouble my self, or Reader with them. He that is curious, and has a mind to
search into the Principles and Practice of this People, may take Aventinus into
his Hands, and satisfy himself whether ever there was a time when the
Boiarians were without Bishops, and governed by Presbyters only. It is not
indeed the design of this History to treat of this Argument directly; but
however, as he goes along, he still occasionally mentions the Boiarian Bishops,
even before they were brought into subjection to Rome.

CHAP. XIX. Of the Doctrine of the Church of England at and since the
Reformation.
THE Controversy at last is brought to our own Doors, and continued down to our
own Times: This Doctrine P. 112.
(says Mr. O.) meaning the Identity of Priest and Bishop) has been maintained
also by the Church of England, both Popish and Protestant. Hereunto belong the
Testimonies which he has in dvers (...) of his Plea drawn from the public Acts
of the Church and State, and the (...) Sentiments of private Doctors, both of
the Roman and Protestant Communion, both of the Established and Dissenting
Party among us. All I am concerned for, is to consider whether the Identity of
Presbyter and Bishop has been declared in any public Act of this Kingdom to be
found, or produced by Mr. O. out of the National Records, at, or since the
Reformation. For it is nothing to me, if the Popish Church of England was of the
same Opinion with our Dissenters, as perhaps many Papists were for advancing
the Power and Supremacy of their Pontiff. Nor is it my business to account for
every casual Expression, that has dropped from the Pen of any Episcopal Writer,
much less of the Dissenters, whose Golden Sayings make up a great part of those
numerous Quotations wherewith he has (...) his Plea. My design is upon Mr. O.
himself, and the Authorities he has gathered out of the public Transactions,
or such as were directed and confirmed by the Government. Mr. O. has alleged
three against us; the little Treatise, commonly called, The Bishops Book,
another, called, The Institution of a Christian Man, and a third is that
Celebrated MS. (...) Published by Mr. Stillingfleet, the late Lord Bishop of
Worcester, in his Irenicum; all which (as I shall prove) belong unto the Reign
of Hen. VIII. and whatever Opinions are there to be met with, are not to be
imputed to our first Reformers, at least, not as their fixed and settled
Judgment; for I reckon, that in Hen. VIII's Days, the Reformation was but an
Embryo in the Womb, newly conceived, not brought forth, that in Edward VI.'s
time 'twas an Infant new Born, and in its Swaddling Cloths, and in Queen
Elizabeth's Reign arrived to the best degree of Perfection and Maturity, that
it has yet been able to attain unto, during which Queens Government, something
also is objected to us, which shall be examined in its Order.

The Bishop's Book, was an Explanation of the Ten Commandments, Strypes Mem A.
B. Cranmer. l. 1. c. 13. p. 50.
the Creed, and the Grounds of Religion, fitted for the Common Peoples
Instruction. 'Twas composed by sundry Bishops, of whom, Cranmer was chief, by
virtue of a Commission issued out by Henry VIII. in the Year 1537. established
by Parliament, and Printed by Tho. Barthelet, with this Title. The Godly and
Pious Institution of a Christian Man. Out of this Book, Fox has furnished us
with this following Passage -- B. of Mar. Vol. 2.
That there is no mention made, neither in the Scripture, nor in the Writings
of any Authentic Doctor, or Author of the Church, being within the Times of
the Apostles, that Christ did ever make, or constitute any Distinction, or
Difference to be in the preeminence of Power, Order, or Jurisdiction, between
the Apostles themselves, and the Bishops themselves, but that they were all
equal in power, etc. and that there is now, and since the time of the Apostles
any such diversity. It was devised by the ancient Fathers of the Primitive
Church for the Conservation of good Order and Unity in the Catholic Church. P.
114.
From hence Mr. O. has gathered (for he refers to Fox's Martyrology) that these
Bishops (the Authors of that Book) affirmed the difference of Bishops and
Presbyters was a Device of the Ancient Fathers, and not mentioned in Scripture.

Ans. This Deduction is downright false, and directly against the obvious
Meaning of the Words. The design of that Prince at that time, was to throw off
the Pope, and his Jurisdiction over the Church and Bishops of England; to this
end in the Bishops Book it is affirmed, that as the Apostles were equal among
themselves, so were the Bishops equal among themselves in the Apostollcal
Times, or (according to Jerome) that the Bishop of Rome was not by Divine Right
Superior to the Bishop of Eugubium: That therefore as I anon observe out of The
King's Book, Patriarchs, Primates, Metropolitans, and Archbishops, and
particularly, the Pope of Rome had originally no Preeminence and Authority over
other Bishops; particularly, not over the English; only that it was a voluntury
Agreement among themselves for Orders sake: But from the beginning it was not
so. Here is not one word of Presbyters, or exempting them from Subjection unto
Bishops. Now, that I have not done the least wrong unto this Book, I appeal to
what I find elsewhere, taken thence by Mr. Strype Mem. p. 53.
. How that the Church of England is in no Subjection to the Pope, but to the
King's Laws: That Priests and Bishops never had any Authority by the Gospel, in
matters Civil and Moral, but by Grant and Gift of Princes, that it was always,
and ever shall be Lawful unto Kings and Princes, with the Consent of their
Parliaments, to revoke and call again into their Hands, or otherwise, to
restrain all the Power and Jurisdiction given, and permitted by their Authority
and Assent, and Sufferance, without which, if the Bishop of Rome, or any other
Bishop whatsoever, should take upon them any Authority, or Jurisdiction in such
matters as (...) Civil, that Bishop is not worthy the Name, is an Usurper, and
Subverter of the Kingdom: That the Church of England is a Catholic and
Apostolic Church, as well as that of Rome: That there is no difference in
Superiority, Preeminence, or Authority of one (Bishop) over another: But they
be all of equal Power and Dignity, and that all Churches be free from the
Subjection and (...) of the Church of Rome. The Equality here spoken of in the
beginning, and in the latter end of this Period, is not between Bishops and
Presbyters in the same Church, but between Bishop and Bishop, Church and
Church, and particularly, that no Church (that of England especially) is
subject to Rome. And though in the beginning he names Priests and Bishops, such
Priests happily were meant as took upon them to Act here in England, in
Subordination to, and by the Popes Authority; not a Syllable of the Equality of
Bishops and Priests is here to be found; only that both depend upon the Civil
Magistrate, and that in Civil and Moral Matters only.

The second Testimony alleged by Mr. O. is another (if happily it be another)
Book, entitled -- The Institution of a Christian P. 113.
Man, drawn up by the whole Clergy in a Provincial Synod, Anno 1537. set forth
by the Authority of King Henry VIII. and the Parliament, and commanded to be
Preached. Out of this Book (afterward Translated into Latin as I guess) Mr. O.
cites as follows. -- in Novo Testamento nulla mentio facta est aliorum graduum
(...) Distinctionum in Ordinibus, sed Diaconorum vel Ministrorum and
Presbyterorum, sive Episcoporum. Which Words (it must be confessed) look pretty
fair and favorable toward Mr. O. at first sight.

Ans. In the first place, I will here present the Reader with what the Author
of the Memorials has delivered concerning Id. ibid.
this, and some other Books of the same nature, and written with the same
design. The Bishops Book, otherwise called The Godly and Pious Institution of a
Christian Man, of which before, came forth again two Years after, sc. in the
Year 1540. but bearing another Name, viz. A necessary Doctrine and Erudition
for a Christian Man; Printed also by Barthelet: That this also was once more
Published in Engglish, and dated Anno 1543. as at the end of the said Book,
according to the Custom of those Times; though at the bottom of the Title Page
I find it dated also 1534. This was composed by Cranmer; but called The King's
Book, because Hen VIII recommended it to the People by Proclamation, added to
it by way of Preface, and assumed to himself the being the Author of it. Mr.
Strype farther acquaints me that in the Year 1536. had been published a Book,
Entitled The Bishops Book, because framed by them; I guess it the same with
that I first spoke of, and that it was written by the Bishops Anno 1636. but
Printed 1637. and he yet tells us of another, which came forth in the Year
1633. also commonly called The King's Book, but Entitled, The Difference
between the Kingly and Ecclesiastical Power. I have procured a sight also of a
Latin Book, going under this Title. -- Christiani Hominis Institutio Edit.
1544. in the Preface whereof, it is said to have been at first writ in English,
and then Translated into Latin, by whom, or by what Authority I find not; and
whether this be the same with Mr. O's, I know not; but this is sure, Mr. O's
was Printed 1537. as himfelf confesses; mine 1544. and the passage cited by Mr.
O. is no where to be read in mine. And since nothing like it is to be met with
in any of the other Books, and all the Controversy in those times was between
the Pope and the English Bishops, not about the superiority, or the distinction
of Bishops and Presbyters in the same Church, I am apt to fear some foul play.
But concerning the Testimony its self, as allowed of, I shall speak more by and
by.

Mean while let us search for what may be had to the purpose in The King's
Book, Entitled A necessary Doctrine and Erudition of a Christian Man.

If it shall be said, that Mr. O's Deduction before spoken of, was borrowed not
out of the Kings's Book, but the Bishops Book; yet I hope the one will be
allowed to explain the other. Thus then I read in the King's Book. -- That the
Sacrament of Order is a Gift or Grace of Par. I.
Ministration in Christ's Church, given of God to Christian Men, by the
Consecration and Imposition of the Bishops Hands. That this Sacrament was
conferred, and given at the beginning by the Apostles unto Priests and Bishops.
That St. Paul Ordered and Consecrated Timothy Priest: That the Apostles
appointed and willed the other Bishops after them to do the like, as is
manifest from Tit. 1. 5. 1 Timothy 5. 22. That there is no certain Rule
prescribed, or limited by the Word of God for Par. 2.
the nomination, election, presentation, or appointing of any such
Ecclesiastical Ministers, but the same is left unto the positive Laws and
Ordinances of every Christian Region, provided, made, or to be made, etc. -- He
afterward enumerates in particular the Common Offices and Ministries, both of
Priests and Bishops, sc. Teaching, Preaching, Ministering the Sacraments,
Consecrating and Offering the Blessed Body and Blood of Christ in the Sacrament
of the Altar, loosing and assoiling from Sin, Excommunicating and finally,
Praying for the whole Church, and their own Flock in special. -- That they may
not Exercise nor Execute those Offices, but with such sort and such
Limitations, as the Laws permit and suffer -- Par. 5.
That the Apostles Ordained Deacons also. Acts. 6. That of these two Orders
only, that is Priests and Deacons, Scripture makes express mention, and how
they were conferred of the Apostles by Prayer and Imposition of Hands -- That
Patriarchs Primates Par. 6.
Archbishops and Metropolitans, have not now nor heretofore at any time had
justly and lawfully Authority, Power and Jurisdiction over other Bishops given
them by God in Holy Scripture: That all Powers and Authorities of any one
Bishop over another were, and be given unto them by the consent Ordinance and
Positive Laws of Men only, etc.

In the Christiani hominis Institutio, which I have seen, there is some
disagreement to be found: For whereas the Necessary Doctrine and Erudition,
etc. seems to speak of two Orders only, i. e. Priests and Deacons, the
Christiani hominis Institutio, expresses it thus -- de his tantum
Ordinationibus Presbyterorum and Diaconorum, Scriptura express meminit, etc.
meaning, as I suppose, not two Ranks and Degrees of Church Officers, but two
Ordinations or Consecrations of Persons appointed to the Ministry, sc. of
Presbyters and Deacons: That is, the Consecration of Presbyters and Deacons, is
only expressly mentioned in Scripture, and that Bishops received not any New
distinct Imposition of Hands: And so Orders in the necessary Doctrine, etc. is
to be understood, as I conceive not of Persons, but of the Ordination of them
as it is often used unto this Day. It is not then affirmed in either, that there
was in the Church but two Ranks or Degrees of Ecclesiastical Offices, that is
Priests and Deacons, (and not Bishops) according to the Scripture: But that two
Consecrations only were expressly mentioned there, nevertheless a superior Rank
might be found in the Scripture, though not separated thereto by a new Imposition
of Hands. MrO's quotation seems indeed to sound quite to another Sense, and to
his purpose rather, sc. that in the New Testament no mention is made of other
degrees and distinctions (in Ordinibus) but of Deacons (or Ministers) and of
Presbyters (or Bishops) How Ministers and Bishops crept in here, I Will not say:
But they are capable still of the same Sense, sc. that in the New (...) there
is no mention of other degrees and Distinctions of Persons in Orders (that is
of Persons Ordained by Imposition of Hands) except Deacons and Presbyters: For
Bishops were not consecrated again by any express appointment in Scripture
according to the prevailing opinion of those times. It Is lastly to be observed,
that in the necessary doctrine, etc. that we read, that Patriarchs, Primates
Archbishops and Metropolitans, have not now nor ever had Power, Authority and
Jurisdiction over other Bishops given them by God in Scripture, it is in the
Latin Translation added cetrosque Inferiores Episcopos aut Presbyteros, which
makes no alteration. For who is there that believes not, that the Archbishop of
York has no Jurisdiction over the Bishop of Chester, nor over the Presbyters of
this Diocese, but what is given him by the Ecclesiastical and Civil Law of the
Land, for Peace and Orders sake? But it is worthy our Notice that in the K's
Book (as is before at large set down) Orders or Ordination is taught to be, A
Divine Gift or Grace given by the Imposition of the Bishops Hands: That the
Apostles gave this Grace and appointed the Bishops after them to do the like:
What need we any more? Here are Bishops having the Power of Ordaining
distinguished from the Ordained, sc. Priests and Deacons.

But when all is said, and whatever Sense any Man shall think fit to put upon
these passages out of the King's and Bishop's Book I make little account of. At
best they express the Mind and Opinion of Hen. 8th, Cranmer and other Bishops,
who were all still engaged and held fast in the Toils of Popish Errors and
Superstitions, all their Design hitherto in these Books being only to cast off
the Power and Jurisdiction of the Pope. For the Rest, they continued yet
Papists all over. Cranmer himself, who was chiefly employed in drawing up these
Books, still retained his old Errors and Prejudices sucked in with his Milk,
and continued Zealous for the Corporal Presence even to the last Year of Hen.
(...). In the necessary Doctrine published 1543. 'twas taught, Preface.
that in the Ave Mary the Blessed Virgin is Honored and Worshipped, that the
reading the Old and New Testament is not so necessary, as of Duty the People
ought and be bound to read it, but as the Prince and Polity of the Realm shall
think convenient, that the Public Law of the Realm had so restrained it. The
seven Sacraments are in the Book its self asserted and explained, Prayers for
the dead recommended upon the Authority of the Book of Maccabees, and of the
Ancient Doctors in Masses and Exequies. Now this is an hopeful Book to
establish Protestant Doctrines by, and thence to affirm, the Protestant Church
of England was of the Mind there were no more Officers in the Church, than
Bishops (or Presbyters) and P. 113.
Deacons. At best the Reformation was but now on the Anvil, and Cranmer and the
other Reformers were but Hammering it out by Degrees. Nor can we believe they
always or at that very time declared their own Opinions fully and freely. Hen.
VIII. was an Haughty and Sturdy Prince impatient of any Opposition, and
resolved to assume unto himself all the Popes Usurped Powers. Cranmer and his
Associates thought it a good step toward their Design, if they could but shake
off the Tyranny of the Pope, hoping after this point once gained they might in
good time compass their whole Design, and establish the Church upon the sure
Foundations of Truth. To please then the Humor of the King and gratify his
Pride, it must be declared and acknowledged forsooth, by the Bishops, when they
took out their Commissions (as Cranmer himself did more than once) that all
Power both Civil and Ecclesiastical flowed from the King, that the Bishops
Exercised it only by the Kings Courtesy, that the King empowered them to
Ordain, to give Institution, and to do all other parts of the Episcopal
Function, of which Opinion Stripes Men. l. 2. c. 1.
Cranmer himself was Anno 1540, and even in the first of Edward the 6 th, or
pretended to be. In short, this Character Dr. Burnet gives of the Archbishop,
that his greatest weakness Burn. Abri. B. 1. p. 250. and p. 4. 5. b. 2. p. 22.
was his over Obsequiousness to Hen. VIII. There is then no Color to ascribe
any thing we meet with in these Books, as the free and settled Judgment of
Cranmer, much less as the the Doctrine of the English Protestant Church. And if
any Man shall pretend by these Testimonies to overthrow the Divine Right of
Bishops, he will be obliged to lay aside the Divine Right of Presbyters also,
who were at the same time and in the same manner subjected to the Will of the
King and to the Laws of the Land, as any intent Reader may observe from the
aforesaid Passages out of the Kings and Bishops Books. And so much of this
matter.

The Third Testimony objected against us is the Celebrated Plea. p. 113.
MS. in the Irenicum, from whence we are informed. That Cranmer and other
Bishops set forth this to be their judgments, that Bishops and Priests were one
Office in the Beginning of Christ's Religion alleging Jerome in Confirmation.

Ans. I have said enough of Jerome already, and need not repeat or apply it
here. I choose 1. to present the Reader with some particular account of that MS.
before I directly reply to the Objection. Iren. p. 389. 390.
The King called a Select Convention of Bishops and Learned Doctors at Windsor
Castle, who were to give their Resolutions of several Questions relating to
Religion every one under his own Hand. They did so, and Cranmer's are
particularly (...) in the said MS. Those which belong to Our present purpose
are.

Quest. 9. Whether the Apostles lacking an higher Power, as not having a
Christian King among them, made Bishops by necessity or by Authority given them
of God.

Ans. Cranmer. All Christian Princes have committed to them immediately of God
the Whole care of all their Subjects concerning the Administration of God's
Word for the care of Souls. That the Prince has sundry Ministers under him as
Bishops, Parsons, Vicars and other Priests, who are appointed by his Highness
unto that Ministration: That the said Officers and Ministers, as well of one
sort as of the other be appointed, assigned and elected in every place by the
Laws and Orders of Kings and Princes: That in the Apostle's time, when there
were no Christian Princes, the Ministers of Gods Word were appointed by the
consent of the Christian Multitude among themselves. That sometimes the
Apostles sent and appointed Ministers of God's Word, sometimes the People did
choose them, and those sent and appointed by the Apostles, the People of their
own will accepted, not for the Supremacy or Dominion that the Apostles had over
them to Command as their Princes and Masters, but as good People ready to obey
the advice of good Consellors,

Quest. 10. Whether Bishops or Priests were first: If Priest, then the Priest
made the Bishop.

Cr. Ans. The Bishops and Priests were at one time, and were not two things,
but both one Office in the beginning of Christ's Religion.

Quest. 11. Whether a Bishop has Authority to make a Priest by the Scripture or
no: And whether any other, but only a Bishop may make a Priest.

Cr. Ans. A Bishop may make a Priest by the Scripture, so may Princes and
Governors, and the People also by Election: The People did commonly elect
their Bishops and Priests.

Quest. 12. Whether in the New Testament be required any Consecration of a
Bishop and a Priest, or only appointing to the Office be sufficient.

Cr. Ans. In the New Testament, he that is appointed to be a Bishop or a Priest
needs no Consecration by the Scripture: For Election and appointing thereunto
is sufficient.

I have somewhat contracted the Archbishops Answers, but so as to preserve the
Sense full and entire, and somethings I have omitted not Material (as I Judge)
here to be set down. These Questions and Answers in the MS. were subscribed T.
Cant. and this is mine Opinion and Sentence, which I do not temerariously
define, but remit the Judgment wholly to your Majesty.

To all which I reply 1. That though these were the Opinions of (...) yet other
Bishops, unto whom the same (...) were put were otherwise persuaded. Mr.
Strype, has furnished us with Mem. in Appen. n. 27.
different Answers given by some others of the learned Doctors or Bishops of
that time from another MS. out of Cotton's Library.

To the 9th Question. The Calling, Naming, Appointment, and preferment of one
before another to be a Bishop or Priest had a necessity to be done in that
sort, a Prince being wanting: The Ordering (Ordination) appears taught by the
Holy Ghost in the Scripture per manuum Impositionem cum Oratione. This I doubt
not will be owned a truer and more Scriptural Resolution of the Question then
Cr's was.

To Question 10th. Bishops (were first) or not after: These learned Men spoke
here cautiously; Cranmer rashly and roundly pronounces.

To Quest. 11. Scripture warranteth a Bishop obeying the (...) to Order a
Priest per Manuum Impositionem cum Oratione, and so it has been from the
beginning. They do not boldly define that Priest and Bishop were one Office in
the beginning of Christ's Religion, as Cranmer did.

To Quest. 12 -- Manuum Impositio cum Oratione, is required unto the making of
a Bishop or Priest: So as only appointing it is not sufficient.

There is yet the Judgment of other Learned Men to be seen in Mr. Strype, which
I will add unto the former. Id. ibid. 28.


To Quest. 9th -- Making Bishops has two parts, Appointment and Ordination.
Appointment, which by necessity the Apostles made by Common Election, and
sometime by their own Assignment, could not be done by Christian Princes,
because there were none; yet now appertains to them: But in Ordering wherein
Grace is conferred, the Apostles followed the Rule taught by the Holy Ghost,
per Manuum Impositionem cum Oratione and Jejunio. A more solid and Judicious
Answer then Cranmer's.

To Quest. 10 -- Christ made the Apostles first both Priests and Bishops, but
whether at one time some doubt. After that the Apostles made both Bishops and
Priests, the names whereof in the Scripture be confounded. They manifestly
imply a real distinction between them, in the beginning, though they were one
in Name, or rather though both were called by both Names indifferently.

To Quest. 11 -- The Bishop having Authority from his Prince to give Orders,
may by his Ministry given to him of God in Scripture Ordain a Priest, and we
read not that any other not being a N. B.
Bishop has since the beginning of Christ's Church Ordained a Priest. N. B.

To Quest. 12 -- Only Appointment is not sufficient, but Consecration, that is
to say, Imposition of Hands with (...), and prayer is also required. For so the
Apostles used to Order them that were appointed, and so has been used
continually, and we have not read the contrary.

From the whole it appears, that what ever was Cranmer's Opinion, yet others
were of a contrary Mind: It cannot then be truly affirmed, that Cranmer's was
the Judgment of the Church of England, as farther may be confirmed by what Dr.
Leighton replied at the same time unto the Queries.

1. I suppose, that a Bishop has according to the Scripture Power from God as
being his Minister to create the Presbyter, although he ought not to promote
any one unto the Office of a Presbyter or admit him to any Ecclesiastical
Ministry, unless the Princes leave be first obtained in a Christian
CommonWealth. But that any other Person has according to the Scripture Power to
create the Presbyter, I have not read nor learned from any Instance. 2. I
suppose Consecration by laying on of Hands is necessary: For so we are taught
by the Examples of the Apostles. Thus much Dr. Durel, who read the whole MS. by
the permission of Mr. St. reports out of it Durel. Vinc. Eccl. An. c. 28. p.
328.
in his Vindiciae Ecclesiae Angli. The Judgment then of Cranmer set forth in
that MS. cannot with any Truth be ascribed to the Church of England; it was the
Opinion but of some Persons, from which their Contemporaries we see differed
much.

But, 2. the Argument grounded on the MS. belongs not to the time when the
Church of England was Protestant. So that the Resolution of those Queries were
rather of the Popish Church of England. For the Questions were not put by Edw.
VI. as was at first surmized, but by Hen. VIII. To make out which note.

1. The Manuscript has no date, nor any King named in it, that called the
Assembly at Windsor. One may then ascribe it to the Father Henry, as well as to
the Son Edward.

2. Cranmer submits himself and his Sentence unto the Judgment of the King. But
Edward VI. was a Child too young, and unexperienced to ask these Questions, or
to have the final decision of them referred to him.

3. Lee, Archbishop of York, who subscribed the Answers in the MS. died in the
Year 1544. Goodw. de Pres. Eccl. Anglicanae.
some Years before Edward was King, by which Argument (Dr. Durel says) he
convinced Mr. Still. that the Convention was held at Windsor in the Reign of
Hen. VIII. not of Edward VI.

4. In Mr. Strype's Memor. the King makes his Animadversions upon the Bishops
Answers, which cannot be thought the Mem. App. ubi supra.
Work of Edw. VI. a Child, but of Hen. VIII.

5. The matter of the Questions, and of the Answers of Cranmer sufficiently
prove that Hen. VIII. convened that Assembly at Windsor. They both resemble the
foresaid King's and Bishops Books, and one Animadversion of the King in Mr.
Strype (which is, since they confess appointing Bishops belongs now to
Princes, how can you prove that Ordering is only committed unto you Bishops?)
bewrays King Henry's aspiring to be invested with all the Spiritual and
Ecclesiastical Power, even of Ordination it self. Of which, see more in his
Memorials. P. 16, 17. Append. N. 7. It. Mem. 141. Briefly as in his elder
Brothers life time, he was bred up in Learning, that he might be Alterius Orbis
Papa, or Archbishop of Canterbury; so after he was King, the Ambition still
prevailed in him, and was not, we see, easily removed.

6. Early in the Reign of Edw. VI. and when the Reformation was going on
prosperously, Cranmer and the Protestant Bishops understanding matters better,
and having freedom to speak their Minds, delivered themselves more clearly in
the point, as may be inferred from sundry Observations belonging to that Time,
and upon Record. As 1. It is declared in the Preface before the Form of
Ordination drawn up and agreed upon in Edw. VI's Reign. That it is (...) unto
all Men, diligently reading the Holy Scriptures, and ancient Authors, that from
the Apostles time there have been these Orders of Ministers in Christ's Church,
Bishops, Priests and Deacons, by public Prayer, and with Imposition of Hands
approved and admitted thereunto. Cranmer it seems was now come over to Dr.
Leighton's Opinion, declared in the days of Hen. VIII. 2. Cranmer set forth a
Catechism in the first Year of Edw. VI. Anno 1548. wherein the three Orders are
taught as of Burnet's Abr. l. 2. p. 57. 58,
Divine Right, from whence (says the Historian) It appears that he had changed
the Opinion he formerly held against the Divine Institution of those
Ecclesiastical Orders. 3 In the Days of Edward VI. Cranmer suspended Heath
Bishop of Worcester, for refusing to subscribe the forementioned Form of
Ordination. 4. In the same Reign John Alasco, a Noble Polonian, was by
Cranmer's means made a Superintendant over all the Churches of (...)'s Mem. p.
234, 237, 239, 241.
the Foreigners, yet newly planted in and about London; the Germans, Italians,
and the French. -- And Superintendant is but another Word for Bishop.


Whoever therefore will impartially weigh the darkness of the times in Henry
VIII's Reign, where the above mentioned King's and Bishop's Books were written,
and the Answers made unto the King's Questions by Cranmer, and some others, the
stifness of that Prince, his fondness of being Head of the Church, and the awe
which the Archbishop and his Associates in the Reformation stood in toward
him, the earnest desire they had at any Rate, and on any Terms to be rid of the
Pope's Tyranny, the falseness, uncertainty, and absurdity of many Opinions
delivered by the Bishops, and their repugnancy to each other, he will be forced
to confess that no stress can be laid upon any of their Conclusions, much less
that they were the first and steady Sentiments of the Protestant Church of
England: For even the Popish Clergy also generally subscribed them. But the
sudden alteration of the Bishops minds as to this present Point in debate in
Edward VI's days: puts it out of all question, that the MS. of my late Lord of
Worcester, belongs to King Henry VIII's days; and that our first Reformers
their mature and settled Judgment was, that there were from the beginning of the
Christian Church three Orders of Ecclesiastical Ministers by Divine Right,
Bishops, Priests and Deacons: Let us hear the Reflections Hist. Reflect. l. 3.
p, 289.
of the Learned Prelate, the now Lord Bishop of Salisbury. -- Abr. b. 1. p. 250.
In Cranmer's Papers some singular Opinions of his about the nature of (...)
Offices will be found; but as they are delivered by him with all possible
Modesty, so they were not established as the Doctrine of the Church, but laid
aside as particular Conceits of his own. And it seems, that afterward he
changed his Opinion; for he subscribed the Book that was soon after set forth,
which is directly contrary to those Opinions set down in this Paper, viz. Mr.
Stillingfleet's MS.

In the next Reign it is no matter to us what became of the Divine Right of
Episcopacy. The Protestant Church of England suffered an Eclipse in Queen
Mary's days, but soon recovering it self under the Auspicious Government of
Queen Elizabeth shined so much the brighter, and in a short time came to that
Settlement which it enjoys to this day, without any considerable Alteration:
And to our present point, (...),

1. That the Form of Ordination of Deacons, Priests and Bishops, with the
Preface before spoken of, were confirmed in the 4th of Eliz. 1562. and again in
her 13th Year Anno 1571. and which to make short work of it, continues in force
unto this Day. 2. In the general Apology of the Protestants, the 5th Article of
the English Confession is inserted, and was drawn up in that Queen's time, Anno
1562. and runs in the words following, -- Farthermore, we believe that there be
diverse Degrees of Ministers in the Church, Deacons, Priests and Bishops, to
whom is committed the Office to instruct the People, and setting forth of
Religion.
But Mr. O. Objects unto us the 13th of Eliz. c. 12. pretending to prove
thereby, that Ordination by Presbyters was then allowed Plea p. 118.
here in England. The Clause he refers to, is more at length thus -- All
Persons under Bishops, who pretend to be Priests, or Ministers of God's Holy
Word and Sacraments, by reason of any other Form of Institution, or
Consecration, or Ordering, than the Form set forth by Parliament in Edw. VI. or
now used, shall in the presence of the Bishop declare their Assent, and
subscribe to all the (...) of Religion, which only concern the Confession of
the true Christian Faith, and the Doctrine of the Sacraments comprised in a
Book, Entitled, Articles agreed to by the Archbishops and Bishops of both
Provinces, and the whole Clergy, in Convocation Anno 1562. for avoiding
diversities of Opinions, etc, -- and (...), etc. From hence Mr. O. infers, That
the Statute respects not Popish Ordinations, only, if at all, but gave
Indulgence to those that were not satisfied to subscribe all the Articles
absolutely, among which was the Book of Consecration; and that the Statute
requires Subscription only to the Doctrine of true Christian Faith, and of the
Sacraments, which he would prove in that the Statute speaks of Ministers of
God's Holy Word and Sacraments, and the Title of Ministers is rarely used among
the Papists, and is common among the Reformed Churches; the Ministry among the
Papists being a real Priesthood, and therefore they call their Presbyters,
Priests.

Ans. The Statute, doubtless, speaks of all Priests and Ministers, whether
Papists, or Dissenters: All were to Assent and Subscribe, in case they would
continue in, or be let into any Ecclesiastical Promotion: But chiefly the
Papists. (...) first, I assert this upon Mr. O's own words. -- The Ministry of
the Papists (says he) was a real Priest hood, and therefore they call their
Presbyters, Priests. On the contrary, I do not remember that Dissenting
Ministers have ever been styled Priests in any public Instrument of Church or
State. Now as for the word Ministers, even that also (it may be) points at the
Popish Priests; for it had lately been used among the Papists. I meet with it
in Smith's Recantation Memor. p. 171.
; in the necessary Doctrine, and other public Records, But chiefly, I consider
that at the time of this Act of Parliament the Popish Priests herded themselves
among the (...), and went by the name, and under the disguise of Dissenting
Ministers. For the more effectual discovery of these Foxes, and to unkennel
them for the security of the Flock, as well as to curb the Dissenters
themselves, Ministers was thought a fit Word to be added unto the Act, to the
end none might escape subscribing. Mr. O's (...) here turns upon himself,
whilst he distinguishes, where the Law does not, contrary to that wise rule of
Interpreting Laws. Besides, these Words in the Statute -- Who pretend to be
Priests or Ministers by reason of any other form of Institution or Consecration
or ordering than the English then in force do in my Opinion, plainly and more
openly strike at the Popish Ordinations, the Great Design of that Reign,
especially in the beginning, being to extirpate the Romish Priests.

It may be urged -- That the Dissenting Ministers by subscribing those
Articles, which only belong unto the Confession of the true Christian Faith,
were to be admited or continued in their Benefices, and by consequence their
Ordinations allowed, though they did not declare their Assent unto the
Ceremonies and Traditions, nor to the 20th and 36th Article of Religion.

Ans. This cannot be: For I shall show anon that they were obliged to subscribe
those two Articles, which if they did ex animo, they must of necessity forth
with enter into Episcopal Orders, and approve of and use Church Ceremonies,
which was what the Statute aimed at.

Nor (as Mr. O. argues) does the subscription seem to intend those only, who
scrupled Traditions and Ceremonies, and not the other Doctrines in the 39,
Articles, which was the case of the Dissenters alone. For the Papists scruple,
many other of the 39, Articles, which also were to be assented unto, but were
not scrupled by the Presbyterian Dissenters (though other Dissenting Ministers
happily did); and though the Papists scruple not Ceremonies and Traditions in
General, yet they scruple ours in particular: By consequence were intended in
the Act, as much and more then the Dissenters.

Mr. O. Because the Assent and Subscription was only to the Articles of
Religion concerning the Confession of the true Christian Faith, and Doctrine of
the Sacraments, therefore an Indulgence was intended the Dissenting Ministers,
who scrupled nothing else but Ceremonies and the Book of Consecration which
belonging not to the Christian Faith, are not required to be subscribed and
assented to, and by consequence Ordination by Presbyters was here allowed.

Ans. All I have to do is to prove that the 20th and 36th Articles among the
39, were by this Statute required to be subscribed and assented to. And thus I
prove it. It Is manifest that the 39 Articles are meant in this Statute, viz.
from these Words in the Act -- -- Articles agreed to by the Archbishops and
(...) of both Provinces, and the Whole Clergy in Convocation Anno 1562. for
avoiding diversities of Opinions in Religion. Oh! but (cries Mr. O.) it is meant
of such Articles only, as concerned the Confession of the true Christian Faith,
which the two aforesaid Articles did not, all the rest being opposed (it seems)
unto the 20th and 36th Articles.

Ans. It is very absurd in my Judgment to Interpret Acts of Parliament in so
loose a manner, which are wont to speak more correctly, and with greater
exactness; and if this had been intended the Statute would certainly have
excepted the two Articles. I rather believe the Articles of Religion here
mentioned, are opposed to other Articles of the Queen's setting forth in the
6th of her Reign, Anno 1564. and to be seen in the Collection of Dr. Sparrow
Sp. Coll. p. 123. 124. 125. etc.
called, Articles (...) Doctrine and Preaching, for Administration of Prayer
and (...), for certain Orders in Ecclesiastical Polity, Apparel or Persons
Ecclesiastical, and Sundry other Protestations. All which were injoined by the
Queens Letters and Authority only, unto which this Statute did not direct an
Assent and Subscription, but to the 39 only. which for Distinctions sake are
entitled Articles of Religion, and in Allusion thereto are so called in the
Statute. To all these 39 Articles called (...) of Religion, all Priests and
Ministers were to subscribe: And this was enacted as well for the avoiding
diversity of Opinions, as establishing of Consent touching true Religion.

Moreover by Ceremonies we commonly understand things of mere Humane or
Ecclesiastical Institution: These indeed considered every one singly by it self
belong not to the true Christian Faith. Right! But the 20th Article, which in
general defines and declares it to be in the Power of the Church to appoint
some decent Ceremonies (...) a Principle or Proposition, which belongs unto the
true Christian Faith, as being founded on the Word of God, and therefore with
the rest was to be subscribed.

The Book of Consecration confirmed in the 36th Article, contains the Scripture
Rule of Ordination by Bishops, and so concerns the true Christian Faith: It was
then to be assented unto. Finally, that I have not mistaken the Sense of the
Statute or the Lawgivers Intendment, I will support my Interpretation by the
Judgment of the great Oracle of the Law, and other Reverend Judges before him.
Subscription required of the Cook's Insti. Part 4. p. 323. Tit. of Subscription.
Clergy is twofold: One by force of an Act of Parliament confirming, and
Establishing the 39 Articles of Religion, agreed upon at a Convocation of the
Church of England, and ratified by Queen Eliz. c. 12. referring to Canons made
by the Clergy of England, at a Convocation holden at London, 1562. containing
39 Articles of Religion, and ratified as aforesaid -- He adds, that in Smith's
Case, who subscribed the 39 Articles of Religion with this Addition -- So far
forth as the same were agreeable to the Word of God, it was resolved by Wray
Chief Justice, and all the Judges of England, that this subscription was not
according to the Statute of the 13 Eliz. because the Statute required an
absolute subscription; that this Statute was made for avoiding Diversity of
Opinions, which was the scope of the Act, but by this Addition, the Party might
by his own private Opinion, take some of them to be against the Word of God.
Contrary to the design of the Statute, and the 39 Articles themselves: Belike
Smith intended to decline, subscribing unto the 20th and 36th Articles. Hereby
then it is apparent, that this Act intended no indulgence unto the Dissenters,
nor allowance of Presbyterian Orders.

In King James the first's Reign, was published a Book entitled Tractatus de
Politia Ecclesiae Anglicanae, by Dr. Mocket the then Archbishop's Chaplain,
whereunto the Author annexed Jewels Apology, the greater and less Catechisms,
the Public Liturgy, the 39 Articles of Religion and the Homilies. Now because
Blondel builds upon these, I ought at least to examine the Treatise and the
Catechisms. The latter, I cannot get a sight of, and shall at present only look
into the former, from whence it may be Collected -- That the Office of a Bishop
is twofold. The first has respect unto all the Faithful of the Whole Flock: The
second unto the Ministers of the Church. As to the former it is acknowledged
that Bishop and Presbyter are the same Degree of Office or Order, or call it
what you please. For the Presbyters Minister unto the People as effectually, as
the Bishops in all the Offices and Conveyances of Divine Grace: And on this
account are the Successors of the Apostles, as much as the Bishops are. The
Presbyters Administer the Sacraments, Preach the Word, interpret Scripture,
reprove, exhort, encourage, and comfort, publish and declare Authoritatively,
and Ministerially the promise of the Remission of Sin, and Eternal Life by
Jesus Christ, not only in the Sermons, but after Solemn Confession of Sin, and
in the Visitation of the Sick, and of such as have been troubled in Mind and
Conscience. In short, to them in the (...) Administrations, appertains that
Principal Gift and Commission -- Receive the Holy Ghost: Whose Sins ye remit
they are remitted, etc. Thus far Bishops and Presbyters are the same, or, as
St. Jerome has it, pene Idem gradus. This is not to be doubted of: For so they
the Presbyters are the same with the Apostles. But the peculiar and
distinguishing Character, and Office of the Bishop is to inspect, Govern and
Ordain Presbyters and succeeding Bishops. On this account the Presbyter (as
Jerome also speaks) is secundus gradus. Thus much we own and freely confess, let
our Adversaries make the best of it they can. I do suppose the difference and
Preeminence, and Superiority of Bishops from and over Prebyters, and their
Ordaining Power is sufficiently cleared to have been the Doctrine of the
reformed Church of England from the beginning, though Blondel would pick out of
this Treatise something to the Contrary, which is not my business here to take
to task.

Lastly, I shall only produce the Testimony of the English Vid. Acta. Syn. Dor.
in the Rem. of Mr. Jo. Hales of Eaton.
Divines in the Synod of Dort held 1618. 1619. The Bishop of Landaff, Joseph
Hall (afterward Bishop of Norwich) John Davenant, and Samuel Ward, having
approved all the Doctrines in the Belgic confession except Three Heads
concerning Ecclesiastical Orders protested -- That the Government of the
English Churches by Bishops, Priests and Deacons, was of Apostolical
Institution. Particularly Landaff in a Speech ran through the three Heads or
Chapters, and then entered this Protestation, that there was not in the Apostles
Times nor ever had been in the Church an Equality of Ministers.

From the whole I gather 1. That it has ever been the Judgment of the
Protestant Church of England from the Reformation, that there was by the
Scripture and ought to be an inequality of Ministers, and that Bishops are
distinct from and Superior to Presbyters.

2. That the Presbyterians and Particularly Mr. O. do a great injury unto the
Memory of that Great Man Archbishop Laud, and through his sides unjustly Wound
all that defend and assert Divine right of Episcopacy, impeaching them of
Novelty and altering the Doctrine of the Church. That Renowned Prelate came
into Play, and became a Leader in this Church not till after all the Instances,
which I have alleged in proof of the Divine Right of Bishops: Even the Bishop
of Landaff and his English Colleagues at the Synod of Dort were not Inferior to
him; nor was it in Laud's Power to Influence their Opinions. He was not
Archbishop of Canterbury till the Year 1633. not of St. David's, till 1621. two
Years after the Synod was broken up. It cannot therefore with Reason (...)
thought, that these excellent Persons, who assisted at that Assembly, were led
by the Nose, or awed by the Authority of Dr. Laud. Nor do I find that he was
any ways interested in their Deliberations, or that he sent to them any
Letters, or Dispatches upon that, or indeed any other subject. It can hardly be
believed, since so many of the Calvinistical Points were then established,
doubtless, to the regret of this Prelate. Besides, Dr. Andrews had before Laud,
written a Book to prove the Divine Right of Bishops, surely not swayed thereto
by Laud, who was, or had been his Chaplain.

But to remove all the invidious Calumnies and Reproaches, that have been
falsely laid upon that unfortunate Prelate, and the rest, who before, and after
him, have maintained the Divine Right of Bishops, it were sufficient to call to
remembrance, that it was the Doctrine of Ignatius, whose Testimonies it is
needless to repeat any more: also of St. Cyprian, Jam pridem per omnes
Provincias and Urbes Ordinati sunt (Episcopi) and what he S. Cyp. Ep. 55.
means by his jam pridem, he explains elsewhere, Sciam Episcopos plurimos
Ecclesiis Dominicis in toto Mundo Divina dignatione praepositos. Id. Ep. 63.
Once more I read, Cum hoc igitur (omnis Actus Ecclesiae) Id. Ep. 33.
per eosdem Praepositos gubernetur divina (...) fundamentum sit. Lastly, of
Jerome himself, Constituit Christus in omnibus finibus Mundi Jer. Com. in Ps. 45.
Principes Ecclesiae, which also he calls Traditionem Apostolicam, writing to
Evagrius., which have been remembered before. Now if some of Laud's immediate
Predecessors, or Contemporaries, can be produced (granting this) as being of
another Mind, not seeing, or not openly confessing and contesting the Truth,
'twas surely for want of Understanding, Courage, or Integrity. But why these
failings and defects should be laid in the balance with the undoubted
Testimonies of the Fathers, or prejudice the Wisdom and Faithfulness of others,
yea the Public and Authoritative Declarations of our Church too, is beyond my
Capacity to comprehend. This is out of question (I judge) that Presbyterian
Ordination, the Identity and Parity of Bishops and Presbyters, has never yet
been pronounced lawful, much less of Divine Right, by any Public and
AuthentickSentence of the Church of England, since the Reformation except happily
by that pack't Assembly of Divines, not one of whom were Legally chose to sit
at Westminster. Some private Writers may happily be found inclining to the
Opinion, whereby Presbyters are equaled unto Bishops, and thought to be of the
same Degree; but I make no reckoning of such private Authorities, though they
were otherwise Persons of singular Learning, Wisdom and Piety: And some
Passages favoring the Presbyterian Pretenses may possibly be found in the
public Deliberations and Conclusions, whilst Hen. VIII. was Vindicating this
Church from the Tyranny of the Pope, and in his stead assuming it to himself.
Thus far we changed our Rider, not our Burden; but it ought to be considered,
that as in those difficult times the Episcopal Power was subjected to the will
of the Prince, and to the Law of the Land, and so may be thought not by Divine
Right, but Humane Constitution; even so was the Power and Office of Parsons,
Vicars and Priests, or Presbyters, and from thence also it (...) with equal
Force, that these also are but by Humane Law, and thence derive their
Authority. Let us for example but look back unto Cranmer's Answer to the King's
9th Query, and we may be convinced hereof. The substance of it is -- That the
whole care of the Church is immediately committed to the Prince. That Parsons,
Vicars, and other Priests, were to be appointed by His Highness to their
Ministrations. To the 10 th Query, that the Prince may make a Priest. He that
will infer hence, that according to the Doctrine of the Church of England at
that time, Bishops were not Jure Divino, but by the Law of the Land, must be
also forced to conclude, that Priests and Ministers hold by the same Tenure and
no other: And from the whole it will follow that Mr. Hobbs was in the right,
when he affirms the Will and Laws of the Prince to be the Standard of the
Peoples Religion. Furthermore, we are often confronted with the Doctrine and
Practice of the (...) Protestant Churches, and called upon to have a more
favorable, charitable, and just Opinion of them, and their Ministry. Hereunto
it will suffice me only to answer with St. Paul, What have I to do to judge
them that are without? But I farther consider with what Difficulties they at
first struggled, and still labor under, and am apt to think that the same good
God that would have Mercy, and not Sacrifice, and so dispensed with his own
appointed Sabbath, may (and I hope) will accept their Sacrifices, though they
be not prepared according to the purification of the sanctuary. I also consider
that the Foreign Protestants are by this time, (many of them, even the most
Learned) quite Captivated by a long Prejudice, which the continuance of the
Presbyterian Government among them for so many Years, since the Reformation has
now perhaps, rendered unconquerable, and that therefore God may (and I hope
does) wink at this Ignorance; for such I reckon an inveterate Prejudice to be.
Besides, though many of the Foreign Protestant Ministers have Zealously
defended the Presbyterian Government, and seem not at all willing, or inclined
to Model themselves into the Episcopal Platform, though it were in their power,
and opportunity served; yet others of them have been contrary minded, and even
in the (...) of that darkness, wherein they lay, have been able do discover the
Truth, which shined through the Clouds of their Hardships and Prepossessions. I
will not here mention the French Letters written unto the present Honorable,
and Right Reverend Bishop of London. Mr. O. has most maliciously Suggested as
if the Authors were Bribed, or by some indirect means induced to write as they
did. I do not know upon what Authority he has published this scandalous
surmize, and if it had been fit to take up Reports by Conjecture, or uncertain
Fame merely to blast the Credit of a Writer, I could have told him (...) now,
what I have heard (from one who was no stranger to the Presbyterian Intregues
in 1640. and so on, and may be presumed to speak what he had (...) to know,
sc.) that Mounsieur Blondel came into England, with hopes to be preferred in
our Church by Archbishop (...), but it seems mist his aim: That he was
afterward hired by the Presbyterians to write for them against Episcopacy.
Thus Revenge and the Love of Money were the Parents of that Celebrated Book
entitled -- Apologia pro Hieronymi Sententia: And Lastly, that even in the
Apology its self some things were intermixed, which undid and overthrew all he
seemed to have advanced in defense of Presbytery: Which therefore he was forced
to expunge before he recovered the Promised Reward of his Labor. But after
this let us now hear what a Learned Protestant, a Foreign Divine has written
upon this Subject, I mean Peter Du Moulin, in a Letter to a Scotch Man Anno
1640. He says -- That the French Protestant Church never put down Bishops (p.
6.) nor encouraged others to do it: That necessity not Choice keeps 'em from
setting up Episcopal Order: That at Geneva, where Episcopacy was changed into
the Presbyterian Form, necessity bore more sway than Council, and Policy than
Divinity: That the Reformation in France began among the People, in Scotland
(and England) at Court: No wonder then that due Regard was not had unto the
Primitive Government in the one as well as the other, that the French
Protestants have much ado to maintain their Ministers by reason of their
Poverty: That if they should establish Bishops, it would provoke their
Adversaries and raise them to Jealousy, and (...) would look more like direct
Schism, two Bishops being at the same time in oneSee: That they are a Body
prepared for Bishops, when Bishops will reform: He gives an Instance, that
somewhere the Bishop in his Cathedral preached the pure Word of God, and the
Protestants submitted to him. He farther Apologizes, that their King will not
suffer them to have Bishops. I only add, hereunto Bishop Hall's Observation,
how that, when our Bishop of Landaff at Div. Right of Episco. p. 9.
the Synod of Dort, charged the Divisions there (in Holland) upon their want of
Episcopacy he received this only in Answer -- Domine nos non sumus adeo
faelices. Whether this was spoken by way of Modest excuse, and a tacit
approbation of Bishops, I know not of certaitny; but believe so; at least I
look upon it as a shifting off the Question about Episcopacy the President not
caring to enter into the Lists with the Bishop upon that Argument. But if he
intended it (as perhaps Mr. O. will think) for a Scoff, I will take the Liberty
to say, that as the High Priest prophesied a great Truth but intended it not,
neither understood it; so might the President too stumble upon a great Truth,
and intimate Episcopacy to be the Happiness of a Church, though at the same time
he was otherwise persuaded or did not discern it. For there are a sort of
Creatures, which cannot endure the Light, and by how much clearer the Sun
shines see so much the worse: Like Saul going to Damascus before his
Conversion, are struck blind with the Glory and Luster of Truth which surrounds
them. This we are assured of by manifold and woeful Experience, and therefore
need not wonder at it. The Eyes of the Understanding labor under the same
natural Weakness, as those of the Body do. When we have continued long in the
dark or have shut our Eyes for somewhile, we are not able to behold the Objects
of Sense, though placed at their proper distance, and in a Medium duly fitted
for their Reception. Thus when Pride, (...) and Prepossession, when Passion,
Sturdiness and Secular Interest, when contentiousness Opposition, and Hatred
have for some time drawn a veil over the Understanding, it is not easy for
these Men to admit any Notions, that thwart and contradict those, which they
have for a long time before entertained, let the Evidence brought for their
Conviction be never so bright and clear. For instance, Mr. O. as has been noted
in the former Chapter has frankly acknowledged it as fit and warrantable, that
some Grave Divines be set over the Churches for Peace and Order sake, whilst
the Younger sort are for the present to be excluded or suspended from the
exercise of their Inherent Power. Now Mr. O. is not able (I perceive) to see,
that this very reasonable Concession of his, if rightly pursued and improved as
it ought; puts an end unto the Controvery. For though he has so frequently and
unreasonably at every turn declared against Ecclesiastical Restraints, yet here
he allows 'em, and supposes it in the Power of the Church to restrain some from
the exercise of their Power, and to reserve the Chief care and Government of
the Church, to a few of the most Eminent. Here I say, then the Cudgels are in
effect laid down, and Episcopacy is sufficiently vindicated and approved of by
the Adversary himself, though before he is aware. No! it will be replied; for
still care must be taken, that it be not however admitted, as of Divine Right.
Well! But if an Ecclesiastical Right be sufficient to oblige us unto Obedience
to our Superiors (as in the concession its self he must suppose) then have our
Reverend Bishops a good Title to their own Power, and to our subjection to 'em.
Besides, how easy is it to improve this Concession even to the Vindication of
the Divine Right of Bishops? For if Mr. O. (who, when he suffers himself to
think, is, I am hereby convinced, a Wise Man, and sees far before Him) will but
turn himself about and look the other way, that is behind him: I mean, will but
admit St. Paul and the Apostles heretofore to have been as wise as himself is
now, it would be no hard matter (one would imagine) to convince him presently
of the Divine, that is, Apostolical Constitution of Bishops. If it is now, it
was also in the Apostles Days fit, and reasonable to commit the care and
Government of the Churches unto some Grave and Worthy Presbyters: And if so,
can we possibly believe the Apostles did not appoint what their own Reason and
Prudence suggested to them?

But let us pass to another Instance. Mr. Stoddon in his Pastoral Charge, has
confessed Past. Charge. p. 105, 108.
that there were Rulers in the Church, who were not Teachers, as appears
plainly to me (says he) from 1 Timothy 5. 17. although I suppose the power of
Preaching was committed to them. Something of this kind I have in the precedent
Papers offered my self, and could farther confirm it out of Mr. Mede, if it
were worth the while and suited my Design. But Mr. Stoddon again distinguishes
between what is primarily, and what is secondarily Id. p. 106.
jure Divino, as Bishop Sanderson long before him has done: And to be short, is
of Opinion that the Clergy has as much need to have a Governor set over them
as the Common People themselves, and that if the Scripture has not expressly
appointed it, yet the reason and necessity of the thing does absolutely require
it, or to this effect (for at present I have not the Book by me): And surely
the Apostles knew this and by Experience too, as well as Mr. Stoddon. Now I
cannot comprehend what should hinder this Gentleman coming over to us, but the
inveterate Prejudices, which he cannot part with, or a stiffness and aversion
to change his Opinions, for which his Old Friends would be sure to reproach him
without (...). In a word, then it is to very little purpose to pretend by the
dint of Argument to make Proselites. One may happily comfort encourage and
confirm some in the Truth, which they already know and profess: But to convert
any, there are very little hopes, seeing most Men have an overweening Opinion
of themselves, and the Party which they have espoused. There I leave them, not
expecting they will be reclaimed from the evil of their way, till God shall
open their Eyes, and by some secret and powerful Influence dispose their
Hearts unto the knowledge and acknowledgment of the Truth, or else by some
visible Judgments and Afflictions constrain us unto Unity, which is the only
thing some Men are afraid of. They have not stuck to declare, that an Agreement
would certainly destroy the Liberties of the People, and introduce Tyranny
among us: A Paradox, which Jesus Christ and his Apostles were (...) Strangers
to, and which all Good Men I hope do utterly abhor. But pray we for the Peace
of Jerusalem: They shall prosper that Love it: Peace be between it is Walls and
Plenteousness within its Palaces: And if there be any Man that is not a Son of
Peace, let him be Anatkema (...).

ADDENDA to the 19 th Chapter.
THere is an Objection which escaped me in its proper place, and therefore must
here be considered, it is, that Presbyterian Orders have been allowed here in
England, that Peter Martyr, Bucer, P. Fagius, etc. were suffered to exercise
their Ministry among us.

Ans. 1. Allowances against an Established Law are not very defensible,
especially when that Law was believed to be of Divine Right, which is the Case
here before us of Ordination by Bishops, let this then be put among the
Infirmities and mistakes of our first Reformers. 2. Our first Reformers might
think it justifiable in Charity to Foreign Protestant Churches, which had not
the opportunity of Episcopal Ordination; the present necessities and Service of
the Church required it: The Reformation otherwise would have received some stop
or Prejudice by bringing this Point into Controversy. For some such like Reason
as this it was, that the Church of England in the Reign of K. James I. sent
Delegates unto the Synod of Dort, and contented her self after the Conclusions
there made only to enter her Protestations against the Parity of Ministers. 3.
Our first Reformers happily went upon this Principle, He that is not against us
is for us, and such were Peter Martyr, Bucer, Fagius, etc. But our Dissenters
were always against us, making it their whole business to overturn the
Ecclesiastical Government of this Nation by railing, and reviling and
representing it as Popish and Antichristian. 4. The Indulgence spoken of had
in it perhaps more of State Policy than true Divinity, and is to be reckoned as
the Act of the Civil Government rather, than of the Church. Thus the (...) and
Huguenot Ministers have ever even to this day been permitted to Officiate in
Divine Things without Episcopal Orders. 5. All these Indulgences (...) not
amount to the destroying the Truth of that Principle concerning the Divine
Right of Episcopacy. Forasmuch as the Relaxation of the Execution of a positive
Law cannot in Reason be accounted the annulling or abolition of that Law, as we
see at this Day, when Liberty is given to the very Dregs of Enthusiastical and
Fanatical Sectaries, which is no more Prejudice unto Episcopacy, than it is to
other acknowledged Truths of the Gospel. 6. As for those particular Persons
allowed to exercise their Minstry here in England we may note, that Peter
Martyr was in Episcopal Orders, and it may be others of them were also. But
there is a story which I am obliged to take notice of because Mr. B. my first
Adversary objected it to us. He affirmed, the Protestant Bishops of England
formerly approved of Presbyterian Ordination, as he inferred from a Passage
about the Ordination of Bishop Spotswood and Others. The Case was this.

In the Year 1609 some Scotchmen were to be Ordained Bishops, Spots. Hist. of
Sc. p. 514. 3 d Edit.
and a Synod was held by our English Bishops for that purpose, Dr. Andrews
Bishop of Ely said, that they ought first to be Ordained Presbyters as having
not been Ordained by Bishops but by Presbyters only. Bancroft Archbishop of C.
maintained, that there was no necessity of that, because where Bishops could
not be had Ordination though by Presbyters ( only,) must be esteemed lawful,
else it might be doubted, whether there was any lawful Vocation in most of the
Reformed Churches. This applauded to by the other Bishops, Ely acquiesc'd.

From hence I infer, not that the Protestant Bishops of England approved of
Presbyterian Ordination, but that in the Judgment of this English Synod,
nothing but necessity can justify it; now what Degree of necessity is
requisite, I Will not here dispute. 2. That where Episcopal Ordination may be had
there Presbyterian Ordination is unlawful. 3. That the necessity here pleaded
in Defense of Presbyterian Orders implies, that Episcopal Ordination is of
Divine Right: otherwise it had been impertinent to excuse Presbyterian
Ordination, only from the necessity of it.

But I crave leave to interpose my own Judgment, and I humbly conceive there
was no need of flying unto this Refuge of necessity, for still the Ordination
of these Scotch Gentlemen might have proceeded, Salvo etiam Episcopalis
Ordinationis Jure Divino; for I do affirm that by the practice of the Church a
Layman may be immediately elevated into the Throne, and effectually receive the
Episcopal Character without being first Ordained Deacon and Priest. This latter
is indeed more safe and regular in Ordinary: Nevertheless in extraordinary
Cases, the former has been practiced. Thus the Learned Dr. Cave has observed,
that Monks were wont to be made Bishops Prim. Christianity.
without going through the usual intermediate Orders of the Church. He
instances in Serapion, Apollos, Agathus, Ariston, etc. mentioned by St. Athan.
Tom. 1. p. 957. However this be I shall produce two notable and unquestionable
instances of it.

The first is of Nectarius P. C. He being but a Catechumen, Soc. E. H. l. 5. c.
8. p. 265.
i. e. an unbaptized Christian (if I may so say) one of the Senatorian Order,
and a Praetor was nominated and Chosen Bishop of Constantinople, when Greg.
Nazianzen had abdicated it, and immediately Soz. l. 7. c. 8. p. 713. 714.
after (...) was Ordained Bishop without the intermediate Orders of Deacon or
Presbyter.

The other is of St. Ambrose Bishop of Milain. He also a Catechumen Soc. l. 4.
c. 30.
only, and at that time the Consular Governor of the Province was chosen, and
after Baptism Ordained Bishop thereof Theod. l. 4. c. 7. c. 19.
without the intermediate Orders of Deacon or Presbyter: For a Bishop according
to St. Chrysostom's Maxim (...) (...) has in him the whole Ministerial Power. I
allege this principally with this Design to Vindicate the succession of the
Scotch Episcopal Ordinations.

The End.
ERRATA.
PART. I.
PAge 1. line 17. read managing, l. 18. r. endeavored, p. 5. l. 9. r.
Diocesan, p. 6. l. 33. r. Epist. 2. 1. 6. p. 12. l. 40. r. denoting, p. 13. l.
ult r. designat, p. 15. l. 34. r. the for that, p. 23. l. 3. r. Angels, ibid.
l. 37. after they, add are, p. 24. l. 5. r. Haggai. ibid. l. 20. r. (...),
ibid. l. 33. after manner, add to be, p. 28. l. 28. after that, add they, p.
32. l. 25. r. Months, p. 46. l. 2. r. Argument, p. 52. l. 3. r. conclude, p.
65. l. 25. r. Successors, p. 67. l. 35. r. pretend, p. 73. l. 17. after of, add
the People, p. 76. l. 15. 1. Gal. 2. 9. p. 80. l. 5. r. Penance.

PART II.
PAge 21. line 7. read bold, p. 22. l. 38. r. Christians, ibid. l. 45. for no,
r. do, p. 42. l. 24. r. Maximinus, p. 45. l. 11. r. Asturica, p. 51. l. 33. r.
Council. p. 55. l. 26. r. Counterfeit. p. 59. l. 4. r. valid, ibid. l. 8. r.
intrinsic, p. 62. l. 3. r. (...). ibid. l. 9. r. received, ibid. l. 11. dele
is, ibid. l. 43. r. ordaining, p. 63. l. 15. r. Ischyras, p. 74. l. 16. r.
Adversaries, p. 76. l. 26. for this r. the, p. 82. l. 35. dele. be, p. 92. l.
23. r. Liberty, p. 102. l. 18. r. Joannes, ibid. l. 37. r. because, p. 106. l.
37. r. dislike, ibid. l. 43. r. out, p. 108. l. 3. r. sufficient, p. 109. l. 2.
r. diverse, p. 110. l. 10. r. voluntary, p. 112. l. 35. dele that, l. 37. r.
ceterosque p. 114. l. 28. r. Counselors, p. 117. l. 32. after days dele: p.
119 l. 37. r. Bishops, p. 123. l. 37. r. Intrigues, ibid. l. seq. r.
opportunity, ibid. r. Monsieur.


